V578 E1070_1 99867150 119441
THE ADVANCEMENT OF MERCHANDIZE: OR, CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS For the Improvment of the Trade of this Common-wealth, humbly presented to the Right Honorable the Council of State. AND ALSO, Against the Transporting of GOLD and SILVER. By THO. VIOLET of London Goldsmith. SPQA LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, Printer to the Council of State. Anno Dom. 1651.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN BRADSHAW LORD PRESIDENT of the COUNCIL of STATE. My Lord! WHEN first I attended your Lordship, about preparing of an Act, against the Tran∣sporting of Gold, your Lord∣ship was pleased to take no∣tice of mee; and that you had heard of my Imprisonment in the Tower, you comman∣ded mee to use my uttermost endeavors, to serv the Common-wealth, that so I might give a clear testimonie both to your Lordship and the State, of my good affection to the pre∣sent Government; and by that means, the State might bee induced to consider my con∣dition, and that my business might bee exami∣ned in Parlament, and I have Justice, by re∣storing mee to my Estate again.
In humble pursuance of your Honor's com∣mands, I did print several Placarts and Ordi∣nances of France, Holland, and Flanders, con∣cerning the regulating of their Monie, Bullion, and Mints, and breviated the Laws and Pro∣clamations heretofore made in England against Transporting of Treasure. And made several arguments upon the whole matter, how high∣ly it did concern this Common-wealth, speedi∣ly to give a stop to the Transporters of Gold and Silver, and several other abuses practised upon the Coin and Bullion of this Common∣wealth. And I did humbly present one of the Books to your Honor, and had your Honor's approbation for the speedie passing of the Act, which your Honor, and the Right Honorable the Council of State, had recommended to the Parlament; but as yet, through the industrie of som guiltie men, this Law, which so highly concern's the safetie, and welfare of the Nati∣on, is not passed the Parlament. And if it were dispatched, it would restore your Mint, to it's flourishing condition, by removing all obstructions in the Mint. And then the settling the valua∣tion of all Coins in Christendom, and the Parr of the Exchange, between us and them, in a∣ny part of Christendom, I would see should bee finished, and the mysteries of Exchange opened, to the high advantage of the Mer∣chants
of this Nation, who are now generally ignorant of this mysterie, and are as far to seek of these Sciences, as two hundred year ago, the passage to the West-Indies, was to Christen∣dom. The reason is, in England wee have none but our own Monie run's in currant paiment, & our Merchants are generally ignorant of the true value and fineness of Forrain Coins, and what proportion all Forrain Coins hold be∣tween us and them, and the just weights and fineness all Forrain Coins ought to hold, and beeing all weightie according to their just stan∣derd, what they will make the Merchant to coin them into our Monie within the Tower of London; and this is the Parr I humbly intend, and petition your Honor for the speedie dis∣patch. These things are no secrets to the Dutch Merchants, and other Merchant-Strangers here, and that make's them so out-wit the Mer∣chants of our Nation, upon the Exchanges of Monie to any part of Christendom. My Lord! I humbly again address my self to your Lordship, with som prime Observati∣ons for Trade, which may highly concern the Common-wealth; and it hath been no small comfort to mee, that both your Honor, and many other Honorable Gentlemen of the Coun∣cil of State, upon the reading of them in Ma∣nuscript, do approv of what I have don in this particular, and that you will speedily put
it in practice for the good of this Nation. My Lord! I have obeyed your commands for the putting in an Index to what I have said, that so you may contract what is by mee humbly desired. The whole drift of what is de∣sired, is the equal inriching of the Nation in gene∣ral, the repairing and inhabiting all our Sea-Port-Towns, and Harbors, the bringing in a Nurserie of rich Merchants into our Land, the increas of Manufacturie, the increas of Shipping, the set∣ting of all our poor awork, the making England the Mistress and Empross of the Sea, in beeing a Bul∣wark and Protection to her Friends, by spreading out her arms to give shelter in all weathers, both for Merchant-men, and Men of War, in all her Havens and Harbors, both to shelter them from storms, and to furnish them with all man∣ner of Ammunition, Victuals and Merchan∣dize, for all parts of the world, and to bee the Magazin for the world, for all wealth and Trade. For as the World is Ring, so Eng∣land is the Diamond of that Ring; and the wealth, strength, and valor of this Nation, was never so well known to all our neighbors, as under the government of a Common-wealth, as it is now settled, and a few years will shew to the world. This I say to bee true, so visibly, that the poorest Commoner in this Nation, will finde there is as much difference between the situation of England and Holland to bring
and contract the Trade of the world, as there is in proportion, difference between an ounce Troie, and a pound weight Troie; for they in Holland, have not six points of the Compass, to have winde to go in and out, and all dange∣rous Seas, and in som of them, as at the Tex∣el, fortie sail of ships are cast away in a year. But behold, England hang's in the Sea, like an O∣riental Pearl at a fair Ladie's ear, no winde can blow at any point of the Compass, but ships may both go in and com out of her Harbors. And I believ, a Free Trade will treble the Importation, and Exportation of goods into all the Sea-Ports of this Nation, besides the emploiment of the shipping of the Nation. And as wee are a shield and protection to our friends, by putting in exe∣cution these Observations, you will reduce the rebellious Sea-men of our own Nation, have an accompt of their wives and children, in what service they are, and where against the State; and by this means, if not out of obe∣dience and love to the present Government, yet out of an affection to their wives and children, and to save their estates, you shall have them return to their obedience; for when their wives are sequestred in England, it will bee a grea∣ter Load-stone, then your Men of War you send out, to reduce them, and this business re∣quire's a diligent and able man, to give the State an Accompt from time to time, and if it
bee effectually followed, will bring home most of our Sea-men to their obedience, a business of the highest consequence both to reduce them, with the least change of bloud and monie. Then the examination of the carriage of se∣veral Companies, for the private enriching of a few, is humbly presented to the Council of State, and the Council for Trade, that so the abuses for the times past, may bee found out and punished, and such Rules and Regulati∣ons for the future, may bee made as shall bee most conducing to the benefit of the Com∣mon-wealth in general, without any private regard to private persons. My Lord! this ar∣gument which I have undertaken, concern's the corrupt interest of many men, who will storm to see these things laid open to the world, and I shall bee sure to bee stung with the venom of som of their tongues; Therefore I am an hum∣ble suitor to your Honor and the Council of State, for your Honor's protection and coun∣tenance of these my weak endevors for the service of this Nation, which noble favor shall for ever oblige mee to praie for your Honor's happiness and prosperitie. God continue your Honor in all prosperitie in this world, and in the world to com; and this shall bee the praier of Your Honor's humble and obliged Servant THO. VIOLET.
TO THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL OF TRADE, This Book with my most humble service. Honorable Gentlemen! THese Papers are most of them recommended to your care by order of the Council of State, to take them into your con∣sideration. Indeed, many of them were drawn by mee a∣bout five years ago in the Tower, afore I ever thought of a Council of Trade. But seeing it is the hap of these unpolished Papers to bee recommended to your care, I am verie glad of it, and most humbly give the Council of State thanks for recommending them to your judicious examination; making no question of their sowing in a fertile ground, seeing som of these Propositions are already com to the perfections of Acts of Parlament. May it
pleas your Honors, I am no other then the day∣laboring man; I have brought you Marble from the Mine, felled you Trees, and brought them to you, and at your feet laie them all, to bee hewn and squared by your judicious and pro∣found Wisdoms; You are the Master-work∣men, who are now to take your Instruments to hew & square them for the building of the trade of this Common-wealth. And I shall presume to wait on you those daies you sit, to see how your Building goe's forward; and when that you give a dispatch of the Materials in these Propositions, it shall not repent mee of what I have don. And I shall with all humilitie and chearfulness furnish you with som other Propositions for the service of this Common∣wealth. To so great and grave Judgments, I know multiplicitie of words need not; the great God of Heaven and Earth bee in the midst of your Counsels, and bee Counsellor to you all, and put that into your hearts, that you may bee enabled for so great a work, as the State hath laid on you, and to bee careful of the maintenance of the Trade that concern's the poor of this Nation in general, that they may have a livelihood as well as the rich. And thus much in all humilitie, let mee tell you, if ever any men in this Nation had need to make use of Christ's rule, of beeing as innocent as Doves
and as wise as Serpents, it is your Honors in this emploiment you have for regulating of Trade. The infinite subtilties, frauds and abuses in se∣veral Trades, are so many, that the hundredth part of the cheats used to get monie, cannot bee imagined by any other persons but your selvs, that daily hear the abuses practised on many Manufactures made in this Nation. And som men by these cheats, have gotten wealth and dignitie; for in London formerly, many times they chose Aldermen most an end for their wealth, not for their wit or honestie, and that hath made such a hole in the Cham∣ber of London's Treasure, & the poor Orphans portions, when such Kites as got their Estates indirectly came to bee Magistrates. Other Trades there are, whose povertie beeing pe∣stered with more multitudes in the Trade then it will bear, make's many people in several Trades, fall a making the Manufacture indi∣rectly, falsly, and slightly, to the great abuse of the Nation, and all the wearers; and this more particularly I know is don, in the making of Gold and Silver-Thread, as was justified to your Honors by hundreds of the women-spin∣ners in London, upon their Petition against the Wheel-spinners, and their humble desires to your Honors for a Regulation for the future: So that what between the covetousness of the
rich, and the necessitie of the poor, all the abu∣ses in Trade is committed; and these weeds will everie daie increas in the Garden of this Common-wealth, if the Parlament make not strict and sharp Laws against these offences, and offendors, that make the Manufactures of the Nation slight and base. And not onely to make Laws, but appoint such persons as shall see those Laws put in execution, that Ju∣stice bee don; and these men would bee the pruning knives to rectifie the Garden of Trade: and till it bee don, the abuses in Trade and Manufacture will not bee prevented. I have humbly and plainly told you what I think is to bee don for the best improvement of the Trade of this Nation, and leav what I have said to your Honor's grave considerati∣on; and shall ever praie for the prosperitie of your Honors: Signed By your Honor's humble Servant THO. VIOLET.
TO MY HONORED FRIENDS, the Merchants, Natives of this Nation of England, and the Merchant-Strangers living and inhabiting in any part of the Dominions of the Common∣wealth of England. GENTLEMEN! MAny of these Papers were drawn by mee in my solitude in the Tower, and I never intended them for publick view, but for my private use; after∣wards Providence ordering it so, I was commanded by som of the Council of State to give them my at∣tendance and humble advice about removing the obstruction of the Mint, and to attend som honorable Gentlemen, who were to draw a table of the just value of all the Coins in Christendom, and to settle their true values according to the Standard of the Mint in the Tower of London, and what those Coins will make in our Mint beeing full weight; a great part of that work is already don, and a mo∣del drawn for the taking away the obstructions of the Mint in the Tower of London, and when the
Parlament and Council of State pleas to command, it will bee perfectly finished; having this opportuni∣tie with somof the Council of State, I was comman∣ded by som of them to draw them such Observations concerning Trade, as I did conceiv might bee for the benefit of the Common-wealth, the increas of Trade, and the increas of Shipping. And though I knew my own insufficiencie for so weightie a business, and that there were many hundred in Lon∣don more able to do this then my self; yet conside∣ring that now God had put into my hands an oppor∣tunitie that I might present my self to the Council of State, and to the Nation in general, that I was not such a man as som maliciously had charged mee to bee, which was, that I was a Malignant, and one dis-affected to the present Government, as it is now settled, without King and Lords. I saie, to give a clear testimonie of the falsness of that ma∣licious charge against mee, I was willing to obey the commands of som of the Council of State, and did with all humilitie present to my Lord President and som of the Council of State, most of these Pro∣positions, for their private use, and they were ho∣norably pleased to accept of my endeavors, and gave mee their approbation of them, as a great ser∣vice offered by mee to the Common-wealth, wherein I did deserv all encouragement, and that the State would see to put many of them in execution; which noble favor of theirs, far beyond my imagination
and desert, hath everlastingly obliged mee to their service, to studie alwaies to advance the interest and prosperitie of the present Government of this Com∣mon-wealth, as it is now settled, without King or Lords, to the uttermost of my power, and to the last drop of bloud I have, against any person or per∣sons whomsoëver, that endeavor the damage or un∣dermining of the present Government. Now my request is to all the worthie Mer∣chants of this Nation, that som of them would bee pleased to take this argument into their hands, and what I have said undigestedly, and without a me∣thod, they with a more learned pen would perfect for the service of the Nation in general. Most of these Papers are transmitted down to the Hono∣rable Council of Trade, by an order of the Coun∣cil of State, and referred to their judicious conside∣ration. And the true reason of my printing of them is, that som more learned pen might finish what I have roughly begun; and whosoëver doth it, would do a great service to the Common-wealth. And for the Merchant-strangers that live and inhabit in any part of this Nation, my request to them all is, That they would consider of what I have here presented in their behalfs, and that they would all contribute their advice and reasons for the perfect∣ing of what is by mee humbly propounded, and so to carrie themselvs in all their actions, that no just ex∣ceptions may bee laid to their charge of beeing pre∣judicial
Instruments either to the present Govern∣ment, or that any of their dealings should bee dis∣advantageous to the prosperitie and commerce of this Nation; but that they in humble requital of the Parlament's Protection, which they all enjoie equally with the Natives of this Nation, would bee pleased to studie all waies and means for the setting of such Manufactures here, as they know is made beyond Seas, for employing our shipping, for contributing their humble advice in repairing our Havens and Harbors, for dreining of our Lands, for employing of our poor, for setting up the Fish∣ing Trade, for making our Sea-Port-Towns their store-houses of Corn, and for laying a foundati∣on of bringing in their rich commodities from all parts of the world into our Ports and Harbors of England, wee having far better and securer Har∣bors then our Neighbors. And for their enabling them to do this, that they would humbly propound to the Parlament and Council of Trade, the best means and waies they conceiv all these things may don; whereof one of the principal waies is, to have free Ports in this Nation, to Import and Tran∣sport all Forrain goods Custom-free, that is not spent in this Nation; and for their settling of a bank in London, and settling of a cours of Bils of Exchange in several Sea-Port-Towns of this Nation; and for the settling of a Court of Mer∣chants in London, to determine all differences
amongst Merchants. If they would studie these things, and all others they know, which would conduce to the profit and honor of this Common∣wealth, and would shew themselves openly that they are publick spirited men, they would Petition the Parlament, and Council of Trade, in these parti∣culars; and when they are required by those in Autoritie, would contribute their best reasons and advices clearly, without any by-ends, justly, and according to the great experience many of them have by their knowledg of business of trade in other Countries. This would bee a great service to the Nation in general, and it is no more then I think is their dutie to do, and I humbly conceiv the State exspect's from them, they should do. And that all Merchants would present un∣to the State, what new Customs and Imposts have been laid on the English Nation in Forrain parts, more then was formerly laid; that so, if our Merchants cannot procure a redress them∣selvs beyond seas, the State; upon the Mer∣chant's Petition, might by their Letters or other waies, to Forrain States, take notice of it, and see our Merchants to have right; and this is usual in Holland, upon the least obstruction of trade, or intrenching upon the Merchants; the States General make it matter of state, and ei∣ther by force or by treatie, remove the obstruction, as all men know, that are acquainted with their
proceedings between the King of Denmark and them, for Customs in the Sound, and the Por∣tingals and them in the East and West-Indies, and in their other transactions with other Prin∣ces and States; their principal care is, to take off the obstructions of Trade, I praie God all just and fair-dealing Merchants with us, may have the like and greater countenance and protection from the State, then their Merchants have in Holland. And whereas the Merchant-stran∣gers in London, have exacted on them several fees more then is conceived to bee by Law, that these Merchant-strangers would petition the State, that the Citie of London bee required to bring in forthwith the tables of fees for Package, Sca∣vage, and all other duties they can by Law just∣ly and anciently demand of the Merchant-stran∣gers. And that a certain rule may bee set up up in Printed tables in the Custom-Houses, what fees shall bee taken for the future. And that such Officers that have formerly exacted more monie of the Merchants, then their just fees, may bee compelled to restore the monie back to the Mer∣chants. And if the State reliev Merchant∣strangers here, it will bee a great Load-stone to other States and Nations to do all right to our Merchants beyond Seas. But for those men, either English or stran∣gers, (I will not honor them with the name of
Merchants) that are Transporters of Wool, Fuller's Earth, Horses, Gold and Silver, or any other prohibited goods, to the weakning and impoverishing of this Nation; and all such as have culled and melted down the heavie Monie of this Nation into Ingots, and sold it to such as have Transported it, or to such as have made Gold and silver Wier, and silver Thread, and such as have couzened the Common-wealth by buying up the light and clipped English silver Coin, and vented it again to Graziers or pub∣lick Cashiers, or any other persons, to the great deceit and damage of the Common-wealth; I shall leav them all to the Law, with this me∣mento to them, That as Justice is leaden-foot∣ed, yet shee hath iron hands; and though slow, yet shee is sure, and all ages have held men that do these things, as Moths and Cankers in a Common-wealth. But for your just Merchant, hec is the Beau∣tie and Ornament of the Common-wealth, a great pillar in any Nation where they remain; and that State or Common-wealth that doth not love and protect them, must at long running bring them∣selvs to povertie. For mee to speak of the worth and dignitie of fair-dealing-Merchants in all ages, is to hold a Candle to the Sun; onely my praier to God shall bee, that their numbers may bee encreased in this Nation, and all encourage∣ment
given them by the State, that they may have good Convoie to guard their ships, both outwards and inwards, from Pirats and Rovers; and if it bee the chance of any Merchant-men to meet with Pirats, that God would strengthen their sea-men, and give them valiant and loial hearts to fight for their Countrie, and their Merchant's ships and goods; and after their deliverance from Pirats, God's protection go along with them all, and bring them everie one to his desired Port; and at the end of our daies, bring us all to the bles∣sed Harbor of the Kingdom of Heaven; and this shall bee the praier of Your assured Friend to serv you THO. VIOLET.
THE ADVANCEMENT OF MERCHANDIZE. To the Right Honorable the Council of State, viz. John Bradshaw, Lord President; Earl of Denbigh; Earl of Salisbury, Lord Howard, Thomas Lord Grey of Groby, Lord Ch. Justice Roll, Lord Ch. Justice St John, Lord Ch. Baron Wilde, Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord General Cromwel, Philip Lord Lisle, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir Wil∣liam Armyne, Sir William Constable, Sir Peter Wentworth, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Sir William Masham, Sir Arthur Hesil∣rige, Sir James Harrington, Sir Henry Vane Jun. t Gen. Ludlow, Lo. Comr Whitelock, Lo. Comr Lisle, Colonel Stapley, Colonel Morley, Colonel Purefoy, Colonel Jones, Isac Pennington Ald. Henry Martin Esq. Philip Skippon Esq. Wil. Heveningham Esq. Rob. Wallop Esq. Jo Hutchinson Esq. Denis Bond Esq. Valentine Wanton Esq. Tho Scot Esq. Cornel. Holland Esq. Tho. Chaloner, Esq. Mr Robinson, Mr Gourdon, Thomas Violet a true Lover of his Countrie most humbly present's these following PROPOSITIONS. SEveral Reasons for the admitting all Mer∣chants to have equal privileges, so far as agreeth with the Pattern and Policie of Am∣sterdam, Legorn, and Genoa, who have gotten themselvs to the hight & greatness of trade; And therefore hold in all Common-wealths that are seated, (as by the blessing of God this is one) in the midst of
the Seas, beeing adorned and beautified with more safe and fair Harbors for shipping, then any of our Neighbors whatsoever. And there ought to bee an especial eie had upon the paths and steps of our neighbors, to see by what waies and means they have got to this greatness of Trade, and to keep a good observation of these times; and to give all encouragement to the Dutch and Forain Nations to com and plant in our Ports and Harbors; They having many of them an earnest desire not to bee so penned up as they are, and therefore many Families are lately removed to Breme, and Hambrough, out of Amsterdam. As was presented to the Council of Trade, by a worthy Member of the Council of State, with his Recommenda∣tions to the Council of Trade, to take all Informaltions con∣cerning free Ports, or Landing places for Forain commodi∣ties Imported, without paying of Custom if again exported, & in what manner the same is best to bee effected; in pursu∣ance whereof, & for the advance of Trade, I have, according to directions of som of the Council of State, treated with the principal Merchants in this Citie; and I do humbly present these few Heads unto your Honors consideration, for the benefit of Trade, and the Nation in General. 1. That Genoa, Legorn and Amsterdam, have raised their greatness onely by giving Merchants Strangers, equal pri∣vileges with their Natives, and in levying Imal duties up∣on goods; And if not spent in their Ports, freely to export them to any part of the world, by which means they have been made the Ware-houses and Shops for all the Merchandizes in the world. 2. By the same means also they grow in Amsterdam mightie in Shipping and Sea-men; for they know the benefit that onely the bringing of goods thither, though never spent in the Countrie, make's them; for there is not the thousand part of the goods spent in Am∣sterdam that is brought thither, but shipped again all over the world.
And they have this advantage, that all the Commodities of the world are there to bee had, which is a benefit to them that spend the Commodities, to have the Market at their own doors, for they can have it cheaper, then to go abroad for it. And the wealth that is gotten by Shipping, Ware-hous∣room, and imploiment of thousands of laboring people, in lading and unlading Merchandize, is and hath been one of the fairest flowers in the Garland of Amsterdam, Genoa, and Legorn. And by the blessing of God, and the Parlaments counte∣nance of such Merchants and others, that shall put to their helping hands, and their industries, the Sea-Ports of this Nation will participate in a large proportion with them, and put the inhabitants of our Sea-Ports in a flourishing condition; wee may see it by experience when our Com∣position Trade was at Dover, what that Town made the State a year for half Customs, and how the rents of houses were raised, how all the Towns∣men grew rich, and Mer∣chants set the poor awork; and also the great imploiment of our Shipping and Navigation, and no Town in England lived more happily, (make it but a free Port, you will re∣store it again to its former condition) whereas now their poor do so infinitely increas on them, that many perish for want of means, and all the houses in the Town not worth the third penny rent they were ten yeers ago; for at the time the Customs made fifty thousand pounds every year, now not four thousand pound per annum. 3. I pray your Honors observ where great Customs are laid, there, either in Kingdom or Common-wealth, the Trade decayeth, and at last fal's to nothing; 'tis true they may bee present benefits, and have been made use of by evil Councellors, both in this Age and formerly, both in this Nation and others; But I pray observ those remedies have ever been wors then the diseases, and in som places it hath cost som of the Inventors, their lives, others, their estates, and all of them, at long running, repentance; and
those Kingdoms, Nations, or Common-wealths, that have soonest recovered out of them, have been the easiest cure of their distempers and commotions. Whereas in such Kingdoms, Nations, or Common∣wealths, where such oppressions have long continued, when the remedie com's to bee workt and wrought, it work's so violently as it break's all the old frame of Go∣vernment in pieces, or els weaken's it in that manner that it corn's not to its first strength again in som Ages; and this I humbly conceiv is like shortly to bee the fate of a great Kingdom, I mean France; The inventions for gathering money there beeing so many that the common people their life is bitter to them, and in all likelihood will end in the ruine of their Task-masters: for the furie of an oppressed people, and a breach of an inraged sea is one and the same. 4. All men know Spain was the Fountain of Gold and Silver, while Customs were easie, the Fleets returning eve∣ry year with fifteen, and sixteen Millions registred, and all the rich commodities brought out of the Indies, landed in Spain, when there was a smal Custom. Afterwards by ill counsel, the Cu∣stom of Silver and Commodities was raised from two, and three in the hundred, to five, six, eight, ten, twelv, fifteen per cent. and more for commodities, which the Mer∣chants seeing, and finding no remedie, grew discontent; and casting about which way to avoid this dutie, agreed that Ships should lie out beyond the Bay of Saint Lucar, Cales, and other Roads, when the West-India Ships came home; and there take out their Silver and rich Commodities, and ship it for other parts of the world, before it paid one pennie Cu∣stom, or touched the Spanish shore. Behold what the State got by this, they might have had all the returns landed in the Kingdom of Spain, had they been content with moderate Customs. And not beeing content with it, the greatest of what com's from the East and West-Indies, is sent away as afore∣said; and Spain, that is, according to a wel-regulated Trade, the Fountain of Gold and Silver, is filled onely with black money, copper money, going at ten times the true value, it
it will make in any part of Christendom; The Merchants Cash-houses beeing more like Braziers shops, then banks of Treasure, and the proverb is fulfilled, which saith, who goe's wors shod then the shoo-maker's wife. So in Spain that should abound in silver, there is nothing stirring in paiment there, within two months after the Fleet com's in from the West-Indies, but black monie. And now the mischief is past cure, Forain Nations having filled them with such quantities of cop∣per monie, that it cannot bee called in; I pray God that the State would keep an eie of our Coins, and keep that little wee have now left in the Nation, and call the transporters of Gold and Silver to a strict accompt, or els this Nation will finde the inconveniencie when it is too late. 5. If you will have Trade flourish, give the same in∣couragements to Merchants Strangers here, as they have in Amsterdam, and other parts of Christendom; they have found that cours to bee thriving to them for many years, and themselvs and the strangers that have planted amongst them to bee both equally advantaged by it. And in France, Spain, Legorn, Genoa, Poland, and many other places, where all strangers of what Nation soëver, paie no more Custom then the Natives them∣selvs; and this business had not been now to do, had it not been for the old Farmors in the Custom-Hous. About fourteen years ago I was emploied by the late King to have settled it, (when the busi∣ness of silver to bee brought up to bee coined from Dover, was concluded of) But I found my Lord Cottington, and the old Farmors against free Ports, out of an opinion that Cot∣tington ever had to bee avers against any model of the Dutch, it savoring of a Common-wealth too much, and not beeing su∣table to his designs, which was alwaies for Monarchie, and the Spanish greatness. The old Farmors I do verily believ were not against it out of any aversness, or envie to the wealth of this Nation's increas by a free Trade, but for som other reasons, and som as I am confident were that upon letting in of a free Trade, you would draw a great many Merchants Strangers in here, which are very prying and sub∣tle
men, men acquainted with managing the Excise and Customs in Holland, and they would presently discover that which they (the Farmors) above all other things labored to keep as a secret, which was the excessive gain every one of them made by the Farm. Secondly, that upon new alteration in the mo∣del of the Farm, there might com new undertakers, and so they might bee disappointed of their monie that they had advanced, which after upon another occasion fell out hea∣vily upon them. 6. But sure I am, divers of the best Merchants in London, and true Lovers of this Nation, have tole mee, and will justifie it to bee true, had I effected it to make free Ports all over the Nation fourteen years ago, the Common wealth had got Millions of monie by it before this time; then you would have had many score of rich Merchants up & down the Ports of this Nati∣on, Wch would have managed trade, not as it hath been: (the miscarriage, I fear mee, hath in part been willingly, and require's a strict examination) But if you had made Trade free, they would have kept stout Men of War at Sea, gon with Convoies, beeing readier to offend, then to take af∣fronts at Sea; which would have been highly for the ho∣nor of the Nation, whose sad losses most coming by dis∣order, and the covetousness of som Merchants, might have been all avoided, the losses, amounting within this twenty moneths to more then would have kept a Convoie suffici∣ent to defend all the Trade of this Nation for thirty years. If it bee examined, I do verily believ, it is not the French that take these ships, but our own Sea-men, that serv's them, and go's in by connivance. 7. I do humbly desire that an enquirie may bee made after it by the Trinitie Hous, and by all other waies what English Sea-men have been taken by the French in the ships lately taken within these twenty moneths, and where they now remain, and what Families they have, in or about LONDON, or other places in England, and how they live, and that their wives give an accompt where their husbands are, and in what service. I am of an opinion you will finde a Pad in the
straw, & that you are robbed by your own Sea-men; and if it bee so, I humbly present unto you, that all waies and means bee found out for the discoverie of the truth, and strict punishment bee inflicted on all such Marriners that shall serv in any Forain Men of War, and their wives and families to bee sequestred, their goods confiscated as Re∣bels and Traitors to this Nation. For such ships as the French take, are taken most by English Marriners, and are richly la∣den, with Merchandize in the Straits; one of them is worth one hundred of their French Coasters, or Fisher-men, and there is never a ship of the Straits-men, but with the Lading will produce fifteen Men of War; for the French laie almost all out in shipping, that the return make's of their prizes: and by this rule I humbly desire you to consi∣der what their Increas is, and if som speedie order bee not taken, wee shall not bee able to put a ship to sea, but 'twill bee snapped in the Straits, beeing the best, richest, and strongest Merchant's ships, wee have that Trade. I praie God the neglecting it so long, do not cost the Merchants and this Nation dear. 8. If you will make the Trade of this Nation flourish, I humbly conceiv you must make all Ports, where there are now Customs paid, to bee free Ports, for som com∣modities; as Wine, Fish, Salt, Corne, Wainscot, Clap-boards, Masts, Furs, Fur-deals, and Timber of all sorts, Iron, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Hops, Madder, and all other commodities of great bulk, to bee free to bring into any Port. And if not spent, to have Licence to transport them back, paying onely such small acknowledgments as they do in Amsterdam. But for fine goods, as Silks wrought or unwrought, Gold and Silver Threed, Bag-cloth, Lawns, Spices, and Drugs of all sorts, and all other fine goods, none to bee laid upon the shore, or imported, till a true accompt were given to the Chief Officer of the Port, and good securitie given, not to defraud the State either of the Customs or Excise, if spent in this Nation. And if any were found, either Merchants, or others, stealing Cu∣stom
or Excise, the same punishment and penalties should bee inflicted upon the offendor as in Holland; for it is but equal, that, if the Merchant desire's the same privileges they have there, the offendor should bee punished by the same Laws they have; therefore for such as deceiv the State, such a strict cours would save much in managing the business both of Excise and Customs. For I believ here are many slight fellows, put in inferior offices, which are corrupted; and when the Constable is a thief, the Felon will hardly bee found; For assoon as a poor fellow gett's into an office in the Excise or Customs, though his fee bee small, onely to keep life and soul, yet you shall have many of them spend yearly ten times their salarie, which must bee don out of their gains, in an indirect waie. I am confident the Merchant or Trades-man will not give such fellows twelv pence, but they will deceiv the State of twentie shillings. Therefore the same rule as is in Amsterdam for ma∣naging the Excise and Customs, or som stricter waie then is at present, would bee highly for the advantage of the State, in point of profit; for the penaltie is there so great, that no man will steal the duties; and it is sit to bee so here, or els you will make onely honest men to paie, which make con∣science: And others, that will steal the duties, the penalties are so little, it encourageth them to steal the Excise and Customs. 9. I humbly conceiv Order and Government in Trade is to bee look't after, especially in these times, when the French take our ships so fast, that every week almost bring's us one of Job's Messengers; And it is more then time strong Con∣voies went with our ships, and they not to com and go single, but in Fleets, which cannot bee don but by a rule, and must bee under a go∣vernment. The Dutch (I have it from good hands) have made Proclamation, that none of their ships go into the Straits, France, or other parts without Convoie. Such a government as this, it is for the honor and safetie of the Na∣tion. I heartily commend, and praie for, and would have all men put to their helping hand. But there are governments
which are for the private advantage of a few men, procuring prohibi∣tion of Importation of several commodities but onely by particular men, and exportation of our Native commodities, but one∣ly by particular men, and onely for som Ports, and at som seasons of the year; I shall instance in som particulars for all the rest, though there bee manie score more. 1. The Green land Companie hath a power that no Dutch nor no others, shall bring in Green-land Oil, which is a com∣moditie of great use in this Nation, and if the Natives may have a free Market, they might bee served som years twen∣tie and thirtie in the hundred cheaper, then they are forced to paie the Green-land Companie; And this is for the benefit of a few, to the dammage of the general. 2. Currants is a commoditie bought up all with readie monie, in Zant, and as Capt. Roberts saith, onely vented in England, and that so greedily coveted by this Nation, that the Natives thought wee made som dying stuff with them, and could not devour them; sure I am, our Cloth is too good a commoditie to give them for such ware. But for our Merchants, when they have monie for their return of our Cloth, to invest it again in Currants, and in such quantities as will appear by the Custom-Books everie year in this Nation; I shall humbly leav it to your Honors, to consider of it, and that you would bee pleased to call for the Propositions and Petitions of those Merchants, that the beginning of this Parlament procured an Act for the prohibiting the Importation of Currants; And that you would consider of this branch of Trade seriously, whe∣ther it bee fit so much readie monie which els would bee returned into this Nation, should bee spent in Cakes and Puddings, whereas in Spain, France, or any other Countrie where they grow, they eat none, and wee spend ten times more then all the world besides. But when these Currants are here, then the Merchants get a Prohibition that none but the Turkie Companie shall Im∣port Currants, and though Forrain Nations would sell them thirtie in the hundred cheaper then the Merchants sell them here, none must bee brought into the Nation: So
that by this Trade wee give monie for little better then dirt; it bee∣ing a vanitie, the Nation may verie well subsist without, and the Natives, if they will spend them, might have the com∣moditie upon a free Trade thirtie in the hundred cheaper then they have paid for many years. 3. Cloth is the staff of England's Trade, but of late, through the sad distractions of these wars, and by the covetousness of som people, both many work-men have unkindly left us, & by many subtle waies and means, stoln away great quan∣tities of unwrought Wooll, and Fuller's Earth, and so have laid the foundation of a Trade in Forrain parts. But as I am credibly informed, this was not the ground of setting up Cloth in Holland, and Germanie, but it did arise by other means, which was the Merchant-Adventurers. They kept their staple but in two places, Hambrough and Roterdam, and there they tied men to such rules for show-daies, and other orders, by forcing all people to com som two or three hun∣dred miles to a Market, whereby the commodities in their Merchants coming down to buie them, and carriage up in∣to the Countrie was raised, and som difference hapned be∣tween the English, and the Merchants Natives, in several par∣ticulars. The great taxes laid here upon Cloth, to keep up their Companie by bribes, and paie the vast summes given in that behalf, the Formal waie of shipping but twice or thrice in the year, all which loaded and clogged the Cloth with such a price at the Market, that Forrain Nations would no longer bee kept under these formal rules. And knowing the advantage would com unto them, by getting the making of Woollen Cloth, labored by all means to attain to it, which they have don. But withal they gave our Clothiers all encouragement, and privileges, and put them upon such wages, as they live better there then here. 10. Wee must match the Dutch at their own weapons, and give them as great privileges, as they have given to our
Clothiers in Holland; it will invite them hither, for our Harbors are better then theirs, and they are straitned for want of room, and by this waie you will make England truly the Empress of the Sea, when everie Sea-Port-Town will bee an Amsterdam. I am informed, by the ablest and best Mer∣chants, and I do believ them, that from Dover to Plymouth, there are ten Sea-Port-Towns, everie one of them lying more commodious for to make the Mart, and Bank for the world then Amsterdam; And besides, North-ward, Har∣wich, Woodbridge, Alburie, Sold, Lastof, Yarmouth, an excellent Haven, and safe Rode; Blackney, Wels, Linn, Boston, Hull, New Castle, and many others, which by their situa∣tion there is no winde shall blow but ships shall go in and out, whereas but few windes will bring you in and out at Amsterdam, especially in the Winter, besides the danger of the Harbor of Texel. In Winter, somtimes in one year fortie Sail of ships and more cast away, to the great damage of the Merchants, which would bee of a safer Harbor, if they can have free Trade, as they have at home. If you embrace this motion, and make your Ports free, all the wealth that is brought from the East Kingdoms, and Hans-Towns, in Germanie to Amsterdam, and laid up in the Summer, there for Markets, will bee brought to our Eng∣lish Harbors, and our English shipping bee emploied in carrying East-Countrie Corn, Flax, Hemp, Timber, and all manner of Provision for Spain, and all other parts of the world, and make their returns in good pieces of Eight, then land them at the first Sea-Port, and away to Sea; this is a sure waie to set the Mint a going, to emploie all our shipping, and return us to our former Trade. And if you will let everie man com in to Trade, accor∣ding to their skill and abilities, that will, and let the rule bee equal to all people in Trade, let no man have a greater pri∣vilege then another; If this cours bee followed, you would sell two Clothes for one that is now sold, you will not have Wooll enough in the Nation to make the Manufacture; and then you may In∣gross
the Spanish and Irish Wooll into your own hands, and have it Manufactured here, which would give a comfor∣table emploiment, to the greatest part of the poor of Eng∣land. For, I most humbly praie you observ, how the poor Clothier, hee cannot make and vent that quantitie of all sorts of Cloth, and other Woollen commodities, nor also cannot emploie thousands of poor people, which other∣wise they may do, if it were permitted for all Nations free∣ly to buie of them. For the Turkie Companie, the Merchant. Adventurers, the Fast-Land Companie, the Russia Compa∣nie, and of late years, the French Companie, These onely do and may buie, and that is onely when shipping is appointed by their Corporation: by which means the Clothiers Cloth lie's by the walls, and the poor want's emploiment, and Cloth must bee sold, when, and at what rates, and time, the said Merchants pleas to give, which occasions the Clothier's for want of quick sale, that they make not yearly the quantities of Cloth which other∣wise they would do, and the poor perish for want of work; & this by reason of the said Merchant's Corporation, and Prohibition of other men, which if free leav and li∣bertie were given to all men, to buie and transport Cloth, would occasion the imploiment of many thousand poor people, and the vent of a far greater quantitie of Woollen commodities then now is, which would bee a great be∣nefit to this Nation, in giving a comfortable livelihood to all the poor, and advance the Customs and Revenues of the Common-wealth. 11. I humbly desire your Honors, that you speedily would take into your consideration, the Provision for Fish for all the year, this beeing the season of the year for doing of it; and that you would have some treatie with the Fish∣mongers speedily about it, and that an Act may bee presen∣ted to the Hous about it, that so the whole Nation may take notice of it, and all Merchants, and Fisher-men make their provision accordingly for the Market; for heretofore
this hath onely been spoken of about that time, which was usually called Lent, when there was not provision to furnish the Citie for a week; and if you would put a re∣straint, for som time, for the killing of Lambs and Sheep, by God's blessing wee might in a short time, recover a stock of Wooll, and this Nation flourish with as many golden Fleeces, as ever it did, the Clothier, and thousands of o∣ther people, having no other subsistance, then what springs from this Mine. And if by a Law you bring in Wednesdaies, Fri∣daies, and Saturdaies for Fish-daies, and see to the strict execution, you would give encouragement to Fisher-men and Marriners, and you will breed up a Nurserie of Sea-men, which must bee our surest strength under God. And when once the Nation hath tasted of the wealth of the Fishing Trade, they will bee as much in love with it, as the Hollanders; wee have greatly the advantage of them, wee have the Frie along the Northern and Western Coast, at our own doors, whereas others must make a Voiage to look them out, and that costs charges and time. 12. That you would take into consideration to have the Parlament send som eminent Merchant, to treat in Spain with the Merchants at Cales, and Saint Lucar, about sending their Silver and Commodities from the Indies or Spain, to Plymouth, or any other part of this Nation, and that there may bee alwaies a good Convoie for their safetie by Land or Sea for that purpose; and that you would bee pleased to advise with Mr Antonio Ferdinando, Mr Derrac Host, Mr Stanier, Mr Vandeput, Mr Kilvert, Mr Vincent Lucas, Mr Vincent Delabar, and such others as you shall think fit, to inform you about this business, and what they desire to have don in it; the Na∣tion found the benefit of the last Treatie for the Compositi∣on Trade at Dover, it brought in to bee coined in the Tow∣er, in Gold and Silver, from 1630 to 1647 above fifteen Millions of monie, which by the covetousness of som men, hath been almost all transported, and the Town of Dover paid the State for all that time above fortie thousand pounds a year Custom.
13. That the Parlament would bee pleased to make an Act, to declare that all Merchants Strangers, or other, that bring in Silver or Gold into the Mint, it shall bee justly (according to the Standard) delivered them back again; and that the Master Warden, and Controller for the time bee∣ing, make due paiment thereof, as hath been formerly ac∣customed; and that no attachment; sequestration, nor other pretence whatsoëver, shall caus a stop to bee made upon a∣ny Gold or Silver brought into the Mint, for, or by reason of any Malignancie, or Delinquencie whatsoëver, by any person, so having Treasure in the Mint: But that the War∣den, Master, and Controller, for the time beeing, shall make speedie paiment, as heretofore hath been accustomed to the partie that brought it to the Mint, or his assigns; notwith∣standing any Warrant or Command, the Act making all such to bee void, if any should presume to do it. This is de∣sired by som Merchants, that know the Spaniard will not trust his Treasure to bee liable to Imbargoes, for the Delinquencie of his Fa∣ctor, if it should so chance that hee bee charged to bee a Malignant. If you pass this Act, and give the Merchants good Con∣voie, you will have your Mint go again, and you will get the Fishing Trade, you will have the Staples for Corn, Flax, Hemp, Timber, Iron, Salt, Wines, and all other com∣modities of the East and West Indies, brought into your Harbors; and by a free Trade, this Nation will never have a dearth of Corn; for it would be grainar'd up in everie Sea-Port-Town, for a Market, as it doth in Amsterdam, that wee should ever bee first served, and at home, and at our own doors: whereas there hath been these last three years, transported many hundred thousand pounds for Corn, bought up at high prices beyond Seas. 14. That you would bee pleased to take into your con∣sideration, the Customs of our English Cloth, and Woollen Manu∣facturies, of all sorts, and so lessen the Customs and duties, that wee may bee able to undersel, and beat out all those that have set up our Manufacture beyond Seas; And that you would procure an
Act to make Transportation of Wooll, and Fuller's Earth, Felonie; and in consideration of what you abate of Ma∣nufacturies of England, that you may, if you pleas, rais up∣on such superfluous commodities in your Customs and Ex∣cise; as shall bee Imported from beyond the Seas of Forrain commodities, to the value of what you abate of Native commodities, and this was the constant practice of the great and wise Lord Treasurer, Burlie and his son, as I have seen by several Manuscripts. 15. I humbly present, that all encouragement, and little duties bee laid upon Raw Silk, of all sorts, Imported into this Nation, Flax, Goat's hair, Cotton, Wooll, Grogran Yarn; and that such as will set up Looms, or any other Engins, may receiv all encouragement; and if they bee strangers, that they may bee Ordered to take our English poor, to teach them their Manufacturies; By which means, in a small time, you will bring a rich Manufacture into the Nation, and not onely bee able to furnish your selvs, with all such wrought Silks, of all sorts, as you spend in this Nation, but bee able to furnish Neighbor Countries, as Germanie, Flan∣ders, Holland, and other Forrain parts, which have not yet this Manufacturie. If you pleas to caus them to bee transported with little duties, the poor will finde a great advantage by it, (thou∣sands beeing set on work in this Manufacturie) and the State get by it; for if the Merchant that bring's here raw or throne Silk, doth transport it within a twelvmoneth, the State doth repaie them back one half of their Custom; and when that Silk is Transported and Manufactured be∣yond the Seas, most commonly those Silks are brought back wrought, and the Custom and Excise stoln, for it is most easie to steal the Custom of Silks wrought, by reason of the little bulk: But a Bail of raw Silk, can hardly be stoln, by reason of the bulk, and by this means, the State is deceived of their due; for if the said Silk were emploied and Manu∣factured here, all the Custom would remain, and the Fx∣cise
would bee duly paid, and it will bee undertaken to make here as good commodities of all sorts of wearing Silks, and better and truer then beyond Seas; for there com's much fals black into this Countrie, to the great prejudice of those that wear them; and those men that have an opinion, that nothing of this kinde can bee made good in their own Countrie, when they shall see the contratie daily practised, they will bee constrained by their own rea∣sons to alter their imaginations, when they shall see thousands of Families emploied, som as Throwsters, Silk-Diers, weaving at the Loom, by twisting of the said Silk, and also the working of all other necessaries that do depend thereupon; for of sixteen shillings, which the small pound of sixteen ounces cost, the first pennie when it is wrought in black Plush, or other Silks, it will yeeld at the least thirtie four, and thirtie five shillings per pound, so that full one half of all Silk Manufactured in this Nation, doth turn wholly to the be∣nefit of the poor for Manufactures, a thing of high concernment to hee speedily put in execution. The like or greater improvement may bee made of Flax, Goat's hair, Cotton, Wooll, and Grogran Yarn, if the un∣dertakers may receiv encouragement to bring som men from beyond Seas, to settle these new Arts and Manufa∣ctures amongst us, and so in a short time, wee may pro∣hibit the Importation of all wrought Silks from beyond Seas, and make here what wee spend, and also get to that perfection, to furnish most part of Christendom, with Silk Manufactures, wee having the Trade, that can afford our raw Silk to the Loom, as cheap, and cheaper then most part of Christendom, bringing it immediately by Sea from Persia, which is the Fountain of raw Silk. 16. That you would bee pleased to make the late King's Hous at Greenwich, a Store-hous for som commodities that shall bee Imported, and lie there for a Market, as Corn, Wine, Fish, Salt, Wainscot, Clap-boards, Fur, Timber of all sorts, Iron, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Hops, Mad∣der, and all other commodities of great bulk; and what
proportion com's in there more then London or the Nation will spend, the Merchants to have free libertie to transport them back to any Forrain part, Custom free, onely paying the State Ware-hous room, and such other moderate fees for Officers that keep accompts, as shall bee settled by the State. Your keeping this Staple, will ever avoid a dearth of Corn for the Citie of London, and have all commodities at the best hand. 17. If these Merchant Strangers, such as abide here with their Families, were all Naturalized, som men saie, they would buie up all our Land, and in time supplant the Na∣tion. Truly the contrarie hath been seen and known, for those that are here Merchant Strangers, but especially the Dutch, that have all turned into English; what wealth they have gotten, hath all been bestowed on the English Nation: As first, Sir Peter Vanlore, Sir Thomas Curtel, Sir Moses Trian, Lucas Lucey, Vandeput, Fortrees, Lamot, Francis Sion, Jacob Oils, De Boise Ganes, Matthew Godscale, Bultel Derrick Host, Hermes Dolens, Vanbrough, Littler Rousiot, Vandecouter, De Fisher, Te∣rance, Lodick, Cross Corsellioos, Vanackers, De Labars, Chamberlain, Sir William Courteen, Antonie, Sir Peter Ricot, Adam Law∣rence, Lucas Jacobs, James Stenirs, Demestrias, Sass, Depester, and many more that abide and plant amongst us in London, and other parts of the Nation, most of them are married in∣to English Families, and are English. And it cannot bee denied, that most of these men have originally, by their fore fathers, brought many industrious Manufactures into this Land; by which means, this Na∣tion hath equally been enriched with the Merchant Stran∣gers; witness Colchester, Norwich, Canterburie, and the Sea-Port Towns wherein they live, the people beeing willing to paie all duties, and helpful to their Neighbors, an industrious Na∣tion, and by their frugalitie, and long continuance in fol∣lowing their Trade, attein the reward of their vigilance, beeing Riches. And when that they have it, do they not dispers it a∣mongst
us, marrying our daughters, our sons marrying their daughters, and so wee becom one Nation. I have ever e∣steemed a good Dutch Merchant, as beneficial to us and our Nation, as they in Holland esteem of their Dutch Cows; one bring's a great deal of Milk to the Pail, and these men a great advantage to the Common-wealth, by planting a∣mongst us. And put the case the State should, by privili∣ges given them, invite many Merchant Strangers to com and plant amongst us, I saie, Merchants, and dispers them∣selvs into several parts of this Nation, and that these men would, and should bee admitted to buie our Lands, and bring over their banks of monie, you would quickly finde monie to bee here at five in the Hundred, and your Lands at dou∣ble and treble the price. For in Holland, they will give three∣score years purchase for Land; would not this, that they object as an argument against their coming hither, bee the most advantageous to this Nation, both to the Gentrie and Trades-men? The Gentrie should double and treble his stock in Land, the Trades-man would have monie at five per Cent. Whereas hee paie's now eight and can hardly get it; besides, they give with their daughters great portions; a tun, and two tuns of Gold with one of them, is ordina∣rie there. These men com to manure our Lands, and im∣prove our Nation by their draining, and other husbandrie, to teach our Nation the Fishing Trade, and make our Har∣bors their Store-houses, and what wee have been so long laboring to get, which is their Fishing Trade, a great part will bee brought to our Harbors, and will invite, and stir up our Seamen, by their example, to bee as industrious as they. And when all is don, this wealth wholly fall's into this Nati∣on; for they are English in two ages, and by former experience, wee know what great advantage wee have had by their planting amongst us. 18. I humbly desire you to take into your considerati∣ons, that upon a Medium, there was for ten years last past, about twentie thousand tun of French Wines imported in∣to
this Nation, till the Act prohibiting the Importation of French Wines. That you would bee pleased to take notice, that the Cu∣stoms and Excise of the French Wines paid to the State a∣bout two hundred thousand pounds a year; and these French Wines, Casks and all, cost not, the first pennie, in France, one hundred and fiftie thousand pounds per annum. That, besides the monie coming to the State upon the dutie for French Wines, thousands of people get livelihoods by that Trade, which is verie considerable; as, first, our ship∣ping emploied, Vintners, Wine-Coopers, Car-men, Wine-Porters, Cel∣larage, and many other people have their livelihood out of Wines imported from France. That many Merchants taking advantage of this Act a∣gainst French Wines, Import Wines from Holland, preten∣ding they are Renish Wines; but the truth is, they are Wines mixed at Dort, and other places of Holland, and are small Coniack Wines, of the growth of France, and after they are brewed and sented in Holland, are Imported here for Re∣nish Wines, which is verie unwholsom for men's bodies, & sold almost in all Taverns, when it is mixed with Red Wine for Claret Wine; so that the people paie dear for what is bad, it beeing sold for twelv pence a quart, & might bee afforded for six pence, and som Merchants get infinitely by selling these Wines. I humbly desire it may bee seriously conside∣red of; and if French Wines bee not admitted, that then there bee no Renish Wines Imported, for under color of Re∣nish Wines sold at the Still yard, they import all small Wines of France, and sell them at double the price they could bee afforded at the best hand. But it is worthie a great deal of consideration of your Honors, whether wee or the French lose most, for the rea∣sons aforesaid, upon prohibiting of French Wines; I humbly leav it to your consideration, whether the State doth not lose more then the French, and if they do, then to prevent it for the future; For two hundred thousand pounds a
year, which is a great summe, towards the charge of the Navie, and if the French will not bee quiet, that monie so emploied, will beat them into better manners. 19. Another Manufacturie of great concernment, is, making of all sorts of Linnen Cloth within this Nation, and would set thousands of people on work. Wee can make as good Flax, as any com's out of the Fast Countries, and what wee make not here, may bee imported from For∣rain parts. I do most humbly desire that a Law bee made, that eve∣rie woman beyond the age of twelv years, within this Na∣tion, not beeing troubled with sickness, bee injoined to spin one pound of Hemp or Flax everie moneth, and such wo∣men whose occasions, or qualitie, will not, or cannot spin one pound of Flax or Hemp everie moneth, they paie to the use of the poor the summe of six pence for everie wo∣man, that shall not spin a pound of Flax and Hemp; and the Constable and Collectors for the poor of everie Parish, may bee injoined to levie it monethly, and to paie the said summe in to the Justices of Peace of each Counties, to bee emploed onely for a stock of Flax and Hemp, to bee spun by the poor of the Parish, where such Collections are made. And that such prices and encouragements may bee settled in each Countie of this Nation, for the poor, for their labor of spinning, as by the Justices of the Peace in each Countie shall bee thought reasonable, to give all the poor a competent subsistance, and to keep them from loitering and begging, by which means thousands of Linnen-Weavers, who now live in great povertie, will have comfortable subsistance, and all the poor women in this Nation will for ever bless the remembrance of this Parlament, for ma∣king so charitable a Law. And by this means, wee need not bee beholding to France for Canvass and Linnen for our shipping, or clothing, and wee shall keep the stock of our Nation amongst us. Wee see the Town of Manchester, and many people in Lancashire, have grown rich onely by this
Manufacture, and set thousands of poor on work; and if the Northern Factors that deal in this Manufacture, were consulted withal, they would present you waies to set our own people on work throughout this Nation, and then wee should not need the Locrams, and Dowlass, your French Canvass, which is all bought with readie monie. And if you pleas to give encouragement to som Forrain Linnen Weavers, onely for Cambrick and Holland, to com and plant in this Nation, and to have equal privilege, as they give the English in Holland and Germanie, you will have your Tiffanie, Cambrick, and Holland Weavers, com over and teach this Nation these Manufactures. And that which you now laie out (the Treasure of this Nation beyond Seas) in vast summes, in buying these Manufactures for readie monie, you shall emploie the poor, keep in the stock of the Nation, and export so much to Forrain parts, as you shall spend here: by managing all the Trade in this manner, you would quickly double the stock of this Nation: for if you make your Exportation more in va∣lue then your Importation, all what is above, is gotten to the State; The like argument hold's for loss, that if you Import more Forrain commodities, then you do export Na∣tive, the ballance must bee made up in monie. (And I have seen at Sir John Cooks, the late King's Secretarie (by whom I lear∣ned most of these Observations) an accompt for many years, yearly presented to Queen Elizabeth, of the exact Importation, and Exportation of Native and Forrain commodities, at everie Port, where Customs were paid; so that the Lord Burlie saw as in a Prospective Glass, the increas or decreas of the stock of this Kingdom: And this accompt the Queen had yearly presented by him to her. I praie God the Parlament would renue that Custom, that so the State may know truly how the stock of the Nation stand's. By that means, they will know what commodities are commodious, and what prejudici∣al, and so laie a great Custom and Excise on that they finde superfluous, and lighten and abate upon all our English com∣modities, where our poor have a livelihood by the Manu∣facture.
20. If you make a free Trade, you will, besides all the former advantages, add one more, that is highly conside∣rable to the Common-wealth in general, and to the Mer∣chants in particular, as everie ingenious Merchant must bee forc't to confess; for whereas now wee give all the credit in Spain, and Portugal, and many other Countries, and have none of their Merchants stocks here, or not con∣siderable; whereby when an Imbargo cometh, the loss fal∣leth, not onely upon the Merchant, but the Nation in ge∣neral; for it fall's upon the Usurer, the Clothier, the Wooll∣man, and the work-man, and so by consequence on the Gentrie; for the breaking of one great Merchant, make's the loss fall on ten several Callings, and peradventure two hundred several Families; So that it is not the Merchant that suffer's, but the Nation in general. For I have seen a Merchant af∣ter his breaking, grow rich again, and I have seen som of that Mer∣chant's Creditors receiv such losses by the Merchant's breaking, that they and their Families have for ever been ruined, and this is no strange sight to see in London; Therefore, if you make a free Trade, you will have great stocks of Forrainers lie here in our Har∣bors, and on our Shores, that if any Imbargo com, as now at Lisborn, wee should have had as much and more of the Portugal's goods in our hands, to have made our loss good, as they had seized. All men know, that have ever been at Amsterdam, what vast summes the Portugals have there, and if wee had free Trade, wee should have all our Ports full of their goods; by which means, our Merchants could have made themselvs whole; and it is highly for the securitie of this Nation, to have as much Forrain commodities in our Ports, as wee send to any place, that so upon any oppression of our Merchants, wee may have to make it good at home. And this, if Trade were free, and Merchants Strangers paid no more Customs, then the Natives, and had libertie to re∣transport such commodities as they could not vent here, af∣ter they had tried the Market, you would ever have their stocks here to make good any Imbargo laid on our Merchants beyond the Sea,
a business of the highest advantage to this Nation, and greatest se∣curitie of Trade that can bee; and if what I do with all humilitie propound, had been don fourteen years ago, when I first moved this business, it had prevented the sad loss our Merchants have susteined at Lisborn; for if the Portugals had more goods here, then our Merchants there, it would have made good for the Merchants of both Nations; for an Imbargo had never been made at Lisborn, and so Trade would have gon on freely. 21. Thus I have with all clearness, according to the best of my judgement, humbly presented you that which cost mee many years pains, and here laid down at your feet; besides, I have the advice and approbation of the ablest, and sufficientest Merchants in London, who by long experience in Amsterdam, Legorn, Genoa, and other Forrain parts, know this to bee true, what is here set down, and to bee most ad∣vantageous to the State, in bringing in of a Nurserie of able rich Merchants of all Nations, to contribute to the publick taxes; besides, you will draw all the benefits be∣fore recited to this Nation. The consideration for the spee∣die putting it in practice, is now most humbly presented to your care, which will oblige this Common wealth to bless God for you, and after ages to have you in honorable remembrance, as the first Founders of laying a foundation of a free Trade. By which means, the Dutch from a small and contemptible beginning, have held war against the most Potent Prince of Christendom, and after fourscore years war, compell'd him to give them their own conditions, have made themselvs rich and Po∣tent in the East and West-Indies, and their Amsterdam the Mart of Christendom. Let us by their examples, invite all Merchant Strangers, giving them the same privileges as they have there; Our Ports are far better and safer for all the Trade of the world, then theirs; by this means, you will contract the wealth of the world, you will increas in ship∣ping, Manufacture, and all the precious things of this world; you will make all our Sea Ports, as it was said
of Tyre and Sidon, and you will justly bee called the Resto∣rers of the English Nation to the splendor of the ancient Ro∣mane Common wealth. 22. Concerning the management of the Custom, I humbly conceiv, as they are now carried on, is not to the best improvementt of the State, in point of the Revenue, nor safetie to the Common-wealth; for in the several Sea-Ports of this Nation, and in the Custom-hous at London, none ought to bee emploied in Offices of Trust, but skilful men, and men of Estates, that if any miscarriage com, their E∣states might bee responsible to the State: And whereas som men are of an opinion, that they would have Trade free, to Import all commodities, and Export all without any re∣straint, not for Leather, Fuller's Earth, Corn, Wooll, Ammunition, Gold and Silver, Horses, and all other things that are the staff and staie of this Nation; I would not write it, but I have it affirmed by men of great qualitie, that this is the opinion of som men that are in place and power. Truly I humbly conceiv, there cannot bee a more destru∣ctive thing to this Common-wealth, then that those men's principles should bee followed: And I humbly conceiv, that it would verie greatly conduce towards the better ma∣nagement of Trade, that if there were such Officers settled in the Custom-hous, as by virtue of the ancient Laws of the Nation formerly were, who were men of known qua∣litie, and did not onely put in sufficient securitie securitie to answer to th State, what monie they received, but also that they should well and faithfully execute their place, in guarding all things prohibited Exportation and Importation, and were also by divers Statutes deprived of Merchandizing, Shipping, and many other emploiments in the Common∣wealth, whereby they might solely attend their several ser∣vices, to the best advantage of the Nation.
About settling a Court of Merchants in London, as it is in Roan, Paris, Burdeaux, Lions in France, and other parts of Germanie; the Model is much after this manner: 23. ONce everie year to caus a general meeting of the Merchants in Roan by common consent, to chool a Prior, and two Consuls, to remain in their Autoritie for a year; and so to bee yearly chosen, according to most voices, not onely the Merchants of Roan, but also the Merchants Strangers, beeing to bee presented, an assistance in the said collection; And this is don the beginning of Januarie everie year. The Prior and Consuls may take unto their Assistants twentie Merchants, or more or less, as they shall think fit to assist them, in the proceedings of their Judgments; They are likewise to appoint one Counsellor, and one Atturnie for this service, and a Register, and the Court to sit one daie in everie week, to hear, determine, and dispatch the said Appellations, by order of Roll for that purpose ordain∣ed. And to give judgment between all men of what condi∣tion or qualitie soever, of all Suits, Controversies, and Diffe∣rences touching matters of Merchandizing, or buying or sel∣ling, as well for obligating Bils of Debt, Receipts, Blanks signed, Bils of Exchange, Answers by Sureties, Associations of Merchants, either general or particular Assurances, Ac∣compts, Transportations of Bils, Bargains, and Partner∣ships for matters aforesaid, or any thing belonging thereun∣to, Commanding all people, Judges, and any other of what condition soever, that they permit the Merchants to use and enjoie this benefit plainly and peacefully, without any contradiction, notwithstanding any Ordinance, Cu∣stoms, Statutes, Privileges, Commands, or Letters to the contrarie.
The Reason wherefore the King of France set up a Court of Merchants, is declared, becaus the Merchants were the first setters up and inventors of commerce, together with the Order and use of Exchange, and by that means, had the best and soundest understandings to bee Judges in these cases; and therefore he did institute them to bee principal Judges. That upon the Prior and Consul's choosing, immediate∣ly they take an Cath in the presence of all the Merchants there assembled, promising duly and faithfully to execute Justice, without any regard either to poor or rich, or pri∣vate interest, as other Judges do, when they are newly esta∣blished in their Government; And the Merchants that are called to assist the Prior, or Consuls, are to bee sworn to do Justice everie time they are requested, to assist the Court of Merchants. And all Jailors, and Keepers of Prisons, are commanded to keep and arrest the prisoners committed unto them by the said Prior and Consuls, as they do the prisoners of all other Judges, under the same penaltie and bonds, without demanding leav or licence of other Judges, or any other person whatsoēver. And all Judgments of the said Prior and Consuls, shall bee executed throughout all the King's Dominion, bee it by attachment of goods and sale thereof, arrest, and impri∣sonment of persons condemned, as also by penalties and forfeitures of monie, according to the caus of the offence; And all Noble Personages and others, as well Spiritual-men and Laie-men, of age or under age, or their Deputies, using and exercising the Trade of Merchandizing, or Exchange, shall in that respect bee subject to the Power and Autoritie of the Prior and Consuls; and all other Judges are forbid∣den to intermeddle concerning such debates and differences, growing between Merchants. And the said Priors and Consuls, with the Merchants their assistants, are required to bee just and careful, and so
to avoid giving of offence to other Judges, by rash hea∣ring. The said Consuls, and Prior, have likewise in charge, the punishing of all frauds, abuses, deceits, falsification, and all other ill dealing in Merchandizes, and all abuses committed in the cours of Exchanges. All Civil Causes between men of what qualitie soëver, besides those which concern Trade of Merchandize, or matters of Exchange, bee all exemp∣ted from the Jurisdiction of the Prior and Consuls, the par∣tie or parties grieved may accuse the said Prior and Consuls, & other Jurisdictions of this Court, if they have lawful caus so to do, and that not in writing, but by word of mouth, in the presence of them they charge. And their accusati∣ons shall bee summarily examined, justly decided, and if the said Prior or Consuls bee parties, then the Priors or Consuls for the five last years past, or so many as are in bee∣ing, shall adjung the caus. And if the said Prior or Con∣suls shall bee accused, and justly proved of any corruption, then they are not to give sentence, but the most ancientest and eminentest Merchants, and those that have the first pre∣heminence in the Exchange, shall sit in the place of the said Prior and Consuls, and give Judgment without any salarie to bee given to the said Merchant, in regard of their judg∣ment; and the Merchant that shall bee chosen, Prior, Con∣suls, and Clerks of the Court, must bee free Denizens, or els naturalized, and married in the Citie of Roan. The elections of the said Prior yearly, must bee made before a Committee of two Counsellors, named and depu∣ted by the Parlament for that purpose, and the Clerk of the Ensurance Office, must bee an Inhabitant in the Citie of Roan, in som publick and eminent place which shall bee assigned for that purpose. And in Paris, you have one Judg, and four Consuls, with the like Jurisdiction as they have at Roan for Merchants, and by their Charter, char∣ging all Judges not to intermeddle in any caus concerning Merchandize and Exchange, upon the penaltie of making
void the Suit, and of Arbitrarie amercements, charges and damages, and interests of the parties grieved, as well of the said Judges, as against the Laws, and Atturnies injoin∣ing all Sergeants everie one of them in their turns to assist, & to bee present at the daies and hours, in which the Court of the said Prior and Consuls useth to bee kept, & there to com∣mand silence, and to put in use and execution, their Orders and Commands, and to give them such honor and reve∣rence, as they owe unto Magistrates, injoining all our good Subjects to do the same. And if there shall arise a Dispute or Controversie, whereby the Merchants shall conceiv they have not justice of the Prior and Consuls, for the time beeing, then all such Merchants, that have been Priors and Consuls, and are remaining in the Citie of Roan, without they bee hindred by sickness, or other just excuse, shall make a Court of Merchants, and there, after they have taken an Oath, to do equal justice, they shall give the sentence, which shall bee binding to all par∣ties irrevocable for the time to com. This Court is at this daie in use in many great Cities in France, by which means, Law-suits are speedily dispatch∣ed, to the great eas of all Merchants, both Natives and Strangers, and they finde the good and speedie justice which all men have there. I humbly desire, that the principal Merchants in London, might bee consulted withal, and their humble desires con∣cerning a Court of Merchants, which may bee settled a∣mongst them, which will bee a great eas and benefit to the Merchants, and to all honest-minded men that are Traders, to have their Suits for Merchandize and Traffick determined amongst themselvs, to have their differences speedily dispatched, and not delaied as it hath been, to the ruine of many Families in this Citie and Nation.
To the Honorable the Council for Trade The humble Petition of Thomas Violet Sheweth, 24. THat your Petitioner seeing in the Journal Books of the Parlament, an Order referring the East-India Companie's Petition, (Wch they made unto the Parlament, for obteining of a Licence, to transport twentie thousand pounds of Forrain Bullion beyond Seas) to this Council for Trade, to give their opinions concerning the said Peti∣tion. And your Petitioner having perused the late Act, for the advancing of Trade, whereby you are made Commissio∣ners, and a standing Council for regulating of the Trade of this Common-wealth, whereby you are autorized not onely to receiv all such Propositions and Overtures, for the well regulating and benefit of Trade, which shall bee offe∣red unto you by any person whatsoēver; but you have likewise full power and autoritie, to view all Books, Re∣cords, and Writings of Publick use, which you shall finde needful for your better information; your Petitioner ha∣ving for these sixteen years been emploied about stopping the transporting of Gold and Silver out of this Nation, and so having many opportunities offered unto him to know many things, that may bee secrets to this Council; his hum∣ble praier to You is, that, before you make your Report to the Parlament, you would bee pleased to take these his hum∣ble Propositions into your serious considerations, beeing highly for the benefit of the Common-wealth. 1. That this Council require the East-India and Persia Companie, to bring in their Charter, whereby you will inform your selvs, with what privilege they have granted them, and upon what conditions and restrictions. 2. That you would bee pleased to require an accompt
of the East India and Persia-Companie, of all the summes of monie, Gold or Silver, either Forrain or English, which they have sent into India and Persia, ever since Julie 1620. this is no new thing, for they did in 1620 give an accompt, as will plainly by their Books appear, that from the Ori∣ginal and first foundation of their Trade, in Anno 1601, to Julie 1620. they had shipped away for India onely, 548090l. sterling, in Spanish monies, and som Flemish and Germane Dollars, which accompt was presented in Parlament at that time. 3. Your Petitioner desire's you to take notice, that if the State in Parlament were then so careful in times of peace, and the Trade of the Nation flourishing, to call the East-India Companie to an accompt for twentie years, and to caus them to make their accompts plainly to appear by their Books for twentie years; surely, I humbly conceiv, this Ho∣norable Council will exspect for the service of the Com∣mon-wealth, to have an exact accompt of all the Treasure the East-India and Persia Companie have exported; and to have them to produce a just accompt what quantities of Gold or Silver they have bought in Holland, and in other Forrain places, immediately upon their proper accompt; and what quantities of English melted Silver in Bars, they have bought of Goldsmiths in London; what quantities of Gold in Bars, they have bought of the Guinie and Barbarie Companies, what quantities of English coined Gold they have sent into the East-Indies, and to Persia; what quanti∣ties of Cardquess, Rex-Dollars, Rials of Spain, or any other Forrain Silver, they have bought up in Londou, of Mer∣chants, Goldsmiths, or others, which without the East∣India Companie so buying, would have been brought into the Mint and coined, to the great augmentation of the stock of this Nation. And that they bee required to give you an Accompt of what qnantities of Spanish Pistollers, Dutch Riders, Hungarian Duckets, Gold Gilders, Gold Albertus of Flanders, Italian Pistolets, Turkie Sultels, and all other Forrain
Gold and Silver, they have bought up in London, of Gold∣smiths, Merchants, Natives, and strangers, which have not been members of their Companie, and transported to India and Persia, within thirtie years; all which, I am sure they have perfect Accompts of. And that the aforesaid Compa∣nie bee required to send you in all the Warrants and Licen∣ces for their doing of the same, and for a true discoverie of the premises. 4. That you would require the Books of Invoies of the Lading of everie ship of all the Gold and Silver, in Bars, or Coin, that hath been sent to the East-Indies and Persia, since 1620. for by them you shall see what Gold and Silver each ship carried, and the Ships, Factors, and Master's names, and to what Factorie in Persia or India, and the several years, and so you will quickly see the just quantitie to a pennie, what they have transported, and in what sort of Coin, ei∣ther English Gold or Silver, or Forrain Gold or Silver, for these thirtie years; the giving you a true accompt thereof, will bee of great concernment to the Common-wealth in many respects. 5. That you would appoint a Committee to view over the Journal Books: for out of them there will bee gathe∣red businesses of great concernment to the Nation; and if som able Book-Keepers bee appointed with mee, to take out what I shall observ in them, it will tend highly to the service of the Nation, and give a stop to great mischiefs that is daily practised on the Common-wealth. 6. If you pleas to inform your selvs by this waie, you will see clearly many other secrets, upon perusal of these Books, then I will speak of, and so you will bee able to rectifie & settle the Trade in a flourishing condition, that it may bee beneficial to the Common wealth, and all the Ad∣venturers, whereas heretofore, & now as it is managed, none getteth by it, but the Committees of the said Companies, and the Companie's Factors and their Officers. The Ad∣venturers having been blinded ever since it was a Compa∣nie,
and led by the nose by their servants, or els how could their Factors and servants bee so rich, and the Companie's stock so poor. 7. I humbly conceiv upon the Examination of all the premises, when that the Books of the Companie are exa∣mined, it will bee found that the East-India Companie hath sent away the Common-wealth's Coin, both in Gold and Silver. I am the more encouraged to speak this plainly to you, becaus I know there is now no Lord Treasurer, no Lord Privie Seal, no Bed-chamber-men, nor Privie Coun∣cil to bribe, nor as I hope any els to bee bribed, to take off and suppress the just examination of abuses in Compa∣nies, which heretofore have been proved to have been a common Trade wth som Companies, to keep up their Letters Patents, to the high deceit of the Nation, having gi∣ven great summes of monie for Bribes, to have libertie to oppress the good people of the Nation, and to have Li∣cence with Autoritie to deceiv the Common-wealth; all which abuses, I praie God may, by the wisdom of this Council, bee carefully found out, and presented to the Par∣lament, and such Order and Regulation made for the future for all Traders, as may bee most for the prosperitie of this Nation in general, without any regard to particular Interest, when it shall bee found destructive to the Common∣wealth. Septemb. 11. 1650. Signed Tho. Violet. Die Mercurii Sept. 11. 1650. At the Council for Trade at White-Hall. Ordered, THat the East-India Companie bee desired to produce their O∣riginal Charter before this Council.
Ordered, THat the East-India-Companie bee desired to bring in to this Council, what Licences they formerly have granted them for the Transportation of Bullion, or Coin, since the year 1620. Ordered, THat the East-India-Companie bee intreated likewise to pro∣duce the direct and true Accompts of all the several summes of Bullion and Coin, in any specie to the full, that have been yearly transported by them, since the year 1620. Ex. Ben: Worslie, Secret. THat your Honors would bee pleased to move effectu∣ally in the Hous, for a positive Order, to require the East-India Companie to give obedience to the Order of the Council of Trade, dated 11 of Septemb. 1650. And that the East-India's and Persia Companie's Books of Invoices, may bee brought forth to the Council for Trade, and not to accept of the Accompt what they have Registred in the Custom-Hous, but what shall appear really upon their O∣riginal Books of Invoices in the Companie's custodie, which they have sent really to everie Factor yearly in Persia and India; for they enter at the Custom-Hous but what they pleas, but the truth must appear by the Companie's Original Books; the Dutch, East-India-Companie, as I am credibly informed, have since their first stock, made everie hundred a thousand to the Adventurers, and as this stock hath been managed in England, the Adventurer get's nothing, but the private Officers. I humbly desire for the service of the Nation in general, the truth of all these proceedings may bee truly stated, that so, the Council may bee enabled, when they see their Accompts, justly and clearly by their own Books, to give the Parlament their opinion concern∣ing the East-India-Companie's request, and for the regula∣ting that Trade for the future, for the best advantage of the
Common-wealth, beeing a business of great concernment to the wealth and honor of the Nation. May it pleas your Honors, I am of old Mr Carmarthen's minde, which was an Officer in the Custom-Hous in Queen Elizabeth's time; hee would speak a truth, though many of the great Officers of the State, & Merchants, & Cu∣stomers, were against him for it; yet by his vigilance & constant perseverance, the truth came to the Queen's ear; and shee check∣ed her Treasurer, and Leicester, and commanded them to bring Carmarthen to her, when Burlie and Leicester, had laid him in the Fleet for a busie fellow; shee would hear, for all their words, what that busie fellow said, though much against her great Counsellor's minde; and then the Queen found, upon examination, that her great Officers were bribed. And the conclusion was, Carmarthen raised the Queen's Farm in few years to double the monie it made afore, and made Custo∣mer Smith paie it, and, in despite of the Lord Burlie and Leicester, Carmarthen had the Queen's thanks. For, though in other things shee would hear them; yet when it concerned them∣selvs, and upon the point of her Revenue, shee would not trust wholly the greatest of her Officers, but had her instru∣ments to give her true Information, a sure waie for a State never to bee deceived, and a rule fit for these times. This storie is much after this manner recorded of Queen Eliza∣beth, for a piece of high Prudence, Justice and Bountie, shee making Carmarthen and his son Surveyor of all the Customs and Customers, in which place they continued above 50 years; and this Carmarthen's son died but three years ago, in the same office the Queen gave his Father for this service. These Propositions in these several Heads beeing set on foot by the Parlament, I humbly conceiv is another man∣ner of service for the State, then Carmarthen's both in point of profit, honor, and safety, and though som private men, for private Companies, may bee avers against what I have here said in these particulars, it is their self-interest that make's them so.
I am an humble suitor to your Honors, that the Act against transporting Gold and Silver, culling and melting the cur∣rant Coin of the Nation, which hath laien so long commit∣ted, may forthwith pass into an Act; for till that bee don, your Mint will bee obstructed, and to transport all the Gold and Silver, and coin none, what the end of such things will bee, I am enforced to speak. 1. For I see there are som which either out of spite to the welfare of this Nation, or by the subtiltie of the transpor∣ters of Gold and Silver, and cullers out of the heavie currant Coins of this Nation, have engaged themselvs to obstruct this great Service, that so the Common-wealth may bee circumven∣ted of his surest strength, Monie, which is the sinews of war, and strength of the Nation, and those people that abound with it, are able to command all things in the world; And that Common-wealth and Familie that is without it, is made uncapable of doing any great action. Besides, by this dangerous Maxim, as much as in them lie's, they labor to darken and weaken the splendor and strength of your Armie, which hath don such great things; for if your Treasure all bee exhausted, how shall they bee paid? And these tenets at the best smell of a Presby∣terian, if not of a Jesuitical design. And I do most humbly de∣sire the Council of War would resent it, it concern's the safetie and well-beeing of the Armie, the keeping of trea∣sure within the Nation; for they, and the Armie are like a ship at sea, which must bee well-provided with Anchors and Cables, and Victuals; monie is to them all this, nay, everie thing. And for those that have maliciously opposed the Act, for prohibiting transporting of Gold and Silver, I make no question to finde a time to call them to an ac∣compt; For others that desire to have the question truly sta∣ted, I will with all willingness and humilitie present what former ages have don, and this present time require's. First, I humbly present to you, that the treasure of England is but like a quantitie of water in a Cistern; wee have no springs of treasure, as in Spain, everie year to bee supplied
from the West-Indies; and therefore it concern's us to keep in our treasure, for beeing once transported, it cannot bee drawn back, but by inhancing of monie, to the ruine of all the owners of Land and settled Revenues; for so much as you rais monie, you take from all Landlords. To this is replied, wee may bring monie from Holland, and seve∣ral other parts of Christendom, freely, and therefore it ought to bee as free here in England, and it is no prejudice to the Common-wealth; and this is the opinion of some Gen∣tlemen, that I believ love the Common-wealth, and speak not out of a design to prejudice either the Nation, or Armie; for these men I humbly offer these reasons to consider. 2. In Holland, when it was made a new State, the Pla∣carts and Edicts shew, which I caused to bee Translated, What severe penalties they put upon transporting of monie; And made it Banishment, Confiscation of goods, Imprisonment, and Corporal punishments; they knew Monie was the principal Ammunition of their Nation, for having that, they could want neither Men, Victual, nor Arms, and this they did at the beginning of their Wars, which is now our condition, and wee ought to follow this rule. But now in Holland, by long continuance of Trade, great thrift and abundance of shipping, they are no other then a Bank or Ware-Hous; they have little lands or houses to in∣vest their stocks in, but must put it into commodities and monie. And since, by God's blessing upon their industrie, they have in a Spot of Ground, contracted the wealth of Christendom. And so abounding in Monies, and not knowing how to invest it, let it bee granted, that they let monie bee exported freely, this make's nothing that wee should do so now, for the reasons following. 3. In England, by the Statute, any man may transport Corn freely, when it is at four shillings a Bushel, becaus of the abundance, that so the Farmer may paie his Land∣lord, and keep his Hous, and paie Laborers for the clear∣ing of his Ground, and Threshing it in the Barn. Doth
the Law allow any man to carrie Corn when it is 10 or 12 s. a Bushel out of the Nation, by that means you may starv the poor, and any that should do it, deserveth the highest punishment; my Argument upon this follow's, viz. 4. Let us attein so much before-hand in stock of monie, as the Hollanders have, bee in so flourishing a condition of Trade as they are, hee master of all the subtilties of the Banks and Exchanges in Christendom, as they are, which they make that use of, as they do of their Sluces, for water, so they let in and out all the Treasure of Christendom to their own advantage; then I saie, with all chearfulness, transport Monie as they do, and freely, and as you do transport Corn, when it is at four shillings a Bushel, but till you have that plentie of Monie to paie your Fleet, to paie your Armies, to maintein Trade, and Commerce, and all these in a plentiful manner, keep your Laws in force, follow the Offendors with severe and sharp punishments, as you do, when there is a death of Corn, punish the transporters of Corn, with the severest punishments, as Murtherers, and Destroiers of the poor. And this is a certain Maxim, that That Common-wealth that hath Monie plentifully, can command all things. 5. I shall leav it to the capacitie of any reasonable man that see's; you may receiv one thousand pounds in a pai∣ment, and not twentie shillings in Gold; you shall receiv one hundred pounds in Silver, and not fiftie pounds of it but clipped, and lighter then the Standard, as it com's out out of Tower, all our weightie Monie beeing melted into Ingots, and sent beyond Seas; you shall have fiftie thou∣sand pounds in a paiment in Holland, all of English half Crowns, and this is known to all men that know France and Forrain parts, that our Gold is fortie times more plen∣tiful in France, Flanders, and Holland, then here. 6. You have som Goldsmiths that have constantly bought the clipped English monie, many times over of se∣veral people, (and put it away again) and so make the
Cheat run round like a Hors in the Mill, and cozen the whole Nation; you shall not receiv in many Towns of this Nation, not in five hundred pounds paiment, two hun∣dred pounds of good Monies, such as the Gentrie or Mer∣chants can paie away again in London; And if hee bee for∣ced by reason of his occasion, to paie Monie in London, hee must sell it in London to the Goldsmiths, at above twentie pound in the hundred loss. And som Goldsmiths so buying it, sell it to the Grasiers, Receivers of Publick Cash, or som one or other, that the Gentleman is sure to have it paid him the next Quarter in the Countrie. And if these Cheats must bee spoken for, coun∣tenanced, and by som publickly warranted, there shall ne∣ver pass a Law to have the Offendors punished. The draught of this Act of Parlament, was drawn by Order of the Council of State, and several times debated upon a Pe∣tition of the Citie of London, the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint, the Officers of the Customs, the Committee of the Navie, and yet nothing don in it, to the unspeakable hazard, and damage of the Common-wealth. I do humbly beseech you consider the great summes of Monie the Navie take's up everie year, and the Armies with both their appurtenances; and these, it is true, waste not the treasure of the Nation by transportation, but it re∣main's constantly amongst us, and without these necessarie supports, the splendor and safetie of the Common-wealth would bee undermined, which is the heartie desire of som of the Presbyterian partie. But those that are versed in the managing of these great Affairs, know you must constantly provide the Sea-man's paie, with the Victuals, and Soldier's paie, besides the Train of Artillerie, and an hundred other necessaries incident to a Fleet and Armie, and without Monie all these strengths ceas as a Clock doth when you take off the weights. I shall humbly leav it to everie judicious man, what the trans∣porter of the treasure is, according to the conjuncture of
this time, and as your Affairs now stand, for many other designes may undermine the State by degrees. But the transporter of treasure now in these times, is a Powder-Plotter, hee blow's up Parlament, Armie, Fleet, and Common-wealth, all at once, and yet som, through ignorance, speak for them; but let the transporters of Gold and Silver, and the cullers and melters of the heavie Coin of this Nation, run their cours a little longer, (which God defend) they will leav no Mo∣nie in the Nation; and then, when it is too late, you will finde as Sampson's strength laie in his hair, so the sinews of War is Monie; and, if formerly they deserved to bee pu∣nished in the purs, that were transporters of monie, cullers, & melters down of the heavie currant Coin of the Nation, they much more deserv to die for it now, for it is undermining of the whole State; And what in time of peace, in this particular was a misdemeanor, I humbly conceiv for the safetie of the Common-wealth, ought to bee made Felonie at this time, considering the multiplicitie of your occasions. I do therefore humbly desire, that the Act may bee spee∣dily dispatched; and not delaied, by the subtiltie of a few men, to the ruine and destruction of the Common-wealth; for without it pass, you will not have Monie left to paie your Armies, your Navie, nor maintain Commerce. It is not an Act of Parlament can levie Monie, if you take not present Order to keep it in the Nation. And therefore (I most humbly praie) as you love the safetie of your selvs, and the Armie, keep the treasure in this Common-wealth (which is yet left) by making transporting treasure Felonie for the future, & punish those that have transported the treasure, and give all encouragement and privilege to such as bring in Silver and Gold into your Mint. I humbly desire, that all private interest in this particular, may, by the Autoritie of the Parlament, bee suppressed, which shall bee proved to bee against the Publick. And that Briberie may bee examined, and branded with all infamie, which have kept up the corrupt interest of many Companies, to cheat
the Common-wealth, and obstruct the passing of good Laws, for the benefit of the Nation. Yet I do most humbly declare to you, I am for all good Orders in Companies, both Merchants and Trades∣men, so far as it is not prejudicial to the Common-wealth in gene∣ral. If this which I have with all humilitie said, shall finde a favorable construction with your Honors, and that it have life from your Honors countenance & protection, and that you put forth your selvs, to see that these things bee put in execution, according to the power you have in this Com∣mon-wealth, I shall thank God for it, and I shall bee well content, that you have seen that in an hour, that cost mee ma∣ny years pains and studie. And I shall bee willing, for the service of this Common-wealth to take som pains to enlarge my self in these particulars, if my humble advice bee requi∣red. For though I love not to give an accompt of my faith to a Presbyter Elder, yet with all humilitie, I conceiv my self bound, and I am readie to give the State an accompt in what I can serv the Common-wealth, when I am com∣manded, and shall and can do it with more chearfulness, they many a Presbyter, that have falsly charged mee to bee a Malignant, and without the Justice of the Parlament, have robbed mee of my Estate, to a great value, and I ne∣ver was as yet heard to obtain a hearing. And that I may have Justice, is all my humble desire, to your Honors. In the procuring mee Justice, I shall bee ever bound to praie for your Honor's happiness here and hereafter. Your Honor's most humble Servant THOMAS VIOLET. Jan. 1. 1651.
A TRUE DISCOVERIE TO THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND, HOVV THEY HAVE BEEN Cheated of almost all the Gold and Silver Coin of this Nation, WHICH Hath been, and is daily Transported into Forrain Parts. AND, How the people of this Nation are, and have been abused by Light and Clipped English Monie, and the means shewed for the prevention thereof. HUMBLY Presented to the Parlament of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND. By THOMAS VIOLET, a true lover of his Countrie. LONDON, Printed by W. DU-GARD, in the Year 1651.
Behold Transporter of Treasure, Culler of Monie, Deceitful Wier-drawer. A TRUE DISCOVERIE HOW THE COMMON-VVEALTH OF ENGLAND, Have been cheated of their Treasure; and means shewed for the prevention thereof. IT hath been daily practised by som particu∣lar Merchants, both Native and Stran∣gers, to transport the treasure of this Nation, to the great prejudice of the State; who for their own private gain, have not spared to damnifie the Common∣wealth so highly, that their persons and estates cannot give a full satisfaction for the great mischief don, and pra∣ctised by them to this Common-wealth, and without a strict examination, and exemplarie punishment of the of∣fendors, or som of the chief of them, these mischiefs will ne∣ver bee prevented, & the Common-wealth will bee still un∣determined by those Moles, to the unspeakable damage there∣of. And becaus som, through ignorance, do not under∣stand and conceiv the great damage which may com to the Common-wealth, by the suffering these abovesaid abuses to continue; and others more craftie and subtile, both Gold-Smiths, and Merchants, that are transporters of Gold and Silver, and practisers of several high frauds and abuses upon
Coin and Bullion, have the confidence (or impudence) to make arguments for defending the transgressors; Now for the information of som in their judgments, that have desired a true accompt, what Laws are now in force in this Nation, for prevention of these mischiefs; what Orders and Laws in France, Holland, and Flanders, for the regulating of their Mints, Monie, and Bullion; what punishments and restriction upon the offendors; I have procured the Or∣dinance, and Placarts of France, Holland, and Flanders, to bee translated; have abbreviated them for your informati∣on, and quoted som Laws of this Nation now in force, as hereafter follow. And if you pleas to make the law, now presented to the Hous, stricter than it is now drawn, I Humblie conceiv you will do the Common-wealth the greater benefit, consi∣dering the present condition of the Common-wealth. Transporting of Treasure hath been Felonie, 4 Henrie 7. cap. 13, and 17 Edward 4. this Statute to endure for twentie years. I humbly conciev the Common wealth hath now as much reason to look to keep the treasures in the Na∣tion, as they had then, considering all things. That you would bee pleased to give one moitie at the least to any person or persons, that will, or can discover the offendors: that so by this reward, all persons may bee invited to discover the offendors all over the Nation, and the same rule followed which was in 14 Rich. 2. cap. 12. where Commissions by Act of Parlament, were granted through∣out the Realm, to enquire of such as had conveyed the Mo∣nie of England out of the Nation; in doing whereof, great summes throughout the Nation will com to the State, and the offendors will remember the Proverb, sweet meat must have sower sauce, when they shall bee enforced to paie back to the State, that which they have defrauded them of, and will prevent them and all others hereafter, for to take the boldness to get themselvs fortunes by any of the aforesaid indirect courses, which so highly tend to the damage of this Common-wealth.
By these deceits Commerce is spoiled, Traffick decaieth, those things that are needful for man's preservation, grow dear, the handie∣craft's work ceaseth, the work-men betake themselves to som other places, and the Commonaltie, to speak all in a word, is brought to po∣vertie, (as is gravely observed by the Master General, and Council of the Mint in Flanders, 2d October 1647. in their Declaration, clearly demonstrating, that the careful and punctual keeping of the Placart of the Mint, is verie necessarie, and with∣all profitable to all persons of what state, qualitie, or con∣dition soëver; shewing, that if the Placart bee not ob∣served, but that monie should bee paid out above the true value through these disorders, they shall never bee able to keep their treasure within their Countrie. And in their Declaration, shewing most judicially, the great mischiefs that befal a Nation by enhauncing and rai∣sing their Monie, beeing no real cure for the Common∣wealth, but utterly destructive to all sorts of people, even from the Prince to the poor Laborer, to any Free State or Common-wealth, to all Merchandize and Commodities: all which considerations, although verie potent, yet do not oftentimes com into the mindes and comprehensions, not onely of the common people, but also of those to whom the emploiment of Publick Office have given more judg∣ment and credit in managing of affairs themselvs, and who dare to spread it abroad, that there is no harm nor evil in enhauncing the Coin above its true value and worth, be∣caus they can put it away at the same price as they receiv it; not taking notice by the waie, that raising and augmenting the price of the Monie, doth, or must by consequence, aug∣ment and encreas the price of all Merchandizes and Provi∣sions proportionable; whereby of necessitie it must follow, that if the Monies bee augmented and hightned, the Land∣lords and Creditors receiv so much less; the Merchandize, Victuals, and all other Wares, grow presently dearer; the publick treasure, either Excise or Customs are abated, by so much as you enhaunce or lessen your Monies: for it is
not the Denomination of an high price of Gold or Silver set's the value, but it must have weight and fineness propor∣tionable to what you call it, or els you go upon a wrong ground; As for example, in Scotland, they call Thirteen pence half pennie, a Mark; and Twentie pence, they call Twentie shil∣lings; this denomination of a great value give's not the in∣trinsical value. I caused these men following, to bee fined in the Star-Chamber, for transporting Gold and Silver, and culling and melting down the heavie Coin of the Nation. The 25th of Jan. 12th Car. Charls Frank 4000l Robert Ellis 4000l Isaac Romeer 3000l Jacob Delew 1000l Roger Fletcher 1000l Richard Cockram 1000l John Parrat 1000l The 17th of Febr. 12th Car. Peter Hern 2000l John Terrie 2000l Timothie Eman 2000l Isaac Brames 1000l Henrie Futter 500l Henrie Sweeting 500l John Perrin 100l The Total of the said Fines amount to the summe of 24100l. Sir John Wollaston Knight, and William Gibs Esquire, both Aldermen of the Citie of London, beeing informed against in this Information, by the late King's then Atturnie Gene∣ral, procured the late King's Pardon, and so were dischar∣ged. And Peter Fountain, who was informed against for tran∣sporting of Gold, procured his Pardon upon paiment of 1100l. And all these I did bring to a Trial, all at my own charge. That besides the fourteen offendors sentenced in the Star-Chamber, and pardoned, as aforesaid, there are many other Merchants, Gold-smiths, and others, that have transported
Gold and Silver out of the Nation, that have sold Gold and Silver at above the price of the Mint, that have furnished much light Gold, English and Forrain, and great quanti∣ties of Gold and Silver to Merchants, and others to trans∣port, that have culled and melted down the weightiest cur∣rant silver Coins, as shillings, six pences, & half crowns, all which offences are against the common Laws of the Nati∣on: And the Wisdom and Policie of State hath, upon free and general pardons at Parlaments, exempted it out of the free pardon, thereby the more to terrifie and restrain men from venturing in that kinde, to transport Gold or Silver, or to melt down the currant Silver Coins of the Nation. That divers Gold-smiths of London, are becom Exchan∣gers of Bullion of Gold and Silver, and buy it of Mer∣chants and others, pretending to carrie it to the Mint, but indeed they are the greatest Instruments for transporting that are; and in a manner, they are onely those who furnish transporters with English and Forrain Gold, Spanish mo∣nie, Rix-dolars, Pistollers, Cardacues, culling and melting down the currant Silver Coins of this Realm for Plate and Silver-Thread; and no doubt, when a true representation of the abuses of such Gold-smiths, Finers, & Wier drawers, as hath been formerly, and is daily practised by many of them, shall bee made appear; I doubt not, but the Parla∣ment will think fit to take the same into consideration, and provide som means to restrain them from doing the Com∣mon-wealth that damage, as formerly hath been don. That som of the Goldsmiths make it their use and pra∣ctice to by light English Gold of shop-keepers, and others, which by the Laws of this Nation, wanting beyond re∣medie, ought to bee bought as Bullion, and upon the sale, ought to bee defaced, and new coined in the Mint: But they take another waie; for they sell all this Gold to trans∣port, though it want four, five, or six grains above the al∣lowance, and that a Twentie shilling piece will not make nineteen shillings to bee coined in the Mint; yet the
Gold-smiths will not abate above two pence or three pence, and somtimes but one pennie in the piece, let the Gold want what it will; by which means, they out-give the Mint: And the Gold which the Gold-smiths buie of the Subjects, thinking it is to carrie to the Mint to bee new coined to pass in currant paiment, they put it into a dead Sea, never to bee made use of in our Common wealth: For weekly, French and English have bought up this Gold, let it bee as light as it will, at higher prices then the Mint are allowed to give by their Indenture, to the value of many hundred thou∣sand pounds; for by the Gold-smith's rule, the Mint is alwaies last served, as beeing the worst Chap man, and giving least for it; for after all hands are full, both for transporters, Plate-workers, Finers, and Wier-drawers; then that, which they cannot vent otherwise, cometh into the Mint; which the Officers of the Mint know verie well: and if Gold and Silver never came into the Gold-smith's hands, (which Merchants sell to them, believing they car∣rie it all to bee coined) far more Gold and Silver would com into the Mint, then now doth. And for this last 5 years, som Gold smiths have given for English Gold twentie shillings six pence, twentie one shil∣lings six pence, and twentie two shillings, for a twentie shillings piece, which for the most part have been bought of them by Merchants, strangers, and others, and trans∣ported out of the Nation, so that now you may receiv five thousand pound in a paiment, & never a piece in Gold: If this ought not to bee looked after, and the offendors brought to Justice, I shall humbly leav it to the Parlament to consider. Also, many thousand of Dolars & pieces of Spanish Monie they furnish Merchants yearly with that Trade for Norwaie and Denmark, and other parts, and transport Silver for those parts, to the great weakning of the stock of this Nation, and hinderance of the sale of our woollen commodities, which (before that pernitious waie was found out) those
Countries vented much of. Besides the hinderance of the sale of our commodities, the State is hindered of their Cu∣stom; for the Merchants drive a Trade inward & outward, & so paie the State no Custom; for instance, Hambrough.-Mer∣chants bring great quantities of Rix-dollars from Hambrough and other parts of Germanie, and paie no Custom, becaus the State hath ever made Gold and Silver free to bee imported without Custom, which the Merchants usually sell to the Gold-smiths, & the Gold-smiths for the most part sell to the Merchants that trade in Norwaie and Denmark: which Dollars are closely packed in som part of the ship, and so no Custom paid, either for bringing in the Silver, or sending it out; and no commodities, in a manner, other then Sil∣ver; are transported into those parts by the said Merchants, considering the quantitie of their return; for what they want in goods exported from hence, they must make up in monie: If great returns of commodities from Norwaie and Denmark, and few commodities exported from hence, the Ballance must bee made up with Silver; for no Nation will give us commodities, but there must bee a Ballance for goods imported, by goods exported, or by treasure. It is to bee feared, that the industrie of many ages can∣not replenish the Nation with so much Gold, as hath been transported out of it within these few years; for it is an infallible rule, that, where Gold and Silver is over-valued, thither will it bee transported by Merchants and others; for it con∣tinually resort's, where it is most made of; and if you seek to rais it here, the remedie is wors then the diseas; for then you take from the Gentrie and all settled Revenuers, as much of their means, as you rais the currant monie; for if Gold should bee raised in England, for example, the twentie shillings, to twentie six shillings, as it was in France, either higher or lower, you should buie no more at your Market for twentie six shillings, then you could before for your twentie shillings; and contrariwise, if your twentie shillings were but fourteen shillings, you should buie as
much for your fourteen shillings, as when it passed at twen∣tie shillings; so that whensoever monie is raised, the loss falleth most upon the Nobilitie and Gentrie, and certain Revenuers, who lose so much out of their inheritance, which they have let out in Leas, as Monie raised. All Merchants that trade for Spain, know, that when the West-India Fleet cometh not into Spain, the trade for that year is lost; and No monie, no trade. If this bee an in∣fallible rule for Spain, which suffer's so much for the for∣bearance of bringing in of treasure for one year, and is sup∣plied the next out of the Indies, and till their Fleet came home, no dealing with Merchants; I do most humbly present, how much more it doth concern this Nation, which hath no West-Indies to supplie the treasure transpor∣ted, to provide, and carefully keep in the Nation's stock, which once transported, cannot bee drawn back, but up∣on unreasonable terms; which will impoverish all the Gen∣trie to an inestimable value; and as long as it remaineth out of the Nation, all Trading and Commerce decaieth, the Subjects are unable to paie taxes, and other duties, and it is one of the greatest mischiefs that can befall the Com∣mon-wealth. 1. These reasons amongst many other, I humbly pre∣sented to the Parlament, April 12, 1643. which if they had been then taken into consideration, had kept many Milli∣ons of Monie in the Nation. But by the subtiltie of two Aldermen, whose pardon I had got from the late King, I for my reward was committed to the Tower, for bring∣ing up a Letter from the late King, though I had a War∣rant from the Hous of Commons, and a Warrant from my Lord General Essex, for to go to Oxford, and the Com∣mittee at Darbie-hous knew of my going to Oxford, for the late King's Letter, which I desired Sir David Watkins be∣fore ever I went, to have him acquaint the Committee of both Nations at Darbie-hous with my business, & som other of the Hous of Commons, and that I would not go with∣out
their leav, which I had from them by him; and Ma∣ster Rilie the Scout-master of London, procured my pass from the Hous of Commons. But the truth was, the Presbyterian partie ruled then all, and they were resolved to make their Brethren of Scotland rich, and had a design to circumvent this Nation, both of all their Gold, Monie, & Moveables; which for a great part they have don, as I will make it appear; and there∣fore any that did speak against Transporting Treasure, or knew so much of their tricks as I did, must bee a Malig∣nant, an enemie to the Covenant; and so I was kept three years and eleven moneths prisoner in the Tower, almost three years of that time close, becaus I should tell no tales; and my Estate given away without hearing, and Sequestred to my damage, to the value of above eight thousand four hundred pounds. Besides, the infinite waies the Presbyterians found out for to enrich their Brethren of Scotland, which all the Nation know; I shall declare one, which was so usurious and destructive to the Nation, as never the like practice was before put on this Nation, nor I believ, scarcely upon any other, under the color of Friendship, League, and Cove∣nant, & this to bee don upon their dear Brethren of London, and that was briefly this. The Scot's Commissioners pro∣cured an Ordinance, that no ships should bring Coals from New-Castle, as appear's at large by the Ordinance. When this was don, They must bee the onely men must bring us Coals from Scotland; whereas before our dear Brethren brought us Coals for nine and ten shillings the Tun, and sold them delivered at London at that price, as will appear by all the Wood-monger's books; they having by the sub∣tiltie of their Faction, got all their trade for Coals for the Citie of London, and other parts of the Nation, into their hands, then the Citie shall paie for their Brotherly assist∣ance. For since the Ordinance for restraint of fetching Coals from New-Castle, until New-Castle was reduced to
the Parlament, Scotch Coals were at thirtie and fortie shil∣lings the Tun; so that they sold them after they had Mo∣nopoliz'd the Coals into their own hands, at four times the value they could, and did constantly before, afford to bring them from Scotland. And the Sea-Coals, which upon a medium for ten years before were all the Summer under twentie shillings a Chaldron delivered; during all the time the Scots were in England with their Armie, were at three pound, four pound, and five pound a Chaldron, as all the Inhabitants of the Citie of London know. Then they had their Factors here, to buie up all the Hang∣ings, Bedding, Pewter, Stools, Chairs, Houshold-stuff, Pictures, and all manner of Lumber, which was sold to the value of many hundred thousand of pounds, out of the Citie of London and Nation, for half the value, and by them in stead of Ballast carried to Scotland, and this can bee witnessed by thousands of people, who have to their to∣tal undoing suffered in this kinde, and are never likely to see their goods, nor never to bee Masters of such again, without they, or their Children will take the pains to go Scotland to fight for them: By this waie they may recover their goods, or their value again. I have been told by several Gentlemen of credit that live in the North, that when the Scotch Armie was with them in the Bishoprick of Durham, Cumberland, and New-Castle, they have seen ma∣ny of the Scotch soldiers date their Letters with this title, From New Castle in Scotland; From Ferrie-Brig in Scotland; From York in Scotland; and so other places where their Ar∣mie came in England, they took it all for Scotland. But God hath put a Hook in their nostrils, and sent them back, and now the victorious English may in requital date all their Letters, if they pleas, From Edinburgh in England: and so I praie God it may continue to the world's end. I shall humbly desire the Parlament to take notice after what rate the Brotherly assistance from Scotland came in to help their Brethren, even, after the rate of sending one
hundred pounds worth of Coals to London, to their dear Brethren, to make their return worth eight hundred pounds in a moneth, or six weeks time, as it is apparent, and can bee witnessed by thousands of people, now they read this. Which after this rate, a poor Scotch-man might with one hundred pounds, within the compass of one year, cheat this Nation of ten thousand pounds, and transport it all in Monie. And this hath been don by many of them, to the value of many hundred of thousand pounds. And becaus I Petitioned the Parlament, to look to the transporting of the treasure, by which means, they would have been prevented in sending the treasure of this Nation into Scotland, I must bee Sequestred, Imprisoned in the Tower, and held a Malignant. But I humbly hope the Parlament will give mee the hea∣ring for my just defence; and when they shall by experi∣ence finde, that this I saie to bee true, and that I discover the nest of them that have robbed this Nation, they will do mee right, and unloos mee from oppression, and restore mee to my Estate. Hereafter follow the Laws in Holland, Flanders, and France, for the regulating their Bullion and Monie. PLACART and ORDINANCE. Concerning the general cours and regulating of the Mints and Monies, as also concerning the Ex∣change and Exchangers, Refiners, Gold-smiths, and others in the Ʋnited Provinces, 1586. ARTIC. XI. AND as for the Gold and Silver-Monies, whose value is valued by this Ordinance, Wee forbid everie one to present, paie away, or receiv the same at a higher rate, then is
here Ordered, upon the forfeiture of such Monies, or the worth of it, in case the Fact bee not presently discovered, and besides, upon the forfeiture of ten Golden Angelots the first time, for the second time twelv Golden Ange∣lots; and for the third, four times as much, and besides, arbitrarie punishment according to the heinousness of the Fact. And wee understand the same forfeitures and pe∣nalties, to take place, as well upon the Receiver, as the Paier away, unless one of them, presently after the Recei∣ving, or Paying away, do present himself to an Officer, in which case the Denuntiator, either Receiver, or Paier away, shall bee freed or quitted of the abovesaid penaltie and forfeiture; and besides, to enjoie the third part of the same forfeit and penaltie. ARTIC. XIV. So that wee expresly forbid, and interdict everie one, to over-buie, or over-sell, Change, or Chop any Species of Monies, rated by these presents, either in taking, or giving upon the same, any profit, gain, or advantage, after what manner soever, upon the same pain and penaltie, as above∣said, against those who shall Receiv, or Paie away the same at an higher rate then that of the Ordinance. ARTIC. XV. Wee forbid also, everie one to Cull any Gold, or Sil∣ver-Monies, and so by this means, to sort the weightie and good ones, from the light, and bad ones, to Paie away the light ones, and make their profit of the weightie, upon penaltie as abovesaid. ARTIC. XVI. And as for the Stuff, and Materials of Gold and Silver,
beeing in Mass, or Sweepings, Wee forbid to buie, or sell them at an higher rate, then according to the Rule of this Ordinance, upon penaltie of confiscation of the abovesaid Materials; and moreover, to forfeit double the worth of them, at the charge as well of the buier, as of the seller, for the first time; for the second time, twice as much; and for the third time, four times as much; and afterwards ar∣bitrarie punishment. ARTIC. XVII. Wee expresly forbid henceforth to transport, or caus to bee transported out of the abovesaid Province, towards any strange Mints, any Gold or Silver-Monies, and also any Materials, in Mass or Monies, also any Materials in Mass or Ingots fit to Coin Monies of them, upon forfeit of confiscation of the abovesaid Monies and Materials, or the worth of them, in case they were alreadie transported; and besides this, upon penaltie of one hundred Golden Angelots, upon everie Mark of Gold, and twentie Ange∣lots for everie Mark of Silver, and of more or less propor∣tionably for the first time; for the second time, upon the same forfeit and penaltie; and moreover to undergo bodily punishment: and if they have not wherewithal to paie the abovesaid forfeits and amerciaments, they shall bee bodily punished according to the manner of the Fact; under which penaltie and amerciaments; wee understand are comprehen∣ded all those who had assisted, & had an hand in the above∣said Transportation, or conveying them away, although the Monies or Materials did not belong unto them. ARTIC. XX. Moreover, Wee forbid everie one to File, Cut, or Wash with strong Water, or Cement, or any otherwise, any Gold or Silver-Monies, or to Soulder, Guild, Piece, or Nail the
same, or any waie to make the same lighter or heavier, up∣on the forfeit of life and goods, where Confiscation ta∣keth place. ARTIC. XXII. Wee forbid henceforth everie one, to Melt any Gold, or Silver-Monies of her Majesties of England's stamp, valued by these presents, upon penaltie of life and goods, where con∣fiscation taketh place: And the Monies of Gold which are found to bee light by three Grains, or otherwise Clipped, Washed, Nailed, or Souldered, shall bee brought to the Exchange, after the old custom. PLACART and ORDINANCE, For Flanders, at Antwerp, the fourth of Octob. 1585. ARTIC. XIII. AND to hinder the Transporting of the good and true Monies, Wee forbid all and everie one henceforth, to buie or sell any Species of Gold and Silver-Monies, to give any profit or gain for it, upon penaltie of the seller to forfeit the Pieces which are sold, or shall bee sold, and besides the buier, as the seller, to forfeit threescore pounds of the above∣said good Monies, for the first time; and twice as much for the second time; and for the third time, four times as much; and besides, they are to bee arbitrarily punished. ARTIC. XIV. Wee also forbid all, and everie one, to Weigh, Clip, File, or make chois of any Species of Gold and Silver, for to make any profit with Melting, or Transporting of them,
upon penaltie of Criminal punishment, besides the loss of the abovesaid Pieces. ARTIC. XV. Furthermore, Wee forbid, and interdict well expresly; that no one of what qualitie, degree, or condition soëver, shall henceforth endeavor to transport, or carrie into any strange Mints, or into any other then our own, any Gold, or Silver-Monies of our Stamp, or others tolerated by this Our Ordinance, nor also any other Monies, beeing Clipped, or declared Bullion, Melted, or in Mass, or otherwise, nor also any other stuff, fit to Coin Monies of them, upon for∣feit of the abovesaid Gold and Silver, and besides, of two hundred Golden-Reals, for everie Mark of Gold, and twen∣tie Golden-Reals, for everie Mark of Silver, and of more or less in proportion for the first time that this shall happen; & for the second time, besides the abovesaid forfeit, to bee bo∣dily punished, and otherwise as occasion shall serv. And if so bee, that any person have transported anie summe of Monies, with∣out beeing taken in the fact; Wee will nevertheless, that whenso∣ever it shall bee perceived, and discovered, they shall proceed against the transgressors by execution of the said penalties, even as if they were taken in the same fact, well understanding, that in stead of Confiscation of the Species, they shall bee bound to paie the price, and estimation of the transported Monies, and besides, the double worth of them, and also to bee criminally punished. Wee will and command also, That those who shall have helped to pack, or secretly convey, and transport the abovesaid Monies, either in Mass, or Species, although the abovesaid Mo∣nies did not belong unto them, they shall bee bodily, or Arbitrarily punished, according to the qualitie of the fact, and persons. The Policie and Laws of this Realm, have alwaies aimed at, and intended the Increas and Augmentation of Monie, especially that of Silver, and this divers waies:
I. By providing again Exportation of it. 9 E. 3. c. 1. 38 E. 3. c. 2. 17 E. 3. 21. 5 R. 2. c. 2. 2 H. 4. c 5. 2 H 6. c. 6. 17 E. 4. c. 1. Made Felonie, 19 H. 7. c. 5. 3 H. 8. c. 1. II. By providing, against the melting it down, to make Plate or other Manufactures of it. 9 E. 3. cap. 3. 17 R. 2. cap. 1. 17 E. 4. cap. 1. 2 H. 6. cap. 13. III. By providing, That if any Monies through time, or any other practice, became uncurrant, then the same to bee converted into Monie again, and not to bee diverted from Coin. E. 1. Statute de monet parva Rastal Tit. Monie. IV. By providing, That none should give a price for Bullion, or Coined Monie, above the rate of the Mint, or what the same is currant for: for it is not to bee exspected, that any Bullion, either Gold or Silver, shall ever bee brought to the Mint, when the owner may have a greater price, then at the Mint, either to bee transported, or to bee converted to make Plate, or other things. This agreeth likewise with the policie of Spain, which though it bee the Spring, and Fountain from whence the greatest Streams of Silver hath been derived into other parts, yet Silver there, will alwaies yield the seller six pence, or one Real more upon the Mark at the Mint, then to bee sold to any other for any purpose whatsoëver, concurring likewise with the practice of other States. That all these Acts are defective, and not effectual to the ends abovesaid, for the reasons following. The Acts against Transportation; som extend not to Gold, as 9 E. 3. c. 1. Others have effect onely upon the Mo∣nie that is transported, and that com's too late, and is sel∣dom or never known, as 38 E. 3. c. 2. 5 R. 2. c. 2. 2 H. 6. c. 6. 17 E. 4. c. 1. beeing now discontinued.
Those that extend to the shipping of it, &c. viz. 2 H. 4. c. 5. 19 H. 7. c. 5. and 3 H. 8. c. 1. give the whole forfeiture to the King, and no part to the Informer, whereby they are not at all made use of, no man beeing willing to bee at charge to prosecute another, doing no good to himself. None of those Acts do give sufficient forfeitures to re∣strain the offences, as hath been manifested by experience. Lastly, they have not given any means for discoverie thereof, without which, the offendors will not bee de∣terred from finding out close and secret waies to adventure and practice against them, when opportunitie of great gain, and hope of concealment, shall invite and encou∣rage them thereunto. And for the now Act drawn and propounded to bee passed. BEsides the frame and bodie of it, comprehending, and fully extending to all the waies and means of the abu∣ses, the same for the forfeitures, is drawn from the exam∣ple and president of 18 El. c. 9. against transportation of Leather, Tallow, and raw Hides, and others in the Queen's time, and the late Ordinance 1647. Against transportation of Wooll, Fuller's Earth, &c. The Clauses touching the proceeding by Information, &c. are the same with the like Clauses of the said Ordi∣nance for Wooll, 1647. And the Clauses to encourage the Instrument, and others to discover the offences, wherein themselves are liable to the penalties, are framed in imitation, and by the president of the said Act of 18 El. And the other Ordinances and Edicts of other Kingdoms and Estates, that give like exemptions and encouragements to such, as though guiltie themselvs in
the second degree, shall reveal and discover others more principal offendors, taking likewise from them the confi∣dence they would have, that the persons they emploied should conceal their offences, whereby they will bee much deterred from hazarding and adventuring upon the practice. And the Claus touching the Commission, and exami∣nation of Witnesses for discoverie, &c. And to commit them in case of their refusal to bee examined, is exampled by the 13 Eliz. c. 7. The Act against Bankrupts, and discove∣rie of their Estates; There beeing greater reason and equi∣tie, for the discoverie of fraud, concerning the Common∣wealth, then concerning any private person. In an ORDINANCE and PLACART, For the general Regulating of the Mint, publish∣ed at Brussel, the 18 of Mar. 1633. is inserted. ARTIC. XXV. WEE declare, That although any of our Subjects or others, who shall have acted any thing contrarie to this Ordinance, and were not taken in the Fact, yet not∣withstanding, after they shall bee convinced of the said transgression, they shall bee proceeded against, with con∣demnation of the said penalties and amerciaments; well understanding, that in stead of forfeiting the said Monies and Materials, they shall bee condemned to paie the worth of them. ARTIC. XXVI. And if it happeneth, that the just qualitie and quantitie of the said Species, Bullion, or Materials cannot bee pre∣cisely known or verified, Wee will, that such transgressors
bee punished according to the heinousness of the fact, being left to the discretion of the Judges. ARTIC. XXVII. Which wee intend shall take place, in regard of those who shall bee convinced, to have paid away, presented, or received any forbidden Monies, at an higher price then by this present Ordinance is declared, although the said quali∣tie & quantitie of the same, could not bee precisely verified. ARTIC. XXVIII. Wee have autorized, and autorize by these, all Officers, for to seiz upon, and break open the Packs, Letters, and Portmantles of the Messengers, or others whom they shall know or suspect to bring in any of the forbidden Species, or Materials, or to Transport, or conveie out of our said Lands, any of our Species, and that in the presence of those, to whom the said Packets are sent, or do be∣long, if so bee they are residing in that place; as also in the presence of one of the Magistrates of the said place, one∣ly to know the name of those who cassued the said Gold and Silver to bee Transported, and to no other end. ARTIC. XXXVII. Wee also Order, That all those that shall bee found to have Counterfeited, Coined, Stamped, Prest, or cast into the sand, any Monies, of what manner, stuff, or Metal soever, shall bee executed as fals Moniers, in a kettle with boiling Oil, and Water, and with Confiscation of all their goods. ARTIC. LV. If so be any one be convinced, that hee had pickt, or chosen
out, or caused to bee chosen out, any of the said valued Species, for to keep the heavie ones for his profit, and to paie away the light ones, to the damage of the Commonaltie; We will, that hee, besides the said forfeits and amerciaments, shall bee banished out of Our said Lands, for the space of ten years. ARTIC. LVI. In case that any of the particular Masters of Our Mints, or Exchanges, were convinced of the said abuse, or that they should have presented, or paid away any of the said Clipt, or other forbidden Species, after that they had recei∣ved the same for Bullion, or not Currant, then shall they bee banished for ever out of Our said Lands, and their goods confiscated. ARTIC. LVII. And becaus the price of the Species is commonly regu∣lated according to the price of the Gold and Silver-Materi∣als, Therefore wee have forbidden, and forbid everie one of what qualitie and condition soëver, to buie or sell any Gold or Silver-Materials, or Species declared for Bullion, or not Currant, at an higher price then the Ordinance of Our said Mint permitteth, upon penaltie of Confiscation of the said Materials, and the worth of them, at the charge as well of the buier, as seller, for the first time; for the se∣cond time, four times as much, besides the Confiscation and Forfeit, and of other Arbitrarie correction. ARTIC. LXIII. Wee order also, that the Brokers, who did assist and help to conclude or treat upon such parcels, either in re∣gard of Monie given upon Exchange, or upon use or obli∣gation, either in paiment of the sold Merchandizes, or
otherwise, shall bee publickly whipt and banished out of Our said Lands, for the space of ten years. ARTIC. LVI. And as Wee have understood, and are truly informed, that a great part of the irregularitie concerning the said Pla∣carts, is risen and occasioned, by reason that many Mer∣chants and Factors will not buie the Works and Manu∣factures of the work-men, and handie-crafts-men, unless they will receiv the Gold and Silver at such a price as they will give it them; or when they have almost bought the goods, they give the Merchandize back again to the sellers, if they will bee paid according to the price Ordered in Our Placart: Therefore Wee will, that such oppressors of the poor Commonaltie, shall bee rigorously proceeded against, and punished, by apprehension of their persons, and that they, their Process beeing summarily, and criminally for∣med, and found guiltie of what is abovesaid, shall bee ba∣nished for ever, and their goods confiscated, or in stead hereof, to bee condemned in a great summe of Monie, ac∣cording to the heinousness of the fact; of which confisca∣tion and amerciament, the half shall bee given to the Plain∣tiff, or discoverer. ARTIC. LXX. In like manner shall bee punished those with the same forfeits and amerciaments, who shall have received, paid away, or presented any clipt Monie, or declared for Bulli∣on, with protestation, or declaration, that it is for to deli∣ver them into Our Mint, or to the Exchangers, unless they had presently cut them in pieces, or deformed them, or caused the same to bee don by others.
ARTIC. XCI. Wee declare, That although it bee that any of the Trans∣gressors do obtain favor and pardon from Us, or from Our Council, Wee do not intend, nor Wee will not, that therefore they should bee quitted, and discharged from the parts of the said forfeits and amerciaments, granted by Us to the Officers, Callers in question, and Plaintiffs, or Dis∣coverers respectively; but such favor and pardon onely to take place, for as much as belongeth unto Us. ARTIC. CV. Wee Order well expresly, all Our Fiscals and Officers, to take their conclusions; and all Our Counsellors, Magi∣strates, and other Judges, to give their Sentences in con∣formitie to this Our present Placart, without using any moderation of the penalties and amerciaments therein con∣teined, under what pretext soēver; nor also any compensa∣tion of charges, to the prejudice of the Officer founded in the principal, upon penaltie of Our indignation, and for to answer for it in their own persons, unless they shall plead any ignorance, or the general transgression. Which excuses Wee do not intend shall avail, or help them in any manner of waie: but Our intention is, that they shall bee punished, becaus of their negligence and conni∣vence. This Ordinance and Placart of the 18 of March, 1633. is again confirmed; and all Magistrates and Officers are required to do their utmost endeavors to see it strictly observed in all points. Published at Brussels the 26 of August, 1643.
In an ORDINANCE and PLACART, For the Regulating of the Mint; Published in Brussels the last daie of Maie, 1644. is inserted. ARTIC. XI. WEE have also forbidden, and forbid by these presents, everie one of what qualitie or condition soëver, as well our Subjects, as others, to transport any Gold or Silver from henceforth out of our Lands, direct∣ly or indirectly, or caus the same to bee transported, either Minted or Unminted; as also in Mass, Ingots, or Bulli∣on; without having obteined of us before-hand express leav and consent for to do the same, upon penaltie of for∣feiting the Gold, Silver, and Bullion, and to paie besides the double of their worth, and upon forfeit of the Merchan∣dizes, if so bee the abovesaid Gold, Silver, or Bullion shall bee found to bee packt in them; as also of the Horses and Waggons of those, who shall willingly and wittingly have brought and conveied the same. ARTIC. XV. And if any one bee found and taken to have transported or caused to bee transported out of our Lands, any Monies by Us valued, or other declared Bullion, or any Materials of Gold and Silver, and have delivered or caussed to bee de∣livered the same into any strange Mints; Wee will, that such persons shall bee proceeded against, sharply & rigorously by the imprisonment of their persons; and that they, besides the forfeits of the said Species and Materials, and four times the worth of them for the first time, shall bee banished out of our abovesaid Lands, for the space of five years; and for the second time, for ever.
ARTIC. XVI. And those who willingly and wittingly have assisted for to pack and transport the abovesaid Monies or Materi∣als, shall bee punished according to pleasure, or banished according to the qualitie of the person. Other Countries you may see strictly provide against these offences; and it will never bee mended here, if you make not as strict Laws as they. In a Declaration of the King of France, for the Regulating of the new price set upon the Light and Clipt Species of Monie: likewise for the observation of the prices of Gold and Silver emploied for the Gold-smith's work. It is also expresly forbidden to melt the Monie, and to transport them, or other Materials of Gold and Silver out of the said Kingdom. Printed at Paris 30 of October, 1640. FOLIO 8, 9. WEE expresly forbid, that all Materials of Gold and Silver, either Coined or Uncoined, shall not bee bought or sold at an higher rate then is expresly set down in this Placart, which doth contain the true value that must bee paid for the Mark of Gold and Silver. FOLIO 13. Wee expresly forbid everie one, of what condition or
qualitie soëver, to transport out of Our Kingdom, any Gold and Silver Coined or Uncoined, nor any other Gold∣smith's work, upon penaltie of forfeiting the Materials and Merchandizes, and other things wherein they shall bee found to bee packt up in; besides the penaltie of fiftie pounds, and bodily punishment. Now that general Laws and Statutes in England from time to time, have provided against transporting of Gold, or melting down the currant Coin, and buying Silver and Gold at above the price of the Mint, appeareth by these following, viz. Stat. 9. Edw. 3. Both forbidding the transporting of the Gold of the Nation, and the melting down the currant Silver Coins, by Gold smiths or others into Plate. Stat. 14 Rich 2. cap. 12. Commissions made through the Realm, for to enquire of such as had conveied the Monie of England out of the Nation, to the prejudice and damage of the King and Realm. Stat. 17 Rich. 2. cap. 1. There shall bee no melting of the currant Monie to make any thing by Gold-smiths or others, upon pain of forfeiture. 2 Hen. 4. cap. 4. No person to transport Gold or Silver, either in Coin or Bullion, upon pain of forfeiting as much as they might. 4 Hen. 4. cap. 10. No Gold-smith or other person to melt down the currant Silver Coins of the Nation, upon pain of forfeiting four times the value. 9 Hen. 5. cap. 1. All Statutes heretofore made touching the good and lawful government of Gold and Silver, and not repealed, to bee in force. 2 Hen. 6. cap. 6. Upon a grievous complaint made in Par∣lament, that great summes of Gold and Silver were trans∣ported into Flanders and Burdeaux, out of this Kingdom, it was ordered and enacted, that no Gold or Silver should bee transported out of the Realm. And becaus it is supposed, that the monie of Gold is transported by Merchants-aliens, It is ordeined, that the
Merchants-aliens shall finde securitie with sureties in the Chancerie, that they shall not transport Gold or Monies out of the Kingdom, upon pain of forfeiting the summe or the value; and if any do contrary, and that duly proved, and hee so doing bee gon over Sea, then his pledges shall paie his said forfeiture; whereof hee that the same espied, and thereof gave notice to the Treasurer or the State's Council, shall have the fourth part. 2 Hen 6. ca. 12. To the intent that more monie bee brought into the Mint, It is ordeined, That neither the Master of the Mint, nor Changer for the time beeing, neither sell nor caus to bee sold, nor alien to no other use, but apply the same wholly to Coin, according to the tenure of the In∣denture made betwixt the State, and Master of the Mint. 4 Hen. 7. cap. 13. Item, Where in a Parlament begun and holden at Westminster the 16 of Januarie, the 17 of Edw. 4. No person to carrie Gold or Silver either in Bullion or Coin, nor Jewels of Gold, but such persons as bee dispensed with by the Statute of Hen. 4. upon pain of Felonie, to bee heard and determined as other Felonie is; the which Statute to endure from the Feast of Easter, the 18 of Edw. 4. unto the end of seven years next ensuing: Since the which seven years expired, the Gold and Silver Coin of this Realm hath, and daily is conveied into Flanders, Normandie, Britanie, Ireland, and other parts beyond the Seas, as well by Mer∣chants-Strangers, as by Denisons, to the great impoverish∣ing of the Realm, and greater is like to bee, without re∣medie thereof bee hastily provided. The King our Sove∣reign Lord, the premises considered, by the advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Praiers of the Com∣mons in the said Parlament assembled, and by the Autori∣tie of the same, have ordeined, and enacted, and established, That the said Statute made in the sixteenth year of Edw. the fourth, bee, and stand a statute good and effectual, with all the premises in the same observed and kept, and put in due execution, from the Feast of the Purification of our
die, which shall bee in the year of our Lord 1489. to en∣dure to the end of twentie years next ensuing. 1 Hen. 8. cap. 13. An Act made, That whosoëver shall car∣rie any Gold, or Silver, or Jewels out of the Realm, shall forfeit double the value, the one half to him that shall seiz it, or therefore sue by action of debt at the Common Law. This Act to endure to the next Parlament. 5 & 6 Edw. 6. cap. 16. An Act touching the exchange of Gold and Silver, that whosoëver give's more for Gold and Silver then it is or shall bee declared by the King's Procla∣mation, shall suffer imprisonment by the space of one year, and make fine at the King's pleasure, the one moitie to his Majestie, the other moitie to bee to the partie that seizeth the same, or will sue for it by Bill, Plaint, or information, or otherwise. 1. A Proclamation against giving for light Gold more then is currant, 21 Julie, 17 Jac. 2. A Proclamation against melting English monie, 18 Maii, 9 Jac. 3. A Proclamation against buying and selling Gold and Silver, at higher prices then the Mint, 14 Maii, 1 Jac. 4. A Proclamation against transporting of Gold, 23 Maii, 1o Jac. 5. A Proclamation against profit for Gold and Silver, and melting English monie for Plate; Waste in Gold and Sil∣ver, 4 Feb. 19 Jac. 6. A Proclamation against transporting Gold and Sil∣ver, and melting down the currant Coins of the Nation, 25 Maii, 3 Car. From all which Statutes and Provisions, it may bee ga∣thered, that the currant Monie and Bullion of the Nation, is the Subjects, onely to use between man and man, but not to abuse: for no man by the Law, can buie or sell them by waie of Merchandize at higher rates then they are Pro∣elaimed; if hee do, hee is finable by the Law: hee that wash∣eth, clippeth, or lesseneth the currant Coins, commit's treason.
Hee that export's the Treasure of the Nation, either in Bulli∣on, or currant Coin, beeing taken, loseth them: hee that melt's down the currant Gold or Silver of the Nation for Plate or other Manufactures, commit's a forfeiture; and transporting of treasure hath formerly been made Felonie, as by the several Statutes and Laws to this purpose appea∣reth. By these and divers other Laws and Statutes, our Prede∣decessors have endeavored the retention and preservation of the Coin and Treasures within this Nation, but could hitherto never effect it. Nor will these mischiefs ever bee stopped, till there bee Commissions by Act of Parlament according to former presidents, when the Nation was defrauded of their Trea∣sure as now it is, strictly to enquire of the offendors, and bring them to Justice. For of late, the easie easie of Delinquents for these offen∣ces, hath given the boldness to offendors to go on: and Time, the truest School-master, hath taught all ages to know, that little penalties could yet never interpose betwixt the Merchant and his profit. Whereas the Parlament, by their Ordinance 6 of Sept. 1647. did descrie all Clipped, Filed, or diminished Monie (by means whereof great quantities were sold to som Gold∣smiths) who have made it a Trade to deal with Receivers of Publick Cashes, Grasiers, and several other persons (and in stead of melting of these Monies down) som Gold-smiths have issued these Monies out again in paiment, whereas at the Tower these Clipped Monies would make but five shil∣lings the Ounce Troie, these men have vented out these Clipped Monies to divers ill-affected people at five shillings six pence, and five shillings eight pence, and six shillings the Ounce, who have dispersed the said Clipped Monies so bought from Gold-smiths, up and down the Nation again, to the great enriching of themselvs, and defrauding of the good people of this Nation, by buying up this Clipped Mo∣nie
since the Ordinance 1647. at the least twentie times over, and venting it for currant again, which had been helped, if there had been but six words put into the Ordinance, which was, to have required all persons exchanging any Clipt, or uncurrant English monie with any Gold-smith or others, upon forfeiture of double the value, to see it cut in two pieces, or so defaced, that it should not bee passable after. I humbly present this defect of that Ordinance, that it may bee looked after and amended; and I humbly desire, that the Act against transporting Treasure now committed, may bee enacted with such vigor, that the Common-wealth may have the real benefit, and the offendors brought to exemplarie Justice. There hath been twentie Millions of Monie coined within this twentie five years, as will appear by the Mint-Books, and almost all of it transported out of the Nation, the Gold all gon, the currant Silver culled out, the weightiest melted and transported: and that Silver-Monies which remain's is but little, and all culled Gold is made as pretious in this Common-wealth as Diamonds. What incon∣veniences will arise by the indirect dealing of private men in this particular to the Common-wealth, I shall humbly leav it to you to consider. In the Year 1643. It was humbly offered to this Parla∣ment, to have the offendors discovered, and to bring them to Justice, and this mischief stopped; but, by the great Interest of the offendors, that had then power in this Na∣tion, the Proposition was slighted, and these mischiefs ever since daily practised, to the unspeakable damage of this Common-wealth: for it is far easier to keep the Trea∣sure in the Nation, by making strict Laws against Trans∣portation, then when it is gon to bring it back, as too late experience will make this Common-wealth feel. But you have the power to call these offendors to a strict accompt, if you pass the Act fully to enable all people to make their discoveries. How, and in what manner other Nations do punish these offendors, you have alreadie presented out of their Placarts.
This evil is grown to such an hight, that both our own Laws put in the strictest execution, and the Customs and Laws of other Countries added to them for this particular, with the greatest diligence of expert men, to make the search for what is past, and to prevent these mis∣chiefs for the time to com, will bee little enough: and to make this discoverie is a service of more Importance to the Common-wealth, then at first sight can bee apprehended. This is a certain rule, No great action in any Common∣wealth or State, can bee don but by Monie, which all ages have held to bee the sinews of War, and Garland of Peace; and what occasions we have to use it both for commerce and safetie, is humbly left to you to consider, and in all well-regulated States it hath ever been accompted a great service to discover the offendors and abuses practised upon the Treasure of their Nation; and to prevent the growth of these mischiefs, is the work of everie faithful lover of his Countrie; And hee or they that shall bee against the discoverie of these offences and offendors, may amongst judicious men bee justly suspected to bee Parties themselvs. And though som Merchants and other Interested per∣sons may, for their own interest, either for their profit, or fear of punishment for what they have don, speak them∣selvs, or get others to oppose the Act against Transporting Treasure to pass the Hous, or procure it to bee so altered, as it shall not bee effectual to give a full cure to the Com∣mon-wealth of the great inconveniences it is now under, by several abuses practised upon Coin and Bullion. To give a cure to the Common-wealth of these great in∣conveniences, and also to take away the great obstructions of your Mint, which will never bee don till this Act pass; and if it were more stricter, it would bee more benefici∣al to the Common-wealth, especially in these times, when you have so many occasions of Monie, by bringing in presently verie great summes of Monie to the State by the punishment of the offendors. You have here, with all humilitie, set down to you, the waies and
means whereby your neighbor Countries use to prevent these mischiefs, and to punish the offendors for what is past, with several old Sta∣tutes of this Nation: out of which if you extract the quintes∣sence, and make a sharp and vigorous Law, and require all your Officers and others to put it in full execution, you may, in a short time, cure this Common-wealth of these dangerous diseases, which if you let it go on, will prove a Gangrene. I humbly beseech you to take notice, there hath been, within seven years Coined in ten daies, more Monie in the Tower of London, then hath been Coined neer upon this three last years. Now if you suffer treasure to go out of the Nation everie daie for want of a Law, to give all people power to discover and examine the offendors, in a short time you will not have any Monie left in the Common∣wealth. For experience in all ages sheweth, that little and slight penalties can never stop som Merchants from their profit: so they get to their private, they care not what mis∣chiefs the Common-wealth suffer's: For a Common-wealth without plentie of Monie, look's like a great Hous unfurnisht; and bare Walls is no handsom sight; and you will finde there will not bee Monie left to paie your just Taxes, Customs and Excise, and to maintain Trade and Commerce, if you clear not the obstruction of the Mint, and take not som effectual cours to set it on work. And this Act is but a preparation and ground work to caus your Mint to go; and till it pass, you will never see your Mint flourish; for to allow any man to out-give the Mint for Bullion, is, to shut up the Mint; for all men will vent their treasure, where they can have the greatest price; and not to make a way for the opening of the Mint at this time, especially when you have such occasions of monie; I shall humbly leav it to you to consider the inconveni∣ence. The Gold-smiths when they were before the Honorable Committee, by their Counsellor Mr Recorder, and Mr Vin∣stanly, beeing demanded by the Committee, what they could saie why an Act should not pass for discoverie of such as had Transported the Coin and Bullion of the
Nation? did by their Counsel, and by Sir John Wollaston, Alderman Viner, and the rest, declare their willingness to have the offendors brought to punishment: The like they did for all such as culled, or melted down the currant Coin of this Nation for their own private profit, or such as bought up the light Clipped English Monie, descried by an Ordinance of Par∣lament the sixt of Sept. 1647. and did not deface it, but con∣trarie to this Ordinance, did vent it again into several parts of the Nation, and paie it away to the deceit of all the peo∣ple of the Nation. Upon this answer to the Committee, it put's mee in minde of a custom, which is usual in all men's houses; If Glasses bee broke, or any other mischief don, No bodie did it: But upon a Commission of enquirie, many times it is found to bee Som. body. But to the question that was asked the Gold-smith. by the Honorable Committee, concerning buying Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint, they pleaded, The Trade was an ancient Trade; that if they were restrained to a price, they, and their families could not sub∣sist, that they could not buie Silver, but somtime the Market was at 5 s. 1 d. 5 s. 2d. and 5s. d. and Sir John Wollaston said, That hee, and divers others, had given 5 s. 4 d. nay, 5 s. 5 d. for Sterling-Silver for their Trade, and for confirmation of the truth of this, hee did appeal to his Brethren, Alderman Viner, & Alderman Nowel, and the rest of the Gold smiths at the Committee, and none of them did denie it. Now I shall humbly offer to your con∣sideration, First, Sterling-Silver will make but 5 s. in the Mint; and it is delivered out of the Mint, after it is Coined, at 5 s, 2 d the Ounce. If the Gold-smiths give 5 s. 5 d. for this Sterling Silver, how can any bee brought into the Mint? nay, how is all the heavie Monie culled and melted down, and none left to pass but light and clipped? And this is the true ground why many Gold-smiths are Cashiers to Merchants, and keep servants to receiv men's Monies, without any reward, onely that they might cull, and weigh out the heavie Silver, and melt it or transport it beyond the Seas, for their own private gain, to the high deceit of the Nation.
There is nothing in this Act doth restrain the due and orderly Trade of a Gold-smith, when in is well weighed and considered. But that which is their usual Trade, now discovered to bee so highly destructive to the Nation, ought to bee restrained. The Bakers may as well Petition against all Pillories, or against my Lord Major, for weighing their Bread, as the Gold smiths justly except against the restrain∣ing them, for giving for Gold and Silver, above the price of the Mint. They see it, that it is the Law of the Land, in the 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 13. It is the daily practice of France, Holland, Flanders, as appear's hereby their Laws. Clothing is the Sta∣ple of the Land, and ought most to bee cherished; yet the law propound's for the regulating of the weight, the length, and breadth. Brick-makers, Wood-mongers, Meal-men. and divers other Trades, are restrained and regulated, and yet all these Trades receiv protection and countenance in their orderly working of their Manufactures, from the Common-wealth. There are people which believ, That if there had been a real intention to give a stop to the transporting of Monie, it had been don before; though for my part I am not of that opinion. There was (saie they) notice of it nine years ago, when the Presbyterie had the power: And seven years ago, the grievances of the Transporting of Gold and Silver, with several other abuses, was by mee at large presented to the Parlament, and the same mischiefs foretold, which are now com to pass; that without it were looked after, and a strict Law made against it, to discover the offendors, there would not bee any Gold or Silver left in the Nation. And this hath proved too true; for many millions of Gold and Silver have since been transported, to the unspeakable da∣mage of the Common-wealth. And upon seizure of several great quantities of Gold and Silver, by M. Watkins, chief Searcher of the Port of London, which was shipped to bee transported; the Order of the
Parlament, the 1 of Septemb. 1647. was made to the Committee of the Navie, to see to prevent it. After all these Certificates made by the Officers of the Mint and Customs, and the Committee of the Navie, for the speedie putting so good a work in execution, (all which, I have hereafter set down.) The Council of State was pleased to make a Committee of themselvs; and after ma∣ny great and serious consultations, drew up the draught of an Act of Parlament, with their desire to the Parlament to have it pass with all expedition, for the service of the Com∣mon-wealth. There are others, more unhappie, which saie, Now the Steed is stoln, shut the stable door: Now there is no more Gold left to transport, to what purpose doth the Parlament make an Act against transporting Gold? this should have been don before; for how can wee maintain Commerce, paie Taxes, when our English Gold is fortie times more plentiful beyond the Seas, then it is in England, and almost all the Silver Coin of the Nation transported, and scarce any left, but clipped, and light monie. And som people are so impudent to believ, that there are som Members of Parlament guiltie of transporting monie, or els this Act should not have stuck so long upon their hands. Others there are, that have transported monie, and com∣mitted manie abuses upon the Coins of the Nation, that hope they shall have their pardon for what is past, though they have transported almost all the Gold and Silver of the Nation, that now if they would, they can offend no more; and they have don the Common-wealth that damage, that a Million of monie cannot give them satisfaction. These I humbly conceiv, ought to bee made to restore their unjust gain, which will deter any others hereafter from doing the like. And there are that saie, Look how almost all men have sped, that have certified against transporting monie, or lookt to stop the same.
Hath not Sir Robert Harlow, and M. Cogan been put out of their places in the Mint? Hath not M. Watkins, M. Tomes, Sir Thomas Daws, and M. Hollowaie been put out of their places in the Custom-Hous? Were not you Thomas Violet imprisoned in the Tower four years, becaus you should not tell the truth, and let the Common-wealth know for all that time, most of their monie and treasure was send∣ing out of the Nation? I shall add somthing more to this. I have observed what the State hath gotten by putting out these men; and I found, First, That upon the putting forth of the old Officers of the Mint, in M. Swallow's place, who was the Clerk of the Irons, and Surveier of the Melting-Hous for the Mint; a place of great skill and trust, there is a now a Clerk put in, to execute that place, that can neither write nor read; and other Officers put into the places of the old ones in the Mint, that were utterly ignorant of managing the mysteries of that Office. And one of the greatest obstru∣ctions of the Mint, coms through the ignorance of the Officers, and their want of correspondence and acquain∣tance with such as usually have brought Monie from beyond the Seas. The old Officers of the Mint, were Masters in this My∣sterie, which is not so soon learned as men think. And for son of those that have been turned out of their places out of the Custom-Hous, now the Act is passed for the Coun∣cil of Trade, there will quickly bee presented the practices of som of the Officers of the Customs, and Pe∣titions for a redress of many abuses practised by som of them, and a Review Petitioned for, to know upon what grounds many of the old Officers were turned out of their places, beeing never charged with any offence, but onely forced out to make waie for others to com into their places; som of the old Officers of the Customs beeing turned out of their places, onely becaus of their activitie in stopping the Gold and Silver of the Nation from beeing transported;
and this is M. Edward Watkins his case, and others put into his Office, that seize's Gold and Silver before it is forfeited, and when the Merchant recover's it again by Law, the Sear∣cher that made the seizure, take's the King's Bench, and so the Merchant may go seek his monie, to the great damage of the Merchant. But according to the former presidents, all Officers of the Customs were to put in securitie for the just perfor∣mance of their trust to the State, and no Officer was to receiv the Customs, and Monies of the Common-wealth in any Port of this Nation; nor to make any seizure before hee had put in securitie to the Lord Treasurer, to make a true ac∣compt of what monies and goods came to their hands, which I (having more then probable reasons) do believ the Collectors, and other Officers of the Ports, have not don, to the great damage of the Common-wealth, and prejudice of the Merchants, if seizures bee unjustly made, and the Mer∣chants recover their Goods or Monies by a Verdict at Law, and after all their charge and hazard, not to have all their Goods and Monies again. This discoverie I have put in for the service of the Common-wealth, it beeing a caus judged in the Checquer this last Term, that for the future such abuses of the new Officers of the Customs might bee prevented. I have to som men replied this Act; it hath been delaied by the Parlament, onely by the multitude of other business, though I must confess there are verie few businesses of the Common-wealth can take place before this, but that all people should see when the Parlament's business was a lit∣tle over, how zealous in deeds, & not in words, they would bee, for to punish these great offendors, and to make them paic back the unjust gain; which monies should bee em∣ploied for the Publick, and so save the Nation Taxes: That I was confident there was not any Member in the Parla∣ment was guiltie of transporting monie; or if there were, they durst not bee seen to justifie so wicked an Act, but
would bee glad to sleep quiet in a whole skin; and truly if I did know any of them, I would not meddle with them, unless the Act did positively enjoin mee to do it. It hath been objected to mee, by som Gold-smiths, and others; That I my self have been a transporter of monie, and melter down of heavie Coin of the Nation, and a furnisher of Gold and Silver to transport out of this Nation, and a buier of Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint. I denie it not, and my an∣swer to them is, An old Dear-stealer is the best keeper of a Park. And though I had the late King's pardon, I had it not but it cost mee dear; I paid at one time to his Privie Purs, two thousand twentie shillings Pieces in Gold, and I am out at this daie by his command, in making the discoverie of such as transported Gold, nineteen hundred & threescore pounds; both which summes, I have been out of Purs fifteen years: I would not have the greatest offendor (that is a Gold-smith) by my consent, paie so great a summe. And this is my answer to them, to that objection. I would have them by my example leav off so destru∣ctive a Trade to the Common-wealth, as furnishing the transporters with Gold and Silver, culling and melting down the currant Coin. If I had not been convinced in my conscience, that it was bad, I would have followed that trade still. I had as good an Estate, as most of the Gold-smiths to do it. I had as good credit, and I left my trade as fairly; for I challenge all, or any man in London, that can saie I did not paie all men readie monie to everie pennie and farthing I ought, when I gave over my trade; and the best Alderman of London can do no more. It is incident to all men to err; happie is hee that repent's; but to persist against the light of a man's conscience, is don by the strong instigation of the Devil. I do humbly present further, that there have great mis∣chiefs happened to this Nation and their Armie in Ireland since this Parlament, by the indirect dealing of som Mer∣chants and Gold-smiths in London, who contracted with
som of the adventurers for Ireland, to sell them Rials of Eight and Forrain Coins, giving them som small time; but the poor Soldiers that received these monies in Ireland, lost above twentie pounds in the hundred by the monies so paid them; for first, the Gold-smiths culled out all the weighti∣est, and delivered none but light and clipped; and then the coursness of the Silver, which was Bead-monie, and adulterated in the West-Indies in the Mints, somtimes six pence, somtimes more upon everie piece of Eight, as is well known to som Gold-smiths and Merchants, so that by the baseness of the Allaie, and want of Weight there hath been at the least twentie pounds in the hundred loss to the soldiers, if hee would make any return of it to his wife or children in England, as many of them found by sad expe∣rience. The Gold-smiths are the general Cashiers, for som of the principal Merchants in the Citie; and this rule the Gold∣smiths observ; when they receiv monies, to take none that is bad or clipped, (but let any man send to them to receiv monies, they shall have great quantities of clipped monie mixed in their monies they receiv, and som of it constant∣ly will escape the teller's eies) which clipped monies the Gold-smiths buie of several people for Bullion, but never Coin it; the rest that they cannot put off here in London, they have their Agents to vent it to Grasiers and other peo∣ple in the Countrie all over the Nation; by which means in many Towns and Cities of this Nation, they are so pe∣stred with clipped monie, that there is little els stirring in paiment, to the unspeakable damage of the receiver, who cannot paie it in London, but sell it to the Gold-smiths, som∣times at twentie five, and thirtie in the hundred abated: which is by the Gold-smiths returned down into the Coun∣trie next week after; So that this abuse is like an Hors in a Mill, it turn's round, and is a cheat put upon all people of the Nation, and without a strict Act of Parlament against it, will not bee prevented.
All these abuses aforesaid, are so high and transcendent, that the offendors ought to bee used as men usually use Wolvs and Foxes; for if private murther bee so penal, much more is publick murther: now Monie is the Life, Bloud, and Soul of the Common-wealth, without it no great action can bee undertaken, for the service of the Nati∣on; and those that transport it, or adulterate it in weight, may well bee esteemed as the greatest enemies to the Com∣mon-wealth. Therefore I humbly praie, that you would bee pleased to give all encouragement to all people, both in the Sea-Ports of this Nation, and in the Citie of London, for the discoverie of the transporting of Gold and Silver, and such as cull out the heavie Silver Coin of the Nation, and such as have bought Gold and Silver above the price of the mint, to transport; for as the affairs now of this nation stand, you cannot have a greater dis-service don to the Common∣wealth; and you will finde the Commissioners and Offi∣cers of the Customs certifie to the Commissioners of the Navie in Sept. 1647. their desires in their fourth Article, that a greater allowance should bee given to such as disco∣ver the transporters of Gold or Silver, then by the Statutes in that Case is provided; and the Statute in 1 Henrie 8. cap. 13. give's double the value, the one half to him that shall seiz it, or therefore sue by action of Debt at the Com∣mon Law; and by this draught of the Act, there is but one moitie of what shall bee proved to have been transpor∣ted, given to the prosecutor. What Forrain Nations do, you have here the presidents of France, Holland, Flanders; and what former ages here in this Nation have don, you have in 14 Rich. 2. cap. 12. by Act of Parlament Commissions made through the Realm, to enquire from the beginning of his Reign, which was for fourteen years, of such as had conveied the Monie of England out of the Nation, to the damage of the Realm; and unless you make the like Commissions, the Com∣mon-wealth will bee brought to extreme povertie.
Here are annexed two Certificates of the Officers of the Mint, and Commissioners and Officers for the Customs, grounded upon an Order of Parlament, and an Order of the Commissioners of the Navie, viz. Die Mercurii, 1 Sept. 1647. ORdered by the Commons in Parlament assembled, That it bee referred to the Committee of the Navie to consider of, and take som effectual cours to prevent the transportation of Bullion out of the Kingdom: and speedily to report what they have don herein, to the Hous. H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. Committee of the Navie, 2 Sept. 1647. THe Commissioners and Officers of the Customs, with Master Watkins the head-Searcher, are desired to consider of som cours to bee taken to prevent the transportation of Bullion out of the Nation, according to an Order of the Hous of Commons, hereunto annexed; and to certifie the same to the Committee. Giles Green. THe Commissioners and Officers for the Customs, ha∣ving together with the Head Searcher, in the Port of London, in pursuance of the directions of this Honorable Committee above mentioned, perused sundrie Statutes yet in force, relating, as well to the restraint of the Exportati∣on of Bullion, as the regulation of Merchants-Strangers in their waie of Trade, do humbly conceiv, 1. That if the Statute of 2 Hen. 6. cap. 6. enjoining Mer∣chants-Strangers, to give securitie in Chancerie, not to transport the Monie or Plate of the Realm: And the Sta∣tute of 3 Hen. 7. cap. 8. enjoining them to emploie the mo∣nie they receiv in the Merchandize of this Nation;
2. And that to the Statute of 5 Rich. 2. cap. 2. and 2 Hen. 4. cap. 5. The Parlament would bee pleased, first, to de∣clare who shall bee reputed Aliens: for that since the sitting of this Parlament, the children of aliens born in this King∣dom, are reputed free born subjects, and do enjoie their privileges accordingly: which in former times was not allowed till the third descent. Secondly, To declare by Ordinance that the Estate of him or them that shall Ex∣port Monie or Plate, shall bee immediately sequestred. 3. To impose a severe penaltie upon the Master of such Ship or Vessel, upon which any Monie or Plate shall bee found above his ordinarie charges, hee beeing privie thereunto. 4. To allow to such as shall discover, or finde out any Bullion or Plate, endeavored to bee transported, a greater share and proportion, then by the Statutes in that case is yet provided. 5. And to settle som waie of punishment for such as shall resist, or abuse Officers sufficiently autorized in their endeavors this waie on the State's behalf. The said Commissioners and Officers, do humbly con∣ceiv, That it would bee a good means to deter such, who by all secret means do daily endeavor the Exportation of the Coin and Bullion of this Kingdom, and much prevent the Exportation thereof. All which, nevertheless they humbly submit to the Wisdom of this Honorable Com∣mittee. Tho. Daws, Col. John Hollowaie, Comptr. R. Carmarden, Super. Vis. Edw. Watkins, Searcher. W. Tooms, Super. Vis. Gen. Walter Boothbie. Rich. Bateman. Sam. Averie. Christoph. Pack. Charls Lloid.
The Officers of the Mint in the Tower of Lon∣don, whose names are here under-written, in pursuance of the directions of the Honorable Committee of the Navie, in relation to their Order dated the third of December present, do humbly conceiv, and certifie as followeth: THat to prevent great abuses practised upon the Coin and Bullion of the Nation, which is transported out of the Nation; as also to prevent the culling and melting down the currant Monie of the Nation: and for the disco∣vering of such as have offended, to bee brought to Justice, to deter others from acting the like abuses for the future, do humbly conceiv, That according to the President of the 14 Rich. 2. cap. 12. a Commission bee granted to make enquirie through the Realm, of such as had conveied the Monies of England out of the Nation, & to make enquirie after all such as melt and cull out the heavie currant Monie, contrarie to the Statute of the 4 Hen. 4. cap. 10. none to melt the currant Silver Coins of the Nation, upon pain of forfeiture four times the va∣lue. That 2 Hen. 6. cap. 12. It is ordeined, that neither the Master-worker of the Mint, nor the Changer for the time beeing, neither sell or caus to bee sold, nor alien to no other use; but apply the same wholly to Coin, according to the tenure of the Indenture of the Mint, made between the King's Majestie and the Master of the Mint: to declare by Ordinance, That what Gold-smith, or Changer shall buie Gold or Silver, and convert it to any use to transport, shall forfeit the value. To declare by Ordinance, that according to the 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 19. an Act touching the Exchange of Gold and
That whosoevër give's more for Gold and Silver then it is, or shall bee declared, shall suffer imprisonment by the space of a year, and make fine at the pleasure of the State. The Mint cannot bee emploied, nor the transporting of treasure stopped, if som cours bee not speedily taken to discover these great abuses. And alreadie, almost all the Gold is transported out of the Nation: and the Silver followeth it apace, as is prudently insisted upon in the late Petition of the Citizens of London, to both Houses of Parlament. Wee humbly conceiv, that the making of this disco∣verie throughout the Nation, of such as have, or shall transport Gold and Silver into parts beyond the Seas, and of such as have, or shall melt down the currant Gold and Silver Coins of the Nation; or have, or shall buie Gold and Silver at above the price of the Mint: (the practice of which abuses, if not timely prevented, is likely to bring speedie destruction to the Trade of this Kingdom: which is presidented Anno 4 Rich. 2. c. 2. when the Nation found the same mischief as wee now suffer under, by transporting of treasure. And Anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 19. by giving for Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint.) As it will bee a service of great importance to the Publick affairs, and bring great advantage to the trade of this Nation; so it will draw with it a verie great charge. Which if Master Watkins will undertake, hee will deserv highly to bee encouraged. Nevertheless, wee humbly submit the premises, to the Wisdoms of this Honorable Committee. John St John, Warden. Robert Hartlie, Master. Henrie Cogan, Comptr. December 20. 1647. THese Gentlemen by reason of their places in the Cu∣stom-Hous, and Mint within the Tower of London, &
their long experience in Merchandize and Trade of this Nation; I humbly conceiv their Certificates will leav a great Impression upon the Parlament, and on the Hono∣rable Committeee that are appointed to report this Act, that what these Gentlemen have certified, hath been don upon a great deal of consideration, and upon great experience, with all their best skill and judgment for the service of this Nation in this most weightie business, it tending so highly to the safetie and welfare of the publick, and the delaie of passing this Act in its full force and vigor will one daie bee found to bee highly destructive to this Nation, and that the design hath been set on foot, and prosecuted to hinder the Act from passing, is don by som people that have made themselvs fortunes by these wicked practices; and though they dare not speak against the Act, yet they labor to stop it and delaie it, or to procure the altering of it, that it may bee uneffectual, to give a stop to these mischiefs which I hope they shall never bee able to effect; I would have these men to know, Justice is slow, but it is sure, and I am assured they will bee discovered and brought to Justice when they least think of it; forbearance will bee no paiment: and this Act will bring their dark actions to light when it is passed the Hous. Besides these former Certificates, the Act now com∣mitted was drawn up by a Committee of the Council of State, and I was required to attend the Right Honorable Sir James Harrington in Januarie last, beeing one of the Com∣mittee for taking away the obstructions of the Mint, which I did accordingly, and thereupon by Order of the Honora∣ble Committee, for removing of the obstruction of the Mint, I was desired to send into Holland for several Coins of Forrain Gold and Silver, and several Placarts and Weights, and som of the said Gold and Silver, I have de∣livered to Doctor Gurden to make Assaies of, for the service of the State, the remainder I have readie to deliver to any that will see mee paid upon the deliverie; I having deman∣ded monie of Doctor Gurden divers times, who tell's mee,
hee will procure monie, but hath not as yet paid mee for what I delivered him: and if I should not bee paid for the Gold and Silver I writ for from Holland, the same price as by my friend I paid for it in the Bank in Holland, there would bee a great loss redound to mee to Coin it here, and lose the Exchange; the Exchange from Holland, when I writ for these Species, running at about thirtie two shillings Fle∣mish. I do humbly desire the Honorable Committee for ob∣structions of the Mint, to call to the old Clerks of the Mint, for an accompt of what they have don about the Assaies made of Forrain Coins; and I humbly desire you to consi∣der, how much it were for the service of the Nation, both in point of honor, profit, and safetie, to set your Mint on work. Which upon the peril of my life, if you pass the Act, as it is recommended from the Council of State, I will finde out waies to set your Mint presently a going, or lose both my Estate and Life. I would not make this proffer, but that I am sure of it; it is well known to all the Officers of the Mint, I know as much of Mint-business, as any of them here do; and for the Gold-smiths, I am sure, they think I know too much: and the Merchants have found it, that I know what many did, and do here, and what their Factors did and do beyond Seas; and to bee Master of this secret, cost mee many an hundred pound, besides many years time and pains; and by my intelligence in the Sea-Ports of this Nation, I have caused the transporters of monie to bee fined at four and twentie thousand one hun∣dred pounds. And now as I have laid this business, they shall bee discovered all over this Nation. If I should offer this, and could do the like service in any other State, I humbly conceiv I need not Petition twice, but it would bee accepted at the first time; and the delaie of passing this Act, move's mee not at all for my own particular, but for the Common-wealth. I shall never forget Sir John Coke
his rule to mee, and hee was Secretarie of State to the late King, That hee never knew a patient and a vigilant man lose his business, if it were just; for at one time or another, that man will finde an opportunitie to do it; and truly, by observing this rule, I have passed through great business, and som of much difficultie; for all which, I humbly thank God, and at∣tribute it to his mercie. THere is another caus of the great waste of the Treasure of the Nation, which is the great quantitie of Flanders Laces, and French Laces, both in the Thread, and in Silk, which are imported into this Nation, to the value of ma∣ny scores of thousand pounds a year, which Lace is stoln in without paying any Custom, beeing subtilly packed in commodities of great Bulk. But what the State lose's by the Custom, is nothing in comparison to what it lose's in Stock; for the returns of this Lace is for the most part sent over in Gold and Silver of the currant Coins of this Nation. Neither is this mischief all the hurt that cometh to the Common-wealth; for this Lace is made by them in France and Flanders, that can afford it far cheaper then any of our poor can do here; for generally it is made in Religious Houses, in their Nunneries; which Nuns, generally bring into the Religious Houses their Dowries when they are admitted, and as long they live, they are well provided for all manner of necessaries to live verie handsomly, both for their diet and apparel, beeing left to their voluntarie choice after their religious Exercises is don, to spend their time as they pleas. Now many of them beeing excellent Needle-women, spend their time in making Cut-works, for their Altar∣cloths, Black Laces for Scarffs, and Flanders Laces, (as they are called) though many of them are made in France. These the Nuns make, and sell great quantities of them into England; which monie is all returned into the use of
the Monasteries, these Nuns thinking they merit most, that can get their Monasteries most monie by their labor. And truly when I have been in companie of som fine Dames in London, that profess much; I have told them of their Laces and Gorgets, that if they did know whom they made rich by such vanities, they would laie by the fashion, and give that monie, they spent in Flanders Laces, to the poor, and not bee instruments of making Nuns and Mo∣nasteries rich beyond Seas; and I have desired them to think how contrarie their work was to their Husbands: their Husbands are destroying Bishop's Houses and Lands, and Deans and Chapter's Houses, and Lands, here in Eng∣land, beeing Reliques of Poperie; and their Wives by buy∣ing up of the Nun's Laces in England, with the Returns of that Monie, which they produce here, are a building Nun∣neries, and Religious Houses in France and Flanders. I humbly desire all the English Gentrie, that are wearers of Lace, both Men and Women, to consider seriously what I saie; it is of concernment. I take God to witness, I have heard French men, and Dutch men, saie to mee, above twelv years ago, that have dealt in Cut-work Laces, and in Flanders Laces, both black and white here in London, that they did believ there was above five hundred thousand pounds in a year transported in Gold and Silver into France and Flanders, onely in Return of Forrain Cut-works, and Flanders Laces, both Black and White; and I believ in my conscience they spoke truth; and to this daie there are extreme excesses in these vanities; which as your af∣fairs of the Common-wealth stand, highly concern you to look to prevent it; for I humbly desire you to consider, the Nation fling's away so much stock in monie; for Flan∣ders Lace is of no use but to keep up pride and vanities; Gold and Silver Lace make's somthing upon the Re∣turn, one hundred pounds worth may make about for∣tie pounds when you have don wearing of it: But for thread & silk Laces, that which cost one hundred thousand
pound, when they are worn out, will not make the Com∣mon-wealth one pennie. I do humbly desire you to consider of a strict Law against importing any Forrain Laces, or selling them in London; the forfeiture of the Laces is nothing, becaus it will not bee discovered, once in one thousand times. But I hum∣bly conceiv, it must bee made Felonie for any to import Flanders, French, or Forrain Laces, or Cut-works, and loss of any Shop-keeper's Estate that shall knowingly sell any Forrain Laces, either Flanders, or any other. By which means you will prevent the transporting ma∣ny hundred thousand pounds of treasure in a year, and you will stop the trade of making Nunneries rich by our monie; And if the Gentrie will wear Laces, let them on God's name put our own poor on work, and not Forrainers; and by this means, you will give relief to many poor Gentle∣women, which through the calamities of the War, are almost starved, and they are ashamed to beg, and they would bee glad to make Lace, if any would emploie them. THere is also a great and excessive waste of the Gold of this Nation, in the vanitie of guilding of Caroches, which is com to that extravagancie, that if a Bainian of the Fast-Indies, or a Chinoes of China, or any other strange Nati∣on should com to Hide-Park, in an after-noon, hee would report in his own Countrie such stories, as your Jesuits report of Perue, and Mexico, upon the first discoverie of the West-Indies; That there were Towns that all the houses were covered over with Gold and Silver: So would an Indian report the Gentrie's wealth of this Nation; That they were drawn through the streets of this Citie of London, in Caroches covered over with beaten Gold. But I shall tell you what a French Merchant said to mee this Summer in Hide-Park, as wee were talking of the great quantities of English Gold, which hath been trans∣ported into France and Flanders, and other Forrain parts;
Saith the French Merchant to mee, I have heard you often com∣plain of all the English Gold, beeing transported beyond the Seas, and now wee are again speaking of it, I will demonstrate to you pre∣sently, that all is not gon, for you see how many guilded Caroches here are; then laughing, hee told mee, you see Sir, how you are mistaken, all your Gold is not gon; but if you had said, almost all the English Gold is transported beyond the Seas, that I would have granted you, for you have the shell of the Gold to guild your Caroches, and to make you fine things, but wee in France have the kernel of your Gold, and thus much I grant you. But wee in France, and Holland, and Flanders, have not all, wee are more conscionable, good Monsieur Violet. I was forced to bite my lip, for I could not denie but that hee spake truth. THere is another great waste of Gold and Silver in this Common-wealth, and that is, the making of Gold and Silver-Thread and Lace within this Nation: there are som things may bee said for it, and som things against it; I shall impartially put down som things which I know in this business; for I had the principal care of regulating that Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Wier and Thread, for five years together in the late King's time, and paid him about four thousand pounds yearly for it; besides I was enjoin∣ed to look to the just standard of the Silver, and to the sub∣stantial making of the Manufacture, which now is totally neglected, and the Common-wealth cheated in the cours∣ness of much of the Silver, and in the slight making of it. If the Manufacture of the Gold and Silver-Thread, was brought in from beyond the Seas, then would the State have the Custom, there beeing a great Impost and Custom laid on it, which would bee a considerable Revenue to the Common-wealth. The Common-wealth in the stock of their treasure would bee augmented; for all Gold and Silver-Thread make's a Return to the melting pot, and so increase's the stock of monie in the Nation; besides, that is an advantageous Trade, which for the Returns of our
Commodities and Manufactures of England, bring's us Re∣turns in Silver. There is replied to this, the setting so many thousands of poor people on work, which will starv, if the Manufa∣ctures of Gold and Silver-Thread, were brought in from beyond the Seas, or if the State should prohibit the wear∣ing of Gold and Silver-Thread and Lace. Indeed this is of great consideration, and ought to bee considered on. But then if they will have leav to make it here, it should bee don with such restraints and limitations, as the treasure of the Nation should not bee wasted or impaired, the currant monie of the Nation should not bee culled out to make Gold and Silver-Thread, as many hundreds of thousand pounds have been since the making of this Manufacture, which was but begun to bee a Trade in London, within less then fortie years; also there should bee a restriction of the number of the workers, not to encreas as they have don, and the Wier-drawers should bee a distinct Corporation, and Officers appointed to look after their due and Orderly working, and an accompt kept for the State, of what Sil∣ver and Gold is spent everie year in the Manufacture, and the Companie of Gold-Wier-drawers enjoined to bring in the value in Bullion from beyond the Seas, as they waste in this Manufacture; for without doing of this, the trade is wholly destructive to the Common-wealth, and there can bee no just plea to allow their trade to continue. I humbly conceiv the Common-wealth is not in a con∣dition to suffer fiftie thousand pounds a year in Silver, to bee brushed and blown away out of Gold and Silver Lace: If those that work the Manufacture, will not see to Import Silver from beyond the Seas, and bee bound not to work Silver with a Core of Copper, and sell it for good Silver, (for which cheat I have caused som of them to stand in the Pillorie, when I had the managing of that Manufacture) and also that the Wier-drawers bee bound, not to make any Spangles, Wier, or Thread, under sterling, which hereto∣fore
hath been their daily practice, and I believ is continued still. Therefore ought by a sworn Officer to bee regulated, and that Officer to bee no Trader in the Manufacture. M. Jackson the Assaie-Master of Gold smith's Hall, by di∣rection of the Lords of the Council, made many score of As∣saies of Gold and Silver-Spangles, Lace, Wier, and Thread, found and taken in Silk-men's shops, which were adulte∣rated, and under the Standard; and this Manufacture will never bee justly made, if there bee not a government set∣tled by a Corporation, and then the Trade might bee so managed by their contracting for Bullion from beyond the Seas, that they may get a great Manufacture here. But I humbly desire that Trade may bee driven with Forrain Sil∣ver; Imported, and not with the Stock, or Coin of the Nation. Die Veneris Decemb. 20. 1650. At the Council for Trade at White-hall. Ordered, THat a Model or Waie for the regulating the Trade of Gold and Silver-Wier, and Thread, and for preventing of all slight or base work, to the abuse and deceit of the Common∣wealth, bee tendred to this Council against Fridaie, Januarie 17. by the Gold Wier-drawers and Refiners of London, and som of the Women-spinners, who are hereby all required to meet together, and consult about it. And they are to take into their consideration likewise the Papers this daie delivered in, and read before this Coun∣cil, presented by Master Thomas Violet. Ex. Ben. Worslie, Sec.
In obedience to your Honor's Order, directed unto mee 29 November, 1650 concerning the Hand-Spinners of Gold and Silver-Thread, I humbly offer to your grave considerations these few Propositions, for the service of the Com∣mon-wealth. I. THat it bee not lawful for any person, either Wier∣drawer, Weaver, or others, to keep any Wheels for the spinning of Gold or Silver-Thread, but within the Lines of Communication of London; and every person using such Wheels, to give in their names, and their abiding places, and how many Wheels they keep, and their several working places, and a sworn Officer appointed, who by himself and his sufficient Deputies, to view and examine both the Sizes, the Silver so spun, and the fineness, and to deface and burn all under the Standard. II. That no Wheel bee admitted to spin Gold and Sil∣ver-Thread, but onely superfine, and all other sorts and si∣zes, to bee spun with, and by the Hand-spinners; and som strict penaltie put on the offendors: for if you keep not a sworn Officer that is no Trader in it, and do not restrain the offendors by a penaltie, there will bee no keeping these men within a rule: for few Laws well executed, is bet∣ter then a multitude of Laws, and none to look after the execution of them. And if this Regulation shall bee left to the Wier-drawers (onely) they beeing parties, and their own profit concerned in it, the Common-wealth will still bee deceived; for where the Felon make's the Hue and Crie, the Thief will never bee found. I humbly conceiv, the Wier-drawers may do well in having an equal power with the sworn Surveior, to finde out the frauds in the Trade, but not to leav it wholly to them to finde out; for
if you do, I humbly conceiv the Common-wealth will have no benefit, but a mischief, as it is in som other Corpo∣rations, which have such privileges, that the Members of them are impowered to oppress and circumvent the Com∣mon people of the Nation, and to enrich themselvs and their private interest, to the great damage of the publick. The Regulation of which is left to your Honors in the ninth Article of your Commission. III. That no Gold-Wier-drawer bee admitted to make Gold and Silver Lace, nor Silver-Ribbon, nor no Weaver to make Gold and Silver-Thread, but either Trade tied to his own Art onely; for by the means of blending these two Trades together, all the bad and slight Stuff is foisted into the Lace, and so cunningly interwoven, interwoven, that Artists themselvs cannot discern it, when it is made into Lace; and by this slight of blending two Trades together, they put into their Silver-Ribbon, much Gold and Silver-Thread, made by the Wheel; som hold's not three Ounces Silver in a pound Venice, which is eight Ounces and four Drams Troie, whereas according to the rule of Merchantable Gold and Silver-Thread, there should bee five Ounces of Silver at the least to three Ounces Silk; a cheat that ought to bee punished with the highest penalties; to couzen the buier of two Ounces in eight Ounces of Silver, and to make them paie for Silver, when the buier hath nothing but Silk, and that many times heavie died, which causeth the color of the Gold to tarnish; and if the late King's Commissioners Books of Orders for the regulating of Gold and Silver-Thread, were returned out of the Parlament Hous to this Council, there it will bee found the Wheels were upon several great complaints of the many abuses thereof totally suppressed. And it was don upon serious deliberation, and much debate before the late King's Coun∣sel at Law, and the Commissioners; and this can bee pro∣ved to bee true by the Oaths of many people, and I will
depose it, if I bee required by this Honorable Council. IV. The poor Women-spinners by the hand spindle, are discouraged from speaking truth by many of their work∣masters, or to move for a Regulation of the abuses of their Trade, and dare not speak against the said abuses, left they should bee turned out of their work, as those poor wo∣men spinners are, that your Honors commanded to agitate for the whole Companie of Hand-spinners. And som of these poor Women-spinners, besides turning out of their work, have been beaten and abused by their tyrannous work-masters, and reviled with base and odious names by som of the Master Wier-drawers; and this is the true reason why the work-men are retarded, that they do not com and join with the women, and shew their just grievances, and the many abuses daily practised in their Trade, whereby the Common-wealth is, and hath been so grosly abused, and the poor work-men and women oppressed. And in∣deed if the poor Hand-spinners had not opened som of the abuses of the Trade to your Honors, neither Work-master, Finer, nor Work-man, would have put to their hand for a Regulation. And this I believ in my conscience to bee true. May it pleas your Honors, the greatest part of the Hand∣spinner's work is fine five-bourn, and the greatest multi∣tude of the poor Petitioners are fine five-bourn-spinners; som of the Wier-drawers are utterly against the Wheels for any sort of work, and many of them for superfine, if they durst speak it: But they all beeing parties, I most humbly leav it to your Wisdoms to take notice, that their self-inte∣rest make's many of them speak that with their mouths, which in my conscience their hearts know they speak not the truth in this particular. And as I humbly conceiv, if that the Wheels bee not strictly tied up onely to superfine, many of the Hand-spinners will perish for want of bread: and this I speak, I believ in my conscience is a truth; and
therefore I do most humbly leav it to your Honor's pious and charitable consideration. That if your Honors would have a speedie Reformation in this Trade, I humbly conceiv, that if any Wier-drawer, Weaver, or others, that make Silver-Thread, or Wier, cour∣ser then the Standard, or spin on the Wheels any other sort of Silver-Thread, then such as shall bee appointed by your Honors; and any other persons that shall make any Gold or Silver-Thread, not holding at the least five Ounces Troie upon everie pound weight Venice, which is eight Oun∣ces, and one fift Troie; that strict punishments may bee or∣dered and inflicted on the offendors; and upon the third time of conviction, besides the loss of the Materials, to bee further punished, either by beeing dis-franchised for a time, or for ever, as to your Honor's shall seem most agreeable to Justice. And that a sworn Officer bee appointed ac∣cording to the best of his skill, to see to make it his business to go from place to place amongst all the workers of the Manufactures, to see the workers make all fine Silver, and everie sort of this Manufacture to bee according to the rules settled by your Honors. Many other things I could enlarge my self in concerning this Trade, but shall respite them for the present; and humbly submit my self, and all that I have here said to your Honor's grave consideration. Signed THO: VIOLET. Decemb. 18. 1650.
WHereas the Gold-Wier-drawers and Refiners of London, have presented to the Honorable Council for Trade, the draught of a Corporation, as it is desired by them, it is utterly destructive to the Common-wealth; and I do most humbly desire the Honorable Council for Trade, to take notice that som of the Gold-Wier-drawers of London, in the behalf of themselvs, and divers other Wier-drawers of London, did Petition the late King for a Corporation, in March 1634. and in April 1635. confes∣sing the many abuses practised in the managing of the same Trade, which were then under no government; did de∣sire in their Petition, that by his Majestie's gracious care, they might bee reduced into Government, and made a Cor∣poration; and that they might have one or two Refiners, such as the Wier-drawers should deem fit, to bee added to their Corporation, (and excluding all the rest of the Refi∣ners) that were Hous-keepers or Free-men, and onely them∣selvs might solely have the Order and Government of the Trade, and the Regulation of the said Manufacture. And in consideration of this, the Wier-drawers offered the late King for his favor in that behalf, to paie to him and his successors, one thousand pounds per Annum, and 2 d. the Ounce for everie Ounce of such Bullion and Forrain Spe∣cies, as they should use in their said Manufacture, over and above the currant price of the Merchants. And about the same time the Companie of Gold-smiths beeing at the late King's Council-Table, did there charge several abuses and high misdemeanors upon som of the Refiners of London, and other persons, as will appear by the Council-Table-Books, and by the Records and Journal Books at Gold∣smith's Hall, if one could com to the sight of them; for it cannot bee imagined, the Companie of Gold-smiths would give so high a charge as they did against som of the Refiners, and som Gold-smiths, but they have the Charge recorded in their Books, which I humbly desire the Coun∣cil
of Trade may have a Copie of, that so they might see the abuses in the Trade of Refining and Wier-drawing, and who were the offendors; and no question but the same abuses are practised still, if there were an examination, and power given to the Surveior of Gold and Silver-Thread, to finde them out. The truth is, that upon the complaint of the Gold-smith's Companie at the Council Table, of the several abuses in the Trade of Refining and Wier-drawing, the Wier-drawers, conceiving the late King and his Coun∣sel would put down the wearing and working of Gold and Silver-Wier, and Thread, and punish the offendors in Star-Chamber, and knowing what would move, and bee most taken in Court, I saie, the Wier-drawers voluntarily, and of their own accord, did com and petition, and made friends, that their Trade should bee continued. And this Model was laid to have a Monopoly to som Wier-drawers, and Finers as aforesaid; and in the pursuance of this pro∣ject of the Wier-drawers, they had many meetings with Sir Ralph Freeman, Sir Ralph Whitfield, and Master Natha∣naël Tompkins, and divers others, where the whole drift was to exclude all the Refiners but one or two from their trades. And in consideration thereof, that they would for this great grace and favor (their own words) paie two pence the Ounce, and one thousand pounds a year to the late King. It is as true, that upon complaint of som of the Gold-smiths, several Refiners and Gold-smiths were proceeded against in the Exchequer, and Star-Chamber, for melting down the currant Silver Coins of the Nation, for buying Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint, and for refining of Sil∣ver contrarie to a Statute made in Henrie the seventh's time; and it is as true, that I Thomas Violet was informed against in the Star-Chamber and Exchequer, for all these offen∣ces, and beeing to bee examined upon Interrogatories against my self, both at the Council. Table and Star-Chamber, and before Master Atturnie Noie, and Master Atturnie Banks, I did refuse to bee examined upon Interrogatories, such
as Master Atturnie General had exhibited against mee in Star-Chamber; for I knew, if I had denied them, the Attur∣nie General could prove them on mee by som Gold-smiths and others, that had voluntarily confessed against mee, that I had transported Gold, and that I had melted the currant heavie Silver of this Nation, and that I had sold Silver and Gold above the price of the Mint. Whereupon that most Honorable Gentleman Sir John Coke, Secretarie of State, after that I had oftentimes been ex∣amined at the Council-Table, and at the Star-Chamber Office, and for refusing to answer to their questions, had suffered close imprisonment for above 20 weeks, beeing close prisoner to several Messengers, viz. Measie, Stockdal, and Barker, for all that time, to the loss of my Trade, which was then greater then any Gold-smith's in London. I saie, that great States-man had a noble care of mee, and sent for mee, shewed mee what was proved against mee, and withal a Warrant that hee had signed by Order of the late King, and his Privie Council, for Master Atturnie General to bring mee to the Star-Chamber-Bar, the next sitting of the Court, and there to crave the Judgment of the Court against mee, his Charge beeing taken against mee pro con∣fesso. Whereupon Secretarie Coke became a Petitioner to the late King, that before hee delivered Master Atturnie the Warrant, to proceed against mee, hee might send once again for mee; and hee told the late King, that hee was of an opi∣nion, that when I saw my danger, and how I was disco∣vered by those that held mee fair in hand, and were the men that did betraie mee, I would bee so ingenuous to my self, to keep mee from a ruine, to confess the truth, and all that I knew upon oath against those that had discovered mee; and my so doing, would bee much for the service of the State: and to this effect, when I spake with Secretarie Coke, was his Discours to mee, not giving mee a quarter of an hours time to return him my answer, nor suffering mee to go
out of his sight. When I saw the Snare, I blest the Fow∣ler, (which was Sir John Coke) who had traversed mee in France, (and intercepted my Letters, though not written to mee by name) knew a great part of my proceedings there, about my Transporting Gold, and hee had many Gold∣smiths that hee sent for, which confessed to him that week∣ly I had bought great quantities of Light English Gold of many Gold-smiths of London, and I was to bee forced to give an accompt what I did with it. And som other of my Factors that I had dealt with in France, Sir John Coke had gotten them upon their coming over at Rie, and at Dover apprehended, and they confessed they did receiv Light English Gold of mee, and other For∣rain Gold and Silver in France. And all the papers that dis∣covered any thing against mee, hee shewed mee, and told mee my danger: When I saw it, I was astonished, not imagining that any man did know my proceedings in this business, or that I was betraied by those that spoke mee fair, and was as faultie as my self; for if it were a crime in mee to buie this Light Gold, it was as great an one in the Gold∣smiths to sell it; and if it were a crime in mee to transport Gold, it was as great a crime in English men to bee my Fa∣ctors and Partners, though at Roan, Calice, Deep, or Paris. And when I found these were the men that abused mee to currie favor, and to get their own discharge, I besought God in my heart, so to direct mee, that I might overcom this Philistim; and I was an humble sutor to Sir John Coke, to make my peace with the late King upon any terms, and that I might have the late King's pardon; and in humble requital, I would really discover to him what Transporters of Gold I knew, and what Gold-smiths I knew had sold Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint, and Culled and Melted down the currant Monie of this Nation, and paie him two thousand pounds in Gold to his Privie Purs, which I did accordingly paie into his Privie Purs, and had my pardon under the Great Seal.
And I was forced before I could get my pardon, to bring in all my Books and Accompts to Sir John Coke, and by them I proved that I had Imported into this Nation more Silver in value, then I had Exported Gold. By which Accompts, I made it clearly appear, that the benefit and advantage was to bee made by understanding the weight and fineness of all Forrain Coins, and what proportion their Silver hath to our Gold, and our Silver to their Gold; for this was the Accompt in France 1632, 1633, 1634. that all our English Gold whether Light or Weight, (for they went all at one price without weighing the twentie shillings piece) passed in currant paiment in France for twentie six shillings, and the Cardecu in France went then at 16 Sols, as all men know which were then in France; so that upon this ac∣compt, I made my reckoning 16 Sols in France, is 19 d. ob. English for everie Cardecu, what will these Cardecues make mee in London, beeing all full weight, six pennie weight Troie at the least, which in the Mint in the Tow∣er of London would make 18 d. sterling. By this accompt, I found there was above twentie in the hundred got by transporting our English Gold, and returning of heavie Cardecues, which then at those times there was as much of them to bee had both at Calice, Paris, Roan, and Deep, amongst the Bankers, as a man would desire. Then for the most part the lightness of the Gold paid for the Portage, and a man might make his return once everie moneth, and I have don it somtimes in fourteen daies, and got above twentie in the hundred. When the late King saw my Accompts in this manner made up for many thousand pounds, hee commended my ingenuitie, but hee would share stakes with mee a little; for hee commanded mee to bring him two thousand pounds in Gold, and then I should have my pardon; which I did verie willingly, and humbly thanked him for his mer∣cie to mee. But that which pleased the late King, and brought mee
into his service, was, when I shewed him several processes attested out of France, under publick Notarie's hands, that som of those French men that dealt with mee for English Gold, were sued in the Parlament of Paris, for sending out of France the heavie Cardecues at an under-value, and for bringing into France English Gold at a greater value. Much about this time, the refiners & wier-drawer's business beeing under examination; the late King finding by what I before had declared, my skill in managing Mint-business, and the Bullion of this Nation, appointed mee to have the view and surveying of all the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Wier, and Thread, and to confirm it to mee for three lives; the Grant cost near fifteen hundred pounds, to the Lord Treasurer, Lord Cottington, Master Secretarie Coke, and others; and I make no question to shew the justness of the Grant to the Honorable Council of Trade, and what ser∣vice it is to the Common-wealth to have mee restored to that office again, which all the while I had it, I caused the Manufacture all to bee justly made, and according to the Standard, and that there was never so good Gold and Silver, Thread made in the Common-wealth before I had the Office, nor since the Office was sequestred from mee; and this I can prove by many people that are Artists in the Trade. That a little before this time, upon the information of som of the Companie of Gold-smiths to the late King and his Council, a Commission did issue out to make inquirie of the deceits and abuses of the Refiners of Gold and Sil∣ver, and in transporting Gold and Silver; whereupon as I said before, Sir John Wollaston, Will. Gibs, Walter Hill, Hen∣rie Patrickson, Refiners; Henrie Foot, John Perin, Timothie Eman, Tho. Violet, Gold-smiths, were made Defendants in the Star-Chamber. The Refiners had that good fortune, they all got off without a sentence, by their wit, which was to out-bid the Wier-drawers; for the Wier-drawers bid as appear's but one thousand pounds a year, and two pence an
Ounce, and a few humble words, viz. And the Corporation of Gold-Wier-drawers, for your Majestie's grace and goodness to them, in continuing their Trades, and reducing the same to Govern∣ment, humbly offer to paie to your Majestie, your heirs, and suc∣cessors, for ever, one thousand pounds a year, and two pence an Ounce, in lieu of your Customs, from Michaelmas next; and for and to∣wards their Provision and Importation of such Bullion as the Members of this Corporation shall use; and this was in March 1634. and in April 1635. And thereupon Master Atturnie General had many trea∣ties with the Wier-drawers, and others, and modelled the draught of a Certificate; and truly I know not whether hee ever delivered it to the late King; but the pithiness and bre∣vitie of it, will shew it must bee his: and that this Certi∣ficate was made upon many arguments of all hands, and treatie with all parties; for Master Atturnie had drawn a Certificate fit for a King to look on, containing so much matter in so few words; and if the Honorable Council of Trade will bee pleased to consider of this Certificate, they will finde a great part of the Regulation of the Trade settled in this Certificate, if they pleas to consider of everie branch of it, for it is all matter of State. A Copie of Sir John Bank's Certificate to the late King, hee beeing his Atturnie General. May it pleas your most Excellent Majestie, I Have taken consideration of the several Petitions of Hen∣rie Earl of Holland, Jane Countess of Roxborough, and of Joseph Simmons, and other Gold-Wier-drawers of the Citie of London, to mee referred. And after several hearings of their Counsel, and of the Companie of Gold-smiths, and the Refiners, I humbly conceiv,
I. That many abuses have been committed in the con∣sumption of the Gold and Silver of this Kingdom, which are fit to bee reformed. II. I do not discern any inconvenience that the Gold-Wier-drawers (who offer unto your Majestie one thou∣sand pounds per Annum, and two pence upon everie Ounce of Bullion which shall bee used by them) should bee in∣corporated for their better Government, so that they bee ti∣ed unto these conditions, or such other conditions as your Majestie in your Wisdom shall think fit. 1. That they shall use in their Trades none but Forrain Bullion or Species, and no more thereof yearly, then shall bee yearly Imported, by their means, or by others, whom your Majestie shall emploie in that service. 2. That the Bullion Imported, shall not bee bought with English Coin, to bee Exported, but for Commodities. 3. That the Importation of Bullion or Forrain Species by others, shall not bee restrained, nor accompted any part of their said Forrain Bullion or Species, so un∣dertaken to bee yearly Imported. 4. That the Gold and Silver-Thread, Purls, Plate, Oes, Spangles, &c. shall bee made according to the Stan∣dard, or better. 5. That under color of these summes given unto your Majestie, they may not in any undue proportion in∣haunce the price of their Commodities. III. Touching the Assaie of the work of the Gold-Wi∣er-drawers claimed by the Earl of Holland, by a former in∣tended Grant, and desired by the Countess of Roxborough's Petition; I finde upon the perusal of the Grant unto the Earl of Holland, dated 12 Novembr. 3 Car. Reg. (which passed onely the Privie Seal, and not the Great Seal) that
there was thereby intended to pass unto him the Assaie of Gold and Silver-Thread, Purls, Oes, Spangles, &c. after the same was made into work. But the thing desired by the Countess, is to have the Assaie of Gold and Silver-Wier at the Bar before the same bee made into work, which is an Assaie of a differing nature. I conceiv that an Assaie is necessarie to prevent the adulterating of the work: All which I humbly submit to your Majestie's great Wisdom. Whereupon the Refiners, as Sir John Wollaston, Master Alderman Gibs, and others, seeing the Wier-drawers go about to exclude them of their Trade, and to get a Corpo∣ration upon the terms aforesaid; they (I saie) did serv the Wier-drawers, as the Merchant-Adventurers served the Cloth-workers, out-bid them; for they to have their par∣dons, and to bee freed of the complaints of the Gold-smiths in the Star-Chamber, and to have the Trade onely in their own hands, that none but the Refiners of London might bee his Majestie's Agents in the new waie of Regulation, for the furnishing, and preparing, fining, refining, and sel∣ling Gold and Silver-Wier, to bee used and emploied in the Manufactures. First, they did covenant with the late King, to bring all the Gold and Silver by them prepared for the Manufactures, to an Hous called the Golden Fleece in Little Britain, or to such other place as the late King's Commissi∣oners should appoint; there to sell and utter the same, and not elswhere. That all Silver so provided, should bee assaied before the same was put to sale, by such as the late King should appoint in that behalf; not to sell the Gold and Silver so provided, but to persons by the late King's Commissioners allowed to work and use the same, and to none other, unless to known Gold-smiths, for the augmen∣tation and amendment of Plate, or to, or for the use of the Mint; and not sell the same to persons allowed, unless they would paie the duties limited to the late King, viz. for
everie Ounce of Silver guilt, six pence; and for everie Ounce of Gold, six pence; So that upon the finishing of this agree∣ment between the late King and the Refiners, the Wier∣drawers which would have excluded the Refiners from their Corporation, are by these Articles debarred their Trade; and both Gold-smiths, and Wier-drawers, or any other but these Agents, were debarred to prepare any Silver for any of the Manufactures of Wier-drawers; and becaus they came off so freely, and bid the late King roundly six pence the Ounce on all the Wier, the late King was pleased to gratifie them with a Courtly title, calling them his well∣beloved subjects, the Refiners of London, his Agents; and to requite them, settled such a price certain for fine Silver, and refine Silver, and such a price certain for ordinary guilt, and rich guilt, and no person should presume to have or make any of these Materials, but to give these the late King's Agents their own price, and none to sell, but these Refiners, lately created the late King's Agents. Whereupon Captain Williams, the late King's Father's Gold-smith, in the behalf of the Companie of Gold-smiths, hee beeing one of the late King's Commissioners, often∣times did desire, that the Gold-smiths might bee heard a∣gainst the Monopoly of the Refiners; and hee beeing a rich man, worth at least fiftie thousand pounds, did offer in the behalf of the Companie of Gold-smiths, to give any securitie to the late King; that if the Trade were left open to a free Market for all the Gold-smiths as formerly, the Gold-smiths would sell all the Silver to the Wier-draw∣ers of London, in everie Ounce of guilt Silver-Wier, two pence, and in Silver-Wier one pennie cheaper, then the late King's Agents made them paie. The like Propositions was made by Henrie Footer Gold∣smith, then a man of great credit, and by William Simmonds Wier-drawer of London, and divers others, for a free Trade, that they might not bee restrained to buie their Silver of the Refiners of London onely, but to bee at libertie as former∣ly
to buie their Silver where they will, and to refine their own Silver. But these offers after many disputes, the Refiners opposed, and then said it was their Trade, and none should fine and prepare Gold and Silver for any Manufactures used by the Gold-Wier-drawers, but themselvs, the late King's Agents, which was, as I take it, onely to eight Refiners of London. The Wier-drawers seeing themselvs over powered by these the late King's Agents, a little before the Parlament, and at the beginning of this Parlament, complained and clamored at the Regulation; when, if the Refiners had left the Market open for all men equally to prepare his own Sil∣ver, paying the late King the duties, it is well known the Wier-drawers could never have hindered the sealing and surveying of the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Thread; for by that waie, the Manufacture was warranted to the Common-wealth: and if it had been continued, it would have avoided and prevented the many abuses since, in ma∣king slight and cours Silver-Thread, and Spangles, and Wi∣er. And if I had had the managing of my Office, as I had formerly, the State should have had twentie thousand pounds in their Coffers for Excise, more then they have received within these four years, due to them upon four pence the Ounce Excise; which monie is in the hands of som of the Wier-drawers and Refiners. Now when this busines came to bee examined in Parla∣ment, these Agents that would not before part with their Title, would not let the Gold-smiths have a free Market to prepare Silver for Gold and Silver-wier; would not suffer the Wier-drawers to prepare their own Silver, they offe∣ring to paie the late King's duties in the Office. I saie, these Agents finding som of the Members in Parlament to resent a restraint in Trade to a few Refiners, and knowing none but themselvs guiltie of the offence, cunningly put in a Pe∣tition into the Parlament, the twentie fourth of November 1640. as though the prices allowed to them to sell their
Silver, and they onely to bee the Agents to sell, was for∣ceably put upon them, and against their wils; and if they should not have furnished the Silver at the place appointed, and bee readie alwaies at fit and convenient times to sell and utter the same to the persons so allowed, desiring to buie the same at the rates limited by their Indenture, but should fail therein for the space of eight daies. Then upon proof thereof before six of the Commissioners, whereof one should bee of his Majestie's Privie Council, & upon their Certificate his Majestie might give libertie to others to do the same; the consequence whereof would have been to deprive the Refiners of their Trade. This shew's clearly, if this Agencie had not been for their profit, and to make an advantage, the Refiners might have forfeited their Agencie everie eight daies. But they kept it up for their own profit; for if they had laid it down, the Companie of Gold-smiths, and the Wier-drawers, would have had a free Market, and the duties still reserved to the late King, would have been paid by the Wier-draw∣ers and Gold-smiths as was offered. And whereas they are so injurious to saie, that they were fettered with the late King's Covenants and Agents, I knew the time when they said otherwise, and when som of them were most humble Petitioners to the late King for his mercie, which hee gave, at my Intercession freely, to som of them, and his pardon under the Great Seal of England; and that courtesie I did for them freely, without one pennie reward. In re∣quital to saie they were fettered with his Agencie; truly it was such a fetter, that I upon my own knowledg do know both the Silk-men of London, the Wier-drawers of London, and the Gold-smiths of London, did oppose the restraining of the Trade of selling Gold and Silver-wier onely to the Refiners, and desired to have a free Market; and som of them did offer to sell it two pence in the Ounce in guilt-wi∣er, and one pennie the Ounce in Silver-wier cheaper then the late King's Agents, and to put in good securitie to per∣form
the same to the Nation, and to paie the late King's du∣ties, which at six pence the Ounce in Wier, is not above two pence the Ounce in Venice Gold and Silver-Thread. This I can saie, what the Finers called a Fetter, would have been an Ornament, if the Wier-drawers had not complai∣ned of them in Parlament, both for their title of the late King's Agents, and the many hundred pounds a year they received for their Silver, more then it was offered to bee sold to the Wier-drawers at, by the persons before named; and this I know to bee true. That upon many daies examination of the whole busi∣ness, by Master Atturnie General, and all the rest of the late King's Council at Law, and before the Lords of the Coun∣cil, it was unanimously upon many great and grave dis∣putes carried, that the intrusting of the Regulation of this Manufacture of Gold and Silver-wier, and Thread, was not to bee don by waie of Corporation, neither to the Refi∣ners, nor Wier-drawers of London; and the principal rea∣sons were. 1. That upon a trial of above one hundred several assaies of Gold & Silver bought up in several Silk-men's, and Wier∣drawer's shops, both of Spangles, plated wier, Gold and Silver-Thread, and made by Master Jackson the Assaie-Ma∣ster of Gold-smith's Hall; the Gold and Silver-Thread, Spangles, & Wier, were found to bee made cours and adul∣terated, and under the sterling; and I had all these Assaies attested under Master Jakson's hand, the Assaie-Master of Gold-smith's Hall; and for his pains in making these As∣saies, I had order from the Lords of the Council, to paie Master Jackson five pounds, which I did accordingly, and I delivered the Reports of these Assaies to the Lords of the Council; and Master Jackson the Assaie-Master of Gold∣smith's Hall, cannot denie this to bee true. 2. It was proved that the Manufacture of Gold and Sil∣ver-Thread, was slightly made, and not so substantial and serviceable as the Gold and Silver-Thread which was Im∣ported
from Venice, and other Forrain parts; all of the Gold and Silver-Thread coming from Venice, holding two parts Silver, or within a verie little, as six Ounces Silver to three Ounces Silk. 3. Thereupon a rule was set by the Lords of the Coun∣cil upon many debates, that no Gold and Silver-Thread should bee made under five Ounces Silver, to three Ounces Silk at the least; and for Needle Gold-Thread, according to the standard of Venice, six Ounces Silver to three Ounces Silk. 4. That all the Gold and Silver-Thread Imported from beyond Seas, beeing of so strong a plate, was made up in scanes, that so the buier might but turn it in his hand, and see it was all perfectly good; a great advantage to the Manu∣facture, to have it all justly made for the fineness of the stan∣dard, and to have such a bodie of Silver on the Silk, as it was serviceable to the Common-wealth; and when it was worn out, almost all returned into the melting pot for Bullion; and upon this reason the slight stuff was prohi∣bited, viz. that it was almost all wasted, and not a tenth part returned to the melting pot, to the waste of the treasure of the Nation, above fiftie thousand pounds in a year. 5. The Lords of the Council after many debates with the King's Council, and they with the Silk-men and Wier∣drawers, set this rule for all the Manufactures of Gold and Silver-Thread, That it should all bee made up in scanes, of about an Ounce weight, according to the commendable waie of Venice, which make's this Manufacture so justly both for the weight and fineness, that in one hundred Ca∣ses of Venice Gold-Thread, there is not one six pence diffe∣rence, but according to the seals or burns, it passe's all the world over. A gallant thing to manage a Manufacture so exactly, and to keep up the reputation of it. The late King and his Council appointed mee a Seal, which was the Rose and Crown, to seal all Gold and Silver-Thread in scanes, at one end of the scane, and to warrant it
to bee good Silver to the Nation, with a Prohibition to any to presume to counterfeit that Seal: The other end of the scane of Silver-Thread, the work-man was to put to his seal; by which waie, the Nation had the Gold and Silver-Thread warranted to them, and if any Gold or Silver-thread were sealed with the seal of the Office, and had the work∣man's seal to it; which seal of the work-mans, was put in a Table in the Office for any man to see, by which means if any man should have counterfeited the Office-seal, and the Thread was found courser or worser then the standard, and not to have five Ounces to one pound Venice, the partie of∣fending was to bee punished; and if any Clerk of mine should have sealed any cours Silver with the seal of the Of∣fice, then I Thomas Violet was to make it good to the Com∣mon-wealth, or any partie grieved, what they were dam∣nified; and to warrant this Manufacture right, both for to have five Ounces Silver on a pound Venice, and that to bee good Silver. I had no more then four pence the pound weight Venice for my pains and hazard, which was little more then one farthing an Ounce; and if any person did complain, then I Tho. Violet was to make all the damage good to the partie or parties grieved; and out of this fee I was to paie Clerk's wages and other Officers for their atten∣dance in sealing the Thread, and for wax for sealing. Besides, it is no small trouble to have daily conversation with people of such several humors, and som of them of such uncivil and cours behavior, that the Honorable Coun∣cil for Trade have had more patience to hear their speeches one to another at the board, then I believ they ever had with any people that came before them; then they must needs bee clamorous when the Officer doth his dutie to see they make all good work; and this place I Thomas Violet was required to execute. And I have the Grant of this Of∣fice under the Great Seal of England for two lives; and though I was commanded to deliver my Patent to the Ho∣norable Gentleman Sir Robert Harlow, who was then Ma∣ster
of the Mint, and Chair-man for this business, but as yet hee hath not made any report concerning this business. I stand upon my Grant as a good Patent, and for the benefit of the Common-wealth; for the fee was not 10 s. in 100 pounds for all Gold and Silver Manufactured in Silver∣thread, Silver-spangles, Oes, and Purl, and Wier, and for that fee I was to run the hazard to make all the Manufacture good to this Nation, that was bought in the Office, or had the seal appointed by the State put to the thread; and I shall humbly appeal to all the wearers of Gold and Silver-Lace in this Nation, whether they would not bee glad to paie ten shillings in the hundred pounds now, to have their Gold and Silver-thread, and wier warranted to them to bee good Silver, and the Silk truly covered with a substantial Bodie of Silver, and to the Thread everie pound Venice to weigh at the least five Ounces of Silver, by which order and rule, their Silver-Lace would last six times as long as it doth, and never lose the color; and when they had don wearing it, it would yield above one third pennie it cost to the melting pot, whereas now upon som Silver-Lace that is made in London, when it is worn out, that Silver that cost ten pounds, will not yield twentie shillings to the melting pot; and this is known by slight Wheel-work, and slight Laces; a great deal of difference upon the return to the melting pot, of rich Lace made by the Hand spin∣ners, and slight Wheel-work made by your Wheel-men; and this can bee proved by many Trades-men, as Tailors and Silk-men, and Silver-spinners, who are best able to judg the Manufacture, that the Gold and Silver-Thread, and Wier, was never so well made in England, before nor since, as during all the time I had the regulating of the Ma∣nufacture; and it did concern mee to look to have it well made, or els I might have been undon, for I was to make it all good. It was not to receiv a fee, and never to look how the Manufacture was made; but my fee was to bee earned with a great deal of attendance, and charge, and
hazard, and my constant searching to see the Manufacture was vvell made. The Wier-drawers and Silk-men knew I would spare none of them that made bad ware; for I caused Gares to stand in the Pillorie, that made Gold and Silver-Thread vvith a Core of Copper; I caused slight vvork to bee unspun a∣gain, that was not covered vvith five Ounces Silver to one pound Venice; and this I did to Archer that was the Clerk of the Commission, though hee brought mee a Letter from a Privie Counsellor, to deliver the Silver-Thread without defacing; yet I valued the keeping my trust, before a Lord's Letter, and hee was no mean man in power then. I questioned Master Bradbourn the Queen's Silk-man, for putting in Copper into an Honorable Ladie's Silver-Lace, and selling it her for good Silver; and a second time for putting Copper into my Lord Carlile's Suit and Cloak, and selling it to him for good Silver; and if the Queen had not sent to mee, and laid her commands on mee not to proceed farther, I had made him an example. Many other Silk∣men sold Silver-Thread with a Core of Copper, and som sold Copper for Silver, vvhich as long as I had the Trust, I vvould not spare any man. I seized on fiftie pounds of Silver-Lace, mixed with Copper, in Master Alderman Garrawaie's custodie, when hee was Lord Major of London, and brought it away from him against his will, as Sir George Sands knoweth, and the vvorld know's hee had spirit enough: and upon that sei∣zure, I found twentie men had an hand in it, for it was sent to Russia, and there the Emperor's Council seized it, and laid Master Sands in prison, Sir George Sand's brother, who had brought the adulterate Silver-Lace into the Coun∣trie. And upon examination and proof, that Master Sands was cousened by buying this Silver-Thread for good Silver in London, it was sent over to the Russia Companie to have the offendors found out, vvhere upon examination before the Commissioners, twentie men run away.
By these good waies, I so ordered the Regulation of the Manufactures during the time of the Regulation, that the stuff was made all good Silver, and five Ounces to one pound Venice; and if any did work in Corners, that which was with a Cote of Copper, or against the rule, my Instru∣ments were sure to finde them out one time or another. And for doing of this service, I had Warrants directed to several people for to discover the offendors; and becaus I was true to my trust, I would not suffer the Common-vvealth to bee cousened in this Manufacture (som men that have de∣ceived the Common-vvealth in making of slight Gold and Silver-Thread, fear, if a Regulation should bee settled by Parlament, to have no Silver-thread spun, either by the Hand or Spindle, but such as is covered vvith a good Plate of Silver, and five Ounces Troie at the least, to the pound Venice, that then they shall bee suffered to cousen no more; and this is the true reason of their anger against any that stand's for a Regulation; then they know their own guilt in so notorious defrauding the State in the Excise, and how much monie they owe the State in Arrears vvithin this four years, beeing above twentie thousand pounds, vvhich is in the hands of fewer then thirtie men; and they know, if I bee commanded by the Parlament, I will give a good accompt of this business. I do humbly desire Sir Robert Harlow, that my Grant might bee delivered to the Honorable Council for Trade, and that hee would pleas to report vvhat hee found concer∣ning it to your Honors; and that if I cannot maintain my Grant for the surveying the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Wier, and Thread, for the good of the Common-wealth, and for the service of the wearer, and honor of the Manu∣facture, I shall with all humilitie laie my self at the Hono∣rable Council for Trade's feet, so to regulate my Grant, as they in their great Wisdoms shall finde most advantageous to the Common-vvealth. And I do humbly farther propound to the Council
for Trade, that they would bee pleased to take notice that there is an Ordinance of Parlament of the sixt of August, 1646. for all Gold and Silver-Wier, to paie four pence on the Ounce Troie, at the disgrossing at the Bar; and this Ordinance follow's in these words, viz. That four pence shall bee paid by waie of Excise, for everie Ounce of Silver Troie weight, and so for a greater or lesser quantitie proportionable of Silver and Gold; that any Refiner, Gold-smith, or Gold-Wier drawer, or other that shall prepare, melt down, or disgross for Wier; the same to bee paid by everie Refiner, Gold-smith, Gold-Wier-drawer, or other, at the Bar, where the same shall bee disgrossed. And that all Gold and Silver to bee disgrossed for Wier as aforesaid, bee brought to one cer∣tain place, or places appointed, or to bee appointed by the Commissioners of the Excise, and not elswhere; and that no Bars, Benches, Screws, Engins, or other Instruments for disgrossing of Silver, bee used or al∣lowed in any other place; this is in the Book of Ordinances; fol. 1114. That for almost four years this four pence the Ounce did not make to the State above one thousand pounds for all that time, of near upon four years. And during these four years, the Refiners of London beeing named in the Act, many of these Refiners durst not sell Guilt and Silver-Wier, without taking and securing the dutie of four pence the Ounce to the State; whereupon rather then they would run into contempt of this Act, som of them gave over their trades, and others of them lost their customers; for many of the Wier-drawers drew and refined all their own Silver, and never paid the State the duties reserved by the Ordi∣nance; and there remain's in the hands of som of the Gold-Wier-drawers, & Refiners above twentie thousand pounds, contrarie and in contempt of this Ordinance of Parlament, and which som of the said Wier-drawers and Refiners are in Arrears to the State. The Wier-drawers, and divers other Trades, having with great advantage made the wearer paie four pence the Ounce Venice for Excise, vvhen any bought it in Lace; and this
which I now put in writing, is, that the Gentrie may know what to paie for the future; for upon a true accompt, four pence an Ounce Troie in Silver-Wier, is not above one pennie farthing upon everie Ounce Venice in Silver. Thread: So though the Wier-drawers made a great advantage of the Excise, collecting far more from the Gentrie of this Nati∣on, then four pence the Ounce Troie, yet they have not paid these Arrears to the State; a business of great concernment, now there is occasion for monie, and require's a speedie examination. That for this last year, the Wier-drawers and Refiners did paie but one pennie the Ounce, which pennie make's now fifteen hundred pounds a year; so that four pence the Ounce would have been above six thousand pounds a year, if the four pence had been justly gathered. Now upon examination, it may bee proved there was more Silver-Wier disgrossed and made into Thread, and small Wier, by the Refiners and Wier-drawers in everie of the years 1646, 1647, 1648, 1649, then in this last year 1650; so that by this accompt, there will clearly remain in the Re∣finer's, and Master Wier-drawer's hands, above twentie thousand pounds, and the number of them is not above thirtie men, which owe this monie, for which summe, they are tied by an Ordinance of Parlament, and no dis∣charge can bee given them of this debt, but by an Act of Parlament; for all that drew Silver at the Bar, are upon the drawing of it, bound to paie the State four pence the Ounce for vvhat they drew, and no persons have any power to discharge this debt, but the Parlament; and if I bee required and impowered, I make no question to give the State a good accompt of this debt. I do most humbly desire the Honorable Council for Trade, to take notice that by the eighth Article of their Com∣mission, they are to consider what Excise is fit to bee laid on all goods and commodities, and so equally and evenly laie it, that the State may not bee made uncapable to defraie
publick charges. Now I humbly desire the Honble Coun∣cil for Trade, to take especial notice of this my humble Pro∣position, which is, that one pennie on the Ounce Troie upon all Gold and Silver-Wier disgrossed at the Bar, and made into Gold and Silver. Thread, is no equal Excise in proportion to other commodities that are rated with Exci∣ses which are far more serviceable to the Common-wealth. Besides, the Gold-Wier-drawers before any Excise was thought of, did offer unto the late King, and his heirs for ever, one thousand pounds a year, and two pence the Ounce, to have a Corporation, as I shall make it appear. But the deceits so grosly practised by many of them, was so clearly proved that then at that time the State would not trust them with a Corporation, as I have formerly decla∣red. Neither would the late King and his Council trust the Finers, but under a Regulation by Commissioners, though they saw paid the late King six pence the Ounce for all Gold and Silver disgrossed at the Bar, upon sale of the Silver. Now I saie, after the Excise of one pennie the Ounce upon Silver and Guilt Wier, when it is Manufa∣ctured into Thread, it is not above ten shillings the hundred pounds Excise for som sorts, and not above fifteen shillings in one hundred pounds worth upon any sort of Gold and Silver. Thread, when it is Manufactured. And other sorts of goods that are for use, and not superfluous, paie's five pounds in the hundred. Now if the State pleas to laie six pence on the Ounce for all Gold and Silver-Wier, that is disgrossed at the Bar, it is not above three pounds in one hundred for som sorts of Gold and Silver-Thread, and four pounds ten shillings in the hundred pounds Excise for the heaviest; when it Ma∣nufactured, and it is a superfluous commoditie, that if any will wear it, they ought to paie so much Excise as other commodities doth; and if the rules desired in the Silver∣spinner's last printed Petition to your Honors, with som few other Observations on Master Atturnie General Bankes
his Certificate, for the Regulating the Manufacture, the State will make six thousand pounds a year of it, and the Manufacture all made right, both for the fineness of the Sil∣ver, and the just covering of the Thread, with a good plate, and to settle a comfortable livelihood for the labor of all the poor working Wier-drawers, and Silver-spinners, that have a right to the Trade by service or seven years usage; and the supernumerarie Master-Wier-drawers, and Work-men, to bee excluded the Trade, that have not served for it, or not wholly followed it for seven years. I humbly desire your Honors to take notice by the Ordi∣nance of Parlament, that laie's four pence upon all Silver disgrossed at the Bar, dated the sixt of August 1646. all Gold and Silver-Thread was to bee made up in scanes, and to bee sealed without any fee: and this no doubt was moved to bee put in by som people who knew verie well, if there were no fee allowed, there could bee no service don; and that which hath made the Citie of London so full of slight Silver-Thread, is the neglecting the surveying of it: For how could any Sealer give his attendance, warrant the Sil∣ver to the Nation, and to any Merchants, to bee good Sil∣ver, both according to the Standard of the Silver, and that it contain's in one pound Venice, five Ounces of Silver; (and without this warrant to the buier, what good doth the sealing of it?) While I had the surveying of this Ma∣nufacture, which was above four years, I warranted it all to the Common-wealth; and I challenge any Wier-draw∣er, or Finer, or Silk-man in London, to produce one pound of bad or slight Silver, I ever sealed at the Office, or that any man could ever fasten one pennie on mee, or other reward, for conniving at any man that did not work good Silver. It is well known, I did alwaies stand to reliev the poor work-men, and work-women, while I had the Office, a∣gainst their oppressing work-masters, in causing their work∣masters not to deliver them bad Silver, or such as would not work by reason of the not refining of it well, and made
the Refiners change it, though it were good according to the Standard, yet not beeing well drietested, it would bring the poor work-men a great deal of trouble and loss, by reason of the Quick-Silver. That I was strict to see all men work good Silver, and to caus those that did not to bee punished, I confess it ot bee true, and it did concern mee to do it, for els I had brought a scandal on the Manufacture, and my Office, and I might have been undon in warranting the commoditie to bee all right that was sealed in the Office. And if the Wier-draw∣ers could have proved but any Gold and Silver-Thread, with all their vigilant search throughout the Citie, that had been sealed, that was cours Silver, or held not five Ounces to everie pound Venice, it had gon in to the Parla∣ment with a full crie: but though they sought, and sought carefully, to finde it out, that either I or my servants had sealed any bad Silver, they could not finde one Ounce; though I am sure I and my servants in the time I had the Office, sealed above one Million of Scanes of Gold and Silver; and it was a great mercie of God to mee, the Wier∣drawers vvith all the tricks they used, could get no cours or slight Silver-Thread to produce to the Parlament. But mis∣sing their mark in that design, they with som Refiners, whose tongues I have found more sharp then a two-edg∣ed sword, with the greatest industrie, subtilly spit out the poison of Asps, which naturally grow's in som of their mouths, or els so much untruth could not bee invented as they bestowed upon mee; the poison of their mouths and tongues beeing to mee as venomous as the Aqua-Fortis they make: For in the beginning of this Parlament, som of them cast about the Citie of London, and to people that ne∣ver knew mee, as if I had been the worst man living. And though the Finers and Wierdrawers of London both Petitioned the late King for their Trade, as I said before, and each striving which of them should set their trade in such a waie that might bring them in the most for their particular
profit; vvhen they had moulded all their Regulation, then I was nominated Surveyor and Sealer of all the Manufactu∣rie by the late King, which I did discharge faithfully, in see∣ing they should not cousen the Common-vvealth; for my doing thereof, som of them clamored most lewdly against mee about the Citie of London. And som which I know did use these unworthie vvaies to defame and slander mee, are now discovered, and held themselvs unworthie men, and in as much contempt with the Citie of London, as they put upon their neighbors. It is not their removing out of the Citie of London, can make their cursed remembrance bee forgot: These restless spirits have left no stone unmoved to do mee a mischief, and to present mee as a Malignant, and dis-affected to this Common-wealth. Truly I will declare to all the world, I ever loved and honored the late King with all my heart, as long as hee bad breath in his bodie, and would have don him any just service; and nothing beyond that I would have don, and I am confident no gallant man will condemn mee for speaking this truth. Now hee is dead, I am free with the same faith and humble dutie, and somthing more, by reason my afflictions hath got mee som more experience, I will constantly serv this Par∣lament and the Common wealth of England, as it is now settled without King or Lords, to the last drop of bloud in my bodie, against any person that oppose's them, and will do the Parlament all just ser∣vice for the Common-wealth. And I thank God I never by any was desired farther; and if I should, I would bid any that ask's mee to do it, do it themselvs. Yet these Moles, som of the Refiners, and som of the Wier-drawers, vvould introduce to som of my friends, that I am a dangerous Instrument for som of the State; so that these men's tongues are like saws, with cross teeth, (if I bee of the King's side, I shall bee blasted, when the King is dead; if I serv the State, I shall not scape them) but if they had rested with words, I should better have born their malice: But this last Michaëlmas Term, they fell on mee with deeds, took mee upon an Execution at the suit
of one Widow Simonds, wife of one Joseph Simonds, when I never vvarranted any Atturnie to appear for mee, and I had a Releas of the said Joseph Simonds for to withdraw all Acti∣ons; and thereupon I delivered him an Ingot of Silver which was seized on by the late King's Commissioners, by order of the Lords of the Council, and this was don eleven years ago. I never owed this woman or her husband one pennie, and I make no question but I shall have reparation, and to finde out the confederacie against mee. This Joseph Simonds brought the same Action against Sir John Wollaston, Alderman Gibs, Sir William Becher, Master Alderman Harison, and divers others, and they all non-suit∣ed him several times; and if I had known the declaration against mee, I would have pleaded and gotten off as well as others; but I was in the Countie of Darbie-shire, and ne∣ver knew of it till there was Judgment entred upon a Nihil Dicit, and a Writ of Inquirie of Damages, when I had the said Joseph Simond's Releas attested by five witnesses, and I found this Releas by a strange accident after I had lost this Acquitance, about ten years, the tenth of this present Januarie; this I put down openly, that as I was affronted publickly on the Exchange, by beeing arrested there, upon an unjust Action all men should know I cannot bee arrested for a just Debt. REceived the 19 daie of Octob. 1640. of Thomas Violet by vertue of an Order of the Lords at White-Hall, the 18 of Octob. 1640. one Ingot of Silver-Guilt, weighing 17 pound weight, one Ounce and five pennie weight; and I do promise to with∣draw all Actions that have been commenced either against Robert Amerie, Thomas Violet, or any other, for seizing and deteining of the said Silver-Guilt; In witness whereof I have bereunto set my hand, Joseph Symonds. Witness wee, M. Blunt. Andrew Heitly. Will. Creswell. Will. Crosbie. Will. Bourne.
Beyond Seas it is not permitted to a Sergeant to arrest any man on the Exchange, and it were verie fit it should bee so here in London; for many Merchants are crazie commodities, and their reputation's not to bee touched, lest they fall in pie∣ces. I speak not for my self, for I owe not one hundred pounds in the world, that any bodie can justly ask mee, though I have had taken from mee by Order of Commit∣tees above eight thousand four hundred pounds, and I have left off trading this ten years: But I know there is a great necessitie at this time for Merchants not to bee arrested on the Exchange, for the humor of many English Usurers and som others is, that if they finde a man sinking, everie man enter's his Action, and pul's somtimes a good Estate in pie∣ces; whereas they should do as they do in Holland, if their debtors have losses at sea, or by fire, or bad debts, they plaie the good Samaritan, binde up their wounds, and instead of adding affliction to their debtor, comfort him, and by this careful usage, many a score of men beyond seas have recovered their Estates, and been gallant Merchants again; whereas here they fling them into prisons, and ruine them. But for such Merchants or others, that break out of knave∣rie, to cousen men by their Composition, as too many do, or such as have Diced or Whored away their Estates, and then break in other men's debts, I desire from my heart, and humbly praie, a Law may bee made to make it Felonie in any that hath, or shall do it; I am credibly told it is so in France, and other Forrain parts. But that which was the Master-piece of all the Refiner's plots to destroie mee, was, when by the subtiltie of two of them they put mee into the Tower for three years and eleven months, and did engage great and honorable men a∣gainst mee, for what som of them knew themselvs long before I did, and I did nothing but by warrant of publick Officers. By which fals information, they caused mee to bee sequestred of my Estate, and damnified, and plunde∣red to the value of eight thousand pounds, and kept close
prisoner in a room in the Tower for nine hundred twentie eight daies, and never could bee heard to make my just de∣fence; and had not God sent Sir Thomas Fairfax his Armie to London, I had never got out of the Tower, but been bu∣ried there alive. For the true Examination of all the transaction of that business, I am an humble suitor to the Parlament to have Justice, and that the truth of this business might bee found out, and that it may bee referred to the Honorable Com∣mittee of Examinations, and then it will bee found this design was to blast and undo mee, and by that means, to prevent mee that I should not tell the State what I knew to bee true, and should never com to bee heard in what I could serv the State; for as they had laid the design for my life and good name, it was one hundred to one, that ever I escaped their mortal snare. An Accompt of what hath been taken from mee, for which I humbly desire reparati∣ons and satisfaction. 1. WHen I was sent to the Tower the sixt of Januarie 1643, my mother had of my Goods, Bonds, and Bils, in her hands, taken away from her at several times, viz. to the value of one thousand three hundred and odd pounds, besides many of my Pa∣pers and Accompts of a great value, and consideration to mee seized, and many of my Papers were of great concernment to the Common∣wealth, and as yet I cannot com to the knowledg who hath them; but this I am sure of, if there had been any thing in them that could have made against mee, there had then use been made of them. 2. My mother had at another time a Privie Seal taken from her, wherein the late King acknowledged hee owed mee for my expences in the Discoverie of the Transporters of Gold and Silver, nineteen hundred threescore and eight pounds, which monie I laid out everie pennie out of my own purs.
3. The Committee of Essex, put mee out of possession of the Man∣nors of Battels and Paton Hall in Essex, as appear's by their War∣rants here annexed; of which Land, I had an extent to the just va∣lue of one thousand pounds due to mee in 1643. and Master Phi∣lip Cage was in possession of the premises for my use, as hereafter fol∣low's. 4. The Committee of Shropshire, seized in my sister's hands in London, three bonds due to mee in two thousand pounds, for the pai∣ment of mee Thomas Violet one thousand pounds by the Ladie Wade, Edmond Lenthal Esquire, Philip Cage Esquire, Charls Mordent Esquire, as appear's under the band of Philip Cage Esquire. 5. I had the Leases of ten several Houses at the Postern in lit∣tle More-Fields, and the Tenants owed mee when I was committed to the Tower, in arrears for rent, about one hundred pounds, and for this seven years I received no rent of them, but Master Elcon∣head hath received the rent ever since. 6. Som of the Wier-drawers by their clamor, caused my Office to bee sequestred from mee, which was for the surveying and sealing of all Gold and Silver-Thread, by which means they have made slight Silver-Thread, to the deceit of this Nation ever since: which office for the surveying and sealing of all Gold and Silver-Thread, and Wier, I had from the late King, for three lives, and it hath cost mee near fifteen hundred pounds to my Lord Treasurer, Lord Cottington, Sir John Cook, Sir John Banks, before I could get the Grant to pass under the Great Seal of England; and that Office made mee above three hundred pounds a year, besides an Hous rent-free; the necessitie of having that Office, I have shewed before. 7. I had one quarter part of the Ladie Viller's Farm for the im∣portation of all Forrain Gold and Silver-Thread, Hat-bands or Lace, and Copper-Thread throughout England and Wales; sor fourteen years, which cost mee a little before I was sequestred seven hundred pounds, and it was worth one hundred and fiftie pounds per annum to mee. 8. I spent in my imprisonment in the Tower for almost four years seven hundred pounds, and could never get my Caus to bee heard.
An Order of the Committee of Shropshier. WHereas by Vertue of an Ordinance of Parlament, autorizing us, the Committee for the Countie of Salop, to seiz, sequester, and secure the Estates of Papists, and Delinquents, for the raising of Monies for the service of the Parlament in the Countie of Salop, which wee shall discover; wee have seized and taken into our possession three several Bonds or Obligations, whereby you amongst others, stand bound to Thomas Violet, a Delinquent and Prisoner in the Tower of London, for paiment unto him of several summes of Monie therein mentioned. It is there∣fore Ordered by the said Committee, That you paie such Monies as are due upon the said Bonds, unto the said Com∣mittee, or to such as they shall appoint, and unto none other, until further order bee taken therein by the said Committee. And further, you are desired to bee present at the said Committee at Salter's Hall, in Bread-street in Lon∣don, upon Tuesdaie next, at three of the Clock in the after∣noon. Dated the tenth daie of October, Anno Dom. 1644. H. Mackworth. Jo. Corbet. Tho. More. Ch. Meredith. To Master Philip Cage, of Great Harwel in the Countie of Hartford Esquire. Memorand. That the 21 of December, 1646. this Warrant was shewed unto Master John Corbet, at the Tower, in the presence of us, and hee did acknowledg it to bee his hand, and that the said Bonds were seized upon according to their Order, and were in the hands of one Brome, belonging to the Committee of Shropsheir. And that the said three bonds were in two thousand pounds for the paying of Thomas Violet one thousand pounds. Henrie Cogan. William Bourn.
Two Orders of the Committee of Essex. Essex scilicet, WHereas Thomas Violet a Delinquent, is imprisoned in the Tower of London, for a Conspiracie against the Parlament, and that his Estate is seized and sequestred, and that it appear's to the Parlament, that there is an extent of the Lands of James Waad Esquire, at the suit of the said Violet, or som others to his use, of the penaltie of one thou∣sand pounds, for the paiment of five hundred pounds char∣ged upon the Manors of Battels, and Paton Hall, with their appurtenances within this Countie of Essex. The high Court of Parlament taking the same into consideration, have been pleased to order the benefit and advantage of the said extent to the use of this Countie. Now wee the Committees of the Countie aforesaid, have assigned, and do by these pre∣sents assign the said extent and all the benefits thereof unto Edward Elconhead Esquire, giving him hereby full power and autority, to take and receiv all and singular the profits and rents of the said Manors of Battels, and Paton Hall, with their and everie of their appurtenances: And wee do also hereby appoint the said Edward Elconhead Esquire, to take into his hands and possession, the said Battels and Paton- Hall, with their appurtenances. And wee do hereby fur∣ther Order and Appoint all and singular, the Tenants and Land-holders thereof, respectively, to paie their several rents with the arrearages thereof, as the same are, or from time to time shall grow due unto the said Edward Elconhead: And wee do hereby require all Captains, and all other for∣ces, as also all High Constables and Pettie Constables with∣in this Countie, to bee aiding and assisting to the said Ed∣ward
Elconhead, in gaining, preserving, and keeping him in the quiet possession of the premises aforesaid. At the standing Com∣mittee at Chelms-ford the 17 of Au∣gust 1644. Thomas Barington. Will. Goldingham. Rich. Harlakenden. H. Holcrost. William Roe. Robert Smith. S. Sparrow. Essex, scilicet. WHereas wee the Committee for the said Countie, now sitting at Chelms ford, have assigned the extent of the Manors of Battels and Paton-Hall, with their appur∣tenances (made not long since by Thomas Violet, now priso∣ner in the Tower of London) unto Edward Elconhead, of the said Countie Esquire. Wee do also hereby Order and Ap∣point, that if any differences shall happen to arise betwixt him the said Edward Elconhead, and any of the Tenants of the aforesaid Lands, that then wee refer the consideration and settling thereof unto Timothie Middleton Esquire, High She∣riff of the aforesaid Countie, and Sir Thomas Barington Knight and Baronet, or either of them, who are hereby desired to mediate therein, or in case of refusal, or obstinacie of any of the said persons, to make their return to us thereof, where∣upon wee shall proceed as to the demerit of the caus shall appertain. At the standing Com∣mittee at Chelms∣ford, the 17 of August 1644. Will. Roe. Will. Goldingham. Rich. Harlakenden. H. Holcrost. Rob. Smith. These two are true Copies of the Committee of Essex Orders, witness our hands this first daie of August 1646. Philip Cage. Thomas Conningsbie. Christ. Hatton.
A DECLARATION OF PHILIP CAGE, Esquire, Shewing by virtue of the Committee of Essex Or∣der, dated 17 August 1644. Hee was forcibly driven out of the possession of the Manors of Battels, and Paton-Hall, which hee held for and to the use of THOMAS VIOLET. Attested by Thomas Conningsbie Esquire, of Hartford-shier, and Christopher Hatton of London, Gentleman. UPon this Order of the Committee, I Philip Cage bee∣ing in possession of both the Manors of Battels, and Paton-Hall, with the appurtenances, in the Countie of Es∣sex, by vertue of a Leas, of an extent from his Majestie, assigned to mee and others, by M. Thomas Violet, in trust of those Lands, with divers other Lands and Tenements in London and Middlesex, for the use of Thomas Violet, I Philip Cage, and my Family, were forcibly driven out of possessi∣on about the 20 of August 1644. and had above three hun∣dred pounds worth of Corn standing on the ground with Hops, with other the Corn and Haie in the Barns, inned; which several Barns and Houses was all forcibly broken and taken from mee by virtue of this Order; and I do ac∣knowledg, that there is now due to Master Thomas Violet, the summe of one thousand pounds, which Edmund Len∣thal Esquire, Charls Mordant Esquire, and I Philip Cage Esq∣with Dame Anne Waad, late of Battels in the Countie of Es∣sex, are bound in two thousand pounds, to Thomas Violet,
for the paiment of one thousand pounds: which debt wee entred into bonds for my brother James Waad's debt to Ma∣ster Violet, and then Master Violet had all my brother's Lands in extent, and assigned them over to mee and others in trust, in consideration of our entring into bonds to paie him one thousand pounds, at or after the death of my Ladie Waad, which Monie is now due. And I Philip Cage am readie to paie it, so as I may have the Sequestration of the Lands taken off, and enjoie the Extent. Witness my hand, this first daie of August 1646. PHIL. CAGE. Witness us underneath, that M. Cage signed this. THO. CONNINGSBIE. CHR. HATTON. An Order of the Committee of ESSEX. JULIE II. 1649. IT is Ordered that Edward Elconhead Esquire, bee desired to attend this Committee upon Thursdaie the six and twen∣tieth of this instant Julie, at the Black-Boie in Chelms-ford, and bring with him the Charge against Master Thomas Violet, somtimes prisoner in the Tower of London, for Conspiracie against the Parlament, and Delinquencie, as the said Ma∣ster Elconhead hath formerly informed. The Order of this Committee, by which the Estate of the said Master Violet was Sequestred, the caus thereof, with the witnesses and proofs, to testifie the Conspiracie and Delinquencie of the said Master Violet. As also the Composition made with the Committee of Essex, for the Extent of the said Master
Violet, and the Discharge made by this Committee upon paiment of that Composition; That so this Committee may give an accompt of the whole business to the right Ho∣norable the Barons of the Exchequer, according to their Order dated 28 Maie last. By the standing Committee for the Countie of Essex. THO. COOK. THO. HONYVVOOD. W. ROVVE. ROBERT SMITH. BARNARD DESTON. J. MATTHEVVS. JOHN FEINING. An Acknowledgment of Mrs Mordant, con∣cerning Tho. Violet's Bonds and Extent on the Manors of Battels, and Paton-Hall, in Essex. IArmenigilda Mordant, daughter to the late Ladie Anne Waad, of Battels-Hall, in the Countie of Essex, and sister to James Waad Esquire; Do declare and testifie, that my brother in Law, Philip Cage Esquire, and my late Husband Charls Mor∣dant Esquire, had an Extent of the Manors of Battels and Paton∣Hall, in Essex, and divers other Lands in London and Middle∣sex, assigned over to them in trust to, and for the use of Thomas Violet of London Gold smith, until the summe of one thousand pounds were paid unto Thomas Violet, which they both entred in∣to bonds in two thousand pounds, for the paiment of one thousand pounds, within three years after the death of my mother, the Ladie Anne Waad, viz. in this manner. The first year after my mother's death, four hundred of pounds to bee paid; the second year, three hundred pounds; the third year, three hundred pounds more, in all the summe of one thousand pounds; and this bond was sealed and signed
by my late Husband Charls Mordant, Philip Cage, & Edmund Lenthal Esquires, and my mother Dame Anne Waad, the sixt of Julie, 1638. and I Armenegilda Mordant, and Jone Campi∣on, and divers others, are witnesses to the aforesaid Bonds, and that the assignment of the Extent from Master Violet of the Manors of Battels, and Paton-Hall, was but in trust until Master Violet had received the summe of one thousand pounds, and then such debts as my brother Philip Cage, and my Husband Charls Mordant, were engaged for, were afterwards to bee answered out of my bro∣ther Waad's lands, and my foresaid mother the Ladie Anne Waad died about June the third, one thousand six hundred fortie three. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand this 15 of August, 1649. Witness on the signing hereof Vincent de la Bare Gerrard Whorwood. per me Armenigilda Mordant. Another Order of the Committee of ESSEX, JULIE 28. 1649. IT is Ordered, that Master Edward Elconhead, do return to this Committee, upon Thursdaie the 23 of August, the caus of the Sequestring the Estate of M. Thomas Violet, with∣in this Countie. By the standing Committee of Essex. Bernard Deston. Tho. Honiwood. Robert Smith. William Harlackenden. Jo. Eldred.
Upon Master Elconhead's several times attending the Com∣mittee of Essex, and not proving his Charge against mee be∣fore the Committee; according to these Orders I did Petition the Committee of Essex, that they would require the Te∣nants of Battels and Paton. Hall, to forbear to paie Edward Elconhead any more rent, and to require Ed. Elconhead present∣ly to bring into the Committee of Essex, all summes of mo∣nie that hee had received by vertue of their Order or Orders, on the Manors of Battels and Paton-Hall, to bee deposited into the Committee's hands, till my caus was examined in Parlament; for Master Edward Elconhead finding I was in the displeasure of the Parlament, thought at once to give mee a paiment both for Master Waad's debt, and my life; and there∣fore M. Elconhead charge's mee with a Conspiracie against the Parlament before the Committee of Essex, as appear's under the Committee's hands by the two aforesaid Warrants; then Master Elconhead compound's with the Committee of Essex for three hundred pounds, that which I had all Ma∣ster Waad's Lands under Extent, worth one thousand pounds Land a year, to paie mee one thousand pounds due to mee in 1643. which Lands of Master James Waad, upon color of this Sequestration of the Committee of Essex, Master El∣conhead ever since hold's in his hands, and keep's Master Waad's Creditors without their Monie; and though Master Waad hath a great Estate, more then will paie his debts, if it were well managed, to live like a Gentleman, yet Master Waad is kept in prison in great want, and Master Elconhead receiv's his Estate without any Accompt. And I had three several Bonds in two thousand pounds as aforesaid, for se∣curing my monie. Now if I had forfeited my Estate to the use of the Countie of Essex, the Committee for the Coun∣tie of Essex were not good husbands for the Countie, to let Master Elconhead have one thousand pounds good Estate for three hundred pounds; for they had Lands tied for it in their own Countie of Essex, of above three hundred pounds a year value. But the truth is, I have enquired whether
ever any monie was paid into the use of the Countie by Ma∣ster Edward Elconhead of this three hundred pounds, and I cannot finde any paid for the use of the Countie. I hum∣bly desire the Committee for the Accompts of the Com∣mon-wealth, would take notice of it, and have it exa∣mined. I shall leav Master Elconhead to the world, to judg of him, to give mee a Charge of Treason, and then by that means to get my Estate for a quarter of the pretended summe hee compounded for, when I was close prisoner in the Tower, and could not make my defence; and then M. Edward Elconhead the 28 of Julie 1649. to denie before the Committee of Essex that hee ever charged mee with a Con∣spiracie against the Parlament, though it bee attested by the Committees of Essex Warrant as aforesaid; and that Hono∣rable Gentleman Sir Will. Rowe, told then to M. Elconhead before the Committee, that if hee could not prove my con∣spiracie against the Parlament, hee had don mee Tho. Violet wrong, and the Committee of Essex wrong; for it was onely upon M. Elconhead's Information to the Committee of Essex, that the Committee certified any thing against mee to the Parlament, and wished M. Elconhead to bring the Acquitance of the Committee, for what monie hee had paid for this Extent, and hee said the Ordinance of Parla∣ment for giving my Estate away, which I had in that Coun∣tie, beeing an Extent on the Manors of Battel and Paton-Hall, was made on the Committee's Information to the Parlament against mee, and their information was onely grounded on M. Elconhead to the Committee; and if hee could not prove his Charge, the Sequestration would ceas, and what monie M. Elconhead could prove hee paid to the use of the Countie, should bee paid him back; for if Ma∣ster Elconhead failed in the foundation, all that was don on that Charge against mee would ceas, and I ought to bee restored to the possession of my Lands in the Countie, but as yet I could not get the Committee of Essex to restore mee to my possession, Master Elconhead desiring further
time of the Committee; therefore I am an humble suitor to bee relieved in Parlament. Here followeth the Copie of the late King's Letter. To Our Trustie and Well-beloved, Our Lord Major and Aldermen of Our Citie of London, and all other our well affected Subjects of the Citie. It is Superscribed, Charls Rex. And beneath, By His Majestie's Command, George Digbie. TRustie and Well-beloved, Wee greet you well. When Wee remember the many Acts of Grace and Favor Wee and Our Roial Predecessors have conferred upon that Our Citie of London, and the manie Examples of eminent Dutie and Loialtie, for which that Citie hath been likwise famous, Wee are willing to believ, notwithstanding the great defection Wee have found in that place, that all men are not so far degenerated from their affection to Us, and to the Peace of the Kingdom, as to desire a continuance of the miseries they now feel; and therefore beeing informed, that there is a desire in som principal Persons of that Citie to present a Petition to Us, which may tend to the procu∣ring a good understanding between Us, and that Our Ci∣tie, whereby the Peace of the whole Kingdom may bee procured: Wee have thought fit to let you know, That Wee are readie to receiv any such Petition, and the Persons who shall bee appointed to present the same to Us, shall have a safe conduct; And you shall assure all Our good sub∣jects of that Our Citie, whose hearts are touched with any sens of dutie to Us, or of Love to the Religion and Laws established, in the quiet and peaceable fruition whereof they and their. Ancestors have enjoied so great Happiness, That Wee have neither passed any Act, nor made any Profession or Protestation for the Maintenance and Defence of the true Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of the Subject,
which Wee will not most strictly and religiously observ; and for the which Wee will not bee alwaies readie to give them any securitie that can bee desired. And of these Our Gracious Letters Wee exspect a speedie Answer from you. And so Wee bid you farewell. Given at Our Court at Oxford, in the nineteenth year of Our Reign: 26 Decemb. 1643. Two Letters fo Master Read's, sent to M. The∣ophilus Rilie, Scout-master of the Citie of London, from Oxford. SIR! I Wrote to you formerly, but never had any answer, I assure you faithfully I have not been wanting to do what you desired (as you may perceiv by the effects) and if you have not your desire, blame your self, but give mee leav to tell you, that if you neglect the opportunitie now offered to you, it may bee you shall never have the like again; for I have made those whom you have given just occasion to bee your worst friends, to bee your best, and the onely instru∣ments to procure what here is sent you, and bee you confi∣dent shee shall still bee so, provided you do your part; con∣sider I beseech you, what a gap is opened by bringing in of the Scots, for the destruction of this Kingdom, if there bee not a Peace, (which I praie God Almightie to send speedi∣ly) you must exspect Armies of Strangers from several pla∣ces, who are now preparing, who certainly at their co∣ing in will over-run the whole Kingdom, and when it is past remedie, you will see your own errors, and there∣fore to prevent more miserie then I am able to express to this deplorable Kingdom, and the effusion of the bloud of Millions of men, women, and children, which must in∣evitably
bee this Summer; apply your selvs in an humble and submissive waie to his Majestie, whom I know you will finde readie with arms out-stretched to receiv you to favor and mercie, and grant you favors, even beyond your exspectation. Defer no time (for God's sake) and what you will do, do it speedily; I saie again, do it speedily, for reasons, I may not write. The direction of the Letter by the same hand that it is written within, is for the Man in the Moon, without date. Sir! I Assure you I have not been wanting to further your good desires, and if it bee not your own faults, I make no doubt but things will have an happie issue; for I finde those that are most concerned in it, forward enough. Reflect now upon the miserie of the times, and upon the groans and sufferings of those you see not, which yet have been nothing to what they will bee, if not speedily prevented by a Peace; which to obtain, I beseech you, let it not one∣ly bee your own care, but the care of all those you love, or have power with; otherwise bee confident of a general ruine, which certainly will bee inevitable both to your selvs and posteritie; and therefore take it into your serious consideration, and let not causless jealousies hinder you to apply your selvs in an humble and submissive manner to his Majestie, who I am sure will yet look upon you with a gracious eie; lose no time, for the longer you delaie, it may prove the more difficult, no doubt. This last Letter I Tho. Violet delivered from Read to Master Rilie, in November 1643.
UPon the bringing up to London of the aforesaid Letter of the late King, I Thomas Violet was examined before an Honorable Committee at Gold-smith's Hall the third of Januarie 1643. where I made the Honorable Committee acquainted, that the later of Master Read's Letters I delive∣red to Master Theophilus Rilie Scout-Master of the Citie of London, who was autorised by Ordinance of both Houses of Parlament, and by Act of the Common-Council of the Citie of London, to hold Intelligence in any of the King's Quarters; and that the said Theophilus Rilie did daily emploie Intelligencers into the King's Quarters by Order of the Ci∣tie of London, and by autoritie of the Parlament, as hee told mee Tho. Violet; and that the said Theophilus Rilie, by virtue of his place, did procure my Pass from the then Parlament to go to Oxford, the twentie fift daie of December, 1643. as appear's by the Journal-Books in the Hous of Commons; and my Lord General Essex did give mee a Pass to go to Oxford in Exchange for Master Haslerig, then prisoner in Bea∣ver Castle, and this Warrant of my Lord General's, Sir Ar∣thur Haslerig procured mee by means of Master Rilie, I bee∣ing prisoner, committed by the Parlament for my Twentie part; both which Warrants were procured for mee Tho. Violet by Theophilus Rilie Scout-Master of the Citie of London, and I Tho. Violet did before the Honorable Committee plead Justification for my doing what I did, having the Warrant and Approbation of the Common-wealth's Scout-master for what I had don. And I then told the Honorable Committee that I con∣ceived my Warrant from Master Rilie for what I did, was as sufficient as if I had had Master Elsing's Warrant: for M. Rilie was as hee told mee approved on by Order of Lords & Commons, and I knew by the consent of the Common-Council of the Citie of London, to bee Scout-master for the Citie; and if hee were a man unfit for such a trust & power, it was the fault in those that chose him, and not in mee wch
was not to question his power, abilities, or trust, but to act according to his directions, as long as hee had the Of∣fice of Scout-Master. Moreover I told the Honorable Committee, that before I went to Oxford, I desired Sir David Watkins Knight, to make the Committee of both Nations, who sate then at Darbie-Hous, acquainted with what I had don with Master Rilie the Scout-master of the Citie of London, that so I might do nothing but by the approbation of the Committee of both Kingdoms; and Sir David Watkins did make som of them acquainted with what I had don with Master Rilie, and I had their approbation to go to Oxford for the late King's Letter, and my Lord General's Pass as aforesaid. Moreover I declared to the Honorable Committeee at Gold-smith's Hall, that there was not then at the time of my bringing up of the late King's Letter, (beeing the 2d of Januarie 1643.) any Ordinance or Order to forbid mee or any other person to bring up a Letter of Peace from the late King as ever I then heard of; and that by God's Law, where there is no Law, there can bee no Transgression; and my bring∣ing then the late King's Letter up to London, before a Law made to shew mee my rule to walk by, I humbly concei∣ved could bee no offence. And the reason wherefore I was willing to go to Oxford, for the late King's Letter, was, becaus I was told that som in London had procured the late King to send mee his Com∣mands, that I should not discover the Transporters of Gold & Silver to the Parlament, which I offered then the Parla∣ment to do. And if I had not then been by the subtiltie of som Finers, and som Transporters of Gold, having in∣censed the Honorable Committee against mee, (& cast mee into the Tower) but had been emploied by the Parlament to make the Discoverie of the Transporters of Treasure, I saie, that all the Gold and Silver that since hath been Trans∣ported (which hath been a greater mischief to the Nation then can bee expressed) had never been sent away; and by
the fines of the offendors, would have com to the State a great and considerable summe to paie publick debts, and such a Regulation settled by the Parlament, that none should have presumed to have Transported Gold or Silver for the future. Here followeth the late King's Letter verbatim, viz. Charls R. TRustie and Wel beloved, Wee Greet you well. Whereas Wee have formerly emploied you for the Discoverie of all such as Transported Gold and Silver Coin beyond the Seas, and all such like∣wise who contrarie to the Laws, and for their own private gain, have Melted down great quantities of Silver; Wherein Wee acknowledg you did Us good and acceptable service, for which (when God shall enable Us) Wee do hereby promise to give you full satisfaction. And for that VVee understand that you are pressed by Our Two Houses of Parlament to proceed in the said Discoverie, Wee do hereby strictly Command you that you intermeddle no further therein, without Our special Direction, As you will. answer the contrarie at your peril. And for so doing, this shall bee your sufficient Warrant. Given at Our Court at Oxford the nineteenth daie of November 1643. in the nineteenth year of Our Reign, &c. By his Majestie's Command, GEORGE DIGBIE. To Our Trustie and Well-beloved Thomas Violet Gold-smith in London. And to get the late King to take off his Commands which hee sent mee by the aforesaid Letter, and to give mee leav to Discover the Transporters of Gold & Silver, was the onely reason that I went to Oxford: When I came to Oxford
I besought the late King to give mee leav to make the Disco∣verie to the Parlament against the Transportes of Gold, but hee would not, and told mee hee reserved that business for himself, for it would make him good store of monie when hee came to London. Then I praied him to give mee leav to paie my Twentie part to the Parlament, and that it should bee no damage to mee, in regard the late King owed mee one thousand nine hundred sixtie eight pounds for what I had laid out in discovering the Transporters of Gold, which hee readily consented to do, and bid mee paie all Taxes laid on mee, and that should not prejudice my debt hee ow∣ed mee, nor his favor to mee, and that hee would see mee paid as soon hee was able. I do humbly desire the Committee of Essex and Shrop∣shier, and all others that have my Estate, to take notice that everie one that is committed to the Tower by the Parla∣ment, is not guiltie of a Conspiracie against the Parlament. Col. Monk hee was committed to the Tower, and cleared, and at this daie a most gallant man in the Northern Armie; Sir Tho. Bendish in the Tower, and cleared, and now Em∣bassador at Constantinople; and many Honorable Members of this Parlament have been committed upon displeasure of the Parlament, and yet restored to sit in Parlament again; I am sure of it I am, and can bee more serviceable to the Par∣lament of England, then any Finer or Transporter of Gold hath, or can bee, that malitiously have charged mee to bee a Malignant, for I will bring the State in fiftie thousand pounds, if they will pass the Act against Transporting of Gold. And I humbly conceiv, no man ought to have his Estate taken from him, and given away, before hee bee convicted by Martial Law, or the Common Law of the Land. If those that have malitiously informed the Honorable Committee that examined mee at Gold-smiths Hall, could have made good their Charge, or have proved any thing to my prejudice, they would have brought mee to my Trial in the compass of four years, while I was pri∣soner
in the Tower; I could not have avoided a Trial, or kept it off one daie, and I know they left no stone unrol∣led, for they sate many daies to have don mee a mis∣chief, and I have it from good hands; that worthie Gen∣tleman Doctor Doreslaws told them, I had don nothing but what I could justifie, having M. Theophilus Rilie's approba∣tion and Warrant, hee beeing a publick Officer of Trust; and if any were in fault, it was M. Theophilus Rilie, who had abused his place and Trust, if hee had don any thing be∣yond his Commission. But the truth was, they looked more to keep mee close prisoner in the Tower, (that so I should not discover them that sent away the Treasure of the Nation) then any thing els; for they knew if I were abroad, I would have served the Parlament in that Discoverie. To the Honorable Council for Trade I am an humble suitor, for restoring mee to my Office for the Regulating the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Thread, the Regulati∣on is now depending before them, and with all my heart I humbly shall laie it at those grave Senator's feet, to regu∣late mee and my fee, as they shall see the Office just and ne∣cessarie, and for the benefit of the Common-wealth, and no further. For the Goods, Bonds, and Accompts taken at several times from my mother while I was in the Tower, J shall humbly desire any persons that did sequester them, to let mee know of it, whither they were carried, and how dis∣posed of, and J shall bee bound to praie for them; and if they bee inferior Officers, or others, that can tell mee, they shall bee well rewarded by mee and God's blessing; for as yet J cannot hear who hath them, and my mother died in my close imprisonment in the Tower; and though by the great favor of Master Henrie Martin one of the Right Hono∣rable Council of State, J had libertie to go and see my mo∣ther whilst J was prisoner in the Tower, with two keep∣ers, yet when J came to her, shee was so spent, and her heart broke for my oppressions, shee beeing threescore and
seventeen years old, that shee could not tell mee any thing of my business, nor give mee the least notice in the world who had taken my Goods, Bonds, and Accompts away, other then that shee was plundered several times; and this old Master White the Warder of the Tower, Master Axtel, and Master Jackson, keepers in the Tower, know's to bee true, who were with mee all the times J saw her. For my Farm in the Custom-Hous, & for the late King's debt, with all my aforesaid losses, J do most humbly leav it to the Parlament, for my satisfaction; and J praie that the Committee of Shrop-shier may bee Ordered to restore mee my Bonds they seized of mine from my sister in Lon∣don, beeing three Bonds in two thousand pounds for the paying mee Tho. Violet one thousand pounds as aforesaid; and that J may bee enabled by Order of Parlament to sue the said Bonds, and any other Bonds or Debts J have due to mee; and the parties owing mee any monie that I can justly prove due to mee, may bee required by the Parlament to paie it to mee, notwithstanding any Ordinance or Order of Parlament heretofore made; and my humble suit is to the Parlament, that the Committee of Essex bee Ordered to put mee into possession of the Manors of Battels. Hall, and Paton. Hall, they having forcibly driven Philip Cage out, when hee was in possession for the use of mee Tho. Violet, as appear's by their own Orders, and that I may enjoie all the said Lands till the rent of sixteen hundred pounds bee paid mee, for so much I am out of purs. The truth is, this envie of som of the Finers, and som of the Wier-drawers, came upon mee becaus I would not let the Wier-drawers cousen the late King of his dutie while I had the Office, but to the uttermost of my power made them make all good Silver-Thread, and to have five Oun∣ces to the pound Venice, and right Silver; and I have heard som of the Wier-drawers confess, that they had rather the State should chose fortie Officers to look after the Excise,
and Regulation of this Manufacture, then one Violet. And this, though it bee a crime to them, is a service to the State, to have such an Officer, which know's all the waies how they are cousened in their Excise in this Manufacture, and to prevent it: and had not my place of surveying of this Manufacture been but I had still en∣joied it, the State should have had twentie thousand pounds in their purs more then they have, onely by the Excise on the commoditie of Gold and Silver-Wier; and all this mo∣nie is lost through the ignorance of the Officers of Excise, who know not how to manage the business; for I know the State many times hath Officers put into such places through the interest and affection of friends, that are utter∣ly uncapable of such places they enjoie; whereby the State is at great charges in fees and salaries to ignorant men. But that is not the tenth part of the mischief the Common∣wealth suffer's by their fees; for through these men's igno∣rances, the State is cousened of the duties that should support the Common-wealth, as is notoriously visible in the Ex∣cise of Gold and Silver-Wier, which at four pence the Ounce at the Bar, which is laid on it by Ordinance aforesaid, would have made the State six thousand pounds a year: and by the ignorance and negligence of the Offi∣cers of Excise, it hath made the State not three hundred pounds a year for almost four years, which is not the twentie pennie of what ought to have been collected. And if I had had my place, I would have seen everie pennie the Wier-drawers then paid for Excise, made twentie pence to the State. And this the Refiners and Wier-drawers know to bee true, and that make's som of them so unwilling that I should have my Office again; they fear I should bee com∣manded by the State to use my uttermost endeavors for the collecting of those Arrears that are in the Wier-drawer's and Refiner's hands, and to restrain them for the future, many of them having bought Lands and grown rich with
the monie they owe to the State, which is fitter to paie the Arrears of the Armie, then to lie in their hands. Now whereas the dispute is, which can afford it chea∣pest, the Wheels or the Hand-spinners, I saie, the best is best cheap; the Hand-spinners, work will make two shil∣lings eight pence, and three shillings the Ounce to the mel∣ting pot, and last six times as long in Lace, as som of the Wheel-work will do; and when this Wheel-work re∣turn's to the melting pot, it make's not one shilling six pence the Ounce, nay, som of it not twelv pence the Ounce, the Silver beeing most of it galled and brushed off the Silk. And this the Gold-smiths and Tailors know to bee true, that within this ten years all the slight Wheel∣work came up, which make's not half so much to burn, as it did formerly in Lace. And whereas it is objected that som of the Hand-spinners work and spin Silver-Thread, as slight as the Wheels, which I believ cannot bee don; but if it bee don, they ought both Wheel-spinners, and Hand∣spinners, to bee severely punished, if they do not put into one pound Venice of Thread, at least five Ounces Troie of Silver-plate; and a sworn Officer that is no Trader in the Manufacture to Regulate the Trade, for whatsoever they put less in Silver then five Ounces Troie to one pound Ve∣nice, is a damage to the wearer, and the wearer is cheated by paying for Silver, when hee Silk for his monie, by which means the Lace will not wear a quater so long as if the Silver were bound in with a strong plate of Silver; for you may observ your slight Silver Laces, one part where it com's to wearing, that look's like Silk Laces, the Silver beeing all stripped and galled off the Silk; but make it with a strong plate, you shall have the Silk wear away, and the Silver remain. I do humbly desire in the behalf of the poor Women∣spinners, and som of the working Wier-drawers of Lon∣don, that their printed Petition for a Regulation of the trade may bee considered; And for the service of the Common-wealth,
that a rule may by your Honors bee set, what fine∣ness of Silver all the Gold and Silver emploied in the Wier∣drawer's Trade, shall bee made, and that it bee all assaied at the Bar, and that what person soever, that shall sell Gold or Silver-Wier, before it bee assaied, and the duties paid, which shall bee settled by your Honors, and approved on by the Parlament, shall for the first offence lose all the Sil∣ver so wrought to the State, and the partie that shall disco∣ver it to have one tenth part for his service; and for the se∣cond offence, to lose his or their freedom, and bee dismissed of his and their Trades for ever. The like penalties for such as work Silver courser then the Standard, and such as paie not the duties at the Bar re∣served to the State, and such as do not put five Ounces of Silver at the least upon everie Venice pound of Gold and Silver-Thread. Then I humbly commend unto your Honors as an Ex∣cellent pattern for a Regulation, the Copie of Sir John Bank's Certificate (the late King's Atturnie General) to the late King; which if you tie the Wier-drawers and Refiners to that rule, the Trade will bee maintained here to the Profit and Honor of the Nation. And whereas it is objected, that som of the Spinners by the Hand make as slight Gold and Silver-Thread, as the Wheels: Truly if they do, they ought to bee punished, any Hand-spinner that put's less Silver in a pound Venice, then five Ounces Troie of Silver; for whether the slight Thread bee made by hte the Hand-spinners or Wheels, is not so much to the point, for which of them soever doth it, cousen's the Common-wealth: and therefore a sworn Officer to look to them both, is for the service of the Common∣wealth, But if it bee left to the Refiners, and Wier-drawers, to melt up the Plate and heavie Coin of this Nation, as they have don, for this Manufacture, the Trade so managed is a canker to the Common-wealth, and will in time eat out
the bowels of the stock of Monie of this Nation. I my self when I was an Apprentice, delivered to Alder∣man Gibs for my Master, in little more then one above twentie thousand heavie shillings and six pences melted into Ingots; and when I told his brother Richard Gibs within this two moneths, that hee knew it to bee true, for at that time hee was his brother's Apprentice, hee re∣plied it was not in Coin, but in Ingots, and that hee con∣ceiv's might excuse his brother. The truth is, as this Trade is managed, it is a great waste of the treasure of the Nation, for this is the usual waie of it to furnish som of the Refiners and som of the Wier-drawers with Silver; som of the Gold-smiths they are general Cashiers for many Merchants, they receiv this monie for nothing, then when they have it in their houses, they cull it and melt down that which is the weightiest, and melt it into Ingots, which is bought up by som of the Refiners, and som Wier-drawers, and fined for Gold and Silver Lace; and according as som of the Manufactures are made by the Wheels, five parts of six are swept away and wasted, and never return's to the melting pot, and this is known and seen to many men. And for this, and other abuses practised on the Coin and Bullion of the Nation, there is the draft of an Act of Parla∣ment commended from the Council of State, and twice read in the Hous, which when it is past, I shall with all humilitie give the State a true discoverie of all these abuses, and prevent the like for the time to com, which will bee a great service to the Nation. Then that there may bee an accompt kept of all the Sil∣ver made in this Manufacture, and such Merchants contra∣oted with, that once in the compass of a year, what is spent in this Manufacture, may bee coined, or at least so much, as upon a calculation of the surveior of the Manu∣facture, shall bee delivered to the State that hee conceiv's the Bullion and Treasure is wasted: But for your Honors
to settle the Trade of Refining of Gold and Silver, and Wi∣er-drawing, in a Corporation, as it is now desired by the Wier-drawers, it were to make all the speed possible, that that little Silver in Coin which is yet left in the Nation, should bee culled and melted up for Gold and Silver Lace, and leav it to their good discretions and honesties, to ma∣nage the other parts of their Trade. The poor Spinners and som work-men, desire your Honors to the contrarie; for as they have beaten them down in the prices, that many of them are readie to starv, so if the whole power of go∣verning the Trade were left to sixteen of their wisdoms and discretions, which is a Master, and Wardens, and Assist∣ants, then should the work-men and work-women's face bee ground and opprest. These Master-work-men that desire this Corporation, are not fortie, and the work-men and work-women thousands; I shall with all humilitie tell you what Forrain Nations do to Regulate their Monie and Bullion, & these Manufactures: and unless you have the like rule here, I humbly conceiv it will be impossible to restore the Mint, to keep the Gold-smiths within com∣pass, or the Wier-drawers in any rule; for many of them have got to licentious height and pride, having got great Estates by culling Monie, selling Gold and Silver to trans∣port, buying of clipped Monie, and paying it away again, and twentie other tricks, that they are so proud, they know not whether they stand on their heels or their head; but the Act against transporting these, when it com's forth, will regulate them all. I saie, if you will have these abuses rectified as in France, Flanders, Spain, Germanie, and other Countries, I humbly conceiv, you must erect a Council for Monies and Bulli∣on; for in France I have seen great Volumes of Arguments of the Government and Management of Monie and Bulli∣on, and the due Regulation is of mightie importance as your affairs now stand; and in all Forrain Countries, the States, that are Kings, or Common-wealths, have a par∣ticular
care, and make the mysteries of managing their trea∣sure, matter of the greatest state and policie; and Gold and Silver, either in Coin or Bullion, the late Kings & Queens in England, did ever appropriate the especial management of them to themselvs, as beeing a business of State. And though now by the blessing of God, wee are a free State, and the Nation a free Nation, I humbly conceiv, not so free, that the Bullion and Coin of the Common∣wealth should bee Manufactured and wasted without any accompt, and without any regard for the bringing in For∣rain Bullion for the proportion is spent here, in the making Gold and Silver-Thread, without offering the State an Ex∣cise fit for to bee imposed on so superfluous a commoditie; when these Wier-drawers voluntarily offered the late King one thousand pound a year, and two pence an Ounce, and the Refiners did give the late King six pence the Ounce; and this to bee don in a King's time, in a time when the Com∣mon-wealth had no Armies to paie; which six pence the Ounce, almost all of it was given by the late King to a couple of Courtiers, the Earl of Holland two thousand pounds a year, the Countess of Roxborough twelv hundred pounds a year. If the Wier-drawers would paie the Ar∣rears they owe to the State, and submit to a Regulation for the present, and binde themselvs to work good Silver, well covered with five Ounces Silver to a pound Venice, seal all the Gold and Silver-Thread as formerly, and paie the duties shall bee imposed on them by the State for Excise, and keep an accompt of all the Silver Manufactured by a Comptroler, there might bee som hopes that this Manufacture might bee regulated: if they will not, I humbly conceiv, if the Par∣lament pass the Act against Transporting Gold and Silver, and have a Council for Monies, according as it is in other Countries, it will regulate the abuses of this Trade, and all others that trade in Gold and Silver. If the State had had a Council for Monies eight years ago, as they have in Forrain Countries, I believe Cheapside-Cross
would have yielded them more Monies then it made the State: I do humbly desire that it may bee examined, how many fodder of Lead was made of the Cross; for all the figures were Lead, and who bought it, and what they paid a fodder, and the total summe in monie was paid for it. Then I do humbly desire to have the partie or parties that bought the Lead of the Cross examined upon Oath, whe∣ther they did ever fine or refine the Lead, and parted the Gold from the Lead, by blowing it down in an Almond∣furnace, and then refining it on attest; and what Gold they extracted out of it, to give a just accompt of the pound weights and Ounces of Gold, hee or they refined and ex∣tracted out of the Lead of Cheapside-Cross. Then that all men would bee pleased to take notice of the long continuance of Cheapside-Cross, since it was made, and in how many King's and Queen's Reigns it was guilt, the Citie-Books I believ will shew, this verie Cross with the Leaden figures. And then that they take notice that the Rain and Wea∣ther decaie's not the Gold, for it will sink into the Lead; and though it change color, and tarnish with the Wea∣ther, yet the Bodie of Gold is in the Lead. And all men know the superstition of former times did not care what Gold they laid on Popish Reliques; and I believ the Citie-Books will shew many thousand pounds laid out in Gold for guilding Cheapside-Cross upon several occasions. I do humbly conceiv that when the Cross was sold, it was sold by the State onely for Lead, and the State had no more for it but for Lead; and if any did refine, and part that Lead, and converted the Gold to their own use, (that all that Gold wch was sold for two pence the pound weight, the State ought to have an accompt for it) and my desire to them that bought it, is, that they would give the just value of all the Gold they extracted out of Cheapside-Cross, to the poor maimed soldiers, towards their relief and mainte∣nance,
they having never paid the State for it. The taking away of Crosses, and Superstition, and pluck∣ing of them down, I thank God for; but withal, I would not that the State should sell Gold at two pence the pound weight to any person, upon what pretence of service or well-deserving soëver; for after that rate the Parlament may have servants too many for their profit, and in mana∣ging business in this manner, the whole Common-wealth suffer's, and som private persons get mightie Estates, to the great damage of the Common-wealth in general. I hum∣bly saie, what is the Common-wealth's, ought to bee sold at the best advantage and improvement for the publick, and and not for private respects, sold at an under value, upon any pretence to any private person whatsoëver. I know for speaking this truth. I shall have envie, but my comfort is, it will bee by or from none but interested parties; and all those that are not, vvill thank mee for speaking truth. The Parlament heretofore made many Provisional Acts, som onely to continue to the next Sessions of Parlament, which was somtimes three, five, seven, ten, fifteen years be∣fore a Parlament vvas called, and no remedie could bee had out of Parlament, if that these Acts were found prejudi∣cial to the State till the next Sessions of Parlament. Now by the blessing of God on this Nation, these inconveni∣ences are remedied, for the Parlament sit's alwaies; so that if the Parlament pass any Act, vvhich they shall finde upon just grounds either to add to it, or take from it, they have it in their own power to alter it upon the trial, if a Law should pass vvhich vvere not for the general good of the Nation. I beeing required to attend the Committee of the Coun∣cil of State, about the Act now presented to the Parlament, I did see, and vvas privie upon vvhat grave consideration everie branch of the Act now depending before the Hono∣rable Committee, vvas framed and put down by the Com∣mittee of the Council of State, before ever it vvas recom∣mended
to the Parlament. And I do humbly desire for the service of the Common-wealth, if any alteration bee made in the Act, those that drew the draft of the Act, may bee required to attend the Committee to give their reasons for the whole Act, or any part of it; for upon the effectual passing of this Act, much doth depend for the safetie of this Nation, and it is of an higher concernment to the Na∣tion, then I can express; and I humbly conceiv, there ought to bee no respect of private interest, where the safe∣tie of the Nation is so highly concerned. I humbly desire the Honorable Committee, that the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint may bee taken into your serious considerations, there beeing verie few men in the Nation, can speak so much upon their own experi∣ence of these abuses concerning the Treasure of the Nation, as these Gentlemen, the Officers of the Mint have certified, which ever since their Certificate, hath been found in eve∣rie part to bee true. The Mint standing still and neglected, the Treasure that hath been Imported, was never brought into the Mint, but Exported out again; by which means for the private gain of a few men, the Nation is ruined and impoverish∣ed, and a Trade Inwards and Outwards, driven without paying of Custom, and the Stock of Treasure of the Nati∣on almost all Exported in these times, now there is so much occasion for monie, to the admiration and astonish∣ment of many lovers of the Common-wealth, that truly understand the secrets and mysteries of Trade, And what mischiefs these doings will in the end bring upon this Common-wealth, is deeply apprehended by ma∣ny wise men, and can have no stop but by a vigorous Act to bring the Offendors to Exemplarie Justice, vvhose Fines and Compositions, throughout the Nation, will a∣mount to many scores of thousands of pounds to the States, for the paiment of publick debts, if Commissi∣ons of enquiries according to former presidents bee grant∣ed
by Act of Parlament throughout the Nation, to enquire for the last ten years of these abuses. If in declaring what hath passed at the Committee, and of other Transactions, bee not usual, I shall, and do humbly desire to have my pardon; for if my silence might not have endangered the Common-wealth, this that I have said, should never have com to publick view; for I know how to keep secrets as well as som other men. I have read of one that was born dumb, and so conti∣nued for many years; seeing one coming to kill his Father, cried out, God save my Father, and so gave timely warning for his Father to prevent the danger. A happie speaking of the Childe for the Father. Truly I count the Obligation to my Countrie, above the Obligation to my Father. I have seen this danger many years coming upon the Na∣tion. Though I am but young, and ignorant in other bu∣siness, I am sure there are but few, if any in the Nation, that have had those waies and means to finde out, and discover these mischiefs, which I have. I know and apprehend more then I vvill or can express. The great mischiefs Transporting Gold and Silver bring's on this Nation, I apprehend. The condition of your Armie, which must bee burthen∣som, if they have not monie to paie for Quartering, I ap∣prehend the danger and damage. The necessitie of Trades-men, and Handie-Crafts men will bee put to for want of emploiment, upon the scarcitie of monie, making all Trade to decaie, I apprehend. The sad condition of poor people, vvho will bee enfor∣ced for vvant to part with their clothes, their bedding, their dishes they eat their meat in, I apprehend. The danger the want and povertie of the poor will bring upon this State, if there bee not waies found out to bring Monie into the Nation, I do verie sadly and seriously ap∣prehend the inconveniences.
And therefore I crie, God save the Common-wealth. God put it into the hearts of the Parlament, to see to keep that little monie wee have yet left; and to finde out and punish those that have cheated, and robbed the Com∣mon-wealth of their Treasure, and to studie vvaies how to bring in monie into the Nation; for if this bee not don speedily, in all probabilitie, greater inconveniences then I dare write, will com on the Common-wealth. Much more I could saie, but if these Reasons before re∣cited, nor the Certificates of the Officers of the Customs, and the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint, & several reasons of som Aldermen of the Citie of London, for the stopping of the Transporting of Gold & Silver, and the Citie of London's Petition to the Parlament, presenting the great inconveni∣ences Transporting Treasure hath brought upon this Citie of London, and the Nation; I humbly saie, if all these will not prevail, I have don: For if I should write a Volume as big as Speed's Chronicle, I cannot give more clear satisfa∣ction of the necessitie of passing this Act. If God hath decreed this Nation shall bee cousened of all it's Treasure, and the Offendors not questioned, nor dili∣gent enquirie made after it, and such means as our Ance∣stors and other Nations (having far less occasion for monie then wee have) do daily practise; to prevent these mis∣chiefs, and discover the Offendors, I shall with all humili∣tie submit to God's Providence, and rest satisfied. I have clearly discharged my dutie to my Countrie, in declaring this business to the Common-wealth, that so they may know the true reasons of the scarcitie of Gold and Sil∣ver in the Nation, and the damage they sustein by the want thereof, and how the Mint com's to bee obstructed, that almost no Monie hath been Coined for these three last years. For som men that have clamored at mee for first enga∣ging to discover the Transporters of Gold and Silver in the
year 1635. in the late King's time, I shall desire them to consider, that I was first complained of by the Gold-smiths themselvs, beeing at the Council-Table, 1634. for buying up of Light Gold, and Transporting of it into France, as Mr Perin the Gold-smith in Cheapside told mee the same daie that som Gold-smiths complained of mee at the Council-Table; I going then up to White-Hall, to see what the Gold-smiths did, and upon their complaint, I was com∣mitted close prisoner for twentie weeks; and yet for all that, death would have been more welcom to mee then to have discovered the Merchants at that time, and this Do∣ctor Amies, Master Turner, and Master White, all of Lon∣don, and now living, know. But when I found the Merchants joined against mee, that were Transporters of Gold themselvs, I was willing to make my peace, though it cost mee dear, and not suffer longer for ungrateful men. When I was engaged in the late King's service, I was ever faithful to all his just Commands, and to the utter∣most of my power did serv him in all lawful waies, and beyond that I would never go. Now with all humilitie I have humbly tendred my self to the Parlament, for I think & believ, & I speak as in the pre∣sence of God, I living under their protection, I am as much bound to serv them faithfully, as ever I did the late King; and I have this advantage in the change, Kings die, but the Parlament of England, as it is now established, never die's: so that here I humbly fix and prostrate, laie my self, and all my endeavors to the uttermost of my power to im∣prove the interest and service of the Parlament, as it is now established, without King or Lords, against any person whomsoëver. It may bee objected by som men, that I have not don pru∣dently in declaring so much for the service of the State, as I have don, before I knew my conditions, what the State
would do for mee; for by these informations, I have given light enough to have others to go on, and laie the foundation of the Regulating of the Trade of this Nati∣on, and it may bee now don by others as well as by my self. This in part I grant to bee true; but my caus, is not everie man's caus; I was blasted by the devillish in∣vention of som men, and to the Citie of London, Ar∣mie, and the Parlament, presented as a Malignant, a Papist, one dis-affected to the Parlament and present Govern∣ment, as it now established, without King, or Hous of Lords: So that beeing under this cloud, and hard opinion of the State, and suffering so long time in the Tower, as before J have said, and my Estate still under Seque∣station, it did highly concern mee to take any opportu∣nitie to remove this hard opinion off mee, and that the Parlament might see from the bottom of my heart my seal in deeds, and not in words, to do them service. J have with all humilitie-truly and plainly stated this business, and J hope have laid the ground-work for the setting of other more learned heads on work, for the per∣fecting what I have roughly begun; and that the Com∣mon-wealth will receiv a great advantage by it: and if the Parlament shall pleas to command mee to serv them in any of these particulars, they shall not finde many men will do them service on the terms I shall, and do with all humilitie offer them; for I will willingly, so I may have my Estate, & Offices restored again to mee, or their value, which have been taken from mee, upon mis-infor∣mation of som malitious people, give the maimed soldiers that have fought in the Parlament's service since the death of the late King, one half of my Estate I shall die pos∣sessed of; and to the maimed Sea-men, that are emploied in the State's service, since the death of the late King, one quarter-part of my Estate, which I shall die possessed of; and the other quarter-part, I will, and do reserv to give to
som friends; so that three parts of four of what I have, or shall have, com's to those that have, or shall have ven∣tured their lives in the State's service; and I am, and shall bee no more but a faithful Steward to improve my E∣state to their advantage. And for the true performance of this, I will willingly give a perfect Accompt to the Master's of Trinitie-Hous, and of Saint Thomas Hospi∣tal in Southwark once everie year, and give them a perfect Invoies of my Estate, and where it remain's, with se∣curitie not to pass any of it away, other then for my ex∣pences for my maintenance; and to have the disposing of one intire quarter-part to som kindred or friends of mine, at my death; the other three parts to bee freely gi∣ven to the relief of maimed soldiers and sea-men, that have or shall bee emploied in the Parlament's service, provi∣ded J may be restored to my Estate. And this J do not as J am conscientious of any evil wit∣tingly or willingly, I ever acted against the State (for J stand upon my innocence) but J do it really, that it may bee a pattern to som that have blasted mee to the State as a Malignant, and a Delinquent, they having no children, and have got som scores of thousands of pounds by the Parlament's service; that they in humble thankfulness to God for his mercie, would bestow a good part on the poor, and for the future bee ashamed of scandalizing mee, when the reality of my words and deeds disprove them to the whole world; for Malig∣nants make not such free will-offerings to the poor maim∣ed soldiers, and maimed sea-men, that have, and shall lose their limbs in the defence of their Countrie and Li∣berties, as it is now settled, without King, or Lords: and though it may not bee above a mite in comparison to the State, J cannot possibly express my real intentions in the Parlament's service, more then by these my words and deeds. And J will upon the peril of my life, bring the
Parlament in fiftie thousand pounds by the Fines and Com∣positions of the Transporters of Gold and Silver, and such as have practised many abuses on the Coins and Bullion of the Nation, within the compass of one year, besides what summes hereafter, if Commissions according to former presidents bee granted, and if the Parlament pleas to pass the Act as it is now drawn, against Transporters of Gold; which Act was recommended by the Council of State to the Parlament, and hath been twice read in the Parlament Hous, and committed; and when it passe's the Hous, the Mint in the Tower of London will again flourish, a busi∣ness of the greatest honor, profit, and safetie to the Nation in general, that can bee, as your affairs now stand. What is here said, is with all humilitie presented to the Parlament for the service of the Common-wealth, by a faithful lover of his Countrie; beeing desired to state my Reasons by som in Autoritie for passing the aforesaid Act, I humbly conceiv (if it were made stricter then it is) it were far better for the Com∣mon-wealth: For Transporting Treasure heretofore hath been made Felonie, when the Common∣wealth, I humbly conceiv, had not so much occasion to see to keep their Treasure in the Nation, and the Mint going, as now they have. Signed THOMAS VIOLET. London, Feb. 12. 1651.
An Index of the principal matters conteined in these PROPOSITIONS. LEgorn, Genoa, and Am∣sterdam have raised them∣selvs to their Greatness onely by giving Merchant∣strangers equal privileges with their Natives, Prop. 1. pag. 1. The great Wealth that hath been gotten in Amsterdam, in bringing of Mer∣chandizes thither, though exported back Custom-free: And the like advantagi∣ous Trade at Dover, upon the Compo∣sition Trade, now brought to povertie for the want of free Trade, Pr. 2. p. 3. The dangerous effects of great Customs either in Kingdom or Common-wealth, Pr. 3. p. 3, 4. Spain lost almost all it's Customs of Goods imported from the West and East Indies, onely by laying an exces∣sive Custom; whereas if they would have been content with a moderate Cu∣stom, the Wealth of the East and West Indies would have been landed for Spain, which now verie scarcely touch∣eth that Land, Pr. 4. p. 4, 5. In France, Spain, Holland, Poland, Legorn, Genoa, and many other pla∣ces, the Merchant-strangers paie no more Customs then the Natives. I Thomas Violet was commanded 14 years ago by the late King, to attend the Lords of the Council about free Trade: and the reasons wherefore it went not on, was, the old Farmers of he Cu stoms, and the Lord Cotting∣ton were against it; with the grounds of their aversness against free Trade Pr. 5. p. 5, 6. If free Trade had been settled 14 years ago, the Nation would have gotten ma∣ny millions of monie before this time, and our ships not so easily lost as they have been, Pr. 6. p. 6. Wee are robbed by our own Seamen, who have their wives and families here, in and about London, and several other parts of this Nation, Pr. 7. p. 7. Good securitie to bee given, not to defraud the State of the Custom or Excize of any Goods imported and spent in this Nation, Pr. 8. p. 7, 8. The great abuse in the Excize and Cu∣stoms heretofore, by collecting of them, and the profuse expence of inferior Clerks, beyond their allowance, which must bee maintained in an indirect waie, to the prejudice of the State; for where the Constable is a Thief, the Felon will hardly bee found. Stricter penalties to bee made against stealing Excize and Customs, Pr. 8. p. 8. No Ships to put to Sea, but in Fleets with good Convoie, Pr. 9. p. 8. Several Governments in Companies high∣ly prejudicial to the Nation in general, instance in three particulars, but there are many score more: First, as in Oil, Currants, and English Cloth, the miscarriage of the Merchant-Adventu∣rers hath caused the Manufactures of Cloth to bee set up beyond Seas, Pr. 9. p. 9, 10.
Give the Dutch the same privileges they give our Natives, you will draw all their rich Merchants into our Har∣bors; for they had rather bring their Goods unto our safe Harbors in Eng∣land, then run the hazard of their Texel at Amsterdam, where they lose fourtie sale of Ships a year, if they could have their Goods brought hither with as little charge as to Amsterdam, Pr. 10. p. 10, 11, 12. If you allow a free Trade, and let no man have greater privileges then other, you will sell ten Clothes for one that is now sold, Pr. 10. p. 12. That you would treat speedily with the Fishmongers, about serving the Nati∣on with fish, this beeing the season of the year for doing it, and so maintain your nurserie of Fishermen. And to prohibite, for som time, the killing of Lambs and Sheep. The benefit that will accrew thereby, Pr. 11. p. 12, 13. That you appoint som eminent Merchant and send him into Spain, to treat in the behalf of the Merchants in Eng∣land, about the Spaniards returning Gold and Silver for England from Spain, and other Merchandizes. That the prime Merchants in London, which are strangers, may bee consulted with about it, for they are the most likely to draw their Trade hither by a Treatie with their Countrie-men, Pr. 12. p. 13, 14. That the Parlament would bee pleased to declare, That no Imbargoe or Seque∣stration bee upon any Gold or Silver brought into the Mint. This is desired by som Merchant-strangers, that know the Spaniard will not trust his Treasure to bee liable to Imbargoes for Delin∣quencie of his Factor, Pr. 13. p. 14. To laie small duties upon English Cloth, and all manner of Woollen Manufa∣ctures, and so to lessen the Customs, as wee may undersel any other Nation; and to make transporting Wooll and Fuller's Earth Felonie, Pro. 14, 15. p. 14. To laie little dutie upon raw Silk, Flax, Goat's-hair, Cotton, Wooll, Grogran-Yarn, that so our poor may bee set on work. That som French and Walloon Weavers bee invited into this Nation, and rdered to, ake our English poor to teach them; these beeing Manufactories whereby many thousand people may bee set awork, and wee get a rich Manufa∣cture into this Nation, as appear's Pr. 15. p. 15, 16. That you would bee pleased to make the late King's Hous at Greenwich a Magazine for Goods; the reasons are, by this means the Citie of London will never have a dearth of Corn, and have all Commodities at the best hand, when the Merchant shall have libertie to export such Goods as hee cannot sell here, after that hee hath tried his Markets, Custom-free, Prop. 16. p. 16, 17. Several reasons, to shew what benefit will com to the Nation by Naturalizing all Merchant-strangers, such as shall com over and plant amongst us, and bring their Families, by former experience of the Dutch, that have planted a∣mongst us; witness several Families now abiding here, Pr. 17. p. 17, 18. About the importation of French Wines, that it make's the State neer upon two hundred thousand pounds a year; and the Wine and Casks cost in France the first pennie, not one hundred and fiftie thousand pound. Then that it is considerable, the many thousand of peo∣ple live on that, as Wine-Coopers, Vintners, Carmen, Wine-Porters. Besides, I am informed there will for∣tie Sail of Ships this year com awaie from the Canaries unladen, the Wines this year having failed; and if there bee not som cours taken to bring in French Wines, hundreds of Vintners will break. The monie that come's in by the Excize and Impost will keep a good Fleet to defend our Navigation; two hundred thousand pound a year is a verie considerable summe, Pr. 18. p. 19. About setting up a Manufacturie of Li∣nen Cloth, and the several great ad∣vantages would com to the Common-wealth
thereby, Pr. 19. p. 20, 21. About keeping an exact accompt in the Na∣tion of all the Native's Goods export∣ed, and forreign Goods imported; by which means you would constantly see yearly, what the Importation exceed's the Exportation, and so would bee cer∣tainly informed, how the stock of the Nation stand's, Pr. 19. p. 20. If you make a free Trade, you will have Stocks of Forreigners lie here to bal∣lance any Imbargo, and make good to the Nation when our Merchants are oppressed beyond Seas; for upon Imbar∣goes it is not onely the Merchants suf∣fer, but the Nation, Pr. 20. p. 22. The great advantages and benefits will com to this Nation by making a free Trade; by the same means the Dutch, from as small and contemptible begin∣ning, have held War against the most potent Prince in Christendom, and after fourscore years war, compelled him to give them their own Conditions, Pr. 21. p. 23. Great inconveniences arising to the State, by not having skilful and able men to manage the Customs by the former rules in L. Treasurer Burly's time, and since all Custom-hous-men were to put in securitie, not onely for the monie they received, but also that they should well and faithfully execute their places, in guarding all things prohibited exporta∣tion and importation; and that no offi∣cer of the Customs should trade as a Merchant. Those Laws were made up∣on great consideration, and highly for the service of the State, Pr. 22. p. 24. Several heads of a Model for a Court of Merchants in London, to determine their differences upon Accompts and Merchandizing, as it is in France and other Countries, where all Mer∣chants, that are honest men, finde the great benefit com's to them by giving a speedie dispatch of their business. My humble request is, That the princi∣pal Merchants in London may bee spoke withal, and their humble desires granted to them concerning this business Pr. 22. p. 25, 26, 27, 28. A Petition to have the East-India and Persia Companie bring in the Books of Invoices of all the Gold and Silver sent by them into India and Persia for thir∣tie years; this is no new thing, for in Parlament, in 1620. they were ordered to bring in their accompts for 1601 to July 1620. They had shipped for In∣dia five hundred fortie eight thousand and ninetie pounds sterling in Spanish monie, and som Flemish and Germane Dolars; which Accompt was presented ub Parlament at that time. The Rea∣sons wherefore I move to have this busi∣ness examined, is, becaus wee have now no Courtiers to bribe, nor I hope no other will dare to take any Bribes, if I knew them, I would not fear to name them▪ When this business is throughly examined, the▪ East India Companie will bee found verie faultie, and as the affairs of the Common-wealth doe stand, ought to have a quick and strict Examination in Parlament, p. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. An humble request to the Council of State, to have the Act pass against transporting Gold and Silver, and six several Rea∣sons for the doing thereof, for the ho∣nor and safetie of the Nation, p. 35. The Treasure of England like a quantitie of water in a Cistern, wee have no spring of Treasure in the thousand pro∣portion as Spain hath, p. 35. In Holland, when they first made it a free State, the Edicts which I have translated, shew what severe penalties were put on Transporters of Gold or Silver, p. 36. In England any man may transport Corn freely when it is at four shillings a bushel, but not when it is twelv shil∣lings. Let us get as much in stock of monie as the Dutch, and have as little Lands as they, then wee might make monie a Merchandize, p. 36, 37. Against the Goldsmiths buying clipped English monie, and putting it awaie again to Grasiers or others, p 38. The great summes of monie the Navie and Armie take up, and the dangerous consequence to the whole Common-wealth,
not to call the Transporters of Treasure to a strict accompt, to terrifie others for the future, and by their Fines to make som reparation to the State, p. 38, 39. The names of such Goldsmiths and Mer∣chants that were sentenced in Star∣chamber, for melting down the heavie currant Coin of this Nation, and for transporting Gold and Silver, beeing fined in the Court of Star-chamber the 25 Jan. 12 Caro. and the 17 Febr. 12 Caro. at twentie four thousand and one hundred pounds, p. 46. Against several great abuses practised by several Goldsmiths, in gathering up several sorts of forreign Gold and Sil∣ver, and English Gold, for several peo∣ple who buie it up of them to transport, and culling and melting down the cur∣rant Silver Coin of the Nation, for to transport or to sell it to such as make Gold and Silver Wier and Threed, p. 47, 48, 49. The great mischiefs that will com to all setled Revenues, if Gold and Silver bee raised, p. 49. The deadness of Trade in Spain when the West-India Fleet doth not bring in Silver; that year the Fleet com's not to Spain, no trading in Spain, p. 50. The design of our dear Brethren of Scot∣land, to circumvent this Nation, both of all their Gold, Monie, and Movea∣bles, in buying up most of the plundred▪ Goods in London and other parts of the Nation, not paying half the value, and in monopolizing the Coals that ser∣ved London, and other parts of this Nation, into their own hands, and then raising the price at four times as much as they were sold for before, all the time of the restraint of bringing coals from Newcastle, ▪till Newcastle was reduced to the Parlament, p. 51, 52. The Scots, when they were in the North of England, as far as their Armie came, dated their Letter from Dur∣ham, Cumberland, Ferribrig, New∣castle in Scotland; I hope the Offi∣cers of our Armie, in requital, may date all their Letters, from Edinburg in England, p. 52. Several Laws and Ordinances for regu∣lating the Mints and Monies, and concerning the exchanges and Exchan∣gers of Monie, Refiners, Goldsmiths, and others in the united Provinces, Anno 1586. p. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57. The policie of this Nation hath alwaies aimed at, and intended the increas and augmentation of Monie, especially that of Silver, and this by divers Statutes and Laws, p 57, 58. For the new Act against transporting of Gold and Silver, and recommended by the Council of State, and twice read in the Hous: it is drawn from the ex∣ample and president of the 18 Eliz. cap. 9. against transporting Leather, and Tallow, and raw Hides, and the late Ordinance 1647. against trans∣porting Fuller's-Earth, and the claus that incourageth the Instruments to dis∣cover the offences, are drawn by the president 18 Eliz, cap. 9. and other Ordinances and Edicts of other States, that give like exemptions and incou∣ragement to such, as though guiltie themselvs in the second degree, and the claus touching Commissions and Exa∣mination of Witnesses for discoverie, and to commit them, in case of refusal, to bee examined, is don 13 Elizab. cap. 7. p. 58, 59, 60. An Ordinance for the general regulating of the Mint, at Brussels the 18 March 1633. p. 60, 61, 62, 63, 64. An Ordinance for the regulating the Mint at Brussels, the last daie of Maie 1644. p. 65, 66. A Declaration of the King of France for regulating the new price set upon light and clipt Species of Monie; likewise for the observation of the pri∣zes of Gold and Silver imploied for the Goldsmith's work. It is also ex∣presly forbidden to melt the Monie, and to transport it, or any other mate∣rials of Gold and Silver, out of the said Kingdom. Printed at Paris 30 Octob. 1640. p. 66, 67. What general Laws and Statutes in Eng∣land from time to time have provided
against transporting Gold, or melting down the currant Coin, and buying Gold and Silver at above the price of the Mint, and Commissions made throughout England, to inquire of such as transported Monie, 14 Ric. 2. cap. 12. p. 67, 68, 69, 70. The easie escape of the Transporters of Gold and Silver, hath incouraged the Merchants and others to transport the Treasure. Little penaltie cannot hin∣der the Merchant from his profit, p. 70. The several abuses and cheats of som Goldsmiths and others, taking advan∣tage of the Parlaments decrying all light and clipped English Silver, which mischiefs had been prevented, if there had been put into the Ordinance, to require all people upon the exchan∣ging of clipt English Monie, to cut it in two pices, p. 70, 71, 80. Twentie Millions of Monie coined in the Tower of London, within this twentie five years, as will appear by the Mint-Book, and almost all transported, p. 71. No great Action in a Common-wealth, can bee don without Monie; therefore to prevent the growth of this mischief of transporting Treasure, is the work of everie faithful lover of his Countrie p. 72. An old Dear-stealer is the best Keeper of a Park▪ Yet before I had my pardon, I paid to the late King two thousand pounds in Gold to his privie purs p. 79. Great mischiefs formerly don to the Ar∣mie in Ireland by paying their Armie with light and cours peices of eight, which was delivered to them at twentie in the hundred more then any Souldier could make, to make any returns to their wives and children; and this was don for the profit of som Goldsmiths in England, p. 80. everal Orders of Parlament, for the discoverie of the Transporters of Gold and Silver, and the Committee of the Navie, the Commissioners of the Cu∣stoms, and the Officers of the Mint's Certificate, for the speedie dispatch, in Sept. 1647. and nothing don in it yet; the Mint ever since at a stand, and almost no Monie hath been coined for above three years, not so much as within this twelve years, hath been coined within the compass of fourteen daies. It were worth inquirie, to have them publickly known, that retard the Act against transporting Gold; it doth highly concern the safetie of the Nati∣on to have it looked after, for there is more in it then vulgarly can bee ima∣gined, p. 82, 83, 84, 85, 87. There is another caus of great consump∣tion of the Treasure of this Nation, by importing French and Flanders Laces, to the value of many score of thousand pounds, which of late is sto∣len in without paying of Customs, bee∣ing subtilly packed in Commodities of great bulk, p. 88, 89, 90. Against the excessive waste of Gold in guilding of Coaches and Carroches p. 90, 91. Concerning the Manufacture of Gold and Silver Threed, p. 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97. For the regulation of the Manufacture of Gold and Silver Threed, to have a sworn Officer, that is no trader in this Manufacture, to bee Surveyer and Sealer. The draft of the Corporation of Gold-wier-drawers, presented to the Honorable Council for Trade, by som of the Wier-drawers, p. 98. The Gold-wier-drawers offered the late King and his Successors, one thousand pounds a year, and two pence an ounce, for to have a Corporation, p. 98. The Companie of Goldsmiths complained at the Council-Table, in 1634. of se∣veral abuses in the Trade of Refining and Wier-drawing, and transporting of Gold. Ʋpon their complaint, I Thomas Violet, and several other Goldsmiths and Fines, were brought into the Star-chamber, p. 99. My great obligation to Sir John Cook, the late Ring's Secretarie, for procu∣ring my Pardon, p. 100, 101. I imported more Silver then I transported
Gold, pag. 102, 103. I was commanded by the late King, to have the viewing and surveying all Gold and Silver Threed, and the Grant cost mee neer fifteen hundred pounds. Never so good Gold and Silver Threed made, as while I had the Office, pro∣ved by many people that are Artists, p. 103. The Refiners had that good fortune, they got all off the Star-chamber without a sentence, by their wit, which was to out∣bid the Wier-drawers, p. 103, 104. A Copie of Sir John Bank's Certificate to the late King, concerning the Wier∣drawer's Corporation, verie fit for the State, to tie up the Trade to such Rules as is there desired, to avoid the con∣sumption of Treasure, 104, 105, 106. The Refiners of London served the Wi∣er drawers, as the Merchant-Adventu∣rers served the Cloth-workers in King James's time, out-bribed or out-bid them, and so got the Monopoly of bee∣ing the King's Agents, they onely to furnish the Silver, p. 106, 107. The Wier-drawer's Petition in Parlament against the Finer's Monopoly, p. 108. The Refiner's craftie Petition, read the 24 of November 1640. as if they were enforced to bee the King's Agents, when it was their desire, and there∣upon som of them had their pardon from the late King. And becaus they gave six pence the ounce to the late King, or see it secured, there was two pence the ounce allowed to them more, for their gilt Wier, and a pennie an ounce for the Silver Wier, then it was offered, to furnish the Wier-draw∣ers at the Golden Fleece, and this is known to bee true, that these Agents were allowed many hundred pounds a year more in the price of their Silver, then the Wier-drawers could have bought it for, had they had a free mar∣ket, 108, 109. That upon trial of above one hundred As∣saies of Gold and Silver Threed, Spangles, and Wier, by Master Jack∣son, Assaie-master of Goldsmith's-Hall, these Manufactures were found to bee cours, under sterling, and adul∣terated; and that was a principal ground the late King, and his Council, would not trust the Wier-drawers nor Finers with a Corporation, but with a Regulation; for it was the sens of the whole Council-Table, To give them a Corporation, and to leav it to them∣selvs to manage, was to give them a Licens to deceiv the Common-wealth with Autoritie, p. 110, 111. The Erecting of my Office of Sealer and Surveyor of Gold and Silver Threed, and to warrant it all good that was sea∣led with the Seal of the Office. With∣out that assurance the Common-wealth had no benefit by the sealing, p. 111, 112. The rude carriage of som of the Wier∣drawers, and others trading in the Manufacture, at the Council for Trade. If they cannot carrie themselvs civilly before such a great Assemblie, what clamors shall the Surveyor have, when hee doth his dutie in seeing them make good work, p. 112. That all Gold and Silver-Threed should bee made with five ounces Troy Silver to one pound Venice of Thread, and if any were made under, to deface or burn it; then you would have your Sil∣ver-Lace last six times as long as it doth, p. 113. The Fee of four pence the pound weigh in Thread allowed to mee Thoma Violet, was earned with a great dea of attendance, charge, and hazard for I was to see all the Manufactur made good to the Common-wealth, th had the Seal of my Office, p. 113, 11. Several people whom I did question f making fals Gold and Silver-Three and Wier, and for putting Copper i to Silver Lace, and selling it for go Silver, p. 114, 115 I humbly desire that Sir Robert Harlov may deliver my Grant for my Offic to the Council for Trade, and hee bee∣ing the Chair-man appointed by th Parlament, to examine the business and that hee would bee pleased, to certi∣fie to the Honorable Council of Trade
what hee found upon Examination con∣cerning my Grant, that so the Honora∣ble Council for Trade may do that which they shall finde upon my Grant most advantagious for the Service of the Common-wealth, that so the Wea∣rers of the Manufacture of Gold and Silver Lace, may not bee cozened, p. 115. An Ordinance of the sixth of Aug. 1646. for laying four pence upon the ounce Troy, upon all Gold and Silver-Wier, p. 116. That there is twentie thousand pounds in the hands of som of the Gold-wier∣drawers and Refiners, which they owe in arrears to the Parlament; the Ex∣cize not making, for almost four year, above one thousand pounds; which if I had had my Office, I would have col∣lected six thousand pounds a year, which is four and twentie thousand pounds: and all this monie due to the Parla∣ment, lie's in the hands not of above thirtie persons, p. 116, 117. The Gold-wier-drawers, before any Ex∣cize was thought upon, did offer the late King, and his Heirs for ever, two pence the ounce Troy, and a thousand pounds a year, to have a Corporation: but the deceits so grosly practised by many of them, were so clearly proved, that this State would not trust them with a Corporation, nor the Finers, but under a Regulation by Commissi∣oners, all men of great qualitie in the Common-wealth, p. 118. There is now, for a time, collected of the Wier-Drawers and Refiners at the Bar, but one pennie the Ounce, which upon account of Excize, is not above fifteen shillings in an hundred pounds of Gold and Silver-Thread, when it is manufactured. Other Commodities which are for use of the Nation, and not superfluous, paie's five pounds in the hundred Excize. p. 118. If the Council for Trade pleas to take in∣to consideration Master Atturnie Gene∣ral Banks's Certificate, for regula∣ting the Manufacture of Gold and Sil∣ver-Thread, this State will make six thousand pounds a year of the Excize, if the Rules desired in the Silver-Spinner's last printed Petition to the Council for Trade, bee also taken into consideration, and my humble Proposi∣tions to the Council for Trade, p. 94. 95, 96, 97. bee taken into considerati∣on, the Manufacture shall all bee made right, both for the fineness of the Sil∣ver, and the just covering of the Thread with a good Plate, at least five ounces the pound Venice; by which means the poor working Wier-drawers and the Silver-Spinners, will have a comfortable livelihood, and the Com∣mon-wealth served with good Silver-Lace, Thread, and Wier, which here∣tofore they have been grosly cozened in, by reason of the slight making of them, p. 118, 119. I challenge any Wier-drawer, Finer, or Silk-man in London, to produce one pound weight of bad or slight Silver-Thread I ever sealed at the Office; or that any man could ever fasten one pennie on mee, or other reward, for conniving at any man that did not work good Silver; and I am sure I and my Servants sealed above a million of Scanes of Gold and Silver; and if they could have found mee faultie in that particular, they would have gon to the Parlament with a full crie. But though they sought, and sought carefully, yet they could not finde one ounce, p. 119, 120. While I had the Office of Surveyor and Sealer for the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Thread, I did discharge my trust faithfully, in seeing the Com∣mon-wealth should not bee cozened; for which som of them clamored most lewdly against mee, about the Citie of London, p. 121. The several mischievous designs of Re∣finers and Wier-drawers against mee, as the Widow Simmonds, wife of one Joseph Simmonds, set on by the com∣bination of the Wier-drawers, in vexatious Suits, when I had their Ac∣quittances, and onely mis-laid them upon my troubles in my Sequestration,
which was brought upon mee by the malicious charge of som of the Refi∣ners of London, p. 122, 123. 124. An accompt of what hath been taken from mee by Sequestration, p. 124, 125, 126, 127, 128. Tho. Conningbie of Hartfordshire Esquire, and Christopher Hatton of London Gentleman, Witnesses of Philip Cage Esq his Declaration, p. 129, 130. An Order of the Committee of Essex, for Master Edward Elconhead, touching Thomas Violet's Lands in Essex, p. 130. An Acknowledgment of Mistris Mor∣dant, concerning Tho. Violet's Bonds and Extents on the Manors of Batels and Paten-Hall in Essex, p. 131, 132. An Order of the Committee of Essex, touching Master Elconhead's bring∣ing in the caus of my Sequestration in Essex, p. 132. Master Elconhead never paid any Mo∣nie to the Countie of Essex, for the use of the Countie, as I could hear of, for the composition of my Lands in Es∣sex, p. 133, 134. The late King's Letter to the Citie of London, p. 135, 136. Two Letters of M. Read's, sent to M. Theophilus Rilie Seout-master of the Citie of London, from Oxford, p. 136, 137 M. Theophilus Rilie Scout-master of the Citie of London, did daily then emploie Intelligencers into the King's Quarters by Order of the Parlament and the Citie of London, as hee told mee Thomas Violet, p. 138 I had a Pass to go to Oxford, as appear's by the Journal-Books, p. 138 The reason wherefore I was willing to go to Oxford, was, that I might have licens from the late King to discover the Transporters of Gold and Silver, which, about a moneth before I went to Oxford, hee sent mee a Letter, to com∣mand mee not to proceed in the said Discoverie. The Copie of the King's
Letter to mee Thomas Violet, 19 Novemb. 1643. The reason why bee would not suffer mee to make that Discoverie, hee told mee it would make him good store of Monie, when hee came to London, p. 139, 140, 141. I do now offer the State to bring them fif∣tie thousand pounds, within the compass of one year, if they will pass the Act against the Transportation of Gold and Silver, as it is now presented by the Council of State, p. 141. For the Honorable the Council for Trade, I humbly present, if they settle the Trade for refining Gold and Silver, and Wier-drawing in a Corporation, as it is now desired by the Wier-draw∣ers, it were to make all the speed pos∣sible, that that little Silver in Coin which is yet left, should bee culled, and melted down for Gold and Silver Lace, p. 148. A Council for Monie were verie necessarie, p. 148, 149. Concerning the buying Cheapside-Cross, p. 150, 151. The great mischiefs Transportation of Gold and Silver bring's on this Na∣tion, p. 153, 154. It may bee objected, that I have not don prudently, in declaring so much for the service of the State, before I knew my conditions, what the State would do for mee. The reasons which did induce mee to do it, p. 155, 156. If I may have my estate restored to mee again, which hath been sequestred upon the mis-informations of som malicious people, I will give the maimed Soul∣diers which have served the Parlament since the death of the late King, half of my Estate I shall die possessed of, and to the maimed Sea-men emploied in the State's Service one quarter-part; and for the true performance of this, I will give a perfect accompt to the Masters of Trinitie-Hous, and the Masters of Thomas Hospital in Southwark once everie year, upon conditions by once recited. p. 156, 157. FINIS.
