3062.3 S123486 44920304 173752
The Pens Excellencie or The Secretaries Delight. Wherein aswell the abuses wch are offered vnto ye worthines of ye Pen, by vnworthie Pen men, are trulie discovered: as ye Dignity of ye Art it selfe by ye Antiquitie, Excellencie & diversitie thereof, is breifly demonstrated Together wih an insertion of sondrie Peeces, or Examples, of all ye vsuall Hands of England: as also an addition of certaine methodicall observations for Writing, Making of the Pen, Holding the Pen, &c. Written by Martin Billingsley Mr in ye Art of Writing Non satis est benè, aliquid facere, nisi etiam fiat venustè. The Greeke & Hebrewe with other Peeces never yet extant are hereunto by the Authour exactlie added. Are to be solde by Io: Sudbury & George Humble in Popeshead W. Holle sculp.
2 To the most Excellent Prince Charles &c. Most Gratious Prince This humble worke of my hands labour, with my hearts loue, first deuoted to yor Highnes Gratious Regard, and nowe (with an Addition) for a publiq good, with yor fauourable Patronage, putt forth into the world: Humblie present to yor Princely patience, Beseeching the height of all perfection, so to blesse yor Highnes in all perfections, as may giue iust cause to ye vertuous in all Professions, to admire yor Excellence, with all loue and seruice: and make my happines, vnder heauen to be a seruaunt to so gratious a Maister. Your Highnes, in all humblenesMartin Billingsley.
The Preface to the READER. IT is an opinion amongst some, not so erronious as ignorant, That Coppy-Bookes of this nature are of no validitie. What reason they can alledge to strengthen so fond a conceit, I know not; sure it is some priuate one, they are so loath to produce it. For mine owne part, I see no reason why these that are grauen should not bee as profitable to a Learner, as those that are meerely written; so they bee exactly performed according to the na∣turall straine of a true Artist; each Letter be∣ing cut according to its true proportion, and losing not the life deliuered in the Example.
Certaine I am, there is no man liuing can write so exactly, but that euen in the writing of sixe lines, hee himselfe shall bee conscious to him∣selfe of some imperfections: which, by directions to the Grauer (being a good Worke-man and carefull) may bee easily helped and made perfect for imitation. Howbeit I deny not, but that oftentimes the Grauer may wrong the Writer, if hee bee not very obseruant in euery touch of a Letter: and the amends which hee may make him in the well cutting of some one or two Hands, will not counteruaile the credit which hee shall lose by his ill grauing and vnnaturall mishaping of some few Letters in one very Ex∣ample. For this Booke ensuing, I know there are some (through an enuious Curiositie, rather then a true Iudgement) which will herein finde many in∣firmities: yet let me tell them, it is an easier matter to pry into the imper∣fections of another, then it is to amend their owne errours: and hee that findes the greatest faults, commonly is the vnablest to amend the least; since Art hath no greater enemy then Ignorance. This is my glory, That I haue not plaid the Theefe with any man, (though it were in my power to haue done it,) But quicquid scripsi, scripsi: whatsoeuer I haue written, I haue done it my selfe: For I would bee much ashamed, that any man should thinke, I had beene brought vp in a place of such scarcitie, and vnder so bad a Master, or that there were in mee such a pouerty, that I must needes goe a thieuing for my skill. I thanke God there is nothing in it, which I am not able vpon an
instant to better. And therefore if any man list to be contentious, let him be contentious; but let him not wrong him in his doings, who is able to doe bet∣ter then himselfe: I speake of those that thinke themselues excellent and past compare, who indeed (be their names neuer so famous) beare about them but the shadow of Art. And howsoeuer the spirits of such men are so eleuated and raysed euen beyond themselues, that they thinke basely of euery mans doings but their owne; though their consciences tell them they are but as empty vessels, which alwayes make the greatest sound. It shall suffice mee, that (I) know what they haue in them, and how farre their skill extendeth; and so rest my selfe contented, till Time and Truth (the Tryers of all mens actions) shall distribute to euery one according to his desert. In the meane time, as this little Booke hath found gracious acceptation at the hands of him to whom it was first pri∣uately intended: So I hope it will haue the approbation of all such as are well disposed, and beare affection to so excellent, commendable and necessary an Art: assuring them, that had I had my right, I should haue giuen them better content, and greater satisfaction of the Penns perfection: As for Carpers and ouer-curious-ey'd men, I passe not, as knowing my selfe euery way (in the Art I professe) a Worke-man that needeth not to be ashamed. From my house in Bush-lane neare London-stone, Decemb. 22. 1618. M. B.
The Pens Excellency. Exordium. THe Profession of the Pen at this day being so vniuer∣sall, and the Professors themselues for the most part so ignorant, and insufficient to vndertake so worthy a function; together with the desire I haue (according to my small talent) to benefit such as are, or would be Practitioners in that commendable Art of FAIRE WRITING; were the onely motiues that induced mee to manifest vnto the view of the world, these few lines heereafter en∣suing. Wherein before I enter into discourse concerning the Art it selfe, giue me leaue cursorily to demonstrate the manifold abuses which are of∣fered vnto the Pen by a number of lame Pen-men; who as they doe in∣trude themselues into the society of Artists, and vsurping the name of Pen-men, seeke detinere Artem in ignorantia: so by their audacious brags and lying promises, they doe shadow and obscure both the excellency of the Pen, and the dignity of those that are indeed true Professors thereof.
But I purpose not to heape vp all the abuses which they may be concei∣ued to offer vnto the Pen; for that were to lose my selfe in an endlesse dis∣course: I will only poynt at a few which I hold to be the chiefest and doe belong principally to matter of Teaching: And those I finde to be foure. First, you shall obserue that these Botchers, (for they deserue no better  title) are for the greatest part of them of no standing, nor euer haue had any ground in the Art, onely haue a certaine confused kinde of writing, voide either of Life, Dexterity, or Art it selfe; and yet notwithstanding they professe, and in their Bills (clapt vpon euery post) promise to per∣forme as much as any whosoeuer. For let any man obserue their Ly-bills, (for so I may very well tearme them) and hee shall see how liberall they are in their promises this way, professing to teach any one (not standing vpon the capacity of the pupill) to write a sufficient hand in a month, and some of them doe say, in a fortnight. Yet, if they did but say so it were tollerable, when as they themselues, (I dare bee bold to affirme it) may goe so long to Schoole to learne a little a, aad yet not attaine to the true touch thereof, being fitter for other Mechanicall occupations (wherein some of them, to my knowledge, haue beene brought vp) then for the Profession of this so curious an Art. Whose Writings (if they come to the touchstone of Art, which cannot erre, and to the iudgement of Artists, who seldome are deceiued) will proue lame and schoole-boy-like. And although in some of their doings, there may seeme in the eyes of the igno∣rant)
to be a shew of Art: howbeit tantum absunt à perfectione, quantum ab ignauia animi magnitudo, They come as farre short of those that haue the least skill, as they doe of Perfection. Next, whereas we that are Pen-men hold this as a Maxime in the Art of  writing, To yeeld a reasod of euery thing we doe, (since plus apud nos vera ratio valet, quam vulgi opinio) why, these ignorant Professors are so rea∣sonlesse in all their workes, both of Writing and Teaching, that it is im∣possible for those whom they teach, or that imitate their doings, to reape any benefit by them, Reason being a second Schoolemaister to bring a man to knowledge in any Art hee desires to practise. And certainely (ex∣perience tells me) that in the matter of teaching, nothing is more auailea∣ble to a learner, then the demonstration of Reason. So that heerein ap∣peares the second abuse, in that these men, being not able to yeeld a rea∣son of that they professe, doe neuerthelesse (Parrat-like) boast of their skill, and in their papers giue out vaunting speeches, as if so be they were the onely fellowes that would (as we say) beare away the bell: whereas if a man take a view of any of their workes or writings, he shall find therein no appearance either of Truth, Reason or Art: but on the contrary, such weake stuffe as he would rather imagine it to be the scratching of a Hen, then the worke of a profest Pen-man. Thirdly, (because I would bee briefe) by these their large (yet lying  promises) they blind the eyes of the common sort, who are rather affected
with nonelties and strange deuises, though they appeare in nothing but vaine ostentations, then with the soundnesse of iudgement and exquisite∣nesse of skill, wherewith Artists are indued. For is it not a common thing amongst them, as well in their residence about this famous City (which God knowes swarmes with them) as in their curriculer Progresses ouer all places in this kingdome; to carry about them, yea and to set in open view the writings and Tables of other men, and affirme they are their owne? I appeale to none but to my owne experience heerein; howbeit I am per∣swaded diuers others (and which I know to) will concurre with me in this truth. And what is this, thinke you, but deceptio visus, a blinding of the world with shewes of what they are not? Lastly, they doe also hinder the commodity of those that goe as far be∣yond  them in excellency of writing, as the Sunne exceeds the Moone, and that two wayes. First, by their base and ignominious carriage of themselues in their ac∣customary cosening, wherby men take occasion to conceiue so ill of others of the same Profession, that it is almost impossible for any one (do or mean he neuer so well,) to haue entertainment where they haue beene before. And secondly by the multitude of them, which is so great that a man can go into no corner of this City, but he shal see and heare of a world of squirting Teachers, not one of them almost worthy to carry a Pen-mans Inck-horne after him, much lesse to beare the name of a good Pen-man.
Diuers other abuses there are which these men offer vnto the excellency of the Pen and Pen-men: But lest I should seem prolixe in so slight an argu∣ment, I will here leaue them to the censure of the skilfull, and to those that to their cost haue made tryall of them. Forasmuch as my intent is not so much to detect the follie of those vnworthy Professors (which is palpable enough to euery one) as to entreat of the Art it selfe, reducing all that I en∣tend to speake in commendation thereof, vnto these three heads▪ 1 To the Antiquitie thereof. 2 To the Excellencie 3 To the Diuersitie First, for the Antiquitie of it. Some affirme that the vse of this Art was found out in the very infancie of the world: and that Enoch the seauenth Ioseph. lib. 1 de Antiquit. from Adam had skill therein: For Iosephus credibly reports, that one of the Prophecies which Enoch wrote on pillers of stone, remained euen in his time; or at least some ruine thereof. But others doe ascribe those pillars to Seth who liued before Enoch. Howsoeuer, if it were but as ancient as the Law, it carries with it age enough. As for the Art of Prining, which came vp but yesterday (in comparison) and is now in much request, that can no way blemish the Art of Writing, forasmuch as Writing is the President by which Printing is effected, and therefore the more worthy. For as wee say in Arithmeticke, Out of the
greater the lesser is deducted: So that, that whence the deduction is made, is greater then the deduction it selfe. I shall not neede to argue much vpon the Antiquitie of this Art, in re∣gard of the vniuersall knowledge thereof. What worthy and notable acts were heretofore done by any, either Diuine, Morall, Legall or Martiall, but were reserued to after-ages by the meanes of Writing? And I wonder how we should euer haue attained to any kind of learning, had we not had the scrolls of our learned fore-fathers to peruse and looke into as also the holy Scriptures, In quibus sunt omnes thesaurt sapientiae ac scientiae reconditi? The next thing to be entreated of, is the Excellency of the Art of Writing,  which doth euidently appeare in these two things: 1 Desiderio. First, in the earnest desire that all men for the most part haue to attaine vnto it: for those things which are rare and delectable, are sought for and pursued of all men, that's a rule in Nature: Now the Art of Writing is a most excellent and delectable Art, and therefore of all men much desired. 2 Necessitate Secondly, the Excellency appeares in the Necessitie thereof: for it is necessary for all (you know) to write; and those that cannot, finde what a multitude of inconueniences doe come vpon them for the want of it. And herein (by the way) suffer me not to giue conniuence to that vngrounded An Answer to a common Obiection. opinion of many, who affirme Writing to bee altogether vnnecessary for women. If by it any foule businesses are contracted, and thereby much hurt effected; Is this to be laid vpon the Art it selfe? Or is not rather the ill
disposition of those to be charged herewith, who make it the instrument, whereby they bring to passe euill actions? For not the vse but the abuse of a thing is it which makes it odious. If it were otherwise, why then foule imputations may be laid vpon the best vertues, which of themselues are immaculate. To bee briefe, the Art of Writing is so excellent, and of such necessary vse, that none ought to be without some knowledge therein, since the ex∣cellency of no Art without it can be made knowne or manifested. And if any Art be commendable in a woman, (I speake not of their ordinary workes wrought with the needle, wherein they excell) it is this of Writing; whereby they, commonly hauing not the best memories (especially con∣cerning matters of moment) may commit many worthy and excellent things to Writing, which may occasionally minister vnto them matter of much solace. Hereby also, the secrets that are and ought to be, betweene Man and Wife, Friend and Friend &c. in either of their absences may bee confined to their owne priuacy, which (amongst other things) is not the meanest dignity. Lastly, the practise of this Art is so necessary for women, and consequent∣ly so excellent, that no woman suruiuing her husband, and who hath an estate left her, ought to be without the vse thereof, at least in some reaso∣nable manner: For thereby shee comes to a certainty of her estate, with∣out
trusting to the reports of such as are vsually imployed to looke into the same: whereas otherwise for want of it, she is subiect to the manifold deceits now vsed in the world, and by that meanes plungeth her selfe into a multitude of inconueniences. Wherefore their opinion who would barre women from the vse of this excellent facultie of Writing, is vtterly lame, and cannot by force of argu∣ment be maintained. And although the Excellencie of this Art (to speake of the curiositie thereof) be somewhat shadowed by the dulnesse of some Mechanicall spi∣rits, who seldome haue skill in any thing out of their owne element, that thinke Writing to be onely a hand-labour, and so they can write to keepe a dirty shop-booke, they care for no more; neuer esteeming the commenda∣ble manner of faire and orderly Writing, which ought in all businesse to be obserued, as well in keeping of Bookes for Merchants and others, as in all kinde of Engrosments, appertaining to the Law, &c: Yet notwithstanding the splendor & grace of writing shines most excellently in the scrols of skil∣full Artists, as in the writing of some may appeare to thē that haue insight. And what should I say of the Excellency of this Art? Is it not one of the hands by which not only this, but al other common-wealths are vpholden? The key which opens a passage to the descrying and finding out of innu∣merable treasures? The handmaid to memory? The Register and Recorder of all Arts? And the very mouth whereby a man familiarly conferreth with
his friend, though the distance of thousands of miles be betwixt them? Infinite other things might be spoken concerning the Excellency of this Art of Writing; and where I faile in the setting forth thereof, assist me with your manifold imaginations. The third and last thing to be discussed of in commendation of this Art,  is the Diuersitie thereof. I meane the diuers kindes of hands which are now vsed among vs. For although they all goe vnder the name of writing; yet they are to be distinguished according to the diuersitie of them. Howbeit my purpose is not to clog my discourse with an enumeration of euery idle hand that may be written: for that were absurd, and out of the element of a Pen-man. I will only entreat of those which are the principall; and wher∣in the most Art, the greatest curiositie, and the rarest dexteritie of the Ar∣tist is to be manifested: and they are these which follow, viz. 1 Secretary. 2 Bastard-Secretary, or Text. 3 Roman. 4 Italian. 5 Court. 6 Chancery. Of each of which I will briefly speake somewhat, onely by way of di∣stinction,
in regard I would not willingly weary the Reader with super∣fluous circumstances, or detaine him long from That which followeth. 1 Secretary. For the first, viz: the Secretary, which is so tearmed (as I conceiue) partly because it is the Secretaries common hand; and partly also, because it is the onely vsuall hand of England, for dispatching of all manner of bu∣neses for the most part, whatsoeuer. I might adde hereunto the super-excellency of this hand, in respect of any other hand; for that the very denomination thereof, imports some things in it that are not easily to be found out, And true it is, that who∣soeuer doth practise it (according to the true nature of it) shall perceiue Secretarius à secretis. therein many secret and subtill passages of the hand, which few, but those that haue beene well grounded therein by a true Artist, are able to com∣prehend: but I affect breuity. To speake of the kindes of Secretary, is (in these dayes) no easie matter: for some haue deuised many, and those so strange and disguised; that there is hardly any true straine of a right Secretary in them. For mine owne part, I make distinction betwixt the Sett, Facill, and Fast hands, of which three I shall (God willing) by and by propose some few examples. 2 Bastard se∣cretary The next is Bastard-Secretary, and so named by the best, because it is gotten of the Secretary, as those that haue any skill may perceiue. This is a Hand not so vsuall as the former; yet of great validity, and for diuers purposes exceeding gracefull; as for Engrossements, Epitaphs for Tombes,
Titles of Bookes, and many other vses, which would bee too tedious for me heere to recite. 3 Roman. The third is Roman, which hath his denomination from the place where (it seemes) it was first written, viz: Rome. A hand of great account, and of much vse in this Realme, especially in the Vniuersities: and it is conceiued to be the easiest hand that is written with Pen, and to be taught in the shortest time: Therefore it is vsually taught to women, for as much as they (hauing not the patience to take any great paines, besides phan∣tasticall and humorsome) must be taught that which they may instantly learne? otherwise they are vncertaine of their proceedings, because their mindes are (vpon light occasion) easily drawne from the first resolution. 4 Italian. The fourth is Italian, a hand in nature not much different from Roman, but in manner and forme, of much incongruity thereunto. This is a hand which of late is growne very vsuall, and is much affected by diuers: for in∣deed, it is a most excellent and curious hand, and to bee written with sin∣gular command of hand; else it will appeare but very ragged and vile; and if the Pen be taken off in coniunction of the letters, it is neither ap∣proueable, nor Pen▪man-like, but meere botching which is detestable. 5 Court. The fist is Court hand; so called, for that it is of great vse in those two famous Courts of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas. It is a hand some∣what difficult to write well, and hee that continually writes it, may hap∣ly come to perfection in that; but for other hands (if hee could write ne∣uer
so many) let him neuer looke to write any of them well: for it is able to marre them all. I am not reasonlesse in this opinion, but able (vnto any that please) to produce the cause. 6 Chancery. The last is Chancery, which euery man knowes to be written no where but in the High Court of Chancery, and in other Offices which haue refe∣rence thereunto. I am of opinion, that this hand being well written, is far more gracefull then the Court, and equally difficult. It hath a kinde of mixture of the Court and Bastard-Secretary in it, which any man of iudge∣ment may easily perceiue. There are two kindes hereof, the Sett and Fast; the difference between them is not little, as they that are Clerks well know. Thus much, or rather thus little, I thought good to deliuer, touching the Antiquitie, Excellencie, and Diuersitie of the Art of Writing. Now here shall follow certaine pecces and Examples of the sixe seueral heads before mentioned; wherein I haue endeauored to fit my selfe with extraordinary matter for coppies; holding it an absurd thing in a good Pen-man to make choice of such fustian stuffe, as many doe, onely to set out their Coppies, and make the writing to seeme gracefull to the eye. Also I haue laboured to be so perspicuous in the nature of euery hand, as that the meanest may imitate me, and reape some benefit by me.
5
8
9
10
11
14
15
18
22
23
24
26
27
28
Thus from the gate or entrance, I haue brought you into the house; where you haue seen sundry ornaments and peeces of Art: and now (if you be not weary) goe with me into one roome more, and there take a view of the implements and tooles, with which you must worke, if you meane to proue a Pen-man; and learne how you are to vse and handle them. But before we enter, steppe aside with mee, and I will giue you notice of cer∣taine obseruations, which are necessary to be knowne of euery one that will practise this Art. Obseruations for writing. EVery one that intends eyther to be a Teacher of others, or a Practi∣tioner for himselfe; ought to know that in the Art of Letters, or Writing, three things are to be obserued, viz. 1 Ratio. 2 Modus. 3 Species. Generally. The former wherof, which is Reason, hath reference to the vnderstan∣ding, and doth most of all concerne the speculatiue part of Writing. The two latter, viz. the manner and shape (which of euery letter
throughout the Alphabet is to be obserued) doth consist in the carriage of the hand; and these are the practique parts of Writing. Particularly. 1 Ratio. First, the Reason of euery letter must be found out; as why such a letter beeing made thus and thus, seemes more gracefull then beeing made so and so. Likewise, as for euery letter, and the least touch with the Pen, a reason must be giuen: So it is in the coniunction, knitting or ioyning to∣gether of the letters; Why the Pen must heere be taken off, and why there not taken off? why the nature of this letter will admit the taking off of the Pen; and why the nature of that letter doth require the contrary. These things must be resolued to the learner, by Reason; else how shall he vnderstand to write well? 2 Modus. Next, the manner of making euery letter must bee knowne too. For if a Scholler be taught to frame his letters after an ill, corrupt and contrary way: It cannot be that he should euer write well. And although per∣chance some doe write sufficient and seruiceable hands, that neuer were taught the true way of framing their Caracters: Yet notwithstanding what they do, they (as we say) do by roate, not vnderstanding, or con∣ceiuing how they write. For I dare vndertake, that such as haue not bin rightly grounded heerein, are neuer able to know or iudge of the good∣nes or badnes of a letter. Therefore it were to bee wished, that men would refraine from these Botchers that spoyle so many & bring vp such a multitude of Scriblers, not fit for any mans imployment: and that they
would (not standing vpon the pay, as many ignorant persons doe) put their youth to such as are able to teach, and are knowne to be good Pen-men. 3 Species. Lastly, as the reason and the manner of euery Letter is to be obserued: so the shape (which giueth life and spirit to writing) must be knowne also: for therein the very substance of Writing consisteth. Herein a man ought to bee very wary and circumspect, concerning the carriage of his Pen: that is, that hee doe not presse vpon that part of the letter which requires a fauourable touch; nor be sparing in that part which requires the contrary: for in either the spirit of the letter is dulled and made blockish, so that the shape cannot then be good. It shall not be amisse for the diligent Practitioner, more specially to obserue these few briefe Rules concerning Writing, viz. 1 FIrst, to size his Writing, that is, to make the depth and fulnesse pro∣portionable. 2 Then to obserue the whites, for that's a maine matter. 3 Lastly, to keepe an equall distance, as well betweene letter and letter, as betweene word and word. These three being the chiefest things wherein the grace of writing con∣sisteth.
In the next place I hold it necessary to set downe certaine rules for the making and holding of the Pen, with other things therunto appertaining. Obseruations or rules for the making of the Pen. AFter you haue gotten you a good Pen-knife well edg'd and smooth'd vpon a hoane, and good second quils, either of Goose or Rauen, scra∣ped with the backe of your knife, begin to make your Pen thus: 1 First, holding your quill the right side vpwards, cut off about the third part of it flat along to the end. 2 And turning it on the backe side, cut off the very end of it asloape; which being done, it will be forked. 3 Then, holding it still on the backe, make a little cut in the very midst of the quill. 4 When you haue done so, take the end of your knife if it haue a pegg, or else another quill, and make a slit vp suddenly, euen in the cut you gaue before. 5 Which being done turne your quill on the right side againe, and be∣gin to cut a little thought aboue the slit, on that side which is next your left hand, and so continue cutting by degrees, till you thinke you haue suf∣ficiently cut that side. A Caueat. But herein you must bee very wary you cut not off too much of the slit; for then your pen will be too hard, and if you leaue too much also, it will be ouer soft.
6 Then euen against the place you beganne to cut the first side, cut the Note that if your quill (as many haue) haue teeth, you are to pare it on the back thinly, to take thē away other likewise, till you haue made them both of an equall thinnesse: and then trying it by lifting vp the slit vpon the naile of your thumbe, you shall see whether it be too soft or too hard: if eyther, bring it to a meane by ad∣ding more slit to it, if you see it be too hard; or by taking some away, if you perceiue it to bee too soft. Lastly, herein lies the difficulty, viz. in the nibbing of the Pen: wherein I obserue this rule, that placing it on the naile of my thumbe, or middle fin∣ger, Obserue that this nibbing of the Pen must be done at once though it seeme two seuerall cuts, otherwise it will not write currantly. I hold my knife somewhat sloaping, and cut the end of the nibbe, not quite off, but before my knife come off, I turne him downe-right and so cut the nibbe cleane away, on both sides alike; contrary to that old vulgar rule, Dextra pars pennae, &c. Now if my pen be to write full, I cut off so much the more of the nibbe; if small, so much the lesse. Obseruations for the holding of the Pen. 1 HOld your Pen betweene your thumbe, your fore-finger, and your middle-finger: viz. with the top of your thumbe, the bottome or lower part of your fore-finger, and the toppe or vpper part of your middle finger. 2 And let your other two fingers ioyne to the rest a little thought with∣in them; suffering none of your fingers with which you hold the Penne, to touch paper: for that is the proper office of the fourth and little fingers, by
which the strength of the others is maintained. 3 Lastly, for the right vsage of the Pen, when you can hold it; you shall obserue, that it ought to bee held directly vpon the full: for that is most proper, being that the nibbe of the Pen must be cut euen, otherwise it is subiect to spatter. Howbeit, I denie not, but in the fetching of any com∣passe, it must be held a little inclining to the left side: for so the Pen will giue full where it should, and small also where it is required. A Caueat. Note, that the Pen must be held very gently in the hand, without gri∣ping, because of two inconueniences which come thereby. 1 The one is, that the command of hand (which otherwise by the easie holding thereof is to be attained) is hereby vtterly lost. 2 The other is, that by this griping, or hard holding of the Pen, a man is kept from a speedy dispatch of that he goes about to write: both which are maine enemies to Clerke-like writing. M. B. his priuate opinion concerning Pen-manship. 1 FIrst, it is a most absurd and hatefull qualitie, to vse any manner of botching in the Art of Writing; yea, though it be in a letter of the greatest vncertainty. 2 Againe, I am of opinion, that although in the writing of some Hands,
(as of the Sett Secretary and some other) it be now and then tollerable to take off the Pen in coniunction of the letters, for the more formall writing thereof: yet that in the Facill, but especially in the Fast Secretary, it is so iniurious to the perfection of Clerke-like writing, that I cannot free him that vseth it, from the imputation of a meere Botcher. 3 The like opinion doe I retaine of those, who must write euerything that is to be performed in any reasonable fashion, and with credit, with or by a line: for therein they shew themselues rather Carpenters then Wri∣ters, and cannot (in the iudgement of Artists) bee rightly tearmed good Pen-men. 4 Also (in my iudgement) he cannot be reputed a good Pen-man that is not able vpon an instant, with any Pen, Inke, or Paper, and in the presence of whomsoeuer, to manifest some skill: Being that the rare & absolute qua∣lity of the Pen, consisteth not in the painting, pricking forth, and tedious writing of sixe lines priuately in a mans Study, with the best implements: but a sweet command of hand, and a certaine conceiued presumption. 5 Lastly, to vse any strange, borrowed, or inforc'd tricks and knots, in or about writing, other then with the celerity of the hand are to be per∣formed, is rather to set an inglorious glosse vpon a simple peece of worke, then to giue a comely lustre to a perfect patterne; they being as vnnaturall to Writing as a surfet is to a temperate mans body. FINIS.
