B5773 53298979 179757
The Declaration of Almighty God, in some few Texts of Scripture, recommended to the Reverend Conforming Divines: By G. B. B. of S—b—y. To be Preach'd upon every third Wednesday in the Month; being the Publick Fast appointed to implore God's assistance for the reduction of Ireland, and the overthrow of the late King James, and his rebellious Forces. PRoverbs, C. 24. V. 21, 22. My Son fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knoweth the ruine of them both. 16. 10. A Divine Sentence is in the Lips of the King, his Mouth transgresseth not in Judgment. Eccles. 8. 2. I Counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the ath of God. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. Levit. 21. 17. He that curseth his Father, or his Mother, shall surely be put to Death. 15. He that smiteth his Father, or his Mother, shall surely be put to Death. 19. 3 Ye shall fear every Man his Mother, and his Father, and keep my Sabbaths. Prov. 20. 20. Whoso curseth his Father, or his Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in obscure rkness. Deut. 21. 18. If a Man have a stubborn and rebellious Son, which will not obey the Voice of s Father, or the Voice of his Mother, and that when they have chasten'd him will not hearken to them. 19. Then shall his Father and Mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders his City, and unto the Gate of his Place. 21. And all the Men of his Place shall stone him with stones that he die: So shalt thou t away Evil from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. 27. 16. Cursed be he that setteth light by his Father, or his Mother, and all the People ll say, Amen. Prov. 19. 26 He that wasteth his Father, and chaseth away his Mother, is a Son that causeth me, and bringeth reproach. 28. 24. Whoso robbeth his Father, or his Mother, and saith it is no transgression, the same is Companion of a Destroyer. 0. 17. The Eye that mocketh at his Father, and despiseth to obey his Mother, the Raven the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagl's shall eat it. Sam. 24. 5. And it came to pass, afterwards, that David's Heart smote him, because he cut off Saul's skirt. . And he said unto his Men, the Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master, Lord's anointed, to stretch forth mine Hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of the d. 6. 9. Who can stretch forth his Hand against the Lord's anointed, and be guiltless. 5. 22. Behold, to obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams. 3. For Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and stubborness is as Iniquity and Idolatry. 1. 19. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land. 0. But if ye refuse, and rebel, ye shall be devour'd with the Sword, for the Mouth of the d hath spoken it. sal. 38 1. Plead my Cause, O Lord! with them that strive with me, fight against them that t against me. Let them be turn'd back, and brought to confusion, that devise my hurt, &c. For without cause have they hid for me their Net, in a Pit; which without cause they have ed for my Soul. 1. They laid to my charge things that I knew not. 2. They rewarded me Evil for Good, to the spoiling of my Soul. 5. But in mine adversity they rejoyced, and gathered themselves together; yea, the Ab∣ gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did tear me, and ceased 3. Stir up thy self and awake to my Judgment, even unto my Cause, My God! and my d! m. 19. 9. And all the People were at strife throughout all the Tribes of Israel, saying, the  saved us out of the Hands of our Enemies, and he delivered us out of the Hands of the tims, and now he is fled out of the Land for Absalom. — Now therefore why speak ye not a Word of bringing the King back. And he bowed the Heart of all the Men of Judah, even as the Heart of one Man; so they sent this Word unto the King, Return thou and all thy Servants. FINIS.
