C5952B 99887057 181784
The Contented CUCKOLD: OR, The Fortunate FUMBLER. Being a Brief Relation of a Young Spark, who Marryed with a Beautiful Maiden, and on the Wedding-Day, received the Sum of 500 l. as her Portion, with promise of as much more at the Birth of her first Child, but he being Insufficient to perform, resolved to Hire his Neighbour Robin the Miller, to help him out at a dead lift. Tune of, Ladies of London. This may be Printed. R. P. THere was a Beautiful Damsel of late, whom many young Men did admire, One above all of a worthy Estate came to her, and love did require: Soon he obtain'd this amorous Maid, and all things was decently carry'd, Five hundred pounds to her Portion was paid, the very day that she was Marry'd. This being paid, and all over and done, her father to show himsef Noble, Said, at the Birth of a Daughter or Son, This Portion I promise to double: Therefore I say make much of your Bride, till then I will still be your Debtor; Yet Seven Years he did lye by her side, poor Soul she was never the better. There was no hopes of an heir being born, therefore he was much discontented, All his old Cronies did laugh him to scorn, alas! he was dally tormented, Some they would say, were you worth your Ears, you ne'r would have bauk't such a Beauty, For to lye by her full seven long Years, and not perform Family Duty. True, he would stroak her ad make a strange rou nay, kiss her, and cal her his Honey, But something else must be done without doubt, e're he has the rest of the Mony: Many a Sigh alas! she let fly, I here am debar'd of all pleasure, Had ever Maid such hard fotune as I, I weep and lament out of measure. Then was he troubled to see her so sad, for why, she no longer could wave it; If any help in the World can be had, my Dearest, said he, thou shalt have it; For as I am a right-hones't Man, you know I was never unwilling, But yet I can do no more then I can, you ne'r wanted Kissing and Billing. There is a lusty lad lives at the Mill, who I have a fancy to hire, Be n a man of much Practise and Skill, I am sure he will grant your desire: Then will thy joys and blessings abound, when as he has made thee a Mother; Before I will loose the Five Hundred Pound, I'le give the one half for the other. Yet I will get him as cheap as I can, I think it is nothing but reason: He is I tell you a right honest Man. and knows how to do things in season: Now it shal be no longer deterr'd, I'le go to this Robin my Neighbour, With me I think he will not stand too hard, I'le give him Ten Pound for his labour. He shall be sworn our Counsel to keep, and not make the Country acquanted, Then what he Sows I do reckon to Reap, seet Wife let the time be appointed: And he in private shall come and go, then though you lye often together, There is no Creature alive need to know, but that I am still the right Father. FINIS. Printed for J. Back, at the Black-Boy on London-Bridge, near the Draw-Bridge.
