c6799A 51617698 175192
A LYE is no SCANDAL. Or a VINDICATION OF Mr. MUNGO CRAIG, From a Ridiculous Calumny cast upon him by T. A. who was Executed for APOSTACY At Edinburgh, the 8 of January, 1697. Ps. 26. v. 6. I will wash mine hands in Inno∣cency so will I compass thine Alter O Lord. Ps. 31. v. 18. Let the lying Lips be put to Si∣lence: Which speak grievous things proudly and Contemptuously against the Righteous. Plaut: in Amphit. — Qui non deliquit decet Audacem esse, & considenter prose & proterve loqui Nam Horat. Epod. 6. — Si quis atro dente me petiverit, inultus ut Flebo Puer? Written, January 15, MDCXCVII.
A VINDICATION, Of Mr. MUNGO CRAIG, from a Ridiculous Calumny cast upon him by T. A. lately Executed for Apostacy. Section I. Containing the Introduction, the Calumny, and some General Observations. ALthough there be no Divine Truth which concerns our Eternal Felicity, more demonstratively de∣ducible from the Axioms of sound Reason, more clearly holden forth in Scripture, or better countenanced by the experience of all Ages; than the being of a Providence, whereby every thing falls out according to the eternal purpose of him that worketh all things according to the Counsel of his own will. Eph, 1.11. This being the necessary result of his Glorious perfections, with respect to his end in Creating of the World. yet, there is no subject about which Men can employ their intellectu∣al faculties wherein they will find their wit nonplus'd in a higher degree, than in the stupendious intricacies of this un∣fathomable deepth; whose beauty and harmony, we can no more unridle in particular instances, than we can grasp the infinite understanding and free-will'd Councels of God, by the narrow limits of our shallow apprehensions. which made the Holy Apostle exclaim in the ii, of the Rom. & 38. v. O the deep of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Know∣ledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments and his ways past finding out. Now, as the truth of both these positions, is aboundantly perspicuous to any who is not altogether a stranger to the things of God: So, (con∣sidering the fewness of my dayes and shortness of my expe∣rience)
it is evident to me in an eminent degree. The Lord having dealt with me in such a manner, as I have often seen the thick Clouds of apparent ruine dispell'd in a moment, and issue in my real Good. And upon the other hand, when my Spirits have been dejected, for the disappointment of mine expectations, in that which I imagin'd wou'd be conducible to my well-being; a few dayes perswaded me of the falsity of my Judgment, when I perceived that it would have ter∣minated in my hurt either one way or other. And truly I cannot but say except I give my Conscience the lie, that ever since I could make any considerable use of Reflexion and Memory; I have observed the Finger of God in every step of my Life. So that I have learned to wait with pa∣tience, on his meaning in any Emergency of his over ruling Power for the Future, hoping through his Grace to be found among these; whom he loveth and chastneth, and that when he hath tryed me I shall come forth as Gold, Job. 23, i0. But here, I must confess that the present and humbling dis∣pensation wherewith the Lord has been pleased to try me, for ends best known to his Holy Majesty, is so odd, by rea∣son of a strangely surprising and ridiculous calumny cast upon me by that poor Creature lately Executed for Aposta∣cy; that I am totally puzled how to behave under it but, Let me not be ashamed O Lord for I have called upon thee: Let the wicked be ashamed and let them be silent in the Grave, psal, 3i, i7. I say it is strangely surprising, first because, (as I call the searcher of hearts to witness) it came to my ear as unexpectedly, as if I had seen the orderly Course of Nature; which God hath established in the Universe, turned in a mo∣ment to Confusion. 2ly. Because it came from one who was to die, and pretended to reced from his former Prin∣ciples. But more of this aferwards. 3ly. Because it has had reception among some who are real Christians, but byass'd by Misinformation. Nevertheless, upon reflex thoughts my Admiration Ceased as to the two first points, when I considered the qualities of my Accuser and had Read his Speech. And likewise as to the third, when I consider∣ed that it was only among such as were unacquainted with me that it had reception; and that it is disseminated and so∣mented only by a Graceless crew of profligat Persons, who cannot endure to see vice crub'd without wheting their ma∣licious
Tougues on such as appear against it. I call it redi∣culous and false, because I'll shortly prove that it is so. And although I be perswaded, both from my own experience, and from the method of the Lords Dispensations toward his People in the whole Canon of the Scripture, that it will ter∣minate in my Advantage; yet seing that it is a publick Scandal to that Holy calling; whereunto out of his abound∣ant Grace and Mercy, he hath been pleased to call me. Hav∣ing an Eye solely to the Glory of God, and that I may not be a Stumbling Block to any weak Conscience; I have thought it not only convenient, but my indispensible duty to give a publick Testimony in my Vindication against it. For the re∣gular performing of which, I shall first lay down his own words for a principal Copy of his Speech. And 2ly, I shall prove them to be false. And lastly Answer some Calumnies that are commonly rumoured, whereof he makes no men∣tion in his last Declaration. The words are those, AND I CANNOT WITHOUT DOING MY SELF A MANI∣FEST INJURIE, BUT VINDICAT MY INNOCENCY FROM THESE ABOMINABLE ASPERSIONS, IN A PRINTED SATYRE OF Mr. M. C's WHO WAS AN EVI∣DENCE AGAINST ME WHOM I LEAVE TO RECKON WITH GOD AND HIS OWN CONSCIENCE IF HE WAS NOT AS DEEP LY ENGAGED IN THESE HELLISH NOTIONS AS EVER 1 WAS. Before I descend to the particular Anatomy of his Accusa∣tion, I must make two General Observations, how the won∣derful providence of God had over rul'd his Malice in mak∣ing his Calumny carry its own Refutation in the forehead of it. My first General Observation is. That one parr of the words is a manifest and undenyable contradiction of the other, for first he sayes, that he is innocent from these abo∣minable Aspersions which I lay to his Charge; and yet he leaves me to reckon with God and my Conscience, if I was not as deeply ingaged in them as he. Now, if he stand to the first that he is innocent, that I'm not guilty as the para∣lel which he runs betwixt our engagements clearly demon∣strats, and so the last part of the Calumny falls to the ground. And if he stand to the second, that I am guilty, then he is not Innocent, and consequently the former clause must be false. Now, although I shall prove both the Clauses of the Calum∣ny to be false, yet it's clear that according to himself one of them must of necessity be so. This being as Logicians term
it Argumentatio ad hominem. Where I must extol the good∣ness of God, in that when the wicked even mine Enemies and my Foes came upon me to eat up my Flesh, they stumbled and fell Psal. 27, 2. My second gneral Obse vation is, that he doth not positively affect that I was as deeply engaged as he but leaves me to reckon with God and my Conscience i I was not so. As if he had said, I have a Suspicion For th (a) that Mr. M. Craig was once so as I am, however, ground o be it so or not, I leave it to God and his conscience, this suspicr if they clear him I clear him. To which I sub-on see Sect some but they have sufficiently cleared me, and 3. Cons. 8. will clear me in the day of general Judgment, be fore Men and Angels, Ergo (according to the most Genuin sense that his words can admit of, considered with their Circumstances) I am sufficiently cleared. And although this Phrase may be admitted for an affirmation in more tri∣vial affairs, where there is no ground of Jealousie, that the Person speaking is either capable or willing to Sophisticat yet, it is not so to be let pass if we consider Thomas Aitkinhead' dexterity in that Art. Especially, seing that from the se∣quel of my discourse (b.) I shall make it apparent, that he had a design to put a blur upon the World in't ei-Sect. 3. ∣ther through malice or mistake. And now I appeal Con. 8. to any competent and unprejudic'd Person, if ever two pro∣positions were more repugnant, or if ever the oracles of the Heathen Daemons were more equivocal. But admitti all which I have observed to be null, yet I shall prove both the parts of his Calumny to be false in the two following Sections. SECTION II. In which the first part of the Calumny is demonstrated to be false. HIs position here is, that I did cast abominable asper∣sions on him in my Satyre of which he was innocent I contradict it thus, I laid nothing to his Charge in that Satyre, of which he was not guilty. That I may prove my Assertion, observe 1, that all that I mention of him in that Pamphlet, may be devided into two parts 1, a relation of some ridiculous and airy Fancies in Philosophy and Chime∣stry, reduced into five heads. 1 Of the Chimaerical ver∣tues or properties which he attributed to his Aurum potabil
as he termed It. 2 Of his design of inventing a way to keep Commerce betwixt the Terestial Glob, and the World which he imagin'd to be in the Moon. 3 Of his new and ex∣traordinary Way of making the Philosopher Stone. 4 Of his rediculing the received and self evident principles of Rea∣son. 5. Of the Extravagant and Blasphemous power Which he attributed to Man's Imagination. That all these and many other Wild Effects of unbridled and daring Ignorance, Were his common discourse, almost every one who had any acquaintance of him can Testifie: I shall Instance some, viz. Mr Patrick Midleton Mr. Adam Mitchel Mr. Hugh Cravefaord Mr John Neilson &c. Moreover, that about Ima∣gination was an Arucle of his Lybel and sufficiently proven against him. The second part, is a general Information of his Extravagancies in Divinity, without so much as naming any thing in particular; because I looked upon it as little less than Blasphemy to name them again, when not called thereunto, and that the Epithe s whereby I designed them there, were very congruous to the things lybelled against him, non that ever heard his Lybel can deny. Now, that he was guilty of these, I have no more to say, but that (after a due and punctual process of Law, whereby every thing contained in his Lybel was sufficiently proven, together with several Articles which were not Lybelled, by Witnesses who heard them in different places, and at several occasions, uttered by him, in the Spirit of Malice and Bitterness, with frequent Repetitions, without any Provocation, yea, con∣trary to the found Admonitions of those, who, with abho∣rence, were his Auditors.) he was Capitally punished for them. Observe, 2ly. That it is to his Extravagancies in Divinity, that his Words have more special Reference, which I Col∣lect from the two Epithets he gives them; viz. Abominable and Hellish, and likewise from the strain of his Speech, Where he endeavours to Lenefie his Guilt, by attributing it to a love of Truth inherent in his Nature; tho non that e∣ver heard him on these points could perceive that it flow'd from such a Principle. And really I cannot see, how curs∣ing and railing against Holy and tremenduous misteries, Which Man's Wit cannot Comprehend, can consist with love of Truth, or how a high Conceit of a Man's own Wit
above all others, and a rejecting of all Instructions th could be given him, as if he were above the possibility  having further Light in the knowledge of things, can cous With the Character of a Philalaethes, And yet both these in the highest degree were his Properties. Observe, 3ly. That (as we may Collect from the for∣mer observation) this doth not only Reflect upon me, b likewise upon the rest of the Witnesses, who Testified th he was guilty of such abominable and Hellish Notions. Ye and upon the Wise and Grave Judges too, as if they eithe had given ear to Calumnies, or, admittted incompetent Wit∣nesses against him; Whereas, never was a Process mo punctual, never a more unanimous consent of Witnesses, who heard them at different occasions as we said before, yea, of a great number of Witnesses Who Were called to∣gether, many were strangers one to another. Observe, 4ly. That this Contradicts the former part o the speech, in which he declares, that since 10 or 11 Years o Age, he was guilty of this Apostacy for which he suffered These things being premis'd, I make the falshood of hi position apparent thus; either his position or mine must b false, the one being the contradiction of the other. But that mine is not false, is evident from the former Observa∣tions. Ergo. His is false which was to be demonstrated. And this in the opinion of any judicious Person, is suffici∣ent to debilitat the Credit of the other part of his Calumny. For how is it to be thought, that a Man vvould stop to ly in so private a Business as my Reputation, vvho had the im∣pudence, to call these things abominable Aspersions or Ca∣lumnies, that vvere so generally knovvn of him, and legally proven against him, I might here take notice, that he promises to vindicat his Innocence from these things, and yet does it not, for he says not a word more upon that point. And if by Vindication he mean only the bare asserting of hi Innocence, (which indeed is a Notion of vindication not a white strangr than the Person that spoke it) then by the same Rule, the bare asserting of my Innocence from what he layes to my Charge, would be (by a Thousand times) a more valid Vindication of me, because such a thing cou'd never be laid to my Charge by any Man.
SECTION III. Wherein the second part of the Calumny is demonstrated to be false THere is one previous consideration I would offer to the Reader, before I proceed to this point. viz, That in proving the falsity of the other Clause, I had a great ad∣vantage that I lake here, my proper station in that being to Oppugn, but here the scene is changed, my Office properly being to defend my self from any thing that he had to lay to my Charge, and his to prove it. But by his bare asserting of the thing & that but seemingly tooSect 1. Observe, 2. without giving particular Instances, I am deprived of many eminent Topicks, from which I might have made his malice demonstratively evident to the World. Notwithstanding, in the strength of the Lord, I shall lay down such grounds for the contrary of his Assertion, taken in the strictest sense that can be put upon it, that tho every one of them in it self considered will not be a Demonstration, yet, we may draw a conclusion from them collectively considered, not inferior to any evidence that a thing of that nature can admit of; which may serve for an Example that a Holy and Wise God will never leave oppressed innocence without a sufficient ground of Vindi∣cation. Then. Consider. 1 That I am neither a Stranger come from Ame∣rica not any other remote place, but had both my Birth and Education in, and about the City of Edinburgh, and has had Converse with People of several Ranks and Qualities, and I give a publick defyance to any one, or all of my Acquain∣tances, if ever I spoke or Acted any thing, that tended that way either directly or indirectly. Yea, I Magnifie the Lord for it, that my Life and Conversation has been so void of Offence before God and Man. (I speak not here of those In∣firmities which are the inseparable adjuncts of corrupt hu∣mane Nature; but of gross Enormities in Principles or practi∣ces) that the Rumor of this, was as Astonishing to any that had particular acquaintance of me, as to my self, and is very far from having the least Degree of their Credit. Consider 2ly, That this Clause is both Ridiculous and Impossible. For I'm confident, that no Intelligent Person who over heard his Lybel can deny, that it is Ridiculous to
suppose any Rational Soul guilty of such Horrid and Presum∣tuous Blaspheniy; that is not either wholly debauched with grols immoraty, or dround and misted with self conceit∣ed Ignorance: And I defy any man to lay these to my Charge And Ah Christians! who gives Ear to this ground∣less Calumny, what for a Monster conceive ye me to be were I guilty of any such thing In painting out that Sin in such black and dismal Colours, as I did in that Satyr, in de∣ecing sonay Wo's against the guilty, and in Attribution to them such He ish properties. Can it enter into your minds  a Man cou'd ever screw up his Soul to such a hight of Hypocrisie, and shake from him so far the aw and dd of a Supream being? As for my part I'm perswaded that if it be not simply impossible 'tis the greatest trouble i the World, for men or these Principles to play the Hypocri And now (whatever Misconstructions some may put upon it) I call God to Witness, that out of sincere love to the everlasting Gospel, and disdain to that mistery of Iniquity, I threw in that Mire of Mine to the publick Treasury. Nei∣ther does any thing there delivered express the Thousand Degree of that Detestation which my Soul conceives against that Hellish homination. Do not I hate them. O Lord that here Thee: And am not I grieved with those that rif up against Thee? Ps. 139 v 21, I hate them with a perfect hatred: I count them mine Enemies. But mistake me not, as if I endeavoutred from this, either to clear my self, or to Extort your assent to my Innocence. But I observe it on∣ly by the By as an an instance of Probability. I say also, that 'tis impossible, because, although I had erred in my Judgment as to the Matters of Religion (as God forbid tha either I had or should do it) yet I cou'd not be so guity a he; in that I neither Rail'd against nor Scandaliz'd the Sub∣lime and Sacred truths of Cristianity, as he did. Consider 3ly. that I was an avow'd Oppugner of him, & en∣deavoured diligently to extricat him from those Souldestroy∣ing Pnciples of which he was possessed. As Mr. Patrick Midl, top, Richard Comlie, and several others can Testifi upon Oath. Consider 4ly. That it was but small and short acquaintance I had of him, as to particulars, being only from Feb. 1696; till April tha sam year. And aoon as I had discovered, th
Latent treasure of Corruption which was within him, and had perceiv'd, that all ordinary means of Recovery prov'd ineffectual; I wholly abandoned his Company, and seped from him only upon that Account. As is well known to the most part of my Acquainnces. From which date of April till he was Apprehended, I never saw him but twice or thrice. Consider 5ly, that it was not I alone, that T. A. Not only. without all ground, but against all Reason; Slandered as guil∣ty of his horrid Extravagancies. For I can prove that he was so Bewitched with his Hellish Delusions, that he ordinarly said; that all knowing Men were so, whatever they said to the contrary, And Mr. Patrick Midlton Mr. John Neilon and I can declare, that he boasted how he had prosolytiz'd to his Apostacy a certain Minister of the Gospel. How ridicul∣ous this is let any man Judge. Consider 6ly the qualities of my Accuser, we are cer∣tain and it was legally proven against him, that he was an Apostat from the Faith, a Blasphemer of God, and a con∣temner of the Sacred & remnduous Misteries of our Holy Re∣ligion. And the Spirit of God makes us Infallibly certain,2 Tim 3. v, 3. that such should be false Acensers (i) and as we are certain of this, so we are uncertain whither he had the very first Decrees of solid Re∣pentance. The Lord forbid that I should take upon me the Incommunicable attributes of God, and prentend to be a searcher of Hearts. But I say, we are very uncertain of it, if we consider 1 That he gave but little satisfaction to tho Pious and Reverend Ministers, who Labouted Industriously to Reclaim him. 2ly. His last Speech is very unbecoming, a dying Man in his Circumstances, being so far Stuff'd with the Affectation of a Bumbast and Airy Sle, which he was not able to Mannage; that he run himself inevitably to writ what no Man can make souse of, where we are entertain'd with much of Extravagant and Illogical Reesoning, in or∣der to self Justification; but with nothing that Savours like a Soul Touched. with a Sense of such nefarious Blasphemy as he was guilty of. For the danger of such a Case, see Heb; 6; v, 4, 5 & 6. And the 10 Chap, of that Epistle, and v, 26 29. Consider. 7ly. The motives he had to Incense him against e, 1 be entertained a suspicion, that I was the first that
discovered him to the Civil Magistrate; which although it was not true, yet seing he firmly believ'd it; it cou'd not but have great influence, to prompt a man of his Principles to Revenge. 2ly, I had made his name publick in that Satyre. 3ly He knew very well, that I wou'd prove an impartial Witness against him; now I can prove that he said that his only Refuge lay in framing Objections, that might Incapacitat his Witnesses to give evidence against him. And because he cou'd lay nothing to my Charge; he endeavour∣ed by this device, either to have my evidence rejected or at least to put a stain upon my Name. But the hope of the wicked shall Perish. Consider 8ly. That he cou'd move no objection against me before the Lords of Justiciary, that was of Force to in∣capacitat me to bear Witness against him; for 'tis beyond all Contraversie, that if he could but have rais'd a Suspicion, in their Lordships that I was such a Person; my evidence had been rejected. It being simply impossible to bind a man, to declare the verity upon an Oath, whose Tenor, in his Iudgment, was not Obligatory. These things being duely considered, and counterpois'd with the Calumny; in the Ballance of a sound and impartial Judgment; the Slander will be found to have no proportion to my Counter Reasons. But, for the more perspicuity, I shall Rank up the degrees of its improbability, in the following Epiromy. An Apostat from from the FaithSect. 3. Con. 6. to whom faise Accusation is an effential Property2. Tim. 3.3. of whose solid Repentance we are very uncertain;Sect. 3. Con. 6. from a habit of Slandering and JealousieCon. 5 hath AmbiguouslySect. 1. Obs. 2 and Contradictoriously,Obs. 1. either out of the Spirit of Malice and RevengeSect. 3. Con. 7. or from mistake:Prop. 4. Slandred one, who is not only of an unblamish'd Reputation,Con. 1. and given proof of his dislike to these horrid Abominati∣ons,Co. 2. but likewise endeavour'd to reduce him,Co. 3. and because he could not prevail, sepe∣tated from him.C. 4. Yea one, against whom he cou'd bring no relevant Objection, when his very Life, in a manner, depended upon the the moving of it.C. 8. What degree of Credit such a Report
shou'd receive, let every one judge proarbitrio: Now me thinks, non can rationally deny, that his Calumny deserves no inconsiderable Station among improbabilityes of the first magnitud. But that we may not rest here, I shall likewise demonstrate; that it is de facto False. And that I may be methodical, I'l first lay down two observations. 2ly. I'l propose and prove some propositions, in order to draw my Conclusion. My first Observation is his behaviour toward me, before the Lords of Justiciary; when I was called to Witness against him. viz. When their Lordships enquired if he had any thing to object against me; he answered, that I should have said to him, before one of the Witnesses then present: that Dr. More was the first that convinc'd me of the truth of Christianity. There Lordship, Replyed that it was no Objection in Law, and that I might bless God for my Conversion: But the the thing as he exprest it, being Notoriously false, I desir'd Permission to speak for my self but their Lordships thought it not necessary, because the Objection was of no Consequence. Their Lordships enqui∣red, if he had any more to say, he aledged that I had Malice against him, because I had mention'd his Name in that Pam∣phelet. from which I was cleared by Oath. It being fur∣ther enquired, if he had any more to Object against me; he answered, NO. My second Observation is, a Succinct and real Narrative of the passage, on which he builded, his first and main Objection. And it is this. when Mr, Patrick Mid∣leton and I went to see how he behaved in Prison, we found upon the Table, Sir Charles Wolsley's Discourse on the reasona∣bleness of Scripture Beliefe. On which I took occasion to ask, what satisfaction it had given him as to his doubts. But when by his constrain'd and ambiguous Answer. I understood that his satsfaction was little or none, I (having read the Book a∣bout two Years before.) Magnified it for the most accom∣plish'd discourse that ever I saw on that Subject. and to in∣force the Doctrine there delivered, home upon him (if the Influence of such a slender Authority as mine, might have prevail'd any thing with him) I said, that it had so great force upon my Judgment, that tho I had doubted never so Sceptically upon that point, (as I bless God, said I, 'twas ne'r my Temptation.) Yet, I could not have any longer de∣ny'd my Assent to the Verity and Divine Authority of the Sa∣cred
Scriptures, I further added, that More, Crotius and others has laid down such solid reasons, for proving the Theory of the Christian Religion, that no rational Soul that ever was at the Pains to weigh them duely, can miss to be a Speculative Christian. For, we must understand, that so∣li Grace and justifying Faith, (which are the necessary re∣quisits of a real Christian.) being supernatural Donatives can neither be acquired by us, this or any other way. But they are the Gifts of God, infus'd into us and bestowed upon u from above; solely upon the score of the infinit Merits of Jesus Christ. From which Observations the Truth of these following propositions is aboundantly perspicuous; upon which account, we shall be the breifer in their Illustrations. Proposition 1. He could say nothing to my Charge, but vvhat he la to it before the Justiciary Court. This is clear from his Answer to their Lordships last query, which was that he had no more to Obiect a∣gainst me: Compared with the 7 consideration of this Section. Prop▪ II. That even by his ovvn Expression I, vvas froc'd from guil. This is apparent from their Lordships Answer to his first and main Objection. prop. III. What he said hefore the Lords of Justiciary, vvas vvholly grounded on that passage related in the 2. Observation. The truth of this appear, from comparing of the two Observations together. But, 'tis put beyond all doubt, by his referring it to one of the Witnesses then present for there was not a Witness then present, that ever was with me and him together; except Mr Midleton and another. Th' other can declare that he never heard us speak any thing about Religion. And Mr. Midleton can depone thet he never heard me use any discourse to that purpose but then. Prop. IV. He vvildely vvrested my vvords to a quite different sense, This is evident from the Comparison of the two Observations And from it we have this natural and undeniable Corrolary. That vvh he said before the Lorde of Justiciary, vva either a LYE t of a design to frame something like h Objection, and stain my Reputation; grted  self-defence and Revenge, Or at least a MISTAKE. Which might  occasioned from his habitual use of wresting Mens words▪ or from i inadvertncy when I spoke, for truly, he never much relish  discourses of that nature. Pro. V. What he says here, is either the same vvith vvhat he said be∣fore the Lords of Juistciary. or a LYE. This proposition is a plain Cor∣rolatly of the first, for, seing he had nothing to say but what he said then this must either be the same or a Lye; seing I never saw  nor spoke to him since. Moreover the particle WAS, is the
same with what he said before the Lords of Justiciary, viz. That  was convinced. And the Ambiguous Phrase which hens, (the Circumstances duely considered) denots that he had either a design to Cheat the World by Sophestry; or at least that he was not positive in what he said. Hence I draw the following Conclusion If vvhat he lays to my Charg, be either a LYE or a MISTAKE, th I'm free, But it is some of there tvvo. Ergo &c. The Major Proposi∣tion, is incontraverible. And I prove the Minor thus; if vvhat he said before the Lords of Jasticiary vvas either a LYE or a MISTAKE And of thibe either the same, or as ill; Then, this is LYE or a MISTAKE▪  he said before the Lord of Justiciary, vvas either a LYE  a MISTAKE; Ad vvhat he says, here is ei the sr ill. Ergo-vvhat he says  is either a LYE or a MISTAKE. Q. E. D. The Connexion of the Major proposition, is founded upon that Axiom qua edam saum tettio, san  intr se. The first part of inor is grounded on the Coolary to the 4 proposition; and the last part of it on ch 9 proposition. Now M thinks that I perform∣ what I promised, in proving the Calumay, not only highty im∣probable  likewise, de facto false. SECT IV. Containing the Conclusion. Having constricted my self, to such narrow Limits; in Rting What T. A. really saids jt wou'd be both a Foolish and Impossible terprise to endeavour to answer every frivolous Calumny of lying Fame. When one lover of Sla, may brch more Lyes in an our; than all the World can refute in  Age. Wherefore, I hll e  brief and General in this part as I can. Some say that I was the first who Inffill'd these principles in hin. Others asseit that I let him Athiestical Books, with in numerable such frivolous stories. The first of these he refutes in his Speech, where he Declares that since 10 or 11 years of age he vvas or these Principles Whereas I never saw him so much as by the Face till he was 17. And had not the opportunity to discover his corrupt qualities till about the end of March 1696. And as for the other objecti∣on or any such like, I answer that if any can prove them legally against me; I am willing, to suffer condign pu∣nishment for them. To which I add that if ever I made A∣thiestical Book either my own Study, or lent them to others. If ever I was instrumental in perverting any, from the Christian Faith If ever I entertain'd a dislike to the same, or if ever I knew any that were of Athiestical and irreligious principies, except T. A. then let the Almighty powr down upon me all the furious darts of his Fiery Indignation both Temporal and Eternal. And would to God, that I were as certain of a Saving Faith to lay hold upon the merits of my Saviour; as I am and ever was perswaed, of the truth
of the Christian Reform'd Religion as its holden forth in the Holy Scriptures. From on jot of which, before I receded (if the Lord would affoord me Strength equal to the Absolute de∣termination of my Mind.) I wou'd willingly endure any Mi∣sery, that can be inflicted on Body and Soul; except a Tot∣al separation from the Glorious presence of God; which is so inseparably connected with the great end of our Creation and Aticles of the Covenant of Grace, that non can chufe the one and reject the other. And what God hath joyn'd let no man put Aslunder. But it may be Objected. Is it not a strange thing, that a man should go to Death with such a Lye in his Mouth? I Answer that it would be a stranger thing, if a groundless Surmise upon the bare words of such a Person as he was shou'd be of Force to invalidat clear evidence; backed with the Execra∣tions and Protestations of one, who can defy the World to lay any Scandalous Enormity to his Charge. More∣over, I cou'd clearly evince that this is not the only Lye in his last Speech, but seing I love to hector no man e∣specially the Dead; except where Necessity impels me to it I forbear it. desiring Earnestly that Christians wou'd Judge nothing before the time, untill the Lord come, vvho both vvil bring to Light, the hidden things of Darkness, and vvill manifest the Councels of the Hearts: And then shall every man have praise of God. 1 Cor. 4 & 5. Novv, be Merciful to me O God for Man vvoud svvallovv me up, &c. Psal, 56, v. 1. Every day they Wrest my vvords: All their thoughts are against me for evil. v. 5 But in God have I put my Trust: I vvill not be afraid vvhat man can do unto me, v. 1 1.—Thou hast dellivered my Soul from death Wilt not thou deliver my Feet from falling? that I may vvalk before God in the Light of the Living.
MUNGO CRAIG. January the 15. 1697.
