D2738 99887731 183396
KIND LADY Or, The Loves of Stella and Adonis. A new Court song much in request. To a new tune. Or, Heyboys up go we, the charming Nymph, or Jenny Gin. THe night her blackest sabled wore, all glooming were the Skies, And glittering Stars there were no more then those in Stella's Eyes: When at her Fathers Gate I knockt, where I had often been, And shrouded only in her & mock, The fair one let me in. Fast lock'd within my close embrace she blushing lay asham'd; Her swelling Breasts, and glowing face, and every touch inflam'd My eager passion; I obey'd, resolving the Fort to win, And her fond heart was soon betray'd: Then, then, beyond expressing, immortal was the joy, I knew no greater Blessing, so happy then was I: And she, transporter with delight, oft prayed me to come again, And kindly vow'd that e'ry night she'd rise and let me in. But, ah! at last she prov'd with Bearn, and sighing sate, and dull; And I, who had as much concern, lookt then just like a fooll: Her lovely eyes with tears ran down, repenting her rash Sin, She sigh'd and curst that fatal hour that e're she let me in. But who cou'd cruelty deceive, or from such beauty part? I lov'd her so I could not leave. the Charmer for my heart; But wedded, and conceal'd the Crime; thus all was well again, And now she thanks the blessed time. that e're she let me in. Such wanton youngsters seldom prove so true at heart as I, But when they gain a Damsels Love, too oft away they fly: Whilest I such Treachery abhor, for 'tis a deadly sin, And now no cause she has to grieve that she did let me in. Those Rosie-blushes that did stain her Cheeks, do now grow pale, Her heart is now rewv'd again, sighs did with me prevail: She grieved was, and I perplext, but now rejoyce again, And Stella now no more is vext because she let me in. When young Adonis call'd to mind the tricks of wanton youth; He cry'd, my Stella she was kind: this is the very truth. Do, she, thou now hast got the knack a tender heart to win, Good Lodging thou shalt never lack, for I will let thee in. With fiery eyes he then beheld Stella, his hearts delight; He bow'd to love he was compell'd by charms of beauty bright: A thousand times he did, her kiss, and then she did begin, And said, there is no joy like this: I'me glad I have let thee in.
