E481 99890178 182529
AN EGLEY UPON THE Most Execrable MURTHER of Mr. CLUN On of the COMEDEANS of the THEATOR ROYAL, Who was Rob'd and most inhumanely Kill'd on Tuseday-night, being the 2d, of August, 1664. near Tatnam-Court, as as he was Riding to his Country-house at Kentish town. MOurn Royal Stage, your Poets pous implore, To cease to write, since Clun can be no more; Turn all your Sceans to black, and let them be, The Emblimes of our cares,  Tragedy: Go hide your Tapestry, and Clothes of green, Act now in black, Clun will no more be seen▪ Be  nor sighing stand; For Comick Clun that dy'd by Tragick hand. Mirth learn to mourn, and banish all our Smiles, Since Clun has plaid the last of his Beguiles: How can my pen bid thy last Rights adue, When I want words to set thy fames forth true; 'Tis beyond Prose, or Art of humane Verse, Thy taking-Humours to their worth rehearse. Dye all desire of seeing more the Stage, Now thou art dead, the Mirrour of our Age; For in thy Action all our joyes were seen, Nor were thou less to either King or Queen. Thou who by polished words, and Womans dr Didst Lovers passions to the height expre And made us weep, at seeming sorrow To hear and see like truth a Fiction And when we frown'd at some pro Then in a moment chang'd that  Henry 4. Then  and Bessus, Broke from thy Lips, to make us ▪ Blind in our haste, The Humo∣rous Lieu∣tenant. More of Venice. will Bessus run away? Yet in the mouth of danger get the day; And thy Lieutenant in his Drink-mad-fight To gain those Trophies which was but thy right. O! but Iago, when we think on thee, Not to applaud thy vice of Flattery; Yet must that Part never in our thoughts dye, Since thou didst Act, not mean that Subtilty: Thou all of all, and only Actor he, That ere trode Stage in English Comedy. But Hellish Fiends, what Devil reign'd in you, To Rob and Murder him that fed you too? Could not his Money your curst spleen abate, Without he fell, a victive to your hate? What Execrations shall my pen indite, Against such Rogues that Eclips'd Clun our Light? Plagues worse then Egypts be your portion here, And may you never mount Heavens Hyemspear: Could I say more, or wish you worse I would, Therefore ile hold, for fear I wish you good. But Oh, black death, something Ile say of thee, thou didst act among this treachery: And thy hand did seal, our poor Clus death, Who oft us pleas'd with (that you took) his breath: O thou unkind and mortal foe to man, Who still art blind, yet checks all thou can. London, Printed by Edward Crowch dwelling on Snow-hill.
