j321 53981536 180258
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION Containing His Majesties gracious Indemnity. JAMES R. JAMES the Seventh, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all and sundry Our good Subjects, whom these Presents do, or may concern, Greeting: We taking into Our Royal Consideration, that notwithstanding the Prudence, Justice, and unparallelled Clemency, which did ever accompany the Govern∣ment of Our most Dear, and most entirely beloved Brother, King Charles the Second, of ever blessed Memory; Several Wicked and Seditious Subjects, did break out into open Rebellions, and Conspiracies against His Sacred Person and Government. And albeit GOD did on all occa∣sions manifest His Wrath against them and their Enterprises, So as their Designs were Defeated, and several of their persons brought to condign and just punishment, yet some few of them were either so malicious, or foolish, as to be ensnared by others to persevere in their Hellish Principles and Practices, both in Defiance of all Law and Justice, and in open contempt of the Reiterated Pardons, pub∣lished and offered by His said late Majesty. And now Our Royal Prudence, and the Care of Our People obliging Us to take full Information of the chief Movers, and most active Instru∣ments in these pernicious Commotions, Before We Determine Our Royal Pleasure concerning them, which We hope to attain in a very short time; yet as a Demonstration of Our Innate Clemency (which also has shin'd in the whole Line of Our Royal Race) and of Our Resolution to imitate the glorious Example of our said Dearest Royal Brother, We have Resolved to Pardon; Likeas, We do hereby Pardon, Indemnifie, and Forgive all Our Subjects in Our Ancient King∣dom of Scotland, under, and below the degree of Heretors, Liferenters, Wodsetters, Burgesses of Burghs-Royal, and vagrant Preach∣ers, of all Rebellions, Treasons, Seditions, Insurrections, Reset, Intercommuning, Fire-raising, Robberies, Slaughters, Free quar∣ters, Leasing-making, Concealing of Treason, and of all Crimes in general Committed by them, or any one of them, by Word, Writ, or Deed, against Our Government and the Laws of Our Kingdom, in any time preceeding the Date of this Our Royal Pro∣clamation. Declaring hereby all and every one of them Free and Secure from all Punishments, or Trouble for the san ither in their Persons, or Goods, in all time coming. Excepting only as to such Fines, for which already Sentences are pronounced; And like∣wise excepting from this Our gracious Pardon, all those who are guilty of the Assassination of James late Arch-Bishop of Saint-An∣drews,  Person. Minister at Carsfarn, Thomas Kennoway, and Duncan Stuart. And We do hereby Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That this Act o Indemnity and Pardon, shall be extended to all who are at present declared Fugitives; Providing these Fugitives make Addrisse within twenty dayes after the Publication hereof, to Our Privy Council, Our Justice Court, or any of Our Sheriffs in Our said Kingdom, Testifying their acceptance of this Our Pardon, by taking the Oath of Allegiance, or otherwise finding Caution to Transport themselves out of Our three Dominions of Scotland, England, and Ireland, before the twentieth day of May, next ensuing the Date of these Presents, and to live Peaceably after the said Publication, until they shall Transport themselves, and never to return to any Part, or Place of Our said Dominions, without a Licence from Us, or Our Privy Council aforesaid, under pain of Death. And We do Command, That this Our Pardon and Indemnity be apply'd and understood in the most ample Sense and Meaning, whereof the Words are capable, and that no person included therein be Troubled or Molested, for any Cause aforesaid in Judgement, or outwith the same in any time hereafter. And lastly, To the end all our good Subjects may have notice of this Our Royal Will and Pleasure; We do hereby Command Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Mecers, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, to make timeous Proclamation hereof, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh. Given at Our Court at White-halt the twenty Sixth of February 1684/5, And of Our Reign the first Year. By His Majesties Command, JO. DRUƲMMOND. EDINBURGH, the 2 day of March, 1685. THe Lords of His Majesties Privy Council Ordains His Majesties gracious Indemnity above-written, to be published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, with the usual and accustomed Solemnities; and thereafter Ordains the same to the Printed and Published at the whole Mercat Crosses of the Head Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, by the several She∣riffs, and others concern'd: and Recommends to the Arch-bishops and Bishops, to cause their several Ministers Read from the Pul∣pit on a Lords Day, after Divine Service, His Majesties said gracious Indemnity, that all Persons concerned may have notice of the same. COL. McKENZIE, Cls. Sti. Concilit.
