L1345B 53299145 179893
Letter and Declaration of the Nobility and Gentry of the County of YORK. TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord Generall MONCK. The LETTER. My Lord, WE find our selves constrained by writing, to supply the Omission of acquainting your Lordship with our thoughts and desires when you passed through our Coun∣ty, which we had then done, if upon so short notice, we could have met for a mutual Ʋnderstanding: Your Lordship will find in the inclosed Declaration the sum of our Apprehensions. We thought it not necessary to multiply particulars, but leave all other things to a duly constituted Parliament; neither have we been sollicitous to multiply Subscriptions, trusting more to the weight of the Proposals than to the number of Subscribers; yet we may safely affirm this to be the sense of the generality of the County, as your Lordship sees it is of others. We have only to add the earnest desires to your Lordship, That you would be pleased to further the Accomplishment of what we have represented, with such seasonable speed, as that the fear of Friends, and the hopes of Enemies concerning a gerous Confusion amongst us, may be prevented. The DECLARATION. WE being deeply sensible of the grievous Pressures under which we lye, and the extream dan∣gers whereunto we are exposed at this time, through the violent alteration of our Govern∣ment, the Multiplication and Interruption of Parliaments: And having no Representatives to expresse or remedy our Grievances, have thought meet (according to the example of other Counties) to Declare and Desire, That if the Parliament begun NOVEMBER the third, 1640. be yet continued, The Members that were secluded in the year 1648. be forthwith restored to the exercise of their Trust, of all Vacancies may be filled up, that Right may be done to their Persons, to Parliaments, and the People that have chosen them. If otherwise, That a Parliament may be presently called, without imposing of Oaths or Engagements, (the greatest prejudice to Civil or Christian Liberty) or requiring any Oualifications, save what by Law or Ordinance of Parliament before the Force in 1648. are alread established. And, untill this, or One of these be done, We cannot hold our selves oblieged to pa the Taxes that are, or shall be, imposed on us, We not enjoying the Fundamentall Rights of this Natio to consent to our own Laws by equal Representatives. Tho. Lord Fairfax, Lord Fawconberge, Bar. Bourchier, Sheriff. Christo. Wivill, Thomas Wharton, Tho. Remington, Tho. Harrison, William Gee, William Fairfax, William Osberton, Thomas Hutton, Gustavus Boynton, Har. Betheli, VVilliam Dawson, Rob. Wivel, Nicholas Bethell, Jo. Ledgar, Henry Fairfax, John Hotham, Thomas Slingsby, Will. Cholmley, Mett. Robinson, Hen. Stapleton, George Matwood, Tho. Heblethwait, Rob. Redman, Rob. Belt, VV. Adams, Jo. Micklethwait, Bryan Layton, Tho. Lovell, VVil. Rokesby, Rich. Levit, Roger Langly, Francis Boynton, Hen. Cholmley, John Dawny, John Gibson, James Moyser, George Crake, John Peirson, Tho. Yarborow, Jo. Richard, VV. Dalton, F. Driffield, VValter Bethel, Wil. Woodver, Jo. Vavasor, &c. Printed at London, and Re-printed at Edinburgh by Christopher Higgins, 1660.
