K289 R219404 51784573 174982
modern book plate SPES LUCIS AETERNAE. Robert Pitcairn WRITER TO THE SIGNET. modern book plate I. Johannis Whitefoord Mackenzie Armigeri.
modern book plate HONI SOIT MAL Y PENSE
The Last and HEAVENLY SPEECHES, AND GLORIOUS DEPARTURE OF John Viscount Kenmuir. EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1649.
For the whole Nobility of Scotland, and others having voice in Parliament, or Committees. WHereas the Testimony of a dying Nobleman, deeply wounded in Spirit is the surest and most unsuspected Argument of the Truth, I have thought fit to make known to all the lves of GOD, and the work of his right hand, The heavy pangs of conscience and tor∣ment of minde, wherewith a Nobleman not long since was exercised with, upon his death bed, for not coun∣tenancing the Cause of GOD when he was publickly called thereunto in Parliament; and to discover the fountain of those terrours and griefs that others may learn by his example, not to displease our dreadfull Lord Jesus Christ, either by unsound dealing, or withdrawing themselves from his work; and seeing it was that late Nobleman his earnest desire that all should be discovered and laid open to you (Right Honourable) It shall not be impertinent (especially in this condition of time) to acquaint you with this following relation. John late Viscount Kenmuir, having come to the Parliament holden at Edinburgh June 1633. was present the first day, did stay but some few days, thereafter, not having courage to glorifie God by his presence when his Cause was in hand, deserted the Parliament, under pretence that his Lady was sick, went home to his own dwelling house of Kenmuir in Galloway, and as Jonas or David, slept securely in his sin, about the space of one year without any check of conscience, till about the begin∣ning of August 1634. his affairs occasioned his return to Edinburgh, where he remained some few days, not knowing that with the ending of his affairs he was to end his life, he returned home with some alterations
of bodily health, and from day to day sickened, till the 12. of September next ensuing which was to him fat all, and the day of his death. But the Lord had other thoughts then that this Nobleman should slip out of this world unobserved, and therefore would not have him to die without some sense of his sin, therefore it pleased the Lord to afflict his body with sick∣nesse, to shake his soul with fears, to drop in bitterness in his spirit, and make him altogether sensible of the power of eternall wrath for his own good, and the good of others in after ages who may be warned by his ex∣ample never to be wanting to the cause of God, when they have any op∣portunity, and never to wrong their conscience, which is a tender piece and must not be touched. So as Nahaz King of the Ammonites would make no accomodation with the Inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead, 1 Sam. 11. but upon that con∣dition, that first he should thrust out the right eye to every one of them: So Satan makes himself never master of men till first he thrust out the right eye of their understanding. Hence is it that the false hopes of carnall men, blinde and deceive their mindes, many times to their eter∣nall distructions, making them to see things in false glasses, shewing them either the profit, pleasures, or preferment, with the fair flourishes of foolish expectations or deluding promises, but under this bait Satan hides the sting and torment of conscience, not suffering them to see how bitter a thing it is to be any ways wanting to a glorious and dreadfull Lord for any by-respect; This is the way how Satan hath ensnared many Mighty, Wise, and Noblemen, making them to nibble at the golden baite, and worship that gold in the coyne, that they would have abhorred in a Molten Image, and so catching the wise in their craftiness: and as the Apostle speaks, 2 Tim. 3. 13. when they are deceiving they consider not that they are deceived themselves, and are so blinded that they become confident of the constancy of sublunary things, not so much as thinking, how unstable is the foundation of that house, honour or pre∣ferment, that is laid upon the ruins of GODS▪ House, wanting illumi∣nation to see, or hope any thing beyond time or death, which is so strict a porter that it will not suffer any to come in, or go out of this world but stript and naked.
But now (Right Honourable) when I am to Represent to you, how fearfully the Spirit of this Nobleman was wounded (whereof the Writer hereof was an eye witness) I shall not think that any will so construct it, as to have been a fit of madness or melancholy; I know that their be many mockers, who will not believe that their is any such thing, as the unexpressable trouble of a troubled spirit, Though Job and Jeremiah, David, Hezekiah, and Gods eternall Word have given very many expressions to the contrary, as these, Hath God forgotten to be mer∣cifull, and Solomon, Prov. 18. 14. But a wounded Spirit who can bear it: Some have chattered as Cranes, and mourned as Doves, others casting out fearfull cryes, as oules in the desert, others screeking as the Pelican, and as this Nobleman said when his conscience was upon the rack, My soul hath raged and roared. I shall further desire you earnestly to consider, that the trouble and tempest of this Noblemans minde, was not for voicing against, but one∣ly deserting the Cause of GOD, which is scarcely counted a fault in these times, this may teach every man to tremble, rather then to be any ways wanting to the cause of GOD, but still to stand to it with cou∣rage for the truth, the peace of conscience being such an inesteemable trea∣sure. So the wound of a wounded spirit is a most unexpressable terror, nor none can describe it, but he who hath tasted & tryed the same: It impareth the health, dryeth up the blood, wasteth away the marrow, pineth away the flesh, consumeth away the bones, maketh pleasure painfull, and shor∣teneth life, no wisdom can counsell it, no counsell can advise it, no ad∣vise can perswade it, no asswagement can cure it, no eloquence can move it, no power can overcome it, no scepter can affray it, no Inchanter can charme it: Who dareth meet with the wrath of these? O holy Lord of Hosts, who can put to silence the voice of desperation? It breeds such hurly-burlyes in the minde of him that laboureth under it, that when it is day he wisheth for night, & when it is night he would have day again, his meat doth not nourish him, his dreams are filled with fears, his sleep forsakes him, all outward comforts are uncomfortable; Then consider that if in this life, the torments of the soul be so fearfull; How much more terrible shall it be to sustain the torments of Hell, where that which
is here finite, is there infinite; where that which is here measurable, is their unmeasurable; How great is that ocean of sorrow, whereof this is but a drop, how hot is the flame of that fire, whereof this is lesse then a sparke: What will then avail Balaams wages, or Naboths Vineyard, or Achans wedge of gold, or Gehezies bribe, or the lust broker Iona∣dabs credit with a Kings Son, or Iudas his 30. pieces of silver, what will avail the rich rewards of many treacherous murtherous emissaries, or the mighty promises made to many night-plotting birds, who writ in obscure characters, who work wisely, and plot in darkness against the ho∣ly Covenant and those who are dearest to the Lord, the Innocents of the earth, and apple of God his own eye; what will pensions and promoti∣ons to high dignities avail them, who are lifted up for betraying the Cause of GOD, Church or State, when not onely the blood of Iesus Christ, his Apostles and Disciples shall be required at their hand, but all the blood from Abel to Zechariah, from Zechariah to Iesus Christ and his disciples from them to the last Martyr that suffered under the ten cruell Emperours, and all the Popes, from them to the poor Walden∣ses, from them to the holy Martyrs that suffered under Queen Mary of England, and all the Martyrs of the massacre of Paris, & all the cruell rosted Martyrs of the Spanish Inquisition, from them to that incompa∣rable murther of the Martyrs and holy ones of Ireland; When all that blood, I say, shall be required at their hand, Who is able to stand before thee, O holy Lord of hosts! when thou shalt once begin to speak a word in thy wrath, and vex wicked men in thy sore displeasure? Rememher therefore that conscience is placed in the soul as GODS own deputy, and GODS notary, there is nothing passes in our life good or evil which conscience notes not down with an indeleble character, conscience writes all mens iniquities as the sin of Judah was written, Jer. 17. 1. With a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond, conscience doth in this our pilgrimage, as travellers upon a journey, it keeps a daily Diary of every thing that occurs in the whole course of our life, and then con∣science is as a thousand witnesses, its an eye witness, and a pen witness, bringing testimony from the authentique Registers and Records of the Court of Conscience, blessed is the man who followeth the injunctions,
dictates, prohibitions and determinations of a good and right informed conscience, and hearkens to all the incitements thereof: Oh that every man would remember how dangerous a thing it is to resist the checks of conscience, for in so doing we fight not only against our own light, but against the light of the holy Spirit, and grow to such a sottishness and in∣duration in sin, that no admonition is able to forwarn us, neither can any punishment work upon us when once we have suffered our selves to be har∣dened by degrees, the smallest means will provoke us, but the greatest cannot revoke us from sin and impiety. Conscience is of the nature of the eye, the least mote, the least touch is offensive to it, and yet the learned Physitians affirm, that although of all the parts of the body it be the most tender, yet if that web which is cal∣led (shirrus oculi) come once upon it, of the most tender and sensible member, it becomes the most insensible of all the body; this should in∣struct all men to fear the Lord greatly, and tremble at his Word, to be ex∣act and strict in watchfulness, fervent and frequent in prayer, least through long custom in sin, the conscience come to a palpable induration, and so as the Apostle speaks, Eph. 4. 19. Past all feeling. David Psal. 37. 37. Desires that we should observe, and we shall finde that the upright man shall have peace at last, which followeth the war∣fare of this life, and bringeth glory and immortality with unwithering Crowns, yet there be many so foolish to get the first peace, that they loose the second, Saul would have peace with men, but lost his peace with God himself and his crown. The Jews refused Peace with Jesus Christ to have peace with the Romans, and when they had killed Jesus Christ, they lost their peace both with GOD and the Romanes: Look back to for∣mer times and it shall appear, that it never went well with them, who to please men offended GOD, or for the faults of men would discord with God; This way of impiety never had, nor shall have good success; so that there is no delight to the delight of a good conscience, let that bird in the breast be alwayes kept singing. The many manifest testimonies (beside this dying Lord) that other dy∣ing persons both in this Kingdom and England have given to this pre∣sent Cause, the Covenant, and Work of Reformation, are not to be passed
in silence, for both the Servant, of GOD in the Ministry, as Mr. Alex∣ander Henderson, and Mr. George Gillespie, and many others of younger years, have to the death incouraged all they left behinde them to be constant therein, and have expressed their hope and confidence, the Lord should yet build a glorious House for himself in this Island, not to speak of the Printed Testimonies of the man of God and Martyr Mr. Geo: Wis∣hard, & that heavenly man in our times, Mr. Iohn Welch, & then those who have opposed the Cause, or have been misled by evil counsel, as the L. Boyd, who was shaken with terrours (as this Nobleman) and others who have expressed much terrour of conscience, and their deep sorrow in coun∣terworking the work of the right Arm of the Lord, many such have been both in Scotland and England: all this I lay before your eyes (Right Honourable) that as you would be blessed with the blessing of the right hand, and likewise have your houses built upon earth, That you would exalt the holy Covenant, which notwithstanding of all the wisdom, un∣derstanding, or counsell that is against it, yet shall it be as oyl among the liquors, have no intelligence with them that forsake it: Be not against it in your hearts, and as it is said, Dan. 11. 30. have no indignation against the holy Covenant. It was the last and most earnest desire of this (Nobleman) Right Honou∣rable, That being warned by his example, you might not split upon that rock, nor stumble upon that stone whereupon he had stumbled, when he was very weak, these were his words, tell them, As they are now, so I have been, and ere it be long they will all follow me; Remember there∣fore that God hath set you (Noblemen) as stars in the firmament of ho∣nour, upon your influence, depends the whole course of the inferiour world, The offence of great ones keeps off many, the piety of great ones brings in many, It should make your hearts to tremble, when it is said, that few are saved; But when salvation is straitened in a more narrow compass, and GODS Word, 1 Cor. 1. 26. hath said of Noblemen, that few are saved; this should stir up all men, but principally Noblemen to tremble at GODS Word, and endeavour with heart and minde, and might to make their calling and their election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. There is no∣thing so base under the Suns circuit, as to see those who are lifted up
through civil Nobility to be under the power of their lusts. Iohn Chry∣sostom compares such men to a King taken prisoner, who is forced to serve with his Crown upon his head, and his royall apparell upon him: Let therefore Spiritual Nobility be superadded to Civil, and then to your Coronets you shall adde a Crown of life, and a Crown of glory to your costly garments: Vitious great men are as Uzziah, they carry their le∣prosie upon their brow, the faults of great men are like ecclipses of the Sun, most eminent to all the world. Its not the antiquity of your Families, nor the long discent of an ancient pedigree through many Noble or Princely Branches that can make you Noble, true Nobility consists in that adoption, by which you are made the sons of GOD, children of the King of kings, and Brethren of the eternal Son of GOD; the titles of this Nobility are not written in old rotten or moulded parchments, but are more ancient then the heavens: labour therefore to be the Sons of GOD by Regeneration, which is the ornament of blood, and the first flower of the Guarland: Fooles may be lifted up, and think what they please of Civill Nobility, but the most Royall blood is in the most Religious heart. If therefore (Right Honourable) you be among men as mountains over valleys, be as those mountains of which Solomon maketh mention, Cant. 4. 6. be mountains of myrrhe and hils of frankincense, and not as those mountains of the Prophet, Osee 4. 13. who had nothing but incense and Idols upon their tops, and so causing the people to erre, become their snares and stumbling blocks, if you be elevated in the world as clifts a∣bove the sea, be as watch-Towers, not as mis-placed Beacons, or lowring rocks: If you be stars, be suns to be chariots of light and life, and not prodigious Comets, to pour out malignity upon the four quarters of the World; and rest assured, that how much more you are with GOD, and uni∣ted to his Majesty, so much the greater shall you be; The more conform∣able you are to the Lord of glory, so much the more shall you behold the earth in contempt under your feet, and Heaven in Crowns over your heads.
The last and Heavenly Speeches, and glorious Departure of John Viscount Kenmuir. UPon the last of August 1634. which was the Sabbath of the Lord, when this Noblemans body was much weakened, he was visited with a Religious and Learned Pastor; who then lived in Galloway, not far distant from my Lord Ken∣muir his house: he rejoyced at the coming of this Pastor to his house, and observed and spake of a directing and all Ruling Providence, who had sent to him such a man, who had been abroad from Gal∣loway for other occasions, and had returned sooner then his own expectations was, or his businesse could permit: after supper about eleven hours at night my Lord drew on a confe∣rence with the said Pastor, saying, I am heavily weighted and af∣frighted in soul with two great burdens, The one is fear of death, the other extream and vehement bodily pain; but the former is heavier then the latter, for I never dreamed that death had such a sowre and austere, gloomie, and such a terrible, and grim-like countenance; I dare not die, howbeit I know I must die, what shall I do for I dare not venter in grips with death, because I find my sins so grievous and so many, that I fear my accompts be ragged, and out of order, and not so as becometh a dying man. The Pastor answered, My Lord, there is a piece of nature in all men (the Believers not excepted) whereby to them the first look upon death is terrible and fearfull, but my Lord, believe in
him who died for you, and look the second and third time upon deaths face, and if you be in Christ, you shall see Iesus hath put a white mask upon death; and I dare say if this be the time of your dissolution, I trust in God you shall both change your minde and words, for if you have a good second in the combate (such as is onely Christ) your Lord will possibly let your conscience wrestle with the fears of death, yet he is beholding fair play, and I hope Christ Iesus shall not be a naked beholder, and say (deal it betwixt you) as he doth in the death of Reprobates, but shall lend you help, for borrowed strength is all your strength here; yea I hope Iesus Christ shal give death the reading stroke; But my Lord, I fear more the ground of your fear of death, which is (as you say) the conscience of your sins, for there can be no plea betwixt you and your Lord, if your sins be taken a way in Christ, for then death looseth its action of Law against you, you being in Christ and therefore make that sure work and fear not. My Lord answered, I have been too late in coming to God, and have deferred the time of my making my Accompts so long, that I fear that I have but the foolish Vitgins part of it, who come and knocked at the door of the Bridegroom too late, and so got never in. The Pastor said, My Lord, I have gathered by experiences, and observed in sundry, and especially in your Father, that when they were plunged over head and ears in the world, and had cast down old Barnes, and built up new again, God come in a moneths space and lesse, and plucked them from their deceiving hopes, before ever they got half a wombfull, yea or a lucky mouthfull of the world, and this my Lord, looketh like your care, for you know how deep your self hath been in the world, in Building, Planting, Parking, seeking Honours, and now belike your summons are to a short day. My Lord answered, its true, I have been busie that way, but my intentions were honest, and only to free my self of burdens and businesse.
The Pastor not being content with such a naked answer in such a weighty proposition, drew the conference about again to his fear of death, and to a reckoning with his Lord; and said, my Lord, you know that it is one of the weightiest businesses that ever you put your hand to (to die) elpecially seeing judgement is at deaths back; faults in your life are mendable by repentance, but one wrong footstep in death is conjoyned with eternal losse; for there is neither time nor place to rate of evil and bad dying; therefore I intreat you my Lord by the mercies of God, by your appearance before Christ your Iudge, and by the salvation of your soul, that you would here look ere you leap, and venter not into eternity without a testificate under Iesus Christ his hand, because it is the curse of the hypocrite, Job 20. 11. He lyeth down in the grave, and his bones full of the sins of his youth. My Lord replied, when I begin to look upon my life, I think all is wrong in it, and the latenesse of my reckoning affrighteth me, therefore stay with me, and shew me the marks of a childe of God, for you must be my second in this combat, and wait upon me: His Lady answered, my heart, you must have Iesus Christ to be your second, unto the which he said heartily, Amen. Then said my Lord, but how shall I know that I am in the state of grace? for while I be resolved, my fears will still overbur∣den me. The Pastor said, my Lord, hardly or never doth a cast away anxiously and carefully ask the question, whether he be the childe of God or not. Then my Lord out of desire to be perswaded of his salvation, excepted against that mark, and said I do not think, that there is any Reprobate in Hell, but he would with all his heart have the Kingdom of Heaven. The Pastor having differenced to him, what sort of desires of salvation falleth in Reprobates: My Lord said, you never did see in me any tokens of true grace, and that is my great and only fear. The Pastor said, My Lord, I was sorry to see you carried so fearfully away with temptations, and you know whether by word
or writ I did give you warning that it would come to this that you see this night: I would wish your soul were deeply humbled for sin; but to your demand, I say, I thought you had ever a love to the Saints▪ and even to the poorest and sillyest who carried Christs Image, howbeit they could never serve nor pleasure you in any way, and John saith, 1 Joh. 3. 14. By this we know we are translated from death to life, because we love the Brethren: with that mark he was after some objtions convinced. The Pastor asked him, my Lord, dare you now quit your part of Christ, and subscribe an absolute Resignation of Jesus Christ? My Lord said, O Sir, that is too hard, I hope He and I have more to do together then so, I will be advised ere I do that. Then my Lord asked, what mark is it, to have judgement to discerna Minister called and sent of God, and an Hireling; The Pastor allowed it as a good mark also, and cited to him John 10. 4. My sheep know my voice. At the second conference, the Pastor urged a necessity of a deep humiliation, and said my Lord, you know Christ must have such souls to work upon, and not the whole: My Lord said, God knoweth, but that is a needfull (must) oh if I could get him, but sin causeth me to be jealous of his love, to such a man as I have been. The Pastor said, be jealous of your self my Lord, but not of Iesus Christ, and know that there is no meeting betwixt Christ and you, except you be weary and laden, for his Commission from the Father, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Is onely to the broken hearted, to the cap∣tives, to the prisoners, and to the mourners in Zion. Whereupon my Lord said with a deep sigh, and with tears God send me that, and thereafter reckoned out a number of sins, which said he, are as Serpents and Crocodiles before my eyes: thereafter my Lord said, but this hath been a sudden warning that God hath given me, what shall I do, I am afraid to die, and I can neither win through death, nor about it. The Pastor said, My Lord, death and you are strangers, you
have not made your acquaintance yet with death, I hope you will tell another tail of death, ere all the play be ended, and you shall think death a sweet messenger, who is coming to fetch you up to your Fathers house. Upon this he said with tears, God make it so, and desired the Pastor to pray. At the third conference my Lord said death bindeth me strait; O how sweet a thing it is to seek God in health, and in time of pro∣sperity to make our Accompts; for now through bodily pain, I am so distempered, that I cannot get my heart framed to think up∣on my Accompts, and the life to come. The Pastor said, My Lord, its a part of your battell to fight against sickness and pain, no less then against sin and death, seeing sicknesse is a temptation. My Lord said, I have taken the play very long, God hath given me five and thirty years to repent (and alas I have mispent it,) and now I see an ugly sight, then he covered his face with a linnen cloth, and bursted into tears and weeped sore. The Pastor said, My Lord, they be far behinde who may not follow, think not your time so late, Christ his door is yet half open, you have time to throng in, and your time is not all spent as yet, its I grant far after noon, and the back of the day is now, yea the edge of your evening, but run fast that ye lie not in the fields, and miss your lodging. Upon that my Lord said with his eyes lifted up to heaven: Lord, how can I run, Lord draw me and I shall run, Cant. 1. The Pastor hearing that, desired him to pray, but he answered nothing, but within one hour after, he called for the Pastor, and in the hearing of his Lady and him, he prayed divinely and gratiously, with tears; The contents of his prayer, was a bemoaning to God of his weak estate, both inward and outward; for said he, Lord I am oppressed with pain without, sorrow and fear within, I dare not knock at thy door, I lie at it but scraping as I may, till thou come out and take me in; I dare not speak, I look up to thee and wait on
for a smatk and kiss of Christs fair face) O! when wilt thou come? At the fourth conference, he calling for the Pastor said, I charge you go to a secret place to God, and pray for me, and take help of others with you, and do it not for the fashion; I know Prayer, will pull Christ out of heaven. The Pastor said, my Lord, what shall we seek from God to you, give us a commission from your own mouth. My Lord answered, I charge you to tell my beloved that I am sick of love. The Pastor said, shall we seek life and recovery to you? He an∣swered, yea if it be Gods good pleasure, for I finde my fear of death now less, and I think God is loosing the roots of this deep grown tree of my soul so strongly fastened to this life. The Pastor said, My Lord, you must swear a Covenant to God, that if he restore you to this life again, you shall renew your obe∣dience to God, and that Iesus Christ shall be dearer to your soul, then your Honours, Pleasures, Credit, Place, Baronies, and Lands and all that you have: he said ere the Pastor had ended (I tro so) and all to little for him; and by Gods grace I binde my self under the pain of everlasting wrath to bide by that Covenant, if the Lord should restore me. The Pastor said, my Lord, our hearts are deceitfull above all things, See that you be honest and stedfast to Iesus Christ in your Covenant; then he read to him the 78. Psal. 36. of a false Cove∣nant, that men often make under heavy troubles, and verse 34. when he slew them, then they sought him, and they returued, and en∣quired early after God, and ver. 35. and they remembred that God was their rock and the high God their Redeemer, and ver. 36. Neverthe∣less they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lyed unto him with their tongues, and ver. 37. For their heart was not right with him, nei∣ther were they stedfast in his Covenant: My Lord said, when he heard this read, in despight of the devil thats not my Covenant: my Lord took the Bible, and said mark other Scriptures for me to
read, and he marked to him the 2 Cor. 5. Rev. 21. Rev. 22. Isa. 38. Psal. 38. John 14. These places he turned over, and cryed fre∣quently, Lord for one of thy love-blinks, O Son of God, one sight of thy face. The Pastor said, my Lord, your prayers and your tears are come up before God, and Christ hath obtained a Pardon for you: my Lord took the Pastor by the hand, and drew him to him, and said with a sigh and tears, good news indeed; thereafter he called the Pastor and conveened such as went with him to pray for him, and said have you gotten any heavenly liberty and access to God in Christ for my soul, they said they had, and he rejoyced, and said then I will believe and wait on: I cannot think but my beloved is coming leaping over the mountains, and skipping over the hills: When any friends or others come to visit him, whom he knew to fear God, he said at the first, go try your power with God for me, go and pray; he sent two of them at their first coming to him to the wood of the Kenmuir, expresly to pray for him; after some cool of a Feaver (as was thought) he said to a Gentle woman who was a good Christian, who at his own desire, attended him conti∣nually Marion, I desire one word of the Pastor, who being cal∣led, came, to whom he said smiling, joy now, for he is come, Oh! if I had a tongue to tell the world what Iesus Christ hath done to my soul. But after this, my Lord conceiving hope of recovery became exceeding careless, remiss, and dead, and seldom called for the Pastor, for the space of two days he continued so, hoping to re∣cover, howbeit upon no terms he would not perm it the Pastor to go home to his Kirk and flock till the Lords day was passed, this coldnesse gave occasion (to my Lady and the Pastor and other his friends and lovers) of heaviness, seeing his care for his soul so exceedingly slacked, this made the Pastor go to the Physition, and asked his judgement for his life, who answered plainly that there was nothing for him but death, which would be certain if his flux returned, which in effect did return; this made the Pastor go in to
him, and say my Lord, I have a necessary businene to impart unto you, and he said, say on. My Lord, you are not aware of a deep and fearfull temptation of the Devil, by the which your soul is dangerously ensnared, you have conceived hope to return back again to this life, but I tell you my Lord, ere it be long, you shall be presented before the Iudge of quick and dead, to receive doom and sentence according to your works, I have warrant for me to say this, therefore I be∣seech you my Lord, as you tender your own souls salvation, be not deceived ere it be long, time will be no more with you eternity is drawing on, your glass is shorter then you are aware of, Satan would be glad to steal your soul out of this life sleeping. The Physitian likewise seconded these speeches, and faithfully gave him warning of the danger of his disease, and told him for the salvation of his soul, it was his wisdom to be prepared, and told him plainly, that he thought his time should not be long; af∣ter these words, he took the Pastor by the hand, and said that he found faithfull and plain dealing, this man and I will not sunder till death sunder us; now I will set aside all things, I know one thing is needfull; it was but the folly of my deceiving heart, to look back over my shoulder to this life, when I was fairly on once in my journey towards heaven, and therefore he caused all men to go out of the chamber save only the Pastor, and caused him close the doors and confer with him anent the state of his soul. The Pastor after prayer, said my Lord, I perceive I have been deceived and your Lordship also, for your joy I fear hath not been wel rooted, neither your humiliation so deep as need were, we must dig deeper again, and seek a lower foundation, for when I bethink me of your coldness in devotion, and your untimous relenting in the necessary work of making your reckoning with your Judge, upon vain conceived hope of recovery of health, I see certainly the work is not sure, one pin is loose: Your Lordship knoweth this Church and Countrey hath been grievously offended at many gross and open sins in you, both against the first and second table
of the Law, and upon this the Pastor burthened him with sundry particulars, and told him plainly and said, my Lord, my mistake of the case of your soul, hath been from hence, that you have never cleared your self of many predominants and bosom sins, whereof I both spake and writ to you, and you may remember how male-content you were, at a sharp Letter of many particulars that I writ to your Lordship, and how at your house of Rusco you made half a challenge of it to me; for I found you always wittie to shift, and cover any thing, whereof you were rebuked, howbeit, at my first co∣ming to this Countrey, when you fided too much with a Gentleman of your name who killed a man vildely, you promised willingly to receive and take in good part, what I freely told your Lordship was amisse. Whereupon my Lord reced out a number of fearfull sins, which because Iesus  hath covered, The Pastor will never discover, but amongst all, he ingeniously, and free∣ly confessed his sin in deserting the last Parliament, and said, God knoweth I did it with the fearfull wrestlings of my con∣science, my light paying me home within, when I seemed to be glad and joyfull before men, yet I did for fear of incurring the indignation of my Prince, and the loss of farther honour, which I certainly expected, but wo, wo be to honours or any thing else bought with the loss of peace of conscience and Gods favour. The Pastor being strucken with fear and astonishment, at the reckoning of those fearfull sins, which my Lord had keep∣ed close, notwithstanding of such fair appearance of a sound mark of grace in his soul, as he had conceived, did then stand up, and read unto him, the first eight verses of the 6 to the Hebrews, and discoursed to him of the far on-going of Repro∣bates in the way of Heaven, and of their taste of the good Word of God, and of the vertues of the life to come, and yet are but Reprobates; and cited also Rev. 21. but the fearfull and unbelievers, and the abominable murtherers, whoremongers,
&c. shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, and told him what everlasting burning was; and with that the Pastor turned his back upon him, and said now my Lord, I have not one word of mercie, from my LORD to say to you, God hath sealed up my lips that I dare speak nothing to you but one thing, the wrath and ire of God Almighty. My Lord hearing this, with tears cried out so, that they heard him in the with drawing Room and in all the houses a∣bout, Then he said, God armed in wrath is coming against me, to beat out my brains; I would die, I would not die, I dare not live, O what a burden is the hand of an angry God? Oh! what shall I do? Is there no hope of mercy. Thus in a fearfull agony he lay a long time weeping, so that those who attended brake in, and said the Pastor had no skill, he wd kill him, and others said I pray you be ware, you will il to thrust him in despair: The Pastor not content with those speeches did bear with them, and went to a quiet part, and sought from God his sal∣vation, and words from God to speak to this patient, and some said that the Pastor was a miserable comforter. After this another Pastor came to visit my Lord, to whom my Lord said, he hath slain me, and before the Pastor could speak for himself, my Lord said, not he hath slain me, but the spirit of God in him: The Pastor said not I, but the Law hath slain you; and my Lord I say yet again, the God of heaven hath a terrible process against your fathers house, and a deep and a bloody controversie, with the stones and the timber of the house of Kenmuir, and my Lord your name is in the pro∣ss, see how you can free your self, God is not mocked. The other brother read to him the history of Manasses his most wicked life, and how the Lord was intreated of him, and gave him mercy, but the former Pastor went still upon wrath, and asked of him, saying, my Lord, you are extreamly pained, I know now both in body and minde, what think you
of the lake of fire and Brimstone, of everlasting burnings, and of utter darknesse with the Devil and his Angels. My Lord said w is me, what can I think of it, I think if I should suffer my thoughts to dwell upon it any space, it were enought to cause me go out of my wits, but I pray you man what shall my soul do? The Pastor answered, my Lord, I am where I was, God knoweth I dissemble not, I have not one word of mercy to speak to you; only I know Christ hath not given out the doom against you, the sentence is yet suspended, therefore mourn and sorrow for the offending of your God. The Pastor said what (my Lord) if Christ had given out a sentence of condemnation, and come to your bed-side and told you of it, would you not still love him, and trust in him and hang upon him. My Lord said, God knoweth I durst not challenge him, yea howbeit he should not love me, yet I will still love him, yea though the Lord should stay me, yet I will trust in him, I will lie down at Gods feet; let him trample upon me, I will die if I die at Christs feet. The Pastor finding my Lord claiming kindnesse to Christ, and hearing him cry often O Son of God! where art thou, when wilt thou come to me? Oh for a love look! Then the Pastor said, is it possible my Lord, that you can love and long for Christ, and he not love and long for you, or can love and kindnesse stand only upon your side? Is your poor fectless unworthie love, greater then infinite love; seeing he hath said, Isa. 49. 15. Can a woman forget her sucking childe that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb; yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, ver. 16. Behold I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, &c. and therefore your loving and longing for Christ, is a fire of Gods kindling, my Lord, perswade your self, you are graven on the palmes of Gods hands. Upon this my Lord with a hearty smile, looked about to a
Gentleman a good Christian, whom he had commanded to attend his body, till his dying hour: Man, saith my Lord, I am written upon the palms of Christs hands, he will not forget me, Is not this brave talking. The Pastor finding him weaker, said my Lord, the marriage day is drawing near, make ready the marriage Robes, set aside all care of your estate and the world, and give your self to Meditation, Prayer, and Spiri∣tuall Conference. He was observed after that to be always upon that exercise, and when none was near him he was overheard praying, and many times when to our sense, he was sound sleeping, he was at prayer. After a sleep he called for the Pastor, and said I haven been troubled in my sleep with this, that being at peace with God, I am not also at peace with men, and therefore send for such a kinsman (with whom I am not reconciled) as also for a Minister that had before offended me, that I may friend with them, which was done quickly. When the Preacher came, he said I have ground of offence against you as a naturall man, and now I do to you, that all men breathing could not have moved me to do, but now be∣cause the holy Spirit commands me, I must obey, and there∣fore I freely forgive you, as I would wish you to forgive me; you are in an eminent place, walk before God and be faithfull in your calling, and take heed to your steps, walk in the right road, hold your eye right, for all the world, decline not from holiness, and take example by me. To his Cousin, he said serve the Lord, and follow not the footsteps of your Father in Law (he had married the Bishop of Galloway his daughter) learn to know that you have a soul, for I say to you the thousand part of the world knoweth not they have a soul, the world liveth without any sense of God. He willed the Pastor to sleep in a bed made upon the ground beside himself within the chamber, and urged him against his will to lie down and sleep, and said you and I have a far jour∣ney
to go, make you for it: some four nights before his death he would drink a cup of wine to the Pastor, who answered, I receive it my Lord, in hope you shall drink of the pure river of water of life, proceeding from the throne of God, and from the Lamb; and when the cup was in his hand, with a smiling countenance he said, I think I have good cause to drink with a good will to you. After some heaviness, the Pastor said, my Lord, I come with news to you, he answered, what be they; The Pastor answered be not afraid of Death and Judgement, because the Process that your Judge had against you is cancelled and rent in pieces, and Jesus Christ hath trampled it under his feet, your Dittay is burnt; My Lord said very pithily with a smile, O that is a luckie tail, I will then believe and rejoyce, for sure I am that Jesus Christ and I once met, and will he not come again: The Pastor said, my Lord, you have gotten the first fruits of the Spirit, the earnest, and Christ will not loose his earnest, there∣fore the bargain betwixt Christ and your soul holdeth. He asked the Pastor, what is Christ like that I may know him? The Pastor answered, He is like love, and altogether lovely, Cant. 5. 6. Love cannot but be known whereso∣ever it is. The Pastor said, my Lord, if you had the man Christ in your arms very now, would you not thrust him to your heart, howbeit your breasts and side be pained with a stitch: He an∣swered, God knoweth I would forget my pain▪ and thrust him into my heart, yea if I had my heart in the palm of my hand, I would give it him, and think it too unworthy a gift for him. He complained of Jesus Christ his going and coming, I finde, said he, my soul drowned with heaviness, when the Lord cometh he stayeth not long. The Pastor said, woers dwell not together, but married folks take up house together and sundereth not, Jesus Christ
is now wooing, and therefore he fedeeth his own with hun∣ger, which is as growing meat, as the sense of his presence. He said often, Son of God, when wilt thou come, God is not as man that he should change, or as the son of manthat he should repent; those that come to Christ, he casteth not away, but raiseth them up at the last day. Still after peace and full assurance of reconciliation, he cast back his eyes to his sins and mourned. The Pastor discoursed to him of the new Jernsalem, and the glory of our Fathers house up above, and said what will you think, my Lord, when Christ shall dry your watery eyes, and wipe all tears from your face, and lay your head upon his breast, and embrace you in his armes, and kiss you with the kisses of his mouth. He said I want words to say what I think, but I know Hea∣ven is above the commendation of all earthly men, howbelt they had the tongues of angels. He was heard to say in his sleep, my wel beloved is mine, and I am his, being asked if he had been sleeping, he said he was asleep, but he remembred he was giving a claim to Christ in his sleep. Another time after sleep he wakened with exceeding great joy not long before his death, saying I have felt an extream sweetnesse, which did arise from the lower parts of my body and come up to my heart as sweet perfume, and so filled it that I was not able to contain the same, but as a pretious per∣fume, it diffused it self through the whole rooms about me with a most delicate and odoriferous smell. The Doctor of Physick desired him to say over the words again, which he did, and said he felt joy unspeakable and glorious. After a sound sleep in the dawning, the Pastor said, my Lord, where lay Christ all night, did not your wel beloved lye as a bundle of myrrhe betwixt your breasts, he answered, nay
not berwixt my breasts, but within my breasts locked in my heart. He asked when will my heart be loosed and my tongue un∣tied, that I may express the sweetness of the Law of God to my own soul, and before the Pastor ansvvered any thing, he answered himself, even when the winde bloweth. Being asked by the Pastor, if ever he had benefited by the word of God in publick, which he had heard preached these many years, he answered, I never come to your Communion, but I was filled with the sense of God, and Christ was power∣fully born in upon my soul, that do my best I vvas not able to hold him out, but in would he be, vvhether I vvould or not, but oh, oh I my vvofull out-breakings, for the Saints I vvas inclined to; the Devil and temptations took me at such a nick, as I could not win by unhurt, but oh! strong, strong Jesus, O the deep of his love that vvould not vvant me. Being asked vvhat vvas his judgement, anent the Ceremo∣nies now entred in the Kirk of God, ansvvered I think and am persvvaded in my conscience, they are Superstitious, Idola∣trous and Antichristian, and come from Hell, and I repute it a mercy, that my eyes shall not see the desolation that shall come upon this poor Church; Its plain Popery thats coming among you, God help you, God forgive the Nobility, for they are either key-cold, or ready to welcome Poperie, where∣as they should resist, and vvo be to a dead time-serving, and prophant Ministerie, they are but a companie of dumb dogs. He called his Lady, and a Gentleman who vvas a friend to his Lady, and had come from the East Countrey a good vvay to visit him vvith the Pastor, caused shut the chamber door upon all others, and from his bed directed his speech to the Gentleman, saying, I ever did finde you kinde and honest to me all the time of my life, therefore I must novv give you a charge, vvhich you shall deliver to all the Noblemen you knovv, and with whom you are acquainted, go through them,
and tell them all, hovv heavie I have found the vveight of the Lords hand upon me, for not giving testimony for the Lord my God, vvhen I had occasion once in my life at the last Par∣liament, for this foul fault how fierce have I felt the wrath of the Lord my God; My soul hath raged and roared, I have been ript up to the heart, tell them that they will be as I am now, en∣courage others that stood for the Lord, tell them that failed, that as ever they would wish to have mercy when they are as I am now, that they would repent, and crave mercy from God; would to God I had such an occasion again to testifie my love to the Lord, for all the earth should I not do as I have done, tell them. To a Gentleman a kinsman of his, he said I love your soul and I love your body; you are a blessed man if you understand it, because ye may have the blessed means of the word preach∣ed beside you, and seeing you are but a tender man of body, I would not have you to drown your self so much with try∣sting and fasheries of this world (as I did) who knowes but you may be the first man may follow me, my greatest grief is that I had not the occasion of good means as you have, and if you your self make not the right use of the occasion of your means, one day they shall be a witnesse against you; Alas take example by me, I was a fool and lifted up with folly, and now when I was at the very top, I was taken by the Lord, when I expect∣ed least: The Lord hath smitten me, therefore take example by me, and leave the world and the fasheries of friends ti∣mously, tender your soul, and tender your worn bodie; if I were to live in the world again, I should not vex and fash my self so much as I did, but should dwell at the Rusco the most part of my life, that I might have the happiness of the ex∣ercise of hearing Gods word preached, as you have, good Cousin use the counsell of your Pastor. To a Lord that was his brother in law, mock not at my counsell my Lord, in case you follow the course you are in,
you shall never see the face of lesus Christ, you are deceived with the merchandise of the Whore that makes the world drunk out of the cup of her fornications, your soul is build∣ed upon a sandy foundation; when you come to my estate, you will finde no comfort in your Religion, you know not what wrestlings I have had, before I come to this estate of comfort: The Kingdom of Heaven is not gotten with a skip or leap, but with much seeking, thrumbling and thrusting. My Lord Herreis not liking this discourse, did press to break it off, by these words, saying, my Lord, I thank you kindely, I am content to see your Lordship so resolved, if I had known of your Lordships sicknesse, I had seen you sooner; my Lord Kenmuir answered, I pray God give you grace to make good use of your coming; seeing you are now come, contemn not good counsell, for I have interest in your Lordship, and loves your soul, and I must exoner my self as I will be answer∣able to God. To a Lady that was his own sister, who knowes sister if the words of a dying brother may prevail with a living sister, alas! you incline to arotten Religion, fie, cast away this rot∣ten dregs, they will not avail you when you are brought to this case as I am, the half of the world is ignorant and goeth to Hell, and knoweth not that they have a soul; its a wonder to see any to know that they have a soul; read the Scriptures, they are plain Scottish Language, to all who desire wisdom from God, and to be led to Heaven. To a Gentleman his neighbour, your soul is in a dangerous case, but you see it not, and as long as you are in the case you are in, you will never see it; I pray you as you love the sal∣vation of your soul leave these courses: you must seek out another way to Heaven then you are in, else look to land at Hell; there are small means of instruction t be had, because
the most part of the Ministery are prophane and ignorant, search Gods Word for the good old way, and search and finde all your own ways. To a Gentleman his Cousin he said, you are a young man, and knoweth not well vvhat you are doing: seek Gods di∣rection for vvisdom in your affairs, and you shall prosper, and learn to know you have need of God to be your friend. To another Cousin, David, you are an aged man, and you know not vvell vvhat an accompt you have to make, and if you were in the case I am in, you vvould count more of your ac∣compts then you do. I know you better then you believe, for you worship God according to mans devices, ye believe lies of God, your soul is in a fearfull case, and while ye know the truth you shall never see your own vvay aright. To a young man his neighbour, because you are but a young man beware of temptations and snares, and above all, be care∣full to keep your self in the use of means, resort to good com∣panie, and hovvbeit you be nicknamed a Puritan and mocked, yet care not for that but rejoyce and be glad, that they who are scorned and scoffed by this godless and vain world, and nick-named Puritans, vvould admit you to their societie, for I must tell you when I am at this point as you see me, I get no comfort to my soul by no second means under Heaven, but from these who are nick named Puritans; They are the men that can give a word of comfort to a wearied soul in due sea∣son, and that I have found by experience since I did lie down here. To one of his naturall Sisters, my dove thou art young, and alas ignorant of God, I knovv thy breeding and thy upbring∣ing well enough, seek the Spirit of Regeneration: Oh! if thou knevv it, and felt the povver of that Spirit as I do novv, think not all is gone because your brother is dead, trust in
God, and your father liveth, & beware of the follies of youth, give your self to reading and praying, and carefull hearing of Gods vvord, and take heed vvhom you hear, and how you hear; God be with you. To another Pastor, Mr. James, its not holiness enough to be a Minister, for you Ministers have your ovvn faults, and those more hainous then other, I pray you be more painfull in your calling, and take good heed to the flock of God, and know that every soul that perisheth by your negligence shall be counted to you soul-murtherers before God, think not but such a man as I may at this time give a wise man Counsell, take heed in these dangerous dayes how you lead the people of God, and take heed to your Ministry. To his Chaplain who then was Mr. George Gillespie, you have carried your self discreetly to me, so that I cannot blame you, I hope you shall prove an honest man; If I have been at any times harsh to you, forgive me; I would I had taken better heed to many of your words, I might have gotten good by the means that God gave me, but I made no use of them: Now I see it was God sent this Pastor unto me, because he re∣solved to stay longer at Irwing; The Lord hath now let me see my wayes, my soul hath been troubled for them, but my God hath given me comfort, and hath begun to loose my tongue, God be thanked for that which I have gotten, I look for more, great is the work of mercy that is shewn to me now the love of God is made known to my soul, and I am grieved for my ingratitude against my loving Lord, and that I should have sinned against him, who came down from the Heaven to the earth for my cause, to die for my sins; The sense of this love born in upon my heart, hath a reflex making me love my Saviour, and grip to him back again, The
sparks and slaughens of this love, shall slic up and down this bed, so long as I lie into it. To another kinsman he said, learne to use your pretious time well: Oh! alas the Ministerie in this Countrey is dead, God help you, ye are not right led, ye had need to be busie among your selves, and the knowledge God hath given you, use it and practise it, men are as careless in the practise of of godliness, as if godliness were nothing but fashious words, sighes and shewes, but all these will not do the turn: O! but I finde it now hard, to take heaven by violence and to thrust in at. To two Gentlemen neighbours, Its not rising soon in the morning, and running out to the Park and stone-ditch, that will bring peace to the conscience when it comes to this part of the play: you know not, how I have been be∣guiled with the world, I would counsell you to seek that one think that is necessary, even the salvation of your soul, be continually casting your Accompts, let not your reckonings be behinde as mine was, but count with your own souls eve∣ry day and every night. To a Cousin, Bailie of Air, Robert, I know you have light and understanding, and though you have no need to be instructed by me, yet have you need to be incite care not over much for the world, but make use of the goo occasions, and means you have in your Countrey, for here is a pack of dumb dogs, that cannot bark, they tell over a clash of terrour, and a clatter of comfort, without any sense or life. To a yong Cousin, and another young Gentleman that was his friend, Sirs ye are young men, and ye have far to go, and it may be some of you have not far to go, and if it fall out that your jovrney be short howsoever its dangerous, now are
you happie, because you have time to lay your Accompts with Jesus Christ: Sir, therefore that your reckoning be made dailie, least you be taken (as I am) to make your Accompts, and to have all your senses to seek about you, suffer not there∣fore this example, that you see of me to slip unobserved, but make your best use of it, I intreat you to give your youth to Jesus Christ, for it is the most precious offer and acceptable gift you can give him, give not your youth to the Devill and your Lusts, and then reserve nothing to Iesus Christ, but your old rotten bones; It is to be feared, that then he will not accept you, learn therefore to watch and take example by me. He called Bishop Lamb, who was then Bishop of Galloway, commanding all who were within the Chamber to remove, and had with him a long conference; exhorted him most earnestly, not to molest or remove the Lords Servants, and not to enforce or enthrall their Consciences to receive the five Articles of Pearth, nor to do any thing against their Consciences, but to behave himself meekly toward them as he would wish to have mercie from God. The Bishop an∣swered, my Lord, our Ceremonies are of their own nature but things indifferent, and we impose them for decency and order in Gods Kirk, they need not to stand scrupulously up∣on them as matters of Conscience in Gods Worship: My Lord Kenmuir replyed, I am not to dispute with you, but one thing I know, and can tell you out of dear experience, that these things indeed are matters of conscience, and not indifferent, and so I have found them, for since I did lie down in this bed, the sin that lyeth heaviest upon my soul and hath burdened my conscience most, was my withdrawing of my self from the Parliament, and not giving my voice for the truth against these things that they call indifferent, for in
so doing I have denied the Lord my God. When the Bishop began to commend and encourage him for his well led life, and did put him in hope of health, and praised him for his civill carriage, and legall behaviour, say∣ing, he was not an oppressour, and without any known vice, he answered, my Lord, thats no matter, a man may be a good civill neighbour, and yet go to Hell: The Bishop answered, I confess my Lord we have all our own faults, and thereafter insisted in long discourse, that my Lord thought impertinent, this made him interrupt the Bishop, saying, what should more, I have gotten a gripe of Iesus Christ, and Christ of me, God be with your Lordship. On the morrow, the Bishop come to visit him, and said my Lord how do you, my Lord answered, I thank God as well as a saved man hastening to heaven can do; after that he had given the Clerk of Kirkcudbright a most Divine and grave counsell anent his Christian carriage, and how he should walk in his particular calling, he caused him hold up his hand and swear by the LORD that he should never consent, but to oppose to the election of a corrupt Minister or Magistrate. He said to his Coach-man, you will novv go to any man, that wil give you most hire, but do not so, go where ye may get best company, though you get less wages, yet wil you get the more grace; (he made him hold up his hand and promise before God to do so) because your calling is subject to drunken∣ness and company. To two yong Serving-men that came to him weeping to get his last blessing, he said, content not your selves to be like old wives with a superficial shew of Religion, to make a shew of blessing your selves in the morning for the fashion onlie, yea, although you would pray both morning and evening, yet that wil not avail you, except likewise you make your account every
day: Oh! ye will finde few to direct or counsell you, but I will tell you what to do, first pray the Lord fer∣ventlie to enlighten the eyes of your minde, then seek grace to rule your affections, ye will finde the good of this when you are as I am, he took their oath to strive to do so; and as he counselled them, he made many Di∣vine and powerfull Exhortations so many sundry per∣sons, that all might be hardlie written for length; he cau∣sed everie man to hold up their hands, and sware in his pre∣sence that by Gods grace, they should forbear their former sins, and follow his counsell. After that he had exhorted many Friends and Ser∣vants, as they were going out of the Chamber he said to them stay (Sirs) I have somewhat yet to say, be not deceived with the World, for me I have played the fool and brought the house of Kenmuir to the perfection of a compleat Fabrique, as it was never before, and bu∣sied my sell exceedingly, and when I came to the top of my hopes, and thought to enjoy them, the LORD came and plucked me from my hopes, thereafter I did see my own folly, and this also I observed in my Father, take example by me, and be not ensnared with the World. There be some who seek the world too carefullie, and some too greedily, & many unlawfullie, and men have it so much in their minde, that they are upon the World in the morning, ere they come out of their bed, & before ever they seek God: Sirs, set your hearts to give pains in sad earnest for the Kingdom of Heaven, I will tell you, the Heaven∣lie Kingdom is not gotten with a skip or a leap: I finde it now, there must be thrusting and thronging and climbing to enter in; It is a strait and narrow way; his omission of prayer in the morning time, through needless foyles and
distractions touched his conscience, this he confessed with regrate. He was giving a Divine counsell to a Friend, and rested in the midst of it, and looked up to Heaven, and prayed for a loosed heart and tongue to express the goodness of God to men, and thereafter went on in his counsell, not unlike to Jacob, Gen. 49. 18. Who in the midst of a Pro∣pheticall Testament resteth a little and saith, Lord I have waited for thy salvation. He gave his Lady divers times, and that openly, an ho∣nourable and ample testimony of holinesse and goodness, and all respective kindness to her husband, and craved her forgivenesse earnestly, where he had offended her, and desired her to make the LORD her comsorter, and said he was but gone before, and it was but 15. or 16. years up or down. He spake ordinarily to all the Boys of the House, Servants, Butlers, Cooks, omitting none, saying, learn to serve and fear the LORD, and use the means of your Salvations carefully, that you put not your Accompts to the hinder end of the day as I did foolishly, I know what is ordinarily your Religion, yea go to the Kirk, and when ye hear the Devill or Hell named in the prea∣ching, ye sigh and make a noise, and it is forgot with you before you come home, and then ye are holy enough, but I can now tell you the Kingdom of Heaven is not got∣ten so easily; then your Pastors and guides misleadeth you, They are but a pack of dumb Dogs, use the means your self and win to some sense of God, and pray as you can morning and evening; if you be ignorant of the way to heaven, God forgive you, for I discharge my self in that point toward you, and appointed a man to teach you, your
blood be upon your selves; The little knowledge that you have, if you would use it carefully, and with a good Conscience, the Lord would lead you on farther, and teach you his wayes, but your form is to aske for that Master who will give you most hire, and little care you to live in good Company, where you may finde the means of Salvation, and so ye spend the time all over in the ignorance of GOD; he took an Oath of his Servants, that they should follow his advice; he had a Speech several∣ly to every one of them; he was so far humbled that he said to every one of them (the meanest no excepted) if I have been rough to thee, or offende thee, I Pray thee for Gods sake forgive me, and among others, one to whom he had been rough, said, your Lordship did me never wrong, I will never get such a master again, yet my Lord urged the boy to say, My Lord, I forgive you, howbeit the boy was hardly brought to utter these words. He said to all the beholders about him, Sirs, behold how low the Lord hath laid me. To a gentleman burdened in his estate, Sir, I coun∣sell you to cast your burdens upon the Lord your GOD. A worthy and Religious Gentleman of his name come to visit him four dayes before his death; he be∣holding him afar off, said, Robert, come to me, leave me not till I die; thereafter being much comforted with the Gentlemans words, he would have him to wa upon his body, and being more and more comforte with his speeches, he said, Robert, you are a friend bot to my soul and to my body; this Gentleman asked hin
saying, my Lord, what comfort hath your soul in your love towards the Saints; he answered, I rejoyce at it; then he asked what comfort have you in bringing this Pastor who attends you to Galloway; he answered, GOD knoweth that I rejoyce that ever GOD did put it in my heart so to do, and now because I aimed at Gods glory in it, the Lord hath made me to finde comfort, to my soul; in the end, I would counsell all men that think∣eth to die, to lay up many good works against the time of departure: the Ministers of Galloway murthered my Fathers soul, and if this man had not come they had murthered mine also. In the hearing of my Lady Herreis his sister, a Papist, he testified how willing he was to leave the world, that he could not command his soul to look back again to this life, he did so long (as he said) for his soul-full of the well of life, that Papists may see that these who dieth in this Religion, seeth and knoweth well whi∣ther they go, and that we are by death fully loosed from the love of this world, for the hope of our own Fa∣thers house. It was told him, that Letters were come from some of his friends to him, he caused deliver them to his Lady, saying, I have nothing to do with them, I had rather hear of news from Heaven concerning my eternall salvation. It was observed, when any came to him anent worldly business, that before they were out at the doors, he returned unto praying, conference, medi∣tation, or some Spirituall exercise, and was exceeding short in dispatching all earthly business; yet so as he took the pains to signe all needfull Writs when he was
required, likewise he recommended the case of the poor to his friends. When he was wearing weaker, he fell in a swound, and being awaked, he said with smiling, and signes of joy to all about him, I would not exchange my life with you all, nay not with you who are Ministers, I feel the smell of the place where I am going to. Upon the Fryday in the morning 12. September, which was the day of his departure, he said to the Pastor, this night must I sup with Jesus Christ in Paradice: The Pa∣stor red to him, 2 Cor. 5. Rev. 22. and made some short notes upon such places as concerned his estate: After Prayer he said I conceive good hope, that God look∣eth upon me when he gives his servants such liberty as to pray for me: Is it possible that Jesus Christ can loose his grips of me, neither may my soul get it self plucked from Jesus Christ. He earnestly desired sense of Gods presence, and the Pastor said, What, my Lord, if that be suspended till you come to your own home, and be before the throne clothed in white, and get your harp in your hand to sing salvation to the Lamb, and to him that sitteth on the throne, for that is heaven, and who dare promise you upon earth, There is a piece of nature in desiring a sense of Gods love, it being an apple that the Lords children delight to play with; but, my Lord, if you would have it onely, as a pledge of your salvation, we shall seek it from the Lord to you, and you may lawfully pray for it, earnest prayers were made for him, and my Lord testi∣fied that he was filled with the sense of his Lords love. Being asked what he thought of the world, he answe∣red, Its bitterer then gall or wormwood. Being demanded
if now he feared death, he answered, I have tasted death now; Its not a whit bitter, welcome the Messen∣ger of Jesus Christ; he never left off to mourn for his sins, especially his deserting of the Parliament. The Pastor said to him, My Lord, their is a process betwixt the Lord and your fathers house, but your name is taken out of the Process, dear and how dear was hea∣ven bought for you by your Saviour Jesus Christ, I know there is wrath against my Fathers house, but I shall get my soul for a prey, which words he had frequently in his mouth, oft times also he would say is not this a sweet word that God saith, As I live I delight not in the death of sinners; he said often I will not let go the grip that I have gotten of Christ, though he should slay me I will trust in him, and lie at his feet and die there, and lie at his door like a begger waiting on, and if I may not knock, I shall scrape; another word was ordinary to him, O Son of God, one love-blink, one smack, one kisse of thy mouth, one smile. When he had been deep in a meditation of his change of life, he made this question, what will Jesus Christ be like when he cometh? it was answered, all lovely. The day of his change being Friday 12. September he was heard pray divinely, on which day he said to the Doctor, I thought to have been dissolved ere now; The Pastor answered, my Lord, weary not off the Lords yoke, Iesus Christ is posting fast to be at you, he is with∣in few miles; he answered mildely, this is my infirmity, I will wait on, he is worthy the on-waiting, though he be long in coming, yet I dare say he is coming, leaping, over the mountains, and skipping over the hills, if he were once come, we should not sunder.
The Pastor answered, some have gotten in this same life their full of Christ, howbeit Christ is oft under a mask to his own in this life, and will have them kissing him through a mask, yet even his best Saints Job, David, Jeremiah were under desertions. My Lord answered, what are their examples to me, I am not in holinesse near to Job, David, or Jeremiah, The Pastor answered its true my Lord, you cannot take such wide steps as they did, but you are in the same way with them, a young childe followeth his father at the back, though he cannot take such wide steps as he, yet this hin∣dereth him not to be in the same way with him; my Lord your hunger overcometh your Faith, only but be∣lieve his Word, you are longing for Christ, onely be∣lieve Iesus Christ is faithfull, and will come quickly. To this my Lord answered, I think it time Lord Jesus come? Then the Pastor said, my Lord, our nature is in trou∣ble to be wholly upon our own deliverance whereas God seeketh first to be Glorified in our Faith and Patience and Hope, and then it is time enough that we be deli∣vered, he answered, Good reason, my Lord be first ser∣ved, Lord give me to wait on, onlie Lord burn me not to drosse. Another said, cast back your eyes, my Lord, upon that which you have received and be thankful, at the hearing whereof he presently brake forth in praising of God, and finding himself weak, and his speech failing, some more then an hour before death, he desired the Pastor to pray, which he did; after Prayer the Pastor cryed in his ear, my Lord, may you now sunder with Christ; he said nothing, nor was it expected he should speak any more, yet a little after, the Pastor aske  ye any sense of
the Lords love, he answered, I have sense, The Pastor said do you not enjoy, he answered, I do enjoy, thereafter the Pastor said, will ye not sunder with Christ, he an∣swered, by no means, This was the last word, not being able to speak any more. The Pastor asked if he should pray, he turned his eye towards the Pastor; in the time of that last Prayer he was observed joyfully smiling, and looking up with glo∣rious looks, as was observed by the beholders, and with a certain beauty, his visage was beautified, as beautifull as ever he was in his life; he expired with loud and strong setches and sobs, being strong of heart and body, of the age of five and thirty yeers: The expiring of his breath, the ceasing of the motion of his pulse (which the Physitian was still gripping) trysed all precisely with the Amen of his Prayer, and so died he sweetly, and holily, and his end was Peace; he departed about the setting of the Sun, September 12. 1634. Blessed are they who die in the Lord. FINIS.
