L271A 47012502 174469
The lamentable fall of Queen Elenor, who for her Pride and wickedness by Gods judgements sunk b the ground at Charing-Cross and rose at Queen hive. To the tune of Gentle and Courteous VVHen Edward was in England King the first of all that name, Proud Elenor he made his Queen, a stately Spanish Dame. Whose wicked life and sinful pride, though England did excl. To dainty Dames and gallant Maids, this Queen was known full well. She was the first that did invent in Coaches brave to ride, She was the first that brought this Land t eadly sin of pride. No Eglish Taylor here could serve to make her rich attire, But sent for Taylors into Spain to féed her vain desire. They brought in fashions strange and new with golden Garments bright, The Farthingale and mighty Ruffs, with Gowns of rich delight. Our London Dames in Spanish pride did flourish every where, Our Englishmen like women then, did wear long locks of hair. Both man and child, both maid and wife wery drown'd in pride of Spain, And thought the Spanish Taylors then our English men did stain. Where at the Queen did much despight to see our English men, In vestures clad  brave to sée as any Spaniard then. She crav'd the King that every man, that wore long locks of hair, Might then be cut and polled all or shaven very near. Whereat the King did séem content, and soon thereto agréed. And first commanded that his own should then he cut with speed. And after that to please his Queen proclaimed through the land, That every man that wore long hair, should poll him out of hand But yet this Spaniard not content, to women bore a spight, And then requested of the King against all Law and right, That every woman-kind should have their right brest cut away, And then with burning Irons sear'd, the blood to stanch and stay. King Edward then perceiving well her spight to women-kind, Devised soon by pollicy, to turn her bloody mind. He sent for burning Irons streight, all sparkling hot to see, And said O Queen come on thy way, I will begin with thee. Which words did much displeass the Queen, that penance to begin, But askt him pardon on her knees, who gave her grace therein. But afterwards there chanc'd to passe along brave London streets, Whereas the Mayor of Londons wife in stately sort she meets. With musick mirth and melody unto the Church they went To give God thanks that to the Lord Mayor, a noble Son had send. It grieved much this spightful Queen to see that any one▪ Should so exceed in mirth and jy, except her self alone: For which she after did devise, within her bloody mind▪ And practis'd still most secretly, to kill that Lady kind. Vnto the Mayor of London then she sent her Letters straight, To send his Lady to the Court, upon her grace to wait, But when the London Lady came before proud Elenors face, She stript her from her rich array, and kept her vile and bose. She sent her into Wales with speed, and kept her secret there, And us'd her still most cruelly, that ever man did hear She made her wash, she made her starch, she made her drudge alway, She made her nurse up Children small, and labour night and day But this contented not the Queen, but shew'd her more despight. She bound this Lady to a Post, at twelve a clock at night. And as poor Lady she stood bound, the Queen in angry mood, Did set two Snakes unto her brest, that suckt away her blood. Thus dy'd the Mayor of Londons wife most grievo for to hear, Which made the Spaniard grow more pro as after shal appear. The wheat that daily made her bread was bolted twenty times, The food that fed this stately Dame, was boyl'd in costly wines. The water that did spring from ground she would not touch at all, But washt her hands with dew of heaven that on sweet Roses fall. She bath'd her body many a time, in Fountains fil'd with milk. And every day did change attire, in costly Median silk. But coming then to London back within her Coach of gold A tempest strange within the Syes this Queen did there behold. Out of which storm she could not go, but there remain'd a spaes. Four horses could not stir the Coach, a foot out of that place. A judgement lately sent from heaven for shedding guiltless blood, Vpon this sinful Quéen that slew the London Lady good. King Edward then as wisdome wil'd accus'd her of that deed, But she deny'd and wisht that God would send his wrath with speed. If that upon so vile a thing her heart did ever think, She wisht the ground might open wide and therein she might sink, With that at Chairing-Cross she sunk into the ground alive, And after rose with life again, in London at Queen-hive. When after that she languisht sore, full twenty dayes in pain, At last confest the Ladies blood, her guilty hands had stain, And likewise how that by a Fryar she had a base born child, Whose sinful lusts and wickedness, her marriage defil'd. Thus you have heard the fall of pride, a just reward of sin, For those that will forswear themselves, Gods vngeance daily win, Beware of pride yée London Dames, both wives and maidens all, Bear this imprinted in your minds, that pride may have a fall. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and VV. Gilbertson.
