M2054 99887235 183482
The MILKMAIDS Resolution. Let Young men prate of what they please Cause young men have been kind, Theyl find no more such Fools as these To please each Apish mind. Tune, Cupids Trappan. OF late I did hear a young man domineer, Plow and vapour of what he could do But I think he knew how for so manage the far better then maidens to woe brave boys far better &c. And he surely doth think that we maidens are mad for to mind ev'ry Clown we do sée Should his Love be exprest, with a vow & pro∣test i'de believe no such boobies as he brave ide &c. Though his bottles of Ale & other fine things he bestows on me ev'ry day It is my intent when his money is spent to bid him begone & away brave boys to bid, &c. Ile give him good words while his money doth last and tell him I dearly do love him When his cash is all gone, ile tell him my man John ther's others I fancy above him brave And that which is worse, when once they do find a maidens poor heart it is won They'l laugh & they'l jeer, they'l giggle & sneer that they this poor maid hath undone brave that &c. Some men they love for what they can get & tis certain ther's many a Lubbard Will sigh & will pant, seeming ready to faint & all for the love of the Cubbard, brave boys & all &c. And others so long as they think a poor maid has been careful and saved some money This maiden will find he will prove very kind & call her his joy & his honey brave boys and &c. Yea if this poor soul will be such a fooll to hearken to this fellows tale Shee'l to poverty fall, he'l beguile her of all she hath got by the merry milk pail brave boys And she that doth carry the merry milk pall and delights for to milk the brown Cow May sure be as good, be it well understood as the Looby that follows the Plow brave as the &c. Yet each pittiful clown will boast up & down of the maidens that he hath betrayd If all were like me, such things should not be nor ever hereafter be said, brave boys nor &c. Keep but at a distance, and then they will be like men quite bereaved of sence Then the best of them all into passion will fall & be ready to dye for a wench brave boys and &c. Tho some of them now, do say they know how to make any mayden to yield But I would defie any man that should try in the midst of the merry Broom field brave in &c. For my modesty shall defend me from all that say tis so easy to win The poor virgins sort, of which they make sport & delight in this treacherous sin brave boys and &c. Then maidens beware, of such villains take care whose delight is your absolute ruine If they conquer with ease & gain what they please theyl soon be weary of wooing brave boys But if you stand off and at them do scoff youl find they will burn like a fire When you make them to bow, let your reason know how to grant then the thing they desire brave to grant &c. Then take my advice you maids that are free ile assure you I speak not in jest, Ne'r play with the dart till you yoyson your heart for a single life it is the best brave for &c. Thers some that are married before they had wit that with sorrows are sorely apprest Then think it not strange, I am not for a change for a single life it is the best brave boys for &c. Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball
