M2048 53981550 180287
A TRUE RELATION Of the Great VICTORY Obtained by the King of the Abissines, called, PRESTER JOHN AGAINST THE TURKS. In taking the Flourishing City of Habalee, and destroying 100000. Ottomons. AS ALSO, A Coppy of a Letter from on Board of His MAJESTIES Ship the Pearl, (riding then at Lisbon) from a Gentleman to his Brother in London, giving an Account of several remarkable passages and Rencounters against the Sally Men. FRom Venice they Write that they had a certain Relation by a Turkish Ship from Alexandria, That Prester John, King of Abissines, (having been infor∣med of the Christian Success over the Turks:) had forthwith sent his Ne∣phew Prince Josephat, and his Son Steven Tingel, with an Army of 400000. Men to Besiege the Great and Famous City Habalee: (in which were 4000 Canons and 18000 Men, the Turkish Governor, having refused the Surrendring thereof, with an answer he would Defend it to the Last) Prince Josephat, made himself Master thereof in the space of 14 Hours, and put all the Garrison to the Sword, and found therein 100000 Millons in ready Coin, besides more precious Things of a double Value: (all the Merchants of Asia, Persia and Egypt, having their Stor-houses there.) After which Victory, the Cities Leobin, two days Journey from Habalee and Dama-Gazon. Surrendred themselves: and the Victorious Prince with his Army proceeded. and Burnt 3000 Villages: which gave such a Dread to all Egypt, that 600000 of the Inhabitants Fled to the City Grand-Cario, Distant 6 Dayes Journey from Corbint: which Prince Josephat has since Besieged. And we expect by the first to have Advice of its being Surrendred or taken. Prester John, hath in the mean time sent to acquaint the King of Persia with his happy Victory: (having since the first Siege before Habalee, Destroyed 100000 Otto∣mons.) And desires him also to Advance his Arms against the Turks: to which there is no doubt but the Zophi will agree.
The LETTER. SIR, AFter my Departure from London, I have with a fervent desire Expected an Answer, upon so many Letters as I have sent you by all Op∣portunities, but considering the uncertainty of the Post, reciprocal∣ly I ascribe my Unhappiness thereunto, but cannot miss this Opportu∣nity once more: (if you will be pleased to forgive the reiteration of my troublesome Lines) to wish your Health and Prosperity, and acquaint you with mine, which Blessed be God continues good, and withal give you a brief Account of those Passages I have hitherto met with in my Voyage, viz. After the Domolishing of Tangier, in which I was no less Active than in hazard (of which Mr Faulkner has given you an Account) to have lost my Life, tho Escaping with a dangerous wound and Bruise by Blowing up of the Castle: in which mutual Danger two Gentlemen belonging to our Ship, were Kill'd: our Ship, with four others were left behind; with Order to Cruize those Seas, and Attaque such Sally men of War, with which we should meet or have advice of, accordingly we put to Sea the 4th of June, setting forth for Lisbon, the place of our Rendevouze, and the same Day came in sight of a Sail which we gave Chase putting out French Colours, and coming up to her within a League, made her our Enemy; whereupon she turned and steared her Course before the Wind, which in persuite of her, we did also, and the next Day came within Shot of her, and then knew her to be the Admiral of Sally: we Fired at her and spoiled her Top-Gallon Sheets, but she would not answer us, but useing all means to escape by the darkness of the Night got from us, but the Sapheir Frigot finding her at Anchor at the Bar of Sally (where she could not pass by reason of the lowness of Water) Sunk her, took the Captain and forty Moors out of the Water, besides 40 English slaves: and afterwards forcing the Captain to tell them where she would find any more of the Sally he bid her stear 30 Leagues of Sally. where she would find a Sally man of War, with a Dutch Prize which he had taken: which the Sapheir do∣ing according to the Captains Words found, Fought, and took them, and brought them to Cadize, and we daily Expect them here. The Dutchmans Ship was lad∣en with Sugar and Oyl. The Sally Man, had 18 Guns, and the other 16. Since which we had the Chance to meet with the biggest Sally men of War on the ninth of June in the morning, who at first came up towards us, supposing us to be a Merchant-Man, but finding to the Contrary, turned her Course, and by Row∣ing, (it being Calm) outrun us, but a fresh Gale of Wind arising, in the morn∣ing following, about two a Clock we came up with him, and about Day-light Fought him for two Hours at a Distance, and it proving calm lost him out of our sight, and all hopes of taking him: notwithstanding, which, we fetched him up on the 10th about Mid-night, and for fear of loosing him, came on and fired a Broad-side to awaken him, he answered us in like manner, and bid us Strike, promising good Quarters; but after 7 hours sharp Fight, we mastered him, having only on killed, with the Boat-Swain. They had 150 Moors, and 38 English Slaves, 4 French men, and 6 Dutch men on Board. There were fifty Killed and Wounded. The Captain was a very Stout Man, but Died of his Wound: he was so Couragious that we Shot his Main-top and Missen-top Masts and the Main, and Fore-Yard away before he would Strike. And all our Maists were disabled, She had 24 Guns, and six Patterreries: and so served us for Break∣fast, the Morning of the Eleventh of June. He confessed that 2 or 3 Dayes be∣fore he had taken 3 Prizes and conveyed them to Sally. So being loath to trouble you any further, I shall conclude with my hearty Wishes to prosper you and your Family (to which I desire my Love to be remembred) and remain till Death. From a board the Pearl, July the 23d. sent by the Swain Friget, by one which was retaken from a Sally man of War. Your affectionate Friend John Miles. Edinburgh, Re-Printed by John Reid, and are to be sold be James Mein on the South-side of the Cross, Anno DOM. 1684.
