N245A 47012540 174510
Natures Wonder? OR,  ount how the Wife of one John Wateman an Ostler in the Parish of Fisherton-Anger, near Salibury, was Delivered of strange Monster upon the 26th. of October 1664. which lived untill the 27th. of the same Moneth. It had two Heads, foure Armes, and two Legs. The Heads standing contrary each to the other; and the Loines, Hipps and Leggs Issueing out of the middle, betwixt both. They were both perfect to the Navell, and there joyned in one, being but one Sex, which was the Female. She had another Child born before it (of the Female Sex) which is yet living, and is a very comely Child in all proportions. This is Attested for truth, by several Persons which were eye wittnesses. The Tune is, London Prentice: Or, Jovial Batchelor. COme take a view good People all, observe it well with héed A stranger Wonder Nature did ne're frame of Humane Séed; A Monster of mishapen Forme I here to you present, By this Example you may learn to feare Gods Punishment. Strange Wonders hath béen lately shown within our English Nation; But none so strange as this was known, you'l find by this Relation; Then give attention to the same, I'le show you how it was, To tell the truth it is no shame, for thus it came to passe. At Fisherton near Salisbury, a Husbandman doth dwell John Waterman so call'd is he, his Neighbours all can tell; It was his Wife which did bring forth this strange Mishapen Thing: From East to West, from North to South the News thereof will ring. It was but in October last, the Six and twenty day, No longer since t'was done and past: I can for certaine say This Woman was Delivered well, and with her Life she scap't Of this same Monster I'le tell how strangely t'was Mishap't. The seond Pat, to the same Tune. TWo Heads it had, grew opposite, the Picture plain appeares With all proportions fair in sight, Mouthes, Noses, Eyes and Eares, Two Bodies shaped perfectly, down to the Navel séen, And there they joyned wondrously, the Hipps and Leggs betwéen. The bodies being joyn'd in one, were of the female Sex, The like thereof was never known, they strangely did Connex; Four Armes were on the body plac'd, it had of Leggs but two; Thus Nature had her work defac'd, which she doth seldom do. The Women they were all afraid to see this fearfull sight, eke the Midwife much dismay'd when as it came to light, But most of all the Mother weak her grievious Paines was much, She had not power long time te speak her sorrow it was such. Two dayes and nights this Monster liv'd in woefull misery, The Parents they were sadly griev'd, the Neighbours came to sée; At length it dy'd, and was convey'd for Chyurgeons to Dissect, And what Report thereof had said, they found it in Effect. Another Babe this Mother sad brought forth at the same birth, A comelier Chld on woman had upon the face o'th Earth; Nature in that did make amends, proportioning each Part; She may bring joy unto her Friends, and chear her Mothers heart. Afflictions God doth sometimes send to Parents for thier sin, When they will not their lives amend, then doth the Lord begin With Iudgements for to humble them, and make them feel his hand; O turn unto the Lord in time, for none can Him withstand. Our God hath many wayes to make vile Sinners come to shame: If once they do his Laws forsake, and wrong his holy Name, A thousand Iudgments (worse then this) he on that People brings, That will not mend what is amiss, but act such hainous Sinnes. Then Parents all Example take, at all times seek the Lord; Fruit of your bodies he can make by your own selves abhorr'd: Your Children which should be a joy and comfort in the end, The Lord in fury will destroy, if you do him Offend. FINIS. A true Relation of this strange and wonderfull MONSTER. AT Fisherton-Anger, near the City of Salisbury (called New Saram) near to the sign of the Angel, Liveth one John Waterman an Ostler, His Wife (whose name is Mary) was Delivered (on Wednesday the 26th. of October 1664. about two a Clock in the Morning) first of a very comely Daughter (which is yet living) And after of a strange Monster which was formed Triangular, two Heads (at either end one) four Eyes, two Mouthes four Armes, two Stomacks, And joyned together at the Navell; and below that two Legges and Thighs, with Natures Pas∣sage (as other Female children have) and a Foundament: They were Baptized at 3 a Clock the same Morning, the first was named Eefelet: and the Monsters were named Martha and Mary; they had very comely faces, and both received Sustinance, but not together: This Monster lived two dayes and then dyed, and is Imbalmed, and to be brought to London to be seen. There hath been both Lords, Ladys, and much Gentry to see it; The Father (bring a poore man) had twenty pound given him the first day, by persons of Quality. I Josiah Smith, Practitioner of Phisick, saw them all three alive. With Alowance, Novemb. 12th. 1664. Printed for E. Andrews at White-Lyon in Pye-corner.
