N222 52614800 175985
A NARRATIVE Of the Progress of His Most CHRISTIAN MAJESTIES ARMES AGAINST THE DUTCH, VVith the Names of the several Places taken. Likewise, A LETTER from his said Majesty to the QUEEN of France, giving an Account of his passing the Rhine at Tolhuys: With a List of the French Nobility killed and wounded in that Action. EDINBURGH, Re-printed in the Year, 1672.
A NARRATIVE OF His Most Christian MAJESTIES Conquests obtained over the DUTCH; with the Names of the several Places taken. Likewise a Letter from His said Majesty to the Queen of France. YOu have with too much impatience, expected the opening of this Cam∣pagne, to be any longer deprived of the Account of those prosperous be∣ginnings which have already signa∣lized it, wherein the Success of the King hath evidenced and asserted the Justice of his Arms. How∣ever, Historians are oblieged to a more then ordinary diligence, to be able to keep pace with that swift course
of Victory that attends his Majesty. We scarce had heard, that this glorious Monarch was preparing to undertake an action of the highest reputation to his designs, but that we were immediately told he had gone through with it, with all the advantage imaginable; but I fear I do too long provoke your appetite, it is now time to satisfie it. I shall enter upon the matter with the particulars of the de∣feat of a considerable part of the Garrison of Rhineberg, which was but a praeludium to the rest. The Vicount de Turenne (being arrived the Twenty ninth of May with a Body of Horse, at a small Place scituate upon the Rhine, within a Leage of Keiserwart, belonging to the Elector of Cologne, which they began to fortifie towards the River) went to see part of the Kings Troops, to the number of 10000 Men, who lay intrenched near the Head of a great Bridge of Boats which they had fitted up in that Place, besides another built over the Rhine, which is of a particular make, and is defended by a Float∣ing Redoubt, that bears both Men and Artillery. After having well viewed these Troops, which he found in excellent order, he appointed the Count Montai (that Commanded them) to go the next night and discover the Countrey, in order to the Armies marching securely by Rhineberg, and Burick, up to Wesel. The Count set out to execute this Command with 200 Horse, belong∣ing to His Majesties Guards, under the Command of the Sieur Mombrun, Captain Lieutenant of the second Com∣pany of the Kings Muskettiers, with the like number of Light Horsmen under the Command of the Marquess of S. Gelais, Colonel of the Regiment of Dauphine, and Thirty Dragoons.
After having marched all night, he arrived next morn∣ing by break of day at Abbaye de Camp, within a League of Rhineberg, where he heard, That the Garrison of that Town went out very often to cut Wood, in the adjoyn∣ing Forrest which belongs to the Elector of Cologne, for the making of their Palisadoes, and desiring to make his advantage of it for the Kings service, he resolved to lay an Ambush for them about a League and an half from the Abbey. To that end, he went to a place which was shewed him by his Guides, but not finding that convenient, he would chuse one nearer to Rhineberg: so leaving his Troops there, he onely took with him three of the Guard, as many Musketieres and six Dragoons, with whom were the said Sieur de Mombrun, the Count de Druy, the Che∣valier de Bethune; these two serving as Adjutants, and the Sieur de Bois aid Major of Charle Roy. Being come into a close Road, he discovered 150 Mus∣quettiers which came from Rhineberg; whereupon (For∣tune seeming so to favour his Design) he sent back the said Sieur de Mombrun in all hast to his Troops, to bring him a 100 Horsmen and the Dragoons, hiding himself in the mean while from being seen. But the Enemy con∣tinuing their march on that side where he was, he com∣manded the three Muskettiers and six Dragoons that were with him to light of their Horses, and go into a Ditch, hard by the way. But the Vantguard of the enemy, which marched near 50 paces distance from their Body, perceiving them, and crying out, Who are you for? they fired at them. The Enemy immediately filled all the way, and dis∣covered the Count of Montal, who was forced to charge them with those few people he had with him, who brave∣ly broke through them, after having received great part
of their shot, and got between two Hedges very thick set with Bushes, that grew all along on the sides of the Ditches. The noise hastned forward the Sieur de Mombrun, with the Troop of Gensdarms, consisting of fifty Men, who set upon the Hollanders; but they (without being any way disordered) going into the Ditches, shot so thick, that he was forced to cause all his Dragoons, Gensdarms, and the Kings Muskettiers to light off their Horses. The Enemy seeing that, and that the other Troop of Light-Horsmen came on, began to think of taking the safest course, which was to retreat cross a Corn Field, to other Hedges which were yet stronger; by the means of which, they might get into Rhineberg, not imagining that our people should have been able to pass a Ditch ten foot deep. But Fortune presented a Passage to the Count of Mon∣tal, which he leaped over with his Horse, being followed but by a few, by reason of its difficulty; and those that were on foot, getting over in other places, the Hollanders saw the way was intercepted, and so were forced to return to their old post, whence they continued their shooting; but were immediatly set upon by those that were on foot, and by the Fifty Light Horsmen, at the Head of which, was the Sieur St. Gelays, and at the same time the Count de Montal fell upon them in the way, where every one behaved himself so gallantly, that they came up to one another, till at last the Hollanders were forced to call for Quarter, after having had Fifty of their number killed. So the rest were made prisoners, the greatest part of which were wounded, in which number were a Lieutenant, two Ensigns, a Lieutenant-Colonel, that commanded the
party; the Governor of Rhineberg's Son in Law, who was wounded in the Body with two Musket shots. The Count de Montal, brought them that night to the Camp, where he found the Vicount de Turenne, and the Marquess de Louvoy, who were extreamly satisfied with the success they had against the Enemy, who were almost equal in number to the Assailants, and had besides an unquestion∣able advantage of the Ground. And one may justly say, That never did Soldiers fight with greater courage then these did on this occasion, as if they had represented to themselves, that it was the first exploit of the Campagne, and were thence encouraged to signalize in a particular manner their Zeal and Valor. But the Sieur de Mombrun, the Marquess of St. Gelays, the Chevaliers de Bethune and de Marsillac, and several others, were prodigal of their persons, in imitation of the Count de Montal, who hath merited the greatest share of glory, by his wise conduct and forward valor in this Action: Which is so much the more memorable, in that there was killed on our side but two private Soldiers, three of the Kings Muskettiers, one Guarde du Corps, some Horsemen, and three Horses. There were two Dragoons wounded, and the Chevalier de Marsillac Cornet of Light-horse, who was shot in the Body with a Pistol, but if he escape, we shall obtain a Victory at a very easie rate, and teach our Enemies not to dare to venture out while our Troops are abroad. But I shall leave this, for to give an account of the Conquest of four Towns, which were almost as soon taken as attempted. I here send you the first Advices from the Camp, still expecting the farther particulars. The King having resolved the 30. past to form these four Sieges, arrived the 2. instant about nine in the mor∣ning
before Orsoy; that day being spent in observing the Scituation of the place, it was resolved, to begin the Siege the night following: Which was put in execution about ten at night, according to the Orders of the Duke of Or∣leans, to whose care his Majesty had committed the Con∣duct of this Attack, whilst the Prince of Conde besieged Wesel, the Viscount Turenne Burick, and the rest of the Troops Rhineberg, whither his Majesty was gone himself to the Cavalry, commanded to invest that place, and their several Posts, afterwards returned to Orsoy. It was order∣ed to make two real, and two false Attacks, the former to be commanded by the Duke of Roanez, Lieutenant-Ge∣neral, the Chevalier de Lorrain, Maistre de Camp, and the Marquis de Beringhen, Colonel; and the false Attacks to be made by two Companies of the Kings Regiment, un∣der the conduct of the Count de St. Geran, and the Mar∣quis de Moussy. The Assault was made with so much vi∣gour and bravery, that they began to lodge their Men at the foot of the Counterschape, the Breach having been made at the head of it. His Majesty, who no more spares himself than the least Officer or Soldier of his Troops, resolved, being accompa∣nyed by Monsieur, to observe himself the opening of this Breach, behind a small Battery, to preserve him from the Cannon of the Enemy, though with so little security, that the Chevalier d' Arquien was killed there upon the place. As well the Besiegers as the Besieged, continued shoot∣ing very furiously all night; the besieged not being want∣ing to make some resistance to favour the humour of the French, to whom no Action seems to merit any Honour, that is not accompanyed with some difficulty.
About Nine next Morning, Monsieur sent a Trumpet∣ter with the Count of Grammont to Summon the Town, but notwithstanding that, he assured the Governor, that they could not hold out two dayes longer, and in case he deferred to Surrender the Place, that all the Garrison should be put to the Sword, and the Town left to the Pillage of the Soldiers: The said Governor answered with all the Courage poffible, That the States General had not entrusted him to that Post, to quit it so easily. But, notwithstanding this Dutch Bravado, he quickly cooled, and was oblidged to surrender the Place, upon no other Termes, then that he and his Garrison should remai Prisoners of War. All those that were employed in this Attack, strove to out-doe each the other in performing wonders; The Count de Grancé, and the Sieur de St. Hilaire, were dangerously wounded with Musket-shot, the one in the Knee, and the other in the Reines. The Sieur de Beau∣viré Captain in the Dolphins Regiment was Mortally wounded, the Count de Valin was killed, with a Lieutenant, about Eight common Soldiers, there having been onely Five wounded. The Fourth Instant, the Viscount Turenne, who had opened the Trenches before Buricke the day before, came early in the morning to acquaint His Majesty with the taking of that Place, on  ditions that Orsy was; The same day the  sent likewise to give His Majesty an Account of th Surrender of Wesel upon the first Attack they had made on the Fort on the Lippe not farr from the said Place. So that only Rhynbergh remained untaken, where in was resolved to open the Trenches the next day, at night,
but the loss of these three other places had so dishearten∣ed the Garrison of this, that not daring to expect an At∣tack, they Implored the Kings Mercy, who accordingly permitted the Garrison to draw out the next morning with Drums beating, Colours flying, and with their Baggage, having ordered a Convoy to conduct them to Maestricht. Thus Victory and Glory delight to heap their Crowns upon the head of this great Monarch, who with so much ardor undergoes the Toiles of the Warr, that he seemes to Merit the Favors of the one and the other, having sub∣jected under his Power Four Places, in so small a time, and with the Losse onely of 100 Men, who have been kil∣led in these Actions. From the Rhine near Wesel, June 9. THe Eighth Instant His Most Christian Majesty arri∣ved at Ossembergh, where he received advice from the Viscount de Turenne, That Rees had Surrendred upon the first approach of the French Troops, without making the Least resistance; And the same day the Prince of Condé sent to acquaint His Majesty with the taking of Emme∣ricke. From the Camp at Rees, June 10. HIs Most Christian Majesty arrived here, having re∣ceived Advice, that the Sieur de Beauviré with 600 Horse, and 100 Dragoons had taken Doetechem, and on the other side the Sieur de Choiseul had taken the Castle of Ʋlm, and in it 150 Soldiers, whom he made Prisoners.
His Most Christian Majesties LET∣TER to the QUEEN of France. From the Rhyne near Tolhuys. YEsterday before Night I receiv'd the News of the taking of Groll by the Bishop of Munster, who besieg∣ed it in Person with the Forces of the Elector of Cologne and his own, Commanded by Monsieur de Luxembourg, 'tis one of the best places the Hollanders had, it held out but four dayes. The Prince having given me an Account of the Fords and Passages that I had ordered him to dis∣cover along the Rhine, from Schenck as far as Arnheim; I passed through Rees with my Gensd'armes, and came into his Camp near Emmerick, where I supp'd; and, as soon as I rose from Table, took Horse together with him, after I had given Orders for the drawing out of a Thou∣sand of his Foot, and the Marching of a body of Horse and Dragoons with some Artillery, and the Boats for Transportation, and arrived this morning before day. I had with me a Guide that knew exactly all the Fords of this River, upon whose Information  Commanded the Count de Guiche to discover a part of it over against a place called Tolhuys, which upon triall he found Fordable. I plant∣ed two Batteries upon the Banck of the Rhine to play upon them that should offer to oppose the Horse I intended to send over on the Right and Left of the Batteries, while I was making a Bridge of Boats in the mean time to passe o∣ver the Foot upon; upon the Information brought me by the Count de Guiche, I commanded Two Thousand Horse of the Left Wing to passe the River under the com∣mand
of the said Count, at the Ford which he had disco∣vered over against Tolhuys, The Regiment of Cuirassiers was to passe first, of which ten or twelve commanded men to passe over, sometimes by Fording it, and some∣times by Swimming, espy'd Three Squadrons advanc∣ing towards them from behind the Hedges and Willowes and were at first briskly charged by the Officers of the first Squadron, they Drawing back some few steps in the River, till those that followed to second them could come up, made their way afterwards with their Swords in their hands so bravely and resolutely, that the Second and Third Squadron (with the fright of it) discharged at random in the Air, and ran. The first, which hitherto had set a good face upon it, gave back as well as the other, to which the continual Fire of our Canon did not a little con∣tribute; and now the rest of the Horse were all passed o∣ver at the Ford, one party of them advanced towards the Enemy under the Command of the Count de Guiche, and the rest stood in Battalia on the Bank of the River. This Action was accompanyed with all the Success and Glory we could desire, having lost very few Horse in the Passage. Nogent being the onely Person of Note that was drowned: But afterwards, as ill Fortune would have it, the Prince, to whom I had sent, not to passe the River, was already gone, before my Orders reach'd him, in a small Boat, to see what Men we should put into the Castle of Tolhuys, and to informe himself better of what passed on the other side of the Water; so that not knowing any thing of my Design, and seeing the Prince of Condé and Duke de Longueville advance upon the Spur towards a Barricade, where the Three Squadrons I mention'd before had joyn'd themselves with some other
Horse and Foot, he made all the haste he could thither, and was follow'd by several others, who now began to keep no Measures, after such an Example. At first, the Prince, and those other Gentlemen astoni∣shed the Enemy with their Threatnings, and their Pre∣sence, and besides the Count de Guiche surprising them in the Reare with some Squadrons, had pressed them so close, that they put themselves in a posture of yielding, on Condition they might have Fair Quarter▪ But, Monsieur de Longueville having passed the Barricade, and crying, Kill, kill, No Quarter; and, as some say, discharged a Pistoll upon them; out of pure despair they made one Volley more, in which the Prince of Condé had the bone of his Left wrest broken, Monsieur de Longueville and Guitry were killed upon the Spot, and severall others were killed and wound∣ed, which you will see in the following List. If we had had a little patience, not one of those men had escaped our hands, the Comte de Guiche had begirt them close on one side, and should have fallen upon them on the other with the other Squadrons, and the Foot which by this time were almost all passed in their Boats; whereas through our own precipitation, the routing them has cost us very dear; this excepted all things are in a very good condition as to the Bettaw, and I have much cause to praise God for the happy Success of this Enterprize, and to promise my self great advantages by it.
Dead and Wounded. Dead. Monsieur de Longueville. de Guitry. De Nogent, drowned. Danbusson. Marq. de Tooon. Brouilly mortally wounded. Some Gentlemen wounded. The Chevalier des Essars, dead of his Wounds. Wounded. The Prince his Wrist broken. Mons. de Marsillac his Shoulder-Bone broken. Mons. de Vivone lost his Hand. The Comte de Sauls, wounded in the Chin. De Beringhen through  Body. The Duke de Coastin his Ha broken. Termes cut cross the Face. La Salle Ayde de Camp F Wounds with a Sword. Reelle, of the Cuirassie wounded in three places. Du Mesnil Montanban, wou∣ded with a Partizan. The Marq. De Abeterre. The Marq. de Manrevert, F wounds. Beauvan, Ayde de Camp  Mons. Rochefort, wound in the Face. FINIS.
