p2557b 47012583 174551
A Pleasant new Song Betwixt a Saylor and his LOVE. To the tune of, Dulcina. WHat doth ayle my Love so sadly in such heavy dumps to stand; Doth she grieve or take unkindly that I am so nigh at hand? Or doth she vow She will not know, Nor speak to me when I do come? If that be so Away Ile go. First kiss and bid me welcome home. Had I ever thée forsaken, putting thee out of my mind, Then thou might'st have justly spoken that I to thée was unkind, Or should I take Some other Mate, Then mightst thou have a cause to mourn, But let me dye Before that I Do so then bid, &c. Sooner shall the grass leave growing, from the Hare the Hound shall run, Husbandmen shall leave their sowing, floods shall run the Land upon, The Fish shall fly The Sea run dry, The Birds shall sing no more but mourn, Ere I of thée Vnmindfull be, Then kiss, &c▪ Smile on me be not offende, pardon grant for my amisse, Let thy favour so befriend me. as to seal it with a kiss, To me I swear Thou art so dear, That for thy sake Ile fancy none, Then do not frown, But sit thee down, Sweet kiss, &c. It thou had'st prov'd chast Diana since from thee I did depart, I have as constant been to thee▪ for on thee fixed was my heart. No not for shee, Jupiter see, Diana in her Tower alone Should me intice No, I'll be nice, Then kiss, &c. No nor Venus Cupids Mother, nor the fairest wife of Jove Should Lucretia or some other, seek by gifts to win my love, Should Hellen fair To me compare, And unto me for love make mone, Yet none of those My mind shall please, Then kiss and bid me wecome home. FRom thy sight though I were banisht, yet I alwayes was to thee, Far more kind then Ulisses to his chast Penelope, For why away He once did stay, Ten years and left her all alone, But I from thee Have not been three, Sweet kiss and bid me welcome home. Come Sweet-heart and sit down by me, and let thy lap my pillow be, While sweet sleep my mind beguileth, all my dreams shall be on thee, I pray thee stay, Steal not away, Let Lullaby be all thy Song, With kisses swéet Lull me asleep, Sweet kiss, &c. The Womans Answer. I Have been sad to see how from me thou so long from me did stay, Yet now I more rejoyce to see thee happily arriv'd this way. Thou from our shore Shalt go no more To wander thus abroad alone, But thou shalt stay, With me alway, And her's my hand thou'rt welcom home, I have prov'd Diana to thee since from me thou went'st away, I have Suitors well nigh twenty, and much ado I had to stay, But I denyed When they replyed, And sent them all away with scorn, For I had sworn To live forlorn, Untill that I see thée come home. Seeing thou art home returned, thou shalt not go home in hast. But lovingly come sit down by me, let my arms imbrace thy wast. Farewel annoy, Welcome my joy, Now lullaby shall be thy song, For now my heart Sings loth to part, Then kiss, &c. Since sweet heart thou dost befriend me thus to take me to thy love Never more will I offend thee but will ever constant prove. Thou hast my heart, Not to depart, But ever constant to remain, And thou art mine And I am thine, Then let us kiss and Welcome home. FINIS. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and William Gilbertson,
