p55a 47012562 174529
Loves Paradice. Shewing the admirable felicity that true-Lovers enjoy in the chaste imbra∣ces of their dearest Loves, as this following example doth declare. To the tune of Fancies Phoenix by J. P. ALL in a pleasant shady grove as I was passing time away, I chanc'd to see the God of Love with Bow and Quiver, sport and play; At randome he did shoot his darts to wound poor lovers tender hearts. But passing forward in a trice, I came to True-Loves Paradice. With admiration I beheld the beauty of so swéet a place, All earthly pleasures it doth yeild to them which do true love embrace, For all delights no place so rare with this Elysium may compare. Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. The Arbours stand in rich array, and gloriously appear in sight. Bedeck'd with Flowers and Garlands gay, with Roses, Damask, Red and White, The murmuring springs do make a noyse for to compleat true Lovers joyes; Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. To sée the Lovers arme in arme, how they together walke and prate, Frée from all danger, dread and harme, each one enjoyes his loving Mate, O happy thrice, dear souls they be alwaies in such swéet company; Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. Their chaste embraces are so swéet, and all their actions innocent When ever their swéet lips do meet a Message to the heart is sent, To stir affection chaste and pure, which shall perpetually endure, Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. Their joyes abounded more and more to hear the birds so swéetly sing, I never heard the like before, they made the Grove with Ecchoes ring, Thrice happy they, that have their choice of this, or that mellodious voyce; Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. The second part, to the same Tune, I Sate mée on a flowry hill, near to an Arbour fresh and green, Where fair Lucina mourn'd her fill, thinking she was not heard, nor seen, 'Twas for the absence of her dear that she did thus lament and fear. Then lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. Shall I lament and mourn alone, whilst other Lovers do rejoyce, O whither is my True-Love gone that I cannot hear his sweet voyce, It would revive my Love-sick-heart, and force all sorrows to depart; Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. Some strange disaster doth detain, my dearest love from mee this time, I'm sure he constant will remain, his love is fix'd and so is mine, O why do I thus pine away since long from mee he cannot stay? Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. It griev'd my heart, her plaint to hear how she did sigh and make her moan, At length her Lover did appear, then all her grief was fled and gone, With great delight they did embrace when they beheld each others face; Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. Dear heart quoth he, I have conceal'd my self a while to hear thy plaint, But since thy love thou hast reveal'd I'le n'ere adore another Saint, Take hand and heart, and all that's mine, for thou mayest freely call mee thine; Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. When they had joyn'd two hearts in one, with true affection in each breast, They could no longer stay alone, but walked out amongst the rest With hand in hand 'twas rare to see, how mutually they all agree; Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. In pleasures rare they passe the time, in choice delights and harmelesse sport, The Summer it was in the prime, when as these Lovers did resort, The warbling quire their sences chear'd enough to ravish all that heard; Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. How happy are those Lovers true, that do enjoy such perfect blisse, He that Loves Paradice will view, may taste of such delight as this, But he that doth unconstant prove. shall never know the sweets of Love; Then Lovers all take my advice, and hasten to Loves Paradice. Finis. London, Printed for W. Kendrick at the Black-spread Eagle and Sun in the Old-Bayly.
