r892 53299225 179963
A Relation of Their Majesties Forces passing the Shannon, near Limerick, and Defeating four of the Enemies Regiments of Dragoons: With the Precipitat Retreat of their whole Camp. Published by Authority. Whitehall, September 24.1691. BY an Express, which arrived here this evening, we have an account from the Camp before Limerick, That the General having resolved to pass the Shannon, in order to attack the Irish Horse, which lay encamped in the County of Clare, and to strengthen the Town on that side, the better to conceal his Design, made a shew on the 15th instant, as if he designed to draw off from before the Place; which the Enemy believed, and expressed their Joy by great and repeated Shouts. That Night a Bridge of Pontons was fini∣shed over the Shannon about a Mile above the Town; and the 16th, by break of day, several Squadrons of Horse, with the Royal Regiment of Dragoons, and a Detachment of Foot, passed over the Bridge to a little Island, and having found a Ford in the other Branch of the River, waded through it without any opposition; As soon as they were discover'd, Bri∣gadier Clifford, who lay encamp'd not far from thence, with 4 Regiments of Dragoons, brought down his Men on foot (their Horses being at Grass) to oppose us; but they were quickly put to flight, flinging away their Arms, and leaving all their Tents, Baggage, Accoutre∣ments, the Standard of Maxwell, and two Pieces of Cannon, behind them. Upon this their Camp, which lay higher up towards Killaloo, drew out, but it was only to cover their Baggage, and to get time to take down their Tents; for so soon as our Troops came near them, and had passed the first Defile that was between them and us, they marched off with what haste they could towards the Mountains. We took a French Lieutenant-Collonel, and about 20 other Officers Prisoners; and that Evening the General ordered most of the Horse and Dragoons, and 13 Regiments of Foot, to march with 5 days Provision of Bread into the County of Clare, to fight the Enemy, or at least to disperse them. Sir Alexander Fitten, Neigle, and Plow∣den, who style themselves Lords-Justices of Ireland, with most of the In∣habitants of Limerick, are in the Irish Camp; The Confusion among them is great, and they will quickly want Subsistance. The Lord Lisburn was kill'd on the 15th by a Cannon Ball, as he was lying upon his Quilt in the Trenches. On the 17th one Captain Taaff came over to us, who said that the Town is quite ruined; that we have killed a great number of their Men; that they have not ten days Bread in the Town, and not above 6000 Foot, and those very ill clad. We continue to play our Cannon and Bombs, and doubt not but in a short time to be Masters of the Place. Printed at London, and Re-printed at Edinburgh, 1691.
