s1409 52528906 178924
ACT Discharging Boats, Barks, or Vessels from Going to the Bass, or Furnishing Supplys there to. Edinburgh, February 28. 1694. THe Lords of Their Majesties Privy Coucil, being informed, that several of the Rebels who hold out the Isle and Rock of the Bass, are at present come, or driven ashore, and that by the late Storms, the Boats belonging to the saids Rebels are lost, which may prove an effectual mean of their Reduction, Do hereby strictly Command and Charge all Persons, Skippers, Owners, or Possessors of Boats, Barks, or other Vessels, great or small, residing and possessing the saids Boats, Barks, or Vessels, on either side of the Firth, from Stirling to St. Andrews upon the one side, and from Stirling to Berwick one the other side of the said Rock, that they carefully keep and secure the same, both Night and Day, from being either seized upon, Stollen, or otherways taken away by the saids Rebels, or any of them, or any other person for their use and service, under all highest pains; and that neither they, nor any person whatsoever presume to Hire, Lend, or otherways furnish any Boat, Bark, or other Vessel to the saids Rebels, or any of them, or any other for their Use and Service, under the pains due to Corresponders with, and Supplyers of Rebels and Traitors. And far∣der, the saids Lords, Do hereby Renew and Assure the Promise of twenty pound Sterling, formerly made to any person who shall seize any of the saids Rebels wherever they may be found, and shall deliver the Person so seized to any of Their Majesties Officers, either Civil or Military. And they Ordain that these presents be Printed and Published at the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh, and also at all the Towns on the Coast of either side of the Firth within the bounds foresaid, that none pretend Ignorance. Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save King VVilliam and Queen Mary. EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno DOM. 1694.
