S1510A R183074 52612434 179571
royal blazon or coat of arms C R LETTERS OF INTERCOMMUNING Against Persons declared Fugitives for not compearing to answer for CONVENTICLES, &c. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Brittain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lovits,  Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch as, upon the twenty fifth, twenty seventh, twenty eight, twenty ninth, and thirty days of July, one thousand six hundred and seventy four years, the Persons underwritten were at the Mercat Crosses of Haddingtoun. Lanerk, Cowper, Perth, Dumfermling, Stirling, Glasgow, Linlithgow, and Edinburgh, successive and respective orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by vertue of letters of denounciation raised, used and execute at the instance of Our trusty and well-beloved Councellor, Sir John Nisbet of Dirletoun Knight, Our Advcat, for Our interest, for their not compearing personally before the Lords of Our Privy Council upon the sixteenth day of July, the said year 1674. to have an∣swered and underlyen the Law, for their keeping, and being present at House and Field-Conventicles, at the places following, and con∣vocating people thereto, Viz. at Enderask, Edmonstoun Chapel, Wolmet, Corstorphine, Magdalen Chapel, and other places, or one or other of them, or near to them; and for their contemptuous invading and intruding themselves in the Pulpits and Churches of Cramond, Forgune, Kirkmahoe, and others, in the moneths of April, May, and June, the said year 1674. contrair to the Laws and Acts of Parlia∣ment made thereagainst, in manner and at length specified in the principal complaint raised against them thereanent; Viz: Mr. David Williamson, Mr. Alexander Moncrief, Mr. William Wishart, Mr. Thomas Hog, in Rosse, Mr. George Johnstoun, Mr. Robert Gillespy, Mr.  Mckillikin in Rosse, Mr. John Rosse, Mr. Thomas Hog in Stirling Shire, Mr. William Erskin in Tiviotdale, Mr. James Donaldson, Mr. Andrew Anderson, Mr. Andrew Mortoun, Mr. Donald Cargill, Mr. Robert Maxwels elder and younger, and James Frazer of Braes. And siklike, upon the fourth and sixth days of July, the said year 1674. the persons underwritten were at the Mer∣cat Crosses of Cowper, Falkland, and Perth, successive and respective orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by ver∣tue of Letters of denounciation, raised used and execute at the instance of Our said Advocat for Our interest against them, for their not compearing personally before the Lords of Our Privy Council, upon the twenty fifth day of June, the said year 1674. to have answered and underlyen the Law, for their keeping and being present at House or Field Conventicles, at Pitscottie, Mure, Rauenshugh, Kinkell, Balmeanoch and other places, and convocating persons thereto, and for resetting and entertaining outed Ministers in the Parochs of Stramiglo, Abernethy, and Auchtermuchty, in the moneth of April, May and June, the said year 1674. contrair to Laws and Acts of Parliament mde thereagainst in manner and at length specified in the principal complaint raised against them thereanent; Viz. Sir John Kirkaldy of Grange elder,  Hamiltoun of Kinkell, James Hamiltoun his brother, John Geddy in Falkland, John Arnottes of Pitgrumzies elder and younger, Archibald Arnot in Newburgh Mr. Thomas Arnot in Collessy, Andrew Arnot Merchant in Kirkaldy, Thomas Shaw elder of Gospitrie, David Shaw his Son, Hary Shaw in Balognie, George Fleming in Balbuthie, William She∣thrum in Lundimile, John Miller in Dinork, Andrew Kinnier Merchant in St. Andrews, John Thomson in Fawfeild,  Gowan in Criel, Robert Herbertson in Tarbet, and  Dowglas portioner of Colsey. As also upon the fifeeen, and six∣teen days of July, the said year 1674. the persons underwritten, were at the Mercat Crosses of Cowper and Forfar successive and re∣spective orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by vertue of Letters of denounciation, raised, used and executed, at the instance of Our said Advocat, for Our interest, for their not compearing personally before the Lords of Our Privy Council, upon the ninth day of July, the said year 1674. to have answered and underlyen the Law, for their keeping and being present at House and Field-Conventicles, at Dumfermling, Cleish, Orvall, and others; and for their inviting and countenancing outed Ministers in their inva∣sion, and intrusion upon the Kirks and Pulpis of Forgune, Balmerinoch Collessey, Moonsey, and Auchtermuchty, and hearing them preach and pray therein, and for harbouring, resetring, and entertaining Mr. John Welsh, a declared and proclaimed traitor, in their Houses and elsewhere, and conducting and convoying him thorow several places in Fyffe, in an hostile manner, and threatning these who should apprehend, molest and interrupt the said Mr. John Welsh and others in his companie; in the moneths of April, May and June, the said year, 1674. contrair to the Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereagainst, in manner and at length specified in the principal com∣plaint raised against them thereanent, Viz. Thomas Blyth, heritor in Kennoway Paroch,  Weymes, Lady Colvill,
John Adam Baily of Stramiglo, James Pryd in nether Ʋrquhart, David Coventrie in Arlary, John Henderson there, Robert Stark in the Milnes of Forth, VVilliam Page in Cowper of Fyffe, John White there, Richard Clidsdale there  Lady Bal∣canquell, Collonel Robert Halket, John Smith in Dundie, John Balfour in Lethum, Alexander Walker in Friertous, George Spence in For∣del, Patrick Melvill in the Burnside,  Wardlaw heritor in Kirktoun,  Colvill, Lady Baily in Dininuo Paroch, James Grieve in St. Andrews, Andrew Kenneir there, James Louthian in Kings-barns, Mr. James Bonner of Greigstoun, John Scot in Lathones,  Lady Collerny, and David and Alexander Cambels in Kirkaldy. And siklike upon the twenty ninth day of July, the said year 1674 the persons underwritten, Viz. William Livingstoun of Greenyards,  Ferquharson of Shielbrae, were at the Mercat Crosse of Stirling orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by vertue of Letters of denounci∣ation raised, used and execute at the instance of Our said Advocat, for Our interest; for their not compearing personally before the Lords of Our Privy Council upon the sixteenth day of July, the said year 1674. to have answered and underlyen the Law, for their keeping and and being present at House and Field Conventicles, at Torwood, Cowie, Airth, Frosk, Carbrock, or in or about one or other of these places, where they heard Mr. John Welsh, Mr. Gabriel Sempil, Mr. Samuel Arnot, and some other outed Ministers, or one or other of them; And for inviting and convocating divers persons to the saids Conventicles, and for supplying, harbouring, entertaining or corresponding with the saids outed Ministers and divers others Our Rebels, in the moneths of May, and June 1674. Contrair to the Laws and Acts of Parli∣ament made thereagainst, in manner and at length mentioned in the principal complaint raised against them thereanent: As also upon the twenty two, twenty seventh and twenty ninth days of August, and second day of November, the said year 1674 The persons underwrit∣ten were at the Mercat Crosses of Edinburgh, Dumbartoun, and Perth, orderly denounced Our Rebels and put to Our Horn, by vertue of Letters of denounciation, raised, used and execute at the instance of Our said Advocat, for Our interest; for their not compearing personally before the Lords Commissioners of Our Privy Council at Stirling, upon the eigteenth day of August, and ninth day of September, the said year 1674. To have answered and underlyen the Law; for their being present at House and Field Conventicles, and withdrawing themselves from the publick ordinances in their own Paroch Churches, for having had their children baptized at these disorderly meetings, or for having invited outed Ministers to intrude and invade Pulpits, and having convocat people to hear them therein, or having heard them themselves; At the least, for harbouring, resetting, supplying or corrosponding with Mr. John Welsh, and other declared Rebel, and Traitors, in April, May, June and July, the said year 1674. Contrair to the Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereagainst, in manner and at length mentioned in the principal complaint raised against them thereanent, Viz. James Sumervail at the boat of Cardross, Hary Dow of Westerpolder, Mr. John King Chaplain to the Lord Cardross, John Doik portioner of Murdistoun, the Lady Pettendrich in Logi Paroch, Robert Fork portioner of Kilpatrik, James Muir portioner of Burdistoun, and John Starks elder and younger, of Balknock. As also upon the twenty seventh, twenty eight and twenty ninth days of October 1674. the persons underwritten were at the Mercat Crosses of Cowper in Fyffe, St. Andrews and Dum∣fermling orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by vertue of Letters of denounciation, raised, used and execute at the instance of Our said Advocat, for Our interest, against them, for their not compearing personally before the Lords Commissioners of Our Privy Council at Cowper of Fyffe, upon the fifteenth day of September, the said year 1674. To have answered and underlyen the Law; for their be∣ing present at House and Field Conventicles, and their withdrawing from the publick ordinances in their own Paroch Churches, for having had children baptized at these disorderly meetings; at the least, for having invite douted Ministers to intrude and invade Pulpits; and having convocat people to hear them therein, or having heard them themselves, at the least, for harbouring, resetting, supplying or corrospon∣ding with Mr. John Welsh, and other declared Rebels and traitores, in April, May, June and July, the said year 1674. Conetrar to the Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereagainst, in manner and at length mentioned in the principal complaint, raised against them thereanent Viz.  Symer of Brathnes, William Crawford of Powmilne, John Lundy of Baldestard, Mr. James Lentron and Helen Inglis his spouse, John Collier of Lochgelly, Dame Anna Riddel, Lady Collerny.  Ladies Ʋnthankes elder and younger, John Fairful of Kinloch, and Dame Margaret Ferquhard, Lady Halhill. And siklike upon the twenty fourth day of September the said year 1674. The persons underwritten, Viz.  Hamiltoun relict of Francis Galloway of Todshough, Simeon Al∣exander fewar and tennent in Kirklistoun, and James Wilkie tennent in Cliftounhal, were orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by vertue of Letter of denounciation, raised used, and execute, at the instance of Our said Advocat, for Our interest, against them; for their not compearing personally before the Lords Commissioners of Our Privy Council at Edinburgh, upon the sixteenth day of September 1674. To have answered and underlyen the Law, for their being present at House and Field Conventicles, and with∣drawing from the publick ordinances in their own Paroch Churches, and having had their children baptized in these disorderly meetings, and for their inviting outed Ministers, to Preach thereat, and convocating people thereto, and for harbouring, resetting, supplying and corro∣sponding with certain outed Ministers, declared Rebels and traitors, in April, May, June, July, August and September, the said year 1674, Contrair to the Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereagainst, in manner and at length mentioned in the principal complaint raised against them thereanent; as the said respective Letters of denounciation above written duely execute and registrate (conform to the Act of Parliament) produced in presence of Our Privy Council, bears. At the proces of which Horn the forenamed persons lye and remain, taking no regard thereof, nor of Our Authority and Laws; and are encouraged to continue in their Rebellion, by the reset, supply and intercommuning, which they have with several of their friends and acquaintances, to the high contempt of Us, Our Authority and Laws. OUR WILL is herefore, and We charge you straitly, and Commands that in continent thir Our letters, seen ye passe to the Mer∣cat Crosses of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Lanerk, Cowper, Perth, Dumfermling, Stirling, Glasgow, Linlithgow, and other places need∣ful; and thereat in Our Name and Authority, command and charge all, and sundry Our Leiges, and Subjects, that they, nor none of them presume nor take upon hand to reset, supply, or intercommune with any of the foresaids persons Our Rebels, for the causes foresaids; nor furnish them with meat, drink, house, harbour, victual, nor no other thing useful, nor comfortable to them; or have intelligence with them by word, writ, or message, or any other manner of way, under the pain to be repute and esteemed airt and part with them, in the crimes foresaids, and pursued therefore with all rigor, to the terror of others. Requiring hereby all Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailies of Regalities, and Bailiries, and their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, to apprehend and commit to prison any of the persons above written, Our Re∣bels, whom they shall find within their respective jurisdictions, According to justice; as you will answer to Us thereupon. The which to do We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full power; by these Our letters, deiivering them by you duely execute, and in∣dorsed again to the Bearer. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixth day of August, one thousand six hundred seventy and five years, and of Our Reign, the twenty seventh year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii. God save the King. Edinburgh, Re-Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty: Anno DOM. 1675. CUM PRIVILEGIO.
