s1559 52529232 178958
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament till the ninth day of January next to come. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith. To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren He∣raulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messen∣gers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and several∣ly specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, by the last Act of the last Session of Our present Parliament of this Our Antient Kingdom of Scotland, dated the fifteenth day of the Moneth of June last, Our said Parliament, is declared by Us to be cur∣rent, and is Adjourned to the twelfth day of September next to come. And We Considering, that the present Condition of Our Affairs in this Our Antient Kingdom, doth not Require that the Members of Our said Parliament should meet upon the foresaid day, and We being Unwilling, that they should be put to any Trouble that may be Dispensed with. Do therefore with Advice and Consent of the Lords of Our Privy Council, hereby Adjourn Our said current Parliament, untill the ninth day of January next: Hereby Requiring all the Members of Our Parliament to attend that day in the usual way, and under the Certifications con∣tained in the several Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires of this Our said Antient Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the said Adjournment of Our Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said twelfth day of September, to the said ninth day of January next. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty ninth day of August, and of Our Reign the Fifth Year,1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplementum Signeti. DA. MONCRIEF Cls. Sti. Concilii. God Save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most Ex∣cellent Majesties, Anno DOM. 1693.
