C6165A R175828 [ocm]80922380 191846
The Copy of a Letter to Thomas Buck Esq; Beadle to the Ʋniversity of CAMBRIDGE. Mr. BUCK, IF I had been well you should have heard from me before now, concerning a Request you made to Mr. Turner in October past; which as he is pleased to relate to me, was, That he would tell me from you that I had wronged the Estate at Therlow of Two Thousand Pounds, and that you would prove it to be truth. If you were subject to speak truth, or if I were guilty, your dogmatical assertion would startle me; but I am so well assured of my own Integrity, and have been so much used to such nonninoes from you, and have so often baffled and disproved you concerning such like idle Reports, that all Persons not willing to be deceived, and that will hear with both Ears, look upon such like Reports from you now, but, as indeed they are, some of Mr. Bucks Stories; so that I ac∣count your tongue no slander: But Mr. Turner conceives his Discretion in question by you for his imploying of me. Therefore for his Vindication, I shall once more invite you to a profitable Tryal of your Truth and my Fidelity: But by the way give me leave to ask you a few serious Questions. Was it discretion or honesty of you, that was intrusted, to receive my Accounts, to give me two or three Discharges of them, and for such considerable Sums, and never, as you say your self, so much as to examine them? Was it discretion or honesty about two years after such Discharges, to charge me with 2387 l. 8 s. . and in about two years strong endevours (with the ssistance of espoused Friends, and foul Play o boot) could not prove two pence of that Charge against me? Or if you could, Was it discretion in you to give me an ample general Discharge of all Matters, except 80 l. 09 s. 04 d. for Rent never denied you? Were not you, only, guilty of part of that you charged me withall? Was it discretion or honesty, about three or four years after all this to report that I had wronged the Estate of four or five thousand pound, and yet not to appear to so fair a profer as give and take, to make good your Assertion, or to vindi∣cate your self? Did you exhibit just Accounts, and yet sometimes want 2387 l. 08 s. 00 d. other times 4 or 5000 l. and now 2000 l. and could tell no better where to find any of the Sums then at these Rates? Did you understand your self and my Accounts no better? Do you understand either yet? Do you not play the Lapwing all this while, and make the biggest noise farthest from the Nest? Do you believe your self in this Report to Mr. Turner; 'tis a Lye that you have told often enough? If you do, you must needs be willing to joyn this Issue, viz. You and I to chuse either of us a Man, to impower those two to chuse a third Person, all of honest Repute, and living within eight Miles of New-Market; just half way for both of us to meet: Into those three Persons hands, you and I to deposite a Hundred Pounds a piece; and if you can make it appear that I have wronged the Estate at Therlow of Two Thousand Pounds, so as two of those three shall subscribe it under their hands, then shall they award you all the money; but if you fail of such Proof, then good reason it should be awarded me. From the Three and Twentieth Day of July to the Second of August, will be my best Time to meet; if any of those days suit your occasions, fix your Day, name your Man, and send me my Charge in particulars; there is reason I should have a few daies to prepare my Defence, you having had so many years to prepare a Charge. If my Time suit not your Occasions, do you set a Time before Michaelmass next, Ile set Harvest Occasions aside to meet you, as the best Harvest I can make; and 'tis pity but one of us should prove Faithful to that Trust, since you know I did make it appear in several particulars wherein your Accounts were not just; to say nothing of your . All you can say will not signifie a jot, nothing but on these Terms, To meet Westly, June 14, 1669 Your very Friend
