P1401A [ocm]80923350 191948
This following is a Copy of a LETTER that was sent (with the foregoing) to William Penn, George Whitehead, and the rest of their Ministers. I That am a Man of Peace, Love, and good Will to all Mankind, have been made to ap∣pear like a Man of Strife and Contention: And why was it? Surely it could not be for any earthly or worldly Advantage I was made so to appear; but it was certainly so order'd, and that by the very same good Spirit (and, at times, in the same Reluctancy of Mind) that Jeremiah was sent to the Israelites of old. Now, if this be true, as most true it is, then it concerns you (unto whom I have so ap∣peared) to reflect upon your selves, and say, What have we done? or are a doing? that such a Person should be [thus] raised up, to Reprove, Warn, and Caution us, as we formerly Reproved, Warned, and Caution'd others? I say, If the Consideration of this was but duly and deeply weighed and considered of by you (as without all doubt it should and ought to be) then 'twere possible you might yet come to see, and be made sensible, that 'tis not the Spirit of Christ that acts and guides you, and that it was not in Enmity or Ill-will (as some of you have imagin'd) that I have been made so often to visit and exhort you, but that it was [only] in love to Truth, and in obedience to the good Spirit of the ever Blessed GOD, in whose Service I desire evermore to be found faithful. J. P. 2d of (the Month call'd) August, 1696,
AN ABSTRACT Of a Large Printed Paper, from Pensilvania, Intituled, A Brief ADMONITION to the Elders and Ministers of the People called QUAKERS. MAny Months have I been pressed in Spirit to Warn you, the Leaders and Ministers of the People call'd Quakers— viz. Tho' you were careful, at your half Years Meeting of Ministers at Phila∣delphia, the 6th of the 4th Month (June) last, to Forbid your Friends wearing a Speckled Neckcloth, a Ribband for a Hatband, and the like; and seem very Zealous to forbid your Friends to Marry with other Christian Professors. Nay, and to warn them, on pain of Judgment, not to have so much Society with your late Friends (whom you call Separates) as to go to their Weddings, Preaching it up as a Sin so to do. And the Yearly Paper from London, warning their Friends to keep to the plain Language of Thee and Thou, &c. Yet, know assuredly, That tho' Your Religion lie in these Outward Ceremonies, they are but Trifles— And are Insufficient to divert Divine Vengeance, which is certainly your Portion, if you still neglect, first to Clense the Inside from Pride and Envy, against your fellow Creatures, for refusing Conformity to your Ways. And inasmuch as you declare to the World, That you are Arriv'd to such a height of Perfection, beyond other Christian Professors, that you are so far free from Sin, as that you have no need to ask Forgiveness; From hence it is, That you do never, in your Prayers, in Meetings, ask Forgiveness of Sin. [Tho' tis apparent, That there is no Religious Society this day in Chri∣stendom, that are Guilty of more Whoredoms, Adultries, and other Foul and Abominable Actions than you have been, the Number considered.] There∣fore cease your Woes and Warnings against the Whoredoms and Abominations that are in the World, and first cry out against those Things that are a∣mongst your selves; first Clense your own Camp, and then Warn others to beware of these Evils, &c. The abovesaid Admonition (with others) being sent from Pensilvania some time ago (put forth by one Daniel Leeds, an Antient Quaker) tis thought meet to have it Reprinted, and to be Communicated to the Quakers here, that so they may see (notwithstanding their High Boast of being Free form Sin) That the Whoredoms, Adultries, and other Immoralities of their Friends beyond Sea, are as great, as theirs are here: And for which, there is great cause of Sorrow, and deep Humiliation, which that this Paper might be Instrumental to pro∣duce amongst them, would be to the Joy, and true Rejoycing of some Sincere Souls that have Mourned for them; and that still heartily desires their Repen∣tance and Amendment of Life; and that longs to see the Day, wherein they might be truly Humbled and Repent: This being the Way, and there is not another, for an Holy and Happy Reconciliation, both with the LORD, and all that truly Love, Fear, and Obey HIM, and that are Zealous for HIS Honour and Glory; of which Number, the Publisher hereof desires Evermore to be found, whilst he has a Being in this World; that when his Days are Ended, and his Work Finished for which he was Born, he may lay down his Head in Peace, and be receiv'd to Mercy with all the Holy Ancients. Even so Amen and Amen, is the humble Desire, and constant Prayer of a Friend to the whole Creation. J. P. LONDON, Printed in the Month called July, 1698.
