S3532 R184144 [ocm]62369670 188133
A Short Account of a Second Engagement, That happened on Monday Night and Tuesday Morning, between the King and Prince of Oranges Army near WINDSOR: With the King's withdrawing from White-Hall; and the Burning of the Popish Mass-Houses; as also the Surrender of the Tower of London. WE Promis'd in our Last, a fuller Account of the Engagement at Reading; but there happen'd since a deeper Skirmish between the same Forces, and other surprizal Accidents since of greater Consequence, obliges us for the Publick Satisfaction, to give a further Account of the present Occurrences. The King's Forces at Reading, for the smallness of their Number, being wor∣sted; The Prince's Army, without any considerable Resistance, made their gradual Approaches towards Windsor, where some Regiments of the King's being Quar∣ter'd, went out in Battalia to Oppose them. The Fight began in the Evening, which continued all Night, with fierce Skirmishes, manag'd with all the Art and Stratagems that Experience or Courage cou'd direct. In the Morning, coming to a resolute Re-encounter, when the Prince of Orange prevailing, got an absolute Conquest. This sudden Defeat, with Horror and Consternation, drew the Re∣sidue of the Vanquish'd Forces towards London, as their last Sanctuary. But the consequence is as deplorable, when coming to Town, they were Disbanded by their Officers, as were several other Regiments the same day. The King having notice of this Defeat, withdrew from Court, with a few Nobles, on Tuesday Morning, about Two a Clock; the Queen and Young Prince being gone the day before. The consequence of this, was as Deplorable as His Majesty's Absenting, when the Commonalty taking advantage of this Opportunity, did what seem'd good in their own Eyes; and the same Night, they gathering into Multitudes in several parts of the City, made great Bone-fires, by pulling down the Popish Mass-Houses, viz. That of St. Jones's, Lincolus-Inn-Fields, Lime-street, &c. Burning their Foppish Trumpery in Smithfield, and in other open places convenient for that purpose. The same day the Lord Mayor, sitting in Council, order'd the Government of the Tower into the Hands of the City. The Prince, without Resistance, is now Marching towards the City, with his Intire Body. There being this day Arriv'd here some Officers Commissioners from His Highness, to assign Quarters for his Van-Guard, whose Orders are ef∣fectually performed, and Quarters already Taken in Holbourn and else-where; they being expected in Town to Morrow, and the Prince on Thursday. LONDON, Printed for W. D. 1688.
