59.5 S113006 99848247 176928
THE HOLINESSE OF CHRISIAN CHVRCHES, OR A Sermon preached at the consecration of the Chappell of Sr. Iohn Baker, of Sussing-Herst in Cranbrooke in Kent, Baronet: upon 1 Cor. 11.22. By ROBERT ABBOT, vicar of the same Parish. Ecclesia homines sunt, de quibus di∣citur; ut exhiberet sibi gloriosam ec∣clesiam. Hanc tamen vocarripsam Do∣mum Oraionum, Idem Apostous te∣stis est, ubi ait; Nunquid domos non habetis ad manducandum & bibendū? An Ecclesiam Dei contemnitis: Au∣gustinus. Quaest. sup. Levit. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Paine, for P. Stephens, and C. Meredith, and are to be sold at their Shop, at the signe of the Golden Lyon in Pauls Church-yard. 1638.
Perlegi hanc Concionem, di∣gnámque judico quae typis mandetur. Octob. 5. 1638. Tho: Wykes R. P. Episc. Lond. Sacell. domest.
TO HIS HONORA∣BLE FRIEND, THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir IOHN BAKER Ba∣ronet, Grace, Mer∣cy, and Peace. SIr, this Ser∣mon is yours by occasion, and request: and though, in respect of it selfe, it deserves not to appeare in publick; yet for your sake, whose name it must beare, I desire it might continue to po∣steritie. Too few yong and noble
gentlemen, shew a pious care, and conscience to religion. The lusts of the eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life, consume their dayes with vanity and wick∣ednesse. But God of his mer∣cy, hath seasoned you with a better spirit, and so stated you in good, that I am confi∣dent, neither I, nor others shall ever see you altered. I rejoyce, and it is my crowne, to see some deepe stamped Cha∣racters in you. I have known you from your infancy, and (from your constant love) have beene no stranger from your house: yet did I never heare you (blessed be God) either in passion, or out, to sweare the least oath, no nor so much as once to use the
strong and too much tossed Asseverations of Faith, and Troth; you are constant, day by day, at your private devo∣tions, to blesse all your occa∣sions, to prepare you for God whensoever hee shall call, and in the meane time to keepe your sweete acquain∣tance with heaven. You are so resolved an observer of Gods solemne worship on the Lords day, in comming with the first (as you can) and going with the last (like a doore keeper in the house of your God,) that, by your good will, you would not, on any season, loose any part of publike prayer, preaching, catechizing, or Sacraments, so oft as they are tendred, e∣ven to the last blessing. And
now, Sir, because of the di∣stance betwixt your house and your Church, and because you would avoid not onely the guilt, but the suspicion of Clandestine and unwarrant∣able courses, you have obtai∣ned by Royall and Ecclesia∣sticall order a consecrated Chappell in your owne house; In which you have, not onely daily prayers according to the lawes of our blessed Church; but also you doe sup∣ply the defects of publike worship, which long waies, and foule weather doe bring upon you, and your blessed family in you. How happy is it, Sir, for you, and yours, that you had such Religious Parents to learne you to beare the sweete
yoake of Christ from your youth! How happie that God hath graciously sanctified their care, and your submissi∣on and observance so, as that you goe on to sow your good seede in this your morning, and doe not yet let your hand rest, when your yeares speake a full, and ripe young man! Lastly, how happy that God hath given you a religi∣ous Lady, whom you dearely love, and who closeth with you in Love, Mercy, and the devout acts of worship both in publick and private! Long may you live together in con∣jugal love, and pious affecti∣ons, to God, goodnesse, and good people! And as you have begunne, and hitherto continued, to be good exam∣ples
to all my flocke in good workes, and frequenting the house of your God: so that you may still live, and die in such indeavours, resolutions, and practises, shall be the ear∣nest prayers of Your Worships in all Christian observance ROBERT ABBOT.
THE HOLINESSE OF CHRISTIAN CHVRCHES, OR A Sermon preached upon 1 Cor. 11.22. Despise ye the Church of God? OF divers questi∣ons asked in the Scripture, this is a convincing, & denying que∣stion: smiting their hearts for despising the Church, and denying that it ought to bee so. It lookes fully upon the businesse in hand; and that
upon this text. For heere is a Church certainely, the Church of God, & the Church that must not be despised. Thus farre I am in a right way to speake something to you to the purpose: our good God grant both a beginning, and a good issue! It is true, Sacrum, Sacellum. the present act is about a Chappell, not a Church: but that is but a di∣minutive of this, Rom. 16.5. a daughter of the mother, for the Church that is in thine house. All the question will bee double: What meant by the church of God. what is meant by the Church of God? and what is meant by the despising of them? Though this word Church be diversly taken, (which hath occasioned a various interpre∣tation) yet certainely heere, Vide Ful∣leri Mi∣scellanea. Ios. Mede, of Chur∣ches. God would have us under∣stand the place where Gods peo∣ple meete for his publick worship.
If yee say,  that in the Apo∣stles daies there were no such churches as wee have.  I an∣swer, that if by churches you understand large and stately buildings, such as heathens had then, and Christians have now; I yeeld there were not. They were in ambulatory troubles, and had not wealth so flowing for the body, that they could spare so much for the soule. But if you under∣stand a cōmodious & fit place, se∣parate from common to holy use, then surely they had them, such there were. For other∣wise they had wilfully negle∣cted that golden rule, that all things bee done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. for the avoiding of the snares of Heretickes and Schismatickes in private con∣venticles. And that this mentioned heere, was such, doth appeare
in the text at three turnes. First, 1 Cor. 11. ver. 18. They were a Church. 1 Cor. 1. before they came together now. ver. 20. Paul saith, when yee come together in the Church. Here are three considerables, the people (yee): their act (coming together): and the place where (the Church). Secondly, what he called a church, hee calls a place; when yee come together into one place; not as one peo∣ple. Thirdly, that which hee called a church, and a place, hee doth oppose to their own houses, have yee not houses to eate in at home? ver. 22. despise yee the church of God? where hee taxeth a double fault. First, that in eating and drinking they kept not to the use of their owne houses: and se∣condly, that they basely abused the church of God after their owne lusts, What meant by despising them. and how was that? Consider next, what is meant by despising them: They
used them like common houses for works of nature and com∣plement: like profane houses for sinne, and Epicurisme: and they used them not reve∣rently, according to the uses whereto they were designed: So they despised them. You see now,  The divisi∣on of the text. that wee have here, A place, the church of God; and an use, not to despise, but to honour it. And thus it comes fully to the worke in hand, setting this holy truth upon our consci∣ences,  that when places are consecrated, The main bent of the text. and set a part to Gods services, they must not bee despised by ordinary and sinfull uses, but honoured as churches of God. Shall I speake what reve∣rence God required to the Ta∣bernacle? The Levites pitch their tents neere it, but the people were not to approach
but for sacrifice, and other service. Num. 1.51 The stranger might not come neere when it was set up by the Levites upon paine of death. Num. 16. Levit. 10.2 The Priests were not to meddle with the high-priests office: and if they erred, they were judged. The high-priest was not alwaies to enter into the holy of holies: that must be but once a yeare, or he must dye. All priests must bee sure not to enter with unwashen hands, and feet, or they must die. Thus God nourished their reverence to the place of his publicke worship: yet theirs was but a shadow of Christ, wee in our assemblies have a promise of Christ him∣selfe (as in a place of presence) made good in the midst of the seven golden candlestickes. Math. 18. Vt in loco praesen∣tie. Apoc. 1.2 Shall I speake what reve∣rence the Iewes had to their
sanctuary? Wiemse in legem cer. They would not enter with staffe, or shooes, no nor spit but in an handker-chiefe. They made not a thorough-fare of it, to shorten their way, but went about. They turned not their backe upon it, Ezek. 8.16 but went side-long to keepe themselves from suspi∣cion of idolatrie. They went not the same way they came in: Ezek. 46. none of them sate in the outer court, save the Kings-house.  They made not houses like that, 2 Sam. 7.18. and all to nourish reve∣rence to the house of God. Shall I say how the very Turkes doe reverence their meeting places?  They pu∣nish with present death any man that voides excrements against them. They go not towards them to worship, but on hands and feete following their priest, neither doe they enter them, but with their
shooes off. They cover the floores of them with tapestry or arras, whereupon they tread, and all to make shew of reverence to the house of their God. Shall I speake how the church of Rome doth reve∣rence her churches?  They do enough past question. They speake loftily among them, who ascribe some divine vertue to the stones and walls of them. Aliquam virtutem divinam saxis & parietibus. Vt sint A∣sili loco. They also yeeld priviledges unto them, as places of refuge and sanctuary for capitall offen∣ces. But as this was not of the rigour of the law (for thou shalt take the murtherer from mine altar, Ex 21.14 2 Chro. 23.14. 1 King 2.29.30. that he may dye), so it makes them dens of theevs, yet this must be granted, that this they doe, to nourish re∣verence to Christian Chur∣ches.
Shall I now say, what reve∣rence wee (if wee would be good Christians) must have to churches? wee must not despise them. The nicest Casuist, that I have seene, saith two things to our purpose. First, Ames. Cas. consc. 40 pag. 182. 1 In usu sacro. in sacred and holy use, instru∣ments set a part to Gods worship must be used with singular reve∣rence: because of the neere re∣lation betwixt the act of worship, and the instrument of it. 2 Extra u∣sum sa∣crum. Se∣condly, out of sacred and holy use, that, though no positive ho∣nour (by Gods appointment) bee due to such instruments, Exinsti∣tuto. as was to the Temple and Arke: yet there is a privative honour due, whereby we must be carefull so to demeane our selves that wee di∣minish not that honour which is due in holy use: that so our proper worship by this out∣ward reverence may bee ad∣vanced.
But that I may be more di∣stinct, I shall propound three particulars. 1 Whether holinesse bee to be attributed to churches? 2 How Reverence is to bee shewed to them? 3 The grounds of this Reve∣rence. If you aske,  Whether holiuesse bee to bee attributed to chur∣ches. whether Holi∣nesse be to bee given to chur∣ches? I answer, there are two kindes of holinesse, an inhe∣rent and actuall holinesse, and an appendent and Relative ho∣linesse. Inherent holinesse is double. The first is fundamen∣tall in Christ, who is an holy thing, Luk. 1.35. Act. 4.30. Gods holy one Iesus, out of whom is derived all our annointing and saving holi∣nesse. The second is deriva∣tive, which springs from Christ to his members, the holy prophets, Luk 1.70. 1 Cor. 3.17. men of God, and saints. The Temple of God is holy
which yee are. Appendent and relative holinesse may bee in things not capable of rea∣son, three waies. First, Ex insti∣tuto et ex∣emplo. from institution, appointment, and from example. So the Sanctu∣ary and Temple of old, whi∣ther God sent his people to seeke him, Deut. 12.5 and to which God tyed his visible presence: and where the Prophets, priests, Levites, Saints, Christ and his Apostles worshipped in their course. Secondly,  Ex exem∣plo, sed non ex institu∣to. Psal. 74.8. Deo ap∣probante, non praeci∣piente. from exam∣ple, but not from divine insti∣tution, and appointment. So the Synagogues of the Iewes were holy, which were ap∣pointed by men to advance holy worship. For though they are called the Synagogues of God,  yet it is because God approved them, Analogicè pervolun∣tariam consecra∣tionem. though hee commanded them not. Third∣ly, from proportion, to the former and voluntary conse∣cration,
whereby the thing it∣selfe is not made more holy materially, and formally, but finally, and reductively for use, as when they are set apart and applyed to holy uses. Thus Churches and Chappels with their accessaries are rightly said to be holy; and it is a snare to the man who devou∣reth that which is (thus) holy. Pro. 20.25 If you next aske,  How reve∣rence is to be shewed to chur∣ches. how reve∣rence is to bee shewed unto them? I answer, two wayes. First, in respect of the bulke and body of them, wee are to make them some way fit for the worship of such a God as is to bee worshipped there. Christ made choise of an up∣per chamber which was large and trimmed to eate the passe∣over in, Mar. 14.15. and they are called blasphemers, Psal. 84.10. who burnt up the Synagogues.
Secondly, Psal. 5. Vbirisus in ecclesia ibi Diabo∣li opus est. Greg. reverence is their due, in respect of the use of them, wee must come with feare unto them, where laughing is in the Church, there is the Devils worke, saith Saint Gregory: and B. Chrysostom thus expostu∣lates with his auditors, Sacerdos orationem offerens, tu rides? Nihil ti∣mes, &c. Chrysost. when the Priest offereth up thy pray∣ers to God, doest thou laugh? doest thou not feare? doest thou not tremble? The church is no market-stall or standing, but the place of Angels, the pallace of the great God. Therefore as Iacob was afraid in Bethel; Gen. 28. Psal. 5.8. and David came in feare to wor∣ship: so reverently must we carry our selves: Psal. 95.5. for holinesse becomes thy house for ever, saith every devout soule. As wee must come with feare, so also must wee reve∣rently performe the whole worship of God there. God hath made a promise to his
people there; and therefore choose to bee an abject in the house of God when thou prayest: bee as low as thou canst; Pulveri∣zato in pulvere sāctuarij. dust thy selfe in the dust of the sanctuary, said the Iew of old. When thou hea∣rest, give attention with reve∣rence: damnation came in by the eare, and salvation must come that way too. When thou comest to the ta∣ble of the Lord, receive the seales of the covenant with reverence also; to have God binde himselfe to thee, and to have thy selfe, binde thy selfe to God, Opus vel ipsis ange∣lis formi∣dandum. Hier. is a worke to be trem∣bled at even by the Angels themselves. Againe, wee must not ap∣ply churches or chappels, to any private use. Saint Paul blames the Corinthians heere for their feasts of love: and Saint Augustine saith of those
kinde of Church-ales, which by abuse crept into them in his time, August. Epist. that if they came thi∣ther Christians, they went home Pagans. And this wee know, that many decrees have beene made against buying, selling, dancing and playing in them. Yea, Act. 20.9. and when Eutichus did but sleep while Paul preached, he fell down, and it had almost cost his life, though he might have had his excuse, that Paul preached too long. Lastly, wee must not apply Churches or Chappels to any sinnefull use. Heathen priests would perswade young vir∣gines, whom they purposed to defloure, 1 Sam. 2.22 that their Gods desi∣red their company: and yee know what the sonnes of Ely did. Such are they that make the church a place of gazing, pride, contention, lust∣full thoughts, or the like. But
as Ahasuerus dealt with Ha∣man, Hest. 7.1. will he force the queene be∣fore me in the house? cover his face, away with him, hang him up: so, and worse, will God deal with them, that dare sinne before him in his house. This reverence yee owe to Churches in their bulke, and use, And that yee may be con∣vinced,  The grounds of reverence to Chur∣ches. 1 Dedica∣tion. consider thirdly, the grounds of this reverence, which are two. First, our churches and chappels are de∣dicated to God, for his holy u∣ses and services: and what is this? when is it done? It is their setting apart to ho∣ly uses for ever. What de∣dication is? The Jewes did it by holy oyle appointed by God, as a type of Christs gra∣ces: and then no ordinary businesses, though the end was sacrificing, Ioh. 2.14. Mar. 11.16 was to be done in them; nor so much
as a burthen to be carried tho∣rough them. Bellarm. The church of Rome doth it by over-loading ceremonies, as oyle, salt, ashes, on which they write the Al∣phabet in Greeke, and Latine. They set up twelve crosses, and twelve lampes, burning, to sig∣nifie the twelve Apostles preaching the crosse. They are given to it; let them a∣lone, they will not doe other∣wise. Hos. 4.17. 1 Tim. 4.5. But wee doe it with the word of God, & prayers, de∣cent ceremonies, to hold them for Gods uses for ever. Thus Constantine having fini∣shed a goodly church, dedica∣ted it with orations, sermons, prayers, praises, saith Euse∣bius. And thus doe wee,  that they may bee made publicke to prevent conventicles: Why dedi∣cated. see Hook. ec∣cles. pol. and that they may bee thus yeel∣ded up to Gods worship, to
keep off prophane bodies and soules, And though God doe not give such a sign of posses∣sion now as in the time of the law, Ex. 40.34 (when a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the Ta∣bernacle; 1 Kin. 18.11 and the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord. And therefore, when Pompey saw a cloud in the ho∣ly of holies, it grew to a per∣verse judgment that the Jews were Nubicolae, worshippers of a cloud): though God (I say) do not thus take possessi∣on of our churches, yet cer∣tainely hee accepts of the ad∣vancement of his worship by his owne rules of edifying, de∣cency, 1 Cor. 14.26.40. and order. Thus chur∣ches and chappells are conse∣crated, and dedicated; there∣fore despise them not.
Secondly, 2 Houses of prayer, and so of glorious presence. our churches and chappells are the houses of prai∣er, Though the sacraments and preaching of the word be there too; yet is it prayer that fits them, sanctifieth and seasoneth them unto us, with∣out prayer, the word ordina∣rily is not the word of life, nor the sacraments the seales of life, yee must knocke, if yee would have it opened, Math. 7 7. ye must aske, if yee would have. Shall I say more? when Gods peo∣ple are in them for worship, they are places of the best pre∣sence. The Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost are there by way of love, grace, communion for our blessed assistance. For though he dwell not in temples made with hands, Act 7.48 by way of confinement, yet doth hee by way of speciall favour amongst two or three that are gathe∣red in his name: Mat. 18.20 and there∣fore
the publicke worship is called the face of God, Psal. 42.2. yea, the angels are there at hand too, by way of service, 1 Cor. 11.10. for the wo∣man must have power on her head because of the Angels. They are therefore houses of prayer, and of glorious pre∣sence, despise them not. Are all christians thinke you, Applicati∣on. now without blame? Are they not covered with Corinthian guilt?  Some care not for the reverent comlines of churches and chappels. To them that care not for comlinesse of chur∣ches. The profane man esteemes the church a prison, the ministe∣ry a bil of inditement, penitent prayers but a devout tragedy, and graves and tombes the shadow of death: therefore hee cares not for them. The Politicians build for them∣selves in state, Ier. 2.14 15. closing themselvs in cedar, cutting themselves windowes, and painting them
with vermilion; Am. 3 15. Am. 6.4. yea houses of Ivory, with beds of Ivory: but a lighter cloake will serve Iupi∣ter, a worse church will serve an assembly of saints by cal∣ling. The covetous worldling eates thistles with the asse, and will serve God enough; if he may do it cheap enough, hee will bee thrifty even to God himselfe. Mar. 10.21 But if hee heare of selling all, and giving to the poore, hee goes away sorrowing, yea, if hee heare of parting with some, to build a church, his devotion is at an hard lift, hee mootes Iudas his case, to what end is this waste? Math. 26.8 The contemner of devotion ca∣reth not what place God hath among men, so hee have any. As Licinius in the dayes of Constantine (pretending a more wholesome aire) drew the people out of the city into the fields to serve God there, so plotting the ruine of churches,
saith the historian: Cogitans eversionē ecclesia∣rum. Euseb. so hee (provided hee may have li∣berty enough, and not bee troubled with that which men call devotion) cares not if oates were sowed where churches stand, why comber they the ground? The scrupulous christian (fea∣ring the superstition of chur∣ches) cares not how low the streame runnes that way. Pa∣ter noster built churches, but his our father shall ptill them down, or let them fall. O saith hee,  they have beene abused to superstition and idolatry! therfore let not a stone lie up∣on a stone unpulled downe, or let them fall. But put the case it be so,  will nothing expiate their guilt but atheisme in their ruine? Originally, they were built to the honour of God, and now by good lawes they are retur∣ned to their proper use, and
sanctified unto us, by the word of God and prayer. Were the Spartan lawes good, for the rooting out of all vines, because men made themselves drunke with the fruite of them? August. Epist. Saint Augustine tells such, that the scriptures have beene abused to make spells and amulets, and yet are they blessed to them that use them well: Iohn 2. and Christ imploy∣ed the water-pots of Jewish superstition in the worke of his first miracle. When Saint Paul was to doe the worke of God, hee con∣versed in Athens, Act. 17.16 dedica∣ted to heathenish Minerva, and sayled in the shippe whose badge was Castor and Pollux. Act. 28.11 So may wee doe Gods businesse in those churches which have beene worse u∣sed.
Yea,  Iohn 4.21 but (saith he) the time is come that wee must not worship God in Samaria, 1 Tim. 2.8 nor Ierusalem, but pray with holy hands and hearts every where, there∣fore what should wee doe with churches?  It is rrue, wee have more freedome since the partition wall be∣twixt Jew and Gentile was pulled downe: but though all dayes are alike in them∣selves, Rom. 14 5 yet, I hope, hee will have one day holier then another in use: so though all places are a like in them∣selves, yet one place may bee holier then another in application, and use, for holy services. If this serve not the turne for the despi∣sers of churches, let us for∣get that there are any such a∣mong CHRISTIANS, till wee see them judged,
and passe further. Others come not to chur∣ches and chappells with feare,  To them that come to churches without feare. and so despise them. They doe not thinke of their dedi∣cation, nor of the fearefull presence of God and Angels, nor of the reverent Acts of worship: and therefore take not heede to their feete when they goe into the house of God. Eccles. 5.1 They forget Gods command to Moyses, when hee was to talke with GOD, put off thy shoes from thy feete. Ex. 3.5. They forget GODS command by Moyses, Ex. 30. make a laver, to wash the priestes when they enter my house. They forget Davids exhor∣tation, O come let us wor∣ship and bow downe, Psal 95.6. let us kneele before the Lord our ma∣ker: yea, and CHRISTS zeale too, who, whatsoever hee endured would not suffer
the house of prayer to bee di∣shonoured. Iohn 2. Hence is it that they come into churches and chappells, as into a play∣house to see and to bee seene, to heare one act his part for two houres, and away, yea worse, as into an ale∣house, to laugh, fleere, and talke. Others againe,  care not to despise them by any com∣mon or sinnefull use. To them that put them to common and sinfull uses. As in our summer fields, the bee gathers hony, the sheep grasse, the hunter his game, but the storke peckes up some toade, or snake, to feede upon them. So they come not to picke up the foode of ANGELS, the heavenly Mannah, but some baser for some wicked lust of sinne to sleepe' upon, from the word and prayer abused. Will yee steale, murther, and
commit adultery, Ier. 7.9, 10. and sweare falsly, and come and stand before mee in this house which is called by my name? So will yee have gadding eyes, wandring thoughts, high lookes? and worse, will yee abuse the meanes of sal∣vation to flatter your selves in sinne, and come into the church of God? will yee thus despise them? Though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Iudah sinne. Let others come and goe wirhout the communion of saints, yet let Saint Pauls wordes sinke into your soules, How chur∣ches ought not to bee despised. despise yee not the church of God. First, despise them not by base uncomelinesse, yee will build houses for the li∣ving, and surely if they bee not founded in confidence to perpetuate your names; nor in unjustice as Ahab, to nigh
Naboths vineyard for his good; nor in oppression, when the stone cries out of the wal, and the beame out of the tim∣ber, Hag. 1. bloods, bloods; nor for ostentation, but for use; it is not unlawfull both for neces∣sity, pleasure, defence, and state: yet the house of God must not lye waste. Yee will build sepulchres for the dead: and surely if they bee not in pride and vaine-glorie; but if they bee to testifie our love to the dead, according to what they were alive; and to testifie our faith in the resur∣rection of the dead: & to pro∣fite our selves by monitors of our mortality; It is not un∣lawfull neither, yet the wit∣nesse of our love to men (in the grave) must not be fairer then the witnesse of our love to God (in the whole Church). In all ages (when peace and
plenty gave liberty) Christi∣ans have beene flowing in workes of charitie and pie∣ty. Heere might yee have seen work-houses for the sound, Wester. Jac. Wel. there hospitals for the sick: Heere almes-houses for the aged, there schooles for the children; Heere colledges for the children of the Prophets, there bride-wells for the idle and incorrigible: Heere chur∣ches for parishes, there chap∣pells for houses: and shall not this provoke your willing mindes? Is nothing left for you? Behold, when Iehu came to Iezreel, and had executed vengeance upon Iezabel, hee said goe now and see this cursed woman, and bury her; 2 Kin. 9.34 for she is a kings daughter. I have done a work of justice, do ye a work of charity to such a person.
There is some little proporti∣on betwixt her and this chap∣pell: Similitu∣do non currit quatuor pedibus. for a similitude agrees not in every particular. It hath beene neglected since the first stone was laid: but now be∣hold it is visited: for it was built as a daughter for the honour of the King of hea∣ven. Goe on (right worthy chri∣stians); and doe so to your owne churches and chappells too. Some monuments may make you infamous, as the building of Babel, Gen. 11. Iosh. 6. 1 King. 16 2 King. 23 the re∣building of Iericho, the set∣ting up of Calves, the ere∣cting of the houses of the So∣domites, the horses of the sun, the houses of abomination to Baal, Ashtoreth, Chemosh, Milchom, and the like. But this worke, and such as this is, shall leave a sweet savour be∣hinde you, when you are
gone, as upon the Centurion, hee loved our nation, Luk 7 5. and hath built us a Synagogue. Yee have done worthily therefore in Ephrata, and made your selves famous in Bethlehem, that yee have not despised it by base uncomlinesse. Secondly,  despise them not by irreverent carriage in them, who can come neere a church or chappell, and not be hum∣bled to thinke how many praiers he hath made in them (or such like) which are justly turned into sinne? wee have sinned, and prayed, and pray∣ed, and sinned, as if our pray∣ers had beene a preparation to our future sinning. The very sight of the place doth, or may, justlie humble us for this. Who can come neere them, and not bee lifted up with such devout thoughts as this, O Lord heare us, heare
thy people that humbly call upon thy name heere. O meete with us in thine own ordinances, (when we meete heere) that we may be taught of God, and furthered in that way that leades to life▪ Who can enter into a church or chappell, and not thinke of the beautie of Gods house, and not crave that (as occasi∣on serves) hee, and Gods people, may see Gods face there? When Cornelius was in a roome of his house (it may be set apart, but for a time) hee said, Act. 10.33. now we are all heere pre∣sent before God: much more may wee in our churches and chappells set a part for e∣ver. I know but three things which can bee a hinderance and impediment unto us, in so pious a worke, and those
are, profit, pleasure, honour, the lust of the eies, 1 Ioh. 2. the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life. All these cannot give reasons weightie enough to conclude the despising of the church of God. As for profit, Math. 16. what will it profit ut to winne the whole world, if wee loose our soules? As for pleasure, Eccles. 2.2 I said to laugh∣ter it is madde, and to mirth, what doth it? the sonnes of men are deceitfull upon the weights: they over-weigh the pleasures of sinne, and un∣der-weigh the paine of mise∣ry. As for honour, if wee seeke honour one of another, and seeke not the honour that com∣meth of God onely, Ioh. 5.44. God will tread downe our life upon the earth, Psal. 7 5. and lay our honour in the dust. But howsoever these prevaile with others, I am sure, that all these three are ingaged, heere not to despise
this church of God. It is built and furnished with cost: profit therefore is engaged, and hath given way to the devout worship of God heere. It is built by a garden of pleasure, a parlour of plen∣tie: pleasure therefore is en∣gaged to give way to the de∣vout worship of God. Iosephs tombe was in a garden, to put thoughts of mortality into his delights, and this chappell is in a garden, to be a monitor (in the midst of refreshments) to the way to immortalitie. It is garnished with the coate of armes below, looking up∣ward: honour offers it selfe to bee serviceable to the de∣vout worship of God. There∣fore as I say, in generall, hus∣bands teach your wives, pa∣rents teach your children, ma∣sters teach your servants, and all Christians provoke one
another not to despise the churches of God: so in speciall in this place as opportunitie is offered. Oh worship God in the beauty of holinesse! Psal 93.5. for ho∣linesse becomes thy house for ever. Thus shall you bring ho∣nour to your God, ornament to your Gospell, edification to your neighbours, and com∣fort to your owne soules in the day of the Lord Iesus, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, bee all praise, power, and Glory, now and for ever. Amen. FINIS.
