9014 506.h.12[27] S123773 99892605 185754
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE ❧ By the King. ❧ A Proclamation appointing the Flags, aswell for Our Nauie Royall, as for the Ships of Our Subiects of South and North Britaine. WEe taking into Our Royall consideration that it is meete for the honour of Our owne Ships in Our Nauie Royall, and of such other Ships as are, or shall be imployed in Our immediate Seruice, that the same bee by their Flags distinguished from the Ships of any other of Our Subiects, doe hereby straitly prohibite, and forbid that none of Our Subiects, of any of Our Nations and Kingdomes, shall from hencefoorth presume to carry the Vnion Flagge in the Maine toppe, or other part of any of their Ships (that is) S. Georges Crosse, and S. Andrewes Crosse ioyned together, vpon paine of Our high displeasure, but that the same Vnion Flagge bee still reserued as an Ornament proper for Our owne Ships, and Ships in Our im∣mediate Seruice and Pay, and none other. And likewise Our further Will and pleasure is, that all the other Ships of Our Subiects of England, or South Britaine bearing Flags, shall from hencefoorth carry the Red-Crosse, com∣monly called S. George his Crosse, as of olde time hath beene vsed; And also that all the other Ships of Our Subiects of Scotland, or North Britaine shall from hencefoorth carry the White Crosse, commonly called, S. Andrewes Crosse, whereby the seuerall Shipping may thereby bee distinguished, and We thereby the better discerne the number and goodnesse of the same; Where∣fore Wee will and straitly command all Our Subiects foorthwith to bee conformable and obedi∣ent to this Our Order, as they will answere the contrary at their perills. Giuen at Our Court at Greenewich,  this fifth day of May, in the tenth yeere of Our Reigne of England, Scotland, France and Ireland. God saue the King. ❧ Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAIESTIE: And by the Assignes of IOHN BILL. 1634.
