16728 S100308 99836153 176331
Decorative border blazon or coat of arms of the city of London. The order of my Lord Maior, the Al∣dermen, and the Sheriffs, for their meetings, and wea∣ring of their Appar∣rell throughout the yeere. ¶ Printed by W. Iaggard, Printer to the Honourable City of London, 1621.
Vpon Midsommer day, for the Election of the She∣riffes of London, &c. MY Lord Maior and the Al∣dermen with the Sheriffes meete at the Guild-Hall, at eight of the clocke in the morning, apparelled in their Violet Gowns lined, and theyr Clokes of Scar∣let lined, without their horses. And when they haue bene toge∣ther in the Councell Chamber a certaine time, concerning the No∣mination of certaine persons to be elected, my Lord and the Alder∣men come out, and put on theyr Cloakes in the Orphanes Court,
and then go downe in order to the Hustings Court, and there beeing set, Master Recorder standeth vp, and maketh his obeysance: first to my Lord, and then vnto the Com∣mons, and declareth vnto them, wherefore they are assembled toge∣ther, shewing vnto them that it is for the Election of one of the She∣riffes of London, and the Sheriffe of Middlesexe, for the yeere next ensuing, and the confirmation of the other Sheriffe, nominated by my Lord Maior, according to his prerogatiue: and also for Master Chamberlaine, and other Offi∣cers. But my Lord and the Aldermen goe vppe to my Lords Court, and there remaine vntill the Sheriffe be named and chosen, the door shut to them. The M. Sheriffes, M. Cham∣berlaine, Master common Serge∣ant,
Master Towne-Clearke, and the Counsellors of the Cittie, and other Officers, remaine still in the Hustings Court, to take and re∣ceiue the Name of him, that shall seeme by their iudgements, freelie and with one consent, to bee nomi∣nated and elected, and iustly tryed out, not onely by voice, but al so by hands, to be Sheriffe for the yeere following. Then the Commons go to the e∣lection of Master Chamberlayne, the two Bridge-masters, the Au∣ditors of the Citties, and Bridge-house accounts, and the Suruey∣ers of Beere and Ale, according to the accustomed manner. That done, the Sheriffes, Ma. Chamberlaine, M. Common Ser∣geant, M. Town-Cleark the coun∣sellors of the Citie, the two secon∣daries, and the Wardens of the head Companies, Mast. Common
Cryer going before them with his Mace, carry vp the report to my Lord, and the Aldermen of theyr saide Election. Which report receiued, my Lord and the Aldermen come downe a∣gaine to the Hustings Court, and there being set in order and placed, M. Recorder standeth vp as he did before, and maketh rehearsal of the Names of those whome they hau nominated and chosen, asking th whether it bee their free election, yea or no. And they grant, yea, yea. Then Mast. Recorder giueth them thankes, and so they arise and de∣part home. On Bartholmew Euen for the Faire in Smithfield. The Aldermen meete my Lorde and the Sheriffes at the Guilde∣hall Chappell, at two of the clocke
after dinner in their violet gowns lined, and theyr Horses, without Cloakes, and there heare Euening Prayer: which being done, they take their horses and ride to New∣gate, and so forth to the gate, ente∣ring into the Cloth Faire, and ther make a Proclamation, and the pro∣clamation beeing made, they ride through the Cloath Fayre, and so turne backe againe thorough the Churchyard of great S. Bartho∣lomews to Aldersgate, and so ride home againe to the Lorde Mayors house. On Bartholmew day for wrestling. So many Aldermen as do Dine with my Lord Maior and the she∣riffs, be apparrelled in their Scar∣let gownes lined, and after dinner, their Horses bee brought to them where they diue, and those Alder∣men which dine with the Sheriffs
ride with them to my Lords house to accompany him to the wrestling Then when the wrestling is done, they take their horses & ride backe againe through the Fayre, and so in at Aldersgate, and so home a∣gaine to the sayde Lord Mayors house. The next day, if it be not Sun∣day, for the shooting, as vpon Bar∣tholomew day: but if it bee Sun∣day, the monday following. For our Lady day in Southwarke. My Lord Maior and the She∣riffes, ride to S. Magnus Church in their Scarlet Gownes lyned, without their Cloakes: after din∣ner at ii. of the clocke, and there the Aldermen meete my Lord, and af∣ter the Euening Prayer, they ride thorough the Fayre, till they come vnto Saint Georges Church, and further to Newington Bridge, or
to S. Thomas of Waterings, to the stones that point out the Liber ties of the Citty (if it bee so theyr pleasures) and they returne backe againe vnto the Bridge-house, and haue a banquet there, and then o∣uer the Bridge, and there the Al∣dermen take their leaue of my Lo. and depart the next way, euery one to his house. And after all is done, and my Lord brought home, my L. Maiors Officers haue a Supper made them by the Bridgemasters. For the swearing of the Sheriffes vp∣on Michaelmas Euen. What day soeuer it falleth, so many of the Aldermen as be bidden to Dinner to either of the sheriffs, come thither to Breakefast, or else to drinke, at eight of the clocke in the Morning, in theyr Violet Gownes furred, with their Violet Cloakes Furred, brought with them without Horses: and if the
Sheriffe bee an Alderman, then they must put on their cloakes, and the Sheriffe likewise his cloake, & so goe to the Guild Hall, betweene two of the gray cloakes: and if the Sheriffe be no Alderman, then to come betweene two of the Alder∣men without Cloakes, and the she∣riffe his Liuery gowne & his hood. And after when he is sworne, then to put on his Violet Gowne and Cloke, and his chaine thereon: and the Aldermen must bring him home to his place, with their Cloakes, to Dinner, and so after Dinner, take their pleasure. Vpon Michaelmas day, for the electi∣on of my Lord Maior. All the Aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffes at eight of the clocke in the Morning, at Guilde-Hall, in their scarlet Gownes and
their Clokes furred, and their Hor∣ses: and after they haue bin a cer∣taine time together in the councell Chamber, they come forth into the Orphanes Court, and put on their clokes, and so goeth in order to the Chappel, there hearing seruice and Sermon, and my Lord with cer∣taine Aldermen, receiue the Com∣munion. And then after the Communion ended, and haue offered, returne a∣gaine into the Councell Chamber, and pause a while, returne to the place where the Hustings is kept, and being set in order, Master Re∣corder ariseth vp, and maketh his obeysance first to my Lord, and af∣ter to the Commons, and declareth vnto them, that they of old custome know that the cause of their assem∣bly and meeting together, is for the election of the Lord Maior for the yeere ensuing; Declaring vnto
them diuers Grauntes from the Kings Progenitors, for this theyr Election from time to time. That done, my Lord and the Aldermen go vppe into my Lords Court, and there tarrie (the doore being shutte to them) till the election be brought to them. Then standeth vp Master Common Sergeant (the Sheriffs standing on either side of him) and by the Sheriffes, M. Chamberlain M. Towne-clearke, the two Se∣condaries, and the Councellors of the City, in the said Hustings court before the Commons. And hee the saide common Sergeant, maketh a short rehearsal of that M. Recorder had spoken to them before, saying: There resteth no more for him to say but to put them in remembrance, in what order and sort they should vse themselues in their election: that is how they must nominate and chuse two, of the which two, my Lorde
and the Aldermen, must confirme one: which two, being nominated, elected, and chosen, Master Com∣mon Sergeant, the Sheriffs, with the rest before named, and certaine of the head Wardens of the cheefe Companies, go vp to my Lord, and the Aldermen, and there present the names of those two, the which the Commons hath nominated in their eelction. Then the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, proceed by Scrutinie to Elect one of those two Personnes which the saide Commons had be∣fore Nominated. Then commeth downe my Lord againe to the Hu∣stings Court, and hee of his lefte hand whom they haue chosen, and so my Lord and the Aldermen sitte downe againe in order: but he who is chosen sitteth next vnto my Lord on his left hand. Then standeth Master Recorder vp, and readeth
vnto them the names of such Per∣sons whome they haue nominated and chosen: of the which my Lord and the Aldermen hath admitted one, whose name is N. asking them whether it bee their free Election, yea, or no. And the Commons an∣swereth, yea, yea. Then the Sword bearer taketh off his Tippet, and hath it for his labour, and putteth on his Chaine, and the Maior new elected standeth vpon the Hustings Court, and giueth them thankes, &c. That being done, the olde Mai∣or doth likewise giue them thanks, &c. Then they arise vp, and put off their cloakes, and my Lord Maior hath the L. Elect riding with him to the eldest Sheriffe to dinner. For the presenting of my Lord Elect, to my Lord Chancellour. Then after dinner, my Lord e∣lect
goeth to my Lord Chancellour if hee be at home, at his Place, or neere vnto it, with v. or vi. of the Aldermen, and Master Recorder with him, in their violet Gownes, either by foote, or by water, as the dwelling place of the Chancellour requireth. The common Hunt, with the extraordinary Officers, and those that be at liberty attend on him. The morrow after Michaelmas day for the Sheriffes going to Westminster. All the Aldermen must be at the two Sheriffes houses in the mor∣ning at viii. of the clocke, in theyr Violet Gownes furred, and their Horses, without cloakes: but my Lord, M. Recorder, and the two Sheriffes must bee in their scarlet gownes furred, and their cloakes borne to Westminster with them, and so ride to the Guild-hall, and from thence to the Vinetree, there
taking Barge, landing at West∣minster bridge, and in the Hall put on their clokes, and so go vp to the Exchequer: and there the two new Sheriffes be presented, and the old sworne to their account. Then they put off their clokes, and take barge, landing againe at the Vintry, and there take horse, and my Lord rideth to the eldest Sheriffe to dinner, M. Recorder and the Sheriffes riding next my Lord, the two Sheriffes carrying two white rods in their hands, & their henchmen going after them. The order for Simon and Iudes day. The olde Maior shall haue so manie of the Aldermen as Dine with him, come to his place at viii. of the Clocke in the morning in their Violet gowes furred, with their Violet Clokes furred, & hor∣ses: and the Sheriffs to fetch him
to the Hall, and there tarrie in the councell Chamber, vntill the new Maior cometh, and the rest of the Aldermen come, with the compa∣nie of either of the Lordes before them: and after they haue bin to∣gether a certaine space, come forth into the Orphans Court, and put on their furred clokes, and goe to the Husting Court, and there being set in order, the common Crier ma∣keth proclamation, commanding e∣uery man to keepe silence. Then M. towne-Clearke gi∣ueth him his Oath, and when hee hath taken his oath, the old Lord ariseth, and giueth the new Lord his place, the old Lord taking the new Lords place: and then master Chamberlaine deliuereth first to him the scepter, next the keyes of the common seale: lastly, the seale of the office of the Maioraltie, af∣ter
M. Swordbearer giueth him the Sword. Then they arise and put off their cloaks, and the old L. rideth home with the new Lord to his place, and there leaueth him, & as many of the Aldermen as Dine with him. And the old Lord with the rest of the Aldermen ride to his place, the sword borne before him, and so after dinner, the Aldermen depart home at their pleasure. On the morrow after Simon & Iudes day for my Lord going to take his Oath at Westminster. All the Aldermen and the She∣riffs come to my new Lord at viii. A Veluet Whood. of the clock, in their scarlet gowns Furred, and their cloakes borne with them, and their horses, and so ride to the Euildhall, and the Bachelors and the Liuery of my Lords company before him.
But the olde Lord rideth from his owne place to the Hall alone, Whood. hauing no Officers to wait vpon him, but the common Hunt, as a Gentleman Vsher going, and the common Huntsman, Veluet Whoodes for both Maiors. and those offi∣cers that be at libertie, with his owne men following him, and so tarrieth at the hall. And after they be come all toge∣ther, they take their horse and ride to the Vintree, & there take barge to Westminster bridge. And after they be landed, the Lord Maior and the Aldermen, put on their Cloakes within the Palace, and goe round about the Hall, making curtesie in the Hall, and so vp the Exchequer, to bee sworn. Then after the oath taken in the Exchequer, come downe a∣gaine, and goe first to the Kings
bench, then to the common place, and so put off their clokes, and goe about the Kings Tombe in West∣minster Abbey, and then take barge againe: and being Landed, rideth to the Guildhall to diuner, and all the Companies of this Citie with him: and at their coming into the hall, the new Lord Maior with ii. of the ancient Aldermen, M. Re∣corder, and the Sheriffes, go vp to my Lords table to bid them wel∣come, and likewise all the other guests there, and from thence to the Lady Maioresse table, and so come out to the Gentlewomens table, and to the Iudges, and so from thence my saide new Lord Maior goeth into the Chamberlaines of∣fice, where he dineth, and the olde Lord Maior at their first coming into the hall, goeth vp to the high table in the Hustings, and there keepeth the state for that feast. And
after the hall is almost serued of the second, then the new L. Mai∣or goeth with Mastèr Recorder, and those aldermen that dine with him, to bid the old Lord and all the guests in the hall welcome. Then after dinner goeth to Pauls with all the Companies wayting before my Lord. For going to Paules on all Saints day, Christmas day, Twefth day, and Candlemas day. All the Aldermen and the She∣riffes come to my Lords place in their scarlet Gownes Furred; A Veluet Whood. All Saints day is the last day that the old Lord rideth with the new. and their cloakes and horses, and from thence ride to the Guild hall, my Lords Companie, and the Bat∣chelers before him, and there hea∣reth Euening Prayer: and when prayer is done they ride to Pauls, and there both the new L. Maior and the olde put on their Clokes,
and goe vp to the Quire, and there heare the Sermon, which done, they goe about the Church, & there put off their cloakes where they were put on. Then they take their horses againe, and the Aldermen bring my Lord home, and then they haue spice bread and hypocrasse, and so take their leaue of my Lord. Vpon S. Thomas day. The Lord Maior and euery Al∣derman is to sit in his Ward in his violet gowne and cloake furred. For Sunday after Christmasse holy daies. My Lord and the Aldermen must be in their violet gownes without their clokes, to the end to heare the sermon. For Monday after Twelfth day. My Lord and the Aldermen meete
at the Guilde-hall at eight of the clocke in the morning in their scar∣let gownes furred, and their clokes furred, without horse, to receiue of their wardes their Indentures of the warmot Enquest, and for the swearing of the Constables and Scauengers. For good Friday. My Lord and the Aldermen meet at Paules Crosse, at one of the clocke, to heare the sermon in their pewke gownes, and without their Chaines and Tippets. For Monday and Tuesday in Easter weeke. All the Aldermen and Sheriffes come vnto my Lords place before eight of the clocke to breakfast, Whood for my Lord. in their scarlet gownes furred, and their cloakes and horses: and af∣ter breakefast, take their horses, & ride to the Spittle, and there put
on their clokes, and so sit downe in order to heare the Sermon, which done, ride homeward in order till they come to the Pump within Bi∣shopsgate, and there so many of the Aldermen as do dine with the She∣riffes, take their leaue of my L. and the rest go home with him. For Wednesday in Easter weeke. Like as afore in the other 2. daies, but that my Lord and the Aldermen must be in their Violet gowns and suteable cloakes. For low Sunday. All the Aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffs at Pauls schoole in their scarlet gowns furred with out their clokes, or horse, to heare the Sermon For Monday and Tuesday in Whitson weeke. my Lords leasure be o goe. The Lord Maior and Aldermen
must meete with my L. at Pauls in their Sarlet Gownes without clokes, to heare the Sermon. For going to Paules the first Sunday of euery Tearme. All the Aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffes at Paules, in their scarlet gowns furred or lined, without clokes or horse, as the time of the yeare requireth, when the Terme beginneth. For the election of the Knights and Bur∣gesses of the Parliament. All the Aldermen meete my Lord and the Sheriffes at Guildhall, at nine of the clocke in their Violet Gownes and their cloakes, furred or lyned, as the time of the yeare, when they shalbe chosen requiretly and sitteth in the Hustings Court while the Commons chuse them. The order is, that they must chuse
Maister Recorder for one of theyr Knights, and one gray cloake for the other, and two commoners for the Burgesses, which done they depart. For the election of Master Chamberlaine and Bridge-Masters, if any of them de∣part within the yeere. My Lord and the Aldermen sit∣teth in the Hustings Court, while they bee chosen, in their Violet gowns, without their cloakes, and doe not remooue vntill the election be done. The vse of my Lords Cloake. From Michaelmas to Whit∣sontide, Beginning vpon Mi∣chaelmas ue. Violet Furred, and from Whitsontide to Michaelmas scar∣let lined. The Lord Maior and those
Knights that haue borne the office of Maioralty, ought to haue their cloakes furred with Gray Amis: & those Aldermen that haue not been Maiors, are to haue their cloakes furred with Calabre. And likewise such as haue beene Maiors, are to haue their cloakes lyned with changeable Taffatie, and the rest are to haue them lined with greene Taffaty. For the buriall of Aldermen. The Aldermen must be in their Violet gowns, but they that haue of their friends blacke gownes. And if any Alderman dieth, ma∣ster Sword bearer, is to haue a blacke Gowne, or xxxiii. s. iiii d. in money: and if he giueth my Lord a blacke Gowne, Master Sword∣bearer must haue another, or xl. s. in money, the price thereof: and so
carry the Sword in blacke before my Lord. Master Chamberlaine is not to weare his Tippet, but when my Lord Maior, or my maisters the Al∣dermen weare either Scarlet or Violet. For the Orphans Court. My Lord and the Aldermen come vnto the Guildhall in their Violet Gownes, without cloakes, but my Lord Maior must haue his cloake on. Which Court the common Crier warneth. The foure Pleaders, the Cham∣berlaine, Towne-cearke, common Sergeant, ii. Iudges of the She∣riffes Court, the Secondaries, vnder Chamberlaine, and Bridge-masters are to attend my Lord at his house, before his going abroad vpon all festiuall times and gene∣rall dayes. FINIS.
