P448_VARIANT C.20.f.9[262] C.20.f.9[263] [ocm]70804051 192752
A Warning to all lewd Livers. By the Example of a disobedient Child, who riotously wasted and consumed his Fathers and Mothers goods, and also his own, among strumpets and other Lewd Livers, and after died most miserably on a Dung-hill. To the Tune of, Sir Andrew Barton. demonic figure with horns, pointed tail, wings, and an erect phallus a man a woman MY bléeding heart with grief and care doth wish all young men to beware That they no such like steps may tread nor lead the life which I have lead. My Father was a Gentleman as many Gallants witnesse can He had no sons but onely I, which made his gold and silver flye. When as my Father had me sent to fell his goods and take up rent I did consume and waste the same. in drinking or unlawful game. The Cards and Dice were my delight, I haunted Taverns Day and Night Lewd Women were my chiefest Ioys and my conforts were cut-purse boys. Gods holy Word I dis-obey'd I car'd not what the Preacher said For quaffing cans of Ale and Béer, was all the service I would hear. Thus acting my ungracious part I broke my aged fathers heart When gashly death on him did seize I thought my self in happy case. What he had left I thought well got, but now the shame falls to my lot Five hundred pound in good red Gold, for wine and béer I quickly sold. Then was I prest to serve the King, that might my name to honour bring A Souldiers life I hold it base and alwaies took it in disgrace. And having thus consum'd my store, I to my Mother went for more Who sold and morgag'd all her land, and put the mony in my hand. And then with tears these words she said thou knowest my Son thy fathers dead No more is left but I and thee therefore dear Son be good to mée. If that thy love from me should fall I have no friend on earth at all Therefore good Son to me prove kind and thou reward in heaven shalt finde. Then on my bended knées fell I desiring of the Lord on high A shameful death might be his end▪ that would his Mother once offend. All you that do no reckoning make of swearing when your words you speak Give ear to that which Ile you tell lewd livers seldome dyed well You disobedient children all draw néer and listen to my fall. Example take, repent  time lst that your woes be like to mine
The second part to the same Tune. a man and two women YOu fathers déer and mothers kinde, bear you this lesson in your minde Trust not too much a wicked Child, for oft times men are so beguil'd. When twigs are gréen you may them ply ut let them grow till they be dry They will so stiffe and stubborn stand you cannot bend them with your hand. So I that ran a wicked race and to amend had not the grace Sixtéen score pound in good red gold nto my hand my mother told But in the compass of one year I spent it all as may appear nd having left no means at all, I unto robbing straight did fall Then did I steal my mothers Rings, her brass, her pewter, and such things, The very bed whereon she lay I like a villiam stole away. What ever I could get or take I thereof straight would money make My flinty heart did feel no grief, to see my mother want relief. At last she grew excéeding poor and beg' relief from door to door, No Infidel nor Pagan vild could bring to light so bad a child. At last my mother lost her breath as she constrained was by death Who yeild rlief when friends gro scnt and easeth those that are in want From place to lace then was I tost by every man and woman rost, No harbour could I get whereby I might at night in safe-guard lye My dearest kinsfolks do me chide my nearest friends mock and deride Those that were my consorts of late their love is turned into hate. Those that have feasted many a time and fed upon that which was mine Despise at me a long the stréet as if they should a Serpent meet. Both Old and Young, both great & smal, both rich and poor despise me all No friend to take my part have I but was constrain'd in field to lie. In this my extream miserie, my grief, and my necessitie No creature gave for my relief one peece of bread to ease my grief But like a poor despised wretch his latest gaspe that he did fetch Was on a Dung-hil in she night when as no creature was in sight. But in the morning he was found, as cold as clay upon the ground Thus was he born in shame to die and end his daies in misery. Take warning young men by this vice learn to avoid both Cards and Dice Lewd womens company forbear they are the high-way unto care All Parents whilst your babes be yg look to their waies in hand and tong Then wickednesse will not abound but race in children may be found. FINIS. M. P. London. Ped for Fra. Grove on Snow-hill, tred according to Order.
