P3692 712.m.1[31] R225309 99886033 186399
A PROPOSAL For Putting some Stop to the Extravagant Humour of Stock-jobbing. WHEREAS great Quantities of several sorts of Shares in Stocks and Bank, &c. are daily Bought and Sold by Brokers, Stock-jobbers, and Others; and by divers Arts and Stratagems Advanc'd and Lower'd, after an extravagant and unaccountable manner, to the great Pre∣judice of many Gentlemen, Merchants, Traders, and O∣thers, and Ruine of many Families, and to the Discourage∣ment of the Trade of this Kingdom in General, by imploy∣ing the Stock and Time of the Traders, whose Heads and Tongues being busied how to Outwit and Circumvent one another, are not at leisure to mind and follow their proper Trades and Callings. It is therefore humbly Proposed, THAT from and after the  Day of  every Person who shall sell any Share or Shares in the said Stock or Bank, &c. shall within  transferr the same to the Buyer thereof; and upon every such Transfer∣ring there shall be paid the Summ of  per Cent. by the Seller, and the Summ of  per Cent. by the Buyer; and the Summ of  per Cent. by the Bro∣kers, &c. which Summs, so paid, shall be appropriated as the Wisdom of the Parliament shall think most meet. That no Stock brought shall be sold again, until it be first Transferred under a great Penalty. That no Bargain shall be vallid for any Stock sold, until it be transferred, and the several Summs paid, as aforesaid. That Certain Days and Times be appointed to Buy and Sell Stocks in, as there is for Cloth at Blackwell-hall, &c. That no Stock be sold till the Owner have had it for a certain space of Time. By which means the extravagant and unaccountable Me∣thods of Brokers, Stock-jobbers, and Others, will in great measure be Restrain'd; the Government supply'd with a Considerable Summ of Money Yearly; the Fair Buyer and Seller at all times Accommodated; and the Tradesmen more at Leisure to follow their several Trades and Callings. All which is humbly offer'd to Consideration.
A PROPOSAL FOR Putting some Stop To the Extravagant Humour OF STOCK-JOBBING.
