S2194 C.20.f.9[120] C.20.f.9[121] R216096 99884640 192669
The Seamans Renown in Winning his Fair Lady. Brave Marriners by this you may behold What 'tis to be a Seaman stout and bold. Their Seaman won a Lady by his valour, And with his Sword he curl'd her Fathers Choller: Therefore go boldly on when you begin, And know Faint-heart did ne're fair Lady Win. Tune of, A Week before Easter. woodcut of man and woman holding hands THere was a bold Seamen, a ship he could stear Of such a brave Seaman you never did hear And he lov'd a Lady of beauty so clear, and now you shall hear of his wooing. Seaman. O pitty fair Lady, let pitty thee move, I'm deep in affection, and tossed in Love, And ou are my Lady, my Turtle, and Dove, on you I do set m affection. Lady. O hold thy peace Seaman, for that may not be, For I am a match for a higher degree. And thy blood and my blood can never agree, then Seaman take this for an answer. Seaman. O Lad your answer doth make me to grieve, Tis true that we all came from Adam and Eve, O loving word to my life is a rerieve, altough I am in Cupids Prsion. Lady. Oh why should you say you'r a prisoner to me, O hold, forbear Seaman, for that may not be, We both may have matches fit for our degree. then forbear and take this for answer. Seaman. O no, for an answer I will it not take, Although your denial doth make my heartke, I'le rather lay down my own life at the stake, to obtain thy good favour sweet Lady. Lady. It is a meer madness thy life to lay down, For people will say ther's an end of a Clown, That past many dangers till fortune did frown, that dy'd like a Prodigal Lover. Seaman. The name of a Clown in my heart I do scorn, Being nobly descended, and a Gentle-man born, Yet I am a Seaman and must live forlorn, unless you can love me fair Lady.
woodcut of man R I woodcut of woman R I Lady. O Pardon me Seaman for I did not know, I thought that thy Parentage had been but low, But I may requite thee before we do go, and give thee a kiss for a favor. Seaman. He took her by th' hand and he kissed her twice, Quoth he, Dearest Lady you have been too nice, To value my love at no higher a price, but now I do hope you'l requite me. Lady. Well Seaman, I see that thou hast a good heart, And art a compleat man in every part, If my Father know this, we should suffer smart, he would be so highly inraged. Seaman. If you are but willing for to be my Bride, My Sword and my Pistol ile take by my side And then to the Church we in private will ride, where we will be married fair Lady. She then gave consent, and away they did ride, The valiant bold Seaman, and his lovely Bride, Not fearing of anger, or what might betide, their hearts were united together. Being married, they back again came speedily; But ridig along they her Father espy, Quoth hed the Seaman I vow thou shalt dye, for deluding away my Dear Daughter. Come on (quoth the Seaman) 'tis no time to practle I see by your Weapons you are for the battle. With Sword & with Pistol he made him to rattle, in the place where he gain'd his fair Lady. He cut him and slasht him, and there he did stand, O then quoth her Father, hold Seaman thy hand, If you'l give your Daughter ten thousand in land, Ile spare you as I am a Seaman. O Seaman quoth she 'tis a portion too small, O peace (quoth the Lord) for that shall not be all, I'le give him great riches what ever befall, because he's a Noble stout Seaman. They put up their Swords, and at last did agree, And strait way the Lady did fall on her knee, And beg'd that her Father would not angry be, although she had married a Seaman. Her Father unto her was there reconcil'd And gave her his blessing as she was his child, Which made the brave Seaman glad that he smil'd, when he see he had gain'd his Lords daughter. They afterwards lived in joy and content, The Lady had never no cause to repent, They passed their time away in merriment, and lovingly they lived together. London, Printed for VV. Thackeray, T. Passenger, and VV. Whitwood.
