S2676 [ocm]12739816 205185
Distress'd Innocence: OR, THE Princess of Persia, A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre Royal by Their Majesties Servants. Written by E. SETTLE. Ʋt ridentibus arrident, ita flentibus adsunt Humani vultus: Si vis me fere dolendum est Primum ipsi Tibi, tunc tua me infortunia laedent Telephe vel Peleu. — Horat. de Arte Poeticâ. LONDON, Printed by E. J. for Abel Roper at the Mitre near Temple-Bar in Fleet-Street. 1691.
To the Right Honourable John Lord Cutts, Baron of Gowran. My LORD, HEroick Virtue is of that Universal Attraction, that in the crowd of her Admirers, the Muses in duti∣ous Homage must make a part of her Train. For under the Umbrage of the Valiant and the Brave, they can∣not seek a Nobler Patronage then where they find their Noblest Theme: Noblest indeed, when the Memorials of true hardy Worth tune their Loftiest Ayres, and fill their largest Volumes: And in that Class, possibly, no Merit stands higher than Your Lordships. For War has been your Early Study; nor has the Age known a more Forward Proficient in the School of Arms than Your Lordship. From your First Honourable Wounds before the Walls of Buda, to your Last before those of Limerick; the no less Favourite of the Great Lorrain, than of the Greater Nassau, You have been
wholly Train'd up under that Sacred Gamaliel, HONOƲR. Nor has Your Cause been less Glorious than Your Courage; The Common Foes of Christendom have been the mark of your Sword; You brought it flusht from against the more declining Turkish, to Engage it against the more prevailing Gallick Tyrant; From combating the Less, to draw it against the Greater Infidel. The Fervor of this Last warm Zeal brought You from the Imperial Leopold's to the Royal William's Standart. And to sum up Your just due in that truest Glory of an Englishman: Not Hannibal was a more Sworn Foe against the Old, than Your Lordship against the New Rome. But all these Excellent Qualifications, these united Mar∣tial Virtues, are not the only influencing Powers that have set you so fair a Mark to the Ambition of the Addressing Muses. They have seen you wear the Impress of the Great Pallas on your Shield, under her double Character, not only as the Goddess of Arms, but of Wit too: And there∣fore they plead some kind of Justification in presuming to take Shelter, where they have formerly received Honour. 'Tis with these Considerations that This Play, much his Best, and (as Written by so Unfriended an Author) not un∣fortunate, begs your Protection. I confess from a more Favourite Pen it might have made a fairer Figure, and con∣sequently have been a more acceptable Present: For Poetry in this Age holds its value not from the Sterling but the Stamp. A Celebrated Minion Writer shall be able to pass even Irish Coyne Currant, when a Hated Scribler, under Pique and Prejudice, shall hardly bring Bullion and Plate into Play. And in my hard Circumstances, even beyond Expectation, I am bound to thank my kindest Stars that I cou'd come within Fifty per Cent success of my happier Brothers of the Quill.
However I must still own my self indebted on all Hands, not only to the kind Audience, but likewise to the kind Company, who amongst other Favours, were pleased to be at the Charge of dressing my Play to so much Advan∣tage. But above all I must make my publick Acknow∣ledgments to Mr. Betterton for his several extraordinary Hints to the heightning of my best Characters, nor am I a little indebted to Mr. Montfort, for the Last Scene of my Play which he was so kind to write for me. And now if it meet so favourable a Reception in Print, as to move some part of that Compassion in the Reading, as it did in the Acting I have gain'd my point: and for some Recommen∣dation to the Reader, whatever Fiction I have elsewhere interwoven, the Distresses of Hormidas and Cleomira are true History. But after all this Encouragement, with what shame must I look back on my long Ten Years silence. Alas, I was grown weary of my little Talent in Innocent Drama∣ticks, and forsooth must be rambling into Politicks: And much I have got by't, for, I thank 'em, they have undone me. And truly when impertinent Busy Fools in my little post, in the name of Frenzy must aspire to State-Champi∣ons, though their Pens are drawn even on the Right side, they deserve no better Fate. We read of the Unfortunate Zeal of the Officious Ʋzzah. Let Government like the Ark of Old, be upheld by its proper Supporters in God's Name; and all intermeddling uncommission'd Hands, as a just Judgment upon 'em, meet my Reward. — — Ne sutor ultra Crepidam▪
And now, after all my repented Follies, if an Unhappy Stray into Forbidden Grounds, (like Trinculo from his Dukedom where he was almost starv'd in't) may be per∣mitted to return to his Native Province, I am resolved to quit all pretensions to State-craft, and honestly sculk into a Corner of the Stage, and there die contented. Nor is it with any little Pride that I return to that Post, when it gives me the Occasion of writing my self, My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most Devoted Servant, E. SETTLE.
THE EPILOGUE Spoken by Mrs. KNIGHT. Written by Mr. MONTFORT. WHat! Alamort at our dull whining Play! Can no Love please you in an honest way? Consider, 'tis but only here we Act it, When we are our selves, we don't so much affect it. Women admire Inconstancy like you, Both in their Love, and their Religion too. Variety is acceptable to all, Dying for one, hang't, 'tis unnatural. They value neither Principle nor Beauty. He that pays most and best performs his Duty; Ne're fear, so long your Ladies will be true to ye. But this is nothing, Gallants, to our Poet, He knows you've Malice, and he fears you'l show it. In vain the hopes of pleasing you we cherish, You hate the Author, and the Play must perish. If so, my Masters, 'tis a little hard, Has he so Sinn'd, that he's all Mercy barr'd? He has chang'd Sides, 'tis true, but Sirs, I pray, Is he the only Scribbler went Astray? No sure, he has some changeable Cameleon Brother, He's not the only pye-bald Son of English Mother. Howe're the Boxes smiles, we hope to find: Those fair unangry Stars will be more kind. And sure in Justice this Chast Piece will spare, For their own Sacred Image copy'd there.
Actors Names. Isdigerdes King of Persia. Mr. Bowman. Hormidas his General and Nephew, a Christian. Mr. Montfort. Theodosius, a young Prince, a Christian. Mr. Powell. Audas, a Christian Bishop. Mr. Hodgson. Cleontes a jolly Lord, Foster-Father to Cleomira. Mr. Bright. Nearchus, Friend to Theodosius.   Otrantes, a Malecontent and Conspirator against Hormidas. Mr. Kynaston. Rugildas his Confederate. Mr. Sandford. Three Persian Magi Priests of the Sun. Mr. Freeman. Mr. Baker. Mr. Verkruggan. An Infant Son of Hormidas.   Persians. Artaban, Gobrias, Briomar, Ortagan, Orundana, Daughter of Isdigerdes. Mrs. Barry. Cleomira, VVife of Hormidas, a Lady of an unknown Birth, a Christian. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Doranthe, Sister to Orantes, and VVife to Cleontes. Mrs. Corey. Celinda, and Lorella, VVomen to Cleomira. Guards, Attendants, &c.   Scene Babylon.
ACT. I. The Princess Orundana, attended by Women. Orund. I'ST not enough that I am born t' a Crown, Heiress of Persia, Heiress to so large A share of the divided Globe, those vast Extended Bounds of Empire, that our God The Sun, with his wing'd Coursers of the Skies, Makes▪ almost half his Mornings Race to travel? And to all these I have a King and Father That reigns the Terror of the World, whose Sword Cuts with so keen an Edge that registring Fame Has blunted her tir'd Pen but to Record The Kingdoms he has won: And yet not all Those strong Foundations of Imperial Glory, Not all these rooted Pillars can support me. A bold Supplanter of my Blood and Birth-right Stands ready with the very lighted Brand To set my Royal Pyramid a blazing. Enter Otrantes. Otrant. Health to the fair Divinity of Persia, Health to your Hopes, your Fame, your Peace, your Glory. Now your just Title's heard; your pond'rous Cause Has turn'd the Ballance of Almighty Justice, And all the Smiles of ever-favouring Providence Declare for Orundana! This blest day Brings home the haughty Rival of your Birth, And yields him to your Pow'r. Orund. Yes, kind Otrantes, I have at last unseal'd the deafen'd Ears Of the Incredulous King; so haunted him With the long Gorgon of his Daughters Wrongs, That now, his Eyes enlightened by my dangers, He sees this towring Eagle mount too high, And is resolved to clip his soaring Wings. Otrant. Clip 'em! Yes, that great work th' impending Weight Of your avenging Influence has begun Already. Orund. True, Otrantes: Was't not worthy My great Revenge to have the ughty Insolent Call'd home i'th' height of all his brightest Victories?
No less than the proud Empire of the West Just truckling to his Sword; the lost Arcadius, A Successor of the Immortal Constantine, Half totter'd from his Throne! Was it not brave To work my jealous Father to recal him Just in that glorious Hour? Otrant. Yes, Madam, to recal him in the head of Two Hundred Thousand conquering Persians, almost Entring the very Gates of Constantinople; To rein his proud Triumphant Chariot back, Just driving to so vast a Grove of Laurels, Was such a check to his Ambitious Pride — But he deserves it all. Orund. Deserves it? Traytor! 'Tis true he's Nephew to the Crown; his Veins Run Royal Blood, and next my nearer self He's Heir of Persia; but t' ascend her Throne, Whilst my Imperial interposing Birth-right Confronts his impious Plea, is that loud Treason — Otrant. Alas! His Treason is not half so monstrous As th' Hypocritical Mask that covers it. Methinks I hear him still (for I shall never Forget the Artful Accents) when his Arm Claspt round my Neck, and with a heaving Sigh, As deep as if a Pang of Conscience breath'd it, He cryed— 'Tis hard my Friend, 'tis very hard T' exclude her from a Throne. But do not think A lawless wish of wild Ambition turns This mighty Hinge: Far, far be that vile Taint Ev'n from my Souls least Thought. No, my Otrantes, Necessity, invincible Necessity, The Exigence of State, an Empires Safety, And the Worlds Peace Command it. Orund. Exquisite Fiend! Otrant. 'Tis true, she's Heiress of the Crown of Persia▪ And the great Blood of Royal Isdigerdes Fills her rich Veins with an Immortal Treasure; And t' heap the Mass Divine, she has so much Beauty, A second Alexander might be proud to kneel to, To raise a Race of Monarchs for the Universe. But still she's but a Woman: and the Scepter, The Persian Scepter weilded by a Woman! Orund. A Woman! Death, a Woman! Can the Villain Forget that the great Foundress of our Empire Semiramis her self was but a Woman! Semiramis, That rais'd the wondrous Walls Of our proud Babylon; Semiramis
That reign'd, so reign'd; and tho' no more than Woman, Stands that recorded all Divine Original That Pettyer Kings, her poorer Successors, Shine but like waning borrowing Moons beneath her; Their boasted Manhoods all but fainter Copies Of one unimitable Female Glory. And what does the false Slave read in my Eyes, But that the glorious Orundana wears A Soul, can buoy up Empire to a height, Sublime, as e're the proud Semiramis raised it? Otrant. Madam, I fear I have too rudely moved Your Royal Genius with this hated Subject; When I have so often tired your sacred Patience With the ungrateful sounds. Orund. So often! No, Id'e have my Wrongs alarum'd in my Ears, Repeated oftner than my very Prayers; It whets my Vengeance keen, the Edge wou'd rust else. She who wou'd sing Revenge must play the watchful Philomel; Hold the sharp pointed Thorn against her Breast To keep her Ayres awake. Otrant. To my best Wishes! Aside. My excellent Royal Engine! Orund. Yes, Otrantes, If Vengeance be the God's, and as they say, There's Musick in their Sphears; 'tis sure, Revenge, That fills th' Immortal Harmony: I am certain Were I a God, and sate to tune the Stars, Seraphick Raptures, Beatifick Visions, Angelick Bliss, and Everlasting Quires, All, all together joyn'd, Divine Revenge Would sound a Note below thee. Enter Persian Magi. 1 Mag. Royal Madam! We come the Harbingers to Fortune's Minion, The proud Hormidas, who returns Triumphant, Like a tall Vessel, bounding as he moves With his gay Flags, and all his glittering Streamers. Orund. Yes, Gaudy Thing! his glittering Streamers fly; But when I raise the Mountain Waves beneath him: When Fate is in the Wind, and the rough Billows Beat Ruine round his Head; then tell me What glittering thing you find him. 2 Mag. True, bright Heroine! Wake, wake our Altar's Champion, and your own; Consider how th' effeminate Indulgence Of our tame Monarch has supinely suffer'd
An upstart Christian Sect of Worshipers To spread a Canker'd Weed through his whole Empire; Whilst this Aspirer, their Apostate Leader Mounts up their Faction's Head, his whole Ambition Too rank a Cyon from that Root, Religion. 3 Mag. Thus with your Birthright, th' Empire of our God Is threatned too, and this Gigantick Rebel At once dares Battail Heaven and Orundana. Orund. Yes; Let the Audacious Rebel Battail Heav'n, And Heav'n as tamely bear't: But from that hour He durst but lift a Thought against my Head, I have hoarded up those Shafts, those Bolts of Vengeance; Shall strike him Headlong, plunging, sinking, drowning, Below where Heav'n has even the Thought of punishing. Enter the King, and the Christian Bishop Audas. Guards and Attendants. King. Well, Christian, for your Prayers you have my Thanks; And if that Power, you kneel to, has stood up That Friend and Champion of my Throne; to shew you His Favours are not wholy undeserv'd, Our kind Protection of your Christian Altars Has paid the Debt we owe. Bish. Yes, Royal Sir; Your kind Protection of our Christian Altars Stands your Recorded Monument. In all Those Thousand and Ten Thousand Christian Proselytes, Through all your spacious flourishing Persian Empire, Not one Knee bends to the Eternal Throne Without a Prayer for Royal Isdigerdes. 1 Mag. That croaking Poysoner hanging at his Ear! All is not well, my Brother, when that Night-Bat Hovers so close there. Aside, whispering to the other Mag. Bish. Yes, Illustrious Monarch; By you our Christian Incense perfumes Heav'n; And Heav'n in its just Gratitude points down Its pendant Blessings on your darling Brow. Does your Sword vanquish, and enrolling Fame Swell Volumes with your Conquests? Does the World Tremble before you? Yes, the Christians God Leads forth your Hosts, and combats on your side. Renown and Victory are sworn your Vassals, And 'tis the Trump of Angels sounds your Glory. Trumpets and Shouts. Enter Rugildas. Rugild. Dread Sir, a Quire of Universal Joy And ecchoing Triumph fill these Sacred Walls; The great Hormidas your Victorious General, Saluted with resounding Io Peans, Welcom'd with all the Breath o Fame, returns.
Bish. Yes Sir, this shining Leader of your Arms returns: And if his rowling Glory as it moves, Gathers the Tribute of the World before him, He begs Admittance as your faithful Treasurer, T' unload the splendid Mass, his Hoard of Honours At their great Masters Sacred Royal Feet. Orund. Rhetorical Priest, there needs not all this Flourish: His Actions speak themselves without a Trumpet. Enter Hormidas, Theodosius, and Attendants. [Trumpets.] Horm. My Royal Lord, Thus kneeling, and Thus bless'd, kneels From all my humble Pilgrimage of Honour, My poorer Race of Fame, and Toyls of War, Translated to this more exaled Glory, 'Tis here I Crown my consummated Bliss. King. Rise, my Hormidas, Rise. Horm. No, my Dread Lord, I have a second Duty yet unpaid: That Sovereign Fair, the Rising Star of Empire, Commands my bended Knee To Orundana. Orund. No, rise Hormidas: You that command the Knees of Nations, stand Adorn'd with Wreaths too proud to stoop thus low. Horm. Proud, Madam! If I am proud 'tis when I kneel: rises. Proud, that from conquer'd Kingdoms I bring home A Homager to the Imperial Orundana. Orund. A Homager! Fawning Infidel! aside. Horm. But Sir, E're I present you with your meaner Laurels, First let m tender you the proudest Trophy Of all your Dzling Glories, this Young Prince, Heir to the Western Empire. presents him Theodosius. King Theodosius! The Great Arcadius's Son! True, kind Hormidas, This is indeed my proudest Trophy. Theod. Oh Sir, Take heed how you receive me from that Hand. No, let me give my self; for the too Generous Hormidas will b over-prize the Present. Horm. Returning in your Conquering Armies Head, (At your Command) with this surprizing Present, Tis more surprizing Embassie was sent me. Go, Valiant Leader▪ and returning tell Your Master, that Triumphant Persian Monarch, His Vanquish'd Enemy, charm'd with the Glories Of his Illustrious Conqueror, presents him His S and Empires Heir, his Pupil and his Nursery:
That rais'd and train'd up in the School of Honour, Under so great a Master in the Art Of War, as the Invincible Isdigerdes, He may wash off a blushing Empires shame▪ The Son Retrieve that▪ Fame the Father lost. Thod. Yes Sir, from my own Native barr'ner Soyl Of Glory, his kind Hand transplants me here, Into your warmer Sun, your fairer Royal Garden, T' enrich my humbler Growth; and bids me tell you An Enemy begs this Royal Grace. King. An Enemy! No, from this hour a Friend. Oh kind Arcadius! So generous and so vast a Trust has cancell'd The Name of Foe, and a new Bond of Honour Ties my Eternal Friendship. Yes, Dear Prince, Come to my Arms, my Arms, thou dear Adoption; Embracing Theodosius. A Father gives thee, and a Father takes thee. Orund. The Western Empires Heir! Methinks there's something Whispers my Pride▪ and tells me that the Crowns aside, looking on Theodosius Of Constantine and Cyrus joyn'd together Would make a Chaplet worthy of my wearing. King. But, my Hormidas, while I treat thee as A Conqueror, I forget to Impeach thee as A Criminal. Horm. A Criminal! King. Yes, Hormidas, I have a Charge against thee of so black A Die, as Sullies all thy Victories. There have been busie Whispers in my Ears, That thou aspirest to bar my Daughters Birthright. Horm. How; my Dread Sovereign! King. That the bold Hormidas Aspires to wrest th' Imperial Persian Diadem From my succeeding Daughters rightful Brow, And on his own plant my devolving Crown? Horm. A Traytor! Oh my bleeding Fame! Is this, This the Reward of all my Faithful Services? Ah Madam! whilst this frightful Load lies on me, The conquering Thousands I have led to Battle, To hew out Deathless Monumental Statues To Orundana's bright succeeding Glory, At the dire sound of this stupendious Forgery, Will blush a deeper Scarlet than their Swords E're dy'd to win you Crowns! Nor shall the World Start only at the sound; the bright Commission'd Ministers, The Angel Guardians of the Life of Majesty,
Hear not this fowl polluting Calumny, But tremble at the impious Execration. King. If thou wert innocent, Hormidas — Horm. If I were innocent! — Name me my Accuser. Ah Royal Sir, if the traducing Monster, Whose foul-mouth'd Falsehood and invenom'd Malice Durst stab the Honour of your Faithful Soldier, Be an incarnate Fiend that walks in Flesh; Oh name him, name him to my just Revenge, That my keen Sword may hunt him through the World, And prove my Truth on his false perjur'd Heart. King. No, my young Son of War, reserve your Sword For Nobler Foes. Let it suffice, we have not Been over credulous, nor fondly lent A listning Ear to this vile Imputation. Horm. Ah Sir! perhaps this Poysoner of my Fame, This Dunghil Snake, is some poor low▪ born Wretch Below the Vengeance of my Arm, a Nephew T' your own rich Veins th' Imperial Blood of Persia, And you're asham'd that I should stoop to punish him. King. Yes, my Hormidas, he's below your Sword, A Slave unworthy— Horm. Is that all? Unworthy! No, Royal Sir, let not that bar your Justice; Take all my Titles, all my Wreaths of Glory; Unplume me, rifle me, degrade me. Oh! Be kind, and strip me naked, that my Sword May right my Honour by the Traytor's Blood. 2 Mag. Gods! How he talks? But oh dread Sir! consider, The mightiest sounds come from the hollowest Hearts. To the King. Ah wou'd you but believe! — King. Wou'd I believe, my saucy Conscience-Driver! What if I cann't believe? Who made you Lords Over the Faith of Kings? 1 Mag. Foolhardy Babler! Aside to the other Mag. Is this a time for talking? King. Well, my Souldier, To hold the Ballance even, I will not lodge A Thought against thy Truth. But to perform The Duty of a Father and a King; To Morrow early in our great Pyraeum, The sacred Temple of our God the Sun Lighted with burning Victims, and perfum'd With solemn Odours, be it your charge to publish To the Magi. Our Orundana, Our Imperial Daughter's Succession to our Throne, that e may bind The Homage of succeeding Generations,
And point 'em where to kneel when we are Dust. Horm. Now you are God-like good. Yes, Sir, Proclaim your Orundana's Birth-Right, With all that bright inaugurating Lustre, Rites so sublime, and Jubilees so loud, As not Remoter Worlds alone shall hear, But th' Ecchoing Vault of Heav'n repeat the sound: And tho' th' unfortunate Homidas cannot Be an assisting Minister at your Altars, I'le pay my humbler Duty at my own— Yes, hear me Men, and listning Angels witness, My very Prayers, the seconds to my Sword, I'le wrestle Heav'n, as I have battail'd Earth, For Blessings on that Brow. King. Enough my Warriour. Enter Cleomira, Cleontes and Doranthe. Come my Imperial Charge — To Theodosius. Hormid. My Cleomira! running to embrace her. King. My Breast and Empires Guest! My Court has Honours To pay thee; and the bending Genius Of the proud Babylon waits to salute thee. Exeunt King Theodosius, Guards, Attendants, &c. Manent only Hormidas, Cleomira, Cleontes and Doranthe. Cleom. And am I blest once more! Hormid. Thou softest Beauty! So full my Soul, so vast my Joys, beyond The Circle of these Arms, Ambition has not A Wish, Delight a Rapture, Life a Blessing, Or Earth a Crown to give! Cleom. Oh! That these melting Eyes and kind Embraces Could hold thee ever fast! Hold thee so fast That envious Glory from the Arms of Love Should never snatch thee more. Hormid. Envyous Glory! Yes, My fair Life, in all my Chace of Honour, Such distant and divorcing Worlds between us; There's not a Laurel I have won in Battle, But I have bought it at no less a price, Than thousand thousand Sighs for Cleomira. Cleom. If such hy ighs, think what my Tears have been; Think with what waitig Patience I have watched The trickling Sand of Time's slow Glass, and counted The numbred Minutes o're a whole long Year, So thoughful Sorrow, and so wishing Love. Doranth. Amongst the greeting joys and ecchoing Shouts, For your Return, we come, Illustrious Prince, To tender your our Loyal Welcome too,
When Love permits you leisure to receive it. Cleont. Yes Sir, 'mongst the stout Bowls, crown'd Healths and hearty Wishes for you, You must accept our Mite in part of payment. Horm. Doranthe, and the good old kind Cleontes, The Honour'd Father to my beauteous Princess, (For I must call you so) thus let me pay you— Kneels to them. Cleont. Rise Prince for shame, I am not half Father Enough to her, to deserve all this Homage: Were she my own Flesh and Blood I might say something to it; But Pox of these Foster Fathers; this rearing of Children by Adoption: We have all the pains in bringing 'em Up, without the pleasure of getting 'em. Had I got thee my self, dear Rogue — To Cleom. Doranth. Thou get her! No; she has nobler Veins than thine. Aside. Horm. But, Oh my Love! I have strange Newes to tell thee; I have play'd a wondrous Game: whilst I have won Renown abroad, I have lost it here at home: Some whispering Slanderers, (wouldst thou believe it?) To blacken my fair Truth, have told the King That I am an Aspirer. Cleom. An Aspirer! Horm. Yes, My dear Sweetness, to divert the Crown From Orundana's Brow. Cleom. 'Tis very hard, That such unspotted Faith shou'd be thus blemisht Horm. True, I'st not hard? Perhaps 't has reacht thy Ear. What hast thou heard the censuring World talk of me? Cleom. I hear, my Lord? No; In thy mournful absence The World and I have been such strangers, that My Prayers and Love have been my sole Companions. Alas! I have only talkt to Heav'n and thee. Enter Otrantes. Horm. That hated Slave here! Aside. Otrant. Sir, Perhaps you'll wonder In your congratulated Victories, To see me one amongst the bending Croud. I must confess, I have born hardships from you Wou'd shake a Saint; but that I can forget 'em, Th' attesting Gods, and th' Honour I still pay you Stand my Record. Horm. Substantial Testimony; If I durst take the Credit of the Voucher. Otrant. 'Tis true, I have had sufferings and severe ones: For after more than twenty years a Souldier, And a Commander too, to be cashier'd, Disgracefully cashiered like me, i'th' Head of Two hundred thousand Witnesses, was hard;
But this I can forget. Horm. No, Sir, Remember it To my Recorded Justice, you deserv'd, And had what you deserv'd. Otrant. Deserv'd! Horm. Deserv'd. And 'twas my Mercy that that publick shame Compounded for your Life, your forfeit Life. Did you not wrong the Souldiers of their pay? A Robbery more infamous than that That hangs the midnight Cut throat on a Gibbet. Otrant. Alas Sir! What if once, once in a Life, Some pressing Chance or personal Misfortune Forced that unwilling Trip: The kind Hormidas Mght sure have wink'd at greater Faults in me; Some more than common grains of Mercy sure Might have been shown me for that Beauty's sake. Horm. For hers? Otrant. For the fair Cleomira's sake. Who raised that beauteous Envy of all Eyes, And Darling of your own, but kind Otrantes? Who crown'd your Love in those dear Arms? Otrantes, Who but Otrantes the Original Founder Of all your boundless Joys? Was not the Mother Of this then unborn Cleomira, Now almost twenty Years, took by my Sword A Captive in the Alexandrian Wars? Horm. Perhaps she was. Otrant. And the young Cleomira, The Offspring of an unknown Father, then The Burthen of her Captive Mother's Womb, When born, in pity by my Hand committed To the indulgent care of that kind Sister, pointing to Doranthe. Now the Honourable Wife of this most Noble Lord? Horm. 'Tis true, all this I own. Otrant. And if The growing Love of this kind, more than Father Adopted her his own, bred her in all The Splendor of the most exalted Blood, Adorn'd her gay in all the shining Beams Of a Court-star, till she subdu'd The great Hormidas's Heart▪ was't not by me? And for my sake this generous Lord — Cleont. Your sake! Fair and softly, good Brother-in-law; a little for your sake I confess, but a great deal more for her own. For let me tell you, my Lord, to Hormidas.
She grew the sweetest, well-favour'd, and the most vertuous Little Rogue— So fair, my Lord, so lovely and so witty, No Cherubim was ever half so pretty. Otrant. Cou'd not this Merit plead a little for me? And soften your unkindness to Otrantes! Horm. 'Tis true, thou hast done all this for Cleomira; And yet, (I know not why) I cannot love thee; A strange aversion rooted in my Soul Sets thee the eternal Object of my loathing; As if some darting Blast, some secret Poyson Shot from thy Eyes, and swell'd me at the sight. Cleom. Alas my Lord! nor can I see that Face, But something rises in my Blood against him, More than against even my most mortal Enemy; For Enemies my Religion bids me love. But at his sight, methinks my disturb'd Fancy Walks Ghastly like a restless Ghost, about Some hidden Treasure lock't from mortal knowledge. Doranth. Yes, sweet wrong'd Innocence, thy true Princely Veins aside. That, that's the hidden Treasure that must lie Lock't and seal'd up for ever. Cleom. Sure, Otrantes, Thou hast strangely wrong'd me, or th' immortal Goodness, The Guardian of my Soul would never suffer These aking Thoughts against thee. Horm. If he has wrong'd thee Be't to his own black Conscience— But because Thou seemst to come suppliant for my favour to Otrant. The Grace thou seekst thou shalt obtain; and that The greatest I can give, which is, to shun That hated Face, and never see thee more. Exeunt Hormidas, Cleomira. Manet Otrantes solus. Otrant. Nor thy more hated Face will I e're see, Unless to cover it with greater shame Than e'er thou heapst on me. I owe thee Ruine; Yes, Prince, I ow't, nor will I die thy Debtor. Enter Rugildas. Otrant. My honest Ingineer, the kind Rugildas! Rug. Yes Sir, your sweating Cyclops at the Anvil. Otrant. But, oh my Friend, this unbelieving King; I am afraid, his cooling Jealousie Stands strong against us, and our great Design Has Crags and Rocks to work through. Rug. Why this Fear? Otrant. Alas, all's hush't; the Princess's Succession I'th' Temple of our Sun proclaim'd to morrow. Rug. Proclaim'd to Morrow! No, that fatal Morrow
Our Sun shall never see. Oh, my Otrantes, I have a Plot would rouze thy drooping Vengeance Even from a Grave. What say'st thou if that Temple Its blazing Roof in one bright Conflagration, Before to Morrows Sun shall lie in Ashes. Otrant. Oh this rich Thought! Rugild. I tell thee, Friend, to night The Temple of our Sun shall burn by me, And the whole Christian Race bleed for't to morrow. Otrant. This is a Master-stroke! Rug. Yes, my Otrantes. Otrant. I am all Rapture! Rug. T' increase your Transport, Of all the whole Artillery of Fate; See here the keenest Shaft. The very Temple Doom'd to one burning Pile, and great Hormidas Himself the leading Firebrand. giving Otrantes a Paper. Otrant. reads. My Orders are, That in the silence and dead of Night you set their Temple on fire; in which be silent as you prize my favour. Burn but their Temple, and the Kingdom is our own. Forwhich deserving Service expect a suitable Re∣ward from Hormidas. Excellent Forgery! Rug. Forgery! No, his own, His own Hand-writing. Otrant. Gods! his own Hand-writing! Oh how! when? where? speak, I am lost in wonder. Rug. No more that Question now: Leave your kind O Edipus, T' expound that Riddle at a leisure hour. Let it suffice he writ it; and the King By my own Spectacles shall read it. — This Dear Paper by some dextrous Conveyance, Lodg'd in the Pocket of their leading Sanctity, Their bearded Holiness, the Christian Bishop, And by wise Conduct seiz'd and found about him, Like a sly Snake from a kind Furies Head, Oh think but how 'twill hiss and how 'twill sting! Otrant. Let me embrace thee for this pregnant Mischief: The great Minerva from the brain of Jove Was not a Birth like this. Rugild. Yes proud Hormidas, This for my Brothers Blood I owe thee, murdered By thy Tyrannick Justice, merciless Judge; His Gibbet and my shame, owe thee this payment. Otrant. Now dear Revenge, the glittering Ore behold, For through this Mine we dig to Veins of Gold. Finis Actus Primi.
ACT. II. Enter Otrantes and Rugildas. Otrant. 'TIS done, 'tis done! see that dear heap of Ruines. Oh Divine Vengeance! To ignobler Deities Let humbler Zealots common Victims burn, Temples themselves are thy more shining Sacrifice. Rug. Nay, for the glorious Consummation of Our prosperous Design, the very Christians, By an officious Zeal to quench the Fire, Thrust their own Necks into the fatal Toyl; Even their own Innocence, by our manag'd Clamours, Transform'd into the very Guilt that damns 'em. But see the King. Enter King, Orundana, two of the Magi, Guards, &c. Otrant. Yes, my Rugildas, He comes, and with that Lightning in his Eyes, So hot the raging Fever of his Blood, As if the very Brand that burnt his Temple Had made a Transmigration, and his Soul Was animated by that only Fire. Enter King, &c. King. Sulphur and Hell! My Royal Temple burnt, And the accursed Christian Brood the Firebrands! 1 Mag. Yes, Sacred Sir, our Waking God of Day Reins his hot Steeds, and mounts his morning Chariot, To see that Sacrilegious Mass of Villany, The dire Remains of that black Night of Treason, That his long Race from the created World Ne're drove a Round more frightful. 2 Mag. Oh Dread Sir, If ever Treason wore a Gorgons Face, Whose very sight would kill, turn, turn your Eyes rom yon Amazing Heap. Otrant. Sound on, sound on, aside to the Magi. My kind Church Trumpeters, rouze him to Blood. Mischief strikes sure, where bellowing Zeal's the Alarum-Bell. King. Oh kind Otrantes, couldst thou have believed That the warm Snakes nurst in my very Bosom Should sting like these ungrateful Christian Infidels! Otrant. Alas! th' amazing Story sounds so dismal, As even my frighted Reason trembles at it. Such a Return for all your Royal Favours! King. My Royal Favours! Yes, they have requited them Oh, I have rais'd a Race of such Barbarians▪
Not Egypt's smiling Sun on Nilus fertile Slime Er'e hatcht so black and so deform'd a Brood. Enter third Magus with the Christian Bishop seiz'd. 3 Mag. To all this horrid Scene of Christian Outrage, See here their leading Engin of Perdition! And Sir, to track the poysonous Fountain Head, Read that dire, Scrowl seiz'd in his Pocket, To find the very Dam, the brooding Cockatrice To the whole nest of Monsters; read that Paper. Gives a Paper. King. Reads. Burn the Temple and the Kingdom is our own; for which deserving Service expect a suitable Reward from Hormidas. Orund. Hormidas! King. Yes, My Orundana: Hell Here opes its Cabinet; and wild Ambition, Drawn to th' full life, stands blazon'd in its whole Infernal Colours. Bishop. Oh, sacred Sir! if e're your Royal Justice Would lend a pitying Ear to wounded Innocence — King. Innocence! No doubt! See here a hopeful sample on't. Bishop. No Sir, that lying Paper's all lewd Fiction, Cheat, rank Imposture; and my righteous Soul More fill'd with wonder than your own with Horror, Knows nought of that false Scrowl. How writ, how seiz'd, How lodg'd about me, all a Mystery As dark — King. Yes, Reverend Impudence, as dark As the black Soul oth' Traytor that receiv'd it, And blacker Devil that sent it. Rug. Now it works. Bishop. Oh, hear me, Sir — Orund. Do; Hear the croaking Raven Stretch his false Throat, and strain his treacherous Lungs To tune his warbling Notes to Truth and Innocence. 1 Mag. I Sir, such Innocence, Such Truth, as starting Fiends would blush at; one Of his Commission'd Imps i'th' very Fact I seiz'd, and threatning him with Wracks and Tortures, The trembling Wretch turn'd pale, and in the Fright Confest the Guilt: Told me his Prince and Bishop Ordered this burning Pile. Bishop. I order'd it! 1 Mag. Yes, Thou: So said the Slave; and what he acted, Was but Obedience to divine Command. King. Divine Commands! Ye Oracles of Darkness! 1 Mag. And Sir, as I was bringing him before you
I' extort the whole Conspiracy, the Villain Toucht with a sense of his uncover'd shame, His babling fear that had so prodigally Unlockt the hideous Plot, drew forth a Dagger Unmatcht, and struck it to his own false Heart. Bishop. What dares not Falshood breath! Orund. Now, where's the Christian Innocence? King. Where? Daughter! Where it shall groan in Blood, My Orundana. Oh thou shalt see me knot those Whips of Vengeance! Rug. But, Father, Was there really that Christian Confest the burning of the Temple? Gods! Aside to the Mag. Can there be Truth — 1 Mag. Truth Fool! Is't not enough The Reputation of my holy Robe Delivers it for Truth? Rug. Thou art i'th' right o'nt, This Reverend Rogue outshoots my Bolt of Villany. Aside. Bishop. Oh Royal Sir! Take heed to what strange Precipice This wicked Spirit of Delusion, these Misleading Meteors guide your wandring Faith; That I am true, the whole bright Host of Heaven, Immortal Truth it self can witness for me. But oh! What dare not the seer'd Consciences Of harden'd Falshood speak, when their great Prompter, The Father of all Lies, has steel'd their Foreheads! King. No; Thou fair painted Saint! What is't the bold Black Hands of Rampant Zeal dare not commit, When an Enthusiastick Altar-Coal Lights the Infernal Brand? But I am too patient. But haste, take hence the Missioner of Hell And hang him on a Gibbet. Orund. Godlike Monarch! King. Yet stay; one word of Comfort e're thou dyest; With thy descending Soul this pleasure bear; Thou shalt not walk the burning Plains alone, A wandring unattended Ghost; I'll send thee A thousand and a thousand bleeding Followers. I tell thee, Priest, in all the Christian Blood That the renown'd immortal Nero shed, His poorer Roman Sacrifices shall be But Scars to the more gaping Persian Wounds. Bishop. And let me tell thee King, in all these Wounds, Thou shalt not hear a Groan. Oh thou shalt view The beauteous Face of Martyrdom so lovely, With all those Bridal Smiles upon her Cheek,
Led to a Stake like Virgins to a Temple: And in thy hottest persecuting Fires, When thou shalt see our Earthly Dross fall from us, Our Rags of Flesh unstript for Robes of Glory, Oh thou shalt hear our cheerful dying Notes Tun'd to Angelick Quires, Celestial Harmony, Whilst each rich Drop from our exhausted Veins Shall shine that Ruby in our Starry Coronets, As distant Eyes so dazled shall behold, Till every Christian Grave, shall Nurse those Roots Whose Branches shall or'e-spread the Convert World. King. I'le hear no more, To Death with the vain Babbler. Exeunt Bishop and a Party of the Guards attending. Orund. In this bright Justice, Sir, you look so awful; My Duty will grow up into Religion, Mistake the Father and adore the God. Enter Hormidas. Horm. Oh this black Night! What angry Providence Has loosed the raging Demons, to uncalm The Royal Brow with this mad Scene of Mischief? King. And does Hormidas come a kind Condoler Of his afflicted King? Horm: Yes, Royal Sir; I know this Night's sad accident disturbs Your Sacred Rest; and my each Loyal Heartstring Toucht with a feeling pang has brought me hither A duteous Mourner. King. Does Hormidas mourn? Horm. Mourn! My most honour'd Lord, when the rough Blast Can tempest-toss the Mighty Sovereign Vessel, The humbler Barks must drown: The Storm that shakes Your Peace must shipwrack mine. King. Yes, Mourning Crocadile, I see a trickling Brine from those false Eyes To weep where thou hast betrayed. Seize, seize the Traytor. Horm. A Traytor is a Name — — King. Too humble for you. And in so narrow, and so poor a Title Perhaps, Gigantick Fiend, I have under dignified Your more exalted Villany. Horm. Oh Horror! What founds are these? King. Strange ones, no doubt, such as Your simple Christian Innocence knows nothing of, But for your Comfort, one of your rank Saints Already I have rewarded; your Church-Tool, Your bearded Fire-ball, that Religious Compound
Of Sanctity and Sulphur, Zeal and Firebrand; I thank my watchful Stars, I have dispatcht that Monster. Horm. Oh what has your mistaken Fury done? King. Done, Miscreant! Only hang'd him on a Gibbet To preach to Crows and Ravens. Horm. Oh Barbarity! That Reverend Piety, that unblemisht Virtue, Cloath'd with such hideous Infamy! King. How, Insolence! Weepest thou his Fate, and shakest not at thy own! Hormid. Shake! Let the trembling Criminal Conscience shake! I know no Guilt, and therefore feel no Fear. But in that Venerable Holy Man You have murder'd that poor martyr'd Innocence— King. Murder'd! Bold Slave; yes, you are both such Innocents: But to tear off the Scales from your false Eyelids, T' unblind your wilful Ignorance; read there giving him the Paper. My obstinate Infidel. And now, If through that thick impenetrable Front 'Tis possible to blush — Horm. Blush Sir! King. Blush Traytor? Yes blush, if all you guilty flaming Pile Can warm your glowing Cheeks. Horm. And is this Paper Produc'd against me for the burning of That Temple? King. Does that Forehead ask that Question! Horm. Oh Sir! To what a Labyrinth of Confusion Has some accursed plotting Villany Misled your abus'd Ear! That very Paper I writ four years ago, your General In the Chaldean Wars, when for your sake By a Martial Stratagem I burnt their Temple Of Jupiter, and won their Kingdom by't. Orund. Oh nimble witted Saint! Rugild. Of his own Canonizing. King. Burnt! Yes, I own that the Chaldean Temple Of Jupiter was burnt, but not by thee. Do not their own still mourning Priests record it, Burnt by a Lightning Flash from their own angry God! Has not the universal Voice of Fame Confirm'd it such, and the whole World rung loud on't? And darst thou say that thou — Horm. Yes, that I burnt it, Burnt for your sake. My Army with diseases Half lost, my Foes too strong, my Fortune hazardous,
To save your Glory, Sir, I us'd this Stratagem: Knowing that the Chaldaean Superstition Had founded all their Hope, their Trust, their Strength Upon that Temple; their whole Confidence Lodg'd in their painted Shrine, and moulten God, I chose two trusty Hands by this Commission To burn their Temple. They obey'd and burnt it; Whilst the Chaldaean Army's drooping Hearts Lost at that mortal Shock, I won their Kingdom. King. If for my sake this burning Feat was done, Pray tell me (for it's wond'rous worth my knowledge) Was there a Service of no less importance, Than winning me a Crown, and I not worthy To know the glorious Stratagem that gave it me But this Romantick Service must lie dormient For four long sleeping years. Hormid. Alas! That only Truth I durst not tell you. For tho my own Religion wou'd permit me To burn a Temple, To win my King a Crown: I knew the secret, Tho' with the purchase of a Diadem, To your offended Zeal wou'd sound too impious; And therefore with no less than fifty Talents I brib'd my very Instrument, to silence: And pusht this Popular Fame around the World, That it was burnt by Lightning, to conceal A Truth too dangerous for your Royal Ear. King. A Truth! No doubt a most stupendious one. This very Paper (mark him) to sum up This great miraculous Truth, writ four years since, A Military Order, found this Morning I'th' Pocket of a Priest: Yes, found this Morning, My Temple burning, and the guilty Christians Caught in the Fact. Hormid. All a false treacherous snare for your delusion And my undoing. But kind Heav'n I thank thee, One of the very Instruments, that both Receiv'd and executed that Commission, Stands here before you. Now I'll make Truth shine Bright as a Morning Star. Speak kind Rugildas, Say, was not the Chaldaean Temple burnt By this Commission and thy Hand? Rug. By mine! I light th' unhallow'd Brand to burn a Temple! Oh Execrable! I, I burn a Temple! Not for a Thousand Worlds. Hormid. How's this! Rugildas!
Perhaps thy jealous Fear t' offend a King Seals up thy silence, and thou darst not owne Thou burnst a Temple. No, let not that fright thee. Alas! the King's too generous — King. Yes, Rugildas. If thou hast ought within thy knowledg, utter it; Speak Truth, tho' ne'r so black; speak it, and meet My Favour not my Frown. Horm. Oh speak! Rugildas. Rug. Sir, wou'd you have me say, I burnt that Temple? Horm. I'd have thee say what thy Soul knows thou oughtst to say. Rug. Alas! dear Prince, so much I honour you, That with my Blood, my Life, I'd freely serve you! But with a Lye I dare not. Own I burnt A Shrine of the Immortal Gods. My Hand Commit that Impious, that Outragious Sacriledge! Alas! I tremble at the very name on't. Enter Theodosius. Horm. Oh, thou vile Wretch! King. Now, wher's your shining Truth, your Morning Star! Horm. By Earth forsaken, and by Man betray'd! Yet Heav'n, Heav'n knows my Soul; there my recorded Innocence — Oh for some generous pitying Power, Some kind attesting Angel — King. Attesting Angels! Yes Fiend, such Angels as thy self, the black Infernal Crew, who, for their uplift Hands Against their Sovereign omnipotent Head, Fell headlong, hurl'd into the smoaking Lake, And burnt and groan'd as thou shalt — such, such Angels May be thy pleading Advocates. Theod. Oh, Sir! Take heed how you condemn the brave Hormidas: His Loyal Faith and Noble Vertue — — King. Vertue! Thou art too young, sweet Prince, to sound the Depths Of Treason. Theod. I dare pawn my Birth-right for him, He's honest. King. No, kind Prince, pledge not thy Glory On a Security so weak. Theod. Alas! Sir, The very Principles of his Religion Forbid so dire a Thought. King. In such black Treason, Religion's but a mask, an outside Varnish To the rank Brass within.
Theod. But Royal Sir! King. I tell thee, Prince, his Doom's irrevocable, His too notorious Guilt has light my hottest Vengeance, and thou plead'st in vain. Horm. If you've decreed my Death— King. Death! No, I know That thou dar'st dye. Death's but the pain of Cowards. Death for thy punishment! That puny oment! No; Thou shalt live; wear a long Life, proud Traytor, To bear a lasting weightyer Load of Vengeance. Horm. A lingring Life, my long, long Execution! Yes, angry King, heap up your wrathful Coais Till they outpile proud Aetna's smoaking Furnace; And thou shalt see my suffering Truth undaunted Walk o're the Mountain Ordeal. King. Slaves, away with him: So preacht th' old canting Fool before him: Exit Hormidas guarded. Drive on bright Charioteer; nor shine less kind! For tho' in heaps thy ruin'd Temple lies, Thy Altar's lost, I'le find thee Sacrifice. Exeunt King, Magi, Attendants, &c. Manent soli Theodosius and Orundana. Theod. Stay, stay, bright Excellence. Orund. Young Prince! Theod. Ah Madam! If Mercy's an Inhabitant of Earth, Sure with the Fair it dwells, the softest Attribute Lodg'd in the sweetest tenderest Divinity. And if all other deaf relentless Ears Are bar'd to the unpityed poor Hormidas, May I not hope the gentler Orundana —— Orund. Plead'st thou for Mercy to Hormidas? Mercy To the Ambition of that proud Aspirer! I tell thee, Prince, the headlong Phaeton Fell not so low, as shall that tumbling Traytor. His burning World pull'd not that Vengeance down As shall my burning Temple. Theod. Beauteous Cruelty! What do I hear! And oh what do I feel! Guard, guard my Heart. Orund. Yes, my unkinder Stars, Ye durst set up that Rival of my Glory. But if I er'e forgive him; or in spight of you Push him not, Gods, to everlasting Ruine; Load me with all the Plagues my Sex er'e bore, Or what's worse, all the Plagues my Sex er'e hatcht▪ 'Tis true, for what I stand indebted, Heav'n,
You have my thanks; that I was born t' a Crown, Gods, is your Work, to wear it is my own. Exit. Theod. Oh poor Hormidas! I came here to cour Pity for thee, and want it for my self. Thy beauteous Murderess so frowns, so dooms And kills with such a Grace, that lovely Tyrant, That whilst I tremble at the Thunder, I Adore the Thunderer. But fair Destroyer! Oh, if the random Shot dart from thy Eye So sure; How must thy levell'd Lightning fly! Finis Actus Secundi. ACT. III. Enter Otrantes as General, Magi, Guards, and Attendants▪ Otrant. HIS Army, Titles, Fortunes, Honours, all His rifled Plumes my own! Beyond my Flight No Glory ever soar'd. 1 Mag. Yes, Princely Darling, Thou great Hormidas, Greater Successor, 2 Mag. Greatest of all, thou our wrong'd Altar's Champion▪ All hail! Otrant. Yes, holy Fiends! in your next Embassy To Heav'n, your next kind Prayers and kinder Sacrifice, Tell the once wrong'd, now righted Powers of Persia; I mount upon their Christian Enemies Heads. Witness their opning Veins and streaming Blood, That now bedews the sprinkled Persian World. Enter Rugildas. My dear Rugildas, Come to my Arms; my Gratitude's too narrow, And Soul wants room to hold thee. Rug. Oh Otrantes! Now Fortune crowns the day. The great Hormidas Whose formidable rowling Bulk of Power Once fill'd the Deep and swell'd the foaming Surge, How have we hunted down. Oh! We have driven him Pent in a Creek, and stranded the Leviathan; Whilst thou with all thy taller weight above him Mount'st on his Head, and tread'st him into dust. Otrant. The Western Prince — that Fool comes to preach Conscience,
A subject not at present for my purpose. Let me avoid him, and retire t' embrace thee. Exeunt. Enter Theodosius and Nearchus. Theod. Thou black Usurper! (Oh the lost Hormidas▪) Yes, thou hast it now: an angry Storm shoots down The Royal Eagle, and a wanton Humour Perches a sooty Raven in his Nest. Nearch. A sooty one indeed! Theod. But if a Prince must fall; Birth-right, Inheritance and Royal Veins, All glittering Titles, mighty Names; but all Too weak to grapple Fate: Yet, why Otrantes? Oh! why mistaken King! such low-born Veins Chose the selected Minion to succeed The great Hormidas! Drest in all his Honours, And in his Post of Trust and Glory, rais'd No less than the first Pillar of the State, And the first Prince o'th' Empire! A strange Leap! What Merit cou'd'st thou find in such course Blood To mount Him? Nearch. Merit! None. Theod. What Kindness then? What unaccountable strange Favour smil'd On that mean Wretch? Nearch. Favour! None neither▪ Theod. None! Nearch. Neither Desert nor Love, but Spight preferr'd him Theod. Spight! Nearch. Down right Spight, pure natural Gall,▪ meer Malice Advanced this humble Tool. Theod. 'Tis strange! Nearch. Alas! He knew that only Villain of the Worl The very Slave Hormidas hated most. And therefore all his disrobed Plumes torn from him; For the most sensible last Stab, On whom Cou'd the Kings artful Spight bestow the Spoils But on this most loath'd Slave, his mortall'st Enemy? Not giv'n him as his Worth and Vertues due, Nor Patrons Favour; not that kind Donation; But lodg'd like Scorpions in a Furies Hand, For that poor persecuted Princes Torturers. Theod. Oh studied Tyranny! Nearch. This is not half, Sir, Th' insatiate Gorge of Vengeance yet unglutted, ▪Tis not enough he's stript, stript barer than The poorest Vagrant Wretch, born to load Earth,
And tire out Heav'n; but ev'n that wretched Misery Must stand the blast of universal Shame; Placed in a Post so vile, doom'd ev'n to water The very Camels of the Army; once Their General, Lord of Lords, now Slave of Slaves, A Vassal to the meanest Vassal there. Theod. Oh King! if this be Pow'r, Crowns hide your tarnisht Jems, and shine no more. Nearch. Oh! had you seen him, Sir, as I have done; Naked to th' Waste, his galling Feet all bare; His tender Flesh parcht with the scorching Sun And Dog-star blast; a little humble Drudge, Driving a happier Brutal Herd before him, Wearied and tired, a thousand Eyes around him: Enter Hormidas, in a Slavelike Habit. But look, seet here! Blast your own Eyes, see there the small Remains Of that prodigious Man! Theod. Thou Royal Ruines! Oh thou poor wrong'd Hormidas! Horm. Poor! ah no: I'am rich, richer than Indian Mines, more rich Than all the Wealth of Empire. The kind King Has left me Vertue, Patience, Innocence, Obedience, and fair spotless Truth, young Prince, Treasures above the fading Jems of Crowns; Which not the frowning World can e're take from me. Theod. No, The ungrateful World has took too much. Horm. Too much! Alas, No more than I had to spare: The welcome Thief came to an open door, And took but what was giv'n me all to lose; Had he but took my Life too, t' had been kind. Theod. Thy Life, my dear Hormidas! Horm. Yes, my Life. Dost thou not see the Christian Veins around me All flowing, and are mine too course to bleed? Theod. The Christian Veins that Spectacle of Horror! Yes, Oh that frightful Gore! Horm. That streaming Glory. When Truth and Vertue bleed, Oh the rich Martyr, Drest in his noblest Royalty, Innocence, That pure white Ermin to his Royal Purple! Theod. But, oh, unhappy Prince, if thine be Royalty, It is a sad one! Horm. No, mistaken World, The brightest Heav'n can give; these gloomy Rags,
My Coronation Robe t' a Crown of Stars. Theod. But in such vast accumulated wrongs Thy Miseries and thy Shame, hard fated Prince, With Sense and Reason, Thought and Man about thee, Oh how can thy resenting Soul support A Load of so much barbarous Injustice! Horm. Support it Sir, Alas! My King commands it. Th'awful Divinity of a crown'd Head frowns on me; And I must bear the undisputed Thunder. Theod. Match me this Vertue, Worlds: thou poor Creation, Where has such Worth a second! Nearch. Oh, lost Prince! How canst thou live beneath a weight so cruel? Methinks such Sufferings, such falling Greatness Shou'd strike so heavy, that were thine my Pain, To break my Tyrant Yoke 'twou'd nobly wake My own delivering Hand. Horm. A Roman Hand! Nearch. Yes, my own Hand, like the old Roman Glory Shou'd shake my Shackles off, mount my free'd Soul, And lull me sleeping in the Peace of Graves. Horm. True, my kind Counsellor, were I less a Christian I should be more than Roman. Nor should that Unpunisht Ravisher of all my Honours, Otrantes, that usurping perjur'd Miscreant — — Yes, thou shouldst see me naked, as I am, Arm'd with my Wrongs, break through a thousand Javelins, Up to that guarded Monster's upstart Throne; Tear through his grapled Throat his Poyson'd Heart; And the black Lake just floating with her Load Of dear Damnation down; then, like a Roman I'de give my plunging Soul a bold Leap after him, To hunt him beyond Death— All this thou shouldst Behold, did not a Manacle of Religion Bind up my Arm, and ev'n this bloated Ruffian Must live to wrong me and I live to bear it. Theod. Thou matchless Miracle! What wou'd I give For Pow'r to save such Goodness! Horm. Generous Prince; I am not worth that wish. Theod. Yes, my Hormidas, Look up, and hope, Horm. In Heaven. Theod. No, Royal Mourner, Earth must not lose thee yet. Oh, I have form'd Such a design to save thee. I'le sound the drowing Deep in which thou'rt swallow'd,
Hoist thy sunk Glories, and weigh up thy Ruins. I love thy beauteous Tyrant, sign and dye For the fair Infidel Orundana. Horm. Love her! Yes, Prince, she is all Charm, born to warm Hearts, Tho' like a Northern Blast she has kill'd mine. Theod. Her pitying and her Father's Listening Ear Already have permitted me to Kneel. And when I have married that too Cruel Fair, Then do but think when Lodged in those soft Arms, By the Authority of his Royal Son, And her Commanding Lord, I shall have Pow'r To serve so dear a Friend; what for thy sake — Yes, t'Heaven and Friendship this just Debt I'le pay, From out the bloody Paws to break thy way, I'le wed the Tygress, and Redeem the Prey. Exeunt Theod. and Nearchus. Enter Cleomira, in a Poor Slave-like Habit. Horm. My Gleomira! Art thou kindly come To Visit Wretchedness; thou shining Cloud, The Lovely sharer of my Woes? Cleom. No Sir, the Partner of your Joys. For Woe's Embracing. A Stranger in these Arms; my Love, my Soul My more than all. Horm. Thou Angel of thy kind. For sure Seraphick Sweetness breath'd Life in thee, And thou wert born all Paradice. Cleom. My Dear Love, I do not come to visit thee alone: I've brought my whole Court too. Come forth Celinda; And thou Dear Infant pledge of our Chast Loves. Enter Celinda leading an Infant. Horm. My little second Self, thou pretty Innocence, Come to thy Father's Arms. Cleom. Of all those thousands, The flattering Crouds that cluster'd round our Glory, See here the scatter'd small Remains of Misery; The poor dear All that's left. Horm. O thou young Martyr, To what a train of Sorrows art thou born! Thy Father's Wrongs ecclipse thy Morning Star, And thou beginst an early Race of Woe.— But oh thy bleeding Wounds, thy bitterer draught of Sorrow, Poor pitied fair. to Cleom. Cleom. Oh do not pity me. For I was born a Slave; And tho advanced To thy Proud Royal Bed, born a poor Captive,
Obscure my Blood. And Sir, Alas, who knows But I am now in these course homely Weeds The very Wretch my Vassal Mother bore me! But thou wert born a Prince, Power and Pride's Darling, Rich hopes, and richer Veins; and fall'n so low! Sure Pity's only thine. Horm. Ah no, thou all Divine! No false Accuser Has stabb'd thy Fame; no Listning King has swallowed Infusing Poysons 'gainst thy slander'd Virtue; No Royal Thunder aims at thee; and my Infectious Ruine to Involve thy Fate, Is very hard. Cleom. Can any thing be hard when I have thy Love? Horm. But oh, my Fairest Canst thou love Raggs! Cleom. Oh canst thou ask that Question! Within this Dear Embrace, this more than Crowns: hanging about his Neck. Now Lightning, Earthquakes, Death and Vengeance fall, In these Dear Arms I'le singly stand 'em all. Enter King, Orundana and Attendants. Let Angry Kings, and frowning Worlds conspire, Their utmost Rage is all but Love's refining Fire. King. And am I brav'd! Death! the Proud Slave's turn'd Cynick, And does not feel my weight; proud of his Raggs, Affects a vanity from Shame and Beggary, Whilst his Diogenes out-prides his Alexander. To water Camels, in that Post he courts The Popular Eyes, and wantons in their Pity. Take him away, and let him hold a Trencher; A Ministring Vassal, and a Houshold Drudge To his new Lord the great Otrantes; under The same proud Roof where he suckt in Ambition, Let him taste Slavery. Away with him. Horm. Sir you are my King, and when you speak, Heav'n dooms: And I the humble work of your Creation, What e're you will, I am — Life of my Life, to Cleomira And thou young Innocence, if we ne're meet again 'Till beyd Death, for one short Glass, farewell. Cleom. Dearer than Joy, and more than Love farewell. Exit Hormidas. King. Am I so weak! no, thou shalt feel me Slave; Take that young Darling of his Love, and send him A present to the Sarasens. Some of the Attendants Seize on the Child. Cleom. How King? King. Take him away, and bid those kind Barbarians Nurse him a Slave; I'le have no more o'th' Breed. Cleom. Oh Cruel King! Kneeling
Stay ye black Limbs of Vengeance! Oh my Dread Lord— Gatching hold of the Kings Robe King. Away, I'le hear no more Exeunt, King, Attendants and Infant. Cleom. Stay, Orundana stay, thou art a Woman, That tender Sex where Native Mercy dwells. Tho pitiless Man is Deaf, thou wilt be kind, And hear my Pleading Groans. Orund. Yes, suffering Virtue Thy sullen Fortune, and the louring Cloud That breaks o're that fair Brow, falls so severe, As I must pity thee. Cleom. If the poor Mother's Wounds can move Compassion, Why that Dear Infant's Doom? Orund. Alas young Sufferer, The Guilty Fathers Fate hangs o're his Head. Cleom. The Guilty Father! does that name condemn him? Oh were the Father that black thing you think him, What has the Infant sinn'd! And is this Justice, To wrong poor Innocence to punish Guilt? Oh Princess, they are very hungry Hunters That thirst for such young Prey. Orund. I must confess This Infant Sacrifice— Gleom. Is that Barbarity As blushing Fame will break her very Trump To breath a sound so shameful? Distant Worlds And Ages yet unborn will hear, and tremble At this Recorded Infamy. Orund Gods! how she talks! Cleom. But, oh thou dear All-Goodness, send thy kind Recalling Mandat for that ravisht Innocence; Snatch the Poor Lamb from the Wild Ravenous Wolves, And give him to a Longing Mothers Arms. Oh Royal Virgin, Love will one day make Thee a blest Mother too, and then thou'lt feel A Tender Mother's Love. Orund. Where am I going? Oh let me fly, fly whilst my Soul stands safe; Aside. I feel a softning Mercy rise within me: Thro my weak Veins its spreading Poysons Post, One dangerous Minute more, and I am lost. Exit. Cleom. And does she fly me too? Oh take Dear Earth Lyes down. The Miserablest Wretch, that the Sun sees, Or the Grave hides! Oh Misery like mine! Enter King, Otrantes, and Magi. King. Thou loveliest Child of Woe, and Heir of Pity, The Fairest Pile of Beauteous Ruins, rise.
Cleom. Ha! Is't my King that speaks? and can that Voice Of Thunder breath the Gentle Name of Pity? King. Yes, Mourning Sweetness, my Imperial Ballance Has weighed thy Miseries, thy Tears, thy Ruines; And tho Hormidas justly suffers — Cleom. Justly! King. Thy Innocence, poor persecuted Fair, Has undeserv'd his Fate, and therefore summon'd By Mercies tenderest Call I come to raise thee A Drooping Lilly from thy Watry Bed, Thy Gloomy Shade of Death; and Plant thee Blest In Life and Glories warmer Smiling Sun. Cleom. No King, that smiling Sun is now Beyond thy Power to give. Is there a Balm For Wounds like mine? — So the relenting Thief Rifles the Plunder'd Traveller, stript naked To the cold Blast of a long Winter's Night, To starve and dye; and his Dear All took from him, Returns him only some poor worthless Ragg To cover Shame and Life; and calls it Mercy. King. Dear Rifled Fair, thou art that plunder'd Traveller, And I the Kinder Thief, as will not only Restore thee thy Dear All, but more than all. Cleom. What says the flattering Sound! King. I come to call thee Forth from thy dark and sullen fate; root up Those hungry Cankers of thy Youth and Beauty, Lean Cares and meager Sorrows; To unloose thee From fall'n Hormidas dragging Train of Woes, And in the Great Otrantes kinder Arms — Cleom. O my chaste Ears! King. Invite thee to revisit Light, prepare thee To mount once more a Bird of Paradice, New plumed with Glories, all that Life and Love — Cleom. How King, desert the Bed of my dear Lord, And in his Arms — King. His Arms my Royal Fair. Alas, Dear Shrowded Excellence, put out Thy poorer Smoky Brand that leads to Graves, And light a Nobler Hymens fairer Torch. Wed him, and with him me; shake off those Shackles That Bind thee groveling to a Bed of Dust, And in this Livelyer Bed of Honour — Cleom. Honour! King. Otrantes happier Arms — Cleom. Oh King, no more. Is this the All, the more than all you bring me?
Think'st thou mistaken King, I am faln so low, That for the purchase of a Lifes short Vanity, A little popular Breath and guilded Dross, I'le pawn a Soul, renounce a long Eternity; Oh canst thou think my Vertue and Religion, Wall in my heart so weak! No; cou'dst thou mount That wretch thou offer'st me (oh the vile thought) Lord of more Worlds than e're Ambition wept for, Or cloyster'd Vertue scorn'd, thou coudst not dress him Half, half so rich, as my Hormida's Rags. Otrant. Alas! Dear Madam — Cleom. Dungeon Toad, darst thou Presume to croak! Thou art no King; no dread Divinity hems round thy sordid Clod Of Earth: But I dare boldly tell thee, Tyrant, Thou poorest, littlest, despicablest Trifie That trampling Pride e're trod beneath her scorn, Tho thy usurping Villany has rais'd thee Proud in my dear Hormidas ravisht Spoils, Imp'd with his Plumes — Yes, there thou mayst reign Lord; But know vain Fool, his Cleomira's Heart's A Throne above thee, Traytor. Exit. King. Peevish obstinate! So deaf t' Ambition, and so fond of Rags, And yet a Woman! Well, thy Sexes Prodigy, This Vertue, my coy Lucrece, shall not guard thee; Thy Crags of Ice, and all thy Alpine Snow, By Hannibal, must melt. Pursue her, Fool, To Otrantes. Quit not the noble siege; pursue and storm her, And take the promise of a King, she's thine. Otrant. That Guarranty 's enough to inspire Victory. And if I win her — — King. If thou dost not win her, Say I'm a Girl, and my weak Infant Vengeance More worthy of a Rattle than a Scepter. Otrant. Gain but this prize, ye Gods, I ask no more. Exit. King. Well, my kind Sanctity, how does your Wisdoms to the Magi. Your Heav'nly Pallates relish my design? 1 Mag. As the profoundest Reach of Royal Thought. Your feeble Rage till now has been no more Than Lambent Fire; has only blaz'd, not burn'd. To water Camels, hold a Trencher, be A Dog, a Varlet; those his tougher scorn Of Fate can bear. But touch him in his Love, That Vital of his Soul, his Cleomira — King. Thou hast me right. My impotent Revenge, Has yet but only play'd;
But if this last home Blow thro' Cleomira Strike him not tottering, groaning, bleeding, dying, Let him brave Fate; set up a Counter second To the fam'd Atlas, and his untir'd Souldiers Bear the whole Hell. 2 Mag. True, Sir, her Love's the Medicine To all his Pains; at the least sickning Gasp Strait to that Herb of Life he runs for Cure: But cut the Balm-Root up, and he is lost. 3. Mag. Yes, Royal Sir, and if her stubborn Vertue Can be but shaken — King. If it can be shaken! A Priest, and ask that question! But I lose time, in short, my holy Friends, I want your Learned help. 1 Mag. Ours, my dread Leige! Oh name the Dear Command. King. You see this dull Religious fondling stands so fortified Against all Batteries from Human Reason, That subtler Depths, and more uncommon Mines Must be prepared for her Assault; and therefore To your profounder Reach, and deeper Studies I leave the whole design. 1 Mag. To ours! King. To yours, My honest Pioneers: Work▪ my dear Earthmoles. 2. Mag. All our divine Assistance can perform Of that, Sir, rest secure. If the kind Gods On your great purpose smile, doubt not success. King. If the kind Gods — What if the Gods stand neuter, Must my Machine stand still? The time has been When the fam'd Persian Magi have been Masters Of those bold Arts, and Charms have stagger'd Nature; Wrought Wonders as Day trembled at: Done feats Undreamt by Gods. And is your Strentgh grown weaker, Or shrinks it now t' obey my Pleasure? 1 Mag. Shrinks! No, Sir, your animating Cause wou'd rouze The Souls of our great Ancestors. And all, All that Heav'n will, we can. That we dare promise you. King. Heav'n or no Heav'n, my idle Trifflers, do 't, Do it or dye. I know your Pow'r to serve me. And dare your Rebel Will dispute my Mandates! 1 Mag. Heav'n or no Heav'n then, Sir, it shall be done. If the Gods will be kind, they may; if not, If the assisting Powers above are sturdy,
We have honest Friends below shall do't without 'em. King. Go on then my best Friends; succeed and claim My kindest smiles, win her and conquer me. Exit. 3 Mag. Do it or dye. 1 Mag. So run the Prologue, but Win her and conquer him made up the Chorus. 3 Mag. But Sir, consider th' hardy Enterprize. 1 Mag. Consider, Younger Brother! yes, dear Novie, I have considered. 3 Mag. Oh the massey Vertue! The Rock of Adamant we have to storm: Such mortified disdain of Worlds, such Faith, Such Constancy. 1 Mag. No Fool, such Clay, soft Clay, As never fear the moulding. See this Ring, Taking out a Ring out of a Box▪ This homely Ring enricht with more than Gems The Workmanship of an Arabian Sorcerer. In this inchanted Circle dance those Devils Of Love; not Pride, Scorn, Vertue, Nuptial Fire Or Virgin Ice, nought Female stands before it. This Rarity of Art (to tell the Truth) Is a small Instrument of my own pleasures. 2 Mag. Just my own Tool. 1 Mag. And to be free, my Brothers, I never saw that Beauty, Wife, Maid, Widow Humbly or nobly born, the Spawn of Cots Or Palaces my hawking Eye ere fixt on, But with this faithful Engine I subdued her. Not the fond Loadstone t' its dear North so kind So melting kind — Pardon my Vow of Chastity, For Flesh and Blood in spight of our Divinity, Sometime creeps in, a common Venial Frailty. 2 Mag. Oh Brother! Thou hast hit my Soul, I have a Philter too A private Pill for crude, weak stomach'd Beauty. A Compound of that strange prodigious Vertue, That more than Magick Power, that yielding Woman, — But I talk time away; the pretious Minutes Call us to action. Our joyn'd Force, my Brother, T' attack this stubborn Girl. 1 Mag. Yes, my coy Vertue; Religion and stiff Morals hold your toughest; And if we do not crak your feeble Gordian — 3 Mag. But if so fair your hopes; so sure your Arts; Why that slow Answer to the King? 1 Mag. Fy▪ Fool. We must not cheapen Mischief. T' have been easy
Had underpriz'd the Work, and made Art little. But the Projection calls, we must make haste; The Coals, the Fire, the Bellows, and the Minerals, And then the great Elixir. Exeunt. The Scene Changes. Enter Cleomira pursued by Otrantes. Cleom. Was ever persecuted Vertue Worried by such a Bloodhound! Otrant. In vain, in vain you fly me. Cleom. Fly thee Monster! Otrant. I tell thee lovely fugitive, I'le chace thee Disdaining, frowning, flying; and untired With Love hunt on, and even whole years pursue thee. Cleom. Years! is that all, yes Slave, pursue me Ages, I'd have a long Eternity a Witness, How I can loath a Villain. Otrant. Fair Barbarian, Why is thy Heatt all Ice? Cleom. Ice Fool, No; 'tis all Chrystal Too pure to hold thy Poysons. Otrant. Cruel Fair, Cou'dst thou but love. Cleom. Love thee, black Infidel! No; despicable Wretch, not pamper'd Beauty Bears a more mortal hate o wrinkled Age, Nor hoarding Misers to a Grave, than I Bear thee. Otrant. If I've deserved all this disdain, I'll call th' attesting World my Judge, i'th' Face Of open day, proclaim th' inviting Glories That call thee to my Arms, thou Fair ungrateful. Cleom. In open day — Thou canst not please me better Yes, in the face of Heav'n, that all the whole Eternal Host above may stand the kind Spectators of my Honour and thy Shame. Nay, when thou hast tir'd out Light and Day to chace me, Haunt me (if possible) to Shades so close; And Walks so dark, as Hell can only peep through. Oh the sweet pleasure t' have thy own dear grinning Imps Behold me scorn their Elder Brother Devil. Exit: Otrant. So tough my Pride, so fierce my battayling Tyrant? No my fair Foe, I am not conqurer'd yet; I'le rally once again and brave thy scorn. As going after her: Enter Hormidas▪ Horm. Stay Earth-born Meteor, Mushroom Greatness stay. Otrant. That Interrupting Face! Horm. How Interrupting! Is there that Terror in this humble Form,
Thy Pride's low Footstool and thy trampled Slave, As can check Thee? Thou whose proud Phaeton Wheels Have driven or'e burning Temples, butchered Innocents, The reeking gore of thousand bleeding Martyrs? Otrant. Ha! Horm. Thou who Faith, Honour, Vertue, Conscience, Heav'n And all its Bolts defyed, hast play'd the boldest Voyager, That ever shot Ambition's darkest Gulph, Through Plots, Conspiracies, Treasons, Murders, Perjuries, all Above Gigantick Size; Original Villany, Crimes even unminted, In the whole Forge of Lucifer. Otrant. I tell thee, Thy Breath's too sultry, and this haughty Boldness — Horm. This Truth, this honest Truth, your Glories Panegyrick, And sung by me, my Duty and Allegiance. What can your humblest flattering Slave do less, Than chant his Lord and Master's Io Poeans? Otrant. Such Insolence from any other Tongue — But I forget — I mount upon thy Ruines; And talking Misery, I can forgive thee. Horm. Ruine and Misery! No, mistaken Fool, Those are thy Portion — Dull, dull Wretch how much My Rags outshine thy Pride? These pitied Raggs Shall cloath my Name with never dying Honours, When thine shall rust and canker into Poyson; The short liv'd Blaze of thy detested Glories Hist to their Grave, and hooted from the World. And then (Oh) what a little tarnisht thing Will that now glittering piece of Vanity look, When all 'its Gold's washt off! Otrant. Poor Snarler, how Thou play'st the Prodigal! thy Breath is all That's left thee, and even that thou spend'st in vain: I'le hear thy babling Dreams no more. Horm. Not hear 'em! No, thou hast dreamings of thy own to listen to, Thy consummating Master stroke of Villany; Thy Tarquin Siege of Cleomira's Heart; The Bloudhound Chace of that fair hunted Vertue. Otrant. Thy Cleomira's Heart, Ha! does that shake thee! Horm. Dost thou shake her 's the Question? Shake me, Brute! No, thou poor little stingless Animal, Mine and my Cleomira's equal Scorn — But stay, perhaps thou lovest — Who knows but a bright Beam From that fair Heav'n has light this Crawling Mud, And warm'd it into Love?
Love did I say? thou couldst not please me more. Pursue, love on, strow all thy Baits of Power Before her: Fix thy Mines, Trains, Engins, all Thy planted Batteries of Hell against her; Of all the Trophies that my Wrongs, and even Her Pride can wish, she wants but such a Lover, And I just such a Rival. Otrant. Death and Furies! This arrogant Contempt's beyond all sufferance. But that the King has tyed my Arm from killing thee Thou soon shouldst know — Laying his Hand on his Sword. Horm. That thou'rt not he can kill me. Otrant. Can kill thee! Horm. Yes, mighty man of Breath; This unarm'd Hand my Feeble Thunderer tells thee, Though thy black Soul wears Villain enough about thee To wish my Death, yet thou want'st Man to act it. Otrant. Oh my tyred Patience! I can hold no longer: To make thee feel my keener Vengeance smart, I'le stab thee through thy Cleomira's Heart. Exit. Horm. Not yet unpitying Providence! And (oh) Coy Death, why comes thy courted shaft so slow? Not one kind Dart for thy poor Suppliant Slave? Is it so long a Voyage to a Grave! Enter Theodosius. Theod. What have my Eyes beheld? Oh my Hormidas! If my astonishment has left a Tongue To utter it, I come to tell thee Prodigies. Horm. Alas dear Prince, Lust and unreign'd Ambition, Drive the mad World at that disordered Rate, That Prodigies now grown the Common Work Of every Day, must sure have lost their Name. Theod. As on Euphrates Banks my Pensive sorrow For the poor bleeding Christian Wounds, and all My dear Hormidas Wrongs led me this morning A Melancholly Walk; brush from a Thicket I saw a Lovely Hind, her Milk-white Skin Not Virgin Snow more fair, till in a Toyle The beauteous Fugitive was lost. But oh! Just as the Savage Hunter's Griping Hand Seiz'd the fair Prey, I saw, to my Confusion, Her Ermine▪ White Transformed all of a suddain In darkest Sable dyed, not Jet more black. Horm. This was Indeed Prodigious! Theod. So Prodigious, The very Hunter sunk beneath the Prey, And dying fell a Victim to a Victim;
Even my own sense was struck with that amazement, As scarce my trembling Wonder has recovered. Horm. This Prodigy indeed is more than Wondrous, And carries in't no doubt some dire Portent. But what — the Event alone must only Tell. Alas the Bounded Eye of Human Knowledge Sees only backwards; there through spacious Regions Vast open Plains, and Thousand Years behind, Our Guided Reason lights; but the vast All Before us lends not one kind Starry Spark; One Minute of to Morrow's all i'th Dark. Theod. But hark. Thunders. So loud a Storm my Young Ears never heard, Unless these Roarers of the Sky are only The Revellers of Heaven, and Tune for Pleasure; Some more than Common Cause leads this rough Dance▪ Horm. Tis a rough Storm indeed; but th'angry blast Of Thunder let the Prosperous Guilty dread. My Miseries, young Prince, are past that fear, Heavens keenest Boult would be a Mercy here. Exeunt. Finis Actus Tertii. ACT. IV. Otrantes solus. Otrant. OH the vast Riot of Loves Revelling Feast! I have Enjoy'd a night of so much Rapture, The softest, sweetest Cleomira mine! Oh Lavish Providence, in this one Treasure Thou hast made me Lord, Lord of that Infinite Mass, Enough to Impoverish Earth and Bankrupt Heaven! But why do I name Heaven? had the great Jove In his Eternal Rambles met that face! Her single Charms had fixt th'Almighty Wanderer; Shackled th'unbounded Rover of the Skies, And peopled from one stock the Heavens with Gods. Enter Cleontes and Doranthe. Cleont. Well, you have got the beauteous Cleomira. Otrant. Got her, and with her all the Joys of Life! Dorant. If the gay Spoils of the once great Hormidas Make up the Joys of Life, those Joys are yours. Otrant. His shining Treasures are not only mine;
But I am greater yet. Cleont. Yes, happy Sir, All that the Favourite of a King can be you are. Otrant. More than the Favourite of a King I am; The Son too of a King. Gleont. How, a Kings Son! Otrant. His Son, whilst Cleomira is his Daughter. Cleont. My Cleomira a Kings Daughter, say you? Otrant. Your Cleomira th' only true born Daughter Of the great Isdigerdes. Cleont. Cleomira, Heir of the Persian Crown! Ith' name of wonder then Whose Daughter is the Princess Orundana? Otrant. Mine Sir. Cleont. Your Doughty Race? Otrant. My Race, my Daughter, Born of that very Alexandrian Captive, Supposed the Mother of your Cleomira. Cleont. More Riddles yet: An Alexandrian Captive The Princess Mother! Otrant. Yes Sir, and my Wife: For though indeed our Marriage we Conceal'd, That Alexandrian Captive Sir I Married, And by her had that titled vanity, The now Imperial towring haughty Orundana. Cleont. Pray Sir unriddle this Miraculous Tale Otrant. You may remember now near Twenty Years The King was Husband to a Young Queen, The fair Mandana; and by r The Father of an Infant Pncess call'd Orundana. Cleont. Remember't! ay too well, by this sad Token, Th' Unhappy Queen, with her young Princess, then But Eight Months old, were barbarously betray'd, And sold to Proud Zoranes King of Arabia; And Persia's Mortal Foe. One Fatal Evening Taking the Air upon Euphrates Streams, The vile Bagoas her Perfidious Eunuch, That Barbarous Wretch bought by th' Arabians Gold, Hurried her down the Stream too far and much Too fast for all her helpless Guards to reach her. Otrant. Th'afflicted Queen thus lost, in nine long Months Captivity, Sickning and almost drooping to a Grave; To save the Branch, though the Fair Tree were lost, Tough watcht too narow for her own Escape, Contriv'd a Plot to have her Royal Infant Rescued from all her unsuspecting Goalours, And sent a Present to her Mourning Lord.
Cleont. Rescued! Otrant. Yes Sir, to have a borrowed Infant By my assisting hand, conveyed to fill The Royal Cradle, and supply the Princess. Cleont. So Sir. Otrant. I being then her Envoy from the King, Own'd my whole Marriage to her Alexandrian: (She with my Sister the young Princess Nurses, Then the only Persian Train her Ravisher left her.) Off'ring an Infant Daughter of my own. Cleont. Most kindly done! Otrant. In short, all things prepar'd, I made the exchange unmark'd and unsuspected. Cleont. Your Daughter for the Princess! very well. Otrant. Here a strange tempting Thought of warm Ambition Whisper'd my Soul, that this Exchange well manag'd Might mount my own Translated Veins to Empire. Cleont. Sweet Villain! Aside. Otrant. As I expos'd A Daughter to the sullen chance of Slavery, Why not to th' Golden Lot of Glory too? I'th dying Eyes of the Sick Queen too plainly I saw approaching Death, and in her Death, The Buried secret safe, the only Councel-Keepers, A Wife and Sister, both soft Wax to mould at pleasure. In less than one short Moon the Queen expired, How by the King deplored, I need not tell, Nor on what Terms the Princess was redeem'd, It is enough my Daughter was that Princess. Cleont. Rare Rogue. Aside. Otrant. And to a Royal Fathers Arms received More than a Princely Blessing. For (alas) All things conspired for the Deceipt: for nine Kind absent Months in a young Infants Face Had worn out all Distinctions of the change. Cleont. Here's a sweet Dog. Aside. Otrant. But to conclude, My Alexandrian not long surviving, I gave the Royal Infant to my Sister, And call'd her Cloemira, now no more The Imperial Orundana; for that Title My more exalted Blood had filled. Cleont. Well Sir, because The dying Queen left my false Beast, your Sister, And the proud Slave, your Wife, the only Confidents, Your itching Pride thought fit to graft your own Most hopeful Brat into the Blood of Cyrus.
Otrant. Yes, Friend, but now my Cleomira's Charms Have nurst a nobler Pride; I'le to the King, Implore his pardon for my blushing Fault; Unmask th' whole Truth and own my self his Son. Cleont. You are sure you will? Otrant. Yes Sir, I will do't. Cleont. Yes Sir, you shall do't, Do't, tho it cost your Head; your Head bold Jugler. Here's a fine Legerdemain put upon A whole cheated Kingdom: and my precious Imp In the Conspiracy? Dor. Alas, dear Sir, Perswaded by a Brother — Cleont. By a Devil: But by this light, I'le instantly to th' King And ring him such a Peal — offers to go Otrant. Stay, Brother, stay, All shall be well. Cleont. Well, in the name of Vengeance! Otrant. Upon my Word, my Honourable Word, Before to Morrow's setting Sun, the King, And the whole Court shall have the Tale at length. Only 'tis fit that first I break the Secret To Orundana, to prepare her Ear For the unpleasing sound. Cleont. Well till to morrow, For once I will strain hard to tye my Tongue up; But such a Cursed Cheat — Otrant. No more; the King. Exeunt. SCENE 2. Enter King, and some Attendants. King. Have you performed my Orders? Attend. Yes, if Tortures, Wracks, Blood and Death in Thousand various Forms Be the performing 'em, we have performed 'em. King. Oh what a Barren Toyl, and fruitless Labour Has my mistaken Vengeance undertook! The Extirpation of this Christian Race; A work wou'd baffle Hercules. His Hydra With all her springing Heads, alas was nothing To this more Growing Monster — Death, They Seed by Graves and Multiply by Destruction. Gods! even the very Dead Convert the Living. Lovely and Charming even in Ghastly Wounds! Almighty Rhetorick, in each dying Gasp, And every Groan an Orator!—Oh Zeal! Oh Faith! How unaccountable's thy Power?
Enter Theodosius. Theod. Forgive, dread Monarch, an aspiring Gazer Whose soaring Eyes have dar'd t'uplift a Heart, A Bold Oblation to Imperial Beauty. But Orundana's all Commanding Charms Have that Resistless Power! and oh great Sir, Kneels. If Kneeling Love, and all my Suppliant Sighs— King. Rise kind Petitioner, I understand Thy Pleading Suit, and grant thy Prayers unheard: And since, Dear Prince, thou art adopted mine, Be nearer so;— My Daughter is thy own. Theod. Oh my Immortal Joys! Let me Embrace Your Royal Knees! King. No more my Son: The Debt You owe in Gratitude to Isdigerdes, Reserve and pay in Love to Orundana. Theod. Blessing like this!— King. To seal the Gift I make, I'll instantly dispatch Embassadours To Constantinople, to the great Arcadius For his assenting Hand to tye the Gordian. Theod. My Fathers binding hand; Yes Generous Monarch His Pride will soar with mine; A Love so high Will more than Crown my Youth, And bless his Age. Exeunt Omnes praeter Theod. But oh in all my Bliss I mount too late, Poor lost Hormidas to avert thy Fate. I fear Thou'rt set, set in so thick a Night As my Meridian Glory cannot light. Exit. SCENE 2. Orundana and Otrantes attended by Briomar and Gobrias. Orund. How Sir! The Great and Glorious Cleomira, Heiress of Persia, Isdigerdes Daughter! And the Poor little Humble Orundana, That low-born thing must call Otrantes Father! Otrant. I must confess 'tis an ungrateful History; And (it's) no doubt, these staggering sounds surprize you. Orund. Surprize me! No, have I not heard it out, Heard the Astonishing stupendious Tale, With all the Patience of a listning Wonder? Otrantes. Tis true my Love, a more than Father's Love Took thee a tender Budding Flower, transplanted thee Into the Royal Garden; and to snatch thee Back to thy Native humble Root again, Is hard, is very hard; — But oh I cannot sleep in Cleomira's Arms, But I must give her back her Ravisht Birthright.
Resistless and Almighty Love, Command their Restitution. Orund. Hold Sacrilegious Insolent Monster, hold; Silence this Impious this Audacious Blasphemy: Thine, thy Base Blood, A Cloven-footed Cub, From that Black Hel-hound? Villain, Villain, never Was such accumulated Mass of Treason Together heap'd, since the Embattel'd Giants Pil'd Rocks on Rocks to scale the Throne of Gods; Infernal Impudence! Say Briomar, Gobrias Didst thou 'ere hear the like? Briom. Hear Madam? no; Nor hope e're shall: 'Tis that Original Impudence, As is impossible should 'ere be Copyed. Orund. Nay, was there ever so much hardned Falshood, Such Canker'd Poyson'd Lies hatch'd at one Birth? Thou art so rank a Rogue, not Poet's Raptures, Not Madmens Dreams, not Swearing Lovers Oaths, Nor even Religious Legends, ever forg'd With half thy front of Brass. Otrantes. Yet hear me, Madam. Orund. No I have heard too much, and to Reward Thy bold tongu'd Guilt, by the wrong'd Blood of Cyrus, By all my Towring Battlements of Glory, Supported by the Tutelar Gods of Empire, Traytor, I'le have thee wrapt in Pitch, and Burnt, A Blazing Torch, to light me to my Throne. Otrant. Oh whither does your Blinded Passion drive! Recall your wandring Reason and Consider — Orund. That thou'rt a Devil; Yes I have Considered. Now thy detected Plots are all unravell'd: Now poor Hormidas, that Betray'd Wrong'd Virtue Too plainly fell thy black Ambitions Sacrifice, His Leading Fall but a preparing Step, To Orundana's Throne. But I am too tame; Seize, seize the Traitour, And in his hearts rank Blood — Gobrias and Briomar seize him. Otrant. Yet hold fair Savage. Yes, you may Kill me; But have a care my unbelieving Parricide, That hand that Murders mee, stabs thy own Father. Orund. My Father! Death! My Father, Fool! how shallow dost thou plot? This Royal Pride, and this Imperial Beauty A base born Cottage Brat of thy begetting; And that bright Spark of Heaven. The sacred animating Fire that lights
This Hollowed Mine, Great Orundana's Soul Struck from thy Dunghill-flint, dull senseless Traitor! Methinks it almost makes me smile to think How tickled will the laughing World, receive This fabulous Tale, thou poor Burlesque Romancer▪ Gobrias. Oh Divine Excellence, your Justice moves Too slow! Pronounce but the Commanding Word, And this Commission'd Arm sends his Black Soul — Orund. No, now I think on't better, let him live; I scorn to take the mean advantage Of my own Royal Walls, a Stage too Glorious For thy base Execution. No I'll give Thee play for Life, and hunt thee fairly dead. Nor hope to fall a Victim to my Vengeance Drest in those Gaudy Plumes; the Persian General And the great Isdigerdes darling Favourite. No Slave, before to Morrow's setting Sun, Expect the wrong'd Hormidas Resurrection. And when thy usurp'd Laurel all Restor'd, I've stript thee to thy self a Naked Villain, I'le have the uncas'd little Mungrel Hanged In his own Native Kennel. Otrant. Threatning Madam, Your Thunder talks too big! Orund. Arrogant Rebel! One bold word more pulls down thy Instant Fate: Take thy Face hence; be gon, and if thou canst, Wear thy false Head; yes, wear it till to Morrow. Exit Otran Oh that so poor a Vassal should disturb me! Ye Gods what unknown sin have I Committed That for my Punishment, your sleeping Vengeance Should suffer so prophane an Insolent To shock the Royal Peace of Orundana? Briom. Alas Dear Madam, never mind the Snarler; Like the Proud Sister Goddess of the Sun, Disdain the little Angry Village-Cur That Barks beneath your Glory. Orund. No my Gobrias, So rank a venemous Blast though ne'er so feeble, Struck at the Root of Kings, the Veins of Cyrus; I must not Cheapen Majesty to pass Forgotten or Forgiven. — Oh that the Traitor Stood Mountain high, that my avenging Justice Might nobly reach his heart. — Howe'er for once, Thou under-ground low Wretch, to crush thy head, I'll stoop to Plow up a poor Mole-hill Bed. Exeunt.
SCENE, an Anti-Chamber. Enter Hormidas and Lorella. Lor. 'Tis with the danger of my Life that I presume T'admit you here; but life's not woth my care, When hazarded to serve such suffering Virtue▪ Horm. Had I Rewards to thank thee for this Kindness, My showring Bounty — Lor. Sir I am pay'd in serving you; No more: That Curtain opens to her Closet. Exit. Horm. Now King, at this last blow thou hast reacht my heart; Stabb'd through and through my Life, my Love, my Soul! Oh Cleomira! Gleomira! She's lost, she's lost, caught by a Gilded Bait, A tempting Lure of Power for ever lost. Yes black Ambition, with thy Dragon's Tayl, Thou has swept down that Beauteous falling Star! Oh Woman, Woman, what is thy Foundation! Who could believe that Dear All-Angel Yesterday, Should be All-Fiend to day! The Scene opens, and discovers Cleomira in a Rich Nuptial Habit, Sleeping on a Couch. But see, see, there she lies! and oh, behold All the same fragrant sweetness on her Cheeks As if she ne'er had sin'd. Not all The Sooty Sulphur in her Veins has steyn'd One fading Rose, or dim'd one sullied Lilly! Oh Heaven! that Treason 'ere should look so lovely! Wake Truth's Apostate, fair Perdition wake! Cleom. Who calls me, and where am I? For methinks I am just rowzing from a long dead Sleep; And such a Giddy Mist swims round my Reason — Horm. Dost thou not hear me yet, Lethargick Infidel? Hangs the black Sleep of Sin and Death so heavy On thy benighted Soul? Cleom. What's that that speaks in Thunder? Horm. I am the Trumpet of thy Shame; young Syren, Call'd by thy Crying Infamy to sound Thy Ecchoing Falshood, and thy loud-Tongu'd Treason. Cleom. Falshood and Treason those hard names for me? Cleom. Hard names! thou Gangreen'd Mass of foul Dishonour Thou purple Plague, with all thy spotted Deaths! Cleom. Ha, who art thou, that look'st like my Hormidas, But dost not talk like him? For such wild sounds Such strange Accusing sounds, should be Strangers To that dear Voice of Peace! Horm. Peace to thy Crimes! Thou bloated Dungeon Viper; Black Adultress!
Cleom. Celinda! ha, who waits there? Stamping. Enter Celinda. Celind. Did you call Me Madam? Cleom. Oh Celinda, see, look there; That angry Thing, so like my once kind Lord, Talks those wild frightful Words! and with a Thousand All hideous Names too terrible to think on, Says I am that strange Spotted Creature! — Nay (Wouldst thou believe't) he calls me an Adultress? What does he mean Celinda! Horm. Mean Barbarian! Death! shee's all Innocent, Knows nothing ill! This hardned Brass, this more than Feminine front's Beyond Recorded Impudence! Cleom. Dost hear him? Just so he talk'd before, all the same wild (I know not what) dire Croake! Horm. And thou the same (I know not what) all Masquerading Perjury. Oh thou all Blood! all Guilt! just risen from Thy dallying Monster's Bed! — Cleom. A Bed! What says he? — Horm. The Guilty Kisses on thy melting Lips! Thy ruffled Arms, and burning Cheeks still Glowing. Yet thou'rt all Saint, all harmless innocent — Devil. Cleom. Dost hear him still! am I awake Celinda? Or does he Sleep, that makes him talk thus strangely! Horm. Death and Confusion! Sleep! no fair Destroyer, Thou hast took care these waking Eyes, and my Poor Murdered Peace shall never sleep again: Whilst thou Gay Venus lull'st on Beds of Downe, Trickt in thy Morning Trim and Fluttering Robes. Cleom. Ha! — Robes! Horm. Yes, my Proud Wanton Cleopatra; Those fluttering Robes, the Monumental Pile Of thy Gay Bed of Death; the Gilded Sepulchre Of thy dead Virtue, and thy buried Honour. Cleom. Oh I can hear no more! Celinda, speak, Say what are these! Celind. These what? Cleom. These Gaudy Trappings; These sparkling Gemms, and glittering Gold! Speak quickly. How came the Mourning Cleomira drest In all this Pompous Vanity? And ha! This shining Roof, and that proud Bed of Gold! Oh my awakening Eyes! speak Dear Celinda.
Where am I! and what am I! prithee tell me. Oh my foreboding Tears! Answer me quickly! Unriddle this dumb show of Splendid Horrours. Celind. This Royal Palace, and these Nuptial Ornaments, And thou the beauteous Pride to great Otrantes— Cleom. Otrantes! Celind. Ris'n with all thy Bridal Blushes From his incircling Arms. — Cleom. Oh— Swoons and Falls. Horm. She sinks, she sinks. Almighty Truth, thou art at last a Conqueror. Convey those Lovely Ruins from my Eyes. The Scene shuts upon her. Oh Conscience! Conscience! Thou art kind too late. Had thy Alarm but struck before her Fall, How glorious had that still Crown'd Beauty lived! And oh! how happy had Hormidas died! Enter Theodosius. Theod. Oh my Hormidas, I've that hideous Story, Thy Cleomira—That Dear Beauteous Innocence, — Horm. Has turn'd all black Deformity; dyed all Her Ermin Honour into sooty Sable; Barter'd her Gemms for Glass, and poorly sold Her Right in Heaven, and all my Peace on Earth. Theod. Oh hold; forbear this unjust profanation: Wound not that ravisht Virtue. For by Arts Infernal, by the Kings Command, perform'd By th' executing Fangs of Power, his Priests: That all unblemisht Fair (Oh! would'st thou think it!) Was to that Villains Bed by Philters poysoned. Horm. Philters! Theod. By Drugs, and execrable Sorceries poysoned. Horm. Poyson'd! my unkind King, that was fowl Play. But, ha! a Dawning Joy tells my Eased heart, That she's all Truth still, all unshaken Truth; Only an Innocent Victim snared to Ruin, And Butchered in the Toyl, a Bleeding Martyr. Theod. Only a sullen Cloud of Hell prevailed, And the bright Heaven Ecclipsed. Horm. Oh my enlightned Peace! Yes my fair Saint; though thy frail Earth is lost, I have not lost thy Soul. — But I forget: Oh let me run, run to her Sacred Knees, And beg my blushing pardon at her Feet; For I have wrong'd her, basely wrong'd her. Theod. Wrong'd her! Horm. Yes, Prince, reproacht her with a Thousand all
The vilest Names of lewd abandon'd Woman. What though her canker'd Veins run all Contagion; And all my blasted Hopes for ever die? Her spotless Mind's all white, and at that Charm A pleasing Rapture glides all Heav'nly fair — But oh! Great Love, how dazling must thy Beams display, When one poor spark of Light lets in the day. The Scence opens and discovers Cleomira held by her two Women Celinda and Lorella. Cleom. Why did you wake me From Deaths cold Sleep to burning Lifes hot Fever? Oh Heav'n, Heav'n, Heav'n! the happy Cleomira Was once your darling care; when radiant Vertue, And blooming Innocence fenc'd round my Peace; But, Oh! ye faithless Guardians of my Soul, Ye false deserting Powers! Why did you basely Shrink like poor craven Cowards from your Post, And leave me lost for ever? Gelind. Why thus cruelly Do you afflict those fair tormented Eyes? Enter Hormidas. Cleom. Eyes didst thou say? These treacherous Balls of Fire: Oh tear 'em, tear 'em out, these rowling Brands, That only light me to Eternal Night — Ha! Stay the growling Fiends, and hissing Furies; Stop, stop the Midnight Thieves, and Cut-Throat Robbers Of murdered Innocence, restore my rifled Treasures, And give me back my Peace, my Truth, my Soul — Oh my sick Brain! Tear off these shining Tresses, These Traytor Jewels, and this guilty Gold; And give me my dear Rags, My loveliest, sweetest, beauteous, honest Rags. Horm. Oh Harmony Divine! Cleom. And art thou here, My dear wrong'd Lord? Oh thou art come to punish me. Yes, Charming Justice strike; my Heart stands fair; And whilst the kind Sword kills me, thus I'le kneel, Kneels. And kiss the guiding Hand. Horm. Kill thee! Cleom. Ah, kill me, Sir, for I am too black to live▪ Oh strike: (Alass!) a very little Blow Will do thee Justice now, a stroke so easy. Turn but one frowning Look from those dear Eyes And stiffled in a flagrant Bed of Roses, I'le sink in Sweets and Dye. Horm. No, Ravisht Sweetness, live. And, oh, forgive the too unkind Hormidas.
For I have injur'd thee; given thee false Names; When oh, fair spotless Truth, thou bleeding Lucrece, An impious Draught of horrid, horrid Philter Drencht thy infatuated Sense all drown'd, And drag'd thee martyr'd to that Traytors Bed. Cleom. Ha! My poor Heart by such vile Arts betray'd! Horm. By foulest, blackest Arts lost and betrayed, Thy Chrystal Veins and purer Reason poysoned. Cleom. Nay, then I am not quite so black, not all So frightful and deform'd a Specter; But thy poor Cleomira has a little, A little Innocence left. Horm. A little! Oh thou all-whiteness, thy untainted Soul, That fair Eternity stands safe within, And but thy poorer, weaker Outwork's lost — But ha — he lives, th' unpunisht Poysoner lives! — Oh mourning Philomel, these lovely Ruines Call loud for Blood: And this too tardy Arm Delays the avenging Bolt. Yes, he must bleed. No Christian Shackle now binds up my Arm, Now my keen Sword may strike: Toads, Vipers, Serpents, The speckled Adder, and the curling Snake, Mans common Foe, all Hands are arm'd to kill. Cleom. And wilt thou kill that impious Savage? Horm. Kill him! Yes, my fair murdered Life, this Arm must carve Thy bleeding Honours Monument, rip up His poyson'd Heart, that baneful Hemlock Root, And weed him from the World. Cleom. Oh let me joyn in that Divine Revenge! Thy single Arm amidst his crowding Followers Would be too weak to reach that guarded Fiend: And to expose thee in too rash a Danger, Wou'd not take his, but hazard thy dear Life. No, my wrong'd Lord, let me instruct your Vengeance. Horm. Oh, speak my leading Oracle! Cleom. Thus then — — This Evening when the lustful Satyr comes Keen for his Prey (oh the detested thought) I'le have thee planted, hid within his Closet; In thy just Arm the pointed Steel, prepared And at th' unguarded Traytors safe Approach, Then strike for Cleomira. Oh my Lord, Rush on him like a Tempest; bolt him headlong, Plung'd in Eternal Flames so quick, that Hell May see him fain, before it hears him falling.
Horm. Thou lovely Amazon, my Divine Inspirer! Cleom. Nay to secure him there, till then I'le calm My Brow, smooth my false Looks, and dance before him A wandring Fire to train him to his Fate. Horm. And will my Cleomira — Cleom. Oh, my Love! To right thy Wrongs, methinks, I cou'd even play The very Hypocrite, act the true Woman To give that Monster Death. Horm. This is so generous — But (oh!) this Scorpion Wound has stung so deep That all the Scorpions Blood can never cure! Oh Love! There stands that parting Gulph between us, That to those Arms I never can return. But though my happy Days and happier Nights Are mine no more; those sweets I am doom'd to lose, I am resolved that Heav'n shall only find. Lodg'd in a Cloyster of devoted Penitents, Thy mounting Prayers shall scale the Throne of Stars, And win the Crown of Peace. Cleom. A Cloyster'd Life! Oh thou dear only Good, and only kind! This is true Love indeed that gives me Heav'n. Horm. Yes, my last Debt I'le pay. I loved thee living, And must embalm thee dead — But then; oh then To all that's dear, Farewel; for we must part for ever. Cleom. Say not for ever. No, my still lov'd Lord, Though these polluted Arms are thine no more, My Sighs, my Tears, my Prayers shall still be thine. And when these Eyes with endless Fountains fed, The Earth my Pillow and my Grave my Bed, I've worn out Life, and washt my stains away, I'le mount above, and meet thee spotless there. Horm. There our new happier Spousals wee'l prepare, In all the Joys of everlasting Day — Cleom. But I must mourn before I find the Way. Exeunt severally. Finis Actus Quarti.
ACT. V. Enter Celinda introducing Hormidas with a Sword in his hand. Celind. MY Lord, behind that Covert take your stand; And when he's safe in your Swords Reach, to his False Heart direct your executing Justice. Exit. Horm. Yes, Cleomira, Love and Vengeance call; Thy Tarquin bleeds to night — But, oh, that in Thy great Revenge this Hand can act so little! This Sword, when drawn in Honors cause, struck nobly; All sparkling in the Front of headed Legions. But, with what blushing Shame this Arm must move, When it thus poorly sculks to strike for Love? Exit. Enter Otrantes and Rugildas. Otrant. Is she so hot then for my thirsted Blood, And drives so furious? Rug. Not a starving Tygress Can hunt more keen: Already she has persued So close, that with a hundred rancrous whispers In the Kings Ear — (Falshood or Truth; no matter) Her subtlest Engines, Power, Arts, Interest, all Stand level'd at your Head. Otrant. My Head! Yes Friend, She has given me leave to wear it till to Morrow. Rug. To Morrow! Otrant. So, the angry Orundana. The great Disposer of my Fate has fixt My bounded Life: My Lease is out to Morrow. Rug. I must confess e're you presum'd to tell her What Veins she wore, you should have first considered What Sex she had been too. Glory, Pride, Ambition The touching of that nice, that tender part, Wou'd shake an Angel were that Angel Woman. Otrant. True, I've so shook the Woman in her Veins, Till turn'd a Fury, She has sworn my Death; and, I am but too certain, Will keep her Oath. Rug. Will keep it? Otrant. If she can. No, my dear Friend, I see my lowring Danger, The mixing Gall and all the angry Viols st pouring, and to shield my Head,
Have form'd that glorious Counter-plot. Rug. A Counter-plot! Otrant. The Arms of Persia are all mine to day; What think'st thou if to Morrow wears her Crown? Rug. The Crown! Otrant. A Crown, that gives me all my Wishes; A Crown, that plants me far above the Shock Of Foes or Fortune's Frowns, wall'd in with safety From the weak Blast of Orundana's Rage; Her Feeble Threats, and Cobweb Plots, all burst. 'Tis true, the means to reach that Crown Is something of the roughest, when my passage Lyes only through the Life of Isdegerdes. 'Tis something hard to cut so keen as I must. Rug. Hard! Otrant. And the thought of Treason — Rug. Treason! Fye! Is that a Bar to Souls resolv'd like ours? Otrant. Oh, my kind Oracle! Embracing him. We are alone, and safe; and in thy Bosom I dare repose my Heart; know then this night This Jason's Arm bears the proud Fleece of Gold. — You know, t' assist the King's Devotion, every night One of his Priests, his Magi, is admitted Into his Closet private and alone. Rug. Alone, and private! Yes, his Guards, Attendants, All, all remov'd at that commanded distance, As if he studied with the same resigning Faith, To trust his Person as he trusts his Soul. Otrant. This night then, my Rugildas, I am that Priest. Rug. Most excellent! Otrant. Alas! how easily Will the dispatching Instrument of Fate Be lodg'd under the Masque and Robe of Sanctity, The time, place, hour, all aiding the great Deed. Rug. Exquisite Mischief! Otrant. Nay, and my Retreat Will be as safe as my Approach. For since 'Tis death by Persia's Laws for any Subject The Closet of the King uncall'd to enter; Who, who shall call, when Death has sign'd his last Long silence, and the Silencer retired With all the safety and the Peace of Innocence! Ay, and to make his Death pass currant Priest-work; It is but hanging half a dozen of Those sanctify'd Church-tools, and the Work's done. Rug. O sublime Reach!
Otrant. Nay, put 'em to the Wrack first, and perhaps Some of the softest pamper'd Fatlings of 'em, That ne're felt pain, unless from a Debauch, May at a Stretch too hard confess the very Murder. It is not the first Wonder of that kind, That Cords and Pulleys have perform'd. — That done, His very Death confess'd, and Blood reveng'd, The feeble Orundana's Talons pared; The poor Hormidas, all his weak pretensions, Husht with a Poniard; and my Cleomira Proclaim'd and prov'd, drest in her native Beams, An Infant of the Sun, and Child of Empire; And my great Self the Partner of her Throne. — Rug. Never was Plot so all divinely Great! Methinks I see the Radiant Hoop of Gold Already twine your Brow, a Crown, a Circle, In which more bright Celestial Myriads dance Then half the Round of Heav'n. Otrant. A Crown, Rugildas! Now Fortune for the Lawrels of the Bold. One Hand a Dagger and a Scepter hold. Exeunt. Re-enter Hormidas as from his Stand overhearing. Horm. A Crown! No; Slave, a Gibbet and a Pinnacle. Oh blest Discovery! Dear Heav'n, not all My studied Vengeance cou'd have form'd a Wish▪ Beyond this pleasing Sound. Quick, let me fly To th' alarm'd Ear of Royal Isdigerdes, And guard his Sacred Life: — For He's my King still. — Oh Cleomira! Now, I'le do thee noble Justice. For that stain'd Slave's black Blood this Sword's too bright. No; the vile Hangman's hand shall do thee right. Exit. Enter King solus. Scene Changes. King. Oh, why Does the mistaken popular Adoration Call Monarchs Heav'n's Vicegerents. — Is it, because We Sovereign Heads bear Rule like them! — Ah no! Such disproportion our Dominions hold▪ What Harmony and Order move their Orbs; And what Confusion ours? Their Measures▪ Sphears▪ Pow'rs, Dominations, Movements numberless, And Circles infinite dance th' Eternal Round, Without one erring Step, or Jar between 'em; Whilst even old Hoary Time himself, with all
His Thousand, Thousand Years upon his Back, Beats not one Pulse uneven. But, Oh, how sickly Is our distemper'd State, our Crazy Sway? Convulsions and Distractions half our Days; And our whole Reign one restless Ferment all: And we resemble Heav'n (alas) no more, Than theirs the Bliss, and ours the Toil of Pow'r! Enter Hormidas Introduced by Orundana. Orund. Otrantes arm'd for Isdigerdes Blood! But see, the King! Approach, thou kind Discoverer. King. Hormidas! Horm. If so poor a vagrant Wretch May dare intrude within these Royal Walls; And Rags and Misery may be permitted To kneel on hallow'd Ground — Kneels. Orand. Stand up, Hormidas, And boldly speak the Mighty Truth thou bring'st. Thou that art come to save a Monarch's Life, Art Heav'ns Ambassador, and thy great Cause Adorns thy poorest Rags. King. To save a Monarch's Life! Horm. To save the Life of Royal Isdigerdes. Oh the most Impious Execrable Treason That ever call'd up Hell, or call'd down Vengeance! King. Treason! From whom? Orund. From that unparallell'd Villain, As Blisters even the very Tongue that names him; That Prodigy, that Monster of all Monsters, Otrantes, comes this Night to be your Murderer. King. Otrantes! Horm. Otrantes, Sir, That vile, that low-born Slave, the coursest Earth That lavish Pow'r e'er moulded into Honour; So blest, so favour'd, so advanc'd; for all Those Pyramids of Glory you had rais'd him, Returns a Dagger to their Founders Heart; With his own Hand this Night designs your Death. King. Thou strik'st those Sounds of Horrour in my Ear, As my Faith staggers but to think — Otrantes! Gods! 'Tis impossible — May I believe thee! Form. Sir, on the forfeit of my Hopes in Heav'n, (For Hopes on Earth I've none, or else I'd pledge them too) What I have told you, is Oraculous Truth; These fihted Ears heard the whole Plotted Treason. King. Otrantes Hand! Ingratitude so Monstrous!
Horm. Nay, this Ungrateful Infidel, if possible, To add to Guilt, so exquisitely wicked, Comes in the Habit of your Priest, and under That Holy Robe he brings th' Infernal Dagger. King. So keen warm Snake; so hot my rank-tooth'd Viper! I'll find you Scorpions that shall match your sting. Orund. Scorpions! Yes, King, rowze all your knotted Vengeance: Whole Years and Ages on the Wrack, Would be a Mercy to so damn'd a Traytor. King. That Hand my Murderer; and thine, thine my Deliverer! Gods! which is my greatest Wonder, He brings me Death, or that thou bring'st me Life! Horm. That I should bring you Life! Alas! Is that so strange! Sir, are you not my King! King. Thy King! Horm. And is my Duty such a Wonder! King. Duty to me! My Cruelty and my Shame! Life from that Hand! Thou the kind Guardian Angel To Cleomira's Poysoner? What, with thy Load of Wrongs! Horm. Wrongs! Breathe those empty Sounds no more. Oh, Sir, consider I'm you Nephew, all My Veins your own; and with my Mothers Milk, Suckt in Allegiance to that Sacred Name; Even the first Breath I drew was all your own. And if at last (alas!) I leave the world With some small Service to that Honoured Head, I only finish where I first begun; And die no more than that which I was born. King. Oh my Awakening Senses! There's something whispers my Relenting Soul, And tells me thou art True. Horm. That I am true — King. That thou art true, Confusion, Horrour, Shame Tear my wrack'd Peace; and all my shivering Nerves Start at thy frightful Wrongs. Horm. Oh, Sir, no more. Let me be still all Black, all spotted Guilt, Ambition, Treason; all the same loathed Wretch. For, Oh! to see you shake that Noble Frame, There's something so all Tender touches here, I dare not purchase Innocence so dear. King Oh! thou all Truth — Horn. Persue that Traitors Falsehood; And leave my Truth to Heaven. — But if my Injuries Must force a Sigh, and melt a Royal Tear, Oh, may that dropping Pearl glide gently down;
No haunting Dreams, nor Walking Vision tread: For, Oh! to sheild the Peace of that Crown'd Head, Light may my Wrongs, all husht my Ashes lie; Exit. If Heav'n can but forgive as much as I. King. How Rich a Jewel that course Casket holds! —But! Ha! I dare not think! Lull, Conscience, lull; and slumb'ring Reason wink: For (Oh Remembrance!) if thou wak'st, I sink. Exeunt Scene changes. Enter Otrantes disguis'd as a Magus. Otrant. Thus far I have walk'd safe, with Bows and Knees Saluted as I past; the distant Crowd with awful Homage bending low before me. Oh the bewitching Charm of Beard and Sanctity! Some of 'em, as I past, whose bolder Zeal Durst find a Tongue to Greet me, cryed, All Health, Health to the Soul of Majesty, the Life of Empire; And Blessings Crown his Prayers!—Yes, all the Blessings, And all that Health the Airy Food of Heav'n, To which this Hour I wing his mounted Soul, Can give, I bring him. Now a Stroke for Empire! Weild Nobly, my bold Arm, but this one Bolt Of Thunder, and the Thunderer's Throne is mine. Ha! the King's Closet opening for my Entrance! Now boyl; boyl up the Fever of my Blood, And every Pulse of my warm Soul beat high. Enter King. King. Oh, art thou there, my Cut-throat Masquerader! Aside. Otrant. The King approaches. Now, now for the Spirit Of the great Brutus, the Immortal Cassius, And a whole Roman Senate in one Arm. King. So punctual at th'Infernal Assignation. Aside. Well, Reverend Sanctity, I see thy pious And holy Zeal is come to bring me Heav'n, Advancing a little nearer to Otrantes. And I thee Hell to thank thee for't. The King stamping with his Foot, enter Gobrias, Briomer, Artaban, Ortagan, and other Attendants, who run in, and seize Otrantes, pulling off his false Beard, and seizing a large Dagger conceal'd under his Robe. Otrant. Confusion! Betray'd and lost! King. Yes, outside Holiness, and inside Devil, We have prepar'd a Counter-Masque to match you. So sharp, my hard-mouth'd Cerberus! Nay, then, 'Twas time to find a Muzzle for my Bloodhound. Otran. True; you have caught me, King. But doubly damn'd
Be those persidious Feinds that laid the Toyl. King. Ha! Dares he speak? Strike the Audacious Insolence Down his false Throat? Rip, rip his Gangreen'd Heart up. Otrant. Yet hold your Royal Vengeance; Save my Life But for an hour; I have Wonders to discover Concern your Safety, Peace, Life, Glory, Empire; Of new Conspiracies, Swords, Poysons, Treasons. King. Treasons against my Life! and thou, Barbarian, Thou, the Discoverer! No; Slave, I'll trust My Life and Throne to Heav'n; Not borrow Engines From Hell for my Protection. But the Traytor Has lived too long. Strike, strike the Monster dead. Quickly, ye tedious Slaves. They all h him with their sveral Daggers, he falls and dies. Now, Briomar, Be it your Charge to see the Traytor's Carcase Dragg'd round the Walls of Babylon; then hang'd On some erected Pinacle, if possible, So high, the very Vultures to devour him, Shall droop their flagging Wings, and tire to reach him. Exeunt some part of the Attendants with the Body of Otrantes. But though our just Disdain refus'd the Service Of a Discoverer from that black Ruffian, 'Tis fit we found the Bottom of this Treason. And therefore, Ortagan, go instantly And seize the false Rugildas. That sly Confident, So dipt in his Intreigues, cannot be ignorant Of this Conspiracy. If his harden'd Guilt Refuses a Discovery, give him the Wrack To soften him to Confession. Exit Ortagan. Oh, poor Hormidas! Were the ravish'd Coronets Torn from thy Brow for Chaplets for this Villain? Oh the mistaken Favours of the Crown! And, Kings, why are we Gods? 'Tis true, their Thunder, Like Gods, we weild in our Revenge: But when We showre our Blessings, we are only Men. Exit King and Attendants. Enter Orundana and Theodosius. Theod Light of my Life, forgive th' ill-manner'd Rudeness Of this ill-season'd Visit. But the Cause That brings me will excuse a greater Fault. Oh, my bright Excellence, I was lead hither By an Alarm of that strange Horrour. Orund. Horrour! Yes, Prince, the busie Demons of the Air, In close Cabal with their great Lord of Darkness, Have sate this Night a hatching mighty Mischiefs,
'Till watchful Providence, and I above 'em, Look'd down, and crush'd the brooding Treason dead. Enter King reading a Letter, with Cleontes and Doranthe, with Attendants. Dor. Oh, Sir, that Letter to your dying Queen To my eternal Shame does but too plainly Confirm the fatal Truth which I have told you. King. Too plain indeed. Dorant. Forgive a Woman's weakness Seduced by a fond Brother's treacherous Art, The mad Ambition of the false Otrantes To mount his own base Brat, false Orundana, A Fairy Changling to the Throne of Cyrus. Orund. How's this? Confusion! King. The true-born Cleomira, My own Imperial Veins! Orund. Can there be Truth then! Dorant. Too fatal Truth proved by too strong Credentials. Orund. The happy Cleomira — Dorant. The great Blood Of Isdiguerdes. Orund. And poor Orundana— King. Orantes Daughter. Orund. Oh Prince, thy Orundana is no more! To Theodosius, sink∣ing into his Arms. Dorant. But, oh, dear Sir, let my repenting Tears For this black Crime implore your Royal Mercy. Cleont. Yes, let her beg that Mercy, as to hang the Witch. Hanging's too good for her. If your Princely Wisdom Can think of any more convenient Noose, Upon my Knees I promise you, Your Majesty, As in all Loyal Duty bound, shall have An honest Husband's hearty Prayers to thank you for't. Enter Ortagan, and some other Attendants. Ortag. I went, great Sir, t'obey your dread Commands, And seize the false Rugildas, but the Traytor Alarm'd, and sheltring his perfidious Head, Is not yet found. But to unkennel him, thô ne're so closely earth'd, Already we have beset the Prince's Palace, The most suspected Scene, nor can he scape, For the whole Babylon's arm'd to apprehend him. But oh, dread Sir! from one of his Confederates, One of his wicked Priests, his impious Engine, Already I've extorted this Discovery,
That their own hands your Royal Temple burnt, And on the most wrong'd Virtue, the Poor lost Hormidas, and th' whole suffering Christian Race Most safely threw their own Barbarian Guilt. King. Good Gods! what do I live to hear? Ortag. And, Sir, All the whole Christian Blood that you have shed, Through the wide Persian World, has only been The crying Wounds of Martyr'd Innocence. King. Those murder'd Thousands! Oh, my butchering Hand▪ Gods! What a Torrent, what an Inundation Of loud Tongu'd Blood o'rewhelms my sinking Soul! But, oh Hormidas! thy more ghastly Wrongs! Thine, and thy ravish'd Cleomira's Wrongs▪ And, oh, my own dire Doom! hard sated Prince! Gods! made a Prostitute of my own Daughter! From her most injur'd Lod, the brightest Worthy That ever set on Earth to rise in Heaven, The richest Jewel sto that e're crown'd Life, T' adorn the blackest Slave that sham'd the light. Orund. Now, rince, where must your Orundana fall? King. But sl fly, recal my bloody Edicts Against the Cristian Lives; proclaim their Innocence, Spotless as a new born Day; Several of the Attendants go off, as to obey this Order. And hast, kind riomar, seize Those holy Beasts of Prey, my cursed Priests, And give 'em to a Den of hungry Lions, Devourers to Devourers, and thou, Ortagan, Burn all their costly Palaces, those Nests Of pious Luxury, fire their hoarded Treasures. Religious Sacrilege those Death-bed, Rapines, The Spoils of cheated Souls; set 'em all blazing, A Sacrifice to my Cleomira's Wrongs. Orund. Now, now my Doom! King. But fly, call instantly that beauteous Sacrifice, And her wrong'd Lord, that long Eclipsing Sun, Of Glory forth. Bow down ye Slaves, low as your Graves before 'em: With bending Knees, and prostrate Necks, receive 'em. Oh! call 'em, call 'em to their Coronation, Bid 'em prepare for loads of Royal Honours — And show'rs of Royal Tears. Exeunt Cleontes and Doran▪ the as to obey this Order. Orund. Yet stay, stay King. Before your Cleomira's Coronation Perform my juster Rites, your Orundana's Funeral. Oh King, I've fill'd a spacious Orb of Glory; And like the glitt'ring Charioteer of Day, Driven my vast Round for twenty smiling Years.
But, Oh! the mighty finisht Circle's done, And I am seen no more; a long long Night! King. Yes, thou unhappy setting fair — Orund. Well, Sir, If I must set, do me this last just right: Tell the vain babbling World, when busie Fools And buzzing Crowds talk little of my Name; Tell 'em, that though my parsimonious Stars Too poorly furnisht out my humbler Clay. Otrantes course-born Blood too low for Empire: Howe're, the kinder Gods enricht me with That nobler Spark of their own Heav'ns, a Soul, Of that unbounded Grasp, as could have weilded The Scepter of the Universe, given Laws To kneeling Kings, driven the Reign'd World before me, And play'd beneath the Toyl. To my Recorded Memory Write that, and then write this. Stabs her self Theod. Oh, cruel Fair, What has your Fury done! Orund. Only let out that poor ignoble Blood, That sham'd me from the World. Theod. Thou rash, unkind Destroyer, Oh! thou hast raz'd the noblest fairest Palace, That e're lodg'd Life, a Temple for the God Of Love to sit Enthron'd, and suppliant Monarchs Come Pilgrims to the Shrine. Orund. Ah! no, kind Prince, My humble Veins — Theod. Name not thy humble Veins; Thy Eyes, thy Beauty, thy Imperial Charms, Were all the dazling Orundana still, All the same Heav'nly Fair. The Diamond Shines not less bright for the course Rock that bred it. Orund. And could you love me still? Theod. Yes, thou mistaken Cruelty, Didst thou want Birth for me, for Love like mine? No; in these dear, dear Eyes, these lovely Suns, I could have bask'd my whole long Life away, Though they had only light me to a Cottage. Oh, hadst thou truly loved me! Orund. Yes, so loved thee! And yet even for that Love I durst not live. No, I had a Soul too Great to out-live Glory, And therefore with it dye. Dyes. Theod. Set then, proud Star! Thou fairest Child of Night, a long Farewell.
King. Remove that Funeral Object from my sight, And lodge her in the Sepulchre of Cyrus. I owe thy pity'd Dust that Royal Monument. But now let's find Hormidas: O Cleomira! That Nature should not plead in thy behalf! No Sympathizing Notion to preserve thee, Or inward Touch to stop my hasty Vengeance. But now thy Father comes to mourn his Fate, And offer thee a Crown, if not too late. Exeunt. SCENE LAST. Enter Rugildas, dragging in Cleomira with a Dagger in his Hand. Bedchamber. Cleo. OH, whither Monster, whither dost thou dragg me? Rug. To bear me company to the other World. Thou sayest, There is a Power above what we Adore, I am sure to dye, but know not where I go; And if thy Heaven be happier than ours, I'le cling thus to thee when▪ thy Saints receive thee, And take thy better choice. Cleo. No, Villain, no; no Murderers come there, No poysoning Infidels of thy black Dye: Hell scarce will take thee. Rug. If Hell wo'nt take me, then the other must, And to be blacker yet, so much I hate thy Husband, That had I time, I would not kill thee, but enjoy thee, proud One! Tast, like Otrantes, all thy rifled Sweets, And leave thee more polluted for Hormidas. But hark! he comes! This I am sure of, Clashing of Swords. And have a chance for more. Horm. Not a Soul enter, as you love your General; Hormidas within. If any hand revenge me but my own, My Shame's but half wash'd off. Enter Hormidas. Horm. Where is the Traytor? Rug. Thou hits me right, the Traytor's here.
Hor. Horrour! That Beauteous Prey in that keen Vultures Talons. Rug. What, didst thou never see this thing before? Look on her well, thou hast not long to look, Nor we to live. Hor. What says the Villain? Rug. What he means to do: Keep off, or by the Sun, nay, by thy Gods I swear, If thou approach me, this shall enter here. Hor. O hold, and hear me. Rug. What is't thou canst propose to save her Life? Hor. Propose thy self, and I'll agree to all that thou shalt ask. Rug. Thou canst not save my Life, if I spare hers. Hor. By all I Worship and Adore, I will. Rug. The King has sworn my Death. Hor. No matter, he 'll relent: I'll hang upon his Knees, and wring his Hands, Melt with my Prayers and Tears his stubborn Heart, And beg for all the Injuries he has done me, Thy Life, which shall atone for my vast Wrongs. Rug. And when he has given me Life, what shall I do with it? I must for ever live abhorr'd and shunn'd A Wandring Scandal through the Persian Empire. No, I am satisfied thou canst not save me; It is thy fear that promises this Pardon: The Crimes I've done, not Man nor Heaven can pardon, And, Christian, thou art a Dog if thou'dst forgive me, After such Wrongs. Hor. My Faith my Soul's at pawn for 't. Cleo. No, let him strike, I'd rather die than owe My Life to such a barbarous Monster. Within. Room for the King. Rug. Then 'tis no time to parley. Stubs Cleomira. Hor. Damnation seize the Insatiate Bloodhound. Hormidas runs at Rugildas, they close. Enter King and Guards, Rugildas in the close stabs Hormidas, and falls. King. Part them, you Villains, And sheathe your Swords in curst Rugildas Heart. Oh Cleomira! — Oh execrable Barbarous Butcher! How is it, my Hormidas? Hor. Near my kind end, set me but nearer there, And I shall die in peace. King. Unparallell'd Monster! What could provoke thee to so damn'd an Action? Rug. Revenge: I knew that I should die for them, And now they die with me. King. To Tortures with the Slave; the little Life that's left him, Let him curse out in exquisite Torments.
Rug. No, silly, credulous, and thoughtless King, I am past thy spight; and what most vexes me, Is, that thou art past mine. Dies. King. Unheard of Wickedness! Drag him hence. Oh Cleomira, if the Wound's not Mortal, Look up to Empire; 'tis a Father calls, And offers thee his Crown. Cleo. A Father! To that honour'd Name thus let my Reverence how; But to an Empire; King, you call too late, That Villain's Dagger, Sir, has gone too far; A Grave, alas, is all my Birthright now. King. Unhappy Innocence! But my Hormydas sure — Hor. Must follow her. All I have left to do, is now Only to steer this tatter'd Barque to Shore, And Land me safe upon Eternal Peace. But Oh! I had once a little Infant-Son — King. Snatcht from thy Arms by my Barbarian Rage. But post kind Artaban with Angels speed, And bring that Infant-Innocence, that budding Bloom Of Majesty, the unplum'd Imperial Eaglet, Back to his Native Nest, the Royal Cedar. Cleo. Now Life and Love, Farewel: To my new Bridal Eternal Mercy calls. Hor. Oh thou soft Soul! Cleo. Farewel. I only go to take my last kind Sleep, That I may wake all thine. Dies. Hor. She's gone, and dying grasp'd me by the Hand As she were jealous I would stay behind her. King. O that thou couldst! A Crown, Hormidas, — Hor. The Vanity of Crowns I cannot choose; I have a Heaven to find, and World to loose. Dies. King. Yes, go, blest Pair, now more than Royal Heirs; Go to your happy Groves, and there look down On the dim Lustre of my poorer Crown: Their Reign above me blest with Joys Divine, I'll envy yours, and you shall pity mine. FINIS.
