10713 99850227 15414
THE HISTORYE OF The Damnable Life and deserued Death of Doctor Iohn Faustus. Newly imprinted, and in conuenient places, im∣perfect matter amended: according to the true Coppy printed at Franckfort, and translated into English by P. F. Gent. LONDON. Printed by Edw: All-de for Edward White, and are to be sold at his Shop neare the little North doore of St. Pauls Church, at the Signe of the Gun. 1618.
A Discourse of the most famous Doctor Iohn Faustus of Wittenberg in Germany Coniurer, and Necromancer: wherein is declared many strange things that he himselfe had seene and done in the earth, and in the ayre, with his bringing vp, his Trauailes, Studies, and last end. Of his Parentage and Birth. Chap. 1. IOHN Faustus borne in the Towne of Rhodes, being in the Prouince of Weimer in Germany, his Father a poore husbandman, and not able well to bring him vp, but ha∣uing an Uncle at Wittenberg a rich man, and without is∣sue, tooke this Faustus from his Father and made him his heire: insomuch that his Father was no more troubled with him, for he remained with his vncle at Wittenberg, where he was kept at the Vni∣uersity in ye same City to study diuinity: but Faustus being of a naughty minde and otherwise adicted, applyed not his studies but tooke himselfe to other exercises, the which his vncle oftentimes hearing, rebuked him for it, as Eli oftentimes rebuked his children for sinning against the Lord, euen so this good man laboured to haue Faustus apply his study of diuinity, that he might come to the knowledge of God and his Lawes, but it is manifest that many vertuous parents haue wicked children, as Caine, Reuben, Absolon, and such like haue béene to their Parents, so this Faustus hauing godly parents, who séeing him to be of a toward wit were very desirous to bring him by in those vertuous studies, namly of diuinity, but he gaue himselfe secretly to study Necromancy & Con∣iuration, insomuch that few or none could perceiue his profession. But to the purpose: Faustus continued at study in the Vniuersitie, and was by the Rectors and sixtéene Maisters afterwards examined how he had profited in his studies, & being found by them that none for his time were able to argue with him in diuinity, or for the excellency of his wisdome to compare with him, with one consent they made him Doctor of Diuinity. But Doctor Faustus within short time after he had obtained his degree, fell into such fantasies and déepe cogitations, that he was mocked of many, & of the most part of the Students was called the Speculator: and somtimes he would throwe the Scriptures from him, as though he had no care of his former profession: so that he
began a most vngodly life, as hereafter more at large may appeare, for the olde prouerbe saith, who can hold that will away? so who can holde Faustus from the deuill that seekes after him with all his endeavor? For he accompanied himselfe with diuers that were séene in those deuillish artes, and that had the Chaldean, Persian, Hebrew, Arabian, and Greeke tongues, vsing figures, characters, coniurations, incantations, with many other ceremonies belonging to those internal arts, as necromancy, charmes, sooth ayings, witchcraft, enchantment, being delighted with their bookes, words, & names so well, that he studied day and night ther∣in, insomuch, that he could not abide to be called D. of Diuinity, but waxed a worldly man, and named himselfe an Astrologian, and a Mathe∣matician, and for shadow, sometimes a Phisition, and did great cures, namely, with hearbs, roots, waters, drinkes, receits, and clysters. And without doubt he was passing wise, and excellent perfect in the holy Scriptures, but he that knoweth his maisters will and doth it not, is worthy to be beaten with many stripes. It is written, No man can serue two maisters: and, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God: but Fau∣stus threw all this in the winde, and made his soule of no estimation: regarding more his worldly pleasures then the ioyes to come: therfore at the day of Iudgement there is no hope of his redemption. How Doctor Faustus began to practise in his deuilish Art, and how he coniured the deuill, making him to appeare and meet him on the morrow at his owne house. Chap. 2. YOU haue heard before that all Faustus minde was set to studie the Artes of Necromancy and Coniuration, the which exercise he followed day and night: and taking to him the wings of an Eagle, thought to flye ouer the whole world, and to knowe the secretes of hea∣uen and earth: for his speculation was so wonderfull, being expert in vsing his Vocabula, Figures, Characters, Coniuration, and other Ceremoniall actions, that in all haste hée put in practise to bring the Deuill before him. And taking his way to a thicke Wood néere to Wittenberg, called in the Germane tongue Spisser Walt: that is in English the Spissers wood: (as Faustus would oftentimes boast of it amongst his crue bing in his iollity) hée came into the same wood to∣wards euening into a crsse way, where he made with a wand a Cir∣cle in the dust, and within that many more Circles and Characters: and thus he pst away the time vntill it was nine or tenne of the clocke in the night, then began Doctor Faustus to call on Mephostophi∣les the Spirit▪ and to charge him in the name of Belzebub, to ap∣peace there personally without any long stay: then presently the deuill
began so great a rumor in the wood, as if heauen and earth would haue come together, with winde, that trées bowed their tops to the ground: then fell the deuill to bleat as if the whole wood had béen full of Lyons, and sodainly about the circle ran the deuill, as if a thousand wagons had béene running together on paued stones. After this, at the foure corners of the wood it thundred horribly, with such lightnings, as if the whole world to his séeming had béene on fire. Faustus all this while halfe ama∣zed at the deuils so long tarying, and doubting whether he were best to abide any more such horrible coniurings, thought to leaue his circle and depart. whereupon the deuill made him such musicke of all sorts, as if the Nymphes themselues had béene in place: whereat Faustus was re∣uiued, and stood stoutly in his Circle aspecting his purpose, and began againe to coniure the Spirit Mephostophiles, in the name of the Prince of Deuils to appeare in his likenes: whereat sodainely ouer his head hung honering in the ayre a mighty Dragon: then cals Faustus againe after his deuillish manner, at which there was a monstrous crye in the wood, as if hell had béen open, and all the tormented soules crying to God for mercy: presently not thrée fathame aboue his head fell a flame, in manner of a lightning, and changed it selfe into a Globe, yet Faustus feared it not, but did perswade himselfe that the deuill should giue him his request before he would leaue. Oftentimes after to his companions he would boast, that he had the stoutest head vnder the cope of heauen at commandement: whereat they answered, they knew none stouter then the Pope, or Emperor: but Doctor Faustus said, the Head that is my seruant is aboue all on earth, and repeated certaine words out of Saint Paul to the Ephesians to make his argument good: the Prince of this world is vpon earth, and vnder heauen. Well, let vs come againe to his coniuration where we left him at his fiery Globe. Faustus vexed at his spirits so long tarrying, vsed his charmes, with full purpose not to de∣part before he had his entent, and crying on Mephostophiles the Spirit sodainely the globe opened, and sprung vp in height of a man, so burning a time, in the end it conuerted to the shape of a fiery man. This pleasant beast ran about the Circle a great while, and lastly appeared in the man∣ner of a gray Fryer, asking Faustus what was his request? Faustus commanded that the next morning at twelue of the clocke he should ap∣peare to him a his house: but ye deuill would in no wise grant: Faustus bgan againe to coniure him in the name of Belzebub, that he should ful∣fill his request▪ whereupon the Spirit agréed, and so they departed each one his way.
The conference of Doctor Faustus with his Spirit Mephostophiles the morning following at his owne house. Chap. 3. DOctor Faustus hauing commanded the Spirit to be with him at his houre appointed, he came and appeared in his chamber, demanding of Faustus what his desire was? then began Doctor Faustus anew with him to coniure him that he should be obedient vnto him, and to answere him certaine articles, and to fulfill them in all poynts. 1. That the Spirit should serue him and be obedient vnto him in all things that he asked of him from that houre till the houre of his death. 2. Further, any thing that he desired of him he should bring it him. 3. Also that in all Faustus his demands and interrogations, the spirit should tell him nothing but that which was true. Hereupon the Spirit answered, and laid his case foorth, that he had no such power of himselfe, vntill he had first giuen his Prince (that was ruler ouer him) to vnder stand thereof, and to know if he could obtaine so much of his Lord: therefore speake further that & may doe thy whole desire to my prince, for it is not in my power to fulfil without his leaue. Shew me the cause why (said Faustus?) the spirit answered Faustus thou shalt vnderstand that with vs it is euen aswell a Kingdome as with you on earth: yea, we haue our Rulers and Seruants, as I my selfe am one, & we name our whole number the Legion: for although that Lucifer is thrust and fallen out of heauen through his pride and high minde, yet he hath notwithstanding a Legion of Deuills at his commandement that we call the Orientall Princes, for his power is great and infinite. Also there is a power in Meridie, in Septentrio, in Occidente: and for that Lucifer hath his Kingdome vnder heauen, we must change and giue our selues to men to serue them at their pleasure. It is also certaine we haue neuer as yet opened vnto any man the truth of our dwelling, neither of our ruling, neither what ou power is, nei∣ther haue we giuen any man any guift, or learned him any thing, except he promise to be ours. Doctor Faustus vpon this arose where he sate & said, I will haue my request, and yet I will not be damned. The Spirit answered, then shalt thou want thy desire, & yet art thou mine notwithstanding, if any man would detayne thee it is in vaine, for thy infidelity hath confounded thée. Hereupon spake Faustus, get thée hence from me, and take S. Va∣lentines farewell and Crisman with thée, yet I coniure thée that thou be héere at euening, and bethinke thy selfe of that I haue asked thée, and aske thy Princes counsaile therein. Mephostophiles the spirit thus
answered, vanished away, leauing Faustus in his study, where he sate pondring with himselfe, how he might obtaine his request of the Deuill without losse of his soule: yet fully was resolued in himselfe rather then to want his pleasure, to doe what the spirit and his Lord should condition vpon. The second time of the Spirit appearing to Faustus in his house and their parley. Chap. 4. FAustus continued in his deuilish cogitations, neuer moouing out of the place where the spirit left him, such was his feruent lone to the deuill: the night approaching, this swift flying spirit appeared to Fau∣stus, offering himselfe with all submission to his seruice, with full au∣thority from his Prinre to doe whatsoeuer he would request, if so be Faustus would promise to be his: this answere I bring thée and an an∣swer must thou make by me againe, yet will I heare what is thy desire, because thou hast sworne me to be heare at this time. D. Faustus gaue him this answere, though faintly (for his soules sake) that his request was none other but to become a Deuill, or at the least a limbe of him, and that the spirit should agrée vnto these articles as followeth. 1. That he might be a spirit in shape and quallity. 2. That Mephostophiles should be his seruant at his cōmandement. 3. That Mephostophiles should bring him any thing, and doe for him whatsoeuer. 4. That at all times he should be in his house inuisible to all men ex∣cept onely to himselfe, and at his commandement to shew himselfe. 5. Lastly, that Mephostophiles should at all times appeare at his command, in what forme or shape soeuer he would. Vpon these points the spirit answered Doctor Faustus, that all this should be granted him and fulfilled, and more: if he would agrée vnto him vpon certaine articles as followeth. First that Doctor Faustus should giue himselfe to the Lord Lucifer, body and soule. Secondly, for confirmation of the same he should make him a wri∣ting written with his owne blood. Thirdly, that he would be an enemy to all Christian people. Fourthly, that he would deny the Christian beliefe. Fiftly, that he let not any man change his opinion, if so be any man should goe about to disswade or withdraw him from if. Further, the spirit promised Faustus to giue him certaine yeares to liue in health and pleasure, and when such yeares were expired, that
then Faustus should be fetched away, and if he would hold these articles and conditions, that then he should haue all whatsoeuer his heart would with or desire, and that Faustus should quickly perceiue himselfe to be a spirit in all manner of actions whatsoeuer. Hereupon Doctor Faustus his minde was so inflamed, that he forgot his soule, and promised Me∣phostophiles to hold all things as he had mentioned them: he thought the Deuill was not blacke as they vse to paint him, nor hell so hote as the people say, &c. The third parley betweene Doctor Faustus and Mephostophiles about a conclusion. Chap. 5. AFter Doctor Faustus had made his promise to the Deuill, in the morning betimes he called the spirit before him, and cōmanded him that he should alwayes come to him like a Fryer, after the order of St. Francis, with a bell in his hand like S. Anthony, and to ring it once or twice before he appeared, that he might know of his certaine commiyg. Then Faustus demanded of his spirit what was his name. The spirit answered, my name is as thou sayest, Mephostophiles, and I am a Prince, but a seruant to Lucifer, and all the circuit from Septentrio to the Meridian I rule vnder him. Euen at these wordes was this wicked wretch Faustus inflamed, to heare himselfe to haue gotten so great a Potentate to serue him, forgetting the Lord his maker and Christ his Redéemer, became an enemy to all man kinde, yea worse then the Gy∣ants, whome the Poets faine to clime the hilles to make war with the Gods: not vnlike the enemy of God and his Christ, that for his pride was cast into hell: so likewise Faustus forgot that high climbers catch the greatest falls, and swéete meates haue oft the sowrest sauce. After a while Faustus promised Mehostophiles to write and make his obligation, with full assurance of the articles in the chapter before re∣hearsed. A pittifull case (Christian Reader) for certainly this letter or obligation was found in his house after his most lamentable end, with all the rest of his damnable practises vsed in his whole life. Therefore I wish all Christians to take example by this wicked Doctor, and to be comforted in Christ, contenting themselues with that vocation, whereunto it hath pleased God to call them, and not to estéeme the vaine delight of this life, as did this vnhappy Faustus in gi∣uing his soule to the deuil: and to confirme it the more assuredly, he tooke a small penknife and prickt a vain in his left hand, & for certainty there∣upon, were séene on his hand these wordes written, as if they had béne written with blood, O homo fuge, whereat the spirit vanished, but
Faustus continued in his damnable minde. How Doctor Faustus set his blood in a saucer on warme ashes, and writ as followeth. Chap. 6. I Iohn Faustus Doctor, doe openly acknowledge with mine owne hand, to the greater force & strengthning of this letter, that sith thence I began to study and speculate the course and order of the Elements, I haue not found through the guilt that is giuen me from aboue, any such learning and wisdome, that can bring me to my desires: and for that I finde that men are vnable to instruct me any further in the mat∣ter, now haue I Doctor Faustus, vnto the hellish Prince of Orient, and his messenger Mephostophiles, giuen both body and soule, vpon such conditions, that they shall learne me, and fulfill my desire in all thinges as they haue promised and vowed vnto me, with due obedience vnto me according to the articles mentioned betwéene vs. Further, I couenant and grant with them by these presents, that at the end of 24. yeares next ensuing the date of this present letter, they being expired and I in the meane time, during the said yeares be serued of them at my will, they accomplishing my desires to the full in all points as we are agréed: that then I giue them all power to doe with me at their pleasure, to rule, to send, feth, or carry me or mine, be it ei∣ther body, soule, flesh, blood, or goods, into their habitation, be it where∣soeuer: and hereupon, I defie God and his Christ, all the hoast of Hea∣uen, and all liuing creatures that beare the shape of God, yea all that liues: and againe I say it, and it shall be so. And to the more strength∣ning of this writing, I haue written it with mine owne hand and blood being in perfect memory: And hereupon, I subscribe to it with my name and title, calling all the infernall, middle, and supreme powers to witnes of this my Letter and subscription: Iohn Faustus approued in the Elements and the spirituall Doctor. How Mephostophiles came for his writing, and in what manner he ap∣peared, and his sights he shewed him: and how he caused him to keepe a coppy of his owne writings. Chap. 7. DOctor Faustus sitting pensiue, hauing but one onely boy with him, sodainly there appeared his Spirit Mephostophiles, in likenes of a fiery man, from whome issued most horrible fiery flames, insomuch that the boy was afraid, but being hardned by his Master he had him stand still and he should haue no harme: the spirit began to bleare as in a singing manner. This pretty sport pleased Doctor Faustus well, but he would not call his Spirit into his counting-house, vntill he had
séene more: anon was heard a rushing of armed men, and trampling of horses: this ceasing, came in a kennell of Houndes, and they chased a great Hart in the Hall, and there the Hart was slaine: Faustus tooke heart, came foorth, and looked vpon the Hart, but presently before him there was a Lyon and a Dragon together fighting so fiercely, that Fau∣stus thought they would haue brought downe the house, but the Dragon ouercame the Lyon and so they vanished. After this came in a Pea-cocke with a Pea-hen, the cocke brusling of his taile, and turning to the female, beat her and so vanished. After∣ward followed a furious Bull, that with a full fiercenes ran vpon Fau∣stus, but comming néere him vanished away. Afterward followed a great olde Ape, this Ape offered Faustus the hand, but he refused: so the Ape ran out of the hall againe. Hereupon fell a mist in the hall, that Faustus saw no light, but it lasted not, and so soone as it was gone, there lay before Faustus 2. great sackes one full of gold the other full of siluer. Lastly, was heard by Faustus all manner instruments of musicke as Organs, Clarigolds, Lutes, Vialls, Citternes, Waights, Hornpipes, Flutes, Anomes, Harpes, and all manner other instruments: which so rauished his minde, that he thought he had bin in another world, for∣got both body and soule, insomuch that he was minded neuer to change his opinion concerning that which he had done. Hereat came Mepho∣stophiles into the hall to Faustus, in apparell like vnto a Fryer to whom Faustus spake, thou hast done me a wonderfull pleasure in shewing me this pastime, if thou continue as thou hast begun, thou shalt win my heart and soule, yea and haue it. Mephostophiles answered this is no∣thing, I will please thée better, yea, that thou maist know my power and all, aske what thou wilt request of me, that shalt thou haue, conditis∣nally hold thy promise, and giue me thy hand-writing, at which wordes the wretch thrust foorth his hand, saying hold thée there hast thou my promise: Mephostophiles tooke the writing, and willed Faustus to take a coppy of it: with that the peruerse Faustus being resolute in his dam∣nation, wrote a coppy thereof, and gaue the Deuill the one, and kept in store the other. Thus the spirit and Faustus were agréed and dwelt to∣gether, no doubt there was a vertuous house-kéeping. The manner how Faustus proceeded in his damnable life and of the diligent seruice that Mephostophiles vsed towards him. Chap. 8. DOctor Faustus hauing giuen his soule to the Deuill, renouncing all the powers of heauen, confirming this lamentable action with his owne blood, and hauing already deliuered his writing, now into the
Deuils hand, the which so puffed vp his heart, that he forgot the minde of a man, and thought himselfe to be a spirit. This Faustus, dwelt at his vncles house at Wittenberg, who dyed, and bequeathed it in his Testa∣ment to his coosen Faustus. Faustus kept a boy with him, that was his Scholler, and vnhappy wag, called Christopher Wagner, to whom this sport and life that he faw his maister follow séemed pleasant. Faustus leued the boy well, keping to make him as good or better séene in his de∣uillish exercises then himselfe, and he was fellow with Mephostophiles: otherwise Faustus had no company in his house but himselfe, his boy, and his spirit, that euer was diligent at Faustus command, going about the house cloathed like a Fryer, with a little bell in his hand séene of none but Faustus. For his victuals and other necessaries, Mehostophi∣les brought him at his pleasure from the Duke of Saxon, the Duke of Bauaria, and the Bishop of Saltzburg: for they had many times their best wine stollen out of their sellers by Mephostophiles: likewise their prouision for their owne table, such meate as Faustus wished for his spi∣rit brought him in: besides that, Faustus himselfe was become so cun∣ning that when he opened his window, what fowle soeuer he wished for, it came presently flying into the house, were it neuer so dainty. More∣ouer, Faustus, and his boy went in sumptuous apparell, the which Me∣phostophiles stole from the mercers of Norenberg, Auspurg, Franckford and Libtzig: for it was hard for them to finde a locke to kéepe out such a théefe. All their mainteinance was but stoine and borrowed ware: and thus they liued anodious life in the sight of God though as yet the world were vnacquainted with their wickednes. It must be so, for their fruites be none other, as Christ faith in Iohn, where he calls the Deuill a théefe and a murtherer: and that found Faustus, for he stole him away both bo∣dy and soule. How Doctor Faustus would haue marryed, and how the deuill had almost killed him for it. Chap. 9. DOrtor Faustus continued thus in his Epicurish life day and night and beléeued not that there was a God, hell, or deuill: he thought that body and soule dyed together: and had quite forgot Diuinity, or the immortality of his soule, but stood in his damnable heresie day and night. And bethinking himselfe of a wife, called Mephostophiles to counsaile, which would in no case agrée; demaunding of him if hée would breake the couenant made with him, or if he had forget it? Hast not thou (quoth Mephostophiles) sworne thy selfe an enemy to God and all creatures? To this I answere thée thou canst not marry,
thou canst not serue two maisters, God & my Prince: for wedlocke is a chiefe institution ordained of God, and that thou hast promised to desie, as we doe all, and that hast thou onely done, & moreouer thou hast con∣firmed it with thy bloud: perswade thy selfe that what thou dost in con∣tempt of wedlocke, it is all to thine owne delight. Therefore Faustus looke well about thée, and bethinke thy selfe better, and I with thée to change thy minde, for if thou kée not what thou hast promised in thy writing, we will teare thée in peeces like the dust vnder thy féet: there∣fore sweet Faustus thinke with what vnquiet life, anger, strife, & debate thou shalt liue in when thou takest a wife, therefore change thy minde. Doctor Faustus was with these speaches in dispaire, and as all that haue forsaken the Lord can build vpon no good foundation, so this wretched Doctor hauing forsooke the rocke, fell into despaire with him∣selfe, fearing if he should motion Matrimony any more, that the deuill would teare him in péeces. For this time (qd. he to Mephostophiles) I am not minded to marry. Then doest thou well answeied his spirit. But within two houres after Faustus called againe his spirit, which came in his olde manner like a Fryer. Then Faustus said vnto him, I am not able to resist or bridle my fancy, I must and will haue a wife, and I pray thée giue thy consent to it. Sodainely vpon these words came such a whirle-winde about the place, that Faustus thought the whole house would haue come downe, all the doores in the house flew off the hookes: after all this his house was full of smoake, and the floore couered ouer with ashes, which when Doctor Faustus perceiued, hée would haue gone vp staires, and flying vp, he was taken and throwne downe into the hall that he was not able to stirre hand nor foote: then round about him ranne a monstrous circle of fire, neuer standing still, that Faustus fryed as he lay, & thought there to haue béene burned. Then cryed he out to his spirit Mephostophiles for helpe, promising him he would liue in all things as he had vowed by his hand-writing. Here∣vpon appeared vnto him an ougly deuill, so feare full and monstrous to behold, that Faustus durst not looke on him. The deuill said, what woul∣dest thou haue Faustus? how likest thou thy wedding? what minde art thou in now? Faustus answered, he had forgot his promise, desiring him of pardon, and he would talke no more of such things. Thou wert best so to doe, and so vanished from him. After appeared vnto him his fryer Mephostophiles, with a bell in his hand, and spake to Faustus. It is no iesting with vs, hold thou that which thou hast vowed, and we will performe as we haue promised, and more then that, thou shalt haue thy hearts desire of what woman
soeuer thou wilt, be she aliue or dead, and so long as thou wilt thou shalt kéepe her by thée. These words pleased Faustus wonderfull well, and repented him∣selfe that he was so foolish to wish himseife marryed, that might haue any woman in the whole Cittye brought to him at his commaund: the which he practised and perseuered in a long time. Questions put foorth by Doctor Faustus vnto his spirit Mephosto∣philes. Cap. 10. DOctor Faustus liuing in all manner of pleasure that his heart could desire, continuing in his amorous drifts, his delicate fare, and costly apparell, called on a time his Mephostophiles to him, who being come, brought with him a booke in his hand of all manner of deuillish and en∣chanted Arts, the which he gaue Faustus, saying, hold my Faustus, worke now thy hearts desire: The copy of this enchanting booke was after∣wards found by his seruant Christopher Wagner. Well (qd. Faustus to his spirit) I haue called thée to know what thou canst doe if I haue néed of thy helpe. Then answered Mephostophiles and said, my Lord Faustus, I am a flying spirit, yea so swift as thought can thinke to doe whatsoeuer. Héere Faustus said, but how came thy Lord and maister Lucifer to haue so great a fall from heauen? Mephostophiles answered: My Lord Lucifer was a faire Angell, created of God as inmortall, and being placed in Seraphins, which are aboue the Cherubins, he would haue presumed vnto the Throne of God, with, intent to haue thrust God out of his seate. Vpon this presumption the Lord cast him downe head-long, and where before he was an Angell of right, now dwells in darkenes, not able to come neare his first place, without God send for him to appeare before him, as Raphiel: but vnto the lower degrée of An∣gels, that haue their conuersation with men, he may come, but not vn∣to the second degrée of heauens that is kept by the Arch-Angels, name∣ly Michaell and Gabriell, for these are called Angels of Gods wonders: yet are these farre inferiour places to that from whence my Lord and Maister Lucifer fell: and thus farre Faustus because thou art one of the beloued children of my Lord Lucifer, following and féeding my minde in manner as he did his, I haue shortly resolued thy request, and more I will doe for thée at thy pleasure. I thanke thée Mephostophiles (quoth Faustus) come let vs now goe rest, for it is night: vpon this they left their communication. How Doctor Faustus dreamed that hee had scene hell in his sleepe, and how he questioned with his spirit of matters concerning hell, with the spirits answere. Chap. 11.
THe night folowing after Faustus communication with Mephostophi∣les, as concerning the fall of Lucifer, Doctor Faustus dreamed that he had seen part of hell, but in what maner it was, or in what place, he knew not: wherby he was much troubled in minde, and called vnto him Mephostophiles his spirit: saying vnto him, I pray thée resolue me in this dout: what is hell, what substance is it of, in what place stands it, and when was it made? Mephostophiles answered: Faustus, thou shalt knowe, that before the fall of my Lord Lucifer there was no hell, but e∣uen then was hell ordayned: it is no substance, but a confused thing, for I tell thée, that before all Elements were made, or the earth séene, the spirit of God mooued vpon the waters, and darknes was ouer all: but when God said, let there be light, it was so at his worde, and the light was on Gods right hand, and God praysed the light. Iudge thou fur∣ther, God stood in the middle, the darknes was on his left hand, in the which my Lord was bound in Chaynes vntil the day of Iudgement: in this confused hell, is nought to finde but a sulphurish fire, and stinking myst or fog: Further, we deuils knowe not what substance it is of, but a confused thing: for as a bubble of water flyeth before the winde, so doth hell before the breath of God. Moreouer, we deuils know not how God hath layde the foundation of our hell, nor whereof it is, but to be short Faustus, we know that hell hath neither bottome nor end. The second question put forth by Doctor Faustus to his spirit, what king∣domes there are in hell, how many, & what were the rulers names? Chap. 12. FAustus spake againe to his Spirit, saying: thou speakest of wonder∣full things. I pray thée now tell me what kingdomes is there in your hell, how many are there, what are they called, and who rules them? the Spirit answered him, my Faustus, knowe that hell is, as thou wouldst thinke with thy selfe an other world, in the which we haue our being vn∣der the earth, euen to the heauens: within the circumference whereof, are contayned tenne kingdomes, namely: 1 Lacus mortis. 2 Stagnum ignis. 3 Terra tenebrosa. 4 Tartarus. 5 Terra obliuionis. 6 Gehenna. 7 Herebus. 8 Barathrum. 9 Stix. 10 Acheron. The which kingdomes are gouerned by fiue Kings, that is, Lucifer in the Orient, Belzebub in Septentrio, Belial in Meridie, Ascaroth in the Occident, and Phlegeton in the midst of them all: whose Rule and
dominions, haue none end vntill the day of doome. And thus farre Fau∣stus hast thou heard of our rule and Kingdome. Another question put foorth by Doctor Faustus to his spirit con∣cerning his Lord Lucifer, with the sorrow that Faustus fell afterwards into. Chap. 13. DOctor Faustus began againe to reason with Mephostophiles requi∣ring him to tell him in what forme and shape and in what estima∣tion his Lord Lucifer was when he was in fauour with God? where∣upon his spirit required of him thrée dayes respite, which Faustus gran∣ted. The thrée dayes being expired, Mephostophiles gaue him this an∣swer: Faustus, my Lord Lucifer (so called now, for that hée was bani∣shed out of the cléere light of heauen) was at the first an Angell of God, yea hée was so of God ordained, for shape, pompe, authority, worthi∣nes, and dwelling, that he farre excéeded all the other creatures of God, yea our gold and precious stones: and so illuminated, that hée farre surpassed the brightnes of the Sunne and all other Stars, where God placed him on the Cherubins: he had a Kingly office, and was alwayes before Gods seate, to the end he might be the more perfect in all his be∣ings: But when he began to be high minded, proude, and so presump∣tuous that he would vsurpe the seate of Gods maiesty, then was he banished out from amongst the heauenly powers, seperated from their abiding into the manner of a fiery stone, that no water is able to quench but continually burneth vntill the end of the world. Doctor Faustus when he had heard the wordes of his spirit began to consider with himselfe, hauing diuers and sundry opinions in his head: and very pensiuely, saying nothing vnto his spirit, he went into his chamber, and laide him on his bed, recording the wordes of Mephosto∣philes, which so pierced his heart, that he fell in sighing and great -mentation, crying out: alas, ah woe is me what haue I done? Euen so shall it come to passe with me: am not I also a creature of Gods ma∣king, bearing his own Image and similitude, into whom he hath brea∣thed the spirit of life and immortality, vnto whome he hath made all things liuing subiect? but woe is me my haughty minde, proude aspi∣ring stomacke, and filthy flesh, hath brought my soule into perpetuall damnation, yea pride hath abused my vnderstanding, insomuch that I haue forgot my Maker, the spirit of God is departed from me, I haue promised the Deuill my soule: and therefore it is but a folly for me to hope for grace, but it must be euen with me as with Lucifer, throwne into perpetuall burning fire: ah woe is me that euer I was
borne. In this perplexity lay this miserable Doctor Faustus, hauing quite forgot his faith in Christ, neuer falling to repentance truly, there∣by to attaine the grace and holy spirit of God againe, the which would haue béene able to haue resisted the strong assaults of Sathan: for al∣though he had made him a promise, yet he might haue remembred through true repentance, sinners once come againe into the fauour of God; which faith the faithfull firmely hold, knowing they that kill the body are not able to hurt the soule: but he was in all his opinions doubtfull without faith or hope, and so he continued. Another disputation betwixt Doctor Faustus and his Spirit, of the power of the Deuill, and his enuy to man-kinde. Chap. 14. AFter Doctor Faustus had a while pondred and sorrowed with him∣selfe of his wretched estate, he called againe Mephostophiles vn∣to him, commanding him to tell him the iudgement, rule, power, at∣tempts, tyrannie, and temptation of the deuill, and why he was moued to such kinde of liuing: whereupon the spirit answered to his question: that thou demaundst of me will turne thée to no small discontentment, therefore thou shouldest not haue desired me of such matters, for it tou∣cheth the secrets of our Kingdome, although I cannot deny to resolue thy request. Therefore know thou Faustus, that so soone as my Lord Lucifer fell from heauen, he became a mortall enemy both to God and man, and hath vsed (as now he doth) all māner of tyranny to the destruc∣tion of man, as is manifest by diuers examples: one falling suddainly dead, another hangs himselfe, another drownes himselfe, others stab themselues, others vnlawfully dispaire and so come to vtter confusion: The first man Adam that was made perfect to the similitude of God, was by my L. pollicy, the whole decay of man, yea Faustus in him was the beginning and first tyranny of my Lord Lucifer to man: the like did he with Caine, the same with ye children of Israell, when they worshiped strange Gods and fell to whordome with strange women: the like with Saul: so did he by the seauen husbands of her that after was the wife of Tobias: likewise Dagon our fellow brought to destruction 50000. men wherupon the Arke of God was stolne: and Belial made Dauid to num∣ber his men, whereupon were slains 60000. also he deceiued King Sa∣lomon that worshiped the Gods of the heathen, and there are such spi∣rits innumerable that can come by men and tempt them, driue them to sinne, and weaken their beliefe: for we rule the hearts of Kings and Princes, stirring them vp to warre and blood shed: and to this intent doe we spread our selues throughout all the world, as the vtter enemies
of God and his sonne Christ, yea, and all that worship them: and that thou knowest by thy selfe Faustus, how we haue dealt by thée: To this said Faustus, then thou didst also beguile me: I did what I could to help thée forward: for so soone as I sawe how thy hart did dispise thy degrée taken in diuinity, & didst study to search & know the secrets of our king∣dome, then did I enter into thée, giuing thée diuers foule & filthy cogita∣tions, prking thée forward in thine intent, perswading thée thou couldst neuer attaine to thy desire, till thou hadst the helpe of some deuill: and when thou wast delighted in this, then tooke I roote in thée, & so firmly, that thou gauest thy selfe to vs both body & soule, which thou canst not deny. Hereat answerd Faustus, Thou saist true, I cannot deny it: Ah woe is me most miserable Faustus, how haue I bene deceiued? had I not had a desire to know too much, I had not bene in this case: for hauing stu∣dyed the liues of the holy Saints & Prophets, and therby thought to vn∣derstand sufficient heauenly matters, I thought my selfe not worthy to be called Doctor Faustus, if I should not also know the secrets of hell, and be associated with the furious Fiendes thereof: now therfore must I be rewarded accordingly. Which spéeches being vttred, Faustus went very sorowfully away from his Spirit. How Doctor Faustus desired againe of his Spirit, to knowe the secrets & paynes of hell: & whether those damned deuils & their company might euer come into the fauour & loue of God againe. Chap. 15. DOctor Faustus was euer pondering with him-selfe, how he might get loose from so damnable an end as he had giuen himselfe vnto both of soule and body: but his repentance was like to that of Cain and Iudas, he thought his sins greater then God could forgiue: hereupō re∣sting his mind, he lookt vp to heauē, but saw nothing therein, for his hart was so possessed of the deuill, that he could thinke of nought els but of hell and the paynes thereof. Wherefore in all the haste he calleth vnto him his Spirit Mephostophiles, desiring him to tell him some more of the secrets of hell, what paynes the damned were in, and how they were tormented? & whether the damned soules might get againe the fauour of God, and so be released out of their torments, or not: whereupon the Spirit answered, My Faustus, thou maist well leaue to question any more of such matters, for they will but disquiet thy minde, I pray thée what meanest thou? thinkest thou through these thy fantasies, to escape vs? No, for if thou shouldst clime vp to heauen, there to hide thy self, yet would I thrust thée downe againe: for thou art mine, and thou belongst
vnto our societie: therefore swéete Faustus, thou wilt repent this thy foo∣lish demand, except thou be content that I shall tell thée nothing. Quoth Faustus, ragingly, I will know or I will not liue, wherefore dispatch and tell me: to whom Mephostophiles answered, Faustus, it is no trouble vnto me at all to tell thée, and therefore sith thou forcest me thereto, I will tell thée thinges to the terrour of thy soule, if thou wilt abide the hearing. Thou wilt haue me to tell thée of the secrets of Hell, and of the paines thereof: know Faustus that hell hath many figures, sem∣blances and names, but it cannot be named nor figured in such sort vn∣to the liuing that are damned, as it is to those that are dead, and doe both sée and féele the torments thereof: for hell is said to be deadly, out of the which came neuer any to life againe but one, but he is nothing for thée to reckon vpon: hell is blood thirsty, and is neuer satisfied: hell is a vally into the which the damned soules fall: for so soone as the soule is out of mans body, it would gladly goe to the place from whence it came, and climeth vp aboue the highest hills euen to the heauens, where being by the Angells of the first Mobile denyed entertainment (in consideration of their euill life spent on the earth) they fall into the déepest pit or valley which hath no bottome, into a perpetuall fire, which shall neuer bée quenched: for like as the Flint throwne into the water, looseth not his vertue, neither is his fire extinguished, euen so the hellish fire is vn∣quenchable: and euen as the flint stone in the fire burned red hot, and consumeth not, so likewise the damned soules in our hellish fire are euer burning, but their paines neuer diminishing. Therefore is hell called the euerlasting paine, in which is neither hope nor mercy. So it is called vtter darkenesse, in which we sée neither the light of the Sunne, Moone, nor Starre: and were our darkenesse like the darknesse of the night, yet were there hope of mercy, but ours is perpetuall darkenesse, cleane exempt from the face God. Hell hath also a place within it cal∣led Chasma, out of the which issueth all manner of thunders, lightnings, with such shrikings, and waylings, that oftentimes the very Deuils themselues stand in feare thereof: for one while it sendeth forth winds with excéeding snow, haile, and raine, congraling the water into Ice: with the which the damned are frozen, gnash their teeth, howle and cry, and yet cannot dye. Other whiles, it sendeth foorth most horrible hot mistes or fogges with flashing flames of fire and Brimstone, wherein the sorrowfull soules of the damned lye broiling in their reiterated torments: yea, Fau∣stus hell is called a prison, wherein the damned lie continually bound: it is called Pernicies and Exitium, death, destruction, hurtfulnesse,
mischiefe, a mischance, a pittifull and an euill thing world without nd. We haue also with vs in hell a ladder, reaching of excéeding height, as though the toppe of the same would touch the heauens, on which the damned ascend to seeke the blessing of God, but through their infidelity, when they are at the very highest degrée, they fall downe againe into their former miseries, complaining of the heate of that vnquenchable fire: yea sweete Faustus, so must thou vnderstand of hell, the while thou art so desirous to know the secrets of our Kingdome. And marke Faustus, hell is the nurse of death, the heate of all fire, the shdow of heauen and earth, the obliuion of all goodnesse, the paines vnspeakable, the griefes vnremouable, the dwelling of deuils, Dra∣gons, Serpents, Adders, Toades, Crocodiles, and all manner of ve∣nomo us and noysome creatures: the puddle of sinne, the stinking fogge ascending from the stgian Lake, brimstome, pitch, and all manner of vn∣cleane mettals, the perpetuall and vnquenchable fire, the end of whose miseries was neuer purposed by God: yea, yea, Faustus, thou saiest I shall, I must, nay I will tell thée the secrets of our kingdome, for thou buyest it dearely, and thou must and shalt be pertaker of our torments, that (as the Lord God said) neuer shall cease: for Hell, the womans belly, and the earth, are neuer satisfied: there shalt thou abide horrible torments, trembling, gnashing of téeth, houling, crying, burning, frée∣zing, melting, swiming in a laborinth of miseries, scalding, smoaking in thine eyes, stinking in thy nose, horsenes of thy spéech, deafenes of thine eares, trembling of thine handes, biting thine owne tongue with paine, thy heart crushed as in a presse, thy bones broken, the diuels tossing firebrands vpon thée, yea thy whole carcasse tossed vpon muck for is, from one deuill to another, yea Faustus then wilt thou wish for death, and he will fly from thee, thine vnspeakable torments shall be euery day augmented more and more, for the greater the sinne, the greater is the punishment: how likest thou this my Faustus? a resolution answerable to thy request. Lastly, thou wilt haue me tell thée that which belongeth onely to God, which is, if it be possible for the damned to come againe in to the fauour of God, or not: why Faustus thou knowest that this is against thy promise, for what shouldst thou desire to know that, hauing alrea∣die giuen thy soule to the deuill, to haue the pleasure of this world, and to know the secrets of hell: therefore art thou damned, and how canst thou then came againe to the fauour of God? Wherefore I directly an∣swere no: for whomsoeuer GOD hath forsaken and throwne into hell, must there abide his wrath and indignation in that vnquench∣able
fire, where is no hope nor mercy to be looked for, but abiding in per∣petuall paines world without end: for euen as much it auaileth thée Faustus, to hope for the fauour of God againe, as Luciser himselfe, who indéed although he and we all haue a hope, yet it is to small auaile, and taketh none effect, for out of that place God will neither heare crying nor sighing: if he doe, thou shalt haue as little remorse, as Diues, Caine, or Iudas had: what heleth the Emperour, King, Prince, Duke, Earle, Baron, Lord, Knight, Squire, or Gentleman, to cry for mercy being there? Nothing: for if on earth they would not be tyrants, and selfe wil∣led, rich with couetousnes, proude with pompe, gluttons, drunkards, whoeremongers, back biters, robbers, murtherers, blasphemers, and such like, then were there some hope to be looked for, therefore my Fau∣stus, as thou commest to hell with these quallities, thou maist say with Caine, My sins are greater then can be forgiuen, goe hang thy selfe with Iudas, and lastly, be content to suffer torments with Diues. Therefore know Faustus that the damned haue neither end nor time appointed in the which they may hope to be released, for if there were any such hope, that they by throwing one drop of water out of the Sea in a day vntill it were dry, or if there were an heape of Sand as high as from the earth to the heauens, that a bird carrying away but one corne in a day, at ye end of this so long labour, that yet they might hope at the last God would haue mercy on them, they would be comforted: but now there is no hope that God once thinkes vpon them, or that their howlings shall euer be heard, yea so vnpossible it is for thée to hide thy selfe from God, as vnpossible for thée to remoue the Mountaines, or to empty the Sea, or to tell the drops of raine that haue fallen from heauen vntill this day, or to tell what there is most in the world: yea and for a Camel to goe thorough the eye of a néedle, euen so vnpossible it is for thée Faustus and the rest of the damned, to come againe into the fauour of God: and thus Faustus hast thou heard my last sentence, and I pray thée how dost thou like it? But know this, that I counsell thée to let me be vnmolested hereafter with such disputations, or else I will vexe thée euery limbe to thy small contentment. Doctor Faustus departed from his spirit very pensiue and sorrowfull, laying him on his bed altogether doubtfull of the grace and fauour of God, wherefore he fell into fantasticall cogitations: faine he would haue had his soule at libertie againe, but the deuill had so blinded him, and taken such déepe roote in his heart, that he could neuer thinke to craue Gods mercy, or if by chance he had any good motion, straight wayes the deuill would thrust in a faire Lady into his chamber, which fell to kissing and dalliance with him, through which meanes, he threw
his godly motion in the winde, going forward still in his wicked practi∣ses, to the vtter ruine both of his body and soule. Another question put foorth by Doctor Faustus to his Spirit Mephostophiles of his owne estate. Chap. 16. DOctor Faustus being yet desirous to heare more strange things, cal∣led his spirit vnto him saying: By Mephosophies, I haue yet ano∣ther sute vnto thée, which I pray thée deny me not to resolue me of: Fau∣stus (qd. the spirit) I am loath to reason with thee any further, for thou art neuer satisfied in thy minde but alwayes bringest me anew: Yet I pray thée this once (qd. Faustus) doe me so much fauour, as to tell me the truth in this matter, and hereafter I will be no more so earnest with thée: the spirit was altogether against it, but yet once more he would abide him: well (said the spirt to Faustus) what demandest thou of me? Faustus said, I would gladly know of thée, if thou wert a man in man∣ner and fore as I am, what wouldst thou doe to please both God and man? whereat the spirit smiled, saying: My Faustus, if I were a man as thou art, and that God had adorned me with those guifts of nature, as thou once hadst, euen so long as the breath of God were by, and with∣in mée, would I humble my selfe vnto his Maiestie, endeauouring in all that I could to kéepe his commandements, praise him and glorifie him, that I might continue in his fauour, so were I sure to enioy the eternall ioy and felicitie of his kingdome: Faustus said, but that I haue not done, No, thou saist true (qd. Mephostophiles) thou hast not done it, but thou hast denyed the Lord thy maker, which gaue thée the breath of life, spéech, hearing, sight, and all other thy reasonable sences, that thou migh∣test vnderstand his will and pleasure, to liue to the glory and honour of his name, and to the aduancement of thy body and soule: him I say be∣ing thy maker hast thou denyed and defied, yea, wickedly thou hast ap∣plyed that excellent guift of thy vnderstanding, and giuen thy soule to the deuill: therfore giue none the blame but thine owne self, will, thy proud and aspiring minde, which hath brought thée into the wrath of God and vtter damnation. This is most true (qd. Faustus) but tell me Mepho∣stophiles, wouldst thou be in my case as I am now? yea saith the spi∣rit (and with that fetcht a great sigh) for yet would I so humble my selfe that I would win the fauour of God, Then (said D. Faustus) it were time inough for me, if I amended. True (said Mephostophiles) if it were not for thy great sinnes, which are so odious and detestable in the sight of God that it is too late for thée, for the wrath of God resteth vpon thée. Leaue off (qd. Faustus) and tell me my question to my greater comfort.
Here followeth the second part of Doctor Faustus his life, and practises vntill his end. Chap. 17. DOctor Faustus hauing receiued deniall of his spirit, to be resolued a∣ny more in such like questions propounded: forgot all good workes, and fell to be a Kalender-maker by the helpe of his spirit, and also u short time to be a good Astronomeror Astrologian: he had learned so per∣fectly of his Spirit the course of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, that he had the most famous name of all the Mathem atiques that liued in his time, as may well appeare by his workes dedicated vnto sundry Dukes and Lords: for be did nothing without the aduice of his spirit, which learned him to presage of matters to come, which haue come to passe since his death. The like praise won he with his Kalenders and Al∣manacks making, for when he presaged of any thing, operation, and al∣teration of the weather or Elements: as winde, rame, fogs, snow, haile, moyst, dry, warme, colde, thunder, lightning it fell so duely out, as if an Angell of heauen had forewarned it. He did not, like the vnskilfull Astronomers of our time, that set in Winter, cold, moyst airy, frosty: and in the Dog-dayes, hot, dry, thunder, fire, and such like, but he set in all his workes, day and haure when, where, and how it should dappen. If any wonderfull thing were at hand, as mortalitie, famine, plague, or warres, he would set the time and place, in true and iust order, when it should come to passe. A question put forth by Doctor Faustus to his Spirit, con∣cerning Astronomy. Chap. 18. NOw Faustus falling to practice and making his Prognestications, he was doutfull in many points: wherefore he called vnto him me∣phostophiles his Spirit, saying: I finde the ground of this science very difficult to attaine vnto: for when that I conferre Astronomia, and A∣strologia, as the Mathematicians, and ancient writers haue left in me∣morye, I finde them to barry, and very much to disagree: wherefore I pray thée to teach me the truth in this matter: to whome his spirit an∣swered, Faustus, thou shalt knowe, that the practicioners or speculators, or at least the first inuenters of these Artes, haue done nothing of them∣selues certaine, whereupon thou maist attaine to the true prognostica∣ting or presaging of things concerning the heauens: or of the influence of the planets: for if by chaunce some one Mathematician or Astronomer hath left behinde him any thing worthy of memory, they haue so blin∣ded it with Enigmaticall wordes, blinde Characters, and such obscure s∣gures, that it is impossible for an earthly man to attaine to the know∣ledge thereof, without the ayde of some spirit, or els the speciall guift of
God, for such are the hidden works of God from men, yet doe we spirits that die and fléete in all Elements, know such, and there is nothing to be done, or by the heauens pretended, but we know it, except onely the day of Doome. Wherefore Faustus learne of me, I will teach thée the course & recourse of ♄ ♃ ♀. ☉ ☿ and ☾. the cause of winter and summer, the exaltation and declination of the Sunne, and Ecclipse of the Moone, the distance and height of the Poles, and euery fixed starre, the nature and operation of the Elements, fire, ayre, water and earth, and all that is contained in them, yea herein there is nothing hidden from me, but onely the filthy essence which once thou hadst Faustus at liberty, but now Faustus thou hast lost it past recouery: wherefore leauing that which wil not be again had, learn now of me to make thunder, lightning, haile, snow and raine, the cloudes to rent, the earth and craggy rocks to shake and split in sunder: the Seas to swell & rore, and ouer-run their markes: knowest not thou that the déeper the Sunne shines the hotter he pier∣ces? so the more thy Art is famous whilest thou art héere, the greater shall be thy name when thou art gone. Knowest not thou that the earth is frozen, cold and dry: the water running, cold, and moist, the ayre fly∣ing, hot and moist: the fire consuming hot and dry? Yea Faustus, so must thy heart be inflamed like the fire to mount on high: learne Fau∣stus to flie like my sel as swift as thought from one kingdome to ano∣ther, to sit at Princes tables, to eate their dain tiest fare, to haue thy plea∣sure of their Ladyes, wiues and concubines, to vse all their iewels and costly robes as thinges belonging vnto thée, and not vnto them: learne of me Faustus to runne through walles, doores, and gates of stone and yron, to créepe into the earth like a Worme: to swim in the water like a fish, to fly in the ayre like a Bird, and to liue and nourish thy selfe in the fire like a Salamander, so shalt thou be famous, renowned, farre spoken of, and extolled for thy skill: going on kniues not hurting thy féete, carrying fire in thy bosome and not burning thy shirt, séeing through the heauens as through a Christall, wherein is placed the pla∣nets, with all the rest of the presaging Comets, the whole circuit of the world from the East to the West, North and South: there shalt thou know Faustus, wherefore the fiery sphere aboue, and the signes of yt Zo∣diack doth not burne and consume the whole face of the earth, being hin∣dered by placing the two moist elements between thein, the airy cloudes and the wauering wanes of water: yea Faustus, I will learne thee the secrets of nature, what the cause is that the sun in sommer being at the highest, giueth all his heate downewards on the earth: and being in Winter at the lowest, giueth all his heate vpward into the Heauens,
that the snow should be of so great vertue as the honny, and the Lady Saturnia in Occulto, more hotter then the Sun in Manifesto. Come on my Faustus, I will make thée as perfect in these thinges as my selfe, I will learne thée to goe inuisible, to finde out the mines of gold and siluer: the fodines of precions stones, as the Carbuncle, the Diamond, Saphir, Emerald, Ruby, Topas, Iacinet, Granat, Iaspis, Amachist: vse all these at thy pleasure, take thy hearts desire, thy time Faustus weareth away, then why wilt thou not take thy pleasure of the world? Come vp we will goe vnto Kinges at their owne Courts and at their most sump∣tuous banquets be their guests: if willingly they inuite vs not, then perforce we will serue our owne turne with their best meate, and dain∣tiest wine: Agréed qd. Faustus, but let me pause a while vpon this thou hast euen now declared vnto me. How Doctor Faustus fell into despaire with himselfe, for hauing put foorth a question vnto his spirit, they fell at variance, where∣upon the rout of Deuils appeared vnto him, threat∣ning him sharply. Chap. 19. DOctor Faustus reuoluing with himselfe the spéeches of his spirit, he became so woful and sorrowfull in his cogitations, that he thought himselfe already frying in the hottest flames of  & lying in this muse, suddenly there appeared vnto him his spirit, deunding what thing so grieued and troubled his conscience? where at Doctor Faustus gaue no answer: yet the spirit very earnestly lay vpon him to know the cause, and if it were possible, he would finde remedy for his griefe and ease him of his sorrowes. To whom Faustus answered, I haue taken thee vnto me as a seruant to do me seruice, and thy seruice will be very deare vnto me: yet I cannot haue any diligence of thée further then thou list thy selfe, neither doest thou in any thing as it becommeth thée. The spirit replyed. My Faustus thou knowest that I was neuer against thy com∣mandements as yet, but ready to serue and resolue thy questions, al∣though I am not bound vnto thée in such respects as concerne the hurt of our Kingdome, yet was I alwayes willing to answer thée and so am still: therefore my Faustus say on boldly, what is thy will and plea∣sure? At which words the spirit stole away the heart of Faustus, who spake in this sort, Mephostophiles, tell me how and after what sort God made the world, and all the creatures in them, and why man was made after the Image of God? the spirit hearing this: answered, Faustus thou knowest that all this is in vaine for thée to aske, I know that thou art sory for that thou hast done, but it auaileth thée not, for I will
thousand péeces if thou change not thine opinions, and hereat he vanished away. Whereat Faustus all sorrowfull for that he had put forth such a question, fell to wéeping and to howling bitterly, not for his sinnes to∣wards God, but that the Deuill was departed from him so sodainly and in such a rage. And being in this perplexity, he was suddainly taken in such an extreame colde, as if he should haue frozen in the place where he sate, in which the greatest deuill in hell appeared vnto him, with cer∣taine of his hideous and infernall company in most vgliest shapes, that it was vnpossible to thinke vpon, and trauersing the chamber round a∣bout where Faustus sate, Faustus thought to himselfe, now are they come for me though my time be not come, and that because I haue as∣ked such questions of my seruant Mephostophiles: at whose cogitati∣ons the chiefest deuill which was the Lord, vnto whome he gaue his soule, that was Lucifer, spake in this sort: Faustus, I haue séene thy thoughts, which are not as thou hast vowed vnto me, by vertue of this Letter, and shewed him the Obligation which he had written with his owne blood, wherefore I am come to visite thée, and to shew thée some of our hellish pastimes, in hope that will drawe and confirme thy minde a little more stedfast vnto vs. Content quoth Faustus, goe too, let me sée what pastime you can make. At which wordes the great deuill in his likenes sate him downe by Faustus, commaunding the rest of the deuils to appeare in their forme, as if they were in hell: First entred Belial in forme of a Beare with curled blacke haire to the ground, his eares stan∣ding vpright: within the eare was as red as blood, out of which issued flames of fire, his téeth were at least a foote long, as white as snow, with a taile thrée elles long (at the least) hauing two winges one be∣hinde each arme, and thus one after another they appeared to Faustus in forme as they were in hell: Lucifer himselfe sate in manner of a man all hairy, but of a browne colour like a Squirrell curied, and his taile tur∣ning vpward on his backe as the Squirrels vse, I thinke he could crack nuts too, like a Squirrell. After him came Belzebub in curled haire of a horse-flesh colour, his head like the head of a Bul, with a mighty paire of hornes, and two long eares downe to the ground, and two wings on his backe with pricking things like thornes: out of his wings issued flames of fire, his taile was like a Cowes. Then came Astoroth in forme of a worme going vpright on his taile, & had no féete, but a taile like a Slow-worme: vnder his chappes grew two short hands, and his barke was cole-blacke, his belly thicke in the middle, yellow like golde, hauing many bristles on his backe like a Hedge-heg. After him came Chania∣gosta, being white and gray mixed, excéeding curled and hairy, he had
a head like the head of an Asse, and a taile like a Cat, and clawes like an Oxe, lacking nothing of an ell broad. Then came Anobis, this deuill had a head like a dog, white and blacke haire, in shape like a hog, sauing that he had but two féete, one vnder his threate, the other at his taile, he was foure elles long, with hanging cares like a blood-hound. After him came Dithican, he was a short théefe, in forme of a Feasant, with shining feathers, and toure féete, his necke was gréee, his body re, and his féete blacke. The last was called Brachus, with foure short féete like a Hedge hog, yellow and gréene, the vpper side of his body was browne, and the belly like blew flames of fire: the taile red like the taile of a Monkey. The rest of the deuils were in forme of vnsensible beasts, as Swine, Harts Beares, Woolfes, Apes, Buffes, Goates, Antlops, Elephants, Dragons, Horses, Asses, Lyons, Cats, Snakes, Loades, and all manner of vgly odious Serpents and wormes: yet came in such sort, that euery one at his entry into the Hall, made their reuerence vn∣to Lucifer and so tooke their places, standing in order as they came, vn∣till they had filled the whole Hall, wherewith sodainly fell a most horri∣ble thunder-clap, that the house shooke as though it would haue fallen to the ground, vpon which euery monster had a muck forke in his hand, holding them towards Faustus, as though they would haue run at tilt at him: which when Faustus perceiued, he thought vpon the wordes of Mephostophiles, when he told him how the soules in hell were tormen∣ted being cast from deuill to deuill vpon mucke-forkes, he thought verily to haue béene tormented there of them in like sort. But Lucifer percei∣uing his thought, spake to him, My Faustus how likest thou this crew of mine? quoth Faustus why came not you in another manner of shape? Lucifer replyed, we cannot change our hellish forme, we haue shewed our selues héere, as we are there: yet can we blinde mens eyes in such sort, that when we will we repaire vnto them, as if we were men or An∣gels of light, although our dwelling be in darkenes. Then said Faustus, I like not so many of you together, whereupon Lucifer commanded them to depart, except 7. of the principali, forthwith they presently vanished, which Faustus perceiuing, he was somewhat better comforted, and spake to Lucifer, where is my seruant Mephostophiles? let me see if he can doe the like, whereupon came a fierce Dragon flying, and spitting fire round about the house, and comming towards Lucifer, made reuerence, and then changed himselfe to the forme of a Frier saying Faustus what wilt thou? Faustus said, I will that thou teach me to transforme my selfe in like sort as thou and the rest haue done: then Lucifer put fooh his paw and gaue Faustus a booke, saying, hold, doe what thou wilt, which hée
looking vpon, straight wayes changed himselfe into a hogge, then into a Worme, then into a Dragon, and finding this for his purpose, it li∣ked him well. Quoth he to Lucifer, and how commeth it that so many filthy formes are in the world? Lucifer answered, they are ordained of God as plagues vnto men, and so shalt thou be plagued (quoth he) whers vpon came Scorpions, Waspes, Emits, Bées, and Enats, which fell to stinging and btng him, and all the whole house was fled with a most horrible stinking fogge, insomuch that Faustus saw nothing, but still was tormented: wherefore he cryed for helpe, saying, Mephostophiles my faithfull seruant where art thou? helpe, helpe I pray thée: hereat the spirit answering nothing, but Lucifer himselfe said, ho, ho, ho Fau∣stus, how likest thou the creation of the world? and incontinent it wes cleare againe, and the diuels and all the filthy cattell were vanished, one∣ly Faustus was left alone, séeing nothing, but hearing the swéetest mu∣sicke that euer he heard before, at which he was so rauished with delight, that he forgot his feares hée was in before, and it repented him that he had séene no more of their pastime. How Doctor Faustus desired to see hell, and of the manner how he was vsed therein. Chap. 20. DOctor Faustus bethinking how his time went away, and how hee had spent eight yeares thereof, he ment to spend the rest to his bet∣ter contentment, intending quite to forget any such motions as might offend the deuill any more: wherefore on a time he called his Spirit Mephostophiles, and said vnto him, bring thou hither vnto mee thy Lord Lucifer or Behall: he brought him (notwithstanding) one that was called Belzebub, the which asked Faustus his pleasure? Quoth Faustus, I would know of thoe if I may see hell and take a view there∣of? That thou shalt said the diuell, and at midnight I will fetch thée. Wll, night being come, Doctor Faustus awaited very diligently for the comming of the diuell to fetch him, and thinking that he tarryed all too long, hee went to the window, where he pulled open a cazement, and looking into the Element, he saw a cloude in the North, more blacke, darker and obscure, then all the rest of the skie, from whence the winde blew most horrible right into Faustus his chamber, and filled the whole house with smoke, that Faustus was almost smothered: hereat fell an excéeding thunder clap, and withall came a great rugged blacke Beare all culed and vpon his backe a chaire of beaten gold, and spake to Faustus, saying, sit vp and away with me: and Doctor Faustus, that had so long abode the smoake, wisht rather to be in hell then there, got on the diuell, and so they went together. But marke how the diuell
blinded him, and made him beléeue they carryed him into hell, for he car∣ryed him into the ayre, where Faustus fell into a sound sléepe, as if he had sate in a warme water or bath: at last they came to a place which bur∣neth continually with flashing flames of fire and brimstone: where aut issued an excéeding mighty clap of thunder, with so horrible a noise, that Faustus awaked: but the deuill went foorth on his way, and carried Fau∣stus thereinto, yet notwithstanding howsoeuer it burnt. D. Faustus self no more heate, then as it were the glimps of the Sunne in May, there heard he all manner of musicke to welcome him, but saw none playing on them, it pleased him well but he durst not aske, for he was forbidden it before. To méete the deuill and the guest that came with him, came 3. other vgly deuils, the which ranne backe againe before the Beare, to make the way, against whome there came running an excéeding great Hart which would haue thrust Faustus out of his chaire, but being de∣fended by the other thrée deuils, the Hart was put to the repulse: thence going on their way Faustus looked, and beholde, there was nothing but Snakes and all manner of venemous beasts about him, which were ex∣céeding great, vnto the which Snakes came many Storkes and swal∣lowed vp all the whole multitude of Snakes, that they left not one: which when Faustus saw, he maruailed greatly, but procéeding further on their hellish dayage, there came foorth of an bollow cliffe an excéeding great flying Bull, the which with such a force hit Faustus his chaire with his head and hornes, that he turned Faustus and his Beare ouer and ouer, so that the Beare vanished away, whereat Faustus began to cry, oh, woe is me that euer I came héere: for he thought there to haue béene begui∣led of the deuill, and to make his end before his time appointed or con∣ditioned of the deuill, but shortly after came vnto him amonstrous Ape, kidding Faustus to be of good chéere and said, get vpon me: all the fire in hell seemed to Faustus to haue beene put out, whereupon followed a monstrous thicke fogge, that he saw nothing, but shortly it seemed to him to waxe cleere, where he saw two great Dragons fasined vnto a Waggon, into the which the Ape ascended and set Faustus therein, foorth slew the Dragons into an exceeding darke cloude. where Faustus saw neither Dragon nor Chariot wherein he sate, and such were the cries of tormented soules, with mighty thunder claps and flashing lightnings about his eares, that poore Faustus shooke for feare. Vpon this came they to a water, stincking and filthy, thicke like mudde, into the which ranne the Dragon, sincking vnder with waggon and all, but Faustus felt no water, but as it were a small mist, sauing that the waues beate so sore vpon him, that he saw nothing vnder and ouer him but onely water,
in the which he lest his Dragons, Ape, and Waggon: and sinking yet déeper and déeper, he came at last as it were vpon a high Rocke, where the waters parted and left him thereon: but when the water was gone, it séemed to him he should there haue ended his life, for he saw no way but death: the Rocke was as high from the bottome as heauen is from the earth, there sate he, séeing nor hearing any man, and looked euer vpon the Rocke: at length he sawe a little hole, out of the which issued re: thought he, how shall I now doe? I am forsaken of the deuils, and they that brought me hither, héer must I either fall to the bottome, or burns in the fire, or sit still in dispaire: with that in his madnes he gaue a skip into the fiery hole, saying: holde you infernall hags, take here this sacri∣fice as my last end, that which I iustly haue deserued: vpon this he was entred, and finding himselfe as yet vnburned or touched of that fire, he was the beter appaied, but there was so great a noise, as he neuer heard the like before, it passed all the thunder that euer he had heard, and com∣ming downe further to the bottome of the rocke, he saw a fire, wherein were many worthy and noble personages, as Emperors, Kings, Dukes and Lords, and many thousands more of tormented soules, at the edge of which fire ran a most pleasant, cleare, and cold water to behold, into the which many formented soules sprang out of the fire to coole them∣selues, but being so fréezing cold, they were constrained to returne again into the fire, and thus wearied themselues, & spent their endles torments out of one laborinth into another, one while in heate, another while in colde: but Faustus standing héere all this while gazing on them that were thus tormented, he sawe one leaping out of the fire and scriching horribly, whome he thought to haue knowne, wherefore he would faine haue spoken vnto him, but remembring that he was forbidden, he re∣frained speaking. Then this deuill that brought him in, came to him againe in likenes of a Beare, with the chaire on his backe, and bad him sit vp for it is time to depart: so Faustus got vp, and the deuill carryed him out into the ayre, where he had so swéet musicke that he fell a sléep by the way. His boy Christopher being all this while at home, and mis∣sing his master so long, thought his maister would haue tarryed and dwelt with the deuill foreuer: but whilst his boy was in these cogitati∣ons, his maister came home, for the deuill brought him home fast asléepe as he sate in the chaire, and threw him on his bed, where (being thus lest of the deuill) he lay vntill day. When he awaked, he was amazed, like a man that had béene in a darke dungeon: musing with himselfe if it were true or false that he had séene Hell, or whether he was blinded or not, but he rather perswaded himselfe that he had béene there then
otherwise, because he had séene such wonderfull thinges: wherefore he most carefully tooke pen and inke, and wrote those thinges in order as he had séene: the which writing was afterwards found by his boy in his study: which afterwards was published to the whole Citty of Wit∣tenberg in print, for example to all Christians. How Doctor Faustus was carryed through the ayre vp to the heauen to see the whole world, and how the Skie and Planets ruled, af∣ter the which he wrote a letter to his friend of the same to Liptzig, and how he went about the world in eight dayes. Chap. 19. THis Letter was found by a frée man and Cittizen of Wittenberg, written with his own hand, and sent to his friend at Liptzig a Phy∣sitian, named Ioue Victory: the contents of which were as followeth: Amongst other things, (my louing friend and brother) I remember yet the former friendship had together, when we were schoole fellowes and Students in the Vniuersitie at Wittenberg whereas you first studied Physick, Astronomy, Astrology, Grometry, and Cosmographie, I to the contrary (you know) studied Diuinity, notwithstanding now in any of your owne studies I am seen (I am perswaded) further then your selfe: for sithence I began I haue neuer ered, for (ight I speake it without affecting my own praise) my Kalenders, and other practises haue not on∣ly the commendations of the common sort, but also of the chiefest Lords and Nobles of this our Dutch nation because (which is chiefly to be no∣ted) I write and presage of matters to come wic all accord and fall out so right, as if they had bin already séne bfore. And for that (my beloued Victory) you write to know my voyage which I made vnto ye heauens, the which (as you certifie me you haue had some suspition of) although you parrly perswaded your selfe, that it is a thing vnpossible, no matter for that, it is as it is, & let it be as it will, once it was done in such māner as now according vnto your request I giue you héere to vnderstand. I being once laide on my bed, and could not sléepe for thinking on my Kalender and practise. I maruailed with my selfe how it were possible that the Firmament should be knowne and so largely written of men, or whether they write true or false, by their owne opinions, or suppositi∣ons, or by due obseruations and true course of the heauens. Behold, I thought my house would haue bene blowne downe, so that all my doores and chests flew open, whereat I was not a little astonied, for withall I heard a groaning voyce, which said, get vp, the desire of thy heart, minde, and thought shalt thou sée, at the which I answered, what my heart desireth, that would I faine sée, and to make proofe, if I shall
sée I will away with thée. Why then (quoth he) looke out at thy win∣dow, their commeth a messenger for thée, that did I, and behold there stood a Waggon, with two Dragons before it, to draw the same, and all the Waggon was of a light burning fire, and for that the Moone shone, I was the willinger at that time to depart, but the voice spake againe▪ sir vp and let vs away: I will (said I) goe with thée, but vpon this condition, that I may aske after all thinges that I sée, heare, or thinke on: the voice answered, I am content for this time. Hereupon I got me into the Waggon, so that the Dragons carried me vpright into the ayre. The Waggon had also 4. whéeles, the which ratled so, and made such a noise, as if we had all this while béene running on the stones: & round about vs flew out flames of fire, and the higher that I came, the more the earth séemed to be darkened, so that me thought I came out of a dungeon: and looking downe from heauen, behold Mephostophiles my Spirit and seruant was behind me, and when he perceiued that I saw him, he came and sate by me, to whome I said, I pray thée Mepho∣stophiles whether shal I goe now? Let not that trouble thy mind, said he, and yet they carryed vs higher vp, And now will I tell thée (good friend and schoole-fellow) what thinges I haue séene and prooued, for on the Tuesday went I out, and on Tuesday seauen night following, I came home againe, that is eight dayes, in which time I slept not, no not one winke came in mine eyes: and we went innisible of any man: and as the day began to appeare, after my first nights iourney, I said to my Spirit Mephostophiles, I pray thée how farre haue we now ridden, I am sure thou knowest: for me thinkes that we are ridden excéeding farre, the world séemeth so little: Mephostophiles answered mee, my Faustus, beléeue me that from the place from whence thou camest, vnto this place where we are now, is already forty seauen leagues right in height, and as the day increased, I looked downe vpon the world. Asia, Europa, and Africa, I had a sight of: and being so high, qd. I to my Spirit, tell me now how these Kingdomes lie, and what they are called: the which he denied not, saying, see this on our left hand is Hungaria, this is also Prussia on our left hand, and Poland, Muscouia, Tartacelesia, Bohemia, Saxony: and héere on our right hand, Spaine, Portugall, France, England, and Scotland: then right on before vs lie the kingdoms of Persia India, Arabia, the King of Althar, and the great Cham: now are we come to Wittenberg, and are right ouer the towne of Weim in Austria, and ere long will be at Constantinople, Tripolie, and Ieru∣salem, and after will we pierce the frozen Zone, and shortly touch the
Horizon, and the zenith of Wittenberg. There looked I on the Ocean Sea, and beheld a great many Shippes, and Gallyes ready to the bat∣taile one against another: and thus I spent my iourney: now cast I my eyes héere, now there, towards South, North, East, and West, I haue béene in one place where it rained and hailed, and in another where the Sun shone excellent faire, and so I thinke that I saw most thinges in and about the world, with great admiration, that in one place it tained, and in another haile and snow: on this side, the Sun shone bright, some hills couered with snow neuer consuming, other were so hot that grasse and trées were burned and consumed therewith. Then looked I vp to the heauens, and behold they went so swift, that I thought they would haue sprung in thousands. Likewise it was so cléere and so hot, that I could not long gaze into it, it so dimmed my sight: and had not my spi∣rit Mephostophiles couered me as it were with a shadowing cloude, I had béene burnt with the extreame heate thereof: for the Sky the which we behold héere when we looke vp from the earth, is so fast and thicke as a wall, cléere and shining bright as Christall, in the which is placed the Sunne, which casteth foorth his raies and beames ouer the vniuersal world, to the vttermost confines of the earth. But we thinke that the sun is very little: no, it is altogether as big as the world: Indéed the body substantiall is but little in compas, but the raies or streames that it cast∣eth forth, by reason of the thing wherein it is placed, maketh him to ex∣tend and shew himselfe ouer the whole world: and we thinke that the sunne tunneth his course, and that the heauens stand still: no it is the heauens that mooue his course, and the Sunne abideth perpetually in his place, he is permanent and fixed in his place, and although we sée him beginning to ascend in the Orient or East, at the higest in the Meridian or South, setting in the occident or West, yet is he at the lowest in Sep∣tentrion or North, and yet he mooueth not. It is the axle of the hea∣uens that mooueth the whole firmrment, being a Chaos or confused thing, and for that proofe, I will shew thée this example: like as thou séest a bubble made of water and sope blowne forth of a quill, is in forme of a confused masse or Chaos, and being in this forme, is moued at pleasure of the winde which runneth round about that Chaos and mooueth him also round: euen so is the whole firmament or Chaos wherein are pla∣ced the sun, and the rest of the planets turned and carryed at the pleasure of the spirit of God, which is winde: Yea Christian Reader, to the glo∣ry of God, and for the profite of thy soule, I will open vnto thée the di∣uine opinion, touching the rule of this confused Chaos, farre more then my rude Germane Author, being possessed with the deuill, was able
to vtter, and to proue some of my sentences before to be true, looke into Genesis, vnto the works of God, at the creation of the world, there shalt thou finde, that the spirit of God mooued vpon the waters, before hea∣uen and earth were made. Mark how he made it, and how by his word euery element tooke his place: these were not his works but is wordes, for all the words he vsed before, he concluded afterwards in one worke, which was in making man: marke reader with patience, for thy soules health, sée into all that was done by the worde and worke of God: light and darknes was, the firmament stood, and there great ☿ and little light ☽ in it: the most waters were in one place, the earth was drye, and eue∣ry element brought forth according to the word of God: now foloweth his workes, he made man after his owne Image, how, out of the earth? The earth will shape no Image without water: there was one of the elements. But all this while where was winde? All elements were at the worde of God: Man was made, & in a forme by the worke of God, yet mooued not that worke, before God breathed the spirit of life into his nosthrils, & made him a liuing soule: Here was the first winde and spirit of God, out of his own mouth, which we haue likewise from the same séede, which was only planted by God in Adam, which wind, breth or spirit, when he had receiued, he was liuing and mouing on earth, for it was ordayned of God for his habitation, but she heauens are the ha∣bitation of the Lord: and like as I shewed before of the hubble, or con∣fused (Chaos made of water and sope) through the wind & breath of man is turned round, and caryed with euery winde, euen so the Firmament wherein the Sunne and the rest of the planets are fixed, moued, turned, and caried, with the winde, breath, and spirit of God: for the heauens and firmaments are mooueable as the Chaos, but the Sunne is fixed in the firmament. And further (my good School-fellow) I was thus nigh the heauens, where me thought euery planet was but as half the earth, and vnder the firmament ruled the spirits in the aire, & as I came down I looked vpon the world and the heauens, and me thought that the earth was inclosed (in comparison) within the firmament, as the yolke of an Egge within the white & me thought that the whole length of the earth was not a span long: and the water was as if it had bin twice as broad and as long as the earth: euen thus at the eight daies end came I home againe, and fell asléepe, and so I continued sléeping, thrée dayes & thrée nightes together: and the first houre I awaked, I fell fresh againe to my Kalender, and haue made them in right ample maner as you know, and to satisfie your request, for that you writ vnto me, I haue (in consi∣deration of our olde friendship had at the vniuersitie of Wittenberge)
declared vnto you my heauenly voyage, wishing no worse vnto you then vnto my selfe, that is, that your minde were as mine in all respectes. Dixi. Doctor Faustus the Astrologian. How Doctor Faustus made his iourney through the principall and most famous lands in the world. DOctor Fau. hauing ouer-run fiftéene yeares of his appointed time, he tooke vpon him a iourney, with full pretence to sée the whole world, and calling his Spirit Mephostophiles vnto him he said: Thou knowest that thou art bound to me vpon conditions, to per∣forme and fulfill my desire in all thinges, wherefore my pretence is to visite the whole face of the earth visible and inuisible when it plea∣seth me, therefore I enioyne and commaund thée to the same. Where∣vpon Mephostophiles answered, I am ready my Lord at thy command, and forthwith the spirit changed himselfe into the likenesse of a flying horse, saying, Faustus sit vp, I am ready. Doctor Faustus loftily fate vp∣on him, and forwards they went: Faustus came through many a Land and Prouince, as Pauonia, Austria, Germania, Bohemia, Slesia, Saxo∣ny, Missene, During, Franckland, Shawblandt, Byerlandt, Styria, Ca∣rinthia, Poland, Litaw, Liesland, Prussia, Denmarke, Muscouia, Tar∣taria, Turkie, Persia, Cathai, Alexandria, Barbaria, Ginney, Peru, the straightes Magenelanes, India, all about the frozen Zone, and Terra Incognita, Nona Hispaniola, the Iles of Terzera, Mederi, Saint Micha∣els, the Canaries, and the Tenorifocie, into Spaine, the maine land, Portugall, Italie, Campania, the Kingdome of Naples, the Iles of Sicilia, Malta maioris, minoria, to the Knightes of the Rhodes, Candie, or Creet, Ciprus, Corinthe, Switzerland, France, Freesland, Westpha∣lia, Zeland, Holland, Brabant, and all the 17 prouinces in Netherland, England, Scotland, Ireland, all America & Island, the out Iles of Scot∣land, the Orchades, Norway, the Bishopricke of Breame, and so home a∣gain: all these kingdoms prouinces & countries he passed in 25 daies, in which time he saw very little that delighted his mind: wherefore he took little rest at home, & burning in desire to sée more at large, & to behold the secretes of each Kingdome, he set forwards againe on his iourney vpon his swift horse Mephostophiles, & came to Trent, for that he chiefly desi∣red to sée this towne and the monuments thereof: but there he saw not many wouders, except one faire pallace that belonged vnto the Bishop, and also a mighty large castle that was built of brick, with 3 walls, & 3 great trenches, so strong that it was impossible for any princes power to win it: then he saw a Church wherin was buried Simeon, & the Bi∣shop Popo: their tombes are of most sumptuous Marble stone, closed
and ioyned together with great bars of yron: frō whence he departed to Paris where he liked well the Academie: and what place or kingdom soeuer fel to his mind, the same he visited. He came from Paris to Mentz where the riuer of Maine fals into the Rhine, notwithstanding he taried not long there but went into Campania in the kingdome of Neapolis in which he saw an innumerable sort of Cloisters. Nunries, and Chur∣ches, great & high houses of stone, the stréets faire & large, and straight foorth from one end of the towne to the other as a line, and all the paue∣ment of ye Citty was of bricke, and the more it rayned in the towne the fairer the stréetes were: there saw he the tombe of Virgill, and the high way that he cut through the mighty hill of stone in one night, the whole length of an English mile: when he saw the number of Gallies & Argo∣zis that lay there at the citty head, the wind-mill that stood in the water, the castle in the water, and the houses aboue the water, where vnder gallies might ride most safely from raine or wind: then he saw the Ca∣stle on the hill euer the towne, and many monuments therein, also that hill called Vesuuius, wheron groweth all the Gréekish wine, & most plea∣sant swéet Oliues. From thence he came to Venice, whereas he won∣dered not a little, to sée a Citty so famously built standing in the Sea, where through euery stréete the water came into such largenesse, that great ships and barkes might passe from one stréete to another, hauing yet a way on both sides the water whereon men and horse might passe: He maruailed also how it was possible so much virtuall to be found in the towne, and so good cheape, considering that for a whole league, no∣thing grew néere the same. He wondred not a little at the fairenesse of S. Matkes place, and the sumptuous Church standing thereon, called S. Marke, how all the pauement was set with coloured stones, and all the Roode or loft of the Church double gilded ouer. Leauing this, he came to Padua beholding their manner of their Academie, which is cal∣led the mother or nurse of Christendome, there he heard the Doctors, and sawe the most monuments in the Towne, entred his name in the Vniuersitie of the Germane Nation, and wrote himselfe Doctor Fau∣stus, the vnsatiable speculator: then saw he the worthiese monument in the world for a Church, named S. Anthonies cloister, which for the pi∣nacles thereof, and the contriuement of the Church, hath not the like in Christendome. This towne is fenced about with thrée mighty walles of stone and earth, betwixt the which runneth goodly ditches of water: twice euery 24. houres passeth boates betwixt Padua and Venice with passengers, as they doe here betwixt London and Grauesend, and euen so farre they differ in distance: Faustus beheld likewise the counsaile-house
and the Castle with no small wonder. Well, forward he went to Rome, which lay, and doth yet lye on the Riuer Tibris, the which deuideth the City into two parts: ouer the Riuer are foure great stone Bridges, and vpon the one Bridge called Ponte S. Angelo, is the Ca∣stle of Saint Angelo, wherein are so many great, cast Péeces as there are dayes in the yeare, and such Péeces as will shoote seauen bullets off with one fire & to this Castle commeth a pring vault from the Church and Pallace of Saint Peter, through the which the Pope, (if any dan∣ger be) passeth from his Pallace to the Castle for safegard: the Citty hath eleuen Gates, and a hill called Vaticinium, whereon St. Peters Church is built: In that Church the holy Fathers will heare no con∣fession, without the penitent bring money in his hand. Adioyning to this Church, is the Campo Santo the which Carolus Magnus built: where euery day thirtéene Pilgrimes haue their dinners serued of the best: that is to say, Christ and his twelue Apostles. Hard by this he visited the Churchyard of S. Peters, where he saw the Pyramides that Iulius Cesar brought forth of Africa: it stood in Faustus his time leaning against the Church wall of Saint Peters, but now Pope Sextus hath erected it in the middle of S. Peters Churchyard, it is 24. fatham long, and at the lower end sixe fatham foure square, and so foorth smaller vp∣wards: on the top is a Crucifixe of beaten Gold, the stone standeth on foure Lyons of brasse. Then he visited the 7. Churches of Rome that were St. Peters, S. Paules, S. Sebastians, S. Iohn Lateran, S. Lau∣rence, S. Mary Magdalen, and S. Mary Maiora. Then went he with∣out the towne, where he saw the Conduits of water that runne leuell through hill and dale, bringing water into the Towne fifteene Italian wiles off: other Monuments he saw too many to recits, but amongst the rest he was desirous to sée the Popes Court, and his manner of ser∣uice at his Table, wherfore he and his spirit made themselues inuisible and came to the Popes Court, and priuy chamber, where he was: there saw he many seruants attending on his holines, with many a flattering Sycophant carying of his meate, and there he marked the Pope and the manner of his seruice, which he seeing to be so vnmeasurable and sump∣tuous: Fie (quoth Faustus) why had not the diuell made a Pope of me? Faustus sawe there notwithstanding, such as were like to himselfe, proude, stoute, wilfull, gluttons, drunkards, whoremongers, breakers of wedlocke, and followers of all manner of vngodly exercises: where∣fore he said to his spirit, I thought that I had béene alone a hog or pork of the Diuels, but he must beare with me yet a little longer, for these hogs of Rome are already fatted, and fitted to make his rost meate, the
diuell might do well now to spit them all, and haue them to the fire, and let him summon the Nuns to turne the spits: for as none must confesse the Nun but the Fryer, so none should turne the rosting Fryer but the Nun. Thus continued Faustus thrée dayes in the Popes Pallace and yet had no lust to his meat, but stood still in the Popes chamber and saw euery thing whatsoeuer it was: on a time the Pope would haue a feast prepared for the Cardinall of Pauia, and for his first welcome the Car∣dinall was bidden to dinner: and as he sate at meate, the Pope would euer be blessing and crossing ouer his mouth, Faustus could suffer it no longer, but vp with his fist and smote the Pope on his face, and withall he laughed that the whole house might heare him, yet none of them saw him nor knew where he was: the Pope perswaded his company that it was a damned soule, commanding Masse presently to be said for his deliuery out of Purgatory, which was done: the Pope sate stil at meat, but when the latter messe came in to the Popes boord D. Faustus laide hands thereon saying, this is mine, and so he tooke both dish and meate and flew vnto the Capitoll or Campadolia, calling his spirit vnto him, and said, come let vs be merry for thou must fetch me some wine and the cup that the Pope drinkes of, and here vpon monte caual, we will make good chéere in spight of the Pope and all his fat Abby-lubbers. His spi∣rit hearing this, departed towards the Popes chamber, where he found them yet sitting and quaffing: wherefore he tooke from before the Pope the fairest péece of plate or drinking goblet, and a flaggon of wine, and brought it to Faustus: but when the Pope and the rest of his crue per∣ceiued they were robbed, and knew not after what sort, they perswaded themselues that it was that damned soule that before had vexed the Pope so, and that smot him on the face, wherfore he sent commandment through the whole Citty of Rome, that they should say Masse in euery Church, and ring all the bels for to lay the walking spirit, and to curse him with bel, booke, and candle, that so inuisibly had misused the Popes holines, with the Cardinall of Pauia, and the rest of their company: but Faustus notwithstanding made good chéere with that which he had be∣guiled the Pope of, and in the middest of the order of S. Barnards bare∣footed Fryers, as they were going on procession through the market∣place called campa de fiore, he let fal his plate, dishes and cup: and with all for a farwell, he made such a thunder-clap and storme of raine, as though Heauen and earth should haue met together, and so left Rome and came to Millaine in Italy, néere the Alpes or borders of Switzer∣land, where he praised much to his spirit the pleasures of the place, the citty being founded in so braue a plaine, by the which ran most pleasant
riuers on euery side of the same, hauing besides within the compasse or circuit of seauen miles, seauen small Seas: He saw also therein many faire Pallaces and goodly buildings, the Dukes pallace, and the mighty strong Castle which is in mānēr halfe the bignes of the towne: Moreouer, it liked him well to sée the Hospitall of Saint Maries with diuers other thinges. He did there nothing worthy of memory, but he departed backe againe towards Bolognia, and from thence to Florence where he was well pleased to sée the pleasant walke of Marchants, the goodly vaults of the Citty, for that almost the whole Citty is vaulted, and the houses themselues are built outwardly, in such sort, that the people goe vnder them as vnder a vault: Then he perused the sump∣tuous Church in the Dukes castle, called Nostra Dama, our Ladyes Church, in which he saw many Monuments, as a marble doore, most huge to looke vpon: the gates of the castle are Bel-mottel, wherein are grauen the holy Patriarkes, with Christ and his twelue Apostles, and diuers other Histories, out of the olde and new Testament. Then went he to Sena, where he highly praised the Church and Hospitall of Santa Maria Formosa, with the goodly buildings, and especially the fairenes and greatnes of the Citty & beautifull women. Then came he to Lions in France, where he marked the scituation of the Citty, which lay be∣twéene two hills, inuironed with 2. waters: one worthy Monument in the Citty pleased him well, that was the great Church with the Image therein: he commended the Cittie highly for the great resort that it had vnto it of strangers. From thence he went to Cullin, which lyeth vpon the riuer of Rhine, wherein he saw one of the auncientest Monuments of the world, the which was the Tombe of thrée Kinges, that came by the Angell of God, and their knowledge they had in the starre, to wor∣ship Christ: which when Faustus saw he spake in this manner, Ah alas good men how haue you erred, and lost your way? you should haue gone to Palestina and Bethlem in Iudea, how came you hither? Or belike after your death you were throwne into Mare Medeterraneum, about Tripolis in Syria, and so you fléeted out of the straigts of Gibalterra, in∣to the Ocean sea, and so into the bar of Portugall, and not finding any rest you were driuen alongst the coast of Gallicia, Biskay and France, and into the narrow Seas, then from thence vnto Mare Germanicum, and so taken vp I thinke about the towne of Dort in Holland, you were brought to Cullin to be buried, or else I thinke you came more easily with a whirl-winde ouer the Alpes, and being thrown into the riuer of Rhine, it conuayed you to this place, where you are kept a Monument. There saw he the Church of S. Vrsula, where remaines a Monument
of the 1000. Virgins: it pleased him also to sée the beauty of the wo∣men. Not farre from Cullin lyeth the towne of Ach, where he saw the gorgeous temple that the Emperour Carolus quartus built of Marble stone for a remembrance of him, to the end that all his successors should there be crowned. From Cullin & Ach he went to Geneua, a city in Sa∣uoy, lying néere Switzerland, it is a towne of great traffike, the Lord thereof is a Bishop, whose wine seller Faustus and his spirit visited, for the loue of his good wine. From thence he went to Strasburg, where he beheld the fairest temple that euer he had séene in his life before, for on euery side thereat he might sée through it, euen from the couering of the Minster to the top of the Pinicle, and it is named one of the wonders of the world: wherefore he demanded why it was called Strasburg? his spirit answered, because it hath so many high wayes comming to it on euery side, for Stros in Dutch is a high way, and hereof came the name: yea (said Mephostophiles) the Church which thou so wonderest at, hath more reuenues belonging to it then the twelue Duks of Slesia are worth, for there pertaine vnto this Church fifty siue townes, and foure hundreth sixtie thrée Villages, besides many houses in the Towne. From thence went Faustus to Basil in Switzerland, where the riuer of Rhine runneth through the Towne, parting the same as the Riuer of Thames doth London: in this towne of Basil he saw many rich monu∣ments, the towne walled with bricke, and round about it without it goeth a great trench: no Church pleased him but the Iesuites Church, which was sumptuously builded, and set full of Alablaster Pillars: Faustus demanded of his Spirit how it tooke the name of Basil? his Spirit made answere and said, that before this cittie was found, there vsed a Bafiliscus a kinde of Serpent, this Serpent killed as many men, women, and children as he tooke a fight of, but there was a Knight that made himselfe a couer of christall to come ouer his head and so downe to the ground, and being first couered with a blacke cloath, ouer that he put the christall, and so boldly went to sée the Basiliscus, and finding the place where she haunted, he expecting her comming, euen before the mouth of her caue, where standing a while, the Basiliscus came foorth, who when she sawe her owne venomous shadow in the Christall, she split in a thousand péeces: wherefore the Knight was richly rewarded of the Emperour: after the which the Knight founded this towne vpon the place where he had flaine the Serpent, and gaue it the name of Basil, in remembrance of his déed. From Basil Faustus went to Costuitz in Sweitz at the head of the Rhine, where is a most sumptuous bridge that goeth ouer the Rhine,
euen from the gates of the towne, vnto the other side of the streame: at the head of the riuer of Rhine, is a small Sea, called of the Switzers the blacke sea, twenty thousand paces long, and fifty hundred paces broad. The towne Costuitz tooke the name of this: the Emperour gaue it to a Clowne, for expounding of his Riddle, wherfore the Clowne named the towne Costuitz, that is in English, cost nothing. From Costuitz he came to Vim, where he sawe the sumptuous Town-house, built by two and fifty of the auncient Senators of the Citye, It tooke the name of Vlm, for that the whole land there about, are full of Elmes: but Fau∣stus minding to departe from thence, his spirit said vnto him, Faustus, thinke of the Towne as thou wilt, it hath three Dukdomes belonging to it, the which they haue bought with ready money. From Vlm he came vnto Wartzburg, the chiefest Towne in Frankeland, wherein the Bishop altogether kéepeth his Court, through the which Towne pas∣seth the riuer of Mayne, that runs into the Rhine: there about groweth strong and pleasant wine, the which Faustus well prooued: The Castle standeth on a hill, on the north side of the Towne, at the foote whereof runneth the riuer: this towne is ful of beggerly Fryers, Nuns, priests and Iesuites: for there are fiue sortes of begging Fryers, besides thrée Cloysters of Nunnes: At the foot of the Castle stands a Church, in the which there is an Alter, where are engrauen all the foure Elements and all the orders and degrées in heauen, that any man of vnderstanding whosoeuer that hath a sight thereof, may say, that it is the Artificiallest thing that euer he behold. From thence he went to Norenberg, whi∣ther as he went by the way, his spirit informed him, that the town was named of Claudius Tiberius, the sonne of Nero the tyrant. In the towne are two famous Cathedral Churches, the one called S. Sabolt, th'other Saint Laurence: in which Church standeth all the Reliques of Carolus magnus, that is to say, his Cloake, his hose and doblet▪ his Sword and Crowne, his Scepter and his Apple: It hath a very glorious guilden Conduit in the Market place of S. Laurence: in which Conduit is the spear that thrust our Sauiour into the side, & a péece of the holy Crosse: the wall is called, The faire wall of Norenberg, and hath 528 stréetes, 160. welles, foure great & two small Clockes, six great Gates, & two smal doores, eleuen stone Bridges, twelue small hills, ten faire market∣places, thirtéen common Hot-houses, ten Churches: within the towne are thirty whéeles of water-milles: it hath 132 tall Ships, two migh∣ty Towne walles of hewen Stone and earth, with very déep trenches: the wals haue 180 Towres about them, and foure faire platforms, ten Apothecaries, ten Doctors of the Common Lawe, fourtéene Doctors
of Phisicke. From Norenburg, he went to Auspurg where, at the breake of the day, he demanded of his spirit, whereupon the towne tooke his name: this towne (quoth he) hath had many names, when it was first built, it was called Vindelica: secondly it was called Zizaria, the yron bridge: lastly, by the Emperour Octauius Augustus it was called Augusta, and by the corruption of language, the Germans haue named it Auspurg. Now for because that Faustus had béene there before, he de∣parted without visiting their monuments to Rauenspurg, where his spirit certified him that the Citty had seauen names: the first Tyberia, the second Quadratis, the third Heaspalis, the fourth Regionopolis, the fift Imbripolis, the sixt Ratisbona, the last Rauenspurg. The scituation of this Citty pleased Faustus well, also the strong and sumptuous buil∣dings: by the walles thereof runneth the riuer Danubia, in Dutch called Donow, into the which not farre from the compasse of the Citty, falleth neere hand thréescore other small riuers & fresh waters: Faustus also liked the sumptuous stone Bridge ouer the same water, with the Church standing thereon, the which was founded An. 1115. the name whereof is called S. Remadian: in this towne Faustus went into the Celler of an Inholder, and let out all the wine and béere that was in the celler. After the which feate he returned into Mentz in Bauaria a right princely towne, the Towne appeared as if it were new, with great stréets therein both of breadth and length from Mentz to Saitburg, where the Bishop is alwaies resident: here saw he all the commodities that were possible to be séene, for at the hill he sawe the forme of a bell made in Christall, an huge thing to looke vpon, that euery yeare grow∣eth bigger and bigger, by reason of the fréezing colde. From thence he went to Vienna in Austria, this Towne is of so great antiquitie, that it is not possible to finde the like. In this towne (said the spirit) is more wine then water, for all vnder the towne are wels, the which are filled euery yeare with wine, and all the water that they haue, runneth by the Towne, that is, the riuer Danubia. From thence he went into Prage, the chiefe Citty in Bohemia: this is deuided into thrée partes, that is, old Prage, new Prage, and little Prage. Little Prage is the place where the Emperors court is placed, vpon an excéeding high mountaine, there is a Castle where are two faire Churches, in the one he found a monu∣ment which might well haue béene a mirror for himselfe, and that was the Sepulcher of a notable Coniurer, which by his magicke had so in∣chanted his Sepulcher, that whosouer set foote thereon, should be sure neuer to dye in their beds. From this Castle he came downe and went euer ye bridge. This bridge hath twenty & foure Arches. In the middle
of the bridge stands a very faire Monument, being a crosse builded of stone, and most artificially carued. From thence he came into the olde Prage, the which is seperated from the new Prage, with an excéeding déepe ditch, and round about inclosed with a well of bricke. Vnto this is adioyning the Iewes Towne, wherein are thirteene thousand men, women and children, all Iewes. There he viewed the Colledge and the Garden where all manner of sauage beasts are kept, and frō thece he set a compas round about the thrée townes, whereat he wondred great∣ly, to sée so mighty a Citty stand all within the walls. From Prage he flew in the ayre and bethought himselfe what he might doe, or which way to take, so he looked round about, & behold be espied a passing faire Citty which lay not farre from Prage, about some foure and twenty miles, and that was Bressaw in Sclefia, in the which when he was en∣tred, it séemed to him that he had béene in Paradise, so neate and cleane was the stréets, and so sumptuous was their buildings. In the Citty he saw not many wonders, except the brasen Virgin that standeth on a bridge ouer the water, and vnder the which standeth a mill like a pow∣der mill, which virgin is made to doe execution vpon those disobedient towne borne children that be so wilde that their parents cannot bridle them: which when any such are found with some haynous offence tur∣ning to the shame of their parents & kindred, they are brought to kisse this virgin, which openeth her arme, the person then to be executed kisseth her, then doth she close her armes together with such violence, that she crusheth out the breath of the partie, breaketh his bulke & so dy∣eth, but being dead, she openeth her armes againe and letteth the party fall into the mill, where he is stamped in small morsels, which the water carryeth away▪ so that no part of him is found againe. From Bressaw he went toward Cracona, in the kingdome of Polonia, where he beheld the Acadamie the which pleased him wonderfull will. In this Citty the King most commonly holdeth his Court at a castle, in which Castle are many famous Monuments. There is a most sumptuous Church in the same, in which standeth a siluer Altar gilded, & set with rich stones, and ouer it is a conueyance ful of all māner of siluer ornaments belong∣ing to the Masse. In the church hangeth the iawbones of a huge dragon that kept the rocke before the Castle was edified thereon. It is full of all manner of munition, and hath alwaies virtual for 3. yeares to serue 2. thousand men. Through the towne runneth a riuer called the Vestual or Wissell, where ouer is a faire woodden bridge. This water duideth the towne and Casmere, in this Casmere dwelleth the Iewes being a small walled Towne by themselues, to the number of 25000. men,
women and children: within one mile of the towne there is a salt mine where they finde siones of pure salt of 1000. pound, 2000. pound, or more in weight, and that in great quantity. This salt is as blacke as the Newcastle coales when it comes out of the mines, but being beaten to powder it is as white as snowe. The like they haue foure mile from thence at a towne called Buchma. From thence Faustus went to San∣dz, the captaine therof was called Deu Spiket Iordan: in this towne are many monuments, as the tombe or sepulcher of Christ, in as ample maner as that is at Ierusalem, at the proper costs of a Gentleman that went thrise to Ierusalem from that place and returned againe. Not far from that towne is a new towne, wherein is a Nunry of the order of S. Dioclesian, into which order may none come except they be Gentle∣women, and well formed, and faire to looke vpon, the which pleased Faustus well, but hauing a will to trauaile further, and to sée more wonders, mounting vp towards the east, ouer many lands and prouin∣ces, as into Hungaria, Transiluania, Shede, Ingatz, Sardenia, and so into Constantinople, where the Turkish Emperor kept his court: this citty was surnamed by Constantine the founder thereof, being builded of very faire stone. In the same the great Turke hath thrée faire pallaces, the walls are strong, the pinacles are very huge, and the streets large, but this liked not Faustus that one man might haue so many wiues as he would: the sea runneth hard by the Citie, the wall hath 11. gates: Faustus abode thre a certaine time to sée the manner of the Turkish Emperours seruice at his table, where he saw his royall seruice to be such, that he thought if all the Christian Princes should banquet toge∣ther, and euery one adorne the feast to the vttermost, they were not a∣ble to compare with the Turke for his table, and the rest of his country seruice: wherefore it so spighted Faustus, that he vowed to be reuenged on him, for his pomp he thought was more fit for himselfe, wherefore as the turke sat at meate Faustus shewed him a little apish play: for round about the priuy chamber he sent forth flashing flames of fire, insomuch that the whole company forsooke their meate and fled, except onely the great Turke himselfe, him Faustus charmed in such sort, that he could neither rise nor fall, neither could any man pull him vp: With this was the hall so light, as if the Sunne had shined in the house, then came Faustus in forme of a Pope to the great Turke, saying, all haile Emperour, now art thou honoured that I so worthily appeare vnto thée as thy Mahomet was wont to doe, hereupon he vanished, & forth∣with it thundred, that the whole Pallace shooke: the Turke greatly meruailed what this should be that so vexed him, and was perswaded
by his chiefest counsellors that it was Mahomet his Prophet which had so appeared vnto them, whereupon the Turke commanded them to fall downe on their knées, and to giue him thankes for doing them so great honour as to shew himselfe vnto them: but the next day Faustus went into the Castle where he kept his Wiues and Concubines, in the which Castle might no man vpon the paine of death come, except those that were appointed by the great Turke to doe them seruice, and they were all gelded: which when Faustus perceiued, he said to his Spi∣rit Mephostophiles, how likest thou this sport? are not these faire ladies greatly to be pittied that thus consume their youth at ye pleasure of one only man? Why (quoth the spirit) maist not thou in stead of the Em∣perour embrace his faire ladies? doe what thy heart desireth heerein, and I will aid thée, and what thou wishest thou shalt haue it performed: wherefore Faustus (being before this counsaile apt enough to put such matters in practise) caused a great fogge to be round about the Castle, both within and without, and he himselfe appeared amongst the Ladies in all points as they vse to paint their Mahomet: at which sight the La∣dies fell on their knées and worshipped him. Then Faustus tooke the fairest by the hand and led her into a chamber, where after his maner he fell to dalliance, and thus he continued a whole day and a night: and when he had delighted himslfe sufficiently with her he put her away. and made his spirit bring him another, so likewise he kept with her 24. houres play, causing his spirit to fetch him most dainty fare, and so he passed away sixe dayes, hauing each day his pleasure of a sundry Ladie, and that of the fairest: all which time the fog was so thicke and so stin∣king, that they within the house thought they had béene in hell for the time and they without wondred thereat, in such sort that they went to their prayers, calling on their God Mahomet, and worshiping of his Image. Wherfore the sixt day Faustus exalted himselfe into the aire like to a Pope, in sight of the great Turke and his people. And he had no soo∣ner departed the Castle but the fog vanished away: whence presently the Turke sent for his Wiues and Concubines, demaunding of them if they knew the cause why the Castle was beset with a mist so long? They said that it was the God Mahomet himselfe that caused it, and how he was in the Castle personally full sixe dayes: and for more cer∣tainty he hath line with sixe of vs sixe nights one after another. The Turke hearing this, fell downe vpon his knées, and gaue Mahomet thankes, desiring him to forgiue him for béeing offended with his visi∣ting his Castle & wiues those sixe daies but the Turke commanded that thost whom Mahomet ha line by should be most carefully looked vnto,
perswading himselfe (and so did all ye whole people that knew of it) that out of them Mahomet should be raised a mighty generation, but first he demanded of the sixe Ladies if Mahomet had not actuall copulation with them according as earthly men haue? yea my Lord (quoth one) as if you had béen there your selfe you could not haue mended it, for he lay with vs starke naked, kissed and colled vs, and so delighted me, that for my part I would he came two or thrée times a weeke to serue me in such sort againe. From whence Faustus went to Alkar, the which before times was called Chairam or Memphis. In this Citty the Egyp∣tian Souldan holdeth his court. From thence the riuer Nilus hath his first head and spring, it is the greatest fresh water riuer that is in the whole world, and alwaies when the Sun is in Cancer it ouerflow∣eth the whole land of Egypt: Then he returned againe towards the Northeast, and to the Towne of Ofen and Sebata in Hungaria. This Ofn is the chiefest Citty in Hungaria, and standeth in a fertile soyle, wherein groweth most excellent wine, and not farre from the Towne there is a Well called Zipzar, the water whereof changeth Iron into Copper: there are mines of gold and siluer, & all manner of metall: we Germanes call this towne Ofen; but in the Hungarian speach it is Start. In the towne standeth a very faire Castle and very well fortified. From thence he went to Austria, & through Slesia into Saxony, vnto the towns of Magdeburg and Lipzig, and Lubeck, Magdeburg is a Bishoprick: in this citty is one of the pittchers wherein Christ changed the water into wine at Cana in Gallile. At Lipzig nothing pleased Faustus so well as the great vessell in the Castle made of wood, the which is bound about with 24 yron hoopes, and euery hoope weigheth 200 pound weight: you must goe vpon a ladder 30 steppes high before you can looke into it: he saw also the new churchyard where it is walled, & standeth vpon a faire plaine, the yard is 200 paces long, and round about the side of the wall are goodly places separated due from each other to sée sepulchers in, which in the middle of the yard standeth very sumptuous: therein standeth a Pulpit of white worke and gold. From hence he came to Lubeck and Hamburg, where he made no abode, but away againe to Erford in Duringen, where he visited the Frescold, and from Erfold he went home to Wittenberg, when he had séen and visited many a strange place, being from home one yeare and a halfe, in which time he wrought more wonders then are here declared. How Faustus had a sight of Paradise. Chap. 34. AFter this Doctor Faustus set forth againe to visite the countries of Spaine, Portugall, France, England, Scotland, Denmarke, Sweden
Poland, Muscouy, India, Cataia, Affrica, Persia, and lastly into Barbaria amongst the Blackamoores. And in all his wandring he was desirous to visite the ancient monuments and mighty hills: amongst the rest be∣holding the high hill called the Treno Reife, was desirous to rest vpon it: from thence he went into the Ile of Britanny, wherein he was great∣ly delighted to sée the faire water, and warme Bathes, the diuers sorts of metal, with many precious stones, & diuers other commities, the which Faustus brought thence with him: He was also at the Ohades behind Scotland, where he saw the trée that bringeth forth fruite, that when it is ripe openeth and falleth into the water, wherein engendreth a certaine kinde of fowle or bird, these Ilands are in number 23. but ten of them are not habitable, the other thirtéene are inhabited. From hence he went to the Hill Caucasus, which is the highest in all that Tropick, it lieth néere the borders of Scythia: hereon Faustus stood and beheld many lands and Kingdomes, Faustus being on such an high hill, thought to looke ouer all the world, & beyond, for he went to sée Para∣dise, but he durst not commune with his Spirit thereof: and being on the hill of Caucasus he saw the whole land of India and Scytbia, and as he looked towards the East, he saw a mighty cleare strike of fire com∣ming from heauen vpon the earth, euen as it had béene one of the beams of the Sunne, he saw in the valley foure mighty waters springing: one had his course towards India, the second towards Egypt, the third and fourth towards Armenia. When he saw these, he would néeds know of his spirit what waters they were, and from whence they came: His spirit gaue him gently an answere, saying▪ it is Paradise that lieth so farre in the East, the Garden that God himselfe hath planted with all manner of pleasure, and the fiery streame that thou séest, is the walls or fence of the garden, but the cléere light thou séest so farre off, that is the Angell that hath the custody therof with a fiery sword, and although that thou thinkest thy selfe to be hard by, thou hast yet further thether from hence then thou hast euer béene: the water that thou séest diuided in foure parts is the water that issueth out of the well in the middle of Paradise. The first is called Ganges or Pisson, the second Gihon, the 3. Tygris, and the 4. Euphrates: also thou séest that he standeth vnder Libra and Aries, right toward the Zenith, and vpon this fiery wall stan∣deth the Angell Michaell with his flaming sword to kéepe the frée of life, the which he hath in charge: but the spirit said to Faustus, neither then nor I, nor any after vs, yea all men whosoeuer are denied to visit it, or to come any néerer then we be.
Of a certaine Comet that appeared in Germany, and how Doctor Faustus was desired by certaine friends of his to knowe the meaning thereof. Chap. 24. IN Germany, ouer the Towne of St. Eizleben was séene a mightie great Comet, whereat the people wondred: but Doctor Faustus. be∣ing there was asked of certaine of his friends his iudgement or opini∣on in she matter? Whereupon he answered, it falleth out often by the course and change of the sun and moone, that the sun is vnder the earth, and the moone aboue: but when the moone draweth néere the change, then is the sun so strong, that it taketh away all the light of the moone, in such sort, that he is as red as blood, and the contrary, after they haue béene together, the moone taketh her light againe from him, and so in∣creasing in light to the full, she will be as red as the sunne was before, and changeth her selfe into diuers and sundry colours, of the which springeth a prodigious Monster or as you call it a Comet, which is a figure or token appointed of God as a forewarning of his displeasure: as at one time, he sendeth hunger, plague, sword, or such like: being all tokens of his iudgement: the which Comet commeth through the con∣iunction of the sunne and moone begetting a monster, whose father is the Sunne, and whose mother is the Moone ☉ and ☾. A question put forth to D. Faustus concerning the starres. Chap. 25. THere was a learned man of the towne of Holberstat, named N.W. who inuited D. Faustus to his table, but falling into communicati∣on before supper was ready, they looked out of the window, and séeing many stars in the firmament, this man being a Doctor of Phisicke and a good Astrologian, said, D Faustus, I haue inuited you as my guest, hoping that you will take it in good part with me, and withall I request you to impart vnto me some of your experience in the stars and planets. And séeing a star fall, he said, I pray you Faustus what is the condition, qualitie or greatest of the starres in the firmament? Faustus answered him: My friend and brother, you sée that the starres that fall from heauen, when they come to the earth they be very small to our thinking as candels, but being fixed in the firmament, there are many as great as this Citty, some as great as a Prouince or Dukedome, other as great as the whole earth: other some far greater then the earth: as the length and the breadth of the heauen is greater then the earth twelue times, and from the height of the heauens there is scarse and earth to be séene, yea the planets in the heauens are some so great as this land, some so great as the whole Empire of Rome, some as Turky, yea one so great as the whole world.
How Faustus was asked a question concerning the Spirits that vexe men. Chap. 26. THat is most true (saith he to Faustus) concerning the Starres and Planets: but I pray you, in what kinde or manner doe the spirits vse to vex men so little by day, and so greatly by night? Doctor Faustus answered, because the Spirits are by God forbidden the light, their dwelling is in darknes, and the clearer the Sun shineth the further the spirits haue their abiding from it, but in the night when it is darke, they haue their familiarity and abiding néere vnto vs men. For al∣though in the night we sée not the Sun, yet the brightnes thereof so lightneth the first moouing of the firmament, as it doth héer on earth in the day, by which reason we are able to see the Stars and Planets in the night: euen so the raies of the Sun piercing vpwards into the fir∣mament, the Spirits abandon the place and so come néere vs on earth, the darknes filling our heads with heauy dreames and fond fancies, with schrikng and crying in many deformed shapes: and some times when men goe foorth without light, there falleth to them a feare, that their haire standeth on end: so many start in their sléepe, thinking there is a spirit by him, gropeth or féeleth for him, going round about the house in his sléepe, and many such like fancies: and all this is for be∣cause in the night the spirits are more familiarly by vs, that we are de∣sirous of their company, and so they cary vs, blinding vs, and plaguing vs more then we are able to perceiue. How Doctor Faustus was asked a question cuncerning the Starres that fall from heauen. Chap. 27. DOctor Faustus being demaunded the cause why the stars fell from heauen, he answered that it is but our opinion, for if one star fall, it is the great iudgement of God vpon vs, as a forewarning of some great thing to come, for when we thinke that a starre falleth, it is but a sparke that issueth from a candle or a flame of fire, for if it were a substantiall thing, we should not so soone loose the sight of them as we doe. And likewise if so be that we sée as it were a streame of fire fall from the firmament as it oft hapneth, yet are they no starres, but as it were a flame of fire vanishing, but the stars are substantiall, therfore are they firme & not falling: if there fall any, it is a signe of some great matter to come as a scourge to a people or country, and then such stars falling, the gates of heauen are opened, and the clouds send foorth floods, or other plagues, to the dammage of the whole land and people.
Faustus was asked a question concerning thunder. Chap. 28. IN the month of August, there was ouer Wittenberg a mighty great lightning and thunder, and as Doctor Faustus was iesting merily in the market place with certaine of his friends & companions being Phy∣sitions, they desired him to tell them the cause of that weather? Faustus answered: It hath béen commonly séene heretofore, that before a thun∣der-clap, fell a shower of raine, or a gale of winde, for commonly after a winde followeth a raine, and after a raine a thunder-clap, such things come to passe when the foure windes méet together in the heauens, the ayrie clouds are by force beaten against the fixed Christall firmament, but when the ayrie clouds méet with the firmament, they are congealed, and so strike and rush against the firmament, as great péeces of yee when they méet on the water, the each other soundeth in our eares, and that we call Thunder, which indéed is none other then you haue heard. The third and last of Doctor Faustus his merry conceits, shewing after what sort he practised Nicromancie in the Courts of great Princes, and lastly of his fearefull and pittifullend. How the Emperour Carolus Quintus requested of Faustus to see some of his cunning, wherunto he agreed. Chap. 29. THe Emperour Carolus the fift of that name was personally with the rest of his Nobles and Gentlemen at the towne of Inszburck, where he kept his Court, vnto the which also Doctor Faustus resorted, and being there well known of diuers Nobles & gentlemen, he was in∣uited into the court to meat, euen in the presence of the Emperor, whom when the Emperor saw, he looked earnestly on him, thinking him by his lookes to be some wonderfull fellow: wherefore he asked one of his Nobles whom he should be? he answered that he was called Doctor Faustus. Whereupon the Emperor held his peace vntill he had taken his repast: after which he called vnto him Faustus into his priuie cham∣ber: whither being come, he said vnto him: Faustus I haue heard much of thée, that thou art excellent in the blacke Art, and none like thée in mine Empire, for men say that thou hast a familiar spirit with thée, and that thou canst do what thou list: it is therfore (said the Emperor) my request of thée, that thou let me sée a proofe of thine experience, and I vow vnto thee by the honor of my Emperiall Crowne, none euill shall happen vnto thée for so doing. Hereupon Doctor Faustus answered his Maiestie, that vpon these conditions he was ready in any thing that he could, to doe his highnes commaundment in what seruice he would ap∣point him. Well, heare then what I say (quoth the Emperor.) Being
once solitary in my house, I called to minde mine elders and ancesters, how it was possible for them to attaine vnto so great degrée of autho∣rity, yea so high, that we the successours of that line are neuer able to come neere. As for example, the great and mighty Monarch of the world Alexander Magnus, was such a Lanterne and spectacle to all his suc∣cessors, as the chronicles makes mention of so great riches, conquering and subduing so many kingdomes, the which I and these that follow me (I feare) shall neuer be able to attaine vnto: wherefore Faustus, my hearty desire is, that thou wouldest vouchsafe to let me see that Alex∣ander and his Paramour the which was praised to be so faire, and I pray thée shew mée them in such sort that I may sée their personages, shape, gesture and apparell, as they vsed in their life time, and that héere before my face, to the end that I may say I have my long desire fulfil∣led, and to praise thee to be a famous man in thine art and experience. D. Faustus answered: My most excellent Lord, I am ready to accom∣plish your request in all things, so farre foorth as I and my spirit are a∣ble to performe: yet your maiesty shal know, that their dead bodies are not able substantially to be brought before you, but such spirits as haue séene Alexander and his Paramour aliue, shall appeare vnto you in maner and forme as they both liued in their most flourishing time: and herewith I hope to please your imperiall maiesty. Then Faustus went a little aside to speake to his spirit, but he returned againe presently, say∣ing: now if it please your maiesty you shall sée them, yet vpon this con∣dition yt you demand no question of them, nor speake vnto them, which the Emperour agréed vnto. Wherewith Doctor Faustus opened the priuie chamber doore, where presently entred the great and mighty Em∣perour Alexander Magnus, in all thinges to looke vpon as if he had bin gliue, in proportion a strong thicke set man, of a middle stature, blacke haire, and that both thicke and curled, head and beard, red chéekes, and a broad face, with eyes like a Basilicke, he had a compleat harnes bur∣nished and grauen exceeding rich to looke vpon: and so passing towards the Emperour Carolus, he made lowe and reuerent curtesie: whereat the Emperour Carolus would haue stood vp to receiue and gréete him with the like reuerence: but Faustus tooke holde of him, and would not permit him to doe it. Shortly after Alexander made humble reuerence and wnt out again: and cōming to the doore his paramour met him, she cōming in, made the Emperour likewise reuerence: she was cloathed in blew veluer, wrought and imbroidered with Pearles and gold, she was also excellent faire, like milke and bloud mixed, tall and slender, with a face round as an apple: and thus she passed certain times vp and
downe the house, which the Emperour marking, said to himselfe: now haue I séene two persons which my heart hath long wished to behold: and sure it cannot otherwise be (said he to himselfe) but that the spirits haue changed themselues into these formes, and haue not deceiued me, calling to minde the woman that raised the Prophet Samuell: and for that the Emperor would be the more satisfied in the matter he said I haue often heard that behinde her necke she had a great wart or wen, wherfore he tooke Faustus by the hand without any words, and went to sée if it were also to be séen on her or not: but she perceiuing that he came to her, bowed downe her neck, where he saw a great wart, and hereup∣on she vanished, leauing the Emperor and the rest well contented. How Doctor Faustus in the sight of the Emperour, coniured a paire of Harts hornes vpon a Knights head that slept out at a cazement. Chap. 30. VVHen Doctor Faustus had accomplished the Emperors desire in all things as he was requested, he went foorth into a gallery, and leaning ouer a raile to looke into the priuy garden, he saw many of the Emperors courtiers walking and talking together, and casting his eyes now this way, now that way, he espied a Knight leauing out at a window of the great hall, who was fast a sléepe (for in those daies it was hote) but the person shall be nameles that slept, for that he was a knight. Though it was all done to a little disgrace of the Gentleman: it plea∣sed Doctor Faustus (through the helpe of his spirit Mephostophiles) to firme vpon his head as he slept an huge paire of Harts horns, and as the Knight awaked thinking to pull in his head, he hit his hornes against the glasse that the panes therof flew about his eares. Thinke here how this good Gentleman was vexed, for he could neither get backward nor forward, which when the Emperor heard, all the courtiers laught, and came foorth to sée what was happened. The Emperor also when he be∣held the Knight with so faire a head, laughed heartily thereat, and was therewithall well pleased: at last Faustus made him quit of his hornes againe, but the Knight perceiued not how they came. How the aboue mentioned Knight went about to be reuen∣ged of Doctor Faustus. Chap. 31. DOctor Faustus tooke his leaue of the Emperor and the rest of the Courtiers, at whose departure they were sory, giuing him many rewards and guifts▪ but being a league and a halfe from the city, he came into a wood, where he beheld the Knight that he had isted with at the Court, with others in harnesse, mounted on faire palfrayes, and run∣ning with full charge towards Faustus, but he séeing their entent, ran
towards the bushes, and before he came amongst the bushes he returned againe, running as it were to méete them that chased him, whereupon sodainly all the bushes were turned into horsemen, which also ran to in∣counter with the Knight and his company: and comming to them, they enclosed the Knight and the rest, and told them that they must pay their ransome before they departed: whereupon the Knight séeing himselfe in such distresse, besought Faustus to be good to them, which he deitied not, but let them loose: yet he so charmed them that euery one, Knight and other for the space of a whole month did weare a paire of Goates hornes on their browes, and euery Palfray a paire of Oxchornes on his head, and this was their penance appointed by Faustus, Vniuersitie requested Faustus to helpe them at a wish to the towne, of Menchen in Bauaria, there to see the Duke of Bauaria his Sonnes wedding. Chap. 32. THrée worthy yong Dukes, the which are not héere to be named, but being Students all together at the vniuersity of Wittenberg, met on a time all together, where they fell to reasoning concerning the pompe and brauery that would be at the Cittie of Menchen in Bauaria, at the wedding of the Dukes Sonne, wishing themselues there but one halfe houre to sée the manner of their iollity: to whome one replied say∣ing to the other two Gentlemen, if it please you to giue me the heating I will giue you good counsaile that we may sée the wedding and be here againe to night, and this is my meaning: let vs send to Doctor Faustus, make him a present of some rare thing, and so open our minds vnto him, desiring him to assist vs in our enterprise, and assure ye he will not deny to fulfill our request: hereupon they all concluded, sent for Faustus, told him their minde, and gaue him a guift, and inuited him to a sumptuous banquet, wherewith Faustus was well contented, and promised to fur∣ther their iourney to the vttermost: and when ye time was come that the Duke his Sonne should be maryed Doctor Faustus called vnto him the thrée yong Gentlemen into his house, commaunding them that they should put on their best apparell, & adorne themselues as richly as they could: he tooke off his own great large cloak, went into the garden that was adioyning vnto his house, and set the thrée young Dukes on his Cloake, and he himselfe sate in the middest, but he gaue them in charge that in any wise they should not once open their mouthes to speake, or make answere to any man so soone as they were out, not so much as if the Duke of Bauaria or his Sonne should speake to them or offer them courtesie they should giue no word or answere againe: to the which they
all agréed. These conditions being made, Doctor Faustus began to con∣iure: and on a sodaine arose a mighty winde, heauing vp the cloake, and so caryed them away in the ayre, and in due time they came vnto Men∣chen to the Dukes Court, where being entred into the vtmost Court the Marshall had espied them, who presently went to the Duke, shew∣ing his grace that al the Lords and Gentlemen were already set at the table▪ notwithstanding there were newly come thrée goodly Gentlemen with one seruant, the which stood without in the Court, wherefore the good old Duke came out vnto them welcomming them, requiring what they were, and whence? but they made no answere at all, whereat the Duke wondred, thinking they were all foure dumb: notwithstanding for his honor sake he tooke them into the court and feasted them. Faustus notwithstanding spake to them: if any thing happen otherwise then well when I say sit vp, then fall you all on the cloake, and good enough: well, the water being brought, and that they must wash, one of the thrée had so much manners as to desire his friend to wash first: which when Faustus heard, he said, sit vp, and all at once they got on the cloake, but he that spake fell off againe, the other two with Doctor Faustus were againe presently at Wittenberg, but he that remained was taken & laid in prison, wherfore the other two Gentlemen were very sorrowfull for their friend, but Faustus comforted them, promising that on the morrow he should also be at Wittenberg. Now all this while was the Duke ta∣ken in great feare, and stricken into an excéeding dump, wondring with himselfe that his hap was so hard to be left behind and not the rest: and now being weked and watched with so many kéepers, there were also certaine of the guests that fell to reasoning with him to know what he was, and also what the other were that were vanished away? but the poore prisoner thought with himselfe, if I open what they are, then it will be euill also with me, whereofore all this while he gaue no man any answere, so that he was there a whole day and gaue no man a word: wherefore the old Duke gaue in charge that the next morning they should racke him vntill he had confessed: which when the young Duke heard he began to sorrow, and to say with himselfe, it may be that to morrowe (if Doctor Faustus come not to aid me) shall I be rached and grieuously tormented, insomuch that I shall be constrained by force to tell more then willingly I would doe: but he comforted himselfe, with hope that his friends would intreat Doctor Faustus about his deline∣rance, as also it came to passe: for before it was day Doctor Faustus was by him, and he coniured them that watched him into such a heauy sléepe, that he with his charmes made open all the locks in the prison, and there
withall brought the young Duke againe in safety to the rest of his fel∣lowes and friends, where they presented Faustus with a sumptuous guift, and so departed one from the other. How Doctor Faustus borrowed money of a Iew, and laid his owne legge to pawne for it. Chap. 33. IT is a common Prouerb in Germany, that although a coniurer haue all things at commandement the day will come that he shall not be worth a peny: so is it like to fall out with Doctor Faustus, in promising the deuil so largely: and as the deuill is the author of lyes, euen so he led Faustus his minde in practising of things to deceiue the people, and blin∣ding them, wherin he tooke his whole delight, thereby to bring himselfe to riches, yet notwithstanding in the end he was neuer the richer. And although during foure and twenty yeares of his time that the deuill set him, he wanted nothing, yet was he best pleased when he might deceiue any body: for out of the mightiest Potentates courts in all those coun∣tries he would send his spirit to fetch away their best chéere: And on a time being in his merriment where he was banquetting with other Students in an Inne, whereunto resorted many Iewes, which when D. Faustus perceiued, he was minded to play some merry iest to de∣ceiue a Iew, desiring one of them to lend him some money for a time, the Iew was content, & lent Faustus thréescore dollers for a month, which time being expired, the Iew came for his money and intrest, but Doctor Faustus was neuer minded to pay the Iew againe: at length the Iew comming home to his house, and calling importunately for his money, doctor Faustus made him this answer: Iew I haue no mony, nor know I how to pay thée, but notwithstanding to the end that thou maiest be contented I will cut off a limme of my body, be it arme or legge, and the same thou shalt haue in pawne of thy money, yet with this condition, that when I shall pay thée thy mony againe, then thou shalt giue me my limbe. The Iew that was neuer friend to a Christian, thought with himselfe, this is a fellow right for my purpose, that will lay his lints to pawn for mony, and was therwith very well content: wherfore doctor Faustus tooke a saw, and therwith séemed to cut off his leg (being not∣withstanding nothing so) well, he gaue it to the Iew, yet vpon this con∣dition, that when he got mony to pay, the Iew should deliuer him his leg, to the end he might set it on againe. The Iew was with this mat∣ter very well pleased, took his leg and departed: and hauing far home, he was somewhat weary, and by the way he thus bethought him: what helpeth me a knaues leg? if I should cary it home it would stinke, and so infect my house, besides, it is too hard a péece of work to set it on again,
wherefore what an asse was Faustus to lay so déere a pawne for so smal a somme of mony: and for my part quoth the Iew to himselfe, this will neuer profite me any thing, and with these wordes he cast the leg away from him into a ditch. All this Doctor Faustus knew right well, therfore within thrée daies after he sent for the Iew to make him payment of his 60. dollers: the Iew came, and Doctor Faustus demanded his pawne, there was his mony ready for him: the Iew answered, the pawne was not profitable or necessary for any thing, and he had cast it away: but Faustus threatning, replied, I will haue my leg againe, or else one of thine for it. The Iew fell to intreat, promising him to giue him what money he would aske, if he would not deale straigtly with him, where∣fore the Iew was constrained to giue him sixty dollers more to be rid of him, and yet Faustus had his leg on, for he had but blinded the Iew. How Doctor Faustus deceiued a Horse-courser. Cap. 34. AFter the like manner he serued a Horse courser, at a Frayre called Pheiffring, for Faustus through his Coniuring, had got an excel∣lent faire Horse, whereupon he rid to the Fayre, where he had many Chapmen that offred him money: lastly he solde him for forty dollors, willing him that bought him, that in any wise he should not ride him o∣uer any water, but the horse-courser maruelled with himselfe that Fau∣stus had him ride him ouer no water: but (quoth he) I will proue, and foorthwith he rid him into the Riuer▪ presently the horse vanished from vnder him, and he sate on a bottle of straw, insomuch that the man was almost drowned. The horse-courser knewe well where he lay that had sold him his Horse, wherefore he went angerly to his Inne, where he found Doctor Faustus fast a sléep, and snorting on a bed, but the Horse-courser could no longer for beare him tooke him by the leg and began to pull him off the bed, but he pulled him so, that he pulled his leg from his body, insomuch that the Horse-courser fell backwards in the place, then began Doctor Faustus to cry with an open throate, hée hath murthered me: Hereat the Horse-courser was afraid and gaue the slight, thinking none other with himselfe but that he had pulled his leg from his body, by this meanes Doctor Faustus kept his money. How Doctor Faustus eate a loade of Hay. Chap. 35. DOctor Faustus being in a Towne of Germany called Zwickow where he was accompanyed with many Doctors and Masers, and going foorth to walke after Supper, they mete with adowne that droue a loade of Hay. Good euen good fellow, said Faustus to
the clowne, what shall I giue thée to let me eate my belly full of hay? the clowne thought with himselfe, what a mad man is this to eate hay, thought he with himselfe, thou wilt not eate much: they agréed for thrée farthings he should eat as much as he could: wherfore Doctor Faustus began to eate, and that so rauenously, that all the rest of his company fell a laughing: blinding so the poore clowne, that he was sory at his hart, for he séemed to haue eaten more then the halfe of his hay: where∣fore the clowne began to speake him faire, for feate he should haue ea∣ten the other halfe also, Faustus made as though he had had pitty on the clowne, and went his way. When the clowne came in place where he would be, he had his hay againe as he had before, a full loade. How Doctor Faustus serued the twelue students. Chap. 36. AT Wittinberg before Faustus his house, there was a quarrell be∣twéen seauen students, and fiue that came to part the rest, one part being stronger then the other. Wherefore Faustus séeing them to be o∣uer matched, coniured them all blinde, insomuch that the one could not sée the other, and yet he so delt with them, they fought and smote at one another still: whereat all the beholders fell a laughing: and thus they continued blind beating one another, vntill the people parted them and led each one to his owne house: where being entred into their houses, they receiued their sight perfectly againe. How Doctor Faustus serued the drunken clownes. Chap. 37. DOctor Faustus went into an Inne wherein were many tables full of clownes the which were tipling can after can of excellent wine: and to be short they were all drunken: and as they sat they so sung and hollowed, that one could not heare a man speake for them: this angred Doctor Faustus: wherfore he said to those that had called him in, marke my maisters, I will shew you a merry iest: the clownes continuing still hollowing and singing, he so coniured them, that their mouthes stood as wide open as it was possible for them to holde them, and neuer a one of them was able to close his mouth again. By and by the noise was gone, the clownes notwithstanding looked carnestly one vpon another, and wist not what was happened: one by one they went out, and so soone as they came without, they were all as well as euer they were: but none of them desired to goe in anymore. How Doctor Faustus solde fiue Swine for sixe Dollers a peece. Chap. 38. DOctor Faustus began another iest, he made him ready fiue fatte Swine, the which he sold to one for sixe dollers a péee, vpon this condition, that the swine driuer should not driue them into the water:
Doctor Faustus went home againe, and as the Swine had fyled them∣selues in the mud, the swine-driuer droue them into a water, where pre∣sently they were changed into so many bundles of straw swimming vp∣right in the water: the buyer looked wishly about him, and was sory in his heart, but he knew not where to finde Faustus, so he was content to let all goe, and to loose both mony and hogs. How Doctor Faustus played a merry iest with the Duke of An∣holt in his Court. Chap. 39. DOctor Faustus on a time came to the Duke of Anholt, who wel∣comed him very courteously: this was ye month of Ianuary, where sitting at the table, he perceiued the Duchesse to be with childe, and forbearing himselfe vntill the meat was taken from the table, and that they brought in ye banquetting dishes, Doctor Faustus said to the Dut∣chesse, gracious Lady, I haue alwaies heard that great bellied women doe alwaies long for some dainties, I beséech therefore your grace hide not your mind from me, but tell me what you desire to eat? she answe∣red him, Doctor Faustus now truly I will not hide from you what my heart doth most desire, namely, that if it were now haruest I would cat my belly full of grapes, and other dainty fruite: Doctor Faustus answe∣red hereupon, Gratious Lady, this is a small thing for me to doe, for I can doe more then this: wherefore he tooke a plate, and set open one of the Cazements of the Window, holding it forth, where incontinent he had his dish full of all manner of fruite, as red and white Grapes, Peares and Apples, the which came from out of strange countries: all these he presented the Duchesse, saying: Madam I pray you vouchsafe to tast of this dainty fruit, the which came from a farre countrie, for there the summer is not yet ended. The Dutches thanked Faustus high∣ly, and she fell to her fruit with full appetite. The Duke of Anholt not∣withstanding could not withhold to aske Faustus with what reason there were such young fruit to be had at that time of the yeare. Doctor Fau∣stus told him, may it please your grace to vnderstand, that the yeare is diuided into two circles ouer the whole world that when with vs it is winter, in the contrary circle it is notwithstanding summer, for in India and Saba there falleth or setteth the sun, so that it is so warme that they haue twise a yeare fruit: and gracious Lord I haue a swift spirit, the which can in the twinckling of an eye fulfill my desire in any thing, wherefore I sent him into those countries, who hath brought this fruit as you see: whereat the Duke was in great admiration. How Doctor Faustus through his charmes made a great Castle in presence of the Duke of Anholt. Chap. 40.
DOctor Faustus desired the Duke of Anholt to walke a little forth of the Court with him, wherefore they went together into the field, where Doctor Faustus (through his skil) had placed a mightie Castle, which when the Duke saw, he wondred thereat, so did the Dutchesse, and all the beholders▪ that on that Hill which is called the Rohumbuel, should on the suddain be so faire a Castle. At last, Doctor Faustus desired the Duke and the Dutchesse to walke with him into the Castle, which they denyed not. This Castle was so wonderfull strong, hauing about it a great and déep trench of water, the which was full of fish, and all manner of water-foules, as Swannes, Duckes, Goose, Bitters, and such like. About the wall, was fine stone does, and two other dores: also within, was a great open Court, wherein were inchaunted, all manner of wilde Beasts, specially such as were not to be found in Ger∣many: as Apes, Beares, Buffes, Antelops, and many other strange Beastes. Alo, there were Hartes, Hurdes, Roe buckes and Does and wilde Soome: All manner of land-Fowle that any man could think on, which flewe from one tree to an other. After all this, he set his guests to the Table, being the Duke and Dutchesse, with all their traine, for he had prouided them a most sumpuous Feat, both of meat, and also of any kind of drinke: for he set nine Messe of meat von the boord at once, and all this must his Wagner doe, to place all thinges on the boord, the which was brought vnto him by the spirit, inuisible, of all thinges their hartes could desire, as wild-foule, venison, and all manner of dayntie Fish that could be thought on: of wine also great plenty, and of diuers sortes, as French wine, Cullen wine, Crabashir wine, Rhemish wine, Spauish wine, Hungarian wine, Watzburg wine, Malmesey, & Sacke: In the whole, there were a 100 Cans standing round about the house. This sumptuous banquet, the Duke took thankfully, and afterwards he departed homewards, and to their thinking they had neither eaten or drunke: so were they blinded while they were in the Castle. But as they were in their Pallace, they looked towards the Castle, and beheld it all on a flame of fire, and all those which saw it, wondred to heare so strange anoyse, as if it had bene great Ordnance should haue bene shot off: and thus the Castle burned, & consumed away cleaue. Which done, Doctor Faustus raturned to the Duke, who gaue him great thankes for shewing them so great curtesie, and gaue him a hundred dollors, and li∣bertie to departe, or stay there at his owne discretion. How Doctor Faustus with his Company, visited the Bishop of Saltzburgs Wine-Celler. Chap. 41.
DOctor Faustus hauing taken leaue of the Duke, he went to Wit∣tenberg, néere about Shroue tide, and being in company with cer∣taine students, Doctor Faustus was himselfe the God of Bacchus, who hauing well feasted the Students before with dainty fare, after the manner of Germany, where it is counted no feast except all the bidden guests be drunke, which Doctor Faustus intanding, said: Gentlemen, and my guests, will it please you to take a cup of Wine with me in a place or Celler whereunto I will bring you: they all said willingly we will: which when Doctor Faustus heard he tooke them forth, set either of them vpon an Holly wand, and so was coniured into the Bishop of Saltzburg his Celler, for there about grew excellent pleasant Wine: there fell Faustus and his company to drinking and swilling, not of the worst but of the best. And as they were merry in the celler, came downe to draw drinke the Bishops Butler: which when he perceiued so ma∣ny persons there, he cryed with a loude voyce, théeues théeues. This spited Doctor Faustus wonderfully, wherfore he made euery one of his company to sit on their holly wand, & so vanished away: and in parting D. Faustus tooke the butler by the haire of the head, and carried him a∣way with them vntill they came to a mighty high lopped trée, and on the top of that huge tree he set the Butler: where he remained in a most fearefull perplexitie: D. Faustus departed to his house, where they tooke their valete one of another, drinking the wine the which they had steine in great bottels of glasse out of the Bishops celler. The Butler that had helo himselfe by the hands vpon the lopped trée all the night, was almost frozen with colde, espying the day, and séeing the trée of so huge great gighnes, thought with himselfe it is vnpossible to come off this trée without perill of death; at length he espied certaine clownes which were passing by, he cried, for the loue of God helpe me down, the clownes seeing him so high, wondred what mad man would clime to so huge a trée, wherefore as a thing most miraculous, they caryed tydings to the bishop of Saltzburg: then was there great running on euery side to see him in the trée, and many deuises they practised so get him downe with ropes: and being demanded by the Bishop how he came there, he said, yt he was brought thither by the haire of ye head of certaine the nes that were robbing of the wine celler, but what they were he knew not, for (said he) they had faces like men, but they wrought like Diuels. How Doctor Faustus kept his Chroue-tide. Chap. 42. THere were seuen students and masters that studied Diuinity, Iu∣ris prudentia & medicina, all these hauing consented, were agad to visit Doctor Faustus, and to celebrate Shrode with him: who
being come to his house, he gaue them their welcome, for they were his déere friends, desiring them to sit downe, where he serued them with a very good supper of Mens, fish and other rost, yet were they but slight∣ly chéered: wherefore Doctor Faustus comforted his guests, excusing himselfe that they stole vpon him so suddainly, that he had not leysure to prouide for them so well as they were worthy: but my good friends (quoth he) according to the vse of our Country, we must drinke all this night & so a draught of the best wine to bedward is commendable. For you know that in great Potentates courts they vse as this night great feasting, the like will I doe for you: for I haue thrée great flaggens of Wine, the fiest is full of Hungarian Wine, containing eight gallons, the second of Italian Wine contaning seuen gallons, the third contai∣ning sixe gallons of Spanish wine, all the which we will tipple out be∣fore it be day: besides, we haue fiftéene dishes of meate, the which my spirit Mephostophiles hath fette so farre, that it was colde before hée brought it, and they are all full of the daintiest thinges that ones heart can deuise, but (saith Faustus) I must make them hote againe, and you may beléeue me Gentlemen, that this is no blinding of you, whereas you thinke that it is no natural food, verily it is as good and as pleasant as euer you eate. And hauing ended his tale, he commaunded his boy to lay the cloath, which done, he serued them with fiftéene messe of meate, hauing thrée dishes to a messe, the which were all manner of Venison, and dainty wild fowle, and for wine there was no lacke, as Italian wine, Hungarian wine, and Spanish wine: and when they were all made drunke, and that they had almost eaten all their good cheere, they began to sing and to dance vntill it was day, and then they departed euery one to his owne habitation at whose parting, Doctor Faustus, de∣sired them to be his guests againe the next day following. How Doctor Faustus feasted his guests on the Ash∣wednesday. Chap. 43. VPon Ash wednesday came vnto Doctor Faustus his bidden guests the Students, whom he feasted very royally, insomuch that they were all full and lustie, dauncing and singing as the night before: and when the high glasses and goblets were caroused one to another doctor Faustus began to play them some pretty feates, insomuch that round a∣bout the hall was heard most pleasant musick, & that in sundry places: in this corner a Lute in another corner a Cornet, in another a Cithern, Clarigolds, Harpe, Horne-pipe: in fine, all manner of Musicke was heard there at that instant, whereat all the glasses and goblets, cups, and pots, dishes, and all that stoods on the boord began to daunce: then
Doctor Faustus tooke ten stone pots, and set them downe on the floore where presently they began to dance, and to smite one against the other that the shiuers flew round about the whole house, whereat the whole company fell a laughing. Then he began another iest, he set an instru∣ment on the table, and caused a mōstrous great Ape to come in amongst them, which Ape began to dance and to skip, shewing them many mer∣ry conceits. In this and such like pastime they passed away the whole day, where night being come, Doctor Faustus bad them all to Supper, which they lightly agréed vnto, for Students in these cases are easily intreated: wherefore he promised to feast them with a banket of fowle, and afterward they would goe all about with a mask: then D. Faustus put forth a long pole out of ye window, wherupon presently there came innumerable of birds & wild fowle, and so many as came, had not any power to flie away againe, but he tooke them and flang them to the stu∣dents, who lightly pulled of the neckes of them, and being roasted they made their supper: which being ended, they made themselues ready to the mask. Doctor Faustus commanded euery one to put on a cleane shirt ouer his other cloaths, which being done, they looked one vpon another, it séemed to each one of them they had no heads, and so they went forth vnto certaine of their neighbours, at which sight the people were won∣derfully afraid. And as the vse of Germany is, that whersoeuer a mask entreth, the good man of the house must feast them: so when these mas∣kers were set to their banquet, they séemed againe in their former shape with heads, insomuch that they were all knowne what they were, and hauing sate and well eate and drunke, D. Faustus made that euery one had an Asses head on, with great and long eares, so they fell to dancing and to drine away the time vntill it was midnight, and then euery man departed home: and assoone as they were out of the house, each one was in his naturall shape againe, and so they ended and went to sléepe. How Doctor Faustus the day following was feasted of the students, and of his merry iests with them while he was in their company. Chap. 44. THe last Bacchanal was held on Thursday, where insued a great snow, and D. Faustus was inuited vnto the Students that were with him the day before, where they had prepared an excellent banket for him, which banket being ended, doctor Faustus began to play his old pranks, and forthwith were in the place thirtéen Apes, that tooke hands and danced round in a ring together, then they sell to tumbling & vau∣ting one our another, that it was most pleasent to beheld, thē they lea∣ped out of the window and vanished away: then they set before Doctor
Faustus a roasted calues head, which one of the Students cut a péece of, and laid it on Doctor Faustus his trencher, which péece being no sooner laid downe, but the Canes head began to cry mainly out like a man, murther, murther, out alas what dost thou to me? whereat they were all amazed, but after a while, considering of Faustus his testing tucks, they began to laugh, and then they pulled in sunder the calues head, and cate it vp, Whereupon Doctor Faustus asked leane to depart, but they would in no wise agrée to let him goe, except that he would promise to come again presently: then Faustus through his cunning made a fledge the which was drawne about the house with foure firy dragons: this was fearefull for the students to beholde, for they saw Faustus ride vp and downe as though he should haue fired and slaine all them in the house. This sport continued vntil midnight, with such a noise that they could not heare one another, and the heads of the students were so light that they thought themselues to be in the ayre all that time, How Doctor Faustus shewed the faire Helena vnto the students vpon the Sunday following. Chap. 45. THe Sunday following came those students home to Doctor Fau∣stus his owne house, and brought their meat and drinke with them, these men were right welcome guests vnto Faustus wherefore they all fell to drinking wine smoothly: and being merry, they began some of them to talke of the beauty of women, and euery one gaue forth his verdit what he had séene, and what he had heard: So one among the rest said, I neuer was so desirous of any thing in this world, as to haue a sight (if it were possible) of faire Helena of Greece, for whom the worthy towne of Troy was destroyed and razed downe to the ground, therefore, saith he, that in all mens iudgement she was more then com∣monly faire, because that when she was stolne away from her husband, there was for her recouery so great bloodshed. Doctor Faustus answered: for that you are all my friends, and are so desirous to sée that stately pearle of Greece, faire Helena, the wife of King Menelaus and daughter of Tendalus and Leda, sister to Castor and Pollux who was the fairest Lady in all Greece: I will therefore bring her into your presence personally and in the same forme of attire as she vsed to goe when she was in her chiefest flowers, and pleasantest priae of youth. The like haue I done for the Emperour Carolus Magnus, at his desire I shewed him Alexander the great and his Paramout: but (said Doctor Faustus) I charge you all that vpon your perils you speake not a word, nor rise vp from the table so long as she is in your presence. And so he went out of the hall, returning presently againe: after whom
immediatly folowed the faire and beautiful Helena, whose beauty was such that the students were all amazed to sée her, esteeming her rather to be a heauenly then an earthly Creature: This Lady appeared before them in a most rich Gowne of purple Velnet, cosily imbroadred: her haire hanged downe loose, as fairs as the beaten golde, and of such len∣gth, that it reached downe to her hmmes, hauing most amorous cole∣bla eyes, a swéet & pleasant round ace, with lips as red as a Cherry, he chéeks of a rose colour, her mouth small, her neck white like a swan, tall & slender of personage In summe, there was no imperfect place in her: she looked round about with a rolling Haukes eye a smiling and wanton countenance, which nere hand inflamd the harts of al students, but that they perswaded themselues she was a spirit, which made them lightly passe away such fancyes: and thus faice Helen and Faustus went out againe one with an an other. But the students, at Faustus entring into the Hall againe, requested him to let them see her againe the next day, for that they would bring with them a Painter▪ to take her Coun∣terfet: which he denyed, affirming that he could not alwayes raise vp her spirit, but onely at certaine tunes: yet said he, I will gine you her Counterfet, which shall be as good to you, as if your selfe should sée the drawing therof, which they receiued according to his promise, but soone lost it againe. The students departed from Faustus to their seueral lod∣gings, but none of them could sleep that night, for thinking on the beau∣ty of faire Hellen. Therfore a man may sée, that the deuill blindeth and inflameth the hart oft times with lust, that men fall in in loue with har∣lots, wherby their mindes can afterwards be hardly remoued. How Doctor Faustus Coniured away the foure wheeles from a Clownes Waggon. Chap. 46. DOctor Faustus was sent for, to come to the Marshall of Brunswick, who was maruailously troubled with the falling sickenesse: Now Faustus had this quality, he sildome rid, but walkt on foote, to ease himselfe when e list: And as he came néere vnto the Towne of Bruns∣wicke, there ouertooke him a Clowne with foure horses and an empty Waggon: to whome▪ Doctor Faustus (iestingly to try him) said vnto him, I pray thée good fellow let mer dea little to ease my weary leggs, which the bussadly Asse denyes, sving, that his horses were all weary: and he woul not let him get vp: Doctor Faustus did this but to prooue this Clowne if there were any crtery to be found in him if need were: But such churlishnes is commonly found among Clownes but he was well requited by Faustus, euen with the like payment, for pe said vnto
him. Thou doltish clowne, voyd of all humility, séeing thou art of so currith disposition I will pay thée as thou hast deserued: for the foure wheeles of thy Wagon thou shalt haue taken from thée, let me sée then how thou canst shift: hereupon his whéeles were gone, his horses also fell downe to the ground as though they had béene dead: whereat the clowne was sore afrighted, measuring it a iust scourge of God for his sinnes and churlishnes, wherfore all trembling and wailing, he humbly besought Doctor Faustus to be good vnto him, confessing he was wor∣thy of it, notwithstanding if it pleased him to forgiue him, he would herafter doe better. Which humility made Faustus his heart to repent, answering him on this maner: Well doe so no more, but when a poore man desireth thée, sée that thou let him ride, but yet thou shalt not goe altogether cléere, for although thou haue againe thy foure whéeles, yet shalt thou fetch them at the foure gates of the City, so he threw dust on the horses and reuiued them againe, and the Clowne for his churlish∣nes was faine to fetch his whéeles, spending his time with wearines, whereas before he might haue done a good déede, and gone about his busines quietly. How foure Iuglers cut one anothers head off, and set them on againe and how Doctor Faustus deceiued them. Chap. 47. DOctor Faustus came in the Lent vnto Frankford fayre, where his Spirit Mephostophiles gaue him to vnderstand that in an Inne were foure Iuglers that cut one anothers head off, and after their cut∣ting off sent them to the barber to be trimmed, which many people saw. This angred Faustus, for he meant to haue himselfe the onely Cocke in the deuills basket, and he went to the place where they were to behold them. And as these Iuglers were together ready one to cut off anothers head, there stood also the barbers ready to trim them, and by them vpon the table stood likewise a glasse full of stilled water, and he that was the chiefest amongst them stood by it. Thus they began, they smote off the bead of the first, & presently there was a Lilly in the glasse of distil∣led water, where Faustus perceiuing this Lilly as it was springing, and the chiefe Iugler named it the trée of life, thus dealt he with the first, making the barber wash and comb his head, and then he set it on again, presently the Lilly vanished away out of the water, hereat the man had his head whole and sound againe, the like did they with the other two: and as the turne and lot came to the chiefe Iugler that he also should be beheaded, & that this Lilly was most pleasant, faire, & florishing gréene, they smote his head off, & when it came to be barbed, it troubled Faustus
his conscience, insomuch that he could not abide to sée another doe any thing, for he thought himselfe to be the principal Coniurer in the world: wherefore Doctor Faustus went to the table whereas the other Iug∣lers kept that Lilly, and so he tooke a small knife and cut off the stalke of the Lilly, saying to himselfe, none of them should blinde Faustus: yet no man saw Faustus to cut the Lilly, but when the rest of the Iuglers thought to haue set on their maisters head, they could not, wherefore they looked on the Lilly, and found it bléeding, by this meanes the Iug∣ler was beguiled, and so dyed in his wickedues, yet not one thought that Doctor Faustus had done it. How an olde man the neighbour of Faustus sought to perswade him to amend his euill life and to fall vnto re∣pentance. Chap. 48. A Good Christian, an honest and vertuous olde man a louer of the oly Scriptures, who was neighbour vnto D. Faustus, when he perceiued that many students had their recourse in and out vnto Do∣ctor Faustus he suspected his euill life, wherefore like a friend he inuited Doctor Faustus to supper vnto his house, to the which he agréed: and hauing ended their banquet, the olde man began with these words: My louing friend and neighbour Doctor Faustus, I am to desire of you a friendly and a hritan request, beseeching you that you will vouchsafe not to be angry with me, but friendly resolue me in my doubt and take my poore inuiting in good part. To whom D. Faustus answered: my louing neighbour, I pray you say your mind. Then began the olde Pa∣tron to say: My good neighbour, you know in the beginning how that you haue defied God, and all the hoast of Heauen, and giuen your soule to the diuell, wherewith you haue incurred Gods high displeasure, and are become frō a Christian, far worse then a heathen person: oh consider what you haue done, it is not only the pleasure of ye body, but that safe∣ty of the soule that you must haue respect vnto: of which if you be care∣lesse, then are you cast away, and shall remaine in the anger of the Al∣mighty God. But yet it is time enough D. Faustus, if you repent and call vnto the Lord for mercy, as we haue example in the Acts of the A∣postles the 8. Chap. of Simon in Samaria, who trased out of the way, affirming that he was Simon homo Sanctus. This mn was notwith∣standing in the end conuerted, after that he had a the sermon of Philip, for he was baptized and saw his sinne and repented. Likewise I beséech you good broher Doctor Faustus, lt my rude sermon be vnto you a conuertion: and forget the filthy life that yet hau ledd: ezent, aske mercy, and liue: for Christ saith, Come vnto me all ye that e
weary, and heauy laden, and I will refresh you. And in Ezechiel, I de∣sire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he will conuert and liue. Let my wordes good Brother Faustus, pierce into your Adamant heart, and desire God for his son Christ his sake to forgiue you. Wher∣fore haue you so long liued in your diuelish practises, knowing that in the olde and new testament you are forbidden, and that men should not suffer any such to liue, neither haue any conuersation with them, for it is an abhomination vnto the Lord: and that such persons haue no part in the Kingdome of God. All this while Doctor Faustus heard him very attentiuely, and replyed. Father your perswasions like me wondrous well, and I thanke you with all my heart for your good will and coun∣sell, proising you as farre as I may to allow your discipline: where∣upon he tooke his leaue. And being come home, he lay him very pensiue on his bed, bethinking himselfe of the wordes of the olde man, and in a manner began to repent that he had giuen his soule to the diuell, inten∣dng to deny all he had promised to Lucifer. Continuing in these cogi∣tations, suddainly his spirit appeared vnto him clapping him vpon the head: and wrung it as though he would haue pulled his head from his shaulders saying vnto him: Thou knowest Faustus that thou hast gi∣uen thy selfe, body and soule, to my Lord Lucifer, and thou hast vowed thy selfe an enemy to God and vnto all men, and now thou beginnest to hearken vnto an olde doting foole which perswaeth thée as it were vnto good when indéed it is too lace, for that thou art the Diuels, and he hath good power presently to fetch thée: wherefore he hath sent me vn∣to thée, to tell thée, that séeing thou hast sorrowed for that thou hast done, begin againe and write another writing with thine owne blood, if not, then will I teare thée all to péeces. Hereat Doctor Faustus was sore afraid and said: My Mephostophiles, I will write againe what thou wilt: wherefore he sate him downe, and with his owne blood he wrote as followeth: which writing was afterward sent to a deare friend of the said Doctor Faustus being his kins-man. How Doctor Faustus, wrote the second time with his owne blood and gaue it to the deuill. Chap. 49. I Doctor Iohn Faustus, acknowledge by this my déed and hand wri∣ting, that sith my first writing, which is seuentéen yeares, that I haue right willingly held, and hath béen an vtter enemy vnto God & all men, the which I once againe confirme, and giue fully and wholy my selfe vnto the deuill both body and soule, euen vnto the great Lucifer, & that at the end of seauen yeares insuing after the date of this letter, he shall haue to doe with me according as it pleaseth him, either to lengthen or
shorten my life as pleaseth him: and hereupon I renounce all perswa∣ders that séeke to withdraw me from my purpose by the word of God, either ghostly or bodily: and further, I wil neuer giue eare vnto any man be he spirituall or temporall, that moueth any matter for the saluation of my soule. Of all this writing, and that therein conteined, be witnes my bloud, the which with my hands I haue begun and ended. Dated at VVittenberg the 25. of Iuly. And presently vpon the making of this letter, he became so great an e∣nemy to the poore old man, that he sought his life by all meanes possible, but this godly man was strong in the holy Ghost that he could not be vanquished by any meanes, for about two dayes after that he had ex∣horted Faustus, as the poore man lay in his bed, suddainly there was a mighty rumbling in the chamber, yt which he was neuer wont to heare, and he heard as it had béene the groaning of a Sow, which lasted long: whereupon the good old man began to iest and mocke, and said: oh what Barbarian cry is this: oh faire bird, what soule musick is this? a faire Angell, that could not tary two daies in his place? beginnest thou now to rim into a poore mans house, where thou hast no power, and wert not able to kéepe thy owne two dayes? With these and such like words the spirit departed. And when he came home, Faustus asked him how hée had sped with the olde man? to whome the spirit answered, the olde man was harnessed, and that he could not once lay holde vpon him: but hée would not tell how the olde man had mocked him, for the Diuels can neuer abide to heare of their fall. Thus doth God defend the hearts of all honest Christians, that be take themselues vnder his tuition. How Doctor Faustus made a marriage between two louers. Cap. 50. IN the Citty of Wittenberg was a Student, a gallant Gentleman, named N. N. This Gentleman was farre in loue with a Gentlewo∣man, faire and proper of personage: This Gentlewoman had a knight that was a suter vnto her, and many other Gentlemen the which desired her in mariage, but none could obtain her: so it was that this N.N. was very well acquainted with Faustus, and by that meanes became a suter vnto him to assist him in the matter, for he fell so farre in dispaire with himselfe, that he pined away to the skin and bones, But when he had opened the matter vnto Doctor Faustus, he asked counsell of his spirit Mephostophiles, the which tolde him what to doe. Hereupon Doctor Faustus went home to the Gentleman and bad him be of good chéere, for he should haue his desire, for he would helpe him to that he wished for, and that this Gentlewoman should loue none other but him onely, wherefore D. Faustus so changed the mind of the damsell by a practise
he wrought, that she should doe no other thing but think on him whom before she had hated, neither cared she for any man but him alone. The deuice was thus: Faustus commaunded the Gentleman that he should cloath himselfe in all the best apparell that he had, and that he should goe vnto this Gentlewoman, d showe himselfe▪ giuing him a King, com∣maunding him in any wise that he should daunce with her before he de∣parted: who folowing his Counsel, went to her, and when they began to daunce, they that were suiters began to take euery one his Lady by the hand: this Gentleman tooke her woo before had so disdayned him, and in the daunce, he put the King into her hand that Faustus had giuen him, which she no sooner toucht, but she fell presently in loue with him, smiling at him in the daunce, and many times winking at him, rolling her eyes, and in the end she asked him if be could loue her, and make her his wife? he gladly answered, that he was content: whereupon they concluded, and were maryed, by the meanes and help of Faustus, for the which, the Gentleman will rewarded hun. How Doctor Faustus, led his friends into his Garden at Christmas, and showed them many strange sights, in his ninteenth yeare. Chap. 51. IN December, about Christmas▪ in the City of Wittenberg were ma∣n yng Gentlemen which were come out of the Country to be merry with their friends: amongst whome, there were certaine well acquain∣ted with Doctor Faustus, who often inuited them home vnto his houses they being there on a certaine time, after dinner he had them into his Garden, where they beheld all maner of flowers and fresh hearbes, and trées bearing fruit and blossomes of all sortes, who wondred to sée that his garden should so flourish at that time, as in the midst of Sommer: and abroad in the streets and all the countrey lay full of snowe and yee: Wherefore this was noted of them, as a thing miraculous: euery one gathering and carying away, all such thinges as they best liked, and so departed, delightd with their swéet smelling flowers. How Doctor Faustus, gathered together, a great Army of men, in his extremity, against a Knight that would haue miured him on his iourney. Chap. 52. DOctor Faustus trauayld towards Eyzelben, and when he was nigh halfe the way, he espyed seuen horse-men, and the chiefe of them be knewe to be the Knight with whome he had Iested in the Emperours Court: for he had set a huge payre of Harts hornes vpon his head, and when the Knight now sawe that he had fit oportunity to be reuenged of Faustus, he ran vpon him (and those that were with him) to mischiefe
him, intending priuile to slay him: which when Faustus espyed, he vani∣shed away into a wood which was hard by them: But when the Knight perceiued that he ws vanished away, he caused his men to stand still, but where they remained, they heard all maner of warlike Instruments of musick, as Drums, Flutes, Trumpets, and such like, and a certaine troope of hors-men ūing toward them: then they turned another way, and they were also met on that side thē another way, & yet were freshly assaulted, so that which way so euer they turned themselues, he was in∣countred, insomuch that when the Knight perceiued that he could escape no way, but that they his enemies laid on him which way soeuer hée offered to flye, hée tooke a good heart, and ran amongst the thickest, and thought with himselfe, better to dye then to liue with so great an infamy. Therefore being at handy blowes with them he demanded the cause why they should so vse him? but none of them would giue him answer vntill Doctor Faustus shewed himselfe vnto the Knight, where∣upon they inclosed him round, and Doctor Faustus said vnto him sir, yéeld your weapon, and your selfe, other wise it will goe had with you. The Knight knew no other but that he was inuironed with an hoast of men (where indeed they were none other thn diuels) yéelded: then Fau∣stus tooke away his sword, his péece, and horse, with all the rest of his companions. And further he said vnto him, Sir: the chiefe Generall of our army hath commaunded to deale with you according to the Law of Arms, you hall depart in peace whither you please, and then he gaue the Knight a horse after the manner, and set him thereon, so he rode, the rest went on foote, vntill they came to their Inne, where being alighted, his Page rode on his horse to the water, and presently the horse vani∣shed away, the Page being almost sunke and drowned, but he escaped, and comming home, the Knight perceiued his Page so bemyred and on foote, asked where his horse was become: who answered that he was vanished away: which when the Knight heard, hee said, of a truth this is Faustus his doing, for he serueth me now as he did before at the Court, onely to make me a scorne and a laughing stocke. How Doctor Faustus caused Mephostophiles to bring him 7. of the fairest women he could finde in all the Countries he had trauailed in, in the 20 yeare. Chap. 53. WHen D. Faustus called to minde that his time from day to day drew nigh, he began to liue a swinih & epicurish life, wherefore he commaunded his Spirit Mephostophiles, to bring him seauen of the
fairest women that he had seene in all the time of his trauell: which be∣ing brought, first one, then another, he lay with them all, insomuch that he liked them so well, that he continued with them in all manner of loue and made them to trauell with him in all his iourners: These women were 2. Netherlands, 1. Hungarian, 1. English, 2. Wallons, 1. Franck∣lander: and with these swéet personages he continued long, yea euen to his last nd. How Doctor Faustus found a masse of money, when he had consumed 22. of his yeares. Chap. 54. TO the end that the Diuell would make Faustus his onely heire, hée shewed vnto him, where he should goe and finde a mighty huge masse of money, and that he should haue it in an olde Chappell that was fallen downe: halfe a mile distant from Wittenberg, there he had him to dig, and should finde it, the which he did, and hauing digged reasonable déep, he saw a mighty huge serpent, the which lay on the treasure it selfe, the treasure it selfe lay like a huge light burning: but Doctor Faustus charmed the Serpent that he crept into a hole, and when he digged dée∣per to get vp the treasure, he found nothing but coales of fire: there al∣so he heard and saw many that were tormented, yet notwithstanding he brought away the coales, and when he was come home: it was all turned into siluer and gold, and after his death it was found by his ser∣uant, the which was almost about estimation a thousand Gilders. How Doctor Faustus made the spirit of faire Helena of Greece his owne Paramour and bedfellow in his 23. yeare. Chap. 55. TO the end that this miserable Faustus might fill the lust of his flesh, and liue in all manner of voluptuous pleasures, it came in his mind after he had slept his first sléepe, and in the 23. yeare past of his time, that he had a great desire to lye with faire Helena of Greece, especially her whome he had séene and shewed vnto the students at Wittenberg, wherefore he called vnto his spirit Mephostophiles, commanding him to bring him the faire Helena, which he also did, wherupon he fell in loue with her, and made her his common concubine, and bedfellow, for she was so beautifull and delightfull a péece, that he could not be one houre from her, if he should therfore haue suffred death, she had so stolue away his heart, and to his séeming in time she was with childe, and in the end brought him a man childe, whom Faustus named Iustus Faustus: This child tolde D. Faustus many things that were to come, and what strange things were done in forraine Countries: but in the end when Faustus lost his life, the mother and the childe vanished away both together. How Doctor Faustus made his will, in which he named his seruant Wagner to be his heire. Chap. 56.
DOctor Faustus was now in this 24. and last yeare, and hée had a pretty stripling to his seruant, the which had studied also at the V∣niuersity of Wittenberg: this youth was very well acquainted with his knaueries and sorceries so that he was hated aswell for his owne kna∣uerie, as also for his maisters: for no man would giue him entertain∣ment into his seruice, because of his vnhappinesse, but Faustus: This Wagner was so well brioued with Faustus that he vsed him as his son: for doe what he would, his master was alwayes therewith well conten∣ted. And when the time drew nigh that Faustus should end, hée called vnto him a Notary and certaine Maisters, the which were his friends, and often conuersant with him, in whose prosence he gaue this Wagner his house and garden. Item he gaue him in ready money 16000. Gilders. Item a Farme. Item a Gold chaine, much Plate, and other houshold stuffe. That gaue he all to his seruant and the rest of his time he meant to spend in Innes and Students company, drinking and ea∣ting, with other iollitie: and thus he finished his will for that time. How Doctor Faustus fell in talke with his seruant touching his Testament, and the couenants thereof. Chap. 57. NOw when his will was made Doctor Faustus called vnto his ser∣uant, saying, I haue thought vpon thée in my Testament, for that thou hast béene a trusty seruant vnto me, and a faithfull, and hast not opened my secrets, and yet further (said he) aske of me before I die what thou wilt and I will giue it vnto thée. His seruant rashly answe∣red, I pray you let me haue your cunning. To which Doctor Faustus answered I haue giuen thée all my books, vpon this condition that thou wouldst not let them be common, but vse them for thine owne pleasure, and study carefully in them. And dost thou also desire my cunning? That maist thou peraduenture haue, if thou loue and peruse my bookes well. Further (said Doctor Faustus) séeing that thou desirest of me this re∣quest, I will resolue thée: my Spirit Mephostophiles his time is out with me, and I haue nought to command him as touching thée, yet wil I helpe thée to another if thou like well therof. And within three dayes after he called his seruent vnto him, saying, art thou resolued: wouldst thou verily haue a spirit: Then tell me in what manner or forme thou wouldst haue him: To whom his seruant answered, that he would haue him in the forme of an Ape: whereupon appeared presently a Spirit vnto him in manner and forme of an Ape, the which leaped about the house. Then said Faustus sée, there hast thou thy request, but yet he will not obey thee vntill I be dead, for when my spirit Mephostophiles shall fetch me away, then shall thy spirit be bound vnto thée, if thou agree: and
thy Spirit shalt thou name Abercocke: for so he is called: but all this is vpon condition that you publish my cunning and my merry conceits: with all that I haue done (when I am dead) in an historie: and if thou canst not remember all, the spirit Abercocke will helpe thée: so shall the great acts that I haue done be manifest vnto the world. How Doctor Faustus hauing but one month of his appointed time to come, fell to mourning and sorrow with himselfe, for his diueilish exercise. Chap. 58. TIme ran away with Faustus, as the houre-glasse, for he had but one month to come of his 24. yeares, at the end whereof he had gi∣uen himselfe to the diuell body and soule, as it is before specified. Here was the first token for hée was like a taken murtherer, or a theefe, the which findeth himselfe guilty in conscience, before the Iudge haue gi∣uen sentence, fearing euery houre to dye for he was grieued, and in wayling spent the time, went talking to himselfe, wringing of his hands, sobbing and sighing, he fell away from flesh, and was very leane and kept himselfe close: neither could he abide to sée or heare of his Me∣phostophiles any more. How Doctor Faustus complained that hee should in his lusty time and youthfull yeares dye so miserably. Chap. 59. THis sorrowfull time drawing néere so troubled Doctor Faustus, that he began to write his minde, to the end he might peruse it of∣ten, and not forget it, and which was in manner as followeth. Ah Faustus, thou sorrowfull and wofull man now must thou goe to the damned company in vnquenchable fire, whereas thou mightest haue had the ioyfull immortalitie of the soule, the which thou now hast lost. Ah grosse vnderstanding and wilfull will, what seazeth on my limbes, other then a robbing of my life? Bewaile with me my sound and healthfull body, and wit and soule: bewaile with me my sences, for you haue had your part and pleasure aswell as I. Oh enuy and dis∣daine, how haue you crept both at once into mée, and how for your sakes, I must suffer all these torments! Ah whither is pitty and mercy fled? Vpon what occasion hath heauen repayed me with this reward, by sufferance to suffer me to perish? Wherefore was I created of man? The punishment I sée prepared for mée, of my selfe now must I suffer. Ah miserable wretch, there is nothing in this world to shew mée com∣fort: then woe is me what helpeth my wailing? Another complaint of Doctor Faustus. Chap. 60. OH poor, wofull and weary wretch: oh sorrowfull soule of Faustus, now art thou in he number of the damned, for now must I waite
for vnmeasurable paines of death, yet farre more lamentable then euer yet any creature hath suffered. Ah senceles, wilfull, and desperate forget∣fulnes! Oh cursed and vnstable life! O blind and carelesse wretch, that so hast abused thy body, sence, and soule! O foolish pleasure, into what a weary laborinth hast thou brought me, blinding mine eyes in the clée∣rest day? Ah weake hart, Oh troubled soule, where is become thy know∣ledge to comfort thée? Oh desperate hope, now shall I neuer more be thought vpon: Oh care vpon carefulnesse, and sorrowes on heapes: Ah grieuous paines, that pierce my panting heart, whom is there now that can deliuer me? Would to God I knew where to hide me, or into what place to créepe or flie. Ah, woe, woe is me, be where I will, yet am I ta∣ken. Herewith poore Faustus was so sorrowfully troubled, that he could not speake or vtter his minde any further. How Doctor Faustus bewailed to thinke on hell and of the misera∣ble paines therein prouided for him. Chap. 61. NOw thou Faustus, damned wretch, how happy wert thou if as an vnreasonable beast thou mightest die without soule, so sholdest thou not fale any more doubts? But now the Deuill will take thée away both body and soule, and set thée in an vnspeakable place of darkenesse: for although others soules haue rest & peace, yet I poore damned wretch must suffer all manner of filthy stench, paines, colde, hunger, thirst, heate, fréezing, burning, hissing, gnashing and all the wrath and curse of God, yea all the Creatures that God hath created are enemies to me. And now too late I remember that my spirit Mephostophiles did once tell mee there was great difference amongst the damned: for the greater the sinne the greater the torment: for as the twigs of a tree makes greater flame then the truncke thereof, and yet the truncke continueth longer in bur∣ning, euen so the more that a man is rooted in sinne, the greater is his pu∣nishment. Ah thou perpetuall damned wretch, now art thou throwne into the euerlasting fiery lake that neuer shall be quenched: there must I dwell in all manner of wailing, sorrow, misery, paine, torment, griefe, howling, sighing, sobbing, running of eyes, stinking at nose, gnashing of féeth, feare to the eares, horror to the conscience, and shaking both of hand and foote. Ah that I could carry the heauens vpon my shoulders, so that there were time at last to quit me of this euerlasting damnation: Oh who can deliuer me out of the fearefull formenting flame, the which I see prepared for me? Oh there is no helpe, nor any man that can deli∣uer me, nor any wailing of sinnes can helpe me, neither is there rest to be found for me day or night. Ah woe is me, for there is no helpe for me, no shield, no defence, no comfort. Where is my hold? knowledge
dare I not trust: and for a soule to God wards, that haue I not, for I shame to speake vnto him: if I doe, no answere shall be made me, but he will hide his face from me, to the end that I should not behold the ioyes of the chosen, What meane I then to complaine where no helpe is? No I know no hope resteth in my groanings. I haue desired that it should be so, and God hath said Amen to my misdoings: for now I must haue shame to comforme in my calamities. Here followeth the miserable and lamentable end of Doctor Fau∣stus, by the which all Christians may take an example and warning. Chap. 62. THe full time of Doctor Faustus his 24. yeares being come, his spirit appeared vnto him giuing him his writing again and commanding him to make preparation, for that the deuill would fetch him against a certaine time appointed. Doctor Faustus mourned and sighed wonder∣fully, and neuer went to bed, nor slept winke for sorrow. Wherefore his spirit appeared againe comforting him and saying: My Faustus, be not thou so cowardly minded, for although that thou losest thy body, it is not long vnto the day of Iudgement, and thou must dye at the last, al∣though thou liue many thousand yeares. The Turks, the Iewes, and many a vnchristian Emperour are in the same condemnation: therefore my Faustus be of good courage, and be not discomforted, for the deuil hath promised that thou shalt not be in paine as the rest of the damned are. This and such like comfort he gaue him, but he tolde him false, and a∣gainst the saying of holy Scriptures. Yet Doctor Faustus that had none other expectation but to pay his debts with his owne skin, went (on the same day that his spirit said the deuill would fetch him) vnto his trusty and déerest beloued brethren and companions, as Maisters and Batche∣lers of Art, and other students more, the which did often visite him at his house in merriment: these he intreateth that they would walke into the Village called Rimlich, halfe a mile from Wittenberg, and that they would there take with him for their repast of a small banquet, the which they all agréed vnto: so they went together: and there held their dinner in a most sumptuous manner. D. Faustus with them (dissemblingly) was merry but not from the heart: wherefore he requested them that they would also take part of his rude supper: the which they agréed vn∣to, for (quoth he) I must tell you what is the Victulers due: and when they sleeped (for drinke was in their heads) then Doctor Faustus paid and discharged the shot, and bound the students and the Maisters to goe with him into another roome, for he had many wonderfull matters to
tell them, and when they were entred the roome as he requested, Doctor Faustus said vnto them as hereafter followeth. An Oration of Faustus to the Students. Chap. 63. MY trusty and welbeloued friends, the cause why I haue inuited you into this place is this: Forasmuch as you haue knowne me this many yeares in what manner of life I haue liued, practising all manner of Coniurations and wicked exercises, the which I obtained through the helpe of the deuill, into whose deuillish fellowship they haue brought me, the which vse the like Art and practise, vrged by the detesta∣ble prouocations of my flesh, and my stiff-necked and rebellious will, with my filthy infernall thoughts, the which were euer before me, prick∣ing me forward so earnestly, that I must perforce haue the consent of the deuill to ayde me in my deuises. And to the end I might the better bring my purpose to passe, to haue the deuils aide and furtherance, which I ne∣uer haue wanted in my actions, I haue promised vnto him at the end and accomplishing of 24. yeares, both body and soule, to doe therewith at his pleasure: and this day, this dismall day, those 24. yeares are fully expired, for night beginning, my houre-glasse is at an end, the direfull fi∣nishing whereof I carefully expect: for out of all doubt this night he will fetch me, to whome I haue giuen my selfe in recompence of his seruice, both body and soule, and twise confirmed writings with my proper blood. Now haue I called you my welbeloued Lords, friends, brethren, and fellowes, before that fatall houre, to take my friendly fare-well, to the end that my departure may not hereafter be hidden from you, besée∣ching you herewith (curteous louing Lords, and brethren) not to take in euill part any thing done by me, but with friendly commendations to salute all my friends and companions wheresoeuer, desiring both you and them if euer I haue trespassed against your mindes in any thing that you would heartily forgiue me: and as for those lewd practises the which is full 24. yeares I haue followed, you shall hereafter finde them in writing: and I beséech you let this my lamentable end to the residue of your liues be a sufficient warning that you haue God always before your eyes, praying vnto him that he would euer defend you from the temptations of the Deuill and all his false deceits, not falling alto∣gether from GOD, as I wretched and vngodly damned creature haue done, hauing denied and defied Baptisme, the Sacraments of Christs body, God himselfe, all heauenly powers, and earthly men: yea, I haue denyed such a God that desireth not to haue one lost. Neither
let the euill fellowship of wicked companions misleade you as it hath done me, visite earnestly and oft the Church, warre and striue conti∣nually against the Deuill with a good and stedfast beliefe in God, and Iesus Christ, and vse your vocation in holines. Lastly, to knit vp my troubled oration, this is my friendly request that you would goe to rest, and let nothing trouble you▪ also if you chance to heare any noise  rumbling about the house be not therewith afraid: for there shall no euill happen vnto you: also I pray you arise not out of your beds. at aboue all things I intreat you, if you hereafter find my dead earkasse, conuey it in the earth, for I dye both a good and bad Christian, for that I knowe the deuill will haue my body, and that would I willingly giue him, so that he would leaue my soule in quiet: wherefore I pray you that you would depart to bed, and so I wish you a quiet night, which vnto mee notwithstanding will be horrible and fearefull. This Oration or declaration was made by Doctor Faustus, and that with a hearty and resolute minde, to the end he might not discomfort them: but the Students wondred greatly thereat, that he was so blin∣ded for knauery, coniuration, and such like foolish things, to giue his bo∣dy and soule vnto the deuill, for they loued him intirely, and neuer sus∣pected any such things before he had opened his mind vnto them: wher∣fore one of them said vnto him: Ah friend Faustus, what haue you done to conceale this matter so long from vs? we would by the helpe of good Diuines, and the grace of God haue brought you out of this net, and haue torne you out of the bondage and chaines of Sathan, whereas now we feare it is too late, to the vtter ruine of your body and soule. Doctor Faustus answered, I durst neuer doe it, although I often minded to settle my selfe vnto godly people, to desire counsell and helpe, and once mine olde neighbour counselled me, that I should follow his learning and leaue all my coniurations, yet when I was minded to amend, and to follow that good mans councell, then came the deuill and would haue had me away, as this night he is like to doe, and said, so soone as I turned againe to God he would dispatch me altogether. Thus euen thus, (good gentlemen and deare friends) was I inthralled in that sata∣nicall band, all good desires drowned, all pitty banished, all purpose of amendment vtterly exiled, by the tyrannous threatnings of my deadly enemie. But when the Students heard his words, they gaue him councell to doe nought else but call vpon God, desiring him for the loue of his swéet son Iesus Christs sake to haue mercy vpon him, teaching him this forme of prayer: O God be mercifull vnto me, poore and mi∣serable sinner, and enter not into iudgement with me, for no flesh is
able to stand before thée: although O Lord I must leaue my sinfull bo∣dy vnto the Deuill, being by him deluded: yet thou in mercy maist pre∣serue my soule. This they repeated vnto him, yet it could take no holt, but euen as Caine, he also said his sinnes were greater then God was able to for∣giue▪ for all his thought was an his writing, he ant he had made it too filthy, in writing with his owne blood. The Students and the other that were there, when they had prayed for him, they wept, and so went foorth, but Faustus tarryed in the Hall: and when the Gentlemen were laid in bed, none of them could stéepe, for that they attended to heare if they might be priuy of his end: It hapned betwéene twelue and one a clocke at midnight, there blew a mighty storme of winde against the house, as though it would haue blowne the foundation thereof out of his place. Hereupon the students began to feare, and got out of their beds comforting one another, but they would not stirre out of the chamber: and the Host of the house ranne out of doores thinking the house would fall. The Students lay néere vnto the hall wherein Doctor Faustus lay, and they heard a mighty noise and hissing, as if the hall had beene full of Snakes and Adders: with that the hall doore stowe open wherin doctor Faustus was, that he began to crie for help, saying: murther, murther, but it came foorth with halfe a voice, hollowly: shortly after, they heard him no more. But when it was day, the Students that had taken no rest that night, arose and went into the hall, in the which they left doc∣tor Faustus, where notwithstanding they found not Faustus, but all the hall lay desprinckled with blood, his braines cleauing to the wall, for the deuill had beaten him from one wall against another: In one corner lay his eyes, in an other his téeth, a pittifull and fearefull sight to behold. Then bean the Students to waile and wéep for him, and sought for his body in many places: lastly they came into the yard, where they found his body lying on the horse, dung most monstrously torne, and fearefull to behold, for his head and all his ioynts were dashed in péeces. The fore-named Students and Masters that were at his death, haue obtained so much, that they buryed him in the village where he was so gréeuously tormented. After the which, they returned to Wittenberg, and comming into the house of Faustus, they found the seruant of Fau∣stus very sad, vnto whome they opened all the matter, who tooke it ex∣céeding heauily. There found they also this historie of Doctor Faustus noted and of him written, as is before declared, all saue onely his end, the which was after by the Students thereto annexed: further, what his seruant had noted thereof, was made in another booke. And you haue
heard that he held by him in his life the spirit of faire Helena: the which had by him one Sonne, the which he named Iustus Faustus, euen the same day of his death they vanished away, both mother and sonne. The house before was so darke, that scarfe any body could abide therein. The same night Doctor Faustus appeared vnto his seruant liuely, and shewed vn∣to him many secret thinges, the which he had done and hidden in his life time. Likewise there were certaine which saw Doctor Faustus looke out of the window by night as they passed by the house. And thus ended the whole historie of Doctor Faustus his Coniuration, and other acts that he did in his life: out of the which example euery Christian may learne, but chiefly the stiffe-necked and high minded may thereby learne to feare God, and to be carefull of their vocation, and to be at defiance with all deuillish workes, as God hath most precisely for∣bidden, to the end we should not inuite the deuill as a Guest, nor giue him place as that wicked Faustus hath done: for here we haue a feareful example of his writing, promise, and end, that we may remember him: that we goe not astray, but take God alwayes before our eyes, to call a∣lone vpon him, and to honour him all the dayes of our life, with heart and harty prayer, and with all our strength and soule to glorifie his holy name, defying the deuill and all his workes, to the end we may remaine with Christ in all endlesse ioy: Amen, Amen: that wish I vnto euery Christian heart, and Gods name to be glorified Amen. FINIS.
