1396 99840223 4699
AN EPITOME OF THE HISTORY OF FAIRE ARGENIS AND POLYARCHUS, Extracted out of the Latin, and put in French, by that Great and Famous Writer, M. N. COEFFETEAV Bishop of Marseilles. And translated out of the French into English by a yong GENTLEVVOMAN. DEDICATED To the Lady ANNE WENTVVORTH. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Henry Seile at the Tygers head in Fleetstreet. 1640.
TO THE MOST VERTVOVS MY MOST HONORED LADY, THE LADY ANNE WENTWORTH, Eldest Daughter To the Right Honorable the Earle of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. MADAM, IT is not needfull, I should use many words, to let You know, that this Booke belongs
to Your Ladiship, It suffi∣cing that You know, I am Yours, (since You gave me the liberty, to call my selfe so, when I had the Honour to bee admitted into the House of my Lord Your Father, where my Parents did introduce me, and where I have profited neere You and my Lady Ara∣bella Your Sister, as in a Schoole of Vertue) whence it followes, that Jonely give You that which is Yours, being found in me: and though it should be otherwise, I could not
present it to any one, that deser∣ved it better then Your selfe. The reading of this Epitome, MADAM, which I dedicate unto You, as being Yours, and which I put to light under Your protection, will represent ARGENIS unto You, as the Fairest, most Vertuous, and Constant Princesse of Her time. And I have thought, rea∣ding this History, that I have seene Your true portraiture in the person of this Faire La∣dy. For, making a Parallell of this Princesse with Your
Honour I finde You very suteable; yea I can witnesse with truth, that You surpasse Her: since that besides the Beauty of the Body where∣with Nature hath endowed You; You are also inrich'd with that of the Soule beyond measure; and as touching Ver∣tue whereof You are a Pat∣terne, You excell Her, being Vertue it selfe. You have besides the knowledge of the True GOD, which is the Ground and Basis thereof, and whereof our ARGENIS was
ignorant; and as for Con∣stancy, You have not (I dare say,) Your equall, seeing You are resolved, to be conformable unto the Will of GOD, and of my Lord Your Father. To which may bee added Your Birth (as well as unto our AR∣GENIS) which makes You truely worthy to beare the Pearled Crowne, where∣with my Lord Your Fa∣ther hath beene Honoured, without asking or intercession; but by the Kings onely Will, who gave it Him for His e∣minent
Vertue and good Ser∣vices; being of the number of those of whom the French Pro∣verbe makes mention; saying, TEL DEMANDE ASSEZ, QUI BIEN SERT. And to conclude MADAM, I say, that-even as it hath pleased GOD, to fill our AR∣GENIS with Joy and Content, giving Her, Her POLIAR∣CHUS, as the most Compleat Prince of the Earth, He may send You for Your, and Your most Honourable Parents Comfort, a Hus∣band
worthy of You, And I am confident, Hee will bee farre Compleater then POLI∣ARCHUS. These are the Wishes MADAM, Of your most humble, most affectionate, most obedient, and most obliged servant, Judith Man.
To the Courteous Reader. Gentle Reader, my hu∣mor inclining to Me∣lancholy, induces me sometimes, to seeke in my Closet for some diversion, in the reading of Bookes, suteable to a Gentlewoman of my quality, and of eighteene yeeres of age; That is it wherein I have most per∣ticularly applied my selfe this Christmas, and amongst the rest, in the reading of this Booke, which hath pleased me; not only for the subject whereof it treats, but also, comming from the hands of an Author, whose me∣mory
I honor, though of a contra∣ry Beliefe to mine, because that being in France, in my Parents company, I have heard a great esteeme to be made of him, as of the most learned Prelate of his time. So as I might make my selfe, so much the more perfect, in the French tongue, I resolved to tran∣slate it, for my owne particular satisfaction, having no other de∣signe, then to warme my selfe therewith; as I have done with some others: But I could not make this Worke so secretly, but that those who watch over my actions, and endeavour my diver∣sion, had notice thereof, by whom I have beene in a manner forc'd (least I should trangresse against
the Law of God)▪ to expose it to the publike view; And all the favour which I could obtaine, hath beene to suffer mee to make choice of a second ARGENIS, under whose Protection I sent it. And J intreat thee, Gentle Rea∣der, to oblige me so farre, as not to presume that J doe it, out of vanity; because it is not without example, and could produce thee many of my sexe, who have traced me the way, witnesse the translati∣on into French of Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia, the New Amaran∣tha, and the Vrania, with many others; neither have I done it to be spoken of, knowing very well, that those of, my sexe, who are least spoken of, are the more to
bee esteemed: But onely have I done it by meere obedience and duty, therefore I pray thee to ex∣cuse the faults, if there be any, and remember, that women (for the most part) are unacquainted with the studie of Sciences; and by that meanes, may sooner erre; Also, I esteeme that thou art Courteous enough, to use mee according to the courtesie and custome, due to the Ladies of this Countrie, where I was borne; And of whose Pri∣viledge I make use, giving ARGE∣NIS the precedency, rather then unto POLIARCHVS in the Fron∣tispice of this Booke; And in so doing, I shall not be a little obli∣ged to thee. J. M.
The Stationer to the Reader. GEntlemen, I should not hold my selfe satisfied with my Impression, if I did not tell you, that I hold it for a favour, in the beginning of this yeare, to see my Shop adorned with this little Volume, which comes from the hands of one of the most Ver∣tuous, and Comeliest Gentlewomen of this Countrey, and which belies not her birth, which is truely Noble. And but that shee is full of respect and humility towards ARGENIS,
and the FAIRE LADV, unto whom she hath Dedicated this Worke, they could make the most agreeable concordance, that could be seene; Also viewing them together (though with the eyes of the minde) I imagine I see the Graces, or those three Faire God∣desses, which puzzled so much, that Judge of Beauty. And therefore I desire You Gentlemen, to esteeme it, as this reputation merits, that you may not but applaud her, to the end that hereafter, she may make you partakers of her lucubrations; and in case you finde any faults, attribute them unto the Printer, for they are his, as pro∣ceeding from the Impression. God preserve you.
THE HISTORY OF FAIRE ARGENIS AND POLIARCHUS EPITOMIZ'D. FORTUNE proud and insolent, beyond all ima∣ginationd, emands a sump∣tuous Theater, to cause the might of Her Empire, to appeare. It is in the Court of Great Kings, where She elevates the Trophies of Her tyranny, & where She brandishes Her vanity. It is there that She takes de∣light, to breake a Scepter a sunder, to o∣verthrow a Crowne, and to tread under
foot, all this pride of the earth, to the end She might render Her victories, so much the more glorious by such magni∣ficent ruines, and Her Trophies the more illustrious, by such noble spoiles. But if amongst those Tragick accidents, She doth afford some cause of contentment, She doth temper it with so much bitter∣nesse, that ordinarily, there is more prickles then Roses found in Royalty. This History is a lively portraiture ther∣of, and causes us to see remarkable ex∣amples in it. Meleander King of Sicily, possessing a rich State, and seeing himselfe adored by His subjects, who tasted with an ex∣traordinary delight, the mildnesse of His government, thought to be arrived at the height of His glory. And that He might say he was happy on all sides, He was Father of a Daughter so accom∣plished in all kinds of perfections, that those who saw Her, imagined that Hea∣ven had assembled all the treasures of beauty, and gathered all the riches of comlinesse, to forme this lofty Master∣peece
of nature. He imagined that this yong Sunne, should be the ornament of his Crowne, the prop of his State, the de∣light of his Life, and the consolation of his Old age. But men are ignorant of their destinies, and know not what may be∣fall them. The event then, made Him know, that as the greatest lights are subject unto the greatest shadows, so the greatest prosperities are exposed un∣to the greatest accidents, therefore one must not so much trust unto the favours of Fortune, but that one must dread Her inconstancy. Argenis then was the name of the Heire of Sicily, which ought to be as a living spring of all goodnesse to Her Fa∣ther and Her State, sees Her selfe to be the subject of a furious and bloody warre, raised by a Prince, one of Melean∣der's subjects, who having had the te∣merity, to aske Her in marriage, recei∣ved the refusall which his presumption merited. The image of this contempt, made such a furious impression upon this wilde and ambitious spirit, that to
take revenge, hee resolved to put the Father out of the world, and to steale away the Daughter to crowne his parri∣cide. This execrable designe had come to passe, if the Divinity, which hath a speciall care of Crownes, and which loves Kings, had not miraculously put by, the misfortune whereof the Sicilian Scepter was threatned. All Europe, and Affrick also were filled with the rumor of Arge∣nis's beauty, which was placed amongst the wonders of the world and nature. A thousand yong couragious spirits, taken with Her love, had resolved to serve Her, and to imploy all their indu∣stry and valour, to insinuate themselves in Her favour. Amongst the rest Poliar∣chus Prince of France, and Heire of one of the fairest Crownes in the world, suffe∣ring Himselfe to bee transported with this passion, sought out for this glory with more successe then wisedome. (But ought one to looke for any in love?) Imagining in Himselfe that an extraordinary beauty merited no com∣mon pursuits; Hee left his Kingdome,
and taking a Gentlewomans habit, crossed the sea, and went to Sicily, where He in∣formed Himselfe diligently of the place where the Princesse was, to whom He desired, with so much passion to offer His service. Meleander fearing least de∣spaire should cause Lycogenes to procure some shame unto Her, had placed Her in a strong Hold, where She passed the time with Her maids, being visited of none but Her Father, who sometime going from Syracuse (which was not farre from thence,) came to see Her, and stayed with Her to divert Himselfe in Her company. Poliarchus following His designe, goes that way, and spying the meanes, to enter in this agreeable soli∣tarinesse, takes His journey towards Sy∣racuse, where being arrived He finds by good fortune Solenissa Argenis'ses Governesse within the Temple of Iuno, where She was at Her devotions. He had learn'd in what ranke she was with the Princesse. He cals her aside, and ha∣ving cast Himselfe at her feet, beseeches her to take pitty on the most unfortu∣nate
Lady which the Sunne shined on, on earth, and to give Her the meanes to tell Her some thing, which could not be knowne to any but she, unto whom She brought letters from a great Princesse. The Strangers comely behaviour, the novelty of Her habit, and Her language, which shewed She was not of the Court of Sicily, caused in Selenissa a desire to learne what She would say. Then going out of the throng, She leads Her, to her sisters house, and entred alone in a Closet fit to receive Her most secret thoughts. Then Poliarchus kissing the letters gives them unto Her, and at last leads so happily this enterprize, that He causes himselfe to be taken for a French Princesse, which the rage of Her Vncle had driven into Sicily to looke out for the refuge and surety, which She could not finde in Her Realme amongst Her friends. My name, said he, is Theocrine the Kings daughter, and Sister unto the Heire of the Crowne of France, whom this parricide (who hath procured all my mis-fortunes,) hath caused to be poiso∣ned
that hee might usurpe his Diadem. That which made her to give more faith unto his words, was, that calling a Freed slave who gave Her a Cabinet, which She had committed to his charge, She drew forth the most exquisite rich∣es, and the fairest precious stones, that were ever seene in Europe; then with a magnificence which truely resembled a great Princesse, gave such a great num∣ber unto Selenissa, that at the instant (suffering her selfe to bee dazled with their sparkling and radiation) She bound her selfe with a strong tye of affection unto Poliarchus, which she took for Theocrine. Whereupon Theocrine conjured her to embrace Her affaires, and to procure that favour towards Ar∣genis, that She might receive Her into Her company, where She pretended not to hold the ranke of a Princesse, but would esteeme her selfe happy to hold the quality of a Waiting-woman. Selenissa being touch'd with Her com∣plaints, offers Her all manner of assi∣stance, neverthelesse, said she unto Her,
to give you accesse in the Princesses house, is a thing which is not in my power, by reason of the strict defence, which the King hath made, not to suffer any strangers of either sexe to see Her. But Theocrine, who desired noting more, then to enjoy this glory, conjures her to breake this obstacle, and to mediate this favour towards the King, with whom She doubted not, but shee was powerfull, since He had committed to her trust that which He held most deare in the world, the Princesse his daughter. Being overcome by such charming in∣treaties, shee undertakes to enforme Meleander of this, whom She soone after caused to yeeld, telling Him al the good which shee could invent of this faire Stranger. At her returne, she declares unto Argenis, the occasion of her jour∣ney, & makes Her so favorable a report of the beauty, comlinesse, and magnifi∣cence of Theocrine, that She offers not onely to receive Her as a great Princesse, but also to love Her as Her Sister. Being then inflamed, with a desire to see Her,
She commands that without any further delay, She should be brought in, that She might see if Her presence would equall the glorious praises which were giuen Her. She is then where She desires. At this first enterview, She forgets no∣thing of Her good behaviour, allure∣ments, and attractive lookes, to charme the Princesses heart, who begins to bee but one Soule with Hers. She can so artificially accommodate Her humour unto that of Argenis, that in a short time She doth purchase a full power over Her mind, though not in the same quality which She wished. They then, passed away the time so sweetly toge¦ther, that they thought they were in Heavens glory. But Licogenes, unto whō the remembrance of the injury, which he thought to have received, gave him cruell torments, raised a tempest which troubled the calme of their de∣lights. For, having plotted with his friends, the meanes to revenge him∣selfe, the resolution of this infamous counsell was, that the Fort ought to be
surprised, to make away the King, and take perforce from thence the Heire of the Kingdome, and so put himselfe in quiet possession of the Crowne; that, to differre any longer, it would be the way to ruinate their affaires, considering the accidents which might happen. There∣fore that hee should shew himselfe a man, and that hee should finde in them the succour and assistance, which hee could hope for, of those who had a whole interest in his trouble. There needed not, to make use of stronger reasons, to perswade a spirit already imbrued with this crime. It was long, since Licogenes saw with griefe the Scepter of Sicily in the hands of Meleander. But to bring this furious counsell to passe, hee thought it fit to corrupt certaine Souldiers, who should know the entrances of this Fortresse. He finds out one, who being conquered by his promises, offers to fulfill his de∣sire, so that hee procure him confede∣rates whose courages may bee like his, and declares unto him, that hee knew
the meanes to enter, by the Sea side where there was no guard. Licogenes glad to have found such a fit instru∣ment for his perfidiousnesse, gives him consorts as desperate as he, and as re∣solute to commit a parricide. Upon a night then, that Meleander was arrived there, to disburden (according to His wonted use) some part of his sorrowes in His daughters bosome; these traitors knew how to follow their enterprise so well, that they entred into the Fort, and having separated themselves in two bands, went the one to the Kings lodg∣ings, and the other to the Princesses. Argenis thought on nothing else, but sweetly to passe away the time▪ amongst Her Ladies, and caused Selenissa and Theocrine (whose beds were in her chamber) to entertayne Her with a thousand pleasant discourses: Meleander whose age tooke away the sweetnesse of this entertainment, had retired him∣selfe to take rest. Argenis understan∣ding a noise, which She was not us'd to heare, holds up Her eyes, and seeing so
many armed men to enter thronging in one after another, is frighted, and be∣gins to cry out with feare. Her other Ladies surprized with the like astonish∣ment, shew no more assurance, and for all their defence, have recourse to their teares. But the gentle Theocrine perceiving one, (who had advanced himselfe first) to lay hands on the Prin∣cesse, lets the reines loose to Her rage, and with an extraordinary courage, layes hold on that traytors sword, wreathes it from him, and presently employes it, against him from whom She had taken it, and layes him dead in the place. Then taking up his buckler, She runnes upon the rest of these rascals, whereof She cuts some part in pieces, and causes the rest to looke out for the doore. Another band of the conju∣rors, had rush'd in Meleander's chamber, whom having found asleepe in His bed, there needed no great strength to seaze on Him. Theocrine, who had none left to fight with, hearing the noise, which those
wicked rogues made about the King, went that way, and entring in the cham∣ber, perceived a spectacle which would have drawne teares from a Tyger. Those infamous Hang-men had bound this great King with cords, and loaded Him with chaines, who amongst so much insolence and brutality, perceiv'd before His eyes nought else, but the images of despaire and horrour. The sorrow to see the Father of Her Argenis so unworthily abused, swells Her cou∣rage in such sort, that without any feare of danger where She was going to pre∣cipitate Her selfe, She enters upon these desperate fellowes, and having made a cruell slaughter, amongst them, addres∣ses Her selfe unto Meleander, and taking away the cords and chaines, said these few words unto Him. SIR, Those who have committed this outrage against you, have not kept the respect due unto Scepters, and your vertue. But the Gods have given me the grace to put you againe in case, to make an exemplary punishment, of the au∣thors of this barbarous attempt. Arme
your selfe, I am going to take order about the rest of your affaires; for it is to be feared, least those who have had the au∣dacity, to plot so infamous a treason should make a last attempt, to asswage their rage, which will not be thus ended. At the in∣stant Theocrine gives a generall allarum, and gives notice to the Guard, of their fault, and of the danger wherein the King had lately beene. And as She saw Meleander's safety to be made sure, She came unto her Argenis, and kneeling on the ground, us'd this language. Faire Princesse, it is bootlesse now to dissemble, any longer; the miracles of your beauty, have given strength to my arme, to take revenge for the cruell injury, which hath beene done to the Sicilian Scepter. I am not a Lady, as hitherto you have believed. I also esteeme, that, what you have seene mee performe, hath already dis-abused you. At least, it is im∣possible, that henceforth, Meleander should take me to be, what hee thought I was. For feare then, least I should ruinate my designes, instead of advancing of them, I take my leave of you: But before I goe from the pre∣sence
of your faire eyes, I most humbly desire you, by all the graces, whereof Heaven hath so richly endowed you, to pardon mee this offence, which is an effect of the power of Love, unto which the Gods themselves can∣not resist. You have prostrate at your feet, the Heire of the Crowne of France, who begs pardon of you. My name is Poliar∣chus, and not Theocrine. I have borrowed this, that I might enter where Poliarchus could not have had accesse: I part from you with the same sorrow, that I should part with my life: but I hope that by my services I shall open the way to more liberty. Pro∣nounce my sentence, and I will take it from you, even as the conquered, receives it from the Conquerour. Argenis being, as it were, thunder∣struck, by the freedome of these words, finds Herselfe surprised, and at the same instant, hath an inward combat by two severall passions, of Love and Feare, which held Her soule in agitation, in such sort that being astonied at Theo∣crines language, She knowes not what answere to make Him. Feare, that this
action should make a spot, in Her Glory, causes Her at first, to breath forth some sparkles of Choler. She complaines of this audacity, and shewes She doth not approve those fictions, whereby She might receive more blame, then the Author could expect contentment. Ne∣verthelesse, at last Love, that (so many present victories went fortifying) bani∣shes all those Feares, and causes Her to finde Theocrines excuses good, to whom at that time She doth in few words dis∣close Her thoughts, and testifies unto Him, that those proceedings are not dis∣pleasing to Her, but enjoynes Him to publish His sexe, and to make him∣selfe knowne, to be the valiant Poliar∣chus. This generous Prince, who onely sought triumphs to insinuate Himselfe by His valour, into Argenis's favour, re∣assumes the name of Poliarchus, and at the same time, kissing His Mistresses faire hands, goes out of the Fortresse and steales away from Meleander, and His Guard, busied in the seeking out of the
factious, whereof they made a horrible slaughter. In the meane time the King is troubled to finde out the Author of His liberty, and as His Daughter tels Him that He is obliged of His life, unto Theo∣crine, He desires to see Her, that He might give Her the praises, and recom∣pence due to so eminent, and prodigi∣ous a vertue. But being inform'd that She is vanish'd, as a lightning, and that She is not to bee found, He presently imagines, that doubtlesse, She was no mortall creature, but the Goddesse Pallas, who foreseeing his misfortune, had ta∣ken the forme of this Lady, to put by the ruines of Sicily, which was in Her keeping. Thereupon, even as supersti∣tion is fertile in new devotions, He re∣volves with himselfe, with what new tribute of piety, He may repay, this re∣markable good deed, which seemed to be beyond all manner of retribution: and wandring in His thoughts, He cau∣sed the Chiefest of His Counsell to be as∣sembled, unto whom speaking of this adventure, He testified to owe His life
and safety, to a particular assistance of the Divinity, rather then to any mans succour, letting them know thereby, that He had a designe to erect new ho∣nours and worship, unto the Goddesse unto whom He imagined to be indeb∣ted, for His miraculous preservation. Such a Religious design having beene greatly applauded and approved by the common voices of all the Counsell; Meleander whose soule was already full of these religious thoughts, and who feared, that shewing Himselfe ungrate∣full towards the Gods, He should oblige them, to draw backe their blessings from His Crowne, was easily led away with this advice, and calling His Daugh∣ter, opens His deliberation unto Her, and perswades Her, so artificially, that She freely accepted, the quality of Mi∣nervas High Priest, in acknowledge∣ment of the favour which She had shewed, to Her Father and State. There She is then wholly tyed, to the Goddesses service, by vertue of Her new Office, now She thinks on nothing else then the or∣dering
of the sacrifices, and ruling of the holy ceremonies. In the meane time Lycogenes, who knowes his crime to be unpardonable, assembles his friends, represents unto them, that their safety consists in ho∣ping none, and that they must come to an open force, since craft and artifici∣all cunning have not succeeded. And whereas the horror of this offence, should have caused the armes to have fallen from his hands, hee prepares to give battayle unto his King. His felony gives meanes unto the French Prince, to cause His great courage to appeare, as∣well under the name of Poliarchus, as it had done, under that of Theocrine. He had gone and presented Him elfe unto Meleander as being newly arrived in His Court, not making Himselfe knowne to be Him, who had newly saved His Life and State. He had beene received there as a stranger, and in few dayes, had left both to the King, and all the Court, a great opinion of His valour. During that time, He found the meanes often∣times,
to see, His Argenis, amongst the sacrifices, which were rendred unto Minerva, for Theocrines victory. Neither His, nor Argenis's devotion, was not so much fixt, on the contemplation of the ceremonies nor on the admiration of all the pompe, as to enterchange amo∣rous lookes, wherein lay all their feli∣city. The envious army, which was alrea∣dy in the field, troubled all this solem∣nity, and oblig'd the King to take up Armes, to oppose the fury of the rebels. He had a singular confidence in Poliar∣chus His valour, which belyed not this hope, nor the good opinion which the world had conceived of the greatnesse of His courage. The two Armies being in sight, He began the fight, and as a mighty war-like thunder, unto which nothing can resist, did so much by the wonders of His sword, that Meleander won a glorious victory, and put the re∣bels out of hopes, to attempt any more, the hazzard of Combats. Dispaire made them seeke after peace; they have per∣mission,
to send their Deputies in Court, to make the overture of some treaty. Poliarchus, who could not live in rest, at the first newes of this peace, which He did not approve, not believing, that the King ought to trust to Traytors; re∣solved to goe elsewhere, to finde out new occasions of Glory. Having then left the Court, and traversing a great forest, having no other thoughts then on His Argenis, which filled all His spi∣rits; Hee meets those whom Licogenes sent unto Meleander, rather ecquipped like Cavaleers, or to speake the truth like Robbers, then Ambassadours. They immediately knew Him for the Author of their misfortune, and enraged, with fury, resolve to revenge on Him the affront, which His valour caused them to receive. At the same time, they set on Him, and make it appeare, that they would bereave Him of His life. But He, who could feare nothing, not being astonied, at their threates, makes them feele the effects of His courage, over∣throwes two, dead upon the place,
scatters the others, and puts them to flight. Those that could escape, goe and fill the Court with their complaints, and aggravate this outrage, done unto Am∣bassadors, whose persons are held for sa∣cred, yea amongst the Barbarous. They demand Justice which cannot be denied them, because the Court hath no know∣ledge of their crime, nor of the inno∣cence, of Him, whom they accused. It is true, that Meleander could not ima∣gine, that so notorious a villany, could have entred, in so noble a courage, and besides all that, that which came from Licogenes'es party was to bee suspected, also the Souldiers whol∣ly affected to Poliarchus, who in their sight, had done so many wonders in the Field, did openly jeere at this ac∣cusation, which, in what kind soever, it could be interpreted; could not, but turne, to the shame of those, who made it, since they accused, one man alone, to have beaten five, well armed, and in case to defend themselves. But, the conjurors faction, was so puissant, in
Court; that, at last, it obtained that Poli∣archus, should be condemned, and to be destined, to serve for a sacrifice, unto the Kings enemyes fury, who in defen∣ding of Him, might have caused a sus∣pition, amongst those diffident spirits, that He had done nothing, but by His authority. Order is then given every where to take Him, and also, the Com∣mons are armed, to the end, that all meanes of escaping, might bee taken away. In the meane time, it hapned during the fight, that, Archombrotus Prince of Mauritania, who was also searching out adventures, under a disguised habit, was by chance, neere the place, where the combat was given. He was newly landed, (having beene beaten with sun∣dry tempests at sea) neere unto that great and thicke Forest, where He was gone, thinking to take some rest under the shade of some trees, being wearied of the sea. But the vertuons Timoclea, who had seen the furious outrage, done to the Prince of France, came unto Him
weeping and waking Him, conjured Him, that if He would doe an action, worthy the generosity which appeared in His visage, that without any further delay, He should goe and succour the most valiant man in the world, that Robbers endeavoured to murther. Ope∣ning His eyes, He searches for His Ar∣mour confusedly, and preparing Him∣selfe, at all adventures, endeavours to put Himselfe in case to fight. Timoclea fearing, least the number, might op∣presse valour, urges Him to advance, and represents unto Him the necessity, and danger, wherein Poliarchus finds Himselfe. He who was enflamed with desire, to have His courage to appeare, in so faire an occasion, without further delay, spurres His Horse towards the place of the combat. But He sees, with some kind of sorrow, that He arrives too late, and that He, whom He is desirous to succour, hath needed no other assi∣stance, then that, of His sword. Ravish'd with this wonder, He doth accost Him, and having courteously saluted Him,
informes Himselfe of the particulars of this encounter, offers to assist Him, in case there remaines any enemy, to fight with, and conjures Him, to honour Him so much, as to imploy Him in this quar∣rell. Poliarchus resting extreamely sa∣tisfied of the Prince of Mauritania's good behaviour, and courtesy, thanks Him for this freedome, and assures Him of the esteeme Hee makes of His courage, not refusing to make use of it, in case, His affaires oblige Him thereunto. But, Gentle Cavaleere, said He, I know neither those, who have so cowardly assaulted me, nor the reason of the furious hatred, which they beare me. Timoclea arriving thereupon with some of Poliarchus His servants, breakes off the two Princes discourse, and taking the word conjures them, to goe out of this Forest, and fol∣low her, to a house which shee hath, neere unto that place, where they might learne the true causes of this encoun∣ter. They went then altogether with Timoclea, where they are hardly arrived, when the Shepheards of the Country,
come to give them notice, that all the champion, is full of kindled fires, every where, and that doubtlesse, there is some accident fallen out at Court; seeing that was never done, but upon great and important occasions. And that He might take no rest, news were brought, that Poliarchus was the subject of all this emotion, to which they adde that upon the Ambassadours complaint, He hath beene condemned in Court. Poli∣archus seeing that 'tis He, whom this tempest threatens, breathes forth all manner of outrages against Meleander, doth reproach His services, complaines of His ungratitude, accuses also the in∣nocent Starres, as if they were the cause of His mis-fortune. Timoclea fearing least He (unto whom all Sicily owed their safety) should fall in the hands of those Traitors, that they should advance His ruine, by their artificiall deceits opens Him the way, how to shade Himselfe, against this tempest, shewes Him at the going out of a closet, of Her house, a long Vault, which went under ground,
whereof the avenewes, were knowne to few, and conjures Him to make use of this opportunity, not onely to steale away, from the eyes of those, who sought Him, but also to goe out of Sicily under the favour of a borrowed visage, wherewith she could so artificially dis∣guise Him, that His most intimate friends, would hardly take Him to bee Poliarchus. At last, He is overcome with her perswasions, makes use of the opportunity, which she presents unto Him, and though unwilling, confines Himselfe within this Vault, (untill he can give some order for His retreate) where Timoclea, and the Prince of Mauritania, would needs conduct Him, daring not to trust those of the houshold, whose faith they suspected; having left Him in this cave, and being come backe to the house, Timoclea began to entertaine her guesse, with the best and most civill dis∣courses which she could invent. In the meane time Timoclea and Archombrotus, thinking to assure Poliarchus His life, did almost ruinate His affaires. To take
away all suspition, they bethought thē∣selves, to cause a rumor of His death, to be spread abroad, and that none might doubt of it, caused His servants to be seene, weeping the losse of their Ma∣ster, & they also shewed sad testimonies of their sorrow. This rumor did fly as farre as Argenis's eares, who would not survive Him, having as She thought, lost Him, who made Her take all the delight She had in the world. Selenissa brake this designe, by her wisedome, shewing unto Her that She ought not so slightly to give faith to a rumor, who had no assured Authour. That asswaged some∣thing Her griefe, but did not altogether heale the sore. Her thoughts were then tossed, with irk some cares, which altred by little and little the beauty of Her face. Also Meleander being come to en∣tertaine Her, with His affaires, though She had resolved, to oppose Her con∣stancy, to Her mis-fortunes, and to sup∣presse Her sorrowes, for feare, that Her Love should be knowne, neverthelesse when He began the discourse, of Poliar∣chus
His accident, and to tell Her how He had bin constrained, to abandon Him, to His enemies rage, She could be no lon∣ger mistris of Her senses, but fell downe in a trance, at the recitall of this adven∣ture. Selenissa smothered this accident, in the best wise she could, and assured the King, that She had had sundry such fits lately, but that she believed, there was nothing to be feared, and that they were but little faintings, caused with the displeasure, which She had suffered during Licogenes his warre; Her Father left Her, amongst Her Women, who, with the severall remedies they gave Her, made Her come to Her selfe againe. But She received a full cure, by the newes which were brought unto Her, few daies after of Her Poliarchus, by an intimate friend of His, named Arsidas. This trusty confident had learn'd by Gelanore, a domesticke servant unto Po∣liarchus, the truth of His History, there∣upon he came to finde Him out in Timo∣cleas house, where having had confe∣rence (of all His affaires) with Him, Po∣liarchus
conjured him, to see His Faire Argenis, in His name, and to know of Her, as of His Oracle, what He should doe, in this extremity; He knew to what end the rumor of His death had beene spread; He had also had notice, with what violence the Commons (to shew themselves passionate for the Kings ser∣vice,) pursued Poliarchus, seeing, that being perswaded, He was in Timocleas house, had runne thither, and without any respect, had violently entred in 't, to take and make Him prisoner. In which, having had no successe, because Poliarchus was in a place of safety. They neverthelesse, discharged their choller, upon His Fellow the Prince of Mauritania, who was, at last, constrained, to suffer Himselfe to be led captive, unto Melean∣der, as if it had beene He whom they sought after. Arsidas then, who had seene all these violences, came to give Argenis notice of the state of Her Poliar∣chus His affaires. At these pleasing news She was as much troubled to keepe backe Her soule, and to hinder it, from
leaving the body, as She had beene, in the excesse of Her griefe. But Joy setled Her minde againe; insomuch that the rayes of this Sunne of the Court, began to appeare againe. During which time, newes were brought unto Her, that Po∣liarchus was led as a prisoner unto the Court: But the intelligence, which She had received, by Arsidas of Archombrotus accident, hindred this ill rumor, from making an impression, upon Her spirit. So that this cloud was soone over. As the Commons, which had taken him, were arrived at Court, one of the Cap∣taines of the Guard, seeing so faire a pri∣soner, in the hands of rusticall men, ask'd of him who conducted Him, what that Cavalleere had done, whom they us'd so rigorously. This Head of the common people, having replyed, that it was Poliarchus, whom the King had commanded, should be taken, that He might be punish'd, according to ju∣stice; He began to smile, and said unto this people, that to speake the truth, they had shewed their fidelity, for the
Kings service, but that they had not sped, in this occasion, seeing their priso∣ner, was not Poliarchus which was sought for. Neverthelesse, He was led before Meleander, who, after He had praised His subjects zeale, address'd Himselfe unto Arcombrotus, and made Him a thousand excuses, for this offence hap∣pened not by His command▪ but by the ignorance, of this people, who had mis∣taken themselves, in His person. The Prince of Mauritania, though full of rage, to see Himselfe so unworthily abused, neverthelesse dissembled His choler, & making His complement, with a very comely behaviour, most humbly desired Him to believe, that in what manner soever, He could bee brought before Him, He held it alwaies for a singular glory, that He had the meanes, to offer Him His service. In fine, neverthelesse, shewing Himselfe more sensible of the injury done to His friend, then to Himselfe, He could not hinder Him∣selfe from representing his complaint, and said with a haughty courage unto
Meleander. But, concerning Poliarchus His disgrace, which hath beene the subject of my mis-fortune; Your Majesty, will give me leave to tell Him, that if accusations make crimes, there will bee no innocence, assured in the world, since, that the most just, will by this meanes be exposed, unto the rage of slander, which is perpetually, about Princes eares, to surprise and give them all manner of ill impressions, against those which they would put out of favour. Your Majesty may be pleased to remember Licogenes his brazen face, and the inso∣lency, of all his confederates? Doe not You imagine also, that those who have made such an outrage, against the Crowne, will spare Your best Servants? Those who conspire against Kings, and that will have their Empires, to grow desolate, doe first endea∣vour, to corrupt and seduce those whom they know to bee most passionate for their service, and when they cannot doe it, make use of other crafts, to cause their Masters to suspect their fidelity, to the end that da∣ring not to trust them any more, they should remaine wholly sefull unto them, I have
learn'd of a Lady of this Court (who by chance was in company with that Cavalleer, when I first saw Him,) the great assistance which He hath given You, in the Warre, that those seditions have most unhappily kindled in the middest of Your Kingdome, and the hurt which He hath done to Your enemies. The griefe which they have con∣ceived thereat hath caused them, to seeke out the meanes to make Him away, by open violence, that they might rob You of that powerfull prop, of Your State. But this designe having fayled, by the great valour that was in Him whom these cowards as∣saulted; They now have had recourse unto vayled artificiall deceits. And to circum∣vent Your goodnesse, doe father upon an innocent, the odiousnesse of an action, where there's no crime, but that which proceeds from their perfidiousnesse. Your Majesty who hath purchas'd so much glory, by the true execution of Justice, not onely amongst His subjects, but also amongst strangers, will reserve, if He pleases, an eare for Poli∣archus, to learne by His owne mouth, the particulars of this encounter, which trou∣bles
all Your Court, and may be pleased to remember, that though He were guilty, it would alwaies bee a kinde of injustice, to condemne Him, and not heare His reasons. And if Your Majesty will grant, that I may finde out the truth of this businesse by those meanes, which are used amongst Ca∣valleers, I offer my selfe to enter in com∣bate against the authors of this slaunder. I am sure that having the Gods, (whom they have offended,) for their enemies, and that having a continuall remorse, in their consci∣ences, their armes will fall from their hands, and that their cowardise will bee a visible proofe, of the infamous treason, whereof they have beene the inventors. The King, who was a generous Prince, was not offen∣ded at Archombrotus His freedome, but by the mildnesse of His face and spee∣ches, testified altogether the beliefe He had of Poliarchus His innocence, and the esteeme He made of His friends great courage, who offered Himselfe so freely to fight, in the behalf of His cause. All the Court made acclamations of joy, at this lofty testimony, which the Prince
of Mauritania rendred unto Poliarchus. Argenis who tooke the best part there∣in, thank'd him, with much curtesie, and by this civility, did put Herselfe in dan∣ger to spoile all, seeing that Archombro∣tus who had nothing of the Moore but the name, being kept backe, in Her Fa∣thers service, and having gotten the re∣putation of the most valiant Cavalleere in the world, after Poliarchus, was sur∣prised with vanity, which made Him so farre to forget, all His promises, that He became His friends Rivall, and endea∣voured to rob Him of the Princesse. In the meane time Argenis, sends a dispatch by Arsidas to Poliarchus, conjures Him by Her letters, to believe that all these crosses of fortune, were usefull onely, to encrease Her love, rather then to dimi∣nish it, that Argenis will never be to any, but to Poliarchus, that She passionatly desired She might assure Him thereof, with Her owne mouth but that She feares, least comming to Court He should be knowen; therefore let him take the surest party, and if He thinkes
it fit, He should returne in His Kingdome: But that He should not forget, to cause His greatnesse to appeare, by bringing so faire an army, from His Countrey, that among'st the obstacles, which might oppose themselves to their designe, He should be able to free Her from those cares and troubles, which Their separa∣tion causes, that in the meane time, Shee will indeavor, to change Her Fathers an∣ger and bring Him againe, in His favour. Which She imagines will not be very difficult, considering the esteeme which He makes, of His vertue. Poliarchus ha∣ving read this letter, could not tell what to resolve. The imagination, of the perill and feare to be discovered, caus'd Him to apprehend the journey to Court, where he doubted not, but His e∣nemies, were watching to surprise Him. Arsidas and Timoclea fearing, least▪ He should miscarry, represented Him the danger, yet greater then it was. But the desire He had to see Argenis, made Him despise all the hazzards, which they re∣presented. He then calls aside, His deare
friend, and declares unto Him, that He had rather expose Himselfe to His ene∣mies rage, then to goe out of Sicily, and not see the Princesse. Arsidas seeing the ardour of His passion, in lieu of oppo∣sing, fortifies it, by the assurance which he gives Him, to runne the same hazard. They take leave of Timoclea, unto whō Poliarchus protested, to be so much obli∣ged, that it is out of His power, to ac∣knowledge the innumerable courtesies, which she hath heap'd upon Him; con∣jures her to believe, that at least, she hath a Crowne and a King at her devotion; assures her, that Hee will returne into Sicily, so well accompanied, that the greatnesse of His birth, shall not bee doubted, and that then, He shall have some manner of meanes, to acknow∣ledge the good offices, which His trusty friends have done him; and then addes, that He is going to make use, of the per∣riwigge, and beard (whereof she had made Him a present) to disguise Him∣selfe. Thus with an extreame sorrow He takes His leave of this vertuous Lady,
which did shed, an Ocean of teares at His departure He soone after arrived at Court, with Arsidas His Conduct, where immediately after, He gives no∣tice unto Argenis of His coming, the joy which She received thereat, cannot be exprest; but seeing Him, with a forme, so different, from that of Poliarchus, She did shed some teares, seeing in what danger, He did precipitate Himselfe for Her sake: on the other side, the content∣ment which She received, to see before Her eyes, that which She held most deare in the world, caused Her, pre∣sently to leave off Her teares. It was in the Temple, in the middest of the devoti∣ons and sacrifices, where they saw each other, but it was impossible to continue this practice, full of danger, any longer; Argenis sent Him word by Arsidas that Hee should with expedition saile into France, to raise there, with promptitude, an army able, not onely, to overcome the Kings enemies, but also all Sicily. Arsidas undertooke to fraight a ship, for that voyage, under colour that he had
another to make in Italy. They im∣barque themselves, intending to hold their course towards France, but the fates disposed otherwise of it. In the meane time, the Warre is kind∣led afresh, and the Confederates, having reunited their forces, caused all the State, to rebell against the King, who had but foure Holds remayning, in one of which (being scituat in an Island) He retired Himselfe with Argenis, and the choyce of his trustiest Servants. In this distresse, Fortune brought forth new causes of trouble, unto Poliarchus and the Princesse. The yong King of Sardany and Corse, taken with Argenis's beauty, whereof the glory as well as the pi∣ctures had flowen, throughout all the Universe, makes a puissant Army, takes His course towards Sicily, and arrives with His Navy, neere unto the Towne where Meleander had retired Himselfe. The sight of so many Sayles, frights all the Kings party, as if they had beene new enemies, arrived to dissipate the relickes of His fortune. But the King
of Sardany, sends to Meleander, gives Him assurance of His Army, and declares Him, that taking that interest which He ought, in the common case of Kings, He was come to assist Him, and to helpe Him to chastise His subjects rebellion. This new joy, causes Him to open His Gates, and the King Himselfe prepares to goe, and receive Him, in His owne ship∣ping. But being desirous to take away all suspition unto Meleander, and His; He commands His Navy to remaine in the roade, till they had newes of Him, and with a small traine, goes to meete with Meleander, who with a great free∣dome leapes into His Ship, to honour Him so much the more. After the com∣plements, the King of Sardany, to wit∣nesse, that He had no lesse confidence, then that of Sicily, goes in His Gally, and went in company together towards the Towne, where Meleander receives Him, with as much magnificence, as the state of His affaires would permit. Having courted a while, He hastens the warre, and being enflamed with the love of
Argenis, whom He had found much fai∣rer, then Her picture, wishes for nought else, but Combats, desiring to make Himselfe remarkeable in them, to shew Himselfe worthy of the love of so faire a Princesse. Archombrotus is jealous of this new Rivall, doth protest in His heart, He will never yeeld Him this glory, which He could not suffer that it should be enjoyed by another, which was bet∣ter then He, who was Poliarchus. These yong Cavalleers, edg'd on by their passi∣ons, doe wonders against the enemies. But the Moore, was so happy, that having saved Meleanders life, He, with His owne hand, slew the chiefe of the factious; Neverthelesse, the forces which the King of Sardany had brought, which doubtlesse had opened the way unto the Victory, seemed exceeding conside∣rable unto the King and Court of Sicily. Being all returned in the place where Faire Argenis was, the onely subject of so many heroicall actions, jealousie in∣flames it selfe; the Moore, (though co∣vertly) imployes all his industry, to
chase the Princesses favour, who hath His sollicitations in disdaine, and de∣tests in Her heart, so visible an infidelity, which tends onely, to make a shamefull wound in Her constancy. The King of Sardany asketh Her in marriage openly unto Her Father, who dares not refuse Her, after so powerfull a succour where∣with He hath newly oblig'd Him. Ne∣verthelesse knowing that His Daughter, had no inclination, for that Prince, He makes use of all manner of artificiall delayes, to feede Him with vaine hopes, without breaking with Him, fearing least being moved with His refusall, He should turne His armes against Sicily. But where art thou Poliarchus? Some few months before, He had shipp'd himselfe in that Vessell, which, Arsidas had caused, to be prepar'd, to sayle towards the Gaules: but He was beaten, with such contrary winds, and His Ship was so much persecuted, with tempestuous stormes, that He was con∣strain'd, to abandon it, and put Himselfe, under the mercy of the waves in a little
Cock-boat, which went and split it self, neere unto a rock, where, with much trouble He saved Himselfe, with His trusty Gelanore: But it was not the end of His adventures. Perceaving from the top of this clift, a Brigantine which say∣led upon the sea, He began to call out, and to conjure, those which were with∣in it, that they should take pitty at His misfortune: They were Pyrates, who had no feeling of humanity: Neverthe∣lesse imagining that those who call'd them, had saved some great riches, among'st the relickes of their Ship∣wrack, they came neere the Rock, and tooke them in their Brigantine. Poliar∣chus His port, and the sumptuous cloathes, wherewith He and Gelanore were clad, was like to be their vndo∣ing: The Captaine with his consorts, would have put them to the Chayne. Poliarchus, astonied at this barbarous∣nesse, retires a step backwards, and put∣ting His hand upon His sword, askes Him whence came this change, having newly saved His life? Desires him, not
to blot so great an obligation, by so bloody an outrage. But He speakes to a barbarous man, to whom intreaties en∣venom and swell the courage. Poliarchus who would dispute His liberty, takes hold on a peece of an oare, whereof He makes use in lieu of a buckler, and drawing His sword, shewes that He is not a man, to suffer that affront; Gela∣nore seconds Him: They fight, but the match was so vnequall, that the Prince had infallibly bin lost, if some prisoners (unto whom He had the dexterity to cut their bonds wherewith they were tyed, arming themselves, with the Py∣rates owne armes, which they had slayne) had not succor'd them. At last this assistance made Him victorious, and master of the Brigantine, and fortune of those which were within it. He learn't by the Galli-slaves, and prisoners, that those Pyrates, had newly taken a great prey, in Mauritania, and that they had carried away, all the Queenes Treasure, who had an vncomfortable sorrow thereof. One of them, to whom Poliar∣chus
had saved the life, told Him all the particulars thereof, and also shewed Him, the place where the Boxes were hidden. Poliarchus having caused them all to be opened; was astonied, at the sight of so much riches, together, and then thought it fit, that being so neere unto the Queenes Territories, He was, (in Honor) obliged, to seeke Her out, and to restore unto Her Her Treasure, to free Her from the affliction wherein this losse had plunged Her. But as they were throwing the dead over-boord, He per∣ceaved, that His folkes were searching one, upon the sands, of whom having pulled off one of his buskins; they found a packet of letters very carefully bound up upon his legge. Curiosity, made Him desire to see what it was; He perceaves presently, that the letters were directed unto Him, and having opened them, sees the name of Licoge∣nes, which was he who writ unto Him. The little love they bare one to another made Him admire this novelty: But ha∣ving read them exactly, He was strucke
with an incomparable astonishment, greater then the first, wherein He had found Himselfe. Licogenes having had notice that Ar∣genis had made Poliarchus His peace with Meleander; and that Meleander, to assure Him of His good will, did not onely write unto Him, but also sent Him a rich Bracelet, in token of His affecti∣on; had found the meanes, to cause this present, to be poison'd, by the arti∣ficiall cunning of one of his confidents; and to cause the horror of his crime to fall on Meleander, had sent him who was found amongst the dead in this ship, to the end he might give notice unto Poli∣archus, of the treason, which was inten∣ded towards Him. Poliarchus having seene by Licogenes His letters, the advice which He gave Him, could never imagine that He had so much care of His life, nor that a great King would have procured Him such an infamous death. He puts off the deli∣beration of the businesse; till Hee was arrived in Mauritania, where at the in∣stant
he caused the Brigantine to saile; He sent His Gelanore before, to advertise the Queene of His arrivall, and to as∣sure Her that He brought backe Her Treasure which He had taken from the hands of the Pyrates. These newes re∣joyc'd the Affricans, but the Queene could not imagine that Her Treasure was yet whole; and there was something in it, when it was taken, which troubled Her more then all the rest. She takes what was next to Her, and goes to the Sea∣shore, to welcome Poliarchus. At their meeting, He salutes Her, and declares unto Her that He believes that Heaven had conducted Him by this tempest about this coast, to quench Her teares, since He brought Her backe all Her ri∣ches, which She had so much deplor'd. The Queene impatient to know the truth, leaps aboard, where He followes and shewes Her immediately the Boxes, well lock'd up. She opens them, and found therein all what She sought for, and particularly the Cabinet, which serv'd afterwards to reconciliate Her
Sonne with Poliarchus. Then She cryed out with great joy, and imbracing the Prince, called Him, the God Saviour of Mauritania, thence She led him to Her Palace, and forgot no kinde of magnifi∣cence and good entertainement, to te∣stifie how welcome He was. Amongst all this mirth and gladnesse Poliarchus His soule was all troubled with Licoge∣nes His letters, & though He could not suspect Meleander of this perfidiousnesse, He was not fully satisfied of Him; To pull out all these thorns from His soule, He resolves to send Gelanore into Sicily, and to give him letters to His Argenis, but not unto Meleander, to whom He was contented to send Licogenes His letters, to the end Gelanore might judge by His countenance what He had in His soule, and if one might believe of Him so un∣worthy a wickednesse. It was in a good time that Gelanore arrived in Sicily, be∣cause Arsidas accompanied with Timo∣nides, which was he unto whom Mele∣ander had given the Bracelet to carry, was going to spread abroad the rumour
of Poliarchus His death throughout all the Court. The Pilote of the ship in which He had made shipwracke, having by good fortune saved himselfe, had brought word unto Arsidas of the mis∣fortune which was happened unto Him, and had described unto him the man∣ner of His losse. Arsidas having at the same time met with Timonides, and learn'd of him the subject of his jour∣ney, had stayed it, and had made him partaker of these bad newes. They had then gone together very sad unto the Court, knowing not how to publish this accident, which was enough to cause Argenis's death with sorrow. The first whom they encountred at their landing was Gelanore which came from Affricke from the Prince of France: At the sight of him they thought they had beene in another world, because they had bin assured he had perish't with his Master: it was then as a sunne of good hope which began to shine upon them. But said they unto him; Gelanore, where is Poliarchus? the ill newes which wee
have heard puts us in such trouble, that wee cannot beginne our complement, but with this question. Poliarchus is very well, replied Gelanore; I have left Him in Affrick, and am come to see the Prin∣cesse on His behalfe. You revive us, re∣plied the Princes two friends, without any further delay Argenis must have no∣tice of it, for feare least this ill rumor which wee have heard should have bin spread in the Court, Arsidas vndertakes this commission, and assoone receaves a command to fetch Gelanore. When he comes before the Princesse, he kisses the letters, and presents them unto Her to∣gether with his Masters commendations: She tooke a singular content at the read∣ing of the letters: But when She, had opened Licogenes His letter, She was seized with horror, and resolv'd that Her Father should see them, as also Gela∣nore had order to present them unto Him. Meleander having seene them con∣ceav'd an extraordinary spite, not only against Licogenes, but also against Poliar∣chus, that without writing, had sent unto
Him, such infamous letters, of a traitor; and testified not unto Him the little faith which He gave to them. Insomuch that as Gelanore who had all the Prin∣cesses dispatches, went to take leave of Him, and ask't Him if he would not do the honor unto His Master to write to Him. Go your wayes, said he, and tell your Master, that I am a King, and not a Poiso∣ner: Neverthelesse that caused two of Licogenes's friends, who had lately bin arrested, to be tortur'd, as having plot∣ted something against the Kings honor, and against the quiet of His State, Gela∣nore went backe, towards Mauritania, where he found Poliarchus yet sicke of His fever. Having delivered Him the Princesses letters; he told Him all the particulars of the Court of Sicily, and a∣mongst other things, complained, of Ar∣chombrotus His great pride▪ who would not daigne to looke upon him, insinua∣ting thereby, openly enough, that he beleeved he aspir'd to marry the Prin∣cesse; there needed no more to put Poliar∣chus in the field. Then, notwithstanding
Gelanore's remonstrances who charg'd Him on the behalfe of Argenis, to go in His Kingdome and bring succours, to put Sicily in liberty, He resolv'd to returne, disguis'd as before, in Meleanders Court; And to that end, seekes out the cure of His ague, in a strange remedy, having better succeeded therein, then the Phy∣sitians had judged; he went presently to take His leave of the Queene, who would by all meanes stay him: but He alleag'd Her so many reasons, that She was forc't to let Him go, for feare She should be a hindrance in the effecting of the great affaires which (as He said) He had in hand. She would have given Him magnificent presents, but He who would not take any thing, of all Her treasures, but one only ring, which per∣force She caused Him to accept, remai∣ned satisfied with the honor of Her fa∣vour, and having ship't Himselfe, hastned so much the Pilote and Mariners, that in a short time He arriv'd at the Court of Si∣cily. Gelanore had charge to advertise Arsidas, to the end he should beare the
newes unto the Princesse; he did it with such dexterity, that there is Poliarchus amongst the King of Sardany's and Ar∣chombrotus His practises, neere unto His Argenis, under favour of His borrowed face. The joy which They received at the sight of each other, is beyond ex∣pression: The conclusion of Their en∣terview was, that at this present He should breake all obstacles, and should goe directly in His Kingdome, to leavie a puissant Army, that He might free Her out of the hands of so many Suters, who were so importunate unto Her. He then leaves Sicily, and happily arrives in His Realme, where He raises a Royall Army, which He presently ships, for the effe∣cting of this great voyage, and to shew unto the eyes of Sicily, as a sparkling of the glory of His birth. But it happened, that being at Sea, the Navy was bea∣ten with a furious storme, that inten∣ding to hold their course towards Si∣cily, He was cast upon the Coast of Mau∣ritania, where He found wherewith to cause His valour to appeare, and to give that successe to His affaires, which He
did not imagine, should be there. Never∣thelesse His absence, a hundred times blam'd by Argenis, which could not tell what Starre to accuse, of this mis-for∣tune, was the cause that the Moore and the King of Sardany continued their pur∣suits; The Sardiot imagining He was abus'd, resolved to steale away Argenis, and to ship Her in His owne Navy, and so returne with so rich a Prey into His Kingdomes. The Moore, who had an eye on all sides, discovers this designe, advertises the King, and gives Him such true tokens thereof, that Meleander gives notice unto Radiroboranes that He igno∣red not His practices, which gave Him cause to breake wholly with Him. To be reveng'd on Meleander, He writ Him a letter, full of contempt and outrages against Argenis, whose Governesse He had suborned, which had discovered unto Him, Poliarchus His secrets and Their loves, Meleander afflicted beyond measure of this affront, is angry with Argenis, which justifies Her innocence, by she her selfe who had betrayed Her. This
miserable wretch seeing her selfe dis∣covered did seeke (by the meanes of poison) the expiation of her crime, and procur'd her owne death, before the eyes of the Court. Meleander to shun a greater mis-fortune, and to fortifie Himselfe with friends, went to His Daugh∣ter, & speakes to Her to marry the Prince of Mauritania, of whose merit and valour He spake advantagiously to enduce Her to consent. She demands some time to resolve Her selfe, and represents unto Him, that it would bee a shame for a Kings Daughter, to give Her faith so slightly unto a man who had not so much as demanded it, with the solem∣nities accustomed in like occurrences. Her Father grants Her two months time, and Fortune lengthned this terme: The King of Sardany full of rage and de∣spight, for so bloody an affront, puts under sayle, leaves Sicily, and having a favourable wind, within a short time, arrives in His Kingdome. His soule being wounded, causes Him to undertake re∣venge (of the injury which He had re∣ceived
in the Court of Sicily) upon Mau∣ritania; He imagined that He could easily conquer that Great Kingdome, where there was but a Queene, which held the reines of the Empire; but the storme, which was like to cast away Po∣liarchus, saved the Moores and their Crowne. The tempest having cast Him upon that coast, He offers His Army, unto their Queene, who knew the obli∣gation which She had unto Him in the former voyage: She accepted those ad∣vantageous offers, and recommended unto Him, the safety of Her State. After many encounters, sometimes the victory was seene to leane on the Sardinians side, and sometimes on the Affricans, assisted with the Gaulois. At last they came to a set battell, which having been bloody amongst the souldiers, was no lesse cruell betwixt the Generals. These two generous Princes edg'd on, by a secret hatred which they bare one to another, sorted themselves during the horror of the fight, and filled with a furious animosity, caused their soul∣diers
to retire, that they might end the Combat, and end their differences by the death of the one or the other; After a great conflict they were separated twice: But both aspiring to the victory, and being impatient at this succour, out of rage and despite threatned their souldiers to fall on them, if they had the audacity to hinder them any more. They beginne their conflict the third time, but they appeared so wearied and weakned by reason of the losse of their blood, that it was thought the Conque∣rour should have no great cause to glo∣rifie himselfe of his victory, at the end of the Combat. In the end neverthe∣lesse Poliarchus who had some advan∣tage upon the Sardiot, for the last blow, finding out a place through the defect of His Armour, thrusts His sword through His throat, and sacrifices Him to the Princesse of Sicily's wrath; Radiro∣branes whose soule was already upon His lips thrust Himselfe on Poliarchus, and fell downe upon Him: but being be∣reaved of life, Poliarchus disingag'd
Himselfe by little and little, from under this body, and appeared victorious in the Head of His Troopes: The Moores know not what Trophies to erect, to the French Princes vertue; their Queene avouches, that Her Sonne and She owe unto His courage, all the remainder of the good fortune which they have in the world. Going to visit Him; when He was sicke, of the wounds which He had received in the Combat, after many praises said to the Conquerours glory, She speaks unto Him of the happy pur∣chase, which Her Sonne had made in Sicily, and in few words gives Him to understand that Meleander, holding Himselfe extreamely obliged unto His valour, had offered Him His Daughter in marriage. At this word all Poliar∣chus His wounds did bleed afresh, and seemes by the palenesse of His face, that His soule is going to abandon His body, as being weary to dwell in it: But this is not all, here's a mightier wave, which comes to encounter Him, to banish out all patience from His soule. The Queene
had conjurd Her Sonne by Her letters, that He should make a journey into His Kingdome, before He married the Prin∣cesse of Sicily, and to induce Him to make this voyage, had represented unto Him the mis-fortunes whereof His State was threatned by the K. of Sardany's Army. There He is come, and led to Poliarchus His chamber, whō He had cruelly offen∣ded: Poliarchus feared not this encounter at all, because the Moore bore another name in Sicily, then in His Kingdome, but knowing His Rival, remēbers what the Queene had told Him, touching Her Sons marriage with Argenis. Griefe so over-mastered His senses, that at this sight, all full of rage, he turn'd His head on the other side, shews tokens of His spight, and receaves no better countenance of the Moore; who resolves to avenge Him∣selfe of the obstacle, which He gives to His Nuptials, imagining, that the delay, wch Argenis had ask't, was for His sake: They come to words which testifie the great adversion which they have against each other. The Queene much astonied,
brings forth Her Son out of the sick mans chamber, chides Him for His incivility, represents unto Him the obligation wch He hath to the French Prince, and by way of reproach, gives Him to understand, that He shall be for ever blamed, to have so unworthily used an outlandish Prince, unto whō His Crown is so strictly oblig'd. In the meane time examining exactly the cause of so cruell a hatred, who had made Poliarchus, to resolve to take Sea, thus sicke and ill as He was, She finds out, that it was Iealousie, which they had each of the other concerning Arge∣nis, which had stirred up this storme: That comforts Her, beleeving She had found the meanes to agree them with∣out much trouble. She speakes to both the Princes; Imperiously, to Her Sonne; Courteously, unto that of France: She conjure Them, to referre the decision of their differences, unto Meleander: And I will cause, (said She unto Poliarchus) that you shall have the Faire Argenis, and that my Son shall not loose Her This pro∣mise, as an Oracle, with two faces, doth
astonish the Princes, but the respect which they bare to the Queene, obliges them to beleeve Her, and to give a true Faith, unto Her words, and stay with patience, what the event will be, where∣of both the one and the other seemed to hope well. Thus, Poliarchus is conju∣red to remaine in the Court of Maurita∣nia to cause His wounds to be healed, and in the meane time the Moore lands His Navy in Sardany full of factions by the death of their King. He conquers it with little trouble; He comes backe Victorious to meet the Queene his Mo∣ther, which at Poliarchus His intreaty, dispatches them both with Her letters, to goe, and decide their difference, before Meleander unto whom they had referred it by Her Counsell. She gives a Cabinet, unto Her sonne, to carry unto Meleander; the pretious stones which were in it, were of an inestimable value, but that was not the secret. Having taken leave of the Queene, the two Ri∣vall Princes, hoise up saile, shewing no signe of anger, against each other: They
arrived much about one time in Melean∣ders Court. Argenis hath notice that Po∣liarchus is so neere unto her: This joy had transported Her, if rage had not cross't it, when She heard, that He had made Her Father Umpire of Her mar∣riage. Is it then, said She, all the esteeme He makes of me, to put Himselfe thus in hazard, to lose Me? And if my Father who hath an inclination for the Moore, gives Me unto Him, doth he thinke, that I will ever con∣sent thereunto? Before that shall happen, steele, or poison shall put Me out of the world: I shall have more courage then He: my death shall blot out all the Trophies that this Moore goes fancying in his minde, and Poliarchus shall know that I can love, more constantly, and truly then He. At least if My sexe takes away the meanes, to dispute against Him, the glory of Armes, nothing shall hinder Me, to take from Him that of Constancy. This list is open to all the coura∣gious spirits, without distinction of sexe, and I shall not be the first Virgin, who hath surpassed men, in fidelity. In the meane time the two Lovers are
favourably receaved at Court, where Poliarchus began to reassume His luster, and as it were, to darken a little the Prince of Mauritanias glory, they go to salute the King, who at first sight, makes them the best welcome which they can desire. Poliarchus was the first which made His complement in few words. But the Moore having presented those letters with the Cabinet whereof His Mother had charged Him to give unto Meleander, saw Himselfe ingaged in a longer discourse. At the opening of the letters, the King changed colour, having read them very exactly, and with an extraordinary attention, He tooke a little Golden Key, which the Queene of Mauritania had in∣closed in them, and opened the Cabinet, where He found things, which did bal∣lance His Spirits in such sort, that among'st the tokens, which He gave of His contentment, the teares were seene to trickle downe His cheekes, in such abundance, that all the company was astonied thereat. At the instant forget∣ting
Himselfe a little in point of ciuility, He left the Prince of France alone, and drew the Moore aside as to entertaine Him more privatly and with more liberty; this negligence was no∣thing to what followed: holding of Him aside, takes Him about the necke, imbraces and kisses Him, and gives Him, the most sensible testimonies which He could wish, of His affection. Not con∣tented with that, He sent in all hast for His Daughter, to whom as She arrived, He said softly, some few words accom∣panied with an action which seemed to be an image of joy, in His heart. The Princesse taking no heed to what was so neere unto Her, advances to salute the Moore with visible signes of Love, Poli∣archus remaines astonied at this spe∣ctacle, and knowes not how to behave Himselfe, but judging by the good enter∣tainment, which Argenis gave unto Archombrotus, that all his hopes were ruinated, and that His rivall was going to triumph, with His pursuits; yielded unto despaire, and in the bitternes of His
thoughts, began to say within His soule; Is this then the fruit of so many paines which I have taken, and so many hazards which I have runn'd, to assure My selfe of the love, of this prodigious inconstancy, She to whom the most violent rigors of a Fa∣ther, with a thousand Martyrdomes ought not to have chang'd, nor altered, suffers Herselfe to be surpris'd by some flatteries, which this Old man rounds Her in the eare: What mountaines of gold? What per∣petuall springs of felicity, have beene pro∣missed Her, thus to change Her affection, and alter Her minde? unfortunate Queene of Mauritania, a scion of the old stock, what characters and inchantments host thou made, upon those letters, to print upon them, that force, and give them that power, to cause so monstruous a change, and to ruinate in so small a time, that which I had built with so long a patience? How am I punished of the folly which I have committed, trust∣ing in the words of a Woman and unto the promisses of a Damzell, whereof the cunning and lightnesse, (qualities unseparable to that sexe) ought to have made me to suspect
them more then the Winds which have brought and driven me on this infamous Shore: But however, If Poliarchus hath beene deceaved, He can take such a cruel vengeance, that neither the Authors, nor confederates of this perfidiousnesse shall have no great cause to build triumphs, nor erect trophies to their vanity. This wretched Old man, who by the artificiall deceits whereof He is full, hath alwayes opposed my content∣ments, and these two insolent Lovers, who sport at the ship-wracke of my fortune, shall be the sacrifices of My fury: But it is not all, I will also dye, to the end my Ghost may pursue and persecute that ungratefull Arge∣nis, unto the Throne of the immortall Gods: Before whom I will reproach Her prodigious infidelity, that a thousand oathes taken in their name, ought to have stayed, if She had had the feeling and beliefe which She should have had of their power and justice; It is apparent, that it was Poliarchus His good Genius, or the Tutelary Angell of Sicily, which busied His Spirit, in these Tra∣gick thoughts, to stay His designe, and to divert Him during as much space as
needed, to give Meleander and Argenis, time to remember themselves, and to come and make their excuses. As He was then, upon the point to goe and exe∣cute so furious a designe, and to put Me∣leander, Argenis, and His Rivall out of the world, and after this bloody execu∣tion, to run His sword through His body, and by that meanes to leave Tra∣gick tokens of His jealousie and despite: Those who seemed, to have too much neglected Him, came to themselves againe, and perceaving their fault, went towards Him to make their excuses, and discover the cause of this joy, which having ravish't them, out of themselves, had made them, to forget all civility: Poliarchus finds the charmes of His fury and frensie in their discourses and rea∣sons: The Moore is acknowledged to be Argenis's Brother; the Queene of Mauri∣tania, had discovered the History by Her letters, and had given such good tokens unto Meleander, that He could not doubt, but that He was His Sonne, and the true Heire of the two Crowns, in∣somuch
that Archombrotus receiving the succession of His Estates, left freely the possession of the Princesse His sister, unto Poliarchus, who would not have chan∣ged it with a thousand Scepters. Meleander, seing that the most part of the assistants, vnderstood nothing in these wonders, and that every one de∣sired, a more particular enlightning, tooke the word, and making a short discourse of the voyage which He had made in Affricke during the heat of His youth, avowed that He had beene ena∣moured of a Beauty, whose favour having purchas't, He had at last mar∣ried Her secretly, and that His affaires, having called Him backe into Sicily, He had left Her with child, of a Sonne, which was Archombrotus, whom, since Hyanisbe, seeing Herselfe without chil∣dren, by the King Her husband, had sup∣posed; fayning to have beene brought a bed of Him, that She had beene in∣duc't thereunto, because Her Sister, (which was She, whom He had loved,) seing Herselfe ready to dye, in childe-bed,
had discovered the Secret, unto Her. Therefore it was not to be doubted but that Archombrotus was Argenis's Brother, to whose marriage for that cause He could not aspire, but left the free possession of her, unto Poliarchus, an Incomparable Prince, and worthy the Alliance of the greatest Princesse of the earth; and accordingly, if ever Sicily had seene Her selfe at the height of good Fortune, it was now where the destinies had brought it unto, by un∣knowne meanes unto men, that there∣fore all the World should give signes of a publike gladnesse, and that every one should runne unto the Temples of their Gods, to give them a thousand thankes, for so many blessings show∣red downe upon His Crowne. At these words the people was seene transpor∣ted with a secret ravishment, by gi∣ving such testimonies of joy, amongst their Feasts, and Sacrifices: Meleander with Archombrotus consent, offers the Kingdome of Sardany, unto Poliarchus for Argenis's Marriage; Poliarchus being
marvellous well contented, makes ou∣verture of an Alliance, for Archombro∣tus with a Sister of His, Daughter of France, which doth accept this glorious party with a thousand thankes, so that the two Crownes of France and Sicily re∣mained united with such strong Bonds, that it seemed, the destinies would make this Alliance, perpetuall. On the other side, Poliarchus sees Himselfe at the height of His desires, see∣ing that He was in possession of Her, whom He loved more dearely, then His owne life. Truely even as the rigours of a long Winter, causes the Spring to be found more pleasing, so all the cros∣ses which He had suffered in this pur∣suit, caused Him to finde the enjoying of it, so much the sweeter. FINIS.
