17476 99847515 12552
THE INSATIATE Countesse. A TRAGEDIE: Acted at VVhite-Fryers. Written By Iohn Marston. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-head-Pallace, neere the Royall-Exchange. 1613.
THE INSATIATE Countesse. The Countesse of Sweuia discouered sitting at a Table couered with blacke, on which stands two blacke Ta∣pers lighted, she in mourning. Enter ROBERTO Count of Cypres, GVIDO Count of Arsena, and Signior MIZALDVS. Mizaldus. WHat should we doe in this Countesses darke hole? She's sullenly retyred, as the Turtle: Euery day has beene a blacke day with her since her husband dyed, and what should wee vnruly members make here? Guid. As melancholy night masques vp heauens face, So doth the Euening-starre present her selfe Vnto the carefull Shepheards gladsome eyes, By which vnto the folde he leades his flocke. Mizald. Zounds what a sheepish beginning is here? 'tis said true, Loue is simple; and it may well hold, and thou art a simple louer. Rober. See how yond Starre like beauty in a cloud, Illumines darknesse, and beguiles the Moone Of all her glory in the firmament.
Mizal. Well said man i'the Moone. Was euer such Astro∣nomers? Marry I feare none of these will fall into the right Ditch. Robert. Madame. Count. Ha Anna, what are my doores vnbarr'd? Miz. Ile assure you the way into your Ladiship is open. Rob. And God defend that any prophane hand Should offer sacriledge to such a Saint. Louely Isabella, by this dutious kisse, That drawes part of my Soule along with it, Had I but thought my rude intrusion Had wak'd the Doue-like spleene harbour'd within you, Life and my first borne should not satisfie Such a transgression, worthy of a checke, But that Immortals wincke at my offence, Makes me presume more boldly: I am come To raise you from this so infernall sadnesse. Isab. My Lord of Cypres, doe not mocke my griefe: Teares are as due a Tribute to the dead, As feare to God, and duty vnto Kings. Loue to the Iust, or hate vnto the Wicked. Rober. Surcease. Beleeue it is a wrong vnto the Gods: They saile against the winde that waile the dead. And since his heart hath wrestled with deaths pangs, From whose sterne Caue none tracts a backward path. Leaue to lament this necessary change, And thanke the Gods, for they can giue as good. Isab. I waile his losse! Sinke him tenne cubites deeper, I may not feare his resurrection: I will be sworne vpon the holy Writ I morne thus feruent cause, he di'd no sooner: Hee buried me aliue, And mued mee vp like Cretan Dedalus, And with wall-ey'd Ielousie kept me from hope Of any waxen wings to flye to pleasure. But now his soule her Argos eyes hath clo'sd,
And I am free as ayre. You of my sexe, In the first flow of youth vse you the sweets Due to your proper beauties, ere the ebbe And long waine of vnwelcome change shall come. Faire women play: she's chaste whom none will haue. Here is a man of a most milde aspect, Temperate, effeminate, and worthy loue, One that with burning ardor hath pursued me: A donatiue he hath of euery God; Apollo gaue him lockes, Ioue his high front, The God of Eloquence his flowing speech, The feminine Deities strowed all their bounties And beautie on his face: that eye was Iuno's, Those lips were his that wonne the golden Ball, That virgin-blush Diana's: here they meete, As in a sacred Synod. My Lords, I must intreate A while your wisht forbearance. Omnes. We obey you Lady. Exit Guido and Mizald. Ma. Rob. Is. My Lord, with you I haue some conference. I pray my Lord, doe you woo euery Lady In this phrase you doe me? Rob. Fairest, till now, Loue was an Infant in my Oratory. Isab. And kisse thus too? Rob. I nee'r was so kist, leaue thus to please, Flames into flames, seas thou pour'st into seas. Isab. Pray frowne my Lord, let me see how many wiues You'll haue. Heigh-ho, you'll bury me I see. Rob. In the Swans downe, and tombe thee in mine armes. Isab. Then folkes shall pray in vaine to send me rest. Away, you're such another medling Lord. Rob. By heauen my loue's as chaste as thou art faire, And both exceede comparison: by this kisse, That crownes me Monarch of another world Superiour to the first, faire, thou shalt see As vnto heauen, my loue so vnto thee. Isab. Alas poore creatures, when we are once o'the falling hand,
A man may easily come ouer vs. It is as hard for vs to hide our loue, As to shut sinne from the Creators eyes. I faith my Lord, I had a Months minde vnto you, As tedious as a full rip'd Maidenhead. And Count of Cypres, thinke my loue as pure, As the first opening of the bloomes in May; Your vertues man; nay, let me not blush to say so: And see for your sake thus I leaue to sorrow. Beginne this subtile coniuration with mee, And as this Taper, due vnto the dead, I here extinguish, so my late dead Lord I put out euer from my memory, That his remembrance may not wrong our loue. Puts out the Taper. As bold-fac'd women when they wed another, Banquet their husbands with their dead loues heads. Rob. And as I sacrifice this to his Ghost, With this expire all corrupt thoughts of youth, That fame-insatiate Diuell Iealousie, And all the sparkes that may bring vnto flame, Hate betwixt man and wife or breed defame. Enter MIZALDVS and MENDOSA. Guid. Marry Amen, I say: Madame, are you that were in for all day, now come to be in for all night? How now Count Arsena? Miz. Faith Signior not vnlike the condemn'd malefactor, That heares his iudgement openly pronounc'd; But I ascribe to Fate, Ioy swell your loue, Cypres, and Willow grace my drooping crest. Rober. We doe entend our Hymeneall rights With the next rising Sunne. Count Cypres, Next to our Bride, the welcomst to our feast. Count. Ars. Saneta Maria, what thinkst thou of this change? A Players passion Ile beleeue hereafter, And in a Tragicke Sceane weepe for olde Priam, When fell reuenging Pirrhus with supposde And artificiall wounds mangles his breast,
And thinke it a more worthy act to me, Then trust a female mourning ore her loue: Naught that is done of woman shall me please, Natures step-children rather her desire. Miz. Learne of a well composed Epigram, A womans loue, and thus 'twas sung vnto vs: The Tapers that stood on her husbands hearse, Isabell' aduances to a second bed: Is it not wondrous strange for to rehearse Shee should so soone forget her husband dead; One houre? for if the husbands life once fade, Both loue and husband in one graue are laid. But we forget our selues, I am for the marriage Of Signior Claridiana, and the fine Mris. Abigall. Count. Ars. I for his arch-foes wedding Signior Rogero, and the spruce Mris. Thais: but see, the solemne rites are en∣ded, and from their seuerall Temples they are come. Mizal. A quarrell on my life. Enter at one doore Signior CLARIDIANA, ABIGAL his wife, the Lady LENTVLVS with Rosemary as from Church. At the other doore Signior ROGERO and THAIS his wife, MEN∣DOSA FOSCARII, Nephew to the Duke, from the Bridall, they see one another, and draw, Count Arsena and others step betweene them. Clarid. Good my Lord detaine me not, I will tilt at him. Rogero. Remember, Sir, this is your wedding day, And that triumph belongs onely to your wife. Rogero. If you be noble let me cut off his head. Clarid. Remember o'the other side, you haue a maiden-head of your owne to cut off. Rog. Ile make my marriage day like to the bloudy bridal Alcides by the fierie Centaurs had. Thais. Husband, deare Husband! Rog. Away with these catterwallers. Come on sir. Clarid. Thou sonne of a Iew. Guid. Alas poore wench, thy husband's circumcis'd.
Clarid. Begot when thy fathers face was toward th'East, To shew that thou would'st proue a Caterpiller: His Messias shall not saue thee from me, Ile send thee to him in collops. Arsen. O fry not in choler so Sir. Roger. Mountebancke with thy Pedanticall action, Rimatrix, Buglors, Rhimocers. Mend. Gentlemen, I coniure you By the vertues of men. Rog. Shall any broken Quacksaluers Bastard oppose him to mee in my Nuptials? No, but Ile shew him better mettall then ere the Gallemawfrey his father vsed. Thou scumme of his melting pots, that wert christned in a Crusoile, vvith Mercuries water, to shew thou would'st proue a stinging As∣pis; for all thou spitst is Aqua fortis, and thy breath is a com∣pound of poysons stillatory: if I get within thee, hadst thou the scaly hyde of a Crocodile, as thou art partly of his na∣ture, I would leaue thee as bare as an Anatomy at the second veiwing. Clarid. Thou Iew, of the Tribe of Gad, that sure, there were none here but thou and I, would'st teach mee the Art of breathing, thou wouldst runne like a Dromidarie. Clar. Thou that art the tal'st man of Christendome; when thou art alone, if thou dost maintaine this to my face, Ile make thee skip like an Ounce. Mend. Nay, good sir, be you still. Roger. Let the Quacksaluers sonne be still: His father was still, and still, and still againe. Clarid. By the Almighty Ile study Negromancy but Ile be reueng'd. Arsen. Gentlemen, leaue these dissentions, Signior Rogero, you are a man of worth. Clarid. True, all the Citie points at him for a Knaue. Arsen. You are of like reputation Signior Claridiana: The hatred twixt your Grandsires first beganne, Impute it to the folly of that age. These your dissentions may erect a faction,
Like to the Capulets and Montagues. Mend. Put it to equall arbitration, choose your friends, The Senators will thinke'em happy in't. Miz. Ile ne'er embrace the smoake of a Furnace, the quintes∣sence of minerall or simples, or as I may say more learnedly, nor the spirit of Quickesiluer. Clarid. Nor I such a Centaure, halfe a man, halfe an Asse, and all a Iew. Arsen. Nay, then wee will be Constables, and force a quiet: Exeunt all the Men. Manet Lent. Thais. Abig. and Mend. Gentlemen, keepe'em asunder, and helpe to perswade'em. Mend. Well Ladyes, your Husbands behaue'em as lustily on their wedding dayes, as ere I heard any. Nay Lady widow, you and I must haue a falling: you're of Signior Mizaldus faction, and I am your vowed enemie, from the bodkin to the pincase. Harke in your eare. Abigall. Well Thais, O you're a cunning caruer: we two that any time these fourteene yeeres haue called sisters, brought and bred vp together: that haue tolde one another all our wanton dreames, talkt all night-long of youngmen, and spent many an idle houre, fasted vpon the stones on S. Agnes night together, practised all the petulant amorousnesses that delights young Maides, yet haue you conceal'd not onely the marriage, but the man: and well you might deceiue mee, for Ile be sworne you neuer dream'd of him, and it stands against all reason you should enioy him you neuer dream'd of. Thais. Is not all this the same in you? Did you euer mani∣fest your Sweet-harts nose, that I might nose him by't? commen∣ded his calfe, or his neather-lip? apparant signes that you were not in loue or wisely couered it. Haue you euer said, such a man goes vpright, or has a better gate then any of the rest, as indeed, since he is proued a Magnifico, I thought thou wouldst haue put it into my hands what ere'thad beene. Abig. Well wench, wee haue crosse fates: our Husbands such inueterate foes, and we such entire friends, but the best is we are neighbours, and our backe Arbors may afford visitation freely: prethee let vs maintaine our familiaritie still whatsoeuer thy hus∣band doe vnto thee, as I am afraid he will crosse it i'the nicke.
Thais. Faith, you little one, If I please him in one thing, he shall please mee in all, that's certaine. Who shall I haue to keepe my counsell if I misse thee? who shall teach mee to vse the bridle, when the reynes are in mine owne hand? what to long for? when to take Physicke? where to be melancholy? why, we two are one anothers grounds, without which would be no Musicke. Abig. Well said wench, and the Pricke-song wee vse shall be our husbands. Thais. I will long for Swines-flesh o'the first childe. Abig. Wilt'ou little Iew? And I to kisse thy husband Vpon the least belly-ake. This will mad'em. Thais. I kisse thee wench for that, and with it confirme our friendship. Mend. By these sweet lips Widow. Lady Lent. Good my Lord learne to sweare by roate: Your birth and fortune makes my braine suppose, That like a man heated with wines and lust, Shee that is next your obiect is your mate, Till the foule water haue quencht out the fire. You the Dukes kinsman, tell me, I am young, Faire, rich, and vertuous; I my selfe will flatter My selfe, till you are gone, that are more faire, More rich, more vertuous, and more debonaire: All which are ladders to an higher reach: Who drinkes a puddle that may taste a spring? Who kisse a Subiect that may hugge a King? Mend. Yes, the Cammell alwayes drinkes in puddle water, And as for huggings reade Antiquities. Faith, Madame, Ile bord thee one of these dayes. Lady. I, but ne'er bed mee my Lord: my vow is firme Since God hath called mee to this noble state, Much to my griefe, of vertuous Widow-hood, No man shall euer come within my gates. Mend. Wilt thou ram vp thy porch-hold? O widow, I perceiue You're ignorant of the Louers leger demane. There is a fellow that by Magicke will assist To murther Princes inuisible, I can command his spirit.
Or what say you to a fine scaling Ladder of ropes? I can tell you, I am a mad wag-halter: But by the vertue I see seated in you, And by the worthy fame is blazond of you, By little Cupid, that is mighty nam'd, And can command my looser follies downe, I loue, and must enioy▪ yet with such limits, As one that knowes inforced marriage To be the Furies sister. Thinke of me. Amb. Ha, ha, ha. Mend. How now Lady, does the toy take you, as they say? Abig. No, my Lord, nor doe we take your toy, as they say. This is a childes birth, that must not be deliuered before a man, Though your Lordship might be a Mid-wife for your chinne. Mend. Some bawdy riddle is't not? you long til't be night. Thais. No, my Lord, womens longing comes after their mar∣riage night. Sister, see you be constant now. Abig. Why, dost thinke Ile make my Husband a Cuckold? O here they come. Enter at seuerall doores Count Ars. with CLARIDIANA: GVIDO, with ROGERO, at another doore, MENDOSA meetes them. Mend. Signior Rogero, are you yet qualified? Rogero. Yes: does any man thinke Ile goe like a sheepe to the slaughter? Hands off my Lord, your Lordship may chance come vnder my hands: If you doe, I shall shew my selfe a Citizen, and reuenge basely. Clarid. I thinke if I were receiuing the holy Sacrament His sight would make me gnash my teeth terribly: But there's the beauty without parallel, To Abigall. In whom the Graces and the Vertues meete: In her aspect milde Honour sits and smiles: And who lookes there, were it the sauage Beare, But would deriue new nature from her eyes. But to be reconcil'd simply for him, Were mankinde to be lost againe, Ide let it, And a new heape of stones should stocke the world. In heauen and earth this power beauty hath,
It inflames Temp'rance, and temp'rates Wrath: What ere thou art, mine art thou wise or chaste: I shall set hard vpon thy marriage vow, And write reuenge high in thy Husbands brow, In a strange Character. You may beginne sir. Mend. Signior Claridiana, I hope Signior Rogero Thus employed me about a good office, 'Twere worthy Cicerces tongue, a famous Oration now? But friendship that is mutually embraced of the Gods, And is Ioues Vsher to each sacred Sinod, Without the which hee could not raigne in heauen, That ouer-goes my admiration shall not vnder-goe my censure. These hot flames of rage, that else will be As fire midst your nuptiall Iolitie, Burning the edge off from the present Ioy, And keepe you wake to terror. Clarid. I haue not yet swallowed the Rhimatrix nor the Ono∣centaure, the Rimocheros was monstrous. Arsen. Sir, be you of the more flexible nature, and confesse an error. Clarid. I must, the Gods of loue command, And that bright Starre, her eye, that guides my fate. Signior Rogero, ioy then Signior Rogero. Rog. Signior, sir, O Diuell. Thais. Good Husband shew your selfe a temp'rate man, Your mother was a woman I dare sweare; No Tyger got you, nor no Beare was riuall In your conception: you seeme like the issue The Painters limbe leaping from Enuies mouth, That deuoures all hee meetes. Rog. Had the last, or the least Syllable Of this more then immortall eloquence, Commenc'd to mee when rage had beene so high Within my bloud, that it ore-topt my soule, Like to the Lyon when he heares the sound Of Dian's Bowe-string in some shady wood, I should haue coucht my lowly limbe on earth,
And held my silence a proud sacrifice. Clarid. Slaue, I will fight with thee at any oddes, Or name an instrument fit for destruction, That ne'er was made to make away a man, Ile meete thee on the ridges of the Alpes, Or some inhospitable wildernesse, Starke naked, at push-of-pike, or keene Curt'laxe, At Turkish Sickle, Babilonian Sawe, The auncient Hookes of great Cadwalleder, Or any other heathen inuention. Thais. O God blesse the man. Lent. Counsell him good my Lord. Mend. Our tongues are weary, and he desperate, He does refuse to heare: What shall we doe? Clarid. I am not mad, I can heare, I can see, I can feele, But a wise rage in man, wrongs past compare, Should be well nourisht as his vertues are: Ide haue it knowne vnto each valiant sp'rit. He wrongs no man that to himselfe does right. Catzo I ha'done, Signior Rogero, I ha'done. Arsen. By heauen this voluntary reconsilation made Freely, and of it selfe, argues vnfaign'd And vertuous knot of loue. So sirs embrace. Rog. Sir, by the conscience of a Catholike man, And by our mother Church that bindes And doth attone in amitie with God, The soules of men, that they with men be one, I tread into the center all the thoughts Of ill in mee, toward you, and memory Of what from you might ought disparage mee, Wishing vnfaignedly it may sincke low, And as vntimely births want power to grow. Mend. Christianly said: Signior what would you haue more? Clar. And so I sweare, you're honest Onocentaure. Arsen. Nay see now, fie vpon your turbulent spirit, Did he doo't in this forme? Clar. If you thinke not this sufficient, you shall commaund
mee to be reconcil'd in another forme, as a Rhimatrix or a Ri∣mocheros. Mend. S'blood, what will you doe? Clar. Well, giue mee your hands first, I am friends with you i'faith: thereupon I embrace you, kisse your Wife, and God giue vs ioy. To Thais. Thais. You meane me and my husband. Clar. You take the meaning better then the speech, Lady. Roger. The like wish I, but ne'er can be the like, And therefore wish I thee. Clar. By this bright light that is deriu'd from thee. Thais. So sir, you make me a very light creature. Clar. But that thou art a blessed Angell, sent Downe from the Gods t'attone mortall men, I would haue thought deedes beyond all mens thoughts, And executed more vpon his corps: Oh let him thanke the beautie of this eye, And not his resolute sword or destinie. Arsen. What saist thou Mizaldus, come applaud this Iubile, A day these hundred yeeres before not truely knowne, To these diuided factions. Clar. No nor this day had it beene falsely borne, But that I meane to sound it with his horne. Miz. I lik'd the former iarre better: then they shew'd like men and Souldiers; now like Cowards and Leachers. Arsen. Well said Mizaldus: thou art like the Base Violl in a Consort, let the other Instrument wish and delight in your high∣est sense, thou art still grumbling. Clar. Nay, sweet receiue it, Giues it Abigall. And in it my heart: And when thou read'st a mouing syllable Thinke that my soule was Secretary to't. It is your loue, and not the odious wish Of my reuenge, in stiling him a Cuckold, Makes mee presume thus farre: then reade it faire, My passion's ample as your beauties are. Abig. Well sir, we will not sticke with you.
Arsena. And Gentlemen, since it hath hapt so fortunately, I doe entreat wee may all meete to morrow, In some Heroick Masque, to grace the Nuptials Of the most noble Countesse of Sweuia. Mend. Who does the young Count marry? Arsen. O sir, who but the very heire of all her sexe, That beares the Palme of beautie from'em all: Others compar'd to her, shew like faint Starres To the full Moone of wonder in her face: The Lady Isabella, the late Widow To the deceast and noble Vicount Hermut. Mend. Law you there, widow, there's one of the last edition, Whose Husband yet retaines in his colde truncke Some little ayring of his noble guest, Yet she a fresh Bride as the month of May. Lent. Well my Lord, I am none of these, That haue my second Husband bespoke, My doore shall be a testimonie of it. And but these noble Marriages encite me, My much abstracted presence should haue shew'd it. If you come to me, harke in your eare my Lord, Looke your Ladder of ropes be strong, For I shall tie you to your Tackling. Arsen. Gentlemen, your answere to the Masque. Omnes. Your Honour leades, wee'll follow. Rogero. Signior Claridiana. Clarid. I attend you sir. Exeunt omnes. Manet Clarid. Abigall. You'll be constant. Clar. Aboue the Adamant the Goates bloud shall not breake me, Yet shallow fooles, and plainer morall men, That vnderstand not vvhat they vndertake, Fall in their owne snares, or come short of vengeance, No, let the Sunne view vvith an open face, And afterward shrinke in his blushing cheekes, Asham'd, and cursing of the fixt decree, That makes his light bawd to the crimes of men, When I haue ended what I now deuise.
Appolloes Oracle shall sweare me vvise, Strumpet his wife, branch my false-seeming friend, And make him foster what my hate begot, A bastard, that when age and sicknesse seaze him, Shall be a cor'siue to his griping heart: Ile write to her, for what her modestie Will not permit, nor my adulterate forcing, That blushlesse Herauld shall not feare to tell: Rogero shall know yet that his foe's a man, And what is more, a true Italian. Exit. Finis Actus primi. Actus secundi Scaena prima. Enter ROBERTO, Lord Cardinall, ISABELLA, Lady LENTVLVS, ABIGAL and THAIS. Lights. Roberto. MY graue Lord Cardinall, we congratulate, And zealously doe entertaine your loue: That from your high and diuine contemplation, You haue vouchsafde to consumate a day Due to our Nuptials: O, may this knot you knit, This indiuiduall Gordiant graspe of hands, In sight of God so fairely entermixt, Neuer be seuer'd, as heauen smiles at it, By all the Darts shot by infernall Ioue, Angels of grace Amen, Amen, say to't. Faire Lady Widow, and my worthy Mistresse, Doe you keepe silence for a wager? Thais. Doe you aske a woman that question my Lord, When shee inforcedly pursues what she's forbidden? I thinke if I had beene tyed to silence, I should haue beene worthy the Cucking-stoole ere this time. Rob. You shall not be my Orator (Lady) that pleades thus for your selfe.
Ser. My Lord, the Masquers are at hand. Rob. Giue them kinde entertainment. Some worthy friends of mine, my Lord, vnknowne to mee, too lauish of their loues, Bring their owne welcome in a solemne Masque. Abigall. I am glad there's Noble-men i'the Masque With our Husbands to ouer-rule them, They had sham'd vs all else. Thais. Why? for why, I pray? Ab. Why? marry they had come in with some Citie shew else, Hyred a few Tinsell coates at the Vizard-makers, which would ha'made them looke, for all world, like Bakers in their linnen bases, and mealy vizzards, new come from bolting. I saw a shew once at the Marriage of a Magnificero's daughter, presented by Time: which Time vvas an olde bald thing; a seruant, 'twas the best man; hee was a Dyer, and came in likenesse of the Raine-bow in all manner of colours, to shew his Art, but the Raine-bow smelt of vrine, so wee were all afraid the property was chang'd, and look'd for a shower. Then came in after him, one that (it seem'd) fear'd no colours, a Grocer that had trim'd vp himselfe handsomely: hee vvas Iustice, and shew'd reasons why. And I thinke this Grocer, I meane this Iustice, had borrowed a weather-beaten Ballance from some Iustice of a Conduit, both vvhich Scales were replenisht vvith the choise of his Ware, And the more liberally to shew his nature, He gaue euery woman in the roome her handfull. Thais. O great act of Iustice! vvell, and my Husband come cleanly off with this, hee shall ne'er betray his weakenesse more, but confesse himselfe a Citizen hereafter, and acknowledge their wit, for alas they come short. Enter in the Masque, the Count of Arsena, MENDOSA, CLARIDIANA, Torch-bearers. They deliuer the shields to their seuerall Mistresses, that is to say. MENDOSA, to the Lady LENTVLVS; CLARIDIANA, to ABIGAL; to ISA∣BELLA, GVIDO Count of Arsena; to THAIS, ROGERO. Isab. Good my Lord, be my expositer. To the Cardinall. Card. The Sunne setting, a man pointing at it: The Motto, Senso  Calarem:
Faire Bride, some seruant of yours, that here imitates To haue felt the heate of Loue bred in your brightnesse, But setting thus from him, by marriage, He onely here acknowledgeth your power, And must expect beames of a morrow Sunne. Lent. Lord Bridegroome, will you enterprete me? Rober. A sable Shield: the word, Vidua spes. What the forlorne hope, in blacke, despairing? Lady Lentulus, is this the badge of all your Sutors? Lent. I by my troth my Lord, if they come to me. Rob. I could giue it another interpretation. Me thinkes this Louer has learn'd, of women, to deale by contraries: if so, then here he sayes, the Widow is his onely hope. Lent. No: good my Lord, let the first stand. Rober. Inquire of him, and heele resolue the doubt. Abig. What's here? a Ship sailing nigh her hauen? With good ware belike: 'tis well ballast. Thais. O, your this deuice smels of the Marchant. What's your ships name, I pray? The forlorne Hope? Abigall. No: The Merchant Royall. Thais. And why not Aduenturer? Abig. You see no likelihood of that: would it not faine be in the hauen? The word, Vt tangerem Portum. Marry, for ought I know, God grant it. What's there? Thais. Mine's an Azure shield: marry what else; I should tell thee more then I vnderstand; but the vvord is, Aut precio, aut precibus. Abigall. I, I, some Common-counsell deuice. They take the wo∣men, and dance the first change. Mend. Faire widow, how like you this change? Lent. I chang'd too lately to like any. Mend. O your husband! you weare his memory like a Deaths-head. For heauens loue thinke of mee as of the man Whose dancing dayes you see are not yet done. Lent. Yet you sinke apace sir. Mend. The fault's in my Vpholsterer, Lady. Roger. Thou shalt as soone finde Truth telling a lye, Vertue a Bawd, Honestie a Courtier,
As me turn'd recreant to thy least designe: Loue makes me speake, and hee makes loue diuine. Thais. Would Loue could make you so: but t'is his guise To let vs surfet ere hee ope our eyes. Abig. You graspe my hand too hard ifaith, faire sir, Holding her by the hand. Clar. Not as you graspe my hart, vnwilling wanton. Were but my breast bare and Anatomized, Thou shouldst behold there how thou tortur'st it: And as Appelles limb'd the Queene of Loue, In her right hand grasping a heart in flames, So may I thee, fairer, but crueller. Abig. Well sir, your vizor giues you colour for what you say. Clar. Grace me to weare this fauour, 'tis a Iemme That vailes to your eyes, though not to th'Eagles, And in exchange giue me one word of comfort. Abig. I marry: I like this wooer well: Hee'll win's pleasure out o'the stones. The second change. Isabella fals in loue with Rogero when the changers speak. Is. Change is no robbery: yet in this change Thou rob'st me of my hart, sure Cupid's here, Disguis'd like a pretty Torch-bearer, And makes his brand a Torch, that with more sleight He may intrap weake women: here the sparkes Fly as in Etna from his Fathers Anuile. O powerfull Boy! my heart's on fire, and vnto mine eyes The raging flames ascend, like to two Beacons, Summoning my strongest powers, but all too late, The Conquerour already opes the gate. I will not aske his name. Abig. You dare put it into my hands. Mend. Zounds, doe you thinke I will not? Abig. Then thus, to morrow (you'll be secret, seruant.) Mend. All that I doe, Ile doe in secret. Ab. My husband goes to Mawrano to renew the Farme he has. Men. Well, what time goes the Iakes-farmer? Abig. He shall not be long out, but you shall put in, I warrant you. Haue a care that you stand iust i'the nicke about sixe a clocke in the euening; my Maide shall conduct you vp, to saue
mine honor you must come vp darkling, and to auoid suspition. Mend. Zounds, hudwinck'd, and if you'll open all sweet Lady. Abig. But if you faile to doo't. Mend. The Sunne shall faile the day first. Abig. Tye this ring fast, you may be sure to know. You'll brag of this, now you haue brought me to the bay. Mend. Poxe o'this Masque: would 'twere done, I might To my Apothecaries for some stirring meates. Tha. Me thinkes sir, you should blush e'en through your vizor, I haue scarce patience to dance out the rest. Robert. The worse my fate that plowes a marble quarry: Primaleon yet thy Image was more kinde, Although thy loue not halfe so true as mine. Dance they that list, I saile against the winde. Thais. Nay sir, betray not your infirmities, You'll make my Husband iealous by and by; We will thinke of you, and that presently. Guid. The Spheares ne'er danc'd vnto a better tune. Sound Musicke there. Isab. 'Twas Musicke that he spake. The third change ended, Ladies fall off. Rob. Gallants I thanke you, and Beginne a health to your Mistresses. 3. or 4. Faire thankes sir Bridegroome. Isab. He speakes not to this pledge, has he no Mistresse? Would I might chose one for him: but't may be Rogero dances a Laualto, or a Galliard, & in the midst of it, falleth into the Brides lap, but straight leapes vp, and danceth it out. Hee doth adore a brighter Starre then wee. Rob. Sit Ladies sit, you haue had standing long. Men. Blesse the man: sprit'ly and nobly done. Thais. What, is your Ladiship hurt? Isab. O no, an easie fall. Was I not deepe enough, thou God of lust, But I must further wade? I am his now, As sure as Iuno's Ioues, Hymen take flight, And see not me, 'tis not my wedding night. Exit Isabella. Card. The Brides departed, discontent it seemes. Rob. Wee'll after her. Gallants, vnmasque I pray, And taste a homely banquet we entreate. Exit Rob. Card. and Lights.
Clarid. Candidi Ernigos I beseech thee. Men. Come Widow, Ile be bold to put you in. My Lord will you haue a sociate? Exit Thais. Rog. Good gentlemen if I haue any interest in you, Lent. Abig. Let me depart vnknowne, 'tis a disgrace Of an eternall memory. Mend. What the fall my Lord, as common a thing as can be, the stiffest man in Italy may fall betweene a womans legs. Clar. Would I had chang'd places with you my Lord, would it had beene my hap. Rog. What Cuckold laid his hornes in my way? Signior Claridiana, you were by the Lady vvhen I fell, Doe you thinke I hurt her? Clar. You could not her, my Lord, betweene the legs. Rog. What vvas't I fell vvithall? Mend. A crosse point my Lord. Rog. Crosse-point indeede: vvell if you loue me, let me hence vnknowne, The silence yours, the disgrace mine owne. Ex. Clar. & Mend. Enter ISABELLA with a gilt Goblet and meetes ROGERO. Isab. Sir, if Wine were Nectar Ile beginne a health, To her that were most gracious in your eye, Yet daigne, as simply 'tis the gift of Bacchus, To giue her pledge that drinkes: this God of Wine Cannot inflame me more to appetite, Though he be co-supreme with mightie Loue, Then thy faire shape. Rog. Zounds she comes to deride me. Isab. That kisse shall serue To be a pledge although my lips should starue. No tricke to get that vizor from his face? Rog. I vvill steale hence, and so conceale disgrace. Isab. Sir, haue you left nought behinde? Rog. Yes, Lady but the Fates will not permit (As Iems once lost are seldome or neuer found) I should conuay it vvith me. Sweete Good-night. Shee bends to mee: there's my fall againe. Exit. Isab. He's gone, that lightning that a vvhile doth strike
Our eyes with amaz'd brightnesse, and on a sudden Leaues vs in prisoned darknesse. Lust thou art hie, My smiles may well come from the Skye. Anna, Anna. Enter ANNA. Anna. Madame, did you call? Isab. Follow yond stranger, prethee learne his name: Wee may hereafter thanke him. How I doate? Exit Anna. Is hee not a God That can command what other men would winne With the hard'st aduantage? I must haue him, Or shadow-like follow his fleeting steps. Were I as Daphne, and he followed chase, Though I reiected young Appolloes loue, And like a Dreame beguile his wandring steps, Should he pursue me through the neighbouring groue, Each Cowslip stalke should trip a willing fall, Till hee were mine, who till then am his thrall: Nor will I blush, since worthy is my chance. 'Tis said that Venus with a Satyre slept, And how much short came she of my faire aime? Then Queene of Loue a president Ile be, To teach faire women learne to loue of mee. Speake Musicke, what's his name. Enter ANNA. Anna. Madame, It was the worthy Count Massino. Isab. Blest be thy tongue: the worthy Count indeede, The worthiest of the Worthies. Trusty Anna, Hast thou pack'd vp those Monies, Plate, and Iewels I gaue direction for? Anna. Yes, Madame, I haue trust vp them, that many A proper man has beene trust vp for. Isab. I thanke thee, take the wings of night, Beloued Secretary, and poste with them to Sweuia, There furnish vp some stately Pallace Worthy to entertaine the King of Loue: Prepare it for my comming and my Loues, Ere Phoebus Steedes once more vnharnest be, Or ere he sport with his beloued Thetis,
The siluer-footed Goddesse of the Sea, Wee will set forward. Flye like the Northern winde, Or swifter, Anna, fleete like to my minde. An. I am iust of your minde Madame, I am gone. Exit An. Isab. So to the house of Death the mourner goes, That is bereft of what his soule desir'd, As I to bed, I to my nuptiall bed, The heauen on earth: so to thought slaughters went The pale Andromeda bedew'd with teares, When euery minute she expected gripes of a fell monster, And in vaine bewail'd the act of her creation. Sullen Night that look'st with suncke eyes on my nuptiall bed, With ne'er a Starre that smiles vpon the end, Mend thy slacke pace, and lend the malecontent, The hoping louer, and the wishing Bride Beames that too long thou shadowest: or if not In spight of thy fixt front when my loath'd Mate Shall struggle in due pleasure for his right, Ile think't my loue, and die in that delight. Exit. Enter at seuerall doores ABIGAL and THAIS. Abig. Thais, you're an earely riser. I haue that to shew will make your hayre stand an-end. Thais. Well Lady, and I haue that to shew you will bring your courage downe. What would you say, and I would name a partie saw your Husband court, kisse, nay almost goe through for the hole? Abig. How, how, what would I say? nay, by this light, what would I not doe? If euer Amazon fought better, or more at the face then Ile doe, let me neuer be thought a new married vvife. Come vnmasque her: 'tis some admirable creature, vvhose beau∣tie you neede not paint. I warrant you, 'tis done to your hand. Thais. Would any vvoman but I▪ be abused to her face? Prethee reade the contents: Know'st thou the Character? Abig. 'Tis my Husbands hand, and a Loue-Letter: But for the contents I finde none in it. Has the lustfull monster, All backe and belly-steru'd me thus? What defect does he see in mee? Ile be sworne wench, I am of as pliant and yeelding body
to him, e'en vvhich way hee vvill, hee may turne mee as hee list himselfe. What? and dedicate to thee: I marry, here's a stile so high, as a man cannot helpe a Dog o'er it. He was wont to write to me in the Citie phrase, My good Abigall: here's Astonishment of nature, vnparaleld excelency, and most vnequal raritie of creation: Three such wordes will turne any honest woman in the world whore: for a woman is neuer wonne till shee know not vvhat to answere; and beshrew me if I vnderstand any of these: you are the partie I perceiue, and here's a white sheete, that your hus∣band has promist me to do penance in: you must not thinke to dance the shaking of the sheetes alone though there be not such rare phrases in't, tis more to the matter; a legible hand, but for the dash, or the (hee) and (as): short bawdy Parenthesis as euer you saw, to the purpose: hee has not left out a pricke I warrant you, wherein he has promist to doe me any good, but the Law's in mine owne hand. Thais. I euer thought by his red beard hee would proue a Iudas, here am I bought and solde; hee makes much of me in∣deede. Well wench, we were best wisely in time seeke for preuen∣tion, I should be loath to take drinke and die on't, as I am afraid I shall that hee will lye with thee. Abig. To be short sweete hart, Ile be true to thee, though a lyer to my Husband: I haue signed your Husbands bill like a Wood cocke as hee is held, perswaded him (since nought but my loue can asswage his violent passions) hee should enioy, like a priuate friend, the pleasures of my bed: I tolde him my Hus∣band was to goe to Mawrano to day, to renew a Farme hee has, and in the meane time hee might be tenant at will, to vse mine: this false fire has so tooke with him, that he's rauisht afore hee come. I haue had stones on him all red: dost know this: Thais. I, too vvell, it blushes for his Mr. Points to the ring. Abigall. Now my Husband will be hawking about thee anon, And thou canst meete him closely. Thais. By my faith I would be loath in the darke, and hee knew mee. Abig. I meane thus: the same occasion will serue him too, they are birds of a feather, and vvill flye together, I vvarrant
thee wench, appoint him to come: say that thy Husband's gone for Mawrano, and tell mee anone if thou mad'st not his heart-bloud spring, for ioy, in his face. Thais. I conceiue you not all this while. Abig. Then th'art a barren woman, and no meruaile if thy Husband loue thee not: the houre for both to come is sixe, a dark time fit for purblinde louers; and vvith cleanly conuayance by the niglers our maids, they shall be translated into our Bed∣chambers. Your Husband into mine, and mine into yours. Thais. But you meane they shall come in at the backe-dores. Abig. Who, our Husbands? nay, and they come not in at the fore-dores, there will be no pleasure in't. But we two will climbe ouer our garden-Pales, and come in that vvay, (the chastest that are in Venice vvill stray for a good turne) and thus vvittily vvill wee be bestowed, you into my house to your husband, and I into your house to my husband, and I vvarrant thee before a month come to an end, they'll cracke louder of this nights-lodging, then the Bed-steads. Thais. All is if our Maids keepe secret. Abig. Mine is a Maid Ile besworne, shee has kept her secrets hitherto. Thais. Troath, and I neuer had any Sea-captaine borded in my house. Abig. Goe to then: and the better to auoid suspition, Thus wee must insist, they must come vp darkling, recreate themselues with their delight an houre or two, and after a mil∣lion of kisses, or so. Thais. But is my husband content to come darkling? Abig. What not to saue mine honour? hee that vvill runne through fire, as hee has profest, will by the heate of his loue, grope in the darke. I warrant him he shall saue mine honour. Thais. I am afraid my voyce vvill discouer mee. Abig. Why then, you're best say nothing, and take it thus quietly when your husband comes. Thais. I, but you know a vvoman cannot chuse but speake in these cases.
Abig. Bite in your neather-lip, and I vvarrant you, Or make as if you were vvhiffing Tobacco; Or puich like me. Gods-so, I heare thy Husband. Exit. Thais. Farewell vvise-woman. Enter MIZALDVS. Mizal. Now gins my vengeance mount high in my lust: 'Tis a rare creature, shee'll do't i'faith; And I am arm'd at all points▪ A rare whiblin, To be reueng'd, and yet gaine pleasure in't, One height aboue reuenge: yet vvhat a slaue am I, Are there not younger Brothers enough, but vve must Branch one another? oh but mine's reuenge, And who on that does dreame Must be a Tyrant euer in extreame. O my Wife Thais get my Breakefast ready, I must into the Country to a Farme I haue Some two miles off, and, as I thinke, Shall not come home to night. Iaques, Iaques, Get my Vessell ready to row me downe the Riuer. Prethee make haste Sweet girle. Exit Mizal. Thais. So, there's one foole shipt away: are your crosse-points discouer'd? Get your Breake-fast ready! By this light Ile tie you to hard fare: I haue beene too sparing of that you prodigally offer Voluntary to another: well you shall be a tame foole hereafter. The finest light is when vve first defraud; Husband to night 'tis I must lie abroad. Exit. Enter ISABELLA and a Page with a Letter. Isab. Here, take this Letter, beare it to the Count: But Boy, first tell me; think'st thou I am in loue? Page. Madame, I cannot tell. Isab. Canst thou not tell? Dost thou not see my face? Is not the face the Index of the minde? And canst thou not destinguish Loue by that? Page. No Madame. Isab. Then take this Letter and deliuer it Vnto the worthy Count. No, fie vpon him,
Come backe againe: tell me, why shouldst thou thinke That same's a Loue-letter? Page. I doe not thinke so Madame. Isab. I know thou dost: for thou dost euer vse To hold the wrong opinion. Tell me true, Dost thou not thinke that Letter is of Loue? Page. If you vvould haue me thinke so Madame, yes. Isab. What dost thou thinke thy Lady is so fond? Giue me the Letter, thy selfe shall see it. Yet I should teare it in the breaking ope, And make him lay a wrongfull charge on thee; And say thou brok'st it open by the vvay; And saw vvhat haynous things I charge him vvith: But 'tis all one, the Letter is not of loue, Therefore deliuer it vnto himselfe, And tell him hee's deceiu'd, I doe not loue him. But if he thinke so bid him come to me, And Ile confute him straight; Ile shew him reasons, Ile shew him plainely why I cannot loue him. And if he hap to reade it in thy hearing, Or chance to tell thee that the vvordes vvere sweet, Doe not thou then disclose my lewde entent, Vnder those Syren vvordes, and how I meane To vse him vvhen I haue him at my vvill: For then thou wilt destroy the plot that's laid, And make him feare to yeeld vvhen I doe vvish Onely to haue him yeeld; for vvhen I haue him, None but my selfe shall know how I vvill vse him. Be gone, why stayest thou? yet returne againe. Page. I Madame. Isab. Why dost thou come againe? I bad thee goe. If I say, Goe, neuer returne againe. Exit Page. My bloud, like to a troubled Ocean, Cuff'd vvith the Windes, incertaine where to rest, Buts at the vtmost share of euery limbe. My Husband's not the man I vvould haue had: O my new thoughts to this braue sprightly Lord,
Was fixt to that hid fire Louers feele: Where vvas my minde before, that refin'd iudgement, That represents rare obiects to our passions? Or did my lust beguile me of my sence? Making me feast vpon such dangerous cates, For present want, that needes must breede a surfeit: How was I shipwrackt? yet Isabella thinke Thy Husband is a noble Gentleman, young, wise, And rich: thinke what Fate followes thee, And nought but lust doth blinde thy worthy loue: I will desist. O no, it may not be. Euen as a head-strong Courser beares away His Rider, vainely striuing him to stay. Or as a sodaine gale thrusts into Sea The Hauen-touching Barke, now neare the lea: So wauering Cupid brings me backe againe, And purple Loue resumes his Darts againe: Here of themselues, thy shafts come as if shot: Better then I thy quiuer knowes 'em not Enter Count Arsena, and a Page. Page. Madame: the Count. Rog. So fell the Troian wanderer on the Greeke, And bore away his rauisht prize to Troy: For such a beautie, brighter then his Dana. Ioue should (me thinkes) now come himselfe againe▪ Louely Isabella, I confesse me mortall: Not worthy to serue thee in thought, I sweare, Yet shall not this same ouer-flow of fauour Diminish my vow'd dutie to your beauty. Isab. Your loue, my Lord, I blushingly proclaime it, Hath power to draw me through a wildernesse, Wer't arm'd with Furies, as with furious Beasts. Boy, bid our Traine be ready, wee'll to horse. Ex. Page. My Lord, I should say something, but I blush, Courting is not befitting to our sexe. Rog. Ile teach you how to woo, Say you haue lou'd me long,
And tell me that a womans feeble tongue Was neuer tuned vnto a wooing-string; Yet formy sake you will forget your sexe, And court my Loue with strain'd Immodestie, Then bid me make you happy with a kisse. Is. Sir, though women doe not woo, yet for your sake, I am content to leaue that ciuill custome, And pray you kisse mee. Rog. Now vse some vnexpect vmbages, To draw me further into Vulcanes Net. Isab. You loue not mee so well as I loue you. Rog. Faire Lady, but I doe. Isab. Then shew your loue. Rog. Why in this kisse I shew't, and in my vowed seruice, This wooing shall suffice, 'tis easier farre To make the current of a siluer-brooke Conuert his flowing backeward to his Spring, Then turne a woman wooer. There's no cause Can turne the setled course of Natures Lawes. Isab. My Lord, will you pursue the plot? Rog. The Letter giues direction here for Pauie. To horse, to horse: thus once Eridace, With lookes regardiant, did the Thracian gaze, And lost his gift, while he desir'd the sight. But wiser I, lead by more powerfull charme; Ide see the world winne thee from out mine arme. Exeunt. Enter at seuerall doores, CLARIDIANA and GVIDO. Gui. Zounds, is the Huritano comming? Claridiana what's the A trampling of Horses heard. matter? Clar. The Countesse of Sweuia has new taken horse. Flye Phoebus, flye, the houre is sixe a clocke. Guid. Whither is shee going Signior? Clarid. Euen as Ioue went to meete his simile. To the Diuell I thinke. Guido. You know not wherefore? Clar. To say sooth I doe not. So in immortall wise shall I ariue. Guid. At the Gallowes. What in a passion Signior?
Clarid. Zounds, doe not hold me sir: Beautious Thais, I am all thine wholy. The staffe is now aduancing for the Rest, And when I tilt, Mizaldus aware thy Crest. Exit. Enter ROBERTO, in his Night-gowne, and Cap, with Seruants, hee kneeles downe. Guid. What's here? the capring Cods-head tilting in the aire? Rob. The Gods send her no Horse, a poore olde age. Eternall woe, and sicknesse lasting rage. Guid. My Lord, you may yet o'er-take'em. Rob. Furies supply that place, for I will not: no, Shee that can forsake mee when pleasure's in the full, Fresh and vntir'd, what would she on the least barren coldnes? I warrant you she has already got Her Brauoes, and her Ruffians: the meanest whore Will haue one buckler, but your great ones more. The shores of Sicilie retaines not such a Monster, Though to Galley-slaues they daily prostitute. To let the Nuptiall Tapers giue light to her new lust, Who would haue thought it? Shee that could no more forsake my company, Then can the day forsake the glorious presence of the Sunne. When I was absent, then her galled eyes Would haue shed Aprill showers, and out-wept The clouds in that same o'er-passionate moode: When they drown'd all the world, yet now forsakes me: Women your eyes shed glances like the Sunne: Now shines your brightnesse, now your light is done. On the sweetest Flowers you shine, 'tis but by chance, And on the basest Weede you'll waste a glance. Your beames once lost can neuer more be found: Vnlesse we waite vntill your course runne round, (And take you at fist hand.) Since I cannot Enioy the noble title of a man, But after-ages, as our vertues are Buryed whilst we are liuing, will sound out My infamie, and her degenerate shame;
Yet in my life Ile smother't if I may, And, like a dead man, to the world bequeath These houses of vanitie, Mils, and Lands. Take what you will, I will not keepe among you Seruants, And welcome some religious Monasterie, A true sworne Beads-man Ile hereafter be, And wake the morning cocke with holy prayers. Ser. Good my Lord: noble Master. Rob. Disswade me not, my will shall be my King; I thanke thee Wife, a faire change thou hast giuen, I leaue thy lust to woo the Loue of Heauen. Exit cum seruis. Guid. This is conuersion, is't not? as good as might haue beene, He turnes religious vpon his Wiues turning Curtezan. This is iust like some of our gallant Prodigals, When they haue consum'd their Patrimonies wrongfully, They turne Capuchins for deuotion, Exit. Finis Actus secundi. Actus tertij Scaena prima. CLARIDIANA, and ROGERO being in a readinesse, are recei∣ued in at one anothers houses by their Maids. Then Enter MENDOSA, with a Page, to the Lady LENTVLVS Window. Mendosa. NIght like a solemne Mourner frownes on earth, Enuying that Day should force her doffe her roabes, Or Phoebus chase away her Melancholy. Heauens eyes looke faintly through her sable masque, And siluer Cinthia hyes her in her Sphaere, Scorning to grace blacke nights solemnitie. Be vnpropitious Night to villaine thoughts, But let thy Diamonds shine on vertuous loue: This is the lower house of high-built heauen,
Where my chaste Phaebe sits, inthron'd 'mong thoughts So purely good, brings her to heauen on earth. Such power hath soules in contemplation. Sing boy (though night yet) like the mornings Larke: Musicke playes. A soule that's cleare is light, though heauen be darke. The Lady LENTVLVS, at her window. Lent. Who speakes in Musicke to vs? Mend. Sweet, 'tis I. Boy, leaue me, and to bed. Exit Page. Lent. I thanke you for your Musicke: now good-night. Men. Leaue not the World yet, Queene of Chastitie, Keepe promise with thy Loue Endimion▪ And let mee meete thee there on Latmus top. 'Tis I whose vertuous hopes are firmely fixt On the fruition of thy chaste vow'd loue. Lent. My Lord, your honor made me promise your ascent into my house, since my vow barr'd my doores, By some wits engine, made for theft and lust: Yet for your Honour, and my humble fame, Checke your blouds passions, and returne deare Lord: Suspition is a Dogge that still doth bite. Without a cause, this act giues foode to Enuy; Swolne big, it bursts, and poysons our cleare flames. Men. Enuy is stinglesse when she lookes on thee. Lent. Enuy is blinde, my Lord, and cannot see. Men. If you breake promise, faire, you breake my hart. Lent. Then come. Yet stay. Ascend. Yet let vs part. I feare, yet know not what I feare: Your Loue's precious, yet mine Honor's deare. Mend. If I doe staine thy Honor with foule lust, May Thunder strike me, to shew Ioue is iust. Lent. Then come my Lord, on earth your vow is giuen. This aide Ile lend you. He throwes vp a ladder of cords, which she makes fast to some part of the window, he asends, and at top fals. M. Thus I mount my heauen. Receiue me sweete. Lent. O me vnhappy wretch. How fares your Honour? speake Fate-crost Lord. If life retaine his seate within you, speake;
Else like that Sestian Dame, that saw her Loue, Cast by the frowning billowes, on the sands, And leane death swolne big with the Hellespont, In bleake Leanders body, like his Loue, Come I to thee, one graue shall serue vs both. Mend. Stay miracle of women, yet I breathe, Though death be enter'd in this Tower of flesh, Hee is not conquerour, my heart stands out, And yeelds to thee, scorning his tyranny. Lent. My doores are vow'd shut, and I cannot helpe you. Your wounds are mortall, wounded is mine Honour, If there the Towne-guard finde you. Vnhappy Dame, Reliefe is periur'd, my vow kept, shame. What hellish Destinie did twist my fate? Mend. Rest ceaze thine eye-lids; be not passionate: Sweet sleepe secure, Ile remoue my selfe. That Viper Enuy shall not spot thy fame: Ile take that poyson with me, my soules rest, For like a Serpent, Ile creepe on my breast. Lent. Thou more then man, loue-wounded: ioy and griefe fight in my bloud. Thy wounds and constancie Are both so strong none can haue victory. Mend. Darken the world, earths-Queene, get thee to bed; The earth is light while those two Starres are spread: Their splendor will betray me to mens eyes. Vaile thy bright face: for if thou longer stay, Phoebus will rise to thee, and make night day. Lent. To part and leaue you hurt my soule doth feare. Mend. To part from hence I cannot, you being there. Lent. Wee'll moue together, then Fate Loue controules, And as we part so bodies part from soules. Mend. Mine is the earth, thine the refined fire: I am mortall, thou diuine, then soule mount higher. Lent. Why then take comfort sweet, Ile see'ou to morrow. Exit. Men. My wounds are nothing, thy losse breedes my sorrow. See now'tis darke. Support your Master, legges, a little further:
Faint not bolde heart with anguish of my wound: Try further yet, can bloud weigh downe my soule? Desire is vaine without abilitie. He staggars on, and then fals downe. Thus fals a Monarch, if Fate push at him. Enter a Captaine and the Watch. Capt. Come on my hearts, we are the Cities securitie, Ile giue you your charge, and then like Courtiers euery man spye out: let no man in my company be afraid to speake to a Cloake lined with Veluet, nor tremble at the sound of a gingling Spurre. 1 Watch. May I neuer be counted a cock of the game, if I feare Spurres: but be gelded like a Capon for the preseruing of my voyce. Cap. Ile haue none of my Band refraine to search a veneriall house, though his Wifes sister be a lodger there: nor take two shillings of the Bawd to saue the Gentlemens credits that are aloft: and so like voluntary Pandars leaue them, to the shame of all Halbardiers. 2. Nay, for the Wenches, wee'll tickle them, that's flat. Cap. If you meete a Sheuoiliero, that's in the grosse phrase, a Knight, that swaggers in the streete, and being taken, has no mo∣ney in his Purse to pay for his fees; it shall be a part of your duty to entreate me to let him goe. 1. O meruailous his there such Sheuoiliers? 2. Some 200. that's the least, that are reueal'd. Mend. groues. Cap. What groane is that? bring a light. Who lyes there? It is the Lord Mendosa, kinsman to our Duke. Speake good my Lord, relate your dire mischance: Life like a fearefull seruant flyes his Master, Art must attone them, or'th' whole man is lost. Conuay him to a Surgeons, then returne: No place shall be vnsearch'd vntill we finde The truth of this mischance. Make haste againe. Exit the Watch. Manet Captain. Whose house is this stands open? in, and search. What guests that house containes, and bring them forth. This Noble-mans misfortune stirs my quiet, And fils my soule with fearefull fantasies. But Ile vnwinde this Labyrinth of doubt,
Else industry shall lose part of it selfes labour. Enter the Watch, with Claridiana and Rogero taken in one anothers hou∣ses, in their shirts and night-gownes, they see one another. Who haue we there? Signiors cannot you tell vs How our Princes kinsman came wounded to the death Nigh to your houses. Rog. Hey-day; crosse-ruffe at midnight. Is't Christmas? You goe a gaming to your neighbours house. Clar. Dost make a Mummer of me Oxe-head? Cap. Make answere Gentlemen, it doth concerne you. Rog. Oxe-head will beare an action; Ile ha'the Law; Ile not be yoakt. Beare vvitnesse Gentlemen, he cals me Oxe-head. Cap. Doe you heare sir? Clarid. Very well, very well, take Law and hang thy selfe, I care not. Had she no other but that good face to doate vpon? Ide rather she had dealt vvith a dangerous French-man, then with such a Pagan. Cap. Are you mad? answere my demaund. Rog. I am as good a Christian as thy selfe, Though my Wife haue now new christned mee. Cap. Are you deafe, you make no answere? Clar. Would I had had the circumcising of thee Iew, Ide ha' Cut short your Cuckold-maker, I would ifaith, I would ifaith. Cap. Away with them to prison; they'll answere better there. Rog. Not to fast Gentlemen: vvhat's our crime? Cap. Murther of the Dukes kinsman, Signior Mendosa. Amb. Nothing else? vve did it, vve did it, vve did it. Cap. Take heede Gentlemen vvhat you confesse. Cla. Ile confesse any thing since I am made a foole by a knaue. Ile be hang'd like an innocent, that's flat. Rog. Ile not see my shame. Hempe in stead of a Quacksaluer, you shall put out mine eyes, and my head shall be bought to make Incke-hornes of. Cap. You doe confesse the murder? Clar. Sir, 'tis true, Done by a faithlesse Christian and a Iew. Cap. To prison vvith them, wee will heare no further, The tongue betrayes the heart of guilty murder. Exeunt Omnes.
Enter Count GVIDO, ISABELLA, ANNA, and Seruants. Guid. Welcome to Pauy sweet, and may this kisse Chase Melancholy from thy company: Speake my soules ioy, how fare you after trauaile. Isab. Like one that scapeth dangers on the Seas, Yet trembles vvith cold feares being safe on land, With bare imagination of what's past. Guid. Feare keepe vvith cowards, aire-stars cannot moue. Isab. Feare in this kinde, my Lord, doth sweeten loue. Guid. To thinke feare ioy (deare) I cannot coniecture. Isab. Feare's sire to feruencie, Which makes loues sweet prone Nectar: Trembling desire, feare, hope, and doubtfull leasure, Distill from loue the Quintessence of pleasure. Guid. Madame, I yeeld to you; Feare keepes vvith Loue, My Oratorie is too weake against you: You haue the ground of knowledge, vvise experience, Which makes your argument inuincible. Isab. You are Times Scholler, and can flatter weaknesse. Guid. Custome allowes it, and vve plainly see Princes and women maintaine flatterie. Isab. Anna, goe see my Iewels and my Trunckes Be aptly placed in their seuerall roomes. Exit Anna. Enter GNIACA Count of Gaza, with Attendants. My Lord, know you this Gallant? 'tis a compleate Gentleman. Guid. I doe; 'tis Count Gniaca, my endeared friend. Gniac. Welcome to Pauie, vvelcome fairest Lady: Your sight deare friend, is lifes restoratiue; This day's the period of long-wish'd content, More vvelcome to me then day to the vvorld, Night to the vvearyed, or gold to a Mizer; Such ioy feeles Friendship in Societie. Isab. A rare shap'd man: compare them both together, Guid. Our loues are friendly twins, both at a birth; The ioy you taste, that ioy doe I conceiue, This day's the Iubile of my desire. Isab. He's fairer then he vvas vvhen first I saw him.
This little time makes him more excellent. Gniac. Relate some newes. Harke you, what Lady's that▪ Be open breasted, so will I to thee. They whisper. Isab. Error did blinde him that paints Loue blinde; For my Loue plainly iudges difference: Loue is cleare sighted, and vvith Eagles eyes, Vndazeled, lookes vpon bright Sunne-beam'd beauty: Nature did rob her selfe, when she made him. Blushing to see her vvorke excell her selfe▪ Tis shape makes mankinde femelacie. Forgiue me Rogero, 'tis my Fate To loue thy friend, and quit thy loue vvith hate. I must enioy him, let hope thy passions smother: Faith cannot coole bloud; Ile clip him, wer't my brother. Such is the heate of my sincere affection, Hell nor earth can keepe loue in subiection. Gnia. I craue your Honors pardon my Ignorance Of what you were, may gaine a curteous pardon. Is. There needes no pardon, where there's no offence; His tongue strikes Musicke rauishing my sense: I must be sodaine, else desire confounds me. Guid. What sport affords this Climate for delight? Gnia. We'll hawke and hunt to day, as for to morrow Varietie shall feede varietie. Is. Dissimulation womens armour is, Aide loue beliefe, and female constancie. Oh, I am sicke my Lord, kinde Rogero helpe me. Guido. Forsend it heauen, Madame sit; how fare you? My liues best comfort speake, O speake sweet Saint. Is. Fetch Art to keepe life, runne my Loue, I faint: My vitall breath runnes coldly through my veynes, I see leane Death vvith eyes imaginarie, Stand fearefully before me: here my end A vvife vnconstant, yet thy louing friend. Guid. As swift as thought, flie I to wish thee aide. Exit. Isab. Thus innocence by craft is soone betraid. My Lord Gniaca, 'tis your Art must heale me,
I am loue-sicke for your loue; loue, loue, for louing: I blush for speaking truth; faire Sir beleeue me, Beneath the Moone nought but your frowne can grieue me. Gniaca. Lady, by heauen, me thinkes, this fit is strange. Isab. Count not my loue light for this sodaine change: By Cupids Bow I sweare, and vvill avow, I neuer knew true perfect loue till now. Gniac. Wrong not your selfe, me, and your dearest friend, Your loue is violent, and soone vvill end. Loue is not Loue vnlesse Loue doth perseuer, That loue is perfect loue, that loues for euer. Isab. Such loue is mine, beleeue it vvell-shap'd youth, Though vvomen vse to lye, yet I speake truth. Giue sentence for my life or speedy death: Can you affect me? Gniac. I should belye my thoughts to giue deniall, But then to friendship I must turne disloyall: I vvill not vvrong my friend, let that suffice. Isab. Ile be a miracle, for loue a woman dyes, Offers to stab her selfe. Gn. Hold madame, these are soule killing passions. Ide rather wrong my friend then you your selfe. Isab. Loue me, or else by Ioue death's but delaid: My vow is fixt in heauen, feare shall not moue me, My life is death vvith tortures 'lesse you loue me. Gnia. Giue me some respite, and I will resolue you. Isab. My heart denies it. My bloud is violent, now or else neuer, Loue me, and like loues Queene Ile fall before thee, Inticing daliance from thee vvith my smiles, And steale thy heart vvith my delicious kisses. Ile study Art in loue, that in a rupture Thy soule shall taste pleasures excelling nature. Loue me, both Art and nature in large recompence, Shall be profuse in rauishing thy sense. Gni. You haue preuail'd, I am yours from all the world, Thy wit and beauty haue entranc'd my soule: I long for daliance, my bloud burnes like fire,
Hels paine on earth is to delay desire. Isab. I kisse thee for that breath, this day you hunt; In midst of all your sports leaue you Rogero, Returne to me whose life rests in thy sight, Where pleasure shall make Nectar our delight. Gniac. I condescend to what thy vvill implores me; He that but now neglected thee, adores thee: Enter Rogero, Anna, Doctor. But see here comes my friend, feare makes him tremble. Isab. Women are witles that cannot dissemble: Now I am sicke againe: where's my Lord Rogero? His loue and my health's vanish'd both together. Guid. Wrong not thy friend, deare friend, in thy extreames, Here's a profound Hipocrates, my deare, To minister to thee the spirit of health. Isab. Your sight to me, my Lord, excels all Phisicke; I am better farre (my Loue) then when you left me: Your friend was comfortable to me at the last. 'Twas but a fit, my Lord, and now 'tis past. Are all things ready sir? Anna. Yes Madame, the house is fit. Gnia. Desire in women is the life of wit. Exeunt Omnes. Enter ABIGAL and THAIS at seuerall doores. Abig. O partner, I am with childe of laughter, and none but you can be my Mid-wife: was there euer such a game at Noddy? Thais. Our Husbands thinke they are fore-men of the Iurie, they hold the Hereticke point of Predestination, and sure they are borne to be hanged. Abig. They are like to proue men of iudgement, but not for killing of him that's yet aliue, and well recouered. Thais. As soone as my man saw the Watch come vp, All his spirit was downe. Abig, But though they haue made vs good sport in speech, They did hinder vs of good sport in action. O wench, imagination is strong in pleasure. Thais. That's true: for the opinion my Good-man had of enioying you, made him doe wonders. A. Why shold weake man, that is so soone satisfied, desire variety?
Thais. Their answere is, to feede on Phesants continually would breede a loathing. Abigall. Then if vve seeke for strange flesh that haue sto∣mackes at will, 'tis pardonable. Thais. I, if men had any feeling of it, but they iudge vs by themselues. Abig. Well, we vvill bring them to the Gallowes, and then, like kinde virgins, begge their liues, and after liue at our plea∣sures, and this bridle shall still reyne them. Thais. Faith, if vve were disposed, we might seeme as safe, As if we had the broad seale to warrant it: But that nights worke vvill sticke by me this forty weekes. Come, shall we goe visit the discontented Lady Lentulus? Whom the Lord Mendosa has confest to his Chirurgion, He vvould haue rob'd? I thought great men would but Haue rob'd the poore, yet he the rich. Abig. He thought that the richer purchase, though vvith the worse conscience: but vvee'll to comfort her, and then goe heare our Husbands lamentations. They say mine has compiled an vngodly volume of Satyres against women, and cals his booke The Snarle. Thais. But he's in hope his booke will saue him. Ab. God defend that it should, or any that snarle in that fashion. Tha. Well wench, if I could be metamorphosed into thy shape, I should haue my husband pliant to me in his life, And soone rid of him: for being weary vvith his continuall mo∣tion, He'de dye of a consumption. Abig. Make much of him, for all our wanton prize, Follow the Prouerbe, Merry be and wise. Exeunt. Enter ISABELLA, ANNA, and Seruants. Isab. Time that deuour'st all mortalitie, Runne swiftly these few houres, And bring Gniaca on thy aged shoulders, That I may clip the rarest modell of creation. Doe this gentle Time And I vvill curle thine aged siluer locke, And dally vvith thee in delicious pleasure.
Medea-like I will renew thy youth; But if thy frozen steps delay my loue, Ile poyson thee with murder, curse thy pathes, And make thee know a time of infamy. Anna, giue watch▪ and bring me certaine notice When Count Gniaca doth approach my house. An. Madame I goe. I am kept for pleasure, though I neuer taste it. For 'tis the vshers office still to couer His Ladyes priuate meetings with her Louer. Exit. Isab. Desire, thou quenchlesse flame that burn'st our soules, Cease to torment me; The dewe of pleasure shall put out thy fire, And quite consume thee with satierie. Lust shall be cool'd with lust, wherein Ile proue, The life of loue is onely sau'd by loue. Enter Anna. An. Madame, hee's comming▪ Isab. Thou blessed Mercurie, Prepare a banquet fit to please the Gods; Let Sphaere-like Musicke breathe delicious tones Into our mortall eares; perfume the house With odoriferous sents, sweeter then Myrrhe, Or all the Spices in Panchaia: His sight and touching wee will recreate, That his fiue Senses shall be fiue-fold happy. His breath like Roses casts out sweete perfume; Time now with pleasure shall it selfe consume. Enter Gniaca in his hunting weedes. How like Adonis in his hunting weedes, Lookes this same Goddesse tempter? And art thou come? this kisse entrance thy soule. Gods I doe not enuy you; for know this Way's here on earth compleate, excels you blisse: Ile not change this nights pleasure vvith you all. Gniac. Thou creature made by Loue, compos'd of pleasure, That mak'st true vse of thy creation, In thee both vvit and beauty's resident; Delightfull pleasure, vnpeer'd excellence.
This is the fate fixt fast vnto thy birth, That thou alone shouldst be mans heauen on earth: If I alone may but enioy thy loue, Ile not change earthly ioy to be heauens Ioue: For though that vvomen haters now are common, They all shall know earths ioy consists in woman. Isab. My loue was dotage till I loued thee; For thy soule truely tastes our petulance, Conditious Louer, Cupids Intelligencer, That makes man vnderstand what pleasure is: These are fit attributes vnto thy knowledge; For womens beautie o'er men beare that rule. Our power commands the rich, the vvise, the foole. Though scorne growes big in man in growth & stature, Yet vvomen are the rarest workes in nature. Gnia. I doe confesse the truth, and must admire That women can command rare mans desire. Isab. Cease admiration, sit to Cupids feast, The preparation to Papheon daliance, Hermonious Musicke breathe thy siluer Ayres, To stirre vp appetite to Venus banquet, That breath of pleasure that entrances soules, Making that instant happinesse a heauen, In the true taste of loues deliciousnesse. Gniac. Thy vvordes are able to stirre cold desire, Into his flesh that lyes emtomb'd in Ice, Hauing lost the feeling vse of warmth in bloud, Then how much more in me, whose youthfull veynes, Like a proud Riuer, ouer-flow their bounds? Pleasures Ambrosia, or loues nourisher, I long for priuacie; come, let vs in, 'Tis custome, and not reason makes loue sinne. Isab. Ile leade the way to Venus Paradise, Where thou shalt taste that fruit that made man wise. Exit Isab. Gnia. Sing notes of pleasure to elate our bloud: Why should heauen frowne on ioyes that doe vs good? I come Isabella keeper of loues treasure, To force thy bloud to lust, and rauish pleasure. Exit.
After some short Song enter ISABELLA and GNIACA againe, she hanging about his necke laciuiously. Gniac. Still I am thy captiue, yet thy thoughts are free: To be Loues bond-man is true libertie. I haue swomme in seas of pleasure without ground, Ventrous desire past depth it selfe hath drownd. Such skill has beauties Art in a true louer, That dead desire to life it can recouer. Thus beauty our desire can soone aduance, Then straight againe kill it with daliance. Diuinest women, your enchanting breaths Giue Louers many lifes and many deaths. Isab. May thy desire to me for euer last, Not dye by surfet on my delicates: And as I tye this Iewell about thy necke, So may I tie thy constant loue to mine, Neuer to seeke weaking varietie, That greedy curse of mans and womans hell, Where nought but shame and loath'd diseases dwell. Gniac. You counsell well, deare, learne it then; For change is giuen more to you then men. Isab. My faith to thee, like rockes, shall neuer moue, The Sunne shall change his course ere I my loue. Enter Anna. Anna. Madame, the Count Rogero knockes. Isab. Deare Loue into my chamber, till I send My hate from sight. Gniac. Lust makes me wrong my friend. Exit Gniaca. Isab. Anna, stand here, and entertaine Lord Rogero. I from my window straight will giue him answere. The Serpents vvit to woman rest in me, By that man fell, then vvhy not he by me? Fain'd sighes and teares dropt from a womans eye, Blindes man of reason, strikes his knowledge dumbe: Wit armes a vvoman, Count Rogero come. Exit Isabella. Anna. My office still is vnder: yet in time Vshers proue Masters, degrees makes vs climbe. Guido knockes. Who knockes? is't you my noble Lord?
Enter GVIDO in his hunting weedes. Guid. Came my friend hither, Count Gniaca? An. No, my good Lord. Guid. Where's my Isabella? An. In her Chamber. Guid. Good: Ile visit her. An. The chamber's lockt my Lord: shee will be priuate. Guid. Lockt against me, my sawcy mallapert? An. Be patient good my Lord: shee'll giue you answere. Guid. Isabella life of loue, speake, 'tis I that cals. Isab. at her window. Isab. I must desire your Lordship pardon me. Guid. Lordship? what's this? Isabella, art thou blinde? Isab. My Lord, my lust was blinde, but now my soule's cleare sighted, And sees the spots that did corrupt my flesh: Those tokens sent from hell, brought by desire, The messenger of euerlasting death. Anna. My Lady's in her Pulpit, now shee'll preach. Guid. Is not thy Lady mad? in veritie I alwayes Tooke her for a Puritane, and now shee shewes it. Isab. Mocke not Repentance. Prophanation Brings mortals laughing to damnation. Beleeue it Lord, Isabella's ill past life, Like gold refin'd, shall make a perfect Wife. I stand on firme ground now, before on Ice; We know not vertue till wee taste of vice. Guid. Doe you heare dissimulation, woman sinner? Isab. Leaue my house good my Lord, and for my part, I looke for a most vvisht reconciliation Betwixt my selfe and my most wronged Husband. Tempt not contrition then religious Lord. Guid. Indeede I vvas one of your familie once: But doe not I know these are but braine-trickes: And where the Diuell has the Fee-simple, he will keep possession. And will you halt before me that your selfe has made a criple? Isab. Nay, then you wrong me: and disdained Lord, I paid thee for thy pleasures vendible. Whose mercenary flesh I bought with coyne,
I vvill diuulge thy basenesse, 'lesse vvith speede Thou leaue my house and my societie. Guid. Already turn'd apostate, but now all pure, Now damn'd your faith is, and loues endure Like dewe vpon the grasse, when pleasures Sunne Shines on your vertues, all your vertue's done. Ile leaue thy house and thee, goe get thee in, Thou gaudy childe of pride, and nurse of sinne. Isab. Raile not on me my Lord; for if you doe, My hot desire of vengeance shall strike wonder; Reuenge in woman fals like dreadfull thunder. Exit. Anna. Your Lordship will command me no further seruice? Guid. I thanke thee for thy vvatchfull seruice past; Thy vsher-like attendance on the Staires, Being true signes of thy Humilitie. Anna. I hope I did discharge my place with care. Guid. Vshers should haue much vvit, but little haire; Thou hast of both sufficient: prethee leaue mee, If thou hast an honest Lady, commend me to her, But shee is none. Exit Anna, manet Guido. Farewell thou priuate strumpet worse then common. Man were on earth an Angell but for woman, That seauen-fold branch of hell from them doth grow, Pride, Lust, and Murder, they raise from below, With all their fellow sinnes. Women were made Of blood, without soules: vvhen their beauties fade, And their lust's past, auarice or bawdry Makes them still lou'd: then they buy venerie, Bribing damnation, and hire brothell slaues. Shame's their executors, Infamie their graues. Your painting vvill wipe off, vvhich Art did hide, And shew your vgly shape in spite of pride. Farewell Isabella poore in soule and fame, I leaue thee rich in nothing but in shame. Then soulelesse women know, whose faiths are hollow, Your lust being quench'd, a bloudy act must follow. Exit. Finis Actus tertij.
Actus quarti Scaena prima. Enter the Duke of Amago, the Captaine, and the rest of the Watch, with the Senators. Duke. IVstice that makes Princes like the Gods, drawes vs vnto the Se∣nate, That with vnpartiall ballance wee may poyse The crimes and innocence of all offenders, Our presence can chase bribery from Lawes: He best can iudge, that heares himselfe the cause. 1 Senat. True mighty Duke, it best becomes our places, To haue our light from you the Sonne of Vertue, Subiect Authoritie, for gaine, loue or feare Oft quits the guilty, and condemnes the cleare. Duke. The Land and people's mine, the crimes being knowne, I must redresse my subiects wrong's, mine owne. Call for the two suspected for the murder Of Mendosa, our endered kinsman. These voluntary murderers That confesse the Murder of him that is yet aliue. Wee'll sport vvith serious Iustice for a vvhile, In shew wee'll frowne on them that make vs smile. 2 Sen. Bring forth the Prisoners we may heare their answeres. Enter (brought in with Officers) CLARIDIANA, and MIZALDVS. Duke. Stand forth you Vipers, that haue suck'd bloud, And lopt a branch sprung from a royall tree: What can you answere to escape tortures? Rog. We haue confest the fact my Lord, to God and man, Our ghostly father, and that worthy Captaine: We beg not life but fauourable death. Duke. On what ground sprung your hate to him we lou'd? Clarid. Vpon that curse laid on Venecians ielousie. Wee thought he being a Courtier, would haue made vs Magni∣ficoes of the right stampe, and haue plaid at Primero in the presence, vvith gold of the Citie brought from our Indies.
Rog. Nay more, my Lord, vve feared that your kinsman for a messe of Sonnets, would haue giuen the plot of vs and our wiues, to some needy Poet, and for sport and profit brought vs in some Venician Comedy vpon the Stage. Duke. Our Iustice dwels with mercy; be not desperate. 1 Sen. His Highnesse faine vvould saue your liues if you would see it. Rog. All the Law in Venice shall not saue mee, I vvill not be saued. Clar. Feare not, I haue a tricke to bring vs to hanging in spite of the Law. Rog. Why now I see thou louest me; thou hast confirm'd Thy friendship for euer to me by these vvordes. Why, I should neuer heare Lanthorne and candle call'd for, But I should thinke it was for me and my Wife. Ile hang for that, forget not thy tricke. Vpon'em with thy tricke, I long for sentence. 2 Sen. Will you appeale for mercy to the Duke? Clar. Kill not thy Iustice Duke, to saue our liues: We haue deserued death. Rog. Make not vs presidents for after wrongs, I will receiue punishment for my sinnes, It shall be a meanes to lift me towards heauen. Clar. Let's haue our desert; we craue no fauour. Duke. Take them asunder, graue Iustice makes vs mirth, That man is soulelesse that ne'er sinnes on earth. Signior Mizaldus, relate the weapon you kill'd him with, and the manner. Rog. My Lord, your lustfull kinsman, I can title him no bet∣ter, came sneaking to my house like a Promoter to spye flesh in the Lent: now I hauing a Venecian spirit, watcht my time, and with my Rapier runne him through, knowing all paines are but trifles to the horne of a Citizen. Duke. Take him aside. Signior Claridiana, what weapon had you for this bloudy act? vvhat dart vs'd Death? Clar. My Lord, I brain'd him with a leauer my neighbour lent me, and he stood by and cryed strike home olde boy. Duke. With seuerall Instruments. Bring them face to face.
With what kill'd you our Nephew? Rog. With a Rapier Leige. Clar. Tis a lye, I kill'd him with a leauer, and thou stood'st by. Rog. Dost think to saue me & hang thy selfe? no I scorne it; is this the tricke thou said'st thou had'st: I kill'd him Duke. Hee onely gaue consent: 'twas I that did it. Clar. Thou hast alwayes beene crosse to me and wilt be to my death. Haue I taken all this paines to bring thee to hanging, and dost thou slip now? Rog. We shall neuer agree in a tale till we come to the gallowes, then we shall iumpe. Clar. Ile shew you a crosse-point, if you crosse me thus, When thou shalt not see it. Rog. Ile make a wry mouth at that, or it shall cost me a fall: 'Tis thy pride to be hang'd alone, because thou scorn'st my com∣pany: but it shall be knowne I am as good a man as thy selfe, and in these actions will keepe company with thy betters Iew. Clar. Monster. Rog. Dog-killer. Clar. Fencer. They bustle. Duke. Part them, part'em. Rog. Hang vs, and quarter vs, we shall ne'er be parted til then. Duke. You doe confesse the murther done by both. Clar. But that I vvould not haue the slaue laugh at mee, And count me a coward, I haue a very good mind to liue, Aside. But I am resolute: 'tis but a turne. I doe confesse. Rog. So doe I, Pronounce our doome, wee are prepar'd to dye. 1 Sen. We sentence you to hang till you be dead: Since you were men eminent in place and vvorth, We giue a Christian buriall to you both, Clar. Not in one graue together we beseech you, wee shall ne'er agree. Rog. He scornes my company, till the day of Iudgement, Ile not hang vvith him. Duke. You hang together, that shall make you friends, An euerlasting hatred death soone ends: To prison with them till the day of death; Kings words like Fate, must neuer change their breath. Rog. You malice-monger, Ile be hang'd afore thee, And't be but to vexe thee.
Cla. Ile doe you as good a turne or the hangman, & shall fall out▪ Exeunt ambo guarded. Enter MENDOSA in his night gowne and cap guarded, with the Captaine. Duke. Now to our kinsman, shame to royall blood, Bring him before vs. Theft in a Prince is sacrilege to honour 'Tis vertues scandall, death of Royalty, I blush to see my shame; Nephew sit downe Iustice that smiles on those on him must frowne, Speake freely Captaine, where found you him wounded? Capt. Betweene the widowes house & these crosse neighbors, Besides an Artificiall ladder made of ropes Was fastned to her window which he confest He brought to rob her of Iewels and coine. My knowledge yeelds no further circumstance. Duke. Thou know'st too much, would I were past all know∣ledge, I might forget my griefe springs from my shame, Thou monster of my blood, answere in briefe To these Assertions made against thy life. Is thy soule guilty of so base a fact? Mend. I doe confesse I did intend to rob her. In the attempt I fell and hurt my selfe Lawes thunder is but death, I dread it not, So my Lentulus honor be preseru'd From black suspition of a lustfull night. Duke. Thy head's thy forfeit for thy harts offence, Thy bloods prerogatiue may claime that fauour, Thy person then to death doomb'd by iust lawes▪ Thy death is infamous, but worse the cause. Enter ISABELLA alone GVIACA following her. Isabella. O heau'ns that I was borne to be hates slaue, The foode of Rumor, that deuour's my fame; I am call'd Insatiat Countesse lusts paramowre A glorious Diuell, and the noble whore,
I am sick, vext, and tormented, O reuenge. Guiaca. On whom would my Isabella be reueng'd? Isab. Vpon a Viper, that does get mine honour, I will not name him till I be reueng'd, See, her's the Libels are diuulg'd against me, An euerlasting scandall to my name. And thus the villen writes in my disgrace. She reads. Who loues Isabella the insatiate, Needs Atlas back for to content her lust, That wandring Strumpet, and chaste wedlockes hate, That renders truth: deceipt for loyall trust, That sacrilegious thiefe to Himens rights, Making her lust her God, heau'n her delights. Swell not proud heart, Ile quench thy griefe in blood, Desire in woman cannot be withstood. Guiaca. Ile be thy champion sweet gainst all the world, Name but the villaine that defames thee thus. Isab. Dare thy hand execute, whom my tongue condemnes, Then art thou truely valiant, mine for euer, But if thou fain'st, hate must our true loue seuer. Guiaca. By my dead fathers soule, my mothers vertues, And by my knight hood and gentilitie; Ile be reueng'd On all the Authors of your Obloquie: Name him. Isab. Rogero. Guiaca. Ha. Isab. What does his name affright thee coward Lord? Be mad Isabella, curse on thy reuenge, This Lord was knighted for his fathers worth, Not for his owne. Farewell thou periur'd man, Ile leaue you all, You all conspire to worke mine honors fall. Guia. Stay my Isabella, were he my fathers sonne, Composed of me, he dies, Delight still keepe with thee: goe in. Isabella. Thou art iust: Reuenge to me is sweeter now then lust.
Enter GVIDO: they see one another and draw and make a passe, then enter ANNA. Anna. What meane you Nobles, will you kill each other? Ambo. Hold. Guido. Thou shame to friendship, what intends thy hate? Guiaca. Loue Armes my hand, makes my soule valiant, Isabellas wrongs now sits vpon my sword, To fall more heauie to thy cowards head, Then thunderbolts vpon Ioues rifted Oakes: Deny thy scandall, or defend thy life. Guido. What? hath thy faith and and reason left thee both? That thou art onely flesh without a soule: Hast thou no feeling of thy selfe and me? Blind rage that will not let thee see thy selfe. Guiaca. I come not to dispute but execute: And thus comes death. Another passe. Guido. And thus I breake thy dart, her's at thy whores face. Guiaca. 'Tis mist: here's at thy heart, stay, let vs breath. Guido. Let reason gouerne rage, yet let vs leaue, Although most wrong be mine, I can forgiue: In this attempt, thy shame will euer liue. Guiaca. Thou hast wrong'd the Phenix of all women rarest, She that's most wise, most louing, chaste and fairest. Guid. Thou dotest vpon a diuell, not a woman, That ha's bewitcht thee with her Sorcerie, And drown'd thy soule in leathy faculties, Her vselesse lust has benumb'd thy knowledge, Thy intelectuall powers, obliuion smothers, That thou art nothing but forgetfulnesse. Guiaca. What's this to my Isabella, my sinnes mine owne, Her faults were none, vntill thou madest 'em knowne. Guido. Leaue her, and leaue thy shame where first thou found'st it; Else liue a bondslaue to diseased lust, Deuour'd in her gulfe-like appetite And infamy shall write thy Epitaph,
Thy memory leaues nothing but thy crimes, A scandall to thy name in future times. Guia. Put vp your weapon, I dare here you further, Insatiat lust is Sire still to murther. Guido. Beleeue it friend, if her heart bloud were vext, Though you kill me, new pleasure makes you next: She lou'd me deerer, then she loues you now, Shee'll nere be faithfull, has twice broke her vow. This curse pursues femall Adulterie, They'l swimme through blood for sinnes varietie: Their pleasure like a sea groundlesse and wide, A womans lust was neuer satisfied. Guia. Feare whispers in my brest, I haue a soule That blushes red, for tending bloudy facts, Forgiue me friend, if I can be forgiuen, Thy counsell is the path leades me to heauen. Guid. I doe embrace thy reconciled loue. Guiaca. That death or danger, now shall ne'er remoue, Goe tell thy Insaciate Countesse Anna, We haue escap't the snares of her false Loue, Vowing for euer to abandon her. Guid. You haue heard our Resolution, pray be gone. Anna. My office euer rested at your pleasure, I was the Indian, yet you had the treasure. My faction often sweates, and oft takes cold, Then gilde true diligence o'er with gold. Guia. Thy speech deseru's it there's gold, giues her gold. Be honest now, and not loues Noddy, Turn'd vp and plaid on whil'st thou keep'st the stock, Prethe formally let's ha thy absence. Anna. Lords farewell, Exit Anna. Guido. Tis Whores and Panders, that makes earth like hell. Guiaca. Now I am got out of lusts Laborinth, I will to Venice, for a certaine time, To recreate my much abused spirits▪ And then reuisit Pani and my friend,
Guido. Ile bring you on your way but must returne; Lust is like Aetna, and will euer burne. Yet now desire is quench't flam'd once in height: Till man knowes hell, he neuer has firme faith. Exeunt Ambo. Enter Isabella rauing, and Anna. Isabella. Out scritch-Owle messenger of my reuenges death Thou do'st belye Guiaca 'tis not so. Anna. Vpon mine honestie they are vnited. Isabella. Thy honestie? thou vassaile to my pleasure take that Strike her. Darst thou controule me, when I say no? Art not my footestoole, did not I create thee? And made thee gentle, being borne a begger: Thou hast beene my womans Pandar for a crowne, And dost thou stand vpon thy honestie? Anna. I am, what you please Madame. Yet 'tis so. Isab. Slaue, I will slit thy tongue, lesse thou say no. Anna. No, no, no Madame. Isabella. I haue my humour, though they now be false, Faint-hearted coward get thee from my sight, When villaine? hast, and come not nere me. Anna. Madame: I run, her sight like death doth feare me. Ex. Isabella. Perfidious cowards, staine of Nobilitie, Venecians, and be reconcil'd with words: O that I had Guiaca once more here, Within this prison, made of flesh and bone, I'de not trust Thunder with my fell reuenge, But mine owne hands, should doe the dire exploit, And fame should Chronicle a womans acts▪ My rage respects the persons not the facts. There place and worths hath power to defame me, Meane hate is stinglesse, and does onely name me: I not regard it, 'tis high bloud that swels, Giue me reuenge, and damne me into hels,
Enter Don Sago a Coronell, with a band of Souldiers and a Lieutenant. A gallant Spaniard, I will heare him speake, Griefe must be speechlesse, ere the heart can breake. Sago. Lieutenant let good Discipline be vs'd In quartring of our Troops within the Citie, Not seperated into many streetes, That shewes weake loue, but not sound policie. Diuision in small numbers makes all weake, Forces vnited are the nerues of warre, Mother and nurse of obseruation. Whose rare ingenious spright, fils all the world By looking on it selfe with piercing eyes, Will looke through strangers imbecilities: Therefore be carefull. Lieft. All shall be ordred fitting your command, For these three gifts which makes a Souldiour rare, Is loue and dutie with a valiant care. Exiunt. Lieft. & Souldiors. Sago. What rarietie of women feeds my sight, And leades my sences in a maze of wonder? Sees her Bellona, thou wert my mistris till I saw that shape But now my sword, Ile consecrate to her, Leaue Mars and become Cupids Martialist, Beauty can turne the rugged face of warre, And make him smile vpon delightfull peace, Courting her smoothly like a femallist, I grow a slaue vnto my potent loue, Whose power change hearts, make our fate remoue. Isabella. Reuenge not, Pleasure now ore-rules my blood, Rage shall drown faint loue in a crimson flood, And were he caught, I'de make him murders hand. Sago. Me thinkes 'twere ioy to die at her command, Ile speake to heare her speech, whose powerfull breath, Is able to infuse life into death. Isabella. He comes to speake: hee's mine, by loue he is mine. Sago. Lady, thinke bold intrusion curtesie,
Tis but imagination alters them, Then 'tis your thoughts, not I, that doe offend. Isabella. Sir, your intrusion yet's but curtesie, Vnlesse your future humor alter it. Sago. Why then Diuinest woman, know my soule Is dedicated to thy shrine of beauty, To pray for mercy, and repent the wrongs Done against loue, and femall puritie. Thou abstract drawne from natures empty store-house, I am thy slaue, command my sword, my heart The soule is tri'd best by the bodies smart. Isabella. You are a stranger to this land and me, What madnesse ist for me to trust you then? To cosen women is a trade 'mongst men, Smooth promises faint passions with a lye, Deceiues our sex of fame and chastitie: What danger durst you hazard for my loue? Sago. Perils that that neuer mortall durst approue. Ile double all the workes of Hercules, Expose my selfe in combat 'gainst an Hoste, Meete danger in a place of certaine death, Yet neuer shrinke, or giue way to my Fate; Bare-brested meete the murderous Tartars dart, Or any fatall Engine made for death: Such power ha's loue and beauty from your eyes, He that dies resolute, does neuer die: 'Tis feare giues death his strength, which I resisted, Death is but emptie Aire, the Fates haue twisted. Isab. Dare you reuenge my quarrell, 'gainst a foe? Sago. Then aske me if I dare embrace you thus, Or kisse your hand, or gaze on your bright eye, Where Cupid dances, on those globes of loue, Feare is my vassall, when I frowne he flyes, A hundred times in life, a coward dies. Isabella. I not suspect your valor, but your will. Sago. To gaine your loue, my fathers bloud I'le spill.
Isab. Many haue sworne the like, yet broke their vow. Sago. My whole endeuour to your wish shall bow. I am your plague to scourge your enemies. Isabella. Performe your promise, and enioy your pleasure, Spend my loues Dowry, that is womens treasure: But if thy resolution dread the triall, Ile tell the world, a Spaniard was disloyall. Sago. Relate your griefe, I long to heare their names, Whose bastard spirits, thy true worth defames: I'le wash thy scandall off, when their hearts bleeds, Valour makes difference betwixt words and deeds. Tell thy fames poison, blood shall wash thee white, Isab. My spotlesse honor, is a slaue to spite: These are the monsters Venice doth bring forth, Whose emptie soules are bankcrupt of true worth. False Count Guido, treacherous Guiaca, Countesse of Gazia, and of rich Massino. Then if thou beest a Knight, help the opprest, Through danger safetie comes, through trouble rest. And so my loue. Sago. Ignoble villens, their best bloud shall proue, Reuenge fals heauy, that is rais'd by loue. Isab. Thinke what reproch is to a womans name, Honor'd by birth, by marriage, and by beautie: Be God on earth, and reuenge innocence, O worthy Spaniard, on my knees I begge, Forget the persons, thinke on their offence. Sago. By the white soule of honour, by heau'ns Ioue: They die if their death can attaine your loue. Isab. Thus will I clip thy waste, embrace thee thus: Thus dally with thy haire, and kisse thee thus: Our Pleasures Pothean-like in sundry shapes, Shall with varietie stirre daliance. Sago. I am immortall, O diuinest creature: Thou do'st excell the Gods, in wit and feature. False Counts you die, reuenge now shakes his rods:
Beautie condemnes you, stronger then the Gods. Isab. Come Mars of louers, Vulcan is not here, Make vengeance like my bed, quite voide of feare. Sago. My sences are intranst, and in this slumber, I taste heau'ns ioyes, but cannot count the number. Ex. Ambo. Enter LADY LENTVLVS, ABIGALL and THAIS. Abigal. Well Madame: you see the destinie that followes marriage, Our husbands are quiet now, and must suffer the law. Thais. If my husband had beene worth the begging some Courtier would haue had him: he might be beg'd well inough, for he knowes not his owne wife from another. Lady Lent. O you'r a couple of trusty wenches, to deceiue your husbands thus. Abig. If wee had not deceiu'd them thus, we had been Trust wenches. Thais. Our husbands will be hang'd, because they thinke themselu's Cuckolds. Abig. If all true Cuckolds were of that minde, the hangman would be the richest occupation, and more wealthie widdowes, then there be yonger brothers to marry them. Thais. The Marchant venturers would be a very small com∣panie. Abag. 'Tis twelue to one of that, how euer the rest scape, I shall feare a massacre. Thais. If my husband hereafter for his wealth chance to be dub'd: I'le haue him cal'd the Knight of the supposed home. Abag. Faith, and it sounds well. Lady. Come madcaps leaue iesting, and let's deliuer them out of their earthly purgation; you are the spirits that torment them: but my loue and Lord, kinde Mendosa, will loose his life, to preserue mine honor, not for hate to others. Abig. By my troth, if I had beene his iudge, I should haue hang'd him for hauing no more wit, I speake as I thinke, for I would not be hang'd for ne'er a man vnder the heau'ns.
Thais. Faith, I thinke I should for my Husband. I doe not hold the opinion of the Philosopher, that writes we loue them best, that we inioy first: for I protest I loue my husband better then any that did know me before. Abig. So doe I, yet life and pleasure are two sweet things to a woman. Lady. He that's willing to die to saue mine honor, I'le die to saue his. Abig. Tut: beleeue it who that list, wee loue a liuely man I grant you: But to maintaine that life, I'le ne're consent to die. This is a rule I still will keepe in brest, Loue well thy husband wench, but thy selfe best. Thais. I haue followed your counsell hetherto, and meane to doe still. Lady. Come: we neglect our businesse, 'tis no iesting, To morrow they are executed leasse we reprieue them, Wee be their destinies to cast their fate. Let's all goe. Abig. I feare not to come late. Exeunt. Enter DON SAGO SOLVS with a case of Pistols. Sago. Day was my night, and night must be my day: The sunne shin'd on my pleasure, with my lone, And darknesse must lend aide to my reuenge, The stage of heau'n, is hung with solemne black, A time best fitting, to Act Tragedies, The nights great Queene, that maiden gouernesse Musters black clouds, to hide her from the world, Afraide to looke on my bold enterprise. Curs'd creatures messengers of death, possesse the world, Night-Rauens, scritch-owles, and vote-killing Mandrakes, The ghosts of misers, that imprison'd gold, Within the harmelesse bowels of the earth, Are nights companions: bawdes to lust and murder, Be all propitious to my Act of iustice: Vpon the scandalizers of her fame,
That is the life-blood of deliciousnesse▪ Deem'd Isabella, Cupids Treasurer. Whose soule containes the richest gifts of loue: Her beautie from my heart, feare doth expell; They rellish pleasure best, that dread not hell. Who's there? Enter Count Rogero. Rogero. A friend to thee, if thy intents be iust & honorable. Sago. Count Rogero, speake, I am the watch. Rogero. My name is Rogero: do'st thou know me? Sago. Yes slanderous villen, nurse of Obloquie, Whose poison'd breath, ha's speckl'd cleare fac't vertue, And made a Leper of Isabella's fame, That is as spotlesse, as the eye of heau'n. Thy vitall threds a cutting, start not slaue, Hee's sure of sudden death, heau'n cannot saue. Count Rog. Art not Guiaca turn'd Apostata, ha's pleasure once againe Turn'd thee againe a diuell, art not Guiaca? hah! Sago. O that I were, then would I stab my selfe, For he is mark't for death, as well as thee: I am Don Sago thy mortall enemie, Whose hand loue makes thy executioner. Rogero. I know thee valiant Spaniard, and to thee Murders more hatefull, then is sacrilege Thy actions euer haue been honourable. Sago. And this the crowne of all my Actions, To purge the earth, of such a man turn'd monster. Rogero. I neuer wrong'd thee Spaniard, did I? speake I'le make thee satisfaction like a souldiour, Tell him all the Plot. A true Italian, and a Gentleman: Thy rage is treacherie without a cause. Sago. My rage is iust, and thy heart bloud shall know, He that wrongs beautie, must be honors foe: Isabels quarrell, armes the Spaniards spirit. Rogero. Murder should keepe with basenesse, not with merit: I'le answere thee to morrow by my soule,
And cleare thy doubts, or satisfie thy will. Sago. Hee's warres best scholler, can with safety kill. Take this to night, now meete with me to morrow, Shootes. I come Isabella, halfe thy hate is dead, Valour makes murder light, which feare makes dead. Capt. The pistoll was shot here seize him, Enter Capt. with a band of Soldiors. Bring lights, what Don Sago Collonell of the horse? Ring the Alarum bell, raise the whole Citie, His Troops are in the towne, I feare treacherie: Whose this lies murdred, speake bloud-thirstie Spaniard. Sago. I haue not spoil'd his face, you may know his visnomy. Capt. 'Tis Count Rogero, goe conuay him hence. Thy life proud Spaniard, answeres this offence, A strong guard for the prisoner, lesse the cities powers Rise to rescue him. Begirt him with souldiours. Sago. What needs this strife? Know slaues, I prize reuenge aboue my life. Fames register to future times shall tell That by Don Sago, Count Rogero fell. Exeunt omnes. Finis Acti Quarti. Actus quintus Scaena prima. Enter MEDINA, the dead body of GVIDO Alias Count Arsena, and Souldiours, Don Sago guarded, Exe∣cutioner, Scaffold. Medina. DOn Sago quak'st thou not to behold this spectacle, This innocent sacrifice murdred noblenes, When bloud the maker euer promiseth, Shall though with slow yet with sure vengeance rest. I'tis a guerdon earn'd, and must be paide,
As sure reuenge, as it is sure a deede: I nee'r knew murder yet, but it did bleed. Canst thou after so many fearefull conflicts, Betweene this obiect, and thy guilty conscience, Now thou art freed from out the serpents Iawes, That vilde Adultresse, whose sorceries Doth draw chaste men into incontinence: Whose tongue flowes ouer with harmefull eloquence. Canst thou I say repent this hainous Act, And learne to loath, that killing Cockatrice? Sago. By this fresh blood, that from thy manly brest, I cowardly sluct out, I would in hell, From this sad minute, still the day of doome: To re-inspire vaine Aesculapius. And fill these crimson conduits, feele the fire Due to the damned, and this horrid fact Medina Vpon my soule, braue Spaniard, I beleeue thee. Sago. O cease to weepe in blood, or teach me too, The bubbling wounds, doe murmure for reuenge: This is the end of lust, where men may see, Murders the shadow of Adulterie: And followes it to death. Medina. But hopefull Lord, we doe commiserate, Thy bewitch't fortunes▪ a free pardon giue: On this thy true and noble penitence. With all we make thee Collonell of our horse; Leuied against the proud Venecian state. Sago. Medina, I thanke thee not, giue life to him, That sits with Risus, and the full cheek't Bacchus, The rich and mighty Monarchs of the earth, To me life is ten times more terrible, Then death can be to me, O breake my breast: Diuines and dying men may talke of hell, But in my heart the seuerall torments dwell. What Tanais, Nilus? or what Tioris swift? What Rhenus ferier then the Cataract?
Although Neptolis cold, the waues of all the northerne sea, Should flow for euer, through these guiltie hands, Yet the sanguinolent staine would extant be. Medina. God pardon thee, we doe. Enter a messenger. A shoute. Messenger. The Countesse comes my Lord, vnto the death: But so vnwillingly, and vnprepar'd, That she is rather forst, thinking the summe She sent to you of twenty thousand pound, Would haue assured her of life. Medina. O Heauens! Is she not wearie yet of lust and life? Had it been Cressus wealth, she should haue died; Her goods by law, are all confiscate to vs, And die shee shall: her lust Would make a slaughter house of Italy. Ere she attain'd to foure and twenty yeeres, Three Earles, one Vicount, and this valiant Spaniard, Are knowne to abeene the fuell to her lust: Besides her secret louers, which charitably I iudge to haue beene but few, but some they were. Here is a glasse, wherein to view her soule, A Noble, but vnfortunate Gentleman, Cropt by her hand, as some rude passenger Doth pluck the tender Roses in the budde, Murder and lust, the least of which is death, And hath she yet any false hope of breath? Enter ISABELLA, with her haire hanging downe, a chaplet of flowers on her head, a nosegay in her hand, Exe∣cutioner before her, and with her a Cardinall Isabella. What place is this? Cardin. Madame, the Castle greene. Isab. There should be dancing on a greene I thinke. Card. Madame: to you none other then your dance of death. Isabell. Good my Lord Cardinall doe not thunder thus, I sent to day to my Phisician▪
And as he say's he findes no signe of death, Card. Good Madame, doe not iest away your soule▪ Isab. O seruant, how hast thou betrai'd my life? To Sago. Thou art my dearest louer now I see. Thou wilt not leaue me, till my very death. Bless't be thy hand, I sacrifice a kisse To it and vengeance: worthily thou didst, He died deseruedly, not content to inioy My youth and beauty, riches and my fortune: But like a Chronicler of his owne vice, In Epigrams and songs, he run'd my name, Renown'd me for a Strumpet in the Courts, Of the French King, and the great Emperor. Didst thou not kill him druncke. Medina. O shamelesse woman! Isab. Thou shouldest, or in the embraces of his lust, It might haue beene a womans vengeance. Yet I thanke thee Sago, and would not wish him liuing Were my life instant ransome. Card. O Madame: in your soule haue charitie. Isab. Ther's money for the poore. Giues him money. Card. O Lady this is but a branch of charitie, An ostentation, or a liberall pride: Let me instruct your soule, for that, I feare, Within the painted sepulcher of flesh, Lies in a dead consumption: good Madame, read, giues a booke. Isab. You put me to my booke my Lord, will not that saue me. Card. Yes Madame, in the euerlasting world. Sago. Amen, Amen. Isab. While thou wert my seruant, thou hast euer said, Amen to all my wishes, witnesse this spectacle: Wher's my Lord Medina? Medina. Here Isabella. What would you? Isab. May we not be reprieu'd?
Medina. Mine honors past, you may not. Isab. No, tis my honor past, Medina. Thine honors past indeed. Isab. Then ther's no hope of absolute remission. Medina. For that your holy Confessor will tell you, Be dead to this world, for I sweare you dye, Were you my fathers daughter. Isab. Can you doe nothing my Lord Cardinall? Card. More then the world sweet Lady, help to saue What hand of man, wants power to destroy. Isab. You'r all for this world, then why not I? Were you in health and youth, like me my Lord, Although you merited the crowne of life, And stood in state of grace, assur'd of it: Yet in this fearefull separation, Old as you are, e'ne till your latest gaspe, You'd craue the help of the Phisition: And wish your dayes lengthn'd one summer longer▪ Though all be griefe, labour and misery, Yet none will part with it▪ that I can see. Medina. Vp to the scaffold with her, 'tis late. Isab. Better late then neuer my good Lord you thinke: You vse square dealing, Medina's mighty Duke: Tyrant of France, sent hither by the diuell. She ascends the Scaffold. Medina. The fitter to meete you. Card. Peace: Good my Lord in death doe not prouoke her. Isab. Seruant low as my destiny I kneele to thee, To Sago. Honouring in death, thy manly loyaltie: And what so e'er become of my poore soule, The ioyes of both worlds euermore be thine. Commend me to the Noble Count Guiaca, That should haue shared thy valour, and my hatred: Tell him I pray his pardon, and Medina, art yet inspir'd from heau'n, Shew thy Creators Image: be like him, Father of mercy.
Medina. Head's man, doe thine office. Isab. Now God lay all thy sinnes vpon thy head, And sinke thee with them, to infernall darknesse, Thou teacher of the furies cruelty. Card O Madame: teach your selfe a better prayer, This is your latest hower. Isab. He is mine enemie, his sight torments me, I shall not die in quiet. Med. I'le be gone: off with her head there. Exit. Isab. Tak'st thou delight, to torture misery? Such mercie finde thou in the day of doome. Sould. My Lord: here is a holy Frier desires, Enter Roberto Count of Cipres in Friers weeds. To haue some conference with the prisoners. Roberto. It is in priuate, what I haue to say, With fauour of your father-hood. Card. Frier: in Gods name welcome. Roberto ascends to Isabella. Rob. Lady: it seemes your eye is stil the same, Forgetfull of what most it should behold, Doe not you know me then? Isab. Holy Sir: so farre you are gone from my memorie, I must take truce with time, ere I can know you. Robert. Beare record all, you blessed Saints in heau'n, I come not to torment thee in thy death: For of himselfe hee's terrible enough, But call to minde a Ladie like your selfe. And thinke how ill in such a beauteous soule, Vpon the instant morrow of her nuptials, Apostasie and vilde reuolt would shew: With all imagine that she had a Lord, Iealous, the Aire should rauish her chaste lookes: Doating like the creator in his models, Who viewes them euery minute, and with care, Mixt in his feare of their obedience to him. Suppose he sung through famous Italy, More common then the looser songs of Petrarch: To euery seuerall Zanies instrument,
And he poore wretch, hoping some better sate, Might call her back from her Adulterate purpose: Liues in obscure, and almost vnknowne life, Till hearing, that she is condemn'd to die: For he once lou'd her, lends his pined corps, Motion to bring him to her stage of honour Where drown'd in woe: at her so dismall chance, He claspes her: thus he fals into a trance. Isab. O my offended Lord lift vp your eyes: But yet auert them from my loathed sight. Had I with you inioyed the lawfull pleasure, To which belongs, nor feare, nor publike shame: I might haue liu'd in honour, died in fame. Your pardon on my faultring knees I begge: Which shall confirme more peace vnto my death, Then all the graue instructions of the Church. Roberto. Pardon belongs vnto my holy weeds, Freely thou hast it, farewell my Isabella. Let thy death ransome thy soule, O die a rare example, The kisse thou gau'st me in the church, here take, As I leaue thee, so thou the world forsake. Exit Roberto. Clarid. Rare accident, ill welcome noble Lord: Madame: your executioner desires you to forgiue him. Isab. Yes and giue him too, what must I doe my friend? Executioner. Madame: onely tie vp your haire. Isabella. O these golden nets, That haue insnar'd so many wanton youthes, Not one but ha's beene held a thred of life, And superstitiously depended on, Now to the block, we must vaile: what else? Executioner. Madame: I must intreat you blind your eyes. Isabella. I haue liued too long in darknesse my friend: And yet mine eies with their maiesticque light, Haue got new Muses, in a Poets spright. They haue beene more gazed at then the God of Day: Their brightnes neuer could be flattered,
Yet thou command'st a fixed cloud of Lawne, To Ecclipse eternally these minutes of light. What else? Executioner. Now Madame: al's done, And when you please, I'le execute my office. Isabella. We will be for thee straight. Giue me your blessing my Lord Cardinall: Lord, I am well prepar'd: Murder and lust, downe with my ashes sinke. But like ingratefull seede perish in earth, That you may neuer spring against my soule, Like weedes to choake it in the heauenly haruest, I fall to rise, mount to thy maker, spirit, Leaue here thy body, death ha's her demerit. Strike. Cardin. An host of Angels be thy conuey hence. Medina. To funerall with her body, and this Lords: None here I hope can taxe vs of iniustice: She died deseruedly, and may like fate, Attend all women so insatiate. Exeunt omnes. Enter AMAGO the Duke, the Watch and Senators. Duke I am amazed at this maze of wonder, Wherein no thred or clue presents it selfe, To winde vs from the obscure passages, What saies my Nephew? Watch. Still resolute my Lord, and doth confesse the theft. Duke Wee'll vse him like a fellon, cut him off: For feare he doe pollute our sounder parts. Yet why should he steale, That is a loaden Vine? riches to him, Were adding sands into the Libian shore, Or farre lesse charitie: what say the other prisoners? Watch. Like men my Lord, fit for the other world, They tak't vpon their death, they slew your Nephew. Duke. And he is yet aliue, keepe them asunder We may sent out the wile.
Enter CLARIDIANA and ROGERO bound: with a Frier and Officers. Rogero. My friend; is it the rigour of the law I should be tied thus hard, Ile vndergoe it: If not, prethee then slacken; yet I haue deseru'd it, This murder lies heauie on my conscience. Clarid. Wedlocke, I here's my wedlocke; O whore, whore, whore. Frier. O Sir be quallified. Clarid. Sir: I am to die a dogges death, and will snarle a little At the old Segnior, you are onely a Parenthesis, Which I will leaue out of my execrations: but first To our quondam wiues, that makes vs cry our Vowels In red Capitall letters, Iov are cuckolds, O may Bastard bearing with the panges of childbirth, be Doubled to him: may they haue euer twins And be three weekes in trauell betweene, may they be, So Riuell'd with painting by that time they are thirty, that it May be held a worke of condigne merit But to looke vpon 'em, may they liue, To ride in triumph in a Dung-cart And be crown'd with al the odious ceremonies belonging too 't: May the cucking stoole be their recreation, And a dungeon their dying chamber, May they haue nine liues like a Cat, to endure this and more; May they be burnt for witches of a sudden, And lastly, may the opinion of Philosophers Proue true, that women haue no soules. Enter THAIS and ABIGALL. Thais. What husband? at your prayers so seriously? Clari. Yes: a few orisons; Frier, thou that stand'st betweene The soules of men and the diuell, Keepe these female spirits away, Or I will renounce my faith else. Abig. Oh husband, I little thought to see you in this taking.
Rogero. O whore, I little thought to see you in this taking, I am gouernour of this castle of cornets, My graue will be stumbl'd at, thou adultrat whore, I might haue liu'd like a Marchant. Abig. So you may still husband. Rogero. Peace, thou art verie quicke with me. Abig. I by my faith, and so I am husband, Belike you know I am with child. Rogero. A bastard, a bastard, a bastard: I might haue liu'd like a gentleman, And now I must die like a Hanger on: Shew trickes vpon a woodden horse, And runne through an Alphabet of scuruie faces: Doe not expect a good looke from me. Abig. O mee vnfortunate! Clarid. O to thinke whil'st we are singing the last Hymne, And readie to be turn'd off, Some new tune is inuenting, by some Metermonger, To a scuruie Ballad of our death. Againe at our funerall Sermons, To haue the Diuine, diuide his text into faire branches: Oh, flesh and bloud cannot indure it, Yet I will take it patiently like a graue man, Hangman, tie not my halter of a true louers knot, I shall burst it if thou doost. Thais. Husband, I doe beseech you on my knees, I may but speake with you. I'le winne your pardon, Or with teares like Niobe bedew a. Clarid. Hold thy water Crocodile, and say I am bound To doe thee no harme: were I free yet I could not Be looser then thou: For thou art a whore. Agamemnons daughter that was sacrific'd For a good winde, felt but a blast of the torments: Thou should'st indure, I'de make thee swownd Oftner, then that fellow that by his continuall practise Hopes to become Drum Maior.
What saist thou to tickling to death with bodkins? But thou hast laught too much at me alreadie, whore. Iustice O Duke, and let me not hang in suspence. Abig. Husband: I'le naile me to the earth, but I'le Winne your pardon. My Iewels, iointure, all I haue shall flye: Apparell, bedding, I'le not leaue a Rugge; So you may come off fairely. Clarid. I'le come off fairely. Then beg my pardon, I had rather Chirurgions hall should begge my dead bodie For an Anatomie, then thou begge my life: Iustice O Duke, and let vs die. Duke. Signior, thinke, and dally not with heauen, But freely tell vs, did you doe the murther? Rogero. I haue confest it, to my ghostly father, And done the Sacrament of penance for it. What would your highnesse more? Clar. The like haue I, what would your highnesse more? And here before you all tak't o'my death. Duke. In Gods name then on to the death with them, For the poore widdowes that you leaue behinde, Though by the law, their goods are all confiscate, Yet wee'll be their good Lord, and giue 'em them. Clari. Oh hell of hels. Why did not we hire some villaine to fire our houses? Rog. I thought not of that, my minde was altogether of the gallowes. Clar. May the wealth I leaue behinde me, help to damne her, And as the cursed fate of curtezan, What she gleanes with her traded art, May one as a most due plague cheat from, In the last dotage of her tired lust, And leaue her an vnpittied age of woe. Rogero. Amen, Amen. Watchm. I neuer heard men pray more feruently. Rogero. O that a man had the instinct of a Lyon,
He knowes when the Lionesse place fals to him: But these solaces, these women, They bring man to gray haires before he be thirtle. Yet they cast out such mistes of flatterie from their breath, That a mans lost againe▪ sure I fell into my marriage bed drunke: Like the Leopard, well with sober eyes would I had auoided it; Come graue and hide me from my blasted fame; Exeunt Ambo with officers. O that thou could'st as well conceale my shame. Thais. Your pardon & your fauor gracious Duke Women kneele. At once we doe implore, that haue so long. Deceiu'd your royall expectation, Assur'd that the Comick knitting vp, Will moue your spleene, vnto the proper vse, Of mirth, your naturall inclination: And wipe away the watery couloured anger, From your inforced cheeke. Faire Lord, beguile Them and your saf't, with a pleasing smile. Duke. Now by my life I doe, faire Ladies rise, I nee'r did purpose any other end, To them and these designes. I was inform'd, Of some notorious errour, as I sate in iudgement. And doe you heare? these night workes require a Cats eyes, To impierce deiected darknesse: call back the prisoners. Clari. Now what other troubled newes, Enter Clarid. and Rogero, with officers. That we must back thus? Ha's any Senator beg'd my pardon, Vpon my wiues prostitution to him. Rog. What a spight's this, I had kept in my breath of purpose Thinking to goe away the quieter, and must we now backe? Duke. Since you are to die, wee'll giue you winding sheetes, Wherein you shall be shrouded aliue, By which we winde out all these miseries. Segnior Rogero, bestow a while your eye, And reade here of your true wiues chastity. Giues him a Letter.
Rog. Chastitie? I will sooner expect a Iesuites recantation: Or the great Turkes conuersion, then her chastitie. Pardon my leige, I will not trust mine eyes: Women and Diuels, will deceiue the wise. Duke. The like Sir is apparant on your side. To tother. Clar. Who? my wife? chaste? ha's your grace your sense, I'le sooner beleeue A coniurer may say his prayers with zeale, Then her honestie. Had she been an Hermaphrodite I would scarce hath giuen credit to you, Let him that hath drunke loue drugs trust a woman, By heau'n I thinke, the aire is not more common. Duke. Then we impose a strict command vpon you: On your Allegeance, reade what there is writ. Clar. A writ of errour, on my life my liege. Duke. You'le finde it so I feare. Cla. What haue we here the Art of Brachigraphy? Lookes ont▪ Thais. Hee's stung already, as if his eyes were turn'd on Per∣sies shield. There motion is fixt, like to the poole of Stix. Abig. Yonders our flames, and from the hollow Arches, Of his quick eyes, comes commet traines of fire: Bursting like hidden furies, from their Canes, Reades. Your's till he sleepe, the sleepe of all The world, Rogero. Rogero. Marry and that Lethergie seize you, reade againe. Clar. Thy seruant so made by his stars, Rogero. Reads againe. A fire on your wandring starres Rogero. Rog. Sathan, why hast thou tempted my wife? To Clarid. Cla. Peace, seducer, I am branded in the forehead With your starre-marke. May the starres drop vpon thee▪ And with their sulphure vapours choake thee, ere thou Come at the gallowes. Rogero. Stretch not my patience Mahomet. Clarid. Termagant that will stretch thy patience. Rogero. Had I knowne this I would haue poison'd thee in the Chalice,
This morning, when we receaued the Sacrament. Clari. Slaue, knowst thou this? tis an Appendix to the Letter, But the greater temptation is hidden within. I will scowre thy gorge like a Hawke: thou shalt swallow thine owne stone in this letter, They bustle. Seal'd and deliuered in the presence of. Duke. Keepe them asunder, list to vs, we command. Clari. O violent villayne, is not thy hand hereto? And writ in bloud to shew thy raging lust? Thais. Spice of a new halter, when you go a ranging thus like Deuills, would you might burne for't as they doe. Rogero. Thus tis to lye with another mans wife: He shalbe sure to heare on't againe. But we are friends, sweet ducke, kisse her. And this shall be my maxime all my life, MAN neuer happy is till in a wife. Clari. Here sunke our hate lower then any whirlepoole. And this chaste kisse I giue thee for thy care. kisse. That fame of women full as wise as faire. Duke. You haue saued vs a labour in your loue. But Gentlemen, why stood you so prepostrously? Would you haue headlong runne to Infamy, In so defam'd a death? Rogero. O my Liege, I had rather rore to death with Phaleris Bull, then Darius-like, to haue one of my wings extend to Atlas, the other to Europa. What is a Cuckold learne of me, Few can tell his pedigree, Nor his subtill nature conster, Borne a man, but dyes a monster. Yet great Antiquaryes say, They spring from our Methusala, Who after Noahs flood was found, To haue his Crest with branches crown'd. God in Edens happy shade, This same creature made.
Then to cut off all mistaking, Cuckolds are of womens making. From whose snares, good Lord deliuer vs. Clari. Amen, Amen. Before I would proue a Cuckold, I would indure a winters Pil∣grimage in the Frozen Zone, Goe starke naked through Muscouia, where the Climate is degrees colder then Ice. And thus much to all marryed men. Now I see great reason why Loue should mary ielousie: Since mans best of life is fame, He had neede preserue the same. When tis in a womans keeping, Let not Argos eyes be sleeping. The poxe is vnto Panders giuen By the better powers of heauen. That contaynes pure chastity, And each Virgin soueraignety, Wantonly she op't and lost: Gift whereof, a God might boast. Therefore shouldst thou Diana wed, Yet be iealous of her bed. Duke. Night, like a Masque, is entred heauens great hall, With thousand Torches vshering the way: To Risus will wee consecrate this Euening, Like Missermis cheating of the brack. Weele make this night the day. Faire ioyes befall Vs and our Actions. Are you pleased all? Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
