17701 99847793 12854
THE Laudable Life, And Deplorable Death, of our late peerlesse Prince HENRY. Briefly repre∣sented. Together, with some other Poemes, in ho∣nor both of our most gracious Soueraigne King Iames his auspicious entrie to this Crowne, and also of his most hopefull Children, Prince Charles and Princesse Elizabeths happy entrie into this world. By I. M. Master of Artes. LONDON Printed by Edw: Allde, for Thomas Pauier, dwelling neere the Royall Exchange, at the signe of the Cats and parrat. 1612.
TO OVR LATE PEER∣LESSE PRINCE HENRIES deere Brother and Sister, PRINCE CHARLES AND PRINCESSE ELIZABETH Infants of Albion, of greatest hope, all happinesse. THrise hopefull CHARLES, gracefull ELIZABETH Great Britaines Hearts-ioy, Europs brightest beames Lo what my Muse, though mournfull, mused hath In laud of our late Lilly of Saint IAMES: All Europes obiect, and the flowre of Knights, Mirrour of man-hood, wonderment of wights. The Life of him whom euery heart did loue, The Death of him whome each heart doth condole These lines doe limme, while Christ him crownes aboue; And that his fame far flee's twixt Pole and Pole: This duties Birth I trust ye will it take In the best worth, for worthy HENRIES sake. Of your Highnesses The right humble Seruant: Iames Maxwell.
To the Reader. Lo heer's the Pattern of Prince HENRIES parts Of HENRIES foure the faire Epitomie, Learn'd like the First; stout, toward, th'hope of hearts, Like to the Fit once cheife of Chiualrie: Like to the Sixt, deuoute, milde, innocent, Like to the Seau'ntn, wise, thriftie, prouident.
THE MEMORABLE LIFE AND DEATH OF OVR LATE Peerelesse Prince HENRIE. 1 MANS life full well is likened to a flower,Man is like a floure that ei∣ther withereth through age, or is pluckt in his Prime. which growing vp doth grace a Gardens aire with sweetest smell, but withreth in an houre: Or else is pluckt for sent, or colour faire: Looke on these lines; they shall vnto thy sence Of this likenesse giue perfect euidence. 2 A plant of price they offer to thy view,the subiect of this Legend is such a flower as was not wi∣thred through age, but was pluckt in the Spring for the sweetnes ther∣of. Pluckt in the Spring by the great Owners hand; Of whom each flower hath being, shape, and hue, And at whose becke they florish, fall or stand: A flower which twice ten sommers had not seene, When it became as though it had not beene. 3God carieth him selfe as a Gardner, or ra¦ther as the ow¦ner of a Gardē amōg the flo∣wers of mortal mē, euery day as it were ta∣king a suruey of the same. Great Ioue one day as he did walke along Did find this flower, so fragrant, faire and sweet, This Lilly-rose that fild all Albien With his sweet sent, he said this flower's more meete For to perfume the Paradise of Saints, Then for to spring among earths fading plants.
4 The blessed Angels gather vp the soules of vertuous men, as men doe plucke or gather sweete flowres for their pleasure.VVhich hauing said, lo troupes of Angels bright, Post-haste from heau'n, vpon S. Leonards day, In the Spring garden at Saint Iames light, And thence our louely Lilly fetch away: Then home they haste scaling the starrie skies, Leauing behind them blacknes, shrikes & cries. 5 The Angels reioyce at the dissolution of the soules and bodies of the good, but men doe mourne; the exaltation & presence of the Soule brings solace to the one; the Soules absence and the Bodies corruption, brings sorrow to the other.Good Lord what discords were in th'accents then Which men and Angels made with heart and voice! Angels had solace, sorrow seas'd on men; Men sigh'd and sob'd whilst Angels did reioyce: Angels were glad, but men were grieued sore, Angels did sing, whilst men did shout and roare. 6 Angels and Saints in the supernall quire With sweetest songs that day did celebrate, Blest HENRIES soule vnto great Ioue so deare With heauenly Hymns they did congratulate: With how great mirth did they this Antheme sing Welcome sweer Saint the sonne of Britains King! 7 The day of Prince Henries death, was both a feasting day and a fasting day, the one to Angels, the other to men: He yeilded vp the Ghost in∣to Gods hands the same day of the weeke, and about the same time of the day that Christ Iesus did yeild his into the hands of his Father; to wit, on friday the sixt day of the weeke, being likewise the sixt day of the ninth moneth, when he was not full 19 years olde.Deere HENRIES death thus made a fest'uall day T'immortall wights, to men much otherwise,
For from their hearts all gladnes fled away, So soone as he had shut his Eagles eyes: VVhich made them crie, is our braue HENRY gon, The ioy of Hearts, the Hope of Albion? 8 The fairest flowre that er'e in Britaines Ile, Did sprout or spring, or Sunne did euer see, Whose fragrant smell diffused many mile Fill'd Sea and Land from Wales to Virginie. Orcades and Gades, west; East, both South and North, Did smel the sent which this sweet floure sent forth. 9 A wight I weene, whose worth both farre and neere,Prince Hen∣ries piety and feare of God. Made each eye loue him, each tong speake his praise; Whose piety, faith, and religious feare; His fame and name shall to the heauens raise: It was his daily practise twise to pray, And praise his God; this was his vse alway. 10 A peerlesse part in him all haue obseru'd,His admira∣ble and lauda∣ble abstinence from swearing cursing & ban¦ning. He neuer did Gods sacred name prophane; He neuer curs'd; for which he hath deseru'd, That all should sing and celebrate his name: To Gods blest word he bare great Reuerence, And Sermons heard with humble diligence. 11His know∣ledge in Diui∣nity, and both learned & mo∣dest discourse. In talking of points of Diuinitie, Great was his wit, his iudgement and his skill;
Men did admire the matchlesse modestie, Which did appeare in his talke euer still: Most father-like in his discourses sweet, Skilfull and graue, quick, ornate, and discreet. 12 His know∣ledge of hu∣mane Scien∣ces and Arts.In euery art he had more then a taste; For in each science of Philosophie, He knew those things that did become him best, And as did serue his minde to beautifie: I meane the choisest things of euery art, This peerelesse Prince had laid vp in his heart. 13 And as he was to God deuotious, His loyall obedience to Father & mo∣ther, and his auersenes frō Absolomes as∣piring minde.Reading each day his word with reuerence; So to his parents most obsequious Was he alwayes with loyall diligence. What er'e he knew to be their minde and will, Most readily he did it aye fulfill. 14 So far was he inclin'd not to rebell, With Absalom, who hellishly did aime His King and father Dauid to expell; So far I say was Henry from this straine; That from his Cradle to his mournfull end, He neuer did his father once offend. 15 O happy father to haue such a Sonne; As neuer did by any wretched wayes,
So much as once prouoke his passion, By word or worke! O wonder of our dayes! The Saint of Sonnes, thus may we him enstile, The choysest child of many million mile. 16 VVhat shall I say of the affection, This heau'n-bred Prince did beare vnto his Brother?His loue & affection to∣ward his Bro∣ther & Sister. Charles our Hearts-ioy, the choyse of Albion; VVhose towardnes doth tell he is another Great-hearted HENRY, borne by starrie fate, This Ilands honour to perpetuate. 17 VVith what kindnes did he his Sister cherish, Eliza's grace, one of the Graces three? That Princesse rare that like a Rose doth florish, Filling each eye with her milde Courtesie: whose happie breeding, worthy inclination, Makes her admir'd, desir'd of euery Nation. 18 The great respect he bare vnto the Peeres,His respect towards the Peeres, Pre∣lates and all Preachers. Pastors and Prelates, and all men of worth, Shall be remembred of succeeding yeeres, which shall him praise, and his faire parts set forth, Extolling HENRIES great humanitie, His mildnesse and his affabilitie. 19 Princes had proofe and good experience, By costly presents, feasts and sumptuous showes,
His magnifi∣cēce towards forraine Prin∣ces and Poten∣tates,Of HENRYES much admir'd magnificence, And Heroicke Heart; this thing all Europe knowes. Spaine, Germanie, with Italie and France, In this respect must his braue Name aduance. 20 His grati∣tude & boun∣ty towards his household ser∣uants.The care he had of his choyse Seruants all, Them to incourage and to gratifie; Shall be spoke of, so long as euer shall An house be kept by Prince of Britanie. His bountie, thrift, his houshold gouernment, Beene marked well, they are a wonderment. 21. His great trayne and at∣tendance with his discretion in making choyce of wor¦thy seruants to be nearest himselfe.Seau'n hundreth soules his seruice did attend, Which of him did reap daily maintenance, Vnto them all his bountie did extend, His helpfull hand, his cheerfull countenance: Yet none were neere him, but of worthy parts, For valour, warrefare, languages, or arts. 22 His great thrift in buil∣ding, planting and repairing.To plant and build he had a great delight, Olde ruines his sole presence did repaire; Orchards and Gardens forthwith at his sight Began to sprout and spring, to florish faire: Aske of faire Richmond standing by the Thames, If this be true; or yet of his S. Iames. 23 His libera∣lity towards Schollers.His glorie was good Schollers to propine, With large ensignes of his benignitie:
As great Mecenas of the Muses nine; Which shall not suffer his braue name to die, So long as Pindus or Mount Helicon, Shall be in place his praises to expone. 24 Likewise to Soldiers and to valiant Wights,His bountie towards Cap∣taines & Sol∣diers. Large was his loue, and liberality; It was his pride to passe whole daies and nights Among such men, and in their company: To ride great horses, and to handle armes, To heare the Drums & Trumpets sound alarmes. 25. To Vault and leap, to wrastle, ride and runne, Hardly to lye, and coursely for to feede,His warre∣like exercises. To play at Foiles, to vse both Pike and Gunne, Both sword and shield at euery pinch and neede: To runne at Ring, at Tilt and Turnament, Were the delights of Albions Ornament. 26 To learne all warre-like feats great was his care, As for to rank a troope, to fortifie, T'assige a Fort, to scale a wall, and there T'erect the ensignes of braue Victorie: T'abide heat, cold, and Souldier-like to sleepe, But a short while, good Sentinell to keepe. 27His tempe∣rance & sobri∣etie. VVhat shall I speake of his sobrietie? His order'd liuing, and his abstinence,
His shunning of all superfluity, In diet, drinke, apparrell, and expense. Base Drunkennes he hated as the Deuil, So did he Sloath the schoole-mistris of Euill. 28 His conti∣nence & cha∣stitie.With wine or Venus neuer was defil'd, The Rosie body of this worthy wight, VVith lusts allurements was he ne're beguil'd; Eguatius & Cuspinianus de Caesaribus in Henrice San∣cto.But pure and chaste remain'd both day and night: HENRY the Saint that worthy Emperour, Was not more chaste, then HENRY Britaines floure. 29 A wondrous thing it is, yet very sure, That such a Prince should liue so continent, VVhere were so many obiects to allure His eyes and eares, his senses to inchant: Sith then this Soule so chaste was and diuine, Let all chaste hands heape Roses on his shrine. 30 Scotland hath brought forth but tvvo prince Henries, and both of them were of most vertuous dis∣position, and of extraordi∣narie expecta∣tion, and died young before their Fathers: the first Prince Henrie was the grād child of holy queen Margeret, el∣dest daughter of Prince Edward the outlavv sonne and heire of Edmond Iron-side King of England▪ The second and last Prince Henrie was the great great grand-childe of Queene Margarete, the eldest daughter of Henrie the seauenth King of England. Reade hereof the Chroni∣cles of both Countries.Two hopefull HENRIES much admir'd for worth, The clime of Scotland heertofore hath bred, The choisest floures that euer soile brought forth; Both's fate it was to make this Ile to shed Huge streames of tears, for that in youthfull Prime Such wights of worth should fall before their time. 31 The first Prince Henry was Saint Dauids childe, That peerlesse Prince borne of Saint Margaret,
And King Malcolme; which of this seuer'd Ile By birth did both the Royall bloods vnite: The next did likewise from a Margaret spring, The Gemme of Iames our Iles vniting King. 32 Likewise that Sainted Prince of Hungarie,Munsterus in Hugaria Auentinus in Annalibus Bo∣iorum. Anto∣nius Bonfinius Michael Riti∣us de rebus Hungarie, in S. Stephano & Emerico. Cuspinianus in Henrico sancto. Saint Henry Emeric Prince of Hun∣garie died yong and before his Father, as did our Henry Frederick Prince of Britannie. King saint Steuens Son, nam'd HENRY EMERICK That holy Prince did in his spring-time die; As did our hearts-ioy HENRY FRIDERICK: Whose holy life shall get him lasting praise, And him enstile the wonder of our dayes. 33 Ten dayes did last lou'd Henries hid disease, During which space, his heau'n-bred brest did burne With diuine loue; in God was all his Ease; Mediciners could do no more, but mourne. And good cause why; seeing their Phisicke-art, No help could giue to heale great Britaines Heart. 34 Thus in the month that martyr'd Edmond fell,In the month of Nouember Saint Edmond King of Eng∣land suffered his Martyrdome, and both king Henrie the 3. and our peere∣les Prince Henrie did die, the one leauing his Kingdome to Edward the 1. the other his Prince-dome to Charles the 1. Once Englands King, whose faith him made a Saint: Henry our hope, who did in faith excell, In hope, and loue, his holy soule vp sent.
To Christs owne Court; a soule so full of grace, That it was worthy of no lower place. 35 Ado Treui∣rensis in Mar∣tyrolog. & alii plures. S. Leonard was a Con∣fessor, and St. Felix a Mar∣tyr.Saint Leonards day neere t' All Saints was his last, That's likewise nam'd Saint Felixs martyr-day; Saint Iames they call the place from whence he past, In th'armes of Saints to liue with Saints for aye: Thus Persons, Times, and places circumstance, Do HENRIES Soules Saints-honour all aduance. 36 Prince Henry a bright starre soone Ecclip∣sed.Lo Norths bright Star thus hath of late gone downe In the South-point of this vnited Land: His too swift course hath made him set too soone, VVhen as his beames did blase o're sea and sand. Our Orbe too base it was this Starre to beare; For it was worthy of an higher spheare. 37 Prince Hen∣ry a rare Pearl soone lost.Lo the rare Pearle, that we of late haue lost, A peerlesse Pearle, the Load-stone of this Ile; VVhose worth did drawe from euery land and coast, The eyes of strangers many thousand mile: But this heart-drawing stone great Iames his Gem More worthy was t'adorne Ioues Diadem. 38 Prince Hen∣ry a faire flour soone pluckt.Lo how the fragrant Lilly of this land, The hands of Angels haue pluckt vp in haste, Presenting it into Iehouah's hand;
For this Rose-Lilly did become him best: Saints Paradise good Lord how it adornes! where floures are free from thistles & from thorns. 39 A Starre, a Pearle, a Flowre sith we haue lost, Bright, rare, and faire, if we haue cause to mourne God wote, man wote;Prince Hen∣ry aliue the so∣lace of hearts; but dead, the sorrowe of hearts. loe that which cheer'd vs most Now doth it to our greatest sorrow turne: HENRIE aliue did lighten euery part But HENRIE dead sends sorrow to each heart. 40 One thing there is our sorrow may asswagePrince Charles is like a Phoe∣nix risen out of Prince Hen∣ries Phoenix∣cinder, to bee a Cordiall and comfort to our hearts. And heale our heart-breake, which is, when we see Heau'n-fauord Charles of such hope in prime age Borne to prolong this Ilands vnitie: So oft as I behold braue HENRIES brother, Me thincks I see a Phoenix from his Cinder. 41 Looke on his face,Prince Charls the viue resē∣blance of Prince Henries both body & mind. and surely ye shall see How HENRIES face in Charles his doth reuiue; Marke then his grace, wit, mildnesse, modestie, And all the goods, which God doth to him giue: Ye'le say with me, that there was ne're another More like to one, then Charles is to his brother. 42 Marke but his courage when he runnes at Ring,Prince Charls his gracefull and vertuous inclinatiō, to∣ward, & cou∣ragious dispo∣sition, godly e∣ducation, me∣morie, wit and vnderstanding euen in his youthfull age of 12. yeeres. His towardnesse and his dexteritie, VVhich promiseth that he shall honor bring
One day by his braue acts to Brittannie: Ye'le wish vnto this tender toward Knight Long for to liue in health, wealth, honors hight. 43 Marke th'vnderstanding of his youthfull prime, His answers quicke, his wit, his memorie, VVhen any Chapter of the Booke diuine He reads, or any humaine historie: Ye'le wonder with me to heare him rehearse The summe and sense of each leafe, page, or verse. 44 Brittans blesse God for such a toward youth As doth succeede in our braue HENRIES place, Pray vnto God for him with mind and mouth, VVish him alwaies the heape of hap and grace; That sweet CHARLES may for euer flourish till That great Charles chaire with honors hight he fill.
PEERELESSE PRINCE HENRIES Epitaph in his owne foure Languages. 1. Epitaph. FAire Europes Phoenix, and great Britaines blisse, The Soldiers solace, and the Schollars ioy, Both Mars and Muses minion, he it is VVhose timeles death doth young and old annoy: HENRIE our hope, and all the worlds wonder His soule heauen-rapt hath left vs but his cinder. 2. Looke how the mightie Macedonian King Surnam'd the great, did perish in his prime, Right so we see fall in his flourie Spring Great-hearted HENRIE long before the time; Here rests his Rosie corps chast, voide of vice: His Lilly-soule perfumes all Paradice. 3 Le Phenix de l'Europe & la fleur de cest age, Le soulas des Sçauants, & des Soldats la gloire: HENRY ce ieun' Heros, tant beau, braue saint & sage: Cy gist laissant a tous de son los la memoire: Tandis que durera le Soleil, Terre, ou Onde, Son beau nom fleurira par tous les pais du monde.
4. Hîc jacet Europae Phoenix, gentis{que} Britannae Gloria Martigenûm, gaudia Pieridum; Flos iuuenum, laus magna senum, lux alma bonorum, HENRICVS patriae spes{que} decus{que} suae: Corpus habet Tumulum, famam capit orbis, Olympum Spiritus, aeterno sic fruitur{que} Deo. 5 Vt perit in primo Pellaeus flore Iuuentae, Carpitur Autumnum sicut et ante suum; Praeproperè sic iste sui flos occidit aeui Henricus, dîo maximus ingenio: Fit Superûm consors claro Diademate fulgens, Linquit et aeternum Nomen in ore virûm. 6 , . : . . 7 .
A POEME, SHEWING HOW THAT BOTH THEOLOGIE AND ASTRO∣logie, doe pronounce the time of his Maiesties entring to this Crowne, to be auspi∣cious and happy. The Argument AT what time God the Father entred into the world by the Cre∣ation thereof, and God the Sonne Christ Iesus entred into the world for the renouation of the same, by the assumption of our flesh in blessed Maries Wombe, at the selfe same time Iames the Sonne of Marie entred to his new Kingdome. 1God began to make the world in the Spring-time: and about the selfe same time thereof that answereth to the 25. day of March accor∣ding to the common con∣sent of Greeke and Latin Theologians, and all Astro∣logians. If that the time be blest when God began To make the masse of this faire Globy frame: Or if the time be blest, he moulded Man First of the Earth, for to rule in the same: Then blest the time wherein great Iames began T'vnite the Crownes of this great Ile of Man. 2 This mother-time wherein all things were fram'd By Gods all-working word, which was his hand, Was fittest time, wherein should be proclam'd
The ioyfull newes of this vnited Land: Britaines belieue: the Worker and the Time, Of this great worke; both make it meere diuine 5 At the feast of the annun∣tiation, Christ Iesus the Son of Mary en∣tred into the world by the assumption of our flesh, and Charles Iames the sonne of Marie entred to his newe Kingdome.For if the Time be blest God did descend, From Heau'n to Earth, a Man for to be made, In Maries wombe, for vs which did offend; To th'end mans sinne on IESVS might be laide: Then blest the time, when Maries IAMES came down From North to South, to beare great Britaines crown. 4 For at what time vnspotted MARIES childe Came downe from God, Eues ill race to rescue From death and hell, to make an vnion Twixt God and man thus reconcil'd a new: At the same time, a matchles MARIES childe Came to vnite men with men in this Ile. 5 Robert the 2 and the first of the Stewart-Kings in Scot∣land, & Iames the 6. and the first of the Stewart-kings in England, be¦gan both of them their reigne in both kingdomes, at the feast of the Annuntiation. See Boethius, Leslaeus, Buchananus & Stowe in their Chronicles.Thus MARIES time hath bene auspicious To MARIES seed, and to the royall stemme Of STEWARDS name, sprung from the valorous Britannish Bruce, borne to Norths Diadem: For in both lands the first of STEWARDS line That e're bare Crowne began both at this time. 6 VVhen Phoebus shining in his Rammie signe The first of signes, and rules the head of man,
Was running from the night-days-equall Line;At what time the fun which is the prime of starres, was running in A∣ries which is the prime of signes, at the same time the prime Starre of the North by his motion began to inlighten the two Hemispheres of this Ilish Orbe. The Norths bright Starre with beamie face began, Surueying South and North both farre and neere, For to o're-shine the two halues of his sphere. 7 And fit it was, that this high head of Iles,Ptolomeus, Al∣bumazar, Fō∣tanus, Carda∣nus & Ranzo∣niun doe place vnder the in∣fluence of A∣ries which is the head of signes, the head of man which is the head of earthly creatures, and vnder the head of the same head signe called Aries, they place great Britannie which is the head of Ilands. Great Britaines Ile, a royall head should see: T'unite her ends, though distant many miles; When the head-signe was in his Royaltie: Which in Mans Body challengeth the Head, And doth his force o're Albions Iland shed. 8 Als when the Sunne did runne his Giants race,At what time the Sunne was mouing in the signe of Leo or the Liō which is the Sunnes owne house, the Lyon of the North at he same time receiued the Crown of the South. Mounted vpon the starrie Lyons backe; Then did the Lilly-Lyon shewe his face In glorie great; when he the stile did take: To be surnam'd King of great Britanie, Norths Prince of peace, and Pearle of vnitie. 9 Yea Iuda's-Lyon that delights to feedeIn the Reue∣lation Christ Iesus is called the Lyon of the Tribe of Iudah, and in the Canticles he remaineth among the Lillies, and the Lyon enuironed with Lillies, is a chiefe part of Charles Iames his royall armes. Amidst the fragrant Lillies of the fielde, Did wish our Gemme goodluck, (and eeke his Seede) Which bear's a Lilly-lyon in his shielde;
E'en Iudah's Lyon man-like sweetly smil'd, To see our Lyon, Britaines King enstil'd. 10 At S. Iames feast was hap∣pily King IAMES crowned. S. IAMES who like-wise was a MARIES childe, Held feast that day, that King Iames bare this Crown: First on his head, as Monarch of this Ile; Congratulate he did his new renowne: Wishing that our King IAMES of Albion, Might match in hap KingIames King of Aragon and Valence, the first of that name, the vni∣ter of two kingdomes & both the son & the grand-son of a Marie was surnamed the fortunate or happie: see Marinaeus in the 10. Booke of his Spanish Historie. IAMES of Aragon. 11 Thou Iacobs Harpe, which he holdes in his armes, Take vp a tune out of thine owne accord: Sing peace on Earth, and end to all alarmes Here in the Land of thy Concording Lord; Play Dauids Harpe, how pleasant is't to see, Britaines to liue in loue and vnitie? 12 Orpheus, Da∣uids, and our Iacobs Harpe is the Symbole of concorde: see Orus Apollo and Pierius in their Hiero∣glyphicks.Sweet Orpheus Harp adde new strength to thy strings, And tame the wild beasts of our passions; Let melodie, mounted on ayrie wings, Charme and dechase our fierce affections: That Britaines borne may liue in rest and Loue Vnited ay, till Christ come from aboue. 13 Come Prince of Peace, vnite vs all in one In Faith and Loue, perfite vs more and more,
Make IAMES the author of that Vnion,The most glo∣rious workes that can enter into any Princes heart or hand are these two, the pacification & re-union of the diuided Catholicke Church, and the restauration and re-union of the diuided and diminished Christian Empire: and it is the Authors most hearty wish, that it would please God to make the hapfull Father the instrument of the one, and the hopefull sonne the instrument of the other. Which was amongs first Christians of before: And let not his braue Charles his head goe downe Before he beare Charles or Constantines Crownes Make hell-hatcht Turkes amaz'd to flee and fall Before his face, till he be Lord of all.
A Poeme shewing the Excellencie of our Soue∣raigne King IAMES his HAND, that giueth both health & wealth, instanced in his Curing of the Kings euill by touch∣ing the same, in hanging an Angell of Gold about the neck of the diseased and in giuing the poorer sort money to∣wards the charges of their iournie. The Argument. KIng IAMES is called of God to be the Curer of the Kings E∣uill; in priuate persons corporally; in the Body of this Ile politi∣cally; in the Pope and the whole Catholick Church Ecclesiastically. 1 Great King it was mine hap of late to see, And to behold the vertues of your HAND; When as from your blest Seate of Maiestie; Before Gods Priests, which did about you stand; Your sacred Touch did serue for Medicine To such as with Kings-ill had plagued beene. 2 Vpon which sight my Muse with speed began To meditate these presents in the praise Of your right HAND blest both of God and man; The force whereof must needes your honour raise: Sith that the sole Touch of it doth much more, Then Med'cines all in curing of this sore.
3Professed phi∣sitions take gold of their patients and yet oftentimes giue them not helth for their gold, but our great Phisition giueth his pa∣tients, gold, & health also. Phisitions, when they doe vnder goe The Cure of this or any other ill; Are wont to reape some Angels one or moe At the sicks hands; thus they their purses fill: Alwaies they take; but oft none ease do giue To such as doe with sores tormented liue. 4 Far otherwise it fareth with our Leeche, Apollo's heire, this Ilands Aesculape; He to his sicke doth golden Angels reeche Out of his hand; and makes them to escape: Which makes our Leeche the Lord of Leeches all; For health and wealth both from his fingers fall. 5 Queene Maulde which was great English Beauclerkes heire,Polydorus Vir∣gilius. R. Holinsbed. I. Pox. I. Stow in Hen∣rico 1. And eke the Niece of Scots Malcolme our King, Who for a time the stile of Empresse bare Returning home, S. IAMES his HAND did bring Vnto her Father; who to dignifie The same, did found rich Readings Monast'rie. 6 S. IAMES his HAND which this faire Lady brought Into this Land, from the imperiall parts, (For ought I know) hath not such wonders wrought, As hath the HAND of IAMES, our King of Hearts: The honord Hand of S. IAMES dead, I say, wrought ne're such Cures as K. Iames Hand this day.
7 King Iames his Hand wrought an admirable, yea an incompar∣ble cure, when he set together againe the Back and the Belly of this two-parted Britannish Bo∣die.Which deed of this North-South-descended Dame, (For of both lands she had the royall blood) Did signifie, that once one of this Name, I meane of IAMES, vnto great Britaines good, Hauing vnited in his Body one Both bloods, should ioyne the halues of Albion. 8 If dead S. Iames his Hand in place had beene At that blest Time, King Iames the South did see, Me thinks it would haue growne both fresh & green At the first Touch of IAMES of Britanie: E'en the reuiued Hand of S. Iames dead On S. Iames Day had crown'd K. Iames his Head. 9 O happy Britaines that thus haue in One A iust, wise, Prince, a prompt Philosopher, A pregnant Poet, a Phisition, A deepe Diuine, a sweet-tongued Orator; AKing Iames a Prince, a Phi∣losopher, a Phisition, a Poet, in one word another Apollo. Curer both of Kings, and poore Mans Euill; What would ye more, aKing Iames a Curer of Kings (if they would be cured) by wholesome admonition, and a curer of the Kings e∣uill in priuate persons by manuall imposition, and a curer yet of another euil (which the Author calleth the poore mans euill) by bounteous subuention. King * Iames plaied the chaser, yea the danter of the deuill in his voyage to Denmark, where he soyled al his forces and scattered his troupes of wicked witches in the mids of the Cimbrianesea. chaser of the deuill. 10 O happy Britaines to haue such an Head! With such an heart, such an health-giuing Hand,
Approu'd of God, of man, of quick and dead; Garded of Angels both by Sea and Land; Thrise happy Britaines I must needs you stile, If that ye weigh Gods blessing of this Ile. 11 Blesse Britaines all great Ioue for giuing you, T'vnite this Ile, such a heau'n-fauord King, Let North and South reere vp aA Temple of concord or peace to the God of peace and concord. Temple now: And ioyning hearts and hands thus let them sing; Long liue King IAMES our Saluer and our Saint North's Prince of Peace, Mont-SyonsThe Oliue-tree is the sym¦bole of peace in Orus Apollo and Pierius: and our Prince of peace is like an Oliue tree planted in the Mount-Sion of the Church with Christs owne hand. oliue-plant. 12. And thou great Iames whom God hath blessed thus With his best things, with might and maiestie, Ascribe with heart and hand religious All praise and laud vnto the Trinitie: To Christs sick Church put to your healing hand; CureThe Kings-euill of the Church is her diuisions to be cured by the hands of kings and the heads of moderate men. her kings-euil, chase sects frō Christen-land. 13 PlayThe Author alludeth to Dauids curing of Saul, and his chasing a∣way of his euil Spirit by the harmony of his Harpe. The Harpe is alwayes the Symbole of concorde, but most properly in our Kings person, in regarde of his mild moderation & singular inclination to Christian con∣corde, the very crowne of all his other qualities. Dauids part, our Curer and our King In Sauls behalfe, e'en the Musition, With your sweet Harpe, cease not to play and sing; Till that ye proue Pope Pauls phisition: Touch still the strings of your Concording Harpe, Till Sauls discording Sp'rit from him depart.
14 But if that Saul out of his frantick moode Pluck vp a speare to pearce you for your play Or in his fury render ill for Good; Then grant great Ioue that one day see I may Great IAMES Empyring, from S. Angels top Reaching an Angell to theThe Pope (whose chiefe Court and chamber is in the Castle cal∣led S. Angell) is so subiect vn¦to the Kings-euill, though he will not be subiect vnto Kings, that he cannot be cured but by the hand of a king: and if a King on earth cannot, or will not cure him; then the King of heauen cure him for the good of his Church. plagued Pope.
A Poeme, representing a mysticall May-Pole of a Palme-tree from holy Palestine, decored with a May-Crowne of sweet Cedar from Mount-Lebanon, and ouer-topt with an Oliue-plant from holy Mount-Sion. Presented in hearts Earnest wish on May-day being the holyMay-day is the comme∣moration of Philip and Iames Day of S.S. Iames Bi∣shop of Ieru∣salem in Euse∣bius, and Hie∣ronymus Ec∣clesiasticall Historie, is na∣med Iustus, & Nazaraeus for his integritie and chastitie. IAMES the Son of Marie once the most holy Bishop of the Holy-Land, so highly renowned for his in∣tegritie and chastitie. Vnto King Iames the Sonne of Marie Lord of theIreland is called the holy Iland by Festus Auenus, so is Lindefarne in Northumberland by Beda in his Historie, of old the seate of the holy Scotish Father Aidanus Primate of Northumberland. holy I∣land, Simbolising with the other both in Name and notable parts. Planted in the mids of his Spring-garden of S. IAMES there perpetually to spring & sprout vntill Prince Charles his hopefull hand, quicken this Conceite. 1 BEhold the May that home to IAMES I bring (In hearts desire) this day that youthfull bands, Fetch From the fields and Forests flourishing The tallest Trees and boughs with busie hands; Their townes, their streets, & dwellings to decore With Spring-times pride, & fragrant Flora's store. 2 A May-pole such the like was neuer seene For matters (yet vnmatcht) Excellencie, All the May-daies that yet haue euer beene Since May began or MayesMeaning the Queene of May. Mayd-monarchie:
In no prophane place did my May first stand, It's such a May as yeelds theThe Palme-tree is proper to Palestine called commonly the holy land, see Dioscrides and Gesnerus de Palma. holy land. 3 The Palme-tree is the sim∣bole of pati∣ence, forti∣tude, victorie in Orus Apollo, and Pierius.The holy Palme almost the prime of Trees, The sacred Symbole of prais'd patience Was fittest to present his holy Eyes; Whose patient Sp'rit all men must reuerence: Milde Iesus hauing on milde Iames his face Engrauen the cleere Image of this Grace. Aristoteles Theophrastus, Plinius, Dios∣corides, Gesne∣rus de Palma. The Palme-tree is the sim∣bole or signe of victorie e∣uen in the Re∣uelation.4 This Tryumph-tree the more it's beaten downe The more it bendeth vp with matchles might; Bowe downe his backe, behold he rises soone, Resembling most a wrastler strong and wight: Hence is the Palme, the signe of Victorie Of Fortitude and Magnanimitie. 5 In which respect this May's most fit for him, Whose Vertues valour doth thus vanquish Vice, As Crueltie, Pride, Lust, and Mammons sinne; A Victorie that mak's him happy thrise: As for his State, the more men it debase The more God mountes it to an higher place. 6 Growe Princely Palme in despight of disdaine, Put forth apace your chiefe branche from your back
Till it o're-top France,To wit Im∣perially, for these words doe bear only a wish for the restauration of the diuided Christian Em∣pire. Almanie and Spaine With Rome and Greece, and bring the Turke to wrack; Christ Iesus helpe Prince Charles his hopefull hand To beare the Palme through out the holy-Land. 7 Vpon this Palme,A Cedar-crowne from Lebanon for our Salomon, the Samori of Albion. Lo a sweet Cedar-crowne Fetcht from the top of loftie Lebanon, For Frankincense is fit for the Renowne Of such a King as aimes at Vnion: Who God-like labours to vnite vs all In faith and loue, that vpstart sects may fall, 8 Loe heere the Symbole of this holy peace,The Oliue-tree is the sim∣bole of peace not onely in Orus and Pie∣rius, but like∣wise in Moses his Genesis. An Oliue-plant his May-crowne doth decore, Whose softning Oyle bedeweth all his face, And makes it sweet and shining more and more: Drop Oyle of peace downe from Mount-Oliues hill On Iames his head till full Christs Church thou fill. 9 O happy sight to see great Britaines King One day descending from Mount-Oliuet! O happy song, to heere the Hebrewes sing! For ioy of heart Iames to congratulate: Blest be the King that comes in IESVS Name To christen Iewes and Crowne Ierusalem.
10 Great IESVS grant, that as one of the Name ofMore Apo∣stolicall Prea∣chers of peace of the name of Iames, of old, and more lo∣uers of Chri∣stian concord at this day, of the same name of Iames, then of any other. S. Iames of old, did direct an Epistle to the dispersed beleeuing Iewes for the furthering of their Christian conuersation, & King Iames (I hope) will doe the like one day to the same, now misbeleeuing and more dispersed na∣tion, for the furthering of their Christian conuersion and collection: Euen so come Lord Iesus, come and vnite both Iewes and Gentiles in one. peace-bred Iames was the first that did beare The Bishops office in Ierusalem; So may our Iames that sacred Sea vpreare: That Iewes with Gentiles vnited in one Next Iesus may serue Iames of Albion.
A Congratulation of the most hopefull Prince CHARLES his auspitious Entrie into the world,Prince Charls his birth-time was both a royall time & a religious time. and Natiui∣tie, which was the 19 of Nouember 1600 being the festiuall day both of S. ELIZABETH the renowned Daughter of An∣drew King of Hungarie & the Eue of the Commemoration of S. Edmond the Martyre once the most Christian King of East-England; and the third day after the Coronation-day of the most renowned Princesse ELIZABETH our late Queene of Famous memorie. 1 GOe to my Muse with mirth some Sonets sing In honor of the blest Natiuitie Of sweet Prince Charles borne of a Queene and King, Whose Name and Fame shall liue in memorie, So long as Phoebus rolling in his Spheere Shall bring forth dayes or seasons of the yeere. 2 The Sunne which is the Lord of life and lightIupiter which is called the prime of pla∣nets for felici∣tie hath his house and hearts-ioy in the signe of Sagittarius vnder which Prince Charls was borne. To euery thing that Nature heere belowe Doth forme or frame; when Charles first came in sight Did his bright beames from Ioues chiefe house him showe That day he did in Sagittarie shine, Which starrie wits doe call Ioues royall signe. 3 And fit it was that the best Planets house Should Lodge the Sunne, the day so sweet a childe
First saw his light; an houre auspicious VVas due vnto the hope of Britaines Ile; I meane to CHARLES ordain'd by starrie fate This Ilands honour to perpetuate. 4. Sagittarius is a signe encli∣ning to beau∣ty of body, quicknesse of wit, and good∣nes of vnder∣standing: also a certain mar∣tiall and Mercuriall starre called the right ankle of the celestiall waineman did arise a litle before Prince Charles his birth, as it were to make him ready to goe to meete & welcome our Martiall and Mercuriall young Prince comming into the world.Sol in this Signe doth frame a feature faire, A louely face, a comely personage; And doth encline to knowe all things that are VVorthy of knowledge, to be quick and sage; VVhen e're these two the Horoscope doe holde They doe encline to be wise, braue, and bolde. 5 Likewise to be iust and ingenuous. Trustie and secret, constant, milde and graue, Nimble of Body and laborious; Yet such a one shall aduersaries haue; VVhich shall oppose his great felicitie, But he preuailes and gets the victorie. Sagittariu is a signe mascu∣line and encli∣ning to man∣hood, besides that Mars the planet of man∣hood, was in this manly signe the day of Prince Charles his birth.6 To riding, shooting, exercise of Armes Much doth the foresaid Horoscope encline: Besides that Mars who moueth all alarmes, That day did in Ioues Sagittarie shine; In such aspect as well doth signifie Highnes, renowne, braue acts of chiualrie.
7 Of Captaines, Souldiers and all men of warre Beloued for his great munificence;Sagittarius is a southerne signe & hath it vnder the best countries of Europe, beside the happie A∣rabia, and the Horoscope in this signe doth encline men to goe and see the said countries with good successe. His toward prowesse spreads his name right farre, Through Sagittaries secret influence, For vnder it are Spaine, France, Italie, High-Dutch-land, Dalmace, Hungar', Arabie, 8 A happy fortune thus it doth betideSole in Sagit∣tario Horosco∣pante qui na∣scitur paternā haereditatem consequetur. VVith ioyfull successe both by Sea and Land, A name renown'd throughout the world so wide: A wise-bold heart with a victorious hand. Yea more according to the starrie fate At home he must enioy his fathers state. 9 Nouembers month into the light did sendVespasion and Tratane were both of them famous for their forti∣tude, courage, wisedome, warlik prow∣esse, iustice, modestie, clemencie, bountie, and liberalitie, towards Schollars and Soldiours; whereof read Suetonius, Dion, and Aurelius Victor in their Histories. Henrie the 4. was likewise a Prince of great vnderstanding, and of quicke wit; eloquent, liberall, and in warre both foreward and fortunate; he fought more fields then M. Marcellus or yet Iulius Caesar, and alwayes with a victorious issue, whereof read Baptista Egnatius, & Cuspinianus in the Em∣perours liues. Three worthy Caesars wise, and valorous, Vespasian, Traiane the choyse of men, Henrie the fourth a Prince victorious; VVho sixtie times did with his sword and shield Alwaies bring home great honor from the field.
10 Charles Duke of Burgundie and Brabant, was a Prince of exceeding great magna∣nimitie; and e∣uen from his lowest yeeres, much addi∣cted to warrelike exercises, patient of cold and heat, hunger and thirst, and both tempe∣rate and continent, free from luxury and lecherie, and the most toward wight of his time, of whom read Pontus Heuterus in his Historie of Burgundie.The same month bare Prince Charles of Burgundie, Surnam'd the bold, a Chieftaine sterne and stout, Who many times brought home braue victorie, And did his prowesse proue at many a rout: Lewis of France much fear'd his force and might And had the worse by him in field and fight. 11 Philip Prince Palatine of Rhine, is re∣nowned for his warrelike prowesse and singular wise∣dome the was a great fauou∣rer both of Schollars and Soldiours, and was chosen Generall of the Imperiall forces, both by Charles the fift, and Ferdinand the first Emperors: of his prowesse, read in Melchior Suterus Historie of the Hungarian warre: and Augustinus Brunnius in his Catalogue of the Palatine Princes.Philip the braue Prince Palatine of Rhine For his rare courage cal'd the Bellicous, Was borne about our young Prince Charles his time Whom heere I name for his acts chiualrous; Which he did shewe vnder great Charles of Spaine, Then Emperour, in defence of Vienne. 12 Twentie sore assaults Soliman had made The famous Citie for to take by might; Whole sixty thousand fell downe by his blade; Yet forward Philip was not turn'd to flight: But valiantly did in defending stay, Till that the Turks were faine to flee their way. 13 * Great Archer-King the soueraigne Lord of all Who didst ordaine Prince Charles to see the light
In th'archer-signe which brings a fat all fall,In the Reuela∣tion Christ is painted out as a crowned ar∣cher riding on a white horse, with a bow in his hand, going forth to conquer and ouercome: & in Astrologie Caput Draconis or the Dragons head hath his fall in the signe of the Archer, vnder the which Prince Charles was borne to be an instrument one day, by his sharpe arrowes of the Turkish Dragons fall and finall ouerthrowe. To Dragons-head; strengthen this tender Knight; Guide thou his Arrow and direct his Dart To pierce the Turkish Dragons head and hart. 14 Stout Castriote,George Castri∣ote a Prince of incomparable courage, ma∣gnanimitie & strength of bo∣dy, entred to his Prince∣dome of Al∣banie in the south about the same time that Prince Charles was borne to be Duke of Al∣banie in the North, and afterwards succeeded to his brother Prince Henrie in the Prince∣dome of Britannie. Of the Turkes he was called Scanderbeg which is another Alexander the great, for his great valour: and of the Christians, in whose cause he shewed an admi∣rable fortitude against the Turkes in many battles and fields, he was called Chrssts soldier and Champion: he liued in great honour reputation and fame, in despight of the Turkes the space of 63. yeeres: of whome read Marinus Barletius in his life, Velaterranus in his description of Macedonie, Aeneas Syluius in his Europe, and Paulus Iouius in his Turkish Commentaries. whom Scanderbeg they call A second Pyrrhus valiant, bolde and braue, The Turkish Troups that often did apall And in the field full oft the foyle them gaue About the time of Charles Natiuitie Began to be nam'd Prince of Albanie. 15 O happy sight to see Prince Charles one dayCastriote alias Scanderbeg was Duke of Albanie in the south, and our Charles is Duke o Alba∣nie in the North. With Castriote once chiefe of chiualrie Against the Turks his Banner to display, That as hee's nam'd the Duke of Albanie: So men may him a Scanderbeg enstile Th'horror of Turks, the Hector of this Ile.
16 Christ Iesus name our Charles of Britanie With Scanderbeg, thy Soldier and thy Knight, Adde vnto his one Nothern Albanie SixIn the Geo∣graphie of Ptolemaeus, Strab, Plinius and Stephanus there doe oc∣curre six coun∣tries and Ci∣ties in the east & south, which beare the name of Albanie, and they lye in Greece, Arabie, Armenie, Ga∣lacie, and Italie, or thereabout; and the seauenth Albanie is in the North of Britannie, be∣ing a part of Scotland, and the first Dukedome of Prince Charles, whome Christ enable to vnite them Imperially all in one. Albanies, choose him thy fields to fight Gainst Mahomet, and giue him for his bire Constantines Towne with the proud Turks Empire. 17 Prince Albert Marquise of Brandenburg for his incom∣parable valour called the A∣chiles of Ger∣manie, was borne on the 19. of Nouē∣ber, euen as our Prince Charles was: see Nicholaus Reusnerus in Diario Historico, a briefe description of whose incomparable valour, and magnanimitie, is to be read in the Genea∣logicall workes of Elias Reusnerus and Hieronymus Henninges, as also in the Electorall Catalogue of Augustinus Brunnius.For month and day, at the same very time That matchles Marquise first did see the light, Who was the honor of the Germaine Clime Whose name Albert Almans Achilles hight: A Prince for fortune, courage, war-like arts VVisedome and worth, renowned in all parts. 18 A Martiall Body, a Mercuriall minde, An ornate Tongue, with an vndaunted heart, Most happily were in this Prince combinde, His prowesse was spoke of in euery part: Witnes his warres in Prusse and Polonie In Silese, Boheme, and all Almanie.
19 Many a troupe this Dutch Achilles led, His fiercest foes he brought them on their backe, Of Challengers right oft the blood he shed, Scal'd many a wall; and strongest townes did take: Was ay the first that enter'd in the field, And ay the last that laid downe sword and shield. 20 Albert was matchles in all martiall playes,Prince Albert did 17. times runne against men all armed and threwe them in the dust, he him∣selfe hauing no more ar∣mor on him except his hel∣met & shield. Of Iusting, tilting, and of Tournament, The onely man remarked in those dayes Who ne're incur'd disgrace or detriment: Yet he vnarm'd, did seauenteene times in Ioust Hurle men all-armd from horse-back in the dust. 21 Yeeres seauentie one this worthy wight did liue In great renowne, with honor, hap, and fame; Great Ioue to our yong Charles vouchsafe to giue The like long life with braue Albertus name: As oft as I see sweet Charles runne at Ring, Me thinks his Sp'rite did from Albertus spring. 22 Great God of Armes grant honor'd Alberts hart, His hand and hap to Charles great Britaines stay; Grant him to proue his Prowesse in each part As he was borne in Alberts month and day; Make him be nam'd th' Achilles Britannick, As Albert was th'Achilles Germanick.
A Congratulation of the happy Birth of the most gracefull Princes ELIZABETH, which was the 19. of Au∣gust 1596. being the festiuall day of the holy Matrone and Martyr S. Thecla, and the next day after the Commemoration of the most religious, & renowned Empresse S. Helen Daugh∣ter of Coilus King of Britanie, and the Mother of the first Christian Emperour Constantine the great, who was borne in the ancient and honorable Citie of Yorke. 1 The Sun be∣ing entred in∣to Virgo which is both a feminine signe, and the house of the feminine pla∣net Venus, they brought forth into the light Princesse Elizabeth to be the flower of the feminine sexe.MVse sing the Birth of lou'd Eliza's grace The flowre of Virgins, whom the Virgin-signe When as the Sunne did there begin his race; Sent to the light; both did their force combine With Venus, who in that Signe hath her house To grace vs with a Virgin vertuous. 2 Virgo is a signe encli∣ning to beau∣tie of body & bountie of minde.In this Signe Phoebus frames a louely face, A comely feature, and a stature tall; Vpon the heart he heaps his richest grace Of prudence, knowledge, bountie; and withall, Inclines to be kinde and officious, shamefast, and graue, iust, and ingenuous. 3 All which are further'd by the good aspect Of th'other starres, which in that houre did shine
So happily; that we may well expect, Of this choyse wight, such things as are diuine; For they encline to magnanimity, To gentlenesse and liberalitie. 4 The Horoscope in Virgo wealth doth yeild, For it disposeth to be prouident, In all things that belong to house or field,Sol in Virgine Horoscopans facit puellam ingeniosam, erecundam, beneuolam, officiosam, prouidam, quae viro nubet circa 16. annum & parturiet primo ge∣nitum eleganti forma. To be thriftie, watchfull and diligent: The maried state, (if that the art be true) Vnto her sixteenth yeere is fit and due. 5 Ierusalem is subiect to her signe,These Cities are vnder the signe of Virgo vnder which Princesse Eli∣zabeth was borne. Corinth and Rhodes, Pauie and Tholouse Towne Basil, with the braue Heidelberg of Rhine Paris and Lyons Cities of Renowne: And though I knowe not, which her must befall Yet this I knowe that she deserues them all. 6Probus the Emperor was born the same month & day that our Pro∣ba Princesse Elizabeth was borne on: he was a wight renowned for his notable parts of wisedome, fortitude, valiancie and vigilancie in warre, wherein he was both foreward and fortunate, whereof read Vopiscus and Cuspinianus in his life. Six Emperours Eliza's time did send Into the light, two onely will I name Probus the prime of olde Romes princely men, whose vertues worth did spread ech-where his fame: The day and month of whose Birth was all one With that of our braue Rose of Albion.
7 Maximilian the 2. the most worthie sonne of a most wor∣thy father Fer∣dinand the 1. was a Prince wōderful wise iust, moderat, clement, milde, affable, and bountifull to Schollars and soldiours, of whom read in Hi∣storia Augusta,The other is braue Maximilian Whom men the second of that name enstile, Whose worth went through all Germanie and Spaine, With Italie, through euery Land and Ile: A Prince renown'd for his beneficence, His wisedome, Iustice and his temperance. 8 Fridericke the 1. and Fride∣ricke the fifth Prince Pala∣tines of Rhine, were borne in the month of August the 1. on the 1. day, and the fifth on the foureteenth, whereof read Nicholaus Reusnerus in his Diarium, and Augustinus Brunnius in his Catalgus Electorum.To Caesars two, two Princes we may ioyne From Caesars sprung, and from the greatest Kings, Two Friderick Prince Palatines of Rhine; The First, the Fift, whose fame with feather'd wings Hee's far and wide, from filu'rie Thames to Tweede From fruitfull Kent vnto Kintires heede. Fredericke the first defended himselfe va∣liantly against his many strōg enemies, Duks Marquises, and Earles, besides Bishops; hee tooke Charles Marquise of Baden, Vldricus of Wirtemberg, Iohn Bishop of Meaux, being all banded a∣gainst him in warlike manner and with them their whole Nobilitie, with fiue hundreth Knights, and carried them away captiue into his Citie of Heidelberg, and there kept them the space of eleuen months, till at what time they had ransomed themselues whereof read Sebastianus Munsters in his Germanie, Iaus Wympelingius, in his Epitome rerum Germanicarum; and Augustinus Brunnius in his Catalogue of the Palatine Princes.9 Fred'rick the first call d the Victorious Is magnified for his martiall deedes, And prowesse great; a Prince magnanimous That of true worth, had both the fruits and seedes; Fred'rick the fift who now adornes this Ile One day shall brooke first Fred'ricks honord stile.
10 Eliza's birth was on S. Theclas day That matchles matron,Of S. Thecla the renowned Matrone and Martyr, read Eusebius, Eu∣agrius & Ni∣cephorus Eccle∣siasticall Hi∣stories. that rare Martyr'd wight VVhose constant faith, and feruent zeale for ay Shall be extoll'd, and had in honors hight: And now me thinks her pietie and faith Doe all reuiue in grac'd Elizabeth. 11 Me thinks I see Eliza in her prime Begin to follow the religious path Of that Princesse still honor'd to this time,S. Elizabeth daughter of Andrew King of Hungarie is much renow∣ned for her feruent pietie towards God and her cha∣ritie towards the poore whom she liberally relieued; and the sicke, vnto whom shee was wont with her owne hands to minister both medicine and meat, yea her costliest orna∣ments, she conuerted them to their vse for the supplie of their wants, of whom read Iaco∣bus Montanus in her life. Vnder the name of Saint Elizabeth: Who was the daughter of faire Hungarie As shee's the daughter of great Britanie. A parent to the poore Eliza was Nine hundreth soules she daily did maintaine This worlds wealth she did esteeme but trash, True godlines was aye her greatest gaine; To fast and pray, to helpe the poore in neede To salue the sicke, the fatherlesse to feede. 12. S. Hellene once a daughter of this Ile King Coilus childe,S. Helens day is the 18. of August, and our Eliza's birth-day the nineteenth. and great Constantines Mother Whose praise was spread from Caluarie to Kyle, For piety was euen such another:
Eliza's grace first saw faire Phoebus raye The next vnto S. Helens holy day. 13 Great Iesus grant to our Eliza's grace S. Helens fortune, and her Empresse-fate S. Helene the daughter of Cous King of Britaines and the worthiest Empresse that euer was in the world, so much renowned for her pietie, charitie and liberalitie: shee founded and builded about 32. Churches, she liued the space of 80. yeeres in health, wealth, with honors Imperiall hight, of whom read Eusebius, Nicephorus, Eutropius, & Orosius, in their Histories.That as they both are of the Royall race, Of British Kings, so she may imitate S. Helens zeale, and so reape for her hyre Helens long life, Helens Crowne of Empire. FINIS.
