18599 99856981 22638
¶The welspoken Nobody. God that is all good and almyghtye Hath shewed his power vpon me Nobodye, For whear my mouth with locke was sparred He hathe it burst and my speche restored, Wherfor I wyll syng prayse vnto his name Bicause I may speke withoute anye blame, And thoughe the pope with all his trayn Do me rebuke and against me sayen That as tofore I shuld nowe holde my peace Yet Gods honour to set furth I can not ceasse. Nobody is my name that beyreth euery bodyes blame ☜Many speke of Roben hoode that neuer shott in his bowe So many haue layed faultes to me, which I did neuer knowe, But nowe beholde here I am Whom all the worlde doeth diffame Long haue they also skorned me And locked my mouthe for speking free As many a Godly man they haue so serued Vvhich vnto them Gods truth hath shewed Of such they haue burned and hanged some That vnto their ydolatrye wold not come The ladye truthe they haue locked in cage Sayeng that of her Nobodye had knowledge For asmuche nowe as they name Nobodye I thinke verilye they speke of me Vvherfore to answere I nowe beginne The locke of my mouthe is opened with ginne Vurought by noman, but by Gods grace Vnto whom be prayse in euery place My Iourneyes I make both far and nere To seke whear people Gods iustice fear In that place wolde I make my habytation Trusting there to haue a continuall mansion In print tofore I did neuer appere Yet many coulde me not well bear But no maruell for the prouerbe sayeth All men can not abyde to here the truthe A companyon must he be with these good fellowes, As long as they wyll haue hym in theyr companyes, But sometyme they forget hym, vntyll he be Moulded or wormeaten, and than for heresye They do hym burne secretely as in the nyght The Iewes toke Christ, so these by theyr myght Followe the other, beyng sore afrayed, Lest these theyr prankes shuld be bewrayed. In the Dedication daye, than oute of the steple Do they hym hange to espye the people, And with a litle bell them for to warne, Because the prestes shuld catche no harme In studiyng Gods worde the flocke to fede. No thys is ynough, they haue no other sede To sowe, therfore they shall reap Vvynde, as they sowed wynde a great heap. Vvo be to me sayth Paule, yf I shuld not preache No sayth the Pope my ceremonyes teache. But what do they teache shew the meanynge? Vvel, Gods worde gyueth me smellyng That Paule and your opinyon contrary be, Shuld men leaue Paule, and followe the. On relyke Sondayes, than bryng you furth trompery Your relykes must be washen, that water saye yet, Is good for synne and sicknes of beast, Thus of Christes bloude make you a gest So is thy soule spiritually fedde, With Christes moost blessed bodye and bloude, Vvhich forthy synnes was offered on the rode, Vvith whiche oblacyon Gods wrathe is satisfyed Neuer hereafter to be Reoffered For with one oblacyon by hym self made, He hath made vs perfect, therfore be glad, For vnto perfection nothyng can be added Vvhere be now suche, as masses haue sayed To be propiciatory God them forgeue, And conuert theyr hartes, whyles they do lyue That they loke for none other propiciation Than that which Christ made hym self alone, In remembraunce, wherof to confirme our faythe He bade vs receyue as the scripture sayeth. Thys holye communyon. No come and see Stare on it (sayeth the Pope) and ones a yere take Nay not so neyghbour take not, but gape. Thy fynger wold rot yf thou touche but the chalyce, O holye Paule, thou bade men be wyse, And ware of suche, as shuld admonysh From hādlyng and touchyng, which thynges do perysh, Euen with thabuse thou sayest. Vvell Nowe seynge that all men begyn to smell All you that be prestes I Nobodye praye, To repent and be lerned, resist not I saye
