18764 99837257 1572
SERMONS OF BARNARDINE OCHINE OF SENA GODLYE, frutefull, and uery necessarye for all true Christians translated out of Italien into Englishe. ANNO DO. M.D.XLVIII. Mensis Iulio.
The contentes of thys booke. i How a Christy an oughte to make hys last wyll and te∣stament. ii How we shuld answere the deueil, when he tempteth vs and namely in the ende of our lyfe. iii How answere is to be ma∣de at the iudgement seate of god. iiii By what meane to come to heauen. v How god hath satisfyed for our synnes and hath pur∣chasyd Paradice for vs.
THE INTERPRETOVR TO the gentle reader healthe in Christe Iesu. DEATH (GOOD READER) as scripture declareth, and our dayly experiēce practeseth, to all mankynde is a thing most certeine and sure. For who is he that shall lyue & not se nor tast of deathes cuppe: the longest ly∣uers at length dyed, neytherkyng ne keysar can auoyde the duyte of death, but of necessitie, as al are of earth and asshes, so shall they re∣turne into the same. Notwythstandynge thys that sure we be to dye, yet when it shall come, the Lord hath lefte secret to hys owne wysdō, chefelye bycause we shulde euer kepe watche, and warde, & be styll in aredines wyth our lāpes burnyng to wayte vpo
the bridegrom, whych cōmeth we can not tell whē, whether at myd∣nyght, or at the cockes crowynge, wherfore our mayster Christ gaue vs warnyng that we shulde be al∣wayes wakyng, and loke vigilātly for he cometh closlye lyke a thefe, wythoute warnynge vs, at what houre he wyll come. Then as he findeth euery mā, so wyll he iudge hym, and where the tree falleth whether it be to∣warde the South or North) there it lyeth: there is then no respite to be had, but streyght waye due ex∣ecution of goddes iustice shal come vpō all fleshe, happy is he therfore, whome hys maister at hys retur∣nynge fyndeth wakynge, for hym shall he put in auctoritie ouer all hys treasure. And for so moche as then the tter shall hange al together in
clearenes of conscience, whyche at that tyme shall accuse a man, or defende hym, acordynge as he hath kepte it cleane with vertues, or stayned wyth vices (for in the booke of mēnes concience are all theyr dedes layed vppe, to be ope∣ned at the audit day of our death) me thynk nothyng can be a great∣ter staye to the concience of man, then to know how he ought to go owt of thys present lyfe, and what to cary wythhym to hys account, or leue behynd hym in the world. In consyderation wherof I haue translated in to my natyue spech out of Italiē a sermō of mai¦ster Barnardine Ochin teaching how a true chrystē ought to make hys last wyll: and for so moche as the diuell is at that instant of deth very bragging busyly wyth man, and diuersly troblith hym, and the
iustice of god on ye other side fearith hym, I haue, to staye & strēgthen the cōsience on thes behalfes, tur¦ned in to english two sermons en∣structyng vs how to aunswer the diuel whē he tempteth vs at what tym, & by what meanes to quiet our myndes, as touching gods ius¦tice, other two haue I also trans∣lated, whych enforme vs of ye true workes that god requireth of vs, and the way to go to heauen, and that our sauiour christ Iesus hath by hys most preciouse death pur∣chased for vs paradise with out our deseruynges. Wich fyue sermons taken out of the first part of maister Barnar dine sermons, as they be wrytten and publyshed of good zeale to the wealth of many, so it is thy curti∣sye (gentle reder) to accept them in good parte, & pardon my grosse
tearmes as of a begynner, and beare wyth my translation, as of a learner obteynynge thys of the good reader I shalbe redye and wyllynge hereafter when god ge¦ueth better knowlege (accordyng as my talēt wyll extende) to turne mo godly sermōs of the sayd may∣ster Barnardine into Englishe for the enformacion of all that desyre to know the truth. For they truely conteyne moch to the defacyng of al papistrie, and hipocrysie, and to the aduancement of the glorye of god, and of the benefytes of Christ Iesus. To whom wyth the ho∣lye ghost be all honoure and glorye for euer and euer. So be it. GOD SAVE THE KYNG and graunt us the truthe of hys Worde.
HOW A CHRISTIAN OVGHT to make his last Wyll and Testamente. IT IS COMMONLY THE CVS∣stome of men in theyre testamentes, and last wylles to saye I leaue, I bequeath, I geue, wyth∣oute onse sayinge I take or carye wyth me, wherin certes they be farre deceyued, bycause they take that, whyche they ought to leaue be hynde them, and go wythoute caryinge that whych is verye be∣hofefull and necessarye. Wherfore to the entent they shulde no more erre on that behalfe: I wolde we shulde cōsyder and weyghe how a true Christiā shuld make hys wyll. Men that be either fooles, mad, phrātike, neyther cä, nor yet know how to make a wyll, by reasō they haue not wytte to descerne good
from euyl, what is theyrs, or what is not, what to take, nor what to restore or bequeath, nor yet to whō nor in what maner. And yf hap∣pelye they go about to make theyr testament, it shulde be but vayne and of no force god alloweth it not as a thyng made of a persone wit∣les. Wherfore he that is wyllynge to make a testament effectuall (as expedient is to him that wylbe sa∣ued) behoueth to haue verye good spirituall iudgemēt, alyuely faith in Christe, and an vnderstandynge and lyght aboue a naturall man, he must also be the sonne, and law∣full heyre of god. And then he may saye: I soūde of mynde, and redye of sprite and remēbraunce, albeit as touchyng my fleshe secke make my testamēt, and bequeath fyrst of all my being and substance to god: he gaue it to
me and also preserued it, and of hym I recognise to haue it, and for it I render hym thankes, I leaue to hym lykewyse the gyftes, graces benefytes temporal, bodely and gostlye, that I haue hadde, or shall here after receyue: for they be hys, and from him by grace I ac∣knowlege to haue receyued all, as Paule sayeth, what hast thou, that thou hast not receyued at goddes hādes. yea for asmoch as al the slā ders, mysreportes, persecucions, syckenes, and mysfortunes, which I haue alreadye or shall frō hence forth suffer, and euē death selfe, I confesse (by the vnderstādyng that the Lorde hath geuē me) that they haue bene and shalbe hys gyftes and graces, geuen and graunted of a great loue for my welthe and profyt: wherfore as hys diuine re∣wardes I Araunt to haue had thē
of god, for them I thāke hym, and as hys owne I leaue and restore them to hym. And for so moche as I can not but acknowledge that I haue goue alwayes backewarde from hym so often as I wolde rule my selfe by my blynde iudgemente, folyshe wysdome, and deuelishe sprite nei∣ther dyd so moch as go one steppe forth towarde God, but when I was moued, diyuen, and thruste forwarde of his holy sprite. Wher∣fore I commytte to the hygheste god my most deare father, and to hys gouernance, al the worlde and specially my self: in him (as I may) I wyll helpe my selfe wyth myne owne witte, and fredome, namely by makynge it obedient to hym. Moreouer if euer I haue spo∣ken or shall frō hence forth vtter any word, if I haue done or shall
do any worke, that is to hym ple∣saunte if I haue had or after thys tyme shall haue thought desier or wyll, that good is, I geue it to god, and at hys handes I professe that I haue had al my goodnes, so that if it were gods wyll, to take from me all that he hathe geuen me, there shulde in me remayne no∣thyng but onely synnes: those are myne owne, and all other thyngs be hys. Thus be my synnes if I shulde go before gods presence. I were but damned, if I were minded to make satisfactiō I coulde not, no nor yet any saynte that euer was, ther is none whose loue is so great to take my synnes vppon hym and sat ysfye for them, and appease goddes angre saue Chryst a lone, wherfore to hym I bequeth my synnes, I leue to hym my pryde,
vnkyndnes, vnbeleue, mistruste, arrogancy, enuy, wrath, ambition and all my vn numerable wycked∣nes: I geue to him my euil though¦tes, affections, & desiers: to be short I make one fagott and boundell of all my offēces present, past, and to com, and geue them to Christe hauynge sure faythe, and stedfast hope, that he wyll accepte them for hys owne, & hath euen alredy taken them, and for them hath satisfied on the crosse, hys father layed them on hys necke, Esai. 53. and he did not ones agayne say it, but of great loue allowed them for hys, and to cōsume and burne them in the flame of hys diuine loue, he bore them on hys Innocent shul∣ders vpō the crosse, 1. Petri. 3. (as peter wry∣teh) & so was offred a sacrifice for vs. Now seyng I haue lefte almy synns to Christ, and geuen to god
my substance, and beyng, wyth all other gyftes & graces, that he be∣stowed on me. I remayne naked wythout eyther good or euyl, and truelye to saye, I am rather no∣thyng, In that I haue restored to god my beynge that I had by cre∣ation and byrth. But for bycause it is impossible that he shuld saue me wythout be∣inge, and so it is that he wyll saue me, therfore fyrst I carye with me Christ hym selfe, whych is my lyfe. God hath so loued me, . 3. that he hath geuen hym selfe to me. For so hath god loued the world, that for theyr synnes he hath geuē vs hys onely begotten sonne. I carye also with me his sprite, that was of his eter∣nall father geuen me of hys most royal liberalytie, as wel declareth Paule, where he sayeth, god hath sēt the sprite of hys sonne into our
hertes wherby we crye and call father, father. And in that he hath geuen me hym, he hath restored me to my selfe and former beinge, wt a new substance and nature spirituall, so that for the possibilite of my salua∣ciō, I haue a beinge: but yet lacke I treasure to discharge my great dettes, & to apere rych in goddes sight, in consyde racion whereof I bere wyth me christes watchyng, abstinences, traueyls, prayeres, persecuciōs, sclāders, I take with me his teares, hys swet, his, blood, and all that euer he did or suffered in thre and thyrtty yeres is myne every deal, and wyth lyuely fayth I embrace it as for myne owne. I carye bysyde this wyth me hys patience, mekenes, loue, and all other his diuine vertues, hys gif∣tes and graces, hys tresurs, and
and all that he hath mereted and deseruid, hys lyfe, passyon, death, resurrection & assension be myne, ye all ye euer he hath done or shall from henceforth do is myne. and what nedeth more to saye, if god haue geuē vs hys own sonne, how hath not he wyth hym geuen vs all thynges, wherfore wyth faith I embrace my sweete Iesus for myne owne, he is my ryghtwys∣nes, Corin. 1. wisdome, raunsom, & holynes he is my strength, he is my sprite, my lyght, lyfe, hope, & all my good∣nes, euē Christ hymselfe in hys last wyll bequethed me all yt he had of the father. wherfore he sayeth, I entertayn you at my table as my father hath vsed me, as my father hath made me hys heyre so now I ordeyne you, I wyll that as you be my bretherne so you shalbe my folowers: And in another place he
sayeth I haue loued you, as my fa¦ther hath loued me sithē I am nou¦through christ so rych of treasures, vertuse, & graces, I shalbe hable not onely tosatilfy for my deites, but also to purchase infinite para dise, whē soeuer they shalbe sould. Who shalbe now either to acuse or condemne me, after that christ hath thus clothed me wyth hys innosency, ryghtwysnes, holynes, loue, with al hys vertuse, graces, treasures, merites, and with hys ownself, I may wyth no lesse bol∣denes and suretie, thē christ, ape∣are before god, I am hys sonne, as he is, and heyre of heauen, semblably I am innocēt as christe is now that he hath satystied for me, and payed my raunsom, and rewarded me wyth hys innocen∣cy, Christe sayed, Iohn. 17. I hallow my self that they also may be holye, euen
he is our holynes, and we be hys mēbers. wherfore it is as possible for god not to loue me, as it is pos∣sible that he shuld not loue christe by reason wherof Paule sayeth who shall deuid me from the loue of god that is in Christe Iesu. Roma. 8. it muste nedes be that he be salued, whych wyth lyuing fayth embra∣ceth Christe for hys owne. And consyderyng that the treasures, and merites of Christ are infinite, and able to enryche a thowsand worldes, I entende not to carye with me any other merites, or spi¦rituall riches, saue those yt Christe hath prouyded for me, for they be not onely sufficiēt for me, but also ouer aboūdāce and vnmesurable. Then shuld I do no smal iniuri to Christ, if I shuld search to store my selfe by any other meane or shyfte, although I myght do it ne∣uer
so easely, nay rather wt Paule wyll I rekenne all other thynges as myre and dyrt so that I haue Christe, Philip. 3. wyth whom alone I wyll appeare before god, and of and by hym wyl I glory and make boast, yea god forbydde, Gala. 6. that I shuld ma∣ke my auaunte of any thyng, saue of the crosse of our lord Iesu Christ of whome onely hangeth all oure health. And all beit al the sayntes be riche by meane of Christ, neuer∣thelesse, yf they hadde meanes of theyr owne most plētuose, & wolde geue thē to me, yet would I none, my Christe is inough for me, wt him had I rather suffer, thē take plea∣sure & ioye without him. It would be a thing pleasaunt to me, yf eue∣ry man shulde make prayer to god for me, not bycause I myght pur∣chase, or haue any other treasures thē those that I haue of Christ, but
that I might by liuely faith euery daye acknowlege possesse and em∣brace those that I haue receyued of Christe, and count thē for myne and so enforme my selfe, I myself were it not by Christe, shulde not know what to aske, for in him is al and with out hym all other thyn∣ges be but mere vanitie, only this peticyon I make to hym, that he vouchesafe euery daye to geue me light and vnderstandynge, that I may haue wytte to accounte and take his treasures for nyne owne. Wherfore yf any man wyll praye for me let hym not tarye tyll I be deade, for then I can no more en∣crease in light and grace. Let him praye nowe, that I may grow in faith and more and more instructe my selfe of Christes ryches. I am well assured that in purgatorye I shalnot come, both bicause ther is
foūd no other purgatory but christ in whom at the full be purged and punished al the synnes of the elec∣ted, and also bycause in case there were one) yet Chryste not by my merytes, but by hys mere good∣nes dothe satisfie for al my synnes trespasses, & paynes, & for as moch as hope neuer made any mā asha∣med, nor cōfounded any persone, Roma. 3 that had it in hys harte (as Pause wrote) therfore am I sure and sec¦ker that he wyll saue me without other purgacion. We can not pro∣messe our selfes to moch of goddes goodnes, no we neuer cā vehete vs so moche, but he wyll recompence moch more. I wyl not suffer ther∣fore that after my lyfe any good be done for me. Truth it is that yf I haue any goodes thē must I leaue to the poore flocke of Christ, not bi∣cause they shuld praye for me, that
am already saued, but for the vse of other that lyue, & shalbe borne, as Christ dyd, on. 17. and also bycause the rather they may lyue godlye, and knowe that they shal neuer lacke that be hys, and putte theyr trust in hym. To whome be alwayes, honour and glory through Iesu Christe our Lorde Amen. HOW WE SHVLD ANSWER the deuel VVhen he tempteth us and namely in the ende of our lyfe. THE DEVELL (AS PETER uuriteth) seketh aluuay to deuour us but chefely he is busy at the houre of deth, Petri. 5. by reason then it stande the hym in hande so to do for hys owne behooue, and our greater endomage and harme.
Then vseth he all myght, power, sleyght, deceyte, & malice: where∣fore I thynke good that we shulde search how to make hym answer and by the assistence and ayde of godes grace to wythstande hym, and gett the vpper hande of hym, He is constraygned specially when we aproch nere to our deth, to throw vs in to the asisse and pyt of desperacion, or els to set vs vp in pryde and presumpciō. if he shal perceue that thou either put trust in thy selfe, or confidence in thyne own workes, he wyl not go inhāde to make ye despayre & mistrust gods mercy, but rather stablishe the in that erronyouse opinion of pryde of thy dedes on the other syde if he fele that thou hast all thy hope in god: then wyll he shew the on the one partie the multitude and wyc∣kednes of thy synnes, and on the
other partie goddes wrathe and seuere iustice, he wyl tell the how thou art in a maze and perplexitie not able to be shaken of, or wōden owt of, and by makyng the to feel thyne offences, other wise thē euer thou deddest in thy health wyll go a boute to take owte of thy harte the passion of christe, and all the great goodnes, mercy, and loue of god, & finally to proue the dam∣ned, he wyl bryng for hys purpose-euen the holy scriptures. But I wyll that al hys tēta∣cions serue the to the honour of god and saluacion of thy soule as they do serue ye turne of ye elected, Roma. 3. to whom all thynges woorke to gether for theyr wealth, fyrste of all I warne the, that thou mayn∣teyn not thy selfe for good, but ad∣myt and graunt all the euill that he shall reherse of the and thynke,
that he hathe not sayed so moche, 1. Iohn. ii. but that it is moch more: & thanke god that now at laste he hathe be so fauorable, to make the consider thy sinnes, wherin he vseth the di∣uel for an instrument, to the entēt that by the knowyng of thē, thow shuldest take occasion to humble thy selfe, and to call Christ to thy remembrance, whych to scoure and clense them hath not only re∣putid them for hys own, but also dyed for thē vpon the crosse graūt thou hardely that thou art a grete rybald and noghtye wythout ex∣cusyng thy self in any wyse, & that thy synnes are in numerable. con∣fesse that thou cold neuer satisfie for one alone, and that thou were the most dāned sinner of the world yf Christe had not delyuered she, and styl prōpte thy selfe with those matters, whych may forther ye to
com in to desperacion of thy selfe: But if the diuel wayt to bring the to despeyr of Christ, thou may in no wyse cōsēte ther to, but sted∣fastlye put thy trust in hym. and my mynd is that thou say to hym thus. if it were good for me to mis∣trust Christ, yu neuer woldest haue perswaded me therto but rather haue drawne me frō it, wherfore in that yu woldest put me in mynde to mistruste Christ, thou makeste me stronger in my hope and trust. Thou shalt saye to hym, that when he caused iniustly Christe to dye, whych was an Innocent, he lost al his interpriest & iurisdictiō, that euer he had or possible might haue ouer man. and if he procede forthe to induce the to dispayer, by settynge before the thy greate synnes, I wyll the to say to hym. go to Chryste, whyche (as Iohn
wryteth) is myne attourney and Aducoate, 1. Iohn.  he can make the an an∣swere for me, reason there wyth hym, yf thou haue any clayme or tytle in me, as thou sayest, doest thou not know that he hath takē my synnes for hys owne, and hath for them made satistactyou moste plentuously, therfore hast thou no ryght in me at all. If he chaunce to say hys death is not inough to saue the, answere him, yf Adam by tasting one apple wyth one onely synne was hable to dāne me: how is it that so many holy workes of Christ, which tasted for my sake of great loue the most bytter deathe, be not suffycient to saue me. Roma.  If the disobediēce of Adā had power to cōdemne me, moch more the obedyence of Christe is stronge inough to saue me, yea the gyfte of Christ is aboue and exce∣deth
the synne of Adā, Christ hath more auayled and holpen vs, thē Adam annoied and harmed vs by reasō the lyght of Christ is of more force and effecte thē the darkenes of our fyrst parente, the goodnes of Christes surmounteth and pas∣seth the malyce of man, & hys ver tue preuaileth about our fraylty: one teare of Christ hath bene more pleasaunt to god, then all the syn∣nes of the worlde be displeasaunt Christe hath be able to do more to appeace hym, then we to prouoke him to anger, Christes liuyng was more formall and ordinarye, then oures was out of ordre and frame Christe hath done more to the ho∣nour of god, then we haue done to hys dishonour. Wherfore I maye well say, Christ that is my wisdom, right wisnes, 1. Cor, 1. holynes, & redemcion is sufficient inought to saue me.
And if haplye he shulde say, it is not sufficient for thy saluacion to beleue in Christe, the behoueth to kepe hys commaundemēts, thou must loue god wyth all thy harte, and thy neyghboure as thy selfe, and desier nor couet anye thynge worldlye, whych thyngs because thou doest not, ergo, thou art dā∣ned, if fayth onlye were inough I also & all the diuels shuld besaued, because (as yt is wrytten) euen the deuels beleue & feare. lames. ii. They beleue ye god made & created heuē and earth, and yt christ came, dyed, rose, ascended in to heuen, yt hesent the holy ghost, & that he shal come to iudge the quicke & dead, and yet are not we therfore saued, & that bicause we obserue not his diuine preceptes. wherfore yu also art but lost, he wyll thus labour to bryng the vnder the law, to thinke yt thou
be iustified not by christ, but by per fourmynge and fulfyllynge of the lawe, to the ende that thou shulde despayre. But I wyl that thou make an∣swere and say, yf thou dyddest be∣leue as by goddes grace I beleue: that is, that god for thy wealthe hath created the worlde, and sem∣blably preserueth it, in such sorte that thou couldest fele in the crea∣tures the loue of god, & lykewyse wolde beleue firmely, that Christe came and dyed for thy synnes, for to saue the, and for thy sake & pro∣fyt, and in lyke maner of the other articles, thou also shulde be saued, and then, when thou haddest a ly∣uely feling of the goodnes and loue of god thou woldest loue hym, and thy neyghbour likewyse, & beynge rauished into god woldest beginne to set litle store by the worlde as al
good Christen men and women do If it fortune that he say, Deut. xx 7 he is cur∣sed that kepeth not and obserueth the law, wherfore thou art one of myne, saye to him agayne, Gala. 3 for that cause christ dyed on the crosse, Roma. 7 for to delyuer me from all curses, and in somoche as I am all ready of christ I am dead to the law. Agayn yf he reply esaying, wher be thy workes, wherby thou trus∣teth to be saued, answere, I trust not to be saued by my workes, for they be soch that yf I shulde haue regarde or respecte to them, I feare me to be dāned, yea I were surely ascerteyned of my damna∣cion. Roma. 8. I hope onelye to be saued by Christ, and hys workes, whyche be myne owne, and so moche rather myne, then they I dyd my selfe, as that ye sprite of christ geuē to me is more entyer to me then myne own
lyfe or any other thyng. Further yf he shuld endeuoure to proue ye to be none of the electe, by reason of the innumerable, and outragiouse synnes that thou hast committed, for prosperites, or ad∣uersites thou hast had, for ye great euils wherin thou arte founde at thy deathe, or for the temtacions thou hast susteyned, sayinge, that god preserueth his elected frō the like euels. make hym answer and say: Roma. 3. rather doth god practise them in diuerse soche maners, albeit of euery thynge they be certifyed to the honor of god, thou shalt more ouer say to hym thus. I geue more credite and trust to christ, whiche when he was deade for me on the crosse, tould me I was saued, then to the, that art always alyer and father of erroures. I wyll thou tel hym, how thou geuest more fayth
to Christ alone, then to al the rea∣sons and autorities of the worlde: thou may bysyde thys say to hym, the sprite of god bearyth wytnesse to my sprite, Roma. 8. that I am the sonne of god, and to hym must I rather trust then to the. when he shal say, if thou were the sonne of god he woulde not leaue the in souch pu∣nishmēts, as thou art in, but wold giue the some release and easmēt Answer hym, In case it were as thou sayest Christ shulde not haue bene the sōne of god, sithen on the crosse he had no comfort, nor sen∣sual tast or feling, so that he saied my god, Marci. 15. my god why haste thou forsaken me: it sufficith to me that he she wyth me so moche fauouer, for I am contented wyth all that pleasethe hym, as Chryste also was, yea in hys sufferynge, he
felte excedynglye the infinite loue of the father. Besyde these of he say: he. ii. thou art the sonne of Adam, ergo thou art acursed. hn. 1. Answere thou thus: I am blessed agayne by beyng borne of god, and by meane of that bles∣sed sede Christ as god longe agone promysed Adam when he sayed. ene. xii. In thy sede al nacions shalbe bles¦sed, thou shalt tell hym: how thou art despoiled and berest of the olde Adā, oma. 13 and clothed with Iesu Christ as Paule teacheth and aduerty∣seth the. What tyme as he shal declare to the that christ is wroth, angry and sharpe: make hym answere howe Christ is not soch one, for he is the healthe and hope of synners, and whylest we be in thys lyfe present he is vttered to vs pytiful, sweete, and our Iesus, that is, our sauiour
and albeit heseme to speke sharpe, and cruel wordes to the woman of Cananye, Math. 1 yet in herte he gaue her confydence and boldnesse, and she∣wed hym self to her full of sweet∣nes and loue. In dede at the daye of iudgement to the damned shall he be shewed angry, and wrathful but in the meane tyme tyll that day while we be here in this presēt life, he is shewed pitiouse to al, and principally to the great synners. And yf it so were that he wolde saye thou art not trulye confessed, nor haste rehersed all thy synnes, and the circūstances of the same, ne hast examyned suffyciently thy conscyence, nor yet hast not that pure perfecte great, and vnfayned sorow for thy synnes that thou of dutye shuldest haue, thou hast not satysfyed for those so great an vn∣numerable dettes, that thou hast
towarde god, make hym thys an∣swere and saye: thou art a seruaūt and not a iudge: or to saye more truelye, n. 3. thou art all ready iudged and condemned, seyng thou bele∣uest not in Christ, and woldest thou indge mettrouble thy selfe no lon∣ger in prouing that I haue failed in al, for sure I am, and fully I be∣leue to be saued, not by my workes by reason they be vnperfecte, nor yet by the worthynes of my fayth, for in that also I am not perfecte, bycause I beleue not wt so great a faith as I oughte, but I beleue I shalbe saued by Christe, and not by my workes. He wyl say: thou art not worthy to be saued, saye thou to hym for a ful answer: the vnworthy beued so often as they acknowledge theyr owne vnworthynes, go hartelye for helpe to Christ, by whose meane
they be come worthy. Where as he shall laye to thy charge that thou arte one of the worst of the worlde: say to hym on thys wyse our infyrmyties be but smal in comparison of the infinite merites of Christe, and of the incō∣prehensible mercy of god: and the more great that my synnes be and without number, so moch greater shalbe hys glory in deliuering me, and I wyth so moche the greater trust pray as that yf he wyll heare me, it shalbe more to hys honoure and glory. And whē I cōsyder and call to remēbraūce, that my swete and louyng brother Iesus Christe the sonne of god, which for my sake dyed on the crosse, & wolde agayne innumerable times for me, yf nede were, & that I am hys owne for so many causes, & that he may deter∣mine of me after his owne mynde.
For somoch as his father hath ge∣uen hym full power in heuen and earth: when I consyder thys, I saye, I canin no wyse dout of my saluacion. If he efte soones reason thus: thou hast done no penance for thy synnes: answere on thys maner: that can I neuer do, yf I shoulde alwaye stande in the fyre, Christe hath done that for me on the crosse more ouer, Christe is myne, the fa∣ther hathe geuen hym to me wyth all hys merites, all the good wor∣kes, that euer he dyd are myne, wherfore I maye wyth hys deui∣ne ryches, and treasures satysfye for all. After this maner I wolde thou shulde answere hym, when soeuer he setteth afore the thy sinnes, and infynite dettes, that thou oughtest to god for the benefites, thou hast
receyued wyth dyuerse and sun∣dry vyces whyl he tempte the, but specyally wyth desperacion, wher∣wyth he tempteth euē the saintes he wyll put the in mynde and my∣struste that Christe hath forsaken the: but make answer that he ne∣uer forsoke persone that trusted in hym, but bycause he wold forsake none of vs, he was mynded to be forsakē him selfe on the crosse, and yf he shoulde at any tyme forsake and refuse vs (the which is a thing impossyble) it shoulde be for more glorye of god, and we oughte not onely to be contented, but also to take it for a syngular pryuylege and prerogatiue. It behoueth vs to stande stronge in the fayth, and thynke that afore god the passyon of Christ can do more to cause him to loue vs, then oure synnes can procure hys hate towarde vs, we
hadde nede to be wel armed wyth spryte, sayth, and grace, for lear∣nynge sufficeth not to know how to aunswer, and wyte thou well that Christ was tempted, and spe∣cyally at the ende, wherfore he sa∣yeth: hn. 15. the prynce of thys worlde is comene, but he hathe gotten no∣thynge of me. And yf he can not wy h these armour hurte the, he wyll turne ouer the leafe, and say thus, and all bycause to deceaue the. go to thou haste alredy vanquished me, I was myneded to brynge the in to desperacyon, but I colde not. thou arte saued: and by and by wyll the angels com to fett the. ii. Corin. 15. he wyll apere to the like an angell of lyght, and saye to the as he did to saynte hilarion. haste thou serued god so long, hast thou done so ma∣ny good dedes so greate penance,
geuen so many good ensamples, saued so many soules: and all beit thou hast cōmitted synns, yet art thou confessed of them, thou hast done penāce, thou hast taken par∣dones, thou haste gone for indul∣gences, thou kepest the cōmaun∣dementes, and besyde these done many volūtary workes that thou wast not bounden to do, wherfore why shuldest thou feare. thou shalt be safe and sure, if thou be not sa∣ued, then shall none be saued. yea thy good woorkes be ouer pluse, more thē sufficith, The deuell is a lyar. Iohn. 3. which thou may sell or geue to other, whych if thou do not the Church of Rome shalbe thy heyre, and thou shalt enryche theyr treasory of indulgēce. what ferest thou therfore: hast thou ha∣ply gone another path or way. al beit thou haue admitted sines, yet seeste thou not how thou art well
disposed at the laste, onelye stande stoutlye in the truste of these thy great and manye good woorkes, suffer thys sicknes, and death for the remission of thy synnes, & thou shalt be more then saued, onely of∣ten remēber thy selfe. of thy good woorkes. Then it is expedient for the to saye thus. Thou wouldeste that I shuld trust in my woorkes, and I haue no fere of being dam∣ned, were it not for my woorkes, I geue thankes to my lord Christe Iesus, whych hath geuen me the grace to counte my woorkes for a thing of nought, and for such, that euery one of them I deserue to be punyshed, thou magnyfy este my woorkes, to draw me backe from the confydence of Christe, but by gods grace, thou shalt not be able to do it. I fynde that I am vpon a litle bourd in the sea tossed wyth
mighty wyndes, and haue embra∣ced and beclepped a strong pyller or rocke, and thou coūcelest me to leaue it, and to sticke to the roten thynges whych if I shulde do, the wyndes wolde cary bothe me and them in to the sea. rather I wyll peryshe wyth Christe whyche is a thing impossible I then lyue with owte hym, no I cane not put my trust holy in Christ oneles firste al to gether I dispayer of my selfe and myne owne woorkes. Wher∣fore it is necessary that we dispoil our selfes of all trust in our owne woorkes, and by fayth and hope, clothe vs and arme vs with Christ and in hym put oure hope, and al though we haue not that greate fayth, yet in no wyse ought we to despayre, bycause if at the firste he do not, yet at lēghthe he geueth it to hys elected at theyr deathe,
as the prophete Abacucke tolde a∣forehande, when he sayed, Lorde when they shalbe nere to the deth at the latter ende, betwene thys waye and the other, thou wylte make knowen to them Christe and his great benefytes, and wylte open to them the bosome of thy graces by Iesu Christe oure Lorde. Amen. HOW ANSWER IS TO be made at the iudgement seate of God. AFELON OR GVYLTYPAR∣son, that can not flye, but of necessytie must apeare at the sessions assyse, or lawedaye afore the barre, picketh out and choseth hym for hys ayed and succoure,
attourneys, protectours, and coū∣seylours, and gothe deuisyng how he maye be defended, namely in a matier touchyng elyfe and death: whyche thynge it standeth vs in hande more to do. In so moch as, that we beyng full of sinnes, must apeare afore the hygh iudgement seate of goddes iustyce, and when iudgement by defynitiue sentence is geuen agaynste vs, we shall lose paradise, soule, grace, god, and all goodnes wythout recouerye, and be throwen in to the depe pytte of hell, there to remayne and abyde in fyre euerlastingly. Wherfore me semeth it were expediēt to imagin what waye to take, what answer to make wyth what reasons to arme vs, that we maye haue the mattyer to passe on oure syde. Fyrst of all an vndouted matter
is it, Roma. 5. that we all haue synned in A∣dam, and besyde the origynal syn∣ne haue innumerable actuall, ne can be saued, onles fyrst we be ab∣solued and forgeuē, and that must nedes be whilest we be in this lyfe for after warde is, no more redem∣cion at all. Luce 16. To the gloton was de∣nyed one droppe of water. Wherfore necessary it is to know that there be two iudgement sea∣tes of god: the one is of ryghtwy∣senes, the other of mercy, grace, pytie, goodnes, loue swetnes, and lyberalitie: Hebre. 4. as Paule speakyng of thys last fayth. let vs go boldlye to the trone, and bench of gods grace at the first bench sitteth god, and Chryste kepeth resydence at the second. Now as for the sinners, if they wylve saued they must go all to the benche of mercy to aske and call for pitie, and not iustice, for
fauoure and strayght reconynge, bycause we haue all bene vniuste, and with alour ryght wysnes, and good workes be not hable to with∣stande goddes rightwisenes, wher∣fore Dauid sayed. Psal. 15. Lord none can be iustyfyed in thy syghte, yf there thou wyltsee a reconynge, and in another place, sal. cxxix. Lord yf thou wylt punishe our iniquities, who shalbe hable to abyde: and Iob sayeth, Iob. 9. I know that mā can not be iustified yf he stande face to face afore god. And in another place, Iob. 15. what thyng is man that he shoulde be cleane: the heauens be not cleane in hys syght. Ieremye. ii. And Ieremye wryteth thus If thou washe the wyth nytrus thou shalt neuerthelesse be stained And Esaye sayeth: our ryght wy∣senes be lyke the clothes of an vn∣cleane womā: Prouer. xx. and Salomon wit∣nesseth the same, sayeng who is he
that can saye my harte is cleane, I am pure & innocent from sinne, wherefore sayeth god by Ierymy, why wyl you striue with me in iu∣gemēt: As though he shuld say you are fooles, if you thynk your selfe hable to wythstande the iustice of god, seing youre ryght wysnes ys vncleane, and that somoch vncle∣ner, as that not onely the workes, but also the very īward thoughts, affections, and desires shalbe exa∣mined, and tryed. therfore sayeth god: I wyl search. trye and proue. Ierusalem. Sopho. 1 wyth lanternes. it is moste profitable therefore to go to the bench of mercy. And say wyth Dauid, Psalm. 15. Lord I shalcom afore the, not with the multitude of my wor∣kes, but of thy mercy, and in case thou be sommoned and called to the trone of iustice, appeale to the other bench of mercy, for as from
the iudgemēt of a lord subiecte to the Emperour a man may appeale to Cesars iudgemēt seate: so may a man appeale from the benche of iustice to the trone of mercy as to the hygher court. In asmoche as Iames writeth mercy ercelleth iu¦stice: it is sene that Ezechyas, Iames. ii. after sentence was gyuen vpon hym at the benche of iustyce, iiii. Regu. bycause he appealed to the other Throne of mercy had graunted to hym, that he shuld lyue fyftene yeres longer. And Dauid by appealyng to mer∣cy caused the sentence to be reuo∣ked, ii. Regu. x which was gyuē that he shuld dye. And what tyme that seruaūt, Math. 3. of whō the gospel speaketh, sayed, haue pacience with me & gyue me respite: he appealed to mercy and was herde. In like maner is it and hath be of al sinners that be saued Now muste we do in the same
wyse, I meane when we be cyted to the court of iustice to rēder and yelde an accompte, then must we appeale to mercy, and saye: we be dead through Christ to the law, Roma. 7. and therfore to iustice also, which iudge after the lawe are we deade, then hath iustice no iurildictiō vpon vs at al, no though it were the grea∣test synner of the world: saye thou to god, I am Christes, thou gauest me to hym, as Christe sayeth: they were thyne, Iohn. 17. & thou hast gyuen thē to me. Moreouer Christ hath rede medme, therfor am I his for many causes, I wyl therfore stāde to hys iudgemēt: thou hast giuen him all power in heauen & in earth as he himselfe sayeth: Math. 18. to me is gyuen all power in he auen & in earth, wher∣fore he may do with me the thyng that lyketh him, and as to him se∣meth good, he is my iudge as Christ
hymselfe sayeth: Iohn. xii. the father hath giuen aliudgement to the sonne, it is therfore his dutye to iudge me. But as in another place he sayeth he came not to iudge but to saue the worlde, say therfore to Christ: do thyne offyce, saue me, for thou camest, and thy father dyd sende the for that entēt, I feele all redy thy voyce, & in my harte thou saiest to me, that bycause I trust in the, thou wylt saue me, alredye by thy grace haue I put in the my cōfy∣dence & hope, and he, Exodi. 19. that beleueth in the can not be damned, saue me therfore accordyng as yu art boun∣den by a couenaunt made. And al∣beit thy cōscience accused the, and all the deuels besyde layed to thy charge, ye a though iudgemēt were giuē against ye: yer so long as yu art in this presēt life, it is alway lauful to appeale to the mercy of god.
And yf it were so, that by force thou shuld be drawen to the court of iustice, crye out wyth Isay, and saye to Christ: ty. 38. o Lorde I suffer vio∣lence, make answere for me, helpe me, forsake me not, I chose and wyl haue the for my attorney and speche mā: not bycause thou shuld defende my iuste accomptes, and true reckeninges, for I haue none soch, but to thentent thou shulde take my synnes for thyne, and re∣warde me with thyne innocencye, holynes, & right witnes. Thou hast already satisfyed for me on ye crosse and appoynted me by adopcion to be the sonne of god, wherfore I cā not be damned, no not one shalbe founde that dare accuse me, Ioma. 8. being one of goddes elected. More ouer yf thou be myneded and wyllyng to appeare wythout daunger at the benche of goddes
ryght wysnes dyspoyle fyrste thy∣selfe of the olde Adam, and appa∣rell the wyth Christ (as Paule ex∣horteth vs,) and thou shalbe safe. Collosen For in somoch as yu hast embraced him for thyne owne, thou cā not be dāned all though thou haddest cō∣mitted al the sinnes of the worlde. As a womā great with childe can not be punished, no more can thou, Apoca.  yf thou haue Christ in thy hart, Iohn. 3. or rather (as Christe sayeth) he that beleueth in the sonne is not iudged he is so assured of hys saluacyon, that there nedeth no examinacion to be had of hym, he is one of Chri∣stes membres, and hath his sprite, wherfore he can no more be dam∣ned thē Christ, bicause he is knytte to hym by lyuely fayth. If it be so that god wolde make there with the a rekenyng, saye to hym how thou hast made it wyth
Christ, for as he put on Christe all our iniquities and sinnes (as I say sayeth) & with great loue accepted them for his owne, ye. 53. and boūde him self to make satisfaction for them. Wherfore thou shalt say, Lorde yf thou hast any reconing or matter against me, make it with Christ he knoweth wel how to answer & can declare ye he hath satisfyed for thē. In case be that any must be dā∣ned for the synnes I haue done, it is Christ, that must be dāned, and not I good Lorde, for albeit I am he that committed thē, neuer the∣lesse Christ bounde hym selfe to sa∣tiffie for them, and that by consent and good wyl of his father, wher∣fore whosoeuer be leueth uely in Christ is al together safe and sure Besyde this yf god wolde nedes make the audite & accompte wt vs, and wolde say: I am not content
with Christes satisfactiō for you, I wyl that your selfes make recom∣pēce for ye you haue offēded (which is a thing impossible) alredy frō the beginning he is cōtented, & hath ac¦cepted that denine sacrifice of the vndefiled lābe Christ Iesus, which dyed on ye crosse to be obediēt to his father (as Paul hath writē) alredy is the right wises of god satisfyed by christ more thē sufficient, Philip. ii. we be airedy reconsiled wt god, and made his sōnes, & so cōsequētly his heires he hath alredy geuen vs paradise, and whē god hath onse giuē a gifte it neuer repenteth hym: Roma. 11 wherfore the gyft can not be called agayne bireason god is not chan̄geable I neuerthelesse althoughe (as I sa∣yed) he shuld say: I wyll that thou thy selfe satisfye. Answere hym on thys wyse: Lorde yf I were as de∣re beloued to the, as is Christ, and
had doone and suffered louynglye for thy honour. all that Christ did and suffered, in thys case woldesse thou not holde thy selfe sufficiently satisfied for me: in case he graūted therto. thou shuld make hym this answer. then is it alredy done. for in that Christ suffered I any selfe suffered, by reasone I am chan∣ged into Christ. ye a the true Chris∣tianes, that haue Christe in theyr hartes (as Paule sayith let Christ dwel in our harts) may pittiously lamēt & complayne to of god, a. . & say to hym: thou hast punished vs more bitterlye then we haue deserued, consideryng that we offended and not Christe, reasone woulde thou shuld haue punished vs, our wyll, and oure lyfe and soule, and not that innocent and vndefiled lambe Iesus Christe, and thou hast puni∣shed Christe whych is the lyfe of my
soule. the harte of my harte, the sprite of my sprite (as Dauid say∣eth god my fleshe and my harte, Psalm. 73. god of my harte. thou shuldest, yf my death had not bene inough for my sinns, turned me into nothing, and letten alone that innocente, and iuste Christe more deare and intier to me then myne owne soule wherfore I feele more that, that he suffered for me, then I shulde haue felte, if I had suffered all the tormente possible on myne owne body, but well wyst thou, that I coulde not by reason of my frailty, a vyde and suffer all, that I had deserued for my synnes, and ther∣fore thou chose that my ghty and stronge Christ to suffer for them in my steade, and more ouer hast set hym in my harte to thentent that I shuld not onely fele that he suf∣fered, but also that he myght geue
me strenghth to be able to suffer. Thou mayst also say: Lord albe it I haue sinned, I am regenerate and borne agayne by Christ. I am no more the man that synned, but I am a new creature: wherfore thou can not iustly ponishe me, by cause that spryte of myne, that synned, Gala. ii. is dead, and Christ lyueth in me. I lyue no longer my selfe, but Christ in me. ponish, kylle, and turne to nought that sprit of mine, that wyl of myne, spoile from me that olde Adam, that sensualitie, and al that in me hath sinned: and ponishe not me, sithen by the new sprite, that I receuid of Christ I am hys moste innocente creatur. more ouer thou Lord hast geuen me Christ wyth al his diuine trea∣sures & graces, Roma. 3. & that to be more surely mine, thē I am my self, and in so moch as he is myne entier I
am able to satisfy for al my dettes What fearest thou then O syn∣ful soule. seest thou not that, as the blood of Abelcried for vēgance, . so this blood of christ callith for mercy and he can not but must nedes be herd. . one abisse calleth on another I me ane the bothomeles abisse of my synnes hath nede of ye abisse of Christes passion, and the abisse of Christes passiō calleth to the abisse of the mercye of god. Psalm. 1. say therfore to Christ. O Lord make thy mercy maruelo us and wonderful, thou sauest them that truste in the: cry saue me for thy mercy sake: take and ēbrace thyne the rightwisnes of Christ, & then can I be cōtented thou say. Psalm. 7. Iudge me lord acording to my ryghtwysnes. Let euery mā therfore go to the court of the mercy of god, & if we be called to the barre of iustice, let vs apeale all wayes to mercy, and see that
neuer a man appeare before the throne of iustice excepte fyrst he be clothed wyth Christ through faith and then he may be presented bol∣delye, as he that is armed wyth innocencye and truth may be pre∣sented afore any place of iudge∣ment. And god shall accepte thē for ryghtwyse. To whō be all honour and glory through Iesu Christ oure Lorde. Amen. BY WHAT MEANE to come to heauen. EXPERIENCE PROVETH THAT euerye creature hathe naturallye a desyre and appetyte to resorte to it owne proper place, and mansyon, and namely mā, bycause he is the most souereine creature of al other
And for so moch as ouer natiue cuntrie is not here vpon the earth, Hebre. 15. Collosn. 1 but in heauen is our place of reste (considerynge that all men haue this desier to go to heauen) I take yt to be expedyent to weygh and ponder how we may go thither. God hath geuen vs Christ for an onely mirrour, glasse, rule, squi¦er, Maister, and Guyde: wherfore whoso is wylling to walke thither I meane to heauen, muste go the same path, that he hath gone and troden before vs, by cause he kno∣weth the waye most perfectly, and tawght it to vs withowt any gyle as wel by hys examples, as by his woords, therfore he that entēdith, to go to heauen must folow hym. And first as he being in the shape and fourme of god was not prou∣de, nor an arrogant vsurper, nor ascribed to hymself that he myght
conueniently haue done: but con∣trary wyse, was louelyhumble, of noreputacion, Philip. ii and toke vpon hym the shape of a seruant, or rather of a synner, Esay. 53. and god layed on him all our wickednes, ye and most lo∣uingly admited and allowed them for hys owne, as though he had committed them hymselfe. Now in lyke maner, a Christen man beynge alredye regenerate and borne agayne by Chryst, and graffede into hym by a lyuynge fayth. cometh doune from heuen, that is from hys owne pryde, and false excellency, Iohn. 3. for (as Christ say∣eth) no man goeth vp in to heuen. but he that cometh doune, that is the son of man and hys members. wherfore by & by as a Christē mā hath aliuely light tast and & feling of Christ, & his great benefite he is hūble, coūteth him self of no value
and nothing in his reputacion. for when he seeth by diuine influence, the mekenes of christ, his liveralite pacience, loue, goodnes, innocēsy, wyth other of his vertues, he is of force constrayned to feele his oune pride, vnkindnes, vnpacientnes, wyckednes, vngodlynes, and hys other iniquities. And as god put vpon Christ all our synnes, and he wyth moste tender loue receyued them: so wyll thys Christen man ascribe to himselfe al the offences of the world: biraesō that he per∣ceuith, that if god had wt drawen from him his grace & had not borne him vp, but ministrid to him occa∣sion & oportunitie to offend, thee hadde not bene a synne in all the world but he had done it wherfore he wyll attribute to himselfe all, as th oughe he hadde committed them in deede so that all be yt in
Christ, and by Christ he perceueth hym selfe innocent and safe, not∣wythstandyng of hymselfe he ta∣keth yt, that he is moste damned, and greatist sinner of al the world and is forced to saye that (which Paul spake long ago) Christ cam in to the worlde to saue synners, 1. Timo. 1 wherof I am one of the chyfe. The seconde acte of Chryste was, that, after he was thus hū∣bled, clothed wyth our frayle na∣ture, borne, and shewed forthe to the world, he liued al to gether for hys neyghbour, and sought onely the glory of hys father, and salua∣cyon of hys bretherne, wythowte any regard or respect to hymselfe. (and cause why is) for that he was so full of loue, ohn. 1. grace, fauour, truth, godlines, and al light, vertue, and perfection, wherfore consideringe he had no nede to enrych hymself,
he lyued holy to the welth and be∣nefyte of others, Collosen. 1 Roma. 15. as Paule sayeth Christe hath not pleased himselfe he was inflamed in soch wyse with a feruent desyre to saue the world, for the glory of hys father, that he beyng cleane swalowed vp in god, had no mynde nor consyderacion of hym selfe. Nowe in semblable sorte that true Christen man, that seeth himselfe the sonne and heyre of god, as Lorde of al studyeth, not to lyue to hys owne vse, but is hol∣lye bente to the benefityng of hys brothern ne for goddes glory, and beynge as it were chaunged into theyr nature feeleth al theyr good, and euyll, as Paule dyd. Next ensueth the thyrde acte, that lyke as the worlde persecuted Christe, so it pursue hym, and that bycause in sauyng hys neyghbour and sekynge the glorye of god, he
auaunceth and set forth the gra∣ce, the gospel, and the great mercy of god: thrustyng downe, submit∣tyng throwyng done to the groū∣de, and makyng nothyng of man: and bycause the worlde repyneth at thys, therfore immediatlye fo∣loweth persecucyon, in lyke case therfore as the hoole life of Christ was one continuall persecucion bycause it was godly, so chanceth fytely & agreably to a true Chri∣stien, that magnifyeth the greate benifite, whych we haue receuid by Christe. whych thynge is open and manifest in sundry places of the actes of the apostles. t. 45, 9 for im∣mediatly as the apostles had prea∣ched the gospell, they were pursu∣ed, and so the case goethe in thys oure time. More ouer as Christe was done on the crosse, frō whence, he wold not come done, although in
scorne it was sayed to hym, Math. xx 7 that yf he were the son of god, he shuld come doune of ye crosse, & they wold beleue hym: but bycause he was the son of god, he wolde not come doune, but abyde there, & with his oune death make perfecte our sal∣uacion. in like maner also a Chris∣ten mā must be transformed and changed in to Chryste crucyfyed, Gala. 3. so that wyth Paule he may say I am crucyfed wyth Chryst, in such wise also knit to him on the crosse, that nothynge ys hable to parte me frome the loue of god, Roma. 3. whych is in Christe Iesus. Further more as Christ dyed on the crosse so a Christen mā, yt liueth in Christ, dyeth to ye world in such sorte, that he passith not of riches, honour, dignitie, kynred, frendes, worldly pleasures, or prosperitee, considering yt he seeth bifaith that
he is safe, happy, and sonne, and heyre of god, yea euen as Christe was buryed, so is he, so that the worlde counteth hym not onelye for a thyng deade, Roma. 6. but rottē, flyng∣kynge and lothsome, wherfore he must saye wyth Paule, Gala. 3. the worlde is crucyfyed to me, and I to the worlde. He besyde thys muste ryse with Christe in newnes of lyfe, ly∣uing after another maner then he dyd before that he was regenerate by Christ, Roma. 6. bicause he is becomē spi∣ritual he liueth to the glory of god. And thus fynally with christ he ascendeth into heuen standing, Collosen. 3. as touchyng his thoughtes affectiōs, and desyres, aboue in his celestiall cuntrey, so that he say with Paule oure conuersacyon is in heauen, Philip. 3. wher he enioyeth and taketh plea∣sure and comfort in god. To whō be alwayes al honoure and glory,
through Iesu christ our lord. Amē. ❧ HOW GOD HATH SATIS∣fyed for our synnes and hath pur∣chased Paradise for us. GOD BY HYS ABSOLVTE AND free pouer myght haue saued us Wythoute any satisfaction at all: In as moch as the iustice of god is cōten∣ted and pleased of al that is lyking his good wil: neuerthelesse he hath appoynted frō euerlastyng by hys diuine mynde & wisdome, neuer to saue sinner, oneles first he were ful lye satisfied, & sethen he perceyued that we could not do it our selfes, he was minded to sēde into the worl¦de his sōne to make for vs satisfac¦tiō, & layed on him the iniquities of vs al, as Isay wrote. Esaye. . And he right louingly, although he were a very innocent, toke them for his owne, and was cōtented to satisfy for our
offēces, to suffer that we had deser¦ued, & dye vpō the crosse, according to his fathers wil, as Paul writeth he toke our infirmities for his own and he hath borne oure iniquities and miseries, by reasō he came into the world as though he had ben an offēder, he toke a symilitude of syn to serue our turne on the behalfe of our sinnes & as though we had ben most innocēte, Esay. 43. & he cōmitted al the sins on his wil was to go alone to the deth, & therfore he sayed to his disciples in the garden: stande therin peace, Math. xxuii rest, & without care, & suffer me alone to enter into the battaile, & abide on my bones that you haue deserued. and meting the multitude he saied to thē: whō seke you: Iohn. 18. they āswered, Iesus of Naza∣reth as though they shuld haue sa∣yed, we seke for hym, whiche hath vpō him all the syns of the world. And christ made āswer, I am he, I
haue taken on me al ye sinnes, loue hath layde thē on my shulders, ther fore if you seke for me as a man in whō be al ye sinnes let my disciples and my elected passe as innocētes ease, satisfie reuēg, & do your worst to me, which am cōtented to suffer for al one cause also, wherfore christ being accused at ye iudgemēt seate of Ierusalē, made no answer was to shew yt they had against him all actiōs, in somoch as he had embra¦ced for his owne al our synnes. It pleased hym also to be crowned wt thornes, as king of al our mise∣ries, & set betwen tow thefes as the starkest errand thefe of al, likewise was he cōtented to be strikē & bea∣ten for our syns, as (Esay sayeth) he was smyten for our infirmities and brosed for our iniquityes, Esaye. 53. and ossēces: god hath chastysed & beatē him for the sinnes of his people and
by his woundes, and passions we be made hole, he payed that he owed not, alm. 63. (as Dauid saied I haue payed those thynges that I tooke not. say. 43. and Esay also dyd saye in the parson of Christ, you haue but me to trouble for your iniquities. he was contented that vppon hym shold come al those infamies, sclā∣ders, and rebukes, which we haue deserued for oure synnes, whych thynge Dauid singnified in spryte in the parsone of Chryste wher he saieth, salm. 68. the rebukes, and reproches, wherwyth they slandered the, fell all vpon me, yea and those curses also, that were due to vs fell vpon hym, (as Paule sayeth) he hath redemed vs frō the cursse, ala. 3 in that he became a curst for vs. and lyke a godly shepherde hauyng on hys backe the lost shepe (for he hath his kyngedome vppon hys shulders) ay. 6
hath he borne our synnes on the crosse, 1. Petri. ii. (as Peter sayeth) he hath borne our syns in hys body vppon the crosse and tre. vpon it as it had bene an altar, to condemne oure synnes, wyth the synne that was imputed to him, was he offered as a sacrifise to be burned in the fier and flāme of gods loue, and to the Corinthiās Paule writeth, ii Corin. 5. he that knewe no synne was made synne for vs. it was gods wyll & mynde, that he which was moste innocent shoulde be doone on the crosse as though he were not onely a sinner but euen syn it selfe & thus (as Da¦niel prophesied was iniquite cōsu∣med) & in one day god toke it oute of the world, acordyng to the pro∣fesye of zachary, Zachar. 5 Iohn. 3. wherfore saynte Iohn sayeth he appeared to take a way our synns, and saynt Iohn Baptist sayeth of Christ that he is
the lambe of god ye taketh away the synnes of the worlde. Therefore when Chryst suffered moste louig∣lye all that, whych we haue deser∣ued, Hebre. 1 he satisfyed for vs, and purged vs from oure synnes. he after the maner of the prodygal sonne, of an excedyng loue, that he bare to the sowle, when he hadde geuen hys diuine treasures of grace to the ve¦rye open synners & harlotes and had taken to hym self our synnes, as yf he had done them hym selfe, he made prayer to his father that he wolde pardon them to him & to him he pardoned thē, for we were not worthy: nether wolde he yeld vp his sprite tyl fyrst he had bowed doune hys heade that ys vntyll he had moued god, 1. Corin. 11. which ys (as Paule writeth) his heade to pardone vs to Chryste therfore were our syn∣nes ascribed so ye iustly he meryted
that death for hys synnes, not by cause he cōmitted thē, but bicause he admited them for his oune and so hath he satisfyed for them, not only suffycyently, but also more then was requisite. for to god ys one teare of Christ more pleasant, then all the synnes of the worlde dyspleasant. & that lyfe & death of hys were more to the honoure of god, then our life was to hys dys∣honoure, yea he hath not onelye satisfyed for our synnes, but hath purchaced for vs lyfe euerlasting. But happly wylt thou say, then nede I to take no paynes nor tra∣ueyl to satisfye for my syns, nor to deserue paradise, I may take mine ease, or do what euyll ye liketh me geuing me to pleasur, & good che∣are, for if it be as ye saiest, I cannot but be saued. I āswer thus. first I say ye truth it is ye oughtest not to
laboure thy selfe for the entente to satysfye for thy synnes nor yet to deserue paradise: for that is onely Christes office, nor thou canst haue any such entent wyth our doyng greate iniury and wronge to god. but where as thou sayeste, that thou wold iue idlye or doo euyll, after that Christe hath now deli∣uered the frome all euill, and pur∣chased the the greattest felicitie: I make the answer on thys wyse. If case were that one were led to the gallowes for hys rybaldry and noghtines, and his lord or maister of mere fauour and good wil shuld deliuer hym, and counte hym for hys sonne, and yet woulde saye, my lord or Maister hath deliuered me frome all euyll, and taken me for hys sonne and heyre, the refore wyl I go my way and be idle, and in folowyng myne own lustes, and
wyl do in him wrong: how thynk you, in thys case be not these wic∣ked wordes? euen the lyke sayeste thow Chryste hath delyuered me from hell, and made me the sonne of god, & heyre of heuen, wherfore I wyll stand like an idle parsone, or rather do more euyll, Christe certes dyed not for the, nor satis∣fied for thy dettes, nor yet merited for the paradise to thentent thou shulde stande idle, cōmit synne, and become a starke ribalde, but that thou, seyng hys greate loue, and hou greatly synne displeased hym seeynge he was wyllynge to dye bycause to take them oute of the world, shulde no more doo synne, but honour hym, loue hym, thank hym, put thy truste in hym, and worke vertuose and good workes plentiouslye, not as a bonde ser∣uāt to escape hell, sithē christ hath
delyuered the, ne yet to get para∣dyse, the whych Chryst hath pur∣chased for the, but as a naturall sonne for the glorye of god, moued therto by mocyon of faythe, loue, and spryte, not by mannes wyt, sensualytie, or thy behofe or com∣modytye. Moreouer eyther thou beleuest that Christ hath satisfyed for the or not, yf thou beleue not, that he hath delyuered the frome hell and gotten the Paradyse, yf thou be wyse, thou wylt searche to helpe thy self, and so wylt thou not be idle, mochlesse wylt thou cōmyt sinnes: but rather enforce thyselfe to make satysfaccion for thy selfe and to deserue paradise, whych is athyng impossible, but yf thou be∣leue lyuelye, that he had so loued the, that to saue the, he dyed on the crosse, thou shulde be constrayned to loue hym agayn, and to do for
his glory, maruelouse workes ple∣tuouslye and redyly to beleue that we are saued by Christ maketh not vs negligente and naughtye, but feruent and holye. Let vs therfore render thākes to oure Lorde god, seynge he hath wyth so greate loue saued vs by so hyghe, ryche, happye, and glo∣riouse meane. To whome be al waye all honour, laude and glorye, throughe Iesu Christ our Lorde. AMEN. IMPRINTED at London by me R. C. for Wyllyam Reddell duellyng at the signe of the George in Pouls chyrch yarde.
