1881 99855951 21462
❧ A famous and godly history, contay∣nyng the Lyues & Actes of three renowmed reformers of the Christiā Church, Martine Luther, Iohn Eco∣lampadius, and Huldericke Zuing∣lius. The declaracion of Martin Lu∣thers faythe before the Emperoure Charles the fyft, and the illustre E∣states of the Empyre of Germanye▪ wyth an Oration of hys death, all set forth in Latin by Phillip Melanc∣thon, Wolfangus Faber, Ca¦pito. Simon Grineus, & Oswald Miconus, Newly Engli∣shed by Hen¦ry Ben∣net Callesian. (∴) ¶ Imprinted at London by Iohn Aw∣dely, dwellyng in lytle Brittaine Streete, by great Saint Bartel∣mewes▪ Anno▪ 1561.
¶ Encomy of Martine Luther. A head where Pallas misteries wer fraight, A face where oumy brighlye dyd appeare, An eye yt could discerne ech mynde  sleight, And eares contēpning priuate au to heare A tong that dyd pronounce the sacred truth, A prareirs pen, that paynted well the same. A zeale that moued Tigrish hartes to ruhe, And could to vertue milds mindes enflame A mynde aspiring ay to wysdomes throne. A hart that neuer drad the Tirantes might. A rocke yt wold remoue from truth for none Disdayning death in quarell of the ryght. These golden gifts, in Luther shined bright For which he now receiues immortal light. ¶ Psalme .cxvi. ¶ The death of the iuste, is precious before the syght of God.
To the right honorable▪ and his syng∣good lord, Thomas Lord Went∣worth, prosperous health, and perpetual fel: citye. (∴) NOT without immortal prayse, & euerlasting re∣nowme ar the actes and monumentes of learned men, cōmended to poste∣rity. For if life wtout lit∣terature is (as Seneca sayth) a death or sepulture of the lyuely man, & the body (as Plato wytnesseth) no body, but a sepulture, cohibiting the minde from hys natural vigour: how much excelleth he (ryght honorable and my syngular good Lord) in thys frayle e∣state, who wyth studies of humanitye garnished, & wyth diuine knowledge adorned, hath not onely enriched his natural vnderstāding: but also made the same almost equiualent to Aun∣gels, comprehēding the glorious mi∣steries of the eternal Father, and his
Sonne Iesus Christ. Among these, how much Martine Luther excelled, his holy woorkes & prophane monu∣mentes, besides the learned testimo∣nies of many famous Clarkes, abun¦dantly deciare. Reading therefore of late tyme, the history of hys Lyfe and Actes, setfoorth by the incomparable ornament of good learnyng Phillyp Melanethon: I was therein maruay∣lously delighted, & efrsones perusing the same. I was rauished with incre∣dible desyre to bestow somtime in the translation therof. Many vrgent cau∣ses moued me, whereof y• principal be these. Fyrst, hys integrity of life, god¦ly conuersacion, & zelous affection to¦wardes the propagacion of Gods ho∣ly word. Secondly, his animosity pro¦fessyng Christ hys Maister, hys lear∣ned conference wyth the temporall & Ecclesiastical Estates of Germany, & his contempt of al worldly felicitye & transitori pompe, in respect of Christ hys Maister, whom he purely profes∣sed, and sincerely preached. Lastly, y• lamentable verses, & funerall Oraci∣ons of diuers, bewayling the losse of this pearle of Christianity, & the tra∣duction
of this present historye into the Germaine, Frenche, Spanish & Ita∣lian tonges by certayn godly persons exiled their natural country, and dis∣persed in sundry Christian Territo∣ries, wher Gods word is purely prea¦ched, and all papistrye abolished. By whyche it appeareth he was no lesse treasure and glory of hys Countrye, spectacle and absolute Image of god¦ly wysedome, then terrour to all Pa∣pisme, and such as builded the laud of theyr lyfe, on the snde of ambicious seekyng. My rude translacion & sym∣ple trauayle, I dedicate vnto your good Lordship, as to the very Patron and fauourable Mecenas of all poore Studentes. Whose honorable perso∣nage to pouder with condigne praise  a thing more due to your desertes, the easy for my rude pen, and more ap¦pertaineth to my duty, then it stādeth wyth myne ability. For who know∣eth your Lordship, and is ignoraunt of the rare gyftes that harbor in your head, & of the natural bountye that so brightly shineth in your countenaūce Who hath not hearde the renowmed brute of your constancye in Christian
religion, euen in these late wretched dayes, whose noble hart, neither tedi∣ous and long imprisonment, neyther flowing heapes of worldly aduersity could fraight with feare, or mooue to deflect to any sinister way, and whose vertuous mynde in greatest troubles euermore aspired to the hygh temple, where God in glorye is in throned. I passe in silence your bounty towards al such as professe God vnfaynedly, & publishe abroade the fruites of theyr studies. All which most heauenly de∣sertes, do not onely merite to be regi∣stred in the booke of Fame, but also ministre ample occasion for your ho∣norable personage (whē the fatal La∣dies shal spyn out the thre of mortal life) to be calendred in the Catalogue of those vertuous wyghtes. Who for sundry their prowesses, woorthye ex∣ploictes, goodly graces, and syngular giftes, were by antiquitye consecrate to immortality. And though your ho∣nour, whose lyfe lightneth hys pro∣fession, and whose profession purelye aduaunceth the glory of God and his sacred word, disdayneth to be setforth wyth my rude penne: yet your Lord∣shyp
must beare with him that of good wyl pronoūceth this of your good de∣series. I coulde wade further in your honours commendacion, but that I haue a certayn reuerence to trouble wyth my prolixitye your grauer af∣faires. And partlye feare pulleth me back, least I be spoiled with the nose of adulacion, whose honorable eares abhorres to hear your proper praise, and whose iudgement woulde con∣dempne my temerarious attēpt here∣in. Therefore sparing to speake that inwardly I conceiue, I remyt this ar¦gument of blasing your heroiacal ver¦tues, to such excellent Rethoricians, as far surmounting me in eloquence & good lytterature, as Phebus wyth hys bryght beames, the lesser celesti∣all bodyes. Thus humbly besechyng your ho∣nour to take in good parte, the base and symple trauayle of a poore Cal∣lisian, and also vouchsafe the Patro∣nage of thys Christian history, or ra∣ther myrrour of Christian lyfe. Vn∣der whose protection I publyshe the same abroade. I beseche the eternall God, and hys Sonne Iesus Christe,
to preserue your Lordshyppe, and the ryght honourable and vertuous La∣dy your Wyfe, sende ye encrease of muche honour, and graunt ye the accomplishment of your gentle hartes de∣syre. From London thys.. of Nouember. 1561. (∴) ¶ Your honours most humble Oratour Henry Bennet.
❧ The hysto∣ry of the Lyfe and Actes of Martine Luther, Doctour of Diuinitie. Faythfully set foorth by Phillip Melanthon. (.¶.) THE reuerende Father Martin Luther promi∣sed in hys fatall tyme, to publyshe, aswell the discourse of hys lyfe, as causes of hys conslicts: whych he resolued to do, yf death (to greedy of her pray) had not reft vs the society of hym, and the heauens acce∣lerated to place thys incomparable Iewell among the elect organes and vessels of God the father. Therefore I iudge it necessary that the conside∣racion of hys particular lyfe be lucu∣lently set forth. Since the same aboū∣ded with manye good examples, that may corroborate in syncere mindes ye fear of god, & not to digres, if I recite ye causes also, for that they aduertise
posterity of many excellent thynges. Further, by thys narracion, the syco∣phancye and sinistre reporte of them,clander gaynste Luther. maye be refuted, who vaunt he was encouraged by certayne Princes and other eminent Estates of the sacred Empire, to deface the dignitie of Bi∣shops, or prouoked wyth inordinate desyre, he brake the band of seruitude in hys Monaslical estate. And it had bene most requisite this discourse had bene wrytten by hym selfe. For albe it currish detractors would haue ob∣iected thys common prouerbe. ¶ Such as wyth hawtye style, adnaunce theyr proper prayse: Deflect frō Sophies golden saws and sue Morias wayes. Yet we, that knowe what rare ver∣tues harbored in his head, what con∣stancie lodged in hys diu ne brest: are perswaded he would iustly and faith∣fully haue recited hys proper hystory, And many graue and godly men liue presently, who would haue condemp ned hys follye, if he had forged an o∣ther historye, as Potes in their poe∣sies
are wont to faine, considering he vnderstode the perfect order & sequele of hys actes were not vnknowen vn∣to them. But since hys fatal day hath preuented the publicacion of such an history: I wyl truly recite, that part∣lye by familiare conuersacion I haue sene, and partlye by informacion and approued testimonies of hys perfecte friendes I haue heard. Ther is an auncient Famely, and amplye augmented, of meane degree surnamed Luther, in the territorie of the Noble Earles of Mansfield. Mar tine Luthers Parentes firste inhabi∣tedHis o try and rentes. the Towne Isleben, anon after they remoued to Mansfield, wher his Father Iohn Luther, exercised the office of a Magistrate, & was syngu∣larlye estemed amonge all sortes, for hys integrity of lyfe. Hys Mother named Margaret, be∣sydes that the had vertues worthy an honest Matrone, thys was syngular. Ther shined in her, continency, feare of God, and inuocacion, and al other vertuous persons constantly planted their eyes vpon her, as on a patron &
president of al moral vertues. I haue some tyme enquired of her, at what time her sonne was borne: she answe¦red, that she remembred the houre & the day of his natiuity, but of ye yeare she was ignoraunt. She affirmed he was borne the .x. day of Nouember at night, about a leuen of the clocke. And ye cause why he was called Mar∣tin, was for that the morow after he receiued Baptisme, was S. Martins day. But his brother Iames, an ho∣nest and vpright mā, said: the wholeThe yeare of Luthers rth. Famely held opinion, he was borne the yere after the Natiuity. 1483. After he was growen to yeares of vnderstandyng, hys Parentes dili∣gently taught hym to feare & knowe God, and accustomed hym to all do∣mesticall duties of honest vertues. They foorthwith addressed hym to schoole, and George Aemilius Fa∣ther led hym a lytle Infant to schole, who lyueth yet, and can recorde the truth. Euen about this tyme the Gram∣merThe oun∣acions of ys study. Schooles began to flooryshe in the Townes of Saony. Wherefore the sayd Martin, fully fourtene yeres
olde, was sent to Magdeburg, wyth Iohn Keynech, who hath prooued a worthy man, and by his vertue acqui¦red high authority in his Countrye. There cōtinued since a conglutinate mutual loue betwixt Luther & Key∣nech, proceding either of agreement of nature, either of society in chyldish study. And yet Martine studied no len¦ger then one yeare at Magdeburg. Departing from Magdeburge, he repaired to Isenach, wher he studied foure yeares vnder one Scholemay∣ster, who taught hym the Grammer more promptly and luckely, then any other. I haue heard Luther cōmende his wyt. He was sent to thys towne, because his Mother was borne in the same, of honest and auncient house. Here he atchieued his study in Grā∣mer. And for that he hadde a lyuelye pregnant & subtil wit, and passingly apt to eloquence: he was preferred a∣boue his schoolefeeres, and excelled the other yonge Impes that learned with him in opposicion of hard que∣stions, in copy of wordes, in compo∣sition of an Oration in prose, and in writing of Verses.
Hauyng then tasted the sweetenes of learning, as he was prone ther vn∣to: he went to an Vniuersitye, as tohe liueli s of spi∣. the fountayne of al Sciences. And yf he had founde meete and conuenient Instructors: he had knowen and com¦prised al kyndes of Sciences orderly, so great was the force of his vnderstā dyng. And it maye be some pleasaunt study of true Philosophie, and care to polysh hys tonge, would haue molle∣fied hys natural vehemency. But at Erford, he met wyth the Dialectique of that tyme, the whych (by dexteritie and redynes of wytte, vnderst andyng more exactly the causes & sprynges of instruction, then others hys compag∣nions) he greedely deuoured, and had in memory. And for that the excellencye of hys wyt embracing good litterature re∣quired many, & those selected things: he priuately red diuers workes of the auncient latine Authors, as Cicero, Titus Liuius, Virgil, & others. He studied not these as the yong scholers are wont, collecting onely the Phra∣ses, but as a doctrine or representaci∣on of humayne lyfe. And therfore in∣tentiuely
applyed hym selfe, to vnder stande the sence & sentence of the Au∣thors. And hauyng a naturall good memory, he had as it were before hys eyes prest, all that he had learned, or hearde. He so excelled in hys younge yeres, that the whole Vniuersity had hys wyt in great admiracion. Beyng twentye yeres olde, he wasHis study in the ciui law. graded Maister of Arte, and then he gaue hym selfe to the study of the Ci∣uil law, by the aduise of hys familiar and nyghest friendes, in so much that they iudged this marueilous pregnā∣cy of wyt and eloquence, ought not to lurke in obscure place: but be made notorious, hereafter to serue and be a neressary instrument of the publicke weale. And the next yere, which was the .xxi. of hys age, he sadaynly, & be∣sydes the expectacion of hys ParentsHis entry into ye mo¦nastery. and friendes, repayred to the Couent of the Augustines at Erphord. Wher he entreated admission, & beyng ad∣mitted, he learned wyth marueilous diligence, not onelye the doctrine of the Couent: but also gouerned hym selfe wyth a great seueritye of disci∣pline, and surpassed al other in all ex∣ercises
of Religion, in lections, in dis¦putacions, in fastinges, and in pray∣ers. He was naturally a smal feeder, wherat I haue mused much, sithe he was of stature tall and strong of bo∣dy. I haue considered in him this ab∣stinence:Incredible sobriety. foure continual daies, when he was well disposed and healthy, he would refraine from meate & drinke. And often tymes I haue seene, when a long season he would dyet hym self with a small peece of breade and one hearyng. The cause wherefore he addicted him selfe to this Monasticall order ofWhat mo¦ued him to Monkery. life: was because he beleued the same to be most conformable to sincere re∣ligion, and to the vnderstanding of Gods doctrine, as he hath related, & many hath knowen. Often tymes he was takē with great and trembling feares, when he attentiuely conside∣red the wrath of God, & the maruey∣lous examples of his punishmentes, that he was in a maner reft of hys wyttes. And I haue marked at a cer∣taine tyme, that beyng sore abashed in one disputacion of thys doctrine, because he gaue attentiue eare there∣vnto:
he was sodēly forced to remoue into a nygh Chamber, & ther resting on his bed, he medled & reported ofteHis abash∣mentes at the wrath of God. this sentence: God hath shut vp al vn¦der our vnbelief, to the end he might extende mercye to all. These abash∣mentes encreased after, but thē most asperously he felt thē, whē he lost hys deare friende & companion, who was stayne, I know not by what mishap. Then penurye pricked hym not to this Monkerye, but the affection he had to learne to serue God. Albeit he learned ther the doctrine vsed in scho¦les, he red the Doctors of sentences, and in publick disputacions, distinct∣ly expressed the difficulties, which o∣ther could not vnfold, whereat many mused: Neuertheles, for y• he sought not in this kinde of lyfe to wyn brute according to the vertu of his wit, butHys studie in the holy scripture. to norish him in the feare of God: he vsed these studies, as one that estee∣med not to be principall of that he searched and easelye conceyued those scholastical Methodes. In the meane season he redde with great affection the fountaines of heauenly doctrine, that is, the Prophetes and Apostles,
therby to frame hys lyfe and conuer∣sacion to the wyll of God, and so be continued in the feare & faith of God, as by manye thynges it was appa∣rent. Yea, howe muche the more ear∣nestly he coueted thys exercise, or ho∣ly contemplacion, so muche the more he was troubled wyth his dolour and abashment. He declared he was manye tymesHe is com∣forted by an old mā. confyrmed by conference with an old man in the Couent of Augustines at Erphord. And impartyng hym wyth hys tremblyng feares, he learned ma¦ny thynges touchyng fayth, and also told vs, he reasoned wyth hym of that Article of the Simbole, whych is: I beleue the remission of synnes. He ex¦pressed vnto Luther thys Article inre remis¦siō of sins. thys sort: We may not generally be∣leue onelye that synnes are or haue bene remitted to some, as the Deuils beleue, they were forgeuen Peter or Dauid: but that Gods expresse com∣maundement is, that euerye man should beleue particularly his sinnes are forgeuen. And further he sayd, that thys interpretacion was confyr∣med by the testimonies of Saynt Ber¦nard,
& he had shewed hym the placeAn excel∣lent decla∣racion of▪ s. Bernard touchyng fayth. in the Sermon of the Annunciacion, where it is thus set foorth: But adde that thou beleuest this, y• by hym thy synnes are forgeuen the. This is the testimony, that the holy Ghost giueth thee in thy hart, saying: Thy syns are forgiuen thee. For this is the opinion of the Apostle, that man is freely iu∣stified by fayth. Luther sayd he was not onely strēg¦thened by these wordes: but ye he was also instructed of the ful meaning of saint Paule, who repeateth so many times this sentence: We are iustified by fayth. And hauing read the exposi∣cions of many vpon this place: he thē perceued as wel by the purpose of the olde man, as by the comfort he recey∣ued in his spirite, the vanity of those interpretaciōs, which he had besydes him. And reading by little and lyttle, with conferring the sayinges and ex∣amples of Prophetes and Apostles, & continual inuocacion of God, and ex∣citacion of fayth by force of prayers, he perceiued that doctrine more eui∣dently. Then he began to reade S. Austens
bookes, where he found many good∣lyThe pro∣fit of s. Au¦stins vokes sentences, among other in the ex∣posicion of the Psalmes, and in the booke of the Spirite and the Letter, which cōfirmed this doctrine of faith & consolacion that was illumined in his hart. And yet he laid not a side the Sētenciaries. He could recite by rote word by word Gabriel and Camera∣censis. He red long tyme the bookes of Occan, & preferred his subtiltie a∣boue Thomas Aquin, and Scotus. He red also and reuolued Gersō, but aboue al the rest, he red and perused al ouer Saynt Austens workes, and committed them to perfect memory. And thus he beganne diligentlye to studye at Erphord, where he conti∣nued foure yeares in the Couent of Augustines. About this tyme one Staupicius aInstituciō of the Vni¦uersitye at Vitteberg famous wyght, who ministred hys helpe to furder the erection of an V∣niuersity in Vitteberge, endeuoured also to haue Schooles of Diuinitye founded in thys newe Vniuersitye. When he had considered the Spirite and erudition of Luther, he called
hym from Erphord, to place hym in Vitteberg, in the yeare. 1508. and of hys age .xxvi. There hys towardnes appeared in the ordinarye exercise of Schoole and predication. And as it happened that manye wyse and lear∣ned men attentiuely heard Luther, namely the Doctor Mellerad. The sayd Mellerstad woulde often tymes say, Luther was of suche a maruey∣lous spirite, and so ingenious, that he gaue apparent significacion, at one tyme or other, he woulde intro∣duce a more compendious, facile and familiar maner of teaching, and al∣ter and abolyshe the order that then was vsed. There fyrst he expounded the dia∣lectique and Phisique of Aristotle, and in the meane whyle intermitted no whyt hys studye in Theologye. Three yeres after he went to Rome about the differences of the Monkes, and returnynge the same yeare, hee was graded Doctor, at the expences of Elector Fridericke, Duke of Sax∣dnye, accordyng to the solempne ma∣ner of Schooles.
For he had heard him preach, wel vn∣derstanded the quicknes of his spirit, diligently considered the vehemencyLuther pas¦sed Doctor of his wordes, and had in singular ad¦miracion those profounde matters which in his Sermons he luculently and exactly exposed. And that al me maye perceiue the degree of Docto was geuen hym by precipitacion o iudgement: it is wel knowen he was then but thirty yeare old. He declare that Staupicius against his wyll en¦forced him to take that degre, saying merely vnto him: that God had man thinges to bring to perfection in hy Churche, wherein he would employ Luther. And thoughe these woorde were spoken merely: yet it came so t passe anon after, as manye predict¦ons or presages proue true before chaunge. After this he began to expound th Epistle to the Romains, & consequēt¦ly the Psalmes. But howe? he decla¦red them so diuinely, that it semed i the iudgement of al faythfull & lear¦ned men, he was a shyning lyght,  bright Phebus, that began to clea after a long cloudy and obscure sky
Ther he shewed the differēce betwixt the law and the Gospel. He also con∣founded the errour that raygned then in schooles and Sermons, the whych errour taught, that men merite remis¦sion of synnes by their proper woor∣kes, and that they be iust before God, by outward discipline, as the Phari∣seis taught. Luther diligentlye redu∣ced the myndes of men, to the SonneLuther taught Ie∣sus Christ of God. And as Iohn Baptist demon¦strated the Lambe of God that tooke away the synnes of the worlde: euen so Luther expressely shewed that sins are freely remitted, for the loue of the Sonne of God, and that we oughte faithfully to embrace this bountefull gift. He also illustrated dius other pointes of ecclesiastical doctrine. These happye begynnynges of so good matters, got him great authori¦ty, considering his lyfe was correspō∣dent to hys profession, and it plainly appeared his woordes were no lyppe labour, but proceded from the verye hart. Thys admiracion of his holye lyfe much inflected, and allured the hartes of his Auditours, and therfore many notable personages, familiarly
knowing hym, and seing him inno∣uate the vsuall Ceremonies, resisted hym nothing, but in respect of the au¦thority, he procured before (as wel for that he reueled many good matters, as that his lyfe was holye) consented wyth him in his opinions, with the which they saw the world deuided di∣uersly, and therfore were pensine and very sore greued. At thys tyme Luther altered no∣thing in the ceremonies, but precise∣ly obserued hys rule among hys fel∣lowes, he medled no doubtful opini∣ons, but expressed thys common doc∣trine, as principallest of all other, in familiar maner to all men, elucida∣ting the same more and more, to say the doctrine of repentaunce, of remis¦sion of synnes, of fayth, of true com∣fort in times of aduersity. Euery mā receiued good taste of this swete doc∣trine, and the learned conceiued high pleasure to behold Iesus Christ, the Prophetes and Apostles come foorth into lyght, out of darkenes, pryson, and other ordures, to vnderstand the difference betwyxt the lawe and the Gospell, betwyxt the promises of the
Law, and the promise of the Gospel, betwixt spirituall Iustice, and ciuill thynges, whych certainlye could not haue bene found in Thomas Aquin, Scotus, nor hys semblables. He considered this also, that many were instigated & solicited by Eras∣mus learned woorkes, to studye the Greeke and Latine tonges, who per¦ceiuing a more gentle & ready order of teaching the before, began to haue in contempt the Monkes barbarous and sophistical doctrine: and special∣ly suche as were of a gentle nature & good disposicion. Luther began to stu¦dy the Greke and Hebrue tonges, to thys ende, that after he had learned the phrase & propriety of the tonges, & drawen the doctrine out of the very fountaynes, he myghte geue more sound iudgement. Whilest Luther was in this course of study, a certaine Dominicke Frier¦nanied Tecel, a most impudent Sico¦phant (if euer there raygned any) cau¦sed the Popes Indulgences or Par∣dons to he caryed and sold about the Country. Luther, much moued wyth the blasphemous sermons this shame¦les
Friar preached, and hauyng hys hart earnestly bent wyth ardent de∣syre to mayntaine true religion, pub¦lishedLuthers Proposici∣ons of par¦dons. certain proposicions of Indul∣gences, whych are in the fyrst Tome of hys woorkes, and fixed them o∣penlye on the Temple that ioyneth to the Castell of Vitteberg, the mor∣rowe after the feast of all Saynctes, the yeare, 1517. Thys beggarlye Friar alwayes lyke vnto hym selfe, hopyng to ob∣tayne the Popes blessynge, assem∣bled certayne Monkes and Deuines, meanelye seene in Sophistry, in hys Couent, and foorth wyth commaun∣ded them to wryte something against Luther. And whylest he would not seeme to be dombe, he beganne not onelye to inueye in hys Sermons, but to thunder agaynst Luther, and balking out hys Asinine brayde, cry∣ed: Luther is an hereticke, and wor∣thye to be persecuted wyth the fyre,The sclaū¦ders of Te¦cel Iaco∣bite. and besydes thys he burned openlye Luthers propositions, and the Ser∣mon he wrote of Indulgences. Thys rage and heliyshe fury of thys bagge bearer Friar Tecel, enforced Luther
to treate more amply of thinges, and to mayntaine the truth. Beholde what were the begyn∣nynges of thys controuersye, where∣in Luther neyther suspecting ne drea¦myng of anye chaunge that myghte happen in the ceremonyes, dyd not vtterly reiect the Indulgences, but required a moderacion in them. And therefore they falselye accuse hym, that blase he beganne wyth plawsi∣ble matter, and whereby he myghte get prayse, to the ende in processe of tyme, he myght chaunge the state of the Common weale, and purchase authoritye, eyther for him selfe or o∣ther. And sure, hee was not suborned or sturred by Courtiers, as the Duke of Brunswike wrote that the Duke Fredericke was sore effended that suche contencion and controuersye should aryse, hauyng regarde to the sequele thereof, that all be it thys be∣gynnyng proceeded fauourablye, yet the flame by lyttle and lyttle kynde∣led, woulde haue spreadde further, as Homere maketh mencion of Fame.
¶ Fame is an euil, then the whychHomere. no swyfter can be found: For she doth florysh wt her chaunge and getteth force by groun. ¶ Smal with first dred, then large the growes, & lifts her in y• aire Thus to Iones seat through cloudes & skies, she blasting doth repaire. And as this good Duke Frederick was one of al the princes of our time that loued best quiet & common tran∣quillity,Prayse of Fridericke Duke of Sarony. neither was auaicious, but wyllyngly bent to referre al his coun¦sels to the common vtilitye of all the world, as it is easy to be coniected di∣uers waies: so he neither encouraged nor fauoured Luther, but often repre¦sented semblant of heauines and sor∣row, whych he bare in hys hart, fea∣ryng greater dissencions. But as he was wyse, and followed not onelye prophane iudgementes, whych cōmaund the tender springes of  chaunges to be sodeinly oppres∣sed: so takyng in counsayl the diuine rule, and wel deliberating therupon whyche enioyneth obedience to the Gospell, and forbyddeth to resist the
tryed truth, and termeth it a blasphe∣my, horribly cōdempned of God, par∣tinaciously to repugne the truth. He dyd that many wyse and godly wold haue done, he obeyed God, leauyng vnto hym hys diuine power, he redde diligently that that was writen, and he would not abolysh, that he iudged to be sincere and true. I know very wel he made inquisi∣cion often tymes, what wer the wise and learned mēs opinions touchyng these thinges. I knowe he gently be∣sought Erasmus (in that assemblye whych Themperour Charles the fift made, in the City of Colein after his Coronacion) freely to tell hym hys o∣pinion, if Luther had erred in those differences, wherof he principally en¦treateth. Then Erasmus sayde, thatErasmus approueth Luthers doctrine. Luthers opinion was good: but that he desired moderation of style in him. Wherof Duke Frederick wrot after greuously to Luther, exhortyng hym to temper the vehemency of his style. It is also apparēt, that Luther pro¦mised y• Cardinal Caietanus to kepe silence, prouided also his aduersaries would do the lyke. Whereby we may
gather, that at that time he determi∣ned not to sturre any newe debates, but rather coueted the cōmon quiet, and that he was prouoked by litle & lytle to other matters, throughe the excitacion of vnlearned writers. Then followed disputacions of dif∣ferēce betwixt diuine & humain law,Declaraci∣on of the principall poyntes of Religion. of the horrible prophanacion of y• sup¦per of our Lord, in selling & applieng the same for other purposes. Here he was forced to expres the cause of the sacrifice, & to declare the vse of the sa¦cramentes. Now the godly & faithful Christians, closed in Monasteries, vn¦derstanding Images ought to be es∣chewed, began to abandō y• wretched thraldom, in which thei wer deteined Now Luther, y• plainlier to expres the doctrine of repentaunce, of remis¦sion of syns, of faith, & of indulgēces, he added these matters: The differēce of diuine & humain lawes, y• doctrine of the vse of our Lords supper, of bap¦tisme & of vowes, and these were hys principal conflictes. As touching the question of the Romain Bishops po∣wer, Eccius was y• author thereof, & for none other respect, thē to inflame the fyry wrath of the Pope & Princes
against Luther. The simbole of y• A∣postles, y• same of Nice & Athanasius he conserued in their integrity. Fur∣ther he declareth in diuers his works sufficiently, what innouaciō is to be required in y• ceremonies & tradiciōs of mē, & wherfore they ought to be al∣tered. And what fourme of doctrine & administracion of the sacraments he required & approued, it is apparēt by the confessiō the Elector Iohn Duke of Saxony, & Prince Phillip Land∣graue of Hessia presented to thempe∣ror Charles the .v. in the yere 1530. in the assembly at Ausburg. It is mani∣fest also by y• cerimonies of y• Church in this City, & the doctrine y• is prea∣ched in our Church, the sōme wherof is fully comprised in this confession: I alledge this y• the godly may consi∣der not onely what errors he hath cor¦rected & reproued, & what images he hath defaced & abolished: but also thei may vnderstand he hath cōprehended y• hole doctrine necessary for y• church he hath set y• ceremonies in theyr pu∣rity, & geuen examples to the faithful to repurge & reforme the Churches, & it is necessary for posterity to know what Luther hath approued.
I wyl not here commemorate, whoWho were n cause ye cerimonies ver chaun¦ged. were the first yt published both partes of the Supper of our Lord, who fyrst omitted the priuate Masses, & where fyrst the Monasteries were abando∣ned. For Luther hath disputed verye lytle of these before yt assembly which was made in the Towne of Vangi∣ons, in the yeare 1521, he chaungedWormes. not the ceremonies, but in his absēce Carolostadius and other altered thē. Then Luther returning (after that Carolostadius had deuised & done cer¦tain thinges, rather to brede mutiny then otherwyse) manifested by euidēt testimonies, published abroade tou∣chyng his opinion, what he approued and what he mystyked. We know that politike men euer∣more, detested all chaunges, and weChaunges are daun∣gerous. must confesse, ther ensueth some euil of dissencions, yea trulye moued for ryght good causes in thys horryble confusion of humayne lyfe, and yet it is our duty euermore in the Church, to aduaunce Gods ordinaunce aboue humayne constitucions. The eternal father pronounced thys voyce of hys sonne: This is my welbeloued sonne
heare hym. And menaceth eternall wrath to al blasphemers, that is such as endeuour to abolishe the manifest verity. And therefore Luther dyd as behoued a Christian faithfully to do, considering he was an Instructor of the Church of God. It was hys office (I say) to reprehed pernicious errors whych Epicures table, wyth a mon∣strous impudencye heaped one vpon an other, and it was expedient hys Auditors dissented not from hys opi∣nion, synce he taught purely. Wher∣fore if alteracion be hatefull, and ma¦ny peryls grow of dissention, as we certaynly see manye, whereof we be ryght sory: they are in fault partlye that spread abroade these errors, and partly that wyth diuelyshe dysdayne presently mayntayne them. I do not recite this onely to defend Luther & hys Auditors, but also that the faythful spirites may cōsider nowThe gouer¦naunce f y• Church. and in tyme to come, what is the go∣uernaūce of the true Church of God, and what it hath alwayes bene, how God hath gathered to hym selfe one eternal Churche, by the voyce of the Gospel, of thys masse of sinne, that is
to say, of the huge heape of humayne ordures, among whō the Gospel shy∣neth as a sparke amyd the darke. As in the tyme of the Phariseis Zacha∣ry, Elizabeth, Mary, and many other reuerenced & obserned the true doc∣trine: So haue manye preceeded vs, who purely inuocated God, some vn∣derstanding more clearely, then some the doctrine of the gospel. Such a one was the old man, of whom I wrote, that often tymes comforted Luther, when his astoneinges assayled hym,  after a sorte declared vnto hym the doctrine of the fayth. And that God may preserue henceforth the lyght of his Gospell, shinyng in many: let vs pray with feruent affection, as Esay prayeth for hys Hearers: Seale the law in my Disciples. Further, thys aduertisement sheweth playne, that coloured supersticions are not perma¦nent, but abolished by God, and sythe thys is the cause of chaunges, we ought diligentlye to endeuour, that errours be not taught ne preached in the Churche. But I returne to Luther. Euen as at the begynnyng he entred in thys
matter, wt out any particular cupidiy:Prudenc to discerne offices. so thoughe he was of a firy nature, & subiect to wrath, yet he alwayes re∣membred his office, onely cōtendyng in his teaching, & prohibited warres to ve attempted, and distingued wise¦ly offices, wherin was any differece, to say: the Bishop fdyng the flocke of God, and the Magistrates that by authority of the sword committed vn to them, repres a certayne multitude of people subiect vnto them. Wherefore when Sathan conten∣deth by scandales to dyssipate the Churche of God, and contumelious∣ly enrage agaynst hym, and delygh∣teth to doo euyll, and reioyceth to be∣hold vs wallowe in the puddle of er∣rour and blyndnes, sinylyng at oure destruction, he spendeth oyle and toil to enflame and sturre vp myscheuous instrumentes, and mutining spirites to so we sedicion, as Monetarius andMonetari∣us sedici∣ons. hys lyke. Luther repelled boldlye these rages, and not onely adorned, but also corroborated the dygnitye and bandes of politicke order and ci∣uill gouernement.
Therfore whē I cōsider in my mind how many worthy men haue bene in the church, that in this erred, & were abused: I beleue assuredly y• Luthers hart was not onely gouerned by hu∣mayn diligence, but with a heauenly light, cōsidering how constantly he a bode wythin the limites of hys office. He held not onely in contempt the sedicious Doctours of that tyme, as Monetar us and the Auabaptistes: but also these horned Byshoppes of Rome, who arrogantly & impudent∣ly by theyr deuised decrees affirmed, that Saynt Peter had not the charge alone to teache the Gospell, but also to gouerne common weales, and ex∣ercise ciuil iurisdiction. Moreouer he exhorted euerye man to render vnto God that appertay∣ned vnto God, and to Cesar that be∣longed to Cesar, to say that al should serue God, wyth true repentaunce, knowledge and propagacion of hys true doctrine, inuocacion & workes, wrought wyth a pure cōscience. And as touchyng ciuil pollecy, that euery one should obey the Maiestcates, vn∣der whō he lyued in al ciuil dutyes, &
reuerences for Gods cause. And cer∣tenly Luther was such a one, he gaue vnto God, that belonged vnto God, he taught God, he inuocated God, & had other vertues necessary for a mā that pleaseth God. Further, in poli∣tike conuersation he constantlye ad∣uoyded al sedicious counsels. I iudge these vertues to be so excellent orna∣mentes, as greater and more deuine cānot be required in thys mortal life. And al be it that the vertue of thysAssurance of the doc∣trine of the Gospell. man is worthy commenacion, & the rather for that he vsed the gyftes of God in all reuerence: yet our duty is to render condigne thanks vnto God that by him he hath giuē vs the light of the Gospel, and to conserue and en¦large the remembraunce of hys doc∣trine. I weye litle the braid & sclaun∣der of the Epicures and Hipocrites, who scoffe and condempne the mani∣fest truth. But I stay wholy here vp∣on, that the vniuersal Churche, hath consented perpetuallye to thys ve∣ry doctrine, which is preached in our Church, where vnto we must frame our lyfe and deuocion conformable. And I beleue yt this is the doctrine,
wherof the sonne of God speaketh: If any loue me, he wyll keepe my com∣maundementes, and my father wyll loue him, and we wyll come to hym, and plant our dwelling with hym. I speake of the somme of the doctrine, as it is vnderstāded, and explaned in our Churches, by the faithfull & lear∣ned Ministers. For al be it that some one often times expoundeth the same more aptly and elegantly then some other: yet as touching the effect, the learned and faithful doo agree in all poyntes. Then weying & perpending with my selfe long tyme the doctrine thatFour chaū¦ges since ye Apostles. hath bene of al tymes, it semeth vnto me that since the Apostles there haue bene foure notable alteracions after the first purity of y• Gospel. Origene had his tyme. Al be it there wer some of a sound and sacred opinion as Me∣thodius, who reproued the furies and otages of Origene, yet he cōuerted the Gospell into Philosophye in the hartes of many that is to saye: he ad∣uaunced this perswasion, that one meane discipline of reason deserueth remission of synnes, and that thys is
that iustice, wherof is sayd: The iust shall lyue of his fayth. That age al∣most lost the whole difference of theIgnorāce of tyme marreth yt sentence. Law and the Gospel, and forgat the words of ye Apostles. For they vnder stoode not the naturall significacion of these wordes: Letter, Spirite, Iu∣stice, Fayth. Now when the proprie∣tye of wordes was ot, whych be no∣tes of the very thinges, it was neces∣sary that other thinges should be con¦triued. Out of this seede sprang Pe∣dagius error, which wandred largely abrod. And therfore al be it the Apo∣stles had geuen vnto y• Church a pure doctrine, as cleare & salutiferous foū¦taines, yet Origene medled the same wyth muche ordure and impuritye. Then to correct the errors of that tyme, or at the least some part of the.S. Augu∣stine resto∣rer of the doctrine. God raised S. Austen, who repurged an some part the fountaynes, and I doubt not if he were iudge of dissen∣cions at this day, but he wold speake for vs, & defend our cause. Certenly, as concerning free remission, iustifi∣cacion by faith, the vse of the Sacra∣mentes and indifferent thynges he consenteth wholy wyth vs.
And albeit that in some places he ex∣pundeth more eloquently and aptly that he wyl say, than in some, yet yf in readyng any do cary wyth them a godly spirite and quycke▪ vnderstan∣dyng, and al euil iudgement ceaseth, they shall soone perceyne he is of our opinion. And where as our aduersa∣ries sometime do cite sentences selec∣ted out of his bookes agaynst vs, and wyth clamour prouoke vs to the aun¦cient Fathers, they do it not for any affection they beare vnto the truth or antiquity, but maliciously to cloke them wyth the authority of the aun∣cient fathers, in the presence of their Idols, whych antiquity neuer knewe of any these horned beastes & dombe Idols, as we haue knowen in these dayes. Neuertheles it is certain, ther wer seees of supersticion in the tyme of the Fathers and auncient Doctors, & therefore S. Austen ordeyned some thyng of vowes, although he wrote not therof so straungely as other: for soth y• best some tymes shal be spotted wyth the blemysh of the follyes that reygne in theyr age. For as natu∣rally
we loue our Country, so fondly we fauour the present fashions, wher in we be trained & educated And very wel alludeth Euripides to thys. What customes e in tender youth by Natures lore receaue: The same we loue & lyke alwayes, and lothe our ust to leaue. But would to God, y• such as vaunt they follow S. Austen, wold alwaies represent one lyke opinion & mynoe, as S. Austen. Certaynly they would not clyppe and mutilate hys senten∣ces, to serue their purpose. And the lyght restored by S. AustēsDepraua∣tion of Ec∣clesiastical ministers. workes, hath much profited posterity For Prosper, Maximus, Hugo, and some other lyke, that gouerned stu∣dies to S. Bernardes tyme, haue for the most part imitated the rule of S. Austen. And this whyle styl the regi∣ment and rytches of the Bishops en∣creased, and therof ensued a moe thē gigantal or monstrous raygne, pro∣phane and ignoraunt men gouerned the Churche, among the whych cer∣tayne were enstructed in sciences and
practises of the Romayne Courte, and some other exercised in plea∣dynges. Then the orders of Dominicke and S. Fraunces Friers began, who be∣holdingThe begin¦ning of. 2. sortes of Friars. the excesse and ritches of the Byshops, & contempnyng their vn∣godly maners, determined to lyue in more modest order, or as I myght say to enclose them in the prisons of disci¦pline, but first ignoraunce encreased the supersticions. Then after, when they considered mens myndes wholy addicted to the study of y• ciuil lawes, for that pleading at Rome aduaūced many to great authority, & enrytched them: they endeuoured to reuoke men to the study of Diuinity, but they mis¦sed of their purpose, and theyr coun∣sayl fayled them. Albert and his sem∣blables that wer geuen to Aristotles doctrine, beganne to conuert the doc∣trineThe Gos∣pel turned into Phi∣losophy. of the Churche into prophane Philosophy. And the fourth age, not onelye fyl∣led with ordure the fountaines of the Gospell: but vomited poyson, to say: opinions manifestly approuyng all idolatries. Thomas Aquin, Scotus,
and their lyke, haue brought in so manye labyrinthes & false opinions, that▪ the godly & sound sort of deuines haue alway desired a more plain and purer kinde of doctrine. Neither can we deny without great impudencye, but it was expedient to alter this kind of doctrine, when it is manyfest that such as employed theyr whole age in this maner of teaching,The impi¦eties of ye Scholasti∣cal doctrin vnderstoode not the great part of the Sophismes, in theyr Disputacions. Further it is playne Idolatry confir¦med, when they teache the applicaci∣ons of sacrifice by woorke wrought, when they allowe the inuocation of Images, when they deny that synnes be freelye remitted by fayth, when of ceremonies they make a slaughter of consciences. Finally, there are many other horryble and pernicious deui∣ses, that when I thynke of theym, Lorde howe I tremble and quake of feare. Let vs render thankes vnto God, the eternall Father of our Lorde Ie∣sus Christe, who hath pleased by the Ministerye of Diuine and godly Lu∣ther, too purifye the Euangelicall
fountaynes of all ordure and papisti∣calLuther hath repur¦ged y• doc∣trine. infection, and restore siucere doc∣trine to the Church, wherof minding euermore, we maye conioyne our la∣mentable peticions, and with zeious affection besech God to cōrine that he hath atchieued in vs, for hys holye Temples sake. Ths is thy voice and promse lyung and iust God, eternal father of our Lord Iesus Christ, crea¦tor of a thinges, and of the Church: I wyll haue compassion on you, for my names sake. I wyll doo it for my see, yea truelye for my selfe, that I be not blaspheed. I beseche thee wt ardent affection, that for thy glory, & the glory of thy sonne Iesus Christ, thou wylt collect vnto thy selfe in the voyce of thy Gospell, among vs, one perpetual Churche, and that for the dare loue of thy Sonne oure Lorde Iesus Christ our mediator & interces∣sor thou wylt gouerne vs by thy holy Gho, that we vnfainedly maye call vpon thee, and serue thee iustly. Rul also the studies of thy doctrine, go∣uerne and conserue the policies and discipline of the same, whych be the Nurs of thy Church & scholes. And
sythe thou hast created mankind that thou mayest be knowen & inuocated of the same, and that for thys respect thou hast reuealed thy selfe by many care testimonies, permit not thys smal nomber and selected ocke (that professe ny sacred wor) to be defa∣ced and ouercome. And the rather, for that thy sonne Iesus Christ readye to fight agaynst death, hath payed in this maner for vs: Father, sanctifye them in verity, thy woord is veritye. We conoyne our prayer wyth the prayer of thys our hoye Prest, & we make peticion wth hym, that thy doc¦trine may the among m, and that we may be directed by the same. We heard Luther euermore pray in thys wyse, and so praying, hys innocent Ghost peaceably was separated from the earthy corps, whē he had lyued al most thee score and three yeares. Such as succeded, haue diuers mo∣numentesThe sōme of all that Luther taught. of hys doctrine & godlines He wrote certain instructing works, wherein he comprised a salutiferous and necessarye doctrine for men, tea∣ching the sincere myndes penitence, the fruites of the same, the vse of the
Sacramentes, the difference betwyxt the Gospel and Philosophy, the dig∣nity of politike order, finally the prin¦cipall articles of the doctrine condu∣cible to the Church. He composed cer¦tayne workes to reproue, wherin he refuteth diuers pernicious errours. He also deuised bookes of interpreta∣cion, in which he wrote many enar∣racions and exposicions of the Pro∣phetes and Apostels, and in this kind his very enemies cōfesse, he excelleth all other, whose workes are imprin∣ted and published abrode. Then al Christiās & godly myndes conceyue what prayse he merited, but certainlye hys exposicion of the old & new Testament, with vtility and la∣bour, is equiualent to al his workes. For in the same is so much perspicu∣itye, that it maye serue in steede of a Commentary, though it be red in the Germayne tonge. And yet this is not a naked Exposition, but it contay∣neth verye learned Annotacions and Argumentes of euerye parte. The whych both set foorthe the somme of heauenlye doctrine, and instructeth the Reader the sacred phrase, and
manner of speakynge in the Scrip∣tures, that the godlye myndes maye receyue fyrme testimonies of the doc∣trine, oute of the verye fountaynes. Hys mynde was not to keepe vs oc∣cupyed in hys woores: but to guyde our Spirites to the verye sprynges. Hys wyll was we shoulde heare God speake, and that by hys woorde, true fayth and inuocacion myght ve kyn∣deled in oure myndes, that GOD myght be sincerely honoured and a∣dored, and that manye myghte bee made Inheritours of the euerlasting lyfe. It behooueth v thankefullye to accepte hys good wyll and great la∣bours, and to imitate the same as our Patron, and by hym to learne to ad∣orne the Churche, accordyng to oure power. For we must referre all oure lyfe, enterprises, and deliberacions, to twoo principal endes. Fyrst, to il∣lustrate the glory of God. Second∣ly, to profite the Churche. As tou∣chyng the fyrst, Saynct Paule sayth: Doo all thynges to the glorye of God. And of the seconde, it is sayde in the hūdred twenty and two Psalme.
Pray that Ierusalem maye prosper, and there followeth a syngular pro∣myse added in thys versice, that such as loue the Church, shal prosper and haue good successe. Let these heauen∣ly commaundementes, and diuine be hestes allure all men to learne the true doctrine of the Churche, to loue the faythful Ministers of the Gospel, and the true Teachers, and to em∣ploy theyr whole studye and diligence to augment the true doctrine, and mayntayne concord and vnity in the trewe Church. (∴)
Martine Lu∣thers declaracion of hys doctrine, before the Emperours Maiesty, Charles the fyft, the Prin∣ces Electors, the Estates of the Empyre, in the iurney an assembly of Princes at Wormes. (∴) THE yere of our salua∣cion▪ 1621. about. 17. ayes after Passeouer, Martin Luther entred Wormes, beyng sent for by the Emperour Charles the fift of hys name, king of Hispaine & Archeduke of Austich. &c. Who the firste yeare of his Empire, made the first assembly of Princes in this regal City. And wher as Martin Luther had published three yeres be∣fore, certayne new propositions, and such as before were neuer proponed, to be disputed in the Towne of Wit∣teberg in Sarony, against the ran∣ny of the Pope (the which not wyth∣standing
were torne in peeces, con∣dempned and burned by the Papists, and yet by no manyfest Scriptures,  probable reason conuinced) the matter began to tende to tumult and mutiny, and yet Luther mayntained a this whyle opēly his cause against the Clergye. Whereupon it seemed good according to the sollicitacion of the Romayne Legates, that Luther should be called, assigning vnto hym an Herauld of Armes, wyth letter of safe cōduct by the Emperour & Prin∣ces. Being sent for, he came, and ad∣dressed hym to the Knyghtes of the Rhodes place, where he was lodged,Luther is sent for to Wormes. wel entertained, and visited of many Earles, Barons, Knights of thordr Gentlemen, Priestes & the Cōmony who frequēted his lodging til night. To conclude, he came besides the expectacion of many, as wel aduersa∣ries as other. For al be it he was sent for by the Emperours Messenger, & had letters of safe conduct: Yet for that a fewe dayes before his accesse, hys bookes were condempned by pub¦licke proclamacions, euery man bele¦ued for thys preiudice he woulde not
come. And ye rather, for ye his friendes deliberated together in a nye Village called Oppenehim (where Luther was firste aduertised of these occur∣rentes) & many perswaded him not to submit himselfe to any daunger, con∣sidering these beginninges aunswe∣red not the fayth of promyse made. Who, whē he had heard their whole perswasion & aduise, he answered in thys wyse: As touching me, synce I am sent for, I am resolued & certenly determined to enter Wormes, in theConstancy in Luther. name of the Lord Iesus Christ: yea, although I knew ther were so many Deuils to resist me, as ther are tyles to couer the houses in Wormes. The fourth day after his repayre a Gentleman, named Vlricke of Pap∣penhim, Lieutenant general of ye mē of Armes of the Empire, was cōmaūded by the Emperor before dynner, to repayre to Luther, & enioyne ye same at. 4. a clock in the after noone to ap∣peare before themperial Maiesty, the Princes Electors, Dukes & other E∣states of thempire, to vnderstand the cause of his appellation. Whereunto he willingly agreed as his duty was.
And after foure of the clocke, Vlrk Pappen him, and Caspar Sturm the Emperours Heraule (who conduc∣ted Martn Luther from Wteberg, to Wormes) came for Luther, and ac¦companied hym through the garden of the Knightes of the Rhodes place, to the Earle Palatines palaice, and least the people shoulde molest hym, that thronged in frequency on the di∣rect way to the Emperous Palaice, he was led by secret stayres to y• place where he was appoynted to haue au∣dience. Yet many, who perceiued the pretence, violently rushed in, and wer resisted to no purpose, many ascended the Galleries, because they desyred to be hold Luther. Thus standyng before the Empe∣rialLuther is roughte efore the mperor. Maiestye, the Electors, Dukes, Earles, & all the Estates of the Em∣pire, assembled there. He was first ad¦uertised by Vlricke of Pappenhim to keepe silence, til such tyme as he was interrogated. Thē the Embassadour of the Empire named Iohn Ecke, the Byshop of Triers general offici∣al, wyth a loud and intelligible voice first in Latine, then in Dutche, accor∣ding
to the Emperours commaunde¦ment, sayd and proponed this senec in maner as ensueth or lyke in effect. Martin Luther, the sacred and in∣uincible Emperial Maiesty, hath en∣ioyned by the consent of al the estates of the holy Empire, that thou shoul∣dest be appealed before the throne of hys Maiesty, to the end I might nter¦rogate thee of these twoo poyntes. Fyrst, if thou confessest these bookesInerroga¦cio. he (for he shewed a heape of Lu∣thers bookes, wrytten in the Latine and Dutche tonges) and which are in all places borne, intituted wyth thy name, be thyne, & thou doest affirme them to be thyne or no? Secondly, yf thou wylt recant and reuoke them, and all that is contayned in them, or rather meanest to stande to that thou hast wrytten. Then before Luther prepared to aunswer, Maister Ierome Schurffe,Ierome Shurffe. appoynted Luthers Aduocate, excla∣med: let the titles of the bokes be red. Forthwith the Official of Triers na¦med certen of the bokes, & those prin∣cipally whych were imprinted at Ba¦sile, among the whych he nominated
his Cōmentaries in the Psalter, hys booke of good workes, his Commen∣tary vpon the Lordes praier, & diuers other, which were not contencious. After this Luther aunswered thus in Latin & in Dutche: Two thyngesLuters aunswer. are proponed vnto me by the Empe∣rial Maiesty. First, if I wyl auow for myne, al those bookes that beare my name. Secondly, if I wyl mayntaine or reuoke any thyng that hitherto I haue deuised and published. Wher∣vnto I wyll aunswere as briefely as I canne. In the first, I can do none other thē recognise those bookes to be myne, which lastly wer named, & certaynly I wil neuer recant any clause therof. In the secōd, to declare if I wil who∣ly defend or cal backe any thing com∣prised in them. For as much as there is question of faith, and the saluacion of the soule, and thys concerneth the woord of God, whych is the greatest and moste excellent matter that can be in heauen or earth, and the whych dulye we oughte euermore to reue∣rence. Thys myght be accompted in me a precipitacion of iudgement, and
euen so a most daungerons attempt, if I would pronounce any thing, be∣fore I better aduised. Considerynge I might recite something lesse then the matter importeth, and more then the truth requireth, if I dyd not pre∣meditate that that I woulde speake. The which, twoo thynges would set before myne eyes this sentence of our Lord Iesus Christ, where by is sayde Who so euer shall denye me before men, I will deny hym before my Fa∣ther. I requyre then for thys cause, and humblye beseche the Emperiall Maiestye, to graunt me libertye and leasure to deliberate, so that I maye satisfye the interrogacion made vn∣to me, wythoute preiudice of the woorde of God, and peryll of myne owne soule. Whereupon the Princes beganne to deliberate. This done, the Offici∣all pronounced what was their reso∣lucion, saying: All beit Martine Lu∣ther, thou hast sufficiently vnderstan¦ded by the Emperours commaunde∣ment, the cause of thy appellacion, & therfore doest not deserue to haue o∣portunity geuen thee to determyne:
Yet he Emperiall Maiestye of hys mere clemency,  raūteth the one day to m for thyne aunswer, the whych to morrowe ar thys instaunt houre thou shalt repaire to render be¦fore hym cotcionally, thou doo not exhibite thyne opinion in wrytyng, but pronounce the same wyth lyuely voyce. This done, Luther was led to hys lodging by the Heraulo, but hereinLuther is exhorted to be con∣stant. I maye not be obliuious, that in the way going to the Emperour, & when he was in the assembly of Princes, he was exhorted of other to be couragi∣ous, and manly to demeane himselfe, and not to feare them that can kil the body, but not the soule: but rather to dread hym that is able to sende both bodye and soule to euerlastyng fyre. Further, he was emboldned wyth thys sentence: When thou art before Kynges, thynke not what thou shall speake, for it shall be geuen thee in that houre. The next day after four of ye clock, the Heraulde came and brought Lu∣ther from hys lodgyng, to the Empe∣rours Couet, where he abode tyi syxe
of the clocke, for that the Princes wet occupied with graue consultacions; a biding there and beyng enuironned wyth a great nomber of people, and almost smothered for the preace that was ther. Then after, whē the Prin∣ces were set, and Luther entred: the Official begā to speake in this maner Yesterday at this houre, Themperi¦al Maiestye assigned thee to be here Martin Luther, for that thou hast af∣firmed those bookes, that we named yesterday, to be thyne. Further to the interrogacion by vs made, whether thou wouldest approue all that thou confessest in them, or abolishe & make boyde any part therof. Thou dyddest require tyme of deliberacion, whych was graunted, & is now expired. All beit thou oughtest not to haue oppor∣tunity graunted to deliberate, consi∣dering it was notorious vnto thee, wherfore we accited thee. And as con¦cerning the matter of faith, euery mā ought to be so prepared, that at all tymes when so euer he shal be requi∣red, he may geue certen and constant reason thereof, and thou the rather so highly learned, & long tyme exercised
in Theology. Then go to, aunswere euen now to Themperours demaūd, whose bounty thou hast proued in ge¦uing thee leysure to perpend. Wylt thou now maintayne all thy bookes which thou hast acknowledged, or re¦uoke any part of them? or submit and yelde thy selfe? The Officiall made thys interrogacion in Latine and in Dutche. Martin Luther aunswered in La∣tine and Dutche, in this wise, modest¦ly and lowlye, and yet not wythout magnanimily, and Christian constā∣cy, so as hys aduersaries would glad¦ly haue had hym whusted, and abased hys courage, but yet more earnestlye they desyred hys reuocation, and cer∣taine of them perswaded euen so, for as muche as he obtayned leysure to deliberate. ¶ Hys aunswer was thus. E Emperour, and my most mag¦nificent Lord, and you most ex¦cellent Princes, and my most clement Lordes, I appeare before you here at the houre prescribed vnto
me yesterday: yelding the obedience that I owe, humblye beseechinge, for Goodes mercye your most renou∣med Maiestye, and your Graces and Honours wyll minister vnto me this curtesye, to attende thys cause be∣nignelye, whyche is the cause (as I trust) of Iustice and Veritye. And yf by ignoraunce I haue not geuen vnto euery of you your iust ti∣tles, or if I haue not obserued the ce∣remonies and countenances of the Court, offendyng agaynste them: it maye please ye to pardon me of your benignities. As one that onelye hath frequented Cloisters, and not courtly ciuilities. Neyther can I geue other testimony of my selfe, but that I haue instructed and written in such simpli¦city of mynde, as onely I haue estee∣med the glory of God, and the institu¦tion of the faythful Christians in all sincerity of doctrine. Most magnificent Emperour, andLuther ge∣ueth ac∣compt of hys faythe before the Emperor. you most noble Princes, my moste gracious Lordes, beyng yesterday in∣terrogated of these twoo Articles ob∣iected by your most excellent Maiesty If
selues ordayne by proper lawes, as in the Distinct. 9. and. 25. q 1. and. 2. that the Popes lawes repugnant to the doctrine of the Gospel, and the o∣pinions of the auncient Fathers, be iudged erronous and reprobate. If then I shall reuoke these, I can doo none other but augment fore o theyr tyranny, & not onely open wn∣dowes, but wyde gates, to such an in fernal iety, the whych wil extend more wyde, and wyth more libertye, then yet she st. And by the testimo¦ny of this my Rtractacion, theyr a∣soent and maliious kingdome shall be made most licencious, and lesse sub¦iect to punishment, most intollerable to the common people, and yet confyr¦med and established, spectaly if thys be bruted, that I Luther haue done thys by the authortye of your moste excellent Maiestye, and the sacred Romaine Empre. Oh Lorde, what a couer or shadowe shall I be then? to cloke theyr naughtynes and tyran∣nye. The rest or third sort of my bookes are suche, as I haue wrytten agaynst some priuate, and some (as thei terme
them) syngular parsons, to saye, a∣gaynst such as wyth toothe and nayle laboured to protect the Romyshe ty∣rannye, and deface true Religion, whych I haue taught and professed. As touchyng these, I playnelye con∣fesse I haue beene more vehement, then my Religion and profession re∣qured. For I make my self no saint, and I dispute not of my lyfe, but of the doctrine of Christ. And these I can not wythout pre∣iuoice call backe for by thys Recan∣tacion, it wyll come to passe, that ty∣ranny and impiety shal raygne, sup∣ported by my meanes, and exercyse cruelnesse agaynste Goddes people, more violentlye and raginglye, then before. Neuertheles, for that I am a man,He requi¦reth to be instructed if he haue erred. and not God, I can none otherwyse enterpryse to defend my bookes, then my verye Lorde Iesus Christe hath ayded hys doctrine. Who beyng exa∣mne of hys doctrine before Annas, and hauyng receyued a buffet of the Minister, sayde: If I haue spoken e∣uyll, beare wytnesse of euyll.
If the lord (who was assured he could not erre) refused not to haue testimo∣ny geuen against his doctrine, yea of a most vyle seruaunt: how muche the more I that am but vyle corruption, and can doo nothyng but erre, ought earnestly to entreate and attende, yf any wyll beare wytnes agaynste my doctrine. Therefore I requyre for Gods mer¦cy, your most excellent Maiesty, your Graces, and right honourable Lord∣shyps, or what so euer he be of hyghe or low degree beare wytnes, if ye can proue I haue erred, or if ye surpasse me in the knowledge of the prophets and Apostles writings, cōuince mine errours, and I wyl be most ready (yf I be so instructed) to reuoke any ma∣ner of error. Yea & the fyrst that shall cōsume my bokes with flaming fyre. I suppose by these it is apparent, that I haue perpended, & wel weyed, the peryls and daūgers, or the diuers opinions and dissentions that haue rysen and growen throughoute the whole worlde, by reason of my doc∣trine, of whych I was vhemently & rbukefully admonished. As touching
my selfe, I conceiue no greater delec∣tacion in any thing, then when I be∣hold discordes and issencions, resus∣citated for the word of God. For such is the course an issue of the Gospell, Iesus Christ saith: I cam not to send peace, but a sword. I came to set man at variaunce against his Father. And further, we must thynke that our God is marueilous and terryble in hys counsels, least perhaps y• that we endeuour with earnest study to at¦chieue & bryng to perfection (if we be¦gyn, after we haue condempned the word of God) that same turne not to a huge sea of euyl, and (wherof we had neede to be prouident) least the Em∣pire of thys younge and bounteous Prince Charles (in whom next after God, we all conceiue singular hope) be lamentable, vnfortunate, and my∣serably begonne. I could eemplify this with autho∣rities of the Scriptures more effectu∣ally, as by Pharao, the Kyng of Ba∣bilon, and the Kinges of Israel, who then most eclipsed the bright Sunne of theyr glorye, & procured their own ruine, when by sage counsels they at∣tempted
to pacify and establishe theyr gouernments and Realmes. It is he that entrappeth the wyly in their wy¦lins, and sbuerteth mountaynes, ere they feel hys myght. Wherefore feare is the woorke of God. I speake not thys, supposyng that so politicke and prudent heades haue neede of my doctrine or admonicion: but because I would not omit to pro∣fit my country and offer my dutye or seruice that may tend to the aduaūce¦ment of the same. And thus I hum∣bly commend me to your most excel∣lent Maiesty, & your honorable Lord∣ships, beseching I maye not incurr your displeasures, neither be contem¦ned of you, throughe the pursute of my aduersaries. I haue sayd. These wordes pronounced the Em¦peroursLuther sol¦licited a∣gayne to submyt hym selfe. Embassadour, who made semblant of good wyll to checke Lu∣ther: sayde that Luther had not aun∣swered to any purpose, neither it be∣haued him to cal in question, thinges in tyme past condempned and defi∣ned by generall Councels. And ther∣fore they required of hym a playne and no crooked aunswer, whether he
would reuoke or no. Then Luther aunswered: Consi∣dering that your soueraigne MaiestyLuthers absolute answer. and your Honours requyre a playne aunswer, I wyll geuethe same, ney∣ther crooked ne contumelious in this maner: that if I be not conuinced by testimonies of the scriptures, and by probable reason (for I beleue not the Pope, neither general Councels) be ouercome in the scriptures alledged by me, and the certitude therof is not found in the word of God, I wil not, nor I may not reuoke any manner of thing, considering it is not godlye ne leful to doo anye thing agaynst con∣science. Here vpon I rest, I knowe not what els I should say. God helpe me. So be it. The Princes consulted together vp¦on this aunswere geuen by Luther, And when they had diligently exami¦ned the same, the Officiall of Triers Embassadour of the Empyre, began to repel hym thus. Martin, thou hast more immodestly answered, then besemed thy person, & also euyl to purpose. Thou deuidest thy bokes in thre sortes, in such order
that al that thou hast said, maketh no¦thing to the interrogacion proponed. And therfore if thou haddest reuoked those, wherein the greatest part of thyne errours is conteined: the Em∣perial Maiesty, and the natural boun¦ty of other woulde not haue suffered the rest that be sounde, to be persecu∣ted wyth fire. But thou resuscitatest and bryngest to lyght, al that the ge∣neral councel of Constance hath con∣dempned, the whych was assembled of al the nacion of Germany, & requi¦rest to be conuinced with scriptures, wherin thou errest greatly. For what aayeth it to renue disputacion of thinges so long tyme past condemp∣ned by the Church and Councels, vn¦les it shoulde be necessarye to geue a reason to euery man of euery thyng. That if all suche as impugne, that which was decreed by the Churche, and Councels may once get thys ad∣uauntage, to be cōunced by the scrip¦tures, we shall haue nothyng certain and established in Christendome. And ths is the cause wherfore the Emperial Maiesty requireth of thee a symple aunswer, either a negatiue,
or an affirmatiue, if thou wilt defend al thy workes as Christian, or no? Then Luther besought the Empe∣rial Maiesty not to cōpell him to yeld against his conscience, cōfirmed wth the holy scriptures, without manifest argumentes, alledged by hys aduer∣saries, & declared his answer was not crooked, but symple, and direct, & fur¦ther he had not to say, then he aduer∣tised before, that if his enemies could not extricate wyth sufficient argu∣mentes hys conscience occupyed (as they sayd) with errours, he was not able to ryd hym self out of the snares wherin he was entangled. And wher¦as the general Councels haue ordey∣ned certain thynges, those therefore not to be tru, for that thei haue erred, & often tymes gaynsayd them selues, & for thys cause the enemyes argu∣ment was of no solidity. Further, he was able to prooue, and would con∣stantly stand to the tryall the Coun∣cels had erred, and it was not meete for hym to reuoke and dysanull that which is manifest, and diligently set forth in the Scripture. Wherunto the Offical aunswered
simply to purpose, and said: No man could proue the Councell had erred, but Luther alledged he could, & pro∣mysed to proue. And now nyght ap∣proching, the Lordes rose and depar∣ted. And after Luther had taken hys leaue of the Emperour, diuers Spa∣niards scorned & scoffed the holy man in his way to his lodging, hallowing & hoopyng after hym a on whyle. The Fridaye following after, the Princes Electours, Dukes, & other Estates, were assembled: the Empe∣rour sent to al them that were depu∣ted Counseillors, one letter, contay∣ning thys that foloweth: Our Pre∣decessors,The Em∣perors aun¦wer a∣aynst Lu¦ther. who truely were Christian Princes, wer obedient to the Romish Church, which Martine Luther pre∣sently impugneth. And for as muche as he is not determined to call backe his errors in any one point, we cānot without great infamy and stayne of honor degenerate from the examples of our Elders, but wyl maintayn the auncient fayth, and geue aye to the sea of Rome. And further, we be re∣solued to pursue Martin Luther and his adherentes by excommuncacions
and by other meanes that may be de∣uised to extinguish his doctrine. Ne∣uertheles, we wyll not violate our fayth, which we haue promised him, but meane to geue order for hys safe returne to the place whence he came. The Princes Electors, Dukes and y• other Estates of the Empire, sat & cōsulted vpon this sentence, Friday all the after noone, and Saturdaye the whole day, so that Luther yet had no aunswer of the Emperour. During this tyme diuers Princes, Earles, Barons, Knyghtes of the order, Gentlemen, Priestes, Monkes with other the Latye and common sort visited hym. All these were pre∣sent at all houres in the Emperours court, and could not be satisfied with the sight of hym. Also ther were hyls set vp one against Luther, & the other as it semed wt him. Notwithstanding many supposed, & especiallye such as wel conceiued the matter, y• this was subtilly done by hys enemies, y• ther∣by occasiō might be offred to infringe the safeconduct giuen him, the which the Romayne Embassadours with al sedulity, endeuoured to bring to passe
The monday folowing, before sup∣per, the Archbyshop of Triers aduer∣tised Luther, that on wednesday next he should appeare before him at syxe of the clocke before Dynner, & assig∣ned hym the place. On Saint Geor∣ges day, the Archbishoppe of Triers great Vicar, about Supper tyme cam to Luther, by the commaundement of hys Prynce, sygnifieng that at the houre and place prescribed, he muste the morrow after haue accesse to hys Mayster. The morrow after S. Georges day Luther obeying the Archbishops com¦maundement, entred his palaice, be∣yng accompanied thyther wyth hys said great Vicar, and one of the Em∣perours Herauldes, and such as camlaci∣ons made to Luther to seduce . in hys companye out of Saronye to Wormes, wt other his chiefe friends Where as Doctor Voeus, the Mar∣ques of Bades Chaplein began to de clare and protest, in the presence of the Archbishop of Triers, Ioachyme Marques of Brandeburge, George Duke of Sarony, the Byshoppes of Ausburg & Brandeburge, the Earle George, Iohn Back of Strasburge,
Verdeheymer & Peutinger Doctors, that Luther was not called to be con∣ferred with, as of a different or dispu∣tacion, but onelye that the Princes had procured licence of Themperors Maiesty, through Christian charity, to haue liberty graunted vnto the, to exhort Luther benignely & brotherly. He said further, that albeit the Coū¦cels had ordeyned diuers thinges, yet they had not determined contrarye matters. And albeit they had greatly erred, yet their aucthoritye was not therfore abased, or at the least not so erred, that it was lawfull for euerye man to impugne their opinions. Fur¦ther, he alledged certayne thinges of Zacheus & the Centurion, of the de∣crees and tradicions of men, & of the ceremonies ordeined, affirmyng that al these were established to repres the vices, according to the quality & reuo¦lucion of tymes, and that the Church could not be destitute of humayn con∣stitucions. Further, that the tree is knowen by the fruit, the lawes haue much profited, and S. Martin, Saint Nicholas, and many other Sayntes haue assisted the Councels.
Moreouer that Luthers bokes wold brede great tumult, & incredible trou¦bles, & that be abused the cōmon sort wyth hys booke of Christian liberty encouraging them to shake of theyr oke, and to confirme in them a diso∣bedience. That presently the worlde was at an other stay, he when y• bele¦uers wer a of one hat & soule, & ther¦fore it was expedient to haue lawes. Thys was worthye consideracion, that albeit he ha wryt many good thynges, and doutes wyth a goodly spirit, as of Triple Iustice and other: yet now the deuil attempted by wyly meanes, that al hys workes for euer more should be cōdempned, and that by these hys last workes it is easye to knowe the re by the fruite, and not by the blossome. Here he added somethynge of the noone Dyuell, of the Spirite com∣mynge in the darke, and of the fli∣yng arrowe. All hys Oracion was exhortatorye, full of common places of Rethoricke, of honesty, of vtility, of lawes, of the daungers of consci∣ence, and of the common and particu¦lar healthe, repeatyng oft thys sen∣tence
in the Proeme, myddle, and ∣po of hys Oration. That thys ad¦mnon was geuen hym of a singu¦lar good wyl and great clemency. In the shutting vp of hys Oration, he ad¦ded mnainges, saying: that yf he would abyde in hys purposed entent, the mprour would procede further & exterminate hym the Empire, per∣swadyng hym deliberatlye to ponder and aduise these and other thynges. Martine Luther aunswered: Most noble Princes, & my moste gracious Lordes, I render most humble than∣kes for your benignities and syngu∣lar good wylles, whence proceedeth thys admonicion. For I knowe my selfe to be so base, as by no meanes I can deserue amonicion of so great Princes. Then he frankely pronounced, heThe coun¦cel of Con¦stance con¦dempned ye woorde of God. had not reproue all Councels, but onely the Councel of Constance, and for this principal cause, that the same condempned the word of God, whych appeared in the nempnacion of thys Article proponed, by Iohn usse. The Churche of Christ is the Communion of the Peinate.
It is euident the Councl of Constc abolished thys article, & consequently thys article of our faith: I beleue the holy Church vniuersall. And that he was ready to spend lyfe and bloud, s he were not compelled to call backe the manyfest word of God, for in de∣fence therof, we ought rather to obey God then men. And that in thys he coulde not ad-2noyde the scandale of fayth, for there is two scandales or offences, to saye, of Charity & of Fayth. The scandaleScandale of Fayth & Charity. of Charity consisteth in maners & in lyfe. The scandale of Fayth or doc∣trine resteth in the word of God, & as touching thys last, he could escape it no maner of wayes, for it laye not in his power to make Christ not y• stone of scandale. If Christes shpe wer fed wyth pure pasture of the Gospell. If the fayth of Christ wer sincerely prea¦ched, & if ther were any good & Eccle∣siastical Maiestrates, who duly execu¦ted their office: we should not nede to charge the Church with mens tradi∣ciōs. Further he knew wel we ought to obey the Maiestrates & higher po∣wers, how vniustly & peruers so euer
they lyued. We ought also to geue place to our iudgmet, al which he had taught in al hys workes, adding fur∣ther, he was ready to obey them in al pointes, so that they inforced him not to deny the woord of God. Then Luther was byd stand aside, and the Princes conued what aun∣swer thei might geue him. This done they called him into a Parlour, wher as the Doctor of Bade repeated hys former matters, admonithyng Lu∣ther o submyt hys writinges to the Emperour and Empires iudgement. Luther aunswered humbly and mo¦destly, he coulde not, neyther woulde permit that men should say he would thunne the iudgement of the Empe∣rour, Princes, & supreme Estates of the Empyre, weying so slenderlye their examinacion, that he was con∣tented to suffer his writings most di∣ligently to be read ouer, considered & iudged of the simplest, so y• this were done, with the authority of the word of God, & holy scripture. And that the word of God made so much for hym, and was so manyfest vnto hym, that he woulde not geue place, vnles they
taught sound doctrine, then the word of God. And y• S. Auten wryteth, he had learned to geue this honor onelyThe word of  one¦ly true. to those bookes, which are called Ca∣nonicall, that he beleued them to be true And as touching the other Doc∣tors, albeit in holynes and excellency of learning, they passed, he would not credit them, vnles they pronounced truth. Further, that Sayncte Paule had wrytten to the Thessalonians, proue all things, folow that is good. And to the Galathians: although an Aungel should descend from heauen, if he preach otherwyse, let him e ac∣cursed, and therfore not worthy to be beleued. Finally he mekely besought them not to vrge his conscience, faste¦ned with the andes of the woorde of God and holy scripture, to deny that same excellent word. And thus he cō∣mended hys cause and hym selfe to them, and specially to the Emperors Maiestye, requiring their helpe, he myghte not be compelled to do anye thyng in thys matter agaynste hys conscience. And otherwyse he would submyt hym selfe in all causes most obedientlye.
And answering thus, Ioachime E∣lector, Marques of Brandeburge, de∣maunded if he had sayd he would not yelde, vnles he were conuinced wyth the scripture Yea trulye ryght noble Lord (quoth Luther) or els by aunci∣ent and euident reasons. Thus the assemble brake, and the Princes repayred to the Emperours court. The Archbishop of Triers a∣bode, accompanied with hys Official Iohn Ecke, & Cochleus, & cōmaūded Luther to come into hys chamber, Ie¦rome Schurff, & Nicholas Ambsdorff assisted to mayntaine Luthers cause. Then the Official began to frame an argument like a Sophist & Canonist, defending the Popes cause: That for the most part at al tymes holy scrip∣tures haue engendred errors, as theFalse ar¦gumentes for y• Pope same of Heluidius the Arian, out of that place in the Gospel, where is ex∣pressed, Ioseph knew not his wyfe til she was deliuered of her fyrst chylde. Further, he grew to ouerthrow thys proposiciō, that the Catholik Church is the Cōmunion of Sayntes, presu∣ming also of Cocle to make wheat, & of bodily excremēts to cōpact mēbers.
Martin Luther & Ierome Schurffe reproued these folyes, & other vaine and ridiculous matters, whych Ecke brought forth but modestli, as things not seruing to the purpose. Somtyme Cochleus would entermedle his mur¦muring chattes, and laboured to per∣swade Luther, to desist from hys pur∣pose, & vtterly to refraine thenceforth to wryte or teach, & so they departed. About euening, the Archbyshop of Triers, aduertised Luther by Ambs∣dorff, the Emperours promise made vnto him, was prolonged two daies, & in the meane season he would con∣ferre wyth him the next daye, and for that cause he woulde sende Doctour Peutinger & the Doctor of Bade the morrow after to hym, and he himself would also talke with hym. The Friday then that was Saynt Markes day, Peutinger, & the Doc∣tor of Bade trauailed in the forenone. to perswade Luther simply and abso∣lutely to submit the iudgement of his writinges to Themperor & Empire. He aunswered he would do & submyt any thing they woulde haue hym, so they grounded with the authoritye of
holy scripture, otherwyse he woulde not consent to do any thing. For god sayd by his Prophet (saith he:) Trust ye not in Princes, nor in the children of men, in whom there is no health. Also, cursed be he that trusteth in me And seyng them vrge him more vehe¦mently, he aunswered: We ought to submit no more to the iudgement of men, then the word of God doth. So they departed, and prayed hym to ad∣uise for better aunswer, and said they would returne after Dynner. After Dynner they returned, exhor¦tyng as before, but in vayne. They prayed him at the least he would sub∣mit his writyng to the iudgement of the next general Councel. Luther a∣greed therunto, but wyth this condi∣cion, that they them selues shoulde present ye Articles collected out of his bookes to be submitted to the Coun∣cel, in this maner, notwythstandyng that the sentence awarded by the coū¦cel, should be authorised by the scrip∣ture, and prooue the contrary wyth the testimonies of the same. Then leauing Luther, they depar∣ted and reported to the Archbishop of
Triers that he had promised to sub∣myt hys wrytings in certayn articles to the next Coūcel, and in the meane space he would kepe silence, whyche Luther neuer thought, who neyther wyth admonicions, ne yet menaces could be induced to denye or submyt hys bookes to the iudgements of mē, he ha so fortified them with cleare & manifest authorities of the scripture, vnlesse the coulde prooue by sacred Scripture and apparent reasons he had erred. It chaunced then by y• special grace of god, that the Archbishop of Triers sent for Luther, resolued presently to heare hym. And when he perceiued o∣therwise then Peutinger, & the Doc∣tor of Bade had tolde hym, he affir∣med that Luther should not haue re∣uoked for a great deale, that he had sayd, vnles he had heard him speake, but that straight he would haue gone to the Emperour, and declared what the Doctors had reported. Then the Archbyshop treated andFamiliar talke be∣twene the archbishop & Luther. conferred wyth Luther very gently, fyrst remouyng such as wer present, as well of the iudgement of the Em∣peror
and Empire, as of the sentence of the next general Councell. In this conference Luther conceled nothyng from the Archbishoppe, affirmyng it was daungerous to submyt a matter of so great importance to them, who after they had called hym vnder safe∣conduct, attempting hym wyth newe commaundementes, condempned his opinion, and approued the Popes Bull. Moreouer, the Archbyshop bedding a friend of hys drawe nygh, required Luther to declare what remedye myghte bee ministred to helpe thys. Luther aunswered: There was no better remedy, then suche as Gama∣lilCounsel Gamalil▪ alledgeth in the fyte▪ Chapter of the Apostles, wytnes Saynte Luke, saying: If thys councel or this worke procede of men, it shall be dyssolued, but if it be of God, ye cannot dissolue it. And that the Emperour and the Estates of the Empyre myghte ad∣uertyse the Pope that he knewe cer∣taynelye yf thys hys enterpryse pro∣ceeded not of God, it woulde be abo∣lished wythin three, yea wythin two yeares.
The Archbishoppe enquired of hym what he would do, if certain articles wer taken out of his bookes to be sub¦mitted to the generall Councell. Lu∣ther aunswered: So that they be not those, which the councel of Constāce condempned. The Archbishop sayd I feare they wyll be the very same: but what then? Luther replied: I wyl not nor I cannot hold my peace of suche,uthers cō¦ncy. for I am sue by their decrees the the woord of God was condempned. Therfore I wyl rather lose head and life, then abandon the manyfest word of my Lord God. Then the Archbishop, seing Luther would in no wyse submit the word of God to the iudgement of men, gently bad Luther farewell, who at that in∣stant prayed y• Archbishop to entreate the Emperours Maiestye to graunt hym gracious leaue to depart. He an∣swered: he would take order for hym, and speedelye aduertise the Empe∣rours pleasure. And within a smal whyle after, the Archbishops Offical, in the presence of the Emperours Secretarye, who was Maximilians Chauncelour, said
vnto Luther in his lodging, by the cō¦maundement of the Emperour: that syne he had ben admonished diuers∣ly of the Emperial Maiesty, the Elec¦tors, Princes, & Estates of the Em∣pire, and that notwythstandyng he would not return to vnity & concord, there remayned that Themperour as aduocate of the Catholike faith shuld procede further. And that it was the Emperours ordinaunce, he shoulde wythin .xx. dayes, returne securely vnder safeconduct, and be safely gar∣ded to the place whence he came, so that in the meane whyle he stirred no commocion among the people in hys iorney, eyther in conference or Sermons. Luther hauing vnderstanded thys, aunswered very modestlye & Christi∣anly: Euen as it hath pleased God, so is it come to passe, the name of the Lorde be blessed. He sayd further, he thanked most humbly the Emperors Maiesty, & all the Princes & Estates of the Empire, that they had geuen to hym benigne & gracious audience, and graunted safeconduct to come & to returne. Finally he said: he desired
none other in them, then a reforma∣cion, accordyng to the sacred woorde of God, and consonancy of holy scrip∣tures, whych effectually in hys hart he prayed. Otherwyse he was prest to suffer al accidentes for the Empe∣riall Maiesty, as lyfe and death, good fame and reproch, reseruing nothyng to hym selfe, but the onely woorde of God, whych he would constantly con¦fesse, to the latter end, humbly recom¦mending hym to the Emperours Ma¦iestye, and to all the Princes, and o∣ther Estates of the sace Empyre. The morrowe after whyche was the .xxvi. daye of Apryll after heeLuthers parture  Wor∣mes. had taken hys leaue of suche as sup∣ported hym, and other hys benuo∣lent friendes, that otn tymes visi∣ted hym, and broken hys fast, at ten of the clocke, he departed from Wor∣mes accompanyed wyth suche, as re∣payred thyther wyth hym. The Em∣perours Heraulde Caspar Sturme followed and ouertooke hym at Oppenhim beyng commaun∣ded by the Emperonr to conduct hym safe∣ly home. (∴)
¶ The prayer which Mar¦tyne Luther was accustomed dayly to say. COnfyrme (O God) in vs that thou haste wrought, and perfect the woorke that thou haste begone in vs to thy glo∣rye. So be it.
❧ An intima∣cion, geuen by Philip Me∣lancthon to hys Auditorye, at Vitteberg. The yeare 1546. Of the decease of Mar∣tyne Luther. (∴) THE Scholers assemb∣led to heare the Lecture of the Epistle to ye Ro∣maynes, Phyllip Me∣lācthon recited publik∣ly, thys that foloweth, at nyne of the clocke before noone, ad¦uertisyng he gaue thys informacion, by the counsayle of other Lordes, for that the Auditors vnderstandyng the expresse truth (for so much as ye lords knew certainly Fame woulde blwe sclaunderous blastes euery where of the death of Luther) should not credit flying tales and false reportes. My friendes, ye know that we haue enterprised to expound Grammatical lye the Epistle to the Romaynes, in the which is contayned the true doc∣trine
of the Sonne of God, the which our Lord by hys singular grace hath reuealed vnto vs at thys present by the reuerend Father, & our dearelye beloued Maister Martin Luther. Not withstanding we haue receiued hea∣uy newes, which haue so augmented my dolour, that I am in dout if I mai continue hencefoorth in scholasticall profession, and exercise of teachyng. The cause wherefore I commemo∣rate thys thinge, is for that I am so aduised by other Lordes, that ye may vnderstand the true sequele of things least your selues blase abroade vayne ales of this fatal chaūce, or geue cre∣dit to other fables, which cōmonly ar accustomed to be spred euery where. Wedensday last past, the. 17. daye of February, Doctor Martin Luther syckned a litle before Supper, of hysThe syck¦nes of Lo¦ther. accustomed malady, to say, the oppres¦sion of humors in the orifice or ope∣ning of his stomacke, wherof I remē¦ber I haue senhim oft diseased in this place. Thys sickenes occupied him af¦ter Supper, with the which vehemēt¦ly contending, he required secesse in∣to an next chamber, & there he rested
on bed two houres, whiles the paines encreased, Doctor Ionas lying in his chamber, Luther awakened, & praied hym to ryse, and call vp Ambrose hys Childerns Schoolemaister, to make fyre in an other Chāber. In yt which beyng newly entred, Albert Earle of Mansfeld wyth hys wyfe and dyuers other (whose names in these letters for hast, were not expressed) at that in stant came into hys Chamber. Final¦ly, feelyg hys fatal houre to approch, before. 1. of the clock in the morning the. 18. of Februarye, he commended him to God, wyth this deuout praier. My heauenly father, eternal & mer∣cyful God, thou hast manyfested vnto me thy deare Sonne our Lord Iesus Christe. I haue taught hym, I haue knowen hym, I loue hym as my life, my health, and my redempcion, whō the wycked persecuted, maligned, and wyth iniury affected. Draw my soule to thee. After thys he sayde thys that ensueth, thryse. I commende my Spirite into thy handes, thou hast redemed me God of truth. God so loued ye worlde, that he gaue his ouelye Sonne, that all those
that beleue in hym, shoulde haue lyfe euerlastyng. Iohn. 3. Hauyng repeated often tymes hysHisdiseas prayers, he was called to God, to the eternal Schole, and perpetual ioyes, in the which he enioyeth the societye of the father, the Sonne, and the ho¦ly Ghost, al the Prophets & Apostles. Heas, the conductor and Chariot of Israel is dead, who hath gouerned the Churche in thys lasle age of the worlde, for the doctrine of remission of synnes, and of the fayth of God, hath not beene compreheneed by bu∣mayne wysedome, but God hath ma∣nifested the same by thys holye man, whom we haue sene raysed of God. Let vs loue the memory of thys mā and the doctrine that he hath taught. Let vs learne to be morest & meeke. Let vs consider the wretched calami∣ties, and marueilous chaunges y• shal folow this myshay & doleful chaunce. I beseche thee O Sonne of God, crucified for vs, & resuscitate Emanuel; gouerne, con∣serue & defend thy Churche. (∴)
¶ Philip Me∣lancthons Oracion, made and recited for the Funeralles of the Reuerens man Marrin Lu∣ther at Vitteberge. (∴) AL best in thys common sorrow my voyce shalbe troubled wyth dolour & teares: yet I must saye somewhat in thys fre∣quent assembly, not (as the Paganes solemne custome was) to sing the Encomye of the dead, but rather to admonish this companye of the marueilous gouernment, & perils of the Church, that we may consider for what causes we ought to be care∣ful & pensiue, what thinges we haue special neede of, & to what examples we ought to direct our lyfe. For al∣though prophane men beholding this horrible confusion in thys mortall e∣state, supposing althinges are trans∣ported by aduenture, and gouerned by Fortune: yet we confirmed wyth
many euident testimonies of God, letThe sōm of uther doctrine. vs separate the Church from the vn∣godly multitude, let vs perswade our selues the same hath bene preserued, and ruled by diuine prouidence, & et vs perpen what is the policye of the same. Let vs acknowledge the true gouernours, and endeuour to frame our coue conformable to theirs. Let vs ec Guides & coueent Instruc∣tors, whom we maye godly imitate & haue in reuerence. It shalbe most ex∣pedient for so meditate and speake of these waighty & graue matters, as of ten & when mencion shall be made of the Reuerend man Martine Luther, our dearely beloued Maister. Whom we must tenderly loue & commende, synce we know that he was diuinely reysed to be a Minister of the Gospel, although many prophane mē, & suche as contempned the Gospel, hated him deadlye. We ought also to collect te∣stemonies,The go∣uernment of ye chur∣che. whereby we may demon∣strate his doctrine contayned no sedi∣cious opinions iniuriously and wyth temerarious affection sowen, as the Epicurean sect imagineth, but that by hys doctrine, the wil and faythful
worshipping of God, & hys holy scrip∣tures ar expressed, & the word of God y• is, the glad tidyngs of Iesus Christ sincerely announced. Al be it in these Dracions accustomably made in this place, we wer wōt orderly to depaint the particular ornamentes of them, whō we praysed: yet I omityng that member of Oration, entend to treate only of this principal article, Ecclesi∣astical function. For the wise & godly wyll deliberate & determine in them selues resoluteli this: If Luther hath manyfested the necessarye doctryne of saluacion in y• Church, great thankes are to be geuen to God, who hath rai¦sed him, & we must commend hys in∣dustry, faith, constancy, & many other hys celestiall vertues, and endeuour the memory of thys man may be em∣braced and reuerenced of euery man. Let thys then be the Proeme of my Oration. The Sonne of God (as Paule sayth) sitteth at the right hand of the euerlasting father, & ministreth good things to men, that is, the voice, of the Gospel, & the holy ghost, and to distribute these giftes, he rayseth Pro¦phets, Apostles, Doctors & Pastors,
taketh these out of our congregacion, such as do learne, who professe, heare & embrace the Prophetes & ApostlesDoctour sent of go to gouer y• Church writings. And calleth not only those to this warfare, which haue ordinari power, but also he denounceth warre against them often times, by Doctors chosen of an other estate. It is moste comfortable, & a pleasaūt spectacle to consider the Churche of all ages, & to remember the bountye of God, who from time to time hat sent successiue∣ly godly Doctors, to thend that when the first were in battayl consumed, o∣ther might supply theyr rankes to at∣chieue that the former begonne. The cōtinual order of y• first fathersThe fyr Guides  the chur Adam, Seth, Enoch, Mathusalē Noe Sem is notorious. This Sem liuing & inhabiting the country nigh to So∣dome, when the people had forgotten the doctrine of Noe, & euery wher ho∣nored Idols, Abraham was raysed to be Sems compagniō to assist hym, to performe this great worke. After suc¦ceded Isac, Iacob Ioseph, y• which Io¦seph in y• vniuersal territori of Egipt (which thē excelled all other kingdōs in y• world) illumined the light of doc∣trine.
Then folowed Moses, Iosue, Samu∣el, Dauid, Elias, Elizeus, whose Au¦ditor was Esay. After Esay cam Ie∣remy, after Ieremye, Daniel, after Daniel Zachary, immediatly succe∣ded Esoras and Omas, after Onias the Machabees. Then after ensued Simeon, Zachary, Iohn Baptist, Ie¦sus Christ, & the Apostles. It is con∣uenient to consider thys continual se¦quele, for that it is an euidēt testimo¦nye of Gods presence in the Church. After the Apostles followed an o∣therThe suc∣ssors of apostles flocke, the whych albeit weaker, yet adorned wyth the testimonyes of God, as Policarpe, Ireneus, Grego∣ry Neocesariē, Basile, Austen, Pros∣per, Marimus, Hugo, Bernard, Tau lerus, and many other in diuers pla∣ces. All be it thys last age was more grosse, and stuffed wyth ordures, yet God preserued alwayes somme re∣maintes. And it is cleare the Gospell hath receiued much light by the prea∣chyng of Luther. Then muste we collocate hym a∣mong this select & blisful Troupe of godly and excellent Mirrours, whom God hath sent to gather & restore hys
Church, that we may vnderstand this was the principal flower of humaine kin▪ Solon, Themistocles, Scipio. Augustus, were excellent & woorthy men, who established and gouerned large Realmes & great Empires: yet were they mu inferiour then these our Guides. Esa Iohn Baptist, S. Paule, Austen, and Luther. It is ne∣cessary for vs to vnderstand these dif∣ferentes in the Church. What then are the absolute & true matters y• Luther hathe manifested, which geueth great glory to his wor∣kes, and maketh hys praise liue in the mouth of men? Many cry out that the Church is disturbed, & controuersies planted in them, not easy to be vnfol¦ded. I aunswer to these: Suche is the gouernment of the Churche, when the holy Ghost argueth the worlde, many dissentions growe through the peruers stubbornes of the wycked, & they are in fault, y• wyll not heare theLuther hathe ma∣nifested y• doctrine. Sonne of God, of whom the Father pronoūceth: Heare hym. Luther hath reueled the true & necessary doctrine, for it is most certain, ther was won∣derfull grosse darknes in the doctrine
of repentannce. This discussed, he de∣clareth what is perfecte penitence, which is the trusty port & assured com¦fort of the spirite astonyed with the fe¦lyng of Gods anger. He hath illumi∣ned S. Paules doctrine, whych trea∣teth, ma is iustified by fayth. He hath expressed what difference is betwyxte the Law & the Gospel, betwixt spiri∣tual & ciuil Iustice. He hath explaned what is the true inuocacion of God, and reuoked the Church wholy from al Pagane and prophane lunacy and furor, who fayne that God is inuoca∣ted, when the spirites oppressed wyth Academical douts, flee God. He hath exhorted to praier in pure cōscience, & hath guided vs as it wer by the hand to the onely mediatour the Sonne of God, syttynge at the ryghte hande of God the Father, and interceadynge for vs, & not to Images and dead me, as the Infidels moued wyth horrible madnes inuocated Idolles and sence∣les Stockes. He hath also instructed other du∣tyes acceptable to God, and so a dour¦ned and fortefied ciuil life, as none to thys day wyth more perfection. Fur∣ther
he hath sequestred childish institu¦ciō of humain ceremonies, y• customs aud lawes lettyng true inuocation from necessary workes. And that this heauenly doctrine manyfested might come to posteritye, he translated the Prophetes and Apostles workes, in∣to hys maternal tong, wyth such per∣spiuitye, that hys traduction geueth more lyght to the Readers, then the Commentaries of diuers other. Hereunto he hath added manye E∣narrations, the whych as ErasmusErasmus testimonye of Luther. in tyme paste affirmed, passed all o∣thers, that be extant. And as it is re∣ported of such as reedified Ierusalem that they buylded with one hand, and held the sword wyth the other: euen so Luther fought agaynst y• enemyes of Christian doctrine, and at that in∣stant deuised enarracions, repleni∣shed wyth heauenlye doctrine, and inLuthers confites. thys exployte, he hath comforted and releued the consciences of many with faythfull Councels. And as it appeareth the greatest part of his doctrine, surmounteth the compasse of humayne capacity, as the doctrine of remission of syns & fayth.
So muste we necessarilye confesse he was taught of God, and diuers of vs haue sene his conflictes, in the which he learned, that we should perswade our selues this, that by fayth we are heard and receaued of God. The sincere & godly wyts shal cele¦brate foreuer, the benefites whyche God hath conferred to his Church by Luther, and fyrste they shall render thankes to God, then protest, they ar much obliged to hys learned labors: albert the Atheistes, who vniuersally haue the church in derisiō, esteme an iudge these true offices and dutyes, a chyidysh pastime, a mere folye, and a∣lienacion of the mynde. He hath not excitated indissoluble disputacions, neither proponed to the Church, the Apple of contencion, nor published obscurities & enigmes. For he is easy to the faythful & godly, and such as be of sound vnderstandyng, & sclaunderouslye wyll not geue iudge∣ment, by conference of sentences to cō¦sider what agreeth with the heauen∣ly doctrine. and what dissenteth. And that more is, the godly are fully resol∣ued▪ that these differentes were longe
synce appointed. For since Gods plea¦sure is we should behold & know hys wyll in the Prophetes and Apostles workes (in the which he hath many∣fested hymselfe) we maye not thynke hys woordes are doubtfull, as the leaues of Sibilla. But some (which wer not peruers) haue compiayned that Luther wasLuthers vehemēcie excused. more vehement, then nde required. I wyl not dispute against any: but I aunswer this that Erasmus hath of∣ten said: God hath giuen this last age a sharpe Phisiciō, because of y• great diseases of the same, & therfore synce he hath reysed such an organe against the truthes enemies, and agaynst the proude and impudent, as he hath said to Ieremy, beholde I haue placed my wordes in thy mouth, to thende thou shouldest destroy & edefye, & also hath pleased hym to set before their beards this Gorgon or buckler, in vaine thei quarell wyth God. God gouerneth hys Church not by mans Counsels, netheir wyll haue hys organes all a∣lyke. This is a common thing, mean and moderate spirites cannot brooke vehement motions, whether they be
good or euyll. Aristides beholdynge Themistocles enterprise great mat∣ters, wyth a patheticall incitacion of the minde, wherof he had prosperous successe, althoughe he dyd gratulate the cōmon weales prsperity: yet he la¦boured diligētly to reuoke Themisto∣cles vehement mynde from y• course. Neyther I deny that sometymes ve¦hement mocions offend, ther is none in thys infirmity of Nature, voide of spot. Yet if ther be any such as the au¦tentick writers haue reported of Her¦cules, Cimon, and other, deformed & misshapen: yet apt and vpryght in ex∣cellent exploictes. Certaynly I must confesse that these be good and praise worthy, and as S. Paule sayth, yf he do hys duty wel in the Church, obser¦uyng fayth, and a pure conscience, he is acceptable to God, and we oughte to reuerence hym. We knowe that Luther hath bene such, for constantly he hath mayntai∣ned the sinceritye of the Gospel, and retayned an integrity of conscience. Now what is he (that hath knowen Luther) & is ignoraunt, wyth whatLuthers humanity humanity he was garnished? How af
fable he was to al such as in familiar conference, or graue deuise had to do wyth hym. How voyde he was of con¦tencion & brawle, & yet among these vertues he had such a grauity, as de∣cently became hys callyng. His man∣ners wer good, his wordes swete and pleasaunt. Finally, althinges (as S. Paule saith) wer in him true, honest, iust, pure, amiable, & renoumed, in so much that we maye plainly perceyue hys vehemencye proceded of a zelous affection he bare to the truth, rather then of any natural sharpenes, & here of not onely we, but many are euidēt witnesses. As touching the rest of hisLuthers integrity. lyfe, whyche hee prolonged to .lxiii. yeares, employing the same with fer∣uent affection in the feare of God, & in al good & liberal scieces, if I had de¦liberated to say ought in hys prayse, what ample theame, what abundāce of matter is ministred to me to frame an excellent & goodly Oratiō. No in∣ordinate desires, no sedicious coūsels raigned in him. He exhorted to peace & disswaded war. He medled not pri∣uate care wt ecclesiastical causes, ther by to enrich himself, or aduaunce hys friendes.
I iudge this to be so great wysdome & vertue, that by humayne diligence it cannot onely be procured, but it beho¦ueth high, vehement, & subtil mindes (as it appeareth Luthers was) to be brydeled diuinely. What shal I saye of other his ver∣tues? I often tymes came vnwaresLuthers earnest prayers. vpon hym, when he wyth teares be∣rayning hys chekes, prayed for the v∣niuersal Church. He prescribed cer∣tayn houres euery day to recite some Psalmes, and in pronouncing them, he expressed his affection, wyth mour¦ning & teares. He rebuked euer those that through negligence, or other do∣mestical busines, sayde: they serued God sufficiently, in makyng a secret zelous prayer, declaring to them that we haue fourmes set foorth by diuine counsell, to thend that in reading we may awaken our myndes, and wyth voyce testify what God we call vpon. And when occasion was offered to enter in consultacion about immi∣nent daungerous, we alwaies obser∣ued hys marueilous constancy of cou¦rage, neyther would he lurke appal∣led, neyther represent anye face ef
feare, wyth the terrour therof. He lea¦ned alwayes to the Lord, as to hys ho¦lye ancre, and neuer waued in anye poynt of hys fayth. Further, he was so ingenious, that alone he considered what was neces∣sarySubtilty of hys Spi¦rite. to be done in doubtful cases. Nei¦ther was he (as many suppose) negli∣gent in the consideracion of the pub∣licke weale, neyther ignoraunt of the myndes and inclinaciōs of other, but he wel vnderstode the state of the com¦mon weale, no man better, & percey∣ued most prudently the natural dispo¦sitions and wylles of them, with whō he was cōuersant. And albeit he was of a ioly & politicke head: yet he moste gredely red the Ecclesiasticall Wry∣ters, old and new, & all the histories, the examples, whereof he conuerted wyth a syngular dexterity, to the pro¦fite of mans lyfe, and present affairesHys elo∣quence. Of hys eloquence we haue euerla∣sting testimonies, wherein certaynly he was equiualent to any that excel∣led in arte Oratory. Then wyth good cause we may la∣ment the lacke of hym, who in wyse∣dome and lyuelynes of spirite was so
excellent, so garnished with doctrine▪ so exercise▪ wyth vie, so adorned with many & those heroyical vertues, so e∣lected of God, for the restauration of the Curch, and finally with so pater∣nal affection, louyng and embracing vs, we are lyke Orphelius, depriued of a faythful and famous father. And albeit necessarelye we must obey di∣uine order: yet let vs endeuour ye me∣mory of hys benefites & vertues may remayne immortal wyth vs. And let vs reioyce that presently he is in the blessed & swete company of God & his welbeloued Sonne our Lorde Iesus Christ, the Prophetes and Apostles,Feliciti in the other lyfe. whose soetye throughe the fayth he had in the sonne of God, he hath day∣ly desyred, and attended. Whereas now he heareth hys labours onely ap¦proued by the iudgement of God, and the testimonye of all the heauenlye Church, whyche he susteyned for the propagation of the Gospell: but also taken out of thys mortal body as out of a pryson, and entred into a schoole adourned wyth more excellent doc∣trine, he beholdeth the essence of god, the two natures cōioyned in ye sonne,
and al the couns of h creation and redemption of the church. The which diuine mstees rked, and wyth compendious oracles proponed he cō¦sidered here only by fayth, out nowe more unt. y veholdyng them, he reioyceth & feruently enflamed wyth the loue of God, he rendreth thankes for this so great & singular benefyt. There he learneth wherefore the sonne of God is called the woord and Image of the eternal Father, & how the holy ghost is the band of mutuall loue, not onelye betwyxt the eternall Father and the Sonne, but also be∣twyxt them and the Church. For he had learned the rumentes and prin¦ciples of thys doctrine in thys mortal lyfe, and mencioned oftentimes these celestiall matters, the difference be∣twyrt true and false inuocation, the true knowledge of God, beholdyng the diuine manifestacions, & the dis∣cernynge of the true God, from fore∣ged and inuented Gods, & these mat∣ters he disputed very wisely & graue Many in thys Auditory haue heard hym at certayn times expressing this sentence: Ye shal see the heauens ope¦ned,
and the Aungels of God ascen∣dyng and descending vpon the sonne of man. In the exposicion of thys, he exhorted hys Auditours to plant in theyr hartes thys syngular consola∣cion, the whyche affirmeth that the heauen is opened, that is to say, way made open for vs to passe to God, the barre of Gods wrathe remoued from suche as haue recourse to the Sonne, that God is familiarlye conuersaunt wyth vs now, and that he receyueth, gouerneth and conserueth such as in∣uocate hym. He admonished yt thatThe Aun∣gels why∣che ascend & descend. decree of God, which the Atheistes ex¦clame to be fabulous, ought to resyst al those humaine doubtes & dreades, whyche keepe backe the wanderyng myndes, that they dare not innocate God, and repose in hym. Further, he sayd that the Aungels ascending and descending in the body of Iesus Christ, wer the Ministers of the Gospel. Who first by Christ their Guide, ascended to God, & receiued of hym the lyght of the Gospell, and the goly Ghost. Then after they descen∣ded, that is to say, thei had the charge to professe and enstruct among men.
He added thys interpretacion, that the very heauenly spirites which we commonly cal Angels, beholding the sonne, are instructed & roye in this merueylous conunction of twoo na∣tures, & for that they war vnder the Lord for the defence of the Churche, they be also gouerned by hys hand. He presently beholdeth these so ex∣cellent thynges, and as before he as∣cended and descended among the Mi∣nisters of the Gospell, by the conduc¦tion of Iesus Christe, so nowe he se∣eth the Aungels sent by hym, & hath equal fruicion wyth them of the con∣templacion & consideracion, of the di∣uine wysdome and marueylous wor∣kes of God. We remember wel what incredible pleasure he conceiued in re¦cityng the policies of the Prophetes, theyr counsels, daungers and deliue∣raunces, and how learnedlye he con∣ferred al tymes of the Church, that he wel declared wyth what burnyng de∣syre he longed to be in the societye of these excellent personages. He em∣braceth these now & reioyceth to haue mutual conference in lyuelye voyce. These salute their louyng companiō
newly repayred to them, and ioyntly yeld thankes to God, that he assem∣bleth and conserueth hys Church. Let vs not doubt, but that Luther is in happy & blessed estate. & let vs la¦ment the losse & acke of so vertuous & heauely a father, & as duty byndeth vs to obey the wyt of God, who hath reft vs such a rare ewel: so let vs vn∣derstand Gods pleasure is, we should cōsecrate to etern, y• memory of his vertues and benefites. Let vs hen in thys apply ou diligence, let vs imi∣tate as we be able, his vertues which is expediet for vs to know, that is, the feare of God, fayth, feruecy in praier, cleannes in ministerye, chastity, dili∣gence to eschew counsels tendyng to sedicion, and desyre to learne. And as it behoueth vs, to remēber the other faythful gouernours of the Churche, whose histories we reade, as Ieremy Iohn Baptist, & S. Paule. So let vs consider oftentymes the doctrine and order of thys reuerend father, & here∣wyth let vs adde prayer, and acti∣on of thankes, as it becōmeth vs now to do in thys assembly.
WE render thankes vnto the, OA prayer of thankes geuyng. most puissant God, eternal fa∣ther of our Lord Iesus Christ, founder of thy Church, together with thy sonne coeternall our Lorde Iesus Christ, & the holye ghost, wyse, good, mercyful, ryghteous iudge, mighty & hauing power ouer althings, for that thou gaherst vnto thy sonne an en∣heritaunce, & conseuest the ministery of the Gospel, & now by Luther hast restored the same. And we pray thee with feruent affection that thou wilt conserue and gouerne henceforth the church, & seale in vs thy true doctrine as Esay prayeth for his Disciples, & that thou wylt illumine our vnderstā¦ding by thy holy ghost, yt in truth we may cal vpon thee, and lyue holyly. Furthermore, because the decease of excellent gouernours is oftē a pre∣sage or foreshewing of great inconue niēces to come to such as shal succede I and al those that professe ministery require you to consider the daungers wherunto the whole world is subiect The Turkes inuade of one side, & on the other domestical enemies, threatē intestine wars. Ther urke also eueri where licencious & insolent heades,
who after they shal cease to feare Lu∣thers censure & seuere correction, wil not stycke audaciously to corrupt this doctrine of vs faythfully taught. Finally, that God may withdraw such inconueniences, let vs apply our diligence to lyue wel, & to study, & let vs retein this setēce alwaies impres¦sed in our mindes that as long as we shal conserue, heare, learn & loue the pure doctrine of y• Gospel, we shal be the house & church of God as the sōne of God sayth: If any loue me, he wyll obserue my word, and my father wylIohn. 14. loue him, & we wyll come to hym and make our abode with hym. Let vs be allured with thys singular promyse, to learne the heauenly doctrine, & let vs be throughly perswaded, that mā∣kinde & ciuil gouernments are cōser∣ued because of ye church. Let vs pōder this in our minde, & be encouraged wt y• imortality y• is cōming, to ye whych God hath called vs, who truely hath not in vayne manifested himself vnto vs by so many testimonies, nor with out good respect sent hys sonne, but tenderly loueth & careth for suche as make accompt of his inestimable benefites. I haue sayd.
¶ A famous & godly history contaynyng the liues and actes of Iohn Eco∣lampadius and Huldericke Zuingli∣us, excellent Diuines, set foorth by Wolfangus Faber Capito, Si∣mon Grineus, and Oswal¦dus Miconius, and Englyshed by Henry Bennet Cal∣lisian. (:) ¶ Anno. 1561. The last of Nouember. (∴)
To the ryght honourable and his syngu¦lar good Lord, the Lord Mont∣ioy, hys humble Oratour Henry Bennet Callesian, wysheth long lyfe with encrease of honour. (∴) THAT vertue and feli∣citye haue theyr begyn∣nyng of laborious and daungerous attempts, Demetrius the Pagan Philosopher abundant¦ly declares. For if blessed estate is ac∣cident to none, but to such as fast and endure aduersity, & those that lyue in pleasure & perpetual rest, are estemed inglorious Epicures, whō God neg∣lectes & iudgeth vnworthy to cōtene wyth calamity. How famous & excel∣lent were the auncient Greekes and victorious Romaines (ryght honora∣ble, & my syngular good Lord) whose vertuous dedes & notable exploictes, not without great perils & honorable
death atchieued, ystify to al posterity their incredible desyre, as well to en∣large the myts of theyr  and illustrate with victories their flo¦rishing publicke weales, as also their intollerable paynes & prudent consi∣deracions to attaine to felicity by the ragged hyls, & sharpe thorny wayes, whych lead to vertue. Hercules, wor∣thely Prince of all Grecia: what la∣bors susteyned he? What ougly Mon¦sters dyd he ouercome and with what magnanimitye dyd he penetrate the gresly denne of Pltoes ghastly king¦dome? By what other counsayle dyd Homexe (udged of y• learned diuine) set before our eyes wandring Vlisses as an absolute Image of wysdom, tos¦sed with many rksome trauayls: but to signify thys to be the ready way to clyme to the palaice of al felicity, and commendable vertue. Such wer Epa¦minundas, Alcibiades, Phociō, Alex∣ander the great, Camllus, Scipio, Paulus, Aemilius, Pompeius, Augu¦stus, Brutus, Cato & Cicero, no es ornamentes of their Country then ex¦presse paternes of vertue. These wor¦thi personages as thei shined in glory
and lyue in the learned monumentes of vertuous writers: So y• infamous and in glorious Princes, as Helioga∣balus, Sardanapalus, Nero, Caligu¦la, & Cōmodus haue not onely eclip∣sed the bryght sunne of theyr honors by lasciuious liuing, & coward dread, but obscurely lurke in the depe onge on of lothsome obliuion. It is then ap¦parēt that nothyng in this world can establish our seate in securiti, but one¦ly vertue, the whych with incredyble trauayl is procured. If these excellet Orators and Poetes haue celebrated the memory of these princes, that one¦ly endeuored to gratefy theyr Coūtry & common weale: What shal we wor¦the lye write in the commendacion of Iohn Ecolampadius and Huldericke Zuinglius, who wyth theyr monu∣mentes of diuine sapience, haue con∣firmed our myndes in y• feare of God, fed vs wyth Euangeical foode, and preached to vs y• doctrine of saluaciō, I may iustly say they were not onely equiualent, but also excelled y• other. The one a man of such innocencye of lyfe, so sincere in preachyng & profes∣syng the Gospell, so readye to oppose
hym self to al worldly daunger, as no age can obliterate his memorye. The other so magnanimous in thaduaūc mēt of Christes glory, and his blessed Gospell, so willinglye bent to dye in quarel of y• right, merites more praise then to be set fourth with foyle of my rude pen. Their liues are no lesse mir¦rours for vs vertuouslye to lyue, then theyr blessed departures comfortable preparatiues, teaching vs to dye god¦ly. Thus desirous to gratefy your ho¦nour, wyth some token of my good¦wyl I haue englished this history, the which for mani your vertues & goodli ornamēts, I dedicate vnto your good Lordship. Which vertues & heauenly giftes, your honour hath not of lats acquired, but naturally are engraffed in your person. Ther is none at thys present that auoreth of any learning but hath red the cōmendacion of your most noble Graundfather Wylliam, Lord Montioy. Who besides nobility of race, was adorned with such piety & good litterature, as he excelled ma∣ny noble men in England. For albe∣it thys victorious Realme▪ flourished at those daies with many learned in∣structors,
yet the excellency of his cou¦rage, could not be contented, vnles he wer taught of the famous & incompa¦rable Clark Erasmus of Roterdam, by whose industry he was so aduaun∣ced in letters of humanitye, that not onely in hys natiue Country, but in many foraine regions, hys glory and fame eternally shineth. Suche is the mutual loue of learned men, to conse¦crate one another in their lucubrati∣ons to immortalitye. And to passe in silence many other his vertues, I wil approch nigher. Your honorable fa∣ther Charles lord Montioy, folowing the lyuely steps of his father, was in∣structed of the notable learned man Andrew Hyperius a Germain. Who not onely in tyme of peace was dili∣gently incūbent t good studies, & fur¦dered good learnyng, but in the late famous warre, & aiege of Boloigne shewed his magnanimity, & inuinci∣ble courage, wher death enuying his glori, claimed her iust debt of him not without the lamentable griefe and in credible sorow of a great mani. Your honor degenerateth nothing frō their lawdable steppes, entertayning with
lyke zealous affection Heliseus Bo∣melius a Germain, who readeth vn∣to your honour the liberal sciences, & whom Phillip Melancthon hath in familiar letters praysed highly for e∣rudicion & godlynes. Albeit hys lear∣ned workes published geue due testi∣mony therof. I pretermit many other your worthy vertues, which iustly to set forth, I leaue to such as wt grea∣ter vessels cā more aptly wade in this sea. Ouely I wil end with your piety which is so great, y• you cānot bear wt any ice, that mai offend God in your honorable house, your vnstayed hand to relieue their wantes, whom you thynke woorthye to receaue your re∣wardes, & your zeale towardes true religion, which many to your syngu∣lar prayse pronounce: In sort y• when the Patrons of Christian religion ar celebrated with iust encomys among men, your honor is not▪ vnremēbred. Thus hūbly desiring your good lord∣ship to beare wt the rudenes of my trā¦slacion, I commit the same & the most vertuous Lady your honorable wife, to the tuicion of the holy Ghost. ¶ At London the last of Nouember 1561. your honors most humble. H. B
The historye of the Lyfe of Iohn Eco∣lampadius, setfoorth by Wol∣fangus Faber. Capito. (∴) ¶ To the Christian Reader. I Wyshe thee fauourable Reader, to encrease in y• knowledge & vnderstan¦dyng of our Lord Iesus Christ raignyng in glo∣ry. Our friende Simon Grineus, as well floorishyng in elo∣quence and ornate style, as learned in sacred knowledge and sence of y• scrip tures, hath by hys letters faythfullye signified vnto vs the true decease of the very organe of Christ, my welbe∣loued brother Iohn Ecolampadius. The whych information two Coun∣sellers of Basile, mē of syngular gra∣uity and good fame haue wyth theyr aduertisment verified to be true, who expressed in suche maner vnto vs the woordes and gesture of the deceased,
that me semed I beheld and heard the lyuely woordes he pronounced at the point of death. These Counsellers, were euer present with the Ministers so long as occasion spared them from publike affaires, and specially when he was ready to geue place to nature▪ They enfourmed he intermitted no time, whyle he was sycke to cōmendeThe last cōmendaci¦ōs of Iohn Ecolampa¦dius. the sincere doctrine of fayth, peace, mutual loue, and diligent care of the Churches to hys brethren, wherof al hys life studious, then he was y• more earnestly moued, yea enflamed when hys sycknes was most impacient and doorous. Pondering also with hym∣self, what occasion of contencion and diseord the enemy wold minister to y• selected Christian flocke, destitute of the goueruaunce & assistence of theyr true Pastor. And fullye I resolue hys prayers auayled muche for that after hys departure, his Successor in moste sharpest time of seuerity & persecutiō, gouerned the sterne ryghtlye, & was not displaced, in sorte that the poore Christiās sequestring them selues for a tyme, & dispersed abroad in the end assembled, & in lyke order as in fewe
yeres before established their Church and abode. Our part is to render har∣ty thanks to the ramous and learned man Simon Grineus, who with com¦pendious clegancy, and syngular eru¦dicion, hath deseriued the decease of thys godlye man, by whose example we haue perfecte president to learne howe to behaue our selues at the lat∣ter houre. The rest of Ecolampadius lyfe is no lesse myrrour, whych Gri∣neus hath required me fullye to set∣foorth. Aprounce (I confesse) farre passyng my power, especially in thys miserable and croked age, & also skyl, if any wer at al wyth tract of yeares, lothsome sycknes, and daylye exercise empayred and decayed. And certes I could none other then encurre worthy note of ingratitude, if the glory of Christ whych shined in thys holy man, if thy desyre fauorable Reader, proceding of a zelous affecti∣on, finally if Grineus earnest request a man of approued learnyng and god lynes moued me not to descriue the hystorye of Ecolampadius lyfe, and comprise in fewe woordes those mat∣ters whych I perfectlye vnderstande.
Thou shalt therefore heare of me the very trouth (and no pay  historye) barrayne of eloquence and phrases, the truth I repeae, will knowen to many credible persons, frang rast if I should disclose doubtful matters, and which I could not warrant, to de¦serue worthely , and staine of credit. Attend therefore to this briefe discours of Ecolampadius life, from the begynnyng to the ater end. Ecolampadius was borne in Ger∣many, in the yere of our Lord. 142.Ecolampa¦dius Coun¦try. in a lytie Village called Viesperg in that Territory which the auncient la¦tins called Cherusci. ys Parentes according to the Country, very rich, hys Mother much renowmed for her integrity of lyfe, and holynes. Who for her liberality towards the poore, and good nature, was well regarded and reported among her neighbours. And when God had refte them of all their Children sauyng thys, they en∣deuoured with al sedulity & diligence to haue hym instructed, and from the very brest nourished in learnyng and godlye feare. Beyng growen some∣what elder, his Father determined to
make hym a Marchaunt, but hys Mo¦ther procured longer exhibition for hys continue in study. When he lear∣ned hys rumets beyng very yong, he represented such a tokē of toward∣nes, that all those that knewe hym, maueyled much thereat, for y• Lorde ripened hym the ryeer, y• he might employe hym in hys seruice. Whych was the cause hys Father, eyther o∣uercome with hys Wyues prayer, or wonne wyth the towardnes of the Childe, foreced for no charges. After he had tasted the first foundacions of learning, his Father sent him to Hel¦teprune, & Heidelberge, to aduaunce hym to the study of the liberall scien∣ces. There he profited so wel, that at the .xii. yeare of hys age he wrate cō∣mendable Verses, and wythin twoo yeares after he obtained the degree of Bacheler, as they terme it. And thys whyle be fructified no lesse in y• feare of God, and innocency of lyfe, then inDiscourse of Ecolam¦padius stu¦dy. god litterature. Being graded Mai∣ster of Arte, he went to Boloigne in Italy, according to his fathers mind, to study the Ciuil law, vnder a Rea∣der therof for hys excellencye in that
knowledge muche renowmed. But wythin one halfe yeare after he was forced to returne, as well for the ayre of Italy, which he could not brooke, as for the fraudulency of a Marchant vnto whom hys father had delyuered money for hys maintenaunce. Then he came backe to Heidelberge, where geuing ouer the Ciuil law, he apply∣ed his mind to Diuinity, cōoygning therwith good learnyng & the tongs. Pleas and ciuil contencions, seemed to base for the excellency of hys wyt. He was so careful and studious to vn¦derstand the truth, that the ambigui∣ty & veacion of questions & vayne so∣phistry (which pull many pregnaunt & natural good wyts, from the cast of holy scripture) coulde not discourage hym to leaue hys purpose. After he had red Thomas of Aquine, he gaue hym selfe to Richard aboue al the sco∣lastical writers. He redde diligentlye Gerson, because he semed more apt to nourish the feare & reuerence of God. He made none accompt of Scotus, al beit he was subtile: he stayed not as one musyng, on euery subtile questiō as hys companions dyd, but hastened
to attain to the somme of thys profes∣sion. And this while he cōferred with certayne the fruites of hys study, andEcolampa¦dius hated ambicion. contemned euermore the publick dis∣putacion of suche as in cōmon places would contend, esteming the same to be a meane to corrupt & marre the to∣ward wyts & good natures of younge men, with pride, arogancy, noise and brawes. He more desyred to learne, then to wynne Fame by knowledge, which was repugnant to the nature of hys tender yeres, & the institucion of his Maisters. You would haue said he had bene the suckyng Infant of sa∣cred Verity, & not the Scholer of dol∣tysh Schoolemaisters. He attempted diligently, as hys capacity serued, to vnderstand playnly all the secretes & misteries of learned truth which was the cause that honest people commen ded hym singularly, both for learning and vertue. Yea, Philippe PalatineThe carle Palatine sent for E∣colāpadius most illustre Prince and Elector of y• empire, encouraged wt his renowme, made him Instructor of hys Childre, which was the ready way to grow to great welth, if he had delited to sauor of the pompe & brauery of the world,
but the vertue of hys mynde borne to embrace godlines, drew him an other way. Wherfore with al celerity he a∣bandoned the Court, and returned to prosecute hys godlye studies agayne. Finally, for that hys Parentes, peo∣ple very deuout, were fullye resolued to employ theyr wealth on Gods ser∣uice, and this their onely Sonne, ha∣uing no further care, nor hope of any issue, & cōsideryng he was of a weake complexion, and apt to proue a nota∣ble Preacher, they founded in the Towne where they were borne, by the aduise and consent of theyr sayde sonne, a Benefice, hauyng the charge of Preacher annexed, and employed theron the principall part of theyr re∣uenue. And therefore EcolampadiusHe was in ituted Preacher. was first assigned Gouernour of that Churche, where hauyng resided syxe weekes, he procured liberty to return to Heidelberg to encrease his studies, thynking hym selfe not then able to dyscharge the office of a Preacher, whych he wel weyed to be no tryuial matter. But fyrst of al he cam to Tu¦binge, and at Stulgarde he conferred wyth Capnion, a man at those dayes
very perfect and skylful in the know∣ledge of the tounges. Who in sewe dayes gaue hym some  of Greke, whych he augmented after wyth pri∣uate study, that at his returne to Hei¦delberg, he wrate a Grammer, which he intitued Dragmata, the whyche synce was imprinted. And at y• tyme he learned the Hebrue tong of a Spa¦niard, who somtyme was my schole∣maister a peruers mā, and or an euill conuersacion, for he hated vs because we studied that holy tonge. Euen thē I was Preacher at Bruschel, and fol∣lowed the Bishoppes Court, about whose affaires, I had occasion often∣tymes to visit Heidelberg, which mi∣nistred opportunity to enter in fami∣liarity wyth hym, and to entertayne ye same with gratifiyng one an other as tyme required. This friendshyppe florished betwyxt vs without violaci∣on, or semblant of vnkyndnes tyll the latter day. For eche of vs was partici¦pant of others affayres, and we dispo¦sed and ordered all our actes and in∣tentes with mutual aduise and coun∣sell, sauynge when he attempted the Monkysh estate, which was contrary
to my wyl. And now that he is depar∣ted out of thys mortal lyfe: I will not omit to loue hym, the which Christe helpyng me, I wyl largely declare in hys Children, cōmitted to my tuiciō. Then he thought good to repayre to his habitacion to discharge his office,The vani∣tye of▪ false Preachers and preserue the same from all conta∣gion, whyche myghte happen to hys Church by the frequency of such pre∣posterous and vayne heads, as uked in great nombers in ye Vniuersities. During whych tyme I was called to Basile, there to preache, and then he preached Christ in his Coūtry, to the great admiracion of al faythful & lear¦ned people, albeit then he entermed∣led many thinges of the auncient su∣persticion, yet some affirmed he was a very seuere Preacher, because he ro¦red not out in the Pulpit, & with plea¦saunt gsture could not moue laugh∣ter among hys gloming▪ Auditors, as was the bestal onkes custome, for he euer obserued modestye & grauitye in his eraunce. This their corrupt & peruerse iudgement gaue hym occa¦siō to write vnto me one litle treatise intituled, the asti of passeouer▪
wherin be expressed hys mynde ye learnedly, and (as I ▪ not▪ ▪ yeares past. Then I  wyth al sedulity to allure such a compani∣on of studye and godlynes to Basi, iudging it vnworthy that suche a to∣ward wyt, and hope of Christian Re∣ligion, should lke in a set  of hys Country. I entreated Christo∣pher of Vnhim, Bishop of Ba▪a d to be a¦chr at Ba¦se. to sende for hym, and to owe hym wyth parhall  of the Cathed∣ral Churche. He brought wyth hym sie Christian Tras, I remem∣ber not y• argumentes of them al, but of one (s I rr) wrytten of the Virgin Mary. And these Tragedies pleased wel the iudgement of al lear∣ned Readers. He gaue hym self much to wryte Greeke and Latine verses. The argumentes of hys Tragedies were not conformable to the rule of fayth, for that he wound hym self out of the errors vsed in the Church slow¦ly and deliberatelye, obeyng rather the iudgement of an apparent & esta∣blished religion, then the vayne affec¦tions of other, whyche was the cause hys Tragedies were not imprinted.
In this broyle, Erasmus of ote∣roame came to Basile, of purpose to haue hys Annotacious vpon the newErasmus ayded of E¦colampadi¦us. Testamēt imprinted, & to accelerate the same, he required Ecolampadius to ayde hym. As he plainly confesseth he was ayded of hym, namyng Eco∣lampadius a perfect and true deuine, and an excellent myrrour of holynes in lyfe, and in the knowledge of the three tonges. He was graded Doctor through the imporuntye & coaction of hys friendes, who iudged hys par∣sonage worthy to be garnished wyth such a title, the common people much applaudyng the same. It was hyghe tyme the lord should be serued of such a Minister so instructed, and ready, & therefore the Chanons of the great Church in Auspurg, sent for hym to preache there: but the haruest of the Lord was not yet rype, and the Euā∣gelical corne not whyte inough to re∣ceiueEcolampa¦dius apoin¦ted Prea∣cher in Au¦spurg. the sythe, considering the life of the common people, was as peruers as the Ecclesiasticall Ministers con∣tagious & corrupt, that the same refu¦sed the hand of the Phisicion, whyche moued hym to determine hys depar∣ture▪
Twoo myles distant from Aus∣purg, there is a Monastary consecra∣ted to S. Alton, wherein dwelleth  Couent of Moonkes, of the order of S. Brigide, who were bruted to lyue more religiously & holyly, then other. Ecolampadius hauing diligently ob¦serued their maners, desired to be ad∣mitted one of that order, and required liberty for hys studies and fayth, the whych he testefied wyth these words: Albeit wt .vi. hundred othes I shoulde oblige my selfe, I wyl not kepe coue∣naunt, if it happen I may supply the office of a Preacher abroade. The Moonkes allowed the condicion, and shewed their priuilege, by whych it was permissiue to ani to haue gresse and preache, if heresies began to bu∣gnEcolampa¦dius agre∣eth to be a Moonke. in any Country. Al thys pleased wel the Bishop of Friguen, who highly esteemed and reuerenced thys holy man. But I (as much as I could cōueniently) resisted this his attempt fearyng the euent, as in dede it came to passe, that he should not finde ther the repose he desired for hys studyes, neither oportunity to serue his neigh¦bour, and the Christian Churche.
Beyng in the cloyster, besydes cer∣tayne sermons whych he published, he wrate a treatise of Confessiō, very godly, and therefore vnpleasaunt to suche as traffique Ceremonies. ForHe is prrse¦cuted. Friar Glapio, Themperor Charles Confessor, put him in great daunger for thys booke, at such tyme as the E∣scates of Thempire wer assembled at Wormes. Wherfore by the perswa∣sion and soliicitacion of his friendes, and the Monkes consent, e abando∣ned that Monastery. Before he depar¦ted the brute was, he was committed to prison, the which a learned Chanō of Auspurge signified vnto me for a matter of truth, when I followed the Archbishop of Mences Court then, at Halle Sales in Saxony. The iourny of Wormes was ended fewe mone∣thes before. Furthwith when I was aduertised of these heauy newes, I re¦quired licence for twoo monethes vn∣der colour of domestical affaires, and addressed me towardes Mens, to de∣iuse some good meane to releace my brother. Being there arriued, and en¦tred into my lodgyng, which was the Curates house, sodaynly and besides
al expectacion I found Ecolampadl∣us, deuising wyth Gaspar Hedio. I do not a lytle delight, when I call to memory the swete gretynges, and in credible ioy we had in our meiyng, and how louingly we embraced eche other. For foure yeares before he depar∣ted from Basile, and since wee sawe not one another. And besides I assu∣redly beleued he was kept in close pri¦son: I was forced twoo monethes at the least to kepe three horses and two seruauutes, as wel at Strasburg and Basile, as in the common Innes in my direct way, til I came to y• Prince at Neurenberg, where then the Prin¦ces were appoynted to assemble. E∣colampadius went from Mens, and came to Fraunces Sickengen, a no∣ble and famous Gentleman, whereFraunces Sickengen a louer of truth. he beganne to repourge the Masse, and translated certayne fragmentes of Chrisostome, but for that thys wor¦thye man was troubled wyth vnfor∣tunate warre (a man worthy to lyue at rest, and beare great aucthoritye, so seruently was he bet to aduaūce Iustice, religion and good learuyng)
Ecolampatius departed to Basile, of purpose to haue imprinted y• he had wrytten, soiournyng wyth the sayde Gentleman. Ther, by the aduise and consent or  Senate (albeit certaynEcolampa dius profes¦seth diuini¦y at Ba∣sile. Sophisies repelled) he began to reade Esay in publicke auditory, & immedi¦atelye after at the request of the Cu∣rate of S. Martins, he tooke y• charge to preache for hym, not wythout the hygh displeasure of the Papistes, but in the end, he whom he sincerely prea¦ched (whych is Christ) wan the field. And al thys while he professed Christ fyue yeares together, wythoute anye meede or salarye, eyther of Curate or Preacher. About this tyme he transla¦ted out of Greke into Latin, Chriso∣stome vpon Genesis, and Theophi∣lactusHis trans∣lacions. wholye. A disputacion euen nowe beganne of the Sacrament of thankes geuing, and beyng required to say his opinion, he declared y• same modestly, and according to the mindeContenci∣on for the Gospel. of the auncient Fathers, whyche he faythfullye alaedged, whereof grewe marueilous contncō, because some conceyued not the sence of hys wry∣tyng, as he meaned. But it is easy to
coniect which way he tended, & what he demaunded, certenly nothing lesse then to disturbe y• Church, or obscure the verity. And thys while the trouth began to florish in Suicerland, wher¦fore Faber, Eccius and other trauai∣led so much (as the brute went) wyth the Chiefetaines of Suicerland, that they got a place assigned for a publik disputacion to discusse the principall poyntes of Religion, that wer in con¦tencion.The iour∣ney. There m Ecolampadius not without great peryl, although he had letters of safeconduct. And for y• Zuinglius would not appeare there, or if he would, the principals of Zu∣ricke woulde not haue suffered hym, doubtyng the enemyes deliberated o∣therwise, then with simple disputaci∣on to pacify thys broyle. Ecolampa∣dius susteyned y• cause of truth alone, agaynst the rnckest Papistes, & lon∣gest experimented Soldiours of Anti¦christ. that in nombers repayred thy∣ther. There be liuing at thys present many credible persons, who can testi¦fy wyth what conscience & dexteritye he cleared hym selfe, besides that the aduersaries haue published the truth
also. A yeare after he employed hym∣selfe, and dyd hys duty notably well, in disputacion & reformaciō of BerneReformaci¦on of ye gos¦pel at bern as the actes receiued of Notaries so∣lemnely sworne, beare wytnes to the whole worlde. Incontinentlye after this a great tumult rose at Basile forSediciō at Basile. that certain of the Senate & the com∣monty boldly & with particular teme¦ity, wythstode matters lawfully & of longe time decreed for the puritye of the Gospel, myliding to disanul & abo¦lysh by priuate authority, the accords & agrements made by publick conser, wherfore it was necessari to reforme, establish, & innouate, as wel in ye city as the villages of this cōmon weale, those matters yt before wer ordayned for religion according to the word of God. And in this sturre, none demea∣ned them selues insolently, for the cō¦mon people attempted nothyng disor∣derly, saue that some puld downe and defaced Images, whych were set vp for supersticion, so vigilant was the Senate to appease al debate, & to re∣duce althinges to good order, & that they did was done by ye meane of this graue & holy mā, who exhorted them continually to modesty, peace, & obedi¦ence.
He was immediatelye after a meane to reestablish in the Church ec¦clesiastical discipline, & the censure ofThe cen¦sure of ex¦cōmunica¦cion recei¦ued. excōmunicacion. The he was called to Vme wyth Ambrose Blawrer, & Martin Bucer, wher he prescribed or¦der for the Church, & reformed ye same according to the rule of the Gospell. He passed the rest of hys lyfe in lyke holy exercises profyting daylye, wry∣tyng, reading, or geuing counsayl toThe exer¦ses of Eco¦lampadiu the churches in Germany, to ye great discōfort of such as couet not to haue Christ raigne ouer them, but to the in estimable emolument, and thankfull contentacion of the godly and sincere sort. Such hath ben the order of thys holy mans life to the latter end, true, pure, prone to piety, ready to relieue men, careful to aduaunce ye kingdom of god, & diligent to subuert ye attēpts of sathan. This life hath he led tyl he departed wtout any alteraciō or insta∣bility. And for y• he laid foundacion & builded on a firme stone, he neuer re∣ceiued torment yt coulde deface, much les ruinate him, he had no other thē Christ in his hart, taking his leuel at him, as at a blank, & al his cares, acti¦ons,
conferences and attemptes, directing hys cours by hym, as by the aspect of a starre, called the lesser Beare, a cer¦tayn marke. He hoysed vp, and haled downe the sayles of Christes shyppe, as tyme required. He succoured theThe of∣es of a tru¦astor. afflicted with godlye consolacion, he offered pardon to the penitēt, the hea∣uy loden & weary wightes he releued with Christ theyr onelye solace. The stony hartes he forced to relent wyth hammer of deuine wrath. He erected nothing, but in his rype tyme, & whē the profit of the Church vrged most. He was a prudēt Stuarde, for he wel ordred, & egally deuided the ordinary foode of the Lordes Family, yt whych he practised in his exposition vpon E¦zechiel. For then he was more incum¦beno his outward Stewardship, to thet yt the false religion abolished among Christians, he myght frame & fasion an vniforme & ryght cōmon wle, according to the word of God. Farewel Reader, and pray with me, that we keping that way which Eco∣laaius hath passed, may through the holye Ghoste attayne to Iesus Christe in hys fathers kyng∣dome. So be it.
¶ The history of the death of Iohn Eco∣lampadius, setforth by Si∣mon  (∴) ¶ Simon Grineus wysheth long health, to his friend Wol∣fangus Faer Capito. I Vnderstand by your let¦ters, that many as well in Fraunce, as in otherSclande of yt death of Ecolan¦padius. places, haue wryttē vn∣to you ye horrible brute flowen in to foreyn Coū¦tries of the departure of oure good friend Iohn Ecolampadius a man of much innocency, as though he had de¦stroyed hym selfe or his friendes se∣cretly made him away, and that thys rumour is aucthorised by certayne bookes published, so that many farre distant hence, perswade thys to be no fable. And therupon you earnestly re∣quire me (yea truly me) that haue  present in al these affaires, obserued the sequele therof more circu spty
then other, vpsucked hys last sighes, & closed my friendes eyes: in considera∣cion of our mutuall acquayntaunce long tyme confirmed, I would grate¦ly the deceased wyth relacion of the truth, remouyng al suspiciō from the vertuous & godly, & confoundyng the sycophancye and sclaunder of the per∣uerse and malicious rable, in sorte, that the vtility which the wise & ear∣n haue reaped of his monumentes, continually mai encrease in the, & his excellent workes be purged of the sa∣crilegious accusacions of the malig∣naunt. Al be it (deare friend Capito) thankes be giuen to God, I neuer yetThe insati∣able malice of the wyc∣ked aga the ste & godly. rested to defend trouth wyth a singu∣ler zeale, and to confute these mon∣strous lies, which euermore troubled my mynde: yet for that & see ordinare¦ly this euil accident to the godly, that in theyr lyfe tyme they be disdained of euil persons, & after theyr decease de∣oed to the diuels: I thought it good to passe in silence the clamour of the aduersaries, fearing some would con¦ceiue this were done of brauerye and vaine otentacion, rather then of any imelling nede, if we trusted our sei∣s
so sclederly in ye defence of ye good renowme of a mā exquisite & absolute in many notable aes. But althings depey perpēded, I could neuer be in∣duced to write any thing of the life or death of him, whom we know wel to haue lyued & dyed most holily. Albeit certain vrged me to this attempt, the which in my iudgemet is notorious i∣nough by his bookes, vnles the vene∣mous tonges of curr detractors in most detestable maner, had cōpelled me to do ye same. And what shal I say (my deare friende Capito) what thys meaneth, or how it happeneth, that a thing deliberatly & with leisure done in a famous & large citie, in the face & audience of a great ōber, can breede any doubt, much lesse be taken in con¦trary part  his aduersaries, so as he who finished his mortal life most bles¦sedly, & was lamented of al good per∣sons, should be defaned to haue bene murdered (a horrible matter) & that he which was al his life tyme of a mke & gentle nature, should be reported  ye informacion of impudent Asses,  cruel and bloudy hand to haue pulled cut the wretched and miserable ghost
Can there be any so senceles, so infa∣mous, so maleuolent to empayre the good renowme of an other, or wyth violent irruption to inuade a syllye dead carcas▪ But such is the order of desteny & course of humayne affaires. Certaynly the clere sunne of ryghte∣ousnes, neuer riseth charged wt darke cloudes, but a soyn tempest, storme and hurle winde folow, menacing the members of Christ a thousande cala∣mities and deathes: furious wrathe & cancred malice spreade theyr force & impudent sclaunders raigne in euery place. But as it is our part to endure and despise these euils, wyth an in∣uincible courage, and harte prepared to the crosse of Christ, and disposed to pacience, so it behoueth vs not to dis∣simule a lye agaynste the honour of God, nor quayle to cleare the truth. We therefore that were present in these affayres, aunswer compendious¦ly and faythfully the truth, touchyng the departure of thys godlye man, as wel to refute the detractacion of the Sicophantes, as to satisfy the desires of the honest, and beare witnes of his innocency, as reason moueth vs.
A yeare before hys decease, he was more afflicted with sickenes, then all hys lyfe tyme past, and notwithstan∣dyng he was neuer empesched wyth weightier affaires then at y• instant, for the both which a litle before was stopped, then began to breake out, & ouerronning in wardlye his whole bo¦dy, marueilously weakened his forces etenuated & exhausted wt watching. This whyle he was moued wyth an incredible sollicitude, not onely to se the Gospel (whych now began to flo∣ryshe) prosper vnder hym: but also in the broyle of ciuill warre, then yrye hote▪ and among, sectes buddyng and springing one from another, labori∣ously to do hys duty, and serue his cal Wherefore hauyng no respect to theEcolamp∣dius tra∣uayles. troublous season, he watched & tra∣uailed much more thē euer he dyd, go¦ing on foote throughe the whole cir∣cuite of hys Churche, exhortinge hys own flocke as wel as hys enemyes, & often times greuously and sharply re∣buking them, not wythout great pe∣ryl of hys lyfe, to reduce them to the ryght way. Briefly he employed hym¦selfe in al thinges most faythfully di∣ligently
& with an ardent zeale. Fur∣thermore among so many publicke & particular affaires, among hys ordi∣nary Sermons, he began the Byble, whych he was accustomed to reade, when hys turne was wyth an other professour of Diuinity, & prosecuting dayly the exposicion of the same, as a true & syngular Byshop of Christ, he made an excellent woorke, brynging to light new & old matters, faithfully & learnedly, through hys great know ledge of holy scriptures, & the Greke and Hebrue tonges. This man alone sustayned manye burdens one whole yeare together, marueilous paciently wyth hys tedious sickenes, when the same in wardly flowed in hys mēbers wyth no lesse payn, thē when it brake out. Besides this he enterprised y• in∣terpretacion of two straunge tonges: I nede not to wryte with what dexte∣rity. For diuers woorkes of Theophi lactus, Cyrillus, & Chrisostomus in that behalfe beare luculēt testimony, although it is apparent they wer ha∣stened to tymely to y• Printers presse. He added hereunto the expositions of those places whych are most difficile,
and remoued from cōmon sence in the sacred scripture, as hys large & lear∣ned Cōmentaries vpō Esai, Ieremy, Hagge, Zachary, Malachy, Daniel, Iob, Ezechiel, the Epistle to the Ro∣maines, and the Hebrues, the Gospel of S. Iohn, and hys Canonical Epi∣stle, the whych he atchieued not long before, euidently declare. And thys whyle he ceased not to preach. I wil∣linglye passe ouer hys particular af∣fayres, and an infinite nomber of an∣swers he gaue dayly to the Churches I haue wondred at hys intollerable trauayles, and priuelye stealyng on hym, I would gently rebuke hym, say¦ing he coulde not lyue long, and per∣swaded hym to repose and spare hym selfe, tyl tyme of necessity. But his fa¦tal day at hand, he hastened aud per∣fected all, as one that certainly knew hys dying date was not farre of. E∣uen at this present Suicerland broy∣ledSuyces warre. with ciuill and lamētable warre, Zuinglius the valiaunt Champion, and deliuerer of Papistical thraldom among hys, and diligent reformer of the Euangelical purity, was cruelly slayne in battayle.
There was also a treatye of peace made to the great discomfort and hea uines of suche as vnfameye feared God. These doleful & miserable mys∣haps, abased the courages of al men, when either throughe pelent ayre, wherwyth the Citye & his house was infected, or through the scabbe which corrupted & putrified his inward par∣tes, there appeared a btch vpon hys huckle bone, where all the bones as∣semble, and immediatlye after enfla∣med hys body wyth a most vehement heate, no doubt it was a Carbuncle. Hys colour was pale and earthy, and as hote as fyre, and notwithstanding al these commō and priuate diseases, he omitted not to preache, wryte and reade Lectures: but as a worthy sol∣dior hardened and pacient in his pai∣nes, abandoned not hys standyng, vn¦tyl the violence of hys malady enfor∣ces hym to kepe home, and reit on his bed, settyng all busynes asyde. We that were his friendes reasoned and conferred wyth the Phisicion, then af¦ter wyth the Chirurgian, as well of the nature as regiment of hys sycke∣nes, and euen the the Phisicion gaue
vs faynt hope of hys recouery, partly considering the nature of hys disease, & partly the weaknes of his body, but when he he had considered althings, he wronght the best & rediest help for his redres. A day or. 2. after, his heate began meanly to aswage by arte & or∣der of the Phisicion, & the botch being rypened, ministred ease for the vehe∣ment heate to respire, so that now we began to hope of hys health. And albe it he tooke in good part the trauayle and seruice of his friendes: yet he prai¦ed them not to take so great paynes, for that he was assured he should not escape thys sicknes. And thys whyleBrotherly & friendly visitacion of Ecolam¦padius. hys friendes of al estates, & the godly and graue Counsellours of the Citye visited hym, offering to gratefye, and declared theyr faythfull and louyng hartes towardes him. It was also by decre of the Senate ordeined that the Phisiciōs should employ their whole knowledge and endeuour to entreate hym well. You should haue sene such conflewence of brethren, and deuout persons to visite, comfort and watche wyth him, that wher many before fre¦quented hys house, nowe a whole
world semed to occupy the same. Hys malady stil continued at one stay, the eyght daye passed, the Phisicions a∣greed not in theyr consultacions, al∣though alyke they did theyr duties as friendes in all diligence and fidelity. They assayed all remedyes, but thys ragyng sicknes ouercame al theyr me¦decines, notwythstandyng that the chiefe ordinary Phisicion of the City confessed that the sycknes so long roo¦ted & grounded in hym, ouercame not so much as the weakenes of hys body whych of long tyme had lost al streng¦the. For the botche ran not as it was wont, but retired inwardye, and yet hys sycknes decreased nothyng (all be it hys heate was temperate) but aug∣mented in hys bowels, with greuous payne of hys head. Then the Phisici∣on that had special charge of hym, re∣systed wyth al force & new medecynes hys sycknes, and concealed no part of hys industry & cunnyng towards hys Pacient. Furthwyth hys strength be¦gan to returne, & we almost perswa∣ded of hys recouerye, for it appeared visibly that nature wared strōger in hym. And sodaynly besydes al expecta¦cion, ye paya raunged along hys right
syde, & apostumed wyth great quanti∣ty of fleume, gathered in his bowels, & flowing in abundaūce, but as it ap¦peared synce, it was ye last conflyct na¦ture had, for by & by hys harte began to tremble, hys eyes to seitle in hys head, hys members to fayle by force & violence of hys sicknes. Then ye Phi∣sicion began to dout, & we despaire of hys recouery, but he ye long past was prepared to thys banket, & with depe syghes groned for y• same, forced not for our consolacions, but wt an inuin¦cible courage bad vs be of good cōfort Then calling to him the Ministers of the Gospell, hys companions in pro∣fession, wyth the pryncipall of the Church, he made the thys Oration. Ye see brethren in what state mineEcolampa¦dius last ex¦hortacion. affaires rest, the Lord approcheth to cal me hence, I am therefore desirous to confirme & establish my soule with the perfect ioy of our Lord, & consola∣cion of you my deare friendes. What shal we the seruauntes of God say in thys fatal farewel, ye ioyntly be coup∣led together in lyke loue towards the Lord, like study, lyke care, & like doc∣trine? Saluacion is procured for vs, ye faythful hope of Gods kyngdome by
Christ is cōquered for vs, his doctrine is true, his light shyneth euen at our fete, wherefore abandon al sorow, al dread of death, all errour & all doubt. What resteth then but constantly & faythfully to folow Iesus Christ, as we long sith haue begun: First in pu¦rity of doctrine, secondly in lyfe con∣formable to the lyuely word of God. Christ puissaunt inough, wyll of hys infinite mercy geue order for the rest and preserue hys Church. Endeuour then wyth all alacrity of mynde, my deare brethren, to make your lyghtThe waye to ouer∣throw Sa¦than. shine, so as God the Father maye be glorified, and the name of Christ res∣plendish and haue light by the bright¦nes and integrity of your conuersaci¦on. Loue one another vnfainedly, ha∣uing god euer more before your eyes. Men preach the truth in vain, and li∣tle preuaile wordes, for if we wil sub¦due Sathan, if we determine to shape this world after Christ, this specially that now is we had neede of a cleare and holy lyfe, of a heauenly courage and mynde. See ye not what cloudes appeare, what tēpest begins to noise, what alienacion of myndes, what
impiety raigne, yet ye must be constāt and couragious, assured the Lord wil dispose al in iust order. O ye I myght be with you in your tribulacions, and expose thys my lyfe for the truth, but it may be so, for as muche as the loue of godly men, and the band in Christ is indissoluble, and haue all thynges common amonge them. Suche dis∣course hadde Ecolampadius concer∣nyng religion, generally with vs his brethren, and then he began to touch hym selfe. Where I am scaundered (sayth he) that peruerslye I haue cor∣rupted the truth. I force not, for prai∣sed be god, I depart to appeare before the throne of Christ in pure consciēce there shal I truly knowe if I haue se∣duced the Churche, I leaue you wyt∣nessesHys prote∣staciō that he taughte the verity. of thys myne opinion and atte¦stacion, the which I mayntayne and confirme in these my last sighes. And when he had sayd thys, the brethren gaue hym theyr handes, and faithful∣ly promised to take care for y• church. The morow after, which was the. r day he had layed sycke, he commaun∣ded his Children to be brought before hym, and fyrst he tooke them by the
hand, then he stroke them on the head & notwithstanding their tender yeres could not conceiue the fathers mynde (for the eldest was but thre yeres old) Go to (fayth he) Eusebie, you Irena, and you Alitha, my deare Children, iu ye God your father. And when theyr Mother hadde made a sygne of graunt, he would fulfyl his cōmaun¦dement, he vended hys eyes towards hys wy, hys mother in law, & other hys , saying: I haue wyth thys my last restament bound ye that ye end my Children be such, as I sayd euen now, and as I haue euer desyred, that is, fearing God, peace∣able, meeke, and true. And after all those that were present, had geuen a∣gayne consent, and faythfull promise to obserue hys request, he caused hys chyldren to be reed from hym. Thys was the last nyght, and all the brhen were wyth him, wyth whom (it semed hauing de o rest) he con¦ferred very ly. A certayne friend of his came in againe that went foorth, whom he required to l sm newes, the other aunswered he knew none. But I wyll tell thee newes sayth E∣colampadius.
Euery man was silent to heare what thys myght be, I shall be shortlye sayth he wyth Christe my Lord. Anon after one demaunded hym if the lyght hurted hym not, and laying hys hande on hys stomacke, aunswered: here is lyght inough. The dawing of day appeared, and the Sunne began wyth hys radiaunt beames to cleare the whole worlde, when hys fatall houre approched. Hys last prayer whych we could vn∣derstand, and which he pronounced wyth great payne, yet casye to be vn∣derstanded: was the .li. Psalme of Da¦uid, which contayneth Dauids peni∣tent prayer for hys synnes, the which thys godlye man recited at large in the presence of vs, with sighes draw∣en from hys diuine brest. Thys done, he paused a while, and as one sodaynelye awakened, sayde thys prayer: Iesus Christ saue me. Thys was the last voyce that issued out of that venerable mouthe. We were ten brethren kneelyng rounde about hys bed, and lyfynge vp oure handes, wee made oure prayer vnto God.
It was uowe cleare and perfect day▪ and the sune ascended our horisont, when thys holy mā rendred his ghost to God hys Creatour, so meekelye, humbly, & wt such affiaunce in Christ hys Lord, that al good people wer no lesse comforted wyth hys godly ende, then they had bene edefied by hys ver¦tuous lyfe. Thus Ecolampadius ended hys dayes, whose lyfe shied in integrity and innocencye. The cause recited in the beginning, moued me (yea truely me, that haue bene a luculent witnes wyth diuers credible persons, of all these thynges wrytten) not to swarue from testification of the truthe, but faythfully to aduertise the same. And now my deare friende Capito, synce you haue exhorted me to set forth hys fatal end: reduce you to memorye, the order of hys lyfe. For you know what pleasure the godly shall receyue, and what prouocacion thys shalbe for thē to imitate hys godly steppes. I do not in vayne require you to attempt this, for no man can more lyuely descriue the same then you▪ wt whō all hys syfe tyme he had great familiaritye and
learned conference. Then seyng thys ample occasion is offred vnto you, to satisfy the thurstye expectacion of the godly, and gratefy the gredye desyres of all honest and vertuous people. I doubt not, and the rather at the con∣templation of my request, you wyll publysh to the whole world, the great abundaūce of grace, it pleased the Lorde to poore in thys man, who is worthy to be ca∣lendred in the Ca∣talogue, of famous and godly pyllers of the Christiā church. Farewel. ▪)
¶ The history of the Lyfe and Death of Huldericke Zuinglins. Wryt∣ten by Oswad Mis. (∴) ¶ Oswald Miconius wysheth per∣fect health, to hys friende Aga∣thius Ber. YOVR request is (deare friend Agathy) I should publysh a matter as wor¦thy notice, as surmoun∣ting the compasse ing skyll. For great thyn∣ges requyre supportacion of great po¦wer, as yet I haue ramforced onely. For I am bothe weake to attaynd to high matters, and naturally giuen to atchieue low enterprises. Think you this is a triuial argumēt to discourse I wyl not say descriue the historye of Zuinglius lyfe? for suche is not your desire, weying the sterility of my skyl and eloquence. Tully the Prince of al good learning, & the famous Plu∣tarche, might with their greatest ves∣sels
wade in thys large sea, without eclipse of their glorious cunning and elegant style. So great is Zuinglius among his sincere friendes, & so sl¦ly estemed among hys illiterate & pro¦phane enemies, herof springeth your doubt. There be some (you allydge) that in praysing him, make the same a myrour of godlynes, and some in contemning hym, paint him out lyke an horrible and monstrous wyght, whych moueth you to maruaile, the yearth canne sustaine so facinerous a creature. Thus ye laud of hys friends alluryng you to reuerence. & the sclaū¦der of his foes, prouoking you to ab∣hore his lyfe and actes: You seme to suspende your resolute iudgement of him, and hys learned woorkes, and therfore requires to be credibly enfor¦med by some his familiar friendes of his demeanure and cōuersacion, that (such is your zelous affection) as hys excellent monumēts shine in al Chri∣stianity and sincere doctrine: so they maye receyue condigne credit, and godlye reporte of all Christian peo∣ple. I maye ryghte boldlye affirme, I knewe Zuinglius familyarlye,
who was my Mecenas, & with whom I had learned conference, for ye which I am obliged vnto hym manyfoldly. But what can I geue, so barrayne of eloquence, and ornate phrase? If you dyd not remember me, I shoulde for∣get my iust debt, now that you presse me, I wyl do what I can, and y• more is, I dare be bold to say, thys compen¦dious narratiō wyl delight you much For I write as I haue had experiēce, trusting you wyl cōmunicate to none thys discourse, but kepe it to your self Zuinglius was borne about the yere of our Lord. 1487. in a Village,The place her zuin∣clius was orne. called Doggiens, otherwyse named y• wylde house, as high situated, as any Mountain in Suicerland. I haue ben fond to beleue he gathered Dininity by hys neare neighborhed to heauen, considering he hadde not hys lyke of long tyme in holynes of lyfe. His Fa¦ther hight Nicholas Zuinglius, hysHis parēts Mother Margaret Meyline, both per∣sons of good fame. His father was re¦nowmed, as wel for hys integrity, as temporal preferment. In hys Coun∣try he was a principal Gouernour, & we estemed. Thys man hauing good
hope of his yong sonne, bestowed him wyth a Priest his Brother, to trye yf he were apt to take learning, and vn∣derstandyng by the same his toward∣nes, he put hym to a Scholemaister, vnder whō he prospered so well, that hys Instructor could not limit him so much to learne, as he had ready wyt to receiue. Therefore he was sent to Basile, beyng but .x. yeares old, and had to Maister one Gregory Binzle a learned and ready Teacher. There he profited in smal tyme so well that he gayned in disputacion, and confe∣rence of study muche more then other hys fellowes, which moued the elderZuinglius was a Mu¦sician. Scholers to stomake hym. He excel∣led in the arte of Musicke, as it is in∣cident to them that be naturally bent more to one science, then an other. Hys Instructor Binzle, louyng hym dearely, considered well the maner of teachyng then vsed, was farre to base for such a ioly and pregnant wyt, and therfore returned him to his Parents praying them to place hym, wher as he myght receyue instruction accor∣ding to hys capacitye. Then was he sent to Berne, there to studye vnder
one Henry Lupulus, a learned mā, & famous in Poesy, who first aduaūcedZuingli{us} is sent to Berne. and professed letters of humanitye in Suicerland. This man red vnto him approued authors, of whō he learned the purity of the Latin tong, & vnder∣standing of Authors with good iudge¦mēt. He also learned to write Verses & could scan & iudge others Poesy. He had not fullye consumed two yeres in this study, when he had grounded soHis studye of Philoso¦phy. wel, as he might build thereupon the study of Philosophy. Thē he repared  Vienna in Autriche, wher he lear¦ned the somme of Philosophie, & aug∣mented hys knowledge in letters of humanitye. In fewe yeares after he was called home, and fearing inter∣mission of exercise of learning, he re∣turned to Basile, where he cōmuni∣cated his skyll to many. And being e∣lected principall of S. Martins Col∣ledge, he began to professe good lear∣ning, to the singular commoditye of al his Auditors. At vacant tymes he curiously examined Philosophy, and the vaine Cōmentes of Sophistes, to arme himselfe the more strongly, if in time to come, it chaunced him to dis∣pute
against them.  his graue studies with some  melody, as he was pleasantly wy liuely, & mey conceited.  e aly after, he learned to play on all Musicall instrumentes, to thene he might quicken his minde, deftigat with studies, & returne to them with more alacrity I doubt muche (deare friend Agathye) hold you can beleueThe profit of M. this, for hereby his enemies haue a∣ asiō tō  him, aenging Musicke is an alluring aite to eche rous lust, & no encouragement to gen¦tle studye. I haue hearde the peruers pronounce euilly of him, & speciallye the Babilonical Priestes, who lyue licenciously, & wallow in Venus d¦die. But who lyues so e of spot, that can escape Momus blast, we wil not be discouraged to aduaunce hys praise, what so euer Miöas Mates, & blinde Bussards chat. Is not this an euident argumēt, he vsed Musick saw dably, consideryng he perswaded  stubentes to geue them selues therun¦to, and wherefore might he refrayne? since there is nothing that reioyceth the sorowful minde more the Musick.
After he had long tyme trauailed, as wel in liberal artes, as in the study of philosophie, he receiued ye due guerō of Scholes, to wyt, the degree of May¦ster. The whych he tooke not so wyl∣lyngly, as to condescend to the opiniō of men, who iudge none learned, vn∣les they e ecked wyth these braue tytles. A whyle after as the matter & order required, he employed hys studyTheologie corrupted wyth Phi∣losophy. in schoole diuinitye, but by and by he perceyued yt it was but losse of tyme, and that by worldly wysdome, God & Philosophy were mixed together, in such sort, that of thys vanitye, barba∣rousnes, or rather vayne glory, there was no certayne hope of anye sincere doctrine: yet he continued in thys ex∣ercise, as though he had bene an espi∣al or loker on the enemies campe, tillZuinglius chosen Pa¦stor of Gla¦ris. those of Glaris elected hym their Su¦perintendent, without taking the or∣der of Priethod. The whych he tooke afterwardes, beyng conayned to perfect that, that the other had begon Hauing receiued thys order, he who∣ly addicted him selfe to study, special∣ly of holye Scripture. For synce that tyme he made none accompt of good
learning, but where the same serued hys turne in the sacred scripture, and preachinges. And for thys purpose heThings re¦quisite to a Preacher. learned Valerius the great by rote, because of hys examples. He conside∣red, that he that had the charge to in∣struct the flocke of Christ, ought to be garnished with the science of manye things, & specially with diuine know¦ledge, more then with eloquence, and elegant phrase to expound althinges duly, and for the vtility & capacitye of euery one. He endeuored wyth all se∣dulity, to atchieue this, perusyng al∣wayes the newe and old Testament, elucidating the proprieties of the text & applying them as he thought good, to the profit and benefit of those of ye Countrye that heard him. By thys tyme he had so encreased in diuine knowledge, that the vertuous & lear∣ned iudged hym wel exercised in holy scriptures, and a perfect Diuine. Yet he was not contented ther with, vntil he had the knowledge of the tounges to supply that he lacked. Wherefore he gaue him selfe first to the Greeke tong, by helpe of Lexicns, or Greke Dictionaries and translacions. He
wrate S. Paules Epistles in Greke, and learned them by rote, so as he vn¦derstoode them better in Greke, then in Latin. The like he did in all other bookes of the newe Testament. But hauing learned of S. Peter that holy scripture is not vnderstanded by par∣ticular interpretacion, he lifted hys eyes to the heauens, beseching the ho¦ly Ghost to be his Instructor, & pray∣ed daylye he myghte haue that grace geuen him to vnderstande sincerelye the sence of the holy Ghost. And fea∣ringwhēre we ought to ta the knowlee of y• holye Scripture least vnder colour of the holye Ghoste he shoulde abuse hym selfe, he conferred that, that was wrytten, and illustrated the darke places, by the plaine, in sort, that when he prea¦ched the scripture, euery man might plainely perceiue he was taughte of the holy ghost. By this meane the knowledge of heauenly trough long time obscured, to the great detriment & perdicion of soules: was happely restored vnto vs He iudged of the Catholick doctours as they iudged of them selues, that we must reade them with iudgemēt, and try them by the Canonical scrip∣tures,
as by a touch stone, otherwyse they be ordinarely so corrupted, with medley of Philosophy and mans rea∣sons, that it is impossible ther should be anye order in conforming them to the authoritye of holye Scripture, a thynge in tyme past attempted and put in vre. Then he practised hys skyll in this maner: He proclaimed & made warre against a notable disorders & enormi¦ties, specially against the pensiōs (for so we terme the presentes that Prin∣cesZuingli{us} zeale aga∣inst Pensi¦onaries. make to some particular parsons to leauye Soldiours, to aide them in their warres) desiring to abolish thē, and to reduce the Countrye to the pristinate estate, and former simpli∣city. For he considered, vnles he pur∣ged the sountaxne of all euyls, Chri∣stian doctrine coulde not settle and take sure foundacion. You may not here Agathy say: Is it possible that Zuinglius yet a Pa∣pist, shoulde thynke of the Gospell? Credite mee, it is more then .xxvii. yeares past, synce these Blocke heads charged him secretelye to be an heri∣tik, as wel for thys that is rehearsed,
as for that he approued Iohn Picus of Mirandolas propositions, set vp at Rome by him in time past to dispute, the whych notwithstandyng he could not obtayne. Hereof sprang the ha∣tred, infamy, exclamacion, and wyly working of the children of the world agaynst Zuinglius, & encreased euen as hys vertues augmēted. The other contrarely that were godly affectio∣ned, as some auncient and vertuous personages, wyth certain Priestes of a lesse corrupt lyfe, esteemed hym so hyghly, as they trusted by hys ende∣uor, the iustice & integrity of the aun∣cestors should be remised in their old estate. At that time he announced the grace of the Gospell, in sorte, that he sayd lyttle of the abuses of Rome, or nothing at al. For he thought it was necessarye that truth fyrste knowen, should worke in the hartes of hys au∣ditors, so that when they had wel vn∣derstanted the true cōntaundements, they myght discerne the false and re∣pugnaunt. And truly, suche was the qualitye of time, he could doo none o∣ther. For in this contrariety of opini∣ons and rebellion of people, the truth
had rather ben reiected, then y• abuse reformed. Truth it is in this poynt I cannot cleare thys yong man of all suspicion of synne, although with sa∣cred desire to serue God, he circum∣spectly tooke hede by euyl example to abase the authority of heauenly doc∣trine. Thus Zuinglius demeaned hym selfe at Glaris. And in thys broil he had good occasion offered hym to repaire to the hermitage for a season. Thither the Lorde Thibaut Gerol∣zege a Baron inuited hym, a man as wel affectioned to learnyng and lear¦ned men, as to true religiō, who was the administrator of our Ladies Her∣mitage. The cause that moued Zuin¦glius to repayre thither, was the sin∣gular desire he had to publish Christ and the verity, among diuers & farre distant nacions, who for the famous brute of y• place, in frequency flowed thither, and partly the goodly oportu¦nity he supposed to finde ther to come to a more perfect vnderstāding of the Greke tong. And happely the euent aunswered hys expectacion, for there he manifested Christ, & got perfect in¦telligence of the Greeke, to vnderstād
more easly the newe and old Testa∣ment. Euen about this tyme the con∣gregacion of Zuricke, destitute of a Preuther, uborned certayn, who did theyr vndeuour to place Zuinglius theyr Superintendent. He was igno¦raunt of thys, tyll that a Chanon of the Citye required hym, if he wouldeZuingli{us} called to Zuricke. discharge the prouince of a Preacher, and be theyr Pastor at Zuricke. He aunswered he was content, and tru∣sted, that if the grace of god was prea¦cher & receyued in so famous a place, the other Cantōs or quarters of Sui∣derland would followe that example, and by thys meane a godlye reforma∣tion would ensue. And all be it hee was assured hee shoulde not haue lyke salarye as be∣fore, yet he sayde, yf they woulde ap∣poynt hym that function, he woulde endeuour to dyscharge the same. But he woulde not requyre it at the tyme of esertion, as many are accustomed, to procure the voyce and suffrage of other. I was suborned, I truly Aga∣thye, to geue Zuinglius my voyce, whych I gaue, aud receyued graunt for hym. Who was immediatly sent
for, & admitted wyth y• incredible ioy of al good persōs. A while after being in the Chapiter of the Chanons, he proponed vnto them, what he deter∣mined to teach the people, to wit, the history of our Sauiour Christ, accor∣dyng to S. Mathew, so as his vertue, whose name thei did aduaunce should not be buryed any lenger, to the detri¦mēt of diuine glory, & helth of soules. Further, he protested he wold not ex∣pound the same by humayn sence, bin¦dyng himselfe by othe to any priuate Interpreter, but by conference & in∣dustrious collection of scripture, & by the intelligence of the holy ghost, the whych he hoped to obtaine wt humble prayer made vnto God. This his reso¦lution made some heauy & sorowful, & some ioyful, euen as the voyces be∣fore wer not al alike to admit Zuing lius. He began to execute his promis at the Natiuity of our Lord. 1519. and synce pursued the same. Duryng hysMartine Luther. continue in this, Luthers name begā to grow in credit, & many bought and red his bokes. And albeit Zuinglius as then red thē not, yet he exhorted in his sermōs his auditors to bie & reade thē.
The reason that moued Zuinglius to do thys, was because yt people, rea∣ding them & vnderstanding, Zuingli¦us emploied no time in studi of them, myght consider in both a conformity and a grement of teachyng & opinion drawen out of the holye scriptures, & be the more enflamed to ground vpon and addict them selues to the truthe. Thys godly deuise had profitable suc¦cesse a whyle after. Truth it is, the or¦der he obserued in preaching made much also, wherby the symple as wel as the learned and ingenious might profit. For he explaned the scripture so plainlye, and with such dexteritye, that he was lothe any shoulde depart from hys sermons, vnles they were edefied & enriched wyth godlye lore. And as he manifestly taught y• truth, and that with great diligence, so was he vehement, & sharpe in reprouyng vice, as much as euer was any man. Aboue al the rest, he inueyed agaynst the Pensionaries, the oppressors of the poore, & the dissolute, ydle, & deli∣cious lyuers. He vsed such a maiesty in rebukyng, as neuer none the lyke before, when he thundred wt terrible
wordes agaynst the Pensions & disso∣lute lyuing, because he woulde not seeme to dashe and astonyshe the E∣states, or suche of the Commonty, as thronged among the peruers, & repro¦bate in hearyng his sermons, he euer more added thys: That thys my vehe¦ment rebuke may not agreue & trou∣ble thee, O vertuous man, vnderstād I touch thee not, nor in thys matter I haue to do with thee. Sometime he digressed from hys theame, when matters interceadyng enforced hym too surcease hys begunne purpose. But now the blessed & happy tyme ex¦pired, the soūdest and best part of the people embraced truth, he discoursed in hys sermons against thynges lesse tollerable in the Church, he condemp¦ned the priuate gaynes of Priestes, & suche as by priuate power abused the church, whych moued the priestes and laity to omit no time of consultacion, by what wyle, or policies they myght entrap hym. But of thys perhaps I wyl discourse more at large. Now let vs returne to hys studies: Emong soZuingli{us} Lectures. many laborius affaires, he ceased not to read al approued Greeke authors,
as Homere, Thucidides and Lucian, that is more playne and easy, Theo∣critus, Hesiodus, Aristophanes and other, tyll he had redde and reuolued them all. And for that hys studye required, and Andrewe Boscheustyn learned in the Hebrue tounge, was come to Zurick to professe the same. Zuing∣glius was hys diligent Scholer, who receyued foorth wyth a marueylous taste of thys tong. And hauing obtai∣ned of the Senate, the erection of a Colledge of good learnyng, and the three tounges, he solicited the same to send for Iames Ceporus a yong man wel learned in those tounges, to be a publicke professor there. Vnder whom he determined to atchieue all that concerned the Greke Grammer. Awhyle after by conference of the Seuenty and S. Ieromes translaci∣on, he tooke boldnes to expounde the text of Esay and Hieremy, ryght ex∣cellent Prophetes, accompanyenge hym selfe wyth Leo Iuda, who had then studyed and trauayled in that knowledge and Felix Mantius, who synce was defamed wyth the heresy
of the Anabaptistes. He studyed con∣tinually stanoyng vp ryght, and pre∣scribed certayne houres to studye, at whyche he neuer fayled, if hee were not pressed wyth matters of impor∣taunce. From earlye morning, tyl tenne of the clocke, he applyed hym selfe to reade, interpretate, instruct, & write, as tyme and occasion required. After Dinner he attended to such as would conferre wyth hym in any matter, or required counsell, or he deuised and walked wyth hys friendes tyll twoo of the clocks, at whych tyme he retur∣ned to hys studye. After Supper he walked a lyttle whyle, and then after he gaue himselfe to wryte letters, the whyche sometymes he vsed tyll myd∣nyght. Further, if the Senate hadde neede of hym in any vrgent matter, he was alwayes ready at theyr com∣maundement. And nowe Agathye, if it delyghte you to heare Zuinglius trauayles a∣gaynst the enemyes of truth, and the attemptes of wyye woorkers, wee must deryue our dyscourse from a far ther and hygher begynnynge.
Albeit that Fraunces Lambert Fri∣ar obseruant of Anguiō, whose name is wel knowen to the French & Ger∣mayne nacion, ought not to be enrol∣led among hys enemyes: yet for that of the fyrst & principal he broched this busynes agaynst Zuinglius, he must not here be buryed in the vale of obli∣tion. He came to Zurick in hys Fry∣ars weede, & disputed openly agaynst Zuinglius, touching the intercession of Saints, but I cannot tel who pric∣ked hym, if it were the truth, or that he set but a face theron. For after cer¦ten propositions, he was contented to be reformed, & gaue thankes to God, that he had reuealed the truth vnto hym so playnly by hys excellent Or∣gane. Awhyle after came Iohn Fa∣ber, & Martine Blanshe Preacher of Tding, addressed thyther by Hugo, Byshop of Constaunce, at the request of the inhabitauntes of Zurick. And albeit as thei reported, they had none other Commission thē to vnderstand the cause of the differentes, and ende¦uour to pacfy and end them: Neuer∣theles occasion so offered, & matters so fallyng out, they fell into question
of the Gospel, the intercession of sain∣tes, humaine constitucions, and other thynges in such ort, that they passed and consumed theyr whole iourney in disputacion herein, and not wyth out emolument, For al the assembly, whych was about syxe hundred par∣sons considered wel, how vyle & frayl al worldly matters were respect of celestial thynges. It sufficed not the Byshop to haue sent these foresayde parsons. For anon after hys Suffra∣gan came to Zuricke in deliberacion to perswade them to beleue the inter∣cession of Sayntes, & the sacrifice o the Masse. The whych by hys booke published abroade, and approued by many scholes, he hath labored to con¦fyrme. But he lost tyme: For a certen noble man of illustre famely, & mag∣nanimous, beyng demaunded what the Suffragan had gotten, he aunswered: The Vicar hath driuen away the Sow, and we bryng the Pygges, or as I mought sai: the Suffragan hath beaten the bush, and Zuinglius hath taken the Byrdes. These thynges so happely fynished by y• singular good∣nes of almyghtye God, Zuinglius
was enforced to set pen to the paper. I wyl not here enterlace the Catalo∣gue of hys bokes, nor declare the vti∣nty of them, considering they be pub∣lished and beare sufficient wytnes of them selues. I wyl briefely say thys: there is a sounde doctrine iuigned wyth simplicity in them, and I know not where any more efficacy or solid∣tye maye be founde in anye mannes woorkes, then in hys in myne opini∣on. In thys hurly burly, I cannot tel what aduertisment the Pope hadde hereof, but incontinētly he addressed hys Ambassadour to vs, and wrate hys Apostolicall letters or schedule, the tenour wherof ensueth. Adrian the Pope, the syrte of thys name. Wedeoned Se, we greteA letter sēt by Adrian y• Pope to Zuingli{us}. thee well, and sende ou Apostolicall benediction. We asse oure reue∣rende Brother Ennu▪ Byshoppe of Verules, domesticall Prelecte, oure Messenger, and of oure Apostolicall Sea a prudent, and faythfull mem∣ber, to repayre to the inuincible and most confederate nacion vnto vs, an our Apostolicall Sea, to streate wyth the same of matters of importaunce,
and whych appertayne as well to the sayde Sea, as to the whole estate of the Christian common weale. Albeit wee haue enioyned hym to propone these thynges publickely, yet beyng enfourmed of thy vertue, and effectu∣allyThe Po∣pes man∣date. embracing thy deuotion, as hys whom we singularly credit, and haue in speciall regarde. We haue geuen expresse commaundement to the sayd Byshoppe our Messenger, to delyuer vnto thee our letters apart, and to ad¦uertise thee of our good wyl towards the same. We therefore exhort thy deuocion in our Lorde, that thou cre∣dit him in all thynges, and that thou haue in recōmendacion our affaires, and the affayres of the Apostolicall Sea, as we haue thyne honour, ad∣uauncement, and profytte, by thys meane thou shalt encurre our special grace and fauour. Geuen at Rome at S. Peters, sealed wyth the Fysshers Kyng. 23. day of Ianuary. 1523. The cause y• moued me to publishe this letter here, is to testify y• if Zuin¦glius had bene more ambicious, then he was sincere & godli, he might haue had preeminēt estate, & abundance of welth.
For not onelye the Pope wrate vnto hym, but also to Fraunces Zuig∣gien to practise wyth Zuinglius, to leane to the Apostolical sea, & mayn∣tayne that part. At a certaine tyme I prayed Fraunces to tell me what the Pope promised for the same. He aun∣swered: certaynly al saue hys Papisti¦cal chayre, or Apostolicall sea. Euen now the Gospel began to florysh, and was estemed of the greatest part, for a heauenly trouth, namely of the Se∣nate of Zurick, and of the Councell of the. 2. hūdred, wherfore Zuinglius began to study to reduce thynges to a better state & to procede orderli. Thei altered fyrst those things whych em∣pesched the propagacion & aduaunce∣ment of the Gospell. The nombre of Priestes and Moonkes were growen in tract of tyme to a more huge multi¦tude, then neede required, for matter of religion. It was then ordayned by the Senate, throughe the perswasion of Zuinglius: that the nombre shuld be abridged & reduced to fewe, & those necessary for the seruice of y• Church, prouided that none shoulde be depri∣ued or expelled theyr benefice, but en∣ioy
the reuenue of the same, duryng theyr lyfe, & deceased, none to be sub∣stitute in theyr place. The three or∣dersThe Mon¦kes see at lyberty. of Monkes were spoyled of theyr religious attyre, and put al together in a place, whence they myghte go forth as oft, and when they thought good wythout any contradiction, ey∣ther to marry or to apply theyr study. If any would not sauour y• swetenes of the Gospel, they had lybertye to go and do where & what they would, in such sort, as none had hys conscience charged. The ecclesiastical reuenues were employed vpon the ministers of the Church, y• professors of good lear∣ning, the rest of the priests & Monkes and on the poore. There were found amōg these yong men of great expec∣tacion, and purely affectioned to the study of piety. Such were reserued in hope to serue the church, & were nou∣rished through out the whole signory of Zuricke, and after were employed as neede required. Zuinglius also a zelous man towardes sacred & good learnyng had builded the foundacion of a schoole, whyche had not bene in∣fer our to any, yf death had not dissol¦ued
by fatal stroke his godly purpose. Further, he deputed certaine of the Counsell to vnderstand and examine the state of Matrimonye. He perswa∣ded to abolyshe the Images, whyche were then worshipped, to deface and teare in peeces the Masse, & to set vp y• Supper of our lord in his integrity From this tyme forwardes the he∣resye of the Anabaptistes beganne to bourgen, who would not permit thatHeresye of Anabapti∣stes. little Children shoulde be baptised, & after rebaptised them selues, and pro¦ceding with an enraged mynde, they rushed into the most horrible heresies that euer raigned. As soone as Zuin¦glius perceiued thys, for that y• prin∣cipal Authors▪ were his friendes, lear¦ned men, of Zuricke and of his flock, he endeuoured bi familiar conference to reduce thē to anity of mynde. But when he saw, that what they conclu∣dedZuingli{us} oppoth hymself a∣gaynst the heresies of the Ana∣baptistes. in his presence, reuolting anone after, they obserued no part of theyr promyse, and heaped nombers of dis∣ciples sequestrynge them from the Church, and framyng another new, it was erpedient for hym to resyste Sathan, and publikly confound them
Beleue me Agathy, I was present at nyne seueral times, and hearde theyr friendly conference and vehement dis¦putacions, it shall be superstuous to enlarge any further hereof. Certenly theyr mouthes so swarmed wyth in∣iuriousIniuries & blasphe∣myes aga∣ynst Zuin¦glius. reportes & blasphemies, that they abashed not to charge and lay on Zuinglius al the euyls & mischiefes which are figuratly setforth in the re∣uelaciō of S. Iohn. This pestiferous sect was of this nature, the more we trauailed to represse their insolencye, the more they encreased in theyr fu∣ror and raging heate. Wherefore the Senate was enforced to proceede a∣gainst them by way of imprisonment exile, and death, as not agaynst Ana∣baptistes, but periured, rebel, & sedi∣cious parsons, for y• they estemed vani¦tye, more then veritye, preferred vyce aboue vertue, & embracing sediciō, ha¦ted security. And it was necessary to sence & fortefy y• godly wt bokes, least they might be seduced. The last that was found of this sect was Baldasar Hubmer enseigne bearer of the Ana∣baptistes, who of a friend & felow of y• Gospel was becom a mischeuous foe.
Thys fyrst wyth writing bewrayed hys wickednes, after in the presence of the deputed Counsellours appro∣ned the same. For being escaped from Walshut, a Towne situate by the Rhene, he came to render hym self to the Lordes of Zuricke, wher he was apprehended. He required the Lordes of the Counsayle he myghte conferre with Leo Iuda, Sebastiā Economus and me. The whych was graunted vnto him for the second time. We tra¦ualied so much with hym, that vndou¦tedly he promised to submyt him selfe the morrow after. Cōming then from the Senate house to the Temple, he ascended the Pulpit, after Zuingli∣us was gone downe, & confirmed all that he had taught before, saying he was moued therto, because Zuingli∣us had praysed so muche that vertue Constancy, intitulyng and callyng so hys partinacious opinion. He was then brought backe to pryson, where he was deteyned, tyll Zuinglius se∣cretly released hym, and sent hym a∣way, not wythout money & a guyde. And arriuing at Constance, he so de∣tracted and most impudētly defamed
Zuinglius, that he was forced wyth an Apology to cleare hymselfe to the brethren, wherein largely he treatedDisputati¦on at bad of the Anabaptistes horrible heresye. Now ye requyre to vnderstand the disputacion at Bade, and fyrst of all what was the cause the Lords of Zu¦ricke would not permit Zuinglius to be there present. But for as much as the whole discourse of the same is di∣uuged & imprinted, I had rather ad∣dresse you thyther, yet doubtynge I should seme ignoraunt of the whole. I send you the Lordes letters of Zu∣ricke to Iohn Eccius with the safe∣conduct & promyse of good men, that inuited hym to conferre wyth Zuing¦lius, and discusse the sacred trouth of the old and new testament to the com¦mon profit of al the Church. For Ec∣cius had enterprised in two Epistles directed to the Embassadours of the league, to conuince and confute the errours and heresy of Zuinglius, by the reading of these letters, & for that Eccius made none account of y• that was wrytten to him, you may vnder∣stand the Lordes intencion, why they stayed Zuinglius, although he hym∣selfe
aunswered sufficiently that mat¦ter▪ in hys woorkes agaynst Faber, & would to God I had euen nowe that disputacion to send to you. Al be it he was not present in the disputacion: yet he labored as much with care, dili¦gence, counsel, aduertisement, exhor∣tacion and writing, whych he sent to Bade, as though he had aided against the enemies of y• truth. For my part I desyre nothyng more, then to haue sene hym face to face disputyng wyth Eccius at ful liberty: I beleue the .v. lytle Cantons of Suicerland had gi∣uen perfect iudgement, where the lye or trouth had rested, but it was not lawful for hym to be ther. Since that tyme, findyng security in trauayl, he went to Berne wher was Murnerus & Eccius, wyth. 4. Byshops, and cer∣tayn principall Moonkes, whych the counsel of Berne required vnder sure¦ty to repayre thyther. Trouth it is, he was garded with. 200. men of armes to passe by the confederate Coūtries. He made also a long iourney to Mar∣purge, to conferre wyth Martine Lu∣ther, and Phillyp Melancthon, of the Eucharistical Sacrament, not doub∣tyng
ani thing, because it was a place voyde of daunger. You cannot chuse but euidently perceyue, he hath endu¦red great trauayles in these affaires. Diuers called hym teacher of new o∣pinions, because of hys iudgement of the supper of our Lord. But I beleue if they had red with equitye, and well weyed that y• he wrote to the Princes of Germany, assembled at Ausburg, they woulde haue iudged other wyse. I remyt you to the booke, fearing is lose tyme. For what perswasion wyl auayle hym, that in the same treatise of the Supper of our Lorde, wyll not perceyue and learne the truth? Hy∣therto we haue treated of the paynes and trauayles he sustayned to defend the verity, and nowe we wyll declare the peryiles he incurred for the same. After that the Priestes and Monks were expulsed theyr Cloysters, and o∣therThe Pri¦stes and Monkes▪ growē on of credit. Religious houses, and sentence iffinitiue pronounced against them, that receiued Princes pensions, they attempted dyuers wayes to destroye him. I wyl wryte of them that be no∣toriously knowe, and passe in silence hys secrete and lurkyng enemyes.
At a certen tyme there knocked one at hys doore after my▪ night, and prayed hym to come and visit one nygh dead. Hys Deacon aunswered, y• he would not awaken his Mayster, but repayre to the sycke hym selfe. The other im∣portunatly refused, so as he bewraied hys wretched entent, wherfore y• Dea¦con faining he would go and awaken hys Maister, shut the dore closely, and suffered the Caitiffe to tarye there at hys pleasure. And when it was daye, Zuinglius had intelligēce, this was a subtile sleyght. Fyrst, to take him so daynlye, then to snaffe hys mouth, & stoppe his speeche, and so to cary hym away in a boate. Awhyle after, they had prepared a horse secretly, for the lyke purpose. Further, we haue sent an epial wandring vp and downe in the Towne, & wearyng a long swerd hyred to encounter Zuinglius, & then to murder hym. Lykewise two Inha∣bitaunts of Zurick, whom I wil not name, came one night when thei we wel whtled, and assailed Zuinglius house, threw stones, brake the wyn∣dowes, belched out raylyng wordes,  so insolently demeaned them selues
that no neyghbour durst rebuke them They stayed not, tyl stones, strength and sclaunder failed them. In y• mor∣nyng the Counsell was aduertised of this tumult, the gates of the City cō∣maunded to be shut, and men clad wt armure to search them euery where, vntyl that certain wemen, whych con¦sented to thys mischeuous & scelerate fact, disclosed one of them, for y• other a lytle before was escaped the towne. This one was found in a new caske, and committed to pryson, & after ma∣ny sentences geuen, was appoynted a perpetual prisoner, and in few wekes after released at the request of those of Berne. Often tymes Zuinglius supped wyth hys friendes, or wt suche as came to the towne, in hys returne he neuer went vngarded home. The Senate in thys troublous sturre cau∣sed warde and watch to be kept about hys house. But if he found security in thys theyr vigilant garde, certes, he was molested wyth thousande other troubles. They called hym Pensio∣nary, because in time past he receiued a yearely pension of the Pope, igno∣rant then it was any synne. As tou∣chynge
that hee excused hym selfe to the Germaynes in thys wyse: Where as I haue had to doo sometyme wyth the Pope, that is ceased now long a∣gone. I thought then it was lawfull to receyue his money, to maintayne hys party. But when I knewe myne errour, I religned hys pension, which is the cause y• Popes Deputies conne e smal thankes: yea, defame & scorn me, as though I were cupable, for as muche as they perswade men, that in taking the Popes money, God is sin∣cerely serued. And writing to Berch∣tho Haer, and Caspar Megander, touchyng Princes presentes, he sayth thus: I esteme the glori of Christ, yea myne own, more then al the treasure of worldly Princes, much lesse the be¦nefites and argesse of one Kyng. I haue learned what princely rewards pretend, so that auarice hath no more place in me, albeit she is familiar and atteding vpon old age. And his aduer saries not satisfied to call him theefe, aduerer & heretik, to defame his doc¦trine & abase his credit, they hyssed & barked at him publicklye, as though they had bene unatike persons. But
when these silly mad doltes saw they preuailed not against the Gospel and seruauntes of God: they conuerted theyr stingyng & hyssing agaynst such as had receiued the word of God, ho∣ping to irritate them, & pull them frō the sauour of hym, who seemed to be the author (as they peruersely iudged) of their euyll. They so reproched and mocked hym, that the Senate of Zu∣ricke determined in reuse these in∣iuries, and culius assaultes. I had nede to wryte a large volume, to suche as desyre to vnderstande or des∣criue hys affayres. In the ende there were apoynted new confederacies for the tuicion of Christiā doctrine, with out violayng or doyng preiudice to the auncient allunce, whyche was not done wythout the syngular dili∣gence and great trauayle of Zuing∣lius. Not that he attempted ani thing agaynst the peace (for neuer lyke la∣gitious deuise coulde penetrate the brayne of suche a louer of hys Coun∣trye) but that by thys pollecye he ho∣ped to eradicate the yces then swar∣myng, and to plant the true and syn∣cere Religion, to the honour of God▪
and the common profit of Swicerlād, or els in defending Gods cause, thus to enflame all mens hartes to prayse the Lord, and by the magnificence of this new confederacy, to astonish and dash the aduersaries, therby the sonerZuingli{us} writeth to hys frien∣des. to wyn and reclayme them to Christ. Thys incontinently moued certayne furious Papistes to fall to weapons, and broche intestine warre. Wherup¦on Zuinglius wrate to hys friendes in thys maner. I wil repeate vnto you that I haue often wrytten, that is, that ye be con∣stant, and not dysmayd with the war, for ye peace that some sollicite so care∣fully, is a warre and no peace, & the warre that we enterprise, is peace & not warre. For we couet not ye bloud of any lyuing creature, & abhorre the effusion of the same in thys commoci∣on: but our whole entent is to inter∣rupte the licencious gouernment of some. If thys he not taken in hande, the Gospell shall neuer haue his free course, nor the Ministers of the same lyue in security. Our determinacion tendeth to no cruelty, but all that we deliberate, is friendly and paternal.
We desyre to preserue suche as by ig∣norancy procure theyr perdicion. We be resolued to defende liberty, where∣fore disdayne not our enterprises, for certaynly they be more godly and iust then is reported vnto you. Credit▪ vs, and be not seduced by suche as accuse vs. Ye haue tryed our constancye and faythfulnes, and well perceyued our enemies leuity, and dissimulaciō. Be present wyth our company, & obserue constantly the fayth ye owe to God & men. What shal I say further? dread nothyng, we wyl atchieue al thynges so prosperously (God helping vs) as ye shall not be a shamed, nor repent ye haue combyned your selues wyth vs. These were Zuinglius woordes, whych I haue recited here to declare how iniustlye he is nominated of cer∣tayne a Bloudsucker. It is most true he was magnanimous and cōstant in greatest daungers, but alwayes cyr∣cumspect, prouident and wise. He ne∣uer thursted the bloud of anye, no ot of hys extremest foes, whych euerye wyse man & Christiā Minister ought to detest. The very ground & founda∣cion of al hys enterprises, was the li∣bertye
of hys Countrye, the vertue of the Aunceltors, & the glory of Christ, what so euer his enemies ceblaterate the which I protest in trouth before God. He was twyse in the warres of the confederates, which bare y• name of a Monasterye called the Chappell. He wyllinglye went to the firste, be∣cause he would be present at the con∣sultacion, fearyng any thyng shoulde be decree ther contrary to right and equity. The matter was ended well, and without effusion of broud. I haue heard him say he perceiued more ma∣lice, and peruers counsel ther, then e∣uer before he red in vokes, or had lear¦ned by experience. In the second war he was elected Pastor of the armye, where he went vnwyllyngly, forese∣ing the peryl that was iminent. The condicion of the warre mysliked hym marueilously, and the rather for that he sawe the enemyes victailes cut of, vnderstanding well what myschiefe hunger would brede & compel. Albeit to speake truly, after those of Zurick had enterprysed the same (wherunto certayne whom we knowe prycked them of a good zeale, hopynge in the
meane season there would be a consul¦tacion and treaty of peace made, not∣withstanding the Lordes of Zuricke had chose the warce) Zuinglius was not determined to alter anye thyng, doubting the enemyes woulde make no accompt of them, as he passed not much to wythstand theyr inuasion. Fourtene dayes before the armye was encamped, I hearde hym twyse say in pulpit wher he preached, in the midst of this broil: I know wel what thys meaneth, all thys is to procure¦iny death. He declared secretly to cer∣tayne of his friendes, that the blasing starre which appeared many wekes, and whiche we supposed to portende Ecolampadius decease: signified hys fatal fall. The Soldiours of Zuricke rushed forth in great disorder. I can∣not but sorowfully lament, when I cal to mynde that doleful tyme. They marched not lyke men of warre in e∣uen rankes, but lyke a sorte of ventu∣rours, some straglyng abroade, some runnyng before and behynde the En∣seygne, destitute of conduct counsell, and pollecye, and accorded not one wyth an other.
I cannot name them to be any great nomber of me of armes, for wher thei wer mustred. 5000. they appeared not in the field ful. 4000. Then as thys lyttle nomber approched to encoun∣tre a huge army and in perfect order, Zuinglius folowed mounted on hors backe, accordyng to the maner of the Country. I cannot expresse the dolor and sorrowe I susteyned, when I be∣held him, truly I was astonished ther with. We mourned all that day, and made our humble prayer vnto God. But he hadde decreed an other thyng for vs, and not agaynst vs, as I holily expounded the same. For by thys we haue learned to be more circumspect, and to take better hede, reuerencyng more the Gospel, and fearyng God al¦so. And the enemyes that resisted the Gospel, are now disclosed, and mani∣fested to vs. About the euenyng of the day, we were aduertised that the bat∣tayles had ioyned very hotely, & that we had lost Zuinglius. The brute went he was thrise dismounted, with the checke of the Troupe, but inconti¦nētly he was holpen vp on horseback agayn, and the fourth tyme he was
stryken on the chynne with a terryble blowe, and fallyng downe from hys horse vpon hys knees, he sayd: what euyl hap is thys? they may flea the bo¦dy, but not the soule, and thys spoken he departed in our Lord. After thys ouerthrow, the enemies hauyug good leysure (for our Soldi∣ours were retired into place of safe∣garde) sought for the body of Zuing∣lius. But who teld them he was in yt battayle and slayne? The body beyng founde, was condempned, and after sentence geuen, dismembred & burnt to ashes. Behold y• discourse of Zuin∣glius lyfe, lo the accident of his death which he suffered for the singular af∣fection he bare to hys Countrye, and Christian common weale. Truth it is, thys end is horryble in the syght of mortall men, but precious before God, and is predestinate to al faithful Ministers by diuine iustice, if y• Lord of hys grace and syngular bountye, spare them not. I suppose Agathy, I haue satisfied your request, I haue obserued as I promysed, trouth ioyned wyth breui∣tye, not forcyng for fyne termes, and
elegāt phrases. I pray God some lear¦ned and godlye man, succedinge me, may descriue and beautefy thys histo∣rye, as truely, ornately, and learned∣ly, as the profite of the studious sort, and the dygnitye of thys excellent man doe requyre. Farewell, it maye please you to accept thys my trauayle in friendly part. At Zu∣rycke the yeare 1532. (:) Virescit vulnere virtus
¶ To the fauourable Reader. IHumbly require thee, fauoura∣ble Reader, to beare wyth such faultes as haue escaped in the prynting, I trust in the next impres∣sion more emendaily to publish these godlye histories. In the meane season I thought good to admonishe thee of one absurdirye, whiche might argue mere ignoraunce, if I would not ad∣uertise thee of the same. In my Epi∣stle dedicatorye to the Lorde Went∣worth, where as is wrytten (and the body is no body, but a sepulture) reat sepulchre. The rest I submit to th learned correction. Farewel. Imprinted at London by Iohn Awde∣ly, dwellyng in lytle Britayne strte, by great S. Bat∣telmewes. (∴)
