19113 38160737 29313
Perlegi Tractatum hunv cui Titulus est (A relation of the Christians in the World) eumque typis mandari per∣mitto. Iulij 29. 1639. Sa. Baker.
A RELATION Of the CHRISTIANS in the World. Revelations 7. 9. After this I beheld, and loe, a great Multitude which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kinreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne and before the Lambe. LONDON: Printed by I. Okes. Anno Domini. 1639.
Reverendissimo in Chri∣sto Patri ac Domino Honoratis∣simo, Domino Gulielmo Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primatiac Me∣tropolitae, Regiae Majestati à Consilijs Sanctioribus, Academiae Oxoni∣ensis Cancellario, & Patrono suo Colendissimo. HAbes in libello isto (am∣plissime Praesul) Ec∣clesiae Catholicae statum, et pomoeria. In quo, Au∣gustam Ecclesiam Ca∣tholicam, non angustis modo Ro∣mani Pontificis limitibus, (ut in∣cassum somniant Pontificij) circum∣scriptam; nec in obscuro aliquo, ut A∣fricae, angulo, (ut non minus olim vane
concluserunt Donatistae) coarctatam; sed vere Catholicam: Hoc est, Uni∣versaliter extensam, & ab Oriente in Occidentem, et a meridie in Sep∣tentrionem sparsim diffusam videri licet. Et mihi certe summa delecta∣tio, et consolatio fuit, cum legendo invenissem, et contemplando intellex∣issem, quam magna sit domus Dei Omnipotentis; quam ingens possessio∣nis ejus locus; quam fortis Ecclesia, columna Dei viventis; contra quam, nec tyrannorum bujus mundi malitia, nec potestatum infernarum astutia, quicquam sint praevalitura. De De∣dicatione huius Operis, (cum argu∣mentum sacrum sit, ac Ecclesiasti∣cum) non diu deliberandum fuit, cuius tutelae Consecrarem. Tibi (Illustris∣sime
ac Reverendissime Praesul, (qui in Anglia nostra summus es Sacrorum Praeses, et Ecclesiae Pa∣tronus, non vigilantissimus mo∣do, sed et verissimus,) optimo iure dicari debet. Ignosce itaque (Reverendissime Praesul) huic meae in dedicando : et dignare etiam (suppliciter oro) hoc meum qualecunque sit opusculum, sub alarum vestrarum umbra protegere. Ego sane iam annosus, et senio con∣fectus, hoc opus non sine magno labore & multis vigilijs concinnatum, ad lucem publicam, (Reverentiae ve∣strae patrocinio fretus,) fidens expono. Mibi quidem, in istiusmodi rhapsodijs conscribendis, coepisse sat est. Nunc, ut alij, longe me eruditiores, ad
gumentum isthoc prosequendum et illustrandum instigentur, vestrum erit. Quod ut usui publico sit, Deum Optimum Maximum precor, per Ie∣sum Christum, ut Authoritatem ve∣stram Ecclesiae tranquillitati quam diutissime servet. Amplitudini vestrae addictissimus, & Reverentiae vestrae servus humillimus, Ephraim Pagitt.
In Europe are 4 Sorts of christians The Protestants Papists Moscouits Greekes These two last agree With the Protestants and are not subiect to the Pope
In Africa are The Cophtie Under the Patriarch of Alexandria And the Abassin christians in Aethiope Under theire Abunna or Patriarch In Asia are the christi∣ans Under the Patriarch of Ierusalem, and Antioch, the Armenians, Georgians, Circassians Christians in Cazan and Astracan ect. Under the Patriarch Mosco. of ASia the lesse, & Under the Patriarch of Musall, The Iacobits, Christians of St Thome Maronites ect
A Relation of the Christians in the WORLD. HAving made a diligent en∣quiry of the estate of the Church of God upon Earth, I doe finde, that it is not confined to any one Country or Nation; nor impaled within any one Bishops Dioces; but truely Catholick or universal, dispersed over the face of the whole Earth. Our blessed Lord and Saviour being ready to ascend into Heaven, com∣manded his Apostles, saying: Goe yee Mat. 28. 19.
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost; And this his Commande∣ment the holy Apostles (being inspired from above) put in execution. They went forth and preached every where, the Lord Mar. 16. 20. working with them. In the Ecclesiasticall Histories the Countries and Nations are named in which, and to whom, they preached. And although some are per∣swaded that those Churches are altoge∣ther perished, or become hereticall; yet according to our Lords promise of As∣sistance (not only to his holy Apostles, viz. I am with you alway but also to their Successors preaching after them even to the Mat. 28. 20. latter end of the world) Christianity in the substantiall and essentiall points of it remayneth in many of these Countries to this day. And truly it is to mee a mat∣ter of great consolation, (in so many changes of this VVorld, and opposi∣tions of wicked men against them that doe professe the Name of our Lord Ie∣sus
Christ) to see the Church of God preserved, and propagated upon the face of the Earth: and not only the Doctrine of Christian Religion but also the ancient Ecclesiasticall Policie and government of Bishops to be main∣ted, The Turks doe not only permit but defend every man in the exer∣cise of his Religion. and defended, (through the pro∣vidence of Almighty God) not only by Christian Princes, but also by Mahume∣tan and Pagan Kings. The world may be di∣vided into the Old, known to the ancients which may be subdivided into Europe, Asia, Africa, The divisi∣on of the World. New, late found out which may bee sub-divi∣ded into America. the North and South un∣known lands.
EVrope hath in Longitude (as some write) from the further part of Ire∣land West, and the River Tanais East, a∣bout 2166 Miles, and in latitude 2220 Miles, or there abouts. Affrica is about twice as large as Europe; and Asia is e∣steemed to be larger than them both. I finde in Europe foure sorts of Chri∣stians: viz. Protestants, Romanists, Muscovites, and Greeks. The Protestants who inhabit the 1 Protestāts England. Scotland. Cambdens Brit. pag. 2. Ireland. Kingdomes of England and Scotland, be∣ing about 1836 miles in compasse, and Ireland conteyning about 400 Miles in length, and 200 in breadth. Gildas writeth, that Britanie received the Faith in the time of Tiberius. Nicephorus, Doro∣theus, and others also write, that the
Ecclesia Occiden∣talis, Reformata in Regnis, Angliae. Scotiae, Hiberniae, Daniae, Norvegiae, Succiae, Transilvaniae. Inhabitant etiam hi Christiani, Pontifi. cijs mixti, Germaniam, Poloniam, Eranciam, Helvetiam, Rhetiam, Hungariam, Bohemiam, Belgiam. Pontificia, in Hispania Italia, Francia. nhabitant etiam hi Christiani, Protestan∣tibus mixti partem Germaniae, Poloniaae, Franciae, Belgiae, Helvetiae, Rhetiae, Hungariae, Bohemiae. Orientalis Graeca, sub Patriarcha Constantinopolitano, Antiocheno, Alexandrino, Hierosolymitano, Moscoviae, Bulgariae, Iberiae seu Georgianorum. Chaldaea, aut Chaldaeis lingua vicina: haec Eccle∣sia dividitur in eam cui imputatur, quod sit Nestoriana sub Patriarcha de Mo∣sul alijs{que} hiChristiani Mahume∣tanis & infidelibus mixti, inhabi∣tant, Babyloniam, Assyriam, Mesopotamiam, Parthiam, Mediam, Catthaiam, Tartariam, Indiam, &c. Monophysitica Armeniorum, Iacobitarum, Coptorum seu Christianorum Aegyptiacorum, Aethiopum seu Abassinorum.
Apostle Simon Zelotes preached in Britanie, and that he was Crucified, & lyeth buried there: some suppose that he came with Ann. Anno. 35. addit. mar. manu. S. quae habetur in Bibliothe∣ca vaticana. Ioseph of Arimathea into Britanie: which Ioseph you may read in Cardinal Baronius his Annals, to have arrived here about the five and thirtieth yeare of our Lord. A∣ristobulus, one of the seventy Disciples, Dorotheus. was one of the first Bishops of Britanie. Some write that the Scots had a Bishop calld Palladius a∣bout the year 196. in the time of Do∣nald, who first of all the Kings of Scotland stamped the Crosse upon his coin, being the badge of Christia∣nity. Merm. de conv. p. 60 Quorum san∣ctâ praedicati∣one rex Lucius & totius Britanniae primates Baptismum susceperunt. Lib. sa. Teilai Ecclesiae landaven. Archiep. The memory of these Arch-Bishops following, (viz.) Of Patrick in Ireland, Palladius in Scotland, and of David in Wales; who Preached the most sweete Name of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ in these Countries before named, will never be forgotten. In St. Peters Church in Cornehill, Lon∣don, remaineth a Monument, declaring that King Lucius founded that Church for a Bishops See, and of a succession of Arch-Bishops there for 400 yeares. El∣vanus sate Arch-Bishop there, by whose preaching, with others, King Lucius had
beene converted: as also Restitutus, a mar∣ried Bishop, who with other British Bi∣shops subscribed the Synode at Arles, Anno 350. Neither is Vodinus, one of the Arch-bishops Arles anno 350. of London, to be left in oblivion, who was murthered for reproving King Vortiger for putting away his wife, and marrying Rowen daughter to Hengist an Infidel. Re∣verend Bede telleth us of many Learned men and Bishops, in Britany before and a∣bout the comming of Austin the Monk: As also of Bishop Aidan and Finan, who are at this day reckoned among the Romish Saints although they would have no Communion with the said Austin. Likewise, Arch-bishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, Bishop Latimer, and others, who restored Religion to the ancient Purity, and sealed their Confession with their Blood, will be had in Ever∣lasting memory. There are now in the King∣domes above named eight Arch-bishops, and about eighty Bishops. The Clergy in these Kingdomes are learned, best provided for, and the most honorable of the refor∣med Churches.
The Bishops are Barons, and sit in their Parliaments: and two of the English Bi∣shops, As there have beene of the Clergy about 160. Lord Chancellours of England, 80 Lord Treasu∣rors, & all the Lord Keepers of the Privy Seale, were ge∣nerally Clergy men. The ma∣sters of Roles were all clergy men untill the 26. year of K. Henry 8. There have bin 12. Clergy-men Lord chief Iu∣stices of Eng∣land. The vi∣ctorious K. Ed∣ward 3. having a great care to advance such persons in the great Offices of his kingdō and houshold, as did excel o∣thers in inno∣cency of life, About the 39. of his raigne, had these cler∣gy mē officers. The Lord Chancellor, the L. Treasurer, the L. Privy Seale, the Mr. of the Roles, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Treasurer of the Houshold, the Mr. of his Jewel house, with many others. Vide Stow, p 266. Moreover in the absence and minority of the Kings, divers Clergy-men have bin Custosses or Vice-royes of the Kingdome. viz. Durham and Eley, have some re∣galities in their Diocesses. In ancient time the Kings of England placed Clergy-men in the greatest Offices of the Kingdome. The Protestants also inhabit the Kingdome of Denmark, with the Balticke Islands, and the great Islands in the Ocean, as Islands part of Freisland. The Kingdome of Norway being in length about 1300. miles, and not halfe so much in breadth. There are in Den∣marke and Norway two Archbishopricks, and foureteene Bishoprickes. These Kingdomes received Christianity from the Apostles or Disciples, as Merman Merm theatrū convers. pag. 83. affirmeth. There were two Danish Bishops in the first Coun∣cell of Nice, viz. Marcus Metropolitanus & Protogenes. The Kingdome of Sweden bigger then France and Italy, in which Kingdome
is one Arch-Bishopricke, and seven Bi∣shopricks. Mirae. de stat. relig. p. 128. Transilva∣nia. The Kingdome of Transilvania in a manner intire. In the Kingdome of Poland (being of no Poland. Brerw. en∣quire pref. lesse space than Spaine and France laid to∣gether) the Protestants in great numbers are diffused through all the quarters thereof; having in every Province their publicke Churches orderly severed, and bounded with Dioces. There are also in Polonia many Greeks, or Russes, who have eight Bishops, whose Metropolitane is the Arch-Bishop of Kiovia. These Bishops are not beggarly, but well provided for, and of good e∣steeme. Isidore, Arch-Bishop of Kiovia, Matth. a Micou. l. 2. before named, went to the Councell of Florence, attended with 100. Horse. There are also many Armenians Chri∣stians, whose Bishop is resident in Leo∣polis. In France the Protestants had at the conference of Poisie 2150 Congregations. France.
In this Christian Kingdome, Philip the Apostle, with many holy Bishops, preached the faith: as Dionysius Disciple of S. Paul, the first Bishop of Paris and Martyrs, La∣zarus Photinus Disciple of Polycarp, and Irenaeus B. of Lions, Hilary B. of Poicteurs, Lazarus was the first Bishop of Masillea. Doroth. in Synop. who tooke great paines to purge France from the Arrian Heresie; Remigius Bishop of Rhemes, who baptized Clodoveus the first Christian King of France. Neither should wee forget Germanus Bishop of Anxer, nor Lupus Bishop of Tros, who Bed. l. 1. c. crossed the Seas to aide the British Bi∣shops against the Pelagians. The Protestants have also the greatest Part of Ger∣many. part of Germany: all the temporall Prin∣ces of note, being of late Protestants, ex∣cept the Dukes of Bavaria and Cleere, and in a manner, all the Free Cities and Hanse Thesaur. Polit. Apot. 6 Townes. The Protestants detain also in their possessions the Archbishopricks of Mirae de stat. Relig. lib. 1. cap. 33. Magdenburgh and Breame, with the Bisho∣pricks unto them belonging. As also the Bishopricks of Verdden, Halberstad, Osna∣burgh,
and Minden. When Magdenburgh Mercat. pa. 134. was converted to the Faith, Albert was there Bishop. Cresceus Disciple of Saint Paul was one of the first Bishops in Ger∣many; and Winibrode an Englishman, com∣monly Theat. con∣vers. pag. 57. called Boniface, is Famous a∣mongst the Archbishops of Ments, whom the Pagans murthered in hope of prey, and found only in his Coffers a few bookes and Relicks. The first Bishop of Wertburgh was Burchard a Britaine: this Bishop is Duke of Franconia, and Lord of part of Vortland. The first Archbishop of Breme was Ausgarius, who converted Erick the third King of Denmarke. Also in these later times, the memory of Doctor Luther, (who caused Reformation in some parts of Germany) is very precious in the Coun∣tries by him reformed. They have also halfe the Netherlands: Parts of the Netherlands there were lately Bishops in these parts, as amongst others, Amandus Bishop of U∣trecht, who converted the Gauntois to the Christian Faith. As also Frederick, Bishop
of the said See, who for reproving Lodo∣wick the Emperour, for keeping Iudith, was put to death, but now in these Coun∣tries, and some others, they have no Bi∣shops: but appropriating the Church-livings to themselues, they give their Ministers Pensions. But I fear, that in this their taking to themselves the Church-livings, set apart by their Fore-fathers for the service of Almighty God, and paying their Ministers pensions, they doe no o∣therwise than a King of Spaine did, who taking very much from the Church, built a Monastery, or two; of whom the Pro∣verbe went, That he had taken a Sheep from Almighty God, and given him again out of it the Trotters. Now what the miserable Ef∣fects are, which follow upon the want of Bishops in those Countries, let the abundance of Heresies, Sects, Schismes, and Religions amongst them, testifie to the world. Also, they have more than halfe Swit∣zerland, Switzer∣land, Grisons. and the Grisons Country, in which
Countries have beene many Bishops. The Protestants also live mingled with the Romanists in Hungarie, Austria, Bohemia, Hungary. Austria. Bohemia. Piemont, and other places. Severinus is accounted the Apostle of Austria. In those Countries have beene many holy Bishops and Doctours, who have shined like Stars in the Firmament, illuminating the Dark∣nesse of the blind World, with the light of their Celestiall Doctrine. The second sort of Christians in Europe, are The Roman Catho∣licks: Romanists. Who inhabit SPain, being in compasse 1893 miles, or Spaine. thereabouts, in times past divided in∣to many Kingdomes; but now united into one. In this great Kingdome, are a∣bout Damianus à Goes, recko∣neth eight Archbi∣shops, and 48 Bishops. eleven Archbishops and many Bishops, men of great Dignity and Estate. Saint Iames is affirmed to be the Apostle of
Spaine, as also Saint Paul: Osius Bishop Eugenius was the first Bishop of Toledo. Damian. à Goes Hispan. pag. 19. Dam. p. 21. of Corduba, (whom Constantine honoured for the marks of Iesus Christ that he bore) and Isidore Bishop of Sivill, are famous for op∣posing the Arrian Hereticks with Ille∣fonsus Archbishop of Toledo, Isidorus Scholer, Fulgentius, and others. The reve∣nues of the Spanish Bishops are very great. As the Archbishop of Toledo hath 250000 Ducats per annum: more than some Kingdomes. Italie, being as some write 900 miles Italie. in length, and in breadth from the Adria∣tick Sea to the Ligurian shoare 240 miles, growing narrower in breadth, untill it shut itselfe into two hornes, either of which are not above 14 miles in bredth. Of this Country the King of Spaine hath a part; as the Kingdome of Naples and the Dutchie of Millaine. In it also, the Venetians; The Duke of Florence, and o∣ther Princes and Common-wealths have severall Dominions. In Italie also resi∣deth the Bishop of Rome, who as hee hath
many Cardinals, Metropolitans, Arch∣bishops, and Bishops under him; so also many temporall Dukedomes and Prin∣cipalities, of which he is absolute Prince and Lord. The Bishops of Rome for the first 300 yeeres, were most of them Martyrs: as Clement who was tied to an Anchor, and cast into the Sea: Fabian, who did prohibit the Emperour Philip to en∣ter the Church without some shew of penitence: Cornelius who was banished, revoked, whipt and beheaded, &c. Paul and Barnabas preached Christ first in Merm. The∣at. Convers. Rome: and afterward, was the first Bishop of Millaine, where Saint Ambrose also sate. France, mingled with Protestants as France. Doroth. in Synop. before, being about 200 leagues square, in which is reckoned, Loraine, Saboie, and Avignion (belonging to the Pope) and Geneva with foure Territories not subiect to the French King. The Church Gallican is best priviledged of all the Churches in Christendome, that are under the Pope. It
is more free from payments to the Pope than the Church of Spaine: as also to the King they pay only the Disme; whereas in Spaine the King hath his Tertias, Subsidio, Pila, Escusado, in all, a moitie of the Church-livings. In France are reckoned 12 Archbisho∣pricks, Relation of the most fa∣mous King∣domes, pag. 174. 104 Bishopricks, 540 Archpriories, 1450 Abbeyes, 12322 Priories, 567 Nun∣neries, 130000 Parish Priests, 700 Con∣vents of Friers, 259 Commendants of the Order of the Knights of Malta: six of the French Bishops are Peeres of France, who Bodin. are to aid the King with their Councell. Poland, mingled with Protestants and Poland. Greeks, as before: there are in Poland two Archbishopricks, and many Bishopricks. The Archbishop of Guesne is Primate, and in the Imper. mūd. Catal. p. 40. vacancy hath regal Authoritie, precedeth in Councell, proclaimeth the new King, &c. Some part of Germany, in which Coun∣try Part of Ger∣many. are reckoned seven Archbishops, and a∣bout 47 Bishops: Three of their Arch∣bishops
are Princes Electours. Halfe the Netherlands in which there Netherlands are two Archbishopricks, and many Bi∣shopricks. One third part of Switzerland, and the Grisons Country, Austria, Hungaria, Bo∣hemia, Switzerland Grisons. and some other Countries, ming∣led with Protestants as before. The third sort of Christians in Europe, are the Moscovites VNder the great Emperour of Mosco∣via, whose Dominions in Europe and Asia: extend from Narve to Siberia, West and East about 4400 Verstes, and from Cola to Astracan, North and South 4226 Fletcher. or thereabouts. A Verst is about three quarters of a mile. They received the Fabr. relig. Moscov. pag. 170. Christian Faith from Saint Andrew the Apo∣stle, as their Histories report. They have the holy Scriptures in their owne tongue
translated by St. Ierome, they use the ser∣vice of St. Chrysostome, translated into the vulgar; neither is their Clergy mean, base or beggarly. The now Emperour Michael honou∣red his father Theodore with the Patriark∣ship of Mosco: their Patriarke, Metropoli∣tanes, Arch-Bishops under him are men of great dignity and honour: what their Clergy want in learning, they have and make good in devotion and holinesse of life. Some of their Bishops have 2000, some 3000 Rubbles per annum. The fourth sort of Christians are the Greekes VNder the Patriarke of Constantinople, Greeks. who live mingled with the Turks, and make two thirds and more of the Inhabitants in many places of the Turkes Dominions.
The Grand Signior alloweth the Chri∣stians Boter. Re∣lat. par. 2. Grand. Tur∣co. the liberty of their Religion, they paying a tribute, and the Bishops their Ecclesiasticall Government. The Patri∣arkship Godin. Curi∣op. pag. 276. of Constantinople being voyd, Sultan Mahumet the Emperour, that subdued Constantinople, invested Gennadius into it with great solemnity, giving to him his Pastorall staffe, and many gifts. This Patriarke had 28 Provinces under his iu∣risdiction: and yet hath at this day ma∣ny Metropolitans, Arch-Bishops, and Bishops under him. Stachis was their Doroth. in Synop. Rom. 16. first Bishop, placed there by St. Andrew, and now Cyril governeth the Patriarchall See, in a continued succession from Sta∣chis before named. In this Church the holy Apostles constituted many Bishops: As St. Paul placed Timothy in Ephesus, Ti∣tus Doroth. in Crete, Silas in Corinth, Silvanus in Thessalonica, with others: As St. Andrew Merman. convers. Theatr. pag. 41. 42. constituted Stachis (before named) Bishop of Bizantium, now called Constantinople: Philologus Bishop in Sinope, Calistus Bishop
in Nice, Polycarp Disciple to St. Iohn, was Bishop of Smyrna. In time following, this Church had many holy Patriarchs, as St. Chrysostome, Gregory, Nazianzen, Paul the Patriarch, (whom the Arrians banished, and strangled) with others, who governed this Church, whose memories shall remaine for ever. The Patriarchs of Constantinople, before the Turkes Conquest, were men of great dignity and estate: as Theophylact about the yeare 936, kept 2000 Horse: and Cedreu. Alexander, An. 1043, died worth 800000 Crownes. The Patriarch now hath (as Chytraeus writeth) about 20000 Dol∣lers De stat. Ec∣cles. pa. 45. He hath yearly from them 500. Scutes. Poss. muscov. p. 1. yearely for his maintenance. He hath also out of Moscovia some pensi∣on, which was in time past under his iu∣risdiction. The Greekes of Corcira, Can∣dy, and other Islands, are subiect to the Venetians, who have Arch-Bishops, and Bishops under them.
In Asia are the Christians 1 VNder the Patriarch of Ierusalem, 1 Ierusalem. who absolutely moderateth in Iudea, and over all professors of the Greek Religion throughout Syria. This Patri∣arch hath had 101 Bishops under him. Tyrr. histor. bells sacri, lib. 14. c. 12. St. Iames (called the Iust and the Brother of our Lord) was the first Bishop there, and now Theophanes sitteth in that See: Simon Cleophas succeeded Iames: among these Bishops Cyrillus was famous, a man greatly hated by the Arrians, and deposed by them. This Church is most ancient: The Law went out of Syon, and the Word of Isay 2. 3. God from Ierusalem. This City was Em∣porium, The mart of the Christian Faith, and the Mother of all Churches, as Theodoret Hist. Eccles. b. 5. cap. 9. saith. 2 Vnder the Patriarch of Antioch, 2 Antioch.
Who had 141 Bishops under him. Their first Bishop was St. Peter, and now Atha∣nasius. Tyrr. histor. bel. sacr. lib. 14. pag. 247. The Disciples were first called Christians there. Ignatius the holy Mar∣tyr was Bishop of this Church, and Cyril, who was slaine for denying Numerian the Emperour, sonne of Charus, to enter his Church, because he had sacrificed to Idolls. Charus was slaine by Thunder, and Numerian by Aper. 3 The Georgians in Iberia, who have 18 3 Georgians. Chyt. de stat. Eccles. p. 22. Bishops under their Metropolitane, or Patri∣arch. 4 The Circassians who inhabite a Coun∣try 4 Circassians. about 500 miles long, and 200 miles broad. 5 The Mengrellians, who live as the 5 Mengrel∣lians. Circassians doe, (by themselves) not min∣gled with the Mahumetans. 6 The Christians in Asia the lesse, who 6 Asia the lesse except, the Cilitians and Isaurians are sub∣iect to the Patriarch of Constantinople. Merman. Theatrum conver. p. 93. These Churches of Asia the lesse St. Iohn governed, and placed Bishops in them.
7 The Christians in the Kingdomes of 7. Christians of Casan & Astracan. Cazan and Astracan, and other Countries in Asia, under the dominion of the Em∣perour of Muscovia, who hath under him, in Europe, and Asia, a greater extent of Land than the Roman Catholicks have in Europe. All the Asiatick Christians before named are of the Greek communion, and observe the Greek rites. 8 The Armenians, under their two 8 Armenians. chiefe Patriarchs: one of these Patriarchs liveth under the Turke, the other under the Persian. In Cardinall 'Baronius Annals, you may read of 1000 Armenian Bishops: Thaddaeus (whom they much esteeme) Annal. Tom. 12. p. 319. Relatio Hist. duae duar. le∣gat. Colon. An. 1611. p. 5. preached the Faith to them: Now I heare the Patriarch of the greater Armenia, to be called Moses. As these Christians live in Armenia the greater and lesser, so also in many Countries and Cities of Asia, Afri∣ca, and Europe. About the yeare 324, Gregory (whom Nicephor. li. 7. cap. 12. they call Illuminator) was Bishop of Arme∣nia, who suffered Martyrdome under Lici∣nius the Emperour.
In the yeare 1609, Abbas, the Persian Herb. relat. Emperour, put to death 1000 of these Christians, upon a Letter fained to bee written from their Patriarch to the Pope of Rome, acknowledging him to be Head of the Church. 9 The Iacobites, who inhabit a great part of Asia, and other places mingled 9 Iacobites. with Mahumetans and Pagans. Their Pa∣triarch Thom à Iesu. convers. l. 7. cap. 14. Zonor, annal Tom. 3. in Heraclio Brer. p. 150. having many Bishops under him keepeth residence in Caramite, the Metro∣polis of Mesopotamia: wee may reade of a Patriarch of the Iacobites, in the time of Heraclius the Emperour. 10 The Chaldean and Assyrian Christi∣ans, Chaldean under the P. of Mozul. with others, under the Patriarch of Mozul, who have many of them their Services in the Syrian Tongue, being the language in which our Lord preached. These Christians inhabite, mingled with Mahumetans and Pagans, a great part of Brerwood. enquire. the Orient; for beside the Countries of Babylon, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Parthia, Me∣dia, &c. wherein many of these Chri∣stians
are found. They are scattered farre and neere in the East, both Northerly in Cathaia, and Southerly in India. Tri∣gautius Hispan. ex∣ped. apud Si∣nab. p. 125. reckoneth 14 Metropolitans, viz. of India, China, Cambaia, Mogor, Hilam, Nzivin, Prath, Assur, Bethgarmi, Halack, Passes, Mauzeor, xam Raziqueor, besides many Archbishops, and Bishops. Cardinall Vitriacus in his History of the East, reporteth, these Christians with the Hist. Orient. c. 77. p. 149. Jacobites, to be more in number then the Latines and Greeks. These Christians were converted by Saint Thomas the Apostle: and in their Service-book they have this Hymne, as Trigantius reporteth. The In∣dians, Hisp. exped. apud Silias, lib. 1. p. 124. the Chinoises, the Persians, and other Islanders, and they that are in Syria, Armenia, Grecia, and Romania, in commemoration of S. Thomas, doe offer prayse to thy holy Name. 11 The Maronites in Mount Libanus, 11. Maronites. who have a Patriarch; and eight or nine Bishops under him. 12 The Indians of Saint Thome, so cal∣led, 12 Indians of St. Thome. because they received the Christian
Faith from Saint Thomas the Apostle. These Christians inhabite many places in the East Indies, as Melia-par (where Saint Thomas was buried, and hath a goodly Temple erected to his name) Angamall (where an Archbishop resideth) Cranganor, Negapatan, Vaipecotan and o∣thers, Trigautius writeth that when the Hisp. exped. apud Sina, lib. 7. p. 125. Portugals arrived at Cochin, that the Lord Iacob ruled the Malabar Church, who sti∣led himselfe Metropolitan of India and Chi∣na, and that Ioseph succeeded him. Io∣sephus Indus borne in Cranganor, in East India also writeth of a great Prelat, to Inter relat. novi. orb. p. 145. whom twelve Cardinals were subiect with two Patriarchs, and many Arch∣bishops and Bishops. 13 The Chinoises possesse a Countrey 13. China. Imp. mund. catal. p. 159 Trigautius. Hisp. exped. apud Sinas, pag. 125. Kirk. pro∣dro. pag. 58. little lesse then all Europe. Saint Thomas preached the Gospel first amongst them, afterwards they had a supply of Preach∣ers from Iudea. K. Tay with Neu huanti, reigning in the yeer 782. They erected a Monument, declaring the bringing in of
the Gospell into China in what Provinces Idem Pat. Eman. Dia in Epist. 23. Aug. 1625. Pa. Francis. vid, Kirk. p. 58. it was promulgated, and how many yeeres it flourished. The Monument is graven with Syrian Letters with these words: Adam sacerdos Presbyter & Papalis Zi∣nostan seu regionis Sinarum: in the mar∣gent of this Monument, there are divers names engraven of them that brought the sweet Name of our Lord Iesus Christ among them, as Constantinus Saba cusio seu Aethiops, Dominus Sergius, &c. Paulus Vene∣tus writeth of a Christian Church in De Region. Orient. lib. 2. cap. 64. the great Citie of Quinsay. I read also of Gaspara a China Bishop. 14 Cathaia is one of the largest Em∣pires 14 Cathaia. upon the face of the whole Earth, in which there be also many Christians.
They write of a Christian King of Ten∣duc, whose native Subiects are Christians: besides he ruleth farre and wide over ma∣ny Provinces, whose inhabitants are also for the most part Christians. To conclude, there is neither speech nor language, but his voice hath beene heard among them. The sound of the Gospell is gone out into all Lands, and the Word of God into the ends of the World.
In Africa are these Christians Africa. following 1 VNder the Patriarch of Alexandria, 1 Alexandria. whose iurisdiction hath been from the River of Nilus, to the Gaditan straits. In the City of Caire only are thought to be 200000 Christians, Saint Marke was their first Bishop, and now Metrophanes governeth and precedeth there, brought up in Oxford, sent hither by Cyrill the then Patriarch to our late Lord Archbi∣shop of Canterbury. In Cardinall Baronious Annalls, you may read of a Succession of Bishops from Saint Marke, to Gabriell, the then Patriarch. There is a service in the Syrian tongue, set forth by Severus Pa∣triarch of Alexandria: also a service in the Cophts Language set forth in print by Kirkerus. The Cophts are the native E∣Egyptians,
and have a Patriarch of their owne. Moreover Demetrius of Thessalonica hath set forth a Service used in Cair, and among the Christians in Arabia. The Holy Bishop Athanasius, who opposed the Ar∣rian World, was sixe and forty yeares Patriarch of Alexandria, with many other Holy Bishops, as among others Poterius Bi∣shop Evagr. li. 2. cap. 8. of Alexandria, who was slaine by the Eutychian Hereticks, haled through the streetes, his body cut in pieces, and his En∣trailes chewed by them. The Patriarchs of Alexandria have beene great Princes, and weare a Crowne: His title is Oecumenick Iudge. So many Holy men lived in this Merman, theat. con∣vers. pa. 30. Church in ancient time, that it was called the Paradise of God. 2 The Abassine Christians, under the Abassines. Emperour of Aethiopia, who inhabit ma∣ny Kingdomes of Affrica: They received the Faith first from Philip, and afterwards Saint Matthew the Apostle preached
among them: they have a Patriarch, or A∣buna, a-man of great esteeme and estate. Their Abuna (when Alvares was in Aethi∣opia) was called Marke, a Reverend old Alvar. sect. 14 pa. 1089. Purch. Man, aged about 110, a man gracious in his speech, never speaking without blessing of God, and giving of Thankes: when hee goeth out of his Tent he rideth upon a Mule, well attended: Their Churches are builded round, adorned with rich hangings and Plate; They have their Service in their owne tongue. Zago Zabo Bugana Raze, that is, The Vice-Roy of Bugana, an Aethi∣opian Damian. à Goes de Ae∣thiop. morib pag. 203. Bishop, was sent Ambassadour from the Aethiopian Emperour, to Iohn King of Portugall, who remained in Europe many yeares; whose Confession of faith is set downe by Damianus a Goes. As also the Aethiopian Rites are set forth in Print by Alvares, a Portugall Priest, who was some yeares Leidger in Aethiopia, sent thither by the King of Portugall. Thomas a Iesuite De convers. omnigent. pa. 373. writeth of a long succession of the A∣bassin Abunas. There is also a succession
of the Christian Abassin Emperours, from Abraham called the Saint, who reigned a∣bout the yeare 427, to Abbas and Clau∣dius their late Emperours: It is reported, Vid Gaulter Iesuit in Chronolog. that the Turke hath subdued much of the Prets Country; yet the Abassine Religion may continue, which the Turke taketh not from any. 3 The Christians also inhabit the King∣dome 3 Cephala. Cosmograp. fol. 99. of Cephala. Thevet writeth that they received the faith by the preaching of the Abassines. 4. Moreover the Matacasian King∣dome 4 Matacassiās Thevet. ib. received Christianity by the means of the King of Cephala. The Matacasian King placed over his Churches eight Bishops, and over them a Primate, or Patriarch, whom they call Elchadie, or Ismael. In time past Christianity flourished 5 North-west of Africa. in the North-west part of Africa. Wee read of Synods there of above 200 Bi∣shops, and in one Province called Zingitana, (where Carthage stood) of 164 Bishops
to bee under one Metropolitane. When these Churches flourished, they opposed the iurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome over them, as appeareth by writings of St. Cyprian, St. Augustine, the sixt Coun∣cell of Carthage, and by a Synod at Mele∣vis, in both which the African Fathers forbad appeales to Rome. In the North-west parts of Africa doe remaine onely now two Bishopriks: (viz) Septa and Tanger: And whereas in Barbary, Algier, and other places, there are many thou∣sands of Christians in Captivity, they are allowed by their Patrons, the Moores, the liberty of their Religion: and the learnedest or eldest, is to the rest in stead of a Priest. 6 Beside the subiects of Prester Iohn, very many people of the neighbour Kingdomes, mixed with Mahumetans, and Heathen people doe professe the Religion, Miraeus de stat. Relig. lib. 3. p. 196. and Rites of the Abassin Christians, as Mi∣raeus affirmeth. 7 In Congo, called by some Manicongo,
there are, or have beene some Christians. Idem ibid. Miraeus reokoneth up a succession of nine Christian Kings in that King∣dome. 8 In Monomopata there have bin some Monomopa∣ta. Christians: and they have had a King baptized. 9. In the Isle of Zocotora there are some Zocorara. Herbert. re∣lat. Christians, who have also a Protomist, or Bishop over them. 10 The Portugals and Spaniards inhabit certaine Townes and Forts in Africa, as also the English and Hollanders reside in some places of Africa. Miraeus setteth downe Alphabetically the Bishopricks of Africa, and reckoneth a∣bout 430; but howsoever many of the Bishopricks are not, but ruinated and dis∣solved; yet the Fame of the Sanctity, and learning of their Holy Bishops heretofore, shall continue for ever: As of St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage: St. Austin Bishop of Hippo: Aurelius Bishop of Carthage: Atha∣nasius Patriarch of Alexandria; Origen,
Tertullian, Arnobius, and others, who governed the Church of God after a most singular manner, and having finished their course, rest with God in Heaven. But by the way, to adde a word or two, for the better understanding of this my Relation: VVhereas you have heard of many Bishops in Europe, Asia, and Africa, it will not be impertinent to set downe what manner of men these Bishops in the Primative Church were: for some sup∣pose Bishops and Elders to be all one, (which was the Herefie of Aerius) and that they lived meanly upon Almes and Stipends. For the first, the Office of a Bishop is set downe by St. Paul, Titus the 1. and 5. For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou shouldst set in order things that are wanting, and ordaine Elders in every City. Here we see Elders, or Pastors to be in every City: But Titus, the Bishop, had the charge to order, and ordaine Elders for the whole
Island, in which wee reade 100 Cities to have been, besides Townes: Titus was their first Bishop, and there is now an Archbishop residing there, who hath Bi∣shops under him. For the second, whereas some suppose that Bishops then lived upon almes or stipends, heare what Saint Augustine hath left written of his little Bishopricke of Epist. 225. Bishop of Hippo, anno 395. Hippo, in Africa. (Saint Augustine was a Pa∣tricians sonne, and had a faire estate from his Father:) I (saith hee) went not from Riches, but to Riches: my fathers estate left mee, was not the twentieth part in comparison of the Farms & other Estates which I was Lord of by being Bishop of Hippo. In the 60 Epistle of Saint Cyprian, Cyp Ep. 60. Bishop of Carthag. an. 250. you may perceive the estate of the Church of Carthage, of which place hee was Bishop. Also Eusebius setteth downe Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 42. Cornel Bi∣shop of Rome, anno 252. the condition of the Church of Rome, under Cornelius the Bishop and Martyr: who had under him 155 Clergie men, besides a multitude of Widdows and Poor,
who were abundantly relieved, and lest any man should thinke this to be done penuriously. The said Cornelius, writeth to Fabian Bishop of Antioch, that so great a multitude were by the Providence of God made rich, and abounding in all plenteousnesse. In ancient time the Church Goods were divided into foure Reade Do. Saravia, lib. 2. of honour due to Pre∣lates, c. 12. parts, one to the Bishop for the maynte∣nance of his Dignity and State, the se∣cond to the inferiour Clergy, the third to the poore, and the fourth for building, repayring and adorning of the Church, and other uses. But whereas, some think, the chiefe points of Reformation to be put downe Bishops, and to ceaze upon Church-livings, and to put their Ministers to stipends. I suppose it to be a great plague laid upon a Church, to make their Ministers Stipenda∣ries: and so to depend upon the benevo∣lences of their people, it being the curse of God denounced upon the Priests of the Posteritie of Elie, to bow for a piece
of silver, and to crowch for a morsell of bread: For the miserable condition of 1 Sam. 2. 36. Stipendarie Ministers, reade Doctour Sara∣via, Lib. Honour due to Pre∣lats, c. 32. who setteth downe the poornesse of their Stipends, as also the difficulty of attaining those little Pittances allotted to them, viz. that oft the Ministers are compelled to travell no small iourneyes to their Pay Masters, in most humble manner (as if it were begging their Sti∣pends) and yet many times sent away with empty Purses, and laden with reproachfull words, and this not only by the Treasu∣rers, but all by men of base condition, as Shoomakers, Taylors, Curriers, &c. who are ready to reproach their poore Mini∣sters, saying, You are our servants, wee pay you your wages: he reporteth also that he heard some of their Burgomasters say, Wee must take heed to these our Ministers, espe∣cially, that their Stipends be not so great: they that too much pamper their servants, shall finde them stubborn and contumacious. The greatest of the Primative Persecu∣tours,
is affirmed, to be Iulian the Empe∣rour: Lord Coke 2 part of his Reports. Who although hee set forth no Man∣date to put Christians to death; yet hee endea∣voured by subtile meanes to undoe Christian Religion: forbidding Christian Schools, and the use of Learning, debarring them from all offices of government, and burthening them with hea∣vie taxes and payments: he robbed the Church, and spoyled Spirituall Persons of their Re∣venues, and tooke away their mayntenance: Whereas other Tyrants persecuted Presbyterors: the Presbyters, or Ministers Iu∣lian persecuted Praesbyterium, the whole Order of Ministers, or Priesthood: by which meanes none would apply themselves to the studie of Divinitie, when after long, painfull, and costly study, they should have nothing to live upon. Such Reforma∣tions before-named, may rather be called Persecutions than Reformations of a Church. Is this a Reformation, to dispoyle their Bishps of their Livings, which they en∣ioyed from the very beginning of Chri∣stianity amongst them, and to root out
the very name of Bishops from among them. Is this a Reformation to appropriate to themselves, or convert to prophane uses the Livings of their learned Pastors, set a∣part by their fore-fathers for their maintenance, and put them to poure Stipends, and oft pay them as the Souldiers are paid in some places with Flemmish cheese? Is this a Reformation to pilfer and pill Churches of their Plate and rich Ornaments, which many a devout Saint had offered to the service of Almightie God, and to convert them to profane uses, which the very Goths and Vandals durst not touch (no not in their Enemies Churches) for feare of Gods heavy indignation upon them? Is it a Reformation to pluck down Chur∣ches, built to the honour of God with great labour and cost? (I have heard one tell me, that he saw the great Church at Redding, overthrowne with a Myne) God be mercifull to us, and deliver all them that beare the name of Christ from
such Reformations. But whom should I exclaime upon for this exercrable wic∣kednesse: upon the Reformers, God for∣bid? they I hope, had no such intent, or upon the Ministers who had delivered their Magistrates from their slavery to the Pope: alas, by this meanes they were brought to misery and slavery. But upon some covetous persons, men void of all Religion, who under colour of Religion and Pietie, ioyning with the Reformers, made a prey of the Church, and brought it to this misery. How can these men expect an inheri∣tance with Christ in Heaven, who have defrau∣ded him here in earth? But what do I tel∣ling them of Heaven. If Almighty God did punish Ananias and Saphyra with sud∣daine death, who gave much to the Church, and kept back only some part de∣dicated to God, and that of their owne: how shall these men stand in iudgement that never gave any thing of their owne, but have seized upon those livings, which
not they, but their Pious Forefathers, with many Execrations had given and dedica∣ted for the Service of Almightie God. In this their execrable dealing, they have given great offence, not only to the Romanists, but to them who are di∣spleased with the Roman Superstitions and Doctrines, and would willingly make a separation from them: but they see in these Reformations, not a secession from their enormities, but rather a defe∣ction from all Antiquitie. In my poore opinion, to overthrow the Policie and Government instituted by Christ in his Church, and continued to this our age, and used in all Churches else, cannot be a Reformation, but rather a Deformation. All this I write not that I blame that which is reformed, but for the amendment of that which is defor∣med, which Almighty God grant in his good time. Queene Elizabeth of blessed memory, was wont to say, That it is in a manner all one to have no Clergie at all, as a beggerly or base one.
In America. THere are some Christians, both Ro∣man Catholicks, and Protestants. The King of Spaine is said to have in America foure Regions, or at least the Maritine parts of the said Regions. The Regions are New Spaine, Castella, Neuva, Peru, and Brasile. The Hollanders have surprised a great part of Brasile. Some write that the Indians had some knowledge of Christ before the Spani∣ards arriued there. For the Estate of Religion in West In∣dia, under the Spaniard, most of the In∣habitants Breew. p. 20. of the Inland Countries, and wilder parts, continue in their Paga∣nisme. Thomas a Iesu writeth. Although De convers. omni Gent. lib. 1. pag. 4. (saith he) the Indians have long enioyed the
Husbandry of Ministers, so that all are bap∣tized, yet very many of them worship Idols, who taking offence at the covetousnesse of their Parish Priests, blaspheme the Christian Faith. In America also are divers Plantations of Protestants, English and Dutch, not one∣ly in the Ilands, but also in the continent. And thus much I have related of the Christi∣ans in the World: but whereas many places of the World are unknowne to us, so also are the sheepe of our great Shepheard, who cannot all be counted, wee being ignorant of the Pa∣stures in which they feed. The Spaniards have in West India some Bishops. 2 What manner of Christians. AS I have in the first place reckoned up these severall sorts of Christians before named. So in the Second place my purpose is to set downe what manner of
Christians these be, both for soundnesse of Faith, and holinesse of life: For the first, these Christians are all Baptized in the Name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. They receive the Holy Eu∣charist in both kinds; according to our Lord and Saviours institution. They Believe the Creed, retaine the Canonical Scriptures; yea, from some of these Chur∣ches, both we, and the Roman Catholicks, have received the Sacraments, and holy Scriptures. Seeing then that these Christi∣ans use the same Sacraments as wee doe: Seeing they believe in Iesus Christ, and pro∣fesse to fight under the Banner of Christ Cru∣cified, and reioyce in their suffering for his sake: farre be it from us ever to thinke these Christians to bee cast away and reiected from being of the houshold of Faith. Of these Christians Brocard the Monke testifieth. Moreover, those whom wee iudge to be damned Hereticks, as the Nestorians, Iacobits, Maronites, and Georgians, and
such like are found to bee, for the most part, honest and simple men, living up∣rightly Terr. Sanct. descrip. pag. 325. towards God and Man. But to answer some particular obiections made by some Roman Catholicke against these Churches. And first for the Greeke Christians, Greeks. whom some Roman Catholicks account erronious in their opinion concerning the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, whom they affirme to proceed from the Father by the Sonne. Now they doe acknowledge the Holy Ghost to be the Spirit of the Sonne, as well as of the Father; because the Apostle saith, He is the Spirit of the Sonne: and in the Gal. 4. John. 16. Gospell he is called the Spirit of Truth. Now seeing it is no other thing to be the Spirit of the Father and the Sonne, then to proceede from the Father and the Sonne. They agree with us in Iudgement, though they differ in Words, so saith Lombard, Thomas a Iesu, and also Cardinall Tolet af∣firmeth, the understanding Greeke (saying In Ioan. Cap. 15. not 25. That the Holy Ghost proceedeth by the Sonne)
signifieth thereby nothing but that which wee our selves professe. But for full satisfacti∣on in this poynt, Read the Booke lately set forth by the most reverend Father in God, the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury Pag. 24. 25. his Grace, (my Honourable Patron) in which it will appeare: The Greekes to differ from us in forme of Words onely: So the Greekes deny not the Holy Ghost, whom they acknowledge to be the third Per∣son in Trinity, God equall with the Fa∣ther: Neither are they Hereticall in this poynt, as some affirme them to be: so Condemning and casting into Hell so many Millions of Christian soules, redeemed with the precious blood of his dearest Sonne Iesus Christ, and for this poynt onely: Moreover Guido the Carmelite, Prateolus, and others, im∣pute unto the Grecians divers errors, which Lucianus of Cyprus, a Bishop, a learned Dominican, and a worthy man (as Possevine the lesuite accounteth him) sheweth to be falsely ascribed to them. Possevine biblioth. li. 6. cap. 1.
As that they teach, simple Fornication to be no sinne, That it is no sinne to lend upon Vsury: That it is not necessary to make restitution of things uniustly taken away, with other things being meere slanders. Thomas a Iesu writeth, that one of the principall Convers. omn. Gent. l. 7. par. 1 c. 33 things that maketh the Grecians so averse from the Latins is, that they are wronged by them by untrue reports, and slande∣rous imputations. Of the Greeke Com∣munion are the Muscovites, the Russes in Poland, the Georgians, Circassians, Mengrel∣lians, and Melchites, all these observe the Greek Rites. 2 Againe, a great part of the Christians in Asia, Persia, Tartaria, and other Provinces are Hereticks; Who affirme, That there were two Persons in Christ, as well as two Na∣mes: But this Errour they have reiected, as Onuphrius writeth, they hold nothing In vita Iulij 3. p. 389. E∣dit. Col. 1626. savouring of that Errour. These Chri∣stians, indeed, make a scruple of calling the blessed Virgin the Mother of God, left they
should seeme to make her the Mother of the ho∣ly Trinitie and divine Essence. 3 The Christians in Aegypt, Aethiopia, with the Iacobites in Syria, are accused to be infected with the Heresie of Eutyches, wheras they curse Eutyches for an Heretick, for confounding the two Natures of Christ. They affirme, The two Natures in Christ to be so united, that there is one personated Nature arising of two Natures, not personated without mixtion or confusion. As Thomas a Iesu, and others affirme. 4 They scandall also the Abassine Christians for using Circumcision: If you be circumcised, you are falne from Grace, and Christ profiteth you nothing; whereas they circumcise not for any Religion; but only it being an ancient custome of the Ae∣thiopians. They accuse them also of Ana∣baptisme, For that they wash themselves yearly in the flouds, in memoriall of Christs Baptisme: As the Spaniards do year∣ly in memoriall of Saint Iohn Baptist:
And the like are the imputations laid upon other Churches. To conclude this point, through the mercifull goodnesse of God, all these different sorts of Chri∣stians (by reason of delivering certaine points of Faith, mistaking one another; or variety of opinion touching things not Fundamentall; yet) agree in one substance of Faith: and are so farre forth Orthodoxe, that they retain a saving Profession of all duties absolutely necessary to salvation, and are members of the true Catholike Church of God. As these Christians are Or∣thodoxe in the mayne: so for their holy lives and conversations they are to be ad∣mired, and may be exemplary unto others.
Holinesse of Lives. FIrst, for their Reverence in Churches, no man is allowed to walke, talke, or sit Reverence in Chur∣ches. Godig. de A∣bas. rebus pag. 133. in them, especially, in the time of Divine Service. In Aethiopia, old men are allowed to use Crutches in the Church, and weak men to leane against the wals. Iohannes Faber reporteth of the Rasses, that he hath Religio Moscov. pag. 188. not seene the like of them, for their fre∣quenting Prayer, and devotion in their Prayers; who lying prostrate upon the ground, poure out their devout Prayers unto Almighty God. For their Chastitie, they permit no Chastitie. Stews, nor Brothel-houses among them. They punish Adultery with death. The Adulterer (among the Aethiopians) is ac∣counted to dishonour the Emperour from whom all Honour is derived: A∣dulterers
among them are cast alive unto the Lions. They are (among other vertues) great In Epist. apud Fra. Hesse in itinerario. Godig. lib. 1. cap. 16. lovers of Truth. Among us (saith Pre∣tegian) if any man willingly tell a lye, hee is accounted a man worthy of death: for the first he is admonished; for the second he doth pe∣nance; for the third he is led by a rope a∣bout his necke, out of the Towne or City, and banished into some Desart, where commonly he perish for hunger. For their Fasts, they keepe them very strictly, farre unlike the Roman Catholicks in the West, who allow men to drink Wine and to eate sweete Meates in their very fasts. Thomas a Iesu writeth, that De convers. omn. Gent. p. 284. the austere living of the Greekes, causeth them to contemne the Latines: but let the Greekes know (saith he) that Christian Righteousnesse doth not consist chiefely in ma∣cerating the Body; but in Charity, Faith, Hope, and other vertues. Although these Christians are not so learned as we sup∣pose the Christians in the VVest to be;
yet they got farre beyond them for god∣linesse and devotion. And if these Christians shall bee excluded Heaven, who ioyne believing and doing, Faith and VVorkes together: alas! where shall they appeare that come farre short of them? But as you have heard of the great multitude of Christians in the VVorld; of their Religion, holy Lives, and Conversati∣ons: wee may in the next place consider what hath beene the bane of the Church, Bane of the Church. (viz) Ambition; which was the ruine of the Angels in Heaven, and caused man to lose Paradise: Of this our Lord gave speciall warning to his Apostles, when they strove who should bee grea∣test. And St. Paul, more especially to Rom. 11. the Romans: Boast not thy selfe against the Branches: Be not high minded, but feare. A great Controversie arose among the Bishops in the west parts of the VVorld who should bee greatest. The Bishop of Rome sitting in the Imperiall
City, claimed superiority above his fel∣low Bishops, precending a Canon of the Counsell of Nice: As also the donation of Constantine the Emperour. Likewise the Patriarch of Constantinople (the Empe∣rours Court being removed thither) claimed the like preheminence, by the Decree of a Councell, also by Donation 4 Gener. coun. at Calce∣don. can. 9. ibi. termi∣nentur. of Maurice the Emperour. Indeed the Easterne Church may challenge to her selfe some preheminence, in regard of her great priviledges and prerogatives, as having all the Apostles Sees, the greatest number of Patriarchs, being the bigger Church, and more ancient. The Maiesty of the Emperour of Con∣stantinople for above 1000 yeares, which hath with stood Paganisme, and Mahu∣matisme: And of the Emperour of Moscho, and Trebizond, for some hundred of years. The authority of seven generall Counsels held among them. The Syrian Language, in which the Sonne of God delivered his Holy Oracles: the Hebrew
and Greek Tongues, in which they were Registred: and which hath had not on∣ly the Holy Apostles, but also Christ himself, when he was in his flesh, preaching among them. And this Church we are forced to confesse (with the Bishop of Bitonto) to be our Mother Church, from whom the Latine Church hath received the Holy Scriptures, the Creedes, the Sacraments, and Christianity it selfe; as the very names of Baptisme, Eucharist, Bishop, Deacon, Presbyter, and many other sacred things doe testifie, Moreover, they have (as they affirme) St. Peters Chaire, who was Bishop of An∣tioch, Allegations of the Patri∣arch of An∣tioch, & Ger∣manus Pa∣triarch of Constanti∣nople, ex∣communi∣cating the Pope. Math. Paris. p. 465 and governed that Church many a yeare: Hee was there Incathedrated, with great reverence received and estee∣med: But going to Rome, he was there most vily used, and put to a most cruell death, with his fellow Apostle St. Paul. They also affirme that the City of Anti∣och (commonly called Theopolis, that is, The City of God) must needs be much
dearer to St. Peter, which honoured and reverenced him, than the City of Rome, which most unworthily used him, and put him to death. They moreover affirm, that he must rather leave the Keyes to the Greek Church, than to the Romish, de∣filed with Simony, Vsury, Avarice, and all other Vices whatsoever. The Greekes also charge the Latines with divers errours besides the challenging of the Supremacy, which they hold to be most grievous and intollerable: to teach all, & to be taught of none, and Dictator-like to give Lawes to bind other Churches, yea, in things against their Consciences, as is their Doctrine of Purgatory, of Image-Worship, abusing their Fasts, making no conscience to drink in them al day long: that they scarce reade the Sacred rules, Irenaus Ro∣doginus. pag. 18. and holy Scriptures; (saying) That the Popes Commandements, who for the time sitteth in the See of Rome, are their Canons and Lawes. That they make no account of Per∣iury,
yea that the Pope freeth them of idem ibidem all Periury, whensoever they intend to breake any bargaine or covenant made with any man. That the Pope and his Priestly traine remit slaughter, Periury, and all kind of crimes past, or to come; by which remis∣sion there is a gate opened to villany: And that which is most ridiculous, for the future time, they will remit to a de∣termined time of Moneths or Years, that the Latine Bishops are accessary to the death of Christian people, the Pope especially, who pronounceth the killer of Christians, such as resist the Papacy, blessed and happy. That they shut up by their Lawes all Priests and Deacons from marri∣age, and hold it an abhomination to receive the Sacrament from married Priests. That there are many Church Men among them, that commit whoredome, Idem. p. 23. and all kinde of uncleannesse most se∣curely,
without punishment. They accuse the Latines of many more Errors, both in their Doctrine, as also in their manners; some of which you may finde in Cardinall Baronius Annalls. Tome 11 Anno Christi 1054. with some Iren. Rodog. pag. 30. answers to them by the Cardinal. But this Church God hath humbled, being sub∣dued by the Mahumetans, living as the Is∣raelites in their Aegypticke Bondage. We may see their lamentable estate in the late Martyrdome of learned Cyril, late Patriarch of Constantinople, who had long and wisely governed that Church. And it seemeth that this his Crowne of Mar∣tyrdome was not to him unexpected: as appeareth by a clause of a letter, written by him to our late Lord Arch-bishop of Canterbury, viz. For the Name of Christ (saith he) which we professe, and whose marks wee beare about in our Bodies, it is
a ioy to us to be afflicted and vexed. so also if it bee the Will of God, to abide the utmost extremity of their cruelty; that in the fiery tryall our Faith may shine more bright, and God receive the greater glory. This Church hath beene humbled (as before) but the Bishops of Rome have exalted themselves, not onely above their follow Bishops, but also above their Lords the Emperours, and the whole Church of God. For the First, Pope Boniface the third having obtained of Phocas the Tyrant, Anno. 606. the glorious Title of Universall Bishop, by little and little the Bishops of Rome, subdued divers Bishopricks under them. As Donus the first subiected Ravenna, a∣bout the yeare 676. Pope Stephen the ninth subdued Millaine, Anno 1057. and so others. Yea Urban the 2. exacted an oath of Bishops, for the further establi∣shing
of their Authority. For the Second, Leo Isaurus being per∣plexed with warre in Asia, and Constan∣tinople it selfe being besieged by the Ca∣liph, Pope Gregory the second stirred up the Princes of Italy against the said Em∣perour, who tooke Italy from him; of which the Pope hath a part, now cal∣led St. Peters Patrimony, which the Em∣perour could never againe recover: The Bishops of Rome dividing the Empire into the East and West, Pope Leo the third proclaimed Charles of France Emperour, about the yeare 881. And Pope Iohn the thir∣teenth, translated the Empire about the yeare 968, from the French to the Ger∣mans. Thus by little and little the Em∣perours waxed weaker, and the Popes stronger, untill the time of Grego∣ry the seventh, who founded (as Aven∣tine writeth) the Pontificall Empire. To this Annal. li. 5. a. 447. In vit. Greg. 7. Man (saith Onuphrius) the Church of Rome is beholding for her freedome, and that shee
is preferred above all Kings and Emperours, whom before they obeyed as their Lords, ac∣knowledging themselves to bee their Vassalls; as manifestly appeareth among other Records, by the Dating of their ancient Bulls and Charters, thus expressed: Such a one, our Lord and Emperour reigning. As also by the Letters of the Bishops of Rome, Guichard. lib. 4. written to the Emperours; as of Pope Leo the first to Martian: By all meanes wee are to bee obedient to your Piety, and most Religious Will: As also of Gregory the great Epist. 59. to Maurice the Emperour: I being subiect to your command; and of divers others, as of Liberius to Constantius: Leo the first to The∣odosius: Simplicius to Zeno: Foelix to the same Emperour: Pope Anastatius to Ana∣statius Epist. 6. the Emperour: Martin to Constan∣tine, with many more. And some of the Epist. 3. In sexta Synod. Con∣stant. act. 4. Epist. 1. Bishops shew a reason of this their Obe∣dience to be, because they are commanded so to doe in Holy Scripture: St. Peter him∣selfe commanding Obedience to the King, as 1. Pet. 2. 13. To the K. as unto the su∣periour. supreame.
Thus they were for many hundred yeares subiect to the Emperours: but now they claime a superiority above Kings and Princes, and challenge to themselves plenitude of Iurisdiction, to take away, and to give Empires and Kingdoms at their pleasures, bringing the Emperours in subiection. Pope Constantine gave his Feet to kisse to Iustinian the Emperour. Gregory the seventh compelled Henry the fourth to wait bare-footed at his Doore three daies and three nights, craving Absolution. Alexander the third set his feete upon the Empe∣rour Fredericks neck. And as they have lift up themselves over their fellow Bishops, and their Lords the Emperours, so also over the whole Church of God, (viz.) Above Generall Councells: A Generall Councell is the repre∣sentative Church of God upon Earth: they claiming power to iudge & controule all men, her selfe to be iudged of none: yea, to make new Articles of Faith. And as the Donatists falling from the unity of
the Church, fell also into this Hereticall Opinion, That the Catholicke Church of God was no where to be found, but in a corner of Africa, where they dwelt, and amongst them. So the Romanists affirme the Catholick Church of God to be onely in Rome, and in the Countries subiect to their Bishop. And therefore they tearme themselves Catho∣licks, excluding all other Christians in the World out of the Catholike Church, and so Heaven, and putting them into the state of damnation, (though never so Orthodox and Pious) for not being sub∣iect to their Bishop onely. Yet many of these Christians, by them so damned; suffer grievous persecutions for Iesus Christs sake; which they might quit themselves of, if they would renounce their Saviour; and also attaine great pri∣viledges and preferments. And that which is more, some of these Churches so damned, and condemned by them, never heard of the Bishop of Rome. Postel writeth a Booke of the great multitude of Comp. Cos∣mog.
Christians unknowne to the Latine World. Before, the Papacy of Iulius the third (writeth Miraeus) the name of the Chaldean Patri∣arch Miraeus de stat. relig. l. 2. cap. 5. was unknowne to us: Neither doe I find any mention of him in the Popes Records. And yet Cardinall Amuleius reporteth, Narratio Card. Amu∣lei. ad Con-Trident. pa. 195. acta conc. Tridēt. That hee and his Bishops had long kept the Faith, and also many of them had suffered Martyrdome for Christs Name. Also the Indian Christians of Taprobane, and the Islands adiacent (saith Thevet) nor their Cosm. lib. 12 cap. 2. fo. 421 Fathers never heard of the Pope of Rome, nor his Cardinals, nor of the Greek Patri∣archs, nor of the Councells, untill the Portu∣gals came among them; and yet they kept the Ceremonies of the Primative Church, which they received from the Apostles, and their Disciples. God forbid that all these Christians, and especially they that have given their Bloods for Iesus Christs Name, and glo∣ry in his Crosse, should be excluded for having any share, or benefit by Christs Blood; and this for not being subiect
to the Pope of Rome, and for not being members of the Roman Catholicke Church, which they never heard of. By this their uncharitablenesse, doe not the Romish Catholicks cut themselves off from the unity of the Catholicke Church: As Firmilian writeth to St. Cypri∣an, of Pope Stephen Excommunicating o∣ther Cypr. Ep. 75. p. 204. Churches. Thou hast cut off thy selfe from the unity of the Churches: Deceive not thy selfe; he is a true Schismaticke that maketh himselfe A∣postate from the Communion and Union of the Churches: Thou thinkest they are divided from thee, but thou onely art separated from them. As the Church of Rome hath exalted her selfe above all other Churches, so also the Roman Catholicks are accused for devising, and adding some new Articles of Faith to the old ones, much advancing the state and profit of their Clergy which the other Christians will not, nor dare admit of, having received onely twelve from the holy Apostles.
As first, they have made the Popes Supremacy (before named) an Article of the Faith, (viz.) That their Bishop is head Exttra. de ma∣jor & obedi∣ent. cap. unam sanctam. of the whole Church of God; and that every soule must be subiect to him upon necessity of salvation. Secondly, Gregory the great the 62. Pope of Rome writeth that none of his Predecessors tooke that name upon them. That their Bishop cannot erre in Cathedra. Thirdly, That their Bishops hath power to depose Kings, and to dispose of their Kingdomes. Fourthly, For the honour of the inferiour Clergy, they have made Transubstantiation a The word Transubstan∣tiation is not in our ancient writers, found first in Hoven∣den. p. 304. who lived a∣bout the yeare 1204. Biel Canon missa. Doctrine of Faith, by which every Priest hath superlative power given him. As a Re∣verend Bishop writeth (viz.) To doe a greater worke daily than God did in the Crea∣tion: For therein Almighty God made but Creatures: But in this the Priest (as they say) can make his Maker. Fiftly, for the more honour of the Clergy, They allow them, the onely use of Christs Blood in the Eucharist, prohibiting the Laity the use thereof: VVhich all the
Christians in the Vniverse enioy, but onely the Romish Catholick Laitie, and for this they have made a Decree flat against Christs institution. viz. Although the Lord Christ in his last Supper did deliver this venerable Sacrament in both kinds, &c. Yet, non obstante, they doe ap∣proue and decree for a Law, the custome of re∣ceiving in one kind. Againe, for the better Maintenance of their Clergy, they have invented new devises; as Purgatory, with the hor∣rible paines thereof, as with Burnings, Boylings, and Roasting of soules; they doe so fright simple people, that they get much mony from them. Of this place the Bishop of Rome hath iurisdiction (the other Orthodox Patriarchs having nothing to doe with it) commanding out whom he will: much Treasure is got hereby. 2 Pardons, which are grounded upon Purgatory. Pardons began (saith Fisher, Bi∣shop of Rochester) when men were frigh∣ted with Purgatory.
3 The inferiour Clergy doth also share with the Pope in the profits of Purgatory; for they have turnd the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist into a Sacri∣fice, true, reall, and propitiatory, under the name of Masse, in which they doe say, that the Priest doth truely and really of∣fer up Christ to God his Father: but this is done by way of bargaine and hire, for remission of sins, and freedome of soules out of Purgatory. And of this they make great profit. 4 They have made a Canon for the These Saints we had in England. Worshiping of Images,; and for this cause they have in every Church an Image or more of some of their Saints; many of Inquire for St. Radegonds Chappell in the Temple London. The barren women were wont to knocke at one of the Knights Templat chā∣ber doores, by whom she was brought to the Saint for helpe. St. Bartilmew was Purveior to St. Thomas Becket: they that would have a male-childe, offered to him a Cock; they that would have a Female offered a Hen, Vid. Lamber. peramb. page. 511. which, simple people, and especially foolish women, are made to beleeve, to have some speciall vertue to helpe, as St. Radegond can make barren women fruitfull. St. Bartilmew can make women
to conceive a Male-child or a Female, according to their desires. St. Margart Enquire for St. Uncomber in St. Pauls Church in Lon∣don. To this Saint they of∣fered Oates. Shrined at Wilton. can give them easie labour. St. Uncomber can make peace betweene married folk. St. Edith can keepe corne from blasting. And to these Saints simple people did trot with rich Offerings, and Worship these Saints with kneeling, bowing, and praying be∣fore Adoration of Images not u∣sed in England many 100 of yeares after Christ. Alc∣wine writ a Booke against it subscribed by our Bishops and Princes. Read Roger Hovenden, Si∣mon of Dur∣ham. Flores His∣storiarum. His∣tor. of Roche∣ster. them: yea, the Priests carry them a∣bout in Procession with great pomp, play∣ing at noddy with the simplicity of the people. 5 They have also devised a Treasury, in which is reserved the surplussage of the Sufferings of Christ, & of the Saints. Whereas (say they) the least drop of Christs Blood had beene sufficient to have saved all the World. And that Christ shed all his blood; and also that many holy men suffered more than their sins deserved: least their sufferings should be in vaine, they are reserved in this Treasury for the Pope to bestow where he list. The other Orthodox Christian Patri∣archs
having nothing to doe with this Treasurie. With this, and such like de∣vises they get much money from simple and silly people. For the confirmation of these things, although they have no Scriptures, yet they will store you with multitudes of Miracles and Visions. These, with some other the Church of Rome hath Canomzed for Articles, or Doc∣trines of Faith: as if the Apostles Creed should be defective, which the other Christians in the world thinke to bee compleate enough. About these Additions is the contesta∣tion betweene the Roman Catholicks, and the other Christians of the world. These are urged by the Romanists under their Popes curse; and these additions are reiected by others fearing Gods curse, being Articles not left by the holy A∣postles, nor found in holy Scriptures: The societies of Christians before named (excepting the Romanists) doe all gene∣generally
(as I find) deny the Popes Supremacy, viz. First, That every soule must bee sub∣iect to him upon necessity of salva∣tion. Secondly, they affirme the Roman Bi∣shops to be subiect to Error, as other Bi∣shops are. Thirdly, they deny that he hath power to depose Kings, and to dispose of their Kingdomes. Fourthly, they teach not works of Su∣pererogation. Fiftly, they admit not of Purgatory. Sixtly, nor pray for deliverances of soules, from any temporall punishment after this life. Seventhly, they reiect the Romish Doc∣trine of Pardons and Indulgences. Eightly, they allow not private Masses. Ninthly, they administer the Commu∣nion in both kinds, daring not to keep the Cup, the symbol of our Lord Iesus Christs Blood from the Laity.
Tenthly, they believe not the Romish Transubstantiation. Eleventhly, nor the now reall sacrificing of our Lord Iesus Christ to quit soules out of Purgatory. Twefthly, they have married Priests. Thirteenthly, they make no Image of God. Foureteenthly, they have most of them their Service in their owne, or a knowne Lan∣guage. And these are some of the causes of the bitter contentions between the Roman Catholicks, and these other Churches: And as the Roman Church excommuni∣cateth In praefati∣one ante acta Theo∣log. Witer∣berg. & Hi∣eremiam Pa∣triarcham. Sacran. ca. 2. Error 3. Thevet. Cos. lib. 9. catho. tr. quae 2. Thev. Cosm. lib. 10. Brerw. enqu. pag. 159. these Churches; so doe they ex∣communicate the Roman Church: For example; the Patriarch of Constantinople doth yearely excommunicate the Pope and his Church for Schismaticks: The Mos∣covites doe the same, as counting the Pope an Hereticke. The Patriarchs of Ierusalem & Antioch have done likewise. The Chri∣stians under the Patriarch of Mozul, call
the Pope the Reprobate Bishop: other call him Antichrist. The Copts account the Roman Church Hereticall and avoid the communion and conversation of the Latines no lesse then of the Iewes. Thus some of the Popes of Rome have beene like Ismael, whose hand was against every man, and every mans hand against him. The Turkes in their Mahumetan Worship. The Pagans in their adorati∣on of the Sun and Moon. The Aegyptians in the service of Isis and Osyris, use diver∣sity of worships and Rites, and yet still retaine the ill-tied knot of Friendship in their Idol-worship. But Christians diffe∣ring, thunder calumnies, & bolt out ex∣communications one against another, & after their excommunications usually follow eradications of Kingdoms, people, & estates by Conspiracies, rebellions, and hostile machinations by generall Massacres, and particular torments: As how many Kings and great persons have beene murthered by their desperate Assassins.
The said Massacre in France is not to be paralelled by any ancient cru∣elty. The Acharonticall Powder treason, for the heinousnesse thereof, will seeme in∣credible in the Ages to come. Examples are infinite; yea, so great is the unchari∣tablenesse and cruelty of the Roman Catho∣licks to the Christians of the Reformed Chur∣ches, that if any of them dye among them; they setting themselves (as if it were) upon Gods Tribunall, (in whose secret Cabinet is blessing and cursing) give sentence of damnation against them, sending their soules packing to hell, and denying their bodies Christian Buriall. Barbarous cruelty, voyd of Cha∣rity! John 13. 35. Damian. a Goes de Aethiopum Morib. pag. 235. As a tree is knowne by his Fruit, so is the true Church by Charity: By this (saith our Lord) all men shall know that yee are my Disciples, if yee love one ano∣ther. Zaga-Zabo, an Aethiopian Bishop, and sent Embassadour from the Emperor of Aethio∣pia
to the K. of Portugall, complaineth: his words are these: The Romish Doctors (I know not how piously) forbad me the communi∣on of our Lords Body, all the time I was in Por∣tugall, even the space of seven yeare; and (which I cannot relate without grief and tears) I was reputed among the Romanists as a Hea∣then, and Anathema: upon which their doings, let him that governeth all things looke: to whose iudgement I commit these their doings. This their uncharitablenesse doth not onely offend other Christians; but also it maketh the very Mahumetans to loath our Profes∣sion, to condemne our Faith, and to perse∣cute our Persons. Good Iesus! when shall these iarrings have an end? when shall the Church Catholicke live in union of faith, and communion of Charity? O miserable Christians, returne unto the Lord, and he will cure you: Earnest Prayer, endlesse Devotion, volumnes of penitentials, Ninives fastings, Peters weeping, Pauls conversion, is the Me∣tredate and true Alexipharmacon to cure this Vlcer, to heale this never enough
to be lamented Schisme. Alas, who shall furnish my eies with floods of wa∣ter? who shall make my head a living Spring, that I might water my Couch with sorrowfull teares? As for us Clergy men, let us not so much endeavour to make the Christians our adversaries o∣dious to our people; as to move them to commiserate their estates, and so to make our ioynt prayers to Almighty God, (not for their confusion) but for their Conversion. Oh would to God, the Po∣tentates and Monarches of Christendome would ioyne hand in hand, to make up the breaches of Zyon, and to build up the wals of Ierusalem. Oh sweet Iesus, that cleansed thy Church by thy most precious blood, Prince of Peace, and author of love, grant us thy peace. To conclude, my most humble prayer to Almighty God is, that he would vouchsafe us, most unworthy, to enioy that Legacy which our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ left unto us, viz.
My Peace I give unto you; my Peace I leave with you. And for this cause, I humbly supplicate his Divine Maiesty, that he would incline the great Bishop of Rome, Pope Urban, whom he hath endued with many gifts and graces; with the hearts of the Lord Cardinalls and Prelates of the Church of Rome; that they would submit themselves to retrograde from some of their new Canons, to the ancient Primative Canons of their Church. viz. That they would restore to the Church of God, of which they have cure, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, The Cup, the symboll of our Lord Iesus Christs blood, accor∣ding to our Lords holy institution, and practise of the ancient Roman Church, and of all the other Christian Churches in the World. That they would suffer our Lord Ie∣sus Christs sheepe to drinke of the Waters of Life, (viz.) to have the use of the Holy Scriptures in the Vulgar tongue, (from which they are now restrained)
with their Service in their own tongue. That they would permit Marriage to all men, and represse Stewes and Bro∣thel-houses, permitted by them, scande∣lous not onely to all the Christians in the VVorld; but also to them which are without: with some other like things; which may admit of reformation. And also, whereas some other Chur∣ches pretend to abhorre Idolls, I wish from the bottome of my heart, that they would also abstaine from committing of Sacriledge. And whereas they cry out of permitting of Stewes and Brothel-houses in the Roman Church; that they would be as zealous in not permitting oppressing Usury among them: both which are alike abhominable in the eyes of Almighty God. Sweete Iesus! what should not a man doe? yea, what should he not suffer, to quench the fire of Contention in the Christian world! There was a time, when the Roman
Church did acknowledge her selfe a sister, and not a mistris. There was a time, when as, with an Harmonious concord, she suffered with the rest of her Sisters, even when as Arrianisme had in a manner overwhelmed the world. There was a time, when she gave her helping hand (as at the famous Coun∣cells of Nice, Ephesus, Constantinople, Chal∣cedon) and did not rule after a Dictatory manner. Let none foster Schisme against Con∣science to maintaine themselves in dig∣nities, wealth, and promotions, to the ruine of the Christian World. Christs Coat is rent, his Garment is torne in pieces: The World is distra∣cted and distempered with the raging waves of Opinions: By which meanes, the Turke over-ruleth the flourishing and most famous parts of Christendome: and have erected the worship of Mahu∣met, even in the stately Oriental Basilisks.
Constantinople, the Queene of Beauty, is become a Mansion of Mahumetans: And, if these devisions continue stil, the rest of the Christian world is likely to be in great danger. The good God of Peace, make peace in Christendome: and grant that all that confesse his Holy Name, may agree in the Truth of his Ho∣ly Word; and live in Vnity and god∣ly Love. Amen. FINIS.
Errata. PAge 5. in marg. read quod habetur. p 9. l. 5. r. Lazarus first Bishop of Massilia. ibid. l. 18. r. Cleve p. 10. l. 11. r. Wertz∣hurg. l. 13. r. Voitland. p. 14. Tit. r. Romanists. l. 14. r. Barna∣bas. p. 15. Tit. r. Romanists. p. 24. l. 11. r. accounted. mar. r. Sinas. p. 30. l. 20. r, a Jesu. p. 36. l. 16. r. to put. p. 38. l. 12. r. Presbyteros. p. 41. Tit. r. Bishops in ancient times. p. 43. l. 7. after continent. r. the Spaniards have in West India some Bishops. p. 53. l. 13. r. al∣most all. p. 59. l. 14. r. 801. p. 65. mar r. extra. mar. r. missae. p. 73. l. . r. lte. p. 72. l. uit. Assassinates. p. 7. l. 22. r. hath.
