20523 99846078 11017
The praise and Dispraise of Women, very fruit∣full to the well disposed minde, and delectable to the readers therof. And a fruitfull shorte Dialogue vppon the sentence, know before thou knitte. C. Pyrrye. man in toga with winged arm ¶ Imprinted at London in Fleetstreete, by William How.
AD CANDIDVM LICTORIM. VItuper at laudat{que} genus breuis iste libellus, Foemineum legito, commoda multa feras. Perlege non etenim, cui{que}uam res lecta nocebit, Perlege, fortassis lecta iuuare queat. Lecta iuuare queat, fi corde animo reuoluas, Si mea dicta tenes, lecta iuuare queat. Lecta iuuare queat, si laudabilia tent, Virtutes{que} sequi, lecta iuuare queat. Lecta iuuare queat, si quae mala crimina sentis, Euitare cupis, lecta iuuare queat. Lecta iuuare queat, mala si peccata malorum, Te faciunt cautum, lecta iuuare queat. Lecta iuuare queat, videas si exempla bouarum, Visa{que}ue facta petis, lecta iuuare queat. Quis nisi mentis inops, videat quin gramina terre, Et flores apibus, reddere fructus, humi. Quis nisi continua, sit stoliditate repletus. Omne quin exemplum, scit forè fructiferum. Perlegere ergo velim, quia scripta sequentia prosunt, Delectant{que}ue animum, non sine fruge bonum. VALE.
To the Reader. AFter I had finished though simplie and rudelye this little Treatise of ye praise & disprayse of Wo∣men: I thought it good gentle Reader to declare and explane in some short preface, two prin∣cipall causes whiche moued me therunto. The one was to the intent, that all those which at any time shall feele themselues entangled with prompte, and tedie enclinacion to vice & euill, and with great slacknes in fur∣deringe that is good and ver∣tuous may by diligent perusing hereof, learne to a voyde and eschew suche greate crimes and greuous offences, as they shall see conteyned and written in
theyr disprayse, & seke diligent∣lie to embrace, and earnestlie to followe those good condicions and laudable vertues, whiche they shall playnlie perceaue to be at large specified, and abun∣dantly set foorth in theyr com∣mendacions. The other is to the ende that the good exam∣ples of good and verteous wo∣men if no other thing wil moue them to doe that they ought, may incite and encorage them to do that is good & verteous, and bring them to suche confir∣mitie of honeste life, that they may be had in good reputacion before men, and founde accep∣table before God And the euill examples of the wicked, maye teache them to despise and vt∣terly forsake those things, that are naught and vicious, lest by
to much enclining to sinne, and vice, they be counted as caste awayes before the worlde, and in time to come fall into vtter, destruction, for if the preceptes of the good, will not prouoke & styre them to Godlines & spedy reformacion of life, in hope of like rewarde that they haue or if the testimonies of the wicked will not withdrawe or terrifye them from doing enill, for feare of like punishment, surely what then may doe it, I know not. These two consideratiōs (gen∣tle reader) did moue me at this time to write ye I haue writen, desiring thee to take it in good part such as it is and to esteme my good will & meaning here∣in, not regarding the rude han∣deling of the matter fith. I did it in hope to profit many, but
surely to hurte none. And wher as I haue made the prayse of women to sounde in suche sorte throughlie, yt I mought seeme vehementlie to gainsay my selfe for speakinge so much in theyr dispraise, I did it being moued therto for diuers good conside∣rations, which I minde not to recite, but leaue it vnspoken of willing thee herein to vse thine owne iud∣gement.
Here beginneth the Disprayse of VVomen. MY penne prolong no longer time, cut of this longe delaye: And now beginne to writ in time, of that, that I shall say. Take thou some paine a litle space, ne be thou ought ashamde: When thou ofttimes in secret place, with great despite art blamde. Of this thou maist assure thée, none will thy truth dissame: Saue onely those that pricked be, and giltie of the same. Spare not to speake, spare not to write, spare not in wordes to tell: Spare thou no time for to endite, an ougely Monster fell. This Monster is the woman kinde, whose ougelye shape and port: I meane to paint, writ thou my minde, not forcing her report.
This woman kinde I know right well, is comelie to the eye: Of perfect shape she beares the bell, I can it not denie. But in her fained couert brest, stronge poison she doth hide: And in her harte, as in a cheft, a deadly stinge doth bide. Which geues an helples hurtfull wounde, as hath ben brought to passe: Much like the snake that vnder grounde, doth lie, and lurke in grasse. She doth annoy by sodden sight, vnlesse thou can beware: And kepes the still in wofull plight, once caught within her snare. Her poison is so swete and pure, and of suche strength and force: That who so doth that same deuoure, is brought vnto his corse. Take hede therfore seke to discerne, b this that foloweth plaine;
With earnest minde see thou do learne, this monster to refraine. For why? she is most proude, seruile, cruell without measure: Reason and lawe she doth exile, to haue her wicked pleasure. She doth all thinges without forsight, all godly end despise: In all extremes she doth delight, suche is her wonted guise. Temperate doinges she forceth not, from vertuous men retyre: Her loue to thee is feruent hote, her hate is deadly Ire. When flouth her slouggish limes do shake she lieth as a stone: Or when a toye her head doth take, she hasteth to be gone. When myrth and ioye is gone and past, graue visage comes in place: And makes her like a winters blast, with frowarde frouning face.
When she by myrth doth seeke pleasure, all sadnes set a part: Her iocond ioye doth wante measure, nought then may gréeue her harte. Then wanton willes talke doth growe, and laughing with excesse: Both, from her fained harte do flowe, Both are without redresse. Now bolde she is, now doth she feare, now séemes she mad, now wise: Now she doth laugh with pleasaunt there, now teares fal from her eyes. Now she will haue it thus to be, chaunce what may chaunce therebyt Now from her selfe doth dissagre, beginninge to reply. It shall not be as I had thought, no, no, it is not fit: An other waye yet haue I sought, such is her wandering wit. Vnconstancie in her doth raigne, she wauerith full of chaunge.
Oft blabbing, talkatiue and vaine double tounged which semeth straunge. Desiring honor, full of threttes, disdainfull, wishing bloud. Still chatchyng what an other gettes couetous, nothing good. Complaining oft, a lyar, enuious, quicke to beleeue a tale, Vnpacient, often tedious, oft dronken with good ale. Oft times she vseth Magickes arte, with baudry her selfe defile, She hath a supersticious hart, she is waywarde, rash and vile. Disceytfull vsing wicked wayes, fine mouthed for daintie meate. Riotouse, full of wanton playes, nought may her minde entreat. She deckes and trims her selfe at ease, her face to beautifie: To frame her talke all men to please, her wittes she doth applye.
Hatefull anger she beares in minde, till time do serue her tourne: Some sharpe reuenge for him to finde, who causeth her so to burne. She is vnthankeful, without faith, bolde, spitefull, of frowarde life, In her all goodnesse waxeth colde, she euer stirreth strife. Oftimes if ought deserued be, before thee it is set: And spoke againe, againe to thee, as though thou didst forget. If she offend in any thinge, she commonlie doth vse: By loftie lookes and hie speakinge, her gilty faulte to excuse. She scoldeth, grudgeth, and reiect, all frendship in disdaine: For nought at all doth she respect, but onlye priuate gaine. She sekes to mocke and flatter much, yea priuelie to defame:
She reprehendeth (beware of such) craftly thy good name. She filles she common peoples eares, with triflinge talke and vaine: Augmentinge whatsoeuer she heares, her mischiefes to maintaine. She fayneth that to come to passe, which neuer was in deede: That not to be which euer was, eche put in others steede. Her tonge she teacheth to intent, meete causes to deceaue: And once made fitte for such intent, deceite doth neuer leaue. Her forginge fayned countenaunce, is redie at her will: In earnest game a daliaunce, to weepe or laugh her fill. From deceite thou can not flee, her craftes thou can not shonne: Such is the hurtefull policie, that she by sleight hath wonne.
Though she comit an heynous deede, and thou perhaps in place: Denienge stil she will proceede stubbornly to thy face. What shall I say, thou must beleeue, (seme it neuer so straunge) All that she speakes, and not beleeue, if ought her minde doe chaunge. Examples playne and manifest, doe teach, it to be true: For while all vice out of her brest, from time to time doth growe. By reading histories thou shalt finde what cruell bloudy factes: Committed were by woman kinde, delighting in such actes. Reade Ouid, Virgil. Virgill, vnderstande in them it doth appeare: How Medea with bloudyhande, murdered her children deare. How Paris stole the Grecian rape, to Troy, and how that she,
Who was in dede of comlye shape) did willingly agree. And how the Grecians sought the way, Ouid. Meth. lib. 8. to haue her home againe. And there by moued warre to Troye, which warre tenne yeres did raigne. How Scilla her fathers house forsooke, Ouid. Meth. lib. 19. what moued her to doe soe: Her fathers purple heare she toke and gaue it to his foe. How Biblis wicked loue did swell, Ouid. to Cavvnus her brother: How she was tourned into a well, hight Biblis and no other. How Deianira to her feare, a poysoned cote did sende, How he therby with euell there, his wretched life did ende. How Hippodame did deceaue, her gentle louinge Father: By marienge without his leaue, causing his death rather.
Because he was by spitefull fate, appointed for to die, That day that she receaued her mate, such was his destenie. And how Lauania (to be shorte) Gene. 28. most doubtfull warre did sende: Among the youthfull Troyan sorte, which came to vnhappie ende. And how Rebecca with a wile, Math. 14. her sonne and eke her feare: Did quite deceaue and cleane begile, though they most simple were. How Herodias with cruell harte, Gene. 3. did wish Iohn Baptist death: And caused him by deadly smarte, to yelde vp liuinge breath. Also how Eue from ioyfull place, (alas, alas, the while) Her posteritie did deface, and cast into exile. Those and sondry more we finde, teachinge vs to beware;
In trustinge of this monstrous kinde, whose mischiefe is not rare. In time therfore take hede and learne, this monster to eschewe, And eke with wisdome to diserne, her wicked witles hew. If thou wilt liue in quietnes, expelling out of minde: All wicked worldlie wretchednes, or if thou seeke to finde. A blisfull happie state of life, and longe therin to dwell, Beware a woman full of strife, auoide her vile counsell. The fearefull byrde him selfe doth keepe, from hauke his deadlie foe: From raueninge woulfe, the seely shepe, from cruell dogge, the Roe. From deceitfull nettes the wilie harte, with spedie flight doth ronne: Why sekest not thou in like parte, craftie women to shonne.
The affection of the Cocodrill, is in her subtile eyes: She sekes by arte how to begile, if ought she doe deuise. When teares fal trincling from her eyne faire wordes when she doth faine: Then doth she most of al encline, some mischiefe to obtaine. Trust not her diuers chaunge of hewe, trust not her spotted faith, Trust not her coulored vertue, (I rede of one that saith.) A glasse doth wante the sharpe and forme, whiche semeth to appeare▪ And eke a womans faith is torne, though she thy eyes do bleare. Both good and godly men there were, in olde and auncient time, Most stout of heart, exempt from feare, and voyd of heynous crime. Which by their strength huge monsters flewe, and made wilde giauntes tame.
Stronge cities eke they ouerthrewe, and so encreased their name. Yet those by sleight were vanquished, of womans deadly hate: And lamentably finished, their liues of cruell facte. Who hath not reade of Herculous, whose spitefull enuious wife: Did cause him ende remediles, his fatall threde of life. By geuinge him a cote to weare, sprincled with poyso onge: Which semed his tender partes to teare, wherby he sured wronge. Whereby also the wretche alacke, soone yelded liuing breath: The putting it vpon his backe, did cause vntimelie death. Of Sampson stronge what néede I speake, Iudges. 16. the scriptures plainlie shewe: How Dalilahe her minde did breake, desirous for to knowe.
Where his chiefe strēgth did most depend, Gene. 19. and when he had her tolde: She brought him to most wretched ende, selling his life for gold. Both Dauid, 3. Reg. 11. Lot, and Salomon, I strike cleane out of minde: With thousandes more that I could name deceaued by woman kinde. If such as those could not auoyde, their subtile craftie bandes: But with theyr pestilence were anoyde, can we escape their handes. No no, for why as I doe here, and as I plainlie see: They are as bad as eare they were, or worse if worse may be. A thousand waies ne do I faine, her wittes she doth extend: With labor, trauell, and great paine, her beautie to amend. Her shinning forhead by arte she sekes, with golden roule to bind:
With purple culler on her chekes, and if it want by kinde. She gouerneth her steppes by art, her heare by arte doth place, She tempereth her eyes by arte, her bodye and her face. She seekes by art her selfe to paint, because she would be faire: Her greisly shape she doth anoint, in hope of some repaire. She calleth to remembraunce, how she may bring to passe: To frame her froward countenaunce, by looking in a glasse. And with her lips she simpereth, abrode as the doth goe: Her shoulders eke she tempereth, her fingar and her toe. It is her common wonted vse, with naked brest to walke: Which thinge (in faith) is dangerous, for in fewe wordes to talke.
It meaneth nought at all but this, (marke well what I rehearse:) That where her poison planted is, with greater stroke may perce. I am compelled now perforce, to draw vnto some ende: For if I speake til I be whorce, or if my penne I spende, Vnto the stalke to write my minde, which busly could deuise: To speake more of this hatefull kinde, yet would it not suffice. Such is her craft and her deceite, such be her wicked wayes: Which she doth kepe till death by sleight, doe ende her hurtfull dayes. What thing in earth is found more rare, then is a cole blacke swan, Whom auncient writers doe compare, vnto a good Woman. Eke Salomon saith thus to thee, (whose wordes be wise and sounde)
A good godlie Women saith he, is scarsly to be founde. Take hede and loke before thou clime, lest sodenly thou slippe: Take hede (I say) whiles thou hast time, lest thou doe fele the whippe. Take hede, beware, be not to rashe, lest thou perhaps repent: When thou doost fele the scorge and lashe to late thou maist lament. Like as the litle foolish flye, his pastime seketh out: When he the candell doth espye, and fleing rounde about. At length the seely wretche doth close, him selfe in fyre flame: And so his wretched life doth lose, in seking of his game. Euen so if thou wilt not beware, but willinglie be entrapt: Within the Womans wilie snare, wherin when thou art wrapt.
Thou maist not well escape againe, no way is left to saue: Till thou be brought to deadlie paine, to thine vntimely graue. Let this that I haue said suffice, and print it in thy brest: So shalt thou be reputed wise, so shalt thou liue at rest. So shalt thou not at all repent, such well bestowed time, So shalt thou ioy when some lament, by voyding sinne and crime. So shalt thou liue in happie mirth, and happlye ende thy life: So shalt thou happly boast the byrth, which is exempte from strife. So shalte thou this life once past, in ioy and blisse remaine, So shalt thou haue for thy repast, all pleasure voyde of paine. ¶ Here endeth the dispraise of Women.
Here beginneth the prayse of VVomen. C. Pyrrye. I Chaunced once to come in place, where I a booke did finde: Which booke did spitefullie disgrace, the gentle woman kinde. Then thus vnto my selfe I thought, good Lord what man was he: That with such painfull studie sought, disprayse of femenie. How coulde he teache his penne to write, how coulde his hart deuise: Such foolish fansies to endite, that all men may despise. How could his sclaūderous, hurteful tonge the harmeles so difame: How coulde he with a tedious songe, the seely women blame. I thinke he was not of mans seede, that this did take in hand:
Against poore wretches to proceede, who could not him withstand. Thus musinge did I syt long time, at last my pen I toke: And so beganne to writ in rime, against that shamles booke. Oh wilfull witles man (quoth I) thy pen whie doost thou frame: To write thy minde so spitefullie, not forcing thy good name. But in despite of them dost speake, to whom thou art most bounde: And in most slaunderous talke dost breake their goodnes to confounde. Their labour and their earnest suite, to thee is spent in vayne: For why? the reape at all no fruyte, but scorne and proud disdaine. Such is thy thankelesse hatefull minde, such is thy cruell harte: Wherin thou shewest thy self vnkinde, in plaing suche a part.
I know no good, nor iust cause why, thou shouldest them so dispraise: Whose life I thinke assuredlie, is innocent alwayes. Perhaps thou doost against them prate, because they be to weake: To ioyne with thee in wordes of hate, and so their anger wreake. Perhaps thy foolish fansie sought, some vayne and worldlie prayse: And so did make somthinge of nought, which soundeth to disprayse. Perhaps some one did the displease, in earnest game or iest: And thou thy furie to appease, dost rayle at all the rest. The selfe same thinge or som such like, doth moue thy stonie harte: This deadly enuious stroke to strike, all iust cause set apart. I thinke thou doost not call to minde, in sicknes or in health:
How we are holpe by woman kinde, whose care is for our wealth. First (as thou knowst) she takes great paine, by trauelinge in bed: And greuous groninges doth sustaine, before she see our head. As long as we poore infantes are, and nought our selfes can geue: So long the woman takes the care, our bodies to releue. When we would eate she makes the pape she geues vs quiet rest: She dandleth vs vpon her lappe, we sucke mylke from her brest. When we do naught but crie and weepe, then will she sing and play: Or els will lay vs downe to slepe, our cryenge so to stay. When we can neyther go nor stand, by reason of our youth: The louinge Woman takes in hande, to helpe vs this is truth.
Now when we come to further age, and can both speake and go: The womans paine doth not asswage: she then hath care and wo. In seekinge how she may prouide, to kepe vs still in health: And caring how she may vs guide, to liue in honest wealth. When greuous sicknes doth vs take, she then with busye paine: Some boyled brath for vs doth make, our bodies to sustaine. All kinde of phisicke she doth vse, that may be for our case: No painfull paine doth she refuse, our sorow to appease. She wakes the longe and wearie night, She toyleth in the day: Our safetie is her chiefe delight, She is our onely stay. For in all places where I go, menne geue the onely charge:
Ʋnto their wifes (the truth is so) because their wittes be large. Eche thing to vewe and ouerlooke, as neede may her constraine: The baker, bruer, and the cooke, no toyle doth she refraine. She ordereth all, man not a whit, as right and reason will: Because she is of quicker wit, her busines to fullfill. It can not be that we could misse, this gentle Woman kinde: Whose presence is our onely, blisse, and cause of quiet minde. Whose harmles helping hand we néede, in euerie thing we doe: And she is redie by her deede, to put her helpe therto. Her counsell is both good and founde, in matters of great weight: And doubtfull thinges she will confounde, by skilfull wisdomes sleight.
The wordes proceding from her brest, are wise and full of skill: All that she doth is for the best, she brydleth witles will. Disdainfull pride she doth abbate, her malice doth asswage: She beareth not in minde long hate, she loueth not to rage. All ill deuise she doth confounde, all rancor doth expell: Of quiet life she sekes the grounde, and long therein to dwell. Ʋaine triflinge talke she doth refraine, fewe wordes is her desire: From quicke beliefe she doth abstaine, and flee from wreckful Ire. She doth nothing without forsight, of good successe in the ende: All modest meane is her delight, to vertue she doth bend. Her listning eare she doth encline, graue wisdome to attaine;
Against all vice she doth repine, and wickednes disdayne. A lothsome thing is lecherie, to her in déede or thought: A hatefull thing is bauderie, which she doth set at nought. Blasphemous othes she doth despise, false lying doth detest: She doth obey in humblewise, she keepeth her behest. To checke, or taunt, she doth refuse, though why perhaps offende: Her frendly councell she doth vse, our giltie faut to amende. She is of chast and honeste life, true loue in her doth flowe, She is a sober quiet wife, her duetie she doth knowe. All euill thoughtes out of her heade, she seketh to remoue, Good cogitation in their steade, her godly minde doth loue;
With ernest labor and great payne, her liuing she doth get: The foode that doth her life sustaine, is gotten by her swet. Her willinge hart doth not withstand, such as are poore in deede: She stretcheth forth her helpinge hand, accordinge to their neede. Her countenaunce she doth not spare, in comely wise to kepe: And ioye with them that ioyfull are, and mourne with them that wepe. Her trustie tonge doth not disclose, the secretes of thy minde: In hidden hart she doth repose, thy thoughtes to her resinde. Her harmles mouth his closed still, from sclaunderous hurtfull talke: To haue true vertue is her will, and long therin to walke. With wanton: eye she doth not looke, on those that she doth mote,
Nor gase (her fansie for to brooke) on either side the streete. She lifteth vp her listening eare, till eche mans tale be tolde, If neede require though she doe heare her talke she doth withholde. Her helping hande is very slacke, to doe the thing is ill: Wish fearefull foote she steps not backe, all goodnes to fulfill. In desent order she doth weare, her garmentes on eche side, She goeth not sluttish in her geare, and yet she wanteth pride. She eates her meate in sober wise, to satisfie her neede: She drinckes no more then doth suffice, not vsing to exceede. Wherby she séemes to beare in minde, man liueth not to eate: But for to liue (by natures kinde) receaueth he his meate.
Abrode she doth not reuell much, till néede doe her constraine: Her self she doth acquaint with such, as vertue doe maintaine. What wilt thou more? if I should write eche vertue she doth taste: The day and eke the candell light, before my talke should waste. Good godly men haue wrote their minde, in olde and auncient time: Much praysing of this woman kinde, for wanting heynous crime. Which if thou hadst obserued well, I thinke thy grudging harte, Would not so much against them swell, with wordes of deadly smart. I thinke thou wouldest not séeke to spill, their good and honest name: In blowyng of a blast so shrill, with trumpe of blacke diffame. Thou dost well know, but wilt forget, thou seest, but wilt be blinde;
That they are cleare from crime or spote, by deede or inwarde minde. Thy tounge I saye will not confesse, that we to them are bounde: That we oftimes (truth to expres) great good by them haue founde. If I did want aucthoritie, to furnish out my cause: Or were it not for flatterie, then would I not long pause. To shewe and set before thy face, good wemen of renoune: Assigninge the their dwellinge place, yet liuing in this towne. But now my minde, my pen shall frame, to set before thine eyes: And speake of those, whose famous fame, by vertue did arise. And doth continewe to this day, and shall for euer last: Though they by death were take away, full many yeares now past.
We finde that Ceres did inuent, Ouid. Meth. lib. 5. all graine to ynne and sowe: And for she was to wisedome bent, most people did her knowe. Honors deuine to her they gaue, so did her dedes expresse: With one consent all men did craue, to call her good goddesse. The. A. B. C. Carmenta founde, Iside. lib. 1. ant. 9. wherby we doe endite: Whereby in wisedome we abounde, and learne the things is right. And Pallas the through pured braine, Ouid. in fast. so doth the story tell: Of oyle and wolle first founde the vaine, which is a great iewell. Wherfore they did her then prefer, before Lady Neptune: To geue the name as pleased her, vnto Athenes towne. And Soppbo eke the Poetresse, with harpe to singe did finde,
Which doth expell all carefulnesse, out of a carefull minde. The maligne sprite had Saul oprest, and longe in sorow tide: Tull Dauid for to giue him rest, his warbling harpe did guide. Such pleasures we by women haue, wherby we be preserued: Yet thou dost seke them to depraue, who haue it not deserued. Let this for truth in thine hart cleaue, for proue it so I can: As many pleasures we receiue, by her as by the man. But sith Poetrie doth decaye, and is had in despite: I will therfore without delay, set forth in open sight. Examples plaine and manifest, in holy writ founde out: Which being waied in euen brest, this slaunders will confute.
To all that read it doth appeare, how Michol Dauids wife: Such trustie loue to him did beare, that she did saue his life. For bloudie Saule, to haue him dead, his messingers did sende: But she founde meanes that Dauid fledde to scape such cruell ende. She through a window let him passe, so that he went his way: And in the bed where Dauid was, an Image did she lay. Wherby king Saule his whole intente, and purpose spent in vaine: To murther Dauid he was bent, he failed to obtaine. Iehosaba did not disdaiue, 4. Reg. 1. Iehoas life to saue: When Athlia with busye payne, the same did seke to haue. Who kept Ionathas in a well, when foes his death had sought,
The wife in Bahurin did dwell, that this good deede had wrought. Ionathas and his fellow eke, this godly wife did hide: That when their enmies did them seke, then were their not espied. The seruauntes that were sent to looke, for them, did aske the wife: Who said they past the water brocke, thus did she saue their life. A mayde was she that did discrye, Eodem. A hitophels entent: And shewed the conspiracie, that was to Dauid ment. To Ionathas declared she, the thinges before vnknowen: So from the snares escaped he, that erst for him were sowen. When Moyses by the riuers brinke, Exod. 2. was in a basket put: Where he was left to swime or sinke, being there so closely shut.
Compassion did the woman moue, when she did heare him wepe: She bare to him suche earnest loue, that she his life did kepe. And like a mother did him find, adopting him her sonne: Beheld the louing woman kinde, this godly dede hath donne. Who caused first let truth be said, 4. Reg. 5. that Naaman had his heale: From leprosie, it was a mayde, for she did first reueale. A godly Prophet to remaine, and be in Israell: Could ease her maister of his paine, and make him whole and well. Wheras the newe Egiptian King, Exod. 12. against thebrues was bent: Because they did encrease and spring, which thing for to preuent. Commaunded be good midwifes, that were of thebriane line:
That they in no case spare their liues, but kill the masculine. Which thing to doe they did refuse, because it was not good: And to the king they made excuse, not shedding giltlesse bloud. The Hebrian wifes O king (sayd he) are women stout and strong, Before we com their birth alway, is donne, which is not long. Who killed king Abimelech, 2. Reg. 11. I say who strake him downe, When he his furious moode to wreke sayd seige to Thebes towne. A woman strake him with a stone, and then the seige therby Was geuen vp (his life once gone) this is no legend lye. When Haman for to haue annoyde, Ec. 17. the Iewes had fully sought: In that selfe place he was destroyed, that he for them had wrought.
For godly Hester founde the meane, to saue the Iewes from death By causing Haman quite and cleane, to yeld vp liuing breath. Of many thousands was not one, 2. Reg. 14. for all the paine they toke: Could make Dauid to Absolon once geue a friendly looke. Vntil the woman did obtaine, as scripture doth recorde: That Dauid cald him home againe and was his gracious Lord. Also we finde that Debora, Iudg 4 a prophetise that was: Did shew the death of Sisara how, when, and in what place. Which thing to her God did declare, with many other cause: To rid the Isralets from care, and eke to iudg their lawes. When Sisara fled from the throng, then Iahel Abues wife;
(Whom God at that time made so strong did riue his fatall life. A solemne vowe did Iepthath make, Iudges. 1. before the God of might: If that he would his hand so slacke, that he preuaile in fight. Then would he geue an offrings swet, the victorie once donne: Who was the next that he should mete, out of his dores to come. And as he came behold the chaunce, his onely daughter dere: Met him with tymbrells and daunce, but when she drewe him nere. With furye forst his clothes he rent, with visage pale and wan: He semed his promise to repent, and thus his wordes began. Alas daughter thou troublest me, for I with willing hart: Haue made a vow to God (saith he) from which I can not start.
Then she vnto her father spake, if thou vnto the Lorde: (My father dere) a vowe didst make, fulfill by deede thy worde. Euen as thou wilt, do thou by me, thy promise doe not lose: Sith God hath now auenged thee, vpon thy deadly foes. Which wordes into her fathers brest, his troubled thoughtes to stay, Did glide, and he from all vnrest, was worne cleane away. Perhaps sith Iephthath did lament, 1. Reg. 25. had not the woman ben: He would haue falsed his entent, which had be shame and sinne. We read also that Nabigale, by wisdome did asswage: The wrath of Dauid to Naball, for he in kingled rage. Pursued his othe and sought to kill, the great and eke the small;
Not leauing one by his good will, to pisse against the wall. But she to Dauid victuall send, and went her selfe also: Wherby she made him Nabals friend, who was his deadly foe. 3. Reg. 14. Abiah stroken with disease did lye at point of death: And of his sicknes had no case, ne wanted liuing breath. I pray you then who tooke the care, whose was the payne and woe: To know how this yong man should fare, did not the woman goe. Yet verely we went to learne, wher he should liue or dye: And so the prophet discerne, Abihas destenye. When as king Dauid waxed old, 3. reg. 1 though clothes on him were cast, He felt no heat but still was colde, til it be fel at last.
One Abisag a Sunamite, was found to kepe him whot: Who cherisht him both day and night, and yet he knew her not. The prophet told to the woman, 4. Reg. 8. the death of seuen yeare, That was to come, not to the man, but she vnto her feare. Did shew the same with willing hart, so they and theirs did passe: And from the dearth did then depart, to go where plenty was. Was not the prophet Eliah sent, 3. re. 17. to haue the womans ayde: Because that in the firmament, the moisture then was staied? The scripture doth declare it playne, that she Eliah fed: And saue that she did him sustaine, perchaunce he had bin dead. Likewise the godly Sunamite, 4. re. 4 gods prophet did entreate,
As ofte as he came in her sight, she toke him breade to eate. Her husbande eke she did require, some place for him to make: And he did graunt her, her desire, his hand he did not slake. Vntill the Prophetes house was downe: his table and bedsteede: He found all thinges when he did come, there redie for his neede. This doe we see that women be, to man profitable: Thus doe we see to indge of thee, and of thy fonde fable. And though perhaps in sondrye case, by strength thinges were not wrought: Yet such is Gods aboundant grace, to ende the same he sought. And bring to passe by women kinde, according to his will: For that they both with hart and minde, his sayinges doe fulfyll.
As we by Iudith may discerne, Iudges. 13. who in dead time of night: Cut of the head of Holiferne, and not by strength in fight. The verteous Susan did not start, from God her louing Lorde: But to his will with willing harte, her doinges did accorde. Wherfore God loued her wondrous well, as scripture doth declare: He raised vp yong Daniell, to plead her cause of care. And proue her to be innocent, before the peoples face: When she was iudged to be brent, in open stret and place. Sara Raguels daughter dere, Tobias. 3. & 6. to seuen maried was: And yet remained a virgin cleare, so god did bring to passe. For he preserued the feminine, because of vertuous life:
But strangled were the masculine, in whome all vice was rise. We finde how Rahab did defende, Iosue. 2 the men of Ierico: Wherfore the scripture doth commend, her and her life also. We read that Marie Magdaline, Luc. 7. with pitious weping teares: The feete of Christ, had washed cleane, and wipt them with her heares. And how by her contricion, and by vnfained faith: Of sinne she had remission, for so the Apostel saith. In token man shold be content, Gene. 22. his wife alwaies to loue, God gaue a straight commaundement, to Abraham from aboue. That he shuld folowe Sara, and doe as she assignde: So was expelled by and by, Agar, this doe I finde,
This Agar was a strong harlot, yet for repentaunce sake: God did forgeue and quite forgot, the sinnes that she did make. The Angell willed her to goe, againe to know her dame: And he that did her faultes forgo, would multiplie her fame. Againe vnto the house she went, 2. Reg. 13. acknowledging her sinne: Where she by thangelles appointment, was then receaued in. Amon vnlawfullye did vse, hir faire sister Thamare: Fayning sicknes (O fonde excuse,) and she therof not ware. Yet long did she lament the chaunce, which was to Amons shame, In token she toke repentaunce, though she were not to blame. And wheras Sichem wickedlye, with Dina of comelye shape: Gene. 34.
Comytted and that filthely, most foule and haynous rape. Yet was it not the womans faulte, for she with willing hart: When he began her minde to assaulte, did not that wicked parte. Wherfore gods hand, (the truth is so) as scripture doth reherse: This wicked man with foundry moe, by sworde to death did pearse. Micheas mother of promise iust, Iudith. 17. a mirror fitte may be: To proue all women true to trust, how so they seme to the. For she by vowe her selfe did binde, a grauen sculpe to make: Which vowe alwaies she bare in minde, and did it not forsake. Miriam to God did giue the prayse, Exod. 15. for the death of Pharao: Sounding timbrels with pleasaunt noise, both she and diuers moe.
This Miriam was a Prophetise, Sister to Aaron: She lauded God in foundry wise, her instrument vppon. Of many moe as yet I can, a true rehersal make: By whose good life the wilfull man, example iust may take. As of good Ruth and Neomy, Ruth. 1.2. Mach. of her that did obey: Gods will, and from all Idolatrie, did tourne her face away. And strengthned her sonnes to dissente, and suffer for Gods lawes: Declaring his iust iudgment, for this their righteous cause. The women haue most worthy praise, for wisdome and mere pitie: With faith and fortitude alwaies, in most aduersitie. As to two Prophetes hath bene seene, 4. Reg. 22. Luc. 22. I meane Oldah and Anne:
With Saba the most worthy Quéene, 3. Reg. 10. to Salomon that came. Reade the new Testamont likewise, there written shalt thou finde: That woman had the exercise, of good and constant minde. Of Christes byrth the misterie, Luc. 1. Elizabeth did beleue: And not the man olde Zachary, whom the angel did repréeue, Great was the loue the woman bare, Ioh. 10. in time of Christes woe: As Magdaline who had great care, and from him did not goe. Though his disciples all were fled, long weping did she sit, And the sepulcre (he once heade) oftimes she did visit, She and her compers with oiles pure, Mah. 5. to shewe their earnest; zeale: Sought Christ theu laid in sepulture, in hope they mought him heale.
For wel they knews and did beleue, by his owne saienges plaine: That in shorte time he would reuiue, and rise from death againe. For the oile she spent God to her gaue, great praise, when as he sat: At meat, and those men did depraue, who did against her prate. The poore (said he) from day to day, amongst you shall remaine: But shortly I must hence away, as I haue told you plaine. Also he did her more esteme, Luc. 11. who did but two mites send: Then the riche man though he did seme, much more then she to spend. No kinde of grace in her was hid, Act. 9. who daily fed the poore: I meane Thabita whom Peter did, from death to liue restore. Ne yet in her than rather woulde, 3. Reg. 3. her child forsake and leaue:
Then Salomon asonder should, his partes most tender cleaue. And Pilates Wife did more pitie, the troublous time of Christ: Then all the men who standinge bye, blaspheming did resiste. To whom thinke you did Christe appeare from death when he arose? In faith for ought that I can here, or ought I can suppose. To Marie Magdaline I read, Math. 27. and to his mother deare: That first he shewed him selfe in deede: this thing in truth is cleare. We seldom finde that Christ did blame, one woman properly: Or any one so fare past shame, so litle set our Sauioure by. As Peter did Christ to denie, Iu. 22 oftimes in open place: For which offence Christ openlie, did blame him to his face.
And where the scribes maliciously, Ioh. 8. to Christ had brought a whore: He saued the woman graciously, and said do soe no more. Which thing to mans rebuke did founde, but tell me if thou can: Did he the like as thou hast found, at any time for man? Likewise the wife of Cananie, Math. 15. whose daughter was possest: With a deuill, on Christ did crie, to geue her daughter rest. To her Christ answered not againe, to thend all men mought see: What constant faith did still remaine, vnto the femine. We finde at the Womans request, and at a nedefull time: Christ being at a solemne feaste, turned water into Wine. Also at the Womans insteance, Ioh. 2. raysed Lazar whole and founde:
Who then (such was Gods sufferaunce,) lay foure dayes vnder grounde. And he be wayled tenderlye, to them that him oft fedde: Martha the one, the other Mary, for this their brother dead. I neuer yet as I am ware, did reade that he did make, Such sorowe or once toke care, for any one mans sake. Thus women be not cast awayes, by scripture proued playne: Nor thse that were of auncient daies, nor they that yet remaine. As I for witnes coulde report, a thousand more as yet: But to thensent I may be shorfe, I will their names omitte, I mought repet Lucrecia, Ouid. in fast. lib. . of chaste and honeste life: Here mought I speake of Porcia, and of Vlisses wife.
With sondrye moe but as I say, and as before I spake: I minde as brieflie as I may, some ende hereof to make. Wherfore do thou thy minde refer, olde auncient bookes to vewe: Then shalt thou see that women were, vertuous, constant and true. Then shalt thou learne to be ashamde, of this thy foolish fact: In that thy spitefull pen was framde, poore women to detract. For though that Eue did first transgresse, whose faulte brought vs in thrall: Yet Mary did the same redresse, and therby losed all. But sith some women wickedly, did ill in sondrie case. Wilt thou therfore so spitfullie, blame all with shamles face? It foundeth muche to thy great blame, all fortes to reprehende;
Because that some without all shame, did wilfullie offende. For as eche tree that yet doth last, geues not his fruite a like: But some geue passing pleasaunt tast, and some we doe mislike. Or as eche clothe is not like bad, for some is fine, some corse: Some light of color, and some sad, some good, and some far worse. Or as eche man is not alike, for some are thicke, some small: Some pacient, some cholerike, some short, some other tall. Semblablie of woman kinde, we al are plainlie taught: That some are of most vertuous minde, and other some are naught. Wherfore if righteousnes should skan, and iudge in this one point: She would condemne as well the man, so durst I lay a wint. Seke not sherfore thine owne reproche,
thy name do not consume: On others faltes doe not encroche, nor yet against them fume. For of saint Paule this maist thou learne, Rom. 2. it doth no man beseeme: Worse of an other to descerne, then of him selfe to deeme. What creature liuing vnder sky, fish, foule, worme, or best: But with his kind continually, doth liue at quiet rest. Saue man alone who being rude, out ragiously doth speake: And raile against his symlitude, his furious moode to wreake. It seemeth then a great abuse, such frowardnes to haue: Yea, it is in maner maruelous, the selfe same to depraue. Whom most we ought to laud and loue, great foliy sure it is: So sclaunderously them to reproue, whom we not long can misse.
Wherfore all ye, that this do se: Iudge them to be most worthy prayse. The truth to tell, I knowe it well: They do expell, all wicked wayes. With hand and to, they do forgo: We find it so, thinges vndiscrete. With earnest mind, this woman kinde, Her selfe doth binde, to vertue swete. Beare them good will seke not to spill: With voyce so shrill, their honest name. For they maintaine, all goodnes plaine, And so obtaine, most famous fame. Seeke not to scorne, their faith vntorne, Which hath forlorne, all doublenes. But rather proue, their stedfast loue: And so remoue, all doubtfulnes. Be true of hart, take thou their part, And as thou art, a stronge defence. So they most meke, will euer seke: To do the leke, in recompence. Farewell adewe, loue woman kinde: For they be true. of hart and minde, Explicit.
A fruytful short dia∣logue vppon the sentence, knovve before thou knitte. W. I will not knit before I knowe, C. Care not for long delaye: W. And so I shall doe best I trowe? C. It is the wisest waye. W. The knot vnknowen I may re∣pente, C. But then it is to late: W. Whiche way mought I this il pre∣uent? C. If ignorance you hate. W. Encline my hart therto I muste, C. Suche wisdome now is rare: W. Repentāce then néede not I trust, C. Then shall you flie from care. W. Can no man lose the knote once knit? C. Once knit it must abide: W. Good sage aduice therfore is fit, C. Your wordes for truth are tride. W. Examples can you here find out?
C. Examples yea great store. W. Som of them dwelling here about? C. Remaining here a score. W. Such as by hast haue found the lost. C. Preuenting foe their care: W. The turning spit who eates the rost C. You yf you can beware. W. New hastie bandes adew, farwel, C. Remember time trieth truth: W. God graunt I folowe good councell? C. Then call to minde your youth. W. Yf I doe not I shall bewaile. C. In that you say the best: W. Repentance then will not preuaile, C. Euen so then seeke for rest. FINIS.
