20925A.5 99840318 4808
¶ A booke cal∣led the Foundacion of Rhetorike, be∣cause all other partes of Rhetorike are grounded thereupon, euery parte sette forthe in an Oracion vpon questions, verie profitable to bee knowen and redde: Made by Ri∣chard Rainolde Maister of Arte, of the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1563. Mens. Marcij. vj. ¶ Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kingston.
¶ To the right honorable and my singuler good Lorde, my Lorde Robert Dudley, Maister of the Quéenes Maiesties horse, one of her highes pri∣uie Coune, and knight of the moste honou∣rable order of the Garter: Richard Rai∣nolde wisheth longe life, with increase of honour. ARISTOTLE the famous Phi∣losopher, writing a boke to king Alexāder, the great and migh∣tie conquerour, began the Epi∣stle of his Booke in these woor∣des. Twoo thynges moued me chieflie, O King, to betake to thy Maiesties handes, this worke of my trauaile and labour, thy nobilitie and vertue, of the whiche thy nobilitie encouraged me, thy greate and singuler vertue, indued with all humanitie, forced and draue me thereto. The same twoo in your good Lordshippe, Nobilitie and Vertue, as twoo migh∣tie Pillers staied me, in this bolde enterprise, to make your good Lordshippe, beyng a Pere of honour, indued with all nobilitie and vertue: a patrone and possessoure of this my booke. In the whiche although copious and aboundaunte eloquence wanteth, to adorne and beau∣tifie the same, yet I doubte not for the profite, that is in this my trauaile conteined, your honour indued with all singuler humanitie, will vouchsaufe to accepte my
willyng harte, my profitable purpose herein. Many fa∣mous menne and greate learned, haue in the Greke tongue and otherwise trauailed, to profite all tymes their countrie and common wealthe. This also was my ende and purpose, to plante a worke profitable to all ty∣mes, my countrie and common wealthe. And because your Lordshippe studieth all singula∣ritie to vertue, and wholie is incensed thereto: I haue compiled this woorke, and dedicated it to your Lorde∣shippe, as vnto whō moste noble and vertuous. VVher∣in are set forthe soche Oracions, as are right profitable to bee redde, for knowledge also necessarie. The duetie of a subiecte, the worthie state of nobilitie, the prehe∣minent dignitie and Maiestie of a Prince, the office of counsailours, worthie chiefe veneracion, the office of a Iudge or Magestrate are here set foorthe. In moste for∣tunate state is the kyngdome and Common wealthe, where the Nobles and Peres, not onelie daiely doe stu∣die to vertue, for that is the wisedome, that all the graue and wise Philophers searched to attaine to. For the ende of all artes and sciences, and of all noble actes and enterprises is vertue, but also to fauour and vphold the studentes of learnyng, whiche also is a greate ver∣tue. VVho so is adorned with nobilitie and vertue, of necessitie nobilitie and vertue, will moue and allure thē
to fauour and support vertue in any other, yea, as Tul∣lie the moste famous Oratour dooeth saie, euen to loue those whō we neuer sawe, but by good fame and brute beutified to vs. For the encrease of vertue, God dooeth nobilitate with honour worthie menne, to be aboue other in dignitie and state, thereupon vertue doeth encrease your Lordshipps honor, beyng a louer of vertue and worthie no∣bilitie. Your lordshippes humble ser∣uaunt Richard Rainolde▪
To the Reader. APHTHONIVS a famous man, wrote in Greke of soche declamacions, to en∣structe the studentes thereof, with all fa∣cilitée to grounde in them, a moste plenti∣ous and riche vein of eloquence. No man is able to inuente a more profitable waie and order, to instructe any one in the ex∣quisite and absolute perfeccion, of wisedome and eloquence, then Aphthonius Quintilianus and Hermogenes. Tullie al∣so as a moste excellente Orator, in the like sorte trauailed, whose Eloquence and vertue all tymes ertolled, and the of∣spryng of all ages worthilie aduaunceth. And because as yet the verie grounde of Rhetorike, is not heretofore intreated of, as concernyng these exercises, though in fewe yeres past, a learned woorke of Rhetorike is compiled and made in the Englishe tounguei, of one, who floweth in all excellencie of arte, who in iudgement is profounde, in wisedome and elo∣quence moste famous. In these therefore my diligence is em∣ploied, to profite many, although not with like Eloquence, beutified and adorned, as the matter requireth. I haue cho∣sen out in these Oracions soche questions, as are right ne∣cessarie to be knowen and redde of all those, whose cogitaciō pondereth vertue and Godlines. I doubte not, but seyng my trauaile toucheth vertuous preceptes, and vttereth to light, many famous Histories, the order of arte obserued also, but that herein the matter itself, shall defende my purpose aga∣inste the enuious, whiche seketh to depraue any good enter∣prise, begon of any one persone. The enuious manne though learned, readeth to depraue that, which he readeth, the ignoraunt is no worthie Iudge, the learned and godlie pondereth vp∣rightly & sincerely, that which he iudgeth, the order of these Oracions followeth afterward, and the names of thē.
¶ The contentes of this Booke. AN Oracion made, vpon the Fable of the Shepher∣des and the Wolues, the Wolues requestyng the Bandogges: wherein is set forthe the state of eue∣ry subiecte, the dignitie of a Prince, the honoura∣ble office of counsailours. An Oracion vpon the Fable of the Ante and the Gres∣hopper, teachyng prouidence. An Oracion Historicall, howe Semiramis came to bee Quéene of Babilon. An Oracion Historicall, vpon kyng Richard the thirde sometyme Duke of Glocester. An Oracion Historicall, of the commyng of Iulius Ce∣ser into Englande. An Oracion Ciuill or Iudiciall, vpon Themistocles, of the walle buildyng at Athenes. An Oracion Poeticall vpon a redde Rose. A profitable Oracion, shewyng the decaie of kingdomes and nobilitie. An Oracion vpon a Sentence, preferryng a Monarchie, conteinyng all other states of common wealthe. The confutacion of the battaile of Troie. A confirmacion of the noble facte of Zopyrus. An Oracion called a Common place against Theues. The praise of Epaminundas Duke of Thebes, wherein the grounde of nobilitée is placed. The dispraise of Domicius Nero Emperour of Roome. A comparison betwene Demosthenes and Tullie. A lamentable Oracion of Hecuba Queene of Troie. A descripcion vpon Xerxes kyng of Persia. An Oracion called Thesis, as concerning the goodly state of Mariage. An Oracion cong a certaine lawe of Solon.
¶ The foundacion of Rhetorike. NAture hath indued euery man, with a certain eloquence, and also subtili∣tee to reason and discusse, of any que∣stion Rhetorike and Logike giuen of na∣ture. or proposicion propounded, as Aristotle the Philosopher, in his Booke of Rhetorike dooeth shewe. These giftes of nature, singuler doe flowe and abounde in vs, accordyng to the greate and ample indumente and plentuousnes of witte and wisedome, lodged in vs, there∣fore Nature it self beyng well framed, and afterward by arte and order of science, instructed and adorned, must be singular∣lie Arte furthe∣reth nature. furthered, helped, and aided in all excellencie, to exquisite inuencion, and profounde knowledge, bothe in Logike and Logike. Rhetorike. In the one, as a Oratour to pleate with all facili∣tee, Rhetorike. and copionslie to dilate any matter or sentence: in the other to grounde profunde and subtill argument, to fortifie & make stronḡe our assercion or sentence, to proue and defende, by the force and power of arte, thinges passyng the compasse & reach Logike. of our capacitée and witte. Nothyng can bee more excellently giuen of nature then Eloquence, by the which the florishyng Eloquence. state of commonweales doe consiste: kyngdomes vniuersally are gouerned, the state of euery one priuatlie is maintained. The commonwealth also should be maimed, and debilitated, except the other parte be associate to it. Zeno the Philosopher zeno. comparing Rhetorike and Logike, doeth assimilate and liken them to the hand of man. Logike is like saith he to the fiste, for Logike. euen as the fiste closeth and shutteth into one, the iointes and partes of the hande, & with mightie force and strength, wrap∣peth and closeth in thynges apprehended: So Logike for the Similitude Logike. deepe and profounde knowlege, that is reposed and buried in it, in soche sort of municion and strength fortified, in few wor∣des taketh soche sorce and might by argumente, that excepte
like equalitée in like art and knowledge doe mate it, in vain the disputacion shalbe, and the repulse of thaduersarie readie. Rhetorike is like to the hand set at large, wherein euery part Rhetorike like to the hande. Rhetorike. and ioint is manifeste, and euery vaine as braunches of trées sette at scope and libertée. So of like sorte, Rhetorike in moste ample and large maner, dilateth and setteth out small thyn∣ges or woordes, in soche sorte, with soche aboundaunce and plentuousnes, bothe of woordes and wittie inuencion, with soche goodlie disposicion, in soche a infinite sorte, with soche pleasauntnes of Oracion, that the moste stonie and hard har∣tes, can not but bee incensed, inflamed, and moued thereto. These twoo singuler giftes of nature, are absolute and perfect Logike and Rhetorike absolute in fewe. in fewe: for many therebe, whiche are exquisite and profound in argument, by art to reason and discusse, of any question or proposicion propounded, who by nature are disabled, & smal∣lie adorned to speake eloquently, in whom neuertheles more aboundaunt knowledge doeth somtymes remaine then in the other, if the cause shalbe in controuersie ioined, and examined to trie a manifeste truthe. But to whom nature hath giuen soche abilitée, and absolute excellencie, as that thei can bothe copiouslie dilate any matter or sentence, by pleasauntnes and The vertue of cioquence. swetenes of their wittie and ingenious oracion, to drawe vn∣to theim the hartes of a multitude, to plucke doune and extir∣pate affecciōs and perturbacions of people, to moue pitee and compassion, to speake before Princes and rulers, and to per∣swade theim in good causes and enterprises, to animate and incense them, to godlie affaires and busines, to alter the coū∣saill of kynges, by their wisedome and eloquence, to a better state, and also to be exquisite in thother, is a thing of all most noble and excellent. The eloquence of Demosthenes, I socra∣tes, Demosthe∣nes. Tisias. Gorgias. Eschines Tullie. Cato. Tisias, Gorgias, Eschines, were a great bulwarke and staie to Athens and all Grece, Rome also by the like vertue of Eloquence, in famous and wise orators vpholded: the wise and eloquente Oracions of Tullie againste Catiline. The graue and sentencious oracions of Cato in the Senate, haue
been onelie the meane to vpholde the mightie state of Rome, The Empe∣rors of Rome. famous in Eloquence. in his strength and auncient fame and glorie. Also the Chro∣nicles of auncient time doe shewe vnto vs, the state of Rome could by no meanes haue growen so meruailous mightie, but that God had indued the whole line of Cesars, with sin∣guler vertues, with aboundaunt knowlege & singuler Elo∣quence. Thusidides the famous Historiographer sheweth, Thusidides. how moche Eloquence auailed the citees of Grece, faliyng to dissenciō. How did the Corcurians saue them selues from the Corcurians. inuasiō and might, of the Poloponesians, their cause pleated Pelopone∣sians. before the Athenians, so moche their eloquence in a truthe preuailed. The Ambassadours of Corinth, wanted not their Corinthians copious, wittie, and ingenious Oracions, but thei pleated before mightie, wise, and graue Senators, whose cause, ac∣cordyng to iudgemēt, truthe, and integritée was ended. The eloquēt Embassages of the Corinthiās, the Lacedemoniās, Lacedemo∣nians. Mituleniās. Athenians. & the Mituleneans, the Athenians, who so readeth, shall sone sée that of necessitee, a common wealth or kyngdome must be fortefied, with famous, graue, and wise counsailours. How often did Demosthenes saue the cōmon wealthes of Athens, Demosthe∣nes. how moche also did that large dominion prospere and florish by I socrates. Tullie also by his Eloquēt please, Cato, Cras∣sus, Socrates. Cato. Crassus. Antonius. Catulus. Cesar. Antonius, Catulus Cesar, with many other, did support and vphold the state of that mightie kyngdō. No doubte, but that Demosthenes made a wittie, copious, and ingenious o∣racions, when the Athenians were minded to giue and be∣take to the handes of Philip kyng of the Macedonians, their Philippe the kyng of the Macidoniās pestiferous enemie moste vile and subtell, the Orators of A∣thens. This Philip forseyng the discorde of Grece, as he by subtill meanes compassed his enterprices, promised by the faithe of a Prince, to be at league with the Athenians, if so be thei would betake to his handes, the eloquente Oratours of Athens, for as long saith he, as your Oratours are with you The saiyng of Philippe. declaryng, so longe your heddes and counsaill are moued to variaunce and dissencion, this voice ones seased emong you,
in tranquilitée you shal bee gouerned. Demosthenes beyng Demosthe∣nes. eloquente and wise, foresawe the daungers and the mischie∣uous intent of him, wherevpon he framed a goodly Oracion vpon a Fable, whereby he altered their counsaile, and repul∣sed the enemie. This fable is afterward set forth in an Ora∣cion, after the order of these exercises, profitable to Rhetorike. ¶ A Fable. FIrste it is good that the learner doe vnderstand what is a fable, for in all matters of learnyng, The ground of al learning it is the firste grounde, as Tullie doeth saie, to knowe what the thing is, that we may the bet∣ter perceiue whervpō we doe intreate. A fable what is a fable. is a forged tale, cōtaining in it by the colour of a lie, a matter of truthe. The moralle is called that, out of the whiche some Morall. godlie precepte, or admonicion to vertue is giuen, to frame and instruct our maners. Now that we knowe what a fable is, it is good to learne also, how manifolde or diuers thei be, I doe finde three maner of fables to be. The first of theim is, Three sortes of fables. wherein a man being a creature of God indued with reason, is onely intreated of, as the Fable of the father and his chil∣dren, i. A fable of reason. he willing thē to concorde, and this is called Rationalis fabula, whiche is asmoche to saie, as a Fable of men indued with reason, or women. The second is called a morall fable, ii. Morall. but I sée no cause whie it is so called, but rather as the other is called a fable of reasonable creatures, so this is contrarilie named a fable of beastes, or of other thinges wanting reason or life, wanting reason as of the Ante and the Greshopper, or of this the beame caste doun, and the Frogges chosyng their king. The thirde is a mixt Fable so called, bicause in it bothe iii. Mixt. man hauyng reason, and a beaste wantyng reason, or any o∣ther thing wanting life, is ioyned with it, as for the example, of the fable of the woodes and the housebandman, of whom he desired a helue for his hatchet. Aucthours doe write, that Poetes in∣uentours of fables. Poetes firste inuented fables, the whiche Oratours also doe
vse in their perswasions, and not without greate cause, both Oratours vse fables. Poetes and Oratours doe applie theim to their vse. For, fa∣bles dooe conteine goodlie admonicion, vertuous preceptes Good doctrin in fables. of life. Hesiodus the Poete, intreatyng of the iniurious dea∣lyng of Princes and gouernours, against their subiectes, ad∣monished Hesiodus. them by the fable of the Goshauke, and the Nigh∣tyngale in his clause. Ouid also the Poete intreated of di∣uers Ouide. fables, wherein he giueth admonicion, and godly coun∣saile. Demosthenes the famous Oratour of Athens, vsed Demosthe∣nes vsed fa¦bles. the fable of the Shepeherdes, and Wolues: how the Wol∣ues on a tyme, instauntlie required of the Shepeherdes their bande dogges, and then thei would haue peace and concorde with theim, the Shepeherdes gaue ouer their Dogges, their Dogges deliuered and murdered, the shepe were immediat∣ly deuoured: So saieth he, if ye shall ones deliuer to Philip, the king of the Macedonians your Oratours, by whose lear∣nyng, knowlege and wisedome, the whole bodie of your do∣minions is saued, for thei as Bandogges, doe repell all mis∣cheuous enterprises and chaunses, no doubte, but that raue∣nyng Wolfe Philip, will eate and consume your people, by this Fable he made an Oracion, he altered their counsailes and heddes of the Athenians, from so foolishe an enterprise. Also the same Demosthenes, seyng the people careles, sloth∣full, and lothsome to heare the Oratours, and all for the flo∣rishing state of the kingdome the ascended to the place or pul∣pet, The fable of Demosthe∣nes, of the Asse and the shadowe. where the Oracions were made, and began with this fa∣ble. Ye men of Athens, saied he, it happened on a tyme, that a certaine man hired an Asse, and did take his iourney from Athens to Megara, as we would saie, frō London to Yorke, the owner also of the Asse, did associate hymself in his iour∣ney, to brynge backe the Asse againe, in the voyage the weather was extreame burning hotte, and the waie tedious the place also for barenes and sterilitée of trees, wanted sha∣dowe in this long broyle of heate: he that satte one the Asse, lighted and woke shadowe vnder the bellie of the Asse, and
because the shadowe would not suffice bothe, the Asse beyng small, the owner saied, he muste haue the shadowe, because the Asse was his, I deny that saieth the other, the shadowe is myne, because I hired the Asse, thus thei were at greate con∣tencion, the fable beyng recited, Demosthenes descended frō his place, the whole multitude were inquisitiue, to knowe the ende about the shadowe, Demosthenes notyng their fol∣lie, The conten∣cion vpon the shadowe and the Asse. afrended to his place, and saied, O ye foolishe Athemans, whiles I and other, gaue to you counsaill and admoniciō, of graue and profitable matters, your eares wer deafe, and your mindes slombred, but now I tell of a small trifeling matter, youthrong to heare the reste of me. By this Fable he nipped their follie, and trapped them manifestlie, in their owne dol∣tishenes. Here vpon I doe somwhat long, make copie of wor∣des, to shewe the singularitee of fables well applied. In the Fadles well applied bee singuler. tyme of Kyng Richard the thirde, Doctour Mourton, beyng Bishop of Elie, and prisoner in the Duke of Buckynghams house in Wales, was often tymes moued of the Duke, to speake his minde frelie, if king Richard wer lawfully king, and said to him of his fidelitee, to kepe close and secret his sen∣tence: but the Bishop beyng a godlie man, and no lesse wise, waied the greate frendship, whiche was sometyme betwene the Duke & King Richard, aunswered in effect nothyng, but beyng daily troubled with his mocions & instigacions, spake a fable of Esope: My lorde saied he, I will aunswere you, by a Fable of Esope. The Lion on a tyme gaue a commaunde∣ment, that all horned beastes should flie from the woode, and none to remain there but vnhorned beastes. The Hare hea∣ring The fable of the Bishop of Elie, to the duke of Buc∣kyngham. of this commaundement, departed with the horned bea∣stes from the woodde: The wilie Foxe metyng the Hare, de∣maunded the cause of his haste, forthwith the Hare aunswe∣red, a commaundemente is come from the Lion, that all hor∣ned beastes should bee exiled, vpon paine of death, from the woode: why saied the Foxe, this commaundement toucheth not any sorte of beast as ye are, for thou haste no hornes but
knubbes: yea, but said the Hare, what, if the i saie I haue hor∣nes, that is an other matter, my lorde I saie no more: what he ment, is euident to all men. In the time of king Hēry theight (a prince of famous me∣morie) at what time as the small houses of religiō, wer giuen euer to the kinges hand, by the Parliament house: the bishop of Rochester, Doctour Fisher by name stepped forthe, beyng greued with the graunt, recited before them, a fable of Esope to shewe what discommoditee would followe in the Clergie. My lordes and maisters saieth he, Esope recited a fable: how The fable of the Bishop of Rochester againste the graunt of the Chauntries. that on a tyme, a housebande manne desired of the woodes, a small helue for his hatchet, all the woodes consented thereto waiyng the graunt to be small, and the thyng lesse, therevpō the woodes consented, in fine the housbande man cut doune a small peece of woodde to make a helue, he framyng a helue to the hatchette, without leaue and graunt, he cut doune the mightie Okes and Cedars, and destroyed the whole woodd, then the woodes repented them to late. So saith he, the gift of these small houses, ar but a small graunt into the kinges hā∣des: but this small graunt, will bee a waie and meane to pull doune the greate mightie fatte Abbees, & so it happened. But there is repentaūce to late: & no profite ensued of the graunte. ¶ An Oracion made by a fable, is the first exer∣cise to declame by, the other, bee these, An Oracion made by a A Fable, a Narracion, Chria, Sentence. Confutacion, Confirmacion. Common place. The praise. The dispraise. The Comparison, Ethopeia. A Discripcion. Thesis, Legislatio OF euery one of these, a goodlie Oraciō maie be made these excercises are called of the Grekes Progimnas∣mata, of the Latines, profitable introduccions, or fore exercises, to attain greater arte and knowlege in Rhetorike,
and bicause, for the easie capacitée and facilitée of the learner, to attain greater knowledge in Rhetorike, thei are right pro∣fitable and necessarie: Therefore I title this booke, to bee the foundaciō of Rhetorike, the exercises being Progimnasmata. I haue chosen out the fable of the Shepeherdes, and the Wolues, vpon the whiche fable, Demosthenes made an clo∣quente, copious, and wittie Oracion before the Athenians, whiche fable was so well applied, that the citée and common wealth of Athens was saued. ¶ A fable. The firste exercise. These notes must be obserued, to make an Oracion by a Fable. ¶ Praise. 1.Firste, ye shall recite the fable, as the aucthour telleth it. 2.There in the seconde place, you shall praise the aucthoure who made the fable, whiche praise maie sone bée gotte of any studious scholer, if he reade the aucthours life and actes ther∣in, or the Godlie preceptes in his fables, shall giue abundant praise. 3.Then thirdlie place the morall, whiche is the interpreta∣cion annexed to the Fable, for the fable was inuented for the moralles sake. 4.Then orderlie in the fowerth place, declare the nature of thynges, conteined in the Fable, either of man, fishe, foule, beaste, plante, trées, stones, or whatsoeuer it be. There is no man of witte so dulle, or of so grosse capacitée, but either by his naturall witte, or by reading, or sences, he is hable to saie somwhat in the nature of any thyng. 5.In the fifte place, sette forthe the thynges, reasonyng one with an other, as the Ant with the Greshopper, or the Cocke with the precious stone. 6.Thē in the vj. place, make a similitude of the like matter. 7.Then in the seuenth place, induce an exāple for the same matter to bée proued by. 8.Laste of all make the Epilogus, whiche is called the con∣clusion, and herein marke the notes folowyng, how to make
an Oracion thereby. ¶ An Oracion made vpon the fable of the Shepeherdes and the wolues. ¶ The fable. THe Wolues on a tyme perswaded the Shepeher∣des, that thei would ioyne amitee, and make a leagne of concord and vnitee: the demaunde plea∣sed the Shepeherdes, foorthwith the Wolues re∣quested to haue custodie of the bande Dogges, because els theiwould be as thei are alwaies, an occasion to breake their league and peace, the Dogges beyng giuen ouer, thei were one by one murthered, and then the Shepe were wearied. ¶ The praise of the aucthour. THe posteritee of tymes and ages, muste needes praise the wisedome and industrie, of all soche as haue lefte in monumentes of writyng, thynges worthie fame, Inuentours of al excellent artes and sci∣ences, com∣mended to the posteritee. what can bee more excellently set foorthe: or what deserueth chiefer fame and glorie, then the knowledge of artes and sci∣ences, inuented by our learned, wise, and graue aūcestours: and so moche the more thei deserue honour, and perpetuall commendacions, because thei haue been the firste aucthours, and beginners to soche excellencies. The posteritée praiseth and setteth forth the wittie and ingenious workes of Apelles, Parthesius, and Polucletus, and all soche as haue artificial∣ly Apelles. Parthesius. Polucletus. setforth their excellent giftes of nature. But if their praise for fame florishe perpetuallie, and increaseth for the wor∣thines of theim, yet these thynges though moste excellent, are inferiour to vertue: for the ende of artes and sciences, is ver∣tue The ende of all artes, is to godlie life. and godlines. Neither yet these thynges dissonaunt from vertue, and not associate, are commendable onely for vertues sake: and to the ende of vertue, the wittes of our auncestours were incensed to inuent these thynges. But herein Polude∣tus, Apelles, and Parthesius maie giue place, when greater vertues come in place, then this my aucthour Esope, for his Esope wor∣thie moche commendaciō godly preceptes, wise counsaill and admonicion, is chiefly to
bée praised: For, our life maie learne all goodnes, all vertue, of his preceptes. The Philosophers did neuer lo liuely sette Philophie in fables. forthe and teache in their scholes and audience, what vertue and godlie life were, as Esope did in his Fables, Citees, and common wealthes, maie learne out of his fables, godlie con∣corde Realmes maie learne concorde out of Esopes fables. and vnitee, by the whiche meanes, common wealthes florisheth, and kingdoms are saued. Herein ample matter ri∣seth to Princes, and gouernours, to rule their subiectes in all godlie lawes, in faithfull obedience: the subiectes also to loue Preceptes to Kynges and Subiectes. Preceptes to parentes and children. and scrue their prince, in al his affaires and busines. The fa∣ther maie learne to bring vp, and instructe his childe thereby. The child also to loue and obeie his parentes. The huge and monsterous vices, are by his vertuous doctrine defaced and extirpated: his Fables in effcet contain the mightic volumes and bookes of all Philosophers, in morall preceptes, & the in∣finite monumētes of lawes stablished. If I should not speake The content of al Lawes. of his commendacion, the fruictes of his vertue would shewe his commendacions: but that praise surmounteth all fame of glory, that commendeth by fame it self, the fruictes of fame I true praise commēded by fame it self. in this one Fable, riseth to my aucthour, whiche he wrote of the Shepeherd, and the Wolues. ¶ The Morall. WHerein Esope wittely admonisheth all menne to be∣ware and take heede, of cloked and fained frendship, of the wicked and vngodlie, whiche vnder a pretence and offer of frendship or of benefite, seeke the ruin, dammage, miserie or destruccion of man, toune, citée, region, or countree. ¶ The nature of the thyng. OF all beastes to the quantitée of his bodie, the Wolue passeth in crueltée and desire of bloode, The wolue moste raue∣ning & cruell. alwaies vnsaciable of deuouryng, neuer conten∣ted with his pray. The Wolfe deuoureth and ea∣teth of his praie all in feare, and therefore oftentymes he ca∣steth his looke, to be safe from perill and daunger. And herein
his nature is straunge frō all beastes: the iyes of the Wolfe, tourned from his praie immediatlie, the praie prostrate vnder The wolues of all beastes, moste obui∣ous. his foote is forgotten, and forthwith he see keth a newe praie, so greate obliuion and debilitee of memorie, is giuen to that beaste, who chieflie seketh to denoure his praie by night. The Wolues are moche inferior to the bandogges in strength, bi∣cause The wolue inferiour to the bandogge nature hath framed thē in the hinder parts, moche more weaker, and as it were manned, and therefore the bandogge dooeth ouermatche theim, and ouercome them in fight. The Wolues are not all so mightie of bodie as the Bandogges, of diuers colours, of fight more sharpe, of lesse heddes: but in The Dogge passeth all creatures in smellyng. smellyng, the nature of a Dogge passeth all beastes and creatures, whiche the historie of Plinie dooe shewe, and Ari∣stotle in his booke of the historie of beastes, therein you shall knowe their excellente nature. The housholde wanteth not faithfull and trustie watche nor resistaunce, in the cause of the maister, the Bandogge not wantyng. Plinie sheweth out of Plinie. his historie, how Bandogges haue saued their Maister, by their resistaunce. The Dogge of all beastes sheweth moste loue, and neuer leaueth his maister: the worthines of the bā∣dogge is soche, that by the lawe in a certaine case, he is coun∣ted accessarie of Felonie, who stealeth a Bandogge from his maister, a robberie immediatly folowing in the same family. As concernyng the Shepe, for their profite and wealthe, The worthi∣nes of Shepe that riseth of theim, are for worthines, waiyng their smalle quantitie of bodie, aboue all beastes. Their fleshe nourisheth purely, beyng swete and pleasaunt: their skinne also serueth to diuers vses, their Wolles in so large and ample maner, The wolle of Shepe, riche and commo∣dious. commodious, seruyng all partes of common wealthes. No state or degrée of persone is, but that thei maie goe cladde and adorned with their wolles. So GOD in his creatures, hath created and made man, beyng a chief creatour, and moste ex∣cellent Man a chief creature. of all other, all thinges to scrue him: and therefore the Stoicke Philosophers doe herein sheweth excellencie of man Stoike Phi∣losophers. to be greate, when all thinges vpon the yearth, and from the
yearth, doe serue the vse of man, yet emong men there is a di∣uersitee of states, and a difference of persones, in office and cō∣dicion of life. As concernyng the Shepherde, he is in his state The office of the shepeher∣des, are pro∣fitable and necessarie. and condicion of life, thoughe meane, he is a righte profi∣table and necessarie member, to serue all states in the commō wealthe, not onely to his maister whom he serueth: for by his diligence, and warie keping of thē, not onely from rauenyng beastes, but otherwise he is a right profitable member, to all partes of the common wealth. For, dailie wée féele the cōmo∣ditie, wealth, pro∣fit, and riches riseth of the wolles of Shepe. wealth and riches, that riseth of theim, but the losse wée féele not, except flockes perishe. In the body of man God hath created & made diuerse partes, to make vp a whole and abso∣lute man, whiche partes in office, qualitée and worthinesse, are moche differing. The bodie of man itself, for the excellent workemanship of God therein, & meruailous giftes of nature and vertues, lodged and bestowed in the same bodie, is called Man called of the Philo∣sophers, a lit∣tle worlde. of the Philosophers Microcosmos, a little worlde. The body of man in all partes at cōcord, euery part executing his func∣cion & office, florisheth, and in strength prospereth, otherwise the same bodie in partes disseuered, is feeble and weake, and The bodie of man without concord of the partes, peri∣sheth. thereby falleth to ruin, and perisheth. The singuler Fable of Esope, of the belie and handes, manifestlie sheweth the same and herein a florishing kingdom or common wealth, is com∣pared to the body, euery part vsing his pure vertue, strēgth & The common wealthe like to the bodie of manne. Menenius. operacion. Menenius Agrippa, at what time as the Romai▪ were at diuision against the Senate, he vsed the Fable of E∣sope, wherewith thei were perswaded to a concorde, and vni∣tée. The vilest parte of the bodie, and baseste is so necessarie, The baseste parte of the bodie moste necessarie. that the whole bodie faileth and perisheth, the same wantyng although nature remoueth them from our sight, and shame fastnes also hideth theim: take awaie the moste vilest parte of the bodie, either in substaunce, in operacion or function, and forthwith the principall faileth. So likewise in a kyngdome, or common wealth, the moste meane and basest state of man taken awaie, the more principall thereby ceaseth: So God to
a mutuall concorde, frendship, and perpetuall societie of life, The amiable parte of the body doe con∣siste, by the baseste and moste befor∣meste. hath framed his creatures, that the moste principall faileth, it not vnited with partes more base and inferiour, so moche the might and force of thynges excellente, doe consiste by the moste inferiour, other partes of the bodie more amiable and pleasaunt to sight, doe remain by the force, vse and integritée of the simpliest. The Prince and chief peres doe decaie, and al the whole multitude dooe perishe: the baseste kinde of menne wantyng. Remoue the Shepeherdes state, what good follo∣weth, The Shepe∣herdes state necessarie. The state of the husbande manne, moste necessarie. yea, what lacke and famine increaseth not: to all states the belie ill fedde, our backes worse clad. The toilyng house∣bandman is so necessarie, that his office ceasyng vniuersallie the whole bodie perisheth, where eche laboureth to further and aide one an other, this is a common wealth, there is pro∣sperous state of life. The wisest Prince, the richest, the migh∣tiest and moste valiauntes, had nede alwaies of the foolishe, the weake, the base and simplest, to vpholde his kingdomes, not onely in the affaires of his kyngdomes, but in his dome∣sticall thinges, for prouisiō of victuall, as bread, drinke, meat clothyng, and in all soche other thynges. Therefore, no office or state of life, be it neuer so méete, seruyng in any part of the common wealthe, muste bée contemned, mocked, or skorned No meane state, to be contempned. at, for thei are so necessarie, that the whole frame of the com∣mon wealth faileth without theim: some are for their wicked behauiour so detestable, that a common wealthe muste séeke meanes to deface and extirpate theim as wéedes, and rotten members of the bodie. These are thefes, murtherers, and ad∣ulterers, Rotten mem¦bers of the cō¦mon wealth. and many other mischiuous persones. These godly Lawes, vpright and sincere Magistrates, will extirpate and cutte of, soche the commo wealth lacketh not, but rather ab∣horreth as an infectiue plague and Pestilence, who in thende through their owne wickednesse, are brought to mischief. Read Plato in his booke, intiteled of the common wealth who sheweth the state of the Prince, and whole Realme, to Plato. stande and consiste by the vnitée of partes, all states of the cō∣mon
wealth, in office diuers, for dignitée and worthines, bea∣ring A common wealth doe consiste by vnitie of all states. Aristotle. what is a cō∣mon wealth. not equalitee in one consociatee and knit, doe raise a per∣fite frame, and bodie of kingdome or common wealthe. Aristotle the Philosopher doeth saie, that a cōmon welth is a multitude gathered together in one Citée, or Region, in state and condicion of life diuering, poore and riche, high and low, wise and foolishe, in inequalitee of minde and bodies dif∣feryng, for els it can not bee a common wealthe. There must be nobles and peres, kyng and subiect: a multitude inferiour and more populous, in office, maners, worthines alteryng. Manne needeth no better example, or paterne of a common A liuely exā∣ple of commō wealthe. wealthe, to frame hymself, to serue in his state and callyng, then to ponder his owne bodie. There is but one hedde, and many partes, handes, feete, fingers, toes, ioyntes, veines, si∣newes, belie, and so forthe: and so likewise in a cōmon welth there muste be a diuersitee of states. ¶ The reasonyng of the thynges conteined in this Fable. THus might the Wolues reason with themsel∣ues, of their Embassage: The Wolues dailie molested and wearied, with the fearce ragyng Masties, and ouercome in fight, of their power and might: one among the reste, more politike and wise then the other, called an assemble and counsaill of Wolues, and thus he beganne his oracion. My felowes and The counsail of wolues. compaignions, sithe nature hath from the beginnyng, made vs vnsaciable, cruell, liuyng alwaies by praies murthered, and bloodie spoiles, yet enemies wée haue, that séeke to kepe vnder, and tame our Woluishe natures, by greate mightie Bandogges, and Shepeherdes Curres. But nature at the firste, did so depely frame and set this his peruerse, cruell, and bloodie moulde in vs, that will thei, nill thei, our nature wil bruste out, and run to his owne course. I must moche, wai∣yng the line of our firste progenitour, from whence we came
firste: for of a man wée came, yet men as a pestiferous poison doe erile vs, and abandon vs, and by Dogges and other sub∣till meanes doe dailie destroie vs. Lycaon, as the Poetes doe Lycaon. faine, excedyng in all crueltées and murthers horrible, by the murther of straungers, that had accesse to his land: for he was king and gouernor ouer the Moloffians, and in this we maie worthilie glorie of our firste blood and long auncientrée, that he was not onelie a man, but a kyng, a chief pere and gouer∣nour: The firste progenie of wolues. by his chaunge and transubstanciacion of bodie, wée loste by him the honour and dignitée due to him, but his ver∣tues wée kepe, and daily practise to followe them. The fame of Lycaons horrible life, aseended before Iupiter, Iupiter the The inuen∣cion of the Poet Ouide to compare a wicked man, to a wolue. mightie God, moued with so horrible a facte, left his heauen∣lie palace, came doune like an other mortall man; and passed doune by the high mountaine Minalus, by twilighte, and sō to Licaons house, our firste auncestoure, to proue, if this thing was true. Lycaon receiued this straunger, as it semed Lycaon. doubtyng whether he were a God, or a manne, forthwith he feasted him with mannes fleshe baked, Iupiter as he can doe what he will, brought a ruine on his house, and transubstan∣ciated Lycaon chaū¦ged into a wolue. hym, into this our shape & figure, wherein we are, and so sens that time, Wolues were firste generated, and that of manne, by the chaunge of Lycaon, although our shape is chaunged from the figure of other men, and men knoweth vs not well, yet the same maners that made Wolues, remai∣neth wolue. Manner. vntill this daie, and perpetuallie in men: for thei robbe, thei steale, and liue by iniurious catching, we also robbe, al∣so wee steale, and catche to our praie, what wee maie with murther come to. Thei murther, and wee also murther, and so in all poinctes like vnto wicked menne, doe we imitate the like fashion of life, and rather thei in shape of men, are Wol∣ues, and wee in the shape of Wolues menne: Of all these thynges hauyng consideracion, I haue inuented a pollicie, whereby we maie woorke a slauter, and perpetuall ruine on the Shepe, by the murther of the Bandogges. And so wee
shall haue frée accesse to our bloodie praie, thus we will doe, wee will sende a Embassage to the Shepeherdes for peace, saiyng, that wee minde to ceasse of all bloodie spoile, so that thei will giue ouer to vs, the custodie of the Bandogges, for The counsail of wolues. otherwise the Embassage sent, is in vaine: for their Dogges being in our handes, and murthered one by one, the daunger and enemie taken awaie, we maie the better obtain and en∣ioye our bloodie life. This counsaill pleased well the assem∣ble of the Wolues, and the pollicie moche liked theim, and with one voice thei houled thus, thus. Immediatlie cōmuni∣cacion was had with the Shepeherdes of peace, and of the gi∣uyng ouer of their Bandogges, this offer pleased theim, thei cōcluded the peace, and gaue ouer their Bandogges, as pled∣ges of thesame. The dogges one by one murthered, thei dis∣solued the peace, and wearied the Shepe, then the Shepeher∣des repented them of their rashe graunt, and foly committed: So of like sorte it alwaies chaunceth, tyrauntes and bloodie The counsail of wicked mē to mischief. menne, dooe seke alwaies a meane, and practise pollicies to destroye all soche as are godlie affected, and by wisedome and godlie life, doe seke to subuerte and destroie, the mischeuous The cogita∣cions of wic∣ked men, and their kyngdō bloodie. enterprise of the wicked. For, by crueltie their Woluishe na∣tures are knowen, their glorie, strength, kyngdome and re∣nowne, cometh of blood, of murthers, and beastlie dealynges and by might so violent, it continueth not: for by violence and blooddie dealyng, their kyngdome at the last falleth by blood and bloodilie perisheth. The noble, wise, graue, and goodlie counsailes, are with all fidelitée, humblenes and sincere har∣tes to be obeied, in worthines of their state and wisedome, to The state of counsailours worthie chief honour and veneracion. be embraced in chief honour and veneracion to bee taken, by whose industrie, knowledge and experience, the whole bodie of the common wealth and kyngdome, is supported and sa∣ued. The state of euery one vniuersallie would come to par∣dicion, if the inuasion of foraine Princes, by the wisedom and pollicie of counsailers, were not repelled. The horrible actes of wicked men would burste out, and a confusion ensue in al
states, if the wisedom of politike gouernors, if good lawes if the power and sword of the magistrate, could not take place. The peres and nobles, with the chief gouernour, slandeth as Shepherds ouer the people: for so Plato alledgeth that name Plato. well and properlie giuen, to Princes and Gouernours, the which Homere the Poete attributeth, to Agamemnon king Homere. of Grece: to Menclaus, Vlisses, Nestor, Achillas, Diomedes, Aiar, and al other. For, bothe the name and care of that state The Shepeherdes name giuē to the of∣fice of kyngs. of office, can be titeled by no better name in all pointes, for di∣ligent kepyng, for aide, succoryng, and with all equitie tem∣peryng the multitude: thei are as Shepeherdes els the sclie poore multitude, would by an oppression of pestiferous men. The commonaltee or base multitude, liueth more quietlie then the state of soche as daily seke, to vpholde and maintaine The state or good counsal¦lers, trou∣blous. the common wealthe, by counsaill and politike deliberacion, how troublous hath their state alwaies been: how vnquiete from time to time, whose heddes in verie deede, doeth seke for a publike wealth. Therefore, though their honor bee greater, and state aboue the reste, yet what care, what pensiuenesse of minde are thei driuen vnto, on whose heddes aucthoritée and regiment, the sauegard of innumerable people doeth depend. A comparision from a lesse, to a greater. If in our domesticall businesse, of matters pertainyng to our housholde, euery man by nature, for hym and his, is pensiue, moche more in so vaste, and infinite a bodie of cōmon wealth, greater must the care be, and more daungerous deliberacion. We desire peace, we reioyce of a tranquilitée, and quietnesse to ensue, we wishe, to consist in a hauen of securitée: our hou∣ses not to be spoiled, our wiues and children, not to bée mur∣thered. This the Prince and counsailours, by wisedome fore∣sée, The worthie state of Prin∣ces and coun∣sailours. to kéepe of, all these calamitées, daungers, miseries, the whole multitude, and bodie of the Common wealthe, is without them maimed, weake and feable, a readie confusion to the enemie. Therefore, the state of péeres and nobles, is with all humilitée to be obaied, serued and honored, not with∣out greate cause, the Athenians were drawen backe, by the
wisedome of Demostnenes, when thei sawe thēselues a slau∣ter and praie, to the enemie. ¶ A comparson of thynges. WHat can bée more rashly and foolishly doen, then the Shepeherdes, to giue ouer their Dogges, by whose might and strength, the Shepe were saued: on the o∣ther side, what can be more subtlie doen and craftely, then the Wolues, vnder a colour of frendship and amitée, to séeke the blood of the shepe, as all pestiferous men, vnder a fained pro∣fer The amitie of wicked menns. of amitée, profered to seeke their owne profite, commoditée and wealthe, though it be with ruine, calamitie, miserie, de∣struccion of one, or many, toune, or citée, region and countree, whiche sort of men, are moste detestable and execrable. ¶ The contrarie. AS to moche simplicitie & lacke of discrecion, is a fur∣theraunce to perill and daunger: so oftētimes, he ta∣steth of smarte and woe, who lightly beleueth: so con∣trariwise, To beleue lightly, a fur∣theraunce to perill. disimulaciō in mischeuous practises begon wt frēd∣ly wordes, in the conclusion doeth frame & ende pernisiouslie. ¶ The Epilogus. THerefore fained offers of frendship, are to bee taken heede of, and the acte of euery man to bee examined, proued, and tried, for true frendship is a rare thyng, when as Tullie doth saie: in many ages there are fewe cou∣ples of friendes to be found, Aristotle also cōcludeth the same. ¶ The Fable of the Ante, and Greshopper. ¶ The praise of the aucthour. ESope who wrote these Fables, hath chief fame of all learned aucthours, for his Philosophie, and giuyng The praise of Esope. wisedome in preceptes: his Fables dooe shewe vnto all states moste wholsome doctrine of vertuous life. He who∣ly extolleth vertue, and depresseth vice: he correcteth all states and setteth out preceptes to amende them. Although he was deformed and ill shaped, yet Nature wrought in hym soche
vertue, that he was in minde moste beautifull: and seing that the giftes of the body, are not equall in dignitie, with the ver∣tue of the mynde, then in that Esope chiefly excelled, ha∣uyng the moste excellente vertue of the minde. The wisedom and witte of Esope semed singuler: for at what tyme as Cre∣sus, Cresus. the kyng of the Lidians, made warre against the Sami∣ans, he with his wisedome and pollicie, so pacified the minde of Cresus, that all warre ceased, and the daunger of the coun∣tree was taken awaie, the Samiās deliuered of this destruc∣cion Samians. and warre, receiued Esope at his retourne with many honours. After that Esope departyng from the Isle Samus, wandered to straunge regions, at the laste his wisedome be∣yng knowen: Licerus the kyng of that countrée, had hym in Licerus. soche reuerence and honor, that he caused an Image of gold to be set vp in the honour of Esope. After that, he wanderyng ouer Grece, to the citée of Delphos, of whom he beyng mur∣thered, Delphos. a greate plague and Pestilence fell vpon the citee, that reuenged his death: As in all his Fables, he is moche to bee commended, so in this Fable he is moche to be praised, which he wrote of the Ante and the Greshopper. ¶ The Fable. IN a hotte Sommer, the Grashoppers gaue themsel∣ues to pleasaunt melodie, whose Musicke and melo∣die, was harde from the pleasaunt Busshes: but the Ante in all this pleasaunt tyme, laboured with pain and tra∣uaile, she scraped her liuyng, and with fore witte and wise∣dome, preuented the barande and scarce tyme of Winter: for when Winter time aprocheth, the ground ceasseth frō fruict, winter. then the Ante by his labour, doeth take the fruicte & enioyeth it: but hunger and miserie fell vpon the Greshoppers, who in The Ante. the pleasaunt tyme of Sommer, when frues were aboun∣daunte, ceassed by labour to put of necessitée, with the whiche the long colde and stormie tyme, killed therp, wantyng al sustinaunce.
¶ The Morall. HEre in example, all menne maie take to frame their owne life, and also to bryng vp in godlie educacion their children: that while age is tender and young, thei maie learne by example of the Ante, co prouide in their grene and lustie youth, some meane of art and science, wher∣by thei maie staie their age and necessitée of life, al soche as do flie labour, and paine in youth, and seeke no waie of Arte and science, in age thei shall fall in extreme miserie and pouertée. ¶ The nature of the thyng. NOt without a cause, the Philosophers searchyng the nature and qualitee of euery beaste, dooe moche com∣mende the Ante, for prouidence and diligence, in that The Ante. not oneie by nature thei excell in fore wisedome to thēselues, but also thei be a example, and mirrour to all menne, in that Manne. thei iustlie followe the instincte of Nature: and moche more, where as men indued with reason, and all singulare vertues and excellent qualitees of the minde and body. Yet thei doe so moche leaue reason, vertue, & integritee of minde, as that thei had been framed without reason, indued with no vertue, nor adorned with any excellent qualitée. All creatures as nature hath wrought in them, doe applie themselues to followe na∣ture their guide: the Ante is alwaies diligent in his busines, and prouident, and also fore séeth in Sommer, the sharpe sea∣son of Winter: thei keepe order, and haue a kyng and a com∣mon wealthe as it were, as nature hath taught them. And so haue all other creatures, as nature hath wrought in thē their giftes, man onelie leaueth reason, and neclecteth the chief or∣namentes of the minde: and beyng as a God aboue all crea∣tures, dooeth leese the excellent giftes. A beaste will not take excesse in feedyng, but man often tymes is without reason, and hauyng a pure mynde and soule giuen of God, and a face to beholde the heauens, yet he doeth abase hymself to yearth∣lie thynges, as concernyng the Greshopper: as the Philoso∣phers Greshopper. doe saie, is made altogether of dewe, and sone perisheth
The Greshopper maie well resemble, slothfull and sluggishe persones, who seke onely after a present pleasure, hauyng no fore witte and wisedom, to foresee tymes and ceasons: for it is A poincte of wisedome. the poinct of wisedō, to iudge thinges present, by thinges past and to take a cōiecture of thinges to come, by thinges present. ¶ The reasonyng of the twoo thynges. THus might the Ante reason with her self, althoughe the seasons of the yere doe seme now very botte, plea∣saunt A wise cogi∣tacion. and fruictfull: yet so I do not trust time, as that like pleasure should alwaies remaine, or that fruictes should alwaies of like sorte abounde. Nature moueth me to worke, and wisedome herein sheweth me to prouide: for what hur∣teth plentie, or aboundaunce of store, though greate plentie commeth thereon, for better it is to bee oppressed with plen∣tie, and aboundaunce, then to bee vexed with lacke. For, to whom wealthe and plentie riseth, at their handes many bee releued, and helped, all soche as bee oppressed with necessi∣tie and miserie, beyng caste from all helpe, reason and proui∣dence mainted in theim: All arte and Science, and meane of life cutte of, to enlarge and maintain better state of life, their miserie, necessitie, and pouertie, shall continuallie encrease, Pouertie. who hopeth at other mennes handes, to craue relief, is decei∣ued. Pouertie is so odious a thing, in al places & states reiected for where lacke is, there fauour, frendship, and acquaintance decreaseth, as in all states it is wisedome: so with my self I waie discritlie, to take tyme while tyme is, for this tyme as a Wisedome. floure will sone fade awaie. The housebande manne, hath he not times diuers, to encrease his wealth, and to fill his barne, Housebande menne. at one tyme and ceason: the housebande man doeth not bothe plante, plowe, and gather the fruicte of his labour, but in one tyme and season he ploweth, another tyme serueth to sowe, and the laste to gather the fruictes of his labour. So then, I must forsee time and seasons, wherin I maie be able to beare of necessitie: for foolishly he hopeth, who of no wealth and no abundaunt store, trusteth to maintain his own state. For, no∣thyng
soner faileth, then frendship, and the soner it faileth, as Frendship. fortune is impouerished. Seyng that, as Homere doeth saie, a flothfull man, giuen to no arte or science, to helpe hymself, Homere. or an other, is an vnprofitable burdein to the yearth, and God doorth sore plague, punishe, and ouerthrowe Citees, kyng∣domes, and common wealthes, grounded in soche vices: that the wisedome of man maie well iudge, hym to be vnworthie of all helpe, and sustinaunce. He is worse then a beast, that is not able to liue to hymself & other: no man is of witte so vn∣descrite, or of nature so dullc, but that in hym, nature alwa∣yes Nature. couereth some enterprise, or worke to frame relife, or help to himself, for all wee are not borne, onelie to our selues, but The cause of our bearth. many waies to be profitable, as to our owne countrie, and all partes thereof. Especiallie to soche as by sickenes, or infirmi∣tie of bodie are oppressed, that arte and Science can not take place to help thē. Soche as do folowe the life of the Greshop∣per. are worthie of their miserie, who haue no witte to foresée seasons and tymes, but doe suffer tyme vndescretly to passe, whiche fadeth as a floure, thold Romaines do picture Ianus with two faces, a face behind, & an other before, which resem∣ble Ianus. a wiseman, who alwaies ought to knowe thinges paste, thynges presente, and also to be experte, by the experience of many ages and tymes, and knowledge of thynges to come. ¶ The comparison betwene the twoo thynges. WHat can be more descritlie doen, then the Ante to be so prouident and politike: as that all daunger of life, & necessitie is excluded, the stormie times of Winter ceaseth of might, & honger battereth not his walles, hauyng soche plentie of foode, for vnlooked bitter stormes and seasons, Prouidence. happeneth in life, whiche when thei happen, neither wisedō nor pollicie, is not able to kepe backe. Wisedome therefore, it is so to stande, that these thynges hurte not, the miserable ende of the Greshopper sheweth vnto vs, whiche maie be an example to all menne, of what degree, so euer thei bee, to flie
slothe and idelnesse, to be wise and discrite. ¶ Of contraries. AS diligence, prouidence, and discrete life is a singu∣lare gift, whiche increaseth all vertues, a pillar, staie Diligence. and a foundacion of all artes and science, of common wealthes, and kyngdomes. So contrarily sloth and sluggish∣nesse, in all states and causes, defaseth, destroyeth, and pul∣leth doune all vertue, all science and godlines. For, by it, the mightie kyngdome of the Lidiās, was destroied, as it semeth no small vice, when the Lawes of Drac, dooe punishe with Idelnes. death idelnesse. ¶ The ende. THerefore, the diligence of the Ante in this Fable, not onelie is moche to be commended, but also her The Ante. example is to bee followed in life. Therefore, the wiseman doeth admonishe vs, to go vnto the Ant and learne prouidence: and also by the Greshopper, lette vs learne to auoide idelnes, lesse the like miserie and calamitie fall vpon vs. ¶ Narratio. THis place followyng, is placed of Tullie, after the exordium or beginnyng of Oracion, as the seconde parte: whiche parte of Rhetorike, is as it were the light of all the Oracion folowing: conteining the cause, mat∣ter, persone, tyme, with all breuitie, bothe of wordes, and in∣uencion of matter. ¶ A Narracion. A Narracion is an exposicion, orderlaracion of any thyng dooen in deede, or els a settyng forthe, for∣ged of any thyng, but so declaimed and declared, as though it were doen. A narracion is of three sortes, either it is a narracion hi∣storicall, of any thyng contained, in any aunciente storie, or true Chronicle.
Or Poeticall, whiche is a exposicion fained, set for the by inuencion of Poetes, or other. Or ciuill, otherwise called Iudiciall, whiche is a matter of controuersie in iudgement, to be dooen, or not dooen well or euill. In euery Narracion, ye must obserue sixe notes. 1. Firste, the persone, or doer of the thing, whereof you intreate. 2. The facte doen. 3. The place wherein it was doen. 4. The tyme in the whiche it was doen. 5. The maner must be shewed, how it was doen. 6. The cause wherevpon it was doen. There be in this Narracion, iiij. other properties belōging 1. First, it must be plain and euident to the hearer, not obscure, 2. short, and in as fewe wordes as it maie be, for soche a matter. 3. Probable, as not vnlike to be true. 4. In wordes fine and elegante. ¶ A narracion historicall, vpon Semiramis Queene of Babilon how and after what sort the obtained the gouernment thereof. AFter the death of Ninus, somtime kyng of Ba∣bilon, Tyme. his soonne Nuius also by name, was left Persone. to succede hym, in all the Assirian Monarchie, Semiramis wife to Ninus the firste, feared the tender age of her sonne, wherupon she thought that those mightie nacions and kyngdomes, would not obaie The cause. so young and weake a Prince. Wherfore, she kept her sonne The facte. from the gouernmente: and moste of all she feared, that thei would not obaie a woman, forthwith she fained her self, to be The waie how. the soonne of Ninus, and bicause she would not be knowen to bee a woman, this Quene inuented a newe kinde of tire, the whiche all the Babilonians that were men, vsed by her commaundement. By this straunge disguised tire and appa∣rell, she not knowen to bee a woman, ruled as a man, for the space of twoo and fourtie yeres: she did marueilous actes, for The facte. The place. she enlarged the mightie kyngdome of Babilon, and builded
the same citée. Many other regions subdued, and vallauntlie ouerthrowen, she entered India, to the whiche neuer Prince came, sauing Alexander the greate: she paed not onely men in vertue, counsaill, and valiaunt stomacke, but also the fa∣mous counsailours of Assiria, might not contende with her in Maiestie, pollicie, and roialnes. For, at what tyme as thei knewe her a woman, thei enuied not her state, but maruei∣led at her wisedome, pollicie, and moderacion of life, at the laste she desiryng the vnnaturall lust, and loue of her soonne Ninus, was murthered of hym. ¶ A narracion historicall vpon kyng Ri∣chard the third, the cruell tiraunt▪ RIchard duke of Glocester, after the death of Ed∣ward The persone the fowerth his brother king of England, vsurped the croune, moste traiteroue and wic∣kedlie: this kyng Richard was sll of stature, deformed, and ill shaped, his shoulders beared not equalitie, a pulyng face, yet of countenaunce and looke cruell, malicious, deceiptfull, bityng and chawing his nether lippe: of minde vnquiet, pregnaunt of witte, quicke and liue∣ly, a worde and a blowe, wilie, deceiptfull, proude, arrogant in life and cogitacion bloodie. The fowerth daie of Iulie, he The tyme▪ The place. entered the tower of London, with Anne his wife, doughter to Richard Exle of Warwick: and there in created Edward his onely soonne, a child of ten yeres of age, Prince of Wa∣les. At the same tyme, in the same place, he created many no∣ble peres, to high prefermente of honour and estate, and im∣mediatly with feare and faint harte, bothe in himself, and his nobles and commons, was created king, alwaies a vnfortu∣nate The horrible murther of king Richard and vnluckie creacion, the harts of the nobles and com∣mons thereto lackyng or faintyng, and no maruaile, he was a cruell murtherer, a wretched caitiffe, a moste tragicall ty∣raunt, and blood succour, bothe of his nephewes, and brother George Duke of Clarence, whom he caused to bee drouned in a Butte of , the staires sodainlie remoued, wher∣on
he stepped, the death of the lorde Riuers, with many other The facte. nobles, compassed and wrought at the young Princes com∣myng out of Wales, the .xix. daie of Iuly, in the yere of our lorde. 1483. openly he toke vpon him to be king, who sekyng hastely to clime, fell according to his desart, sodainly and in∣gloriously, whose Embassage for peace, Lewes the Frenche king, for his miseheuous & boodie slaughter, so moche abhor∣red, that he would neither see the Embassador, nor heare the Embassage: for he murthered his .ij. nephues, by the handes of one Iames Tirrell, & .ij. vilaines more associate with him The tyme. The maner how. the Lieutenaunt refusyng so horrible a fact. This was doen he takyng his waie & progresse to Glocester, whereof he was before tymes Duke: the murther perpetrated, he doubed the good squire knight. Yet to kepe close this horrible murther, he caused a fame and rumour to be spread abrode, in all par∣tes of the realme, that these twoo childrē died sodainly, there∣by thinkyng the hartes of all people, to bee quietlie setteled, The cause. no heire male lefte a liue of kyng Edwardes children. His mischief was soche, that God shortened his vsurped raigne: he was altogether in feare and dread, for he being feared and dreaded of other, did also feare & dread, neuer quicte of minde faint harted, his bloodie conscience by outward signes, condē∣pned hym: his iyes in euery place whirlying and caste about, his hand moche on his Dagger, the infernall furies tormen∣ted The state of a wicked mā. him by night, visions and horrible dreames, drawed him from his bedde, his vnquiet life shewed the state of his consci∣ence, his close murther was vttered, frō the hartes of the sub∣iectes: thei called hym openlie, with horrible titles and na∣mes, a horrible murtherer, and excecrable tiraunt. The peo∣ple sorowed the death of these twoo babes, the Queene, kyng A dolefull stale of a quene. Edwardes wife, beeyng in Sanctuarie, was bestraught of witte and sences, sounyng and falling doune to the grounde as dedde, the Queene after reuiued, knéeled doune, and cal∣led on God, to take vengaunce on this murtherer. The con∣science of the people was so wounded, of the tolleracion of the
facte, that when any blustryng winde, or perilous thonder, or The wicked facte of kyng Richard, a horror and dread to the commons. dreadfull tempest happened: with one voice thei cried out and quaked, least God would take vengaūce of them, for it is al∣waies seen the horrible life of wicked gouernors, bringeth to ruin their kyngdom and people, & also wicked people, the like daungers to the kyngdome and Prince: well he and his sup∣porters with the Duke of Buckyngham, died shamefullie, God permit meanes, to pull doune tyrauntes. The knotte of mariage promised, betwene Henrie Erle of Richemonde, and Elizabeth doughter to kyng Edward the fowerth: caused diuerse nobles to aide and associate this erle, fledde out of this lande with all power, to the attainmente of the kyngdome by his wife. At Nottyngham newes came to kyng Richard, that the Erle of Richmonde, with a small cō∣paignie of nobles and other, was arriued in Wales, forthe∣with exploratours and spies were serit, who shewed the Erle to be encampled, at the toune of Lihfield, forthwith all pre∣paracion Lichefelde. of warre, was set forthe to Leicester on euery side, Leicester. the Nobles and commons shranke from kyng Richarde, his power more and more weakened. By a village called Bos∣worthe, Bosworthe in a greate plaine, méete for twoo battailes: by Lei∣cester this held was pitched, wherin king Richard manfully fightyng hande to hande, with the Erle of Richmonde, was slame, his bodie caried shamefullie, to the toune of Leicester naked, without honor, as he deserned, trussed on a horse, be∣hinde Kyng Ri∣chard killed in Bosworth fielde. a Purseuaunte of Armes, like a hogge or a Calfe, his hedde and his armes hangyng on the one side, and his legges on the other side: caried through mire and durte, to the graie Friers churche, to all men a spectacle, and oprobrie of tiran∣nie this was the cruell tiramites ende. ¶ A narracion historicall, of the commyng of Iulius Cesar into Britaine. WHen Iulius Cesar had ended his mightie and huge battailes, about the stood Rhene, he marched into the The tyme. regiō of Fraunce: at the same time repairing with a The persone. freshe multitude, his Legiōs, but the chief cause of his warie
in Fraunce was, that of long time, he was moued in minde, to see this noble Islande of Britain, whose fame for nobilitee The cause. The fame and glorie of Britaine. was knowen and bruted, not onelie in Rome, but also in the vttermoste lādes. Iulius Cesar was wroth with thē, because in his warre sturred in Fraunce, the fearce Britaines aided the Fenche men, and did mightilie encounter battaill with the Romaines: whose prowes and valiaunt fight, slaked the proude and loftie stomackes of the Romaines, and droue thē to diuerse hasardes of battaill. But Cesar as a noble warrier The prowes of Iulius Cesar. preferryng nobilitee, and worthinesse of fame, before money or cowardly quietnes: ceased not to enter on ye fearce Britai∣nes, and thereto prepared his Shippes, the Winter tyme fo∣lowyng, that assone as oportunitee of the yere serued, to passe with all power against them. In the meane tyme, Cesar in∣quired of the Marchauntes, who with marchaundise had ac∣cesse The maner how. to the Islande: as concernyng the quātitee and bignes of Cesars com∣municacion with the mar¦chauntes, as concernyng the lande of Britaine. The ware & politike go∣uernement of yt Britaines. Aliaunce in tyme traite∣rous. Britain som∣tyme called of the Grekes Olbion, not Albion. Caius Vo∣lusenus, Em¦bassadour to Britaine. it, the fashion and maner of the people, their lawes, their or∣der, and kinde of gouernmente. As these thynges were in all poinctes, vnknowen to Cesar, so also the Marchaūtes knewe no more thā the places bordring on the sea side. For, the Bri∣taines fearing the traiterous and dissembled hartes of aliaū∣tes, politikelie repelled them: for, no straunger was suffered to enter from his Shippe, on the lande, but their marchaun∣dice were sold at the sea side. All nacions sought to this land, the felicitee of it was so greate, whereupon the Grekes kno∣wyng and tastyng the commoditée of this Islande, called it by a Greke name Olbion, whiche signifieth a happie and fortu∣nate countrie, though of some called Albion, tyme chaunged the firste letter, as at this daie, London is called for the toune of kyng Lud. Cesar thereupon before he would marche with his armie, to the people of Britain, he sent Caius Volusenus a noble man of Rome, a valiaunte and hardie Capitaine, as Embassadour to the Britaines, who as he thoughte by his Embassage, should knowe the fashion of the Island, the ma∣ner of the people, their gouernemente. But as it seemeth, the
Embassadour was not welcome. For, he durste not enter frō his Ship, to dooe his maisters Embassage, Cesar knewe no∣thing by him. Yet Cesar was not so contented, but sent an o∣ther Comas A∣trebas, secōde Embassador from Cesar. Embassadour, a man of more power, stomack, and more hardie, Comas Atrebas by name, who would enter as an Embassadour, to accomplish the will & expectacion of Cesar, Comas Atrebas was so welcome, that the Britains cast him in prison: Embassages was not common emong theim, nor the curteous vsage of Embassadours knowen. Al these thin∣ges, made Cesar more wrothe, to assaie the vncourtous Bris¦taines. In those daies Cassibelan was kyng of London, this Cassibelane king of Lon∣don, at the a∣riue of Cesar Cassibelane a worthie Prince. Cassibelan was a prince of high wisedom, of manly stomacke and valiaunt in fight: and for power and valiauntnesse, was chosen of the Britaines, chief gouernour and kyng. Dissen∣cion and cruell warre was emong thē, through the diuersitie of diuers kinges in the lande. The Troinouaūtes enuied the state of Cassibelan, bicause Immanuencius, who was kyng of London, before Cassibelan, was put to death, by the coun∣sail of Cassibelan. The sonne of Immanuencius, hearing of the commyng of Cesar, did flie traiterouslie to Cesar: The Imanuēcius Troinouauntes fauoured Immanuēcius part, & thereupon promised, as moste vile traitours to their countrie, an ente∣ryng to Cesar, seruice and homage, who through a self will, The Troy∣nouauntes by treason let in Cesar. and priuate fauour of one, sought the ruine of their countrie, and in the ende, their own destruccion. But Cassibelan gaue many ouerthrowes to Cesar, and so mightelie encountred with hym, so inuincible was the parte of Cassibelane: but by treason of the Troinouauntes, not by manhod of Cesars po∣wer, enteryng was giuen. What house can stande, where∣in Treason a confusion to the mightiest dominions. discord broile? What small power, is not able to enter the mightiest dominions or regions: to ouercome the strongeste fortresse, treason open the gate, treason giuyng passage. Al∣though Cesar by treason entered, so Cesar writeth. Yet the fame of Cesar was more commended, for his enterprise into Britain, and victorie: then of all his Conquest, either against
Pompey, or with any other nacion. For in a Piller at Rome A sentēce gra¦uen of Bri∣taine, in the commendaci∣on of Cesar. this sentence was engrauen: Of all the dominions, Citees, and Regions, subdued by Cesar, his warre attēpted against the fearce Britaines, passeth all other. After this sort Cesar entred our Islande of Britaine by treason. ¶ A narracion iudiciall, out of Theusidides, vpon the facte of Themistocles. THe Athenians brought vnder the thraldome of the Lacedemonians, soughte meanes to growe mightie, and to pull them from the yoke, vnder the Lacedemonians. Lacedemonia was a citee enuironed with walles. Athenes at the same tyme without walles: whereby their state was more feeble, and power weakened. Themistocles a noble Sage, and a worthie pere of Athens: gaue the Atheniās counsaile to wall their citee strōgly, and so forthwith to be lordes and rulers by them selues, after their owne facion gouerning. In finishing this enterprise, in all poinctes, policie, and wittie conuei∣aunce wanted not. The Lacedemonians harde of the pur∣pose of the Athenians, & sent Embassadours, to knowe their doynges, and so to hinder them. Themistocles gaue counfaill to the Athenians, to kepe in safe custodie, the Embassadours of Lacedemonia, vntill soche tyme, as he from the Embas∣sage was retourned frō Lacedemonia. The Lacedemonians hearyng of the commyng of Themistocles, thought little of the walle buildyng at Athens. Themistocles was long loo∣ked for of thē, because Themistocles lingered in his Embas∣sage, that or the matter were throughly knowen: the walle of Athens should be builded. The slowe commyng of The∣mistocles, was blamed of the Lacedemonians: but Themi∣stocles excused hymself, partly infirmitie of bodie, lettyng his commyng, and the expectacion of other, accompaignied with hym in this Embassage. The walle ended, necessitie not artificiall workemanship finishing it, with al hast it was ended: then Themistocles entered the Senate of Lacedemo∣nia,
and saied: the walle whom ye sought to let, is builded at Athens, ye Lacedemonians, that wee maie be more strong. Then the Lacedemonians could saie nothyng to it, though thei enuied the Athenians state, the walle was builded, and leste thei should shewe violence or crueltie on Themistocles, their Embassadours were at Athens in custodie, whereby Themistocles came safe from his Embassage, and the Athe∣nians made strong by their walle: this was politikely dooen of Themistocles. ¶ A narracion Poeticall vpon a Rose. WHo so doeth maruaile at the beautée and good∣ly colour of the redde Rose, he must consider the blood, that came out of Venus the Goddes foot. The Goddes Venus, as foolishe Poetes dooe feigne, beyng the aucthour of Loue: loued Ado∣nis the soonne of Cynara kyng of Cypres. But Mars called the God of battaile, loued Venus, beyng nothyng loued of Venus: but Mars loued Venus as feruently, as Venus lo∣ued Adonis. Mars beyng a God, loued Venus a goddes, but Venus onely was inflamed with the loue of Adonis, a mor∣tall man. Their loue was feruent, and extremely set on fire in bothe, but their kinde and nature were contrary, wherev∣pon Mars beyng in gelousie, sought meanes to destroie, faire amiable, and beautifull Adonis, thinkyng by his death, the loue of Venus to be slaked: Adonis and Mars fell to fighting Venus as a louer, ranne to helpe Adonis her louer, and by chaunce she fell into a Rose bushe, and pricked with it her foote, the blood then ran out of her tender foote, did colour the Rose redde: wherevpon the Rose beyng white before, is v∣pon that cause chaunged into redde. Chria. CHria, this profitable exercise of Rhetorike, is for the porfite of it so called: it is a rehersall in fewe wordes, of any ones fact, or of the saiyng of any man, vpō the
whiche an oracion maie be made. As for example, Isocrates did say, that the roote of learnng was bitter, but the fruictes pleasaunt: and vpon this one sentence, you maie dilate a am∣ple and great oracion, obseruyng these notes folowyng. The saiyng dooeth containe so greate matter, and minister soche plentie of argumente. Aucthors intreatyng of this exercise, doe note three sortes to bee of theim, one of theim a Chria verball, that is to saie, a profitable exercise, vpon the saiyng of any man, onely con∣teinyng the wordes of the aucthour, as the sentence before. The seconde is, conteinyng the facte or deede of the per∣sone: As Diogines beyng asked of Alexander the Greate, if he lacked any thyng, that he was able to giue hym, thinkyng his demaūde vnder his power, for Diogenes was at the same tyme warmyng hymself in the beames of the Sunne: Dio∣genes aunswered, ye take awaie that, that ye are not able to giue, meanyng that Alexander by his bodie, shadowed hym, and tooke awaie that whiche was not in his power to giue, Alexander tourned hymself to his men, and saied, if I were not Alexander, I would be Diogenes. The thirde is a Chria mirt, bothe verball and notyng the facte, as Diogenes seyng a boie wanton & dissolute, did strike his teacher with a staffe, vetteryng these woordes: why doocst thou teache thy scholer so dissolutlie. You shall learne to make this exercise, obseruyng these notes. Firste, you shall praise the aucthour, who wrote the sen∣tence, waighing his life, if his life be vnknowen, and not easie to finde his sentence or sentences: for godlie preceptes will minister matter of praise, as if these saiynges bee recited, thei are sufficient of them selues, to praise the aucthour. Then in the seconde place, expounde the meanyng of the aucthour in that saiyng. Then shewe the cause, why he spake this sentence. Then compare the matter, by a contrary.
Then frame a similitude of the same. Shewe the like example of some, that spake the like, or did the like. Then gather the testimonies of more writers of the same Then knit the conclusion. ¶ An Oracion. I Socrates did saie, that the roote of learnyng is was bit∣ter, but the fruictes were pleasaunt. ¶ The praise. THis Oratour Isocrates, was an Athenian borne, who florished in the time of Lusimachus the chief Lusimachus gouernor of Athens: this Isocrates was brought vp in all excellēcte of learning, with the moste fa∣mous and excellent Oratour Prodicus, Gorgias Leontinus Prodicus. Gorgias Le∣ontinus. indued him with all singularitie of learnyng and eloquence. The eloquēce of Isocrates was so famous, that Aristotle the chief Pholosopher, enuied his vertue & praise therin: Demo∣sthenes also, who emong the Grecians chieflie excelled, lear∣ned his eloquence, of the Oracions whiche Isocrates wrote, Demosthe∣nes learned eloquence of Isocrates. to many mightie and puisaunt princes and kinges, do shewe his wisedome, & copious eloquēce, as to Demonicus the king to Nicocles, Euagoras, against Philip the king of the Mace∣doniās, by his wisedome and counsaill, the Senate and vni∣uersal state of Athens was ruled, & the commons and multi∣tude thereby in euery part florished: chieflie what counsaill, what wisedome, what learnyng might bee required, in any man of high fame and excellencie: that same was aboundant¦ly in Isocrates, as in all his Oratiōs he is to be praised, so in this sentence, his fame importeth like commendacion. ¶ The exposicion. IN that he saieth, the roote of learnyng is bitter, and the fruictes pleasaunt: he signifieth no excellent qua∣litie or gift, vertue, arte or science can bee attained, All excelle  is attained. except paine, labour, diligence, doe plant and sette the same:
but when that noble gift, either learnyng, or any excellente qualitee, is lodged and reposed in vs, then we gather by pain∣full labours, greate profite, comforte, delectable pleasures, wealth, glorie, riches, whiche be the fruictes of it. ¶ The cause. AND seyng that of our owne nature, all men are en∣clined from their tender yeres and infancie, to the ex∣tirpacion of vertue, folowyng with all earnest studie and gréedie, the free passage to vice, and specially children, whose iudgementes and reason, are not of that strengthe, to rule their weake mindes and bodies, therefore, in them chief∣lie, the roote of learning is bitter, because not onely many ye∣res thei runne their race, in studie of arte and science. With care and paine also, with greuous chastisment and correcciō, thei are compelled by their teachers and Maisters, to appre∣hende the same: the parentes no lesse dreaded, in the educaciō of their children, in chastisement and correction, so that by all meanes, the foundacion and roote of all learnyng, in what sort so euer it is, is at the firste vnpleasaunte, sower, and vn∣sauerie. The roote of learnyng bit∣ter. To folowe the times and seasons, appoincted for the same, is moste painfull, and in these painfull yeres: other greate pleasures, as the frailtie of youth, and the imbecilitie of nature iudgeth, dooeth passe by, but in miserable state is that childe, and vnfortunate, that passeth the flower of his Who is a vn∣fortunate childe. youth and tender yeres, instructed with no arte or Science, whiche in tyme to come, shalbe the onelie state, helpe, the pil∣ler to beare of the sore bront, necessitie, and calamities of life. Herein the noble Romaines, laied the sure foundacion of their mightie dominion, in the descrite prouidente, and poli∣tike Good educa∣cion the foun∣dacion of the Romaine Empire. educacion of children: to whom the Grecians gaue, that necessarie bulwarke and faundacion, to set vp all vertue, all arte and science. In Grece no man was knowen, to liue in that common wealth, but that his arte and science, gaue ma∣nifest probacion and testimonie, how and after what sorte he liued. The Romaines in like sorte, the sworde and aucthori∣tie
of the Magistrate, executyng the same, did put forthe, and draw to the attainment of learnyng, art or science, all youth hauyng maturitie and ripenesse to it, and why, because that in a common wealth, where the parentes are vndescrete and foolishe, as in all common wealthes, there are not a fewe, but many, thei not ponderyng the state of the tyme to come, bringing vp their children without all ciuilitie, vnframed to vertue, ignoraunt of all arte and science: the children of their owne nature, vnbrideled, vntaught, wilfull, and heddie, doe run with free passage to all wickednes, thei fall into al kinde of follie, oppressed with all kinde of calamitie, miserie, and vnfortunate chaunces, whiche happen in this life. Nothyng doeth soner pulle doune a kyngdome, or common wealthe, Euill educa∣cion bringeth to rume migh¦tie kingdoms then the euill and leude educacion of youth, to whom neither substaunce, wealth, riches, nor possessions doe descende, from their auncestours and parentes, who also of themselues wāt all art, science and meanes, to maintain them to liue, who of themselues are not able to get relief, for onely by this mea∣nes, life is maintained, wealth and riches ar possessed to ma∣ny greate siegniorics, landes, and ample possessions, left by their parentes, and line of auncetours, haue by lacke of ver∣tuous educacion, been brought to naught, thei fell into ex∣treme miserie, pouertie, and wantyng learnyng, or wealth, to maintaine their state and delicate life, thei haue robbed, spoiled, murthered, to liue at their owne will. But then as rotten, dedde, and putride members frō the common wealth thei are cutte of by the sworde, and aucthoritie of the Magi∣strate. What kyngdome was more mightie and strong, then the kyngdome of Lidia, whiche by no other meanes was brought to rume and destruccion, but by idlenes: in that thei Lydi. were kepte from all vertuous exercise, from the studie of ar∣tes and sciences, so longe as thei meditated and liued in the schoole of vertuous life: no nacion was hable to ouerthrowe them, of themselues thei were prone and readie, to practise all excellencie. But Cyrus the kyng of Persians, by no other Cyrus.
meanes was able to bring them weaker. He toke from thē al furtherance to artes, destroied all occupaciōs of vertue wher∣vpon by commaundemēt and terrour, wer driuen to practise the vaine and pestiferous practise, of Cardes and Dice. Har∣lottes The decay of a kyngdome. then schooled them, and all vnhoneste pastyme nurte∣red them, Tauernes an quaffyng houses, was their accusto∣med and moste frequented vse of occupacion: by this meanes their nobilitie and strengthe was decaied, and kyngdome made thrall. Ill educacion or idlenes, is no small vice or euill when so mightie a prince, hauyng so large dominions, whō all the Easte serued and obaied. Whose regimente and go∣uernemente was so infinite, that as Zenophon saieth, tyme would rather want, then matter to speake of his mightie and large gouernement, how many nacions, how diuerse people The mightie dominions of Cyrus. and valiaunte nacions were in subieccion to hym. If this mightie Prince, with all his power and populous nacions, was not hable to giue the ouerthrowe, to the kyngdome of Lidia, but by ill educacion, not by marciall attēptes, sworde Euill educa∣cion. or battaill: but by giuyng them scope and libertie, to dooe as he would. No doubt but that Cyrus sawe, by the like exam∣ple of other kyngdomes, this onelie pollicie to bee a ruine of that kyngdome. Pythagoras the famous and godlie Phi∣losopher, Pithagoras. saued the kyngdome and people of Crotona, thei leauyng all studie of arte, vertue and science. This people of Crotona, was ouercome of the people of Locrus, thei left all Eatona. exercise of vertue, neclectyng the feates of chiualrie, whervpō Pythagoras hauyng the profitable and godlie lawes of Ly∣curgus, which he brought from Lacedemonia: and the lawes of Minos kyng of Creta, came to the people of Crotona, and by his godlie teachyng and Philosophie, reuoked & brought backe the people, giuen ouer to the neglectyng of all vertue, declaryng to them the nobilitie and excellencie thereof, he li∣uely set foorthe the beastlinesse of vice. Pithagoras recited to them, the fall and ruine of many regions, and mightie king∣domes, whiche tooke after those vices. Idlenes beyng forsa∣ken,
vertue embrased, and good occupacions practised, the kyngdome and people grewe mightie. Emong the godlie lawes of Lycurgus, Lycurgus omit∣ted Lycurgus. not to ordaine Lawes, for the educacion of youthe: in the whiche he cutte of all pamperyng of them, because in tender yeres, in whose bodies pleasure harboreth, their vertue, sci∣ence, cunnyng rooteth not: labour, diligence, and industrie onelie rooteth vertue, and excellencie. Vices as vnprofitable Vertue. weedes, without labour, diligence and industrie growe vp, Vice. and thereby infecteth the minde and bodie, poisoneth all the mocions, incensed to vertue and singularitie. Who euer at∣tained cunnyng, in any excellent arte or science, where idle∣nes or pleasure helde the swaie. Philosophie sheweth, plea∣sure to bée vnmete for any man of singularitie, for pleasure, Pleasure. Idlenes. Ignoraunce. idlenes, and ignoraunce, are so linked together, that the pos∣session of the one, induceth the other. So many godlie monu∣mētes of learning, had not remained to this posteritie of ours and of all ages: if famous men in those ages and tymes, had hūted after immoderate pleasure. Thindustrie of soche, who left to the posteritie of all ages, the knowledge of Astronomie is knowen: the monumentes of all learnyng of lawes, and of all other woorkes of antiquitie, by vertue, noble, by indu∣strie, labour, and moderacion of life in studie, not by plea∣sure and wantones, was celebraied to all ages. the migh∣tie volumes of Philosophers, bothe in morall preceptes, and in naturall causes, knewe not the delicate and dissolute life of these our daies. Palingenius enueighyng against the pā∣pered, and lasciuious life of man, vttereth a singulare sentēce Qui facere et qui nosce, cupit quam plurima et altum, In terris virtute aliqua sibi querere nomen: Hunc vigilare opus est, nam non preclara geruntur, Stertendo, et molles detrectat gloria plumas. Who so coueteth to purchase fame by actes, or whose minde hunteth for aboundaunte knowledge, or by vertue in this life, to purchause good fame. He had not nede to slugge
and flepe in his doynges: for good fame is not vpholded by gaie Pecockes feathers. Of this, Demosthenes the famous Oratour of Athens, vttereth a worthie saiyng to the Athe∣nians in his Epistle: if any will iudge Alexander the greate, to be famous and happie, in that he had successe in all his do∣ynges, let this be his cogitacion, that Alexander the greate, alwaies did inure hymself to doe thynges, and manfullie to Alexander the great, cō¦mended for diligence. assaie that he enterprised. The felicitie of his successe came to hym not slepyng, or not cogitatyng thereof: Alexander the greate now dedde, Fortune seketh with whom she maie ac∣companie, and associate her self. Thusidides comparyng the Lacedemonians, and the A∣thenians together, shewed a rare moderacion, and tempera∣ture of life, to be in the Athenians: wherupon thei are moste commended, and celebrated to the posteritie. ¶ The contrarie. EVen as idlenes and a sluggishe life, is moste pleasant to all soche, as neglecte vertuous exercises, and god∣lie life. So paine, labour, and studie, bestowed and emploied, in the sekyng out of vertue, arte, or science is moste pleasaunt to well affected mindes: for no godlie thyng can be attained to, without diligence and labour. ¶ The similitude. EVen as housbandmen, with labour and trauaile, dooe labour in plantyng and tillyng the grounde, before thei receiue any fruicte of the same. Euen so no vertue, arte, or science, or any other thyng of ex∣cellencie is attained, without diligence and labour bestowed thereto. ¶ The example. LEt Demosthenes, the famous Oratour of Athenes, bee an example of diligence to vs, who to auoide all let from studie, vsed a meanes to kepe hymself ther∣to: preuentyng also the industrie of artificers. The same De∣mosthenes,
wrote seuen tymes out the storie of Thusidides, to learne thereby his eloquence and wisedome. ¶ The testimonie. PLinie, Plato, and Aristotle, with many other mo, are like examples for diligence to vs: who wrote vpon vertue and learnyng like sentences. ¶ The conclusion. THerefore, Isocrates dooeth pronounce worthelie, the roote of learning and vertue to be bitter, and the fru∣tes pleasaunte. ¶ A Sentence. THe Oracion, whiche must be made by a sentēce is in al partes like to Chria, the profitable exer∣cise, onelie that the Oracion made vpon a sen∣tence, as aucthours do saie: hath not alwaie the name of the aucthour prefixed in the praise, a small matter of difference, who so can make the one, is ex∣pert and exquisite in the other, aucthours doe define a sentēce in this maner. A sentence is an Oracion, in fewe woordes, shewyng a godlie precept of life, exhorting or diswadyng: the Grekes dooe call godly preceptes, by the name of Gnome, or Gnome. Gnomon, whiche is asmoche to saie, a rule or square, to direct any thyng by, for by them, the life of manne is framed to all singularitie. Thei are diuers sortes of sentences, one exhor∣teth, an other diswadeth, some onely sheweth: there is a sen∣tence simple, compounde, profitable, true, & soche like. Frame your Oracion vpon a sentence, as in the Oracion before. 1. The praise of the aucthour. 2. The exposicion of the sentence. 3. A confirmacion in the strength of the cause. 4. A conference, of the contrarie. 5. A similitude. 6. The example. 7. The testimonie of aucthors, shewing ye like. 8. Then adde the conclusion.
¶ An Oracion vpon a sentence. ¶ The sentence. In a common wealthe or kyngdome, many kynges to beare rule, is verie euill, let there be but one kyng. ¶ The praise of the aucthour. HOmere, who of all the Poetes chiefly excelled, spake this sentence in the persone of Vlisses, vpon the king Agamemnon, kyng of Grece. This Homere intrea∣ting of all the princely affaires, and greate enterprices of the Grecians: and of the mightie warre againste the Troians, emong whom soche discorde rose, that not onely the warre, for lacke of vnitie and concorde, continued the space of tenne yeres. But also moche blood shed, hauocke, and destruccion, came vpon the Grecians, vttered this sentēce. This Homere for his learnyng and wisedome remaineth, intteled in many monumentes of learnyng: with greate fame and commen∣dacion to all ages. What Region, Isle, or nacion is not, by his inuencion set foorthe: who although he were blinde, his minde sawe all wisedome, the states of all good kyngdomes and common wealthes. The verie liuely Image of a Prince The praise of Homere. or gouernour, the faithfull and humble obediēce of a subiect, toward the prince, the state of a capitaine, the vertue and no∣ble qualities, that are requisite, in soche a personage, be there The content of Homers bookes. set forthe. The perfite state of a wiseman, and politike, is in∣treated of by hym. The Iustice, and equitie of a Prince, the strength of the bodie, all heroicall vertues: also are set forthe his eloquence and verse, floweth in soche sorte, with soche pleasauntnes: so copious, so aboundaunt, so graue and sen∣tencious, that his singularitie therein excelleth, and passeth. The mightie prince Alexander, in all his marciall enter∣prices, Alexander, and great conquestes, did continually night by night, reade somewhat of the Ilias of the Poete Homere, before he The Ilias of Homere, mete for prin∣ces to looke vpon. slepte, and askyng for the booke, saied: giue me my pillowe. Alexander as it semeth, learned many heroical vertues, poli∣cie, wisedome, & counsaill thereof, els he occupied in so migh∣tie
and greate warres, would not emploied studie therein. Iulius Cesar the Emperour, commendeth this Poete, for his singularitie, his commendacion giueth, ample argu∣ment, in this singulare sentence, whiche preferreth a Monar∣chie aboue all states of common wealthes or kyngdome. ¶ The exposicion. HOmere the Poete, signified by this one sentence, no kyngdome or common wealthe can prospere, or flo∣rishe to continue, where many holde gouernement as kynges. For, the mindes of many rulers and princes, doe moste affecte a priuate wealthe, commoditie and glorie: and where, many doe beare soche swaie and dominion, the com∣mon wealth can not be good. For, thei priuatly to theim sel∣ues, doe beare that regiment, and alwaie with the slaughter of many, do seke to attain and clime, to the whole gouermēt ¶ The cause. MAny occasions dooe rise, whereby many princes, and gouernours in a common wealth, be diuerslie affec∣ted, The state of many kinges in one lande. so that the gouernmēt of many, can not prosper. For, bothe in quiete state, their counsailes must bee diuerse, and vncertaine: and where thei so differ, the kyngdome stan∣deth in great ieopardy and daunger. Isocrates intreatyng of a Monarchie, sheweth that the common wealth of Athenes, Athenes. whiche detested and refused, that forme and state, after the ruine and fall of their citee: beyng vnder the thraldome of the Lacedemoniās, bothe in their externall chiualrie and seates, bothe by sea and by lande, and also in regimente otherwise, their citee grewe mightie, and state stedfast. The Carthagineans also, gouerned by one, had their go∣nernment Carthage in a monarchie. stedfaste, and kyngdome totall: who in puisaunte actes, might compare with the noble Romaines. As the obe∣dience to one ruler and chief gouernour, sekyng a common wealth, is in the hartes of the subiectes: feruent and maruei∣lous with loue embraced,  the Maiestie of hym is dreade,
with loue serued, and with sincere barte, and fidelitie obeied, his maners folowed, his lawes imitated. Many gouernours The state of many kinges mone lande. bearyng regiment, as their maners be diuers, and fashion of life: euen so the people bee like affected, to the diuersitie of di∣uers princes. And if we weigh the reuolucion of the heauens and the marueiles of God therein, the maker of the same, who beyng one God, ruleth heauen and yearth; and all thynges cōtained in the same. The heauen also adorned with many a A monarchie in heauen. One Sunne starre, and cleare light, haue but one Sunne to gouerne thē: who being of a singulare vertue aboue the rest, by his vertue and power, giueth vertue to the reste. Also in small thynges the Ante and the Bee, who for prouidence and wisedome, at The Ante. The Bee. moche commended: haue as it were a common wealth, and a king to gouerne thē, so in all thinges as a confusion, the state of many kings is abhorred in gouernmēt. After the death of Constantinus the greate, Constancius his sonne was made Emperour, and Licinius with him, partaker in felowship of Constancius Licinius Marabodius the Empire. But forthwith, what blood was shed in Italie, with all crueltie, vntill Constancius had slaine Licinius, partaker of the Empire, and Marabodius was slaine also, whom Licinius did associate with hym in the gouernment. So moche princes and chief gouernours, doe hate equalitie, or felowship in kingdomes. After the same sort, in this migh∣tie Pompey. Cesar. Marius. Silla. Monarchie of Rome, diuerse haue attempted at one and sondrie tymes, to beare the scepter and regiment therein, but that mightie Monarchie, could not suffer but one gouernor. The kyngdome of Thebes, was in miserable state, the twoo sonnes of Dedipus, Eteocles, and Polunices: striuing bothe to be Monarche, and onely kyng. The kyngdome of Assiria; Assiria the first monar∣chie. whiche was the golden kyngdome, and the first Monarchie: hauyng. 36. kynges by succession, continued. 1239. yeres, this kyngdome for all nobilitie and roialnes excelled, and all in a Monarchie. The kyngdome of the Medes, in a Monarchie florished in wealthe and glorie and all felicitie: who in domi∣nion had gouernmente. 300. lackyng. 8. yeres. After that, the
monarchie of the Medes ceased, the Persiā people rose migh∣tie, The monar∣chie of the Medes. The Persiā. Macedonia. bothe in people and Princes, and continued in that state 236 and 7 monethes. Macedonia rose from a base and meane people, to beare the whole regiment, and power ouer all king¦domes. So God disposeth the state and seate of princes, ouer∣throwyng often tymes mightier kyngdomes at his will: the continuaunce of this Monarchie was. 157. and eight mone∣thes, ten kynges linealie descendyng. Asia and Siria, was Asia Siria gouerned by one succedyng in a sole gouernement. Nicanor gouerned Siria 32. yeres. In the other Antigonus raigned, Demetrius Poliorchetes one yere, Antiochus Soter also, the scepter of gouernment, left to the succession of an other, then Antiochus Soter, ruled all Asia and Siria, hauyng. 16. kin∣ges whiche in a monarchie, cōtinued 189. yeres. The Egipci∣ans, Egipte in a Monarchie had famous, wise, and noble princes, whose kyngdome and large deminion, in all felicitée prospered: whiche was in the tyme of Ninus, the first king of the Assiriās, who hauing 10▪ princes, one by one succedyng, Cleopatra their Quéene, gouerning, stoode in a monarchie. 288. This one thyng she∣weth, that kinde of gouernmente to bee roiall, and moste fa∣mous, not onely for the felicitée and glory therof: but also for the permanent and stedfast state thereof. Aristotle and Plato setteth forthe, thother formes of gouernmēt. But in all those, no long cōtinuaunce of felicitee, nor of happy state can appere in them, as for the contrarie to a Monarchie, is tirannis, pe∣stiferous, Tirannis Nero Domicianus Caligula. and to be detested, where one man gouerneth to his priuate gaine, pillyng and polyng his subiectes, murderyng with all crueltie, neither Lawe nor reason, leadyng thereto: but will bearyng regiment ouer lawe, Iustice and equitee, whiche princes often tymes see not. How the wilfull rashe∣nes, or tirannicall minde doeth abase them, and make them, though in vtter porte the same princes, yet in verie déede, thei bee thrall and slaue to beastlie affeccion. Nothyng dooeth so what doeth beautifie the throne of a Prince moche adorne and beautifie, the seate and throne of a prince, as not onely to beare dominion, ouer mightie people and re∣gions,
then to be lorde ouer hymself. The state of a fewe pèe∣res Aristocratia. or nobles, to holde the chief and whole gouernment, who bothe in vertue, learnyng, and experience dooe excelle, is a goodlie state of common wealth. But the profe of that com∣mon wealthe and ende sheweth, and the maner of Princes: who, although thei be, of life godlie, wise, graue, expert and politike. For, these vertues or ornamentes, ought to be repo∣sed in soche noble personages, thei doe marueilously chaunge and alter: So honour and preeminente state, puffeth theim vp, and blindeth theim, that euery one in the ende, seeketh to climbe ouer all, as hed and gouernour. Shewe me one kinde of this state, and forme of gouernmente, whiche either longe prospered, or without bloodshed, and destruccion of the rest of the nobles and peres, haue not caught the whole regimente. Seyng that in all common wealthes and kingdomes, equa∣litee or felowshippe, will not be suffred in gouernmente: for, it can not bee, that this forme of common wealthe maie bée good, as Aristotle and Plato sheweth: The ende of this go∣uernemente, The ende of Aristocratia. fell euer to one, with a ruine of the kingdome and people. The multitude to beare dominion, and though a Politeia. publike wealth bée sought for a tyme, moche lesse thei conti∣nue in any good state: for in the ende, their rule and gouerne∣ment, will be without rule, order, reason, modeste, and their lawe must bee will. The other three states, are the refuse of good common wealthes, not to bée tollerated in any region. The one of them is a tyraunte, to bée gouernour onely to his Tirannis. owne glorie, with crueltie tormented his subiectes, onelie to haue his will and lust, ouer all lawe, order, and reason. The nobilitée rulyng to themselues, euery one for his owne time The third, the base and rude multitude, euery one for hym∣self, Oligarthia. and at his will. This troublous state, all Regions and Democratia. common wealthes, haue felte in open sedicions ano tumul∣tes, raised by theim, it is a plagued and pestiferous kinde of gouernemente. The example of a good Monarchie, is of greate force, to confounde the state of al other common weal∣thes,
and formes of Regimente. The nobilitée of Persia hauyng no kyng, linially des∣cendyng, A monarchie prefarred of the Persians to rule that mightie dominion of Persia, Cambises beyng dedde, the vsurper murthered, thei tooke counsaill in their assemble, what state of gouernment was beste, thei ha∣uyng the profe of a Monarchie: in their longe counsaill, thei knewe the felicitie of that state, thei knewe as it seemed, the perilous state of the other gouernmentes. If these noble and peres had been ambicious, and that eche of them would haue had felowshippe, or participacion in kyngdomes: thei would not haue preferred a Monarchie aboue the reste. The anti∣quitie of that tyme sheweth, their personages, wisedome∣grauitie, and maiestie was soche, that eche one of theim was mete for his vertues, to haue a whole kyngdome. If Aristo∣cratia would haue contented them, then was tyme and occa∣sion offered, no kyng remainyng to haue preferred that state. But thei as vpright nobles, sincere and faithfull, hauyng al∣together The duetie of al noble peres respecte to a publique wealthe: to a permanent state and felicitie of kingdome, sought no participacion by priuate wealthe, to dissolue this Monarchie. But thei beyng moste godlie, eche were content to proue, whose chaunce might be, to set vp againe that Monarchie. The kyngdome at the laste came to the handes of Darius, who was after kyng of the Darius. Persians. This is a goodly example, to shewe the worthines of a Monarchie, the Persian kingdome after many yeres de∣clinyng, from his power and state, not for any faulte of go∣uernment, but God as he seeth tyme, raiseth vp kyngdomes and plucketh them daune. Afterward Darius the kyng, not Kyngdomes rise and fall able to make his parte good with Alexander the Greate: of∣fered to hym the greatest parte of his kyngdome, euen to the stood of Euphrates, and offred his daughter to wife: Alexan∣der was content to take the offer of Darius, so that he would The answer of Alexander to Darius, as cōcernyng a monarchie. bee seconde to hym, and not equall with hym in kyngdome. For, Alexander saied, that  the worlde can not bee gouer∣ned with twoo Sunnes,  the worlde can suffer twoo
mightie kingdomes: wherupon it is manifest, that no king∣dome will suffer equalitie or felowship, but that if the will & minde of Princes might brust out, the state of all the worlde, would bee in one mightie gouernours handes. For, alwaies Princes dooe seke to a sole regimente. Alexander the greate Alexāder the great prefar∣red a Mo∣narchie. cōquerour also, preferring for worthines a Monarchie, at the tyme of his death, demaunded whō he would haue to succede him in his mightie dominiōs, he by one signifiyng a Monar∣chie, saiyng: Dignissimus, that is to saie, the worthiest. After the death of Alexander, Antipater caught the gouernmente Alexanders monarchie fel by many kin∣ges. Antipater. Crates. Meliagrus. Perdiceas. Ptolemeus. Learcus. Cassander. Menander. Leonatus. Lusimacus. Eumenes Seleucus. of Macedonia and Grece, and Crates was Treasurer. Me∣leagrus and Perdiceas caught other of his dominions, then Ptolemeus possessed Egipte, Africa and a parte of Arabia, Learcus, Cassander, Menāder, Leonatus, Lusimachus, Eu∣menes, Seleucus and manie other, who were for their wor∣thines in honor and estimacion with Alexander, caught in∣to their handes other partes of his dominions, euerie one se∣kyng for his time, his owne priuate glorie, dignitie, and ad∣uauncemente, but not a publike wealthe, and so in fine, am∣bicion broiled in their loftie stomackes, eche to attaine to o∣thers honor. Whereupon bloodshed, destruction of the peo∣ple and countries, the fall of these Princes ensued. So moche kingdomes hate equalitie or felowshipe let vs laie before our iyes, the kyngdomes nere at hand. Fraunce, from the tymes of Faramundus vntill this daie haue stoode, and did florishe Fraunce. Spaine. Germanie. Britaine. in a Monarchie. The state of Spaine, from the tyme of the firste Kyng, vntill this daie, hath florished continually in a Monarchie. The great seigniories of Germanie, by one suc∣cedyng in gouernment, haue been permanent in that good∣lie state. Our noble Isle of Britain from Brutus, hath stoode by a Monarchie: onely in those daies, the state of gouernmēt chaunged, at the commyng of Iulius Cesar, Emperour of Rome. The lande beyng at diuision, and discorde, through the diuersitie of diuerse kynges: so moche the state of diuerse kynges in one lande, is to be expelled, or the gouernment of
the base multitude, to haue vniuersally power of dominion, or the state of peres, to bee chief in regiment, no kyng lefte to commaunde ouer the people, and nobles, or els there can not be but discorde in thende, whiche pulleth doune mosse migh∣tie Regions and dominious, so that the beste state, the moste stedfaste and fortunate, is in all tymes, in all ages, in all la∣wes, and common wealthes, where one king sekyng the ad∣uauncement, wealthe, glorie, of hym and his people. ¶ The contrarie. THat housholde or familie, can not be well gouerned, where many and diuerse beareth gouernment, nec∣leayng the state prosperous vniuersallie: for where obedience is drawen to diuers and many, there can not bee good gouernment, nor faithfull obedience. And so in a king∣dome where one chiefly gouerneth, and to a common wealth there the hartes of the subiectes, be moste knitte to obaie. ¶ The similitude. EVen as thei, whiche serue one maister, shall soneste with labour please, and with fidelitie, accomplishe his will and pleasure. For, the maners of many mē be diuerse, and variable, so in a Monarchie, the state of one is sone obaied, the minde and lawe of one Prince sone folowed, his Maiestie dreaded and loued. ¶ The example. LET the fower thief Monarchies of the Assirian, the Persian, Grecian, and the Romaine, whiche haue continued from the beginnyng mightie, moste hap∣pie, bee an example herein. If that state of gouernement, had not been chiefe of all other, those mightie kyngdomes would not haue preferred, that kinde of gouernment. ¶ The testimonie of auncient writers. THerefore, Aristotle, Plato, and all the chief Philoso∣phers, intreatyng of the administracion of a common wealthe: doe preferre bre all states of gouernment
a Monarchie, bothe for the felicitie of it, and stedfaste state. ¶ The conclusion. HOmere therefore deserueth greate commendacion, for this one sentence, whiche preferreth a Monarchie before all states. The destruccion. THis exercise of Rhetotike, is called destruccion, or subuersion, because it is in a oracion, a certain re∣prehension of any thyng declaimed, or dilated, in the whiche by order of art, the declaimer shall pro∣cede to caste doune by force, and strengthe of reason, the con∣trarie induced. In this exercise of Rhetorike, those proposicions are to be subuerted, whiche are not manifeste true, neither it so repu∣gnaunt from reason, as that there can appere no bolde, to in∣duce a probable reason to confounde the same. But soche pro∣posicions are meete for this parte, as are probable in both si∣des, to induce probabilitie of argument, to reason therupon. It shall behoue you firste, for the entryng of this matter, to adde a reprehension there against those, whiche haue con∣firmed as a truthe, that, whiche you will confute. In the same place, adde the exposion, and meanyng of his sentence. Thirdly, shew the matter to be obscure, that is vncertain Incrediblie. Impossible. Not agreyng to any likelihode of truthe. Vncomlie to be talked of. Vnprofitable. This exercise of Rhetorike doeth contain in it al strength of arte, as who should saie, all partes of Rhetorike, maie co∣piouslie be handled in this parte, called confutacion, so am∣ple a matter Tullie doeth note this parte to be. ¶ The theme or proposicion of this Oracion.
It is not like to be true, that is said of the battaill of Troie. ¶ The reprchension of the auc∣thor, and of all Poetes. NOt without a cause, the vanities of Poetes are to bee reproued, and their forged inuencions to bee reiected: in whose writynges, so manifestlie are set forthe as a truthe, and Chronicled to the pesteritie of ages and times, soche forged mat∣ters of their Poeticall and vain wittes. Who hath not heard of their monsterous lies against God, thei inucntyng a gene∣alogie The vanities of Poetes. of many Goddes procreated, where as there is but one God. This vanitie also thei haue set forthe, in their mo∣numentes and woorkes. How a conspiracie was sometyme emong the Goddes and Goddes, to binde the great God Iu∣piter. How impudentlie doe thei set forthe the Goddes, to bee louers of women, and their adulterous luste: and how thei haue transformed theimselues, into diuers shapes of beastes and foules, to followe after beastly luste: The malice and en∣uie of the Goddes, one to another▪ The feigne also the heauē to haue one God, the sea an other, helle an other, whiche are mere vanities, and false imaginaciōs of their Poeticall wit∣tes. The like forged inuencion haue thei wrote, of the migh∣tie The battaill of Troie, x, yeres for a harlotte. and terrible battaill bruted of Troie, for a beautifull har∣lot susteined ten yeres. In the whiche, not onely men and no∣ble peeres, gaue the combate of battaile, but the Goddes toke partes against Goddes, and men wounded Goddes: as their The vain in∣uention of Poetes. lies exceade all nomber, because thei hee infinite, so also thei passe all truthe, reason, and iudgemente. These fewe exam∣ples of their vanities and lies, doe shewe the feigned ground and aucthoritie of the reste. Accordyng to the folie and super∣sticiousnes of those tymes, thei inuented and forged folie vp∣pon folie, lye, vpon lye, as in the battaill of Troie, thei aggra∣uate the dolour of the battaill, by pitifull and lamentable in∣uencion. Plato reie∣cteth Poetes from the com¦mon wealth. As for the Poetes themselues; Plato in his booke, made vpon the administracion of a common wealth, maketh
theim in the nomber of those, whiche are to bee banished out of all common wealthes. ¶ The exposicion. HOmere dooeth saie, and many other Poetes, that the warres of the Grecians against the Troians, was for beautifull Helena, and continued tenne yeres. The Goddes and Goddis toke partes, and all the people of Grece, aided Menelaus, and the kyng Aga∣memnon, to bryng home again Helena, neclecting their own countrie, their wife and childrē, for one womā. The Grekes inuentyng a huge and mightie horse made of Firre tree, and couered with brasse, as huge as a moūtain, out of the whiche the Grecians by treason issuyng, brought Troie to ruine. ¶ The obscuritie of the matter. IT semeth a matter of folie, that so many people, so mightle nacions should bee bewithed, to raise so mightie a armie, hassaroyng their liues, leauyng their countrie, their wiues, their children, for one woman: Be it so, that Helena passed all creatures, and that Nature with beautie had induedher with all vertue, and sin∣gularitie: Helena. yet the Grecians would not be so foolishe, that vni∣uersallie that would seke to caste doune their owne wealthe, and moche more the common wealthe of Grece, and kyng∣dome to stande in perill. Neither is it to be thought, the Gre∣cians, sekyng to aduaūce the beautie of Helena: would leaue their owne state. But it is like, the wittes of Poetes did im∣magine The cause of the forged in∣uencion. so forged a Chronicle, that the posteritie of ages fol∣lowyng, should rather wounder at their forged inuencion, then to beleue any soche warre truly mencioned. There was no soche cause, seyng that the kyngdome of Grece, fell by no title of succession to Helena, for them to moue warre, for, the bringyng backe of that beutifull harlotte Helena. Neither in Helena was there vertue, or honestie of life, to moue and ex∣asperate the Grecians, to spende so greate treasures, to raise
so mightie an armie on euery side. What commēdacion had Nocommen∣dacion in vp∣holdyng and, maintainyng of hariottes. the Troians to aduaunce Helena, and with all roialnesse to entreate her, she beyng a harlotte: the folie of the Grecians and the Troians, is so on euery side so greate, that it can not be thought, soche a warre truely chronicled. If violence and power, had taken Helena from her housebande, and not her owne will and luste, caught with the adulterous loue of Pa∣ris, Helena follo∣wed Paris. beyng a straunger. If her moderation of life had been so rare, as that the like facte for her chastitie, had not been in a∣ny age or common wealthe, her vertues would haue giuen occasion: The Princes and nobles of Grece to stomacke the matter. The example of the facte, would with all praise and Vertuous life, worthie commendati∣on in al ages. Lucrecia. Tarquinius. the kyng ba∣nished for ra∣uishyng Lu∣crecia, and all of his name banished. Penelopes chastitie. commendacion be mencioned, and celebrated to al ages. Lu∣cretia for her chastite, is perpetuallie to be aduaunced, wher∣vpon the Romaines banished Tarquinius their kyng, his stocke and name from Rome. The rare chastite of Penelope, is remainyng as a example herein: So many shares laied to caste doune her vertuous loue towarde her housebande V∣lisses. But Vlisses made hauocke by murder, on these gaie and gallante Ruins, who in his absence sought to alienate and withdrawe, the chaste harte of Penelope, consumyng his substance. A greater example remaineth in no age, of the like chastite. As for the battaile of Troie, raised for Helena, could wise men, and the moste famous nobles of Grece: So occupie their heddes, and in the same, bothe to hasarde their liues for a beautifull strumpet or harlot. The sage and wise Nestor, whom Agamemnon for wisedome preferred, before Nestor. the moste of the péeres of Grece, neither it Vltisses wanted at the same tyme, hauyng a politike and subtill hedde, to with∣drawe Vlisses. theim from so leude and foolishe a enterprise. Grece wanted not beautifull creatures, Nature in other had besto∣wed Grece the lande of faire women. amiable faces, personage, and comelie behauiour. For, at those daies, Grece thei called A chaida calligunaica, that is, Grece the lande of faire women. The dolorous lamentacion of the Ladies and Matron Grec, would haue hindered
soche a foolishe enterprise, seyng their owne beautie neclec∣ted, their honestie of life caste vp to perilles, one harlot of in∣numerable people followed and hunted after, in whom nei∣ther Vncomelie. honestie, vertue, nor chastite was harbored. ¶ Vncredible. ALthough the folie of men is greate, and the will of princes and gouernours beastlie and rashe, yet by no meanes it can be so many yeres, so greate folie to take roote in their hartes, and that the wisedom of the Greciās should not rather caste of as naught, the beau∣tie Beautie without ver∣tue, nothyng of valour. of Helena: rather then the whole multitude, the state of the Prince, the welfare of the subiecte, to stande in perill for the beautie of one. What is beautie, when a beastlie and ad∣ulterous minde is possessed: Beautie without chastitie, har∣boreth a monsterous rabelmente of vices, a snare and haire, Beautie a poison, in a adulterous mynde. to poison other. Beautie in fewe yeres, is not onely blemi∣shed, but decated, and wholie extinguished: it is vncredible, that the Grecians would seeke to bryng home Helena, who Beautie sone fadeth. had loste the chaste loue toward her housband, beyng caught with the adulterous loue of Paris, soonne to Priamus kyng Paris Hele∣nas louer. Phrigia. of Troie. The lande of Phrigia was a mightie Region, the people noble, puissaunte in warre: the kyng for nobilitie of actes famous. The Citee of Troie, wherein the kyng helde his Scepter of gouernement, was riche, mightie, and popu∣lous: ruled and gouerned, by the wisedome and policie of fa∣mous counsailours, so that by all meanes it is vncredible, without any possibilitie. Thei neclectyng their owne state Vncomelie. and kyngdō, so to preferre the beautie of one, that the whole multitude of Grece thereby to perishe. It is a matter vncre∣dible in all Grece, whiche for the fame of wisedome, is moste Grece the fountain of al learnyng. celebrated emong all nacions, not one wiseman at the same tyme to be therein: whose coūsaile and politike heddes, might ponder a better purpose. Grece, whiche was the mother and fountaine of all artes and sciences, all Eloquence, Philoso∣phie, wisedome flowyng from them, and yet wisedome to
want in their breastes. Reason can not make any parswasion that any probabilitie can rise, of any soche matter enterpri∣sed, what could the intent be of the Grecians, as concerning Menelaus. In Menelaus there was no wisedom, to seke and Menelaus housbande to Helena. hunte after Helena, or by any meanes to possesse her, she be∣yng a harlotte, her loue alienated, her hart possessed with the loue of an other manne: foolishlie he hopeth to possesse loue, that seeketh to enioye the cloked, poisoned, and dissembled Harlottes loue dissent∣bled. harte of a harlotte, Grece was well ridde of a harlotte, Troie harbouryng Helena. In the Troians it is not to be thought, Troians. that either the kyng, or nobles, for a harlotte, would see the the people murthered, their owne state, the king to be in dan∣ger of ruine. In the Grecians there was neither wisedome, Grecians. neither commendacion, to pursue with a maine hoste, with a greate Nauie of Shippes, to bryng backe againe a harlotte, whose enterprise rather might better bee borne, to banishe & exile soche a beastlie disposed persone. The Troians mighte Absurditie. well scorne the Grecians, if that the possession of a beautifull moste amiable, and minsyng harlotte, was of soche valour, estimacion, and price with theim, not onely the beautie of all other to bee reiected. But moste of all the vertuous life, and chastitie of all their matrons and honourable Ladies, to bee caste of as naught. Grece that had the name of all wisedome, The defence of Helena. of all learnyng and singularitie, might rather worthelie bee called, a harbouryng place of harlottes: a Stewe and vphol∣der of whoredome, and all vncleanes. Wherefore, these ab∣surdities ought to bee remoned, from the minde and cogita∣cion of all menne, that should worthelie ponder the state of Grece. Troie of like sorte to bee a kyngdome and common Troie a king¦dome of whor¦dome. wealthe of all vice: whoredome in soche price with the kyng, and people, that moste fortunate should the harlotte bee, and the adulterour in soche a common wealthe, that for adulte∣rous loue, putteth rather all their state to hasarde and perill, for the maintenaunce of beastlie loue, brutishe societie moste, in price with soche a  chastitie and moderacion of life,
abandoned and caste of. ¶ Vnpossible, and not agreyng. IF wee weigh naturall affeccion, it can not bee, that Nature ab∣horreth the warre of the Grecians. the Grecians so moche abhorring frō nature, should cast of the naturall loue of their wifes, their children and countrie, to bryng home againe, by slaughter of infinite people: soche an one as had lefte honestie, and chaste loue of her housbande. For, what praise can redounde to the Greci∣ans by warre, to bryng home Helena, though she of all crea∣tures Helena. was moste beautifull, beyng a harlotte: followyng the bridell and will of an other man. Maie shame or commenda∣cion riseto the Troians, can wisedome, counsaile, or grauitie, defende the adulterous luste of Priamus soonne, yea, could Priamus. Priamus so loue Helena, for Paris his sonnes sake, as that he had rather venter the ruine and destruccion of his citee, and the falle of his people, the murder and ruine of his children, and wife for the beautie of one. For what is beautie, where honestie and vertue lacketh, it is an vncomply matter, though the Poetes so faigne it, not onely that in heauen, a contenciō should fall emong the Goddises of their beautie, or that Iu∣piter of whom thei make an ignoraunt God, to chuse Paris the kynges sonne of Troic, chief arbitratour & Iudge of that matter, to whō he should giue the goldē Apell to her beautie, as chief of al other, was ascribed these thynges, are vndecent to thinke of the Goddeses, and moste of all, to thinke there is more Goddes then one. And euen as these are vanities, and forged imaginacions of the Goddes, so of the hattaile. ¶ Vncomelie and vnprofitable. THE daunger of many people doeth shewe, that no soche thyng should happen, either of the Grecians or of the Troians: for, it is a matter dissonaunt frō all truthe, that thei should so moche neclecte the quiete state, and prosperous renoume of their kyngdome, in all tymes and ages, since the firste can stitucion of all Monar∣chies
and kyngdomes. Who euer harde soche a forged mat∣ter to be Chronicled, and set forthe. Or who can giue credite to soche warre, to be enterprised of so small a matter: to leaue the state of waightier thynges for one woman. All the wo∣men of that countrie to stande in perill, the slaughter of their deare housbandes, the violent murder of their children to in∣sue. Therefore, the wilfulnesse of people and princes, are the cause of the falle and destruccion, of many mightie kyngdo∣mes, and Empires. The fall of Grece ensued, when the chief citees, Athenes and Lacedemonis tooke partes, and did con∣sederate Ambicion. Eesar fell by ambicion. diuers citees to them to assiste theim, and aide theim in battaile onely: ambicion and desire of glorie, moued bothe the Athenians and Lacedemonians, frō concorde and vnitie Discorde. by whiche meanes, the power, glory, and strēgth of all king∣domes falleth. Ambicion was the cause that mightie Pom∣pey fell, and died violently. Cesar likewise caught with am∣bicion, not bearyng the equalitée, or superioritie of Pompei, Pompey. was tourned of violentlie frō Fortunes whéele. Many prin∣ces of like sorte and kingdomes. By ambicion onely, had the cause of their ruine. The glorie of the Assirian Monarchie grewe moste mightie, by the ambicion of Ninus kyng of Babilon: the offpryng of Ninus, whiche were kynges line∣allie descendyng to the firste kyngdome of the Medes, bothe inlarged their kyngdomes, and also had the decate of theim by ambicion. Let the Medes also assoriate them selues to thē, from Arbactus the first kyng, vnto Astiages the laste: the be∣ginnyng and falle of the Persian Monarchie. The mightie state of Grece, the seate Imperiall of Rome, by ambiciō first Romulus kil¦led Remus by ambicion. extolled theim selues: and also by it, their glorie, scepter, and kyngdome was translated, but the falle of Troie came not, by ambicion, that the Grecians sought. But as the Poetes doe saigne, the beautie of one women so wounded their har∣tes, that the Grecians did hasarde, the perilles of thei un∣trie. The Troians so moche estemed, the beautie o ena, as that the state of all their kyngdome perished. I alas no
glorie nor honour to the Grecians, to resiste by armour, and to defende the violente takyng awaie of Helena, from her housbande: nor it was no honour, the Grecians to pursue by armour, the takyng awaie of Helena, beyng a harlotte. So that by no meanes it can followe, these thynges to bee true, of the battaile of Troie. ¶ Confirmacion. The other part, contrary to destruccion or subuersion, is called confirmacion. Confirmacion, hath in it so greate force of argumente, to stablishe and vpholde the cause or proposicion: as destruccion hath in castyng doune the senten̄ce or proposicion. Confirmacion is a certain oracion, whiche with a certain reprehension of the persone or facte, by order and waie of art, casteth doune, the contrary propounded. As in the other parte called destruccion, those proposici∣ons are to bee subuerted, whiche are not manyfestlie true, with all other notes before specified: so in contrariwise, this oracion by contrary notes is declaimed by, as for example. 1.It shall behoue you first, for the entring of the oracion, to induce a reprehension againste those, whiche haue confutid as a truthe, that whiche you will confirme. 2.In the seconde parte, place the exposicion and meanyng of the aucthours sentence. 3.Shewe the matter to be manifest. 4.Credible. 5.Prossible. 6.Agreyng to the truthe. 7.Shewe the facte comelie. 8.Profitable. This exercise of Rhetotike, doeth contain in it all strēgth of arte, as who should saie, all partes of Rhetorike maie  ee handled in this parte, called confirmacion. You  matter riseth, ioigne twoo notes together, as the reason  the argumente cometh in place, whiche Apthonius
a Greke aucthour herein vseth. As manifest and credible pos∣sible and agreyng to truthe, comelie and profitable, but in al these, as in all the reste: the theme or proposicion by itself, is to bee placed, the reprehension of the aucthour by itself, the exposicion of the theme by itself. ¶ The theme or proposicion. IT is true that is saied of Zopyrus, the noble Per∣sian, who vētered his life: & did cause the deformi∣tie of his bodie, for the sauegarde of his countrie. ¶ The praise. Iustinus the Historiographer, for worthinesse Iustinus. of fame and wisedome, deserueth to the poste∣ritie of all tymes, immortall fame, by whom the famous actes of Princes, and other noble men, doe remaine Chronicled. Giuyng exam∣ples Chronicles moste neces∣sary to be red of all valiauntnesse and vertue: for, bothe the actes and worthie feares of Princes, would passe as vnknowen in all ages, excepte the worthinesse of them, were in monumentes of writyng Chronicled: For, by the fame of their worthines, and vertues, cōmon wealthes and kyngdomes, doe stablishe and make Lawes, the hartes of people are incensed, and in∣flamed, to the like nobilitie of actes, and famous enter∣prices, The worthi∣nesse of histo∣ries. Histories of auncient tymes, bee vnto vs witnesses of all tymes and ages, of kyngdomes and common wealthes, a liuely example. A light to all truthe and knowledge, a schole∣maister: of maners a memorie of life, for, by it we se the wise∣dom what is a hi∣storie. of all ages, the forme of the beste and florishing common wealthes. We learne by the vertues of Princes and gouer∣nours, to followe like steppe of vertue: to flie and auoide vi∣ces, and all soche thynges, as are to the destruccion and de∣caie, of realme and countrie. How brutishe wer our , if  An ignorant life, . knewe no more then we se presently, in the state of  wealthe and kyngdome. The kyngdome  and common wealthes that  by
the longe experience, wisedome, pollicy, counsaile, and god∣lie lawes of Princes of auncient times, no smal praise and commendation can be attributed, to all suche as doe trauell The know∣lege of Histo∣ries maketh vs as it were liuyng in all ages. Historiogri∣phers. in the serching out the veritie of auncient Histories, for bi the knoledge of them, we are as it were liuyng in all ages, the fall of all kyngdomes is manifeste to vs, the death of Prin∣ces, the subuersions of kingdomes and common wealthes, who knoweth not the first risyng & ende of the Assiriane mo∣narchie, the glorie of the Persians, and the ruynge of the same, the mightie Empire of the Grekes, risyng & fallyng, the Romane state after what sorte florishyng and decaiyng, so that no state of common wealthe or kyngdome is vnkno∣wen to vs, therefore Iustine, and all suche as doe leue to the posteritie, the state of al things chronicled, deserue immortal commendacions. ¶ The exposicion. IN the time of Darius kyng of the Persians, the Assyriās who ware subiects to him, sence the time The treason of the Assy∣rians. of Cirus the firste kynge of the Persians, rebel∣led, inuaded and toke the myghtie Citie of Babi∣lon, whiche beyng possessed, with much difficultie, and not withoute greate daungers coulde bee attained. Darius the Darius. kynge hearyng of the treason of the Assyrians and that the mightie Citie of Babilon was taken, was very wroth wai∣ynge Babilon ta∣ken of the As∣syrians. with himselfe, that there by, the ruyne of the Persian Kyngdome mighte happen. Zopyrus one of the .vij. noble Peres of Persia, seing the daunger of the countrie, the state of the Prince, and the welfare of the subiectes to decaie, in the safegarde of his countrie, leuyng all priuate commoditie, for the behoufe and felicitie of the Persian kyngdome, did ven∣ter his owne life, commaunded his seruauntes at home to The fact of Zopyrus.  rēte his bodie with whippes, to cut of his nose, his  his eares, these thinges being vnknowen to Da∣rius ▪ As sone as Darius sawe Zopyrus so torne
and deformed, bewailed his state being astonished, at so hor∣rible Zopyrus cau¦sed the defor∣mitie of his bodie, for the good state of his countrie. a faict: but Zopyrus shewed to the kynge his hole in∣tente and purpose that he mynded to go to Babylon, whiche the Assyrians dyd traitorouslie possesse, & complained as that these things had ben don by the tyrannte and crueltie of Da∣rius, be wēt to Babilon, and there complained of the cruel∣tie of his Kyng, whereby purchasyng the fauor and loue of the Assyrians, he shewed them how Darius came to be kyng not by worthines, not by vertue, not by the common consent of men, but by the neynge of a horse. Zopyrus therefore ad∣monished them, that they should trust more to their armour, then to their walles, he willed them to proclame opē warre, The pollicie of Zopyrus. forthwith they encountred with the Persians, and for a time victorie fel on the Babilonians side, suche was the pollice of Zopyrus. The Assyrians reioised of the successe and felicitie of their warres, the King of the Babilonians gaue to Zopy∣rus, the chiefe power & office, to leede a mightie armie, of the whiche beynge Lientenaunt, he betraied the Babilonians and their Citie. ¶ Manifeste. NOt onlie Trogus Pompeius the famous Historio∣grapher, and Iustine which tooke the Story of him, Trogus Pō¦peius. but also the Greke writers doe sette forthe, as matter of truthe, the valiaunte enterprises of Zopyrus: so that the straunge and mightie facte of him can not seme vncredible, hauyng testimonie of it in all ages. Zopyrus hauing not re∣spect Zopyrus. to his owne life, to his owne priuate wealthe or glorie, did thereby put of the daunger that insued to the Persiane Kyngdome: It maie seme a greate matter, to a mynde not well affected towarde his countrie, to destroie or deforme his The saiyng of Tullie. owne bodie, for the sauegarde of countrie or common welth. But if we waie the State of oure bearth, oure countrie cha∣lengeth more at oure handes then frindes or parentes, so muche price Plato the Philosopher, and  Plato, . vnto our countrie, the volumes of all
doe prefare oure naturall countrie before the priuate state of owne manne, wealthe, glorie, honor, dignitie, and riches of The state of a publike wealthe, is to beē preferred before a pri∣uate wealth. Pericles. one or fewe, the Statutes of all Princes, sekyng the glorie of their countrie, doe prefare a vniuersal welthe, before a pri∣uate and particulare commoditie. Pericles the noble Athe∣nian in his oration made to the Athenians, sheweth that the glorie and welthe of one man or manie, cannot plante suche glorie, and renowne to their countrie, as that in all partes thereby to be beautified and decorated, but whē glorie a hap∣pie and florishyng state redoundeth to the kyngdome, the subiectes, the nobelles and hye peres, the gouuernour stan∣deth happie and fortunate. Who so hopeth in sparing costes and charges, monie or ornaments, to the behouf and imploi∣ment of his countrie and not by all meanes to his power and strength aydeth and defendeth his naturall countrie, from the daunger and inuasion of his enemie, what state inioyeth A good sub∣iecte is redie to liue and die for his countrie. he, or what wealth remaineth priuatlie, when the trone and scepter of his kyng faileth, the enemie wasteth, spoileth and destroieth all partes of his state, with the reste his life pe∣risheth, so that no daunger, coste, is to bee refused, to serue the kingdom and prince, by whose scepter, iustice, lawes, and equitie we are gouuerned, there is no subiect well affected, but that he onlie liueth to proffite his countrie, to liue & dye therein. ¶ Probabell. IF only Zopyrus had enterprised this valiaunt act, and that no memorie were remainyng in anie age of the noble acts of other men, it may seme not true∣lie chronacled; but from time to time, in all ages & cōmon wealthes, famous men for their acts & nobilitie haue ben, whiche with like courrage and magnanimitie haue sa∣ued their countrie, by the losse of their owne liues. Horatius Horacius Co¦cles. Cocles is bothe a witnesse and a light to the same, by whose aduenture the mightie and stronge Citie Rome was saued:  a what time as the Hetruscians entred on the citie, and
were on the bridge, Horatius cocles defendid the ende of the same, baryng of the brunte, and stroke of the enemie, vntill the Romans, for the sauegarde of the cytie, had broken doun the bridge, as sone as Horatius Cocles sawe the Cytie thus deliuered, and the repulse of the enemie, he lepte with his ar∣mours into the flud Tibar, it semed he had not regard to his life, that beyng burdened with the waighte and grauitie of his armour, durst venter his life to so main and depe a water. Marcus Attilius in the defence of his Prince, his right hand Marcus Attilius. being cut of, the which he laide on the ship of the Massilians, forthwith he apprehended with the lefte hand, and ceased not vntill he hadde soouncke the same ship. Cynegerus the Athe∣nian lineth by fame and like nobilitie of actes, vēteryng his Cynegerus. life for his countrie. The mightie cytie of Athenes, brought vnder the dominions of the Lacedemonians. Thrassbulus, Hismenias and Lisias bi their aduenture, and noble atchiue Hismenias. Thrasibulus reduced Athenes to his falicitie so moche loue, soo faithefull hartes they hadde towardes theire countreie. Leonides the King of the Lacedemonians, defendyng the narow straights of the cytie Thermopolie with sower thousand men against the mightie and huge armie of Xerxes, for Xerxes contemned theire smalle number and armie: Leonides the kyng hearde Leonides kyng or the Lacedemo∣nians. that the place and hill of the battell was preuētid of .xx. thou∣sande enemies, he exorted his souldiours parte of them to de∣parte vntill a better time might be locked for, and onlie with the Lacedemonians he proued the conflicte and the combate, although the campe of Xerxes was mightier & more in num∣ber: yet Leonides the kyng thought it good for the sauegarde of his contrie, for saieth he, I must rather saue it, then to haue respecte to my life, although the oracle of Delphos had fore∣shewed, that euen Leonides muste die in the fielde or battell of the enemie, and therefore Leonides entred battall, & com∣fortid his men for their countrie sake, as to die therein, there∣fore he preuented the narrowe straightes of the countrie, and the dangerous places, where the force of  neme ught
bruste in, he lingered not, leste the enemie mighte compasse him in, but in the quiet season of the nighte, he set vppon his enemie vnloked for, and they beynge but sixe hundred men with the kyng Leonides, brust into the cāpe of their enemies Leonides. beyng sixe hundred thousand menne, their valiauntnes was suche, and the ouerthowe of their enemies so great, and Xer∣xes the Kyng hauyng two woundes, retired with shame and loste the honor. Agesilaus and Conon valiaunte in actes, Agesilaus. Conon. and excellynge in all nobilitie, what great and mightie dan∣gers haue thei atchiued and venterid for their countrie sake, howe moche haue thei neglectid their owne wealth, riches, life and glorie, for the aduauncement and honor of their coū∣trie. Lisander also the Lacedemonian, was indued with like nobilitie with faithfull and syncéer harte towarde his coun∣try. Lisander. Archidamus also lieth not in obliuiō, whose fame death buried not the famous aduenture of Codrus kyng of the A∣thenians Archidamus Codrus. is maruelous and almoste incredible, but that the Histores, truelie set forth, and declare a manifest truthe ther∣of, who is more famous then Epaminundas, bothe for vir∣tue, Epamniun∣das. nobilitie and marciall feates among the Thebans, the mightie armie of the Grecians, at the longe sege of Troie, Grecians. what valiaunte Capitains hadde thei, whiche in the defence of their countrie hasarde their life: the Troians also wanted Troians. not for proues valiauntnes and al nobilitie, their péeres and nobles: amonge the Romans, what a greate number was Romans. of noble peres, whose studie alwaies was to liue and dye in the glorie, aide and defence of their countrie, for he liueth not by whose cowardlines fainted harte and courage, the contrie or kyngdome standeth in perrill, he liueth in shame, that re∣fuseth daunger, coste or charge, in the defence or procuryng, better state to his countrie. The worthie saiyng of Epami∣nundas declareth, who liueth to his countrie, who diyng va∣liauntlie who liueth in shame. in the felde, beyng thrust thorow with the speare of his enemie, asked those questions of these that stoede by him at the poincte of deathe, is my speare manfullie broken, and
my enemies chassed awaie, the whiche things his cōpanions in warre affirmed, then saide he: nowe your Capitaine Epa∣minundas beginneth to liue in that he dieth valiauntlie for Epamenun∣das a most no¦ble and vali∣aunt pere. his countrie, and in the proffite & aduauncement of the same, a worthie man, noble and valiaunte, his sentence also was worthie to be knowen, and followed of all suche as bee well affected and Godlie mynded to their countrie, Marcus Mar∣cellus of like sorte, and Titus Manlius Torquatus, & Sci∣pio Aemilianus, Marcus Attilius shewed in what hye price our naturall countrée ought to bee had, by their valiaunt at∣chifes, and enterprises: I might passe by in silēce Scipio Ca∣to, and Publius Scipio Nasica, but that thei by like same, honour and glorie liue immortall to their countrie, the fame also of Vibeus, Valerius Flaccu, and Pedanius Centurio giueth ampell and large matter to all menne, endued with nobilitie and valiaunt proues, for the defence of their coun∣trie with Quintus Cocctus, Marcus Sceua and Sceuola. ¶ Possibilitie. THere nedeth no donte to rise of possibilitie, seinge that examples doe remain of famous men, of god∣lie and well affected persones, whiche haue with like magnaunimitie putte in daunger their life, to saue their Prince, kyngdome, and countrie. Greate honour was giuen of the Athemans, to soche noble and valiaunte men, whiche ventered their liues for their common wealthe, The order of Athenes. to maintaine the florishyng state thereof. The eloquente and copious oracion of Thusidides, the true, faithfull, and elo∣quente Historiographer doeth shewe: what honour and im∣mortall Thusidides. fame was attributed, to all soche as did venter their liues, in the florishyng state of their countrie, in supportyng, mainteinyng, and defendyng the same. Who, although thei loste their liues, whiche by death should bee dissolued, their fame neuer buried, liueth with the soule to immortalitie, the losse of their Priuate wealthe, glorie, riches, substaunce, or dignitie, hath purchased and obtained fame, that withereth
not, and glorie that faileth not. ¶ Agreyng and comelie. BOthe the true Histories, doe leaue in commenda∣cion, the facte of Zopyrus, and the noble and wor∣thie enterprises of other: whiche haue giuen the like assaie, and their fame is celebrated and titeled with immortall commendacion and glorie, to the posteritie of all ages followyng. What harte can bee so stonie, or bru∣tishly The duetie of all good subiectes, affected, that wil not venter his life, goodes, landes, or possessions: if with the daunger of one, that is of hymself, the whole bodie and state of his countrie, is thereby supported, and saued. What securitie and quietnesse remained, what wealth, honour, or fame to Zopyrus: if not onely Zopyrus had perished, but the kyng & people vniuersally had been de∣stroied. Therevpon Zopyrus weighing and cōsideryng, the state of his birthe, that his countrie chalenged his life, rather then the dissolucion of the whole kyngdome, the decaie of the The cause of our birthe. Prince, the takyng awaie of the scepter, the slaughter of in∣finite people to ensue. He was borne to be a profitable mem∣ber to his countrie, a glorie and staie to the same: and not spa∣ryng his life, or shunnyng the greate deformitie of his bo∣die, to bee a ruine of the same. Was it not better that one pe∣rished, then by the securitie of one, a whole lande ouer run∣ned, as partes thereby spoiled: it was the duetie of Zopirus, to take vpon hym that greate and famous enterprise. It was also comelie, the kyngdome standyng in perill, a sage and descrite persone to preuente and putte of, soche a daunger at hande: The faicte altogether sheweth all vertue and greate The facte of Zopyrus. singularitie, and a rare moderacion of minde, to cast of all re∣spectes and excuses, forsakyng presentlie honour, quietnesse and obiecting himself to perill, he sawe if he onelie died, or by ieopardie saued his countrie, many thereby liued, the kyng∣dome & people florished, where otherwise, he with his Prince and kyngdome might haue perished. ¶ Proffitable.
AL the power of the Babilonians, was by his pol∣licie The fact of Zopyrus. throwen doune, the Citee taken, the enemie brought to confusion: on the other side, the Persi∣ans rose mightie, soche a mightie enemie put vn∣der foote. The fame of Zopryus and glorie of the facte, will neuer be obliterated, or put out of memorie, if this were not profitable to the kyngdome of Persia: if this were not a re∣noume to the prince and people, and immortall glory to Zo∣pryus iudgeye. Zopyrus therfore, beautified his countree, by Zopyrus de∣formed, a beautie of his countree. the deformitie of his bodie. Better it wer to haue many soche deformed bodies, then the whole state of the realme destroied or brought to naught: if we weigh the magnanimitie of that man, and his enterprise, there is so moche honour in the fact, that his fame shall neuer cease. ¶ A common place. A Common place is a Oracion, dilatyng and ampli∣fiyng Why it is cal∣led a common place. good or euill, whiche is incidente or lodged in any man. This Oracion is called A common place, because the matter conteined in it, doeth agree vniuersally to all menne, whiche are partakers of it, and giltie of the same A Oracion framed againste a certaine Thefe, Ertorcio∣ner, Murderer, or Traitor, is for the matter conteined in it, metelie and aptlie compiled, against all soche as are giltie of theft, murder, treason, or spotted with any other wickednes. This oracion of a common place, is like to the laste argu∣ment or Epilogus of any oracion, whiche the Grekes doe call Deuterologian, whiche is as moche to saie, as a rehearsall of that whiche is spoken of before. Wherefore, a common place hath no exhordium, or be∣ginnyng, yet neuerthelesse, for the profite and exercise of the learner, you maie place soche a proemium, or beginnyng of the oracion, as maie be easie to induce the learner. This parte of Rhetorike is large to intreate vpon, for the aboundaunce of matter. This part of Rhetorike is large to intreate vpon, for the
aboundaunce of matter. The common place, whiche Aphthonius intreateth of, is to be aplied against any man, for the declaimor to inuade, ei∣ther against vices, or to extoll and amplifie his vertues. This oracion of a common place, serueth bothe for the ac∣cuser and the defender. For the accuser, to exasperate and moue the Iudges or hearers, against the offender, or accused. For the defendour to replie, and with all force & strength of matter, to mollifie and appease the perturbacions of the Iudges and hearers, to pulle doune and deface the contrarie alledged. There is greate force in this oracion, on bothe the sides. Properlie this kinde of Rhetorike, is called a common place, though it semeth to be made againste this man, or that man: because the matter of the same shall properly pertain to all, giltie of the same matter. Pristianus sheweth, that this parte of Rhetorike, is as it Pristianus. were a certaine exaggeracion of reason, to induce a manifest probacion of any thyng committed. As for example, a Theife taken in a robberie, in whom neither shamefastnesse, nor sparcle of grace appereth against soche a one: this oracion maie be made, to exasperate the Iud∣ges from all fauour or affeccion of pitie, to be shewed. ¶ The order of this Oracion followeth with these notes to be made by. ¶ The firste Proheme.▪ DEmosthenes the famous Orator of Athenes in his oraciō made against Aristogitō doeth saie, that Lawes wherewith a common wealthe, ci∣tie what are Lawes. or Region is gouerned, are the gifte of God, a profitable Discipline among men, a restraint to with holde and kepe backe, the wilfull, rashe, and beastilie life of man, and therupō Aristotle and Plato doe shewe, that Aristotle. Plato. through the wicked behauour of men, good lawes were first
ordained, for, of ill maners, saie thei, rose good lawes, where lawes doe cease, and good order faileth, there the life of man Order. will growe, rude, wild and beestlie: Man beyng a chiefe crea∣ture Man borne by nature to societee. or God, indued with manie singuler vertues, is framed of nature to a mutuall and Godlie societie of life, without the whiche moste horrible wolde the life bee, for not onlie by concorde and agremente, the life of man dothe consiste but al things on the earth haue therin their being: the heauens and lghtes conteined in the same, haue a perpetuall harmonie & concente in finishyng their appointed race. The elementes of the worlde, where with the nature and substaunce of all All thinges beyng on the yearth, dooe consiste by a harmonie or concorde. thinges, doe consiste onlie by a harmonie and temperature of eche parte, haue their abidyng increase & prosperous beyng, otherwise their substaunce, perisheth and nature in all partes decaieth: Kyngdomes and common wealthes doe consiste in a harmonie, so long as vertue and all singularitie tempereth their state and gouernemente, and eche member thereof obe∣ieth his function, office and callynge, and as partes of the∣same bodie, euerie one as nature hath ordained theim occu∣piyng, their roume and place, the vse of euerie parte, all to the vse and preseruacion of the hole bodie, and as in the bodie so in the common wealthe, the like concorde of life oughte to be in euery part, the moste principall parte accordyng to his di∣gnitie of office, as moste principall to gouerne thother inferi∣or partes: and it thei as partes moste principal of thesame bo∣die with all moderacion and equabilitie tēperyng their state, office and calling. The meanest parte accordyng to his lowe Order con∣serueth com∣mon wealth. state, appliyng hymselfe to obeie and serue the moste prin∣cipall: wherein the perfecte and absolute, frame of common wealthe or kyngdome is erected. And seyng that as the Phi∣losophers doe saie, of ill maners came good lawes, that is to saie, the wicked and beastlie life of man, their iniurius beha∣uiour, sekyng to frame themselues from men to beastes mo∣ued Euil maners was theocca∣sion of good Lawes. the wise and Godlie, elders to ordaine certaine meanes, to rote discipline, whereby the wickedlie disposed personne
should bee compelled to liue in order, to obeie Godlie lawes, to the vpholdyng of societie. Therefore, all suche as dissolue lawes, caste doune good order, and state of common wealth, out as putride and vnprofitable weedes, to be extirpated and plucked vp from Citie and Common wealthe, from societie, who by mischeuous attemptes seke, to extinguishe societie, anntie, and concord in life. Princes & gouernors with al other magistrates ought in their gouernment to imitate the prac∣tise of the Phisician, the nature of man, wekedned and made feble with to moche abundaunce of yll humors, or ouermoch with ill bloode replenished, to purge and euacuate that, and all to the preseruacion and healthe of the whole bodie: for so was the meanyng of the Philosopher, intreatyng of the po∣litike, gouernment of kingdome and commonwealth, when thei compared a kingdome to the bodie of man: the thefe and robber as a euill and vnprofitable member, and all other as without all right, order, lawe, equitie and iustice, doe breake Theiues not mete to be in any societie. societie of life, be the against lawe and nature: possessing the goodes of a other man, are to bee cutte of, as no partes, méete to remaine in any societie. ¶ The seconde Proheme. THe chifest cause that moued gouernours and ma∣gistrates, Why theiues and wicked men, are cut of by lawe. to cutte of the race of theues, and violēte robbers, and of all other mischeuous persons, was that by them a confusion would ensue in al states. What Citee could stande in prosperous state, yea, or what house priuatlie inhabited, where lawes and aucthoritee were exiled: where violence, will, luste, and appetite of pestiferous men, might without terrour bee practised. If the labour and industrie of the godlie, should be alwaie a praie to ye wicked, and eche mannes violence and iniurious dealyng, his owne lawe, the beaste in his state, would bee lesse brutishe and in∣iurious. Who so seketh to caste doune this societee, he is not méete to be of any societée, whiche he dissolueth. Who so rob∣beth or stealeth, to liue by the gooddes of an other manne, as
his possession, is by violence and againste Nature: so by vio∣lence and against nature, their pestiferous doinges do frame A due rewar¦des for thie∣ues and mur∣therers. their confusion: their execrable & desietable purpose, do make theim a outcaste from all good people, and as no members thereof, cut of from all societée, their euill life rth perpetu∣al ignomie and shame. And  the tragicall ende of their enterprise. ¶ The contrarie. HErein the lose and dissolute state of gouernments called of the Grekes Democratia, haue conten∣ted the wilfull heddes of pestiferous men: where∣in Democratia. euery man must bee a ruler. Their owne will is their Lawe: there luste setteth order, no Magistrate, but euery one to hymself a Magistrate. All thynges in common, as long as that state doeth remain emong the wicked, a most happie state coumpted, a wished state to idell persones, but it continueth not. Herein the murtherer, the thiefe were meete The thiefe. The mur∣therer: to be placed. The greater thiefe, the better manner the moste execrable murtherer, a moste mete persone, for soche state of gouernemente. There is no nacion vnder the Sunne, but that one tyme or other, this troublous state hath molested theim: and many haue sought to sette vp soche a monsterous state of regiment, a plagued common wealthe, and to be de∣tested. Soche was the order of men, when thei liued without lawes. When the whole multitude were scattered, no citee, Toune, or house builded or inhabited, but through beastlie maners, beastlie dispersed, liued wilde and beastlie. But the wise, sage, and politike heddes reduced by wisedome, into a societie of life, nature leadyng thereto: Houses and habta∣cions, Houses. Families. Tounes. Citees. were then for necessitte made, families multiplied, vil∣lages and Taunes populoustie increased, and Citees raised emong so infinite people. Nature by God inuented and sta∣blished Lawe, and the sage and wise persones, pronounced and gaue sentence vpon Lawes. Whereupon, by the obedi∣ence of lawes, and preeminente authoritie of Magistrates.
The state of mightie kyngdomes and Common wealthes, haue growen to soche a roialnesse and loftie state, many fa∣mous kingdomes haue been on the face of the yearth: many noble Princes from tyme to tyme succedyng, whiche with∣out a order of godlie lawes, could not haue continued. What Obedience of Lawes did stablishe the mightie mo∣narchies. was the cause that the mightie Monarchies, continued many hundred yeres: did the losse and dissolute life of subiectes and Princes, cause the same but good lawes, and obedience to or∣ders. Therefore, where Magistrates, bothe in life and office, liue in the obedience of Lawes: the multitude inferiour, by The life of the Magi∣strate, a lawe example of the Magistrates singularitie, incensed dooe place before them, their example of life, as a strong lawe. Theodosius Emperor of Rome, writyng to Volufianus The Epistle of Theodosi∣us Empe∣ror of Rome his chief Pretor, as concernyng his office, in these woordes, saieth: Digna vox est maiestate regnantis legibus alligatum se principem profiteri. Adeo de autoritate Iuris nostra pendet autoritas et reuera maius imperio est submittere legibus prin¦cipatum & oraculo presentis edicti quod nobis licere non pa∣timur alijs indicamus. It is a worthie saiyng, and meete for the Maiestie of a Prince, to acknowledge hymself vnder his lawe. For, our aucthoritie, power, and sworde, doeth depende vpon the force, might, and aucthoritie of Lawes, and it pas∣seth all power and aucthoritie, his gouernemente and kyng∣dome to be tempered by lawe, as a moste inuiolable Oracle and decrée, so to doe as we prouulgate to other. Whereupon it is manifeste, what force godlie lawes gaue to the Prince, what aucthoritie. Take lawes awaie, all order of states fai∣leth, the Prince by Lawe, is a terrour to the malefactour: his Princes Lawe. Maiestie is with all humblenesse serued, feared, and obeied. By lawes, his state maketh hym as a God, emong menne, at whose handes thé preseruacion of eche one, of house, citee and countrie is sought. Seing bothe lawes and the Prince, haue that honour and strength, that without them, a Chaos a con∣fusion would followe, in the bodie of all common wealthes and kyngdomes. Let them by aucthoritie and lawe bee con∣founded,
that practise to subuerte aucthoritie, to neclecte the Prince, and his godlie lawes. ¶ The exposition. THe theife, or any other iniurious persons, doeth seke Theiues and all iniurious persones. to bee aboue all lawes, exempted from all order, vn∣der no obedience, their pestiferous dealyng, dooe vt∣ter the same: For, as Demosthenes the famous Orator of A∣thenes Demosthe∣nes in Ari∣stogiton. doeth saie. If that wicked men cease not their violēce if that good men in all quietnes, and securitie, can not enioys their owne goddes, while lawe and aucthoritie of the magi∣strate, seuerelie and sharply vseth his aucthoritie and sword. If dailie the heddes of wicked men, cease not to subuerte la∣wes, orders, and decrees godlie appoincted. Whiles that in all Citees and common wealthes, the Princes and gouer∣nours, are by lawes a terror to them. Lawes then ceasyng, The force of lawes. the dreadfull sentēce of the Iudge and Magistrate wanting. The sworde vndrawen, all order confounded, what a con∣fusion would followe: yea, what an open passage would bee lefte open to all wickednesse. The terrour of Lawes, the sworde and aucthoritie of the Magestrate, depresseth and put¦teth doune, the bloodie cogitacions of the wicked, and so hin∣dereth and cutteth of, many horrible and bloodie enterprises. Els there would bee neither Prince, Lawe, nor subiects, no hedde or Magistrate: but euery manne his owne hedde, his owne lawe and Magistrate, oppression and violence should bee lawe, and reason, and wilfull luste would bee in place of reason, might, force, and power, should ende the case. Where∣fore, soche as no lawe, no order, nor reason, will driue lo liue as members in a common wealthe, to serue in their functiō. Thei are as Homere calleth theim, burdeins to the yearth, wicked men burdeins of the yearth. for thei are of no societie linked with Nature, who through wickednesse are disseuered, abhorryng concorde of life, socie∣tie and felowship. Whom sinister and bitter stormes of for∣tune, doe daiely vexe and moleste, who in the defence of their
countrie are masmed, and thereby their arte and science, for, imbecilitie not practised, all art otherwise wantyng, extreme Maimed sol∣diours muste be prouided for. pouertee fallyng on them, reason muste moue, and induce all hartes, to pitee chieflie their state: who in defence and main∣teinaunce of our Countrie, Prince, and to the vpholdyng of our priuate wealthe at home, are become debilitated, defor∣med and maimed, els their miseries will driue them to soche hedlesse aduentures, that it maie bee saied, as it was saied to Alexander the Greate. Thy wartes, O Prince, maketh ma∣ny The saiyng of a shuld our to Alexander the greate. theues, and peace will one daie hang them vp. Wherein the Grecians, as Thusidides noteth, had a carefull proui∣dence, for all soche as in the defence of their Countrie were maimed, yea, euen for their wiues, and children of all soche, as died in warre, to be mainteined of the commō charge and threasure of Grece. Reade his Oracion in the seconde booke, niade vpon the funerall of the dedde soldiours. ¶ A comparison of vices. THe dronkarde in his state is beastlie, the proude The drūkard The proude persone. The prodigal The couei∣tes: is. The robber. and arrogante persone odious, the riotous and prodigall persone to be contempned, the couei∣tous and nigardlie manne to bee reietted. But who so by violence, taketh a waie the goodes of an other man, or by any subtill meanes, iniustlie possesseth the same, is detestable, with all seueritée to be punished. The adulterer and the harlotte, who by brutishe behauiour, leude affection, not godlines leadyng theréto: who by their vnchast The adul∣terer. The hariot. behauior, and wanton life doe pollute, and cōtaminate their bodie, in whom a pure muide ought to be reposed. Who the∣rowe beastly affection, are by euill maners transformed to beastes: and as moche as in theim lieth, multipliyng a bru∣tishe societie. The homicide in his state more horrible, accor∣dyng The homi∣cide. to his outragious and bloodie life, is to bee tormented, in like sort all other vices, accordyng to their mischiues, rea∣son, Lawe and Iustice, must temper and aggrauate due re∣ward,
and sentence to them. ¶ The sentence. NO vice was more greuous, and horrible emong the Scithians then thefte, for this was their sai∣yng: Thefte horri¦ble amōg the Scitheans. Quid  potent silicet furarl, what can be safe, if thefte bee eull or tolerated. Herein the vniuersalle societee of  is caste doune, hereby a confu∣sion A sentence a∣genst thefte. groweth, and a subuersion in all states immediatlie fol∣loweth, equitee, iustice, and all sincere dealyng is , violence extirpateth vertue, and aucthoritie is  of. ¶ The digression. THe facte in other maie be with more facilitie to∣lerated, in that to theim selues, the facte and con∣uersacion of life is moste perus, and hrtfull, but by so he kinde of nature, whole kyngdomes and common wealthes would bee  for a prosperous state and common wealthe, a common woe and calamitee would fall on them, tumultes and vprores main∣tained, right and lawe exiled: neither in field quitnes, welth Horrible vi∣ces. or riches, houses spoiled, families extinguished, in all places sedicion, warre for peace, violence for right, will and st for lawe, a hedlesse order in all states. And as concernyng Vsu∣rers though their  be neuer so ample, and plentifull Vserers. to enriche them, whereby thei growe to be lordes, ouer many thousandes of poundes: yet the wealthe gotten by it is so in∣iurious, that thei are a greate plague, to all partes of the cō∣mon wealthe: so many daungers and mischiues, riseth of thē Cato the noble and wise  of Rome, being demaun∣ded diuers questions, what was firste to bee sought, in a fa∣milie The sentence of Cato a∣gainst vsu∣rers. Vsure is ¦ther. or housholde, the aunsweres not likyng the demaun∣der: this question was ashed, O Cato, what senfēce giue you of Vsurie, that is a goodlie matter to bee enriched by. Then Cato aunswered in fewe woordes. Quid hominem occidere. What saie you to be a murderer? Soche a thyng faieth he, is
Vsurie. A brief sentence againste Vsurers, but wittely pro∣nounced from the mouth of a godlie, sage, noble, and descrite persone, whiche sentence let the Vsurer, ioigne to his Vsure retourned, and repeate at the retourne thereof, this sentence of Cato, I haue murthered. This one sentence will discou∣rage any Vsurer, knowyng hymself a murtherer. Though The sentence of Cato a dis∣comfort . moche more maie be spoken against it, this shalbe sufficient. The Hebrues calleth Vsurie, by the name of Shecke, that is a bityng gaine, of the whiche many haue been so bitten, that whole families haue been deuoured, & beggerie haue been their gaine. And as Palingenius noteth. Debitor aufugiens portat cum faenore sortem. The debtour often tymes saieth he, runneth awaie, and carieth with hym, the debte and gaines of the Vsurie. The Grekes calleth Vsurie Tokos, that is properlie the trauaile of women of their childe: soche is their Vsurie, a daungerous gettyng. Demosthenes likeneth their state as thus, as if ter∣restriall thynges should be aboue the starres: and the heauēs and celestialle bodies, gouerned by the base and lowe terre∣striall matters, whiche by no meanes, can conserue the ex∣cellencie Vsure a dan∣gerous gaue. of them, for, of them onely, is their matter, substaūce and nature conserued. ¶ Exclusion of mercie. WHerefore, to whom regimente and gouerne∣mente is committed, on whose administracion, the frame of the cōmon wealth doe staie it self: thei ought with al wisedome and moderacion, to procede in soche causes, whose office in wor∣thinesse of state, and dignitie, maketh thē as Goddes on the yearth, at whose mouthes for wisedome, counsaill, and for∣tunate Princes and magistrates be as Gods on the earth. state, infinite people doe depende. It is no smal thing in that their sword & aucthoritee, doeth sette or determine all thinges, that tendereth a prosperous state, whereupon with all integritee and equitée; thei ought to temper the affeccions of their mynde: and accordyng to the horrible facte, and mis∣chiues
of the wicked, to exasperate & agrauate their terrible iudgemente, and to extirpate from the yearth, soche as be of no societie in life. The , the thief, the adul∣terer, for by these all vertue  out, all godlie societie The ▪ The Theue. The Adulte∣ror. extinguished, cit, rales, and cuntries, prostrate & pla∣gued for the toleraion of their  aginst sch renhip in iudgemente muste cease, and accordyng to the state of the cause, equitee to retaine frendship, money muste not blinde, nor rewardes to force and temper Iudgementes: but accor∣dyng to the verit of the cause, to adde a conclusion. Wor∣thelie the pictures of Princes, Gouernours and Magistrates Whey the pi∣ctures of ma∣gistrates bee picturid with oute handes. in auncient tymes doe shewe this, where the antiquitée ma∣keth theim without handes, therein it sheweth their office, and iudgemente to proceade with equitée, rewardes not to blind, or suppresse the sinceritie of the cause. Magistrates not to bee bounde to giftes, not rewardes to rule their sentence. Alciatus in his boke called Emblemata, in senatū sancti prin∣cipis. Effigies manibus trunce ante altaria die Hic resident, quarum himine capta prior Signa potestatis fumme, sancti{que} senatus, Princes and magistrates, graue & ∣stante. Thebanis fuerant ista reperta viris. Cur resident? Quia mente graues decet esse quieta Iuridicos, animo nec variare leui. Cur sine sunt manibus? Capiant ne xenia, nec se Pollicitis flecti muneribus ve smant. Cecus est princeps quod solis auribus, abs{que} Affectu constans iussa senatus agit. Where vertue and integritie sheweth it self, in the persone and cause, to vpholde and maintain the same. Roote out hor∣rible vices from common wealthe, that the more surer and stronge foundacion of vertue maie be laied: for, that onelie cause, the scepter of kinges, the ice of magistrates was left to the posteritee of allges.
¶ Lawfull and just. SEyng that lawes bee godlie, and vniuersally thei Lawes giue equitee to all states. temper equitée to all states, and giue according to iustice, euery man his owne: he  vertue, that dispose than other manne of his own; and  Iustice. And thereupon his beastly life What briueth ye magistrate to horrible sentence a∣gainst wicked persons. by  forceth and driueth, lawe and Magistrate, to terri∣ble iudgement. For, who so against right, without order, or lawe, violateth an other man, soche a one, lawes of iustice, muste punishe violentlie, and extirpate from societée, beyng a  of societee. ¶ Profitable. IF soche wicked persones be restrained; and seuerelie punished, horrible vices will be rooted out: all artes sciences, and godlie occunacions maintained, vphol∣ded and kept. Then there must bee a securitee in all states, to practise godlines, a mutuall concorde. The Magistrate with Magistrate. equitée, the subiecte with faithful and humble obedience, ac∣complishyng Subiect. his state, office, and callyng. Whereupon by good Magistrates, and good subiectes, the common wealthe and kyngdom is in happie state stablished, For, in these twoo poinctes, as Plato doeth saie, there is vertuous rule, and like obedience. ¶ Easie and possible. AL this maie easely be doen; when wickednes is cutte of, in his firste groweth, when the magistrate driueth continually, by sworde and authoritee, all menne to obedience, bothe of lawes and gouernuurs. Then in al good common wealthes, vices are neuer tolerated to take roote: be∣cause The begyn∣nyng of vice is to be cutaf. the beginnyng and increase of vices, is sone pulled vp, his monsterous kyngdome thereby ouerthrowen. ¶ The conclusion. SO doyng, happie shall the kyng be, happie kyngdome, and moste fortunate people.
¶ The parte of Rhetorike called praise. His Oracion, which is  praise, is a declamaciō of the vertuous or good qualitees, properties belon∣gyng to any thyng, whiche dth procede by certaine notes of ate. All thynges that maie be see with the iye of , tou∣ched, or with any other sen apprhendd▪ that maie be prai∣sed, or dispraised. . . Fe. Bea. Orthardes Stones. Trees. . . . Ca. T. adins. . Artes. Scinc. Any vertue maie be praised, as wisedome, rightuousnes fortitude, magnanimitie, temperaunce, liberalitee, with all other. These are to be celebrated with praise. The persone, as Iulius Cesar, Octauius Augu, Hierele, Tullie, Cato, Demosthenes. Thynges, as rightuousnes, temperaunce. Tymes, as the Spring tyme of the yere, Sommer, Har∣uest, Winter. Places, as Hauens, Orthardes, Gardeins, Toures, Castles, Temples, Iandes. Beastes wantyng reason, as Horse, Shepe, Oxen . In the praise of vertue, this maie be saied THe excellencies of it, the antiquite and originalls be∣ginnyng  any region by it, as no  without vertues
and to extoll the same, in makyng a comparison, with other giftes of nature, or with other giftes of fortune, more infe∣riour or base. Vpon a citee, praise maie be recited, consideryng the good∣lie situacion of it, as of Paris, Venice, London, Yorke: con∣sideryng Wherein the praise of a ci∣tie consisteth the  of the lande, the wealthe and aboun∣daunce, the noble and famous gouernours, whiche haue go∣uerned the same. The first aucthors and builders of the same, the politike lawes, and godlie statutes therein mainteined: The felicitee of the people their maners, their valaunt pro∣wes and hardines. The buildyng and ornatures of the same, with Castles, Toures, Hauens: Floodes, Temples: as if a manne would celebrate with praise. The olde, famous, and aunciente Citée of London, shewyng the auncient buildyng The praise of London. of the same: the commyng of Brutus, who was the firste au∣cthor and erector of the same. As Romulus was of the migh∣tie Brutus buil¦ded Londō in the. . yeare of his raine, Citée Rome, what kyngs haue frō tyme to tyme, lineal∣ly descended, and succeded, bearing croune and scepter there∣in: the valiauntnes of the people, what terror thei haue been to all forraine nacions. What victories thei haue in battaile obteined, how diuers nacions haue sought their amitée and league. The false Scottes, and Frenche menne truce brea∣kers: Fraunce and Scotlande vpholdid by ye gouernors of this lande. many and sonderie tymes, losyng their honour in the field, and yet thei, through the puissaunt harte of the kynges of this lande, vpholdyd and saued, from the mighte and force of other enemies inuadyng theim. The twoo famous Vni∣uersitées of this lande, from the whiche, no small nomber of Cambridge. Oxforde. greate learned men and famous, haue in the comon wealthe sprong, with all other thynges to it. The praise of a Kyng, Prince, Duke, Erle, Lorde, Ba∣ron, Squire, or of any other man be maie declaimed of obser¦uing the order of this parte of Rhetorike. This parte of Rhetorike called praise, is either a particu∣ler praise of one, as of kyng Henry the te, Plato, Tullie, Demosthenes, Cyrus, , Alexander the greate.
Or a generalle and vniuersalle praise, as the praise of all the Britaines: or of all the citin of London. ¶ The order to make this Oracion, . Firste, for the enteryng of the matter, you shall place a exordium, or beginnyng. The second place, you shall bryng to his praise. Genus¦eius, that is to faie: Of what kinde be came of, whiche dooeth consiste in fower poinctes. Of what nacion. Of what countrie. Of what acetours. Of what parentes. After that you shall declare, his educacion: the educacion is conteined in thrée poinctes. In Institucion. Arte. Lawes. Then put there to that, whiche is the chief grde of al praise: his actes doen, whiche doe procede out of the giftes, and excellencies of the minde, as the fortitude of the mynde, wisedome, and magnanimitée. Of the bodie, as a beautifull face, amiable countenaunce swiftnesse, the might and strength of the same. The excellencies of fortune, as his dignitée, power, au∣cthoritie, riches, substaunce, frendes. In the fifte place vse a comparison, wherein that whiche you praise, maie be aduaunced to the vttermoste. Lasts of all, vse the Epilogus, or conclusion. ¶ The example of the Oracion. ¶ The praise of Epaminundas. IN whom nature hath powred singuler giftes, in whom vertue, & singularitee, in  en∣terprises aboundeth: whose glorie & renowne,  to the , immortall . n the grae, their vertues and godlie
life, tasteth not of Obliuion, whiche at the length ouershro∣weth Obliuion. all creatures, Citées, and regions. Thei liue onelie in all ages, whose vertues spreadeth same and noble enterpri∣ses, by vertue rooteth immortalitee. Who so liueth as that his good fame after death ceaseth not, nor death with the bo∣die Who liue in all ages. rutteth of their memorie of use: Soche not onely in life, but also in death are moste fortunate. In death all honor, di∣gnitee, glorie, wealthe, riches, are taken from vs: The fame and glorie of singulare life is then, chieflie takyng his holde Good fame chieflie rou∣teth after death. Tuilie. Demosthe∣ues. Iulius Ce∣sar. Ocrauius Augustus. Vespasianus Theodosius. Traianus. Adrranus. and roote, wise men and godlie, in life, knowen famous, af∣ter death, remain woste worthie & glorious. Who knoweth not of Tullie, the famous Oratour of Rome. Doeth De∣mosthenes lieth hidden, that noble Oratour of Athenes. Is not yt fame of Iulius Cesar, Octauius Augustus remainyng of Vespasianus: of Theodosius, of Traianus, of Adrianus, who by praise minded, be left to the ende of al ages. Soche a one was this Epaminundas, the famous Duke of Thebe, whose vertues gane hym honour in life, and famous enter∣prises, immortalitée of fame after death. What can bee saied more, in the praise and commendacion, of any peere of estate, then was saied in the praise of Epaminundas, for his ver∣tues were so singulare, that it was doubted, he beyng so good a manne, and so good a Magistrate, whether he were better manne, or better Magistrate: whose vertues were so vnited, that vertue alwaies tempered his enterprises, his loftie state as fortune oftentymes blindeth, did not make hym vnmind∣full of his state. No doubt, but that in all common wealthes, famous gouernours haue been, but in all those, the moste parte haue not been soche, that all so good men, and so good magistrates: that it is doubted, whether thei , or better magistrates. It is a rare thyng to be , Good man, good magi∣strate, boothe a good man and a good magistrate. but a more difficult matter, to bee a good Magistrate: and moste of all, to be bothe a good man, and a good Magistrate. Honour and preeminent state; doeth , whereupon thei ought the more  to wade
in all causes, and with all moderacion, to temper their pree∣minent state. The Philosophers ponderyng the brickle and slippere state of fortune, did pronunce this sentence: Diffici∣lius The saiynge of the Philo∣sophers. est res aduersas pati, quam fortunam eslantem ferre, it is more easie to beare sharpe and extreme pouertie, then to rule and moderate fortune, because that the wisest menne of all haue as Chronicles doe shewe, felte this obliuion, that their maners haue been so chaunged, as that natures molde in thē Obliuion. had ben altered or nuelie framed, in the life of Epaminūdas moderacion and vertue, so gouerned his state, that he was a honor and renowne to his state, nothing can be more ample in his praise, then that which is lefte Chronicled of him. Of his countrie. EPaminundas was borne in Thebe a famous citie in Beotia, the which Cadmus the sōne of Agenor buil∣ded, Cadmus. whiche Amphion did close & enuiron with wal∣les, Amphion. in the whiche the mightie and valiaunt Hercules was Hercules. borne, & manie noble Princes helde therin scepter, the which Citie is tituled famous to the posterity by the noble gouern∣ment of Epaminundas. ¶ Of his auncetours. EPaminundas came not of anie highe nobilitie or blood, but his parentes were honeste and verteous who as it semed were verie well affected to vertue, instructyng their soonne in all singulare and good qualities, for by good and vertuous life and famous enter∣prises from a meane state, manie haue bene extolled to beare scepter, or to attaine greate honour, for as there is a begyn∣nyng of nobilitie, so there is an ende, by vertue and famous Nobility rose by vertue. actes towarde the common wealthe, nobilite first rose. The stock of Cesar and Cesars was exalted from a meaner state, Cesar. Scipio. by vertue onelie to nobilitie. Scipios stocke was not alwais noble, but his vertues graffed nobilitie to the posteritie of his line and ofspryng followynge. And euen so as their fa∣mous
enterprices excelled, nobilite in theim also increased. Catilina wicked, was of a noble house, but he degenerated Catilina. from the nobilitie of his auncestours, the vertues that graf∣fed nobilitie in his auncestors, were first ertinguished in Ca∣tiline. Marcus Antonius was a noble Emperour, a Prince Marcus Antonius. indued with all wisedome and Godlie gouernmēt, who was of a noble parētage, it what a wicked sonne succeded him, the father was not so godlie, wise, and vertuous, as Commo∣dus Commodus. was wickedlie disposed and pestiferous. There was no vertue or excellence, meete for suche a personage, but that Marcus attained to. Who for wisedome was called Marcus Philosophus, in his sonne what vice was thē that he practi∣sed not, belie chier, druncknes and harlottes, was his delite, his crueltie and bluddie life was suche that he murthered all the godlie and wise Senatours, had in price with Marcus his father. Seuerus in like maner, was a noble and famous Seuerus. Emperor, in the Senate moste graue, politike, and in his warres moste fortunate, but in his sonne Marcus Antoni∣nus Marcus Antonius Caracalla. Caracalla, what wickednes wanted, whose beastlie life is rather to be put in silence, then spoken of. In the assemble of the Grecians, gathered to consulte vpon the contencion of Achilles armour, Aiax gloriouslie aduaunceth hymself of his auncestrie, from many kinges descended, whom Vlisses his Aiax. Vlisses. aduersarie aunswered: makyng a long and eloquente Ora∣cion, before the noble péeres of Grece, concernyng Aiax his auncetours. These are his woordes. Nam genus et proauos et que non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voco, sed enim quia retulit Aiax, esse louis pronepos. As for our parentage, and line of auncetours, long before vs, and noble actes of theirs: as we our selues haue not doen the like, how can we call, and title their actes to be ours. Let them therefore, whiche haue descended from noble blood, and famous auncetours: bee like affected to all nobilitée of their auncetours, what can thei glory in the nobilitée of their aun∣cetours.
Well, their auncetours haue laied the foundacion, and renoume of nobilitee to their ofspryng. What nobilitee Nobilitee. is founde in them, when thei builde nothyng, to their aunce∣tours woorke of nobilitée. Euen as their auncetours, noblie endeuoured them selues, to purchase and obtain, by famous actes their nobilitée) for, nobilitée and vertue, descendeth al∣waies to the like) so thei contrary retire and giue backe, frō all the nobiliée of their auncestours, where as thei ought, with like nobilitée to imitate them. Many haue been, whiche through their wisedome, and famous enterprises, in the af∣faires A beginnyng of nobilitee, of their Prince, worthche to honour haue been extol∣led and aduaunced: who also were the firste aucthours and founders of nobiliée, to their name and ofspring. Whose of∣spring indued with like nobilitee of vertues, and noble actes haue increased their auncestors glorie: the childrē or ofspring lineally descendyng, hauyng no part of the auncestours glo∣rie, how can thei vaunte them selues of nobiliée, whiche thei lacke, and dooe nothyng possesse thereof, Euen from lowe birthe and degree. Galerius Armentarius was aduaunced, euen from a Shepherdes sonne, to sit in the Imperiall seat of Roome. Galerius Maximinus whom all the Easte obaied, Galerius a Shepherds, sonne Empe∣ror of Rome. Probus a Gardeiners sonne, Em∣perour. his vertues and noble acts huffed hym to beare scepter in the Empire of Roome. Probus a Gardiners soonne, to the like throne and glorie ascēded, so God disposeth the state of euery man, placyng and bestowing dignitée, where it pleaseth him as he setteth vp, so he pulleth doune, his prouidence & might is bounde to no state, stocke, or kindred. ¶ Of his educacion. EPaminūdas beyng borne of soche parentes, was brought vp in all excellente learnyng, for, vnder hym Philippe the kyng of the Macedonians, the soonne of Amintas, was brought vp. This Epa∣minundas, the Histories note hym to be a chief Philosopher, and a capitaine moste valiaunte. In Musike, in plaiyng, and
singyng finelie to his Instrumente, notable and famous, no kinde of learnyng, arte, or science, wanted in his breaste: So greate and aboundante were his vertues, that aboue all go∣uernours, whiche haue been in Thebe, his name and fame is chieflie aduaunced. ¶ The praise of his actes. EPaminundas beyng moste valiaunte and no∣ble, leauing all priuate commoditée, glory, and The dutie of good gouer∣nors. riches a side: sought the renoume of his coun∣tree, as all rulers and gouernours ought to do. For, a kyngdome or common wealth, can not rise to any high nobilitée or Roialnesse, where gouernours, rulers, and magistrates, neclecting the vniuersall, and whole Nowe a king¦dome riseth to all felicitie. body of the common wealthe, doe cogitate and vigilantly en∣deuour themselues, to stablish to them and theirs, a priuate, peculiar, and domesticall profite, glorie, or renoume. Couei∣teousnes, whiche is in all ambicious Magistrates the poison, plague, destruccion, and ruine of the beste and florishing cō∣mon wealthes, of al wickednes and mischief the roote: a vice, whereupon all vice is grounded, from whom all mischiefe Couetousnes a great euill. floweth, all execrable purposes issueth. That wanted in Epaminundas, for in the ende of his life, his coffers were so thin and poore, that euen to his Funerall, money wanted to solempnise the same. Priuate glorie nor excesse, was hunted after of hym, yet his vertues were of soche excellencie, that honour, dignitée, and prceminent state, was offered and gi∣uen to hym vnwillinglie. This Epaminundas was in go∣uernement so famous, and so vertuouslie and politikelie ru∣led the same, that he was a glorie, renoume, honour, and fe∣licitée to his kingdome, by his state. Before the time of Epa∣minundas, the countree of Beotia was nothyng so famous Beotia. in their enterprises: neither the citee of Thebe so roiall, puis∣saunt Thebes. or noble, the antiquitee of that tyme sheweth, that E∣paminundas wantyng the power of Thebes, their glorie, strength, and felicitee fell and decaied. The learning of Epa∣minundas
and knowlege, was so aboundant and profounde bothe in Philosophie, and in all other artes and sciences, that it was wounderfull. In chiualrie and in feates of warre, no péere was more couragious and bolde, or hardie, neither in that, whiche he enterprised, any could be of greater counsaile in hedde more pollitike, of minde more sage and wittie: his gouernement so good, that beyng so good a Magistrate, it is doubted, whether he be better man, or better Magistrate, E∣paminundas died in the defence of his countrée. The Athe∣nians were enemies to the Thebanes, and many greate bat∣tailes were assaied of theim and foughten: and often tymes the Athenians felt many bitter stormes, and fortune loured of them, he beyng so valiaunt a capitain. Epaminundas be∣yng dedde, the Athenians ceased to practise, any one parte of chiualrie, their prowesse and dexteritée decaided: thei hauyng no aliaunte, and forraine enemie to moleste theim, or whom thei feared. So that a famous, wise, pollitike, and valiaunte capitaine, is not onely a staie, a pillar and strong bulwarke A valiant ca∣pitain, to his countrie a pil¦lar to his ¦mie, a occasiō to dexteritie. to his countrée. But also forraine nacions, hauyng one, whō for his valiauntnes thei dreade, doe practise and inure themselues, to all dexteritee, counsaile, wisedome, and pollicie: soche a one was Epaminundas, to his enemies and coūtrée. ¶ The comparison. NEither Hector of Troie, nor Achilles of Grece, might bee compared with Epaminundas, Numa Pompili∣us Hector. Achilles. Numa Pom¦peius. Adrianus. was not more godlie, Adriane the Emperour of Roome, no better learned, nor Galba the Emperour more valiaunte, Nerua no more temperate, nor Traianus more noble, neither Cocles nor Decius, Scipionor Marcus Regu¦lus, did more valiauntly in the defence of their countrie, soche a one was this Epaminundas. ¶ The conclusion. OF many thynges, these fewe are recited, but if his whole life and vertues, wer worthely handeled: fewe would beleue, soche a rare gouernour, so vertuous a
Prince, so hardie and valiaunte a capitaine, to haue remai∣ned in no age. ¶ The parte of Rhetorike, called dispraise. THis parte of Rhetorike, which is called dispraise, is a su∣uectiue Oracion, made againste the life of any man. This part of Rhetorike, is contrary to that, whiche is be∣fore set, called laus, that is to saie, praise: and by contrary no∣tes procedeth, for the Oratour or declaimer to entreate vpō. This parte of Rhetorike, is called of the Grekes Psogos. In praise, we extoll the persone: First by his countrée. Then by his auncestours and parentes. In the third place, by his education and institucion. Then in the fowerth place, of his actes in life. In the fifte place vse a comparison, comparyng the per∣sone with other, whiche are more inferiour. Then the conclusion. Now in dispraise, contrarily we doe procede. Firste, in the dispraise of his countrée. Of his auncetours and parentes. His educacion is dispraised. Then his actes and deedes of life. Also in your comparison with other, dispraise hym. Then in the laste place, adde the conclusion. All thynges that maie be praised, maie be dispraised. ¶ The dispraise of Nero. AS vertue meriteth commendacion and immor∣tall renoume, for the nobilitée and excellencie reposed in it: so ougle vices for the deformitée of Vertue. them, are in mynd to be abhorred and detested, and with all diligence, counsaile, and wisedome aucided. As pestiferous poison extinguisheth with his cor∣rupcion and nautinesse, the good and absolute nature of all Vice. thinges: so vice for his pestiferous nature putteth out vertue and rooteth out with his force all singularitée. For, vice and
vertue are so of nature contrary, as fire and water, the vio∣lence of the one expelleth the other: for, in the mansion of ver∣tue, vice at one tyme harboreth not, neither vertue with vice can be consociate or vnited, for, vertue is a singuler meane, what is ver∣tue. or Mediocrite in any good enterprise or facte, with order and reason finished. Whose acte in life, doeth repugne order and reason, disseuered from all Mediocrite, soche do leaue iustice, equitée, wisedome, temperaunce, fortitude, magnanimitée, and al other vertues, bothe of minde and body: onely by ver∣tues life men shewe theimselues, as chief creatures of God, with reason, as a moste principall gifte, beautified and deco∣rated: In other giftes, man is farre inferiour to beastes, both in strength of bodie, in celeritée and swiftnesse of foote, in la∣bour, in industrie, in sense, nothyng to bee compared to bea∣stes, with beastes as a peculier and proper thyng, wee haue our bodie of the yearth: but our minde, whiche for his diuini∣tée, passeth all thynges immortall, maketh vs as gods emōg other creatures. The bodie therefore, as a aliaunt and forain enemie, beyng made of a moste base, moste vile and corrup∣tible nature, repugneth the mynde. This is the cause, that wickednesse taketh soche a hedde, and that the horrible facte and enterprise of the wicked burste out, in that, reason exiled and remoued from the minde, the ougle perturbacions of the minde, haue their regiment, power, and dominiō: and where soche state of gouernemente is in any one bodie, in priuate and domesticalle causes, in forraine and publike affaires, in kyngdome and cōmon wealthe. Vertue fadeth and decaieth, and vice onely beareth the swaie. Lawe is ordered by luste, and their order is will, soche was the tyme and gouernment of this wicked Nero. ¶ Of his countres. NEro was a Romaine borne, though in gouerne∣ment he was wicked, yet his coūtrée was famous, and noble: for, the Romaines wer lordes and hed∣des ouer all the worlde. The vttermoste Indians,
the Ethiopes, the Persians, feared the maiestie and auctho∣ritée of the Romaines. From Romulus, who was the firste founder, and builder of that Citee: the Romaines bothe had their name of hym, and grew afterward to marueilous pui∣saunt Rome. roialnes. There was no nacion vnder the Sunne, but it dreaded their Maiestie, or felte their inuincible handes: there hath been many mightie kyngdomes, on the face of the yearth, but no kyngdome was able, with like successe and fe∣licitée in their enterprise, or for like famous gouernors, and continuance of their state, to compare with them. This was, and is, the laste mightée Monarchie in the worlde. Roome a olde aunciente citee, inhabited firste of the Aborigines, which came from Troie. The prouidence of God, so disposeth the Carthage. tymes and ages of the world, the state of kyngdomes, by the fall of mightier kyngdomes, meaner grewe to power and glorie. The Carthagineans, contended by prowes, and ma∣gnanimitee, to be lordes ouer the Romaines. Carthage was a greate, mightie, olde, auncient & famous citee, in the whiche valiaunte, wise, and pollitike gouernours, helde therein re∣giment, long warres was susteined betwene the Romaines and Carthagineans, emong whom infinite people, and ma∣ny noble péeres fell in the duste. Fortune and happie successe fell to the Romaines: the people of Carthage vāquished, and prostrate to the grounde. Scipio the noble Consull, beyng at the destruccion of it, seeyng with his iye, Carthage by fire brunte to ashes, saied: Talis exitus aliquando erit Rome: euē as of Carthage, like shall the destruccion of Rome bee, as for Destruction of Rome to ashes in tune. continuaunce of the Romaine state, of their glorie, power, and worthie successe, no nacion vnder the Sunne, can com∣pare with theim: soche was the state of Rome, wherein wic∣ked Nero raigned. ¶ Of his anncestours. DOmitianus Nero, the sonne of Domitius Enobar∣bus, Agrippina was his mothers name: this Agrip∣pina, was Empresse of Rome, wife to Claudius Ti∣berius,
the daughter of his brother Germanicus. This A∣grippina, the Chronicle noteth her, to be indued with al mis∣chief Agrippina. and crucltée: For Tiberius her housbande, hauyng by his firste wife children, thei were murthered by her, because she might, thei beyng murthered, with more facilitée, fur∣ther the Empire, to her soonnes handes, many treasons con∣spired against them oftentimes, Agrippina poisoned her hus∣bande, then Nero succeded. ¶ Of his educacion. SEneca the famous Poete & Philosopher, was schole∣maister Seneca schol maister to Nero. to Nero, who brought hym vp in all nobili∣tie of learnyng, mete for his state: though that Nero was wickedlie of nature disposed, as his beastlie gouerne∣ment sheweth, yet wickednes in him, was by the seueritie of Seneca, and his castigacion depressed: for Traianus Empe∣rour of Rome, would saie, as concernyng Nero, for the space of fiue yeres, no Prince was like to hym, for good gouerne∣ment, after fiue yeres, losely and dissolutly he gouerned. ¶ Of his actes. THis Nero, at what tyme as his mother was con∣ceiued The dreame of Agrippina mother to Nero, in his concepcion. of him, she dreamed that she was conceiued of a Viper: for, the young Viper alwaies killeth his dame. He was not onely a Viper to his mo∣ther whom he killed, but also to his kyngdome and common wealthe a destroier, whiche afterward shalbe shewed, what a tyraunte and bloodie gouernour he was. This Nero made in the Citee of Rome, the rounde seates and scaffoldes, to be∣holde Nero a viper spectacles and sightes, and also the bathes. He subdued Pontus a greate countrée, whiche ioineth to the sea Pontus∣whiche countrée containeth these realmes, Colchis, Cappa∣docia, Armenia, and many other countrées, and made it as a Prouince, by the suffraunce of Polemon Regulus, by whose Pontus. Colchis. Cappadocia. Armenia. name it was called Pontus Polemoniacus. He ouer came the Alpes, of the king Cottus, ttius the king being dedde
The life followyng of Nero was so abhominable, that the shame of his life, will make any man a fraied, to leaue any Nero vnwor¦thie to be chro¦nicled. Seneca▪ memorie of hym. This Domitius Nero, caused his Schole∣maister Seneca to be put to death, Seneca chosing his owne death, his veines beyng cutte in a hotte bathe died, bicause he corrected wicked Nero, to traine hym to vertue. He was out∣ragious wicked, that he had cōsideracion, neither to his own honestie, nor to other, but in continuaunce, he tired hymself as virgines doe when thei marie, callyng a Senate, the dou∣rie assigned, and as the maner of that solemnitee is, many re∣sortyng and frequentyng, in maidens tire and apparell. He went beyng a man, to be maried as a woman: beside this, at The shamful life of Nero. other tymes he cladde hymself with the skin of a wilde beast, and beastlie did handle that, whiche Nature remoueth from the sight. He defiled hymself with his owne mother, whom he killed immediatlie. He maried twoo wiues, Octauia, and Sabina, otherwise called Poppea, firste murtheryng their housbandes. In that tyme Galba vsurped the Empire, and Caius Iulius: as sone as Nero heard that Galba came nere Galba. Caius Iu∣lius. towardes Rome, euen then the Senate of Rome had deter∣mined, that Nero should bee whipped to death with roddes, accordyng to the old vsage of their auncestours, his necke yo∣ked with a forke. This wicked Nero, seyng himself forsaken of all his friendes, at midnight he departed out of the Citée, Ephaon, and Epaphroditus waityng on hym, Neophitus and Sporus his Eunuche: whiche Sporus before tyme, had Nero assaied to frame and fashion out of kinde. In the ende, Nero thruste himself through, with the poinct of his sworde, his wicked man Sporus, thrustyng foreward his trembling hande: this wicked Nero before that, hauyng none to mur∣ther The death of Nero. hym, he made a exclamacion, in these woordes. Is there neither friende nor enemie to kill me, shamefullie haue I li∣ued, and with more shame shall , in the .xxxij. yere of his age he died. The Persians so atire ly loued hym, that after his death thei sente Ambassidours, desiryng licence to erecte
to hym a monumente, all countrées and Prouinces, and the whole Citée of Rome, did so moche reioyce of his death, that thei all wearyng the Toppintant hattes, whiche bonde men doe vse to ware, when thei bee sette at libertie, and so thei tri∣umphed of his death, deliuered from so cruell a tyraunte. ¶ A comparison. AS for wicked gouernement, Nero doeth make Ca∣ligula like to Comodus, Domitianus, Antoninus Nero. Caligula. Domitianus Antoninus. Caracalla, thei were all so wicked, that the Senate of Rome thought it méete, to obliterate their name, from all memorie and Chronicle, because of their wickednesse. ¶ The conclusion. MOche more the life and gouernement of wicked Ne∣ro, might be intreated of, but this shall be sufficient: to shewe how tyrannically and beastly, he gouerned vnmete of that throne. ¶ A comparison. A Comparison, is a certain Oracion, shewyng by a collacion the worthines, or excellēcie of any thing: or the naughtines of the same, compared with any other thyng or thynges, either equalle, or more in∣feriour. In a comparison good thynges, are compared with good as one vertue with an other: as wisedome & strength, whiche of them moste auaileth in peace and warre. Euill thynges maie bee compared with good, as Iustice, with iniustice, wisedome with foolishnes. Euill thynges maie be compared, with euill thynges, as wicked Nero, compared to Domitianus, or Caligula to Cō∣modus, theft to homicide, drunkenes with adulterie. Small thynges maie be compared with greate: the king with his subiect, the Elephant or Camell to the Flie, a Cro∣codile to the Scarabe. In a comparison, where monumente is supputated on
bothe the sides, worthetie to praise, or dispraise. Where a comparison is made, betwene a thyng excel∣lente, and a thyng more inferiour: the comparison shall pro∣cede with like facilitee. All thynges that maie bee celebrated with praise, or that meriteth dispraise: al soche thynges maie be in a comparison. The persone, as Cato being a wise man, maie be compa∣red with Nestor, the sage péere of Grece: Pompei with Ce∣sar, as Lucane compareth them, and so of all other men. Thynges maie bee compared, as golde with siluer: one mettall with an other. Tymes maie bee compared, as the Spryng with Som∣mer: Harueste with Winter. Places maie be compared, as London with Yorke, Ox∣forde with Cambridge. Beastes without reason, as the Bée with the Ante, the Oxe with the Shepe. Plantes, as the Vine, and the Oliue. First, make a proemium or beginnyng to your cōparison Then compare them of their countrée. Of their parentes. Of their auncestours. Of their education. Of their actes. Of their death. Then adde the conclusion. ¶ A comparison betwene De∣mosthenes and Tullie. TO speake moche in the praise of famous men, no argument can wante, nor plentie of matter to make of them, a copious and excellent Ora∣cion. Their actes in life through nobilitée, will craue worthelie more, then the witte and penne of the learned, ca by Eloquence expresse. Who can worthelie expresse and sette foorthe, the noble Philosopher
Plato, or Aristotle, as matter worthelie forceth to commend, Plato. Aristotle. when as of them, all learnyng, and singularitée of artes hath flowen. All ages hath by their monuments of learning, par∣ticipated of their wisedome. Grece hath fostered many noble wittes, from whom all light of knowlege, hath been deriued by whose excellencie Rome in tyme florishyng, did seeke by nobilitée of learnyng, to mate the noble Grecians. So moche Italie was adorned, and beautified with the cunnyng of the Grecians. Emong the Romaines many famous Oratours and other noble men hath spronge vp, who for their worthi∣nesse, might haue contended with any nacion: either for their glorie Tullie. of learnyng, or noble regiment. Emong whom Tul∣lie by learning, aboue the rest, rose to high fame, that he was a renoume to his countree: to learnyng a light, of all singuler Eloquence a fountaine. Whom Demosthenes the famous Oratour of Athenes, as a worthie mate is compared with, whom not onely the nobilitée, and renoume of their Coun∣trée shall decorate, but thē selues their owne worthines & no∣bilitée of fame. No age hath had twoo more famous for lear∣nyng, no common wealthe hath tasted, twoo more profitable to their countrée, and common wealthe: for grauitée and coū∣saile, nor the posteritée of ages, twoo more worthie celebra∣cion. Thusidides speakyng, in the commendacion of famous men sheweth: as concernyng the fame of noble men, whose Thusidides. vertue farre surmounteth thē, and passeth al other. Thenui∣ous The enuious manne. man seketh to deprane, the worthinesse of fame in other, his bragging nature with fame of praise, not decorated. The The igno∣raunte. ignoraunte and simple nature, accordyng to his knowlege, iudgeth all singularitée, and tempereth by his owne actes the praise of other. But the fame of these twoo Oratours, nei∣ther the enuious nature can diminishe their praise, nor the ignoraunt be of them a arbitrator or iudge, so worthely hath all ages raised fame, and commendacion of their vertues. ¶ Of their countree.
IN Grece Demosthenes, the famous Oratour of A∣thenes was borne, whose Countrée or Citee, lacketh no cōmendacion: either for the nobilitée of the lande, or glorie of the people. What nacion vnder the Sunne, hath not heard of that mightie Monarchie of Grece: of their migh∣tie citees, and pollitike gouernaunce. What famous Poetes how many noble Philosophers and Oratours, hath Grece brede. What science and arte, hath not flowne from Grece, so that for the worthinesse of it, it maie bee called the mother of all learnyng. Roome also, in whom Tullie was brought vp, maie contende in all nobilitee, whose power and puisant glorie, by nobilitee of actes, rose to that mightie hed. In bothe soche excellencie is founde, as that no nacion might better contende, of their singularitée and honour of countrée, then Grece and Rome: yet first from the Grekes, the light of Phi∣losophie, and the aboundant knowledge of all artes, sprange to the Romaines, from the Grecians. The Godlie Lawes, wherewith the Romaine Empire was decorated and gouer∣ned, was brought from the Grecians. If the citee maie bee a honour and glorie, to these twoo Oratours, or their Eitees a singuler commendacion, there wanteth in bothe, neither ho∣nour, or nobilitee. ¶ Of their auncestours, and parentes. BOthe Demosthenes and Tullie were borne, of ve∣rie meane parentes and auncestours: yet thei tho∣rowe their learnyng and vertues, became famous, ascendyng to all nobilitee. Of their vertues and learnyng, not of their auncestours, nobilitée rose to them. ¶ Of the educacion. THE singuler vertues of theim bothe, appered euen in their tender youth: wherupon thei being brought vp, in all godlie learnyng and noble Sciences, thei∣became moste noble Oratours, and by their copious Elo∣quence, counsaile, and wisedom, aspired to nobilitée & honor. ¶ Of their .
BOthe were taught of the mouthe of the best learned, Demosthenes of Iseus, a man moste Eloquent: Ci∣cero of Philo and Milo, famous in wisedome and Eloquence. ¶ Of their exercise. CIcero did exercise hymself verie mothe, to declaime, bothe in Greke and Latine, with Marcus Piso, and with Quintus Pampeius. Demosthenes wanted not industrie and labour, to attain to that singularitée, whi∣che he had, bothe in Eloquence, and pronounciacion. ¶ Of the giftes of their minde: IN bothe, integritee, humanitee, magnanimitee, and all vertue flowed: at what time as Demosthe∣nes was commaunded of the Athenians, to frame a accusacion, againste a certaine man, Demosthe∣nes refused the acte. But when the people, and the whole multitude, were wrothe with hym, and made a exclamacion against hym, as their maner was. Then Demosthenes rose, and saied: O ye men of Athenes, againste my will, you haue me a counsailer, or pleater of causes before you: but as for a accuser, & calumniator, no, not although ye would. Of this sorte Tullie was affected, excepte it were onely in the saue∣gard of his countrée: as against Catiline, bothe were of god∣lie, and of vpright conuersacion, altogether in Mediocrite, and a newe leadyng their life. ¶ Of their actes. DEmosthenes and Tullie bothe, gaue themselues to trauail, in the causes and affaires of their com∣mon wealthe, to the preseruacion of it. How ve∣hemently did Demosthenes pleate, and ingeni∣ouslie handle the cause of all his countree, against Philip, for the defence of their libertee: whereupon he gatte fame, and greate glory. Whereby not onely, he was coumpted a great wise counsailour: but one of a valiaunte stomacke, at whose
wisedome, all Grece stode in admiracion. The kyng of Per∣sia, Darius. Philip. Demosthe∣ues. laboured to enter fauour with him. Philip the king of the Macedonians, would saie often tymes, he had to doe against a famous man, notyng Demosthenes. Tullie also by his E∣loquence and wisedome, saued Roome and all partes of that dominion, from greate daungers. ¶ Of their aucthoritee. THeir aucthoritee and dignitee was equalle, in the common wealthe: For, at their twoo mouthes, Roome and Athenes was vpholed. Demosthenes was chief in fauour with Caretes, Diophetes, Le¦ostines, Cicero with Pompei: Iulius Cesar, ascending to the chief seate and dignitee of the Consulship. ¶ Of a like fall that happened to them, before their death. YOu can not finde soche twoo Orators, who borne of meane & poore parentes, that attained so greate honour, who also did obiecte themselues to tyran∣tes a like, thei had losse of their children a like, bothe were out of their countree banished men, their returne was with honour, bothe also fliyng, happened into the hau∣des of their enemies. ¶ Of their death. BOthe a like, Demosthenes and Tully wer put to death, Demosthenes died, Antipater gouernyng Antipater. Demosthe∣nes. Archias. Marcus Antonius. Tullie. by the handes of Archias. Cicero died by the com∣maundement of Marcus Antonius: by Herenius his hedde was cutte of, and sette in Marcus Antonius halle. His handes also were cutte of, with the whiche he wrote the vehement Oracions against Marcus Antonius. ¶ The conclusion. TO speake as moche as maie bee saied, in the praise of theim: their praise would rise to a mightie volume, but this is sufficiente.
¶ Ethopoeia. Ethopoeia is a certaine Oracion made by voice, and la∣mentable imitacion, vpon the state of any one. This imitacion is in iij. sortes, either it is. Eidolopoeia. Prosopopoeia. Ethopoeia. That parte, whiche is called Ethopoeia is that, whiche hath the persone knowne: but onely it doeth faigne the ma∣ners of the same, and imitate in a Oracion the same. Ethopoeia is called of Priscianus, a certaine talkyng to of any one, or a imitaciō of talke referred to the maners, apt∣ly of any certaine knowen persone. Quintilianus saieth, that Ethopoeia is a imitacion of o∣ther meane maners: whom the Grekes dooe calle, not onelie Ethopoeia, but mimesis, & this is in the maners, and the fact. This parte is as it were, a liuely expression of the maner and affeccion of any thyng, whereupon it hath his name. The Ethopoeia is in three sortes. The firste, a imitacion passiue, whiche expresseth the af∣fection, to whom it parteineth: whiche altogether expresseth the mocion of the mynde, as what patheticall and dolefull o∣racion, Hecuba the quene made, the citee of Troie destroied, her housbande, her children slaine. The second is called a morall imitaciō, the whiche doeth set for the onely, the maners of any one. The thirde is a mirt, the whiche setteth for the, bothe the maners and the affection, as how, and after what sorte, A∣chilles spake vpon Patroclus, he beyng dedde, when for his sake, he determined to fight: the determinacion of hym she∣weth the maner. The frende slaine, the affection. In the makyng of Ethopoeia, lette it be plaine, and with∣out any large circumstaunce.
In the makyng of it, ye shall diuide it thus, to make the Oracion more plaine, into three tymes. A presente tyme. A tyme paste. A tyme to come. Eidolopoeia is that part of this Oracion, whiche maketh a persone knowne though dedde, and not able to speake. Eidolopoeia is called of Priscianus, a imitacion of talke of any one, vpon a dedde manne, it is then called Eidolopoeia, when a dedde man talketh, or communicacion made vpon a Eidolopoeia dedde manne. Eidolopoeia, when a dedde manne talketh, is set forthe of Euripides, vpon the persone of Polidorus dedde, whose spi∣rite entereth at the Prologue of the tragedie. Hector slain, speaketh to Eneas in Eidolopoeia. O Eneas thou goddes sonne, flie and saue thy self, from this ruine and fire: the enemies hath taken the walles, and loftie Troie is prostrate to the grounde. I would haue thought, I had died valiantlie inough to my countrée, and my father Priamus, if with this my right hande, Troie had bee defended. Polidorus beyng dedde, in Eidolopoeia talketh to Eneas whiche Virgil sheweth in his thirde booke of Eneados. Iulia the wife of Pompei beyng dedde, spake to Pompe, preparyng his arme against Cesar, Eidolopoeia. Reade Lu∣cane, in the beginnyng of his thirde booke. Tullie vseth Eidolopoeia, when he maketh talke vpon Hiero beyng dedde. If that kyng Hiero were reduced frō his death, who was a aduauncer of the Romaine Empire, with what counte∣naunce, either Siracusa or Rome, might be shewed to hym, whom he maie beholde with his iyes. His countree brought to ruin, & spoiled, if that kyng Hiero should but enter Rome, euen in the firste entryng, he should beholde the spoile of his countree. Tullie also vseth the like Eidolopoeia, as thus, vpon Lu∣cius
Brutus dedde. If it so wer, that Lucius Brutus, that noble and famous Lucius Brutus. manne were on liue, and before your presence: would he not vse this oracion: I Brutus, somtyme did banishe and cast out for crueltee, the state and office of kinges, by the horrible fact of Tarquinius, againste Lucretia, and all that name bani∣shed, but you haue brought in tyrauntes. I Brutus did re∣duce the Romain Empire, to a fredome and libertée: but you foolishly can not vphold and maintein, the same giuen to you. I Brutus, with the daunger of my life, haue saued my coun¦tree of Roome, but you without all daunger, lose it. ¶ Prosopopoeia. AS cōcerning Prosopopoeia, it is as Pristianus saith, when to any one againste nature, speache is feigned to bee giuen. Tullie vseth for a like example this, when he maketh Roome to talke againste Cateline. ¶ Prosopopoeia of Roome. NO mischief hath been perpetrated, this many yeres, Catiline. but by thee Catiline, no pestiferous acte enterprised, without thee: thou a lone, for thy horrible murther perpetrated vpon the citee of Rome, for the spoile and robbe∣ries of their gooddes art vnpunished. Thou onelie haste been of that force and power, to caste doune all lawes and aucthori∣tee. Although these thinges were not to be borne, yet I haue borne them: but now thy horrible factes are come to soche an issue, that I feare thy mischiues. Wherfore leaue of Cateline and deminishe this feare from me, that I maie be in securitée Lucane the Poete, intreating of mightie and fearce war∣res, againste Pompei and Cesar, maketh Roome to vse this Prosopopoeia againste Cesar. Quo tenditis vltra quo fertis mea signa viri, Si iure venitis si aues hucus{que} licet. Prosopopoeia is properlie, when all thinges are faigned bothe the maners, the persone, as of Roome in this place.
¶ what lamentable Oracion Hecuba Quene of Troie might make, Troie being destroied. WHat kyngdome can alwaies assure his state, or glory? What strength can alwaies last? What Kyngdomes. power maie alwaies stande? The mightie O∣kes Okes. Cedars. are somtyme caste from roote, the Ceadars high by tempestes falle, so bitter stormes dooe force their strength. Soft waters pearseth Rockes, and ruste the massie Iron doeth bryng to naught. So nothyng can by strēgth so stande, but strength maie ones decaie: yea, mightie kingdoms in time decaie haue felt. Kingdomes weake haue rose to might, and mightie kyngdomes fallen, no counsaile can preuaile, no power, no strength, or might in lande. God disposeth Princes seates, their kyngdome there with stan∣des. I knewe before the brickell state, how kyngdomes ruine caught, my iye the chaunge of fortune sawe, as Priamus did aduaunce his throne, by fauour Fortune gat, on other For∣tune then did froune, whose kingdom did decaie. Well, now I knowe the brickle state, that fortune hath no staie, all rashe her giftes, Fortune blind doeth kepe no state, her stone doth Fortune hath no staie. roule, as floodes now flowe, floodes also ebbe. So glory doth remaine, sometyme my state on high, was sette in Princelie throne, my porte and traine ful roiall was, a kyng my father also was, my housband scepter held. Troie and Phrigia ser∣ued his becke, many kynges his power did dreade, his wille their power did serue. The fame of Troie and Brute, his glorie and renouine, what landes knoweth not? But now his falle, all toungues can speake, so greate as glorie was, though kyngdomes stronge was sette, loftie Troie in duste prostrate doeth lye, in blood their glorie, people, kyng are fal∣len, no Quene more dolefull cause hath felte. The sorowes depe doe passe my ioyes, as Phebus light with stormes caste doune. Hectors death did wounde my hart, by Hectors might Troie stiffe did stande, my comforte Hector was, Priamus Hector. ioye, of Troie all the life, the strength, and power, his death
did wound me for to die, but alas my dolefull and cruell fate to greater woe reserueth my life, loftie Troie before me felle, sworde, and fire hath seate and throne doune caste. The dedde on heapes doeth lye, the tender babes as Lions praies are caught in bloode, before my sight, Priamus deare mur∣dered Priamus. was, my children also slain, who roiall were, and prin∣ces mates. No Queene more ioye hath tasted, yet woe my io∣yes hath quite defaced. My state alwaie in bondage thrall, to serue my enemies wille, as enemie wille, I liue or dye. No cruell force will ridde my life, onely in graue the yearth shal close my woes, the wormes shall gnawe my dolefull hart in graue. My hedde shall ponder nought, when death hath sence doune caste, in life I sought no ioye, as death I craue, no glorie was so wished as death I seeke, with death no sence. In prison depe who dolefull lieth, whom Fetters sore dooeth greue. Their dolefull state moste wisheth death, in dongion deepe of care my harte moste pensiue is, vnhappie state that wisheth death, with ioye long life, eche wight doeth craue, in life who wanteth smart? Who doeth not féele, or beare som∣time, a bitter storme, to doleful tune, mirth full oft chaunged is, the meaner state, more quiet rest, on high, who climes more deper care, more dolefull harte doeth presse, moste tempestes hie trees, hilles, & moutaines beare, valle is lowe rough stor∣mes doeth passe, the bendyng trees doeth giue place to might by force of might, Okes mightie fall, and Ceders high ar rēt from the roote. The state full meane in hauen hath Ancre caste, in surgyng seas, full ofte in vaine to saue the maste, the shippe Ancre casteth. ¶ The descripcion. THis exercise profitable to Rhetorike, is an Ora∣ciō that collecteth and representeth to the iye, that which he sheweth, so Priseianus defineth it: some are of that opinion, that descripcion is not to bee placed emōg these exercises, profitable to Rhetorike. Because
that bothe in euery Oracion, made vpon a Fable, all thyn∣ges therein conteined, are liuely described. And also in euery Narracion, the cause, the place, the persone, the time, the fact, the maner how, ar therin liuely described. But most famous and Eloquente men, doe place descripcion, in the nomber of these exercises. Descripciō serueth to these things, the person, as the Poete Lucane describeth Pompei & Cesar: the person is described, thynges or actes, tymes, places, brute beastes. Nec coiere pares, alter vergentibus annis In senium longo que toge, tranquilior vsu. Dedidicit. &c. Homer describeth the persone of Thersites, in the second booke of his Ilias. Homer setteth out Helena, describing the persone of Me∣nalaus and Vlisses, in the fowerth booke of Ilias. Thynges are described, as the warres attempted by sea and lande, of Xerxes. Lucan describeth the war of the Massiliās against Cesar Thusidides setteth forthe in a descripcion, the warres on the sea, betwene the Corcurians, and the Corinthians. Tymes are described, as the Spryng tyme, Sommer, Winter, Harueste, Daie, Night. Places are described, as Citees, Mountaines, Regions, Floodes, Hauens, Gardeines, Temples: whiche thynges are sette out by their commoditees, for Thusidides often ty∣mes setteth forthe Hauens and Citees. Lucane also describeth at large, the places, by the whiche the armie of Cesar and Pompei passed. The descripcion of a∣ny man, in all partes is to bee described, in mynde and bodie, what he was. The acttes are to bee described, farre passed, by the pre∣sente state thereof, and also by the tyme to come. As if the warre of Troie, should be set forthe in a descrip∣cion, it must bée described, what happened before the Greci∣ans arriued at Troie, and how, and after what sorte it was
ouerthrowne, & what thing chaunced, Troie being destroid. So likewise of Carthage, destroied by the Romaines. Of Hierusalem, destroied by Titus Vespasianus, what ad∣monicion thei had before: of what monsterous thynges hap∣pened also in that ceason: Of a Comete or blasyng Starre, and after that what followed. Lucane also setteth forthe the warres of Pompe and Ce∣sar, what straunge and marueilous thynges fell of it. ¶ A descripcion vpon Xerxes. WHen Darius was dedde, Xerxes his soonne did succede hym, who also tooke vpon him to finishe the warres, begō by his father Darius, against Grece. For the whiche warres, preperacion was made, for the space of fiue yeres, after that Xerxes entered Grece, with seuen hundred thousande Persi∣ans, The armie of Xerxes. and three hundred thousande of forrain power aided him that not without cause, Chronicles of aunciente tyme dooe shewe, mightie floodes to be dried vp of his armie. The migh¦tie dominions of Grece, was not hable to receiue his houge, and mightie power, bothe by sea and lande: he was no small Xerxes a cowarde. Prince, whom so many nacions, so mightie people followed hym, his Nauie of Shippes was in nomber tenne hundred thousande, Xerxes had a mightie power, but Xerxes was a cowarde, in harte a childe, all in feare the stroke of battaile moued. In so mightie an armie it was marueile, the chiefe Prince and Capitaine to be a cowarde, there wanted neither men, nor treasure, if ye haue respecte to the kyng hymself, for cowardlinesse ye will dispraise the kyng, but his threasures beeyng so infinite, ye will maruaile at the plentie thereof, whose armie and infinite hoste, though mightie floodes and streames, were not able to suffice for drinke, yet his richesse semed not spente nor tasted of. Xerxes hymself would be lasto Xerxes laste in battaile, and first to runne awaie. in battaile to fight, and the firste to retire, and runne awaie. In daungers he was fearfull, and when daunger was paste,
he was stoute, mightie, glorious, and wonderfull crakyng, before this hassarde of battaile attempted. He thought hym¦self The pride of Xerxes. a God ouer nature, all landes and Seas to giue place to hym, and puffed with pride, he forgatte hymself: his power was terrible, his harte fainte, whereupon his enteryng into Grece was not so dreaded, as his flight frō thence was sham¦full, mocked and scorned at, for all his power he was driuen backe from the lande, by Leonides king of the Lacedemoni∣ans, he hauing but a small nomber of men, before his second battaile fought on the Sea: he sente fower thousande armed men, to spoile the riche and sumpteous temple of Apollo, at Delphos, from the whiche place, not one man escaped. After that Xerxes entered Thespia, Platea, and Athenes, in the whiche not one man remained, those he burned, woorkyng his anger vpon the houses: for these citees were admonished to proue the maisterie in wodden walles, whiche was ment to bee Shippes, the power of Grece, brought into one place Themistocles, fauoryng their part, although Xerxes thought otherwise of Themistocles, then Themistocles perswaded Xerxes to assaie the Grecians. Artemisia the Quene of Hali∣carnasis aided Xerxes in his battaile: Artemisia fought man Themi∣stocles. fullie, Xerxes cowardly shronke, so that vnnaturally there was in the one a manlie stomacke, in the other a cowardlie harte. The men of Ionia, that fought vnder Xerxes banner, by the treason of Themistocles, shrāke from Xerxes, he was not so greate a terrour or dreade, by his maine hoste, as now smally regarded & least feared. What is power, men, or mo∣ney, when God chaungeth and pulleth doune, bothe the suc∣cesse, and kyngdome of a Prince. He was in all his glorie, a vnmanlie, and a cowardly prince, yet for a time happie state fell on his side, now his might and power is not feared. He flieth awaie in a Fisher boate, whom all the worlde dreaded and obaied, whom all Grece was not able to receiue, a small boate lodgeth and harboureth. His owne people contemned hym at home, his glorie fell, and life ingloriously ended, whō
whom God setteth vp, neither treason nor malice, power nor money can pull doune. Worthelie it is to be pondered of all Princes, the saiyng of Vespasianus Emperour of Rome, at a certain time a treason wrought and conspired against him, the conspiratours taken, Vespasianus satte doune betwene The saiyng of Vespasi∣anus. theim, commaunded a sworde to be giuen to either of theim, and saied to them: Nonne videtis fato potestatem dari. Dooe you not see? Power, aucthoritée, and regimente, by the ordi∣naunce of God, is lefte and giuen to princes: A singuler sen∣tence, A sentence comfortable to al princes. to comforte all good Princes in their gouernemente, not to feare the poisoned hartes of men, or the traiterous har∣tes of pestiferous men. No man can pull doune, where God exalteth, neither power can set vp and extoll, where God dis∣plaseth or putteth doune: Soche is the state of Princes, and their kyngdomes. ¶ Thesis. THesis, is a certain question in consultacion had, to bée declaimed vpon vncertaine, notyng no certaine per∣sone or thyng. As for example. Whether are riches chieflie to be sought for, in this life, as of all good thynges, the chief good. Whether is vertue the moste excellente good thynge in this life. Whether dooe the giftes of the mynde, passe and excelle the giftes and vertues of Fortune, and the bodie. Whether doeth pollicie more auaile in war, then strēgth of menne. Who so will reason of any question of these, he hath nede with reason, and wittie consultacion to discourse, and to de∣claime vpon the same. The Greke Oratours doe call this exercise Thesis, that is to saie, a proposicion in question, a question vncertain, in∣cluded with no certaintée, to any perticuler thyng.
The Latine men doeth call it a question infinite, or vni∣uersall: Tullie in his booke of places called Tpickes, doeth call Thesis, Propositum, that is to saie, a question, in deter∣minacion. Priscianus calleth it positionem, a proposicion in question on ether parte to be disputed vpon. As for example. Whether is it best to marie a wife? Whether is frendship aboue all thynges to be regarded. Is warre to be moued vpon a iuste cause? Is the Greke tongue mete, and necessarie to be learned? There is an other kinde of question called hypothesis, hy¦pothesis is called questio finita, that is to saie, a question cer∣taine notyng a certaine persone, or thyng, a certaine place, tyme, and so forthe. As for example. Is it mete for Cesar to moue warre against Pompei? Is not there a certain persone? Is the Greke tongue to be learned of a Diuine? Is the Greke tongue maete for a Phisicion? In this kinde of exercises, famous men of auncient time did exercise youth, to attain bothe wisedome and Eloquence therby, to make a discourse vpō any matter, by art of lerning Aristotle the famous Philosopher, did traine vp youthe, to be perfite in the arte of eloquence, that thei might with all copionsnes and ingenious inuencion handle any cause. Nothing doeth so moche sharpe and acuate the witte and capacitee of any one, as this kinde of exercise. It is a goodly vertue in any one man, at a sodain, to vtter wittely and ingeinouslie, the secrete and hid wisedome of his mynde: it is a greate maime to a profounde learned man, to wante abilitee, to vtter his exquisite and profounde knowe∣ledge of his mynde. ¶ Thesis. tHis question Thesis, which is a question, noting no cer∣taine persone or thyng: is moche like to that Oracion,
intreated of before, called a Common place. ¶ A Common place. BVt a Common place, is a certaine exaggeracion of matter, induced against any persone, conuicted of a∣ny crime, or worthie defence. ¶ Thesis. Thesis is a reasonyng by question, vpon a matter vncer∣taine. Thesis, that is to saie, a questiō generall is in two sortes. A question Ciuill. Contemplatiue. QVestions Ciuill are those, that dooe pertine to the state of a common wealth: and are dailypractised in the common wealthe. As for example. Is it good to marie a wife. Is Vsurie lefull in a citee, or common wealthe. Is a Monarchis the beste state of gouernement. Is good educacion the grounde and roote, of a florishyng common wealthe. ¶ A contemplatiue question. THe other Thesis is a question contemplatiue, which the Grekes dooe call Theoricas, because the matter of them is comprehended in the minde, and in the in¦telligence of man. The example. Is the soule immortall? Had the worlde a beginnyng? Is the heauen greater then the yearth? A questionA question is either Simple. Compounde. Is it good for a man to exercise hymself in wrastlyng, or in
Is it profitable to declaime. A compounde. Is vertue of more value then gold, to the coueitous man Doeth wisedome more auaile, then strength in battaile? Doe olde men or young men, better gouerne a common wealthe? Is Phisicke more honourable then the Lawe? A Oracion made vpon Thesis, is after this sorte made. Vse a exordium, or beginnyng. Vnto the whiche you maie adde a Narracion, whiche is a exposicion of the thyng doen. Then shewe it lawfull. Iuste. Profitable: And possible. Then the conclucion. To this in some parte of the Oracion, you maie putte in certaine obieccions, as thus. Vpon this question: Is it good to marie a wife? In Mariage is greate eare, and pensiuenesse of minde, by losse of children, or wife, whom thou loueste. There is also trouble of dissolute seruauntes. There is also greate sorowe if thy children proue wicked and dissolute. The aunswere to this obiection, will minister matter to declaime vpon. ¶ Is it good to Marie. SInce the tyme of all ages, and the creaciō of the worlde, GOD hath so blessed his creacion, and meruailous workemanship in manne: as in all his other creatures, that not onelie his omnipo∣teucie, is therby set forthe. But also from tyme to tyme, the posteritee of men, in their ofspring and procrea∣cion, doe aboundantlie commonstrate the same. The state of Kyngdomes continue by mariage and cōmon welth all kyngdomes and common wealthes: by procreacion deri∣ued, haue onelie continued on the face of the yearth, thereby
many hundred yeres. How sone would the whole worlde be dissolued, and in perpetuall ruine, if that God from tymes and ages, had not by godlie procreacion, blessed this infinite The dignitee of man, she∣weth the worthines of mariage. issue of mankinde. The dignitee of man in his creacion, she∣weth the worthie succession, maintained by procreation. In vaine were the creacion of the worlde, if there were not as manne so excellente a creature, to beholde the creatour, and his meruailous creacion. To what vse were the Elementes and Heauens, the Starres and Planettes, all Beastes and Foules, Fisshe, Plantes, Herbes and trees, if men wer not, for mannes vse and necessitée, all thinges in the yearth were made and procreated. Wherein the Stoike Philosophers do note the excellencie of man to be greate: for saie thei, Que in terris gignuntur omnia ad vsum hominum creari. To what vse then were all thynges, if man were not, for whose cause, vse, & necessitée these thynges were made. If a continuaunce of Gods procreacion were not, immediatlie a ruine and ends would ensue of thinges. What age remaineth aboue a hun∣dred yeres? If after a hūdred yeres, no issue wer to be, on the Godlie pro∣creacion. face of the yearth, how sone wer kyngdoms dissolued, where as procreacion rooteth, a newe generacion, issue and ofspring, and as it were a newe soule and bodie. A continuaunce of la∣wes, a permanente state of common wealthe dooeth ensue. Though the life of manne be fraile, and sone cutte of, yet by Mariage, man by his ofspryng, is as it were newe framed, his bodie by death dissolued, yet by issue reuiued. Euen as Plantes, by the bitter season of Winter, from their flowers fadyng and witheryng: yet the seede of them and roote, vegi∣table and liuyng, dooe roote yerelie a newe ofspryng or flo∣wer in them. So Mariage by godlie procreacion blessed, doth perpetually increase a newe bodie, and therby a vaste world, A similitude. and infinite nacions or people. Xerres the mightie kyng of Persia, vewing and beholding his maine and infinite hoste, weeped: who beyng demaunded, why he so did. Doleo inquit post centum annos, neminem ex hijs superesse. It is a pitée∣fulle
and dolefull case, that after a hundred yeres, not one of these noble capitaines, and valiant soldiers to be left. ¶ The obieccion. But you will saie parauenture, mariage is a greate bon∣dage, alwaies to liue with one. ¶ The solucion. To followe pleasure, and the beastlie mocions of the mynde: what libertée call you that, to liue in a godly, meane, and Mediocritee of life, with thy spoused wife. There is no The libertie in mariage. greater ioye, libertee, or felicitée, who so practiseth a dissolute life: whose loue and luste is kindeled, and sette on fire with a harlotte, he followeth a brutishe societée. What difference is there, betwene them and beastes? The beaste as nature lea∣deth, A brutishe societie with harlottes. he obaieth nature. Reason wanteth in beastes, manne then indued with reason, whiche is a guide to all excellencie how is it that he is not ruled by reason. Whom GOD hath clothed and beautified, with all vertue and all singularitée: If a godly conuersacion of life, moueth thee to passe thy daies without mariage, then must the mocions of thy minde, be ta∣med and kepte vnder. Otherwise, execrable is thy purpose, and determinaciō of the life. If thou hopest of loue of a harlot Ehastitee in mariage. though thou enioye her otherwise, thou art deceiued. Bac∣chis the harlot, whom Terence maketh mencion of, in the persone of her self, sheweth the maners of all harlots to An∣tiphila, saiyng. Quippe forma impulsinostranos amatores colunt: Hec vbi immutata est, illi suum animum alio conferunt. Nisi prospectū est interea aliquid nobis, deserte viuimus. For saieth she, the louer anamoured with our loue, and sette on fire therewith, it is for our beautie and fauour: but when beautie is ones faded, he conuerteth his loue to an o∣ther, whom he better liketh. But that we prouide for our sel∣ues in the meane season, wee should in the ende liue vtterlie forsaked. But your loue incensed with one, whose maners and life contenteth you: so you bothe are linked together,
that no calamitèe can separate you: who so hopeth loue of a The loue of a harlotte. harlotte, or profite, he maie hope as for the fruite of a withe∣red tree, gaine is all their loue, vice their ioye and delite. In vertue is libertee, in vertue is felicitee, the state of mariage is vertuous, there can be no greater bōdage, then to obaie ma∣ny beastly affections, to the whiche whoredome forceth hym vnto, Loue is fained, cloked amitée, a harte dissembled, ma∣ny a mightie person and wise, hath been ouerthrowen by the deceiptes of harlottes: many a Citee plagued, many a region ouerthrowen for that mischief, to obaie many affections is a greate bondage. Who so serueth the beastlie affections of his mynde to that purpose, he must also as Hercules to Ompha∣la Hercules. Omphala. bee slaue, not onely to his owne will and affection: but to the maners, will, and exspectacion of the harlotte. So serued Thraso, and Phedria Thais, that Gorgious harlot, Antony and Iulius Cesar, Cleopatra, this is a bondage, to liue slaue from reason and all all integritee, to a monsterous rablemēt The harlot∣tes lesson to her louers. of vices, who so serueth a harlot, thei must learne this lesson. Da mihi & after, giue and bryng. The women of Scithia, abhorryng the godlie conuersa∣cion of mariage, with their housbandes, lefte theim, who in tyme waxe so mightie, that thei repelled theim by force: thei called mariage not Matrimonie, but bondage. For, the chro∣nicles doe testifie, thei became conquerours ouer many kyn∣ges, all Asia obaied them: thei did builde many a great citee, and for theire successe, thei might compare with many prin∣ces. These women were called Amazones afterwarde, the The life of the Amazo∣nes. order of their life was this, ones in the yere thei would en∣ioye the compainie of a man: if it so were that thei had a man childe, the father to haue it, if a daughter, then thei possessed her, and foorthwith burned her right pappe: for thei were all Archers, and wonderfully excelled therein, but in the ende, thei came all to ruine. One of them, Thalestris their Quene in the tyme of Alexander the Greate, came to Alexander, Thalestris. thinkyng that he had been, some monstrous man of stature:
whom, when she did beholde (for Alexander was of no migh∣tie The offer of a woman to Alexander. stature) did contemne hym, and offered him hand to hande to fight with hym. But Alexander like a wise Prince, saied to his men, if I should ouercome her, that were no victorie, nor manhoode againste a woman: and being ouercome, that were greater shame, then commendacion in all my victories The answer of Alexander to the offer. and conquestes, but afterwarde, there was a greate familia∣ritee betwene them. The adulterer and the adulteris, neuer prospereth, for many mischiues are reserued, to that wicked and beastly loue. Sincere loue is not rooted, frendship colou∣red: the sober and demure countenaunce, is moche to be com∣mended in a chaste woman, whose breaste pondereth a chaste life. The facte of the matrones of Rome, semeth straunge to The facte of the matrones of Rome. be tolde, of Papirius a Senators soonne, beyng taken to the Senate house, of his father: the childe beyng indued with a singuler wit, harde many causes in the assemble, talked and consulted vpō, at his retourne home, his mother was inqui∣sitiue of their consultacion, to heare somewhat. The childe was commaunded by his father, to vtter no secrete that he heard, wherevpon of a long tyme, he refused his mothers de∣maunde: but at the laste subtelie, he satisfied his mothers re∣quest. Truth it is, my father willed me, to vtter no secret, you Papirius. keping my counsaill, I will shewe you, it is concluded by the Senate house, that euery man shall haue twoo wines, that is a straunge matter, saieth the mother: foorthwith she had communicacion with all the matrones of Roome, that could doe somewhat in this matter, thei also full willyngly assem∣bled themselues, to let this purpose, to the Senate house, thei went to vtter, their swollen griues. The Senators were a∣mased at their commyng, but in this matter bolde thei were, to enterprise that, whiche thei wer greued at. A Dame more eloquente then all the reste, and of stomacke more hardie, be∣gan in these woordes. Otherwise then right, we are iniuri∣ously The Oraciō of a matrone, to the Sena∣tours. handled, and that in this assemble, that now we should be caste of and neclected: that whereas it is concluded in this
counsaile, that euery manne should haue twoo wiues, more meter it were, that one woman should haue twoo housban∣des. Straunge it was in the Senators eares soche a request, whereupon a proofe made how that rumour rose, Papirius was found the aucthor, who tolde before the Senate, his mo∣ther alwaies inquisitiue to knowe that, whiche he should not tell, and thereupon he faigned that, whiche he might better tell. It is to be supposed the Senators mused thereat, and the matrones of Rome went home ashamed: but their secrete co∣gitacion of minde was manifest, what willingly in hart thei wished. What greater felicitee can there bee, then in a vnitée of life, the housebande to liue with his wife. The beastes in their kinde, doe condemne mannes brutishe affections here∣in: there is no facte that sheweth a man or woman, more like to beastes, then whoredome. ¶ The obieccion. But you will saie, many calamitées happeneth in mariage? ¶ The solucion. Fortunne herein is to bee blamed, and not mariage, if a∣ny misfortune happeneth to manne therein, the felicitée and Eleccion in Mariage. quiet state that any man enioieth thereby. The discrete elec∣cion is therein approued, in the state itself, nothyng can bee founde worthie reprehension, if a man will impute the bit∣ter stormes of life to mariage: whatseouer happeneth, our owne reason maie iudge contrary. Place before thy iyes all the affaires, and occupacions of this life, bee all tymes plea∣saunte to the housebande man, many a colde storme perceth his bodie, and many a mightie tempeste, dooeth moiest hym and greue hym. Sommer is not the tyme, to caste his seede in the grounde, or implowyng to occupie hymself: shall he ther∣fore leaue his housebandrie, or doeth he rather neclecte it, his diligence therein is the more, and labour more industrious. From whence commeth the tempeste, the stormes and bitter seasons? From his house, from his wife, from his art and oc∣cupacion, all those thynges by violence are expelled from the
aire. No state of life is able to giue riches, healthe, or securitée to his state. There hath been princes and Emperours, nedie, Emperours. full of infirmitées and sickenes, in daungerous state, oppres∣sed with many calamitées: was their dignitie and office, the cause of their calamitées? No, God tempreth the state of eue∣ry one, how, and after what sorte to possesse the same. Some are fulle fortunate in Mariage, if Mariage were of necessitée the cause, then all should be onely fortunate, or onely vnfor∣tunate: Mariage. then in mariage is not the cause, if in marige the ma∣ners doe disagrée, and loue is extinguished, blame thyn own maners, thy choise, and thy eleccion. The Mariner that pas∣seth the daungerous Seas, and by dreadfull tempestes, and The Mari∣ners. huffyng waues is alwaies in perille, and many often tymes drouned. The Marchaunt lesyng his marchaundise by ship∣wrack, The Mar∣chauntes. shall thei impute the daunger and losse, to their wife at home? Or doe the Mariners leaue for all these tempestes, their arte of Nauigacion? Or the owner breake his shippe? Or the Marchaunt proue no aduentures, because of his losse, and many haue been of this sort drouned. No. But more ear∣nestlie thei dooe assaie theim selues thereto. Because warre spoileth many a man of his life, doe Princes therefore, leaue warre, to moue armour againste the enemie, but because, who so in the defence of his countrée, dieth manfullie, is worthelie ad∣uaunced, and in perpetuall memorie, no daunger is refused, because euill thynges happeneth in life, is the state of good thynges to be auoided and eschued. Were it not vnsemelie, if housebande men, for no storme or tempeste, doe leaue their state, their laborious and rough cōdition of life, nor the ship∣man his arte of Nauigacion, because he seeth many drouned venteryng thesame, and he hymself often tymes in daunger, nor the soldiour or capitain, their perilous condicion of life, doe leaue for daunger. Should Mariage bée lesse sette by, be∣cause alwaies riches and quietnes happeneth not. ¶ The obieccion. The losse of a good wife and children, is a greate grefe to
any man, and a cause to blame mariage. ¶ The aunswere. You your self are borne to dye, thei also by death obaye likewise Nature, this is the Lawe of Nature ones to dye, The lawe of Nature. whiche you seeme to blame. Thou the death of thy wife and childrē, is not the blame in Mariage. What is the cause that you dye? Natures imbecillitie and weakenes, then in theim Mariage is not the cause: Nature in her firste molde hath so framed all, wherefore doe you ascribe that to mariage, that is founde faultée in Nature. Thei die that marie not, what infirmitie, daunger or peril happeneth to any in mariage, as sharpe and perilous, doe molest and torment the other. If any manne by death, leaseth aright honeste wife, clothed with all chastites, demurenesse, sobrietée, and also with all singulari∣tée of vertue adorned: he hath losse a rare treasure, a iewell of price, not in all to bee sounde. Did you loue your wife, that A chaste wo∣man. was so goodlie, so honeste and vertuous: there was greate cause saie you, for her vertuous sake, God hath chosen her frō a mortall creature, to immortalitée, with her it can not bee better. There is no cause why you should blame mariage, for the losse of her, or of thy children, or for the losse of thee, she to blame mariage. If for thy owne sake, this sorowe bee, Estseipsum amantis non amici, it is then of a self loue, to thy self, not for her cause: for I muste aunswere as Lelius did to Aricanus; Cumea optime esseactū quis neget, quid est quod no assecuta est immortalitatem. Who can deny saieth he, but that with her it can not bee better? What is it that she hath not attained. Immortalitée. She was vertuous, chaiste, so∣ber, descrete, of behauiour womanlie: for her vertues belo∣ued. Well, now she hath immortalitée and blesse, are you so∣rie thereat, that were enuious. Did you loue her liuyng, loue her also departed, her vertuous shewed vnto vs, her immor∣talitee. ¶ The obieccion. There is a care for the wife and children; if the housband
dye before theim. ¶ The aunswere. If thou leaue them riches, hope not that thy riches shal be a staie to theim, though thei bee innumerable: a wretched, a miserable executour, wasteth and destroieth oftentymes, the fruictes of thy trauaile, who reioyseth more of thy death, then A wretched executour. of thy life. Or thy childrens father in Lawe, shall spoile and spende with a merie harte, that whiche thou haste long tra∣uailed for. Staie thy self and thyne vpon Gods prouidence, for it hath been seen, many a riche widowe, with infinite treasure lefte, to her children also like porcions descendyng: Gods pro∣uidence. afterwarde bothe wife and children, haue been brought to miserie and beggerlie state. Otherwise, poore children com∣mitted to the prouidence of God, and vertuouslie brought vp, and the wife in like state, yet thei haue so passed their daies, that thei haue rose to a goodlie state. See that thy richesse bée not iniuriouslie gotten by falshode, by liyng, by Vsurie, if it so be, then Male parta male dilabuntur. That is this, gooddes euill gotte, euill spente, soche riches neuer giue déepe roote to their ofspryng. That is an euill care, by a iniurious care, to purchase thynges and gooddes wickedlie. Also mariage taketh awaie widowhed, and doeth repare with a newe freshe mariage, the lacke and priuacion of the other. She that was by death left a widowe, mariage again Death. Mariage. hath coupled her to a newe housbande: and doeth restore that whiche death tooke awaie. That that death dissolueth and destroieth, mariage increaseth, augmēteth, and multiplieth. Bee it so, but mariage is a painfull life, it forceth euery one to trauaile, to vpholde and maintaine his state, I commende not the idell life, neither a life occupied to no vertuous ende. Nature moueth euery manne to loue hymself and his, so thy care and paine be to a godlie purpose. It is commendable. It is the duetie of euery man, as his power, witte, and industrie is able, to emploie thereto his cogitacion. To laboure for thy wife, whom thou loueste, and deare children, thy laboure is
pleasure, the ioye easeth thy labour. To behold thyself in thy children, thei beyng vertuouslie broughte vp, it is a goodlie comfort, to liue with a chaste woman, sober and continente, The mariage of a chaste woman. her vertues be a continuall pleasure, a passyng ioye. In ma∣riage ought to be greate deliberacion, whom thou chosest to thy continuall compainie or felowshippe, her life paste well knowen, her parentes and kindrede how honeste and vertu∣ous, her maners, her fame, how commendable, her counti∣naunce The choise of a wife. sober, a constaunt iye, and with shamefastnes beau∣tified, a mouthe vttering fewe woordes discretlie. She is not to be liked, whō no vertuous qualitées in her educaciō, beu∣tifieth and adorneth, the goodlie qualitees sheweth, the well framed and nurtured mynde. These thynges maie be suffi∣ciente, to shewe what excellencie is in mariage and how ne∣cessarie it is, to the procreacion and preseruaciō of mankind. ¶ Legislatio. ¶ A Oracion either in the defence of a Lawe, or againste a Lawe. MAny learned menne are in this opinion, that vpon a Lawe alledged, a Oracion maie bee made in the defence of it: or matter maie be suppeditated, to in∣uaigh by force of argument againste it. Although the lawe alleged be in maner the whole cause, bicause it doeth cōtain al the matter included in the oracion. In this Oracion, the persone is induced to be spoken vp∣pon, vnknowne, vncertaine: wherefore it is to be placed, ra∣ther in the state and forme of consultacion, and to bée exami∣ned with iudgement. The induccion of a Lawe, is in twoo sortes. A confirmacion of any olde Lawe, or a confutacion. As for example. The Ciuill Lawe doeth well commende, bondmen to be manumised, that is, to be made free. The lawe is herein to be praised, that willeth the coūsail of the parentes & frendes, to be knowne before the contracte.
Vpon a Lawe alledged, worthelie matter maie rise, waigh∣yng the godlie ende, whereunto the Lawe was firste inuen∣ted, derreed and stablished, what profite thereof ensueth and foloweth. What it is to vertue a mainteiner, otherwise if it be not profitable: What moued any one to frame and ordain soche a Lawe, as was to a common wealthe vnprofitable, to vertue no aider, if it were a profitable Lawe and godlie, it is as Demosthenes safeth, of God inuented, though by famous wife, and godlie menne, stablished and decréed. Good Lawes Lawe. tempereth to all states equitee and iustice, without fauour or frendship, no more to the one then the other. The order to make an Oracion by a lawe, is in this sort. First, make a prohemiū or beginning to enter your matter. In the seconde place, adde a contrary to that, whiche you will entreate vpon. Then shewe it lawfull. Iuste. Profitable. Possible. You maie as in Thesis, whiche was the Oracion before, vse a contradiction or obiection: and to that make an answere or solucion. ¶ A confutacion of that Lawe, whiche suffered adultrie to bee punished with death, no iudgement giuen thereupon. SOlon, who was a famous Philosopher, in the time of Cresus king of Lidia, and a lawe giuer The moste rigorous and moste cruell lawe of Solō to the Athenians: by whose Lawes and godlie meanes, the Athenians were long and prospe∣rouslie gouerned. Emong many of his lawes, this Solon set forthe againste adulterers: Fas esse deprehen∣dentimaechum in ipso adulterio interficere: it shalbee lawfull saieth he, who so taketh an adulterer in his beastlie facte, to kill hym. Solon beyng a wise man, was more rigorous and cruell, in this one Lawe, then he ought to be. A meruailous
matter, and almoste vncredible, so wise, so noble and worthy a Lawe giuer, to bruste out with soche a cruell and bloodie lawe, that without indgement or sentence giuen, the matter neither proued nor examined, adulterie to be death. Where∣fore, reason forceth euery manne, to Iudge and ponder with hymself, that either adulterie is a moste horrible vice, moste beastlie & pestiferous, and not mere to tary vpon the censure, Adulterie a horrible vice. and sentence of a Iudge: or Solon was not so wise, discrete, and a politike persone, but a rashe and fonde lawe giuer, that in soche a terrible voice, he should burste out, as adulterie so horrible, as not worthie to be pondered, examined and boul∣ted of in Iudgemente. The Athenians receiued that Lawe, thei did also obaie his other lawes. Their dominions there∣by in felicitée was gouerned: there was no populous nom∣ber of adulterers, to let that Lawe, thei liued mosts godlie, a straunge worlde, a rare moderacion of that age and people. Plato the godlie Philosopher, who leste in his woorkes, and Plato aga∣inste adultrie made a lawe. monumentes of learnyng, greate wisedome and also godlie Lawes in his bookes: intiteled vpon Lawes, and gouerne∣ment of a common wealth, did not passe by in silence, to giue and ordain a Lawe against adulterie. Who also as it semed Iudged adulterie as moste horrible and detestable, in his .ix. booke de Legibus. This is the Lawe. Adulteram deprehen∣sam impune occidi a viro posse. The adultrous woman saith he, taken in the crime, her housbande maie without daunger of death, or feare of punishement slea her. A straunge matter twoo so noble, so famous for wisedome, to make adulterie present death, no Iudgement or sentence of Magistrate, pro∣cedyng to examime and iudge, vpon the state of the cause. A man maie saie, O goodlie age, and tyme in vertue tempered, eche state as seemeth brideled and kepte vnder, and farre frō voluptuousnes remoued. There was no stewes or Baudes houses, where soche Lawes and Lawmakers were. Sobrie∣tée was in maides, and chastitée harboured in matrones and wedded wiues, a harte inuiolable to honeste conuersacion.
Where adulterie is cutte of, there many detestable vsces, and execrable purposes are remoued. Cato the sage Peere of Catos sen∣tence vpon adulterie. Rome, indued with like seueritée, did fauour that lawe and highlie extolled it. Although adulterie bee a detestable vice horrible, yea, although it be worthie death, better it were by iudgemente, and the sentence of the Magistrate, the faute to bee determined: then at the will of euery manne, as a Lawe Lawe. by death to bee ended, the common wealthe shalbee in more quiet state, when the horrible factes of wicked menne, by the Lawe made worthie of deathe: are neuerthelesse by a liuelie The Iudge, a liuely lawe. Lawe, whiche is the Iudge, pronounced and condemned, ac∣cordyng to the Lawe. Els many mischiues might rise in all kyngdomes and common wealthes, vnder a colour of lawe, many a honeste persone murthered: and many a murtherer, by cloke of a Lawe, from daunger saued. In Rome somtime a Lawe there was ordained againste adulterie, whiche was called Lex Iulia, this Lawe Octauius Augustus set foorthe. The Lawe was thus, Gladio iussit animaduerti in adulteros The lawe commaunded adulterers to be hedded. The chro∣nicles of aunciente tymes herein doe shew, and the decrées of auncient elders also, how horrible a thing adulterie is, when thei punishe it with death. Who knoweth not emōg the Is∣raelites, and in the olde lawe thei wer stoned to death. Well as Magistrates are in common wealthes remoued, or as ti∣mes chaunge, lawes also are chaunged and dissolued: and as the Prouerbe is, Lex vt Regio, the Lawes are accordyng to the Region. Afterwarde Valerius Publicola, a man ascen∣dyng to high nobilitée of honour, and fame emong, the Ro∣maines gaue this Lawe. Qua neminem licebat indicta causa necare. By this lawe it was not lefull, any manne to be put A godly law. to death, their cause not examined in Iudgemente, this was a goodlie Lawe. Then afterwarde, Lawe giuers rose in the common wealth, that with more facilitee tolerated that vice, then wickednesse flowed, adulterie not punished by death. And sence that, the Romaine Empire, wrapped and snared
with soche mischiues hath decaied, in fame, nobilitée and ver∣tue. Many a parte of their dominion plagued, deuoured, and destroied. The good and godlie menne, nede not to feare any The good manne. Lawe godlie, their life beyng in vertue and godlines nurtu∣red. The terrible sentence of a lawe, forceth the good and god∣lie, to perseuere and continue in godlines. The terrible sen∣tence Lawe. of a Lawe, cutteth of the wicked enterprises of pestife∣rous menne. Vice where lawe is not to correcte, will inure it Vice as a lawe by cu∣stome. self by custome as a Lawe, or borne and tolerated againste a Lawe. Therefore as adulterie without Iudgemente, to bee punished worthie of death is vngodlie: so it ought not to bee passed ouer, or tolerated in any Region or common wealth, as no lawe seuerely to punishe the same. Adulterie. ¶ The contrarie. AL other lawes doe differ, from that rigorous lawe of Solon and Plate herein, yea, and though thei be vices horrible, yet thei ar not determined, with out the sentēce of the Magistrate and Iudge. But this cruell Lawe of Solon, doeth repugne all lawes, stabli∣shed in all Citees and common wealthes. And sithe the lawe The lawe v∣niuersall and equall to all menne. is of hymself vniuersall, with equitée, giuing and tempering to all states. Fonde muste that Lawe bee of Solon, whiche rashely, without consideracion of iudgement doeth procede, no man ought in his own cause, to be his own iudge or Ma∣gistrate. This is argument sufficient to confounde the lawe of Solon. All Lawes are repugnaunte to that, because with Iudgement thei procede against vices moste pestiferous. In common wealthes Theft is by lawe, pronounced worthie of Thefte. death, whereupon also the Magistrate and Iudge, determi∣neth the matter, and heareth of bothe the action of the case, before he condempneth, so in all other mischiues. But you maie saie, many mischiues riseth of adulterie. Although it so be, the Iudge determineth vpon Murder, whiche is in like sort horrible, soche also as dooe séeke to caste into perill their countrée, and by treason to destroie the same,
Iudgemente proceadeth by determinacion of the Lawe and Iudge. And so in all other wicked factes, and mischiuous en∣terprises, the Iudgement in euery cause procedeth, as Lawe and right willeth, from the mouthe of the Iudge, he beyng a The Iudge & liuely lawe. liuelie Lawe, to the Lawe written. The cruell Lawe of So∣lon, is like to the phantasie and wille of a tyraunte, who, as phantasie and will leadeth, murdereth at his pleasure, whose will is alwaies a sufficient Lawe to hymself, as who should saie, so I wille, so I commaunde, my wille shall stande for a The will of a tyraunte his owne lawe. Lawe: but godlie lawes doe iustlie, accordyng to reason and vertue, tempereth the cause of euery man. No godlie Lawe, maketh the accuser his owne Iudge. ¶ Lawfull. WHo so by Lawe is iudged, and the offence proued, there is no excuse in the malefactour, nor suspicion Lawes were made for two causes. seing that, accordyng to lawe, the fact is punished, and as Demosthenes saieth, twoo thynges moued the wise Elders to make Lawes, that the wicked should bee hindered, and cutte of from their purpose, and that good men seyng by a lawe, the actes of pestiferous men kepte vnder, by the terrour of them, are afraied to commit the like facte. This was euen accordyng to lawe. The terrible sentence of a law executed, vpon moste wicked persones, doe kepe vnder many a mischiuous enterprise, whiche through the dolefull and la∣mentable ende of the wicked, doe driue and force all other to all godlines. ¶ Iuste. THe accuser by Lawe and Iudge, is able to defende hymself, whē his cause is ended accordyng to law. Vertue thereby vpholded, when by order of lawe, vice is condempned. The malifactour hath no ex∣cuse, all staie and colour remoued, the accuser by iuste Lawe pleateth, when the law is thereby supported and saued. And herein a greate parte of Iustice is placed, when the fauour of the Iudge or frendship, is onely on the cause, the persone nec∣lected,
that is Iustice, to giue to euery one his owne. ¶ Profitable. IT must be profitable to the whole bodie of the com∣mon wealthe, when by the Iustice of godlie lawes, vertue is in high price aduaunced, vice by the open sentence, and manifeste profe conuicted, the malefa∣ctour shall be knowen, the sincere and godlie deliuered, and from tyme to tyme maintained. Lawes as thei be vniuersall so thei openlie ought to giue sentence. ¶ Possible. THen without lawe to procede, and iudgemente of the Magistrate, as Solon did in this lawe, it were not possible, any common wealthe to florishe ther∣by. Therefore in Iudgemente ought the cause of euery one to be pleated and examined, that thereby all suspi∣cion, & greuous enormitees, maie be put of. Vice is not there∣fore tolerated, because for a tyme, Iudgemente ceaseth, but hereupon vices are more depely rooted out, all people know∣yng the determinacion of the lawe, and the manifest sentēce of the Iudge heard. A terrour ensueth to al malefactours and pestiferous men, good men are incensed to all godlines, whē vice by Lawe is condempned, cutte of, and destroied. Good menne by Lawe and aucthoritée, vpholded and maintained. This is the state of good lawes, by order to procede, the cause in Iudgemente examined, the facte proued, The state of good lawes. vertue in any persone vpholded, vice in all caste doune and defaced, so there is good Lawe, as Demosthenes saieth, sincere Iudge, and sentence inuiola∣ble.
