20879 99840918 5462
A DISCOURSE OR HISTORIE OF BEES. SHEWING Their Nature and usage, and the great profit of them. VVhereunto is added the causes, and cure of blasted Wheat. And some remedies for blasted Hops, and Rie, and Fruit. Together with the causes of smutty Wheat: All which are very usefull for this later age. Written by RICHARD REMNANT. LONDON, Printed by Robert Young for Thomas Slater, dwel∣ling in duck lane at the white Swan. 1637.
To the Reader. HEaring and reading the Discourses and Writings of very many about Bees, and finding most of my Countrymen not over skilfull in the way of keeping and meanes of preser∣ving them; as also of the way of preserving wheat, and other things from blasting by mildews: I having of late had a little leasure to write, and considering the great good and benefite that may bee made of this knowledge; have therefore (though rude∣ly) penned this little Treatise, for the benefit of present and future ages: and am willing also, if this prove profitable and acceptable, to add something more hereunto of further use. And so praying God to give a blessing, I rest Thine in the Lord, RICHARD REMNANT.
The Contents of the first Booke. Chapter. 1. OF the nature of Bees. Folio. 1. Chapter. 2. How Bees are bred. Folio. 2. Chapter. 3. Of their work. Folio. 9. Chapter. 4. Of the getting of Bees, and how to finde and re∣medy the losse of the Queen. Folio. 13. Chapter. 5. Of the time to remove Bees, and placing them to the best advantage. Folio. 15. Chapter. 6. How to defend your Bees, and preserve them from their enemies. Folio. 18. Chapter. 7. Of swarmes and swarming. Also in this chapter is shewed how to feed Bees: Also how and when to drive full and fat stocks. Folio. 22. Chapter. 8. How to chuse and know the best Hives for store: Also how to help them that have too much, or too little food: Thirdly, signes of the first swarming: Fourthly, how to recover Bees that are chilled with cold. Folio. 31. Chapter. 9. How to make hony, mead, and wax. Folio. 34. Chapter. 10. Bees and women compared. Folio. 39. The Second Booke. Chapter. 1. OF the cause and cure of blasted wheat. folio. 40. Chapter. 2. How this knowledge come to bee so long hid, and now discovered. folio. 43. Chapter. 3. The cause of smutty wheat, with the best remedy that I can advise you. folio. 44.
A HISTORIE, OR DISCOURSE CHAP. 1. Of the nature of Bees. IT is not my purpose here, either to follow or to confute other mens opinions concerning Bees: I shall briefly set down my owne know∣ledge in this subject. To reveale the whole nature of Bees is very hard, and to little pur∣pose; at least no great use or benefit if it were done: I purpose therefore to discover onely so much as may serve for common use among us: And first of the na∣ture of Bees. They are of nature very hot and fiery;The nature of Bees.
whence it is that the hony which they gather is like∣wise hot, though extracted out of cold and mild flowers. They are blowne by the females: Their sex is male and female: They are an entire female Monar∣chie, having the males among them but one part of the yeere: Their Queen hath her guard, which depart not from her, which (together with their admirable order, and industry) doe represent a well governed Common-weale. There is but one sort of good or usefull Bees in our Country, having six legges, foure wings, two fangs, one beake or bill, few intralls, five senses, very quicke and apt for use: all of one colour and forme, but differ in quantitie, sex, beauty, quality, employ∣ment and labour, care and providence. CHAP. 2. How Bees are bred. THe breeding of Bees is after this manner: The fe∣males doe blow their brood in the cells or holes of their combs. In the uppermost part of their combs they lay up and keepe honey for their winter pro∣vision; in the lower part they breed during all the warme moneths; the first and last of the yeere they breed females, the second or third course is males and females, if the stocke be good and forward to swarme, else they breed no males till the middle part of the yeere: for till they have use of males they breed them not. For they know when they blow males, and when females; which I prove thus. First, because they never
blow males till they have need of them. Secondly, it is apparent by this reason, because they place them altogether in the middle of their brood, and the fe∣males round about them, and make the cells or holes in which they blow them either higher or lower, fit for the body of the sex which they blow. When they blow males they encrease it higher, and when females they gnaw it downe lower,A strange in∣stinct. as any that will observe the worke may see. Wherein we may note a strange instinct beyond other creatures, in that they know when they breed males, and when females, and when to breed each: which is indeed wonderfull, as also many other things in the their common-wealth are: as, their government, and the manner of it; their comely order and valour, their labour and daintie worke, their care and providence. All which are wor∣thy the beholding and consideration of all people, both rulers and subjects: and I wish that good use might be made of all the visible workes of the Lord, I meane the admirable workes of creation and preser∣vation: for the workes of the Lord are wonderfull, and, I am sure, ought to be sought out of all that feare him. But to returne whence I digrest. That there bee males and females I shall now shew you. There are visibly to bee observed two sorts among them, the one bigger, the other lesser: the bigger, which wee call Drones, are indeed the male Bees; they worke not, but live on the labour of the rest: whence it is that wee give that name Drone,Reasons to shew that the lesser Bees are the females. to our unprofitable lubbers in the common-wealth. That the lesser Bees are the females, I thus prove: It is the female that beares the seed in her body, but the lesser Bee beares
the seed in her body and blowes it, therefore they are the females. A second reason is this: There is not one male or Drone in the stock all the winter (which I will anon prove) therefore the lesser Bees (being onely there) must of necessity bee the females: and they blow or breed when the males or Drones are not among them, which proves them to be females. Yet all the summer the males are among the females; and are by the females bred for generation, and kept for that use: But they kill them for necessity; for the males are exceeding great eaters and wasters of the winter provision, therefore the females kill them, and had rather be without their sweet companie, than starve in their winter. I call it their winter when they can∣not gather food, which is their meanes to maintaine life: for so soone as ever the hony gathering failes in the fields, the females kill the Drones or males, or drive them outIgnavum fucos pecus à praesepibus ar∣cent., and suffer none in winter. Now whereas some stockes have so many Drones that the female Bees are long in killing them, and so spend their precious time about that, when as they would bee otherwise employed: And whereas other stocks are so weake and poore, that they are not able to kill them; therefore I advise you at that time of the yeere to helpe your Bees in killing them: which you may doe in this manner. When and how to kill Drones.In the heat of the day in August (which is the usuall time when hony-gathering begins to faile) then stand at the mouth of your Hives that are full of Drones, and as they come out, bruise some of them with your fingers on the stocks-mouth, and make the hony come forth of them, and leave them among the females; and so will they sucke the hony out of them,
and fall to doe it themselves, and kill their Drones. But for the helpe of them that have many Drones,Drone-pots: Set these pots, and stop them close to the Hive mouth, in the heat of the day. and are weake or few themselves, and so cannot so well doe it, for them provide drone-pots to doe it: which pots are made of Osiars, the twigges being set so close that the Drones cannot get out, and yet wide enough for the females or Queen to goe through. But because the catching in these pots doth trouble the Bees, therefore I esteeme it the better way, if you dare, to kill them with your fingers. Concerning the matter in which they blow or breed,The matter in which they blow. it is something that they gather of the flowers or plants, and bring home, and put it into the holes or cells of their combs, and mixe it finely with a little water, and then blow in it a small thing, lesse than, or as little as a flie-blote, which comes to be as big as a great Maggot, and coloureth browne; and within eighteen or twenty one dayes, as the weather is colder or hotter, they come forth. Note,Heat brings forth in eigh∣teen or twenty one daies. that it is the heat of the Bees that brings the blote to maturitie, as hens or fowles doe egges: and herein the male hath his use also, for he is very hot. The place (as I told you) of blowing the males, is in the midst of the combs and in small number, the females round about them, in exceeding greater number, and the Queens on the edges of the combs, in the midst and safest place of the Hive. The males cell is bigger than the females, and the Queenes cell bigger than the common Bees, and farre thicker and stronger: and but five, six or seven in an Hive. Whether the Queenes blow the Queenes I am not very certaine, but I take it to be so,Queenes blow Queenes. because of the fairenesse and excellency of the creature, and the dif∣ference
that is betweene her and the common Bees. But that there is any odds, excellency, or use of the males one above another, I find not: neither is there any other use of the males but for generation, and breeding, and helping to bring the brood to maturity: and they are great eaters, and labour not, but play and sport in and out, and take the aire when it is warme, for their pleasure, and so cleanse their bodies, and back againe to eate and sleep: a dainty life, from which good Lord deliver me. The manner of convaying seed.The females receive seed from the Drones in Sum∣mer time, after what manner I cannot well tell: But there is in the hinder part of the male or Drone a little white thing like the instrument of generation; take one of them alive and crush the body of it some∣what hard between your fingers, and you shall see it put forth. Also the females have neere their stings a little neat place of receit for generation: but whether they receive the seed at the head or taile, I am not cer∣taine; but if at the taile, the females must needs hold their stings very close: for if the males were prickt or venomed thereby, common sense (without reason) would make them take heed of comming there againe; which many reasonable creatures (the more shame for them) cannot doe. The Queen, being a female, hath a sting in her taile, but useth it not,The beauty and use of the Queene. it being onely for distinction of sex and ornament. She is longer and somthing bigger than a common Bee, much clearer and more beautifull, and yellower under the belly and the legges. She rules and governes all by commanders, and in working time goeth from place to place in the Hive: she hath a speciall guard about her of the fairest and most valo∣rous
Bees, which alway attend her within and with∣out, especially when shee comes abroad. And in swarming time you may in the heat of the day some∣times see her. For a little before they swarme she will come abroad, and flie about to take the aire, and make her selfe fit to goe with the swarme, and to harden her selfe: for she is very tender and chilly,The Queen is very choise and chilly, and soone lost, which done ruines the common-wealth. by reason she comes seldome abroad. There is one of them al∣waies in the Hive, both winter and summer; and but one onely, except it bee in swarming time: For more than one the Commons will not endure, and without one they cannot subsist, but are distract, disperst, wander and worke not, but come to nought and pe∣rish; which is worthy our observation, and may be holpen, as I will shew hereafter. Furthermore the Queenes are the calling Bees, and are bred to goe forth one with every swarme: and if two goe in a swarme, then will there be a combustion among the commons, and one will kill another, striving which of those Queenes shall governe; and so will fight till one of those Queene be killed: which done, they will bee all quiet and fall to worke. This is worth the noting; Therefore to remedy it,How to make peace when there is vari∣ance about the Queene. I take away one of the Queenes from such a swarme, and put her into the old stocke againe: for sometimes all the Queenes goe away with the swarmes, and then the old stocke will perish. Now in swarming time, when they first begin to swarme, there are 5, 6, or 7. Queen-Bees, more or lesse, as they are prepared for swarming, and they are all calling Bees: and after the first swarme about ten dayes they call for a second: and so continue in calling till they have done casting.
When they call.Between the first and second swarmes, commonly they stay twelve or foureteene dayes, but for the se∣cond and third, but a day or two, if the weather hin∣der not. Calling Bees.The Queenes have severall notes, and call out one bigger, another lesser, one note under another; And I thinke can alter their notes as they list; for the lesser noted Bee calls last, and is most shrill and earnest, and goeth away with the second swarme: as once I found, when I had a swarme went out and came home a∣gaine, and went into the next stock. And there the smaller noted Bee, called a day or two, till the swarm came away againe: And the smaller note being gone in the second swarme, then the next small note doth alter, and calleth as shrill and loud as the former. These Queenes goe calling round about, and over all the stock (as you may heare in an evening.) And they rest not till the swarmes are set forth: and if there be more Queenes bred than to furnish every swarme with one, then so soone as the stock hath done swarming, they kill all those Queenes save one, and bring them out of the Hive. The Queens are gentle, amiable, very loving.The Queen is a very gentle and loving Bee, and will not sting: And if you chance to rescue her from danger, or succour her any way (as I have often done) then will she flie to you, and hang about you, and not willingly depart from you, which is worth your noting and observation. Looke care∣fully after the Queene in swarming time, but trou∣ble not the swarme.Now in time of swarming, it behoves you careful∣ly to looke after your Queene Bee: for she is often beaten downe, or falleth among the weedes, beanes, or grasse, or such like, neare the swarme; which if you doe not espie and helpe, all the swarme will returne
home againe: and then it is a chance if ever they come forth againe. Which you may prevent, by looking diligently for the Queen; who is easily found, because wheresoever she is, there the guard will sit fast about her; who are a knot or clump of Bees as big as a Ten∣nisball, or somewhat bigger, according as the swarme is in quantitie. Therefore in swarming time you must looke about diligently neere the Bees, and if you find her fallen at the mouth of the Hive, or elsewhere, take her up and put her to the swarme. The Queenes lie most commonly in the middle of the swarme, and are safely guarded, and carefully at∣tended: a thing worthy observation. CHAP. 3. Concerning their Worke. THe common Bees, (as I said before) they are fe∣males, and are bred in farre greater number than the other. For they are the working Bees: and ma∣ny of them are lost in foule weather. Also they have many enemies, and so perish by them. These are they that fight for, and defend the rest: and so are in dan∣ger. Besides, they are the first that endure penury: for they spare their food (when it begins to be scarce) to maintaine their Queene:In cold wea∣ther keepe the Hive close in breeding time. also they are often chil'd in the brood; therefore in breeding time, when the weather is cold, it is good to keep the mouth of your Hive somewhat close, but especially in the night: and keepe the Hives warme. Also you must endevour to kill and destroy all their enemies, to prevent all dangers, to cure all diseases,
to cleanse them in the spring time, and to accom∣modate them with necessaries as you can; which to doe I shall shew hereafter. Their curious worke.Concerning the manner of their working, it is very daintie, curious and exact: their combs placed so, as they may passe between them, and come at every cell or hole to lay up hony or to breed in: And alway in warme weather, they cleanse and repaire their worke, and in cold weather, they lie or sit there close together, to keepe themselves warme. They gather wax all the yeere, from the first gathering to the last, from the willow to the blowing Ivie: but they gather their hony in warme moneths, except it be cold and dry; and when the hony dewes fall, they gather abundantly.The manner of their gathe∣ring hony and wax. They take up or draw the hony with a fine little beake like a Gnat, and carry it home in a little bladder, or thing like the crap of a bird or hen, in the forepart of their bodies, and lay it up in their cells or holes, and cover it over finely with thin wax, and so keepe it for provision. The hony, when it is first extracted or drawne, is as thin as any rock water: but by the heat of the Bees, and age, it becommeth thicke and hard. The wax is gathered of the flowers or bloomes, with the fangs of the Bee; and so she puts it to her thighs, and rubs one against another to fasten it on: and then carrie it home, and make the combs in their Hives. The heat of the Bees maketh the waxe so warme and so pliable, that at the first gathering they can worke it and turne it to their purpose. Their combs are set all upright, beginning at the top, and so wor∣king downe to the bottome. The frame and manner of it is curious, with holes on both sides of the
combs, many hundreds: yet are they none of them just one against another, but placed triangular, one against three, and that most neatly and artificially: which argueth their feeling to be good, for they doe it in the darke. They season their hony with salt water; which (if they be farre from the Sea) they sucke out of sinkes or old ditches, and places that encline to salt-peter: but a∣bout their brood they use fresh water: wa them. Therefore it is not amisse that you set brine, or salt water in some place neere them, and fresh-water in time of drought. They work very diligently, omitting no time to gather in, that is any thing fit, but will abroad, though it be to the hazzard of their lives. Their sight is very cleare, specially farre off,The severall and quick use that they have of all the five senses. Sight. which guides them abroad, and directs them home, though sometimes in still and mild weather they are three or foure miles off from home: but their sight is not so quick neare hand; for sometimes they flie against you if you come suddenly crosse them, and sometimes neere the mouth of their Hive, they flie aside, and misse the holes: then up they flie a little further off, and take better view, and so fall right. Their smelling also is exceeding quicke,Smelling. for they will sent hony a mile from them, and make hast to it: And by this sense of smelling, they find the strange Bees that are not of their own Hive, and seeke pre∣sently to expell them. Their taste is as active as their other senses;Taste. there∣by they make choice of waters, and all other gathe∣rings for their use and purpose. Their hearing also is very good,Hearing. and they delight in musicall sounds: of which observation comes the
sounding of pannes in swarming time: but it usually doth more hurt than good. ke gainst g with too soone. For if pans be rung, or other troublesome noise till the swarme be all out, it causeth them to goe back againe, or some other di∣straction it causeth among them. Therefore ring not except the swarme be flying away; and then make the greatest sound you can to prevent it, and throw up dust, or hogs dung, or cowes dung to disturbe and trouble them; so will they settle or goe home again. The Commons are all very laborious and carefull to make provisions for food and generation: they are very heedfull and observant, also fearfull of dangers, but marvellous valorous if they apprehend an enemie approaching, or any offensive creature, and will re∣solutely hazzard their lives in defence of their Com∣mon-wealth, and sting other Bees to death that come to robbe or hurt them. Now in stinging one ano∣ther, they lose not their stings, for their skinne is so dry and thin that their speares come away againe without hurt to themselves: but in stinging thicke and moist skinned creatures, they leave their stings be∣hind them and die,The nature of envie. for their intrals come forth there∣with: yet are they so furious, that though they die for it, they will doe it: the which the Prophet seemes to note, when hee saith that his cruell enemies came about him like Bees; which may be understood, not only in regard of their multitude, but also in regard of their great malice and furie, and also in regard of their intent, viz. to kill and destroy: The sequell of which their furie proved (likewise) like this of Bees; they destroyed themselves. And this is the nature of envie, that it will not or cannot be guided by reason: from which good Lord deliver us.
And thus much of the nature and breeding, comely order and valour of this little creature, which is a fe∣minine Monarchy, and orderly Common-wealth, consisting of an amiable, loving and gentle Queene, and of proper, comely, able, attentive and diligent guard and commanders, with loyall and laborious, provident and valorous Commons: all worthy admi∣ration, and serious observation. CHAP. 4. Of the getting of Bees, and how to finde and remedy the losse of the Queen. IN the next place I come to set downe my advice to all those that have a desire to exercise, or employ themselves about Bees. And first concerning the ob∣taining or getting them. Some have received a superstitious and foolish con∣ceit, that if they be bought with mony they will not prosper: but I say, let them not be stollen, or gotten unjustly: for stollen goods will not prosper; or if they prosper outwardly, thy conscience will suffer for it, and thou shalt have a greater losse inwardly than thy gaine will be outwardly. Therefore regard not old wives fables, but get them lawfully, though thou buy them with mony, and then thou mayest expect a blessing. And for my part I have good store, I thank God, yet I have both bought and sold to the vallue of a thousand pound by the yeere, for divers yeeres together. Now I should come to speake of removing of Bees, but that I think fit first to discover a very needful ob∣servation,
and, for ought that ever I have heard, of all men unknowne. And that is, How many, both stocks and swarmes, doe perish having lost their Queene. Which I will here teach how you may both find out, and remedy. How to know when the Queen is lost.When you see any that have good store of Bees and worke not, then be you sure that something is a∣misse with them: Either they are annoyed with dead brood: Or disturbed with some enemies, as Ants, or mice, and the like: Or else they have lost their Queene: the which in an evening you may dis∣cerne by the mornefull noise that they will make. In∣deed they will mourne, if mice, toads, emmets, or other hurtfull or noysome thing, be gotten among them: but most of all if they have lost their Queene, roaring and running about the Hive, stopping or staying a while, and then begin againe in lamenting manner. Then looke under them, and if you espie no hatefull thing, bee sure the Queene is lost; then bestirre you to helpe it in time: the which I have done after this manner. How to re∣store a Queen.I doe usually save a poore swarme at the end of summer: and looking over my Bees in winter, and a∣gaine at the spring, I found a good stocke that had but few Commons; and looking over them againe, I ob∣served another good stock which had lost their Queen. Then tooke I my poore one, and stilled the Bees with smoak, & knockt down the Bees and work and all, upon a cloath, and so found the Queen, and put her into the middle of that stocke which wanted the Queene; and I put the commons to the other which wanted com∣mons: and so both were accepted, the Queen where a
Queene was wanting, and the commons where com∣mons were wanting: and so both my good stocks were preserved; and onely the little poore one (thus for necessity) ruinated, which at the best was not worth above one shilling sixe pence. I preserved two good stocks thus in the spring also, which at that time fell to worke presently, that before had left wor∣king:No Drones a∣live in winter. and now in both these times I found not one Drone living: but in the spring I found some to bee blown and white in the combs, but not come forth of their cells; which proves plainely the little Bees with the stings to be females. Now if you find a swarme or stock in summer that hath lost their Queen,How to pre∣serve a stock in summer that hath lost the Queene. you may preserve it by putting a little swarme to it: for in putting a Queene where a Queene wants, or common Bees where common Bees are wanting, in both these cases either Queene or commons will bee received: but else they will fight and kill one another. But now,In what case Queene or commons will be recei∣ved. if you have no little swarme to save your swarme that hath lost their Queene, then put that where the Queene is lost home againe to the old stocke: Doe it thus. Knocke it down upon a broad board, and set a little board for them, whereon to runne up to the old stock. CHAP. 4. Of the time to remove Bees: and placing them to the best advantage. I Come now to direct concerning removing, setting, and ordering of Bees: and first of the time of re∣moving them.
The best time to remove your Bees, is in February, or a little before they begin to gather. Indeed you may remove your stockes in any of the cold months, (so that you bee carefull to carry them upright, and not squat or bruise them:) but their work is stiffest and least hony in it about February, and therefore then best to carry. ☞In removing your Bees, alway remember this ob∣servation, to set the same side foremost, that was fore∣most before; and the same place of the Hive for their passage out, which they had before you removed them, or else you will put their worke out of order. If you be driven to remove your stockes in warme weather, you must remove them the space of a mile or two, or else they will goe back to the place whence you did remove them, and so many of them will bee lost and perish. But swarmes are best to be removed as soone as they are hived, for then they are unac∣quainted where they stand, and there is nothing then in them which is apt to be bruised, or to take harme. Where and how to place your Bees, after you have remo∣ved them.Now when you have them, let them be set in the best place you have, where they may have a pretty faire flight; and in a sweet aire, and the ground made cleane before them: the grasse kept cut, or the ground hard, and swept sometimes. Also not neere any deepe water, by the space of ten or twelve score paces, if you can avoid it: for the winde will beat them downe and drowne them. The seat.The best seat or stoole for them is a round board, or stone fit to the Hive, onely left an hand breadth wider than the Hive before, for a place for the Bees to alight upon; and set it a little leaning forward, for that the raine may runne off, if any be driven or fall
upon it: yet to keepe them from raine and wet you must cover them with boards, if they be straw-hives:Cover them. or with straw-hackles, if they bee twig-hives: And be sure to keep them dry, for the wet will decay both the Hive and the Bees worke. Set them on a single stump, the board fast nailed; or if on stone, et as few stumps as will set them fast, and as farre under the stoole as may be, to prevent the getting up of mice and other vermine.Prevent their enemies. Also be care∣full to set them where no emmets come; for they will get up into the Hive, and steale out all the hony, and starve and taint the Bees. But if they come at un∣awares, then shave the stumps on which the Bees stand, and anoint them round the middle with tarre, which will keepe the Emmets from going up: And throw seething water on the emmets, or destroy their hill or nest, if you can find it: and kill the mice with traps or how else you can. Set your Bees about two foot above the ground, or higher if need bee: let their flight be to the South or Southward, and set trees, or other shelter not far from them, to breake off the wind; and let not the Sun shine hot upon the bare Hives: for their worke will bee in danger to melt. Neither need you to cloath or cover them the more for winter, for the cold hurts them not,☜ Note this, they must not be set too hot in the Sunne. so they bee defended sure from the wet: Therefore keepe the Hives whole and close, so as two or three Bees may get in and out; for in cold weather, they lie close and sleep, but spend not. Set Goar, Withies, or Palm-trees neere them,What trees and flowers to set neere them. for that is the first of their ga∣therings: Also Cherry-trees, Plum and Peare, and any fruit trees: Also Rosemary, Time, Burrage, Bu∣gloss,
Balm, and Violets, Wall and stock-gilly-flowers, Rockets, and any other hollow bloome; especially Beanes, Pease, Turnep, and seed-Cabbage. Also they gather much of Buck-wheat and Woad, but both these are faint and foggy, and overlade them, and cause them to fall downe and perish. Therefore at such time of the yeere lay salt under all your Hives, with∣in upon the stoole, which will quicken your Bees, and put vigour into them, and make them the better able to labour.When and how to put salt under them. Doe the like at other times, when you see your stocks that have hony in them to be lazy and dull: but those that worke not, being faint for want of hony, must bee fed, whether they bee stocke or swarme; which how to doe I will hereafter show; because many (for want of skill how to feed them) doe it to no purpose, and besides, spend more hony in do∣ing it, by a great deale, than needs. CHAP. 6. How to defend your Bees, and preserve them from their enemies. Keepe your Bees sweet and cleane, and alway note and ob∣serve what e∣nemies they have.AS all Common-wealths are infested with some e∣nemies, sometimes many, sometimes fewer: so likewise is this Common-wealth of Bees. Their great enemies are Hornets, Swallows, Titmice, Mar∣tins, and the like; besides Waspes, and robbing Bees: their lesser are Emmets, Spiders, &c. which I have spoken of before: ☞Were it not for the Hornet and the Swallow, Waxe would be as cheape as tallow.
Therefore destroy the nests and breeding places of these vermine: also the creatures themselves, as oft as you can take them. To take Hornets, set lime-twigges before their holes, if you cannot come at their nests to destroy them. To take Wasps, set glasses with wort or water sweetned with sweet fruit in it, or a little sugar melted and dissolved in the water: but sweet fruit is the best, for feare of drowing the Bees; for they will goe into any thing that hath hony in it. Of Emmets and Mice I have spoken before: also toads, snailes & spiders are noisome and hurtful to the Bee. Spiders wil entangle and take them in their webs, and venome them to death, and suck out their honie: therefore brush downe their webs, and kill them. Also robbing-Bees are great enemies,☜ Robbers. and very fre∣quent in the spring of the yeere and the fall of the lease; which to prevent,How to pre∣vent them. you must often prove whe∣ther your stocks have Bees enough to keep them out. Those stocks which have not, you must keepe the mouthes of their Hives closer, so that few may get in. If you find that the robbers be too strong for your stock, and have made some great entrance thereinto, presently stop up that stock, though it bee at noon-day: then in the even, so that they may see to flie, open the hole, and let out the robbers, and be sure to have ready in your hand some white flower, or meale, or lime, or the like, and sprinkle it on them as they come out, thereby you shall know them as they flie: and marke whether they flie to some of your owne stocks, or to your neighbours; for you shall see them presently flie home with the meale on their backes.
Which when you have found, you may thus remedie: Take a long knife or a dagger, & thrust it into the rob∣bing stock about the middle of the Hive, on both sides: and so a little break their work. This will make them leave robbing, and fall to worke to make up their own breaches: and this will doe the robbing stockes no hurt, but rather good: for they are commonly the fattest Bees which rob, who have enough or too much already; like those that are guided by sense, and so cannot tell when they have enough. Now after the robbers are thus gone out of your stocke, as I have before shewed, looke in, and see if there be left Bees enow to live: shut them in close in the day time for a day, two or three, and let them out about sun-set to take aire: If your stocks be full, lay in three or foure little hollow kiskes or quills to let in aire, else the full Hives will stifle, yet they must bee so little that a Bee get not through: but if all or the most part of your Bees bee gone, if there be not above an handfull of Bees left; then take away the stocke quite, and save the hony. Better is it to doe so than lose it, for want of Bees to defend it. Trie often whether your stocks want Bees.Now in these robbing times you must try your stocks often, whether they want Bees or not; which you may doe by looking in morning and evening: or by knocking on the side with a phillip of your fin∣ger: if there bee store, they will rush a prety while: if few, they will give a little quick sound; by which you may perceive their quantitie. Bees come to decay and be lost many wayes, as in boisterous windes, or by faintnesse, by robbers and fighting, by rotten combs, or dead brood.
How you may keepe them in heart and vigour,Take out the rotten combs and dead Brood. I have already shewed; I shall now shew you how to take off rotten combs, and to take out dead brood, or any other putrefaction. You shall know when there is dead brood or other putrefaction, by lifting them a little up on one side, when it is darke, and put your nose toward the worke, and so shall you find an ill favour: then in an evening you may still the Bees, and take it out. That you may still your Bees doe thus: Take a coale of fire, and neere the Hive kindle a little dry straw, and cast upon it a little muck, or green weeds, to keepe it from flaming, and to raise smoake: then take the infected Hive,How to still Bees. and hold it over the smoak two or three turnes a little while, and the Bees will runne up to the top of the Hive: then turne up the Hive, and you may see and smell where the dead brood or other putrefaction lieth. Some putrefaction sticks fast in the cells or holes, and is of a brown or deepe yellowish colour, which should have been brood, but came not to perfection. Other putrefaction looketh somewhat white, and was a brood, but afterward tooke cold, and so was chill'd, and perished before it came to maturity, and so turned to putrefaction: and you may discerne it by thrusting your knife into the cells, if otherwise you cannot see it: and it is easie to discerne the hony from the putrefaction. If the Bees stir while you are doing it, quiet them with smoake, and so drive them up againe: and then take and cut out so much worke as you find infected. When there is but little, they can bring it out them∣selves,
but being much it will trouble them much, and be long in doing: or else it will taint and stench them up, and make them die, or leave their Hives. The reason why smoake rules them.Now the reason why smoake feares them, and offends them so much, is because of the quicknesse of their sight and smelling: but let it be quickly done, and away, and then they are quickly pleased, and come to themselves againe: but to stand continually in a smoakie or bad aire they will not thrive: therefore set them not neare a Kiln, or any noisome aire, or where smoake may beat downe upon them. As concerning rotten or decaied worke, you may know it by feeling; it is crispy, and of an ash colour, and without any clamminesse or wax in it. This you must cut off as high as it goeth, for they cannot work to it, but must gnaw it off. Blacknesse is no fault, but commeth by the heat of the Bees, and may endure long time notwithstanding. And thus being carefull and diligent to keepe your Bees sound and in plight, you may find by Gods blessing the profit of your labours in the thriving of your Bees. CHAP. 7. Of swarming and hiving your Bees, dressing the Hives, and ordering the swarmes. Swarming time.IF the yeere prove warme and kindly, not very wet nor very dry, then may you expect swarmes in May: therefore prepare your seates and Hives a∣gainst that time. If your Hives be old, bee sure to aire
them well in the Sunne: but lay them to aire where Hens come not at them, for Bees will not abide the sent of Hens. If they bee new Hives,How to dresse the hives. remember to make them smooth and cleane as you can, by cutting or pulling off the twigges or rinds, which stick loose in the Hive; for else the Bees will be troubled to pick it cleane. Concerning the bignesse of your Hives, you must fit them bigger or lesser, according to the big∣nesse of your swarme, or time of the yeere, in for∣wardnesse or backwardnesse. And rub your Hives with beane, or oake, or willow, or other sweet leaves: and then sticke the Hive with a sticke cleft in foure quarters, and cleft to the upper end within an hand∣full, and take off the edges making the stick smooth and flat: then set it to the top of the Hive, and plash it foure waies, and sticke the lower ends fast into the Hive within sixe or eight inches of the bottome: and being bent and so set, they will sticke fast. Also put two cleft sticks in the middle, one crosse the other: let the wood whereof they are made be either withie, or hasell. Then when your swarme is come, sprinkle a little hony or other sweet thing, as wort, or sugar dissolved in faire water, which will make them take the better liking of the Hive. As soone as the swarme is setled,The hiving of Bees. goe presently to hive it, for feare of rising, or other comming to it. If it knit or light on the body of a tree, or on some stiffe thing that cannot bee shaken; then with a neat little broome, or little greene bough, sweepe them into the Hive: or with a thin slice of wood, made smooth for the purpose, strike them in gently: or if you can come to set the Hive over them, with greene
twiggs move or stirre them to make them runne up into the Hive: but if they hang on a bough or other place that may be shaken, then put your Hive under them, and shake them in: and being high on a tree, take a cleane linnen cloath upon your arme, to cast over the Hive, lest they flie out in bringing them downe: and being come downe, bee sure to have a board in readinesse to set them downe upon. Then lay the Hive on the side, and turne it up gently, and cover the Hive, all save one side with the cloth: and that o∣pen side, you must raise, or set up with two stones or stickes, two or three inches high, for the Bees to goe in and out: and if any remaine behind, or flie up, and sit there againe, then fetch them downe in an empty Hive, and knock them down on the board or cloth, and so will they run to their fellowes. And, as I told you before, remember carefully to looke for a Queen. If it bee hot weather when you Hive your Bees, then remember to cover or shade the Hive with boughs: else they will rise & flie away. Then at night, when they are all within the Hive, carry the swarme to the place appointed for them to stand in. But set them not too neere any new-hived swarme, nor yet neere the old stock from whence they came, for feare they creep together. Now if you chance to observe two forward or great swarmes comming out together, stop up one stock with a fine linnen cloath or grasse, till the other be hived;What swarmes to keepe asun∣der, about which you must bee quick. Then open the other and let it out, and cover the first hived or setled swarme by hanging a cloath over it: for twenty to one, if the latter risen swarme see or
heare the first, but it will to it. But now if two little swarmes, or late in the yeere,And what to unite. rise and goe together, that is best of all, so that they agree and doe not fight. Yea if they goe not together, it is best to put them together: which you may doe after this manner. When they are both hived, take the first, and set it on a board, and spred a cleane cloth upon the board, if the board be not broad enough, and knock the last swarme downe on the end of the board, by the first: which being set up two or three inches on the side, next to that which you have knockt downe, they will of themselves run to the other swarme: and in their running up to the other swarm, you may see the Queen, which you must take away; she will not sting: and you may put her into the stocke which shee came from, unlesse you have any other swarme or stocke which wanteth a Queene, unto which you may put her. Thus you may unite swarmes, and so you shall have none little or poore. But if notwithstanding all your care two great or forward swarmes doe goe together, which you thinke are too bigge (for a competent number is the best) you may devide or part them thus: First still the Bees with smoak, as is before shewed:How to divide great swarmes that are gone together. then having another Hive ready trimed and drest, set it by upon a board teeled, or set up a little on one side: then beat or knock downe some of the Bees where two are gone together, and in running or going to the empty Hive, one Queen will be found, which you must put to the empty Hive; and knock Bees out of the other, till you have a competent num∣ber:
but be very carefull that the Queens be divided too, or else the commons will together againe, or perish for want of a Queene. The cause of fighting among swarmes.Thus also you may make to agree two little swarmes which goe together, or are put together, by taking away one Queene, and make them leave figh∣ting, which otherwise will dis-agree; for if there bee fighting or distraction among swarmes, it is for want of a Queene; or having two Queenes they will strive which shall governe till one be killed, and then they will be at peace. Also when you put two little swarmes together, it is good to sprinkle strong beere, or strong ale a∣mong them, to make them all of one sent; so can they not find out one sort from another, but be all as one and agree. In the next place remember to heed your swarmes, that they flie not away when the hony dewes fall (for many hony dewes doe fall in gloomie weather:) and in such times they may chance stay a while, and work in their Hives,How to pre∣vent swarmes from flying away. and yet afterward leave all and bee gone into the woods; where they from the Oaken leaves can gather more freely and readily: which to prevent, be sure to feed them with hony, by putting in a cane or kiske of hony into their Hives every morning, till they have gotten some store, and have some provisions in their Hives, which may give them content at home, and so keepe them from straying abroad. How to feed Bees. Note this by the way, that Bees are not to bee fed
in the winter, but in the spring and summer, in cold or wet or over-dry weather; when hony is not to be ga∣thered abroad, then feed your swarmes,Times to feed in, are cold or wet or over-dry. else may they starve, or pine, or be out of heart, and not able to work. To feed them doe thus: Take a kiske or cane that is hollow, and cut it so that you leave a knot at each end of the kiske: let the kiske be eight or twelve inches long, and in bignesse answerable to the number of Bees in the swarme or stocke that you feed. Then cut open and make the kisk hollow on the upper-side, and there powre in the hony, and put it under the Hive: knit a string to the end of the kiske, to pull it out of the Hive: so may you put it in or pull it out quite, without raising of it. Thus you may feed your poore ones, at the Spring, when you find your stocks without hony. But if (notwithstanding all your diligence) you have some poore ones at the end of the yeere, then if you take any stock, save some hony combs to feed with, at the Spring: then in the Spring, when you see them gather, (if they want food) you may put in those preserved hony combs: which you may doe after this manner: First still the Bees with smoake (but not too early in the morning, lest they take harme by the cold aire:A very ap∣proved way of feeding Bees.) then turn them up, and take out a combe neere the Bees, wherein is no hony, and in stead thereof, place the hony-combe, and pin it in with thin spleets thrust through the Hive to fasten it: and set it so that the Bees may goe between the combs: and this they will take for their owne, and be content to stay. Other∣wise, when hony is to bee had in the fields, they
will flie away, if they have none of their owne. How to take Bees that you find in a Tree. But now if notwithstanding all your diligence a swarme happen to flie into the woods, and get into a hollow tree, or if you chance to finde a swarme in a tree; if the tree be not your owne, first get leave of the owner, and then take it out: which you may doe after this manner. Cut an hole a little above the place where the Bees lye, and another a little below them, and set a prepa∣red hive over the uppermost hole, and make a smoak without flame in the under hole, putting it in and out too and fro; and so you shall make the Bees to runne up into the hive: then put a cloth over the hive, and tye it round with a line, and so bring it home. If the Bees be newly gone in, they will the sooner be gotten out; but if they have bin there some time, and have gotten good store of provision in the tree be∣fore you finde them, then they will hardly and with much adoe leave it; then your best way will be to cut it off: which if it bee but an arme of a tree, is easily done; or if in the body of a tree, where you can come at it, cut above it and below it; and being cut (a rope being first fastened about it) let it downe as gently as you can, for feare of bruising and squatting: then stop the holes, or tye a cloth about them, and bring them home, and naile a board at the top to keepe out the water: then set them in your garden, or some other convenient place. But now if there be no way to cut it downe or to save it, then when it is fullest of hony take it: which
you may doe after this manner. Cut an hole under it, and take matches of brimstone, set them on fire and put under them, and stop the hole to keepe in the aire and vapour of the brimstone: and this will kill them stone dead. So may you take out the hony and waxe, and make use of it. How and when to drive full and fat stockes. If the yeere bee such that many hony-dewes fall, and your stockes prove so fat that they lie out, and will not swarme, then about the middest of July drive some of the fattest: which you may doe thus: In an evening take the fat and full Hive, and set it upon a big joyned stoole or some other hollow frame, with the mouth upward: then take a prepared Hive, being sprinkled with hony, and set over it, and bind a cloth round about them, to keepe the Bees in: then knock or rap the under Hive, to make the Bees goe up to the empty Hive. This doe often to move them and disturb them to make them run upward: and if you can, open or make an hole in the top of the under Hive; and with a litle smoak under them, you may drive them upward, and so let them stand all night; and in the morning if you by knapping, perceive any Bees to remaine still in the under Hive, then doe so a∣gaine till all or the most part be gone up: then take the upper Hive, and set it where the full stock stood: and take out the combs of the driven Hive, and put them into a pan or kettle: and in taking out the combs, shake or brush off the Bees (if any remaine) so will they goe to their old place to the new prepared Hive.
Experience will make you more perfect and readie in these things. Be not fearefull, but patient and gentle, and in case of necessity, over-rule your Bees by smoak, and so you may doe about them whatsoever is fit: but if by chance you are stung by them,What to doe when you are stung by the Bees. first pull out the sting presently, then wet your finger often with spet∣tle, and apply to the place, and keepe it wet and coole in the aire: and then it will not smell. Also if you rub the place with Mary-golds, or hony, or St. Johns wort, is a good remedy unto some. How to make Bees swarme. If some stocks hang out somewhat long, and are not willing to swarme; to provoke them to swarme, doe thus: Raise up the Hive on that side where the Bees lie out, about three or foure inches high, and with a little smoake, and also by stirring and moving them, make them goe up into their Hive: then let downe the Hive close againe to the stoole, and rub the place where the Bees lay, with elder, May-weed, or hemlock, so will they abide in, and in short time swarme. But if this will not serve to make them swarme, then drive those that are full and fat, as is before shewed.
CHAP. 8. Wherein first is taught how to chuse for store: Secondly, how to helpe them that have too little, and take from them that have too much: Thirdly, signes of the first swarming: Fourthly, how to recover Bees that are chilled with cold. FOr choice of the best for store, alway keepe them that have the fairest and the evenest work, neither too fat nor too leane, and full of Bees. If a swarme bee very fat, choose rather to keep an old one of a middle waight, than that fat one; choose one about three pecks or a bushell waight, and not above: for if their combs be all full of hony, then they have no where to breed, and will not swarme, and may perish for want of Bees. Now if your Bees bee too fat,Feed the lean, and take from them that are too fat. and all their combs full of hony; then at the spring of the yeere still your Bees, and cut off the combs two or three in the middle a foot high, so will they worke new, and breed: And if then you have any too poore and light, then feed them as is before shewed. Now in choosing your Bees for store, if you find that their work is crumbling, or crisping into small crumbs, as big as a great pins-head, then be sure those Bees are faulty, or robbers, or strange Bees haunt them, or they dislike something. And if your Bees bee kindly to swarme, you may keepe them long, though old and black, for blacknesse is no fault so long as they bee sound. If a stocke swarme, and stand to health, and so hold out healthfull for three yeeres, I have knowne such stand eighteen or twenty yeeres.
Signes of the first swarme.Now to direct you to know the first swarming of your Bees, the signes are these. The males or Drones will commonly play forth three or foure daies, or more, before they swarme; and the Bees will play swarme-play; and sometimes you may see the Queen come out and in before swarming. Concerning the signes of second swarms, I have before shewed by cal∣ling Bees; and also how to put the late little swarmes together, or else put them back into the stocke to pre∣serve the stock, which else may dye for want of Bees. Now if notwithstanding all your care and diligence some prove light, as under the weight of eighteen or twenty one pounds weight, then when they have done gathering, close them up fast with cow-dung and a∣shes mixt together, or lime and haire, which mice cannot gnaw,Set poore stocks into the house in win∣ter. Bees eate not in winter. and set them (stoole and all) into some cold dry place of your house or barne, where they may be little sensible of the change or alteration of the ayre; for as long as they stirre not they eate not. And this is the reason that they may not bee fed in cold winter, but onely when they gather, at the spring or summer cold. Also keepe your Hives close in win∣ter, by putting stones at the mouth of the Hive, to pre∣vent mice from going in; and open them wider, or shut them up closer in the spring time, according as the weather proves hotter or colder, and according to the strength or weakenesse of your stocks. Alwaies in snowie weather remember to shut up your Bees close in sunshine, or else they will out, and be drowned or chilled. And sometimes in cold springs a poore swarme may bee starved or benum∣med before you are aware. I once found two or
three so benummed that none of them were able to stirre, but sat as dead Bees.How to reco∣ver chilled Bees. Then made I an indifferent big fire before them, and tooke them off their seares, and turned them open against the fire, and so the warmth recovered them, and made them move: then I sprinkled hony in among them, and set them up, and laid salt on their stooles, within the Hives: and then they came forth presently, and went to worke: so then I fed them a little every day, and recovered them. Also you must remember to bee very carefull in keeping hoggs, or horses,Be sure to keep cattell from them. or any cattell from com∣ming neere them to trouble them. Once I knew a good Nag stung to death by them. But if any trouble or disturbance chance, and they prove very angry and cruell, and unruly, then make a great smoake among them, and so they will quickly bee quiet and still a∣gaine. Many things more I could have shewed concerning Bees, but these I have here delivered are things of use, and most needfull to be knowne. How to take Bees. Now when God hath blessed your labours, and sent you store, you may receive the benefit of your labour, by selling or taking some. And alwayes if any be over fat, and their combs all filled with hony, be sure to take them: which to doe, and how to make and order your hony and waxe, is shewed in the next chapter.
CHAP. 9. Of making hony, mead, and wax. How to take Bees.TO take your Bees doe thus: untwist an old rope or cord, and of the severall liches, cut peeces six or eight inches in length: then melt Brimston in a pan or potsheard, and dip the peeces of cord into it, and wet it round as a candle: then take some little tub, or deepe bowle, or else dig an hole in the ground, and lay two sticks over it, and then light or kindle your match, and then put them on a short candle-stick, or a peece of clay, and set it into the bowle or hole, and set the stock of Bees over it, and keep in the aire round about the Hive with an old cloth, and so the steeme or vapour of the brimston will kill the Bees stone dead:How to make hony. then take out the combs, and brush off the Bees, if any hang on, and breake out the dead brood, if any be: then put all those combs that have hony in them, into a pan or kettle, and bruise them together: and straine it through a thin cloth-bag: or if you will have your hony very fine, let it run through a sieve with∣out crushing. Now if your hony were gathered on good land, in a good soile, it will need no warming: but if on course or clay land, you must set it on the fire when it is strained, and make it twice blood-warme; then stirre it well, and put it into the vessell where you intend to keepe it; and after a while scum it, and it will be candied. Mead.How to make Mead. Now when you have taken as much hony out of your combs or pulse as you can doe, then wash your puls with water made blood-warme, and make your Mead with that. And if you desire to have your Mead
very good and strong, make it so full of the hony, that it will beare a hen-egge swimming as broad as a sixe pence on the top: then set it over the fire, and boyle it well, and take the scum clean off; then set it a clearing into a kive or tub, two or three daies till it be cleare; and then draw it off from the lees or grounds, and put it up into a vessell; but stop it not too close, for the strength of it will teare the vessell in peeces. Also if you will, you may put in a bag of spices thereinto in boyling. But now,Metheglin. how to make metheglin I purpose not to teach you; for it is part of my present trading: both hony and metheglin have an excellent vertue for ma∣ny cures; being moderately taken they doe remedy many diseases.The good use of hony, mead and metheglin They are especially good against a cold consumption, or cold watery stomacke, as also a∣gainst divers other both inward & outward diseases. Also there may bee admirable Baths made of it, and strange cures have beene done therewith: it is proved in my own experience, in salves both for old and new wounds, that both wax and hony are very soveraigne.Aches and itches. I have holpen aches and strong itches in Bathes made of hony. Once I had a friend had such a foule itch that hee was like a Leper: then I tooke an empty wine Caske, call'd a Pipe, and tooke out one head, and made a liquor of water and hony, making it pretty strong with the hony, and heat it as hot as my friend could indure to stand in it, and put it into the Pipe, and cau∣sed him to stand in it up to his neck a pretty while; and this he did three daies one after another, and was re∣covered as cleare as ever. The like experience for aches. If the Bath bee a little renewed with a little
hony every day, it is the better. How to make wax. In making wax, you must put both your pulse and dry combs together into a kettle, and put an indiffe∣rent quantity of water thereunto, and make it boyle on the fire: then take a thin cloth bag very strong, or a haire bag, and crush it as hard as you can; and have seething water ready by you to put into the bag, and to cast on the outside of the bag, and wind it up close, and crush and squeese it hard. This doe three or foure times, and the wax will come cleane away. Then let it stand in the keelar or bowle till it be cold; and then take up all the wax from the water, and melt it again with a little water in the bottom to keep the vessell from burning; and being melted put it into a pan or vessell, of what size you think fit to make your cake or tren of wax: but first annoint the vessell by the sides with a little hony, or butter, and so the wax will come clean off. The singular use of wax in salves and chirurgery, for cures both within and without, and for use in making candles for sweet and dainty burning, and the divers other uses, is well known: therefore I say no more, but praise the Lord for all his marvellous benefits. Whether women may govern.And now, may there be any further use or appli∣cation made of this knowledge? Yes surely: for the most wise God hath founded all his works in wise∣dome, and set them forth for us to make use of. How then shall I apply it? Why I raise this Quere: This is a feminine Monarchie, the females governe: But it is lawfull for women to govern in a common-wealth? Ans. Yes, in some cases: that is, first, when the male
sex is wanting; or secondly, otherwise disabled by na∣turall disability: as here; nature not having enabled the male to governe, the female doth it. And surely God hath given this instance in nature, to confirme this truth: other instances we have even in sacred writ, as in Debora the Prophetesse: the Queene of the South that came to heare King Salomon: Queene Candace of Aethiopia, and others. But see this royall Queen of Bees, how qualified; she is faire, comely, loving, harmelesse, gentle, peaceable, yea a vigilant Queen, a royall emblem of government. See also the care, labour, diligence, providence and provision, watchfulnesse, valour, and loyalty, of this common-wealth. How would that common-wealth flourish, where the members joyning in such unanimity, should all (setting aside private gaine) aime wholly at the publike weale; and in defence thereof esteem nothing too deare to bestow, no not their lives? as it is with these poore flies, who will resolutely hazzard their lives for the generall good. See also their policy too, in keeping and preserving the seed royall, and admit∣ting but one to governe, to prevent contention and domestick broyles. A rare pattern, and indeed a no∣table Hieroglyphick of a well governed Republick. But to descend lower: May the female from this example, urge a power of government in private houses and families? Let me answer in a distick or two of our English Maro, (whose baptized muse hath clo∣thed vertue in a more pleasing habit, that so some may fall in love with her, if not for her owne sake, yet at lest may come to the sight of her beauty in that poetick garbe.)
Ill thrives that haplesse family that showes, Quarles.A cocke that's silent, and an hen that crowes. I know not which live more unnaturall lives, Obeying husbands, or commanding wives. But I wish there were not too many of these: But how may it be remedied? Perswasions, instructions, and wholsome words from the husband may doe much, if God add his blessing. Take that incompara∣ble loving example of our Saviour toward his Church, set forth by S. Paul, And remember alway that your labour is not in vaine, for the woman is the glo∣ry of the man. And let me add, that a vertuous woman will do thee good and not hurt all the daies of her life. But what if she be stubborn and selfe-will'd, so that she is nothing the better for thy paines? I answer: It was thy hard hap to meet with her; and though thou doe her no good, yet know that thy labour is with the Lord, and thy reward with the Almightie. Q But may not a woman govern in the house? Yes, if God hath made her able: for she was created to bee an helpe: and especially in her husbands absence or weaknesse she ought to perform her best therein: and sometimes with meeknesse (remembring her sex,) to advise her husband: for somtimes two heads are better than one, & plus vident oculi quam oculus. And a wise woman will observe the waies of the family, & see to their labours & emploiments with diligence & watch∣fulnes, and bring up her children in the feare & nurture of the Lord, & in all things be as carefull as thy selfe; and all little enough in this age, wherein both servants and children are (many of them) very unruly and un∣toward; and there is worke enough to keepe them in order. More might be said, but this is most pertinent:
and perhaps some of this may bee censured by some. For what is so well done but may bee amended? or what can any man doe but some will calumniate? But my poore endevours are entended to profit the wil∣ling and well minded. And so I end this little tract or direction, for the ordering of this little, yet profitable Common-wealth of Bees. CHAP. 10. Bees and women compared. OUt of the experience of ruling Bees may be lear∣ned how to rule most women: for there is some resemblance between them. So are wo∣men. 1. Bees are very sensible and apprehen∣sive of any good or evill that is for them or against them. 2. Bees are very teachy and passionate. 3. Bees if they be well governed, and kept in good order, are very industrious, but let them be out of order, or ill hand∣led, and there comes no good of them, but hurt and trouble. 1. Therefore to answer their senses which are so quick & apprehensive, let them not apprehend or see a∣ny evill from you by your example, but alwaies good. 2. For their passions, overcome them by reasons and love: But some are so passionate, that reason cannot rule; others so sottish and sluttish, that they cannot bee ordered, or altred from what they are: for the will is more froward than the minde is ignorant. But if you can win a woman thus, she may be both profi∣table and a comfort.
THE SECOND BOOKE. CHAP. 1. In this second Booke is shewed the cause, together with the cure of blasted wheat: also of rye, hops, &c. THE blasting of Wheat commeth two wayes: 1. Either by windes: 2. Or by mildewes. The blasting by winde happe∣neth in our country but seldome; and for this kinde of blasting I confesse I know no cure: for the winde bloweth where it lists, without possible re∣sistance from any mans power. That which I shall here speake of, is that blasting which comes by mil∣dew, threatned from God, Deut. 28.22. It is an affli∣ction which by our ungratefulnesse we provoke God to send upon us; a sinne that deserves punishment, not onely by depriving us of the food of our bodies, but of our soules too: yet upon repentance God hath pro∣mised to take away our sinnes, and to cure our sicknes∣ses; for hee hath a salve for every sore, if wee had hearts to seeke it of him who is able to give. Now for this mildew, it is a fine thin sweet dew when it falleth; no dew or water in the earth is so thin, that I know of: yet if it lye till the sunne or heat come upon it, or windes dry it, then it becomes clam∣my, stiffe, and binding: but the worst effect that it hath, is upon wheat and hopps.
It falls commonly in the warmest and stillest wea∣ther; it is exhaled or drawn up by the sunne out of the flowers, and from sweet things or sweet places of the earth: and it is most frequent in the height of summer and warme weather, especially a little before wheat harvest: so that wheat is taken by it when it is full corne in the eare, and the straw is dry and beginneth to change white. It falleth sometimes in the night, sometimes in the day, but most of all in cloudy, misty, and gloomy weather. The which to find out, keepe Bees, and they will be your intelligencers. If it fall in the night, they will out to gather as soone as day is light; or if it fall by day, they will abroad to gather, though it fall fast, and as big as a pretty raine. Therefore when you see them flie thus early and di∣ligently, bee sure there is a sweet dew fallen: then make hast before the Sun or drinesse commeth on it, and get helpe, and away into your wheat, and with a line or rope run over your wheat as fast as may bee, one in one furrow, and another in another furrow a land, two or three distance, as you can well reach, one at one end, and the other at the other end of the cord or pole: and the least touch or wagging will shake it off, it is so exceeding thin when it is new fallen. Yet if you have time and helpe, it were good that you went backward as well as forward, to make sure worke. But if you let the dew alone, it will stick fast when heat or drinesse commeth on it, and so in time will set your wheat, so that no moisture or nourish∣ment can come out of the root into the eare, and then your corne shrinkes in the eare for want of nourish∣ment. This dew will in time stick fast, and become
clammy, and bind like Turpentine or Bird-lime, first straked on the straw, and within a while all black o∣ver, and round about the straw: while the wheate is greene, and that there is moisture in the straw, so long the mildew doth no hurt; so likewise when the corn is hard and dead ripe in the eare, it is then past dan∣ger: so that the greatest hurt is done betweene the time that it beginneth to change colour, and the full ripening; and if you be carelesse and negligent in this time, be sure your wheat will be dryed up with the Sunne, and shrunk in the eare, and blasted like Phara∣oh's leane kine, and his leane eares of corne in Aegypt, nothing but huske; which by Gods blessing, and your small paines and diligence, you may prevent. Some have sleighted and contemned this weake meanes for a while, as Naaman the Syrian did the advice of the Prophet Elisha, who bade him wash in Jordan and be cleane; but after better consideration have made use of it, and found the profit and benefit, and were thankfull for it. The mildew is also to be perceived upon the oake leaves shining and sweet: but having your intelligen∣cers at home, you need not seek abroad. Concerning the blasting by wind, and cold or hot ayre, it is not very frequent in our Countrey, thanks be to God: yet rye and fruit is sometimes blasted by some of these, and hops very often by the mildew; therefore when this dew falleth, shake your hop-poles, and with a gentle wand beat off this dew from the leaves, and if it bee not too much labour, wash it off also by throwing water, if you see that it will not come off with shaking: for if it stick on and continue
there, you shall see wormes and bobs breed and stick there, and so spoile your hops, and they will be low∣sey and filthy, and much impayred, if not all lost. Now if you bee diligent and watchfull herein, you may, by Gods blessing, receive double and trebble or greater recompence of your paines, and preserve a∣bundance which the former ages have lost. Rye and fruit is blasted with the wind, or in cold or hot aire, and in frosts, therefore I think it were good in frosts to shake off the dew, before the sun shineth upon it, or to make some smoake or smolder to pre∣vent the coldnesse of the aire, (taking heed alway that your fire doe no harme.) Now the time wherein fruit and rye are blasted, is most commonly in the blowing of them. CHAP. 2. The reason why this knowledge hath so long laine hid, and now discovered. EVerie thing hath an appointed time (saith the wise man in his Eccl.) and God hath made every thing beautifull in his time. And this is the very reason why this knowledge hath laine so long hid, and now com∣meth to be knowne: for in these latter ages, the world is exceeding populous, and our mother Earth (whe∣ther now grown weaker in her age, & ad ruinam ver∣gens, I will not here dispute the question: but) scarce able to yeeld food for those that live on her: in this time I say, hath God revealed this knowledge. For he taketh care of, and provides for all his creatures; and as he sent the disease, so hee can shew the cure: there∣fore
let us learn to ascribe it all unto him, and to give him the praise: for he dispenseth all his gifts wisely, where and when hee sees need. And doe wee not see how in this age God hath shewed the art of liming, & other manuring of land, to the wonderfull improve∣ment thereof? Besides, since our Woods failed, the fewell of coale, peat, turfe, and the like, hath beene found. The which let us neither despise nor neglect, but embrace, and give the all-wise and ever-loving God his due praise and glory therefore. But what if for all this Thomas will not beleeve? Let him strive with himselfe, and enforme himselfe, and come to his fellow Disciples, and conferre with them. But let him not looke now for any speciall re∣velation: time and experience may convince him of the truth of that which at the first sight appeares fabulous. CHAP. 3. Of the cause and remedy of smutty wheat. I Come now to set downe my opinion concerning the causes and the remedy of smutty wheat, so much as I know; because in this, wherein I am not altoge∣ther perfect, I will not be peremptory: but when I have attained the full knowledge, I entend also (God willing) to publish it. The cause I conceive to be this: a defect or failing in nature, 1. Of the seed: or 2. Of the land: or 3. Of both; but rather of the wheat: for as all things are of the earth, so to the earth they decline and re∣turne: and things that are best decay, die, and putrifie,
and so become the worst and basest of all: and when they are at their height, or greatest strength and vi∣gour, then they soone returne and decay. I apply it to my matter in hand. Wee see most men will make choice of the fairest, freest, plumpest, and waightiest wheat for seed, and they think that they doe well in it: but observe it better, and make other trials of it, and see what will come of it. Is the fattest Bull or Oxe, or the fattest Cow, the best to keepe? It may for a yeere or thereabouts, but when they are fallen in their flesh, will they so easily rise againe? Or will not the poorer cattell sooner rise, and make the best improvement, especially if the poore cattell come out of a meane or weake pasture, and are put in a good and full pasture, and the fat are just contrary? Doth the full growne tree or plant grow higher and better, or doth it not rather decay, after it hath attained it's perfection? But to instance in my owne Element: Doe the fattest stocks of Bees prove better, or the most fruitfull? No surely, I find that good midling stocks, that are mending, prove best, and swarme oft∣nest: and the very fat ones prove leaner, and sometimes die, but seldome swarme. So I take it to be in this case: when wheat is at the best, it doth soone decay and be∣come worse, yea naught and worse than naught. You shall see it come up in great plenty, blades enough, and straw enough, and shoots the eare, and is corne in the eare; but suddenly it perisheth & dieth in the eare, and becommeth naught; yea dust, and vile dust, worse than the earth, and of no use, but putrified, dead and gone. You may see it at a stand, and dead in the eare; the eare gaping and staring, much differing from the o∣ther
that hath life and vigour in it. And if the land be not in very good heart, much of your wheat will be thus spoiled; and the more that comes up, and the greater bulk, the more will perish and become blacke, and will soile all your good wheat in the threshing, and will make it blacke at the ends: and it hath a dampe and faintish smell with it, and I thinke, is not wholsome to eate; therefore picke or lease it out of the sheafe before you thresh it, or else you had need wash it well, and drie it after it is thresh't, before you eate it. Therefore when your wheat is very faire, plumpe, and waighty, use that rather to spend in your house; for it yeelds more and better flowre: but for seed chuse a middle size, not so great, nor yet of the smallest rank, but a middle sort. Another reason to prove that wheat when it is at the best decayes soonest, you shall see in this experi∣ment following. Sow of this wheat the next yeere, whether it bee washed or not washed, yet it will bee very smutty; whereas if you sow leaner or a mid∣ling wheat on the same land, and the same season, yea that very day, and yet the one will turne smutty, and the other will not; which proveth that the plump and fullest wheat, being at it's height and period, returnes, decayeth, and commeth to nought: (Oh the fleeting and fading estate of all, yea of the best earthly things!) How to helpe, and to prevent, and keepe wheat, that it smut or decay not. I have by some little experience, found that there is much helpe in the choice of the wheat, and ordering
of the land for the seed: but most of all in adding vi∣gor and help to the seed which is sowne, by steeping it in and with a certaine ingredient, before it be sowne, which keepeth it from decay and smut. And of this I purpose hereafter to publish somewhat more, when I have gained the certaine experience by further triall. In the meane time prove some of what I have here de∣livered, and make choice of your seed, not the fairest and plumpest, but the hardest, and a midling graine, neither fattest nor leanest. Or if you think good to trie this experiment, sow the same day, and on the same land, a little of the plumpest fairest seed that you can get, and some other of a midling hardie graine: and you shall soone observe the difference: especially if your land be somewhat weake, and a little out of heart, the difference will the sooner ap∣peare. FINIS.
