23398 21432313 23984
A perfect Pathway to Felicitie, Conteining godly Meditations, and prai∣ers, fit for all times, and necessarie to be prac∣tized of all good Christians. Imprinted at Lon∣don by Richard Yardly for Humfrey Lownes. 1592.
To the right worship∣full, vertuous, and godly Gentlewoman mistresse Ka∣therine Milward, most faithfull spouse to the no lesse worshipfull, wise and religious Gentleman, ma∣ster William Milward, esquire, P. S. wisheth all hapie successe in this life, with increase of worship, and in the life to come, eternall felicitie in the heauenlie Hierarchie by Iesus Christ. TWo things per ad∣uenture (right worshipfull) may be maruailed at,
concerning this litle booke, as namely, first why I haue published it, considering the great number of bookes, ei∣ther of the same, or verie like argument, extant in these dayes. Secondly, wher∣fore I haue dedicated it ra∣ther vnto you, then to anie other. For the first, I pro∣test before God, who know∣eth the secrets of all hearts, I haue not published it, ei∣ther for vainglory, lucre, or
gaines, nor yet for any other priuate respect of my owne whatsoeuer, but at the in∣stant request, and earnest desire of one of my verie good friends, and alliance also, who yet being liuing, and the onely man that hath borne the whole charges of the impression thereof, both can, and I know will (if need should require) iustifie the same, against any that should auerre the contrarie. And
for the second, when I con∣sidered with myselfe, howe much b und I haue alwaies beene to your worship, euer since the time that I was first acquainted with you, for your good opinion you haue euer cōceiued of me, & sundrie other your courte∣sies shewed towards me, far beyond my deserts or expec∣tation: As also when I cal∣led to remembrance your feruent zeale hich you
haue euer borne to the word of God, & holy religion, your exquisite knowledge there∣in, your carefull indeuour to put the same in practise, and to frame your life therafter. Briefly, when I remembred your maruailous humilitie and lowlinesse of mind, your wonderfull modestie, gen∣tlenesse and affabilitie, your rare continencie and inte∣gritie of life, with infinite the like vertues and graces,
wherewith God hath beau∣tified & adorned your wor∣ship aboue manie others, I say, when I remembred these things, with many mo, I could do no lesse (hauing so fit an occasion giuen me, by reason of my friends im∣portunacie) then to dedi∣cate these my labors to your worship, though not as a guerdon answerable to your deserts, yet as an infallible testimonie, pledge and to∣ken
of my thankful good wil and gratefull heart towards you. And albe it that in re∣spect of the form or methode of the booke (for herein I haue not studied to be curi∣ous) it may seeme to be base and contemptible, and such as is farre vnworthie to be exhibited, to so wise, so dis∣creet, so godly and religious a gentlewoman, yet in re∣gard of the matter, which is heauenlie and diuine, I
most humbly beseech you to accept therof, and to permit the same to go forth to the view of the worlde vnder the gard of your protection, and to patronize both the author & the booke against the poysoned tongues of rai∣ling Phormions, and flou∣ting Momusses, to whom all good things are had in disdaine. And in so doing, both God shall bee glorified by you, the church & Saints
shall praise God in you, and I my selfe besides that I will not rest vnthankfull to you to the death, will not cease also to pray to God for you. And tus I most humblie take my leaue. From my Chamber, this pre∣sent 10. of April. 1592. Your worships in the Lord. Philip .
To the curteous Rea∣der, grace, mercie, and peace GEntle Reader, I haue beene constrayned horowe the im∣portunacie of my friend to publish this little treatise or manuel of praiers & meditations, praying thee in brotherly loue & christian charitie (which as Paul saith couereth the multitude of sinnes) that if any thing haue passed my penne, either tho∣row
lack of due cōsideration, or the presse thorow want of diligent attention, thou wilt yet, either friendly amend it with thy pen, or else silently passe it ouer. And if any thing seem harsh, rough or vnfiled, thinke that in this kind of ar∣gument I haue not studied to be curious & besides, impute the cause thereof to strait∣nesse of time, which would not suffer mee so much as to write out my copy twise, nor being once writ, scarce to
read it ouer againe. Thus friendly Reader I cōmit thee to God, praying thee to cen∣sure al things to ye best, and to helpe mee with thy praiers that both thou and I, and all the elect of God, in his good time appointed, may come to the full fruition, and pos∣session of all the ioyes and glorie of heauen, which God the father hath promised vn∣to vs, thorow his sonne Iesus Christ our Lord and Siuior. Thine in the Lord. P. S.
Certaine Graces to bee saide before and after meat. O Lord our God wee giue thee most heartie thanks for all thy benefits which thou in mercie hast vouched∣safe to bestow vpon vs, and namely (O Lorde) for these thy creatures which at this present
we shall receiue of thy bounteous liberalitie, beseeching thee to giue vs grace to vse them both at this and all o∣ther times, to thy ho∣nour and glorie, and to the refreshing of our hungrie bodies, that therby we may be made more apt to doe those things which thou hast commaunded vs in thy holy word. Grant this
O Lord for Iesus christ his sake our onely Sa∣uiour. Amen. Thankesgiuing ater meate. WE yeelde thee hear∣tie thanks, O most mercifull father for all thy benefites most libe∣rally bestowed vpon vs, and especially at this time, for feeding vs so plentifully, and graunt
(good father) that wee neuer abuse them, but that wee may alwayes vse them in such sort as we neuer offende thy maiestie therby. Grant this, O father, for Iesu Christs sake. Another prayer before meate. O Gracious GOD, vouchsafe to looke vppon our weakenesse
and want, and giue vs at this time those things which may be to our comfort, sanctifie these thy gifts, that our bodies beeing repleni∣shed, we may be thanke∣full, and enioy at thy mercifull handes, the bread of eternall life, to the releefe of our poore soules; through Iesus Christ.
An other praier after meate. WE thank thee, most bountiful Lord, for this thy fatherly fee∣ding our hūgry bodies, so likewise wee beseech thee feede our hungrie soules with the breade of eternall life, yt after this life is ended, wee may ascend where christ Iesus our onely redee∣mer
is gone before. A∣men. A praier before meate. AL things depend vppon thy proui∣dence (oh Lord) to receiue at thy gracious handes due sustenance for the maintenance of their needy bodies, thou giuest it them, and they gather it, thou openest
thy hande, and they are satisfied with all good things, O heauenly fa∣ther, which art the ve∣rie fountaine of al good∣nesse, we beseech thee to shew thy mercies vpon vs thy children, and sanctifie these giftes which wee receyue of thy merciful liberality. Amen.
A thankesgiuing after meate. O Lord God, which of thy great bountie and fatherly kindnesse, hast at this time most plentifully fedde our weake bodies, giue vs grace continuallie to bee thankefull vnto thy Maiestie, for these and all other thy benefites
most aboundantly at all times bestowed vp∣on vs, thorow Ie∣sus Christ our Lorde. A∣men.
A note to knowe the beginning and ending of the foure Tearmes of the yeare. HIllarie Tearme be∣ginneth the three & twentie of Ianuarie, (which if it be Sun∣day) then the next day follo∣wing, and endeth the twelft of Februarie. Easter Tearme beginneth seuentene dayes after Easter, and endeth foure dayes after
Ascension day. Trinitie Terme beginneth ye next day after Corpus Christi day, and endeth the wednes∣day fortnight after. Michaelmasse Tearme be∣ginneth the ninth of Octo∣ber (if if be not Sunday) and endeth the eight and twentie of Nouember. The Queenes Maiesties Iudges neither sit in West∣minster
hall, nor heare anie matters pleaded in these dayes following. Namely, on the Ascension, Saint Iohn Baptist, All Saints, the Puri∣fication of Marie, nor the Sabboth dayes. Note also that the Esche∣quer openeth eight dayes be∣fore any Terme begin, except Trinitie Terme, in which it openeth but foure dayes be∣fore.
Speciall Medita∣tions for all times, and for all per∣sons. _, meditate with thy self, and thinke what god is, name∣ly a diuine spirite, or spirituall bring: and there∣fore will bee worshipped in spirite and . Consider howe that this blessed God, being diuided into a Trini∣tie of persons, the Father the
Sonne, and the holie Ghost, yet all one in substance and essence, hath by his almigh∣tie power created all things both spirituall and temporall, visible and inuisible whatso∣euer. And as he hath created them by his omnipotent power, so doth hee rule and gouerne them by his proui∣dence, according to his good will and pleasure. And there∣fore think that nothing com∣meth to passe by fortune or chance, but by his heauenlie
determination, and appoint∣ment. Consider how he hath created thée after his owne siitude and likenesse, and therefore oughtest thou to be holic, as he is holie. How he hath predestinate and chosen thee before the foundations of the world were layde, to euerlasting saluation in Ie∣sus Christ: how he hath and doth iustifie thee, that is, a∣count thée iust and righteous by a true and liuelie fayth in the blood of his Sonne: howe
he doth call thée to the know∣ledge of his will, and to the state of grace. First by the se∣cret working of his spirite, secondlie, by the preaching of his word: thirdlie, by the sight and vse of all his crea∣tures of infinite varietie. Confider howe he made thée holy, pure and righteous, and howe thou by thy rebellion, pride, infidelitie, and disobe∣dience, madest thy selfe sin∣sull and wicked. Then consi∣der, howe hee sent his owne
sonne Christ Iesus to re∣déeme thée by the shedding of his blood. Who as he is our onelie saniour and redéemer, so is he our onelie mediator and aduocate, and onelie to be called vppon & inuocated, and neither Angel nor saint, martyr nor confessor, patri∣arch nor father, nor any other creature whatsoeuer. Consi∣der with thy selfe, that as he hath fulfilled all things for vs, & reconciled vs to his fa∣ther, so is he now ascended
into the heauens, to prepare a place for vs, who at the great day of accounts shall come againe in the same shape, and with the same bo∣die that he receyued of Ma∣rie, to iudge both the quicke and the dead, and to rewarde euerie man according to his works. Thinke that after the generall iudgement, our bo∣dies being made immortall, and incorruptible, shall bee vnited againe to their proper soules, and for euer inherite
the euerlasting kingdome of heauen, where is such ioy, as no heart can conceiue, no tongue, no not of Angels themselues expresse, nor any penne is able to write. These and the like meditations en∣ded, render most heartie thanks vnto god in the name of Iesus Christ, for all his benefites and blessings in mercie bestowed vppon thee, pray for grace to bee thank∣full, craue pardon for hy vn thankfulnesse, and the mor∣ning
approching, exercise thy selfe as followeth. Precepts and directions for the morning. WHen thou arisest in the morning, lift vp thy handes, thy eyes, thy soule and mind towards hea∣uen, giuing God heartie thanks, as generally for all his graces, and louing kind∣nesse shewed towards thée in Christ: so particularly for the quiet rest and sléepe, which
hee hath giuen to thy bodie that night. Pray for his pro∣tection, and assistance, in the residue of thy life: which done, meditate thus with thy selse. Meditations in the morning. SAy thus to thy selfe. This day which I now enter into, is my last day, nay this moment, my last breath. I haue no fréehold of my life, fee simple of my dayes, no
charter of my yeares, no not for one minute of an houre, or twinckling of an eye. Death, yea infinite deathes daylie waite vpon me, and threaten my destruction: yea my body it self, earieth in finit deaths in it selfe, being indéed the efficient cause of it owne miserie and calamitie. Think also that as shy bodie now re∣sesh out of thy materiall bd, so shal it rise out of the bed of thy graue at the great day of the Lord, and appeare before
the tribunall seat of God, all naked as euer thou wast borne, there to receiue either the incorruptible crowne of euerlasting glorie, or else the iust rewarde of perpetuall confusion. Thinke also, that as thou risest forth of thy bed to be occupied and emploied in the labours and trauailes of this life, so shouldest thou arise out of the bed of sinne, to serue the liuing God, in holines and righteousnes all the dayes of thy life.
Meditations to bee conside∣red of, at the rising of the Sunne. AS now this tem∣porall Sunne in the heauens re∣presenting vnto vs the true Sunne of God Christ Jsus, is now risen, and hath spread his beames vppon the whole face of the earth, so shall the sonne of God indéed, at the time ap∣pointed manifest himselfe
to the whole worlde, in vn∣speakable glorie, to iudge all flesh, and to reward euerie worke vnder the Sunne ac∣cording to the qualitie, and merite of the same. Thinke also what infinite glorie is treasured vp in the kingdom of heauen, for the elect and chosen of God, after this life. For if this Sunne in the ele∣ment (being made but one lie for mans vse, and to giue light to the world for a time) bee so glorious as no mortall
eie without teares can be∣holde the same, how much more glorious shall we think the ioies of heauen to be, pre∣pared for the elect after this life? Thinke also, that the Sunne in the element doth not onelie giue light to the world by his radiations and glistering beames, but also doth quicken, reuiue, fructi∣fie, and cause to growe all naturall thinges vpon the whole face of the earth: so Christ Iesus the sonne of
God, doth not onelie inligh∣ten man by the beames of his grace, and inspiration of his holie spirite, but also doth reuiue and quicken both our bodies, and our soules, being dead in sin, and also maketh vs fruitfull and plentifull in all good workes, to the praise and glorie of his holie name. Thinke also of the immensi∣tie of this visible Sunne, which beeing in appea∣rance but a small creature, yet such is the maiestie and
glorie thereof, that it conuey∣eth his beames vnto euerie corner of the earth: and there∣by gather thou, the immensi∣tie and vnmeasurablenes of the son of God Christ Iesus, who being the verie light and life of the world, sitteth as a most glorious sonne in the middest of his creatures, imparting to euerie one of them certaine sparkes of his glorie, which beeing taken away, they all consume and come to nothing. These me∣ditations
ended, humble thy selfe before God, and pray as followeth, or otherwise as the spirit of God shall thy spirite. A praier for the morning. OH most glorious God and louing Father, who as thou hast by thy mightie power created all things; so hast thou by thy vnsearchable wisdome orde∣red
and disposed them, as may best serue for the benefit and comfort of man. I ren∣der most humble and heartie thankes nto thée for all thy benefites and blessings, both infinite, and inestimable, in merci bestowed vpon mee, and namely for the swéete sléepe, & quiet rest, which thou hast giuen to my bodie this night. And as thou hast pre∣serued me this night from all perils and daungers; so I beséech thée to kéepe my body
and my soule this ate, not onely from committing that which is euill in thy sight, but also from sustaining any euil thorow the enuy of the diuel, the malice of his ministers, the allurements and intise∣ments of the worlde, or the corruptions of the . And for that thou commaun∣ded euerie man to labor and in his vocation and calling, for the maintenance of his estate, I pray thée (father) so to blesse all my la∣bours,
and the workes of my handes, which I shall take in hand in thy blessed and holi name this day, so as they may tend to thy honour and glorie, the reliefe of my ne∣cessities, and the common benefite of all men. In all which my labours, giue mee grace (I beséech thée most mercifull Father) to deale faithfullie, trulie, & vprightly, with all men, and not to increase my wealtth by wicked or vnlawful means.
Grant that I maie spende this daie in such holie exerci∣ses as thou hast commanded in thy blessed word, those things which are euill, and following those thinges which be good. And for that we are as it were besieged, and on euerie side beset, and most stronglie assailed with many and puissant enemies, as the deuill, & his members, which are infinite, on ye one side, the world & the flesh on the other, I beséech thée (good father) to
preserue mee thy seruaunt from all their rage and furie, from al their force & violence. And to this end, let thy holie Angels pitch their tents round about me, conduct me by their ministery, & preserue me by thy mightie power, so shall I prayse thée for euer, in the congregation of thy Saints, thorow Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Precepts at thy going foorth of thy Chamber. WHen thou goest forth of thy cham∣ber salute thy bed∣fellow (if thou hast any) giuing him the time of the day, & in méeting others do the like, (for ciuilitie re∣quireth it.) And when thou commest into the presence of thy parents, not onely salute them, but also fall downe vpon thy knees before them,
and desire them to praie to God to blesse thée. When thou hast so done, wash thy face and thy hands, and kéepe thy bodie cleane and neat, in the doing wherof meditate thus with thy selfe. Meditations in the washing of ones face and hands. AS the filthinesse and pollution of my bo∣die, is washed and made cleane by the element of water; so is my
bodie, and soule purified, and washed from the spottes and blemishes of sinne, by the precious bloud of Iesus Christ. Thinke also, this wa∣shing putteth me in remem∣brance of my baptisme, of my spirituall birth and rege∣neration, whereby I am not onelie borne anew by the operation of the holie Ghost; but also am sealed vp to eter∣nall saluation, thorowe the redemption that is in Christ. These Meditations ended, pray as followeth.
A praier to be said at the wa∣shing of ones face and hands. MOst gratious God, ind louing father, who hast giuen thy onelie begotten son Jesus Christ, to suffer death vpon the Crosse for my re∣demption, graunt I most intirelie beséech , for his sake, that as this my bodie is nowe washed, and made cleane by the element of ma∣teriall water; so my bodie
and soule, may both be puri∣fied and purged from all vn∣cleannesse, and filthinesse of sinne, thorow the efficacie of thy sonne his most precious bloud. These things thus or∣dered, go forth to thy labours in the feare of God, doing all things to his glorie, and the good of thy brethren. Meditations before and at dinner. WHen dinner time ap∣procheth, meditate thus
with thy selfe, as this earthly tabernacle of my bodie hath néed to be relieued and sustai∣ned with common aire and materiall foode; so my sonle hath much more néede to be refreshed, and fedde with the incorruptible food of the word of God: and then as thou dost hunger after the one, so thirst thou much more after the other. This done, draw néere to the table with reuerence, and with heartie affection pray as followeth.
A praier before meate. MErcifull father, who in thy great wisedome and incomprehensible power, hast not only created the foules of the aire, the beasts of the earth, and the fishes of the sea, of infinite varietie, for the benefite and vse of man; but also by thy blessing doest dailie multi∣plie and increase them for the
sustentation of mans bo∣dies, sanctifie, I beseech thee, these thy creatures by the power of thy worde, giue them strength to nourish my bodie, and me grace to vse them to thy glorie, and my owne comfort. And as in mercie thou doest feede my bodie with these earthlie creatures, which are transito∣rie; so vouchsafe to feede my soule with the spirituall foode of thy blessed word, which is euerlasting, and neuer shall
decay, thorow Jesus Christ my onelie Lord and sauiour, and for hs sake. Amen. Directions how a Christian should behaue himselfe at the table. WHen thou comest to the table, shew all obeysance, and curtesy, be hauing thy selfe modestlie, humblie and soberlie, as in the pre∣sence of God. Eate so much as nature requireth, not
how much insaciable appetite desireth. Be spare as well of hande, as tongue. Let thy countenance be amiable and pleasant toward all men. Let all thy communication bee seasoned with salt, as the A∣postle speaketh, that it may giue grace to the hearers, re∣membring that wee must giue accounts at the day of iudgement for euerie idle word. Use not to laugh much, to iest, or scoffe, to floute or mocke, to deride, backbite,
detract anie man behind his backe, but in all things so thy selfe, that thou maist neither dishonour thy God, nor giue either offence, or euill example vnto anie at the table. Dinner being en∣ded, giue God thankes as followeth. A thankes giuing to God after dinner. MOst holy father, Lord of heauen and earth, I giue thée thanks in
the name of Iesus Christ, for all thy benesites and bles∣sings in mercie bestowed vp∣on mee euer since I was borne. And namelie, O Fa ther, I praise thée for feeding my hungry body, as alwaies heretofore, so now presentlie at this time, with earthlie foode, beséeching thée to féede my soule likewise with the celestiall foode of thy holie worde. And I pray thée, good Lord, that as thou hast giuen vnto mee the vse of these
earthlie creatures in great measure; so thou wilt in mer∣cie vouchsafe to giue vnto me the continuall supplie of al my necessities and wants, néedefull either for my soule, or bodie, to the end, and in the end, thorow Iesus Christ our Lord. Meditations after dinner. THinke thus with thy selfe. As the mouth of my bodie whereby I receyue
corporall sustenance, is flesh and bloud; so the mouth of my soule, whereby I receyue the spirituall foode of eternall life, is faith towardes God, hope in his promises, & loue from a pure heart towards ye brefhren for his sake. Thinke also, that as ye Sun is now in his highest ascent & degrée, and therefore of necessitie must néedes decline, and go downward: And as the day also is now at the midst, or full, and therefore must needs
in like maner draw towards his end; so my life being once come to his full ripenesse and maturitie, must of force draw towards his end, which is death, the reward or salary of sinne. These things thus performed, dispose thy selfe to the labors of thy vocation, as before, doing all things to the glorie of him that made thée, and one day will require a straite account of thée for all thy labours and workes done vnder the Sunne.
Directions how to behaue thy selfe before and af∣ter Supper. WHen the daie is ended, and the night approcheth, first praise God, for thy preseruation, and pro∣tection that , beséeching him to take care ouer thee that night. This done ar∣raine thy selfe (as it were) at the barre, and call thy con∣science to accounts, demaun∣ding
of thy selfe, as wel what good thou hast omitted, and hast not done, as the euill which thou hast committed, and shouldest not haue done. And as well repent for the one, as be sorowfull for the o∣ther. This doue, drawe to∣wards the table in reuerent maner, prag GOD to sanctie his catures vnto thée, either in this, or the like forme.
A thankes giuidg to God before Supper. FAther of mercy, and God of all trueth, looke downe I be∣séech thée, from the throne of thy heauenly pal∣lace vpon vs thy humble ser∣uants, albeit most wretched and miserable sinners, sanc∣tifie both our bodies and soules, by the presence of thy holie spirite, and blesse these thy creatures vnto vs, giue
them strength to nourish our bodies, and our bodies their naturall powers and force, euerie member to performe his office and dutie, according as thou hast appointed, & as thou séest to bee best for thy glorie, and the sustaining and repairing of our ruinous and weake natures. And we pray thée good father also, to féede our soules with the celestiall Manna of thy blessed worde, and bring vs once to suppe with thée in the kingdome of
heauen, thorow the precious bloud of Iesus Christ. Then sall to thy meate re∣uerentlie, as before at din∣ner, hauing alwaies a dili∣gent eie, that thou abuse not the good creatures of God, by gluttonie, drunkennesse, gourmandise, or anie other kinde of riot, or excesse. Re∣member that nature is satis∣fied with a little, and what is more then wil suffice nature, is super fluous, and one daie thou shalt be accomptable for
it, to the great iudge of all the earth. Thy bodie being satisfied, forget not to relieue the necessitie of the Saints, according to thy abilitie, that God maie blesse thée, and multiplie thy store. When Supper is ended, giue God thanks, eyther as followeth, or otherwise, as the spirite of God shall illuminate thy heart.
A thankesgiuing to God after Supper. OH Lord our god, most gracious & holie father, we render all praise and thankesgiuing to thy so∣ueraigne maiestie, for all thy benefites and blessings so plentifully bestowed vppon vs. And namelie we thanke thée (holie father) for these thy good creatures, which thou hast at this present in full
measure giuen vnto vs. Oh Lord make vs thankfull for them, & pardon our vnthank∣fulnesse for Iesus Christ his sake. Finally, make vs al thy true, obedient and faithfull seruants, and bring vs to euerlasting life in thy good time, for thy great mercies sake in thy beloued. Amen. Directions of Christian behauiour after supper. THe rest of the time after Supper vntill thou goest to bed,
spend with thy familie, either in singing of Psalmes, and spirituall songs, singing and making melodie to the Lord, in your hearts: or else in conferring, reasoning, dispu∣ting & talking of the word of God, in reading, expounding or interpreting of the same. Then, when time calleth thée to go to bed, call thy whole housholde togither in some conuensent place, make pub∣like confession of your sins to God the Father, craue
pardon and forgiuenesse for Iesus Christs sake, and pray for grace to bee able to resist sinne hereafter, with all meanes, waies, and allure∣ments leading there unto. Which done, repaire to thy chamber, reuoluing with thy selfe these and the like things following. Meditations when thou cō∣mest into thy chamber. WHen thou art come in∣to thy chamber, call to
thy remembrance what euill thou hast committed that day past, either in thought, word, or déed, towards GOD, or towards man, and the good which thou shouldest haue done, and hast not done. I thou hast sne or heard anie good thing in anie man, note it, learne it, and praie for grace to follow it. If againe thou hast séene or heard anie cuill in anie man, note it in thy selfe, and pray for grace to eschue it. This done, knéele
downe by thy bed side con∣fesse thy sinnes to GOD the father, craue pardon for Ie∣sus Christ his sake, and pray to him to protect thée that night, and to defend thée vnder the shadowe of his wings, from all perilles and daungers both bodilie and ghostly. Thy clothes being put off, meditate thus with thy selfe. Oh what a filthie, vncleane, and vgglesome carkasse doe I beare aboute with me, that for verie shame
had néede to be couered with garments? Thinke also from what an excellent state and dignitie (in regard of thy first creation) thou art fallen, by reason of the ilthines of sin. Then thinke, that if thy ap∣parell were giuen thee for verie necessities sake, to couer & hide thy shame with∣all, what reason hast thou to be proude therof? For should a begger bee proude of the cloutes that wrap his sores? Thinke also, that as thou
canst not without shame stand before men, naked and bare, so canst thou not with∣out shame and confusion of face, stand before the maiestie of God, except thou be clothed & muested with the garment of Christs righteousnes and holines. Finallie thinke, that as thou puttest off, and laiest aside thy materialgarments: so shalt thou once, and perad∣uenture before thou ysest againe, put off, and lay away the earthlie mansion of thy
bodie, committing it to mo∣ther earth againe, from whence it first came. When sléepe commeth vppon thée, pray as followeth. A prayer when sleepe com∣meth vpon one. MOst mercifull fa∣ther, with whom there is no diffe∣rence of time, nor varietie of chaunge, séeing thou hast appointed the day for man to trauaile in, and
the night for him to take his naturall rest, I beséech thee that as my bodie hash béene occupied and employed this day in the labors of this life, so it may receiue by thy pro∣tection quiet rest and sleepe this night, that I may be the aber to go forwarde in the exercise of good works, in the rest of my life that I haue to liue, to the praise and glorie of thy blessed name. And in this my sléepe defend me, I beséech thée, from all perilles
and daungers, and from all the force & violence of mine enemies both spirituall and corporall. And as it maie please thée to graunt to my bodie quiet rest and sléepe; so let it bee thy good pleasure to make my soule watchful and vigilant to waite vpon thee, and diligentlie to looke for y• comming of thy deare sonne Iesus Christ vnto iudge ment for my redemption. Kéepe me from al fearefull dreams, and visions, from all phanta∣sticall
apparitions, & diuelish illusions of the wicked ene∣mie, from all carnall pollusi∣ons, & vngodlie suggestions of the wicked spirit. Finallie graunt, that both my bodie and my soule, resting vnder thy diuine protection, may be safe from all enmitie and hostilitie whatsoeuer, and at the last may attaine euerla∣sting life, thorow Iesus Christ my onelie Sauiour and redéemer. This done, dispose thy selfe to rest, com∣mitting
both thy bodie and soule into the hands of God, praying him to be thy watch∣man that night. Then discend thou into the secret closets and priuie chambers of thine heart, search euerie place, and ransacke euerie corner: and if thou findest anie filthinesse or vncleannes therein (as in deed thou shalt, find nothing else) wash it away with the teares of repentance, & make itcleane with the broome of contrition. Then thinke thus
with thy selfe. My bed dooth represent vnto me my graue, wherein I must once sléepe, and the clothes, the earth, where with all I shall shortlie be couered in my sepulchre or graue. And as these flees and gnats do bite and gnaw my skinne, so shall the wormes, cate and consume the frame of my bodie, in the dust of the earth, when the Lord doth please. When the morning beginneth to dawn and the daystarre to appeare,
thinke thus. As nowe the morning commeth on, and the daie starre beginneth to appeare, so shall Christ Iesus the true morning star, shewe himselfe at the time appoin∣ted of his father, to iudge both the quicke and the dead. And when thou hearest the crowing of the cocke, the sounding of belles, or anie other noise whatsoeuer, think alwaies, that thou hearest the trumpe of the Archangell sound, saying, arise you dead,
and come vnto iudgement. When thou awakest out of sléepe, praie to this effect as followeth. A prayer when one awakes out of sleepe. MErcifull father, grant that as thou hast now awaked my earthlie bodie out of this materiall sléepe, so thou wilt also vouch∣safe to raise me vp from the sleepe of sinne, and in the generall resurrection of all
flesh, to eternall life, thorowe Iesus Christ my onelie Sa∣uiour and redéemer. Meditations when one awa∣keth out of sleepe. CAll to remem∣brance the vn∣speakeable , glory and beati∣tude, the ineffable blessednes, comfort and solace, which all the chosen of God haue, and shall haue for euer after this life, in the kingdome of hea∣uen.
Thinke also of the won∣derfull beautie that our bo∣dies shall haue and at the day of iudgement, being made like to the glorious bodie of Christ Iesus, and shining for euer as the Sun, in the kingdome of heauen. A prayer to be said at the breake of the day. OH Lorde thou great and euer∣lasting light, from whome all
other lights whatsoeuer haue their being, & in comparison of whom, they are all but grosse and palpable darknes, illuminate my heart, and inlighten my vnderstanding with the perfect knowledge of thy blessed will. And grant that I knowing it, maie faithfullie obcie thee in the same all the daies of my life, that at the last I may attaine to euerlasting rest both of body and soule, thorow Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Meditations at the appea∣ring of the day. THinke with thy selfe, that as thy earthlie bodie is guided and go∣uerned by thy bodilie eies; so, and much more, is thy soule and mind guided, ruled and gouerned by the direction and inspiration of Gods holie spirit. And therefore howe much more precious the eie of the soule is, then the eie of
the eie of the bodie; so much more is the one to be sought for, then the other. Think that brute beasts haue their bodi∣lie eies, but man hath not onelie corporall eies, but spirituall also, whereby hee strange thinges, conceiueth infinite things, vnderstandeth woonderfull things, beléeueth all things, and hopeth all things. This done pray as followeth.
A praier when one ariseth forth of his bed. I Confesse most mer∣ciful father, our first parents by sinne threw themselues, and all their poseritie into a most deadly lethargie, and sléepe of sinne, whome thou in great mercie vouchedstsafe to re∣store againe, and renue by the death of thy sonne. Grant holie father, that as thou hast now raysed my bodie from
all sleepe; so thou wilt also raise both my bodie and , from the deadlie sléepe of sinne; and at the last from the dust of the earth, to dwell with thée for euer, in thy euerlasting kingdome, tho∣row Jesus Christ. Meditations when one ari∣seth out of his bed. THinke that as thou now arisest forth of thy bed, so shouldst thou rise
from sinne, the li∣uing God in holinesse and righteousnesse all the of thy life. Thinke also, that thy bodie shall rise againe in the end of the world, either to euerlasting life (if thou doo well) or to euerlasting death (if thou do euill.) Then put on thy apparell, in the dooing whereof pray thus.
A praier to be said at the put∣ting on of a mans clothes. BLessed father, sée∣ing my naturall corruption and silthines is such, and so great, that of necessity it must be couered with these earthly garments, least o∣ my nakednesse and shame should appeare to the world, clothe me, I beséech thée, with the garments of Christs righteousnesse and
holines, and impute not vnto me my manifold sinnes and offences, least I receiue not shame onlie, but euerlasting confusion both of bodie and soule, as a iust reward and guerdon for my deserts. Christian directions for the morning. WHen thou hast attired thy ∣cently & comely, not nor proudlie, goe forth of thy
chamber, and if thou beest a maister of a houshold, call thy familie togither, confesse your sinnes, craue pardon for Iesus Christ his sake, pray for grace to resist sinne hereafter, prayse God for all his benefites, and blessings in mercie bestowed vppon you, pray for continuance of them. Thanke him for your protection that night, besée ching him to protect you that∣day, and to blesse all your works andlabours. And fi∣nally,
desire him to kéepe and defend you that day, and cuer from all perils and dangers, both bodilie & ghostlie what∣soeuer, and to bring you to euerlasting life at the time appointed, thorow the pre∣cious bloud of Iesus Christ. This done, go forth to thy labours in the feare of God, doing all things with single eie, and good conscience, to the praise of him that made thée, being assured that as in mer∣cie he will not leaue the good
good worke that we do vnre∣warded: so in iustice he will not leaue the least euill that we doe commit, either in thought, word, or déed, vnpu∣nished, except we repent. To God therefore our father, to Christ Iesus our Sauiour and redeemer, and to God the holie Ghost our comforter, and sanctifier, thrée persons and one true and euerlasting God, be all honour, glorie, praise, dominion & thanksgi∣uing for euer more. Amen.
A short Trea∣tise of praiers and supplications, Comprising a briefe summe of all such things as we stande in neede of in this life. By the same author, P. S. Gent.
A praier for the morning. I Giue thée thanks most merciful fa∣ther, for all thy tender mercies, and louing kindnes shewed towards me in Christ Jesus euer since I was borne, and namelie for the quiet rest and sléepe which thou hast giuen to my bodie this night, and for preseruing of me from
infinite perils and dangers where unto poore man is sub∣iet in this life. And I beséech thée holie father, to extend thy louing fauour towardes mée this day: defend me from all mine enimies both bodilie and ghostlie, blesse all the workes of my hands: grant good issue and good successe vnto mee, in all my godlie actions, enterprises and af∣faires. And aboue all things giue me a willing heart, and a readie mind to serue thée, in
true holinesse and righteous∣nesse all the daies of my life: that I glorifying thée here vpon earth, may be glorified of thée for euer in heauen, thorow Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. A praier for the Eue∣ning. MOST gracious God, I prayse thee thorow: Je∣sus Christ, for de∣fending of me this day from
all dangers of bodie & soule, and for all thy other benefites which thou hast plentifullie bestowed vppon me. And I pray thée, good father, to par∣don and forgiue me all my sinnes and wickednes wherin I haue offended thy diuine maiestie, either this day, or anie day of my life here to∣fore, euen to this present houre. And receiue mee this night into thy tuition and protection, that my enimies may haue no power ouer
me, nor in anie sort preuaile against me: but that my bo∣die by thy gracious goodnes, enioying quiet sleepe, my mind, my soule & spirite maie continually waite vpon thée, and thorow faith behold thy blessed maiestie with an as∣sured confidence, and an in∣fallible hope, after this fraile and transitorie life ended, to possesse that immortall and euerlasting glorie wherein thou eternallie reignest, to whome bee all honour and
glorie for euermore. A generall confession os our sinnes to God thesather ne∣cessarie to be said at all times. OH eternall God, father of our lord Iesus Christ, without begin∣ning or ending, & of whom all things haue their being, I a poore wretched and mise able sinner, lamenting my sinnes from the bottome of
my heart, prostrate my selfe before the footestoole of thy blessed maiestie, acknowled∣ging and confessing, that I am a most grieuous sinner, begot, conceyued, and borne in sinne, and liuing in all cor∣ruption and iniquitie, so that in me there is no goodnesse: yea, my whole nature is so corrpt, that my verie righ∣teousnesse it selfe is nothing but sin in thy sight: wherefore deare father, setting a part al my own pretensed merits
as insufficient to purchase thy fauor, I come vnto thée in the name of thy beloued son Iesus Christ (who is made vnto vs, holinesse, righteous∣nesse, santification, and re∣demption) most humblie be∣seeching thee for his precious bloud shedding, and for his bitter death and passion, to haue mercy vpon me, pardon and forgiue me all my sinnes and wickednes, both original & actuall, of thoughts, words, workes and déedes, of pre∣sumption,
of frailtie, of ig∣norance, and of knowledge, or how soeuer els committed against thy souereigne ma∣iestie, euer since I was born. Good father blot them out of thy remembrance, hide them in the bloudie wundes of thy sonne, wash them away in the streames of his bloud. Accept his holinesse for my holinesse, his righteousnesse for my righteousnesse, and his precious bloud as a full recampence, satisfaction and
propitiation for al my sinnes. And as I craue pardon for al my sinnes past; so I beséech thee, for thy great mercies sake in Iesus Christ, giue me grace, power and strength, to resist sinne hereafter, with al occasions, meanes, wayes, and allurements leading therevnto. And because (oh Lord) without faith nothing can please thée, giue me, I beséech thée, a true, perfect and a iustifying faith, without the which no man shall sée thy
blessed face. Strengthen this faith in mee for euer to the end, & in the end, grāt me thy holie spirit trulie to repent, and most heartilie to sorrow for the multitude and hey∣nousnesse of my transgressi∣ons. Worke in me also (good father) an inwarde hatred, lothing, and detestation vnto sume, that I walking before thée with vprightnes of hart, may after the dissolution of this my earthlie tabernacle, inherit eternall glorie in the
heauens, thorow the merits of thy sonne Christ Iesus, Amen. A confession of our sinnes to Christ Iesus our sauiour, with desireof forgiuenes. OH swéete Iesus, oh most glorious Iesus, sonne of the eternall God, whorainest into this world to take away the heauie bur∣then of them that were la∣den, to seeke them that were
lost, and to call sinners to repentance, to giue life to the faithfull, and to be a me∣diatour betweene God and man. I a poore and miserable sinner, lamenting my sinne from the bottom of my hart, most entirelie beséech thée for thy infinite mercies sake, ac∣cording to thy accustomed woont, to pardon and forgiue me all mine offences, sinnes and wickednesse, of what na' ture or kind, or how manie or grieuous soeuer they be, and
to be my mediatour and ad∣uocate to God thy father, to appease his wrath, to satisfie his iustice, and to reconcile me into his fauour againe. Regenerate, renue, and sanctfie my heart (swéete Ie∣sus) with thy holie spirite, the spirit of truth, that I maie procéed and go forward from vertue to vertue, from grace to grace, from holinesse to holinesse, vntil I ariue in the kingdome of heauen, the most quiet and happie hauen
and port of all peace, thorow the merits of thy bloud. A fruitfull praier to God the holie Ghost. OH most glorious spirite of the most high god, who being true & euerlasting God, with God the father, and God the sonne, proceedest from them both, who also by thy heauenly inspiration and breathing, dost quicken them that before were dead in s,
comfortest them that were comfortles, inlightnest them that were ignorant, bringest tp the way of truth all such as haue erred and are decey, ued, and plentifullie enrichest them with vnspeakable gra∣ces, that pray vnto thée in the name & mediation of Iesus Christ. Purifie my hart with the fire of thy loue, ortifie in mee whatsoeuer is not thine, garnish my mind with all heauenlie and spirituall treasures, that I may bée a
most beautiful temple for thy blessed maiestie to dwell in, to lead me into all truth, oh thou euerlasting spirite o euerlasting truth, and suffer me not to bee caried about with euerie blast of strange doctrine, but alwaies to re∣maine and abide in that doc∣trine, whereof thou onelie art the authour. Inarme my soule against the poysoued suggestions, & craftie temp∣tations of the denill, against the vaine pleasures and de∣ceiuable
delights of this life, and against the filhie lusts of this my cankred flesh, that I being indued and repleni∣shed with thy holie breath, may doe that which is plea∣sant and acceptable vnto thée, to whom bee all honour, glorie, and thankesgiuing for euer, Amen. A Praier for the Queenes Maiestie. WE render all prayse and thanks to thée, oh
king of all kings, and gouer∣nour of all things, for that in the multitude of thy mercies thou hast vouchedsafe to place ouer vs thy little flock, so godly & vertuous a guide, so gracious & wise a princes, as the worlde neuer had her péere. And we humblie pray thée, holie father, with thy fa∣uourable countenance to be∣holde the same thy seruant, our souereigne Ladie and go∣uernesse. And so sanctifie her heart with the grace of thy
holie spirte, that shee maie bend all her studie and inde∣nour to yt setting forth of thy glorie, yt maintenance of thy holie religion, the aduaunce∣ment of true vertue and god∣lines, the supplanting of vice and commoditie of this her maiesties common wheae vnder thee: kindle in her a fer∣uent zeale of thy glory and a vehement desire to establish whatsoeuer is defectiue or wāteth in this thy Church & vineyard in England, for the
true & sincere discipline & go∣uernment of thy church & cō∣mon welth. Saue and defend her from al forreigne power, & authoritie, from all traitte∣rous conspiracies, plots and practises, either of papists, A∣theists, or any other sectaries whatsoener. Giue her godlie, wise, & religious counsailers, such as may respect onlie thy glorie, that her maiestie ru∣ling acording to thy wil, they counselling according to the inspiration of thy holy spirit,
and we her subiects faithfully obeying, may altogether in the end receiue the incorrup∣tible crowne of eternall glo∣rie in the heauenlie Hierusa∣lem, thorow Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. A praier to be said of all such as be maiestrates and rulers in the common wealth. FOrasmuch as it hath pleased théeoh, eternall God, ruler of all kinges and
kingdoms, to constitute and appoint me (though altogi∣ther vnworthie) to be a ruler and gouernour of thy people vnder my soueraigne, I be séech thee, giue me grace, so to excute my office, and minister iustice in the com∣mon wealth, that I maie please thée in all things iniu∣rie no man, oppresse no man, damnifie no man, neither in bodie, nor in goods, but by thy gracious working, may iudge iustly, neither fauoring
the rich nor mightie for desire of gifts, nor yet dispising the poore for want of rewardes, that I seeking thy glorie, the aduauncement of thy holie word, and Gospell, and the common benefite of all men, may be found acceptable vn∣to thee in thy beloued, and may heare that swéete har∣uest sung, well good seruant, thou hast béene faithfull in small thinges of this life, (which are but vanities and trifles to the things in the life
to come) enter into the ioy of the Lord. Oh Lord let it be so for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. A praier for the increase of faith. O Almightie God, and louing Fa∣ther in Iesus Christ, by whose holie worde wee are taught, that without faith it is vn∣possible to please thée, vouch∣safe therefore most merciull
Lord God) to plant in my heart and mind, a true perfect and a iustifying faith, that I may certenlie knowe thee, the onelie true God, and him whome thou hast sent Iesus Christ, with the holie spirite our comforter, sanctifier, regenerator, instructer, and teacher. Increase this fayth in me (O Lord) daylie more and more, that it may growe vp to full perfection, accom∣panied with good workes, without the which no man
shall sée thy glorie. Banish fare from me, sweet father, all infidelitie & incredulitie, all mistrust, and distrust, all dobting and wauering, in stead whereof, plant in my heart a constant hope, with a carefull kéeping of all thy commaundements, that I doing that which is good and acceptable before thee, may be glorified of thée in the end, in the kingdome of heauen, thorow Iesus Christ our Lord.
A praier against the deuill, the world and the flesh. MOst mercifull fa∣ther, I a poore wretched and mi∣serable sinner, humblie beséech thée, to send me frō thy holy heuens, both power and strength to resist and withstand al the assaults, firie darts, and subtle temp∣tations of the deuill, who like a roring Lion, goeth about séeking to deuoure me. Giue
me also thy holy spirit, with grace and strength to resist all the raging lusts, and filthy concupiscenses of the flesh, with all the vanities of this wicked world, that being by thy onelie helpe acquitted and fréed, srom the force and violence of these & all other my mortall enimies, may serue thée in holinesse and righteousnesse all the daies of my lif, thorow Christ our Lord.
A praier for Gods direction in all things which we take in hand. OH Lorde my God, I doe acknowledge and fréelie confesse my owne great blindnesse, and ignorance, and the wilfull obstinacie of my corrupt na∣ture, which séeketh rather to fulfill the tasies & deuises of my owne braine, then the motions of thy holie spirite, and rather to vse humaine
help, then to craue thy diuine ayde. Wherfore, holie father, vouch safe I beséech thée, to establish in my heart, godlie feare, with most sincere obe∣dience to thy holie ordināces, statutes and lawes. And for that without thy blessing no∣thing can prosper, or come to good effect, blesse al the works of my hands, all my labours, actions and affaires, which I shall take in hand in thy holy name, according to thy will, for the necessaire mainte∣nance
of my poore estate. Grant me good issue, and good successe in them for the glorie of thy holie ńame, that I ha∣uing plentie of al good things in this life, may bee rich and plentifull in all good workes, to the glorie of thy holie name, and profite of my bre∣thren, through Jesus Christ our Lord. A praier for a competent and a necessarie liuing. OH Lord our God, most gracious & holie father,
whose loue towards man in Christ Jesus, is infinite and vnspeakable, & whose tender care ouer him is such, that thou hast promised that who soeuer beléeueth in thée, de∣pendeth vppon thy prouf∣dence, and séeketh his reliefe at thy blessed handes, shall neuer want anie good thing, ether necessarie for soule or bodie. Wherefore most gra∣cious father, I thy elie creature, of my selfe poore, yea pouertie and nakednesse
it selfe, most intirelie beseech thée, for Jesus Christ his sake, that thou wilt giue vnto me a competent, and a necessary liuing, as meate, drinke and cloth, with all other thinges néedfull for my bodie, that pinching pouertie oppresse me not, nor that I bee not drawen to attempt wicked and vnlawfull meanes for the maintenance of my life. To this ende therefore (good father) blesse my store, and replenish my basket with thy
blessings, that I may be able thorow thy beneficiall libe∣ralitie, to liue out of debt and danger of all men, and to occupie my selfe in the exer∣cise & practise of good works, to the reliefe of them that haue néede, and the setting forth of thy honour & glorie; thorow Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A praier for grace that wee may vse our wealth to the glorie of God. ALmightie & most mercifull father, the onelie giuer of al good things, the onelie stay and comfort of all mankind, giue mee grace thy humble seruant, that as thou hast blessed my store, & increased my wealth excéedinglie, farre beyonde either my deserts or expecta∣tion,
insomuch as I haue not onelie sufficient to supplie mine owne want, but also inough to relieue others that haue need: so I beséech thée to remooue farre from me all couerous desires of lucre and gaine, and giue me a willing mind, and readie desire to distribute to the necessitie of thy saints, according to the abundance of my wealth, to féed the hungrie, to cloth the naked, to harbour she har∣bourlesse, to visite the sicke
and needie, and to do all other good works which thou requi∣rest of me in this life, that I liue not to my selfe, and for my selfe onelie, but to the helpe and reliefe of all that haue néed of my furtherance in this life, that treasuring vp for my selfe a good foun∣dacion in the kingdome of heauen, I may inherite eter∣nall life thorow Jesus Christ my onelie Lord and sauiour, Amen.
A praier to be said of women with childe. ALmightie & most mercifull Father, creator of heauen and earth, who in the begining for the sinne of our first parents, diddest laie a most heauie iudgement vp∣on the sinfull daughters of disobedient Eue, namelie, that in sorrow & great paines wee shoulde bring forth our fruit. And for that our nature
is weake, and our sex fraile, & altogither vnable to beare the pangs, the throbbes and throwes, which accompanie vs poore women in these our trauailes, I most humblie beséech thee, (holie Father) for Iesus Christ his sake, that thou wilt extend to me, and to all others in the like case, thy mercie and louing fauor, to mgate the paines ther∣of, that we maie be able to sustaine and to indurs the pangs and paines of our tra∣uailes
at the appointed time, that the fruite of my wombe where with I am now laden, maie graciousie ve deliue∣red from my weake and frail bodie, to thy praise and glorie and my comfort. Send vs (good sather) both easie, and spéedie deliuerance, that wèe maie become ioiful mothers, of happie children. Graunt both to me, and to all others, who by thy blessing haue con∣ceiued with childe, strength to bring foorth that which thy
almightie hand hath so won∣derfullie wrought in vs. Bee present with vs (good Lord) in all our trauailes, helpe vs, and most graciously deliuer vs. Let thy mightie power and outstretched arme, be no less manifested in the deliue∣rie, then it was, and is in the forming, and framing of thy creature in our wombs: and after our deliuerie vouchsafe (holie father) to restore vs to our former strength, and abi∣litie of bodie againe, that we
maie sing vnto thée the Psalmes of praise & thankes∣giuing all the daies of lour liues, thorow Iesus Christ our Lord. A praier for godly wise∣dome. HOlie father, who art wisedome it selfe, light it self, and vnderstan∣ding it selfe, vouchsafe to giue vnto me thy selie crea∣ture, that excellent gift of
wisedome, discretion and vn∣derstanding, replenish my heart with all heauenlie pru∣dence, renue a right spirite within me, and write thy holy lawes in the tables of my hart, by the finger of thy holie spirit, that I walke not in the waies of errour, neither yet be caried awaie with euerie blast of vain doctrine. Swéet father, giue me this blessed gift of heauenlie wisedome, that I may perfectlie knowe and vnderstande what thy
holie will and pleasure is, in all things: and grant that I knowing it, may faithfully obey it, and walke in the true obseruation thereof all the daies of my life, that hauing the lampe of loue, and the candle of true faith continu∣allie burning, in the secrete closets of my heart, I maie at the last enter with thine elect into the kingdome of heauen, purchased with the blood of thy sonne to all faith∣full beléeuers. To thée there∣fore
witth thy deare sonne Iesus Christ, and the holie spirit, be all honour and glo∣rie for euer. Amen. A praier against all kind of enemies: OH Lord such is the malice of Sathan that he not onelie séeketh my confu∣sion himselfe, but also raiseth vp his members, wicked men, in number manie, in power strong and mightie to practise my destruction: er∣fore
(holie father) receiue me into thy protection, and safe∣gard: driue backe and con∣found them all that rise vp against mee: fight for me a∣gainst them that fight a∣gainst me. Strike a terrour into their harts (oh lord) that they may not dare to lift vp a hand against me. Turn their wicked imaginations & deui∣ses from mee, either to their amendment, or to their owne confusion. Let all the woordes whiche they
vtter to my discredite, re∣dound to their owne shame. Let thy holie angels pitch their tents about me, and de∣fende mee from the rage and furie of all my enimies, that they maie, not onelie not preuaile against me, but also maie flie before my face by the mightie power of thine owne right arme. Good Fa∣ther, looke vpon them, either in mercie to conuert them, and to turne their hearts, or else in iustice to confound
them, that thy neuer haue power to hurt me thy seruāt, either in body, goods or name, so hall I praise thée for euer, thorow Iesus Christ my one∣lie Lord and sauiour. Amen. A praier when one taketh a iourney in hand. O Lord God, who not onlie guidest and directest all those that walke and trauaile in this worlde, but also defendest them from
infinite perils and dangers in the same: vouchsafe to holde thy holie hands of pro∣tection ouer me, and defende me from all hostilitie and en∣mitie whatsoeuer in this my intended iourney, which by thy diuine assistance I pur∣pose to take in hand at this time. And because (O Lord) my enimies are manie and stong in this world, which lie in waite for me, and séeke my destruction, I most hum∣blie beséeth thée for Iesus
Christ his sake, to command thy holie. Angels to conduct me, by their ministerie, and to preserue me by thy mighty power, let them goe before me, and deliuer me, as they did why seruant Tobias tra∣uailing into a strange coun∣trie. Prosper me also in this my iournie (good father) that my businesse maie haue good successe, and that I maie by thy blessed assistance returue home again safe & sound, both in bodie and soule, to glorie
thée the onelie true God, to whom with thy deare sonne Iesus Christ, and the holie comforter, be all honour, and glorie for euermore. A thanksgiuing to God after ones returne home from his iourney. MOst holie father, I praise thée in thy sonne Iesus Christ, for that it hath pleased thée of thy singu∣lar grace and goodnesse, to
giue me prosperous, & happie returne home againe from this my iournie: and for pre∣seruing of me from all perils and dangers in the same, as namelie from drowning by water, from stroke of thun∣der, and blasts of lightning, from the vnsaciable iawes of cruell beasts, and from the bloodie hands of théeues and robbers, and infinite the like dangers, whereto wes ise∣rable men are subiect in this life. I praise thée also (good
Lord) not onelie for preser∣uing of me in this my iour∣nie, but also for prospering my businesse, and graunting good issue, and good successe vnto me in all things I haue taken in hand. O Lord I acknowledge it to bee thy onelie blessing, & to procéede onlie from thy meere mercie and not from anie deserts of mine, to thée therefore, with thy son Iesus Christ, and the holie ghost, be all praise and glorie for euer.
A praier for euerie subiect of a common wealth. O Lord God, wee ac∣knowledge & consesse, that as in thy vn∣searchable wisedome, thou hast appointed some to rule and gouerne, that thy glorie maie bee increased, and the common societie of men maintained; so hast thou or∣dained also other some to obey, and to be subiect. And for that it hath séemed good
to thy blessed maiestie, to appoint me in the number of subiects, I praie thée (good Lord) giue mee a faithfull heart, and an obedient mind to my superiours, rulers and gouernours. Keepe me farre from all disobedience, rebel∣lions, treasons, conspiracies, and practises against them, knowing that who so resisteth the powers, resisteth thy holie ordinaunce (for there is no power but of thée) and purchaseth to himselfe eter∣nall
damnation, as thy holie worde beareth recorde. Make mee (O Lorde) faithfllie to obey them, and trulie to ho∣nour them, according to thy blessed worde and ordinance, in all things not derogating from thy honour, that they iustlie ruling, and I dutifully obeying, maie all in the end receyue the crowne of euer∣lasting glorie, purchased for vs by the bloud of Jesus Christ: to whom be all honor & glorie, both now & for euer.
A praier to be said of those that be vnmaried. OH Lord our god, in as much as thou hast com∣maunded in thy blessed worde the worde of trúeth, that we abstaining from all whordome and for∣nication, and vncleannesse, should kéepe our vessels in holines, and not in the filthie lusts of the flesh as doe the heathen, who know not thée.
I beseechthee therfore to giue mee grace to performe this thy most holy cōmādement, and grant that I neuer pul∣lute nor defile my bodie with whordome, fornication, nor anie other vncleannes. And because, O Lord, chastitie of the bodie is nothing, withóut the continencie of the minde, bridle therfore, I beséech thée, al the motions and affections of my hart, that I banishing all wicked thoughts, and vn∣cleane imaginations out of
my mind, may liue in al holie innocencie, puritie, and inte∣gritie, both of bodie & soule, vnto my liues end, thorowe the efficacy, power, & strength of the precious bloud of Ae∣sus Christ. Amen. A praier to be said of those that are maried. HOlie father, we are taught by thy sacred worde, the breath of thy own mouth, that after thou hadst
created all things, the last of all other thou createdst man, & woman of a rib of his side, giuing her vnto him in holie wedke, adding vnto them thy blessing, saying: increase and multiplie, and replenish the earth: I giue thée most humble and heartie thanks, for that it hath pleased thee, to call me to the honorable state of mariage. And I most har∣tilie beséeth thée, that we may liue togither in thy true faith feare, and loue all the daies of
our liues. Giue vs grace the one to loue the other, and both of vs to loue thee, and our bre∣thren for thy sake. Keepe vs (good Lord) farre from all wicked ielosie, hatred, malice and contention one with the other. And as our bodies are incorporate togither, and be∣come, as it were, but one bo∣die, so vouchsafe, holie father, that as thy owne turtle doues, we may liue togither in chastitie and contenencie both of bodies and mindes,
without derauding one other. And if it please thee to blesse vs with children, giue vs grace to bring them vp in such holy exercises discipline and learning, as thou requi∣rest of vs in this life. Grant that we may labour and tra∣uaile either of vs in our vo∣cation, that by thy blessing, we may haue alwaies suffi∣cient to maintain onr estates withal, in thy holie feare, that wee be not chargeable to o∣thers, but liuing forth of debt
and daunger of all men, maie be rich and plentifull in all good works, to the praise & glorie of thy blessed name, thorow Iesus Christ our lord, to whom be praise and glorie for euermore. Amen. A praier to be said of those that be maisters of housholds. THou hast commaun∣ded (oh gracious lord God) by thy blessed Apostle, that maisters should
intreate their seruants gent∣lie, and courteouslie, putting away all bitternesse, and threatning, doing vnto them all equitie and iustice, know∣ing that thou art our commā maister in heauen: graunt me grace theerfor, good lord) so to order my seruants, as I neuer attempt nor enterprise anie vnrighteous thing a∣gainst them, but so to execute my authoritie ouer them, as I may alwaies remember that thou art the Lorde and
maister of vs all, and respec∣test no mans person. Make me, O Lord, to be the same vnto them, that a good pastor is to his flocke, to teach them by wordes thy holie lawes, and by example of life, true righteousnesse and holinesse in conuersation, that they & I togither in thy good time, may all inherit euerlasting life, by Christ our Lorde. Amen.
A praier to be said of seruants. O Lord our God, sééing thou hast ordained sundry degrées & states of men in this life, & amongst them all hast appointed me to bee a seruant, giue mee grace I beseech thee, to serue in my vocation faithfullie, and to obey willinglie in all things, not repugnant to thy blessed will, not with ete ser∣uice
as studying to please men, but with all sinceritie, and singlenesse of heart, as séeking to glorifie thée, being thorowlie perswaded that in seruing them, I serue thée, and of thee shall receiue my reward. Giue me grace to demeanour my selfe faith∣fullis, iustlie, and truelie to∣wards all men, in all things, and not to inrich my selfe by picking, stealing, imbeza∣ling, purloyning or conuey∣ing anie thing from anie
man by any sinister practise whatsoeuer but so to behaue my self towards all men, as there may be no fault found in me, that thy name maybe glorified, & my saluation in Christ Iesus sealed vp vnto me. Graunt this O Lord for thy mercies sake. Amen. A praier to obtaine the grace and fauour of God. I Confesse and acknowledge (O Lord my God) that al∣beit
a man doe around with all transitorie pleasures, and vaine delights that this world can afford, yet if hee want thy grace and fauour, all is vain vanitie, and vexa∣tion of minde, & he remaineth neuerthelesse the bondslaue and vassall of Sathan: yea all his pleasure is but a swéet poyson, and all his riches no∣thing but beggerie it selfe. Powre downe therfore (most merciful father) thy heauenly grace into our hearts, and
extend thy gracious fauour and loue towardes vs, that we may bee thorowlie per∣swaded by the suggestion of thy holie spirite, of the singu∣ler good will, and fatherlie care which thou hast ouer vs. Make vs, O Lord, to loue thée aboue all things, and our brethren for thy sake. Banish far from vs all hatred, ran∣cour and malice, and ingraffe in our heartes godlie feare and reuerence to thy holie name. Kéepe vs from all car∣nall
securitie, and worldlie delights, and chaine vs vnto thée by the linkes of thy loue. Finallie, graunt that wee abandoning the world, with all deceytfull pleasures, and vaine detectations of lesh and blood, maie in thy good time come to those euerla∣sting ioies, which thou hast promised to them that loue thée, thorow Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A praier to God for a quiet conscience. THe wicked and vngodly (O lord) are like vnto a tempestuous, ra∣ging and to ming sea, which is neuer calme, neuer silent, nor neuer at rest, but conti∣nuallie boiling and foming: wheras on the contrarie side, such (good Lord) as loue thée, beléeue in thée, & obediently walke before thee, haue all
ioie, all peace, and all tran∣quillitie of conscience, which is the greatest iewell, and the incomparablest treasure in the world. Giue me therefore (holie father) a ioyfull mind, a quiet and merrie conscience, with a full and resolute per∣swasion of the accomplish∣ment and performance of all thy gracious promises made vnto me in Christ Iesus, in thy good time. Graunt (good Lord) that I may so behaue my selfe in this peruerse and
crooked world, that I maie haue the testimonie of a good conscience, in al my actions, that I being frée from the ac∣cusations of Sathan, my ancient and deadlie enimie, from the vaine allurements of the world, from the filthie incitations of the flesh, and from the heauie curse and malediction of the law, may be made thy elected childe in Christ Iesus, and may final lie inherite euerlasting life, thorow the merits and death
of thy sonne, who died for my sinnes, and rose againe for my iustification, to whom be all glorie, praise and thankes∣giuing for euer. A praier for a true and liuely faith. FOr as much (most mercifull father) as whithout faith no∣thing can please thée, séeme it neuer so holie good, commendable, or beau∣full to the eie of the world, I
beséech thée, to breath & instill into my heart, soule & mind, by the inspiration of thy blessed spirite. this most ex∣cellent gift of faith, working by charitie. O Lord giue me no weake, wauering, cold or faint faith, such as ye very de∣uils themselues haue, who be∣léeue & tremble (as thy blessed Apostle berreth record) but giue vnto me a true, perfect, liuelie and iustifying faith, such a faith (O Lord) as may beléeue thée to bee the onelie
true God, and him whome thou hast sent Iesus Christ, with the holiespirit our com∣forter, and teacher, yea such a faith as maie bring forth good works in full measure, to the glorie of thy most blessed name, to whome be rendered all praise and thankes for euer. Amen. A praier for loue and charitie. HOlie father, we are taught by thy blessed
word, that loue and charitie, from a pure heart, a good conscience, & faith vnfained, are the cognizances and bad∣ges whereby thy children are discerned, and knowen from the prophane people of the world, I beséech thée therfore, holie and blessed father, giue me this Christian badge of loue and charitie, that I may loue thée, my Lord God with all my heart, soule and mind, my neighbour as my selfe, and all thy creatures for thy
sake, that at the great audite when all flesh shall appeare before thy tribunall seate, I maie be knowen & discerned by this thy cognizance and badge, from the wicked and reprobate, and being num∣bred amongst thy saints and holie ones, maie be receyued into the kingdom of heauen, there to rest with thée for euer, through Iesus Christ our onelie Sauiour and re∣déemer.
A praier against pride, and for humilitie. WE are taght by thy blessed worde (most holie Fa∣ther that euerie good gift, and euerie perfect gift, commeth from thée the father of light, and that we haue nothing which we haue not receyued, remoue farre from me therefore (good lord) all pride, arrogancie, and hautinesse of minde, and in∣graffe
in my heart true hu∣militie, that I may not onlie acknowledge thée to be the authour of all good thinges, yea, goodnesse it selfe, but also may rest thankfull vnto thée for them, & may so vse them, as may be to the glorie of thy grèat & magnificent name, and ye profite of my brethren. Withdraw from me all loue of this world, and giue mee grace that I may reioise in nothing but in thée alone, knowing that all things in
this life are nothing but va∣nitie and vexation of minde, and that to loue and beleeue in thée, is the onelie true life and felicitie of soule & bodie. To thée therefore with thy deare sonne Iesus Christ, and the holie spirite, be all prayse and thankesgiuing for euer. Amen. A praier for a good name. THou hast commaunded (good Lord) in thy sacred
word, that those that professe thy name, should be holie as thou art holie, and should so frame their liues, as ye very e∣nimies of thy truth may haue no sust cause to speake euil of them, giue me grace therfore (oh blessed father) so to order my life, after the rule of thy word, as I may giue no man iust occasion to speake euill of me. Graunt, that whereas it hath pleased thée in mercie to bestow vpon me the name of a Christian, the most ex∣cellentest
name or title in the world, so I may in my life and conuersation bring forth the fruits of true Christiani∣tie, that thy holie name bee not blasphemed, nor euill spo∣ken of amongst the heathen, which know not thee. Make me able and willing (oh my good God) to doe thy will, and to stoppe the mouthes of all them that lyinglie, falselie and deceitfullie go about to take my good name from me. Finallie, bring me to
euerlasting life in thy ap∣pointed time, thorow the me∣rits of thy son Iesus Christ, to whom be praise for euer. A praier for patience in sicknesse. THy holie Apostle (O Lorde) dooth teach vs, that thou doost chastice eue∣rie childe whom thou recey∣uest, and that him whom thou chastenest thou louest, and further, that if we be not vn∣der
hastisement, we are ba∣stards and not children: there∣fore most holie father, in as much as thou hast at this pre∣sent laide vpon me thy heauy rod of correction, and chastise∣ment, as a iust punishment for my sins, I most humblie beséech thée, good father, for Iesus Christs sake, to giue me the excellent gift of pa∣cience, and contentation of mind. Make me, O Lord, to humble my selfe vnder hy hand, to rest contented with
thy good will and pleasure, and not to repine, grudge or murmur against thy iudge∣ments, but in all things to submit my will to thy blessed will, being assured that thou workest all things for the best to them that loue thée, know∣ing most certenlie, that thou workest my saluatiō by these meanes, subduest the flesh to the spirite, and renuest me in the inward man, that I may serue thée in newnesse of life, to the praise and, glorie of
thy blessed name, thorow Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. A praier for the assistance of Gods bolie Angels in any ex∣tremitie or neede whatsoeuer. FOrasmuch (oh most gracious Lorde God) as thou hast created thy holie Angels, not onelie for the execution of thy bles∣sed will, but also for the pre∣seruation, protection and defence of shine elect and
chosen vpon earth, and for that I thy poore seruant, weake and féeble, am at this present, and at all times, and in all places sundrie waies assaulted with infinite, both spirituall and corporall ene∣mies, which dayl séeke my destruction, I beseech thée, good father, looke down from heauen vpon me, send thy holy angels, those ministring spirits, to take care & charge of , to watch ouer me, to pitch their tents round about
me, and to saue and defende me from all the raging furie, and cruell tyrannie of all my enimies. Let me not fal into their hands, O Lord, lest they be too proude, and say, where is now his God? But abae thou their pride, asswage their malice, confound their deui∣ses, and bring their counsels to naught, and make them ares to take the mselues with all. Finallie, graunt, O Lord, that I being deliuered and set rée from all perils
and dangers, and from all the rage and frie of mine ene∣mies, may giue thée thanks, and so wholie to rest vpon thy mercies. Grant this, oh Fa∣ther of all mercie thorowe Iesus Christ our Lord, and for his saké. Amen. A praier against sudden death. O Lorde our God, who in thy secret iudgements as a punishment for
sinne, hast appointed euerie man to die once, keepe me, I beséech thée, from sodaine death, and from euerlasting condemnation. Make me al∣waies readie and prepared, good Lord, that the day of my departure hence come not soddenlie vppon mee to my vtter destruction for euer. Make me also mindull and willing to die, knowing that so long as we are at home in the bodie, we are strangers from thee. Teach me to num∣ber
my daies, O Lord, that I maie know how long I haue to liue. Giue me also not only true repentance for all my sinnes, but also sufficient time, and space to repent in that I neuer depart hence in thy wrath and heauie displea∣sure. Giue me a true faith, and a constant hope, looking for y• accomplishment of thy promises made vnto vs in thy beloued, as also, a zealous care, and feruent desire to walke in the true obedience
of thy blessed lawes and holy commandements, that after the finall dissolution of this life, I may dwell with thée for euer in the kingdome of heauen, thorow Iesus Christ Amen. A praier for one that is sicke, and at the poynt of death. O Lord our God, who as thou hast appoynted all men to die once,
so hast thou ordained sicknes and diseases, as ordinarie meanes to bring him to the same, and as it were to sum∣mon him to the doome, I a poore wretch, and iniserable sinner, visited by thy hande with extreame sicknesse, and grieuous diseases, most hum∣blie beséech thée for Iesus Christs sake, to looke downe from heauen vpon me, with the eies of thy pitie and com∣passion. Pardon and forgiue me all my sinnes, which are
the causes both of sickenesse and death it selfe. Enter not into iudgement with mo, O lord, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. Punish me not (O Lord my God) according to my deserts, neither in this life, nor in the life to come, for then I must néeds perish, so manifolde are my sinnes, and so hainous are my trans∣gressions. Giue mee grace that I may willinglie leaue this wicked world in ful & cer∣tain hope of the blessed resur∣rection
of my bodie to eter∣nall life in thy good time. Make strong my soule (O Lord) against all temptati∣ons of the wicked enemie, and strengthen my faith that I neuer wauer, nor fall away from thée, neither for loue of life, nor feare of death. Grant (good father) that I mate humble my selfe vnder thy hand, and take pacientlie whatsoeuer it shall please thée in mercie to laie vppon mee, without all grudging and
murmuring whatsoeuer. And if it be thy blessed wil, restore me to health of body againe, as thou didst thy seruant E∣zechias, prolonging his life xv. yeares more, that I may praise thee al the daies of this my transitorie and miserable life: but if it séemeth better vnto thee to take me out of this wretched worlde at this present, thy blessed will bee done, onlie this (oh father) giue thy holie Angels to carrie and conueigh, my
soule into thy euerlasting kingdome of heauen, there to reigne with thée for euer, thorow Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A praier for those that be rich and wealthie. MOst gracious God, and louing father, who giuest thy blessings, and thy benefites sundrie waies to mā, to some more, to some lesse, according to the purpose
of thy will and as thou séest to be best for thy glorie, and their good. I praise thée, and I thanke thée, for that it hath pleased thée in thy great libe∣ralitie, to bestow vpon mee thy vnworthie seruant, so great a portion of earthlie riches & temporall blessings, I beséech thee to giue me grace, that I may vse them to thy honour and glorie, and to the comfort and helpe of others that haue néed, being assured that thou hast made
me a steward of so manie and great things to no other end, but that I should destri∣bute them to the poore and needie. Oh Lord giue mee a willing heart, and readie minde to doe good, according to that abilitie that thou in mercie hast bestowed vppon me. And as I acknowledge them to be thy gifts, so giue me grace, good Lord, that I neuer mispend them in gl∣tonie, drunkennesse, riot, or excee, neither yet in prsde,
or anis other vncleannesse, vanitie or follie, knowing that thou wilt one day re∣quier a straite account of me, both howe I haue gotte my goods, how I haue kept them, and howe I haue spent and layd them forth. And as thou hast made mee rich in tempo∣rall blssings, and things of this life, so make me much more rich in spirituall gifts, and graces, that in the end I being founde a faithfull and Steward of thy goodes,
may receiue the crowne of immortall glorie in the king∣dome of heauen, thorow the merits of Iesus Chrst, to whom be all honor and glorie foreuer. A praier for those that bee poore and needie. GRacious father, who hast apoin ted in thy vn∣searchable wise∣dome, sundrie states and conditions of men, and has
commaunded euerie one to bee contented with his state and calling where in thou hast placed him, without all rep∣ning, murmuring, or grud∣ging against thée for the same. I a poore worme before thée, and one whom thou hast placed in the lowest degrée, and meanest state amongest men, most intirelie beséech thy fatherly goodnesse, to giue me grace to be heartilie well contented with thy good will and pleasure, being assured
that thou knowest what is best for me, and workest all thinges for thy owne glorie, and our good. Make me there∣fore good father willinglie to submit my will to thy blessed will, to depend vpon thy pro∣uidence, and to cast all my care vpon thee, who hast pro∣mised to be carefull for mee. And albeit I bee poore and néedie, yet kéepe me farre from all infidelitie, and in∣credulitie, from all mistrust and distrust, and from all dis∣paire
of thy help whatsoeuer. Finallie, grant (O Lord) that I walking in thy holie feare, and doing those things which please thee, may at the last receiue the reward of euerla∣sting glorie, thorow Iesus Christ our Lord. A praier for the increase and preseruation of the fruits of the earth. AS thou hast appoin∣ted man how long he hath to liue vpon
the face of the earth, most mercifull father, so hast thou ordained him meanes to pre∣serue and continue this his life withall, as séemeth best to thy godlie wisedome, and to that end hast appoinnted the earth to bring forth all maner of fruites of infinite varietie for his reliefe and sustenance. Blesse therefore (I beséech thée) the fruits of the earth vniuersallie, and of me particularlie, whose ground for the multitude of
my sinnes thou hast made barren. Enter not into iudg∣ment with me; O Lord; nei∣ther punish me according to my deserts, but in mercie looke vpon me, and so multi∣plie my store, as thou diddest the Oyle of the woman of Sareptha thy seruant. And if it please thée (good Father) to multiplie and increase the fruits of the earth generally, and of mee particularlie, grant seasonable and tempe∣rate weather also for the ga∣thering
and reaping of them, that we hauing plentie of all things, may be rich and plen∣tifull in all good works, and with ioifull hearts, may laud and praise thy souereigne ma∣iestie all the daies of our liues, thorow Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A praier against couetousnes and auarice. OH lord my God, most blessed and holie Fa∣ther, who hast com∣manded
euerie man to labor and trauaile in his vocation, for the maintenance of his estate, & hast promised therto thy blessing, blesse (I beséeth thée) all my labours, actions, enterprises, & affaires, which I shall take in hande in thy holie name, at anie time hereafter, for the necessarie maintenance of my poore estate, so as I hauing al∣waies sufficient, maie be frée from all couetousnes, ambi∣tion, and filthie auarice, being
alwaies perswaded that god∣linesse is great riches, if a man bee content with that that he hath, for we brought nothing into this world, nei∣ther shall we carie anie thing out. Grant, good Lord, that I hauing sufficient foode and raiment for my bodie with al other necessaries néedfull for this my life, may be heartilie well content therewith, not desiring or coueting more. Withdrawe my heart, O Lord, from the loue of this
vaine world, and of all things in the worlde. Make mee to loue and desire hée, and nothing but thée, knowing that he that loueth anie thing beside thée, loueth thee so much the lesse. To thee there∣fore, oh Father, with thy Sonne, and the holy Ghost, be all glorie, and prayse for euer. Amen.
A praier to be said before the reading, studying, or hearing of Gods word. FOr that thy word (O Lord) as Dauid thy seruant witnesseth, is a light vnto our paths; and a lanterne vnto our feet: and for that all humaine wisdom is nothing but foolishnessé be∣fore thee, and altogether vn∣able to pearce into the bo∣wels and secrets of thy re∣uealed will, without the illu∣mination
of thy holie spirite. Instill therefore, O Lord, in∣to my heart and soule, the spirite of wisedome, know∣ledge and vnderstanding, that I may be able to vnder∣stand the isteries of thy law. Kéepe me farre from all sects, schismes, heresies, and errours contrarie to thy worde, and so roote thy truth in my heart, that it may ne∣uer be remoued, but alwies remaine firme, and stedfast in thée. And in the reading,
hearing, studying, confer∣ring, reasoning, disputing or talking of thy word, giue me (most glorious father) not onelie the spirite of holie wis∣dom, to vnderstand it aright, but also grace to humble my selfe vnto thée in all holie o∣bedience, reuerence, humili∣tie, and feare, that I obeying thee in thy worde, and liuing thereafter, may come to those euerlasting ioies which thou hast prepared for them that loue thée, thorowe Iesus
Christ our Lord. A praier against swearing. SEing that thy holie name (oh most gra∣cious God, and lo∣uing father) is both so honourable & maiestiall, as the same is neuer to bee either remembred or once spoken of, without great re∣uerence, feare and dread, at the glorious naming wherof, the verie deuils themselues
doquake & tremble as thy ho∣lie Apostle Iames recordeth. And seeing thou hast com∣manded vs that wee should not sweare at all, but that all our communication should be yea, yea, nay, nay: and in as much as thy holie reue∣rence hast promised that thou wilt not holde him guiltlesse that take name invain, I bes the therefore, good father, so to direct me by thy spirite, that I may neuer thinke nor speake of thée, but
with al holy reuerence, feare, and dread. And in all my communications & speeches (good Lorde) keepe me I pry thée, from all maner of swea∣ring, forswearing, blasphe∣ming, and prophaning of thy sacred name; And for that thou hast giuen vnto man∣kind onelie tho vse of the tongue aboue other crea∣tures, to this end (no doubt) that hee might glorifie thée therewith. I pray (holie father) so to qualifie the affec∣tions
of my minde, and to order ye words of my mouth, that in all my thoughts, wordes and déedes, I maie do worship to thy glorious name, thorow Iesus Christ thy onelie begotten sonne, to hom with thy blessed maie∣stie, and the holie spirit, be all honour and glorie for euer. A praier against drun∣kennesse. MOst mercifull and holie father, who in thy great
liberalitie hast giuen vnto man the fishes of the sea, the foules of the heauens, and the beasts of the earth, with other thy good creatures of infinite varietie, for the su∣stentation and maintenance of this his life, and hast com∣maunded them to bee recey∣ued with praise and thankes∣giuing vnto thée for the same. I beséech thée therefore, O Lord my good God, and holie father, to giue me grace to vse all thy creatures both so∣erlie
and temperatelie, and alwaies to rest thankefull vnto thée for them. Giue me grace (blessed Lorde) that I neuer abuse them, nor offend thee in them, thorow drun∣kennesse, gluttonie, or anie other kind of superfluity, riot or excesse, knowing that the abusing of thy good creatures reacheth euen to thy owne reuerence. Finallie grant, that I walking in al sobriety and integritie of life, may at the receiue the reward of
euerlasting; glorie in the kingdome of heauen, thorow Iesus Christ, and for his sake Amen. A praier against slouthfulnes and idlenesse. WE are faught, O Lord, in thy holie worde, that sole∣nesse is the mo∣ther & nurse of al wickednes and sinne: for the bodie being idle, the mind is naturallie occupied in vaine thoughts,
and foolish imaginations, and so consequently made wea∣ker, & readier for the enimie to assault. I beséech thée ther∣fore (oh my good God) kéepe me from all idlenesse and slouth, and grant that I may be alwaies occupied in some good thing, to the glorie of thy name, and the benefite of my brethre. And as it may please thée, O Lord, in mercy to keepe my bodie from all maner of idlenesse & slouth, so I beséech thée to kéepe my
soule euer exercised in bolie meditations, and contemplations, thinking alwaies of thée, louing thée, and euer praysing thée in all things, till I come to the perfect fruition of thy hea∣uenly ioies, thorow Iesus Christ. Amen. A praier for those that persecuted for the truth. OH Lord Iesus Christ, who comming into this miserable worlde,
and taking our nature vpon thée, didst thereby not onelie deliuer vs from sinne, but also remembring thy mer∣cies, diddest also leaue vnto vs the iimable treasure of thy blessed word, as a per∣fect direction, and rule for vs to frame our liues by, and which alone is able to saue our soules. Blesse therefore this thy holie word vnto vs, make it a worde of power to regenerate and beget vs a new vnto eternall saluation
of our bodies and soules. And strengthen all thy seruants which in anie place are perse∣cuted, imprisoned, condem∣ned, and dailie put to death, for ye sincere profession of the same, and for the testimonie of a good conscience. Be mer∣cifull vnto them, O Lord, and although they séeme destitute of all mans ayde, or worldly comfort, yet let thy swéete comfort and grace neuer de∣part from them, O Lord let no further triall be laid vpon
them, then they may be made able by thee to beare. And as thou hast by the power of thy might, not onlie vanquished and ouercome all corporall and bodilie enemis where or whatsoeuer, but also thy and our spirituall aduersa∣ries, so strengthen all thy seruans that suffer anie kind of crosse, persecution, trouble or veration, either in bodie or mind, for the constant profes∣sion of thy holie worde and sacred religion. Giue them
patience, good Lord, to beare thy crosse thankfullie, with strength to go thorow, and to perseuere to the end, euen to the effusion of their bloud, knowing that they who denie thée before men, thou wilt denie them before thy hea∣uenlie father, and his holie Angels in heauen. And for that there is no true wisdom whereof thou art not the au∣thour, inspire their hearts with the spirite of true wise∣dom, knowledge, and vnder∣standing
that they may know thy will aright, and that they may bee able by the same spirite to confound, and ouerthrow all the enimies of thy truth. Grant this swéets Iesus for thy holie names sake. Amen. A praier for Godly wisedome. IConfesse (good Father) that so long as we beare about vs this
earthe tabernacle, impriso∣ning the soule, that our na∣ture is so corrupted as it al∣waies rebelieth against the spirit, accompting that true wisedome, which is nothing but méere foolishnesse in déed. Wherefore good Lorde, vouchsafe to send downe thy holie spirite, euen the spirite of wisedome which waiteth vpon thy throne, into my heart, that I may know and vnderstand what things are good and acceptable before
thée, that I may attaine euerlasting life, thorow the merits of thy sonne his most bitter death & passion. Amen. A praier for grace to be mindfull to die. OH lord our God, in whose handes standeth the life and death of all mankind, vouchsafe I beséech thée, for thy sonne Christ his sake, to make me mindefull and readie to depart out of
this miserable and transitory life. And al though my bodie doth creep here vpon ye earth, yet let my conuersation bee alwaies in heauen, from whence we looke for a sauiour euen Iesus Christ the righte∣ous, who shall chaunge our vile bodies, and make them like to his glorious bodie, by the mightie power whereby he is able to subdue all things to himselfe. Teach me, good Lord to know, that wee are al here strangers & pilgrims,
and haue in this worlde no dwelling place, but looke for one to come: in regarde whereof, giue me grace, I be séech thee, willinglie to forsake this wicked worlde, with all the vanities therof, & to hunger & thirst after that life, which neuer shall decay. Make me good Lorde to estéeme all things in this worlds as dongue, that I may winne Iesus Christ. And for that yt remembrance of death terrifieth vs from
sin, as thy seruant Salomon beareth record, giue mee grace I most humblie intreat thée, alwaies to remember and beare in mind, that I am mortall, and therefore must once of necessitie depart hence, either to euerlasting glorie, or else to euerlasting paines and confusion both of bodie and soule. Oh Lord as∣sist mee with thy holie spirit, that I male so liue in this present euill world, as I may not feare either, but when∣soeuer
he approcheth, I may with bolde confidence, crie out & say, Oh Death where is thy sting? oh Hell where is thy victory? Grant this, O Lorde my God, for Iesus Christ thy onelie begotten sonne his sake, Amen. A Thanks-giuing to God for all his graces & blessings bestowed vpon vs. SUCH is thy libera∣litie and mercie, O Lord, towards mankinde,
that for all thy blessings and benefits both innite and in∣estimable, beowed vppon him, thou requireth nothing againe, but thankfull hearis to thee. Wherfore (most holy father) I render al praise and thanks to thee, from the bot∣tom of my heart, generallie for all thy benefites and bles∣sings, for all thy great mer∣cies, and louing kindnesse shewed towards me in Iesus Christ, and particularly for that it hath pleased thée to
elect and chuse mee in Christ Iesus to euerlasting salua∣tion, before the foundations of the world were layde, for creating me after thine owne similitude and likenesse, for redéeming of me by the death and passion of thy owne Son Iesus Christ, when I was lost and cast awaie for euer, for regenerating and renuing of me by thy ho∣lie Spirit, for sanctifying of me by the same spirit, for in∣stilling into my heart a true,
a liuely and tustifying faith in Iesus Christ, for giuing me grace to be penetent and sorowfull for my sinnes, for inspiring my heart with a true and constant hope, loo∣king for the accomplishment of all thy gracious promises, made vnto me in thy beloued without all doubting, or ∣uering. For giuing me wise∣donie, vnderstanding and knowledge in some compe∣tent measure, I praise thée, and I thanke thée also, O
Lord, for feeding, nourishing, clothing and sustaining my bodie euer since I was born, for defending of me from in∣finite perils and daungers, yea from infinite deathes, which at diuerse times, and in sundrie places haue laine in waite for me, and threat∣ned my destruction, and in∣to which I had certainlie fallen, had I not béene by thy gracious goodnes supported, protected & defended. Last of all, I thanke thee, good Lord,
and I prayse thée, for thy swéete promises of euerla∣sting saluation, made vnto mee in Iesus Christ. For these and all other thy most gracious, benefites and bles∣sings, (oh most glorious Fa∣ther) I prayse thée, moste humblie beséeching thée for Iesus Christ thy sonne his sake, to pardon and forgiue mee my great vnthankeful∣nesse, ingratitude, and vn∣kindnesse towards thee, and from hencefoorth giue mee
thy holy grace, that I may procéede from thankfulnesse to thankfulnesse, from grati∣tude to gratitude, and from kindnesse to kindnesse to∣wards thée, that I be neuer accounted amongst the num∣ber of those ix. vnthankefull leapers, who being cleansed from their leprosie, returned not againe to giue thée thanks. Graunt these my petitions vnto me, oh most benigne father, with all other good thinges which thou
knowest to be necessarie for me, better then I can either wish or desire, euen for the glorie of thy great name, for the truth of thy promises, and for Iesus Christ thy Sonne his sake my onelie Lorde, Sauiour, Kedéemer, Me∣diatour, and Aduocate, to whome with thy blessed Maiestie, and the holie Spirite, one true and e∣uerlasting GOD, bee all honour, glorie, prayse, do∣minion,
power, and thanks∣giuing for euermore. Amen. Vni Deo & trino sit, omnis gloria. FINIS.
