4232.5 99855820 21323
The Promises: OR, A TREATISE Shewing how a godly Chri∣stian may support his heart with Comfort, AGAINST ALL THE distresses which by reason of any afflictions or temptations can befall him in this life. Containing al the most com∣fortable places through the whole Bible, order∣ly digested By N. Bifield Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middlesex. LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Ralph Rounthwaite. 1619.
TO THE MVCH Honoured and right wor∣thy, Sir William Throgmorton, Knight and Baronet: and Sir Francis Darcie, Knight, N. Bifield wisheth the increase of all Grace and happinesse that accompanieth the loue of the Lord Iesus in sinceritie. IF the many cros∣ses & temptati∣ons with which the life of all men, euen the most godly is distressed, be seriously weigh∣ed,
and withall the great dis∣consolation that too often sur∣priseth the hearts of most Christians, be compassionate∣ly thought on: and if with all the singular glory of a godly mind framed vnto vnmoue∣able rest, and stedfast con∣tentment, be throughly con∣ceiued of; it cannot but bee manifest, that if a way can bee shewed how a Christian may fill his heart with com∣fort in any condition hee can fall into, in respect of afflic∣tion, that such a course is pro∣fitable, and all ought to take notice of it, and with all care and paines imploy themselues about it. This by Gods assi∣stance
vpon apparent groūds of Scripture I haue indeuou∣red to shew in this Treatise; and doubt not but by experi∣ence humble and godly Chri∣stians will finde much refre∣shing and establishment of heart, if they apply them∣selues distinctly & diligently to draw of the water of life, out of those wells of saluation, opened for them euery where in this roule of Gods Promi∣ses. This Treatise I present to your Worships, and vnder the countenance of your names, desire to commend it vnto the Church of God: and this I am induced to doe for
diuers reasons: your for∣wardnesse in the profession of sincere Religion for many yeares, the publike seruice you haue done in your Coun∣try in the administration of Iustice, for the incourage∣ment of the good, and refor∣mation of abuses, your great care from time to time to plant painfull and profitable teachers in the places of your abode, together with the ex∣cellent gifts with which God hath furnished your mindes, deserue to be freely and pub∣likely acknowledged in the Church of God; and in mine owne particular I haue beene so many waies obliged, that
with much gladnesse I em∣brace this occasion, to let the world know my desire to bee thankfull for the many helps & furtherances my ministry hath receiued from the coun∣tenance & endeuours of both your Worships, as occasion hath at any time bin offered. Desiring your acceptance hereof, and praying God to preserue you in his fear with∣out offence, till the Day of Christ, and to inlarge in you the desire & power of wel-do∣ing in all things, I end and rest, Isleworth, Octo. 1618. Your Worships in the seruice of Iesus Christ, to be commanded, N. Bifield.
The chiefe Contents of this Booke. Chap. 1. THE drift of the whole booke is, to shew aboun∣dant comfort against any di∣stresse. pag. 1. Two things taken for gran∣ted, viz. both that godly men shall be distressed, & also that comfort may bee had in any distresse, p. 2. 3 The worth of those promises. p. 4. 5. To whom the promises be∣long. p. 6. 7. The vse they will serue for, being learned. p. 7. 8. 9. 10
The infallibility of those pro∣mises proued by 13. Argu∣ments. p. 11. 12. to 20. The promises sealed 4. waies. p. 17. Sixe rules to bee obserued, if we will profit by the promi∣ses. p. 20. 21. 22. 23 Chap. 2. 3. Sorts of promises. p. 24. 25 Sorts of afflictions, in which we need comfort, p. 26. 27. 28. 29. Chap. 3. 12. Priuiledges of the godly. p. 32. to 47. Chap. 4. What meant by outward af∣flictions. p. 48. 10. Arguments of consolation
to support vs against out∣ward afflictions. p. 48. to 64 Chap. 5. Men neede comfort against reproches. p. 65. 12. Arguments of consolation against reproches. p. 66. to 78 Chap. 6. Many principall obiections of the godly about reproches answered. pag. 78. to 90. Chap. 7. Directions in the case of re∣proches. p. 90. 91. 92 Chap. 8. How the godly may comfort themselues in the case of aduersaries. p. 93. to 104. Chap. 9. 3. Things taken for granted,
about temptations. p. 104. 106. Sathan tempts vs fiue waies, p. 106. 107. 3. Sorts of temptations by sug∣gestion. p. 109. 110. 9. Occasions of temptation. p. 111. to 118. Chap. 10. How many waies a godly man may comfort himselfe a∣gainst temptations. p. 118. to 126. 6. Things in Christ comfort vs against temptations. p. 121. 122. How farre forth we may pray against temptations. pag. 125. 126. How wee may know that wee
are not ouercome of temp∣tations. p. 126. 127. Chap. 11. Two sorts of promises about infirmities. p. 131. What is meant by infirmi∣ties. p. 132. 9. Arguments of consolation against our daily infirmities. p. 132. to 149. The goodnes of Gods nature shewed in 4. things. p. 135. 136. Many things comfortable in Christ. p. 137. 138. 139. 9. Priuiledges about infirmi∣ties assured vs in the word. p. 141. to 147 Chap. 12. Diuers obiections about our
infirmities answered. pag. 149. to 175. About ignorance diuers com∣fortable meditations. pag. 154. to 158. The explication of two excel∣lent places of Scripture, with the sundry answers of many obiections met with∣all in those places, from p. 159. to 174. Chap. 13. Many consolations to support vs against the feare of fal∣ling away, taken from the consideration 1 Of God. p. 176. to 184 2 Of Christ. p. 184. 185 3 Of our own estate in Grace, p. 186.
Chap. 14. Three sorts of most comfor∣table promises about pray∣er, p. 187. to the end of the booke.
CHAP. I. Containing the Preface. THE drift of this Treatise is, to shew a godly Chri∣stian, (who is already assured of Gods fauor, and knowes he shall haue abundant happinesse when he dies, in Heauen) how hee may support his
heart with sufficient con∣tentment, against all the miseries can assault him from the time of his con∣uersion, till his death. For this purpose I shall breake open a Mine of Treasure: for I intend from all parts of the booke of God to se∣lect and set before thee those rich promises, which God hath there recorded, to be as Wells of comfort vpon all occasions. Two things must of ne∣cessity bee granted. The one is, that though wee haue gotten the assurance of Gods fauour and free∣dome from the power and
guilt of our sinnes; yet ma∣ny things will still aile vs, and oppose our consolati∣on. We shall meete with temptations and afflicti∣ons of all sorts, reproches, aduersaries, trouble of spi∣rit, and such like. The o∣ther is, that there can bee no such discouragement, difficulty, or affliction, but in the Word of God we may haue a sure consolati∣on or direction for it, able euery way abundantly to sustaine vs. But before I enter vpon the vnfolding of this great Roll of promises, I must preface about fiue things,
which tend to make vs more fit to receiue them. First, it will be profita∣ble for vs to consider brief∣ly the worth of the promi∣ses; The worth of the pro∣mises. they are called the vn∣searchable riches of Christ, to assure vs that he is a ve∣ry Eph. 3. 6. 9. rich man, that hath his heart stored with the pro∣mises of God wel applied. The Apostle Peter saith, 2 Pet. 1. 3. that they are great, and pre∣cious promises, which God hath giuen to vs. Promises in our hearts, are better then pearles or precious stones in our chests. They are the inheritance God giues to his people in this
life, and therefore they are called the heyres of promise; Rom. 4. a greater portion then any King on earth can giue to his childe. The very kee∣ping of the Records of these promises, was a great prerogatiue to the Iewish Rom. 9. nation: and it is accoun∣ted a singular happinesse for the Gentiles, that they may now partake of those promises. Little doe wee Eph 3. 6. know what wrong we doe to our soules, when wee keepe them ignorant of the promises; and it is one of the greatest offices vn∣der the Sunne, to dispense these promises to man.
2. Tim. 1. 1. Titus. 1. 1. 2. 3. Secondly, before I en∣ter 2 vpon the explication of the promises, I must To whom the promises belong. likewise tell you, to whom they belong, and who they are that haue interest in them: For all vnregene∣rate men, that liue in their sins without repentance, are strangers from the coue∣nants Eph. 2. 12. of promise. The chil∣dren of the bond-woman Gal. 4. haue no part in the testament of Grace: onely they that are Christs, haue the bene∣fit of the promises in Gal. 3. 22. Christ. The children of God are the heyres of promise. Men must haue godlinesse, Heb. 6. 17.
that haue the promises ey∣ther of this life, or that to come. In short, all those that haue repented them 1. Tim. 6. 8. of their sinne, and belieue in Iesus Christ, may come to these promises with large hearts, as knowing that they reade and heare that which they haue clear and full interest in. Thirdly, concerning the 3 The vse of the promises. vse these promises may be put vnto all our life long: They will driue away griefe, discouragement, or feares, that at any time may seize vpon vs: They will sweeten all our afflic∣tions: they will exceeding∣ly
nurse vp, and confirme our faith, and further, they will haue a singular vse in preseruing vs against the inticements of the profits, pleasures, and lusts of the world, and against the cares of this life. Our affe∣ctions are the feete of our soules, and with the pro∣mises wee may bee daily shod; so as neyther thor∣ny cares pricke vs, nor foule pleasures defile vs, Eph. 6. The Gospel shewes vs still a better proiect, when the Deuill or the world intice vs. And a true reason why many times wee are not able to
resist inticements, is, be∣cause our hearts are not fil∣led with the promises, which else would shew vs so much sweetnesse, as all other things would seeme but base in comparison of them. When we are temp∣ted with the pleasures of sinne, if wee haue not a more delightfull proiect to offer to our hearts, it is easie for vs to be seduced. And further, these promi∣ses soundly studied and laid vp in our hearts, will breed cheerefulnesse of spirit, and that contentati∣on which makes godlines 1. Tim. 6. 7. 8. to be so great gaine. And
besides, they will daily ex∣cite in vs all encourage∣ments to well-doing, and they doe also set out mar∣uellously the glory and splendor of Gods loue, power, presence, proui∣dence, and grace toward vs. What shall I say? the promises giue vs euen hea∣uen vpon earth, and set out the incomparable gaine of true godlinesse; yea, by them we approch so neere vnto God, that as Peter saith; By them we par∣take of the Diuine nature. 2. Pet. 1. 4. A fourth thing which I would preface about, is, concerning the infallibili∣tie
of these promises: For The infalli∣bility of the promises pro∣ued by 13. wayes. that may much enflame in vs the desire to store our hearts with them, (hauing heard of their worth,) if we likewise be fully assured concerning the certaine accomplishment of all the good which is contained in them. I suppose, no man doubts, but that if it could be made good, that a poor Christian might haue all those excellent things which are contained in all the promises of the Bible, he were in a matchlesse e∣state. Now there are ma∣ny things which may put vs out of all doubt in that
point; marke them heed∣fully, for they may do thee singular good. First, obserue that the promises are in some scrip∣tures called in the singular number, the Promise: and 1 They are all but as one promise. why so? As for other rea∣sons, so to assure thee, it is as sure and as easie for God to fulfil al that good∣nesse contained in al those promises, as if they were but one onely promise. 2 Consider the Nature 2 From the nature of God. of God, hee cannot lye, it is impossible for him to de∣ny his word, he may as ea∣sily deny himselfe. If God haue said it, it must needes
come to passe. This argu∣ment is vsed in this point, Titus 1. 1. 2. 3 The antiquity of these 3 From the antiquity of them. promises much adde to our assurance. The Apo∣stle in Titus 1. 2. saith, that these promises were made before the world was: and hitherto in all this time God neuer failed of one word of his goodnes. 4 We haue the writing 4 Frō Gods writing. of God to shew for them, they are vpon Record in the Scripture: and shall we mistrust when we haue Gods owne hand to shew for it? His word is true, and righteous altogether, Ps. 19. 8
5 Yea, we haue the oath 5 From Gods oath. of GOD too, that by two things, in which it is vnpos∣sible for God to change, the heyres of promise might haue abundant consolation, when∣soeuer they make recourse vnto the promises, Hebr. 6. 17. 18. 6 Wee haue these pro∣mises 6 From the messengers sent about them. preached vnto vs by Ambassadors sent of pur∣pose, at the commandement of God, who hath enioyned them to make it manifest, that God will bee as good as his word in all those, Ti∣tus 1. 3. 7 Yea Christ Iesus him∣selfe 7 From the Ministery of Christ him∣selfe. did imploy his Mini∣stry,
to assure and confirme the promises made before to the Fathers, as the Apostle shewes, Rom. 15. 8. 8 Yet more; wee haue 8 From the death of the Testator. the bloud of Christ, and the death of the Testator, to cō∣firme this new Testament, and all the promises con∣tained therein, Hebr. 9. 16. so as in Christ they are now all, yea and Amen: there can bee no nay nor deniall of them; they well may be now pleaded in a∣ny Court of the Iustice of God. 9 The Anointing that is vpon vs, may assure vs, & establish vs. Was there
euer any King anointed of God to be a King, that 9 From our Anointing. made doubt of the King∣dome? Why? The an∣nointing of God is vpon our hearts, the graces of the spirit powred out vpon vs, are our assurance, that God will not with-hold from vs our regall priui∣ledges, if wee seeke them, 2. Cor. 1. 20. 21. 10 It is some setling to 10 From the extent of the promises. vs, to consider the extent of the right to those pro∣mises: For God hath ex∣cepted no sort of men, but in Christ they may get to haue their part in those promises, as the Apostle
shewes, Galath. 3. 27. 28. 29. 11 The Law was the 11 From the time of gi∣uing the pro∣mise. onely thing that might hinder vs of the enioying of the promises. And the Apostle hath proued, that the Law cannot disanull the Promises, in which the na∣tions of the earth should be blessed, made 400. yeers before the Law was giuen on Mount Sinai, Galat. 3. 17. 21. 12 We haue the seale The promise sealed foure wayes. of GOD to this writing: now God hath sealed four waies. First, in his Counsell: the 1 In his Counsell. booke of his eternall coun∣sell was written within, and
without, and it had seuen seales, to signifie that it was perfectly ratified, and though none in heauen and earth could reade it, yet for our comforts wee know, that the Lambe of the tribe of Iuda, the Lord Iesus Christ our Sauiour, hath opened it now, and made it manifest, Reuel. 5. 1. 2. &c. 2 In his Sonne: for him 2 In his Son hath God the Father sealed, Iohn. 6. 27. God made all sure when hee sent out Christ; he sealed his com∣mission in all things, that concerned the happinesse both of Iewes & Gentiles.
3 In his Spirit; and 3 In his Spirit. thus all the belieuers are said to be sealed by the Spi∣rit of Promise: and this is Gods priuy Seale. 4 God hath sealed to all his promises in the Sa∣craments, 4 In the Sacraments. which are giuen vs as Gods broad Seales, and outward tokens and pledges to confirme our Faith. 13 We haue the expe∣rience also of all the saints, 13 For ex∣perience. who in all ages found God as good as his word, and had euer reason to say as Dauid did, In the Lord will we praise his word, Psalm. 56. 10. The Patriarchs embra∣ced
the Promises, as the chiefe stay of their liues in their pilgrimage on earth, Heb. 11. 13. Thus of the fourth point. 5 A fift thing I would preface about, is concer∣ning certaine rules to bee 6 Rules to be obserued if we will profit by the Promises. obserued, if we would euer receiue the sound profit of these promises, and so wee must looke to sixe directi∣ons. First, when wee come to these promises, we must renounce our own merits, & all opinion of our owne worthinesse, and acknow∣ledge from our hearts, that all the grace we find in the
promises, is in & through Iesus Christ. All the pro∣mises 2. Cor. 1. 20. Rom. 4. 14. are yea and Amen through him, and onely in him. 2 When wee haue the promises laid open before vs, we must beleeue them, Gal. 3. 22. Rom. 4. 16. and apply them to our selues, or else they will doe vs no good. 3 We must be further carefull to hide them in our hearts, & to commit them to memory, that wee may be often thinking of them, and musing vpon them. It will not serue the turn that wee haue them written in the Bible, or in our note∣bookes,
but wee must get them written in our hearts too: wee must bee at the Psal. 119. 11 paines to acquaint our selues distinctly with them, and to fill our heads with store of them. 4 When any thing ay∣leth vs, we must flye to him for refuge, and cast the an∣chor of our hope vpon them, that God himselfe may see Heb. 6. 18. that our hearts are bent to trust vpon his Word. 5 We must neuer cast away our confidence in them, but wait with patience, and not limit God to the time, or manner, or meanes of accomplishment, but hold
fast to his promises, and eaue the rest to God, as in many places of Scripture may appeare, especially, Hebr. 10. 36. Rom. 4. 22. 6 In short, wee must ooke to it, that we be not slothfull and idle, and such as will not be at the paines to study and commit to memory, and rest vpon these glorious comforts; but wee must follow them which through faith and pa∣tience Heb. 6. 22. doe inherit the promi∣ses. Thus of the Preface.
CHAP. II. The diuision of the Promises. THE Promises may bee diuided into three parts. 1 The first may con∣taine such places of Scrip∣ture, 3 Sorts of Promises. 1 Priuiledges as shew the Priuiled∣ges of the godly aboue o∣ther men; and that is one chiefe way by which the Lord doth refresh the hearts of his people, by as∣suring them in generall of such & such prerogatiues, which hee will confirme
vpon them, and vpon none but them. 2 The second may con∣taine 2. Comforts in affliction. comforts; that is, pla∣ces of Scripture which do foretell what goodnes the Lord will shew to his peo∣ple in affliction. For hi∣ther-vnto belong all those promises which are giuen of purpose for the comfor∣ting and supporting of the godly in all their trialls. 3 The third part may 3. Rewards of certaine graces. containe such Promises, as are made to certaine par∣ticular Graces in the godly, as promises made to prai∣er, faith, trusting in God, or such like. It is the se∣cond
sort of promises, which I intend here more at large to intreat of. I would shew what variety of comforts there are, with which a godly man may inflame his heart, accor∣ding to the seuerall distres∣ses may fall vpon him, and these may be thus subdiui∣ded. All afflictions are ey∣ther outward, or inward: Sorts of af∣flictions. For outward afflictions, it were too tedious, and to little purpose to gather comforts against euery particular crosse, and ther∣fore one head may suffice for the Generall, viz. the
promises or consolations a∣gainst all outward afflicti∣ons. Now, because godly people are oftentimes more troubled with the stormes and reproches of the world, which are cast vpon them for well-doing, then with the ordinary af∣flictions of life; therefore I would in the second place gather the comforts against reproches, and with∣all I would adde in the third place, consolations a∣gainst aduersaries. Now for inward afflic∣tions; they are the afflic∣tions of the spirit of man, and arise eyther from the
temptations of Sathan, or from the trouble of the conscience vnsatisfied in diuers scruples. I would therfore in the fourth place shew how wee might bee comforted against the temp∣tations of Sathan; and be∣cause the trouble of con∣science ariseth vsually ey∣ther from the burthen of our daily infirmities, or from the feare of our fal∣ling away: I would in the fifth place shew how we may bee comforted against our daily infirmities; and then in the last place I would vnfold those promi∣ses, that may assure vs of
perseuerance. Now suppose a Christi∣an Note. soule clearely informed with the knowledge of those priuiledges wherein he excels all the people of the world; and withall, that he knew how to com∣fort himselfe against any outward afflictions, and had store of consolations in his heart against the temptations of Sathan, and did know how to sup∣port himselfe against the sence of his daily weake∣nesses, and withal were set∣led & out of feare for fal∣ling away; would you not thinke such a one wonder∣full
happy? And this may be heere attained vnto, if wee be not slothfull: and what can in this life bee grieuous vnto vs, if wee be soundly fenced in those things? There can be no∣thing that can seeme a mi∣sery vnto vs, but wee may find comforts vnder some one of these titles.
CHAP. III. Shewing the priuiledges of the godly aboue all other people. THe first sort of pro∣mises, or comforta∣ble places of Scrip∣ture, are such as in general shew the happinesse of the godly in all estates of life; these I call priuiledges. These are such comforts as are not restrained vnto some certaine time, but are such as he is inriched with all at all times: These we ought to know as the foun∣dation
of all the rest, and wee should striue to haue them perfectly in our me∣mories, so as any time we could number them if need were. Euery godly Christian hath twelue priuiledges, 12 Priuiled∣ges of the godly. wherein hee excels all the men of this world. 1 The first is, the loue and fauour of God, the espe∣ciall The loue of God. grace of God toward him; this is the foundation of all his happinesse: and if Eze. 36. 28 Ioh. 14. 21. hee could order his owne heart aright, hee could ea∣sily see that hee could not be miserable, so long as he was in fauor with his God.
If the fauour of great per∣sons be so much accounted of; what reckoning is to be made of Gods fauour, who is Lord of Lords? yea King of all Kings, and the more should a Christian fill his heart with ioying in this prerogatiue, if hee consider three properties 3 Properties in Gods loue. in the loue of God. For first, it is a free loue, hee 1. It is free. stands not vpon desert: he is gracious, looking vpon his owne goodnesse, and not on ours, Hosea 14. 4. Secondly, it is an eternall 2. It is eter∣nall. loue, and vnchangeable, God will neuer bee weary of louing him, Ierem. 31. 3.
His louing kindnesse is better then life; for it lasts vnto all eternity, without alteration: The fauour of man in this world is muta∣ble; Kings may extreme∣ly loath, whom they yer∣while loued with their in∣tirest affection; but in God there is no shadow of changing, hee loues with an euerlasting loue. Third∣ly, 3 It is in∣finite. it is infinitely immense, and great, no affection in any, or in all the creatures in this world, if they could be fastned vpon one man, can reach to the thousand part of Gods loue to vs, Ephes. 2. 47. Esay 49. 15. 16.
This light of Gods coun∣tenance shining vpon vs, makes vs at all times more rich then they, that are encreased most in corne and wine, and oyle, Psal. 4. 7. 8. 2 The second is, the The second priuiledge is the giuing of Christ to them. donation of Christ; Christ is his, God hath giuen him Christ, Rom. 8. 32. so as all Christ is his proper porti∣on: and how is Christ his? euen in all dearenesse of relation. He is his Prince, his Priest, and Redeemer, his Father, his Lord, his Master, his Friend, his Brother, &c. All these titles are giuen to Christ, to sig∣nifie,
he is all that, which those things could shad∣dow out. No father, bro∣ther, friend, could so loue their childe, brother, or friend, as Christ loues the Christian. No Lord, Ma∣ster, Prince, can so prefer, prouide, or care for their seruants or subiects, as Christ cares for the Christi∣an. Look what the fauor or power of any of those, or al those could doe, Christ is, & wil become much more vnto the godly Christian. 3 The third priuiledge is Deliuerance, & the Chri∣stians The third is deliuerance  things. deliuerāce is excee∣ding great, if hee consider
seriously how he is deliue∣red from the Kingdome of darkenes, from this present euill world, frō the dominion of sin, from the handwriting of ordinances, that was a∣gainst him, from the rigour and curse of the Law, and from condemnation. The fourth is free pardon of all his sins past, his soule The fourth is, for giuenes of all sinnes. being washed in the bloud of Christ from all his sins, so as now they were as white as snow, though they had beene redde like scarlet, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. Esay 1. 18. What rest & peace would this breed in our hearts, if we did daily thinke of it in
our owne particulars, that wee had obtained pardon and remission of all our sinnes. The fift priuiledge is, the inhabitation of the Holie The fifth is the inhabi∣tation of the holy Ghost. Ghost. The soule and body of a Christian, is the Tem∣ple of the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit of God doth verily and truly dwell within the brest of a Christian, and that not in a naked pre∣sence; but the holy Ghost is there, to teach him to guide him into all truth, to tell him when hee is ready to goe out of the way, on the right hand, or on the left, and to comfort him in
all distresses, and to seale the promises to his heart, and to anoint him with the oyle of true knowledge and grace, and to bee as a pledge and earnest of his inheritance looked for from heauen, and to teach him to pray, when he knowes not how to pray for himselfe; and many other excellent benefits hee reapeth from this spirit of God, whom the world cannot receiue. Hee hath for this respect a very spring of knowledge, and ioy and grace in his belly. The sixth priuiledge is, The sixth is the restoring of Gods Image. the Image of God restored in him, by the mighty
power of Christs voyce in his first resurrection, being made now a new creature to God, and so partaking of the diuine nature, in re∣spect of the qualities wher∣in hee doth excellently re∣semble God. The seuenth priuiledge The seuenth is, freedome in Gods house. is the freedom to Gods house, and to all the feasts, & Di∣uine entertainment which God makes there, Psal. 36. 9. and 65. 4. Esay 25. 8. Luk. 14. 17. Reue. 2. The Word and Sacraments are his; he is Gods bidden ghest: he may alwaies come and welcome: The fatnesse and pleasures of Gods house, Oh
how sweet are they! Who can tell the excellency of the Manna that is hid? The eight priuiledge is, The eight is, the hearing of his praier. entrance and accesse, and audience with God in all his suites. He may aske almost what he will of God, hee will not deny him any thing he askes in the name of Christ. And sure he is worthily miserable that will not make himself hap∣py, when hee may haue what hee will aske of him, that is able to giue what he can aske, Marke 11. 24. Ephes. 2. 19. The ninth priuiledge is, The ninth is the atten∣dance of Angels. The seruice and attendance
of the Angels. The Angels doe pitch their Tents about those that feare God, Psa. 34. and are ministring spirits to euery heire of saluation, Heb. 1. vlt. Oh the dignity and safety of that man, whom the glorious Angels doe guard and attend vpon! The poorest Christian hath a better guard about him, then the greatest Mo∣narch in the world that is not a Christian. The tenth priuiledge is, The tenth is the commu∣nion of Saints. the Communion of Saints; hee is mystically vnited in one bodie to all the wor∣thies that are in heauen, or earth; and doth effectually
enioy the benefit of com∣munion of Saints; too large to be heere reckoned vp. If it were no more, but the profit hee hath by the prayers of the godly all o∣uer the world: were it not a great fauor? Ephes. 2. 19. and 3. 6. Philip. 1. 5. Colos. 2. 29. besides al the comforts hee hath in the fellowship with the godly. The eleuenth priuiledge The eleuēth is the inheri∣tance of the earth. is, the inheritance of the Earth, which is restored to him in Christ; so as hee now passeth that which he hath of the earth, by as good a Title as euer Adam held Paradise: yea, so as
whatsoeuer in the whole earth is good for him, shal not bee with-held from him, Math. 3. 7. Psal. 84. 12. Outward prosperity hee is sure of, so farre as it is good for him, Iob 8. 7. Psalme 37. 5. The last priuiledge is that Inheritance immortall, The twelfth is, the inhe∣ritance of heauen. incorruptible, and that fa∣deth not, reserued for him in heauen, which for excellen∣cy passeth all that which euer the eye of man saw, or the eare of man heard, or the heart of man can conceiue, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Now then, to summe vp all this, let a Christian
tell his owne soule plainly, and vpon cleere proofe, by the signes of a child of God, that hee is in fauour with God, and that Christ Note. is his, and that he hath ob∣tained strange deliuerāce, and that all his sinnes are forgiuen, and that the ho∣ly Ghost dwells in him, & that the image of God is restored in him, and that he is free to Gods house, and that hee may begge any thing of GOD, and that hee hath Angels to waite vpon him, and that he is neere of kinne to all the Saints in the World, and that he is Lord of the
earth, and that hee shall certainely goe to Heauen when he dieth. Let this, I say, bee told to his soule, can hee be dismaid? will not the Peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding, keepe his heart and minde, and that constantly for euer?
CHAP. IIII. Shewing how the godly may support their hearts a∣gainst all outward afflic∣tions. HItherto of the Pri∣uiledges. Now it followeth, that I should open those conso∣lations, that may support the hearts of men against al the distresses of this life. And first I would shew, how the Lord is pleased to comfort his seruants in seueral Scriptures, against all the outward afflictions
may befall his seruants in this world. By outward afflictions I meane such as these; What meant by outward afflictions. wants, losses, wrongs, troubles, exile, imprison∣ment, sicknesse, feares, po∣uerty, or any other thing, wherewith the life of man is molested in any condi∣tion. Now there are many The godly man may comfort him∣selfe against afflictions, by the con∣sideration, 1 Of the commonnes of them. excellent waies of aboun∣dant comforts against these, or any of these, as 1 First, if we consider but the commonnesse of them, all things fall alike in these things, Eccles. 9. 2, 3. Euery man that is born of a
woman, hath but few daies, and is full of trouble, Iob 14. 1. Christ hath no Disciple but he is told aforehand, He must take up his Crosse, and that daily, Luk. 9. 24. There can bee no afflicti∣on, but what accompani∣eth, or may accompany the nature of man, 1. Cor. 10. 13. The same afflictions are accomplished vpon our brethren which are through the world, 1. Pet. 5. 9. And we haue the Pro∣phets & greatest worthies of the Lord, for an example of suffering, Iam. 5. 10. And all the godly must through many tribulations enter into
the Kingdome of God, Acts 14. 22. 2 Secondly, if we con∣sider Of Gods knowledge of our di∣stresses and desires. that God takes no∣tice of vs, and of all our trialls: The Lord knowes the way of the righteous, Psalm. 1. 6. None of our griefes are hid from him, All our desires are before him, and our groning is not hid from him, Psalm. 38. 9. and hee knowes our soules in aduersi∣tie, Psal. 31. 7. And as hee takes notice of al our trou∣bles, so he takes notice of all that is good in vs: Hee knowes them that are pati∣ent, and trust in him, Na∣hum. 1. 7.
3 Thirdly, if we consi∣der Of Gods compassion. the wonderfull com∣passion of God in the affli∣ctions of his people: hee doth not willingly afflict, but regards vs with pitty, and with loue thinkes of redeeming vs, and sends the Angell of his presence to comfort and saue vs, and in all our afflictions is affli∣cted with vs, Isay 63. 8, 9. 4 Fourthly, if we con∣sider Of Gods high estima∣tion of vs. the high estimation that God holds of his ser∣uants, notwithstanding their afflictions. Crosses may make men loue vs the lesse, but they doe not a iot discommend vs before
God. He can take notice of his seruants in their di∣stresses, as well as if they did shine in the greatest outward splendor in the world. This is the conso∣lation that God speakes to vs (euen when he corrects) as to his children; and for that reason wee should not refuse his chastning, Hebr. 12. 6. Prou. 3. 11. We may be honourable in Gods sight, though wee bee in a most forlorne and despised con∣dition in the world: Wee may, I say, be precious in Gods sight, and greatly beloued, Isa. 43. 4. 56. The Apostle Peter shewes, that
a poore seruant, when hee suffers hard words, and ill vsage from his froward Master, doth herein finde acceptation with GOD, 1. Peter 2. 19. 20. Now this is an instance beyond ex∣ception: For, what condi∣tion more vile, then of a seruant? and what crosses were likely to be disregar∣ded of God sooner, then these domesticall indigni∣ties? and yet wee see a proofe of the regard and loue of God euen in those things. 5 Fiftly, if we consider Of the vi∣ctory of Christ. the victory of Christ ouer the world: Our Sauiour
vseth this as a consolation; he tels his Disciples, In the world they shall haue trou∣ble, but he wold haue them be of good cōfort, he hath ouer come the world, so as now they shall neuer be hurt by their trobles. Their crosses may be too hard for them to master, but Christ can order them so, as in him they shall haue victory ouer them. But of this more afterwards, Iohn 16. 33. 6 Sixtly, If wee consi∣der Of the holy Ghost com∣forting vs. the presence of the holy Ghost, he is giuen of Christ and the Father to bee our Comforter, and as
our afflictions abound, so shall our consolations also, Ioh. 14. 16. 2. Cor. 1. 4. Now, how shall a man be dismaied, that hath Gods spirit with∣in him, to harten him, and assist him, and refresh him, and make glad his heart? 7 Seuenthly, if we con∣sider Of the issue out of trou∣ble. the issue out of all troubles; Many may be the troubles of the righteous, but God will deliuer them out of all, Psal. 34. 19. If GOD make vs sore, he will make whole: if he wound, he will binde vs vp againe: In sixe troubles he shal deliuer them, and in seuen there shall no euil touch them, Iob 5. 18. 19.
God will giue his people rest from the daies of aduersity, till the pit be digged for the wicked, Psal. 94. 13. Light is sowne for the righteous, & gladnesse for the vpright in heart, Psal. 97. 11. It is well said, It is sown; For though God do not presently giue vs ease and comfort, yet the Haruest will come, if with patience wee rest vp∣on God, and be truely sin∣cere, and keepe his way: God will settle his people, as in the former dayes, and it may bee, doe better vnto them, then at the begin∣ning, Ezech. 36. 11. For Gods thoughts towards his
people, are thoughts of peace, and not of euill, to giue an expected end, Ierem. 29. 11. so as Gods seruants shal sing for ioy of heart, when wicked men howle for vexation of spirit, Esay 65. 14. 8 Eightly, If wee con∣sider the wonderfull care Of the mea∣sure of our afflictions. of God about the measure of our crosses: For God will not lay vpon man more then right, that hee should enter into iudgement with God, Iob 34. 23. Therefore Ia∣cob should not feare, be∣cause God will not make a full and final end of him, as he will of the Nations, but will correct him in mea∣sure,
not leauing him wholly vnpunished, Ieremy. 46. 28. God doth waite to be gra∣cious to his people; hee is a God of iudgement, and doth not consider what sin they haue committed to deserue affliction, but what strength they haue to beare it: After hee hath giuen them the bread of af∣fliction, and the water of ad∣uersity, he will not restraine his mercies from them, Isay 31. 18, 20. There is great difference betwixt Gods dealing with wicked men that are enemies to the Church, and his dealing with the godly. Frō hence
the Prophet asketh: Hath he smitten him, as hee smote them that smote him? and re∣solueth that God smites in measure, and but in the branches, hee will not cut them vp by the rootes, Isay 27. 7, 8. 9 Ninthly, if we consi∣der Of the shor∣t continuance of them. the short time of these afflictions: Heauines may be in the Euening, but Ioy will come in the Morning: For Gods anger endureth but a moment, but in his fauour is life, Psal. 30. 5. The rodde of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, Psal. 125. 3. For the Lord will not cast off for euer, but though
hee cause griefe, yet will hee haue compassion, according to the multitude of his tender mercies, Lamen. 3. 31. 32. For a small moment GOD may forsake, but with great mercy will he gather vs. In a little wrath hide I my face, but with euerlasting kindnes will I haue mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer, Esay 54. 7. 8. Hence Christ saith, A little while, and ye shall not see me, and againe, A little while, & ye shall see me, Iohn. 16. 16. The godly may be in heauinesse, if need require, but it is but for a short season, 1. Pet. 1. 6. and Paul saith, The afflictions of
this life are but light, and for a moment, 2. Cor. 4. 17. 10 Lastly, if wee consi∣der Of the good effects of them. the good wee get by these afflictions. For God will make all worke together for the best, vnto them that loue him, Rom. 8. 28. The godly may bee troubled on euery side, and yet not be di∣stressed: they may bee per∣plexed, and yet haue no cause to despaire, &c. 2. Cor. 4. 8. The godly in affliction may bee like the burning bush which Moses saw, which was not consumed: and there are many parti∣culars of the good they get by their crosses. For
affliction is as the fire, only to refine them, & try them, and make them more bright, Zach. 13. vlt. they lose nothing, but their drosse, and this is all fruit, euen the taking away of their sinnes, Isa. 27. 11. Besides, they meet with many con∣solations in affliction, which otherwise they had not experience of, 2. Cor. 1. 7. and therefore wee should count it all ioy to fall into many temptation, as knowing that the trial of our faith worketh patience, and if patience haue her perfect worke, wee shall bee intire, wanting nothing, Iam. 1. 3, 4
Lastly, the trial of our faith, which is more precious then gold that perisheth, will bee found vnto praise, & honor, and glory in the reuelation of Iesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 7. and our light & short afflictions will worke vnto vs an eter∣nall weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4. 17. and if we endure temp∣tation, wee shall receiue the crowne of life, Iam. 1. 12. Loe What thou must doe in thy afflictiō. thus we haue searched it: and thus it is, heare it, and know thou it for thy good, Iob 5. vlt Learne thou therefore in nothing to be carefull, but in all things to make thy re∣quests known vnto God with giuing of thankes, Phil. 4. 7.
And if any man lacke Wise∣dome to know what to do in his affliction, let him aske it of God, who giueth liberal∣ly, and reprocheth no man, Iam. 1. 5. CHAP. V. How the godly may comfort themselues against Repro∣ches. HItherto of the cō∣forts against al out∣ward afflictions in the generall. Now it fol∣loweth, that I instance in reproches, & aduersaries.
For reproches; it is e∣uident, there is neede of Men need comfort a∣gainst re∣proches. consolations, more speci∣ally against them, because naturally men stumble at it, when they see Religion censured and scorned, and it hardens many men, when their hearts are infe∣cted with this preiudice, that they heare this way euery where ilspokē of. Som∣times men are dismaid at the disgrace of sincerity in the generall. Sometimes they are troubled for what they themselues do suffer, or may be in danger to suf∣fer. Sometimes the weake are scandalized, when they
heare or see what others suffer. And it is manifest, that the best men haue bin put to a great plunge when they haue beene la∣den with reproches. This makes Ieremy so vnquiet, Ier. 18. 18, 21. Now there Thou maist comfort thy selfe in the consideratiō. are many wayes, by which a Christian may establish his owne heart against all the scornes and reproches of the men of this world. 1 First, if they consi∣der that God takes notice of all the wrongs of that Of the notice God takes of them. kinde done vnto them. Thus Dauid, O Lord, thou hast known my reproch, and my shame, and my dishonor,
mine aduersities are all be∣fore thee, Psal. 69. 19. It ea∣seth his heart, but to talke with GOD, and tell him, that he knowes his disho∣nour. 2. Secondly, it is an in∣crease Of Gods great ac∣count of vs. of the comfort, if wee further consider that God fauors vs, & accounts vs deare & honorable, what∣soeuer the wicked thinke of it: and this argument the Lord himselfe pleades withall, Esay 43. 4, 5. If Gods face shine vpon his seruant, what cares Dauid for the reproches of all sorts of men, euen of his neighbours and familiar
acquaintance. It is enough to him, that his best and next neighbour and friend respects him, Psalm 31. 11. 12. 16. 3 Thirdly, thou maist Of thy good report a∣mong the godly. comfort thy selfe by oppo∣sing the good report thou hast amongst the godly a gainst the reproches, with which wicked men pursue thee. As thou goest throgh ill report, so doest thou through good report: thou hast honour as well as dis∣honour, and it is a great re∣compence to obtain good report amongst the god∣ly, 2. Corinth. 6. 18. Hebr. 11. 2.
4 Fourthly, were it so Of thy praise thou shalt haue in the day of Christ that thou hadst no honour in thy name on earth, and that well-doing were in no request at all: yet this should comfort thee abun∣dantly, that thy faith and sincerity, and innocency, will be found vnto praise, and honour, and glory in the reuelation of Iesus Christ. Thou shalt haue vnspeake∣able praise at that day, 1. Pet. 1. 7. 5 Fiftly, the same per∣sons Of praise from them that now re∣proach thee. that now reproach thee, may be so turned a∣bout by the power and grace of God, that in the day of their visitation they
will admire thee, and glo∣rifie God for thee, 1. Peter. 2. 12. 6 Sixtly, we should be Of the small things thou sufferest. the lesse troubled with our reproches, because this is not to resist vnto bloud. God deales fauourably with vs. If we had liued in the daies of our Fathers, when to professe the Gos∣pell of Christ, had beene occasion of terrible death; then wee might haue had some pretence of gree∣uance. But now in these daies, when the hurt is done only with the tongue of infamous men, it is a great weakenesse to bee
disquieted, Hebr. 12. 3. 7 Seuenthly, let vs looke Of the ex∣ample of Christ. vpon the author and finisher of our Faith, euen He was exposed to these indigni∣ties, and yet for the glory set before him, despised the shame, & endured the crosse, and is now crowned in heauen, Hebr. 12. 2. What should the seruant com∣plaine of, when his Lord and Master is called Beel∣zebub? 8 Eightly, Dauid easeth himselfe, by considering Of the cause of thy repro∣ches. the cause of his suffering. For thy sake (saith hee to God) haue I borne reproch, shame hath couered my face:
The zeale of thy house hath eaten me vp, and the repro∣ches of them that reproched thee, haue fallen vpon mee: when I wept and chastened my soule with fasting, that was to my reproach, Psalme. 69. 7. 9. 10. Ninthly, why should we Of the con∣dition of all the godly. be troubled at that which is the lot of all the Saints? We haue heard of Dauid before, how he was slande∣red by many, and on euery side, Psalm. 31. 12. 13. Iere∣my complaines, that they consulted how to deuise deui∣ces against him, and how they might smite him with the tongue, Ierem. 18. 18.
False witnesses were subor∣ned against Stephen, and that in case of Religion, Acts 6. 11. 13. 14. Many & grieuous complaints were laid against Paul, Act. 25. 7. Yea, it was the condition of all the Apostles, and the principall men of the Christian world, to be made a spectacle to men and Angels, and to be accoun∣ted forlorne, and as the off-scowring of all things, 1. Cor. 4. 9. 10. 13. And our Sauiour Christ supposeth the case of any blessed man, that men may say all manner of euill sayings of them, Matth. 5. 12, &c.
10 Tenthly, The Spirit of God and of glory doth rest Of the pre∣sence and assistance of the holy Ghost. vpon you, 1. Pet. 4. 14. Yee haue the Spirit of God in you, what need you care, what the world accounts of you? you haue aboun∣dant treasure in your harts, and you haue an heroycall or diuine spirit in you, and therfore why are you trou∣bled about such meane things? and your patience and their rage, is a signe you are in a happy condi∣tion, and haue Gods spirit, & the spirit of God, which in you, is a spirit of glory, and leades you to a better life. And therefore seeing
you are but trauelers here, why turne you againe at the barking of euery dog? yea, these reproches signi∣fie, that wicked men doe see some glory of God shi∣uing in you, which they striue by all meanes to vi∣lifie & despise, being vext in their hearts at it. 11 God will certainely Of the con∣dition of those men that doe re∣proch thee. take an order with all that reproch his people. For first, he will reckon all their reproches, as cast out a∣gainst himselfe; and there∣fore will indite them of blasphemie, Psal. 74. Col. 3. 8 1. Peter. 4. 14 1. Corinth. 4. 13.
Secondly, in his due time hee will put to silence those lying lips which speake grieuous things proudly, and contemptuously against the righteous, Psalme 31. 18. Thirdly, all that were in∣censed against the godly, shall bee rewarded with shame, which GOD will powre vpon them for the cōtempt with which they haue dishonoured his ser∣uants, Esay 41. 11. 14. And to conclude, God will cer∣tainely bring them to iudgment for these things, they must make their ac∣counts before the Iudge of the quicke and dead, that speake
euill of other men, because they will not runne with them into the same excesse of riot, 1. Pet. 4. 4. 5. 12 Lastly, God wil pro∣uide Of the course God will take for thy clea∣ring and comfort. for his own innocent seruants. His thoughts are not to let his people be shamed, Micah 4. 11. 12. and besides, hee will bring forth their righteousnesse as the light, they shall be clee∣red, Psalm. 37. 6. Iob 5. 15. and they shall receiue double for all their shame, Isa. 61. 7. and their reward shall bee great in heauen, Math. 5. 12. For which reason Moses accounted the reproches of Gods people to be greater ri∣ches,
then the treasures of Egypt, Hebr. 11. 26. and in the meane time there is a hiding place with God from the strife of tongues, Psalm. 31. 20. CHAP. VI. Wherein many principal Ob∣iections of the godly are answered. NOW for the better establishment of mens hearts in the former comforts; it will not bee amisse to take off the obiectons with which
many times godly men doe aggrauate their di∣stresse aboue the respect of the former consolations. 1. Ob. If they were or∣dinary reproches, it would not so much trouble mee, but they are vile things which are obiected against mee? Sol. They cannot bee viler things then haue bin obiected against Christ & the godly. For there haue beene obiected; Grieuous things. Acts 25 7. Gluttony. Math 11. 18. 19. Madnesse: Iohn. 10. 20. Blasphemy. Mat. 26. 65. Ac. 6. 11. 13. 14 Deceiuing. Iohn 7. 12. Rebellion. Acts 17. 6. 7.
Railing. Acts 23. 4. Schisme. Acts 28. 22. Wickednes of life. 1. Pet. 2. 12. 2. Ob. But base persons doe reuile mee, the very scumme of the people doe scorne me. Solu. This is no strange thing. The abiects gathered themselues together against Dauid, they did teare and ceased not, Psal. 35. 15. The drunkards sang of him, Psal. 69. 13. Those that derided Iob, were such, whose fathers hee would haue disdained to set with the dogs of his flocke, Iob 30. 1. 3. Ob. But I haue liued long vnder such disgraces.
Sol. Rest thy selfe, and fret not at the man that pros∣pereth in his way, the Lord will finde a time to bring forth thy innocency, as the light, Psal. 37. 7. Zephan. 3. 18. 19. God will find a time to get thee praise in euery place where thou hast beene put to shame. 4. Ob. But I am almost buried with the almost in∣finitenesse of scorne and reproches. Sol. That was no more then was in Dauids case; he was so buried in disgrace, that hee was as a man dead, forgotten, and out of minde, Ps. 31. 14. he was a reproch of
men, Psal. 22. 12. A by-word, Psal. 44. 9, &c. A prouerb, Psal. 69. 11. A wonder to ma∣ny, Psal. 7. 7. and the Apo∣stles were a gazing stocke to men and Angels, 1. Cor. 4. 9. 2. Cor. 6. 13. 5. Ob. But great men set against me. Solu. That was Dauids case: Feare was on euery side, he heard the railings of great men, which consulted together against him, Psalm 31. 13. 6. Ob. But I am senten∣ced and accused as an euill doer most vniustly, and that publikely. Sol. So was our Sauiour
Christ, & that by a whole Councell of men, Mat. 27. 1. Iohn. 11. 47. 48. and so was Stephen, Act. 6. 12. and so were the Apostles, Act. 4. 6. 15. and 5. 27. and so was Paul, Act. 23. 1. The most righteous may suffer as e∣uill doers, 2. Tim. 2. 9. The wicked so compasse about the righteous, that many times wrong iudgment proceedeth, Hebr. 2. 3. 4. but this is his comfort, The Lord will not leaue him in the hand of the wicked, nor condemne him, when hee is iudged, Psal. 37. 32. If God condemne vs not, it matters not for the sentences of vniust men.
And the rather, because God hath further promi∣sed the godly man, that he will stand at his right hand, to saue him from the iudges of his soule, Ps. 109. 31. 7. Ob. But I am by slan∣der cast out of the Church with great pretence of the glory of God. Solu. The Lord in the Prophet Isaiahs time had obserued such a thing as this. For the Prophet tels the godly, that their bre∣thren had cast them out, and said; Let the Lord bee glori∣fied. But hee assures them from the Lord, that God would appeare to their ioy,
and their brethren which cast them out, should be asha∣med, Isaiah 66. 5. 8. Ob. But they which haue thus grieuously wron∣ged me, liue in all prospe∣rity, no iudgement ligh∣teth vpon them, God doth not pleadmy cause against them. Sol. Thou knowest not how GOD dealeth with them, God can iudge them secretly, and con∣sume them insensibly, so as the world shall take no no∣tice of it, as the moth ea∣teth vp the garment, with∣out making any great rent, Isay 51. 8. And for this rea∣son
they are exhorted in that place, not to feare the reproch. Secondly, what knowest thou what God will yet doe with them? For God hath pleaded the cause of his seruants many times, by bringing strange iudgements vpon the wic∣ked. This Pashur shall bee made Magor-missabib, that is, a terrour round about, & all that heare it, shall trem∣ble, Ierem. 20. 3. God can cloath thy aduersaries with shame, and couer them with their owne confusion as with a mantell, Psal▪ 109. 29. 9. Ob. But I am censu∣red by good men with
much bitternesse, as if I were guilty, and there is none to comfort or pitty mee. Sol. So was Iob deeply censured by his godly friends: and so was Paul of his owne hearers, 1. Cor. 4. 4, 10. Thus Dauid was forsaken in his wrongs, so as none would comfort him, Psal. 69. 20. 10. Ob. But yet one thing much troubles me, that is, that since these slanders, the hand of God hath bin vpon mee in diuers parti∣cular iudgements, and this makes people to thinke, sure I am guilty.
Sol. So they thought of Paul when the Viper fell on his hand, being a man that was before accused, and now sent as it were a prisoner, Acts 28. so they iudged of Dauid when hee was sicke, that some euill dis∣ease did cleaue to him, Psal. 41. 8. Yea, this was our Lord Iesus Christs case; For they iudged him as pla∣gued, and smitten of GOD, Esay 53. 4. 11. Ob. But the things obiected against mee are so foule, that when I heare those things spoken of publikely, or priuately, I blush, & that may cause me
to be thought to be guilty. Solu. This was Dauids case being innocent; hee saith, Shame couered his face when he bore reproch, Psal. 69. 7. and his confusion was continually before him; and the shame of his face couered him, for the voyce of him that reprocheth and blasphe∣meth by reason of the enemy, Psal. 44. 14. 16.
CHAP. VII. Directions in the case of re∣proches. I Conclude this point concerning reproches, with certain directions. There be diuers things to 4 Waies to a∣void repro∣ches. be done by vs, if we would bee rightly ordered in the case of reproches. 1 We should shunne the company of such as are giuen to slander, as it is said of Paul, when diuers were hardned, and spake euill of the way, he depar∣ted from them, and sepa∣rated
the Disciples, Acts 19. 9. 2 Thy daily refuge a∣gainst the scorns of repro∣chers, must bee to goe to God, and hide thy selfe with himby praier. When Dauid is thus encountred, if you aske, what hee did? he saith, when they railed, But I betooke my selfe to prayer, Psal. 109. 4. and Ps. 31. 19. 3 Look to thy tongue, be silent, see thou render not reuiling for reuiling, but rather trust in GOD, and blesse them that curse thee, Psal. 37. 7. 1. Pet. 3. 9. Psalme. 31. 14. 1. Cor. 4. 12.
Ierem. 18. 20. 4 Liue inoffensiuely, & be sure thou keep Gods way: For if any thing will medicine their tongues, that must be it, 2. Cor. 6. 3. 8 2. Pet. 2. 12. and 4. 14. 15. Ps. 37. 34. For it may bee at length the same mouth that cursed thee, wil blesse thee, and glorifie GOD for thee.
CHAP. VIII. Shewing how the godly may comfort themselues against their aduersaries. HItherto of the con∣solations against reproches: Now it followeth, that I should shew how a Christian may comfort himselfe against his aduersaries, that op∣pose him in his course of Hee may comfort himself from the conside∣ration, 1 Of the cō∣mon condi∣tion of all the godly. godlines, and so there are many arguments of con∣solation. 1 The first may be ta∣ken from his condition
as it is common to all the godly: For this may stay a mans hart to know for cer∣taine, that euery man that will liue godly, shal be oppo∣sed, and must suffer persecu∣tions, 2. Tim. 2. 12. 2 The second may bee taken from the appoint∣ment Of Gods ap∣pointment. of God herein: and this stands of two bran∣ches. First, that God from all eternity hath decreed euery mans sufferings this way. Thus Paul lesseneth the thought of the crosse, by pleading that God had appointed them thereunto, meaning by his eternall decree, 1. Thessal. 33. Se∣condly,
that GOD hath likewise appointed the end, and measure, and de∣liuerance out of the afflic∣tion. Thus the Church is comforted, Reuel. 2. 10. If it were grieuous to them to know that the Deuill should raise vp wicked men, that should cast them into prison, yet this may refresh them, that GOD hath set the time when they shall come forth a∣gaine. It shall bee but for ten daies: It shall neyther bee so long as the Deuill and wicked men would haueit, for then they must neuer come out; nor so
little a while, as they them∣selues wold haue it; for then they would neuer comein, or stay but awhile: but God will rule by determi∣ning the time for their good. 3 The third may be taken from the refuge wee may Of our re∣fuge in God. haue in God: wee may al∣waies make our recourse to God in all our wrongs, who hath promised to be our refuge, euen our refuge in due time, Psal. 9. 9. If God will receiue vs, and heare our moanes, & vndertake our protection, it should be no great thing for vs to indure the oppositions of
vnreasonable men. 4 The fourth may bee taken from the prediction Of the pre∣diction of Christ. of Christ: wee haue beene told before plainely what we should expect. Wee may haue peace in Christ, but hee hath fore-told it, that in the world wee shall haue trouble, Ioh. 16. 13. yea, that wee must pro∣uide to take vp our crosse daily, Luke 9. 24. 5 The fift may bee ta∣ken Of the deli∣uerance pro∣mised. from the deliuerance GOD hath promised vs; for thus he assures vs, The hand of the Lord shall bee known towards his seruants, and his indignation towards
their & his enemies, Isay 66 14. for that God that will be the strength of the righ∣teous in their trouble, will be their saluation out of their troubles: he will help them and deliuer them, hee will deliuer them from the wick∣ed, & saue them because they trust in him, Psalme 37. 39, 40. This glory of the Lord shall bee knowne and feared from the East to the West, that if the enemy come like a floud, the Spirit of the Lord shall chase him away, Isay 59 19. Therfore feare not thou, O worm Iacob, for thus saith the Lord, I am thy GOD, I will sustaine thee with the
right hand of my Iustice: Be∣hold, all they that prouoke thee shall be ashamed, they shall be as nothing: the men of thy strife shall perish, Isay. 41. 10 11. For the Lord knoweth how to deliuer the godly out of temptation, and to reserue the vniust to the day of iudg∣ment to be punished, 2. Peter 2. 9. GOD will deliuer the poore when he crieth, the nee∣die also, and him that hath no helper, Psal. 72. 12. 6 The sixt may be taken Of Gods iudgement vpon our aduersaries. from the certaine iudge∣ment of God that shall fall vpon their aduersaries: The men of thy strife shall perish, and they that warre
against thee, shall bee as a thing of nought: They shall seeke them & not find them, Isa. 41. 11. 12. All these cur∣ses will the Lord lay vpon their enemies, and vpon them that hate them & per∣secute them, Deut. 30. 7. All those euill neighbours that touch the Inheritance of Is∣rael, God will plucke them out of their land, and plucke his people from among them, Ier. 12. 14. The wicked draw their swords, and bend their bowes against the godly; but their sword shall enter into their owne heart, and their bowe shall be broken; for the armes of the wicked shall bee
broken, and the Lord will vphold the iust, Psal. 37. 14. 15. 17. And besides, for their full paiment, they are reserued vnto the day of Iudgement to be puni∣shed. 7 The seuenth may be Of the ef∣fects and consequents. taken from the considera∣tion of the effects and con∣sequents of this oppositi∣on: For first, hereby wee giue our testimony to Christ and the Gospell, when we partake of the af∣flictions of the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1. 8. Secondly, these oppo∣sitions doe as much good for the present, when Gods seruants fall into
these troubles, the fruite will be, it will trie them, and purge them, and make them white, till their time be come, for there is a time appointed, Dan. 11. 35. 36. Thirdly, God may turne the hearts of the wicked, and make them of Lyons and Tygers, to become Lambes, and no more to do hurt in the moun∣taine of the Lord, Isay 11. The Wolfe and the Lambe may come to feede together, and the Lion eate straw like the Bullocke, Isay. 65. 25. Lastly, wee shall gaine Of our owne gaine by them. exceedingly by these suf∣ferings; for wee are assu∣red, that if wee suffer with
Christ, we shall reign with him in another World, 2. Timo. 2. 11. 12. Wee should therefore reioyce, that we partake in the suf∣ferings of Christ, because wee are punished, that when Christ appeares in his glory, we shall then be glad and reioyce, 1. Peter 4. 13.
CHAP. IX. Of the wayes how Sathan tempts vs, and the occasi∣on of temptation. HItherto of outward afflictions, and the comforts against them. The inward afflic∣tions follow, and heere in the first place come tenta∣tions to be considered of, euen those conflicts which men haue in their soules with euill Angels. Three things must bee 3. Things taken for granted. granted concerning temp∣tations.
1 First, that the doctrine of temptations is obscure, because the disease lies in∣ward in the soule, and is such as the vnregenerate world hath little care of, or iudgement in. 2 Secondly, that when God leaues his children to be tried by this afflictiō, & softens their harts to feele this combat with Deuils, it doth wonderfully amaze and disquiet them, and therefore this is a point needfull to be handled. 3 Thirdly, that there is sure remedy in the word of God, euen for this affli∣ction also.
Now, because this do∣ctrine of temptations is somwhat obscure, I would, before I entreat of com∣forts against them, consi∣der of three things. 1 How many waies Sathan tempts men. 2 To what things hee tempts. 3 What are vsually the occasions hee takes of tempting. For the first, Sathan Sathan tempts vs fiue waies. tempts vs diuers waies. 1 One is, when hee tempts God against vs, la∣bouring to bring God out of liking with vs. Thus he insinuated the dispraises
of Iob to God, Iob, chap. 1. and 2. And thus Sathan stood at the right hand of Io∣shua the high Priest, to resist him before the Angell of the Couenant, Zachar. 3. 1. 2 Another way is, when he appears in some shape, and by voyce, or other∣waies terrifies men. 3 When he brings di∣stresses vpon mens bodies, or other heauy calamities, and thus also hee tempted Iob by GODS permis∣sion. 4 When he stirs vp o∣ther men to tempt vs: thus hee stirred vp Peter to tempt Christ, and disswa∣ded
him from his suffring, Math. 16. And thus hee tempted the Woman by meanes of the Serpent: and thus also hee imploy∣eth wicked men, daily to tempt by euill counsell & inticements. 5 The last and most v∣suall way is by iniecting, exciting, or suggesting e∣uill internally within our spirit. This is that kind of temptation I heere especi∣ally meane. 2 For the second, that wee may finde out the na∣ture of temptations, and the things whereabout Sa∣than workes, we may refer
all the temptations to three sorts. 3. Sorts of temptations by suggestiō. 1. Temptati∣ons of blas∣phemy. The first sort of tempta∣tions, are temptations to blasphemy: and thus hee tempts when hee suggests monstrous things against God, or the word of God, or the prouidence of God, or the like. The second sort are, 2. Temptati∣ons to parti∣cular sinnes. temptations to particular sinnes, as when he tempts to the deniall of Christ, as hee did Peter, and so hee tempts to lusts of all sorts. And so the Deuill is the father of lust, Iohn 8. 44. and euill Angels are spirituall wickednes, Ephes. 6. 13. and
thus also he tempts to rage or reuenge; and therefore the Apostle implies in his speech about anger, that to giue place to wrath, is to giue place to the Deuill, who vsually excites those violent passions, Eph. 4. 26. And thus also hee tempts to couetousnes, in respect of which sinne, the Deuill is said to enter into Iudas: And thus also hee tempts to lying, as in the case of Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. and so he tempts men to murther, either of them∣selues or of others. The third kind of temp∣tation 3. Tempta∣tions to des∣paire. is, the temptation to
despaire, which is, when he perswades with men to despaire of all mercy in God. Thus he made Iudas despaire: and into some degree of despaire for the time was Dauid himselfe entred, Psal. 77. Thus of the sorts of temptations. 3 Now it is wonderfull 9. Occasions of templati∣ons. necessary in the third place to take notice of the occa∣sions of temptations. Sa∣than vsually tempts not, but vpon some aduantage giuen him, & so there are many things, which as it were, tempt the Deuill to tempt men, as
First, solitarinesse: the Diuell watched to finde Solitarines. the woman alone from her husband, and then set vp∣on her. Such persons as loue solitarinesse, loue not their owne soules; for they giue great aduantage to Sathan to assault them and circumuent them, & there∣fore we should take heede of it. The second occasion is security, when the Deuill Security. spies that men be carelesse, and keepe no watch ouer their owne hearts, and are rechlesse in their courses, and goe from day to day, and feare not euill, then he
lies in wait to assault, by iniecting some vile or base temptation to sinne. The third occasion is Pride; when Paul is some∣what Pride. lifted vp with the consideration of his reue∣lations, then doth Sathan take his aduantage, and set vpon him with his messen∣ger, euen some vile temp∣tation: when we take liber∣ty to make our selues great in our owne eies, and nou∣rish the pleasing thoughts of high opinion, and selfe∣conceit, if God doe not greatly guard vs, wee are neere some desperate as∣sault of Sathan.
The fourth occasion is anger. The Deuill seldome Anger. forbeares to enter into the heart of the wrathfull per∣son, when anger hath set open the doore, as was no∣ted before out of Ephes. 4. 26. The fift occasion is dal∣liance with euill thoughts, 5. Dalliance with euill thoughts. when the Deuill sees vs play with contemplatiue wickednesse, and be well content to let our thoghts runne vpon sinful proiects or imaginations of sinnes, which perhaps wee inten∣ded not euer to commit. This tempts him to im∣ploy his skill to put fire to
those thoughts, so long till the whole heart bee ensna∣red by them, or by other waies, to draw vs into mis∣chiefe. These lusts will draw away, and Sathan en∣gendring with them can make them conceiue, &c. Iam. 1. 14. The sixt occasion is, the 6. Intempe∣rate vse of outward things. intemperate vse of outward things. For the Deuill wal∣keth about as a roaring Lion, seeking whō he may deuoure, and when he findes a man excessiuely bent to the things of this world, as meat, drinke, apparell, ri∣ches, pleasures, honours, &c. hee sets vpon him by
some of his methods to carry him away captiue at his will. Therefore the A∣postle Peter wills vs to bee sober, if we would preuent him; implying, that the Deuill will giue the onset, when hee findes vs intem∣perate, 1. Pet. 5. 8. The seuenth occasion is 7. Vnsetled∣nes in Faith vnsetlednesse in our assu∣rance of Gods fauour, and our owne saluation: We cannot resist the Deuill, if wee bee not stedfast in the faith, and wee giue him wonderfull aduantage, if we be tossed about like the waues of the Sea, and are vnconstant or carelesse in
matter of our faith; we ne∣uer barre out the Deuill soundly, till we be stedfast in our assurance, 1. Peter. 5. 8. 9. The eight occasion is, 8. Triall of Faith. when sometimes the Lord will haue vs tempted, only for the triall of our faith, and the grace which hee hath giuen vnto vs. Lastly, the ninth occasi∣on 9. Relapse into some grosse sinne. is, a relapse into some grosse sinne after calling, which is scourged with hi∣deous temptatiōs through a secret depth of Iustice in God, who thereby can shew how fearefull a thing it is so to offend.
CHAP. X. How the godly may comfort themselues in their temp∣tations. THe consolations a∣gainst temptations follow. A Christian, that feeles himselfe assaulted by the Deuill, may raise vp in his thoughts diuers contem∣plations, able to succour He may comfort him selfe from the conside∣ration, Of the com∣mon condi∣tion of the godly. him in his distresses: as 1 First, if hee consider that this is the case of all the godly, to be tempted: It is no new thing which
hath befallen him. Thus Paul comforts the Corin∣thians, No temptation hath befallen you, but what accom∣panies the nature of man, 1. Cor. 10. 13. And the A∣postle Peter hartens them to whom he writes, by this argument: The same afflic∣tions are accomplished vpon your brethren that are in the world, 1. Pet. 5. 9. This also the Apostle to the Ephesi∣ans affirmes, that those spi∣ritual wickednesses are found euen in the most heauenly places on earth, Ephes. 6. 12. The Apostles themselues were not free from this combat, & therefore Paul
saith, Wee wrestle with prin∣cipalities and powers, &c. 2 Secondly, if we con∣sider Of the mea∣sure. the measure of them, God will not lay any more vpon him, then he is able to beare, he may feare his owne strength, as Paul did, but God wil make his grace sufficient for him, 1. Cor. 10. 13. 2. Cor. 12. 9. Sathan is limited, hee can goe no further then his chaine will reach, and for that cause it is, that wee are taught to pray, that God would not lead vs into temptation, as acknowled∣ging that God doth dis∣pose and order the mea∣sure
of this kinde of afflic∣tion. 3 Thirdly, if hee con∣sider Of the short continuance. the short cōtinuance of his temptations; They may be fierce, but they are not long: GOD will shortly tread downe Sathan vnder our feete, Rom. 16. 20. We shal suffer but a while, 1. Pet. 5. 9. 10. 4 Fourthly, if hee seri∣ously Of diuers things in Christ: as meditate of diuers things in Christ his Saui∣our: as, First, his example. It 1. His example should bee lesse grieuous to bee tempted, because Christ himselfe was temp∣ted in all things, as he is, sin
sinne onely excepted, Hebr. 4. 15. Secondly, Christ hath 2 His victory ouer the De∣uill. atchieued an admirable vi∣ctory ouer these principa∣lities and powers, and hath triumphed ouer them, and made a shew of them o∣penly, Col. 2. 15. Thirdly, there is in 3 His sympa∣thie. Christ a sympathy and fel∣low-feeling. He is touch∣ed with our infirmities, and doth much compassi∣onate our case, Heb. 4. 15. Fourthly, he hath made intercession, and praied for 4 His Inter∣cession. vs, that our faith might not faile. For that which hee assured to Peter, hee per∣formeth
also for all the e∣lect, Luk. 22. 31. Fiftly, Christ is the true 5 His vertue for healing vs. brazen Serpent, which is lift vp of God, that when we feele our selues stung with these fiery serpents, by looking vpon Christ we are sure to be healed, Iohn 3. 15. Lastly, we are sure to be helped and succoured by 6 His succour. Christ in the combat: Hee was tempted himselfe, that hee might succour them that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. 5 Fiftly, if he consider Of the issue out of temp∣tation. the issue that GOD will giue, He will giue issue out of the temptation, 1. Cor. 10. 13.
He will tread down Sathan, Rom. 16. 20. He will stablish vs, after wee haue suffered a while, 1. Pet. 5. 9, 10. If wee resist the Deuill, he shall flye from vs, Iam. 4. 7. 8. If hee lead vs into temptation, hee will deliuer vs from euill, Math. 6. 13. The Lord will breake the head of the great Leuiathan, the crooked ser∣pent, the Dragon of the Sea, Isay, 27. 1. 6 If he consider the ef∣fects of temptation, it is Of the effects. the schoole of Christ to traine vs vp in spirituall souldierly, they cannot hurt vs, they make vs more humble, 2. Corin. 12. 8. 9.
They are for our triall, 1. Pet. 1. 7. Sathan doth but winnow vs, wee lose no∣thing but our chaffe, Luke 21. 31. Ob. But it seemes, temp∣tations are a grieuous e∣uill, because we are taught to pray against them in a speciall manner in the Lords praier, which shews that my estate is miserable, in that I am ledde into temptation. Ans. It is true, that wee How wee may pray a∣gainst temp∣tations. must pray against tempta∣tions, & that it is a iudge∣ment; but yet no other, then sicknesse, pouerty, or the like: and therefore we
are not to pray against them simply, but with sub∣mission to Gods will; only we must pray absolutely to be deliuered from the euill of temptation, which lat∣ter words doe restraine or correct the former. Quest. But when I am tempted, how may I know that I am not ouercome of the temptation? An. Obserue thine own How wee may know that we are not ouer∣come of temptations. heart in the entertainment of those vilde iniections. If thou abhorthem as soon as they come in, and giue no manner of consent vn∣to them, thou art free. For Christ himselfe was temp∣ted
by euill cogitations cast into his minde: (for Note. the Apostle saith) He was tempted in like manner as wee are, and yet he was not guilty of the euill of the temptation. It is true, that for the most part wee are infected in some degree or other by it: but yet it is not impossible for man to bee free from the euill of temptation, as that exam∣ple shewes. But secondly, thou maist Two signes. know whether thou be o∣uercome or no, by two signes. For first, if thou feele the temptation to be an affliction to thee, and
account it an euil day, and art burthened vnder it, as if it were a very buffeting of thy body, thou art yet safe: The Deuill hath no victory, thou art not ledde captiue, all this while Paul was worse feared then hurt, 2. Cor. 12. 7. 8. 9. Se∣condly, all the while thou resistest by prayer, & wra∣stlest, with it, and keepest thy spirituall weapons in thy hands, thou art the conqueror, for thou art as∣sured of God. If thou re∣sist, the Deuill will flye from thee in due time. Thou art neuer ouercome, till the temptation please thee, &
thou resoluest to make no resistance spiritually, Iam. 4. 8. Quest. But what if I bee ouercome? am I not in a desperate condition, if the temptation haue preuai∣led ouer me? An. Thy case is mourn∣full, but not desperate: for Peter and Dauid were ouer∣come of the temptation, and though it cost them many teares, yet they were recouered. Christ hath made intercessiō for thee, and will heale thee, if thou make thy recourse vnto him, and penitently plead
for mercy before the throne of Grace. CHAP. XI. Comforts against our daily infirmities. HItherto of the con∣solations against the temptations of Sathan. There remaine two other distresses of the Spirit. 1. The one arising from the sence of daily in∣firmities. 2. The other from the feare of falling a∣way, and losing of what we haue.
1 For the first, there are many waies, by which a Christian may fence his heart against the discou∣ragements that arise from the sence of daily infirmi∣ties. And these promises are Two sorts of promises. of two sorts: For they are eyther such as giue vs ar∣guments of consolation in themselues, or such as withall remoue the obiec∣tions are wont to arise in our hearts vpon some par∣ticular consideration of the manner of the infirmi∣ties in vs: By infirmities, I meane What is meant by in∣firmities. defects, Ignorance, Indis∣position,
Feare, Discou∣ragements, Forgetfulnes, Omissions, Distractions, Particular falls through frailty, some kinds of euill thoughts, Dulnesse, Vn∣cheerefulnesse, Doubts, and the euill of our good workes. The arguments of Conso∣lation The com∣forts raised from the consideratiō. are: 1 There are differences Of thy age in Christ. in the degrees of the age of Christ in vs: Some Christians are but weake, young ones, lambs, babes, new formed, and GOD knowes it, and lookes for no more from such, then what agrees to their age:
He is a compassionate Fa∣ther, that doth not require the same power of gifts in a weake Christian, which he lookes for in a strong. 2 It should much ease 2 Of thy con∣dition now vnder grace. vs to remember, that wee are not vnder the Law, but vnder Grace, Rom. 6. 14. Wee are deliuered from the rigor of the Law, God now doth not expect per∣fection from vs, nor ac∣counts vs as transgressors, because we are imperfect, but hath receiued vs to the benefit of the new coue∣nant: In which, perfecti∣on is onely required in Christ, and vprightnesse
3 Wee may bee very 3. Of the fruit∣fulnesse may be in a weak Christian. weake in strength & pow∣er of gifts, and yet very fruitfull: we may do much good while we are in the infancy of Grace, which the comparison of the vine (to which the godly are resembled) shewes. The vine is not the stron∣gest of Trees, and yet is more fruitfull in pleasing fruit, then many other trees, not of the field only, but of the garden also. Now the godly are like∣ned to the vine, Esay 27. 2. to shew, that al their weak∣nesse notwithstanding, they may bee aboundant
in pleasing fruite. 4 The goodnes of Gods Of the good∣nes of Gods nature: for he is nature should much in∣courage and comfort vs herein: and so if we consi∣der foure praises in the nature of God. First, he is gracious: he stands not vpon desert, 1 Gracious. we may buy of him with∣out money, hee can loue vs for his owne sake, though wee be able no way to plead our owne merits, Esay 55. 1. 2. 3. Secondly, hee is mer∣cifull, 2 Mercifull. yea mercy pleaseth him, it is no trouble to him to shew mercy, but he delighteth in it, Mic. 7. 18.
Thirdly, hee is slow to anger, Infirmities will 3 Slow to an∣ger. not prouoke him to wrath; hee can delight in vs still, though wee haue many wants and weakenesses, Ps. 103. Fourthly, he is ready to forgiue; if by our too 4 Ready to forgiue. much carelesnesse and frequency in offending, he be not vrged to dis∣pleasure, yet hee is quickly pacified; a few praiers and teares in the confession of our faults, will turne away all his displeasure, so as he will remember our iniquities no more, Ps. 103.
5 The Lord will streng∣then Of the hope of strength and his owne worke in vs by his Spirit, and though Grace bee but in the bud, yet his blessing shall be vpon our buds, and he wil make vs grow as the willowes plan∣ted by the water-courses: the hope of increase should stay vs against the present sense of weakenesse, Esay, 44. 2. 3. 4. 6 There are many Of many things in Christ: as things comfortable to be thought vpon in Christ. For first, he makes ac∣count 1 His opinion of vs. to finde vs sicke, and sinners, hee doth not expect to finde vs righteous altogether:
Hee came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mark. 2. 17. Secondly, wee haue such an High Priest, as 2 His compas∣sion. knowes how to have compassion vpon those that are out of the way: he is touched with our infir∣mities, hee doth rather pitty vs, then hate vs for our weakenesses, Hebr. 4. 15. Thirdly, his interces∣sion 3 His inter∣cession. couers our infirmi∣ties. If any man sinne, we haue an Aduocate, euen Iesus Christ the righte∣ous, who is the propitiati∣on for our sinnes. Hee
takes an order in Hea∣uen, that God shall not bee turned away from vs, hee makes daily in∣tercession for vs. Fourthly, his bloud will powerfully cleanse 4 His bloud. our Consciences from the deadnesse which is in our workes, Heb. 9. 14. Fiftly, hee is the Lord our righteousnesse, and 5 The imputa∣tion of his righteousnes. that is his name by which he wil be called, Ierem. 23. 6. His perfect righteousnes is as truly ours, as if wee had per∣formed it our selues: so as although we be most vnperfect in our selues,
yet in Christ God can finde no fault in vs, nor see any transgression: Though our sanctifica∣tion be spotted, yet our iustification hath no blemish in it. 7 The helps God hath The helpe of the Mini∣stery. affoorded vs in his Mini∣sters, may bee some ease vnto vs: though for weak∣nesse we be but lambs, yet God hath prouided for vs; he hath giuen vs shepheards to feede vs, and giuen them a charge to looke to his Lambes, as well as his sheepe. The Church is compared to a nurse with brests, and wee haue a pro∣mise
to sucke out of the brests of his consolations Ierem. 23. 4. Esay 66. 11. 12. 13. Iohn 21. 19. 8 We should especial∣ly Of diuers particular fauours God hath assured vs of. bee refreshed with the consideration of diuers particular fauours, GOD hath assured vs of in his word, as First, that hee will not deal with vs after our sins, nor reward vs after our ini∣quities, Psal. 103. Secondly, that hee will spare vs, as a man spareth his sonne that serueth him. No father can shew com∣passion like to that which God will bee bound to
shew to his children, Mal. 3. 17. Thirdly, that the smoa∣king flaxe shall not bee quen∣ched, and the bruised reede shall not be broken; though grace were in vs but like the heat in the week of the candle when the light is out, yet God hath taken or∣der that it shall not be ex∣tinguished, Esay 42. 3. Fourthly, that in all times of need we shal haue accesse vnto the Throne of Grace, and obtaine a sup∣ply of all our wants; so as we may go boldly to aske what we need, in the name of Christ, and it shall bee gi∣uen
vs, Heb. 4. vlt. Fiftly, that hee will ac∣cept of our desires, and our will to do his seruice, shall be taken for the deed, so as he will reckon of so much good to be done by vs, as wee desired and endeuou∣red to doe: our workes are as good as wee desired to haue them to be. The pre∣parations of our hearts are reckned with God as great things, Esay 55. 1. Ierem. 30. 2. 2. Cor. 8. 12. Sixtly, that in all his dea∣ling with vs, he will vse vs in all compassion with a ten∣der respect of our weake∣nesse. Our weeping and
supplication shall bee ac∣cepted before him, and he will cause vs to walke in a straight way, in which wee shall not stumble, Ier. 31. 9. In all our afflictions he is af∣flicted. In loue, in care, in pitty hee will redeeme vs, and carry vs as in the daies of old, Esay 63. 9. As he hath borne vs from the wombe, so will hee bee the same still vnto old age, euen vnto the gray haires. Hee will carry vs in the armes of his com∣passion: Hee hath made vs, hee will beare, euen hee will carry, and will deliuer vs, Esay 46. 3. 4. He will gather the Lambes with his armes,
and carry them in his bo∣som, & gently lead those that are with young, Esay 40. Seuenthly, that he will supply al our necessities out of the riches of his glory, Phil. 4. 19. Eightly, that he wil passe by our meere frailties, and take no notice of the errors of our liues, that arise from meer infirmities; there is no God like vnto him for passing by transgressions, Mic. 7. 18. Ninthly, That hee will strengthen vs, and make vs grow in the gifts be∣stowed vpon vs: The Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the chil∣dren
of Israel. Ioel. 3. 16. He giueth power to the faint, and to them that haue no might, hee increaseth strength: they that wait vp∣on the Lord, shal renew their strength, Esay 40. 29. 31. He wil be as the dew to his peo∣ple. They shall grow as the Lilly, and cast foorth their rootes, as Lebanon. Their branches shall spread, and their beauty be as the Oliue tree, and their smell as Le∣banon. They shall reuiue as the corne, and grow as the vine, Hosh. 14. 5. 6. 7. And to assure all this, God would haue vs to know that he hath married
vs vnto himselfe, and holds himselfe tied in the coue∣nant of marriage with all kindnesse and faithfulnes, to take the care & charge of vs for euer, Hosh. 2. 19. 9 To conclude this first sort of promises, what knowest thou what GOD Of what God may bring thee to. may bring thee vnto, not∣withstanding thy weake∣nesse? He can make thee to multiply as the bud of the field. Hee can make thee increase and waxe great. Hee can make thee attaine vnto excellent ornaments, Ezech. 10. 7. Since thou art the branch of his planting, the worke of his hand, he
may greatly glorifie him∣selfe in thee, so as thy little one may be as a thousand, & thy small one as a strong Na∣tion, God can performe it in his due time, Esay 60. 21 22. Though thou haue but a little strength, God hath set before thee such an open dore, as no man can shut: and God can make thee stand in the loue of the trueth, without denying his name when the hower of tempta∣tion comes vpon the world, & many of greater vnder∣standing fall, Reu. 3. 8. 9. 10. Hitherto of the princi∣pall consolations in the case of infirmities.
CHAP. XII. Diuers obiections are answe∣red. IT followeth that I should answer certaine Obiections which doe vsually depresse the hearts of men, and by the trouble of which they neglect the former consolations. Ob. Some one may say, My infirmities are the more grieuous, because I find affliction of spirit ioy∣ned with them. These ter∣rors and passions vpon my heart doe dismay me, and
make mee doubt, those comforts doe not belong vnto me. Solu. God may afflict thy spirit, and yet be well pleased with thee; yea therefore thy case is the more comfortable, be∣cause thou feelest the waight and burthen of thy sinnes, as these places of Scripture following, most euidently and com∣fortably shew: namely, Psalm. 34. 18. The eyes of the Lord are vpon the righ teous, and his eares are open vnto their cry. Math. 11. 28. 29. Come vnto me, al ye that are weary
and laden, and I will ease you. Take my yoke on you, and learne of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall finde rest vnto your soules. Ierem. 31. 25. For I haue satiate the weary soule, and I haue replenished euery sor∣rowfull soule. And their soule shal be as a watred gar∣den, and they shall haue no more sorrow: the latter part of the 12. verse, &c. Isaiah 63. 9. In all their troubles he was troubled, and the Angell of his presence sa∣ued them. In his loue and in his mercy he redeemed them,
and he bare them and carri∣ed them alwaies continually. Psal. 31. 21. 22. Blessed be the Lord: for he hath shew∣ed his maruellous kindnesse toward me in a strong City. Though I sayd in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight; yet thou heardst the voyce of my prayer, when I cried vnto thee. Psal. 103. 9. He will not alwaies chide, neyther keepe his anger for euer. Ob. But I offend daily. Solu. That is cleerely an∣swered in Gods promise: For he saith, he will multi∣ply pardon, or abundantly pardon, Esay. 57. 7.
Ob. But I finde I grow worse then I haue bin, my hart is much out of order. Sol. If there be a heart in thee desirous to return, there is comfort also a∣gainst this distresse. The Lord wil heale thy back-sli∣ding, if thou take vnto thee words to confesse thy fal∣ling away, Hosh. 14. 2. 3. 4. Behold (saith the Lord) I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and reueale vnto them the abundance of peace and truth, Ier. 33. 6. There is healing in the wings of the Sonne of righte∣ousnesse, and ye shall go forth and grow vp as the Calues of
the stall, Malach. 4. 2. Ob. But I am extream∣ly burthened with my ig∣norance, this is a continu∣all grieuance vnto me. Solu. There are many cōforts against ignorance. 1 It is a speciall promise 8. Constru∣ctions about ignorance in the godly. of God in the new Coue∣nant, that hee will write his lawes in thy hart, and he will make thee to know the Lord: thou maist goe boldly to the throne of Grace, to beg the further illumina∣tion of the Spirit of God. This is one of the suites God cannot deny. 2 God hath promised to leade thee by a way which
thou hast not knowne: Hee will preserue thee by his knowledge, though thou be vnacquainted with the way thy selfe. He that led his people from Babel to Sion, when they scarce knew a foote of that long way, will lead thee in the streight way from earth to heauen, if thou seeke a way of GOD as they did, Isay 42. 16. 3 Wee haue such an High Priest, as knowes how to haue compassion on the ig∣norant. Hee that required that property of the High Priest in the Law, will much more expresse it
himselfe, Hebr. 5. 1. 3. 4 This must bee thy glory, and the crowne of reioycing, that though thou be ignorant of many things, yet thou knowest God, and Christ crucified, and this is eternall life, Ioh. 17. 3. 5 The Ministers of the Gospell are ours, and ther∣fore if we attend vpon the Word, and continue in it, wee shall know the truth: their instructions shall bee daily distilled into thy heart like drops of raine, 1. Cor. 3. 22. 23. 6 The anointing thou hast receiued, shall teach thee all
needfull things, & lead thee into all truth, 1. Ioh. 2. 27. 7 There is a seede of heauenly doctrin cast into thy heart, which shall euer remaine in thee. It is inde∣lible, it cannot be blotted out, 1. Ioh. 3. 9. 8 Lastly, knowledge is the gift of Christ, and as we know that he is come, so wee beleeue that hee will giue vs vnderstanding, that wee may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, euen in his Sonne Ie∣sus Christ: this is the true God, and eternall life, 1. Ioh. 5. 20. Ob. But we want, or haue
lost the meanes of know∣ledge; our teachers are ta∣ken from vs. Solu. It is true; Where vi∣sion faileth, the people faint, but yet: 1 After God hath giuen you the bread of affliction, & the water of aduersity, hee will restore teachers, and no more restraine instructions, Esay 30. 20. 2 Though thou see no way of helpe, yet thou knowest not how God can prouide; He can open Riuers on the tops of mountaines, and he maketh the wilder∣nesse a standing poole, when his people thirst and
cry vnto him, Isaiah 41. 17, 18. 3 If ordinary meanes faile and be denied, God will then supply of his spi∣rit, and make that meanes which is left, to suffice for thy preseruation, and buil∣ding vp, Philip. 1. 9. Now that there may be the more aboundant sup∣port vnto our harts in this case of infirmities. I will open two places of Scrip∣ture that doe meete with the most obiections of our hearts. The first is, Exodus 34. The full ex∣plication of the words in Exod. 34. 6. 7. 6. 7. where the Lord pro∣claimeth the goodnesse of
his nature, that all men may take notice of it, and giue him the praise of his rich grace, where hee so describeth the Lord, that in his titles hee giueth an answere to many obiecti∣ons. 1. Ob. If thou say thy in∣firmities may alienate the Lord from thee? Solu. He answers, that hee is Iehouah, alwaies the same, vnchangeable. Hee will not alter his loue to∣wards thee, but loue thee to the end, & for the more assurance, hee repeated that title twice, because he knowes, we most doubt of
that, and haue most neede to be succoured with that Argument, as the founda∣tion of all our comfort. 2. Ob. If thou say thou hast strong inclinations to sinne, or strange tempta∣tions, or great impedi∣ments, or many aduersa∣ries and discouragements? Solu. He answers, he is God, or strong; to signifie that nothing shall hinder the worke of his grace to∣ward thee, but hee will keepe thee by his power, and make his grace suffici∣ent for thee. 3. Ob. If thou say hee is of pure eyes, and cannot
but discerne thy faults, and sinne is sinne in the sight of God. Sol. He answers, that he is mercifull. 4. Ob. If thou say thou deseruest no such mercy. Solu. He answeres that he is gracious, & doth not stand vpon desert. He will shew mercy, not because thou art good, but because he is good. 5. Ob. If thou say, The daily repeating & renew∣ing of thy sinnes may pro∣uoke him, though hee bee mercifull and gracious. Solu. Hee answeres, that he is long-suffering.
6. Ob. If thou say thou hast many defects and wants to be supplied. Solu. Hee answers, that he is full of goodnesse. 7. Ob. If thou saist, thou art ashamed of the igno rance, which is more then can be conceiued. Sol. He answers, that he is abundant in truth to supply thy defects, & to performe his promise, though thou haue but a little faith. 8. Ob. If thou say thou doest beleeue that God is all this vnto some men, & that Abraham, and Dauid, and others that were in great fauour with GOD,
haue found all this. But for thy selfe thou art so vile a creature, and so meane a person, as it is not for thee to expectsuch great things of God, Solu. He answeres, that hee keepes mercy for thou∣sands. Hee hath not spent all vpon Dauid, or the Pa∣triarchs, or Prophets, or Apostles, or Martyrs, or Ministers: but he hath an Ocean of goodnesse still to be shewed, without res∣pect of persons, to all that come vnto him for mercy. 9. Ob. If thou yet say, thou art guilty of diuers sorts of sinnes, and that it
is not one offence onely, but many that lye vpon thee, and some of them such as thou darest not name, they are so vile, Solu. He answers, that hee forgiues iniquity, trans∣gression and sinne, that is, all sorts of sinnes, of nature, of weakenesse, or of presump∣tion. 10. Obiec. If any other should say, this is a do∣ctrine of liberty, and may embolden men to sinne, Solu. He answers to that, he will by no means cleare the wicked, those are fa∣uours onely hee will de∣clare to the penitent, that
are weary of their sins, and would faine offend no more. 2 The second place is, The full ex∣plication of the words in Ezech. 36. 25. &c. Ezech. 36. 25. and 7. where many obiections are eui∣dently answered, the con∣solations beeing fitted of purpose, so as euery word almost preuents some doubt might arise in mens mindes: as 1. Ob. I am exceeding lothsome, and a creature extremely filthy in respect of my sinnes. Solu. I will powre cleane water vpon you; that is, I will wash your soules in the fountain of my grace,
and both forgiue you, and sanctifie you. 2. Ob. Oh it cannot be that any meanes should doe me good, I am so to∣tally defiled. Sol. Ye shall be cleane; tis easie for God to clense vs, tis our owne vnbeliefe hin∣ders vs: God hath promi∣sed our cleansing. 3. Ob. O but my sinnes are great and grosse sins, I haue offended more grie∣uously then other men. Sol. From your Idols, & from your filthinesse will I cleanse you; though thy sins were as great as Ido∣latry in the first Table, or
whoredom in the second, yet God can forgiue and sanctifie thee. 4. Ob. But my nature is so bad, that if I were forgi∣uen, I should offend a∣gaine. Sol. A new heart will I giue thee; where GOD forgiues our sinnes, hee giues vs another dispositi∣on, and changeth our na∣tures, vers. 2. 6. 5. Ob. O, but I am so ig∣norant, I cannot but of∣fend. Solu. A new spirit will I put within you; he will giue vs vnderstanding and wis∣dome.
6. Ob. But I am so dull and hard-hearted, that I am not sensible of my own distresse or wants, and can∣not bee affected with the excellency of the goodnes or promises of God. Solu. I will take away the stony heart out of your body; God will cure vs of hard∣nesse of heart. 7. Ob. But if my heart were softned, and that I had some feeling, it would grow hard and senselesse againe. Sol. I will giue you a heart of flesh. 8. Ob. O, but if all this were done for mee, yet I
know not how to order my selfe, and what to doe to goe on in a religious course of life. Solu. I will put my Spirit within you, verse 27. 9. Ob. If the Lord doe giue mee his Spirit, yet I feare I shall not bee ruled by it, but offend and grieue the Spirit of God, through ignorance, or want of strength. Solu. I will cause you to keepe my Statutes, and ye shall keepe my iudgements, and doe them: The Lord will worke our workes for vs, and teach vs to obey, and giue vs power to doe
what he commandeth. 10. Ob. I finde a maruel∣lous vnfitnesse in the very things of my outward e∣state. Solu. Ye shall dwell in the land; the Lord will blesse vs in outward things, as well as in spirituall. 11. Ob. But when I come to vse the creatures, me thinkes I see such vnwor∣thinesse in my selfe, that I am almost afraid to med∣dle with them. Sol. I gaue the land to your Fathers: you hold these outward blessings, not by your deserts, but by my gift, and my gift is anci∣ent,
I bestowed these things on your Fathers. 12. Ob. It may bee so; our Fathers were in coue∣nant with God, and more eminent men, and more worthy then we. Solu. Yee shall be my peo∣ple, and I will bee your God: Gods couenant of grace is with the Fathers, and their generations after them: if he haue beene thy Fathers God, hee will be thy God also, and thou shalt bee of his people. 13. Ob. O, but I finde such daily sins, & I am pol∣luted in euery thing I doe, I am many waies vnclean.
Sol. I will also saue you from your vncleannes: God will multiply pardon, hee will forgiue vs, and com∣fort vs against our sinnes after calling. 14. Ob. But how shall I beleeue all this? for I see, God hath plagued vs by famine, and scourged vs with great want, which stil lies vpon vs. Solu. I will call for the corne, and increase it, and lay no more famine vpon you, & I wil multiply the fruit of the trees, and the increase of the field, &c. 15. Ob. But is there no condition on our part?
Solu. Yes; for all this shall bee done vnto you, when you remember your owne euill waies, and your do∣ings that were not good, and shall loath your selues for your iniquities, and for your abo∣minations. These comforts belong vnto vs, when wee are throughly displeased with our selues for our faults. And besides, for all this must the Lord be sought vnto, wee shall obtaine all, or any of these, but wee must aske first, vers. 31. 37.
CHAP. XIII. Shewing how a godly man may comfort himselfe a∣gainst the feare of falling away. HItherto of the com∣forts against our daily infirmities. The consolations against the feare of our falling a∣way follow. Wee may three waies comfort our selues against this feare, namely, if wee consider God, or Christ, or our selues. 1 In God there are two things of excellent obser∣uation, both of them ex∣prest
in the Scriptures. The first is, that hee hath vndertaken to preserue vs from falling away. The se∣cond shewes vs distinctly, how he will performe this. For the first, that GOD will keepe vs from falling away, we haue four things to assure vs. First, the promises of God directly to that end: for he assures vs, that his Elect shall enioy the worke of their Four things may assure vs that God will keep vs from falling away. hands, and shall not labour in vaine, Esay 65. 22. 23. The smoking weeke shall not be quenched, nor the bruised 1 His promises reed broken. Esay 42. Not one of them shall bee lacking
in the whole flocke, Ierem. 23. 4. God will build them, and not plucke them downe, hee will plant them, and not pull them vp. Ierem. 24. 6. He will confirme vs, in and to the end, that we may bee blamelesse in the Day of our Lord Iesus Christ: for God is faithfull, who hath called vs to the fellowship of his Sonne Iesus Christ our Lord. 1. Cor. 1. 8. 9. 2. Secondly, the de∣cree 2 His decree. of GOD, concerning which the Apostle saith, That the foundation of God remaineth sure: he knoweth who are his. Though Hy∣meneus and Philetus fall a∣way, yet none that call vp∣on
the name of the Lord, and depart from iniquity, can neuer bee lost, 2. Tim. 2. 19. Thirdly, the attributes of God: and so there bee 3. Three attri∣butes in God viz. three things in God may wōderfully settle vs against this feare. The one is, his faithfulnesse. The other is His faith∣fulnesse. his power. The third is his immutable loue: All three are laid to pawne for the performance of this pre∣seruation, & so pleaded in Scripture. For his faithful∣nes, the Apostle therethēce concludes, that the godly shall bee confirmed to the end, as was alleadged be∣fore,
1. Corin. 1. 8, 9. and so hee reasoneth, writing to the Thessalonians: The Lord is faithfull, who shall stablish you, and keepe you from euill, 2. Thess. 3. 3. And of the power of God these places speake, Wee are kept His power. by the power of God to salua∣tion, 1. Pet. 1. 5. I know (saith Paul) whom I haue beleeued, and I am perswaded that hee is able to keepe that which I haue committed to him a∣gainst that day, 2. Tim. 1. 12 Now vnto him that is able to keep you from falling (saith Iude) and to preserue you faultlesse before the presence of his glory, with exceeding
ioy. To the onely wise God our Sauiour, be glory, and Ma∣iesty, Dominion and Power, now and euer, Iude 24. And His loue. for the loue of God, that it is vnchangeable, there is apparant proofe. Whom he loueth, hee loueth to the end, Iohn 13. 1. so as wee may bee confident in this, that hee which hath begun a good worke in vs, will performe it till the day of Christ, Philip. 1. 6. Fourthly, wee haue the 4 His seale. seale of God for it, and he hath giuen vs earnest, that wee shall certainely enioy the inheritance purchased for vs. And thus euery
one that beleeueth, is sea∣led by the holy Spirit of pro∣mise, which also is our ear∣nest, Ephes. 1. 14. 15. and therefore we shall bee sta∣blished, 2. Cor. 1. 22. Now for the second; If any aske how GOD will do this? I answer, That the Scrip∣ture shewes how this will be performed thus: For 1 God will not cast off his What God will doe to keepe vs frō falling away people, he will neuer forsake his inheritance, Psal. 94. 14. 1. Sam. 12. 22. For the Lord loueth iudgement, and for sa∣keth not the Saints, & ther∣fore they are preserued for e∣uer, Psalm. 37. 28.
2 God will put his feare into their hearts, that they shall not depart from him: For this is his Couenant with his people, that Hee will not turne away from them to doe them good, and hee will put his feare into them, that they shall not de∣part from him, Ierem. 32. 40, 41. 3 To make all the su∣rer, hee will put his Spirit into them, which shall leade them into all truth, and cause them to keep his statutes, and to doe them, Ioh. 14. Ezech. 36. 4 He will vphold them, and order their wayes, and
keepe their feet, that they fall not. The steps of the good man are ordered by the Lord, & hee delighteth in his way: Though he fall, hee shall not vtterly bee cast downe: for the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand, Psal. 37. 23. 24. Hee holdeth our soule in life, and suffereth not our feet to be moued, Psal. 66. 9. Hee will keepe the feete of his Saints, 1. Sam. 2. 9. 5. Lastly, GOD will worke their workes for them, & continually assist them with his presence, and blessings, Esay 26. Eze. 36. Phil. 2. 13. And thus of the comforts that we may
gather from God. Now secondly, in Christ there are three things may minister much establish∣ment Three things in Christ may comfort vs. in our hearts against this feare. 1 His Intercession: he 1 His inter∣cession. hath specially praied for vs, that God would keepe vs from euill, Iohn 17. and therefore is able to saue vs to the vttermost, because hee euer loueth to make Interces∣sion for vs, Hebr. 7. 25. 2 The consideration of 2 His office herein. his office heerein. It is his worke to be Omega as well as Alpha, to be the finisher of our faith, as well as the author of it: He is the end
as well as the beginning, Reu. 21. 6. Heb. 12. 2. 3 The power of Christ, 3 His power. None can take vs out of his hand, Ioh. 10. & as was said before, hee is able to saue vs to the vttermost, Heb. 7. 25. Thus of the consideration of Christ also. Now thirdly, in our selues wee may looke vpon three 3. Things in our selues may com∣fort vs. things, as wee are in the e∣state of grace. For first, we are borne a∣gaine to a liuely hope of an immortall inheritance reser∣ued for vs in Heauen: Our new birth intitles vs to hea∣uen, and it is kept for vs, and our hope is liuely, 1. Pet. 1. 3.
Secondly, our seed abi∣deth in vs: It cannot bee blotted out. Hee that is borne of God, sinneth not, because his seede remai∣neth in him, 1. Iohn. 3. 9. Thirdly, eternall life is begun in vs, Ioh. 17. 3. Now if it bee life eternall, how can it end? How can we fall away from it? Naturall life may end, but Spiritual life can neuer end.
CHAP. XIIII. Promises that concerne Prayer. HItherto of promises that concerne affli∣ction. And in as∣much as my purpose was but to fence the godly mā setled in his iustification, against the grieuances which might befall him in respect of afflictions, du∣ring the time of his pilgri∣mage heere: I shall end with the discourse of those promises, sauing that I will giue a taste of the last sort
of promises, viz. such as are encouragements to holy graces or duties. I will not instance in the promises made to the loue of God, to meekenesse, to such as seeke God, to the loue of the Word, and the like: But onely I will open the promises made to the prayers of the godly, and the rather, because Chri∣stians are most troubled a∣bout their prayers. The promises that con∣cerne Those pro∣mises refer∣red to three heads. prayer, may be refer∣red to three heads; For eyther they are such as as∣sure vs that God will heare the praiers of his seruants,
or they shew vs, what in prayer hee will heare: or else they describe the won∣derfull goodnesse of God in the manner how he will heare. For the first, that the Lord will certainely heare prayer, these places of Scripture do most com∣fortably assure vs. Esay 58. 9. Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answere: thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. Math. 21. 22. And what∣soeuer ye shall aske in prayer, if ye belieue, yee shall receiue it. Iohn. 14. 13. And what∣soeuer yee aske in my name,
that will I doe, that the Fa∣ther may bee glorified in the Sonne. 1. Iohn. 3. 14. 15. And this is the assurance that wee haue in him, that if wee aske any thing according to his will, he heareth vs. And if we know that hee heareth vs, whatsoeuer wee aske, we know that wee haue the petitions that wee haue desired of him. Iob. 22. 27. Thou shalt make thy prayer vnto him, and hee shall heare thee, and thou shalt render thy vowes. Iob 33. 26. He shall pray vnto God, and hee will be fa∣uourable vnto him, and hee
shall see his face with ioy; for he will render vnto man his righteousnesse. Psal. 34. 15, 17. The eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous, and his eares are open vnto their cry. The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth them, and de∣liuereth them out of all their troubles. Psalm. 50. 15. Call vpon mee in the day of trouble, so will I deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. Iohn 15. 16. That what∣soeuer ye shall aske of the Fa∣ther in my name, hee may giue it you. Iohn 16. 23. And in that
shall ye aske me nothing: Ve∣rily, verily I say vnto you, whatsoeuer ye shall aske the Father in my name, hee will giue it you. 2 For the second, it may much comfort vs, if we consider that God will not onely heare our pray∣ers in generall, but our voyce, Psal. 5. 3. Our very desires, Psalm. 10. 17. Our teares, Psalm. 39. 12. The very naming of Christ shal not bee done without re∣gard, 2 Tim. 2. 19. Our groaning, Psalm. 102. 20. When we are destitute of words to expresse our selues, our groaning, our
teares, yea the very desires of our hearts is an effectual prayer to God. Hee doth not looke what we do say, but what wee would say. If we come like little chil∣dren, and but name our Fathers name, and cry, ma∣king moane, it shall bee heard. 3 But in the third point appeares the wonder of his compassion: For 1 God will heare with∣out despising their prayer, Psal. 102. 17. 2 Hee will not reproach them, nor hit them in the teeth with what is past, or their present frailties, Iam. 1. 5.
3 Hee will prepare their hearts too: he wil as it were helpe them to draw their petitions, Psalm. 10. 17. 4 He takes delight in hea∣ring their prayers, Pro. 15. 8 5 Hee lookes from heauen of purpose to heare their groanes, Psalm. 102. 19, 20. His eares are open, there is not the least impediment in his hearing, Psal. 34. 15. It is his very nature to be a God that heareth prayers: It is not contrary to his dis∣position, Psal. 65. 1. 6 He thinkes thoughts of peace to giue an end, and expectation, Ierem. 29 11, 12, 13.
7 He will be plenteous in mercy, to them that call vp∣on him, Psal. 85. 5. Iam. 1. 5. He giueth liberally. 8 He will answer them, and somtimes shew them wondrous things, which they know not, Ierem. 33. 3. 9 He will refresh them also with much ioy and comfort of heart: Hee will be many times, as the dew vnto their harts, Iob 33. 26. 10 It is a singular com∣passion that hee will heare euery one that comes with petitions to him, hee will except no man: All shall be heard, whosoeuer asketh, shal haue, Mat. 7. 7. Lu. 11. 10
11 It is yet more com∣passion, that God wil heare them in all they aske, what∣soeuer they desire of him in the name of Christ: They may haue what they will, Mark. 11. 24. Iohn 15. 7. 12 The spirit shall helpe their infirmities, when they know not what to pray for as they ought, Rom. 8. 26. 13 God will crown the praiers of his seruants with this honour, that they shall be the signes both of their sanctification, and of their saluation, Iohn 9. 31. Rom. 10. 13. If God heare their prayers, hee will receiue them vp to glory.
14 Lastly, the Lord shewes a wonderfull com∣passion in the very time of hearing prayer: hee will heare in the morning, Psal. 5. 3. In the very season; the due time, when wee are in trouble: yea so, as he will in our affliction in a speci∣all manner let vs know, that he is our God, and that he will deliuer vs, Zach. 13. 9. Psalm 51, 15. and 91, 15. Hee is ready to be found, Psalme 47. 1. Daniels prayers were heard from the very first day he made them, Daniel 10. 12. yea God will heare vs while we speake vnto him, and answer vs, before we can
expresse our selues vnto him many times, Esay 65. 24. Yea the Lord heareth the prayers of his people, euen then when they think they are cast out of sight, Ps. 31. 32. FINIS.
