4545 99840595 5116
A RELATION OF THE LATE ROY∣ALL ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY THE RIGHT HONO∣RABLE THE LORD KNOVVLES, AT Cawsome-House neere Redding: to our most Gracious Queene, Queene ANNE, in her Progresse toward the Bathe, vpon the seuen and eight and twentie dayes of Aprill. 1613. Whereunto is annexed the Descron, Speeches, and Songs of the Lords Maske, presd in the Banquetting-house on the Mariage night of the High and Mightie, COVNT PALATINE, and the Royally descended the Ladie ELIZABETH. Written by THOMAS CAMPIAN. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Budge, and are to be sold at his Shop at the South-doore of S. Pauls, and at Bri∣taines Bursse. 1613.
A RELATION OF THE LATE ROYALL ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY the Right Honorable, the Lord KNOVVLES, at Cawsome-House neere Redding: to our most gracious Queen, Queene ANNE, in her Progresse toward the Bathe vpon the seuen and eight and twentie dayes of Aprill. 1613. FOr as much as this late Entertainment hath beene much desired in writing, both of such as were present at the performance thereof, as also of many which are yet strangers both to the busines and place: it shall be conuenient, in this generall publication, a little to touch at the description and situation of Cawsome seate. The house is fairely built of bricke, mounted on the hill-side of a Parke, within view of Redding, they be∣ing seuered about the space of two miles. Before the Parke-gate, directly opposite to the House, a new passage was forced through earable-land, that was lately paled in, it being from the Parke a∣bout two flight-shots in length: at the further end whereof, vpon the Queenes approch, a Cynick appeared out of a Bower, drest in a skin-coate, with Bases of greene Calico, set thicke with leaues and boughes: his nakednesse being also artificially shadow∣ed with leaues; on his head he wore a false haire, blacke and dis∣ordered, stucke carelessely with flowers.
The speech of the Cynick to the Queene and her Traine. Cynick STay; whether you humane be or diuine; here is no passage; see you not the earth furrowed? the region solitarie? Cities and Courts fit tumultuous multitudes: this is a place of silence; heere a kingdome I enioy without people; my selfe commands, my selfe o∣beyes; Host, Cooke, and Guest my selfe; I reape without sowing, owe all to Nature, to none other beholding: my skinne is my coate, my ornaments these boughes and flowers, this Bower my house, the earth my bed, herbes my food, water my drinke; I want no sleepe, nor health; I enuie none, nor am enuied, neither feare I, nor hope, nor ioy, nor grieue: if this be happinesse, I haue it; which you all that depend on others seruice, or command, want: will you be happy? be priuate; turne Pallaces to Hermi∣tages, noies to silence, outward felicitie, to inward con∣tent. A stranger on horse-back was purposely thrust into the troupe disguised, and wrapt in a cloake that he might passe vn∣knowne, who at the conclusion of this speech beganne to discouer himselfe as a fantastick Traueller in a silken sute of strange Checker-worke, made vp after the Italian cut, with an Italian hat, a band of gold and silke, answering the colours of his sute, with a Courtly feather, long guilt spurres, and all things an∣swerable. The Trauellers speech on horse-back. Trauell. Whether trauels thy tongue ill nurtur'dman? thy manners shew madnesse, thy nakednesse pouertie, thy resolution folly; since none will vndertake thy presump∣tion; let mee descend, that I may make thy ignorance know how much it hath injured sacred eares.
The Traueller then dismounts and giues his cloake and horse to his Foot-man, in the meane time the Cynick speakes. Cyn. Naked I am, and so is truth; plaine, and so is ho∣nestie; I feare no mans encounter, since my cause deserues neither excuse, nor blame. Trau. Shall I now chide or pitie thee? thou art as mise∣rable in life, as foolish in thy opinion; answere me; doest thou thinke that all happinesse consists in solitarinesse? Cyn. I doe. Trau. And are they vnhappy that abide in societie? Cyn. They are. Trau. Doest thou esteeme it a good thing to liue? Cyn. The best of things. Trau. Hadst thou not a Father and Mother? Cyn. Yes. Trau. Did they not liue in societie? Cyn. They did. Trau. And wert not thou one of their societie, when they bred thee, instructing thee to goe, and speake? Cyn. True. Trau. Thy birth then and speech in spite of thy splene make thee sociable, goe, thou art but a vaine-glorious counterfait, and wanting that which should make thee happie, contemnest the meanes; view but the heau'ns, is there not aboue vs a Sunne and Moone, giuing and recei∣uing light? are there not millions of Starres that partici∣pate their glorious beames? is there any Element simple? is there not a mixture of all things? and wouldst thou on∣ly be singular? action is the end of life, vertue the crowne of action, society the subject of vertue, friendship the band of societie, solitarinesse the breach. Thou art yet yong, and faire enough, wert thou not barbarous; thy soule poore wretch is farre out of tune, make it musicall, come, follow me, and learne to liue.
Cyn. I am conquered by reason, and humbly aske pardon for my error, henceforth my heart shall honour greatnesse, and loue societie; leade now, and I will follow as good a fellow as the best. The Traueller and Cynick instantly mount on horse-backe, and hasten to the Parke-gate, where they are receiued by two Keepers, formally attired in greene Perpetuana, with ierkins and long hose, all things else being in colour sutable, hauing ei∣ther of them a horne hanging formally at their backes, and on their heads they had greene Mommoth-caps, with greene fea∣thers, the one of them in his hand bearing a hooke-bill, and the o∣ther a long pike-staffe, both painted greene: with them stood two Robin-Hood-men, in sutes of greene striped with blacke, drest in doublets with great bellies and wide sleeues, shaped farding∣gale-wise at the shoulders, without wings; their hose were round, with long greene stockings; on their heads they wore broad flat caps with greene feathers crosse quite ouer them, carrying greene Bowes in their hands, and greene Arrowes by their sides. In this space Cornets at sundrie places intertaine the time, till the Queene with her traine is entred into the Parke: and then one of the Keepers presents her with this short speech. Keeper. More then most welcome, renowned and gra∣cious Queene, since your presence vouchsafes to beautifie these woods, whereof I am Keeper, be it your pleasure to accept such rude intertainment, as a rough Wood-man can yeeld. This is to vs a high holy-day, and henceforth yearly shall bee kept and celebrated with our Countrie sports, in honour of so Royall a guest; come friends and fellowes now prepare your voices, and present your ioyes in a Siluan dance. Here standing on a smooth greene, and enuironed with the Horse-men, they present a Song of fiue Parts, and withall a liue∣ly
Siluan-dance of sixe persons: the Robin-hood-men faine two Trebles, one of the Keepers with the Cynick sing two Coun∣tertenors, the other Keeper the Base; but the Traueller being not able to sing, gapes in silence, and expresseth his humour in Antike gestures. A Song and Dance of sixe, two Keepers, two Robin-hood-men, the fantastick Traueller, and the Cynick. DAnce now and sing the ioy, and loue we owe: Let chearfull voices and glad gestures showe, The Queene of grace is shee whom we receiue, Honour and State are her guides, Her presence they can neuer leaue. Then in a stately Siluan forme salute Her euer flowing grace. Fill all the Woods with Ecchoed welcomes, And strew with flowers this place: Let eu'ry bow and plant fresh blossomes yeeld, And all the aire refine. Let pleasure striue to please our Goddesse, For shee is all diuine. 2. Yet once againe, let vs our measures moue, And with sweet notes record our ioyfull loue. An obiect more diuine none euer had. Beautie, and heau'n-borne worth, Mixt in perfection neuer fade. Then with a dance triumphant let vs sing Her high aduanced praise, And eu'n to heau'n our gladsome welcomes, With wings of musick raise; Welcome, O welcome, euer-honoured Queene,
To this now-blessed place, That groue, that bowre, that house is happy Which you vouchsafe to grace. This song being sung and danced twice ouer, they fall instantly into a kinde of Curranta, with these wordes fol∣lowing. NO longer delay her, 'Twere sinne now to stay her From her ease with tedious sport; Then welcome still crying, And swiftly hence flying, Let vs to our homes resort. In the end whereof the two Keepers carrie away the Cynick; and the two Robin-hood-men the Traueller, when presently Cornets begins againe to sound in seuerall places, and so conti∣nue with varietie, while the Queen passeth through a long smooth greene way, set on each side with Trees in equall distance; all this while her Maiestie being carried in her Caroch. But because some wet had fallen that day in the forenoone (though the Garden-walks were made artificially smooth & drie) yet all her foot-way was spred with broad cloth, and so soone as her Maiestie with her traine were all entred into the Bower Gar∣den, a Gardiner with his Man and Boy, issued out of an Arbour to giue her Highnesse entertainment: The Gardener was suted in gray with a ierkin double iagged all about the wings & skirts, he had a paire of great slops with a cod-peece, and buttoned Ga∣machios all of the same stuffe, on his head he had a strawne hat, pibaldly drest with flowers, and in his hand a siluered spade: His man was also suted in gray with a great buttoned flap on his ier∣kin, hauing large wings and skirts, with a paire of great slops and Gamachios of the same, on his head he had a strawne hat, and in his hand a siluered Mattox: The Gardiners Boy was in a prettie
sute of flowrie stuffe, with a siluered Rake in his hand: when they approched neere the Queene, they all valed Bonet, and low∣ting low, the Gardner began after his anticke fashion this speech. Gard. Most magnificent and peerelesse Diety, loe I the surueyer of Lady Floras workes, welcome your grace with fragrant phrases into her Bowers, beseeching your great∣nesse to beare with the late woodden entertainment of the Wood-men, for Woods are more full of weeds then wits, but gardens are weeded, and Gardners witty, as may appeare by me. I haue flowers for all fancies, Tyme for truth, Rosemary for remembrance, Roses for loue, Harts∣ease for ioy, and thousands more, which all harmonious∣ly reioyce at your presence; but my selfe, with these my Paradisians heere, will make you such musick, as the wilde Wooddists shall bee ashamed to heare the report of it. Come sirs prune your pipes, and tune your strings, and a∣gree together like birds of a feather. A Song of a treble and base, sung by the Gardiners boy and man, to musicke of Instruments, that was readie to second them in the Arbour. 1 VVElcome to this flowrie place, Faire Goddesse and sole Queene of grace: All eyes triumph in your sight, Which through all this emptie space Casts such glorious beames of light. 2 Paradise were meeter farre To entertaine so bright a Starre: But why erres my folly so? Paradise is where you are Heau'n aboue, and heau'n below. 3 Could our powers and wishes meete,
How well would they your graces greete, Yet accept of our desire, Roses of all flowers most sweete Spring out of the silly brier. After this song, the Gardiner speakes againe. Gard. Wonder not (great Goddesse) at the sweetnesse of our Garden-aire (though passing sweet it be) Flora hath perfumed it for you (Flora our mistresse, and your seruant) who enuites you yet further into her Paradise; shee inui∣sibly will leade your grace the way, and we (as our duetie is) visibly stay behinde. From thence the Queene ascends by a few steps into the vpper Garden, at the end whereof, neere the house, this Song was sung by an excellent counter-tenor voice, with rare varietie of diuisi∣on vnto two vnusuall instruments, all being concealed within the Arbour. 1 O Ioyes exceeding? From loue, frō power of your wisht sight proceeding! As a faire morne shines diuinely, Such is your view, appearing more diuinely. 2 Your steppes ascending, Raise high your thoughts for your content contending; All our hearts of this grace vaunting, Now leape as they were moued by inchaunting. So ended the entertainment without the House for that time, and the Queenes pleasure being that night to suppe priuate∣ly: The Kings Violins attended her with their sollemnest mu∣sick, as an excellent consort in like manner did the next day at dinner.
¶ Supper being ended, her Maiestie accompanied with many Lords and Ladies came into the Hall, and rested Her selfe in Her Chaire of State, the Scaffoldes of the Hall being on all partes filled with heholders of worth, suddainely forth came the Traueller, Gardiner, Cynicke, with the rest of their crue, and others furnished with their Instruments, and in maner following entertaine the time. Traueller. A Hall, a hall for men of moment; Rationals, and Irrationals; but yet not all of one breeding. For I an Academicke am, refined by trauell that haue learn'd what to Courtship belongs, and so deuine a pre∣sence as this; if we presse past good manners, laugh at our follies, for you cannot shew vs more fauour, then to laugh at vs. If we proue ridiculous in your sights, we are graci∣ous; and therefore wee beseech you to laugh at vs. For mine owne part (I thanke my Starres for it) I haue beene laught at in most parts of Christendome. Gardiner. I can neither bragge of my Trauels, nor yet am ashamed of my profession; I make sweet walkes for faire Ladies; Flowers I prepare to adorne them; close Arbours I build wherein their Loues vnseene may court them; and who can doe Ladies better seruice, or more acceptable? when I was a Child and lay in my Cradle, (a very pretie Child) I remember well that Lady Venus ap∣peared vnto me, and setting a Siluer Spade and Rake by my Pillow, bad me proue a Gardiner; I told my Mother of it (as became the duetie of a good Child) whereupon shee prouided straight for mee two great Platters full of Pappe; which hauing duetifully deuoured, I grew to this
portrature you see, sprung fodainely out of my Cabine, and fell to my profession. Trau. Verily by thy discourse thou hast Trauelled much, and I am asham'd of my selfe that I come so farre behind thee; as not once to haue yet mentioned Venus or Cupid, or any other of the gods to haue appeared to mee. But I will henceforth boast truely, that I haue now seene a Dietie as farre beyond theirs, as the beautie of light is beyond darknesse, or this Feast whereof we haue had our share, is beyond thy Sallets. Cynick. Sure I am, it hath stir'd vp strange thoughts in me; neuer knew I the difference betweene Wine and Wa∣ter before. Bacchus hath opened mine eyes, I now see bra∣uerie and admire it, beautie & adore it. I find my Armes naked, my discourse rude, but my heart soft as Waxe, ready to melt with the least beame of a faire eye; which (till this time) was as vntractable as Iron. Gard. I much ioy in thy conuersion, thou hast long beene a mad fellow, and now proues a good fellow, let vs all therefore ioyne together sociably in a Song, to the honour of good fellowship. Cyn. A very Musicall motion, and I agree to it. Trau. Sing that sing can, for my part I will onely while you sing, keepe time with my gestures. A la more du France. A Song of three Voyces with diuers Instruments. NIght as well as brightest day hath her delight, Let vs then with mirth and Musicke decke the night, Neuer did glad day such store Of ioy to night boqueath. Her Starres then adore, Both in Heau'n, and hore beneath.
2. Loue and beautie, mirth and Musicke yeeld true ioyes, Though the Cynickes in their folly count them toyes. Raise your spirits nere so high, They will be apt to fall: None braue thoughts enuie, Who had ere braue thought at all. 3. Ioy is the sweete friend of life, the nurse of blood, Patron of all health, and fountaine of all good: Neuer may ioy hence depart, But all your thoughts attend, Nought can hurt the heart, That retaines so sweete a friend. At the end of this Song, enters Siluanus, shapt after the de∣scription of the ancient Writers; His lower parts like a Goate, and his vpper parts in an anticke habit of rich Taffatie, cut into Leaues, and on his head he had a false Haire, with a wreath of long Boughes and Lillies, that hung dangling about his necke, and in his hand a Cypresse branch, in memorie of his loue Cy∣parissus, The Gardiner espying him speakes thus. Gard. Silence sirs, here comes Siluanus god of these Woods, whose presence is rare, and importes some no∣ueltie. Trau. Let vs giue place, for this place is fitter for Die∣ties then vs. They all vanish and leaue Siluanus alone, who comming nee∣rer to the State, and making a low Congee, speakes. SILVANVS. THat health which harbours in the fresh air'd groues, Those pleasures which greene hill and valley moues, Siluanus the commander of them all,
Here offers to this State Emperiall; Which as a homager he visites now, And to a greater power his power doth bow, With all, thus much his duetie signifies: That there are certaine Semideities, Belonging to his Siluan walkes, who come Led with the Musicke of a Spritely drome, To keepe the night awake and honour you, (Great Queene) to whom all Honours they hold due, So rest you full of ioy, and wisht content, Which though it be not giuen, 'tis fairely ment. At the end of this speech there is suddainly heard a great noise of drums and phifes, and way being made, eight Pages first enter, with greene torches in their hands lighted; their sutes were of greene Satten, with cloakes and caps of the same, richly and strangely set forth: Presently after them the eight Maskers came, in rich imbrodered sutes of greene Satten with high hats of the same, and all their acoutrements answerable to such Noble and Princely personages, as they concealed vnder their visards, and so they instantly fell into a new dance: at the end whereof they tooke forth the Ladies, and danced with them, and so well was the Queene pleased with her intertainment, that shee vouch∣safed to make her selfe the head of their Reuels, and graciously to adorne the place with her personall dancing: much of the night being thus spent with varietie of dances, the Maskers made a conclusion with a second new dance. At the Queenes parting on wednesday in the afternoone, the Gardiner with his Man and Boy and three handsome Countrie Maides, the one bearing a rich bagge with linnen in it, the second a rich apron, and the third a rich mantle, ap∣peare all out of an Arbour in the lower Garden, and meeting the Queene, the Gardiner presents this speech.
GARDINER. STay Goddesse, stay a little space, Our poore Countrie loue to grace, Since we dare not too long stay you, Accept at our hands, we pray you, These meane presents to expresse Greater loue, then we professe, Or can vtter now for woe Of your parting hast'ned so. Gifts these are, such as were wrought By their hands, that them haue brought, Home-bred things, which they presumed, After I had them perfumed With my flowrie incantation, To giue you in presentation At your parting, come feate Lasses With fine cursies, and smooth faces, Offer vp your simple toyes To the Mistris of our ioyes; While we the sad time prolong With a mournefull parting song. A Song of three voices continuing while the presents are deliuered and receiued. 1 CAn you the Author of our ioy So soone depart? Will you reuiue, and straight destroy, New mirth to teares conuert? O that euer cause of gladnesse Should so swiftly turne to sadnesse! 2 Now as we droupe, so will these flowers Bard of your sight.
Nothing auaile them heau'nly showres Without your heau'nly light. When the glorious Sunne forsakes vs, Winter quickly ouer-takes vs. 3 Yet shall our praiers your waies attend, When you are gone; And we the tedious time will spend, Remembring you alone. Welcome here shall you heare euer, But the word of parting neuer. Thus ends this ample intertainment, which as it was most nobly performed, by the right honourable the Lord and Ladie of the house, and fortunately executed by all that any way were Actors in it, so was it as graciously re∣ceiued of her Maiestie, and celebrated with her most roy∣all applause.
THE DESCRIPTION, SPEECHES, AND SONGS, OF THE LORDS MASKE, PRESENTED IN the Banquetting-house on the mariage night of the high and mightie Count Palatine, and the royally descended the Ladie ELISABETH. I Haue now taken occasion to satisfie many, who long since were desirous that the Lords maske should be published, which (but for some priuate lets, had in due time come forth. The Scene was diuided into two parts from the roofe to the floore, the lower part being first discouered (vpon the sound of a double consort, exprest by seuerall instruments, plac't on either side of the roome) there appeared a Wood in prospectiue, the in∣nermost part being of releaue, or whole round, the rest painted. On the left hand from the seate was a Caue, and on the right a thicket, out of which came Orpheus, who was attired after the▪ old Greeke manner, his haire curled, and long; a lawrell wreath on his head; and in his hand hee bare a siluer bird, about him tamely placed seuerall wild beasts, and vpon the ceasing of the Consort Orpheus spake. ORPHEVS. AGen, agen, fresh kindle Phoebus sounds, T'exhale Mania from her earthie den;
Allay the furie that her sense confounds, And call her gently forth, sound, sound, agen. The Consorts both sound againe, and Mania the Goddesse of madnesse appeares wildly out of her caue. Her habit was con∣fused and strange; but yet gracefull, shee as one amazed speaks. Mania. What powerfull noise is this importunes me, T'abandon darkenesse which my humour fits? Ioues hand in it I feele, and euer he Must be obai'd eu'n of the franticst wits. Orpheus. Mania? Mania. Hah. Orpheus. Braine-sick, why start'st thou so? Approch yet nearer, and thou then shalt know The will of Ioue, which he will breath from me, Mania. Who art thou? if my dazeled eyes can see, Thou art the sweet Enchanter heau'nly Orpheus. Orpheus. The same Mania, and Ioue greets thee thus, Though seuerall power to thee, and charge he gaue, T'enclose in thy Dominions such as raue Through blouds distemper, how durst thou attempt T'imprison Entheus, whose rage is exempt From vulgar censure? it is all diuine Full of celestiall rapture, that can shine Through darkest shadowes, therefore Ioue by me Commands thy power strait to set Entheus free. Mania. How can I? Franticks, with him many more In one caue are lockt vp, ope once the dore, All will flie out, and through the world disturbe, The peace of Ioue; for, what power then can curbe Their rainelesse furie?— Orpheus. —Let not feare in vaine Trouble thy crazed fancie, all againe Saue Entheus to thy safeguard shall retire, For Ioue into our musick will inspire
The power of passion, that their thoughts shall bend To any forme or motion we intend: Obey Ioues willing then, go, set Entheus free. Mania. I willing go, so Ioue obey'd must bee. Orph. Let Musicke put on Protean▪ changes now, Wilde beasts it once tam'd, now let Franticks bow. At the sound of a strange musicke twelue Franticks enter, six men, and six women, all presented in sundry habits and hu∣mours: there was the Louer, the Selfe-louer, the melancholicke-man full of feare, the Schoole-man ouer-come with phantasie, the ouer-watched Vsurer, with others that made an absolute medly of madnesse, in middest of whom Entheus (or Poeticke furie) was hurried forth, and tost vp and downe, till by vertue of a new change in the musicke, the Lunatickes fell into a madde measure, fitted to a loud phantasticke tune, but in the end there∣of the musick changed into a very solemne ayre, which they soft∣ly played, while Orpheus spake. Orph. Through these soft and calme sounds Mania passe With thy Phantasticks hence; heere is no place Longer for them or thee; Entheus alone Must do Ioues bidding now, all else be gone. During this speech, Mania with her Franticks depart, leauing Entheus behind them, who was attired in a close Curace of the Anticke fashion, Bases with labels, a Roabe fastned to his shoul∣ders, and hanging downe behind; on his head a wreath of Law∣rell, out of which grew a paire of wings, in the one hand he held a booke, and in the other a pen. Enth. Diuinest Orpheus, ô how all from thee Proceed with wondrous sweetnesse, am I free? Is my affliction vanish't? Orph. —Too too long Alas, good Entheus, hast thou brook't this wrong; What? number thee with madmen? o mad age, Sencelesse of thee, and thy celestiall rage.
For thy excelling rapture, eu'n through things That seems most light, is borne with sacred wings: Nor are these Musicks, Showes, or Reuels vaine, When thou adorn'st them with thy Phoebean braine; Th'are pallate sicke of much more vanitie, That cannot taste them in their dignitie. Ioue therefore lets thy prison'd spright obtaine Her libertie and fiery scope againe: And heere by me commands thee to create Inuentions rare, this night to celebrate, Such as become a nuptiall by his will Begun and ended,— Enth. —Ioue I honor still, And must obey, Orpheus I feele the fires Are reddy in my braine, which Ioue enspires, Loe, through that vaile, I see Prometheus stand Before those glorious lights, which his false hand Stole out of heau'n, the dull earth to enflame With the affects of Loue, and honor'd Fame, I view them plaine in pompe and maiestie. Such as being seene might hold riualitie, With the best triumphes; Orpheus giue a call With thy charm'd musicke, and discouer all. Orph. Flie cheerfull voices, through the ayre, and clear These clouds, that you hid beautie may appeare. A Song. 1 COme away; bring thy golden theft, Bring bright Prometheus all thy lights, Thy fires from Heau'n bereft Shew now to humane sights. Come quickly come; thy stars to our stars straight present, For pleasure being too much defer'd, loseth her best cōtēt,
What fair dames wish, should swift as their own thoughts appeare, To louing & to longing harts euery houre seemes a yeare. 2 See how faire; O how faire they shine, What yeelds more pompe beneath the skies? Their birth is yet diuine, And such their forme implies. Large grow their beames, their nere approch afford thēso By nature sights that pleasing are, cānot too amply show, O might these flames in humane shapes descēd this place, How louely would their presence be, how full of grace! In the end of the first part of this Song, the vpper part of the Scene was discouered by the sodaine fall of a curtaine, then in clowdes of seuerall colours (the vpper part of them being fierie, and the middle heightned with siluer) appeared eight Starres of extraordinarie bignesse, which so were placed, as that they seemed to be fixed betweene the Firmament and the Earth; in the front of the Scene stood Prometheus, attyred as one of the ancient Heroes. Enth. Patron of mankinde, powerfull and bounteous, Rich in thy flames, reuerend Prometheus, In Hymens place aide vs to solempnize These royall Nuptials, fill the lookers eyes With admiration of thy fire and light, And from thy hand let wonders flow to night. Prom. Entheus and Orpheus names both deare to me, In equall ballance I your Third will be In this nights honour, view these heau'n borne Starres, Who by my stealth are become Sublunars. How well their natiue beauties fit this place, Which with a chorall danee they first shall grace, Then shall their formes to humane figures turne, And these bright fires within their bosomes burne.
Orpheus apply thy musick for it well Helps to induce a Courtly miracle. Orp. Sound best of Musicks, raise yet higher our sprights, While we admire Prometheus dancing lights. A Song. 1 ADuance your Chorall motions now You musick-louing lights, This night concludes the nuptiall vow, Make this the best of nights, So brauely Crowne it with your beames, That it may liue in fame, As long as Rhenus or the Thames Are knowne by either name. 2 Once moue againe, yet nearer moue Your formes at willing view, Such faire effects of ioy and loue, None can expresse but you, Then reuell midst your ayrie Bowres Till all the clouds doe sweat, That pleasure may be powr'd in showres On this triumphant Seat. 3 Long since hath louely Flora throwne Her Flowers and Garlands here, Rich Ceres all her wealth hath showne, Prowde of her daintie cheare. Chang'd then to humane shape descend, Glad in familiar weede. That euery eye may here commend The kinde delights you breede.
According to the humour of this Song, the Starres mooued in an exceeding strange and delightfull maner, and I suppose fewe haue euer seene more neate artifice, then Master Innigoe Iones shewed in contriuing their Motion, who in all the rest of the workmanship which belong'd to the whole inuention, shewed extraordinarie industrie and skill, which if it be not as liuely ex∣prest in writing as it appeared in view, robbe not him of his due, but lay the blame on my want of right apprehending his instru∣ctions for the adoring of his Arte. But to returne to our pur∣pose; about the end of this Song, the Starres suddainely vani∣shed, as if they had beene drowned amongst the Cloudes, and the eight Maskers appeared in their habits, which were infinitly rich, befitting States (such as indeede they all were) as also a time so farre heightned the day before, with all the richest shew of solemnitie that could be inuented. The ground of their attires was massie Cloth of Siluer, embossed with flames of Embroidery, on their heads, they had Crownes, Flames made all of Gold-plate Enameled, and on the top a Feather of Silke, representing a cloude of smoake. Vpon their new transformation, the whole Scaene being Cloudes dispersed, and there appeared an Element of artificiall fires, with seuerall circles of lights, in continuall mo∣tion, representing the house of Prometheus, who then thus ap∣plies his speech to the Maskers. They are transformed. Prometh. So, pause awhile, and come yee fierie spirits, Breake forth the earth-like sparks t'attend these Knights. Sixteene Pages like fierie spirits, all their attires bing alike composed of flames, with fierie Wings and Bases, bearing in ei∣ther hand a Torch of Virgine Waxe, come forth below dauncing a likely measure, and the Daunce being ended, Prometheus speakes to them from aboue.
The Torch-bearers Daunce. Pro. VVAit spirits wait, while through the clouds we And by descending gaine a hier place. (pace, The Pages returne toward the Scaene, to giue their attendance to the Maskers with their lights: from the side of the Scaene ap∣peared a bright and transparant cloud, which reached from the top of the heauens to the earth: on this cloud the Maskers led by Prometheus, descended with the musicke of a full song; and at the end of their descent, the cloud brake in twaine, and one part of it (as with a winde) was blowne ouerthwart the Scaene. While this cloud was vanishing, the wood being the vnder-part of the Scaene, was insensibly changed, and in place thereof appea∣red foure Noble women-statues of siluer, standing in seuerall ni∣ces, accompanied with ornaments of Architecture, which filled all the end of the house, and seemed to be all of gold-smithes work. The first order consisted of Pillasters all of gold, set with Rubies, Saphyrs, Emeralds, Opals, and such like. The Capitels were com∣posed, and of a new inuention. Ouer this was a bastard order with Cartouses reuersed, comming from the Capitels of euery Pil∣laster, which made the vpper part rich and full of ornament. Ouer euery statue was placed a history in gold, which seemed to be of base releaue; the conceits which were figured in them were these. In the first was Prometheus, embossing in clay the fi∣gure of a woman, in the second he was represented stealing fire from the chariot-wheele of the Sunne: in the third, he is exprest putting life with this fire into his figure of clay; and in the fourth square, Iupiter enraged, turnes these new made women into sta∣tues. Aboue all, for finishing, ran a Cornish, which returned o∣uer euery Pillaster, seeming all of gold and richly carued.
A full Song. SVpported now by Clouds descend, Diuine Prometheus, Hymens friend, Leade downe the new transformed fires, And fill their breasts with loues desires: That they may reuell with delight, And celebrate this nuptiall night, So celebrate this nuptiall night, That all which see may stay. They neuer viewed so faire a sight, Euen on the cleerest day. While this Song is sung, and the Maskers court the fowre new transformed Ladies, foure other Statues appeare in their places. Entheus. See, see Prometheus, foure of these first dames Which thou long since out of thy purchac't flames, Did'st forge with heau'nly fire, as they were then, By Ioue transformed to Statues, so agen, They suddenly appeare by his command At thy arriuall, Loe how fixt they stand, So did Ioues wrath too long, but now at last, It by degrees relents, and he hath plac't These Statues, that we might his ayde implore, First for the life of these, and then for more. Prom. Entheus, Thy councels are diuine and iust, Let Orpheus decke thy Hymne, since pray we must. The first Inuocation in a full Song. POwerfull Ioue, that of bright starres, Now hast made men fit for warres; Thy power in these Statues proue, And make them women fit for loue. Orpheus. See Ioue is pleas'd, Statues haue life & moue,
Goe new-borne men, and entertaine with loue, These new-borne women, though your number yet Exceedes their's double, they are arm'd with wit, To beare your best encounters, Court them faire: When words and Musicke speake, let none despaire. THE SONG. WOoe her, and win her, he that can, Each woman hath two louers, So shee must take and leaue a man, Till time more grace discouers; This doth Ioue to shew that want, Makes beautie most respected; If faire women were more skant, They would be more affected. 2. Courtship and Musicke, suite with loue, They both are workes of passion, Happie is he whose words can moue, Yet sweete notes helpe perswasion. Mixe your words with Musicke then, That they the more may enter; Bold assaults are fit for men, That on strange beauties venture. Promet. Cease, cease your woing strife, see Ioue intends, To fill your number vp, and make all friends, Orpheus, and Eutheus, ioyne your skils once more, And with a Hymne the Dietie implore. The second Inuocation to the tune of the first. POwerfull Ioue, that hast giuen fower, Raise this number but once more,
That complete, their numerous feet May aptly in iust measures meet. The other foure statues are transformed into women, in the time of this inuocation. Enth. The number's now complete, thankes be to Ioue, No man needs feare a Riuall in his loue; For, all are sped, and now begins delight, To fill with glorie, this triumphant night. The Maskers hauing euery one entertained his Lady, begin their first new entring dance: after it, while they breath, the time is entertained with a dialogue song. BReath you now, while Io Hymen To the Bride we sing: O how many ioyes, and honors, From this match will spring? Euer firme the league will proue, Where only goodnesse causeth loue. Some for profit seeke What their fancies most disleeke, These loue for vertues sake alone: Beautie and youth vnite them both in one. CHORVS. Liue with thy Bridegroome happy, sacred Bride; How blest is he, that is for loue enui'd. The Maskers second dance. BReath againe, while we with musicke Fill the emptie space: O but do not in your dances, Your selues only grace.
Eu'ry one fetch out your Pheare, Whom chiefely you will honor heere, Sights most pleasure breed, When their numbers most exceed: Chuse then, for choice to all is free, Taken or left, none discontent must bee. CHORVS. Now in thy Reuels frolicke-faire delight, To heape Ioy on this euer honored night. The Maskers during this Dialogue take out others to daunce with them, men women, and women men, and first of all the Princely Bridegroome and Bride were drawne into these solemne Reuels, which continued a long space, but in the end were broken off with this short Song. A Song. CEase, cease you Reuels, rest a space, New pleasures presse into this place, Full of beautie and of grace. The whole scaene was now againe changed, and became a pro∣spectiue with Porticoes on each side, which seemed to go in a great way, in the middle was erected an Obeliske, all of siluer, and in it lights of seuerall colours, on the side of this Obeliske, standing on Pedestals, were the statues of the Bridegroome and Bride, all of gold in gratious postures. This Obeliske was of that height, that the toppe thereof touched the highest cloudes, and yet Sybilla did draw it forth with a threed of gold. The graue Sage was in a Roabe of gold tuckt vp before to her girdle, a Kirtle gathered full, and of siluer; with a vaile on her head, being bare neckt, and bearing in her hand a scrole of Parchment.
Eutheus. Make cleare the passage to Sibilla's sight, Who with her Trophee comes, to crowne this night, And as her selfe with Musicke shall be led, So shall shee pull on with a golden thread. A high vast Obeliske, dedicate to fame, Which immortalitie it selfe did frame. Raise high your voices now, like Trumpets fill, The roome with sounds of Triumph, sweete and shrill. A SONG. COme triumphing, come with state, Old Sibilla, reuerend Dame, Thou keep'st the secret key of fate, Preuenting swiftest fame. This night breath onely words of ioy, And speake them plaine, now be not coy, SIB. DEbetur alto iure, Principium Ioui, Votis det ipse vim meis, dict is fidem. Vtrin{que} decoris splendet egregium Iubar, Medio triumphus mole stat dignus sua, Coelum{que} summo Capite dilectum petit; Quam pulchra pulchro sponsa respondet viro! Quam plena numinis? Patrem vultu exprimit, Parens futura masculae prolis, Parens Regum, imperatorum: Additur Germaniae Robur Britannicum. ecquid esse par potest? Vtram{que} iunget vna mens gentem, fides, Dei{que} Cultus vnus, & simplex amor. Idem erit vtri{que} hostis, sodalis idem, idem Votum periclitantium, at{que} eadem manus. Fauebit illis Pax, fauebit bellica Fortuna, semper aderit Adiutor Deus.
Sic, sic Sibilla; vocibus nec his deest Pondus, nec hoc inane momumentum trahit. Et aureum est, & quale nec flammas timet, Nec fulgura, ipsi quippe sacratur Ioui. Pro. The good old Sage is silenc't, her free tongue That made such melodie, is now vnstrung: Then grace her Trophee with a dance triumphant, Where Orpheus is none can fit musick want. A Song and dance triumphant of the Maskers. 1 DAnce, dance, and visit now the shadowes of our ioy, All in height, and pleasing state, your changed formes imploy. And as the bird of Ioue salutes, with loftie wing, the morn; So mount, so flie, these Trophees to adorne. Grace them with all the sounds and motions of delight, Since all the earth cannot expresse a louelier sight, View them with triumph, and in shades the truth adore, No pompe or sacrifice can please Ioues greatnesse more. 2 Turne, turne, and honor now the life, these figures beare, Loe, how heau'nly natures farre aboue all art appeare, Let their aspects reuiue in you, the fire that shin'd so late, Still mount and still retaine, your heauenly state. Gods were with dance, and with musick seru'd of old, Those happie daies deriu'd their glorious stile from gold: This pair by Hymen ioyn'd, grace you with measures then, Since they are both diuine, and you are more then men. Orph. Let here Sybilla's Trophee stand, Leade her now by either hand, That shee may approch yet nearer,
And the Bride and Bridegroome heare her Blesse them in her natiue tongue, Wherein old prophesies shee sung, Which time to light hath brought: Shee speakes that which Ioue hath taught. Well may he inspire her now, To make a ioyfull and true vow. Syb. Sponsam sponse tro tene pudicam, Sponsum sponsa tene toro pudicum. Non haec vnica nox datur beatis, At vos perpetuò haec beabit vna Prole multiplici, pari{que} amore. Laeta, ac vera refert Sybilla, ab alto Ipse Iuppiter annuit loquenti. Pro. So be it euer, ioy and peace, And mutuall loue giue you increase, That your posteritie may grow In fame, as long as Seas doe flow. Enth. Liue you long to see your ioyes, In faire Nymphs and Princely Boyes: Breeding like the Garden flowers, Which kinde heau'n drawes with her warme showers. Orph. Enough of blessing, though too much Neuer can be said to such; But night doth wast, and Hymen chides, Kinde to Bridegroomes and to Brides, Then singing the last dance induce, So let good night preuent excuse.
The Song. NO longer wrong the night, Of her Hymenaean right, A thousand Cupids call away, Fearing the approching day, The Cocks alreadie crow, Dance then and goe, The last new Dance of the Maskers, which concludes all with a liuely straine at their go∣ing out.
