5251 99840779 5309
A Prayse, and Reporte of Maister Martyne Forboishers Voyage to META INCOGNITA. (A name giuen by a mightie and most great Personage) in which praise and reporte is written diuers discourses neuer published by any man as yet. Now spoken of by Thomas Churchyarde Gentleman, and dedicated to the right honorable M. Secretarie Wilson, one of the Queenes Maiesties most honorable Priuie Counsell. Imprinted at London for Andrew Maunsell in Paules Churchyard at the signe of the Parret.
To the right honorable mai∣ster Secretarie VVilson: Thomas Churchyard presenteth this booke and wisheth encrease of vertuous same, and de∣sired felicitie. IN rememberyng of courtesies vvhiche I founde in Flaunders vvhen your honour vvas Lorde Embas∣sadour there, I thought my selfe more bounde, than able to requite, and so searchyng the storehouse of my sub∣stance, I savve nothyng so readie to spare as the exercise of my Penne in parte of payment of that Iovve: yet thinking therby no peece of duetie dis∣charged. For the memorie of a good-tourne
is a sufficient cause to a honest minde, euer to be thankefull in all ser∣uiceable manner, and neuer to forget a benefit receiued. And especially in this scrupulous age and season, vvhen good tournes neither goe a begging nor can not bee gotten for greate crauing and much a∣doe. And yet some men of themselues are so noble and apt to doe good, they can bestovve many pleasures frankly and freely, vvhere no hope of recom∣pēce is to be found or looked for, nor in a maner our deseruyngs are occasiō of. Among the cheef of that sort is the honorable syr Francis VValsingham, a singuler Proppe and Piller, vppon vvhom all our most feeble Souldiours doe leane, and from vvhom comes
but fevve suters discontented, or not reasonablie satisfied. The voyce ther∣of is so generall, that vvithout any kinde of adulation I may report it. Albeit my fortune is not much amen∣ded, nor my luck vvas neuer to light so farre in his fauour as to fasten a simple book of my making in his hands. For here I must confesse to your ho∣nour, this little treatise (for that hee fauours Maister Forboyshers Iorney) vvould gladly haue bin supported by his honourable countenance. But as a Boule in a smoth Alleye may get a iob, and yet proue to be a good sauyng cast vvhen the game is in triall, so this my vvork neither found free passage nor acces to his noble iudgement, nor is not as I hoep vtterly voyd of a
good Patroen to giue it some credit, and yet the better by his meanes it shalbe accepted. And the more is my hap that so ho∣nourable a parsonage as your self shal vouchesafe to reade it, and let it pas to the veaue and liking of the vvorld. Not that I presume that the vvri∣ting thereof doth claym any commen∣dation, but that by my boldnes and studie, the vvorthines of trauelars may bee vnderstoed, and sutch as haue sovven the seed of painfull labor and exercies, shall reape the fruit of good fame, and possesse that honest re∣port that belongeth to their vvel∣doyng. My learning is not so great as to treate of hye matters, vvherefore I haue chosen familier thinges too
vvrite vpon. And so presenting to the people that vviche they are beste a∣quainted vvithall, I shall not vveery them vvith a straunge and statelie style, nor ouercharge their iudgements vvith farre fetched vvordes or vveightie deuises. Yet blushe I to blot my booke vvith fancies and fa∣bulls (vvhich the folly of youth in for∣mer dayes ledde me to.) And reioyce the more in findyng any occasion that may vvin good men renoume, & make me put the idell pen to paper. And so this small vvoork of myen keepes but my Muse occupied, and makes my frendes remember mee, and shoes no∣thing but a cōmendation of those that loue not to liue vnprofitable mēbers: and vvithall cares not for the ha∣zarde
and daunger of death, so some knovvledge rise to their Countrey by their paynes and practises. Thus ouer tedious in settyng foorth a triefle, and somevvat bolde to trouble your good consideration vvith so badde a dis∣course, I staye and keepe silence till my seconde booke (promised long since to Maister Uyez Chamberlayne) com∣meth out, and shall bee published in print. Of the vvhich booke I mynde to make you a present, and in the mean season I vvishe that euerie good gift of grace may encrease in your honour. From the Courte the laste of Aprill. Yours humbly at commandment: Thomas Churchyard.
A discourse of the valiant Voyage to Meta Incognita. THE first labour and verses in the behalfe of Maister Forboyshers voyage, procured my pen after the farewell giuen to him (and his valliant companions) to saiute them with a welcome home, Likewise in verse, so soone as thei here seuerally and saffely ariued. And now conside∣ryng their greate venter and hazard and callyng to mynde the trauaile of Collumbo, Theuet, Gabotha, Magelanus and others (notorious in nauigatiō, and singularly giuen to good exercise and studie) I thought it neccssarie for the encoragement of any forward minde (seruyng for the maintenāce of a cō∣monwealth)
to shewe a little at large the goodnes that riseth by traueiling abroade, and commoditie that com∣meth by seekyng out suche soiles and Countries, as maie make our coun∣triemen here happie at home. There is suche pleasure in this ioyfull pil∣grimage (and it purchaseth suche a greate profite in small proces of time) that I doe call it the garlande of gain and glorie, and perfite passage too all worldly felicitie. For in the redemyng of tyme that our auncestours haue loste (and gai∣nyng of knowledge that makes our posteritie bothe riche and honorable) wee make the barrain ground fruit∣full, and the idell people to become la∣borious, and readie to aunswere our expected desires, and able to with∣stande the wicked willes, and proude purposes of forraine power. The daies haue bin (and of late) that a Pilot who knew but the coast
of Spaine (the Canaries, or course to the Indians) hath gotten suche cre∣dite that eche Marchaunte thought hymself happie that could commende his wealth and ship to the handes of suche a Pilot. And now thankes bee too GOD and our good industrie, if you would make a voyage to Cattaie, or in a ma∣ner to the verie cōfines of Europe, Asia, Affrica, or America, you should quick∣ly finde readie members, and Noble minded Gentlemen, that would not onely hazarde their owne patrimo∣nies, for the performance of the ex∣ploite, but likewise accompanie you with their own persons in y• iourney. And for that euery Gentleman (or labourar in the Uineyard) ought not onely to taste of the clustred Grapes, but also to reape some of the gaine and glory belonging to the Uintage, I thinke it moste necessarie and rea∣son, that Maister Forboisher (Gene∣rall
to Meta incognita) maister Fenton, Maister Yorke, Maister Beste, and others that were in the late iourney, and eskriyng of an vnknowen Ilād, or countrey, should bee registred in a perpetuall booke of memorie, as men that haue esteemed nothyng so dear∣ly, as the vnfoldyng of hard matters and hidden secretes. Whereby, thei haue hope to spread Gods glorie farther then euer hath bin by our common knowledge vn∣derstoode, or our highest senses and reasons could reache vnto. And surely this is a true testimo∣nie of greate goodnesse intended, that our Nation in suche a christian sorte and maner, refuseth no hazarde nor daunger, to bryng Infidelles too the knowledge of the omnipotente God, yea, albeit great wealth and commo∣ditie maie rise to vs of their labours, yet the purpose of manifestyng Gods mightie woorde and maiestie among
those that feed like monsters (and ra∣ther liue like dogges then men) doeth argue not onely a blessed successe, but perswadeth a prosperous and benefi∣ciall retourne. For admitte that no further gaine then Goddes glorie were looked for, and that our peaceable Prince nou∣risheth people only to that respect (as mēbers & instruments for the redee∣ming of many a loste soule) we ought to imagin there can not be a greater grace, nor a more richer and precious thyng expressed in this vngracious tyme and season. And those that offereth to do their best in the furtherance of christian re∣ligiō, are sure diyng or liuyng in that determination, to attain the vnspea∣kable and wished ioyes thei desire be∣sides here to remaine with immortal fame whiles the worlde lasteth. The cause and constancie of suche as shewe any courage at all, either
springes from a deuine delite in good doyng, or a worldly desire of well wō credite valiantly gotten. And the co∣ward Spirite of those that dare at∣tempt no hazardes comes from a fe∣ble iudgement, or a weake womanish bodie that trembles to take in hande any stoute or manly enterprise. Fortune herself giues place to any inuincible courage, and the fortitude of the mynde cōquers countries, and ouercōmeth the greatest conquerors that is vnder the cloudes. I read of the firste greate Turcke Otthoman and others (with all their successours) an incredible discourse, and yet by their mightie monarchies am forced to beleeue their dignities and destenie did muche depende vpon their resolute myndes. The greatnesse of Alexanders hart was no whit inferiour to the greate and good Fortune he possessed. And so generally to speake of the
forwardnesse of man, and woorthie laude that folowes vertuous actiōs, I could occupie your eares with the hearing of many a noble historie, and proue thereby that nothyng is com∣parable to a couragious determina∣tion. For as many aucthours affirme, (and mannes actions declare) that man is but his mynde: so it is to bee daily tride, that the bodie is but a mix ture of compoundes, knitte together like a fardell of fleashe, and bondell of bones, and vnited as a heauie lumpe of Leade (without the mynde) in the sillie substaunce of a shadowe. We see a marueilous boldnesse in some horsses, that with the least mo∣tion of rodd or sticke will take hedge or diche, whē a royle of a greater sta∣ture is a fraied of a little bushe. Among Birdes in like maner is a wonderfull difference, and yet the Cocke in his combate surmounteth
them all. But Man the Kyng of all creatu∣res by force and discretion, gouernes what he pleaseth, and cōpasseth thin∣ges that the base expectation neither can comprehende, nor dare not at∣tempte. Now vnder correction, was not this a valiaunt aduenture, to take in hande a voyage neuer sailed before, (but by one Gabotha whiche hereafter I will speake of) and in this sailyng to incounter suche huge mountaines of Iee, and passe the same so orderlie and so soone, without any probable certaintie of a happy successe and safe retourne. Albeeit that Maister Forboysher had asaied the dāger with some good signe of benefite not long agoe, Yet the course was so combersome, and the passage so perilous, that few men were willyng to make a triall of the iourney, till these Gētlemen and their
couragious cōpanions of their owne good will, tooke vpon them to see the vttermost of the matter, and to abide the bronte of all that might happen. And when thei were vndersaile, be∣holde how obediently and painfullie thei behaued them selues, and forget∣tyng delicate and fine feedyng, tooke what was fitte for the tourne, and stoode contente with what portion was appointed, as men resolued to suffer a little scarcitie and sorrowe, in hope of aboundance and greate plea∣sure to come. And agreed in fellowe∣ship so faithfully, y• it was to bee iud ged y• one Mother had sent so manie children abroad, to shew what mutu∣all loue ought to be among brethren. And in verie deede the greatest conquest can bee made is the victorie and masteryng of affections, (for the auoydyng of contencious tumultes, and brablyng curiositie) whiche here tofore hath hindered not onely great
seruices, but also hath bredde greate mischiefes and wounded a common wealthe, with an infinite number of beggerie botches, and incurable dis∣eases. By vnion and amitie wee are taught bothe by the Bee, and the Ant a lesson woorthie notyng, and so suc∣kyng in season the fruite of our la∣bors, with sugred pleasures our pai∣nes be recompensed. Now returnyng to my former di∣scourse, I would a little touche by your licence, the hardie and brutishe maner of the people lately discouered for it seemeth by their bold and beast∣ly fashion, that thei dare do any thing that their consceites will allowe, or courage of man maie execute. Firste thei aduentured by struggelyng and strengthe, to ouercome man to man any one of our companie, and as I heare saie xiiii. of them gaue charge vpon xxx. of ours, and stoode stoutely to their enterprise. Hauing with their
able bodies suche a kinde of agilitie and swiftnesse, as is to bee wondred at: Besides thei haue a dissemblyng pollicie to seeme lame, when thei pre∣tende a mischief, and carriyng suche a dreadlesse mynde, and desperate in∣tention, thei rather flyng themselues headlong into the Sea (from the top of a mightie mountaine) then yeld to the mercie of any that maie subdewe them. This is a straunge kynd of stout∣nesse, and peraduenture procedes frō some wronges thei haue suffered by some other Nation then ours, whose crueltie hath made them so fearfull to come in handes: That thei haue no skill of submission, nor will not learn to knowe the courtezie of a Conque∣ror. Which resolution in thē (though barbarous it seeme) showes a settled opinion thei haue in their force and liberties, and vtters a miraculous manlinesse to abounde in that brutish
Nation. The more praise and renowme shall thei haue, that seketh to reforme these foolishe hardie Infidelles, and retourne too grope and finde out the commodities of that place, and cōdi∣tions of the people enhabityng there. And as touchyng the singulare gaine that maie growe by their tra∣uailes that goeth thether, I remitte that to the triall all readie hadde, and Iudgemente of those that can looke depely into the bowels and bothome of suche causes and businesse, assured∣ly beeleuing by that I haue seen and heard, that many good thynges will fall out to vs by the iourney. Then lette vs with wishyng well be furtherars and fauourars of that noble enterprise, whiche frō the begin nyng of our age, was neuer brought to passe throughly, nor in a maner di∣rectly thought vppon. The course is so orderly thether that none, whiche
can skill of nauigation, but will grāt the voyage to be easily accomplished: notwithstandyng the Winde, Wea∣ther, and sharpe ayre of the countrey must bee borne withall and suffered, as God shall ordaine, and men maie prouide for. In good sooth I heare a number that murmurs at this mat∣ter, some suche as neuer did saile be∣twene Douer and Callice, and some that haue sailed verie farre, and foūd no peece of benefite to bee gotten in a cold climate, makyng strong reasons and argumentes on their owne sides because thei haue not proued the ex∣perience of this iourney. Well, I admitte that many maie mislike this trauail, and shewe many perswasions for the maintenance of their dislikyng, yet consideryng that a verie wise and learned Gentleman (called Sir Humfrey Gilberte) hath written of this enterprise, and verie graue and honourable personages,
doe sette their helpyng handes to the same, the mislikers should either hold their peace, or put in practize a mat∣ter of more importance, or at the least beholde the successe of the nexte iour∣ney, with more silence, and lesse mur∣muryng. The exercises of Nauigation is commendable, and makes many a good Mariner. The tyme is so well spente (where otherwise Idlenesse would nourishe men in vices) that diuerse shalbe kept occupied, and made the better able to liue. The attempte is so honourable, that fewe or none but base mynded people will condempne. The charge is not so greate to set the shippes out, but y• blessyng of God and the benefite of the iourney, maie requite at the commyng home again. The subiectes of our soile can lose but little, in settyng idle men a worke
about honest affaires: and bothe this lande and diuerse of our neighbours maie winne muche by their aduen∣ture, in bringyng among Christians that treasure, whiche Gods enemies neither knewe howe to vse, nor are worthie of. Then tell me I praie you, what hurte maie come vnto vs, where so greate hope of help is to be loked for? Their Captaines are knowne to be of good birth and hauiour. Their Souldiours of honest cre∣dite and callyng. And all their Officers and Mari∣ners are chosen people, of experience greate and good, and of good paren∣tage and affinitie. The sufficiencie of this people and certaintie of their last doyngs, should bee a sufficient testimonie for euer of their wel meanyng and good seruice. Wherefore the lookers on maie of courtezie sitte still or bee better occu∣pied,
than be to busie in the hindryng of a noble iourney and worthy actiō. But GOD bee blessed, either thei can doe no harme that are hinderars of good thinges, or goodnes itself is so free from danger that no man may hurte it. I thought it conuenient to shewe those that desire to knowe as breiflie as I can, the order of their laste set∣tyng foorthe, whiche was the xxv. of Maie from Blackwall, and so stai∣yng a while before Graues ende, they passed towardes Harwiche, where they did as the Lordes of the Coun∣sell by letters appoincted. So takyng leaue from thence, thei helde their course to Orkneyes, than to Caethneyes, a parte of the mayne lande of Scotlande. And so to S. Magnus sounde, where the people were affrayed of our men at the first: but afterwardes entertai∣ned them, as the commoditie of the
barraine soyle would suffer. There the generall gaue a speciall Card and order to his captaines for the passing of the straites, and passing all the moneth of Iune towards the Countrey, they came in Iuly in the veawe of Freeselande, where they were troubled with aboundaunce of Ice, and felt extreame cold: albeeit it was in Iuly. Then holdyng on a combersome course to passe the straites, thei found suche stormes & harde weather, that one loste a Rudder, and an other a Maste, and the whole companie wer in sore distresse and hazard. Whiche dāger of storme and anoiance of Ice dured a long time, in which season by diligence and Goddes good meanes, their came into the Straites (as thei tearme it) where escriyng lande, thei were troubled a freashe with suche a deale of Ice, that thei had muche ado to set foote on land, but in the ende, at
Haulls Ilande (so named for Haulls fauour) they landed and tooke suche Eure from thence, as they thought necessarie for their purpose. Afterwardes the General landed in an other Ilande, where vsyng courtezie for the reclaymyng of the people there, was forced by the rude∣nesse of that Nation, too shewe some extremity in the taking of one in that Ilande, whō he brought aboarde the Ayde. So seekyng further intoo the straites (as the Ice would permitte) they came where they landed of their men a sufficient nomber, and there geuing thankes to God for their safe ariuall, they marched with Enseigne displayed fower or fiue miles intoo the Countrey, but the Mountaines were so great in that place they could not passe further, and retourne that night to their shippes, whiche made theim retyre. And marchyng backe, they found a straunge Fish dead, that
had been caste from the Sea on the shore, who had a Boane in his Head like an Vnicorne, whiche they brought awaye and presented to our Prince, whē thei came home. But now after many thinges were tried, & some sea∣son spent for searchyng out of Eure▪ they departed from Iackmans soūd and put into another place, named at that presente Beares sound, and lan∣ding there, foūd good Eure, of which Eure was digged twentye Tunne in two dayes. Then on a Sonday the Generall landed vppon the mainlande, with a good cōpany of Souldiours. Which Maine was plainer ground than a∣ny of y• other Ilandes named before. But the night following their lan∣ding, there arose suche a wind, which brought in tide and Flood so faste to the same sound where the shippes did ride, that the aboundance of Ice did breake a Cable of the Gabriell, and put
all their people in a terrible feare and perplexitie, in whiche feare and emi∣nent daunger they wayed the Anker of the Michell, Maister Yorkes ship, & were faine to cast it on a great Rocke of Ice. Whiche Rocke defended them from the reste of the Ice that might haue doen them no little displeasure. And in short space after, the Ice so encreased, that thei were fain to waie an Anker al at once, and take the mi∣ners aborde, and set sayle presentlie to Gabriells Iland. And the generall findyng another sound (where Golden Eure was too be had) caused the rest to come vntoo hym that were of his companie, and so laded their ships with the porcion that they were able to get and carrie. Now there happened a Calme, in whiche calme they plyed the tide ouer to Iackmans sound, and were enfor∣ced by a Tide of Flood to put intoo a sound called Yorkes sound, and whē
they were entered there, they espied twoo Tentes, to the whiche some of our men repaired, and found y• people fledde, yet in the same Tentes were eight Boates (made of Seale skins) left, and possessed by our men, with o∣ther trifles scarce worthy the mentiō. Notwithstandyng, findyug a Dou∣blet, a Shyrte and a paire of Shues (knowen too bee an Englishemans that was lefte there the yere beefore) Maister Yorke caused a Letter to be written by Haull the Maister of a Barke, and that letter to be left in the Tent, with Paper, Pen, and Ynke, therby to get some intelligence of the man they presupposed to be aliue, and to woork therafter as occasiō should be offerered. And so leauyng the Tentes stan∣ding: In them, Belles, glasses and o∣ther toyes to emboldē the barberous people to vse some courtesie, our men departed toward Iackmans sound,
without any further offence offered to the Infidels. Yet tooke our menne vieue by the waie, where and how thei might en∣uiron the enemie about if necessitie so compelled them. And the firste daie of August, they came into Iackmans sound, & there tooke sutche order, that as many as might be spared, should waite on the Generall, for to get sutche honour or intelligēce as the cause required, and euerie one of them were bente rather to receiue wrōg, than offer any peece of iniurie. And had good instruction giuen them by their readers, that all thinges should bee doen by discretion and carefull regard of duetie. But the Caniballes had sutch suspici∣on of their doornges, that our mens deuice was in a maner frustrate. For the Tentes were taken awaie, the e∣nemies were fled (or in holes among Rockes) and some of theym were in
Boates where our menne might not easely come vnto them. Whereat our people determinyng to doe that they came for, landed. At whom the Caniballes shot and of∣fered too shewe some defence, whiche moued so mutch the manhode of our countreimen, that they deuised howe to bee conquerours in sutch forte, as might sound to their reputation and christian credite. Making no delaye vpon this their resolution: Parted their companie the one halfe to follow the fliers, and the other halfe too trace out the fine Foxes that were creapt intoo holes, whiche pollecie preuailed so mutche, that their enemies were amazed, and stood not in suertie of themselues, for they were followed on all sides, and not only hunted out of holes: but bea∣ten and driuen backe in opē field. And yet they shot so sore, that they woun∣ded a man of ours dangerously in the
body. Ourmen shot at them againe, and thei tooke vp those arrowes and most obstinatly shot those arrowes at our people without regarde of their owne liues, by whiche folly of theirs, our men ranne in vpon them, hopyng to take some of them aliue. And they continuyng in this obstinacie (rather than thei would yeld) tumbled doune from a high Mountain, into the bot∣tome of the Seas. So leauyng that place, frō thence our men wente to a soyle thei named the Counties of War wickes Iland, where was perceiued by the wauing of a white garment, and other signes that y• Caniballes made: that thei would deliuer our men again, for those peo∣ple that thei had loste. But the people our men had taken, were kept to ga∣ther knowledge of, (and the Caniballes did but dissemble) and in deede their furie burste out vppon their practize. For when thei sawe our men would
not bee trained into their Treasons, thei issued out from the place thei lay in, and openly as thei durst, and with out regarde followed the Shippes, shoutyng and shootyng moste outra∣giously, as long as thei had any po∣wer too come neere our men. And it was to be iudged, that there were of the ennemies an hundreth or twoo more, in couerte, then our menne had seen before: whiche strategeme and fiennesse in thē did plainly declare, yt thei are not so simple, but can deuise more mischief then was looked for, or espied out at the first. And our menne hauyng dispatched their handes of these Infidelles, did lade their Ship∣pes, ended their businesse, and tooke in their stouffe, and tentes that was a shore, and giuyng thankes to God, for their so good happ and fortunate successe. Their Generall gaue cōmaunde∣ment, that whiche of the Barkes did
firste recouer the sight of Englande, should sette into the shore, and there tary the councells pleasure, if it hap∣pened them before to bee seuered by Winde and Weather any waie one from an other. And after this direc∣tion and order giuen, they hoised vp sailes, and in verie deede by occasion of cruell weather and tempeste, could not keepe compaignie long together. For Maister Yorkes Shippe loste sighte of the Aide and Gabriell, and was tossed so sore, that the mayne Maste was blowne ouerboarde, and his Shippe diuerse times in perill to be shaken in peeces, besides a daun∣gerous leakyng it had, whiche could not bee readily remeadied.: Yet as all violent thinges doe endure but a sea∣son, so this rage of storme ceased in continuaunce of tyme, and the Ship saffely ariued at Yarmouthe Hauen, where the officers of the Toune did shewe greate courtizie to the sailers,
and offered all the gentlenesse to the Captaine that might bee imagined. The Ayde and Gabriell in like sorte felte their parte of affliction and dan∣ger, and at lengthe came gallauntly home to Gods greate glorie, and the gladnesse of good people. Now is not this their paines wor thie the pennyng, and doeth not this voyage merite to bee remembred: bee iudge thereof your selues into whose hādes this little treatize maie happē. And for that I haue forgotten some necessary members, and furthe∣rars of this iourney (whose charges and diligence is great) and other no∣table & prosperous voyages, I praie you pardon me, though here I pre∣sente too your good commendation their names, and because Maister Mighel Locke hath alwaies furthe∣red Maister Forboisher, I maie not omitt his paine and willyng exspen∣ces, but bryng to remembrannce the
merites of so worthie a Marchaunt. I call to minde in like maner how a Knight called sir Hew Willowbie, moued to seke Cattaie, and bring home some newes thereof, perished in the enterprise, but though he be dead, his fame maie bee reuiued, and freashely liue in our memories. There were of his companie that founde out  at that presente tyme, whiche men ought not altoge∣ther to bee forgotten. I knewe my self twoo notable menne of them, the one called Chancelar, and the other Borrowes, whiche Chancelar espe∣cially was the odde man of his tyme, for matters touchyng the Sea. Maister Hawkins and Maister Ienkinson, for many greate trauail∣les, are here to be honoured with the reste, that haue gone forward in any famous aduentures. These men and many moe of ex∣cellente wittes and practizes, were
knowne and tried in the raigne of that noble yonge Prince Kyng Ed∣warde the sixte, and were furnished with goodly shippes, at whiche tyme was considered, that greate vesselles liyng idle at Gillyngham, spente and consumed muche in keepyng and re∣pairyng, and in the ende but rotted a∣waie, without any profit or pleasure springing from them, and that in sai∣lyng abroade, might bryng home cō∣modities innumerable. And encrease Marriners too the greate glorie and safetie of our coun∣trey: and as I haue vnderstoode and learned, the third parte of the worlde is vnhabited, and one Columbo an I∣talian, in Kyng Henry the seuenths tyme, was set a woorke by the Kyng of Aragon and Queene Isabella, which Columbo made a discouerie of the In∣dians, by a voyage he tooke in hande, of whiche discouerie sence that sea∣son, is growne suche an infinite trea∣sure,
as is incredible to be spoken of. And this is to bee proued, that there are nombers of places in the Indi∣ans not yet possessed, nor neuer were in the handes of Christen people, nei∣ther yet can not bee offensiue too the Spaniardes, if Englishe menne en∣ioye them: For in cōscience and right thei were better to haue our compa∣nie, then neither wee nor thei enioye the mightie Masse of wealthe, that these Indians would yelde vs. The earth was made for y• childrē of men, & neither the Spaniard, nor the Frenche, hath a prerogatiue too dwell alone, as though God appoin∣ted them a greater portiō then other Nations. In deede hee that lies idlelie at home, and hopes that GOD will caste kyngdomes in his lappe, maie as well catche at the Cloudes in the ayre, as come by any commoditie of the Earth. But to those that trauai∣les
abroad, a double or treble parte is a lotted, as a manne might saie, that Destinie makes her dole, and giueth an almose to them that reacheth out their handes for it: But too suche as thinketh scorne too come, when the dole is a dealyng, she neither castes a bare chipping of bread, nor flings any thankfull chaunce of good Fortune. I trust wee are not afearde to of∣fende those, that with that golde see∣keth meanes to conquere the whole world, and encomber by crueltie and pride ali the kingdomes of the earth. Why may not wee as well by pol∣licie aud Sworde (if it come too that pointe) posses a peece of those places, that falleth by enheritance too none but sutch as are able to get them and haue power to defend them. As our Prouerbe is, Winne Golde, and weare Golde. So the necessitie of millions of men biddes them seeke a∣broad for some benefite, or lie at home
in exstreme ruine and beggerie. For want of good exercies to main∣teine a multitude that daylie encrea∣se, the fine and stoute stomackes stou∣peth to steale, and the cunnyng and craftie wittes compasseth by falshead to come by true mens Goods, so that here at home is no other occupation commonly vsed: But a newe kinde of arte how to deceiue one another. And surely it is no maruell, for if people bee not employed to win their foode, and that neither Plague nor Warres doe deminish the multitude. I feare in a whyle we shall haue nei∣ther meate for our mouthes nor hou∣ses for our heades. I wonder why there is more men hanged in Englande in the space of one yere, then in fiue regions our nei∣bours in the space of ten yeres put to execution. Belike if those busie Bodies and stout corrages were occupied about
honest causes, they would bee rather able to giue bread to the needie, then ready too spoyle and cut the throates of the welthy and ritch. You know, and all the world may see, that we had neuer bigger nor bet∣ter Shippes, nor more abundance of them, whiche Uessailes were they a∣broad, the sight & shot of them would make our enemies affraid and trem∣ble. And those shippes sparkled seue∣rall waies about some noble discoue∣rie, if our foes in the meane while of∣fered iniurie to our countey: O what a discourage shoulde the enemy haue, when at their backs thei should finde our shippes vnder saill, armed and apointed too giue them a charge and a foyll. By the reporte of sutch as bee wise and worshipfull, if our goodly shippes were employed, where lawfully we may goe and vse good traficke. Their yerely commo∣ditie would fiue tymes surmount the
reuennue of the Crowne. Further I am sure of, if wee tooke a custome too be abroad, both the Turkes Gallies and al other christen princes powers on the Seas, would giue them free passage, or stand in awe of our Prin∣ces Nauie. Than iudge what is lost by this our slacknes and slouth, and consider what gain and glorious vi∣ctorie may bee won with a little tra∣uaill and exercise, (the Mother and Nurse of life and good lawes) a thing moste liked in a common weale, and followed and embraced of euery good mynde. But I doubt whether Ale∣xander the great was more to be prai∣sed in his conquestes (for that he bee∣gan with a kingdome) than sutch as with little maintenance attaines by exercise of wit and bodie to any noble territorie. For Alexanders fame by Philip his Father was spread so farre, that the Macedonians name was a terrour too
their enemyes, and Alexanders Purse and power (with the greatesse of his harte) was in a maner sutche readie Proppes to holde hym vppe, that hee could not fall but by the rebuke of Fortune or want of worldly pollicie. But sutch as from small abilitie or suckor, doe rise too greate wealth or gouernmente (hauyng neither Kyng nor Kingdomes too comforte them) are of great hart and corrage, neither inferiour to Hercules, nor in their min∣des behind no iote the mightie Ale∣xander for worthy renoume. For as by our comon opinion they can not sincke that are held vp by the Chin, so is it hard too swimme in a strong Flood (or bee any way aflote) where is greate weakenes of bodie and little strength to withstande the streame. I can doe no more with my penne but praise and commende all Noble and manly exercises, in whiche exer∣cise
I put these parties afore rehear∣sed, and all other that may and doe by their paines and discoueries helpe their Countrey too commoditie. And will spare neither charges, studie nor trauell in preferryng of Gods honor and wealth of the Prince they were borne vnder. And albeit that this ior∣ney is a speciall thing to be spoken of, yet in reading Belle Forest in the second Tome and other Authours, I finde that Gabotha was the firste in Kyng Henrie the seuenths daies, that dis∣couered this frosen land or Seas, frō sixtie seuen towards the North, and from thence towards the South a∣long the cost of America, to thirtie sixe degrees and a halfe, as it is affirmed in the sixth booke of the Decade. This beeing doen (at that season) for the discouerie of Cattaye, auouched by the Spanishe Decades and other bookes & Authors of as great credit. But this Gabothaes labour robs no
peece of praise from maister Forboy∣shers, for Gabotha made but a simple rehearsall of such a soyle. And Maister Forboysher makes a perfaite proofe of the Mines & pro∣fite of the countrie. By whiche action he encorageth sondrie good subiects to search out the secretes of naturall causes and hidden Treasures, kept for wante of exercise in Nauigation from our knowledge and vse. And as I might properly say hee hath broken the Ice, explained the passage and opened the Port of pre∣sent commoditie and gaine. Thus trusting you that reade this woorke, will take in worth my good will and paines (who hath written in the praise of vertue, no more then is needefull to bee touched for the auoy∣ding of vice.) I remain at their deuo∣cions that loue good studie, and hate idlenes and sloth, promising with this my poore and litle present, a greater
booke to followe of my Chips, which shall as I hope content the Readers better then my first volume did. And so wishing that those whiche enuie well doyng, may doe well them selues (to Gods glory, and honour of our Countrey) I troble you no further with the readyng of my fruitlesse la∣bours. FINIS. The tenth of Maye. 1578.
The partyng of frendes. With shaking hands & heauy hart, true frends their leaue do take, And one the other wisheth well, and some for frendships sake, Shed teares good store, & sadly sighes whē they fro frends depart. signe of loue, a solemne sho, a prose of frendly hart,) Who bydes at home, doth way abroad, what perills men do passe. And knowes the course of mortall life, is like a running Glasse That neuer rests, but still holds on, his houres as clock and chyme, Whose minsrels vs pilgrimes all, we waste and weare with tyme▪ And such a way in Balance well the woe that trau'lars finde, Bids frends farewell as oft as cause, can call the man to mynde. Yea when some sit at Bankets sweet, and taste on daintie fare, They think on euery hongry meall, they feele that seedes on care. Than with they part of each good dishe, amids the hands of those, That in strange lands, ful far from home: for countreis profit goes. The wife that wāts the husbāds vieue: bursts out in blubbring stil, The children finde a sodain chaunge: of Fathers warme good will. The neighbours sen can misse their frend: & all the Parish throw, At Church or market in some sort: will talke of  now. But those that bear vnfaied loue: are neuer well at eas, Vntill they hear how hee hath sped: that wanders Land and Seas. And where two mindes are knit in one▪ and bodies sondred bee, The lampe of loue with liuely Oyll still feedes the blase you see. o God and all good lucke they say: be with my fellow than, But if that none of these good signes: be freely found▪ in man. And that thei part with poultīg looks: that lours like clouds in ayr, (which with black stormes hath clean orecast: the pleasant weather Be sure that scorne and deep disdam: in hatefull brest is hid (fair.) And weery world or wyly wit, would of a mate be rid. Then churlish chat, and crabbed spech: like thonder bolt it flyes Strikes doune good men, teares vp renoume: & ratleth throwé the skies) A monster to good nature sure: a worme to kernell sweet,
A canker that doth fret hard steell: a mayme to vpright spreet. O lothsome birdes that hatcheth hate: O Snakish Serpents brood, To wicked humours giuing place: and hath no noble mood. To bid adue to wandring wights: that bids farewell God wot, To all the earth, and seekes in Seas, Sometymes a luckles lot. Well frends for that my hart is free, to wish and thinke you wel, My tongue is Trumpet of your fame: my pen like Larum bell, Shal sound your prais & salue the sores, that sle Malbouche shal make A clapping mill that grinds had grain, & doth good orne forsake Farewell deer frends from deepth of brest: could seas and I agree In such old gyes of shaking hands, you should not part from ee I stay to put their woorkes in Print: whose merites claym reward. And forto make my fortune mend, would haue my frends preard. FINIS. {quod} Tho. Churchyard. Gent.
