5306 99843670 8418
AN Epistle or letter of EXHORTATION VVRIT∣ten in Latyne by Marcus Tullius Cice∣ro, to his brother Quintus the Pro∣consull or Deputy of Asia, wherin the office of a Ma∣gistrate is connyngly and wisely de∣scribed. Translated into englyshe by G. G. ¶Set furth and authorised accor∣ding to the Queenes Maie∣sties Iniunctions. PRYNTED AT LONDON BY Rouland Hall, dwelling in Golding lane at the sygne of the three arrowes. 1561.
GODDRED GYLBY TO THE READER. WHERE AS MEN are now a days here in England glutted as it wer with gods worde, & therfore al¦most ready to vomit vp again ye which thei haue recey∣ued, lothing ye sermōs & despising the preachers, some turning to cu¦rious arts, & som cōtemning al ar¦tes & sciences, som Epicures, som Atheistes, & few or none do stand¦forth as fathers to vs yonglings to byd vs folow their fotesteppes in vertues and godlines: We the youth of this realme are drawen into diuers and sundrye doubtfull wayes aud wandering bypathes, and many of vs by pouerty and o∣ther calamities are oppressed at our first breathing & either know not which way to directe our stu∣dies or els want helpe to go for∣warde and are cut of in the fyrste
herbe accordyng to the Prouerbe. This is one thyng also that gre∣ueth vs: we see them that are wise and learned altogether contem∣ned and despised, and thei often ti∣mes are compelled to go and seke to the riche and noble mens hou∣ses, but the riche wyl not come to their houses nor greatly delyte in their companies. And thogh thys be some cause thatPetrus Cri∣nitus lib. 7. 14. de ho¦nesta disci∣plina. Aristippus answered to Dionisius why the learned doe haunte the houses of the rich and the wise many times go & seke to the wealthy and not they to the contrary: for that the wise doe knowe what the riche do want and the welthy worldlings can not se their want, as he saith. Yet in these our tymes we maye find other matters that cōpelleth thē to seke to such as be in power & autoritie. For iniquitie doth a∣bounde in these latter dayes and the pore ar oppressed by the migh∣ty. And as I doe here mine elders
talke. The lawes are good to right the wronges, but lawyars do not their duties. Iustice is good, but the Iustyces care not for poore mens causes. Officers are enowe and wel prouided for in all places but these officers vnderstand not their office and duty or yf they do vnderstand it, they will not do it, & which is the worste of all, when thei do it not, thei may not be told of it, especially by a man that is learned in gods worde. For what cā he skyl of ciuil offices say these politike officers. Thus is the rule of all equitie openly contemned. Therefore not seyng wherevnto in this my youth I could direct my studies yet neither wheri I cold be better occupied both for mine own learning, and for the instructiō of such politike men as wil vochsafe to read heathen writters, though they regard not the scriptures: I haue trāslated as I could into our natiue language, the notable epi∣stle
of that famous wise and poli∣tike man M. Tullius Cicero vn∣to his brother Quintus, wherein iustice and the right vse of an of∣fice is so wel and politikely descri∣bed that the politike heades may learne therby to put good things in practise & nede nether to be asha∣med of the authour who was a man of singuler wisedom & great experience, nor of the matter whi∣ch is an instruction of the Magi∣strate meete for all ages: yf God grant me any abilitie to expresse it. Take these first fruits of mine infācie in good part, so & you shal encourage me to farther trauails. My father cōmādeth me to folow labour and to suffer others to seke for honours. Fare you wel in the Lorde. At London the vii. of Iuly, the yere of our Lord. 1561.
The exhortacion OF MARCVS TVLLIVS Cicero vnto hys brother Quintus. ALTHOVGH I DID not dout but that both many messen∣gers and also fame it self should by her swyftnes preuente my letters, and that thou shuldest sooner here tell of others that the thyrde yere was added to our de∣sier & to thy labour: yet I thought it necessary that I shuld also send thee a message of this trauayle. For as for the former letters not in one but in many, when as now other men had despered of yt mat∣ter, yet I did put thee in hope that yu should shortly depart, not onely that I myghte comforte thee as longe as it myght be, with a plea¦sant opinion and persuasion: but
also because I did not mistrust but that the matter might be brought to passe, for so muche as bothe I my self and also the pretors were so earnest in the cause. But now because it is so come to passe that neyther the Pretors wyth theyr riches nor we wyth our diligence can doe any good, it is a very hard matter not to be grieued there∣with: but yet it is not meete that our courage whych is exercised in doing and suffering great things shoulde be broken or cast downe with sorrowe.Mē shuld be most so¦ry for that vvhich cō∣meth by their ovvn faute. And because men oght to be most sorowful for those thynges which are come by theyr own faut: ther is good cause why it shuld more grieue me then the, for it came to passe by my faute o∣therwise then yu thoght, both whē thou tokest thy iourney and after¦warde where by letters thou did∣dest go about yt a succsessor shoulde not be deteined to thee the firste yere. The which matter whiles I
loke to ye sauegard of our cōfedera¦tes whiles I resist yt impudency of certen merchāts & whiles I desire yt our glory shuld be augmēted by thy vertue I wrought nothing wise¦ly, & specially seing ye I haue com∣mitted this faute that the second yeare shuld also brīg ye third. Tyhe which thing because I confesse it to haue ben my faut, it belongeth to thy wisdom & humanitie to pro¦uide & to bring to passe that this which was vnwisely done of, me shuld by thy diligēce be corrected. Now if thou do rase vp, thy selfe more earnestli and diligētly of all sides to get a good name so that yu do not now striue we others but we thi self and if thou do stirre vp thy whole mind care thought &Desire of glory ouer cōmeth al. desire of glorye which ouercometh all thīgs sureli this one yere whiche is added to thy trauell shall bothe brīg vs ye ioy of many yeres & also make our posterity glorious wher fore first I desire this of the yt yu be
not dyscoraged nor discomforted and that thou suffer not thy selfe to be ouer whelmed wt ouer great businesse as it were wyth a floode but contrariwise that thou rayse vp thy selfe and resiste it and also that thou wyllyngly set thy shul∣ders agaynst the weyght of thine affayres: For thou doest not rule that parte of the common wealth wherein fortune hath muche po∣wer but yt part whych may be go¦uerned chiefelye by reason and di∣ligence. And yf I dyd see that thy dominion and authoritie had ben prolonged to thee whilest yu wast occupyed by some great and dan∣gerous warre my heart woulde quake: to consider that the power of Fortune at the same tyme al∣so shoulde be prolonged agaynste vs. But nowe synce yt parte of the common wealth is committed to thy charge in the which Fortune either hath small oir els no parte of rule at all: euen that which se∣meth
vnto me wholly to consist in thy vertue & moderatiō of minde. I thyncke we nede not feare any priuy traynes of enemyes, any o∣pen war, any rebelliō and falling away of our felowes and confede∣rates, any lacke of wages or pro∣uision for corne, nor finally any se¦dicion of the army, which haue of∣ten chaunced to moste wise men: that asThe Ma∣gistrate is compared to a ship∣maister. shypmasters be thei ne∣uer so connyng can not resist the force of ye tempest so they cold not withstand the violence of fortune But to thee is geuen the greatest peace and tranquillitie taht can be, so that it is of force inough to ouerwhelme a shypmaister that slepeth but a wakyng gouernour woulde be delited therewith. For first the prouince doeth consist of such cōfederates as are of al kind of men most gentle: and secōdly of such kind of citezins as either be∣cause thei are publicans ar ioined vnto vs by very great frendshyp,
or els because thei ocupy marchan¦dise are very riche and iudge that by the means of our consulshippe their riches are in safetie. (But it may be said) that euen amongest this kind of men there are greate controuersies many wronges are done and waighty contentious a rise. As though I shoulde thinke that thou haddest nothing to do. Yes I know that there is greate matters to do and suche as neede greate aduisement. But remem∣ber that I do attribute som thing more in this busies to aduisemēt then to fortune for what bysynes shal it be to bridle them which are vnder thy gouernaunce if thou cā¦bridle thy selfe? But let that be a greate & hard matter vnto others as it is very hard: yet to thee both it hath bene allwaies very easye yea & in dede oght to haue bene so seing yt thy nature is such as seme yt it wold haue ben moderat wtout learning: but now suche learning
is ioined with the good nature as were able to bring into order and beautify the worst dispositiō that euer man had. Thou truely thy self shalt withstand the greedy de¦sire of mony of pleasure and of all other things as in dede thou dost: & then shalt thou haue any greate to feare lest thou be not able to re¦presse a wicked marchant or a co∣uetous publicane? As for the Grecians when they se¦thee so they wil haue the in such admiration as they are wonte to haue som noble man mencioned in their chronicles or els thy wil thinke that thou so diuine a man, art come downe from heauen in∣to the prouince. Whyche thynges I wryte not as thoughe I exhorted thee to doe them but that thou shoulde reioi∣se that thou doest, and hast doone them allready: For it is an honorable thynge to haue hadde greate power in Asia
for the space of thre yeares and so to haue behaued thy self that no olde monument, no painted table no precious vessell, no riche ap∣parell, no notable bondman, no beautie of any person and finally no bargē of mony of which thīgs there is greate store in thys pro∣uince could euer bring thee from the pathe of exacte integritie and continence. And surely what can be more notable or more to be de∣syred then that thys vertue thys temperaunce and moderation of mind, shuld not be hid in the dark but be set forth in the broad lyght of Asia nad in the eies of a moste noble prouince and in the eares of al people & nations:The pre∣sence of a good offi∣cer oght not to be terrible but com∣fortable. in so much as they are not made affraide by they iourneys: they men art not burdened with charges nor trou∣bled with receiuing thee: but ra∣ther where so euer thou comest there is incomparable ioye bothe publikly and priuatly. for so much
as ye citie wher thou entrest dothe seme to haue receiued a defender and not a tyrant: the house were thou lodgest, a gest and not a rob∣ber? But as for these motters, vse it self hath taught that it is not in ough that thou thy selfe shoulde haue these vertues but that thou ought to loke about diligently yt in ye preseruation of this prouince not onely thou but also all the mi¦nisters of thy dominion shulde be haue them selues after the same sort both towards our fellowes & citizens and also to all the cōmon welth. Howbeit thou hast such em¦basadours as will haue regard of their own worship: of whom Tu∣bero is the chiefe both in honour dignitie & age: who I think (chife∣ly because he wryteth an history) maye chuse many men out of hys owne chronicles which bothe he will and also may follow. But ha¦lenius is our owne bothe in heart and good will and also in follow∣ing
our kind of lif. And what nede I speake of Gratidius? Whom I know of a suerty so to care for his owne estimacion that for the bro∣therly loue towards vs he careth also for ours. Thou haste also a questor which was not chosen by thine owne iudgement but such a one as was giuen by lot. Whō it behoueth both of his owne accord to be moderate: & also to obey to thy wyll and commaundement. Of whome yf paraduenture any were some what couetous thou shuld beare so long wyth hym vn¦till he of his owne head did violat those lawes to the whych he is bounde not permitting yt he shuld abuse to lucre and gayn yt power which thou haddest committed to him for honour: for surely it plea∣seth me not (chiefly seing that the maners of this time are so muche declined vnto so great lightnes & ambition) that thou shouldest sea¦rche out all filthines and examin
euery one to the vttermost but to commit so muche to euery one of them as he may be trusted wyth∣al. And amongst those whom the commonwelth it self hath appoin¦ted to be as fellowes and helpers with thee thou shalt be aboue thē only in those poīts which I haue That is to giue euery man that vvhich he may be tru¦sted vvithal heretofore prescribed. As for thē whom thou hast wyth thee either of thy householde or of the necessa¦ry messengers whom men vse to call as it wer of the pretors band both the deds and also the words of these menThe magi∣strate must answere both for the words and dedes of their fa∣milies and train whi∣ch they chuse to haue aout them. must be performed by vs. But thou haste those men with thee whome thou shalt haue occasion to loue doyng wel, or els yf they haue not respecte to thy honour thou maist easely correct. Of whome because thou wast vn∣expart it semed that thy good na∣ture might easely haue bene decei¦ued: The ber∣ter a mā is the soner is he begyled for the better a man is, the lesse he suspecteth another to be e∣uil But now this third yere hath
as much integritie as the two for¦mer, yes & by experience is made more ware and diligent. The cares of a magi∣strate. Let thyne eares be suche as may be taught to heare those thin¦gs which they heare in dede, not such as men mai whisper in salfe∣ly and faynedly for lucre sake. The ring and signets Let not thy ring be an instru∣ment not regarded but as thou thy selfe: Not a minister of ano∣ther mans pleasure but a witnes of thy wyll. the serge¦ant & pur∣seuant. Let the Purseuant also be in that degree in which our aunce∣ters wold haue him which did giue ye office not as a benefite but as a labour & charge and dyd not rash∣ly commit it to any, but to them whom they had brought to liber∣tie, ouer whome yet they had au∣thoritie litle lesse then ouer their seruaunts. Let the Sergeant be a mesen∣ger not of hys but of thy gentle¦nes: the ma∣ses. and let them beare those
mases & pollaxes rather for a sign of dignity thē of power.The loue of subiects Finally let it be known to al ye prouince yt ye sauegard of ye families good na∣me & substāce of al men ouer whō thou bearest rule are moste deare vnto thee. Yea & let them thinke on this, thatBribe gi∣uers and bribe ta∣kers. thou wilt not only be an enemye to them which take bribes, but also to them that giue bribes if thou know it. And surely no man will giue bribes when he doth once perceyue that nothing can be obteyned of thee by their meanes which make a shewe as thogh they could do much wt thee. Neither do my words tend to this end that I would haue thee ether to rigorous or suspicious against thy officers:Of trusty officers. For if there be any whiche for the space of two yere were neuer suspected of thee to be couetous (as I hear of Cesius Che¦rippus & Labeo, & because I know them I beleue it) there is nothing which I thinke thou maist not be
bolde to commit to them or any other of like fidelitie. But if there be any in whom thou hast spied or of whom thou hast perceiued any thing: trust him with nothing ne∣ther commit to hym any parte of thine honor.Of newe frendes. And if yu hast found any man in the prouince it selfe, which is all together become thy familier frende which was afore vnknowen vnto vs: loke diligent how much thou may truste hym: not but ye ther may be many good men in the prouince: but this mai be hoped for to iudge it, it is dan∣gerous. For the disposition of the nature of euery mā is cloked with many foldes of dissemblyng and couered as it were with certayne veales: the forehead the eyes and countenaunce wyl deceyue a man often,The tōge of man. but the tong oftnest of al. wherfor how canst yu find such mē as being drawne with the lust of many would lack all those things frō ye which we cannot be seuered
and that should hartily loue thee being a strunger and would not rather seme to beare the good wil for ther owne profit sake? It se∣meth to me a great matter speci∣ally since those men do allmoste loue no priuat men yet that they shoulde loue all they pretors. Of whiche sort if thou haste knowen any whiche loued thee more then the time (for so it might be) reken him gladly amongest thy friends. But if thou shalt not be sure of yt thee is no kind of men whose fa∣miliaritie thou oght more toBeware of money men. be∣ware of because they know al the shiftes of mony and do all things for mony yea and care not for his estimation wyth whom they in∣tend not to leade their life. yea & amongest the Grecians som fami∣liarities must be auoided except of fewe men which follow ye maners of old Grecia. But many of thē are so deceitfull and vnconstant & by their longe bondage haue ler∣ned
to muche flattery. Whom I would all to be liberally entertei∣ned but a fewe of the best must be chosen for hospitalitie and frend∣shippe. Their great familiaritie is not to be trusted (for they dare not be against our wils) yet they enuy both our contry men & their owne. But now since I will be so ware and so diligēt in such thīgs wherein I am afraid lest I be to hard: how thinkest thou I would haue seruants ordred? Whom as in all places so chiefly in the pro∣uinces we oght well to gouerne. Of which kind many things may be spoken: but this is both shor∣test and may easily be kepte in me¦mory that they do so behaue them selues in these iourneis in Aslya as though they were trauailing in the hye way called Appia And let them think ye ther is no diffe∣rēce whither thei com to Tralles or to Formie. And if there be any of thy seruants very faithfulthe charg of seruants let
him haue ye ouersight of thy house hold & priuat busines. But as for such thinges as do apperteine to thy office & autority or to ani part of the common welth let him not once medle therewith. For many thinges wherewith faithful ser∣uants may be trusted yet for ad∣uoiding of ye speeche of people & ill report oght not to be cōmitted to them. But I cannot tell how my folke is fallen to a kind of instru∣ction wher as in ye beginning I did purpose no such thing. For what shuld I instruct him whō I know in this matter to be as wise as mi self & by reason of vse mroe wise? But I though yt if ye auctoritie of my counsell were ioyned to those thīgs which thou dost thi self thei shoulde be more pleasant to thee. The foun¦dacion of true honor & dignitieWherfore let these be the foun¦dacion of thy dignitie first thy cō∣tinence & integrite secōdly ye sham fastnes of all them that are with thee (yea & loke thou very wearly
and diligently haue choise of fami¦liarities as wel of men of the pro¦uince as of the Grecians) & last of all a graue & constant order of thy house. Which things seing they are comely in these our priuat & daily orders: in so large a domi∣nion which hath so corrupte ma∣ners & in a prouince that so easily corrupteth others thy must nee∣des seme diuine & heauenly. This gouernemēt & order mai vphold ye seueritie in makinge statutes and decrees whiche thou haste vsed in those thinges by ye which we haue purchased certein priuy grudges whereof I am very glad: Vnles yu think that I am moued with the complaints of one Paconius whō I knowe not what he is who is not so good as a Grecian but ra∣ther a Mysian or Phrygian or els with ye words of Tuscenius a vile and mad man out of whose filthy mouthe thou hast gotten wt great equitie a most shameful lust. But
we cānot snsteine these and other things which thou hast decreed in this prouince ful of seuerity with out great tēperance of life. Wher¦fore loke ye there be great seuerity in iudgmētsLet not fauor per∣uert iudge¦ment. so yt it be not chaun¦ged for fauor but yt it be kepte e∣quall and vpright. But surely it shal litle preuil if yu do iustice vp∣rightly and diligently vnles the same be done of thy compartners to whom thou hast granted some parte of yt office. And surely me think there is no great diuersitie of busines in gouerning Asia but yt it doth only cōsist in giuing iust sentence in the which the fashion how to gouerne a prouince is eui¦dent. Constācy Grauitie. Constancy also & grauity muste be added which maye resist not only fauor but also suspicion. Loue. Humanity Diligence. Whereunto must be ioined pro∣mptnes to heare gentilnes in dis∣cerning & finally diligence bothe in making and giuing answer & also in reasoning. For these thīgs
friende was not lightly wont nei¦ther without a cause to lay out of his hands for ther is no deinty of a diligent & moderat gouernemēt in them omitted. If Cyrus who knew he shulde neuer be a priuat man so diligently obserued these things wt what care oght they to kepe & obserue them which beare rule with this conditiō that they must depart from it againe and re¦turne vnder obediēce of those law¦es by order of ye which the gouer∣uaunce was committed vntothē? The feli∣citie of the subiectes is the ende of gouerne¦ment. And surely me thinketh yt thys oght to be ye end of all things that the rulers shuld do. Namely that they which be vnder their domi∣nion maye be as happy as is pos∣sible: which thing is greatly com¦mended both by true report & also by all mens talk ye thou dost chief¦ly esteme it & hast so euer sence yu camest first īto Asia. And it is sure¦ly yt office not only of them whi∣ch beareth rule ouer ye confedera∣tes
and citizens of Rome but also of him which hath ye charge of ser¦uants yea and of dome beastes to care for ye profit & vtilitie of them ouer whom he beareth rule. And I perceaue ye all men doe agree yt in such kind of things thou art as diligent as may be & that ye cities are charged wt no new debte nor impost but yt many townes ar by thee discharged of their old debte which was both great & greuous yea ye many which were fallen in decay & almost desolat are by thee restored of whō there is one most citie of Ienia & an other of Caria Samus & Halicarnassus: & yt ther is no dissension nor discord in the cities: & that yu dost prouide that ye cities be ruled by ye counsel of the nobles: that ye robberies of Mysia are taken away & murders in ma¦ny places are stopped & caused to cease & that peace is established ī the whole prouince & not onely ye those theftes which were cōmit∣ted
by ye way side & in the fields ar¦ceased & put away but also many mo & greater theftes & murthers which were cōmitted in cities: & that false accusation which is the most cruell seruant of the pretors couetousnes is taken away & re∣moued from ye same & from goods and from ye welthy quietnes of ri¦che men: yt the costes & tributs of the cities are equally susteimed of all which inhabut ye borders of ye said cities: ye one may easely haue acces to thee yt thy eares are open to ye complaintes of all men ye no mans pouerty or misery is not on¦ly not shut out from ye common as¦semblies & from thy iudgement but not so much as from thi house and priuy chamber: & finally ye in thy hole dominion ther is nothīg greuous nothing cruell and that all things are full of clemēcy mek¦nes & humanity. And surely how great a benefite is it ye thou haste deliuered Asia (thogh we susteine
great grudge) from ye iniust & gre¦uous tribut for & publike buil∣dings? for if one noble man doe complain openly yt thou haddest taken from him two hundred .M. pence because yu haddest cōmaun∣ded yt mony shuld not be appoyn∣ted for commō places: how much mony then shuld be paid if mony shuld be laid out for all them whi¦ch make plaies at Rome ye which thing was also ordeined? Howe be it we haue suppressed these cō¦plaints of our citizens moued we this counsell which I cannot tell how it is praised in Asia but at Rome it is had in no smale reue∣rence: because yt where as ye cities had decreed mony for our churche and monument which thing thei had doone of their owne accorde both because of my great desertes and also for thy great benefytes: The magi¦strate may take mony of the sub∣iectes for the buil∣ding of tē∣ples and monumen¦tes. yea & ye law dyd specially except that it shoulde be lawfull to take for a church or a monument and
because that whyche was giuen should not perishe but shoulde re∣maine in ye ornaments of ye church so yt it should haue semed to haue bene giuen not so much to me as to the people of Rome and to the immortall Gods? yet I thought that that in ye which the dignity yt law yea and the will thē which did it, did consist, ought not to be receaued bothe for other causes and also that they to whome it was not dewe nor lawfull might beare it more willīgly.The go∣uernour must be careful bo∣th for reli∣gion and iustice to make the people blessed. Wherfor labour with all thy mind and dili¦gence to kep ye trade which thou haste as yet vsed that thou liue & by al meanes defend them and stu¦dy that they be as blessed as may be whom the senat & the people of Rome haue committed to thy po¦wer & fidelitie and of whom they haue giuen thee charge. And if so be yt by lot thou haddest ben made ruler of Africa or of Spaine or of france which are fearce and bar∣barous
people: yet it were a part of thy humanity to prouide for their commodity & to loke to their health and profit. But since we beare rule ouer yt kind of men in whom not only humanity to selfe is but also from whō it is thought to haue proceded to others we oght specially to shew humanitie to them of whom we receiued it for I will not be ashamed to say this (chiefly in that maner of life and in those noble actes in which there can no suspicion of sluggi∣shenes or of lightnes remaine) yt we haue obteined these thynges which we haue gotten by those ar¦tes and studies which were giuē vs by moniments and doctrines of Grecia.Practise hu¦manitie to vvards thē of vvhō vve learne it. Wherefore besides ye common loyaltie & fidelitie whi∣ch is due to al mē we seme to owe it chiefly to these men yt by whose precepts we haue bene taught a∣mong them we shoulde set forthe those things which we haue lear¦ned of them. And surely Plato the
prince both of wit and learnng thoughtWhē shal realmes be blessed & happy. that then common wel¦thes shuld be happy when either learned and wise men beginne to gouerne them or els when they which did gouerne thē did bestow all their study in learning and in wisdome. For he thought ye thys ioining to gether of auctoriti and wisdome was the preseruation of cities which thing perchance hap¦pened to all our common welthe but nowe surely it is chaunsed to this thy prouince that he shoulde beare chief rule therein, who had bestowed much time and diligēce euen from his youth in learning vertue and humanity. Wherfore see that this yere which is added to thi labor may also seme to haue ben added to the welthe of Asia: for Asia was more happy in retei¦ning thee thē we were in leading thee of thy iourney from vs but bring thou to passe that oure ear∣nest desire mai be mitigated with the ioyfull remembrance of ye pro¦uince:
for seīg thou hast ben more diligent then any man in deser∣uing that so great honours shuld be giuen thee, as I know not whi¦ther they were giuen to any be∣sides, thou must nedes be a greate deele more diligent in maintei¦ning these hounours. Howbeit I wrote to thee heretofore what I did iudge of this kind of houno∣rs. The right iudgemēt of honors. I thought them allwais yf they were common to be vile: yf they were rodeined by necessitie of time light: but if they wer giuē for thy deserts (as it is come to passe) I thought that thou oghtest to be very diligent in maintei∣ning of them: wherefore seing in those cities thou hast ye chiefe rule and power in ye which thou seest the vertues consecrated and set in the nomber of the goddes thou must remember in al things whi∣ch thou doest ordeine, which thou dost decree, and what soeuer yu dost what thou owest to so gret hope which men haue conceiued of the,
likewise tot he iudgements of mē and finally to so gret honours. The which office is such yt thou mist care for all men that yu geue remedies for the discommodities of men and prouide for their wel th, as thou woldest both be called and counted the parente of Asta. But to this thy will and diligēce the publicanes are a greate hin∣drance: whom if we resist we shal seperate from oure frendship that company whiche hath doone very muche for vs and whiche by vs is ioined to the common welthe and not onely from our frendship but from the commō welthe also: but if we do in all points suffer them we shall suffer them vtterly to perishe for whose sauegard not on¦ly, but also for their profite we oght to care. This is the onelye difficulty, if we wil wey it a right that is in all thy dominion: for a man to be continent to bridle all his lustes to kepe vnder his owne housholde and to obserue equitie
in iudgement to shew himself rea¦die to consider sutes to heare men and to admit to his speach is more glorious then harde. For it con∣sisteth not in any labor but in that a man can finde in heart to do it. The publi¦cans and tolle ga¦therers are commōly extorcio∣ners. As for that busines of the Pub∣licans how greuous it is to our fe¦lowes we vnderstand of the citi∣zens which in pleding that ye tole shoulde be taken out of Italy dyd not so much complayn of the tole as of certain iniuries done by the tole gatherers. Wherefore I am not ignorant what doeth chaunce to our felowes in those far coun∣treys, since I haue heard in Italy the complayntes of our citizens. In this case so to behaue thy selfe yt thou mayst both satisfie ye publi∣cans (specially seyng the thinges of the cōmon wealth are but late∣ly recouered) and not suffer our fe¦lowes and confederates to perish requireth a diuine vertue whiche is thine. And first of al as for that which is most greuous to the Gre¦cians
yt thei are tributaries ought not to seme so greuous forsomuch as before they were subiect to the people of Rome by their own or∣dinances thei were so. As for the name of a publican thei can not re¦iect it seing that wtout a publican thei cold not pay ye tribute which Silla did equaly apoint thē. Yea & it mai be wel knowen yt ye greciās are no gētler in gatherīg of their tributs thē our publicās by this ye al ye Cauniās now of late fled out ye iles, which wer assigned of Sil∣la to ye Rodiās, to ask helpe of ye se¦nat desiring rather to pay tribute to vs then to ye Rodiās: wherfore nether oght they to abhorre ye na∣me of publicās which wer alwais tributaries: nor thei reiect it whi∣ch cold not of them selues pay tri∣bute: nor thei refuse it which dyd require it. Yea & let Asia remēbre this thing yt if it wer not holdē vp wt this gouernmet yt it shuld lacke no miserie which cā com either by war wt farren naciōs or yt cometh∣by
inwarde discordes.vvherfore tribute is geuen. But seing that this gouernment cā not be re¦tained wtout tribut let her willīg¦ly be cōtent for a litle part of her fruts to redeme perpetual peace & quietnes. And if so be yt thei cā wil¦lingly abide ye name & cōpanye of publicās all other things which yu dost by coūsel & wisdom shall seme more easy to thē: yea & thei mai in making oft their berges haue respect not to ye law of ye Censors but ra∣ther to ye cōmoditie of doing their: busines & to ye deliuerāce frō grief, yea & yu maist do yt which yu also hast done very wel & at this time dost, to wit, that yu tel thē what dignity is in ye publicans & how much we are doūd to that cōpany that set∣tyng asyde authoritie and force of powre & scepter yu maist ioyne the grecians and publicans together in fauour & authoritie. Yea & de∣sire this of thēfor whō tho haste done so much, & which are bound to thee in all thinges that they byt their gentlenes woulde suffer vs
to kepe & preserue yt frēdship which we haue wt the publicās: but what do I exhort to thee these thinges which yu canste not onely of thyne owne accorde do wtout any mans teaching but also hast for the most part already done thē? For most ho¦nest & the greatest felowships doe not cease dayly to thanke vs: the which thing was therefore more pleasant to me because that ye gre¦cians do it. But it is a hard mat¦ter to ioyne those things together in one accord which are diuers in cōmodities in profite & almost by nature. And surely I haue writtē those things which are writtē a∣boue not to teach thee (for thy wis¦dom nedeth no instruction of any man) but the rehearsal of thy ver∣tew when I wrote dyd delyte me: Althoughe I haue longer in these letters then I woulde or then I thought I shuld haue bene There is one thing which I wold not cease to cōmaūde thee nor will suffer thee so much as in me lyeth
A prayse vvith an. ex¦ceptation. to be praised wt an acception: for all that come out of thy prouince do so report of thy vertue integri∣tie & humanitie ye in thy greatest prayses they except, only wrathe: the which vice as it semethWrathe the signe of a light mynde. to be ye point of a light & vnstable minde in a customable & priuate kinde of life:Nothing is more vn¦comely thē to ioyne bitternes of nature to autho∣ritie. so nothing is more vncome¦ly then to ioyne bitternes of na∣ture to hie authority: wherfore I wil not now vndertake this to de¦clare vnto thee those thīgs which are spoken of most wise men con¦cerning wrath both because I wil not be ouerlonge & also because yu maist easly know it by many mēs writings. Neither thinke I yt we ought to let passe that which is ye propertie of a letter, to wit, yt we let him to whom we write know those things whereof he is igno∣rant. Yea and al bring vs word of this that there is none more plea¦sant then yu whē angre is absent: vvrath. banisheth all huma¦nrte. but if any mans wickednes and peruerse maners doe moue thee
then yu art so angry yt all men find lack of humanity in thee: wherfor seing we ar com into this kind of liuing not so much for desire of glo¦ry as by ye thīg it self & by ye course of fortune that ye posteritie shulde alwais talk of vs: let vs beware as much as in vs lieth & asmuche as we cā do yt no notable vice be repor¦ted to haue ben in vs. Neither yet go I about this (which as in al a∣ges so especially in our age it is a hard matter) to change ye mind & if any thing be thorowly growne in our maners suddēly to pluck it a∣way:A remea∣dy agaynst vvrath. but I do admonish thee here of yt if yu cāst not altogether auoide this vice because angre doth take place in thy mind before ye reason cā prouide for it: that yu shuld afore prepare for thy self & euer more re¦mēbre that yu must resist wrath: & when as it doth moste moue thee then yu oghtest most diligently to Rule thy tonge. bridle thy tonge: whiche semeth somtimes to be no les vertue then not to be angrie at al, for to be an¦grie
is not only a point of grauity but somtime also of gētlenes: but to tēper ye mide & talke whē a mā is angrie or les to kepe silēce & to hold in thine own powre ye mociō of thi mīd & grief, although it is not yt point of perfit wisdō it is a point of no final wit: & herin thei bring word yu art much more easly & gen¦tle: nether do we hear of any more greuous mociōs of yt minds or de∣spitful words which ar both far di¦stāt frō lerning & humanitie & also cōtrary to auctoritie & dignitie for if the wrath can by no meanes be appeased it is to great bitternes: but if it mai be easely entreated it is great lightnesOf two euils the lesse is to be chosen. which for al ye (as choise mai be in euill things) It is bet∣ter to be to gētle then to cruell. ought to be chosen before bitter¦nes. But because in the first yere there was muche talke of this I thinke because that ye iniueries of men their couetousnes & pride did chance cōtrary to thine opinion & did seme intollerable: & the secōde was much more gentle because yt
both custom & reasō & (as I thinke euen my letters) did make thee pa¦cient & gentle:An olde officer muste so growe in vertue that he must be altogether fauteles. as for ye third yere it oght so to be amended yt no mā maye haue occasion to rebuke the least thing yt may be. But now I do not handle the matter wt thee by ye way of exhortaciō & precepts & teaching but by brotherly pray∣ers that yu wouldest set thy whole minde care & thought to gather & win ye praise & cōmendation of all men on euery side. Now if so be yt our matters stode ī ani mean state of talk & cōmendation: I would re¦quire no notable thīg norani thīg of thee aboue the cōmon custom. But now because of the dignity & greatnes of those things in ye whi¦ch we haue ben occupied vnles we get wōderfull great praise of this prouince I cā not se how we cā a∣uoide wōderful great rebuke and shame, for such is our state that al good men do both fauour it & also require & loke for al diligence and vertue at our hāds: but al wicked
men because we haue takē in hād a perpetuall battell against them wold be content vpō very smal oc¦casion to put vs to rebuke. Wher¦fore since yt this stage wherevpon we stād is filled wt the celebrity of al Asia, & in quātitie is ye greatest in iudgement, the best learned, & by nature so far soūdyng that the voices & signes ar broght to rome I besech thee labour & do thy dili∣gēce that yu may not only seme to haue ben worthy those things but also to haue ouercom al things by thy cunning. And because that I amōg other kinde of officers haue obteyned ye administration of the common wealth in the citie, and thou the gouernaunce in a pro∣uince, although my parte do geue place to no man, yet loke that thy part ouercome all other: remem∣ber that we do not striue of ye glo∣ry that remaineth & is loked for, but for that that is gotten alrea∣dy which was not so necessary to haue bene desyred as it is mete it
should nowe of vs be mainteined. And if so be that I might be sepe∣rate frō thee in any thing I wol desire no more then this state whi¦ch I haue already obteyned. But nowe the matter goeth so that vn¦lesse all thy wordes and dedes doe agre with the thynges which we do. Here I shall thynke my selfe to haue gotten nothyng by my so great labours and so greate dan∣gers of all the which thou haste bene partaker. But seyng thou aboue all others hast helped vs to get great renowne: surelye thou ought to labor aboue all others to preserue the same. For thou must not only haue the estimaciōs and iudgemēts of those men which ar now liuing, but also of thē which shalbe hereafter.We iudge more equal¦ly of them that are de¦parted be∣cause to∣wardes thē enuy cea∣seth. How be it their iudgemēt shalbe more right seing it is fre frō slaunder & il wil. Fina¦ly yu ought to thinke thus yt thou doest seke glorye not only for thy selfe: ye which thyng though thou diddest yet thou wouldest not con¦temne it, especiallye seyng that
thou hast consecrated the memory of thy name amongest wonderful great monuments. But this thy glorye must be communicat with me, yea and deliuered to our chil∣dren. Wherin thou must beware lest if thou be negligent thou doe not only seme to haue cared lytle for thy self, but also to haue enui∣ed thy frēds & kinsfolk. Nether do I say this yt my words shuld seme to awake thee which afore diddest slepe but rather to haue pricked thee forward which afore didst run for yu wilte always do that which thou haste done, that al men may prayse thy iustice, temperancie, seueritie and integritie. But an infinite desire of glory do∣eth wholly possesse me for the sin∣gular loue which I beare to thee. Howbeit I thinke thus yt Asia is now as wel knowē to thee as eue¦ry mā knoweth his own house, & since yt to thy great wisdō so good experiēce is ioyned I thinke there is nothing which doth appertaine
to praise which thou dost not wel se & which thou dost not daily very well remēbre wtout any mans ex∣hortacion.Loue cau¦seth longe letters. But I because yt whē I reade thy letters me thynke I speake wt thee, am most delited we thy longest letters & I am oftē ti∣mes very lōg my self in writing. Now last of al I desire and exhort thee to this thatGood offi¦cers muste be like good poe∣tes. as good poets & as cūning plaiers do so that thou in the last part & cōclusiō of thine office and busines be as diligent as may be that this thirde yere of thy gouernmēt may seme to haue ben most perfect & most adorned as though it were the thirde act in a comodie, the which thinge yu shall easly bryng to pas if yu thinke yt I (whom alone yu rather dost please then al others) am al wais wt thee and present in al things which ei∣ther thou dost or sayest. Now it re¦maineth to desire thee that if thou loue me & wouldest haue al thyne to doe well thou haue regarde to thine owne health and welfare. FINIS.
