B2554 15556705 103722
portrait of King David of Israel KING DAVID Blessed be the Kingdome of our Father David that cometh in ye name of the Lord. Hosannah in the highest. Mar. 11.10.
THE PSALTER or PSALMS OF DAVID Paraphras'd in Verse. Set to new Tunes. And so design'd that by Two Tunes onely, the whole Number of Psalms (Four onely excep∣ted) may be Sung; One of which Tunes is already known (being the usual Tune of the C. Psalm) the other Tunes onely are new. But any one of them being learnt, all the other Psalms may be sung by that one onely Tune: As on the contrary any one Psalm may be Sung by all the new Tunes. So that a greater facility for those who are less able to Sing; or a greater varie∣ty for those who are more able, cannot reasonably be de∣sired or afforded. The Second Edition, wherein the whole Number is Compleated. By RICHARD GOODRIDGE. Te decet Hymnus. Psalm 65. Praise is comely. Psalm 147. Hallelujah. OXFORD Printed by L. Lichfield Printer to the University, for Jo. Crosley. 1684.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE HENRY EARL of ARLINGTON, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesties Houshold, One of His Majesties Most Ho∣nourable Privy-Council, and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Gar∣ter, &c. My Lord, WERE not the Sub∣ject of these Papers, and the End they aim at, of the greatest Mo∣ment, I durst not have adventur'd
them to your Lordship: For, as for what ever I may have perform'd in them, I know it to be far more beneath the Heights of the Ori∣ginal, than David, when he coun∣terfeited the Mad-man before A∣cish, was unlike that David, who returning with the Spoils of the Philistin, was met in triumph by the Daughters of Israel; and his Conquest over that One Monster, was sung above the thousands of Saul. My aim then is not Praise, which I thus unfeignedly acknowledge, not to be due: and therefore am not so vain, as to think they will ever be receiv'd into the place of those now us'd; which have the same fortu∣nate, and ill luck with us, as the Mathematicians of Old had at
Rome; still to be reteyn'd, yet still condemn'd. All I shall hope for, is, that having first obteyn'd His Pardon, who, not requiring our exact, but our utmost possible per∣formances, will accept the faithful Endeavours, and pardon the fail∣ings of the Weak and Impotent: I may have the like Measures from Your Lordship; and from all such as Your Lordship; who endeavouring to express in themselves the Image of their Maker, will, as himself does, re∣mit to those who have no other end but to edeavour to celebrate his Praise, and promote the Good of o∣thers, the infelicities of their Suc∣cess. Which I cannot but hope from Your Lordship, not only from Your Lordships Noble inclinations to such
in general; but from Your Lordships particular Favour to your Servant; which, begun so many years past, in that Society, to which Your Lord∣ship is so confess'd an Honour, Your Lordship has been pleas'd to continue hitherto; and to look back upon, and know him yet, at that distance of Fortune, in which Your Lordship so eminently, and so deserv'dly stands. The God of Heaven multiply his Graces on Your Lordship here; and assign You your Portion hereafter among the Pious and the Just. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and, most affectionately devoted Servant, Ric. Goodridge.
PREFACE. §. 1. WHAT Offence is gene∣rally taken, and how justly, at our English Version of David's Psalms into Meeter, is sufficiently known. Dr. Donne, upon that of Sr. Philip Sidney, and the Countess of Pem∣brooke, commending theirs, censures the other of Sternhold, and Hopkins, and our Churches Toleration of it, thus. When I behold that these Psalms are become So well attyr'd abroad, so Ill at Home; So well in Chambers; in the Church, so Ill; I scarcely can call That reform'd, until This be reform'd. Would the State present A lesser Guift, than some One Man hath sent? And shall our Church, unto her Spouse, and King, More hoarse, more harsh, than any other sing? §. 2. Some have endeavoured to make it more tolerable, by expunging those many low, and indecent Expressions; and putting others in
their Places: but the Attempt is fruitless. For, if what they substitute be like the remainder, 'twill be all flat: If it be rais'd somewhat a∣bove that level, the whole will be unlike it self; and by the Addition of new Pieces, —cum vnus & alter Assuitur Pannus,— the Rents will be made worse. Wherefore, a New Version is doubtless the only Expedient; for, if to imitate the best Originals be mean and ser∣vile; what is it to draw after the worst Copies? §. 3. There are many excellent Versions ex∣tant; out of all which, if the choicest in Each were taken, and put together; such a Collection would not only exceed that which is now in use; but any one particular Version, of any of those Persons, who have labour'd in them. §. 4. For doubtless, as there is no Man but is much more himself at some one time, than a∣nother: (Ego nunquam (says Scaliger) ad scriben∣dum accingor, nisi ab ipso Genio invitatus) so there is no Man, who may not be much more concern'd in the Subject of some one Psalm than another: as expressing, possibly, his particular Wants or Enjoyments; or having more affinity, either with the constant innate Temper, and Ge∣nius of his Mind; or With the accidental Emo∣tions and Sallyes of it, from some emergent Occasion: So that what he shall then perform in
that Fervour, that Extasie, that Indignation or Agony, shall not only exceed what others, less concern'd, shall have done on it; but what him∣self could have perform'd, at any other cooler time: And all this, in a Natural way; not to say, what greater Assistances may be lent, up∣on an humble Addressto Him, who will undoubt∣edly open those Lips which beg it of Him, for no other end, but that they may shew forth his Praise. §. 5. Besides, they who have indifferently under∣taken all the Psalms, have set themselves a kind of Task; and probably would not have adventur'd on some few particular ones, had they not been found among the number which they had oblig'd themselves to compleat. So that though they may have gone through them all with great Di∣ligence, yet the Effects of Care and Diligence, can never equal the Efforts of Love, Joy, Zeal, or other mighty Passion; which possessing the Soul, and being further rais'd and excited by the Hymn, compos'd by the same, (for kind) but by a far higher (in Degree) and more inspir'd an ardour, the mutual Fire kindles; And as the Hymn awakes a fervour in the Soul, so the ex∣alted Soul impresses that fervour in its Tran∣script of the Hymn; into which, it self thus ex∣cited, passing forth, copies out, and arrests in it, its own Transports and Emanations; and joyn∣ing, as in Consort, with the Divine Raptures there, fixes in it the lasting Character, and I∣mage
of both; which Character, that Tran∣script bears, and is; remaining an Eternal Mean, Guide, and Conduct, by which, the penitent, the distress'd, the ravish'd, or the any other way divinely-affected Soul, uniting with it, its own cognate Fires, may ascend together, to his Throne who will accept those Sacrifices of Prayer, and Praise, which himself has inspir'd, and kindled as with a Coal from his own Altar. §. 6. Wherefore, as it will not seem una∣greeable to the honour of the sacred Poem, that all, as out of Duty, should humbly present the utmost they are able to contribute to∣wards the copying out the Beauty of the Divine Original: So that Copy, doubtless, will be the least reproach to it, which shall be drawn from out the choicest of all the Offerings. §. 7. The Reader, I hope, will have the Chari∣ty to believe, that  see∣ing I have taken them all indifferently as they lye, I do not pretend to have done them o∣therwise, than as impos'd upon my self; and to present them out of Duty only, and as to be refus'd; being satisfied in the attempt only, of rescuing that Divine Poem from dishonour; and to excite those of greater Abilities, to pur∣sue it by a joynt Endeavour; and to that end, to have cast into the Common Treasury, this mean and unprofitable Labour.
§. 8. Having thus let the Reader know, how much I am concern'd for vindicating the Honour of the Divine Poem; and how uncon∣cern'd for what ever I may have offered towards it, I shall acquaint him what I have oblig'd my self to in the Prosecution. §. 9. First, therefore, I have endeavour'd to avoid all obscurity; which though it be a Rock, that all who speak or write, are bound to shun; and therefore it may seem impertinent to take notice of it here, as of a new care: Yet, when it shall be remembred, how Ʋniversal the num∣ber is, of those who are invited, and bound to joyn in celebrating the Honour of their Maker; Young Men and Maidens; Old Men and Children; and all the different Ranks and Conditions of all those Ages and Sexes; it cannot but be acknow∣ledg'd, that a very particular care ought to be had, that what is thus to be perform'd by all, should be rendered intelligible to all; to the High and the Low; to the Rich and the Poor; to the One with the Other. §. 10. In order to which, I have not ren∣dred it litterally, but (as possibly all Transla∣tions ought to be) by way of Paraphrase; since not only Proverbial, and Parabolical Speeches, and the whole Train of Verbal Allusions, &c. but the very disposition, and coordination of Words, being different in differing Languages,
what was Natural to one, will not only be inde∣cent, and, possibly, ridiculous in another; but, a varying from its known accustom'd Forms, ob∣scure too. For Idioms and the peculiar Cha∣racters of the Language of one People, litterally rendred into another, are notwithstanding such traduction, strange, and forraign still: And, (as Coins) bearing on them the Impresses proper to the Places whence they came, are not cur∣rent elsewhere: the stamping of Money and Words, and the Minting of Dialects and Modes of Expressions, being the peculiar Royalties of each Place and People. That which is fix'd in any Writing, is its intrinsique worth; which, as the Rich Mettal, reteyns its value still, whose soe∣ver the Image and Superscription be; and is that alone, which being design'd to be transferr'd to others, ought therefore to be impress'd with those Significant Characters which those People know, and allow of; and not rendred dark, ei∣ther by reteyning any of its former perplex'd Original Characters; or by the close Order of a Verbal exchange. §.11. I shall not give the Reader the trou∣ble to shew him, how very particularly a lit∣teral Translation of the Hebrew would be con∣cern'd in this Case; but leave him to think how differing their Modes are like to be from ours, who Write without Vowels, and read backward.
§. 12. As I have chosen to render it by way of Paraphrase, so I have put that Paraphrase in∣to Verse; for such are the Psalms in the Origi∣nal, (though we cannot yet find out the mea∣sures; but we abundantly find the foot∣steps of a Poem in the admirable Heights, and Divine Raptures every where;) and how great a disadvantage it must be for Verse to be unra∣vel'd into Prose, any one may judge, who knows the bounds of either; and that there are words and expressions peculiar to Verse, which Prose dares not assume; as on the other side, there are infinite Prose-words, which Poesic disdains: being adapted, and proportion'd to the expres∣sing the different heights of thoughts and con∣ceptions, peculiar to Verse, and peculiar to Prose. So that to dissolve a Poem, and melt it down into Prose, were to destroy both the Verse, and the Prose too. For, as the Verse would be no more such, when the Words had lost their num∣bers, and their order; so those disordered, Poe∣tial Words and Expressions appearing eminenly, and unseasonably here and there above the level of Prose; —rarinantes in gurgite vasto— the Prose would cant: You would find every where —disjecti Membra Poetoe— the unfortunate Spoils of a Poem, which ga∣ther'd up, and dispos'd in no other Order than as
they fell, would look like the barbarousBuildings of the Turks, rais'd out of the Noble Ruins of the Groecian Cities and Temples; where the fragment of some mighty Column sustains a Shed; and the Walls of a poor Cottage, are indifferent∣ly made up of ill-rang'd Marbles, and inverted Statues, laid in Beds of Mud and Clay: which being thus unworthily plac'd, appear more rude and deform'd, in the wild Order, than in the Ruine; for 'twas a Spectacle of Pity to the Beholder, to see them in the heap; but of Scorn and Indignation, in the unhappy structure. §. 13. I desire not to be misunderstood here; for it must be truly, and with all submission ac∣knowledg'd, that the litteral Prose Versions of the Psalms, as they are in Vulgar Translations (Latin or English, &c.) conform to the Origi∣nal, are absolutely necessary so to stand, as the Rule and Canon of Scripture; by which, the truth of any Pharaphrase may be judg'd Notwithstanding which, since in the Text it self, there are many things hard to be under∣stood, therefore, as the unfolding it in other words, by way of Paraphrase, or short Expo∣sition, is expedient for the better informing our Ʋnderstanding; so it seems as expedient, that (as the Original it self has given the Example) that Paraphrase should be in Verse; for the bet∣ter raising and exciting our Wills and Affections
in the zealous performance of those Duties and Services, of which those Divine Hymns are given us as the Forms. §. 14. In the choice of words and expressions, I have taken care to use such, as may be both intelligible to the meanest, and yet (as far as we were able) not unbeseeming the Dignity of the Subject: remembring at the same time, both, who some are among the many who are to speak the Praises; and whose Praises they are, which we all celebrate. Wherefore, though I have endeavoured that the expressions be plain; yet understanding by plainness only Perspicuity, as 'tis opposs'd to what is perplex'd or obscure; I endeavour to avoid that meanness of expression, which is made up out of the Language of the People; and which, some by descending to take up, have lost the Poem in the too great a plain∣ness and condescention of the Style; for —mediocribus esse Poetis, Non Homines, non Dii, non concessere Columnoe. there being in a Poem, as in a Natural Body, a minimum quod non (as 'tis call'd) within which Size and Stature, when either of them are shrunk, they quite degenerate and lose them∣selves; that Poem being no longer One, which is so indifferent and languishing, as to be also Prose, if the Measures and the Rhimewere away.
§. 15. I should not here have reflected upon the Translation now us'd with us, were it not even necessary, that some few of the many In∣decencies being laid open, we should be con∣vinc'd of the unworthiness of such Addresses; and not henceforth dare to offer up unto God, a Praise which is not comely; and to speak in his Temple unbeseeming his Honour. §. 16. We shall not all accuse the Translators for any of those Words or Forms of expression which having been in use in the Age they liv'd in, are now discontinued; that were unjust; since every Age has absolute Power of repeal∣ing, continuing, or new making those words which do then obtain; 'Tis a sufficient Plea to say—volutt Ʋsus—(Custom gave the Sanction.) Quam penes arbitrium est, & jus & Norma loquendi. Which words, and much of the Style, are so ex∣presly the Characters of their own Age, that 'tis no unusual or difficult thing, to discover the Age of a Writing by its Language; as is oftentimes successfully perform'd, in detecting Spurious Authors. And therefore, we shall not blame them for that, or any other the like expression, Psalm 1. v. 1. The Man is bless'd that hath not bent to wicked Read his Ear. the word Read, signifying only Lecture, or In∣struction;
frequent in Chawcer, and continued down to that Age, but left off in Ours; and therefore though justly to be rejected now, as not intelligible, yet with no reproach to those who spake intelligibly to their own Times. §. 17. That which is the fundamental perpetual Law of expression, is, That things be naturally represented; which they then are, when as in Picture, the Original, or first Transcript, is as the Life: the first Requisite of which, is Verity; and the next, Decency. Now, though in every thing Natural, there is an innate Decency; and therefore what is truly and properly deliver'd, is also, as being conform to the thing it self, Decent; yet there is a farther Measure of De∣cency; which, though it have its Foundation in the things themselves, yet the taking it out thence, is much owing to us. §. 18. For we being seated as amidst a world of Beings, do behold them, not only as they are Simple in themselves, but as they have di∣vers Respects, and Habitudes to each other, according as they are differently plac'd, and orderd; which divers ordering them, makes them appear to us (as Objects plac'd in differing Lights) full of admirable, and indefinite Varieties: Each Mode of considering the Subject, (as 'tis call'd) varying it; and by changing its Situa∣tion, giving it a new Colour, and new Relations and Alliances to other things. And hence, as
we observe how things are proportion'd to, and do bear to each other, so we speak them, borrowing the Names proper to some things, and their Accidents, &c. and transferring them to others; yet not rudely, and abusively inforcing them, but as complying with their own in∣clinations, we wed together the Beautiful, and proportion'd Varieties. And this is the great and inexhausted Promptuary of those words, and expressions, which are call'd Tropical, in the decent managery, and cultivating of which, consists the greater part of the so much con∣troverted Dominion, and Province of Wit. §. 19. As single Words are thus regulated, so are they when they are woven together into Propositions and Sentences; which are to move within the same Bounds, as of Truth, so of Decency; the measure of which, (chiefly) is the adapting the Style and Character of those Enuntiations to the Subject treated of, and according to the Mode after which 'tis treated; with respect also to those Circum∣stances of Time, and Place, of the Persons speaking, and of those to whom the Address is made, &c. So as (to instance only in what we shall have occasion here to note) those Vul∣gar Forms of Expression, as the Common Say∣ings, and By-words of the People, be not ap∣plyed to Subjects grand, and far above that
level; For though possibly there may be Truth in such expressions, yet there will certainly want Decency; and by default of observing a fit and proportioned distance, the Address will appear altogether Rude and Vulgar. §. 20. The same Laws of Proportion are to pass through the whole Discourse; which being inform'd as by a Soul of Truth and Decency, be∣comes one thing; true, and proportion'd to the Subject it treats of, (and to all, both its usual Train of Circumstances, and those often new and surprizing Ones, which emerge upon occa∣sion; and are (as some particular Airs of a Countenance, or glances of an Eye, are by Painters) heedfully to be watch'd, caught up and arrested as they sly) and throughout to it self And by these Laws, if we examine the Ver∣sion, we shall not injure it. §.21. We are to remember then, that the Psalms are Forms of our Addresses of Prayer and Praise to God: Of whom, and to whom, no∣thing ought to be spoken, but with the highest Veneration; what is common here, is also (as) unclean; and in Offering up these Sacrifices of Prayer, and Praise, we are to observe what the Universal Laws of Sacrifice require, to chuse them (at least as far as we are able) without blemish.
§. 22. Not to distinguish betwixt Persons and Things, but to speak of them alike, were untrue, and indecent in any writing, whether Verse or Prose. As, Psalm. 72.1. —with his Son that Princely Thing. So Psalm 135.11. He slew also the Kingdoms all. How monstrous, and beyond all Truth, is that Similitude? Psalm 58.6. The Tusks which in their great Jaw-bones like Lyons Whelps hang out. How false and ridiculous is that expression! Psalm 35.14. When they were sick, I mourn'd therefore, and clad my self in Sack. And how too abundantly true, is this other? Psalm 115.6. And they have Ears joyn'd to their Heads. Psalm 127.2. How is that excellent borrow'd expression—eat∣ing the Bread of Sorrows, lost, in being made (as) true and proper. Feeding full hardly with Brown-bread. How rude are the following Ones? and taken out from amidst the Manners and the Language of the Street! Psalm 33.21. Our Soul in God hath Joy and Game— Psalm 35.26. There! There! this Gear goeth trim. Psalm 49.14. When as from House to Pit they pass with wo and wellaway. Psalm 55.16. For mifchief reigneth in their Hall, and Parlour where they dwell.
With the same folly and rudeness, they speak of God Himself. Psalm 60.6. The Lord did speak from his own Place, that was his joyful Tale. Psalm 64.9. And praise his witty Works. Psalm 77.8. What is his goodness clean decay'd for ever and a day? Psalm 78.38. Yea many a time he turn'd his Wrath, and did himself advise. In their immediate Addresses to him, they use the same boldness, and irreverence; as in the fol∣lowing Petirions. Psalm 31.9. —My Womb for wo doth ake. Psalm 74.12. Why dost thou draw thy Hand aback, and hide it in thy Lap? O pluck it forth, and be not slack to give thy foes a rap. Psalm 35.23. But Lord thou seest what ways they take, cease not this gear to mend, Be not far off, nor me forsake, as Men that fail their friend. And their Praises are as indecent as their Prayers. Psalm 139.6. Too wonderful above my reach, Lord! is thy cunning Skill. Psalm 18.13. Lord! at thy wrath and threatening, and at thy thiding Thear. Psalm 35.10. O Lord! though they do seem full gay, what man is like to Thee! But what follows, being neither Prayer, nor Praise, I shall leave the Reader to name. Psalm 20.3. And so receive right thankfully thy burnt Offerings each one. Psalm 22.9. But Lord! out of my Mothers Womb, I came by thy request.
§. 22. However we may in Charity believe, that these Men meant not so falsly, and unwor∣thily as they spake; yet whosoever shall think to repeat after them, may do well to consider, that God is in Heaven, and himself on Earth; and therefore to take care that such Expressions as these, be not any of those few words he ut∣ters; but that he first well weigh the Gift he brings, before he lay it on the Altar; that so he be not hasty to offer up the Sacrifice of Fools. §. 23. For, can any sober, devout Soul ima∣gine, that being to celebrate (for instance) the Power of the Almighty, in rendring Vengeance upon his Enermes, he does worthily express the Indignation of an offended God, by calling it—his chiding Chear?—To say, he made bare his Holy Arm—and gave his Foes a rap? And then to give him thanks in the Blasphemy of a Ballad, for vindicating, not the Right, but the malice of the informer?— Psalm 9.4. Thou hast revenged all my wrong, my grief, and all my grudge; Thou dost with Justice hear my Cause, most like a righteous Judge. Which is somewhat like that expression, To Justice, Equity, and Right, he hath a great good-will. Can that, or any other Soul imagine, that such Expresstions as these bear any proportion to the Ma∣jesty of the Judge, the Glory of the Vengeance, or the fearful Praise!
§. 24. I have forborn to make any such Re∣flections on them, as they are too very much obnoxious to; since it cannot be done without too great a Levity, and a rallery unfit to be affix'd to those Expressions, which, how inde∣cent soever they be, are yet interwoven with things sacred. Nor had I took notice of so ma∣ny (though an inconsiderable number in respect of what are left behind) had it not been even necessary, that by giving the most ordinary Reader some particular view of the deformities he dotes on, he might no longer oblige those Persons, who have so often, and so highly re∣sented them, to indulge the use of them to his ignorance and humour; that so at length, as the Buyers and the Sellers were scourg'd out of the Temple; so the Language which they trade in, and which so much abounds here, may be dri∣ven out too. Which may the more easily be effected, since those Exchangers, and their Wares, did not more unlawfully intrude themselves in∣to the Temple, than these have done; And though these seem more excusable, as having (which we will most readily, and charitably grant them) far different, and most contrary in∣tentions, yet we cannot possibly justifie them, or any other, who shall speak dishonourably of God, and mean well. §. 25. It has been said, that such Psalms as
these, are not usually Sung; but the Clark re∣fusing them, takes others. If this excuse were admitted, and that there were really any considerable number of Psalms remaining, after such were excluded, which without Scandal to a Pious Soul it might chearfully offer up to its God; yet (without taking notice of the acknow∣ledg'd dishonour done to these Hymns, by re∣ducing them to so condemn'd a state, that they must unavoidably fall to the Judgment of a poor Parish-Clark, when ever the great work of refusing shall be submitted to his Arbi∣trement) how can we patiently bear the injuries and losses we our selves sustain, when so confess'd a number of Psalms shall be ravish'd from us; and be retein'd amongst the rest, only to fill up a useless number? § 26. Having thus avoided that low and vi∣cious plainness which destroys the very Being of Verse; and cast out those impious indecen∣cies which prophane the Honour of the Hymn (in farther abhorrence of which latter, we have refus'd such words, which having once born an innocent Sense, our Manners have debauch'd) we have in order to our design for Perspicuity, forborn to make use of any words which may be above the capacity of the Meanest; having therefore coin'd no new ones, nor taken in any which have not for a sufficient time been natu∣raliz'd.
Nor can I imagin that such a plainness of words which aims at Perspicuity, the end of all Speech, can depress a Style; or that unusual words, with difficulty, and perhaps obscurity, can advance it; greatness of Expression, being like greatness of Mind, free, generous, and conde∣scending; that swelling and Tumor of words, of a dark and reserv'd Sense, is as Pride; vainly great, and unprofitable; the Language of Pe∣dants, and Critiques; and of those Sons of Art, who speak on purpose not to be understood. §. 27: As care has been taken to avoid ob∣scurity in Words; so the like care has been, to clear that obscurity which seems to be in the Sense, from the great and unexpected Tran∣sitions; which seem to us, who are unaoquaint∣ed with such admirable sallies, abrupt, and inco∣herent; but are in themselves extreamly No∣ble; and the Evidences and Remains of those powerful Emotions, which proceed from Rap∣ture, and Extasie: When the same Spirit ani∣mated both the Prophet and the Poet; who thus doubly inspir'd—velox mente nova— de∣spis'd the safeties of our low timerous flights; taking new pathless ways of his own; through, beyond, and above which, how abrupt and dangerous soever they seem'd, and how lessen∣ing their heights were, and disappearing to us that Spirit securely bare him. Which Tran∣sitions,
though they seem clos'd, and viewless, have yet really sign'd, and describ'd their way; and the Connexions which seem to have been made, flow naturally out of the Text; and are not Additions, but Emanations. §. 28. And such liberty of Connexion, is no more than what is usually taken in the litteral Prose version of the Psalms; where (to instance only in our English Version) those additional words, with which the Interpreters found it necessary to conjoyn the words of the Text, which otherwise would have seem'd loose, and incoherent, are printed in a different Cha∣racter; yet werè before such their actual emer∣gency, always in Power, and understood in the Text: Which Additions, being most justifiable in the very Text, and Canon of Scripture, can∣not be condemned in a Paraphrase, or Comment; which has the same design of manifesting the Syntax, and coordination of the Sense, as the litteral Version has of the Words. §. 29. The same care has been taken to keep close to the Text, that its sown proper vigour be not lost in too wide a Paraphrase; as when Spirits are too much diluted; Or, as when the Beams of the Sun, which have been so united and con∣tracted as to Burn, being too far releas'd, lose their Fires, and are again dissolv'd into Light. Vherefore, we have made the Paraphrase
to wait on the particular Verses of the Psalms, as they are distinguished in the new Transla∣tion of our Church-Bible; guiding it by them, as by the designing Lines in Originals; and as those Originals are themselves guided by the natural Lineaments, and exact Proportions of the Life; that so at any time, the Truth of the Paraphrase may be justified by the Text; as the Text, explain'd by the Paraphrase; when from each to other, there may be a mutual Re∣course. §. 30. Nor can I suspect, the Paraphrase should go less from such an Imitation as this; for, though it be true, that whoever takes his Mea∣sures wholly from another Pattern, forfeits his Liberty; and under that restraint, (as under a state of Captivity) becomes mean, and servile; not daring to exert his own Powers beyond the bounds prescrib'd him; and therefore, while he thus continues true and faithful to the Copy, can never aspire to any thing of his own, great, and exceeding; in consideration of which, some have nobly, and successfully adventur'd to make Translations better things than they have usually been, and to set them above their Origi∣nals: Yet this bravery cannot be admitted in all Cases: Since, as it would be too rash and daring; so it would be unsucessful, when the at∣tempt shall be made upon the Psalms; or other
Hymns, penn'd by immediate Divine Inspiration: Where doubtless, 'tis not lawful for any one, to take, leave out, or add what they please; but adhering firmly to the Original (as they would do, in copying out Records, or the Deeds, and Evidences of their Lands) to transcribe the whole Truth; to raze out nothing but the Veil, which (as to us) was drawn before it; nor to add any thing, but what the necessary Circum∣stances of the transferring them to other Places, and Persons, will require, and decently admit; remembring always, that our business is only to copy out, and not to Design; and that the Copy, being taken from an Original that's Divine, (whose Heights are not like our Heights) the aims we take, can never be beneath us; but that perfectly to imitate, is to exceed our selves; and that that Fancy, and those Powers cannot but move with the greatest freedom, which are limitted by no other Bounds, but such as are transcendent. §. 31. What measures the Hebrews had for their Verse, is unknown to us; and possibly were they known, our words might as ill com∣ply with them, as with the Hexameters and Pentameters of the Greeks and Latins. Where∣fore, in putting the Psalms into Verse, we are oblig'd only to make choice of such Modes as are most conducing to the End we design, and
beseeming the Dignity of the Subject we treat of. I have therefore rejected the Verse of seven Feet, (so frequent in our common Version) not only as being worn out of use, and therefore as being indecent to us, who have exploded it; but also as being so, really in it self. For if the whole length of seven Feet be accounted as one Verse, the Verse is then too long; but if that Verse be divided into two unequal Parts, of four, and three Feet, (as is usual) those pieces will be too short; and (as that eminent Person, the late Reverend Bishop of Chichester acknow∣ledg'd) of all other Measures, the least graceful: Who yet, to his extream disadvantage, took that very Measure; who, otherwise, had he gi∣ven himself the liberty of chusing such as his own Judgment could have better directed him to, there had been no need of any other Version but his. §. 32. As that form of Verse is indecent for its Measure, whether whole or divided: So o∣thers, both for the Measures of their Verse, and the Time of their Feet; which makes their mo∣tions more light and trifling than the former. Thus that heavenly, and most seraphick Psalm the Hundred and fourth, is made to beat the Time of a Northern Jig; a Time, so indecent for the Majesty of that Hymn, that though the Language were most decent, (as it is most other∣wise) the Measure only would condemn it.
§. 33. I have made choice of the Verses of four or of five Feet (One only Psalm excepted) each following Verse giving the Rhime to the preceding; as seeming to me, more indifferent to be either Read or Sung, (as the Psalms are left to the choice, or abilities of the Performer) than those of shorter, and unequal lengths; or where the Rhime is alternate, or of greater distance. Divers of which Modes (as the short alternate) seem too light and airy to be Read; being (as all Lyriques are)—socianda chordis— design'd only to be Sung; Nor can I think that any Person, how well-affected soever to that Version, did ever make his Addresses to God (or would believe so falsly as to imagin that it were decent to do so) in those Forms (other∣wise than when he allow'd himself to sing them) which are left by Sternhold, and Hopkins. Where∣as the Verse of five Feet, or that of four, may be solemny repeated by speaking; as we might instance, not only in our English Epick, from whence Tragedy borrows its Mode, speak∣ing in no other than in such measur'd Language, (the Verse of five Feet:) But also in one of our Churches most solemn Offices; where the Hymn Veni Creator, is Verse; and that not sung, but spoken; and alter'd from that of seven Feet to that of four: And we cannot doubt, but the taking such Measures as are fittest to be spoken,
may be useful, not only for those Persons who are naturally unapt for singing, but for all (what∣ever the Subject of the Address be) and that  the Poenitentials, and others of like nature, may be as fervently pour'd forth in the Closet, in the voice of weeping, as they may be Sung; —cum versa est in luctum Cythara, & Organum in vocem flentium. §. 34. But this is not to prefer the repeat∣ing them by speaking, before that of singing; nor (generally) to equal it; for, our affections being heavy and dull, the utmost assistances are requisite to be call'd in, to excite them; and to help our infirmities. Wherefore, the Psalms were not only compos'd in Verse, (the most exalted Language) but a farther height was added to them in the Address; and the grand  the dark Parable, and the deep Saying being open'd upon the Harp, was thence in∣spir'd anew; and rais'd yet higher on another Wing. §. 35. And 'twas from the aforesaid Consi∣deration, viz. the dulness of our Affections, and the weakness of our Nature, (too apt to be tyr'd, by any long intention) which induc'd our Church to give so great a Variety to our Service: ma∣king the particular Prayers, short, like Ejacula∣tions; intermingling Responds, Readings, Psalms, and Hymns: whose excellent design, if
it were prosecuted; and that those Psalms, and Hymns, were performed in that natural way, which is most proper for them, by singing; (which our Church recommends, though she permits them to be said as well as sung) and that after some better manner than is usual; as the design'd Variety would be greater; so would our intentions be more unbent, and conse∣quently our Devotions more quickned. For, as any Member, labouring in that posture which they call Tonique, (as an Arm working at its full extent over the Head) will not be able, long, with any strength to continne so working, but being releas'd from that posture, it will pre∣sently be eas'd, and refresh'd for a new labour: So the Soul being serv'd by the Organs of the Bo∣dy, (whose weight presses down the Spirit) if those Organs be too long intent upon any one O∣peration, they, as being corporeal, will certain∣ly tire; and the Strengths of the Soul will seem to be abated and enfeebled as those of its Or∣gans are: But if the Soul vary its thought, the Organs will receive a new Schematism; and be dispos'd and conceiv'd into another Form, ac∣cording to the Idea and Impress of that new thought: and the Souls vigour, which seem'd tyr'd by the weariness of the Organs, will return; and be quickned by that acceptable Variety which refreshes the Organs, by which it self ne∣cessarily operates.
§. 36. In order to this Mode of performing them by singing, I have refus'd such words as are improper for Song; for as there are some words proper for Verse which are not for Prose, and contrary: So there are others, though proper enough for Verse, or Prose, yet are not so for Song; such are the finals in (n) where the (e) is quiescent; as darken, fasten, golden; and sometimes in the middle of a word, as often∣times, Even-song, &c. where, if the (e) be not sounded (as it ought not to be) the stress of the Syllable resting upon the (n,) whose sound passes through the Nose, the Tone so held, will be very indecent; but if, to avoid that indecency, the (e) be sounded, as when the Syllable ten in fasten shall be pronounc'd as in the word tender; and the Syllable ken in dar∣ken, as in the word ken (to discover) and that of den, in golden, as in the word Den (antrum) such a Pronunciation being different from the common one, will be ridiculous §. 37. As the Verses of four, or five Feet seem'd fitter to be read than those other of shorter and unequal lengths, &c. as being not so light and airy; so, for the same reason, they are more proper to be set for Church-Musick; since the Measures which are Originally in the Verse, have an influence on the Measures of the Air.
§. 38. For, as when a firm Body is compass'd with a soft fluid One, that firm Body is as a Mould to that other; and impresses its own Form and Signature in the Bounds it gives it: So the Ditty, appearing as in a Vest of Air, gives that Air its own Measures and Proportions: So that not only the length of each Verse is set forth in an equal length and Measure of Air; determin'd by some longer Note, or Rest, or Por∣tion of a Strain; which ends, where the Rhime ends; or, as in the present Case, where the di∣vided parts of four and three Feet do end; whe∣ther with, or without Rhime, (which are always clos'd with a Sembrief or whole Time); But also the Time of the Feet of the Verse, does ve∣ry often necessitate the Time of the Air, and appear in it. As to instance in the 104 Psalm; the Measure of whose Feet is Triple; and will oblige any one, who shall give it an Air, to make the Time of that Air Triple. But that Triple, being not so solemn as that of the Iam∣bique (the Measure of our English Verse) when at the  (or depressing of the Hand, or Foot, in keeping Time) One only Syllable is repeated, of a double quantity to that Syllable repeated at the  or Elevation: But that of the Tri∣brach, (where two Sillables pass at the () and the Iambique, alternately; the Verse compos'd of that dancing Measure, will be too moving; and
the Air set to it, too light for any Subject which is in Dignity, equal to, or above the Heroique. §. 39. Wherefore, since the Measures of the Verses, and of their Feet, have an influence on the Airs set to those Verses; and contrariwise, that the Tunes so set, will impress their own receiv'd Measures on any other words which shall be form'd by them: we have rather cho∣sen, in stead of conforming our Verses to those obsolete Measures, for the Tune's sake; to take other Measures on purpose to avoid them; lest they should betray the Words to the Old le∣vity: and to take such others, as were not like to introduce any new one; not excep∣ting against many other Forms which divers have happily taken, as the excellent Pindaric (though unfit for a Parochial Congregation, because every Verse is particularly to be set) nor any other which moving more temperately, are more commensurate to the Subject which they express; and more inservient to the End for which they were design'd. §. 40. And the due respect to these, is the equal concern both of Verse, and Musique; be∣ing grounded upon that great and Ʋniversal Law of proportion'd Decency; which, like the Platonick Soul of the World, being dissus'd through the whole Body of Nature (magno se
Corpore miscens) is thence copied out by all our Modes of Imitation; and particularly by that of Verse and Musique. Which conforms it self to the Nature of those Subjects, which the Verses or the Airs describe; and the End they tend to. For Motion, which is as the Soul both of Verse and Musique, represents, by the diffe∣rent proportion it bears to the different Sub∣jects, which the Verse or the Musique express, the difference which those Subjects bear to each other: the Motion being as the Movent; as the Port, and Min of Persons, ought to be as their Worth and Dignity; and therefore to be ex∣press'd after the Rate themselves move. Thus the step of the Hero, was not equal'd by those of the Child Ascanius; who follow'd him—non pas∣sibus oequis—and the grand and flow recurses of the deeper Tones, are impossible to be adjusted, by the swift narrow Purlings, and Undulations of the higher. And this great Law of Decency is, as to Verse, the ground of that Rule (whose converse also holds, and regulates all, both true, and Poetick Subjects, and their Measures.) Versibus exponi tragicis, res Comica non vult. And, as to Song, it obliges the Musician, to make the Air and Time of the Musique, proportion'd to the Nature and Air of the Subject; which is what they call humouring it. So that what's
given to a Comick Subject, must be a brisk Comick Air; and what sings the Heroique, must be high and Heroique. And therefore, since the Subject of Church-Musique is the highest, and most transcendent, its excellency cannot consist in being light and airy; but in being Solemn, Grave, and Majestick. The Musique, as the Verse, being to be proportion'd, as to the great Subject and the End, so to the sublime Af∣fections which ought to be excited, and carried up towards it. So that as far as Earth, and the Affections to Earth, are distant from Heaven, and the Affections tending thither: So far ought we to sever those Airs, which tend to Gayety, and to Rapture. §. 41. It would be too far a Digression to shew, how Musique in general excites such Mo∣tions in our Spirits as it excites in Air; how they both tremble, and vibrate alike; and how, as the Vibrations of particular Chords do particularly vary, and modifie the Air, and the modified Air trembles on, as a continued Body, and conveys the Impress to the proportion'd distant Chord, and moves it, as it self was first mov'd, by the impulse of the Elater: So particular Airs in Musique, impress their particular Sallyes, and the various Movements, and Contextures of those Sallyes, upon the Common Air; which, being so impress'd, strikes our Sense, as it self is strook;
and either finding the same cognate Motions in our Spirits (such is the one Harmony of floating Spirits and Tones) cherishes, and advances them; or strong∣ly beating on them, impresses them. It will be e∣nough, here, to say, that particular Airs, excite par∣ticular Affections; and (without digressing so large∣ly, as were requisite to shew the Reason) to confirm it with that one known Old Example, of those Young Men, quieted by the Dorick Harmony, whom the Phrygian had enrag'd: (as if those Passions had been first in the Musique, and afterwards in the Men) and thence, farther, to infer, that since particular Airs excite particular Affections, we ought to take care, that the Church-Musique be such as the Church-Affection ought to be: such, as by which the Mind may be compos'd, and withdrawn within it self, from attending the Objects here below, to be fix'd on Heaven only, and the things above; That the Mu∣sique be not compos'd, nor at any time perform'd, for it self; (as when (possibly) the Air, or the Com∣position being graceful, One only Verse of a Psalm or Hymn is usually Sung, by those, who pretend to be lovers of Musique; limitting their Devotions by the length of the Tune; airy alike, and alike passing into nothing) but in order only to those Ends for which it serves; that so, the Mind following only after those, and being abstracted from things sensible to those unseen, it may be ravish'd above 'em, and find another Harmony within its self, beyond that of Mu∣sique; when, (as Preluding to its Separation) she quits all her Interest in the Affections here, and their miquiet tumultuary Joys, and begins to taste some ear∣nest of her future State, in the first Heaven of an inward Peace and Tranquillity.
§. 42, And it were to be wished, that all they who truly mind their own Peace, and the Peace of Jerusalem too, would joyn the Quire: That all, who profess, and call themselves Christians, would re∣nounce all those Lusts and Affections, from whence, all, both our inward and outward Enmities, our Wars, Strifes, and Contentions come; and Sacrificing them to the private Peace of each Mans Bosom, and the General Peace and Honour of the Christian Name, would unite, as One, in Offering up their joynt Praises to their Common Father, and the God of their Common Salvation; That each would invite his Brother, (there's no Schisme in Praise) in our Pro∣phets own Words, O Praise the Lord with Me! and let us magifie his Name together. §. 43. And doubtless the Psalms may be look'd upon, not only in those Forms of Thanksgiving, but in all other the numerous Modes of Address, as a Ʋniversal Character of Devotion; in which, all the Pious of all the differing Perswasions, and Languages in Religion, may consent; and speaking all in that one known Tongue, may both rightly understand each o∣ther, and be understood themselves, and (which 'tis pro∣bable some are not) even by themselves. It were utterly needless, to shew, how the Psalms, throughout all the Ages of Christianity, have been an express part of the Forms of their Devotion; the Great Author him∣self, and Finisher of our Faith, repeated on the Cross the 22. Psalm, if not intirely (as the Tradi∣tion holds) yet the first Verse of it word for word: His Disciples oft Sung them with Him; and his A∣postles after; and the same has been the undoubted Practice of the Christians throughout all Ages. §. 44. From these, and the like Considerations, some Peaceably-minded, and well-dispos'd Modern Ones, have
labour'd, by extracting particular Collects, out of e∣very Psalm, to compose such Forms of Devotion, as all the Societies of Christians may joyn in with∣out dissenting, or giving, or taking Offence: Which Endeavour, as it can never be sufficiently commend∣ed; so it may seem as possible, that the same end may be prosecuted, and as happily attain'd, by rendring the intire Psalms themselves plain and intelligible to the meanest Capacities, after the like Forms in which they were first Written, and according to the ancient Modes of their performance, as by any Collect that may be taken from them. §. 45. And how happy might the Consequence be of either! When, as the wild Confusions of our differing Opinions, have withdrawn us into barbarous misunderstandings, and into Actions, which would dishonour a very Heathen: So a Ʋnion in our Devo∣tions might beget a Union of Hearts, and Affections; and make us all speak the same Language of Chari∣ty; contrary to whose Gospel, whatever fair, and speciously adorn'd, but miserably adulterated Truth, the Tongue of Men or Angels shall utter, will dis∣cover its falshood by that very Doctrine; that Religi∣on which obliges us to dissolve the Bond of Charity, the End of Religion, and to dispence with all, or any the known Practique Duties, and Obligations to God and Man, by Perjuries, Rebellions, Murthers; by all the close holy Cheats, and Conspiracies against the Life or Fame of others; and by all the open Violences and Ravages whatever, in order to the propagating our vain Imaginations, and the setting up the Idols of our own Opinions, being certainly, for those very Practises, false, and diabolical; and to be countenac'd only, and profess'd, by those un∣happily
misguided Wretches, and their tique Lea∣ders, who, under the pretended Ensigns of the Lord of Hosts, do fight the Battels of the Ambitious. §. 46. And when by these, or by what other bles∣sed means, we shall have broken down all the nar∣row envious Enclosures which have hedg'd us out from each other, within the Churches of our own In∣terests, the Fold will not only be One, but 'twill be Ʋniversal too: For, when we shall be at leisure from disputing, and fighting with each other, to convince those who are without; and when, by beholding our true Gospel-temper, the honest Conversation; the Brotherly love; the like-mindedness; the forbearing and forgiving one another for Christ's sake; the Infidel shall be able to understand what we mean by Chri∣stanity: When, he shall be no more perplex'd which Party, undoubtedly, to be sav'd with; and with which, inevitably to perish; which now (out of the seeming insuperable difficulties of taking the right, and the numerous odds against him, that he takes the wrong; since he fees each dissenting Party condemning, and being condemn'd, by all the other Churches, Mili∣tant against it) makes him fearful to chuse any; and rather quietly to take his Lot among the Heathen, than amidst so much Rage, and Zeal, and Malice, of Parties, and Opinions, to run the desperate ha∣zard, and adventure of Christianity: We may hope, that the promiss'd fulness of the Gentiles (which de∣lay, our selves are in so vast a Measure guilty of) may be mercifully compleated; when, in our Prophets own Language, All the Ends of the Earth shall remem∣ber themselves, and be turn'd, unto the Lord; and All the Kinreds of the Nations shall Worship before Him. When they, who already offer at the Songs of Sion
in that strange Land, without the Pale of the Church, (for the Jew, and the Mahometan practise them in their Synagogues, and Mosques,  as admitted by this Key of David, enter into his Gates with (these) Thanksgivings, and into his Courts with (these) Praises. When all the World shall Worship Thee, O God! sing of Thee, and praise thy Power: And, as thou shalt have made thy ways known upon Earth, thy saving Health among all Nations; shalt have brought them out of Darkness, into thy Marvelous Light; and fill'd all the Earth with thy Glory: So all Nations shall flow in unto Thee; All the Earth shall be fill'd with thy Praise; and shall make the Returns of thy Glory, as Universal as the Influence. Laudate Dominum Omnes Gentes! Laudate eum Om∣nes Populi! Quoniam confirmata est super Nos Miserecordia E∣jus; & veritas Domini manet in Aeternum. Hallelujah!
A Collection of sundry of the Contents of the Psalms, dispos'd under several Heads: Whence, as from a Promptu∣ary, we may readily draw forth such Instructions, Comforts, and Assistan∣ces, as may be proper to Our parti∣cular Concerns, in the manifold Emergencies of Life; as also Patterns and Forms of Address, in our Devoti∣ons of Prayer and Praise. PSALMS, Shewing, That All Our Happiness is in God; the only Hope of the Pious and the Just. Ps. 4. v. 6. Ps. 39. v. 7. Ps. 62. v. 9. Ps. 73. v. 25. Ps. 84. v. 11. Who are the Godly, and the Righteous. Their Acti∣ons. Their present, and their future State of Bliss. Ps. 1. Ps. 15. Ps. 18. v. 20. Ps. 24. v. 3. Ps. 25. v. 9. Ps. 26. Ps. 31. v. 19. Ps. 32. Ps. 41. Ps. 92. v. 12. See more of their Happiness as they are under God's Protection, and are the Care of his Providence. The Hope of the Godly of a Resurrection to Eternal Life. Ps. 16. v. 9. Ps. 17. v. 15. Ps. 27. v. 13 Ps. 49. v. 14. Their Happiness in Praising God, Ps. 92. in his Tem∣ple. Ps. 26. v. 8. Ps. 27. v. 4. Ps. 31. v. 19. Ps. 36. v. 7. Ps. 65. v. 4. Ps. 84. Ps. 89. v. 15.
Their longing desire to Praise God in his Temple. Ps. 42. Ps. 43. Ps. 63. Ps. 84. Their Honour, as they belong to the Church. Ps. 87. The Glory, Strength, and Safety of the Church under God's Protection. Ps. 46. Ps. 48. v. 13, 14. Ps. 87. The Beauty of the Church, inward Holiness. Ps. 45. v. 13. The Glory of Christ's Kingdom. Ps. 72. v. 3. How prepar'd They ought to be, who present themselves before God, and approach his Altar. Ps. 4. v. 3. Ps. 5. Ps. 26. v. 6. Ps. 66. v. 17. That the Offerings of Prayer and Praise; The Vow performed; and the Pure Heart, are the most ac∣ceptable Sacrifice. Ps. 4. v. 4. Ps. 40. v. 6. Ps. 50. v. 8. Ps. 51. v. 16. Ps. 69. v. 30. Ps. 96. v. 8. Divers Praecepts, and Instructions, to frame our Lives by, Ps. 1. v. 1. Ps. 4. v. 3. Ps. 15. Ps. 32. v. 8. Ps. 34. v. 11. Ps. 37. Wherein True Glory and Honour consists. Ps. 45. v. 3. Ps. 76. v. 4. Ps. 87. Wherein it does not consist. Ps. 9. v. 6. Ps. 52. Ps. 76. v. 4. That true Worth, and a just Fame, is not in exter∣nal, and circumstantial Glories, but in Our Own proper Vertue. Ps. 49. v. 18. That we are oblig'd to Acts of Charity, frm God's Benefits to us: On whom to be bestow'd. Ps. 16. v. 2. The Reward of it. Ps. 41. The Brevity and Vanity of Life; And of all the Pom∣pous Trifles here below. Ps. 39. v. 4. Ps. 49. Ps. 90. That God beholds Humane Affairs; protects the Pious, and the Poor Oppressed, appealing to him; and guards them from the Wicked, against whom He appears in vengeance, Ps. 9. v. 7. Ps. 11. Ps. 12. v. 5. Ps. 46. Ps. 37. Ps. 55. v. 22. Ps. 73. Ps. 75. Ps. 92. v. 5. Ps. 94.
The Happiness of the Pious, in their acquiescence under God's Protection of them, and Provision for them. ps. 3. v. 5. ps. 31. v. 6. ps. 22. v. 23. ps. 23. ps. 27. ps. 33. v. 12. ps. 34. v. 6. ps. 37. ps. 42. v. 5. ps. 46. ps. 62. ps. 73. v. 23. ps. 85. v. 9. ps. 91. ps. 93. ps. 94. v. 12. The wretched State of the ungodly and the unjust, here and hereafter. ps. 1. v. 4. ps. 5. v. 6. ps. 11. v. 5. ps. 58. ps. 52. ps. 82. ps. 92. v. 5. express'd as Execrations; but may be understood as real Declarations of the Vengeance that justly follows them; or Prophetick Denunciations of it. ps. 35. v. 4. ps. 69. v. 22. That God will judge the World. ps. 50. ps. 75. ps. 96. v. 10. ps. 97. That the Prosperity of the Wicked is not to be envied. ps. 37. ps. 49. v. 16. ps. 73. v. 16. That the Sinner is an Atheist. ps. 10. v. 4. & v. 11. ps. 36. The folly and the cursed consequences of Atheism. ps. 14. ps. 36. That the visible Works of God may convince the Athe∣ist. ps. 8. ps. 19. That his Judgments on the Wicked may also convince him. ps. 58. v. 10. PSALMS, Invocating God for de∣liverance and protection From his Enemies. ps. 3. ps. 7. ps. 10. ps. 13. ps. 22. ps. 25. v. 19. ps. 38. v. 12. ps. 59. ps. 70. ps. 71. ps. 86. v. 14. enforcing his Petition from his Own Innocence, and the Justice of his Cause. ps. 17. ps. 7. v. 4. ps. 26. ps. 43. Against Liars, and Dissemblers; false and subtle Accusers; Hypocrites, and the treacherous Friend. ps. 5. v. 8. ps. 10. ps. 12. ps. 28. v. 3.
ps. 31. v. 11. ps. 35. ps. 38 v. 11. ps. 41. v. 5 ps. 55. ps. 56. ps. 57. ps. 69. Against declared Enemies, and open Hostilities ps. 44. ps. 60. ps. 68. ps. 74. ps. 79. ps. 83. ps 89. v. 38. ps. 94 As going forth against their Enemies. ps. 20. ps. 80 Against Oppressors, and Ʋnjust Judges. ps. 10. ps. 56 ps. 58. ps. 69. ps. 82. ps. 94. ps. 63. v. 4. Against Detractors, and Slanderers. ps. 57. ps. 64 ps. 69. v. 19. ps. 70. Being persecuted and reviled for God's Cause. ps. 42 ps. 44. v. 13. ps. 22. v. 7. ps. 69. v. 6. In time of Sickness. ps. 38. ps. 39. v. 8. In time of Affliction. ps. 25. ps. 31. ps. 40. v. 11 ps. 61. ps. 77. ps. 86. Being under a sense of God's Displeasure. ps. 77 ps. 88. In his Old Age. ps. 71. From Sin. ps. 19. v. 13. ps. 25. v. 6. ps. 85. ps. 90 v. 13. From Sin, and its punishment (in the Penitentials.) ps. 6. ps. 32. ps. 38. ps. 51. Through the whole Course of his Life. ps. 25. v. 4 ps. 90. v. 12. PSALMS, Invocating God To assist the king going forth against his Enemies. ps. 20. To succour him in Distress. ps. 89. v. 38. ps. 80 v. 14 To give him a long Life here, and Eternity hereafter. ps. 61. v. 6. To Crown Him with Justice and Righteonsness; that those Grandeurs which exalt the just Throne, an extended Dominion, and an extended Name, may
follow his Vertues; and that Peace and Plenty may bless his People. ps. 72. For the Churches Deliverance, and Restauration. ps. 14. v. 7. ps. 51. v. 18. ps. 74. ps. 79. ps. 80. ps. 83. That the Light of Truth may shine on all the World. ps. 67. PSALMS, Giving Thanks to God For his Blessings on the King. ps. 21. For the Assurance the Church hath of the continuance of his Favour towards it. ps. 69. v. 34. For deliverance from Enemies. ps. 10. v. 16. ps. 54. v. 4. ps. 57. v. 7. ps. 59. v. 16, 17. For Victory, and Deliverance from open Hostilities. ps. 9. ps. 18. ps. 21. ps. 31. ps. 46. ps. 48. ps. 66. ps. 76. ps. 98. In a Song of Victory, encouraging the Host, and sung by the Daughters of Jerusalem. ps. 68. v. 12. For deliverance from Enemies and Sickness. ps. 30. ps. 56. v. 12. ps. 66. v. 8. For deliverance from Misery and Affliction. ps. 22. v. 22. ps. 34. ps. 40. ps. 71. v. 19. That he is seated where the True God is worshipped. ps. 16 v. 5. In the Feast of  ps. 81. PSALMS, Magnifying God's Works and Power. ps. 8. ps. 19. ps. 24. v. 1, 2. ps. 29. ps. 33. ps. 65. v. 5. ps. 66. ps. 89. ps. 92. v. 4. ps. 95. ps. 96. ps. 97. His Justice, Goodness, Mercy, and Truth. ps. 33. ps. 36. v. 5. ps. 42. v. 8. ps. 45. v. 6. ps. 65. ps. 68. v. 4. ps. 71. v. 19. ps. 94. v. 12. ps. 98. ps. 99. His Righteous Laws. ps. 19. v. 7. PSALMS, Exhorting
PSALMS, To joyn in magnifying and praising God. ps. 34. ps. 66. ps. 95. ps. 96. ps. 98. ps. 100. To instrust the Gentiles. ps. 96. v. 10 The Gentiles to embrace Christ. ps. 2. v. 10. Inveighing against the Enemies of the Church. ps. 2. Prophecying the Conversion of the Gentiles. ps. 22. v. 27. ps. 47. v. 6. ps. 86. v. 8. Prophecying of our Saviour's Passion. ps. 22. ERRATA In the Preface. PAge 3. l. 25. for impressess, r. impresses. p. 8. l. ult. for Affection, r. Affecti∣ons. p. 10. l. 9. for not all, r. not at all. ibid. l. 17. for Quam, r. Quem. p. 17. l. 23. for those, r. these. p. 19. l. 13. for of r. in. p. 20. l. 25. for dilated, r. diluted, p. 24. l. 15. for would, r. could. In the Psalms. Page 5. l. 10. comma after enough, p. 6. l. 11. for Mouth. r. Mouth. p. 13. l. 10. for Arms, r. Arm. p. 15. l. 6. for guiltless, r. guileless. p. 20. l. 6. for destroy, r. deteyn. p. 21. l. 19. for the Portions, r. their Portions p. 35. l. 7. for Sense r. Cense. p. 51. l. 12. for Bonds, r. Bounds, ibid, l. 25. for when, r. where. p. 57. l. 17. for Affayres, r. Affair. p. 64. l. 3. for exalting, r. exulting, p. 72. l. 15 for Guard, r. Guards. p. 79. l. 8. for thy, r. the p. 80. l. 7. for shall r. shalt. p. 93. l. 2. for th' emitted, r. th' immitted. p. 100. and 101. the Verses to be all thus noted. ".p. 106. l. 10. for Songs, r. Song. p. 108. l. 22. for thrown, r. prone, p. 114. l. 16. for Labanon, r. Lebanon, p. 115. l. 25. for the, r. thy. p. 116. l. 9. and 10. to be noted thus ".ibid. l. 23. for put, r. pull. p. 119. l. 10. for wonders, r. wonder. p. 128. l. 3. for his Burthen, r. the Burthens. p. 131. l. 17 for or'e-fill'd, r. or fill'd. p. 135. l. 5. for Sense, r. Cense. p. 136. l. 6. for Hand, r. Hands, p. 138. l. 11. for of, r. o'th'. p. 145. l. 2 for consent, r. concent, p. 153. l. 9. for All the, r. All ye. p. 155. l. 26. for lab'ring Soul, r. lab'ring wearyed Soul.
Advice to the READER For the more easy singing of these Psalms. OƲT of a due Regard to those, who though they think not so ill of this Version of the Psalms, as they do of that of Sternhold and Hopkins: yet because of the difficulty they apprehend to be in singing them by reason of the difference of the measures, and consequent∣ly of the Tunes set to them, make use of the Other, not out of Choice, but as out of Necessity: I think my self oblig'd to represent to them how easily that imaginary diffi∣culty may be remov'd; and that All the Psalms, four onely excepted (the VIII, the XI the XLVI and the CXXXVI) may be sung to Two Tunes onely; of which, One of them is already known, and usually sung in Churches;the Other onely is new; which comprehending onely four Verses, any Person who has but an ordinary Ear, and has heard it some few times sung, may as easily learn so short an Air, as those old Tunes now used were at first learnt, by the
greater Number of People, when they also were new. All that is requisite to this, is onely tast the Verse of the Psalms into One kind of Stanza; and the Stanza of four Verses being the shortest to take That. This  so easy to be apprehended that 'tis needless to tell any One that those Psalms whose Stanza is already of four Verses must continue so: Those of eight must be divided into two Stanzas: And where the Stanza is six, the Verses of that must be divided into Couples, two of which make a Stanza. This being done, All the Psalms whose Verses are four Feet will be sung to the known Tune of the  Psalm; and All the Psalms whose Verses are five Feet, to the Tune of the XXIV, XXXII, XLIX, LXVI, LXVII XCI XCVI, or CXXXIII Psalm: so great a variety of Tunes of that Measure being given, that any One may take what he shall best fancy, or can most easily learn. As by this means all they who are able to sing but  One new Tune, may by that One onely Tune sing any Psalm whose Ʋerses are five Feet, (which is the onely Measure which is new.) So they who are able to sing All the Tunes may receive a greater Benefit, For having regard to the Subject of the Psalm and to the Affections to be rais'd in themselves in making the Address; They may choose what Tune they find most proper for that Per∣formance: since (having respect onely to the length of the Verse) any Tune will sing any Psalm.
If it happen that at the End of any Psalm some Verses are wanting to compleat the Stanza, a Gloria of the Num∣ber of Verses required, will supply that defect. So like∣wise if any Portion of a Psalm be chosen out (as is usual before or after Sermons, and in the Private Devotions of Families) If it happen that by reason of some transition in the Psalm to another Subject, the Portion of the Psalm so chosen be ended before the Stanza be finish'd, a Gloria will likeWise compleat it. So that by this means we may begin and end in any Part of any Psalm we shall think convenient and proper for the Occasion we choose it for. Another Benefit may be this: If we shall at any time select any particular Verses out of divers Psalms proper for our Concerns in our Private Devotions, after that Mode which the Church has observ'd in those Hymns which are used in stead of the Venite upon the Thirtieth of January, and the Twenty Ninth of May; and in those Forms of Thanksgiving appointed to be used at Sea after a dangerous Tempest, or for victory or de∣liverance from the Enemy (of which kind the Author of the Whole Duty of Man has collected divers under the Title of Pious Ejaculations taken out of the Book Psalms) If, having made such a Collection, we shall transcribe those Verses out of the Paraphrase, we shall have form'd a Hymn proper for our own Occasions, which may easily be sung to one onely, or to any of the Tunes, after the manner we have directed.
Wherever a Word is thus noted (▪) as Israël, that Syllable upon whieh the two Points, are is to be divided, and sung two Notes, as being to be accounted two Syllables,
The FIRST BOOK of the PSALMS, Paraphras'd in Verse. Psalm I. [Beatus vir qui non abiit.] BLessings Crown his fair Soul, who does not stray, Led by false Counsels, in the Sinners way: Who has not sate in the Proud Scorners Seat, Who mock at Piety, and God forger. But in Gods Law hath plac'd his whole delight, And makes that Law his study Day and Night. He's like the fruitful Tree, whose spreading Root Fed by the flowing Stream, yields timely Fruit. His Leaves are crown'd with an Eternal Spring, And God his Deeds to a Bless'd end shall bring. But (O) How different is the Sinners Lot! Like Chaff, the scorn o'th' Winds, wav'd and forgot. Wherefore in Judgment Sinners shall not stand, From the Just banish'd, and their promis'd Land
For God the ways does of the Righteous know, But Sinners Paths lead to Eternal Wo. Psalm II. [Quare fremuerunt Gentes?] WHy do confed'rate Nations rise, Designing mighty Vanities? 'Gainst God, and 'gainst his Christ conspire, And 'gainst his Thunder, throw vain Fire? Let's gain our Liberties, say they, And cast their Cords of Law away. He sees in Heav'n, He sees their Pride, And does their feeble Threats deride; And with the Terrour of his Frown, And Potent Anger, hurles them down. Despight of these, my King have I On Sion plac'd, secure, and High. I now will publish the Decree Which thou thy self reveal'dst to Me; Thou art my Son! This day begot; Ask of Me, and thy boundless Lot Shall be th' Extents of Earth, and Sea; All Nations shall thy Subjects be. Broke like a Potters Vessel, all Shall to thy Powerful Scepter fall. Now therefore, O ye Kings! Be wise, And Judges! Learn what Prudence is:
Serve ye this Lord with awful Fear, With Joy and Reverence draw near. Embrace the Son, and embrace Bliss; And pay your Homage with a Kiss. Shun not his Rule, lest He in Wrath Permit you stray from the right Path; For if his Wrath on  he pour, O where's another Saviour! Psalm III. [Domine quam multiplicati!] HOw, O my God! do they increase, Who seek to rob me of my Peace! They say, my Soul's forsook by Thee, And that Thou hast no help for me. But Thou my Shield art, Thou my Praise, Thou my dejected Head doest raise; When troubled, unto thee I cry, Thou hear'st, and help descends from High. In Peace I'll lay me down and sleep, And rise: Who hurts whom thou dost keep? Thus guarded, though Ten thousand were About me set, I would not fear; Rise Lord! and Shield me from their Power, And break the Jaw that would devour. O bless thy People, who alone Canst bless us with Salvation.
Psalm IV. [Cum invocarem exaudivit.] O Thou! who dost the Prayers attend, Which from the Pure in Heart ascend; Who me inclos'd with misery, Didst from its Straits and Pressures free; As thou art wont an Ear to give, Now hear! And when thou hear'st, relieve! How long, vain Men! will ye defame Mine Honour, and blaspheme my Name? How long will you delight in Lies, And cheat your selves with Vanities? Know, the Lord Those, and only Those, Who love and fear his Name, hath chose. When I (Lord, I thee love and fear!) Make my Petition, thou dost hear. Stand then in awe, and fear to Sin, Examine what does dwell within; Your selves unto your selves impart, And search the Closet of your Heart. Trust not in outward Sacrifice, Nor Cleansings which from Offerings rise; Bring other Fires, more Pure, more Bless'd, Chast thoughts, and th' Incense of the Breast: And then in God put your whole trust; For such He will accept as just.
The busie men o'th' World enquire For Good, who'll shew it us? And where? O let our Souls enjoy thy sight, The endless Treasures of thy Light. Let Souls forgetful of their Birth, Fix their low hopes on Joys of Earth, Upon their Corn, and Oyl, and Wine; Our Wealth's Immortal, all-Divine. Soul take thine ease, lye down and rest, Thou hast enough, of God possess'd: Under the shade of the most High Enjoy a safe Tranquillity. Psalm V. [Verba mea auribus percipe.] REgard my Words, my God and King! Behold the servent thoughts I bring. Hear, O my God! either Address, Both what I can, and can't express. To thee before the day is born My Prayers ascend, chaste as the Morn; Chaste as the Morn they rise, for thou Wilt no Impurity allow. Sin can no more dwell in thy sight, Than Darkness in the face of Light; Nor in thy Presence shall remain The Foolish Person, or the Vain. Who thirst for Blood, the Men of Prey, And they who kill the guileful way;
The smooth Acceiver too shall fall, And from thy Presence perish all. But I with humble confidence That thou with frailty's wilt dispense, In reverence and holy fear, Will to thy Sacred House draw near. Lord, lead me in thy Righteousness, Because of these mine Enemies; Guard and make plain thy Servants way From the close Ambushes they lay. For in their Mouth no truth's contain'd, With Guile their very Souls are stain'd; Their Throat, like Monstors that devour, Is as a gaping Sepulcher; Whilst their fair, smooth, dissembling Tongue Speaks kindly, and does no Man wrong. Destroy them, Lord! and let them all By their own faithless Counsels fall. I'th' midst of their Impiety Cast out these Rebels against thee. But let all those who trust in thee, Rejoyce and sing incessantly; For those who love thee, thou wilt bless, And 'gainst their pow'rful Enemies, Thy mighty favour, as a shield, Will cover them, and safety yield.
Psalm VI. [Domine ne in furore.] SPare, Lord! nor while thy Wrath does burn, Punish my Guilty Soul; O turn! Have Mercy, Lord! In Mercy speak! Pity the frailties of the weak. O heal me! for my Bones are vex'd, But my griev'd Soul far more perplex'd. How long, my God! my God! How long Wilt thou my killing griefs prolong? O turn! and me to favour take, And save me, for thy Mercies sake. For none of thee remembrance have In the Oblivion of the Grave; Or who with Praise will honour thee I'th Land where all things cover'd lye? Lord, I am weary of my Groans, My languishing extended Moans: Night yields no rest, my floating Bed With springs of Tears is watered. Sorrow has thrown a veil on me, And hid me in deformity; My Eyes grow dim, griefs early Age Hastes through my pains, and my Foes rage. Away, Servants of Sin, away! He hears! God hear me now I Pray.
My humble plaints, my fervent moan, Admitted are before his Throne; My Foes shall perish, they shall all Flee back, and in confusion fall. Psalm VII. [Domine Deus Meus!] MY God! I put my trust in thee, O save me from mine Enemy; Lest he my Soul in pieces tear, As a Wild Beast, when no help's near. To thee (just Judge!) I do appeal, If I for Good have rendred Ill; If, 'bove revenge, I did not free My base and causeless Enemy; Then let mine Enemy pursue, O're-take, and my false Soul subdue; My hated Life seize as his Prey, And in the Dust mine Honour lay. Rise, Lord! in thy just Wrath arise Against my raging Enemies; Rise for me in my Righteous Cause, And Judge them by thy stablish'd Laws. So shall the poor Oppress'd to thee, The God of their known refuge, flee; When they th' Examples thou shalt make Of Vengeance see; rise for their sake. And let thy Sentence pass'd on me, Regard my Soul's Integrity;
Thus, ever let the Sinner Bleed, And ever be the Righteous freed. For thou behold'st the inward Parts, The Candor, or the Stains of Hearts; My help from thee alone is sent, Who dost preserve the Innocent. God is a Righteous Judge, most strong, But Patient, and from vengeance, long; And God, (How does his vengeance stay!) God is provoked every day. But if Man will not turn, then know, He takes his Sword, He bends his Bow, His Shafts against their Face presents, And all Death's dreadful Instruments. Th' ungodly's wicked to no end, He's big with Sin, but brings forth Wind; Contrives, and digs a subtle Pit, And falls into the midst of it, His Engines do recoil, and all Their fury on himself does fall; The mischief which himself has bred, Shall crush his own condemned Head. And now, thus freed, My God I'll bless, According to his Righteousness; And my just Praises shall advance The God of my Deliverance.
Psalm VIII. [Domine Deus noster.] HOw, through the World is thy loud Name proclaim'd And 'bove the Heav'ns thy boundless Glory fam'd, O our Great Maker! Our Great Governour! Thy Glorious Name Sucklings and Infants praise, Who from their silence dost Convictions raise, To Charm Blasphemers, and assert thy Power. When th' Heav'ns I view, and those fair Orbs of Light, The Moon, and Stars distinguishing the Night; Which by thy Power and Wisdom stablish'd are; I then reflect on Man; Lord! what is He? What is the Son of Man, that He should be So great a part of the Almighty's Care? Thou next those Winged Ministers of Light, This Second Order, Man, less High, less Bright, In Glory and in Magnitude dost Crown, And over all thy Works Him Prince hast set; And having all things put beneath his Feet, Hast given to him the sole Dominion. All Cattel of the Pastures and the Fields, Fishes and Birds, those floating Regions yield, Of Sea and Air, are Subjects of his Power. Through all the World be thy loud Name proclaim'd, And 'bove the Heav'ns thy boundless Glory fam'd, O our Great Maker! Our Great Governour!
Psalm IX. [Confitebor tibi Domine.] WIth my whole Heart, O Lord! I thee And thy Great Deeds will magnifie. Thy Name I'll bless, O thou most High! And all my Song shall be of thee. My fearful Enemy Retreats, Thy Presence only him defeats: Thou dost my Right, and just Cause own, For Justice waits upon thy Throne. Thou hast subdu'd mine Enemies, And blotted out their memories: O thou great Troubler of the World, Who round it hast Destruction hurl'd; Both thou and thy Destruction's gone, As the raz'd Cities thou hast won; Buried alike, to after Times, Are they, and thy Victorious Crimes. But God lives ever; at whose Seat Stand the Oppressed, and the Great: And He shall judge the Worlds great Cause According to his Righteous Laws: For He th' Oppressed will relieve, And flying to his Arms, receive. Who know thee, Lord, will trust in thee, Thou ne'r fail'st those who to thee slee.
Wherefore, the God of Sion's Name To all the suffering World proclaim; For He the Poor's Complaint will hear, When th' price of Blood he does require. Save me, O Lord! and hear my cry, Oppressed by mine Enemy; Who from the Gates of Death canst raise, Raise me, that I may sing thy Praise. I joy in thy Salvation; For lo! Mine Enemies are sunk down; Into the Pit themselves have made, Their own deceitful Foot's betray'd; They fetter'd and entangled lye In their own Nets of Politie How manifest Gods Judgments are! The Sinner's caught in his own Snare. And now, in endless Chains of Night, Th' Oppressor's lye, who God forget; And Peace is the meek Sufferers lot, Whose Patience is not still forgot. Rise, Lord! in Judgment rise! Shall frail Proud Mortals over thee prevail? Compafs'd with Terrors, rise, and then They'll know themselves to be but Men. Psalm X. [Ʋt quid Domine recessisti?] WHy,O my helP! art tnou so far? and why Dost thou withdraw thy self, when Peril's nigh?
The Poor's expos'd to th' Lust of Tyranny, O let all Guile by its own Malice dye. Th' Oppressor his own will sets up, does bless What God abhors, Rapine and Avarice. Swoln big with Pride, he does his God contemn, And from his Thoughts and Counsels banish him. His ways are always grievous; high, and far, The distant Prospect of thy Judgments are: Wherefore he scorns his Enemies, Tush! says he, What Arm can hurt? What Power ruine me? His false dissembling Lips are full of Lies, And his lewd Tongue repleat with Vanities; He lies in wait, on Spoil and Murder bent, And drinks the Blood o'th' beguil'd Innocent. Close like a Lyon in his Den he lyes, That he the Poor and Simple may surprize; His subtle Nets, contriv'd to catch the Poor, He closely spreads; and caught, he does devour. T' entice the Poor, he humbly does fall down, Taught th' Arts of Holiness and Ambition; God does not see, (saies he) he takes no care How the Affairs of Mortals hurried are. Just God, arise Behold the Oppressed's state, The poor, and thine own Honour, vindicate; How long shall the successful thee blaspheme, And say, thou seest not the Oppress'd, nor him?
Lord! Thou dost see it, thy just wakeful Eye Sees, that it may reward Impiety. Wherefore the Poor commits himself to thee; Who else the Father of Relicts can be? Break the malicious, and the ungodly's Power, Break it, till there be none lest to devour. For ever (Righteous King!) abides thy Throne, The mighty-cruel, and th' Oppressor's gone. Thou hear'st the Cryes of the poor destitute, Thou dost prepare, and thou dost grant their Suit: To help th' Oppressed and the Fatherless. That them the Man of Earth no more oppress. Psalm XI. [In Domino confido.] ANd cannot God defend? The God on whose Protection I rely, Cannot he succour lend? But, like a Bird, to th' Hills for safety I must fly? His Bow th' ungodly bends, And his keen deadly Arrows does prepare, And secretly intends To pierce th' exposed Heart of those who Righteousare. Say not! He'll overthrow All the Foundations, the Defences all, What now can th' Righteous do; The Righteous now must fly, or must defenceless fall.
For know, in Heav'n God is, And in his Temple is his Second Seat; Thence his still wakeful Eyes Look down, and try the Poor; look down, and try the Great. The Actions of the Just He sees, and does their guiless ways approve; But who obey their Lust, His Soul abhors, and from his Presence does remove. And now, behold their Doom! Upon the Sinner Snares and Storms fall down, Brimstone and Fire shall come, This is their just, their Everlasting Portion: But God loves Righteousness, He is its spring, and therefore loves th' upright; He the pure Soul will bless, He them beholds; and they, his everlasting Light. Psalm XII. [Salvum me fac Domine.] HElp Lorld! How great's the Solitude Of Vertue, when not One Man's good? Truth has forsook the Race of Men, Thrust out, and made an Ahen. Each with his Neighbour deals in Lies, The Pest of all Societies; Their Lips speak fair, but their salse Hearts Dissemble, and know other Arts.
The treacherous Lip, that thrives by wrong, God shall root out, and the false Tongue; That Tongue which, wanting other Powers, Prevails by Lies, and so devours: Then boasts its Conquest; Who is he Binds me to truth? Lord over me? And now, for the Oppressed's Moans, Their languishing, despairing Groans, I will arise, (says God) and free The Poor, ensnar'd by subtlety; Thy Words (O God!) are true, more try'd Than Silver, sev'n times Purified; Rise then, and blast the lying Tongue, And save thine from dissembled wrong; Whilst falshood walks on every side, Where safely can Truth's Servants 'bide? Psalm XIII. [Ʋs{que} quo Domine?] HOw long, O Lord! Lord ! canst thou yet, And wilt thou ever me forget? How long withdraw thy Face away, Whose Splendor lets in all my day? How long shall be my Counses vex'd, What to embrace; or shun, perplex'd? How long shall my glad Enemy Insult, and triumph over me? O Lord, consider! My God, hear! O let thy Dawn of Light appear!
Let thy Soul-quick'ning Beams of Light Wake my dead Soul, heavy with Night. Lest my Foes boast, if I'm cast down, I by their power am overthrown. But to thy Mercies, Lord! I fly, And chearfully on them rely. Be glad, my Soul! God's help is nigh; O bless the Name of the most High. Psalm XIV. [Dixit Insipiens.] THe Fool, in's Heart, doth God deny; Hence, his secure Impiety Levels the bounds of wrong and right, And owns no Power above Might; Thus none of these does Good, not One; What Lust alone directs, is done. From Heav'n, the God of Heav'n look'd down, And thence survey'd Earth's Region; To see if any understood, Sought God, and their own endless good; But all were lost, all went astray, All had forsook Life's blesled way. Have they no knowledge? is that Light, The God eclips'd in Man, lost quite? Have Men of Prey their Nature sled? Eating up Men, as they eat Bread? A sudden fear shall pierce their Heart, A Honour from an unseen Dart;
When they, who thus mock and devour, Shall find a God among the Poor. And O! that thy Salvation Were from thy Holy Mount sent down; That all thy Israel might rejoyce, Joyn'd in One Freedom, and One Voice. Psalm XV. [Domine quis habitabit?] LOrd! who among the Bless'd shall dwell? Or, who rest on thy Holy Hill? He who a guileless Life does lead, And in the Paths of Justice tread; In whose firm Soul Truth sets her Throne; Whose Lip's above detraction. Who to his Neighbour does no wrong In Act, nor wounds him with his Tongue; Counts those Men vile, where vice he finds; But pays due Honour to Great Minds. Stedfast his promise is; and He, All lost, keeps his Fidelity. Who the distressed, and the Poor, Does not by Usury devour; Knows the high price of Innocence, And, spight of Bribes, gives it defence His great Soul, here, finds early rest, And shall be added to the Bless'd.
Psalm XVI. [Conserva me Domine!] O My sole refuge! unto thee I flee, Preserve me, Lord! for all my trust's in thee; But, O my Soul! what Tribute shall we raise? What can we render God, but barren Praise? O Living! O Eternal Spring of Good! What-e're we have, flows from thy boundless Flood; Nor can, as a supply, return to thee, Consummate in thine own Felicity. To Those alone our Good extends, who be Great in their Vertue, and their Poverty: All my delight is on thy Saints on Earth, Who, in their Actions, do confess their Birth. But who trust other Gods, are not preserv'd, Their hopes are false; false as the God they serv'd. Their piercing sorrows shall be multiply'd, By their all-powerless God, not to be freed. Their guilty Sacrifice I'll not offer up, Nor the Drirnk-Offerings of th' inhumane Cup, Their hated Gods shall not my Lips prophane; Nor will I swear by their accursed Name: Thou, Lord! My Worship art, and Portion; My Lot is faln where thy Great Name is known; Where, I, the Cup of Blessing take; and where, Maintain'd by thee, all fertile Pleasures are. But, lest I grow remiss through happiness, I bless thee, Lord! Afflictions me chastise;
But so chastise, as that I firmly stand, Sustain'd by thee, still set at my Right Hand. Wherefore, my Soul exults; and my glad Tongue My Glory boasts, in its triumphant Song. And full of hope, my flesh put off, shall rest; Hell cann't de the Soul, thou hast releas'd. Nor wilt thou e're forsake thy Holy One, Or suffer him to see Corruption. The Path, thou'lt shew me, which to Life does lead, And thither thou my happy steps wilt guide; Where, in thy glorious presence, Joys shall flow, Joys boundless, which nor term, nor measure know. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XVII. [Exaudi Domine Justitiam.] O Righteous Judge! to my just plaints attend, And crys, which from no feigned Lips ascend From thine own Presence let my Sentence come, Who canst not but pronounce an equal Doom. Thou try'dst my Heart, conceal'd not from thy sight By darkness, or its own dissembling Night. And thou know'st, Lord! my stedfast purpose is, Nor in my Thoughts, or Words, e're to transgress. My Actions I have guided by thy Laws, Not by th' example o'th' destroyer's ways; O hold thou up my goings in thy way! That my foot slip not, that I never stray.
When e're I call'd to thee, O present, Lord! Thou heard'st; that wonted favour now afford; O Saviour of all Them who trust in thee, The wonders of thy Love now shew to me! Preserve me as the Apple of thine Eye, And let thy Wings vast Shadow cover me! Cover me safely, from their threatning Power, Who compass me as ready to devour. Mighty in Power, their Tongue does proudly threat; Not petty wrongs, but what are dar'd by th' Great. They've watch'd my steps, intently fix'd their Eyes, And closely couch, as ready to surprize. As the fierce Lyon lurks to seize his Prey, Low, and obscur'd and quiet to betray. Rise! disappoint them, Lord! and cast them down! No other Power can save me, but thine own. From thine own Sword, by thine Almighty Hand, Save! and the fury of these Men withstand; These Men o'th' World, who have the Portion here, Whose full enjoyments equal their desire. Their Issue's numerous, and when they dye They leave their Wealth to their Posterity. But I'll behold the Glories of thy Face In Righteousness, and when I've run my Race, And, in the Morn of my Eternal Day, Ascending, drop'd the Mantle of my Clay, Shall wake up with thy likeness, I shall rest For ever satisfi'd, for ever bless'd.
Psalm XVIII. [Diligam te Domine!] O My dear God! How can I but love thee My certain help in all Adversity? Thou art my Rock; Thou my munited Tow'r; Thou art my God, and thou my Saviour; Thou art my shield; my hope on thee is laid, Thou art my only, Thou my numerous aid. O thou moste worthy Praise! I Honour thee; For thou wilt guard me from mine Enemy. Death's dreadful terrors did encompass me, And Flouds of Cruel Men did terrifie, Hell and the Grave seem'd ope, unthought of Death Watch'd, to have canght my faint departing Breath Amidst the horror of this Agony To God, my last and only hope, I cry, He hears from Heav'n, and my unfeigned Mone Ascends, and finds access unto his Throne. His Wrath against my Foes wax'd hot; Earth shook The Mountains from their firm Foundations broke; He Flouds of Smoke from his dread Presence sends, And rowling Flames; Heav'n bows, and God descend He rode upon the Winged Cherubim; Their, and the Winds swift Wings did carry Him; Darkness sate round about, a Night of Clouds Enclos'd Him, and impenetrable Flouds. But his bright Presence rends the heavy veil, Shoots flames of Lightning, and revengeful Hail,
Heav'n gives upon its Foes; Thunder and Hail Fall thick, and lowd; and the great Arms prevail. They flye; part are beat down by th' Hails cold wound, And those that scape, the raging Flames confound. The secret Springs o'th' Floods, at thy great War, And th' Worlds low Foundations, op'ned are. Midst all this horror, God remembred me; Sent down; and sunk I'th' Floods, sav'd me from high; Sav'd me himself from my strong Enemy, For their great Powers too mighty were for me: But, nor their Powers prevail, nor close surprize, He, as their Power, so brake their subtleties; Then led me to a place of liberty. Because He had a favour unto me. For He my Righteous dealing did regard, And cleanness of my guileless Hands reward, Because Gods ways I never did forsake, Nor wicked Men my foul Examples make; The measure of my Deeds, his Laws I made; And my Religion to them ne're betray'd. By them I form'd my Soul; new Nature took; Was uncorrupt; and all my self forsook. Wherefore, thy recompence, O God! to me As my just dealing was, and Purity; For th' Holy, crown'd by thee, Bless'd Saints shall shine, The perfect shall be God-like, All-Divine; The Pure shall see the Glories of thy Face, But the perverse, thy Frowns, to Death shall chace: For thou, the Proud, shalt bring down from on High, And raise thy People in Adversity. And me thou shalt exalt; a Beam of Light Shot through my Soul, shall chace away its Night.
By thee, I shall an Army break, and scale Their City's proud defence, and leap its Wall. Thy way, O God! is a just, perfect way; Thy Word is try'd, as by Fire's last Assay: Those, who rely on thee, thou dost sustain, For none, who trust in God, trust Him in vain. Tell, O ye Gods! Or ye who serve them, tell! Is any God, like th' God of Israel? Confess your vain weak Powers! And yield, at length, Th' are, as your selves, but Images of strength. By Him, I'm arm'd, and girded unto War, And own'd by Him my Enterprizes are, Swift as a Harts, He makes my Feet, and I Beyond, and above Danger, mount on High. He strength does give, and to that strength adds A Does force, and skill to govern it, impart. Arms me with safety; with Salvation, Shields; His Hand, sustains; Protection, Courage yields. Makes plain my way, and from false Ambush clears; Secures me both from Dangers, and from Fears. Thus guarded, I mine Enemies pursue; O're-take, assail, and their faint Troops subdue. Wounded, and Slain they fall; fall, not to rise; But at my Feet, the calm Insulter lyes. But this I do, arm'd by thy Power Divine, 'Tis not my Arm has vanquish'd 'em, but thine; Thy fear astonish'd 'em when amaz'd, they fled; When I destroy'd, and gave 'em to the Dead. Lost to all help, from their own Gods they fly, And cry to thee, but thou reject'st their cry.
Small, as the Dust, I scatter'd them; and they Mix'd with the Earth, made but one Bed of Clay. Thou charm'st th' unquiet Peoples Murmuring, And dost the Gentiles to my Scepter bring; Nations unknown, me serve; brought in by Fame, And without Arms, fall only to my Name. They quit their strongest Holds, and to me fly; Fly humbly, fear turns into Flattery. God lives! My powerful Avenger lives! Bless'd ever! who me Strength and Conquest gives; From all my Foes sends me deliverance, And 'bove them and their Malice does advance. High, 'mongst the Gentiles, thy great Name I'll raise; And sing abroad, my Triumph, and thy Praise; Of thine abundant favour, sure, and long. To David, and his Seed, shall be my Song. Psalm XIX. [Coeli enarrant gloriam.] THe Heav'ns declare a God, th' extended Skie Tell, that their Maker was not less than He; Day, without voice, tells day; and Night tells Night; Twisting Time's winding Chain, of Shade and Light. What Land's unknown to Night? or shuts out Day? Which part the World, and run divided way? Who hears not th' springing voice of chearful Light? Or the soft whispers of the charming Night? In them the guilded Tent o'th' glorious Sun Is plac'd, the Fountain of Light's motion. He, like a joyful Bridegroom, bright and gay, Does ope his Chamber, and lets forth the Day.
And, as a Champion, with known vigorous force, Advances to run o're his wonted Course; Whole Heav'n's th' extent of his vast motion, Gives East and West to us, Himself takes none, His brooding heat inspires cold Clay with Breath, His Ebbs and Floods of Light, give Life and Death. Such are thy Laws to him; but nobler far Thou giv'st to Man; by those Souls guided are; Souls, taught by thy most perfect Law, to thee Convert, and wed rejected Purity. Thy Promises, to th' Simple, Wisdom give; Thy Statutes, faint, oppressed Hearts relieve. Thy pure Commands give light unto our Eyes; Thy awful fear our stain'd Souls purifies; It lasts for ever, as thy Judgments do, Thy Judgments, mighty Lord! Righteous and True. Can Gold, much Gold, can much refined Gold Any proportion, with these Treasures, hold? Can Honey, dropping from the Virgin-Comb, With these transcendent Gusts in tryal come? By these high Tasts, our ravish'd Souls are fed, Taught Heav'n; and for reward, are thither led. But O, Man's frailty! O false Error's Guile! How oft he does offend thee, who can tell? From secret faults, and from Presumptuous Sin, O cleanse my stained Soul, and make me clean! And so shall I be clad in Innocence, And be preserved from the Great Offence. The thoughts, my Heart; the Words my Lips do pour; Accept, my God! my Strength! my Saviour.
Psalm XX. [Exaudiat te Dominns.] IN thy great day of trouble, God thee hear! The Name of Jacob's God for thee appear! Send thee strong succours from the Sanctuary, And Sion be thy great Auxiliary. Remember, and accept, thy Sacrifice; And the loud Incense from thy Prayers does rise. We'll, in the Name of God, our Ensigns rear; And triumph in thy safety: God thee hear! And thou wilt hear; wilt thine Anointed Shield; And strength from Heav'n, and thy Right Hand, wilt yield. Their many Chariots, some, and Horses boast, Our Number, only is the Lord of Hosts. Our Foes are faln, brought down, and put to slight; By the same Power we rise, and stand upright. Save Lord! O King of Heav'n hear us, and save! And grant the mighty succour that we crave. Psalm XXI. [Domine in virtute tua.] LOst to all help, in thine, O God! alone The King shall joy, and thy Salvation; Thou gav'st all he could wish; and th' easy task Performed by him, only was to ask.
Thy Goodness did his utmost hopes prevent, Ʋnlook'd-for Blessings, and a Crown it sent. He beg'd the Guist, the Measure was from thee He asked Life, thou gav'st Eternity. Though Great in Glory; Great in's honour'd Crown, His Greatest Honour's thy Salvation. All Humane Grandeur, ends; beholding thee He shall enjoy termless Felicity. O Great Reward of his great Trust in thee! It gives his Throne, and him, stability. Thine Enemies shall feel thy mighty Power, Whom, as a Fire, thine Anger shall devour. God shall consume them; their abandon'd Place No more shall them remember, nor their Race. For they close treacherous designs have lain Against thy Peace, but they have laid in vain. Wherefore, their Troops, thou shalt victorious chace And shalt direct thine Arrows 'gainst their Face. In thine own strength, Great God! exalted be; Thy Power we'll praise in Songs of Victory. Psalm XXII. [Deus, Deus Meus! quam dereliquisti?] MY God! My God! why hast thou me forsook? Why, of my woful Moans, no knowledge took? I, Day by Day; and Night by Night, do cry; Nor Day, nor Night release my misery. O Holy God! O Praise of Israel! Our Fathers of thy mighty Deeds do tell;
How they did cry to thee, and thou didst hear How they did trust, and they deliver'd were: But I'm a Worm, trod down, and overborn By all; and made their Fable and their Scorn. With all the gestures of Indignity They prosecute, and advance my misery. This is One of Gods Holy Ones, say they, One who a mighty trust in God did lay; If God do love him, God perhaps may save him, And if he will deliver him, shall have him. O my dear God! O my experienc'd Hope! Who didst to me the Gate of Life set ope; To whom, when hanging on my Mothers Breast, My helpless Soul its Infant-vows address'd; My first, and (now) last refuge! thou, on whom I have been wholly cast on from the Womb, O be not far! my God! my God! draw nigh; For all Help's fled, and leaves the Danger by. Monsters surround me, Heards of ravenous Men; Fat Bulls from Basan, Lyons from their Den, They gape, and roar, as ready to devour, Fearful to me, to their chang'd selves, much more. I'm pour'd like Water forth, my pains relax My feeble joynts, my Heart's like melted Wax. My strength's breath'd forth, my parch'd Tongue stark and dry Cleaves to my Mouth, and the cold Grave draws nigh. And yet they cease not, but like Dogs surround The anguish'd Prey, and with fresh Counsels wound;
They pierce my Hands and Feet; my fleshless Bones Expos'd to view, may be told every One. And now, unsatisfi'd with Cruelties, They stare, and gaze, and glut their greedy Eyes, And view, in me, what hate and rage can do; In me, the source and spectacle of Wo. They part my Garments, which as spoils they got; My Vesture's Owner is design'd by Lot. In this last Agony, draw nigh, O Lord! Thy help, who alone canst help, my God afford! O save my Soul from Death! My Darling save! Nor Lyons Mouth, nor Dogs be made its Grave. O save me, Lord! Thou, who amidst the Horns Hast heard me of the numerous Unicorns. Then, freed from Death, I shall, triumphant, tell Thy glorious Name to all thy Israel. O ye who fear the Lord, the Lord's Name bless! For he does not forsake Souls in distress; Nor hides, as unconcern'd, his Face away, But hears, and turns, and rescues when they pray. In sight of all I'll pay my Vows; we'll raise One common Cloud of Incense to thy Praise. O Praise the Lord! the Poor shall eat and live, Live ever, He shall Bread Eternal give. Man shall remember whence he fell, and all The World return, and to their Maker fall: And God alone shall Monarch be, for his Kingdom, the Ʋniversal World is. All from the Throne unto the Dust, shall fall Before his Presence, for th' are equal all;
All from their Maker took one common Breath, To Life none rais'd himself, nor can from Death. Posterity shall serve him, and their Race, For ever serve him, beyond Time and Place. Gloria of Four Verses. Psalm XXIII. Dominus regit. HOw can I want whose Shepherd is my God? His mighty Scepter deigns to be a Rod; Calm Streams, cool Shades, my high Refreshments be, My Soul has, Heav'ns own rest, Tranquillity. How can I wander? He, when e're I stray, Seeks his lost Sheep, and turns me into th' way, How can I fear? Death's dark veil cannot fright, His glorious Presence does dispel the Night. My Table thou shall spread spight of my Foe; Balm shall annoint my Head, my Cup shall flow, All my time here, thy favour rests on me, And shall, O my dear God! Eternally. Psalm XXIV. [Domini est Terra.] THe Earth is Gods, and all that is therein; All things, all Creatures, and the Sons of Men;
He its Foundations on the floating Bed O'th' Floods has set, and firm established. Who shall ascend into the Holy Hill Of God, and in his sacred Presence dwell? Whose Hands and Heart are clean; who hates what vain Whom nor Deceit nor Perjury does stain. He shall receive the Blessing from above, And th' Righteous God his doings will approve; He's of the Race o'th' Blessed; such as He Shall constitute Heaven's Glorious Colony. Lift up your Heads ye Gates! and op'ned be Ye everlasting Doors! to the most High! Who's the most High? thus Great in Majesty? The God of Battel is the Lord most High. Lift up your Heads ye Gates! and op'ned be Ye everlasting Doors, to the most High! Who's the most High? thus Great in Majesty? The Lord of Hosts, he is the Lord most High. Psalm XXV. [Ad te Domine levavi.] TO thee, in whom I all my trust repose, I list my Soul; O guard me from my Foes! And let not me, let none be put to shame Who flee unto the refuge of thy Name. But put to shame my causless Enemies, And blast their cruel, hateful purposes.
Shew me thy Paths, O thou unerring Guide! And in those Paths my straying footsteps lead. For thou art God of my Salvation, On thee all day I wait, on thee alone. Remember, Lord! thy ancient, tender Love; Which has been ever, as thy years above. But of my Sins, blot out the memory, Think on thy Mercies, Lord! then think on me. Our God is good; full of compassion; And will to Sinners his bless'd ways make known. He will instruct the lowly and the meek, And they shall learn his ways, who his ways seek. To those who keep his Covenant, his Paths be All Mercies, all Eternal Verity. Exalt thy Name, for mercy infinite; By pard'ning, Lord! my sin, because 'tis great. The Pious Man, who does his God revere, God will direct; and guide him lest he erre. His high contented Soul shall dwell at ease; And his Posterity the Land possess. God will reveal to him his mysteries, Those Heav'nly secrets which make truly wise; Will shew him his Eternal Covenant, And seal unto his Soul Heav'ns mighty Grant. Mine Eyes, O Lord! do wait, still wait on thee, For thou alone my entangled Feet canst free. O turn unto me, Lord! pity my state! For I'm in misery, and desolate. The troubles of my Heart are still enlarg'd, With growing Burthens more and more o'recharg'd.
Lord help! Lord bring me out of my distress, And all my pain, and all my sins release. Behold, O Lord! who are mine Enemies; And how their Numbers, Malice, Rage, encrease. O keep my Soul! and do not me expose, Who trust in thee, to th' triumph of my Foes. I wait on thee, O let my Souls defence Be still, Integrity and Innocence. O give thine Israel rest! and set it free From all its troubles! own'd, and redeem'd, by thee Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XXVI. [Judica me Domine.] TO thy Tribunal, Righteous God! I fly, For I have walk'd in my Integrity; And wholly do on thy Protection trust, Who, from the Sinner, dost discern the Just. All the Recesses of my Soul, to thee Are fully ope; try, and examine me! Goodness, and Truth, to me the measures be Of Action, measures which I take from thee. The false Dissemblers, who Truth's Candor stain, I flee; and the Contagion of the vain. I shun th' Assemblies, and the black Consults Of the unjust, nor mix with their Results;
And having wash'd my Hands in Innocence, Thine Altar I'll approach with reverence. There, I, in Songs, thy great Deeds will proclaim, And celebrate the Triumphs of thy Name. What transports in my Soul thy House does raise! The House where thou Inhabitest, our praise. Judge not, nor ranck my Soul with that lost Cense Of Men, who trade in Blood and Violence. Who all the Laws of Equity proscribe; Prize Gold; and sell their Virtue for a Bribe. My Soul abhors their ways, bless'd Innocence Be thou my choice! and thou, Lord! my Defence. My Paths are Right; thine Honour I'll proclaim, Great God! and in thy House will praise thy Name. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XXVII. [Dominus illuminatio mea.] SInce God's my safety; God my strength and might; What Man, what Powers of Darkness can me fright? My Foes drew nigh as if they would devour, With great assurance, and Ʋnited Power; But, as by chance, (th' unseen Path who can tell?) Approaching me, they all stumbled and fell. Should an Host charge me, in his Strength, I dare Oppose my single Breast against a War.
One onely thing I would of God desire, One onely thing, may I still This require! That in his House I may spend all my Days, T' admire his Beauty, and to sing his Praise. There, to the Worlds vain fears and hopes unknown He'll hide, and set me on a Rock of Stone: Whence my advanced Head, secure, looks down Upon my Foes; great, and above their Frown. There, O my God! to thee I'll offer Praise, The service of thy Temple, and my Days; Hear and have mercy, mercy Lord! on me, And do not my unfeign'd Requests deny. My Soul, O God! as in an Extasie, Receiv'd these Words—Seek thou my Face! from the Thy Face, O God! I seek; what other Bliss Can I pursue? This the transcendent is. Reveal thy Glories! What can I more desire? Grant thy Command! Give, what thou dost require! Hide not thy Face! Turn, Lord! and grant my suit, And help, as thou art wont, the destitute. Lost to my Parents care, and left alone I was God's care; He was my Portion. Lord! lead me in thy just, thine upright way, For my Foes wait t' entrap me if I stray. O leave me not to them! They Witnesses Suborn, and stain my Innocence with lies. I should have sunk, and fainted utterly, But that I stedfastly expect to see Thy Goodness, Lord! in Life's Eternal Land, Where all shall have their Portions from thy Hand.
With fortitude, and patience, wait that time! Dare to be vertuous! and leave all to him. Psalm XXVIII. [Ad te Domine clamabo.] O Thou my strength! to thee I cry, Hear, Lord! for if thou dost deny, They, who descend into the Grave, Cannot more Night, and Darkness have. Towards thy House my Hands I rear, And to thy Mercy's Seat, O hear! O Number not my Soul with those Deceitful Ones, who Truth oppose; Who, seeming Friends, their Neigbour wrong By the fair treach'ry of their Tongue: Pay them according to their guile And malice of their borrow'd smile. Let them be carri'd smoothly on, And flatter'd to destruction. For they thy works regarded not, Nor th' Righteous Judgments thou hast wrought! Therefore they shall be overthrown, And, not to be rebuilt, cast down. Bless'd be the Lord, who hath me heard; And doth my humble suit regard. God is my Strength, God is my Shield, I trust, and he does succour yield.
Wherefore my Soul new heat inspires; Fill'd with Divine and Heav'nly fires. His praises shall inform my Tongue, And God alone shall be my Song. He his Anointed will defend, And his effectual Powers lend; Lord! save thine own Inheritance; Here, and for ever them advance. Psalm XXIX: [Afferte Domino filii Dei.] BRing, O ye mighty! Bring your Sacrifice! Bring Rams; and let the chearful Incense rise Confess God's Power; yield, and confess your own, The honour of all Power give him alone. His Honour in his Sanctuary confess; And him, I'th' Beauty praise of Holiness. His voice breaks ope the Fountains of the Clouds, He Thunders, and pours forth descending Flouds, With his voice Power dwells and Majesty; Rent by his voice, low the proud Cedars lye; Like trembling Calves, they shake when they are blown And the  too, Sirion and Lebanon. His Glorious voice, the Breath of Flames express, Shakes th' Wilderness; shakes Kadesh Wilderness; Makes Hinds bring forth their young, and through the Night Of the thick Bushes, darts its trembling Light.
His Temple speaks his praise; He, on his Throne High, o're the Floods, Rules ever, Rules alone. He shall protect, He shall his People bless, Bless with a present, and Eternal Peace. Psalm XXX. [Exaltabo te Domine!] GReat God! Thou hast exalted me In triumph 'bove mine Enemy; And me, with pain and sickness griev'd, Thy Goodness has with Health reliev'd; Brought down to th' Grave, and low as Death Thou caugh'st back my descending Breath. Sing, O ye Saints! to His Name raise Eternal Monuments of Praise. For in a Moment his Wrath's past, But his Joys live, and Favours last; If heaviness endure a Night, Joy wakes, and springs up with the Light. In my Prosperity I said, (By weak Prosperity betray'd) I am so strong, so great, so high, No chance can ever ruine me: Thou saw'st the folly of my Pride, And didst thy blesled Presence hide. How soon did then my Glories fade! Drop down, and sink into a shade!
I then sought my neglected Lord, And humbly my Petition pour'd. What profit, O my only Good! Is there in thy poor Creatures Blood? Can Dust praise thee? Can Thanks return From the dark silence of the Urn? Hear, Lord! Lord help! Have mercy, Lord! He hears, He helps, mercy affords; Thou hast to joy my sorrow tnrn'd, And comforted the Soul that mourn'd. My Sackcloath thou hast torn away, And me, with gladness, dost array; All Saintas shall in thy Praise conspire, And fill one Universal Quire: And I, Great God! will sing to thee Eternal praise, Eternally. Psalm XXXI. [In te Domine speravi.] IN thee, my God! I trust alone, Put me not to Confusion! But, Lord! as is my trust in thee, So thy Protection be to me. Bow down thine Ear unto my cry, And make haste to deliver me. Be thou my Rock! Be thou my Fort! To whom I ever may refort.
For, Lord! as my sole Rock and Fort, To thee alone I do resort. O guide my wandring steps! And lead Me in the Paths that I should tread. Free my unwary Soul, betray'd Into the Net which they have laid; O may the Captive, loos'd from th' snare, Be made its great Redeemer's care! Receive, into thine Arms now thrown, My Spirit! and protect thine own. Vain, lying helps, I have abhorr'd, My only trust has been the Lord; And I'th' success I joy; for he Consider'd mine Adversity: And hid in sorrows, knew my Soul; Rais'd it, and wounded, made it whole. He took me from mine Enemy, And gave me to my Liberty. Thy wonted mercies, Lord! extend; And give my present troubles end; Grief, a deep shade casts o're mine Eyes, And clouds my Soul with heaviness. Age hastes, and takes in other years, And into Time computes my Cares; My strength 'does fail, and Vigour dyes; My Neighbours too are Enemies, O're-power'd by mine Enemies, And false to my Adversities.
Shun, as a Pest, my misery; And me, and my Sick Fortunes flee. I'm clean forgot, as one that's dead; All my deserts are buried. As a broke Vessel, I'm refus'd, They took me, only to be us'd. Yet still I'm living to their hate, That treads upon my lowest state; That to new Counsels does them bring, How to remove the useless thing. But, O my God! Thou art my aid! On thee I all my hope have laid. My time is in thy Hand, O save! O save me from th' untimely Grave! And from my cruel Enemy, And bitter Persecutors free. O let One Beam, One Ray, from thee Break through my Clouds of misery! Lord! Let me not be put to shame, For I have call'd upon thy Name. Put Sinners to Confusion, Into Eternal silence thrown. Let the false Lip its Portion have, Shut up for ever in the Grave. Which does maliciously traduce The Innocence o'th' Righteous. O the vast Treasures of thy Love For those who fear thee stor'd above! Thy present Bounties too, giv'n here, Do to the Sons of Men appear.
Them, by thy Presence, thou shalt hide, And they shall in thy House abide; Where, in a Blessed, long recess, Far from the World, they'll rest in peace; In Peace, under th' Eternal Shade Which thy vast pow'rful Wing has made. No malice there; no strife of Tongue; No entrance for condemned wrong; None, who insultingly deride, The Proud are banish'd thence, and Pride. And now, I, of thy glorious Name, The present Honour must proclaim. And the great mercy to me shown In a strong, well-munited Town: Where, chac'd, I was ev'n nigh despair, Rash, in my uncollected fear; But, though astonish'd. and dismay'd, Thou heard'st me, when to thee I pray'd. O Love the Lord, all ye his Saints! He saves the faithful, hears their plaints; But gives the Proud, who Right contemn, A vengeance, worthy him, and them. Be strong! Trust Him! His strength is thine; He'll guard thee with an Arm Divine.
Psalm XXXII. [Beati quorum remissa.] HOw Bless'd! how happy is that Man, whose Sin God covers; and his stained Soul makes clean! Thrice happy he, whose Sins are all forgot, And in whose  Soul is found no spot. Whilst I, the loathsom Poyson of my Sin Conceal'd within my Breast, and held it in, It festred, and consum'd my raging Bones, My tedious hours were counted by my Grones. Thy Hand lay heavy on me, Night and Day; My strength, like Summer's moisture, breath'd away Then I return'd to God, then I confess'd, Then I made known to him how I transgress'd. And he, O miracle of Love! He heard; Pardon, as my Confession, swift appear'd. For this, the Pious unto thee shall pray In a due time; Pray, while 'tis call'd to Day; 'Twill be too late, when Life, or Time, shall be Swallow'd I'th' Ocean of Eternity. Thus reconcil'd to God, I boldly flee To him; he hides me, and he sets me free; My Sighs are fled, Joys only now advance; With Songs I'm compass'd of Deliverance.
I will (saies He) direct thy future way, My careful Eye shall watch thee left thou stray. Know thy self then! Be not like Horse and Mule, Reason must thee; them Bit and Bridle rule. Set up the Man! Dethrone the Beast within, Th' Ʋsurping Beast; Remember ye are Men! Remember too, the wages that attend Vertue, and Vice; the bless'd or dreadful End, What raging Flames shall round th' unjust be thrown, What lambent Glories shall the Righteous Crown. Rejoyce ye Righteous! lift up your chearful voice; Be Righteous still! And ye shall still rejoyce. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XXXIII. [Exultate Justi in Domino.] TO God, ye' just Ones! your glad voyces raise; The Just becomes the decency of praise. With Harp, and Lute, and Ten-string'd Instrument, Let th' Voice, and Harmony of Souls consent. Sing a new Song! apt Words, and Notes prepare; To the great Ditty, joyn the equal Ayre. Gods Word is true; his Works establish'd be; He Justice loves; Judgment, and Equity; His Goodness, through the World diffus'd, does know No Ebbe; no other motion, but to flow.
His Word, the Heaven's, out of the empty shade Of Nothing, call'd forth; and the Heaven's were made Their noble Host march'd up in bright array Of diff'ring Glories, leading in Night and Day. The Floods, together gather'd on a heap, Rowl'd down into the Treasures of the Deep. O Earth, thy Maker honour! O let all Thy People, with due fear, before him fall. He spake, and it was done; by his Command Nature's great Laws firm and unmov'd do stand; Princes Decrees, and what the People speak He blasts, and then their giddy selves do break; But Gods Decrees, His Counsels, and His Laws, Stand ever; Stand Eternal as their Cause. O happy People! O their unknown Bliss Who call him, God; and he does call them, His; For he, upon the Sons of Men looks down, And to him, all their hopes and fears are known. He all the close Intrigues does understand O'th' Heart he made, that Heart's still in his Hand. In vain a King trusts in his numerous Host; In vain the strong Man in his strength doth boast, In vain is safety sought from Humane force, Or from the strength, or swiftness of a Horse; But they who trust in him, trust not in vain, He sees their wants; sees that he may sustain. Whom Hosts, nor Strength, nor any pow'r of Earth Can save, God saves; and feeds in time of Dearth.
To him alone in all distress we flye, And, full of joy, on our great Choice rely; O Thou! on whom we trust, and trust alone, With mercy, our long hopes, and patience Crown. Psalm XXXIV. [Benedicam Dominum.] O Thou! whose mercies do me ever bless, Shall they still flow, and shall my Praises cease? Th' afflicted Soul shall hear, and join with me, And we, together, will him magnifie. I humbly sought the Lord, and he did hear; And he deliver'd me from all my fear. Th' afflicted turn'd to him their mournful Eyes, And on their Face a dawn of Joy did rise. See how the Poor, who fear him, cry! and see How God does pity! How he sets them free! He who fears God, God does protect that Man, Gives him an Angel for his Guardian. O taste and see how gracious the Lord is! Who trust in him, with him, have all of Bliss. O fear the Lord, ye Holy Ones! for he Will all your fit desires and wants supply. Lyons their Prey may want, and bloody food, But who fear God, shall nothing want that's Good. Attend ye Children, and to me draw near! I will instruct you in th' Almighty's fear. With Blessings crown'd, wouldst thou thy Life prolong, Seal the false Lip; charm the deceitful Tongue;
Shun Ill; do good; seek calm beloved Peace; Peace the way to, Peace the glad end of Bliss. Such God will bless; their steps his careful Eyes Will watch, and guard; his Ears receive their Cries. But 'gainst th' unrighteous Soul he sets his Face; Blasts their faln Glories, and plucks up their Race. The Righteous cry, and God their Prayer hears, He sends relief, and wipes away their Tears. The Sighs of contrite Hearts ascend on high, Mercy descends, and God himself draws nigh. Though great the troubles of the Righteous are, Their God delivers them, for they're his care; He, as intrusted, safely keeps each Bone, And firm, and whole, restores them every One. But Vengeance shall the Guilty Wretch o'retake, Who, th' Object of his hate th' upright does make. All those, who trust in God, their God relieves, And to their captiv'd Souls Redemption gives. Psalm XXXV. [Judica Domine Nocentes.] LOrd! aid thy Servant in distress; and those Who my weak strength o'repow'r, thy self oppose. Thy mighty Arms put on; thy Spear and Shield Bring forth, and stop the Torrent of the Field. Turn the Pursuer back! Tell! who alone Canst tell, my Soul, I'm thy Salvation. Let those who chace my Soul be overthrown, Turn'd back, and fall into Confusion.
Let them, like Chaff, loose and disorder'd be; And 'fore a wrathful Angel's fury flee. Let their Retreat be dark, and slippery, And a commanded Angel, Enemy. For they, without a cause, have laid a Net For my too credulous Soul, and dig'd a Pit. Let a swist Vengeance seize him unaware, Caught in his own malicious, wanton Snare. My Soul's and Body's Powers, God shall bless; Both, freed; both his Salvation shall confess. Who, Lord! is like to thee, who sav'st the Poor, The helpless Poor, from him that does devour? False Witness rise, and stain my Innocence; Stain without Crime; blot with their true Offence. And, to my Souls yet further wounding, they For Good, I did to them; me, Ill repay. I dealt not so with them; for I, when they Were Sick, with Sackcloth cloath'd, did fast and pray; And, since my Pray'r cast off, in vain did mourn, My Dove into my Bosom shall return. For, Brother, Friend, or dearest Mother, none Than I for them, more tender Grief have shown. But they, in mine Adversity were glad; Not singly, but a Publick Triumph made. All flow together, the very Abjects flout, One Joy th' unworthy Great, mix'd with the Rout. Their scorns, my Soul afresh wound, and destroy, The tender'st of my Suff'rings was their joy. How long shall they afflict? How long thou see? Lord! wilt thou but look, on my misery?
O from the cruel pains which me invade Save! and more cruel Men; Men Lyons made. So, in the great Assembly, thy great Name I'll praise, and my deliv'rance loud proclaim. Let not my treach'rous causeless Enemy Insult, O Lord! and triumph over me: Whose fair Discourse, and Treaties, are a snare, Made smooth, to take the Souls that guileless are, And having gain'd their end, they falsly cry Out on the Wretch! we saw it with our Eye. This thou hast seen, O Lord! O God, draw near! 'Gainst them, and for my Soul, Just God, appear! Wake, Lord! while thou look'st on, O Truth's De∣fence! Shall Malice triumph over Innocence? Shall they, great in success, cry, He's devour'd? There! There! the Holy Man is overpowr'd. Shame and Confusion cover them! Let all Who me oppress, with foul dishonour fall. Then shall all they who favour the upright, When thou regard'st the Righteous, take delight: All shall thee bless, call happy, who thee trust, Who pleas'd art i'th' Prosperity o'th' Just. Thy Justice, Righteous God! my ravish'd Tongue, And Truth, shall celebrate all my Day long. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm XXXVI. [Dixit Injustus ut delinquat.] MY Heart's convinc'd, that he who follows sin Dethrones his God, and Atheist is within. Yet the smooth Hypocrite walks fairly on, And cheats his Soul, till his dark Crimes be known. His words are feign'd; all subtile, all pretence; The Serpent in him kills the Innocence. He plots his sins, when lesser Cares are fled; Results o'th' Night, and Counsels of the Bed. He starts at nought; but, to attain his will, Unravels all the Bounds of Good and Ill. High, as the Heav'ns; and 'bove the Heav'ns High, Thy mercy is, O Lord! and Verity. Thy Justice does as the firm Mountains rise; And thy great Judgments deep are as th' Abyss; On all thy Works thy boundless Mercies flow, The Beasts, them, with thy Creature Man do know; But Man, whom, after those, thy last Hand made, Under thy Wing does find another Shade. He, in thy House receiv'd, its fulness tastes, Drinks Joys, and Pleasures that for ever last. The Joys with them Immortal Life do bring; For there's both Joy's and Life's Eternal Spring. Where Souls with a new flame, more high, more bright, Shall quick'ned be, strook from thy Font of Light.
O let those Bounties ever, ever flow, To th' Pure in Heart, who still thirst thee to know; Let not the foot of Pride tread my Life down; Nor let me be by wicked Hands o're-thrown. See how themselves are ruin'd! ruin'd, all! All wicked doers, ne're to rise, shall fall. Psalm XXXVII. [Noli aemulari.] LEt not th' Opinion of th' ungodly's State Move thy firm Soul; nor envy thou his Fate. For, like the Grass cut down, or gather'd Flowr, Vengeance shall him, and his vain Pride devour. Do good, and trust in God; dwell in the Land, And thou shalt feed o'th' Bounties of his Hand. Delight in God; thou shalt in him possess Thy whole desire; true, and all Happiness. Commit thy ways to him, and the success Shall shew, how all succeeds, where God does bless. He shall clear up thy wrong'd Integrity, It shall acquit, and it shall honour thee. Wait still on God; on him thy hope repose: Vex not to see the wicked prosperous. With Patience arm'd, bear thine own Lot, and theirs, Immov'd, or by their hopes, or thine own fears. God shall th' unjust cut off, and dispossess, The Just shall live; live the great Heirs of Bliss.
Wait! Thou shalt see th' unjust soon run the Race Of his swift Glories, and forsake his Place. But the Meek Spirit shall the Earth possess, Refresh'd among the blessed Shades of Peace. The Sinner plots, and threats the Just to slay, God laughs, he cannot hurt beyond his Day. The Sword, which 'gainst the Poor, th' unjust have drawn, And the bent Bow, are bent and drawn in vain. Through his own Heart, shall pierce the fatal stroke, And his prepar'd, and threatning Bow be broke, A little, the contented Poor Man has Does the vast Treasures of th' unjust surpass. Th' ungodly's strength of Wealth shall weak'ned be, But God sustains th' upright in Poverty. God has accounted the upright Mans Age, And makes perpetual his Heritage. In Perillous times he shall be safely led Through Dangers, and in time of Dearth, be fed. The Sinner, like the Fat of Lambs, consumes, And vanishes like the ascending Fumes. Th' unjust pays not again what he does owe, The Good Man lends, is great, and can bestow. The Good shall dwell i'th' Land, and shall be Bless'd, The Sinner shall be curs'd, and dispossess'd. God does direct a Good Man in his way, Himself shall be his Conduct, can he stray? Though he should fall, yet he shall rise again; For though he's weak, God's strong, who does sustain.
Through my whole Life, to Age from Childhood led, I ne'r saw th' upright left, or his, beg Bread. The Just is ever merciful and lends, And the great Recompence to his Seed descends. Choose the beloved Good, and Evil flee, And thou, unmov'd, shalt dwell Eternally. For Goodness is th' Almighty's Love, and he Keeps that fair Soul that weds Integrity. The Sinners Branch, cut off, shall wither'd lye, The Just shall flourish, flourish ne'r to dye. The great Souls of the Just great thoughts comprize, Wisdom and Judgment are their exercise. The Law of God does in their Heart abide, Guided by that, their sure steps ne'r can slide. The Impious Man still Persecutes the good; Nothing can satiate but the Precious Blood. God from his cruel Arms takes him away, And himself rescues the condemned Prey. Hope still in God! still keep his Righteous way; And thou shalt see the wicked snatch'd away. I've seen th' Oppressour great, and flourishing, Fresh as the Lawrel clad in its own Spring, And I went by, and lo! the Scene was gone, And all his Glories wither'd into none. But the upright, the pure, the innocent Breast, Wrapp'd in the blessed Shades of Peace shall rest. The Sinners shall together Perish, all; For th' End of the Transgressour is to fall.
God does the Righteous keep; from him alone Comes strength in trouble, comes Salvation. He shall stand by them; He, protect and save; Such rescue, all who trust in God, shall have. Psalm XXXVIII. [Domine ne in furore.] O Do not in thine Anger me reprove, Nor punish in thy Wrath, great God of Love! Thy dreadful Arrows in me fixed stand, And I am sorely pressed by thy Hand. My Body finds no rest; my Soul within Is pierc'd with deeper Arrows of my sin. My sins, like raging Seas, high, and o'regrown, Swell o're my Head, and their weight sinks me down. My Sores corrupted are, fowl, and unsound; And I abhor the folly of my wound. I am so much bow'd down, so overborn By misery, that all the Day I mourn. My Loins diseased are, no Part is sound; And all my tortur'd Body's but one Wound: My strength is gone; vanquish'd, and over-powr'd With pains, not to be told, but groan'd and roar'd. I am unable to express my Moans, But Lord! Thou knowst the Language of these Groans. What begs this panting Heart? these gasping Cryes? Cast up to thee, these longing, dying Eyes?
All, but thou' Lord! forsake me; Friends are gone; They, or desert, or unconcern'd look on. But my Foes leave me not; they seek yet more T' afflict, and add their Malice to my Sore. But I, with Patience arm'd, immov'd do lye, As Deaf, and Dumb; nor hear, nor make reply. For I my Cause wholly refer to thee, O thou my trust! Thou answer shalt for me. O let me not the triumph be of those Who watch my steps, and each small lapse expose. I'm prone to slide; but as my Errour is, So is my sorrow, and my heaviness. For I to thee my wandrngs will confess, And my chang'd Soul, from Guilt shall find release; But my Foes malice is inveterate, No change of mine alters thier lasting hate. Their unjust Souls, do Good, with III, requite; And hate me, cause in Good I take delight. Thou, Lord! my Refuge art; and I thy Care; Forsake me not, O God! nor be thou far. In thee I've all my help and safety plac'd, Help, O my God! and let that help make haste. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm XXXIX. [Dixi custodiam vias.] WHile tne ungodly were in sight, though they Provok'd me, I took heed unto my way: And lest I should offend, I silence kept; Bridled my Tongue; and all my Passions slept. I heard; but it was pain and grief to me To hear, and not what's Just, and Good, reply. My Passions calm'd, a nobler fire did burn; Slighting the World, and them, to God I turn. O thou! to whom our space of Life's defin'd, Number my Days, and let me know mine End! That I may learn how long I chain'd must be To Life, and Care, and when I shall be free. How, like a Span, to th' Heaven's unbounded space, Is unto thee, the moment of my Days! How vain's th' Affair of Life! the Scenick Stage Of Greatness! and the Nothing of our Age! Man, like a Shadow hastes; while passing, fled; Busie in vain; in vain disquieted. He gathers Wealth, his fruitless heaps still rise; Leaves all, unknown to whom, leaves all, and dyes. And now, Lord! what's my hope? what can it be? What can I still enjoy, but only thee? Free me from sin, which separates from thee, And let me not to Fools a Triumph be.
I bare their follies, and made no excuse; For I had sinn'd, and tthou hadst let them loose; Take them, and all thy other Plagues away, Too heavy thy consuming Hand does lay. How vain is Man! when thou dost Man chastise His Beauty fades; fades, and before him dyes; So, Garments by consuming Moths are gnawn; And Man's unravell'd, So: How vain is Man! Lord, hear my Prayer! Let thy gracious Ears Admit my servent Sighs, and grant my Tears. My Soul's already on its Wing, for here I'm but a Stranger, as my Fathers were. I beg not Life; some little strength, before I go from hence, and shall be seen no more. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XL. [Expectans Expectavi.] MY Soul with patience did on God attend, He heard, and to my stedfast Pray'r inclin'd. Sunk in a dreadful Pit, far from the Day, He drew me forth; strugling i'th' Mire and Clay: And on a safe high Rock advanc'd my Head, Safe, for himself my goings ordered. Sing, O my ravish'd Soul! warm'd with new fire, For God himself does his own praise inspire.
Behold, ye long afficted ones! Draw near! Trust in my God; see me, and learn his fear. Trust not th' false strength, nor falser promises O'th' great, he's blessd alone wh' on God relies. Great God! Great are the wonders thou hast done; And thy great Thoughts to us, compriz'd by none. Our Praise is dumb, and cannot them express; For who can Number what is Nnmberless? Thou art not, Lord! appeas'd with Sacrifice, In vain the Guiltess, for the Guilty dies; Behold, then, O my God! said I, I come To do thy will, my self, and bear thy Doom. I'th' Volumn of thy Book 'tis writ of me, I must thy Law and Justice satisfie. My Heart's the Transcript of thy Law; thy Will, O Righteous God! I'm ready to fulfil. I have not, Lord! thy Righteousness conceal'd, But thy great Goodness, and thy Truth reveal'd. Thy Mercies have not in my thankless Breast Been hid, but loudly unto all confess'd. O let those mercies ever follow me! Thy Truth, and Love, still my Safe-Conduct be. For Cares do sink me down, Cares numberless, Which only than my Sins vast heap, are less. Lord, save me! for th' united force prevails; Haste, Lord! my fainting Heart, o're-numbred, fails. Shame and Confusion cover them, who joyn Together, for my Soul's Destruction.
Let them be desolate, and cloath'd with shame, Who do, insultingly, traduce my Name; But who seek thee, let them be glad in thee; Still freed, still their Redeemer magnifie. Lord, I am Poor, Poor and in misery; But thou, O powerful God, hast care of me. Thou art my Saviour, I thy rescu'd Prey; O my Redeemer, make no long delay. Psalm XLl. [Beatus vir qai intelligit] WHo helps the Poor, the woful, and distress'd, God will help him, and free him when op∣press Death shall not snatch him from the Earth, till he Be satisfied with Life, and would be free; No force, nor malice of his Enemies Him, from his mighty Guardian shall surprize. When languishing upon his Bed he lies, God will sustain him, comfort, and give ease. Himself will in his Sickness make his Bed, Compose his Mind, raise his declining Head. Lord! I have sinn'd, sin has transfix'd my Soul, O wash the Wound, bind it, and make it whole. My Foes speak out; when, say they, shall he die? Dye, all? He and his blasted Memory? If any Visit me, 'tis to ensnare, And, as a Spy, betray me unaware,
His talk is vain, his free demeanours, loose And airy, but his dark intents are close. For whate're of my innocent concerns Perversly and maliciously he learns, When he comes forth, he tells; and then, they all Together whisper to traduce my fall. A foul Disease sticks close to him, say they; And will the loathed Wretch bear loath'd away. These were not Enemies Profess'd; alone, But mine own near familiar Friend made One. He, whom I fed, whom I did trust, did prove False to his Faith, and Traytor to my Love. Lord! raise again thy Servant, that I may Their Guile, and smooth Hypocrisie repay. And, Lord! thou wilt me raise; thy love I know By this, that I'm not triumph'd by my Foe. For, the Integrity they would disgrace Thou hast upheld, and set me 'fore thy Face. Thy Name be bless'd by all the Sons of Men Throughout all Ages, and beyond. Amen. FINIS.
The SECOND BOOK of the PSALMS, PARAPHRAS'D. Psalm XLII. [Quemadmodum desiderat Cervus.] NOT the chas'd Hart more longs for the cool Flood, Than my faint Soul for thee, my only good! My Soul's athirst for God, the living God, Who 'twixt the Cherubims makes his aboad: When shall my longing Soul be satisfi'd? My famish'd Eyes, when with thy Presence fed! Tears feed, and Tears consume me; while my Foes Deride my Miseries, and upbraid my Woes. They will not me a quiet grief allow; But cry, where's God? where's thy dear Refuge now! How bitter is my solitary moan! Condemn'd to grieve, condemn'd to grieve alone.
How am I alter'd! Ah! How chang'd from me, Who to thy House led the glad company: When the triumphant and exulting Throng Sung on the glorious Day, the glorious Song? Why, O niy Soul! dost thou thus grieve? And why Desert thy self, and unlearn Constancy? O trust in God! He will again thee raise, Who holds thee now, and is th' afflicted's Praise. But, O my God! How can I but lament, Forc'd beyond Jordan, and to Hermon's Tent? Yet, there I'll think on thee, and Hermon's Hill Shall learn the Praises which thy Sion fill. As Wave to Wave, and Deep to Deep does call, By th' roaring Cataracts impetuous fall; So Wo to Wo, and Grief to Grief succeeds: Each fruitful Ill a second greater breeds: All have gone o're my Head; on me alone, Thou the whole Tempest of thy Wrath pour'dst down; Yet in the midst of Wrath his mercy shone, And all his loving kindness was not gone; Each day discover'd it, it sprang as Light; Less certain the Morn rose, and rose less bright. Night bless'd him for the Day, and praise return'd; My Song gave Praise; whilst thus my Prayer mourn'd. God of my Strength! God of my Life! O why Hast thou forgot me? why thus heavily, As of my God deserted, do I go? Oppressed and derided by my Foe.
Swords can less wound; and Spears less pierce my Heart, Than do the quick and killing words they dart: Whilst my insulting Foes continually Where's thy dear God? where's thy sure refuge? cry. Why, O my Soul! dost thou thus grieve? And why Desert thy self, and unlearn Constancy? O trust in God! He will again thee raise, Who holds thee now; and is th' afficted's Praise. Psalm XLIII. [Judica me Deus!] MY God! appear for me, and my just Cause, Against the Men who violate thy Laws; Those who the plain and simple circumvent, Th' unjust, the treach'rous, and the fraudulent. For I from none can have redress, but thee; From none but thee, who now hast banish'd me; O why am I cast out; Why, Lord! am I Thrown to the Mercies of mine Enemy? Send from above, and save! O send thy Light And thy Truth forth, and chase away my Night; That they may lead me to thy Holy Hill, And to the House where thou my God dost dwell. That to thine Altar I may come; and bring Unto my God, my banish'd Offering; Take up my Harp age, and, new inspir'd, May mix Thanksgivings with the Altars Fire.
Why, O my Soul! dost thou thus grieve? And why Desert thy self, and unlearn Constancy? O trust in God! He will again thee raise; Who holds thee now, and is th' afflicted's Praise. Psalm XLIV. [Deus auribus nostris.] WHat wonders, mighty God! have we been told Thou didst;and none but thou couldst do, of Old? How thou didst plant our Fathers in this Land; And its own People cast out, by thy Hand; For 'twas thy Hand; thy Pow'erful Arm alone, Not their own Sword, got them Possession; But thy Almighty Favour, and the bright Beams of thy countenance, and their conquering Light, O our same God! Our same Almighty King! To thine oppressed Jacob succour, bring; For, by thee aided, we shall soon put down Our Foes, and tread them to Confusion. For I'le not trust my Bow; 'tis not my Sword Can help, or my weak Arm relief afford; But it is thou, O Lord of Hosts! alone Who savest us, and throw'st our Enemies down: Thus, Lord, we boast of thee, all the day long, And still as Victors, triumph in our Song. But now thou dost not with our Armies go; But hast abandon'd us unto the Foe;
The strength of Israel is departed; we Flee from a once despised Enemy. They spoil us, and like Sheep, we scatter'd fly, 'Midst our Foes scatter'd, and like Sheep we dye. As cheap and useless Souls w'are giv'n away; And thou takest nothing for the worthless Prey. W'are scorn'd by those about us; who all tell, Scoffing, the Fable of thy Israel. I'm amaz'd quite; cover'd with shame and scorn, By Miseries and vile Reproaches torn. Pursu'd by th' fury of th' Avengers Sword, And foul Blasphemers deeper piercing words; And though all this be come upon us, yet, Yet, O our God! we do not thee forget; Nor have we the Eternal Covenant brake Which thee our God, thy People, us, did make. Our Heart's not turned back, nor do we stray In Paths forbid, from thy commanded way, Not though w'are chac'd into the fearful Den Of Dragons, Places yet untrod by Men: Though, languishing, we draw our gasping Breath Within the Region of the Shade of Death. Had we for other Gods deserted thee, And to a strange Name bow'd, should'st not thou see? To whose clear sight, plain and distinct are brought The subtlest Webs, and nicest Chains of thought. But 'tis for thee our God, w'are put to shame; We bear th' Offence and Scandal of thy Name:
For thy sake w'are oppress'd; for thee we flee; For thee w'are hated, and for thee we dye: Rise, Lord! O rise! why dost thou, as asleep, Forget us? Wilt thou no more thy Israel keep? Why dost thou hide thy Face? O turn! look down! See, Lord! thy Peoples last Oppression. Groveling, we creep upon the Earth; bow'd down Low as the Dust, and level'd with the Ground. Lord, rise! Lord, help! and pity on us take, Great God of Mercy! for thy Mercy's sake. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XLV. [Eructavit cor meum.] FUll of the mighty Subject that I sing, My Heart breaths forth the Glories of my King, My flowing thoughts move swifter than my Pen, O Bless'd! O fairest of the Sons of Men! Graces sit on thy Lips, from Heaven showr'd down, Round thy fair Soul, by Beauties Author thrown; Gird on thy conquering Sword, O mighty One! Bright, as thine Honour; Brave, as thy Renown. Tell the false World where true Honour is, It dwells with Truth, Meekness, and Righteousness. Be ever prosp'rous in pursuit of these, Ride on! and may just Heaven its own Arms bless.
A glorious terrour from about thee hurl'd Shall scatter, shall confound th' Apostate World. How firm's thy Throne! firm as thy Righteousness, O King! O God! whose Scepter Justice is. Justice has been thy Love, and Wrong thy hate; Wherefore 'bove others, God has rais'd thy state; God is made thine; and on thy conquering Head He has the Oyl of his own gladness shed. Tears of rich Gums refresh thee with their smells, Pour'd on thy Garments from their Ivory Cells; Daughters of Kings thy fair Attendants be, And Princesses adorn thy Family. But more adorn'd, more fair than these, did stand Thy Queen; on thine and Beauties own right Hand; Clad in a Vest of Gold, with Colours wrought, The Tribute to her Beauty Ophir brought. Hear, Daughter! Hear, O Fairest! now remove Thy old affections, and new plant thy Love; So shall the King rejoice; call thee, his own; For he's thy Lord, he is thy God alone. To thee the Tyrians shall their Purple bring; And all the Rich present their Offering; Daughter of Heaven! O Beauty, All-Divine! Thou art all fair; all Glorious, within: And though th' art clad with all we precious hold, Art gives thy Garments Texture; Nature, Gold; Yet, than thy Soul, that Gold is less refin'd, Ev'n thine own Beauties yield unto thy Mind.
Thou thus adorn'd, shalt to the King be given The Royal Consort, and the Spouse of Heaven: A glorious train of Virgins wait on thee; And the Chaste, Fair, with thee presented be. With Joy, presented; and receiv'd with thee, They the most Beaut Palace Beautifie, Thou, stead of Parents, shalt be bless'd with Son's; A Race of Princes for all Regions. Throughout all Ages I'le extend thy Fame; And, beyond Time fix thy Eternal Name. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XLVI. [Deus noster Refugium.] O Present still! O still protecting Lord! Who help to thy distressed dost afford, What can us fright? should the fix'd Laws o'th' world Be broke, and Mountains into Seas be hurl'd; Though Hills, through Tempests rock, Seas overgrow; O're Immense Cliffs the vaster Billows flow; 'Midst its own Calm, Sion the Storm derides, Sion, the Holy Place, where God resides. God's in the midst of her, How can she move, Sustained by the Powerful Arm above? The Lord of Hosts, his Sions strength shall be; Himself shall help, shall help her speedily. The Heathen move; and mighty Kingdoms threat, Earth's shook by the wild Tempests of the Great.
But God appears, utters his Voice, and they, And their tempestuous greatness, melt away. Fear not any mortal Powers, Who can hurt, when God is ours? See now, what wonders this our God hath wrought, What desolations on the Mighty brought. He through the bleeding Earth makes Wars to cease, And sheds the soft, the dewy Balm of Peace. He breaks the Bow; confounds the mortal Spear, And drives the furious Chariot to the fire: Know then that I am God! know and be still; Great 'mongst the Heathen, and my Israel. Fear not any mortal Powers, Who can hurt, when God is ours? Psalm XLVII. [Omnes Gentes Plaudite.] REjoyce, O thou redeemed World! Sing Triumphant Praise to thy Triumphant King; For God is King, He bears Dominion O're all the Kings and Gods of Earth, alone. He hath subdu'd the Nations under us, Ʋs, whom for his lov'd Heritage he chose. God, with the Trumpets sound, ascends on high; With joyful noise, and Songs of Victory. To our ascended God, O Praises sing! O Praises sing to our Triumphant King:
For God o're all the rescu'd Earth is King, Praises with Skill and Ʋnderstanding sing. God rules the Nations, God, upon his Seat Exalted, ever sits; Holy and Great; Princes submit their Scepters to his Rod, All made One Israel, under Abrahams God: Who else can save? what new Almighty Power? And who can hurt, when God's our Saviour? Psalm XLVIII. [Magnus Dominus.] GReat God! thou'rt greatly to be praised still In thine own Temple, on thine Holy Hill. Sion Earth's joy, which, to th' North side is seen O' th' Great King's City, and whose God's within; Sion's known God, who guardsher Palaces; Still known to her, now to her Enemies: For lo! the Kings of Earth's Confederate Pow'r, Together came Assembled to devour; But their bold Troops soon met confusion; Together gather'd, and together gone. Amazement seiz'd 'em at thy Terrours sent, Disarm'd by a Divine astonishment. Fear, like a Womans fear in Travel, came And they fell, as the fearful fall, with shame; Fell, broke, as Ships, dash'd by the furious shocks O 'th' Eastern Wind, in pieces 'gainst the Rocks.
Such, Mighty God! thy marvels were of Old By our deliver'd, wondring Fathers told; Which now thou hast renew'd, and, what they tell, To our slow Faiths confirm'st the Miracle: And this great Truth confirm'st, That thou wilt still, O God of Hosts! Protect thy holy Hill. Our Souls, thus full o'th' Mercies thou hast wrought, Within thy House thus speak the flowing Thought. Be thou for ever prais'd! and be thy Fame To th' end of Earth extended as thy Name. And justly, Lord! all Honour's due to thee, Whose Hand divides Justice and Equity; Let Sion praise thy Judgments, shewn for them, And all the Daughters of Jerusalem. Walk about Sion; view the Glorious Mount; Its Towers, Palaces, and Bulworks count: And tell from whom all her firm Glories rise, To our Sons Sons, and their Posterities. For, Lord! Thou'rt God of us, and of our Seed, Our present, now, and our Eternal Guide. Psalm XLIX. [Audite haec omnes.] HEar, O ye Sons of Men! who-e're you are; High, Low, Rich, Poor, secure or full of care, One with another; for all equal be In the great Doom pass'd on Mortality.
To understanding I'll incline my Heart, And the great Depths of Wisdom will impart. My Harp, inspir'd, to the loud Song shall rise; And strike an Ayr, high as the Mysteries. Why should I, anxious, fear Adversity? Or quit my strength, when Death it self draws nigh? All dye; nor can those Mighty Ones, who boast Their Pow'r, or Wealth, Redeem a Brother, lost; Unseal th' Eternal Grave; or, unto Death Pay down th' unknown, th' unvalued price of Breath; Prolong life's Race, that it extended be, Beyond the Confines of Mortality. The Wise man dies too, as the Fool, and leaves His painful Wealth to Strangers; leaves, not gives: And yet they think, though their own House of Clay Dissolve, their Dwelling-place shall ever stay; And to preserve the Shadow of a Fame, Give to their Lands their own departed Name. But worthless Man with his vain Honour dies; Dies, as the ignoble Beast that perishes. This yet's their folly still; this their lost way, And their Posterity praise All they say. Like slaughter'd Sheep, thrown in the Grave, they lye, And Death devours Them and their Memory. How far shall the bright Glories of th' Ʋpright, In the Great Morn of Life's Eternal Light, Out-shine these Meteors! whose wan, sickly Ray, Shall set in Night, and vanish at their Day.
But God shall raise my Soul from the dark Night O'th' Grave into the Regions of Light. Be not thou mov'd at th' Rich and Glorious, Who does advance the Grandeur of his House: For Man, as naked born, so naked dies; And in the Dust, cold and inglorious lies; Pomp mixes not with Clay, he's rest of All, And his stript Glories have their Funeral. Yet while he liv'd, he dream't he happy was; But with his breath the guilded Dream did pass: Do well unto thy self, and cultivate Thy Mind; such Good's thine Own, and above Fate; For Men, who see it, will record thy Fame; And with thy proper Worth adorn thy Name: But worthless Souls pass on to endless Night, With their Fore-Fathers, and shall ne're see Light. The Honour'd without Understanding dies; And dies, as the dull Beast that perishes. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm L. [Deus Deorum Dominus.] THE Lord, the God of Men and Gods, is come, And summons all the World to their Doom; He on his Glorious Mount appears, and calls The Earth, from the Sun's rise, to where it falls.
Our God will come, and his great Day of Doom; With Storms and Glories circled, God will come. He calls the Earth to witness and admire His Judgment; calls Heaven, and its conscious Fires. Gather my Saints together to me, those With whom, to make a Covenant, I have chose: And now, Hear, O ye Heavens! Hear, and confess (For God is Judge himself) his Righteousness. Hear, Israel! Hear, my People! thy self be The Witness, how thy God shall deal with thee: I'll not reprove thee for the Offerings Thou didst less frequent to mine Altar bring. I will not take a Goat out of thy Fold; Or other Creature which thy Pastures hold: All Beasts are mine which the wild Forrest fills; And Cattel on a thousand thousand Hills: Each Wing I know, o're the steep Mountain flies; Each Beast, which in his closest Covert lies. If I could hunger, I'd not tell it Thee; The World, and all it holds, belongs to Me. Think'st thou I eat Bulls Flesh? That for me dies The Off'ring? And I live by Sacrifice? Bring to mine Altar Thanks and Praise, make good Thy Vows, and thou may'st Offer without Blood: And call upon me in the perillous days Of trouble; I will hear, and Thou shalt praise. To th' wicked then God said, How dar'st thou Preach My Laws, and live, false to the Truths they teach.
Why dost thou vainly boast my Covenant, Who having nought performed, cancell'st my Grant? When thou hast seen a Thief thou didst consent, And follow'dst when the close Adulterer went. Thou hast accustom'd thy opprobrious Tongue To Falshood, Treachery, black Reproach and Wrong: Name. Thou violat'st the spotless tender Fame O'th' vertuous, and wound'st thine own Brothers And whilst my kind long-suffering slept for thee, Thy Blasphemy rose higher and aim'd at Me. But I'll thy sins order before thine Eyes, Beyond th' Evasions of thine own Replies. O ye who God forget, consider this! Before I pluck you hence, and none release. Who offers Thanks, does offer Sacrifice, Praise ascends higher, and above Incense flies: And that cleans'd, grateful Soul, which lives upright, I'll free from death, and place in endless Light. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm LI. [Miserere mei Deus secundum, &c. O Thou whose boundless Mercies ever flow, And, as thy self, nor Term, nor Measure know, Let my transfixed, anguish'd soul, now prove The inexhausted Bounties of thy Love.
Bathe me in that pure Spring flows for th' unsound; Whose vertuous Streams can cleanse & heal my Wound; My loathsome Wound; which (Lord) I here expose, And my abominated Crimes disclose. The horrour of their Guilt me terrifies In gastly Forms, still waking to mine Eyes. Against thee (holy God) 'gainst thee alone I've sinn'd, and in thy sight this Evil done: And, if thou should'st condemn me, must confess My Doom were just, and just thy Righteousness. I'th' Dawn of life, before I saw the Sun, The Seeds of Ill stain'd my Conception. And though in my laps'd Soul, immers'd, does shine Thy Wisdom, and a Ray of Light Divine; Yet my frail Soul, false to that Heav'nly Fire, Weds the base Lusts and Follies of Desire. With thy Blood With Hysop cleanse my stains, and I shall grow More Pure, more White, than is the falling Snow. Make me to hear the long-departed Voice Of Gladness, that the broke bones may rejoice. From mine Offences turn away thy Face, And all the deep and leprous Prints erase. Renew my mind, estrang'd to false desires, And kindle in it its faln primitive Fires. From thy bless'd Presence, cast me not away; But guide me with thy Spirit lest I stray; The Joys of thy Salvation restore, And stablish me, that I may fall no more.
then the Transgressors, who, like me did stray, Like me, shall turn again into the way; From the deep stains and the loud Cries of Blood, Wash me i'th' living Font's Immortal Flood. Then shall my ravish'd Tongue aloud confess Thy Mercies and amazing Righteousness. Then shall my Lips an higher Anthem raise When thou thy self inspir'st the mighty Praise. Could Sacrifice appease thee, I had soon The certain Price of all my sins paid down; But Pardon comes not at so vile a rate; Now Blood, nor Incense, can sins Expiate. A Bleeding Heart; Souls chang'd to new desires Which put out Earthly; kindle Heav'nly Fires; Are th' only Pure accepted Sacrifice; A contrite Heart, O God! thou'lt not despise. Look on thy Sion, Lord! Build up the Wall Of thy Jerusalem, broke down by all; We'll then, with Blood and common Sacrifice, Bring the true Sacrifice of Righteousness. Psalm LII. [Quid gloriaris in Malitia?] WHy, Potent Wretch! boasts thou a wicked Power? As if 'twere great and glorious to devour? Know, Goodness the Almighty's Honour is, VVhich shall blast thee, and thine Oppress'd release.
Thy false Tongue mischief only does devise, Sharpned with Lies and killing Treacheries: Art profess'd Enemy to Truth and Right, And dost in Ill alone place thy delight. False Tongue! who dost prevail by thine own power, And lov'st the words are mighty to devour; Shall find th' avenging God, the God of Might, VVill vindicate Oppressed Truth and Right; VVill pluck thee out from thy close winding Den Of Guile, and banish thee the Race of Men; The Just shall see and fear, and shall deride The ruin'd heights and confusions of Pride. This was the Man (say they) sought other strength Than God; And where's the pow'rful VVretch at length? His Trophies, got by Force, or Fraud and Stealth, VVhere are they sunk? where's his Almighty VVealth? But I? who ever on my God rely, On his sure Mercies long Benignity, Like a green Olive Tree in Peace shall stand, In Gods own Courts, planted by Gods own Hand. For these great Judgments thou hast shewn for me, O just Avenger! I thee magnifie. Thou'rt all my hope; with me join in thy Love The Just on Earth and all the Bless'd above. The 53 Psalm being the same with the 14th is omitted.
Psalm LIV. [Deus in Nomine tuo.] SAve me, O Lord! save by and for thy Name, And the wild rage of the Oppressor tame; Hear, Lord! for they who o're me Tyrannise Are Strangers to thy Name, and thee despise: But lo! from Heaven my God appears for me; Sets me, and those who do assist me, free: Renders Confusion to my Foes; who all To his unconquer'd Truth just Triumphs fall. Accept, O God, who still my Succour art, The Off'ring of a voluntary Heart: I will thy holy Name for ever bless, So Great, so Good, so all my happiness: For I from all my Miseries am free, And see thy Glory on mine Enemy. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm, LV. [Exaudi Dens orationem.] LOrd, hear my Prayer! Hear my servent Cry! Look on me, Lord! oppress'd with Misery.
Mingled with sighs, hear my Petition, And hear those sighs, and the deep frequent Groan; With Malice arm'd, and Rage, my Enemy Pursues me, and with Violent Cries draws nigh. My Heart within me is disquieted, And Death's black Cloud stoops hov'ring o're my Head Horror and dreadful Fears astonish me, My melted strength's dissolv'd i'th' Agony: O had I VVings, as has a Dove, how then VVould I soon fly from the faln Race of Men! And to some quiet VVilderness fly hence, Born with the Doves VVing, and Doves Innocence: There would I rest, far from the Cries of wrong, In its vast Calm lost to th' spent Storms o'th' Tongue: Cleave the Malicious Tongues, and cut them out; For strife and wrong the City dwells throughout: I'th' midst of which, whilst these their VValls surround Th' Oppressors wrongs, th' Oppressed's Tears abound; Falshood dwells in their Streets, and in their Hearts Deceit bears Rule, and all its Curious Arts. 'Twas no known Enemy dishonour'd me, I could have born th' expected Injury; And from a Foe, who had himself declar'd, I had withdrawn my self, if unprepar'd But thou, my Friend! Could I from thee fear harms? Embracing me, hast crush'd me in thine Arms. One Counsel steer'd us, our Souls were knit as One, In Friendship's, and our God's Religion.
Let them be snatch'd away by sudden Death! And the Grave seize their unexpired Breath. For they themselves abandon to all Ill, Mischiefs, and they as in one Houshold dwell But as for me, I to my God will flee For Refuge, and my God will rescue me. At Evening, Morn, and Noon, I'll seek to thee, VVho wilt not shut out my continual Cry; 'Tis He, who when i'th' Field a numerous Pow'r Beset me, or subdu'd, or brought them o're; Th' Eternal Rightful Judge heard my Appeal, And Vengeance 'gainst th' obdurate did reveal. VVho being never waken'd by distress, Fear'd not the Lord; undone by happiness. VVho, faithless, his most Sacred Covenant brake; And a feign'd Peace, did VVars chief Engine make: His Lips dropp'dBalm, whilst his Heart Poyson meant, VVith healing Dews the killing Venom went. Smoother than Oyl, flow'd out his Charming Words, But when believed, they were very Swords. O cast thy Burthen on the Lord! remit All unto him, and he shall care for it. He shall himself sustain the Righteous, VVhom, resting on his Pow'r, no Pow'r o're-throws But his Just Arm shall hurle th' Oppressor down, Down into the Pit of Destruction, The false and Bloody Man his Days shall never Fulfill; But I, trusting in God, live ever. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm LVI. [Miserere mei Deus quoniam.] LOrd, snatch me from the greedy Jaws of those Who are devouring me, the Contentious; From their beloved strife who never cease, But with new Quarrels daily rend my Peace. Mine Enemies combine to swallow me, Pressing with Number and Sedulity, This frights me, but when my Fears present are, I view my hopes, and the two strengths compare My hopes on thy help rest, of which thy Word, O thou my Praise! th' assurance does afford. And what can any Arm of Flesh do now? My Trust's above; Injustice is below. They falsly wrest my Words, and represent Another Sense, from what my clear thoughts meant; All their contrivances for mischiefs be, And their whole business is to ruine me. For this they meet, weave curious Plots and dark, And my unwary Soul's plain footsteps mark. O Righteous Judge! shall safe Oppression thrive? Thou shalt it down precipitately drive. Record my Sufferings, and when wrong'd I mourn, Pour mine appealing Tears into thine Urne: Thou art my Refuge, when on thee I call, O my known Aid! mine Enemies must fall.
Thy Wor'ds my Trust; thy promised Word, my Joy; When thou wilt save, what Power can destroy? My rescu'd Soul shall pay its Vows to thee, And thee, its Great Redeemer, magnifie. For, from the Grave thou didst me back recall, Heldst my prone steps, put forth and ready to fall; That I, thus rescu'd, might enjoy thy sight I'th' Land of th' Living, 'mongst the Sons of Light, Psalm LVII. [Miserere mei Deus Miserere.] I Have no other Refuge, Lord! but thee: Have mercy, Lord! Have mercy, Lord! on me. To the known safety of thy Wing I sly, Until the Fury of these Storms pass by. On thee alone I all my hope have laid, O never-failing! O sufficient Aid! Thou, from the black reproachful Calumny Devours my Fame, shalt save me from on High. Truth shall descend, and vindicate my Cause; And mercy save me from those Lyons Jaws, 'Mongst whom I dwell; those Men whom Rage unmans, Rage, that lets loose the Beast, and the Man Chains; Whose quick Reproaches pierce like sharpest Swords; And Spears and Arrows are their killing Words. Exalt thy self'bove th' Heav'ns, O thou most High! And through all th' Earth diffuse thy Majesty.
They have press'd down my Soul, and dig'd a Pit; And hid in my plain Path a treach'rous Net: The Net has caught themselves, and the false Pit Beguil'd its own Contrivers wary Feet. My Soul's possess'd, O God! and full of thee, Breaks into Praise, not to be' held in by me. Glory, awake! wake Harp! and Lute! and tell, Tell, if you can, what is Ineffable! And thou, my Soul, wake first! wake all my Powe'rs! Prevent the Morn, and give the Day more Hours! Sing his loud Praise among the Nations! Extend it wide as his Dominions! Extend it 'bove the Clouds, 'bove th' Heav'ns extend; Mercy and Truth reach thither, where's no End. Exalt thy self 'bove th' Heav'ns, O thou most High! And through all th' Earth, diffuse thy Majesty. Psalm LVIII. [Si vere uti{que} Judicium.] DOes Justice on your Judgment Seats reside? And Righteousness your awful Senates guide, O Sons of Men? O Sons of Men, alone! From your great Parents Image laps'd and gone. Your false Hearts favour Violence and Might; Contemn bare Truth, and poor and friendless Right Born Truth's deserters and Right's Enemies, Ye weave a Life full of deceit and Lies.
Poyson from you, does as from Serpents flow, Like Poyson subtile, and destroying too. As the deaf Adder, so you stop your Ear, Kill on, and will not any Charmer hear. Break, Lord! the Teeth of this degenerate Race Of Men, young Lions; and curse them from their Place. Like Water pour'd out, be they still melting down, Be empti'd quite, and drank up by the Ground. When they their cruel Arrows shall prepare, Cut the vain Shafts, and break 'em in the Air. Let them consume like Snails, and turn to slime, And like Abortives, fall before their time. Swifter then Flames, can Heat, or Tempests flye, Rapt by thy Anger's Whirl-wind, let them dye: Be they with sense of Guilt and Wrath perplex'd; As a raw Wound by a rough Hand is vex'd The Just in Triumph shall the Vengeance see, And all the World convinc'd acknowledge thee: Doubtless (they'll say) there is a God above, Condemns th' Unjust, and does the Just approve. Psalm LIX. [Eripe me de Inimicis.] SAve me O God! from those who 'gainst me rise, From my Blood-thirsty, Cruel Enemies. They lye in wait to take my life; set on, Not by my sins, O Lord! but by their Own:
Their Malice arms them, without mine Offence; Behold, O Lord! and guard mine Innocence. Lord of all Earthly, and all Heav'nly Pow'rs, Visit the Heathen! Judge their Cause and Ours: And punish those who causelesly transgress, And sin out of malicious Wickedness. As hating Light, and Enemies of Day, They rowze at Ev'n; Creatures of Night and Prey: Snarling like Dogs, the City they invest, When sleep Chains all, and all, but Malice, rest: Sharp as their VVeapons, are their cursing Words; They strike with both, and kill with either Sword: And who shall hear? who shall revenge? they cry; More high than us is Israel's most High? But thou, O Lord! dost their vain boasts deride; And shalt, contemning, crush the Insulters Pride. Thou art my strength; I wait, O God! on thee, My known Defence against mine Enemy. Thou shalt prevent me, Lord! and let me see Thy Vengeance, swifter than my wishes, flee. Slay them not utterly, O God! left we Forget th' Almighty's signal Victory: But be they through the VVorld, th' Examples known Of Divine Vengeance, and Protection. Let their own Curses blast them! and the Lies Entangle them, which their own Lips devise; Consume, consume them, that they may not Be; That Jacob, and the VVorld may confess thee.
And now let them return at night, and grin, And again compass despis'd Sion in: Lost Wretches! let them wandring seek for Bread, And grudge and pine, because unsatisfi'd. My ravish'd Tongue shall sing aloud thy Pow'r; Rise e're the Morning, and awake the Hours: O my sole Refuge! who hast set me free In the great Day of my Calamity. Psalm LX. [Deus repulisti nos.] O Just, O most offended God! whose Hand Has scatter'd us abroad, and mov'd the Land: O turn! O heal us! and again make One Thy wasted and divided Region. Thou to thy People heavy things hast shown, Made us drink off a deadly Potion: But for thy Truth's sake thou hast now display'd Thy Banner, and sent those who fear thee, Aid. That thy Beloved, who thy help do crave, May be delivered; O hear, and save! And thou wilt save, wilt the torn Remnant bless; For thou hast sworn, sworn in thy Holiness, I will in Triumph Sichem's Land divide, And give to mine Succoth's rich Valley's Pride: Mine is Manasses; mine fair Gilead's Fields; Ephraim's my Guard; Judah my Scepter wields.
Moab shall serve, Edom I down will tread, And the bold Philistims in Triumph lead. Who into Edoms Forts secures my way? And its proud Towers shall in Ruines lay? Who, Lord! but thou? who thine Inheritance Deserting ruind'st, returning shalt advance. O turn to thy distressed Ones again, Be thou our help, for all Mans help is vain. Trod down by thee, our Enemies shall flee, And we shall rise; Great God! we follow thee. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm LXI. [Exaudi Deus deprecationem.] FRom out the utmost Coasts of Earth, to none But Nature and my straying footsteps known, O're-whelm'd with grief, I send up unto thee, VVho fill'st each place, my no-where-distant cry. O set me on the Rock higher than I! High above Earth, Mans Land of Misery: That Rock in whom alone I trust; whose Power Has still my shelter been, and still my Tower; Safe in thy House my cover'd Days I'll lead, And trust that VVing whose shade obscures my Head, For thou hast heard my Prayer, and for those VVho fear thy Name, an Heritage hast chose.
Thou to the King a termless Life shalt lend, Throughout all Ages, and when Ages end. He shall still dwell with thee, let his Guard be Thy Goodness, and Eternal Verity. So shall I always bless thee, and each Day Renew'd Thanksgivings humbly vow and pay. Psalm LXII. [Nonne Deo subjecta erit.] WHat e're the Terror or the Danger be, My Soul still waits, still truly waits on thee. For since my God is my Salvation, My Guard, my Rock, I ne're can be o'rethrown. How long will you 'gainst him God does sustain Mischiefs devise, and wicked be, in vain? Prone unto ruine, ye shall perish all, Like a broke Hedge, or undermined VVall. VVhom God exalts, their aim is to put down, And level his advanced Station. Spreading ill Fames and bold Infectious Lies, Curse with good words, and with false Hearts they bless; What e're their known or close Designs may be, O thou my Soul! still on thy God rely. For since my God is my Salvation, My Guard, my Rock, I ne're can be o'rethrown. God is my Refuge, God my Strength alone, My Glory, and my sole Protection.
O all ye Sons of Men! pour forth your Heart In all Distress to him, He'll help impart. Trust not the Poor, the Poor no help can give; Nor trust the Great, the Great will it deceive: Put in the Balance them and Vanity, And Vanity it self will over-weigh. Trust not the Spoils of the Oppressed's Field, Nor the vast Gains safe Robberies do yield; In none of Earths deceitful Treasures trust, Nor the false Bounties of the Gilded Dust. But trust in God. Thine Oracles Divine Have oft to Mortals told, All Pow'r is mine; Proclaim'd thy Goodness too, who will dispence To all our Actions their just Recompence. Psalm LXIII. [Deus Deus meus ad te.] O Lord my God! early I seek to thee, E're the Day mount, and the chas'd Shadows flee. My Soul, so thirsts, so, dying, languishies, As here, my Body, where no Water is; That I thy Glories may behold agen Within thy Temple, as I erst have seen. For Life's less sweet than th' Joys thy Love does give; Immortal Joys, which Souls but taste and live. My Soul thus fill'd, shall Number o're its Days, In Off'ring Thanks; and live a Life of Praise.
O the high tastes of Souls thy Love inspires! When they, in Praise, reflect th' emitted Fires. Ravish'd upon my Bed I Thee have sought, VVhen Night and Silence fed the mighty thought. My Soul lies down i'th' Covert thou hast made, Made by that Wing, where safety is the Shade. O only Pow'r! whose Arm still rescues me, My Soul does still enjoy, still thirst for thee. They who pursue my Soul, shall be thrown down, Be made the Sword's, and th' wild Beast's Portion. The King shall in his God rejoyce; and they With Praise rewarded be, who him obey; For their black Mouths who do Untruths devise, Shall be for ever clos'd; they, and their Lies. Psalm LXIV. [Exaudi Deus Orationem!] LOrd! save my life from those who 'gainst me rise, My treacherous, conspiring Enemies; Who whet their Tongues, and Words, as Darts, pre∣pare; The Weapons of malicious, private War. In secret hid, they warily take aim, And 'gainst th' upright, level a guilty Fame. Close, as their Snare, their selves in secret lye, And, who shall see? who shall reward? they Cry. They search for Crimes; what, without Fault, was done, By wresting, they interpret into One.
Their thoughts are subtile, curious, and profound; Pierce deep, as their malicious Hearts do wound. But from th' Almighty's Arm, a sudden Dart, Unseen, inevitable, strikes through their Heart. Their faultring Tongue shall its own lies oppose, 'Maze the Confed'rates, and the Truth disclose. All Men shall see and fear; and understand, Vengeance came down, dispens'd by Gods own Hand. And all the Just shall magnifie that Pow'r Appear'd for them, and trust that Saviour. Psalm LXV. [Te decet Hymnus Deus!] PRaise waits thee, Lord! and Silence above Praise; When Souls, no voice, equal to Thought, can raise: To thine own Courts, in Sion, we will bring Our humble Vows, and promis'd Offering. O thou who hearest Pray'r! and grant'st the cry Of the distress'd! All Flesh shall come to thee. Our sins had cover'd us; Their vast account O're-whelm'd us, but thy Mercies did surmount. O Bless'd the Man! O happy! thou hast chose, Whose ravish'd Soul shall in thy Courts repose; Who, with th' abundant Pleasures shall be fill'd Thy House affords, and only it can yield.
How terrible thy Judgements, Lord! appear, When thou sav'st us, and learn'st the World thy fear! Hope of all th' Earth! All th' Earth on thee depend; And who to th' Terrours of the Deep descend. Girded with Pow'r, who set'st the Mountains fast; And their sunk Roots, steep, as their Heights hast plac'd. Who charm'st the Winds; mak'st the wild seas obey, And the Tumultuous People, wild as they. Whose Pow'r in signs and wonders far is shown, As Natures Coast, or that of Being's known. Whom setting and returning Light does praise, And the full Circles of the Nights and Days. Upon the teeming Bosom of the Ground, Blessings from thee descend, and Fruits abound. Thy Bounties waste not; but their River flows, Still full, still pouring forth, and no Ebb knows. Thus for the Earth thou Blessings dost command; And all Flesh waits the Bounties of thy Hand. Thy Rains make soft the Earths relenting Bed, Melt down the Mass, and wake the Life o'th' Seed. Thou dost the happy Year with blessings crown, And thine abundant Clouds drop Plenty down. Drop on the Pastures of the Wilderness, And all the little Hills the Donor bless.
Pastures with Flocks abound; with Corn the Field, All, bless'd by thee, all, to thee Praises yield. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm LXVI. [Jubilate Deo omnis terra.] LEt all the World their diff'rent Voices raise! And the one only Language speak, of Praise! Sing forth his Honour, all! Each his Part bear, And in his Glory joyn the distant Choire. Say all! How terrible, Great God! art thou, To whose acknowledg'd Pow'r thine Enemies bow! For all the World shall fall down to thee, Confess thee, and adore thy Majesty. Behold the works of God! his wonders, done For Man; his terrible Salvation. He stopp'd the Seas, and the commanded Heap Stood fast, while the safe Host march'd through the Deep. His Power fixes the Eternal Laws Of Nature, firm and potent in their Cause. He wakes for Man; th' Obedient does sustain; But makes th' attempts of the Rebellious, vain. O praise the Lord! the God alone that's fear'd, Praise him aloud; make his just Praise be heard. VVho keeps our Soul; holds back the Fugitive; And gently winds it i'th' soft Bonds of Life.
Confirms our strength, sustains it from above; And gives to our try'd footsteps not to move: For thou, O God! hast us thy People try'd As Silver, when i'th' Fire 'tis purify'd. Thou brought'st our erring steps into the Snare, And chain'dst us fast to Miseries and Care. Our Enemies prevail'd, and trod us down; Subjected to a scorn'd Oppression. We, through the midst of Fire, and Water, went; And all the inhuman Arts of Punishment. 'Midst Fire and Water, and the extreams of Pain, Thou brought'st us off, and safe restor'dst again. Draw now, (my Soul) the withdrawn guilty Scene! Present thy Suff'rings; Woes; Despairs, agen! And what, amidst those Tortures, thou didst Vow; Be Just, and in Gods House, pay th' Off'ring, now. Prepare the Altar! kill the Sacrifice! And in one Cloud, let th' invovl'd Incense rise. O all who fear the Lord, draw nigh! and see What his Almighty Goodness wrought for me. In my distress, I to, my God did call; And did his help, above all help, extol; I cleans'd my Soul; should I to him address Polluted Vows, who abhors Wickedness? And, O my God! Thou heard'st me; didst attend, And from thy Heav'n a mighty Succour lend. Bless'd ever be my God who heard my suit, Drew nigh, rais'd up, and sav'd the Destitute
Psalm LXVII. [Deus Misereatur Nostri!] BE merciful, O God! Chace away Night! And bless us with the Vision of thy Light; That unto all the Earth thy way be known, Thy Universal, glad Salvation. O let thy Name and Praise resounded be Through all dark Coasts of faln Humanity! How will the Nations joy, when God does reign! When Justice comes, and Mercy dawns again? O let thy Name and Praise resounded be Through all dark Coasts of faln Humanity! Earth, as renew'd, shall then yield her increase, And God, his own Mankind, all People, bless. O bless us! and make thine, All Nations! Be thy Redeem'd Ones, All! and All thy Sons! Gloria of two Verses. Psalm LXVIII. [Exurgat deus.] O Just, O only Pow'rful God, arise! And scatter those, dare be thine Enemies.
As Smoke, dispersing still, ascends and dies, Or melted Wax, floating and formless lies; So perish the Unjust! Let the Just live! Live ever, and Immortal Praises give. O sing Jehovah's Praise! sing it aloud, Who rides upon the Chariot of a Cloud. The Orphan's Father; Judge o'th' Widows Cause; Which he regards from out his holy Place. Who gives an home to th' out-cast Family, Leads forth the Prisoner from Captivity: But the Rebellious, false to his Command, Condemns to th' Labours of a thirsty Land. O God! when thou thy self didst Israel lead, And of our Host thou Lord of Hosts wert Head, Earth trembled; and the melting Heav'ns drop'd down, Sinai was loos'd from its Foundation. When Drouth had parch'd the Land, thou gav'st it rain, Renew 'dst its spent, and wearied strength again. For thou, thy Peoples want supply'st; thy store, O Lord of Bounty! furni'shes the Poor. Thou gav'st us Victory, and inspir'dst the Song; Thus chanted, by the numerous, feeble Throng. "Kings with their Potent Armies fled, and they "Who sate at home, the weak, possess'd the Prey. "Resume your hopes! for though ye yet have lain "In Beds of Clay, ye shall be bright again; "As the fair glittering Plume o'th' Dove is bright; "Guilded with Beams, and the rich strokes of Light.
"Thus were ye bright, when God did overthrow "Kings for your sakes, bright as is Salmon's Snow. "Let conquer'd Basan boast no more; God's Hill "Exalted Basan's Height does far excel. "Nor boast your selves, ye other Hills! what Hill "Can equal that where God himself does dwell? Dwell with the Host and all the Strength of Heav'n, In thousand thousand winged Chariots, driven? I'th' midst of whom, as in his Sanctuary, God rests; prais'd with Eternal Harmony. To this great Choire Thou art gone up on high; And with thee, Captive lead'st, Captivity. And hast receiv'd the Donatives of Heav'n, VVhich thou to men; to men, thy Foes, hast giv'n. That the Rebellious Souls, thou did'st redeem, Might dwell with God; & God might dwell with them. O praise the Lord! whose Bounties ever flow, VVhose Love no Current has, but to bestow. He gives Salvation; He redeems our Breath: Frees from, or gives us Victory in Death. But God shall wound his profess'd Enemies, Who wilfully persist in wickedness. But I'll mine own, says God, in Triumph bring, As led through th' Sea; or leading Basan's King. That thou thy steps may'st wash, i'th' blood o'th' slain; And Dogs, i'th' purple flood, their dip'd tongues stain. We thy accustom'd Praises then shall see In the Processions of thy Sanctu'ry: Where Voices led; clos'd up, by th' Instruments, Virgins i'th' midst, with waving Timbrels went.
O bless the Lord! each Israelite bear his part! And, loudest in the Consort, bring his Heart. How great's th' appearance! There is Benjamin, Who with their little Tribe, their Ruler bring; Judah their strength, who sits upon the Throne; Their Counsel, Nepthali and Zabulon. What e're our Numbers be, our strength alone Is God; O finish what thou hast begun! For thine own Temple's sake, that Kings may bring Their Gold; and more, themselves, an Offering. Confound those Men, who do themselves deface! The Bulls and Calves; the Brutes of humane Race. Bring back the Man! Bring him agen from far; But scatter those who do delight in War. Then shall their Princes come from Aegypt's Land; And unto God, the Aethiop stretch his Hand. O all ye Kingdoms of the Earth! sing Praise To him, who was, e're the Beginning was: Who rode above the Heav'n of Heav'ns of old; Whose mighty Voice is in loud Thunder told. Sing the Great Pow'r of God! known in his Love To Israel, and in the Clouds above. O Lord our God! Great in thy holy Place! Thou, with thy Pow'r, us bless; we, Thee, with Praise!
Psalm LXIX. [Salvum me fac Deus!] SAve, Lord! I'm perishing; the Waves o'reflow My Soul, are working still, and mightier grow. I stick in the deep Mire's deceitful Bed, Still sinking, while the Stream runs o're my Head: I'm spent and tyr'd, with my continual cry, My Voice is gone, and my hoarse Throat is dry. Waiting for God, my longing Eyes grow dim; Yet still they wait; languish and dye tow'rd him. They who me falsly prosecute, exceed The Number of the Hairs upon my Head: Great, and unjust, my Right they overthrow; Compell'd to pay them what I did not owe. O God thou seest my plain simplicity; And my wrong'd Innocence is known to thee: O let not those, dear Lord! who wait on thee, Grow faint, and be discouraged for me: Hide my Example! that, who seek thy Name Be not reproach'd and cover'd with my shame. Because for thee, I'm faln into disgrace; And thy dishonour's drawn upon my Face. Cast out, I am my Brethren's stranger, grown An Alien unto my Mothers Son. Zeal of thy House consumes me, they who thee Dishonour most, fall heaviest on me.
if I afflict my Soul, and fast and mourn, I, and those Services, am made their scorn. If clad i'th' Habit of my mind, they jest, Deride my sackcloath, and the lowly Vest; I am the Drunkards Song, those mean Souls hate Who live in vain, and theirs who sit i'th' Gate. Hated and scorn'd by all, to thee I flee In thine own time, th' extreams of Misery. O God of Love! O God of Verity! That Love, and that thy Truth deliver me. Draw me out of the Mire; raise my faln State; Sunk i'th' deep Floods, and my Foes deeper Hate. Let not the Deep devour me! the deaf Wave Swallow me up, nor close me in the Grave. Lord, hear! Lord, save! O my sole help, draw nigh! I'm perishing; Lord hear me speedily! Thy self my Witness art; know'st my just Cries, Know'st my reproach; and know'st my Enemies. Reproach has broke my Heart, o'refill'd with Grief; None pity'd me; I look'd, but no relief! Dying for thirst, for One, last drop I call'd, They gave me Vineger mingled with Gall: Let th' Altar prove a Snare! All Good Turn Ill! and as their Malice, be their Food. Shut from their Eyes the Day; and with their night, Horrour dwell on them and a lasting Fright: Let Vengeance overtake them; let them stand The fury of a Just, Almighty Hand. From out their hated Dwellings, pluck their Race, And none Succeed to the condemned Place:
Because whom thou casts down, they more pursue, Upbraid Afflictions; and thy stroke renew. Let them add sin to sin; fill up the sum Of their Injustice, and compleat their Doom. Blot them out of that Book, where thou enrol'st The Living Names of Just and Vertuous Souls. But me, poor, and oppress'd with Misery, Raise, O my God! and set me safe on High: I then will Praise and loud Thanksgivings bring, Thy most accepted, grateful Offering. For thou with Smoke and Blood, less pleased art, Than Praise, the Incense of a flaming Heart. Thus let your Hearts, ye Poor! seek God and live; Live, as Immortal as the Praise ye give. God hears the Poor; and him, who here beneath Has nothing but Captivity and Breath, When into Praise, he does that Breath convert, And gives it from th' free Altar of his Heart. Ye Heav'ns and Heav'nly Pow'rs! your Maker bless! Earth! Sea! and all therein, his Name confess! For God will Sion save; and Judah Build, And to his People its Possession yield; To us and to our Seed, and to all them Who love his Name, and praise and honour him.
Psalm LXX. [Deus in adjutorium.] HAste, Lord! make haste my burthen'd Soul to free; Press'd down by Malice and Calamity. Defeat their Counsels and their Pow'rs confound, Who chase my Soul and its bless'd quiet wound: Turn the Reviler back oppress'd with shame, Whose falshood does my Innocence defame. But the Just Soul that hopes in thee alone, That trusts his God, and his Salvation, Fill with thy Joy; and dry up ev'ry Tear; Let it begin its Hallelujahs here: But I am Poor, Poor and in Misery, O my Redeemer! O my God! draw nigh! Thou art my Saviour; Thou my only stay, Lord help! and do not, Lord! that help delay. [Gloria of four Verses.] Psalm LXXI. [In te Domine speravi.] O Thou in whom alone my Soul does trust, Let me not perish ever! thou art Just: O be thy promis'd Arm stretch'd out to save When lost and helpless, I thy help do crave.
O save me from th' inhumane Cruelties Of Men unman'd; th' unjust and merciless! For thou hast been my early hope; and thou My only Refuge, from my Youth, till now. Thou took'st me from the Womb, to life didst raise, And to this Hour sustain'st; O still my Praise! My Suff'rings are become a Prodigy, Strange and unheard, yet still I trust in thee. Save me, O Lord! and fill my Mouth with Praise; Thine Honour be the Song of all my Days. When strength forsakes me, do not thou forsake! But mine Old Age to thy Protection take: For, from the Prospect of my feeble State, My Foes hope more Success unto their hate. Take him, say they, he cannot scape unharm'd, Enfeebled quite, and of his God disarm'd. But, O my help! draw nigh and succour me! And let my Foes sham'd and dishonour'd dye! When thus my hopes shall crown'd be with success, I shall untyr'd, still hope, untyr'd, still bless. I shall each Day thy great Salvation bless; And bless those Mercies I can ne're express. Hope in thy strength, and in my Songs make known Thy Righteousness, thy Righteousness alone. Thus from my Youth, I'm taught to sing thy Glory; And of thy Goodness my whole Life's the story. My God! strength of my Youth; hope of mine Age, Leave not my Gray Hairs now, in Life's last Stage;
Till to the present times I have made known Thy Power, and to all Succession. How high is thy transcendent Justice! High Above all Praise; who, Lord! is like to thee? And how immense, thy Acts of Goodness are, O God of Love, who may with thee compare? How hast thou me into the deep cast down, Rais'd up again, sunk lower than the Ground! And how divided hast, 'twixt hopes and praise, The Showers, and the Sun-shines of my Days! Hast rais'd to honour my dejected Head! And hast on every side me comforted! Wherefore, for ever, Lord of Verity! I'll sing the Honours of thy Truth and thee; And on the Harp, loudly thy Praises tell, O thou the Holy One of Israel. My Lips shall sing thy Praise; my Soul shall sing, And all my Pow'rs present the Offering. For thou, my Soul didst with Redemption crown; And trod'st my Foes into Confusion. Psalm LXXII. [Deus Judicium tuum.] FOuntain of Justice! Right's Eternal Spring! Impress those Powers Divine upon the King: And on his Son! Then shall He Right dispense To all, and shield the Poor from Violence.
Mountains and Hills shall yield the Fruits of Peace; And Peace shall be the Fruit of Righteousness. He shall the simple save, whom Fraud devours; And the weak friendless poor, whom Might o'repow'rs But the Oppressour shall in pieces break, And on his guilty head just Vengeance wreak. With Sun and Moon, he runs a Race of Pow'r; Still glorious, still encreasing as their Hours. He shall descend, as into Grass new mown, Of its own Shade bereft, the Show'rs drop down: In his bless'd Reign the Just shall be the Great; And Peace shall wait on his establish'd Seat; Still wait, 'till with the course of Sun and Moon Time shall set too; when their spent Lights are done No Bounds shall measure his Dominion Vast spreading, as the Seas vast Arms are thrown, Beneath those shady Coasts, where to our Eye The swelling Floud meets the descending Skye. The Salvage Nations shall, reclaim'd, him bless; He them shall cultivate, and their Wilderness. His Enemies, such are the wild Unjust, at his Feet, shall pining, lick the Dust. The Isles shall serve thee and the utmost Sea, And Saba Gums and Spices bear for Thee: All Nations shall present their Offerings, And all their joyful Tributary Kings. For when his Aid the poor and helpless crave, He rescues them, as only Great, to save.
His Goodness does the poor and needy spare; And takes them, from themselves, to his own care: Exerts his Pow'r then 'gainst deceit and might; For dear their precious Blood is in his sight. Live, O great King, for ever! And to Thee Present its Gold, now, Happy Araby. Successive Vows of Prayers, mix'd with Praise, As Wreaths of Glories, circle all thy Days. Dry Hills shall yield, from few seeds, vast encrease; And Cities, flourish as the Field, with Peace. Thy Name be Great to all Posterities; Bless'd by all th' Earth, and who all th' Earth dost bless. Be all the World fill'd with the Majesty Of Israel's God, from whom all Wonders be: And be thy Name, by all the Sons of Men, For ever and for ever bless'd! Amen. Hallelujah.
The THIRD BOOK of the PSALMS, PARAPHRAS'D. Psalm LXXIII. [Quam bonus Israel.] IT cannot be, but the true Israelite, The pure in Heart, must be his God's Delight. Yet my foot slip'd, and I was almost lost, When I beheld the Fool and the Ʋnjust. How free's their State! How full of Happiness! Flowing still on in Vanity, and Peace? Their strength continues to Life's utmost Stage; And Years alone, not weakness, brings on Age. From th' Common Lot of Man, condemn'd to Cares, These are exempt; as Heav'ns Peculiars. Hence, Pride invests 'em, and bold Insolence; Spoiling the Weak, th' are cloath'd with Violence.
With Riot fill'd, they, theyrswoln Eyes inflame; Yet their excess, can't their abundance tame. Oppress the Vertuous, and th' abandon'd Poor; Speak high; and justifie their Wrongs by Pow'r. And having gone through Earth, 'gainst Heav'n they fly; And raise their Blasphemy 'gainst the most High. Wherefore, the People, judging such Men bless'd; And Vertue unregarded, 'cause distress'd; Fall in unto them; who, their wants relieve; And from their flowing Cups, give them to live. For thus they say; God knows not our Affairs; Nor, from above, respects mean humane Cares. For lo! th' Ʋnjust is great; th' Oppressour thrives; The World is made; and Mankind, for them lives; How have I cleans'd my Heart in vain! in vain, In spotless Innocence, wash'd out my stain! Have unregarded Suff'rings, long sustain'd! And each Morn languish'd, in unheeded Pain! Are then the Impious bless'd? is Wo, our Lot? Our Patience, and Fidelity forgot? Shall that high Race of Souls, which mind their Birth; Be for their Vertue, still, condemn'd on Earth? This cannot be; nor can that other be: Reason's short sight cann't pierce the Mystery. Into thy Sanctuary then I went, And my dark Vail of Ignorance was rent. There, I beheld their future, dreadful End; The Pit, to which, their fatal Glories tend. How on a slippery Precipice, they stand; Rais'd thither, and thence thrown down, by thy Hand.
How dreadful is their fall! how sure! how soon! Strook, by the Lightning of thy Vengeance, down. And then, as waking, a Dream's Shadow flyes, Fancy's vain Creature, and th' dread Vision dies: So vanish, when Thou hurlst them from their Seat, The dreadful, but imaginary Great. False Cares thus vex'd my Soul; and with true pains Wrought on my Body; and went through my Reins. So foolish was I, ignorant, and dull, As if turn'd Brute; and acted by His Soul. But Thou art always with me! By thy Hand Of Providence, I Lord! am still sustain'd. Thy Counsel, and thy Wisdom from above, Guide me to Glory; and immortal Love. Whom have I in the Heavens, dear Lord! but Thee? Or what Good, on this Earth, can satisfie? All fleshly, mortal Objects, dye away; And Hearts, that court those Objects, dye as they: But the pure heart, fixing its Love on Thee, Thou strengthnest; and it loves Eternally. And Thou, whose love kindles th' Immortal Fire, Wilt satisfie the infinite desire. And now, behold! such as do stray from Thee, And seek false Loves, shall perish utterly. But I, who Thee parsue, O my sole Good! My onely Hope! my whole Beatitude! Shall ever live; shall ever live with Thee; And praise Thee, and thy Works, Eternally. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm LXXIV. [Ʋt quid Deus?] HAst thou, for ever, us rejected, Lord? O why, are thy deserted Sheep abhor'd? Think on thy Flock! the Price thou didst advance! Thy Purchased; thy dear Inheritance; Remember Sion, where thy self hast sate! Behold the Mount!—See, Lord! 'tis desolate. Lift up thy Feet, and tread the Spoiler down! Revenge our endless Desolation! The Foes Blaspheme thee in thy House of Praise; And, as defying thee, their Ensigns raise. The softer Forms, carv'd by the sweetening stroke O'th' Artist's tender Hand, lye rude, and broke; And the rough Axe, and Hammer, have beat down What Art could yield, or th' Pride of Lebanon. For, what to th' Builder, erst, did give renown, They count it now, more glory to pull down. Thy Sanctu'ry, the Dwelling of thy Name, Burnt, and Unhallow'd is by other Flame: And th' Ax, forbid to raise the peaceful Pile, Does to the Ground, both ruin't, and defile. Their Malice rages, as their Flames do burn; And all our Synagogues to Ashes turn. And, as our God had quite forsook us, we Nor Sign, nor Prophet see, nor Prophecy.
There's none can tell, how long their Cruelty 'Gainst us shall last, and Blasphemy 'gainst thee. O Lord! How long? How long this Misery? Shall it for ever, thus? for ever, be? Where's thy Almighty Hand? thy jealous Arm? O pluck it forth! Guard us, and them disarm. For thou canst help; thou, Lord! canst help alone; Earth's Refuge; and the World's Salvation: O God! my King of Old! who didst divide The Sea; and in it, brak'st the Dragon's Head; Pharaoh's Proud Host, the bold Leviathan; Levell'dst his Pride; and shrunk'st him to a Man: Didst, with a Wonder arm'd, his Pow'r defeat; And threw'st him to the Vultur for his Meat. Rocks, cleft by thee, were thaw'd into a Flood; And Floods, at thy Command, as firm Rocks stood. Thine, is the Day; Thine, the Repose of Night; And the advancing Sun, shines with thy Light. Thou, hast the Borders of the Earth, defin'd; Which stated Limits it shall ne're transcend. Giv'st Laws to Time, boundest its floating Tide 'Twixt Winter's Ebb; and Summer's flowing Pride. Remember, Lord! and let the Fool no more, Nor the Proud Foe, Blaspheme thy obvious Pow'r. Give not thy faithful Turtle's Soul, away, Which to thy Bosom flies, the Vultur's Prey! Forget not ever the unremembred Poor; Nor leave him in their Jaws, who thus devour! Think on the Oath! All Dens, and Coverts, be Fill'd with the Darkness of their Cruelty.
Let not the Simple, still be sham'd! but raise The Poor, and turn his anguish'd sighs to praise. Rise, Lord! and thou thy self thine own Cause plead! The Fool, his dayly Blasphemies does spread, Forget him not! Nor, Lord! forget the Poor: For his successful Rage grows more and more. Psalm LXXV. [Confitebimur tibi Deus!] THy Pow'rful Name, still nigh to the distress'd, O God of Wonders, and of Love! we bless. When the Great Day of Recompence shall come, That Mortals must receive their final Doom, I, then, will judge according to the Laws Of Right; and vindicate th' Oppressed's Cause. Vain Man is weak; and the weak Earth is vain; But I, Earth's Pillars bear; and Man sustain. I bad the Fool, be less so; bad the Great, Th' Oppressing Great, to Power Limits set; Lift not your Horn on high! and do not speak, Hurry'd by wilful Pow'r with a stiff Neck. I gave you the command ye have; nor East, Nor West, nor South, makes potent, or distress'd; But I am Judge; I am, who pull down One, And set Another on his empty Throne. For in my Hand's a cup, and the Wine's red; Full mix'd; and through the World distributed:
But all the Dregs thereof, and fatal Lee, Shall the Ungodly's deadly Potion be. "O Righteous God! thy Name we'll magnifie "For ever; we'll for ever sing to thee. I'll break their Pow'r who in themselves do trust; And crown with Joys, the patience of the Just. Psalm LXXVI. [Notus in Judaea Dominus.] IN Judah, and in Israel, God is known; His Name's there great, and his Salvation. In Peaceful Salem He hath pitch'd his Tent; And in Mount Sion God is resident. There he the Battel brake; the Shield, and Spear; The safeties, and the furies of the War. True Honour, thy Victorious Arms does crown; Which flies th' ambitious Robber's false Renown. The Spoiler's spoil'd; and the triumphant Proud, Rest of his Glories, sleeps within a Cloud. No fruits, from his curst Ravages abound; His empty, guilty Hands, have nothing found, At thy rebuke, the Chariot, and the Horse, O God of Jacob! fall and lose their Force. Who, Lord! is to be fear'd, but thou, alone? And who can stand the Power of thy Frown? When thou, the Heav'ns, didst with thy Terrours fill Of Judgment, the Earth trembled, and was still.
And when thou didst appear for the distress'd, To save the Meek, and helpless Man, oppress'd; The fierceness which thou tam'dst, turn'd to thy Praise; And th' Ravages restrain'd, thine Honour raise. To your Redeemer, ye redeem'd Ones! Vow; Vow, and perform; and with your Presents bow. Princes unbounded Spirits he'll refrain; And o're the Kings of Earth with Terrour Reign. Gloria of four Verses. Psalm LXXVII. Voce mea ad Dominum.] UNto my God, aloud I cry'd; and He Heard me i'th' day of my Calamity. Wasted with pains, when I found no relief; And Night's slow Hours, told, heavily, my grief. Then I remembred God; and 'midst my Pains, My anguish'd Spirit thus to him complains. Thou hold'st mine Eyes, heavy to sleep, awake; Whilst over-whelm'd with Grief, I nothing spake: But in my anxious thought, I drew the Scene O'th' Day, of Old, and th' Mercies, erst had been: How, in the midst of Night, my joyful Tongue Gave thanks to thee; and thy great Praises sung. And then, my Soul into it self withdrawn, Viewing its present state, did thus complain.
Will God for ever cast me off? and be No more, no more inclin'd to pity me? Is Mercy, clean, for ever gone? and shall the Promise of the God of Truth, now fail? Has God, his tender pity quite forgot? His Love's Eternal Spring, and Fountain shut? Vain thought! look back my Soul! and see The Years of the Right Hand of the most High: Present Times past again, and there behold His works of Love, and wonder, done of Old. Fix these great Thoughts within thee; and proclaim His Works to All; and th' Honour of his Name. Thy ways, O God! though hid to our faint sight, Alike in Goodness, and in Pow'r are Great. By thee, O God! alone, are Wonders done; Who hast thy strength,'midst all the People shown. Thy Israelites, Jacob's, and Joseph's Seed, In Bondage held, thy Pow'rful Arm has freed. The Waters saw thee, and the frighted Flood Shrunk back; while th' naked Depths amazed stood. Thine Arrows flew abroad; dreadful, and loud; And new Floods pour'd down from the breaking Cloud. From out the breaking Cloud, shot flames of light; And Thunder roar'd; Earth trembled with the fright. In the Deep Waters lies thine unknown way; Whose viewless Path the clos'd Waves ne're betray.
Thy People's Shepherds, Moses, and Aron, led Safely thy Flock; by thee from Bondage freed. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm LXXVIII. [Attendite Popule.] HEar, O my People! Hear, O Israel! Encline your Ears unto my Parable! I will unfold dark Sentences of Old; Which both our selves have known, and Fathers told. That we the same, should to our Children tell, And to Succession Gods great Acts reveal. For to our Fathers be gave Laws; to be Observed by them and their Posterity. That, taught his Mercies, and his Judgments, they Might always hope in him and him obey: And not be like their Fathers; who, forsook His Laws, and their own froward Counsels took. Like Ephraim's, Children, soon discomfited, Who 'gainst the Battel arm'd themselves, and fled. They soon forgot the Laws he gave; and soon Forget the Wonders his great Pow'r had done. The mighty Wonders which their Fathers saw; Wonders, which did the Proud Aegyptian awe. 'Twixt the divided Sea he made a way; Whilst firm, as their own Banks, the steep Waves lay.
By Day a Cloud conducted them; by Night From out a flaming Pillar issued Light. Full streams gush'd forth, from out the Rocks he clave, Which, to their thirst, supplies like Rivers gave. Yet still they sinn'd; and by a new desire Tempt him again; their Lust does Meat require. He cleft the Rocks (said they) and Streams did flow; But can he here prepare a Table too? Can He, within this barren Wilderness, With Bread, and Flesh, his wand'ring People bless? God heard this, and was Wroth; and his just Frown, Wrapt in consuming Flames, sent Vengeance down. Because they, faithless, his great Conduct fear'd; Though new Salvations every Day appear'd: For he had Manna rain'd; and from the Cloud Another Plenty drop'd, ev'n Angels Food. And unto Man, Rebellious Man, had giv'n To eat, who eat and loath'd, the Food of Heav'n. And now, he gives Command to th' Winds, and they Do the desired Flesh, to th' Host conveigh. Clouds, fraught with Quails, a choice Provision bring; Which flew to th' Camp, not born on their own Wing. So they did eat, and were well fill'd; for he Gave what their murm'ring Lust did satisfie. But 'midst their wanton Food Vengeance drew nigh; And overtook the curst Satiety. He slew the choicest of them; and his just Incensed Wrath reveng'd the prosp'rous Lust.
Yet still the Remnant sinn'd; and though, before Their Eyes, Judgment march'd on, sinn'd the same sins o're. Wherefore their Years did he condemn to pain; And they, Life's Treasure wasting, liv'd in vain. When Death devour'd them, they seem'd, then, t' enquire For God; who still was God, during, their fear. But th' Hypocrites bely'd their Hearts; for they Were not upright, and stedfast in his way. Yet he, still Merciful, still inclin'd to save, Full of Compassion, still, their sins forgave: Check'd his fierce Anger; made his Vengeance stay; And through his Wrath, for Mercy, forc'd a way. For he well knew frail Flesh was as a blast; A Wind that ne're returns, when once 'tis past. How oft i'th' Wilderness did they rebel? Requiring such and such a Miracle? They soon forgat his Works; that glorious Hand Whose Wonders did Deliverance command. The pow'rful Signs 'mongst the Aegyptians shown; And th' dreadful Miracles to Zoan known. How he had turn'd their Waters into Blood; So that they could not drink th' infected Flood. Had sent against them, the most Powerless Of all his Creatures, Armies of Frogs and Lice. Their Labours, to themselves, no Fruit did yield; Commanded Locusts ravaged the Field. Beat down by Hail-stones, their rich Grapes were lost; And all their other Fruits destroy'd by th' Frost.
Storms of great Hail-stones on their Cattel flew; And fiery Thunder-bolts the Remnant slew. His fiercest Anger was against them sent; Their anguish'd Souls were their own Punishment. Horrour, and Conscious Guilt, and black Despair, To those, he sent, their own Ill Angels were. Then Death was loos'd; 'gainst the First-Born, impowr'd; All whom, the swift Plague, in one Night devour'd. But for his own, He other measures took; And led them in the Desart, like a Flock. Led them through Seas, when the stupendious Wave To their Foes Death; to them, safe passage gave. Brought them to th' Border of his Sanctuary; The Purchase of the Arm of the Most High. Cast out the Heathen; and assign'd by Lot To Israel's Tribes, the Conquests he had got. Yet still they tempted him; still went astray; Taking their own, they soon forgat his way. False, like their Fathers, they forsake their Guide; Like a deceitful Bow, starting aside. For, the Desertors, carved God's ador'd, Dull Gods of Wood; forsook the Living Lord. Who therefore loathing them, from Shiloh went; The place where God, with Men, had pitch'd his Tent. His captiv'd Ark, gave to the Enemy; And them to Death, and to Captivity. Their Young Men Fire consum'd; their Priests the Sword; No Marriages were made; nor Deaths deplor'd.
Then God, as Men refresh'd by sleep, arose; Or strong ones fill'd with Wine; and on his Foes Reveng'd his captiv'd Glory; whom he smote With Plagues, which pame, and which dishonour brought. The Ark return'd, He Joseph's Tribe refus'd To be its Seat; nor Ephraim did chuse; But chose the Tribe of Judah; and the Hill Sion, where he, alone, delights to dwell. And there he, built his Sanctu'ry on High; Fix'd, like the Earth's firm Roots, perpetually. Then, from the Fold, his Servant David took; To be the Shepherd of his own Great Flock. Who, faithfully, the happy People fed; And, with a prudent Conduct, safely led. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm LXXIX. [Deus, venerunt Gentes.] O God! into thine own Inheritance The Heathen are broke in; who do advance Their Ensigns on thy sacred Mount; defile Thy Temple, and the place where thou dost dwell. Jerusalem's a Heap. The Slaughter'd they Cast out to be th' wild Beasts arid Vultur's Prey. Their Blood, like Water, round about is shed; And none are left to see them Buried.
Our Neighbours, now, express their utmost Hate, All scorn, reproach, and wound the Ʋnfortunate. How long? O Lord! Lord! wilt thou ever, thus Forsake? thus, ever, wilt thou punish us? O turn! and pour thine Indignation Upon the Heathen, where thy Name's unknown. Who thee Blaspheme; devour thy Israel; And who lay waste the place where thou dost dwell. O Lord! Remember not our former sin! Forget, how most Rebllious we have been! Call back thy Mercies! call them speedily; For we are faln to th' lowest Misery: God of Salvation, help! Help, for thy Name! Thy Glory is reproached in our shame. Why should the Heathen say, Where is their God? Revenge thy Glory, and thy Servents Blood! O hear the Captives sighs! their trembling Breath! And save those helpless Souls, are chain'd for Death. To those, who durst reproach thine honour'd Name, Give back a manifold return of shame. So we thy Flock, shall to thee praises send; All, shall continue them; but none, shall End.
Psalm LXXX. [Qui regis Israel, intende!] GReat Shepherd of thy People Israel, Who 'midst the winged Cherubim dost dwell; Regard! and from the Glories of thy Throne, Upon thy Flock, thy Beams of Light show'r down. Lead thou our Armies! Before Benjamin Advance! Manasseh's Tribe, and Ephraim. Turn us, O God! dispel our heavy Night! Salvation waits on thy Victorious Light. How long, O Lord! wilt thou displeas'd appear With those, who lowly offer up th' Address of Pray'r? Tears are our Drink; and we with Tears are fed; Which thou hast plenteously measured. To those about us w'are become a Snare; VVhilst they contest, how they may Israel share. Turn us, O Lord! dispel our heavy Night! Salvation waits on thy Victorious Light. Thou, out of Aegypt, didst transplant a Vine; Didst root the Heathen out, and set that, in; It, over all the Land, did prosp'rous grow; Drop'd on the under shrubs, and kept them low. Rose 'bove the Hills, and bless'd them with its shade, VVhich vast was, as is that by Cedars made; Threw its fair Arms, down to the River's side; VVhence to the Sea, th' extended Branches spread
Why hast thou all its Fences rooted out? So that who-e're pass by, pluck off her Fruit? Why is it giv'n a spoil, to the wild Boar, And other Beasts o'th' Forrest, to devour? Return, O God of Hosts! Visit the Vine! And the exposed Vineyard, which is thine: And that selected Branch, chose out among The rest, which, for thy self, thou mad'st so strong. It undergoes a numerous Fate; cut down; And burnt with Fire; and blasted with thy Frown. Support the Man of thy Right Hand! Arise, Great God! Raise him, confound his Enemies. So, O our strength! we'll not go back from thee; Help us, that we thy Name may glorifie. Turn us, O Lord! dispel our heavy Night! Salvation waits on thy Victorious Light. Psalm LXXXI. [Exultate Deo adjutori!] TO God, our strength, let us our Voices raise In Psalms, on all the Instruments of Praise! In the appointed Feast, when the New Moon Varies her Light, be the loud Trumpets blown. For Israel, of Old, commanded was To keep this Statute, and this Law of Praise. When the tyr'd Captive was from Aegypt led, From their strange Tongue, and from their thraldom freed.
'Twas I (says God) brake the Aegyptian Chain; Loos'd him; and gave him to Himself again. Threw down the Burthens on his Shoulders lay; And his spent Arms releas'd, from moulding Clay. Hand thy afflicted Cry, and answer'd thee By Thunder, that my Pow'rful Aid was nigh. Try'd thee at Massah, when thou murmur'dst there, Sated thy Thirst, and did ev'n Murmurs hear. Then gave thee Laws; hear, Israel! Bow thy Knee Unto no Other God; no God but Me. 'Twas I, from Pharaoh's Power rescu'd thee; And who, alone, can all thy Wants supply. But Israel would none of Me; forsook His God; and his Own wandring Counsels, took. O had my People Me obey'd, how soon Had I, beneath them, trod their Enemies, down! My Foes had soon submitted; but their Day No Night had clos'd; nor shall, who me obey. With finest Flow'r of Wheat, I had them fill'd; And flowing Honey, from the Rock distill'd. Psalm LXXXII. [Deus stetit in Synagoga.] GOD in th' Assembly of the Princes, stands; Judge of those Earthly Gods, and their Commad. How dare ye in his sight, wrong Judgment give? The great Ʋnjust, or guilty Friend receive?
You are intrusted with the Fatherless, Who want a Bribe; and whom no favours bless; Yours are the Poor, who flying to the Laws, Bring nothing, but a barren Righteous Cause. Th' Oppressed, and the Out-casts are your care; Who, what th' Oppressor left, beg you would spare. But you'll not hear; you will not understand; Your Souls are Slaves, and at your Lusts Command; You walk in Darkness, in despite of Light; Move the Foundations, and the Bounds of Right. I've said you're Gods, the Sons of the Most High; And such are those Great Souls who Earth desie. But ye Ʋnrighteous Souls! your selves degrade: Dye Men, then! Dye, what ye your selves have made. Judge of the Earth, arise! send Justice down From Heav'n, on th' injur'd World, which is thine own. Psalm LXXXIII. [Deus quis similis.] RIse, Lord! thine Enemies beat thick Alarms, And round about us joyn consed'rate Arms To root us out; that we be but a Name; And live but in a long dishonour'd Fame. Incestuous Moab, and the Ismaelites, Join with the Hagarens, and Edomites. Gebal, and the Amalekites conspire With Ammon, th' Philistins, and them of Tyre.
The Powerful Assyrians too, combine, And joyn in League with Lot's detested Line. But, as thy Vengeance Midian overtook, Jabin, and Sisera, at Kison's Brook, Whose Slaughter'd Carcases at Endor, flung To Birds, and Beasts of Prey, became as Dung; So perish these: And may their Rulers all Like Zeb, and Oreb, and Zalmunna, fall. Who said, Gods Houses, all the Land throughout, Our selves will enter, and the God cast out. Render their giddy Counsels like a Wheel; Let them, like Chaff, by Whirl-winds hurry'd, reel. As raging Flames consume a growing Wood, Born down, as by a swist impetuous Flood, Whence their bright Waves o're the steep Mountains born, All their fair crowns of Trees, to Ashes turn: So blast them with the Tempest of thy Frown; And with thy dreadful Vengeance, hurl them down. Confusion cover them, and lasting Shame, That, perishing, they may confess thy Name. That thou, O our Jehovah! maist be known To be the Highest, to be God alone. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm LXXXIV. [Quam dilecta.] HOw highly ravishing, Great God of War! Where thou hast chose thy Seat, thy dwellings are? My longing Soul faints for thy Courts, and thee; Nought else, the thirst of Souls, can satisfie. The Sparrow, Lord! may nigh thine Altars rest; And Swallow, undisturbed, build her Nest. But happy they, who in thy House of Praise, Hon'ring thy Name, number their joyful Days. And happy they, who do thy Laws fulfill, And in thy strength approach thy Holy Hill. Who think on nothing more, than on those ways Which to thy Temple lead, and House of Praise. Whither, though they through thirsty Desarts go, Yet, for their use, commanded Springs do flow; O r fill'd with Floods, descending from the Skie, The swelling Pools do all their wants supply. These happy Troops, i'th' Stated Feasts o'th' Year, Before their God in Sion do appear. Lord! hear; and grant my Heart's unfeign'd Address And with thy Presence thine Annointed bless. For in thy House one day is better far Than in another place, a thousand are; I would despise the Courts, and glorious State O'th' Wicked, for the Threshold of thy Gate.
For what's more glorious than the Soul that's thine? Who Grace bestow'st, and Glories All-Divine? Who dost to those who do uprightly live, O Sun! O Shield! O God! all good things give. O Lord of Hosts! how surely bless'd is he Who quits all other strength, and trusts in thee. Psalm LXXXV. [Benedixisti Domine.] LOrd! Thou hast own'd thy People; set them free; And brake the Chain of their Captivity. Turn'd back thy Wrath, and all the Plagues it sent; Releas'd our sins, and their due Punishment. Turn us now, Lord! as thou thy Wrath didst turn; That neither we may sin, nor thy Wrath burn. Check our renewing Evils; and oppose The still-advancing Powers of our Foes. Wilt thou for ever, Lord! displeased be? Extend thy Wrath to all Posterity? Shall Mercy be no more? No more revive Our Souls, which only, joying in thee, live? God of Salvation, save! and manifest Thy Mercies, which alone can make us bless'd. Speak Lord! for thoul't speak Peace to those who mourn Their Sins; if they no more to folly turn. Salvation keeps those who keep God's Command; And brightest Glories over-spread their Land.
Mercy there joyns with Truth; and Righteousness Meeting with blessed Peace, each other kiss. Truth shall from th' Earth, a new encrease be giv'n; And banish'd Righteousness look down from Heav'n. Yea, God will such with all his good things bless; And th' Earth shall pour forth her full Encrease. The Just shall reap, what Heav'n and Earth can yield; Graces of Heav'n, and Bounties of the Field. Thus God appears for those who him obey; Whom Justice goes before, and signs his Way. Psalm LXXXVI. [Inclina Domine.] BOw down thine Ear, O Lord! and hear my Cry; For I am Poor; Poor, and in Misery. Preserve my Soul; for I thy Laws obey; Do trust in thee, and serve thee Day by Day. Hear, Lord! and my afflicted Soul relieve; For thou art Good, and ready to forgive. Give ear, O Lord! for thou wilt hear my Cry, Pour'd forth i'th' Day of my Calamity. Among the Gods, O Lord! like thee is none; And who can do the Works that thou hast done? Man is thy Work, and his dissenting Race, Those scatter'd Limbs shall joyn, and thus thee Praise.
"Thou, Lord, art Great! Thou art our God alone! "By Wonders, by Mans self, the Noblest, known; "Shew us thy Truth! and our seduced Heart, "From thee betrayed, unto thee convert! "Our Souls shall then for ever Praise thy Name; "Inlightned by their first Original Flame; "And bless that Mighty Love, which, when they fell "From thee, redeem'dst them from the lowest Hell. O God! the Mighty Ones against me rise; Forces and Counsels joyn, and thee despise: God of all pity! O long-Suffering God! Fountain of Truth! Mercy's unwasted Flood; Behold the threatned Storm! and from thy Throne Thy Forces, thy resistless Aids, send down. Own thy weak Servant! and by some bless'd Sign, Tell my amazed Foes, that I am thine. Psalm LXXXVII. [Fundamenta ejus.] UPon the sacred Mount the Building's rais'd; Sion there stands, and the lov'd House of Praise. 'Bove Jacob's other Dwellings lov'd; for God Has made thee glorious, with his own abode. Talk not of Rahab, or of Babylon, To those to whom the greater Sion's known! Let no Man boast, he's born a Tyrian, A Philistin, or Aethiopian.
For God a firmer Honour gives to them Who are the Natives of Jerusalem: For when he lists the World, it shall be told From thence, are Men; from hence, are Saints enroll'd. And in that honour'd Cense, all who Praise him, Are Sons of Sion, and Jerusalem. Who, those bless'd Springs, which his abundant Grace Sheds on their Souls, return again in Praise. Psalm LXXXVIII. [Domine Deus.] GOd of Salvation, hear! for unto thee, All Day and Night, wasted with Cares, I cry. My Soul is full of Anguish; and my Life Hastes to an early Grave, pierc'd through with Grief. I seem like one who is already dead; Sorrow has slain me, e're my Days are fled. I'm like the Slaughter'd, whom the Sword sets free, Releas'd from Life, to th' Grave's dark Liberty. And like to them, I unremembred lye; Shut from the Light; and, Lord! forgot by thee. Into the lowest Pit I am sunk down; Down into th' Deep, and th' Land of Darkness thrown. And yet thy heavy Wrath renews the Load; As VVaves urge VVaves, and re-inforce the Flood.
No Eye does pity me; I'm left alone; My Friends are fled; for Misery has None. Chain'd to my Woes, I, as in Bendage, lye, Grief's Captive; and there's None to ransom me. To Thee, O Refuge of my Soul! I turn, Stretch out my Hands all day, and all day mourn. Lord! wilt Thou shew thy Wonders 'mongst the Dead? Shall the clos'd Lip praise Thee? and th' Breath that's fled? Shall the dark Sepulcher thy Goodness tell? Thy Truth be shown, there, where Life's Ruines dwell? In Night's deep Cell, thy buried Wonders known? Thy Justice, honour'd in Oblivion? O let the Living praise Thee! O let Me Who, e're the Dawn appears, wake up to Thee. Why, Lord! dost Thou my anguish'd Soul reject? And not One Mercy, not One Beam reflect? In Sorrows spent, I've numbred o're my years, And for the Hours I've liv'd, counted my Fears. My God! I dye; thy Terrours me surround; Thine Anger, and the Fury of thy Frown. Like Waves they swell; farther, and higher, roul; And the vast Deluge overwhelms my Soul. Those few, are yet my Friends, thou dost remove; And banish from my sight their useless Love. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm LXXXIX. [Misericordias Domini.] GReat God of Truth and Love! thy Name I'le praise Ever; and leave my Song to after Days. Beyond the Bounds of Time thy Mercy's known; And thy Truth's fix'd, as stable as thy Throne. To David I have sworn, rais'd by my Hand, Thy Kingdom shall, beyond Time's ruine, stand. The Heav'nly Host thy Wonders, Lord! confess; And all thy Saints sing loud, thy Faithfulness. Who, mighty Lord! with Thee, compar'd may be? Nor Earth can yield, nor Heav'n, a God like Thee. In their Assemblies, Thee, thy Saints revere; And all the Great on Earth, with Terrour, fear. Who's strong like Thee? Thee Truth surrounds, with bright, But softer Glories, than thy Robes of Light. Thou check'st the ragings of the angry Deep; And in a Calm all its bold Terrours sleep. Aegypt, in vain, withstood thy Pow'rful Hand; Thou didst destroy proud Pharaoh, and his Land. The Heav'ns are thine; thine is the Earth; and thine Nature's vast VVealth, and inexhausted Mine. All Coasts thou mad'st, praise Thee; and to rejoice In Thee, Tabor and Hermon find a Voice.
Great, above pow'r; and high, is the Command Of thy Victorious, thine Almighty Hand. Justice, before thy Throne; and Judgement, wait; Mercy and Truth, Heav'n's Ministers of State. O blessed They! who, on th' appointed Days, Summon'd, attend Thee in thy Feasts of Praise. They in thy Light shall walk; whose glorious Beam Shed round them, shall direct and cover them. Blessing thy Name, they pass their happy days; And hon'ring thee, learn the Delights of Praise. When they the Glories sing oth Pow'r Divine, They boast their Own; theirs is wrapt up in thine. Thy Justice them exalts; that strength is theirs, And that high favour which for them appears. They're safe in thy Defence; and then they sing They People's Bliss, when they sing Thee their King. Thou, to thy Prophet, hast in Vision said. To One that's Mighty, I more Help did add. My Servant David I have chose, and shed My sacred Oyl, on his Annointed Head; My pow'rful Arm shall be his strong Defence, And guard him from the Sons of Violence. Before him I'le destroy his Enemies; And strike with Plagues, those who against him rise. But with Himself, my Truth and Love shall stand For ever; and exalt his high Command.
His Scepter from Euphrates shall extend, Till in the Western Sea his Regions end. He shall, Me, Father call; Me, God alone; And Me, the Rock, of his Salvation. And I, Him, Heir will make; the sirst in Birth; And First,'bove all the Princes of the Earth: My Mercies ne're shall leave him; but as sure, And stedfast, as my Covenant endure. To his immortal Race, there shall be given The termless Measure of the Days of Heav'n. But, if they break my Laws, I'II them recall With Stripes; will punish, but relieve the Fall. For, my sworn Mercies, and transcendent Love, Exceeding, far, their Crimes, I'le ne're remove. For, though They break their part o'th' Covenant, My Mercy shall confirm the forfeit Grant. The Holy One of Israel shall not lye; Nor th' Oath he sware to David, falsifie. Thy Seed for ever shall endure; thy Throne More glorious, more lasting, than the Sun. And shall, beyond Heav'ns second Light, the Mon, A Circle of unvaried Glories, run. These conscious Lights attest my stedfast Truth; Are Witnesses of Me, and of my Oath. But thine Annointed, now, thou hast forsook; As if thou didst thy Covenant revoke; No more regardest his dishonoured Crown, But hast struck't off, and cast it to the Ground.
Thou hast his Strengths and his Defences broke; And his firm Powers to confusion shook; Now He's the Spoil and Scorn of All; to All Expos'd, since Thou art pleased with his Fall. He boasts no more, his Enemies overthrow, Thy David is the Triumph of his Foe. How are his Glories faln! and how, their Light Not wan and fading, but extinguish'd quite! How are his youthful days, not fully ran, Cut off! and measur'd by a shorter Span! When, for thy Servant, Lord! wilt thou appear? When quench the wrath of thy consuming Fire? Remember, Lord! how swift, Life's Shadow hastes; Man's days are lost, whose Hours Affliction wastes. The longest, freest life, must end; and Death Stops our unsimsh'd Labours with our Breath. O where, O God! where is thy former Love? To David sworn, and registred Above? O think on the Reproaches I endure, Cast in my Breast, expos'd to th' Men of pow'r. But stay not there; for what by them is thrown 'Gainst thine Annointed's Honour, wounds thine Own: Whose hallow'd Name, has, from all Ages, been, And be it ever bless'd! Amen! Amen! Hallelujah.
Part of the FOURTH BOOK of the PSALMS, PARAPHRAS'D. Psalm XC. [Domine Refugium factus es.] O Thou the Rock of Ages! thy high Seat Has to us ever been a safe Retreat. Before the horrid Night was chas'd away, And sever'd from the Censines of the Day; E're Being was; or Motion receiv'd Laws; But the VVorld slept, in Thee th' Almighty Cause, Thou wert: And when their measur'd Race is run, Thou shalt endure beyond Succession. From out the Dust, thou hast call'd VVretched Man; Then call'st him back, and he is Dust again. Shouldst thou extend his Span, what would it be, Compar'd, O God! to thy Eternity?
Forth' Ages of a thousand Years, thy sight Beholds, but as the past Hours of One Night. Upon Times floating Stream, our Years are born; The River runs not back; nor th' Years return. Our Days seem as a sleep; when we awake Dying; and on the Dream of life, look back. W'are like the Flower, which in the Morn was Gay; But cropt i'th' Evening, pale, and wither'd lay. Our Sins provoke thine Indignation, And on our wretched Life, more Plagues call down. We waste our Years in Vanity, and Care, Whilst our dark Crimes expos'd to Justice are. By Trouble, Sorrow, Need, Sickness, is drawn The Scene of Life; and Fable of the Man. Our Life is Seventy Years; if we attain Eighty, those feeble Ones, are Years of Pain; So soon, or so unuseful our Days run; They swiftly haste; and e're we live, th' are gone. Yet thy fierce Wrath, though equal to our fear, Who minds, till Death's Eternal Hour draws near? Teach us Time's value; that the Years we have, We may redeem; and rescue from the Grave. And may learn Wisdom, whilst we draw that Breath Which, as a glorious Prize, we gain from Death. Return, O Lord! and be incens'd no more! Remit our Sins! and th' Judgments we deplore. Give us an early Mercy, that yet we, Our few remaining Years, may joy in thee. Make a return of Bliss for those Years spent In Wo; and worn out by thy Punishment.
Be these thy Works of Favour, and of Grace, Shewn unto us, and our Succeeding Race. O Lord of Glories! with thy Conduct, bless Ʋs, and our Works; and crown them with Success. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XCI. [Qui habitat!] WHo the Almighty his Defence has made, May rest secure under the Pow'rful Shade; 'Tis God alone, whose strength can succour me, All my dependence, Lord! and hope's in thee. He shall thee free from the dissembled Snare O'th' Guileful, and from the Pest's killing Air. The safety of his Wing shall cover thee, And his sure Promises, thy Refuge be. Night's Terrors, nor the Arrows shot by Day, Shall the sure Peace of thy firm Soul betray; Nor the dark Pest, which, as in Ambush, kills; Nor bolder War, which Day with Slaughter fills. Thousands on this, Thousands on that Hand dye; But the vain Fury shall not come to thee. But, while thy self in safety art, shalt see The just Revenges on Impiety. O happy thou! who,'cause thou dost rely On God, and fix thy Thoughts on the most High;
Therefore no Plague Shall ever daret' infest Thy Dwelling, nor disturb thy happy Rest. He shall command his Angels to descend For thee; the Bless'd shall on the Bless'd attend. This unseen Guard, shall in their Arms thee bear O're Dangers, that thy stumbling Foot not erre. Thou shalt the Lyon tame, crush th' Adder's Head; And on the harmless Poyson, safely tread. Because (says God) his Love on me was set, Rescu'd from Perils, I will make him Great. He shall his Prayer make, and I will hear; And will in Mercy answer his desire: In Troubles I'll be with him; set him free; And make his Sufferings, his Honour be. When satisfi'd with Life, his Years are done, I then will shew him my Salvation. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XCII. [Bonum est confiteri.] HOw Good, how Pleasant, are the Acts of Praise, When we to Heav'n our Souls and Voices raise! Before, the Stars, i'th' Morn, lose their pale Light; And when their sparkling Fires relieve the Night; By all the modes, the trembling Air is shook, When sounds, sounds meeting, are in murmurs broke.
Upon the Lute and Ten string'd Instrument, Joyn'd with the full, and solemn Harps, concent. Lord! in thy Works does my glad Soul rejoyce; And, as in Triumphs rais'd, lift up its Voice. What Wonders ev'ry where, thy Works present! How full of Order! full of Ornament! How deep thy Counsels! and how dark to Sense, Are thy mysterious Ways of Providence! Ways which the Fool will never comprehend; Nor learn his own, and th' Just Mans, different End. Not learn that Sinners, as Grass fully grown, Fatally sprung, only to be cut down. Eternal Lord! Eternally most High! See, how thine Enemies fall, and scatter'd lye! But me, thou dost exalt; and on my Head Thy freshest Oyl, and softest Balm hast shed. Whilst, as in triumph, I my Foes behold Punish'd by thee; and unto Vengeance sold. The Just, like th' Palm, continual verdures crown; Or Cedars on the Head of Lebanon. In thy bless'd Courts, planted, they take deep root; And, as by Age renew'd, then bear more Fruit. That all may know, that God loves Righteousness; Will Sinners punish; and the Just Man bless.
Psalm XCIII. [Dominus regnat.] CLoathed with Glory, God reigns King alone; And arm'd with Power; for what he wills is done. He has fix'd Nature's Laws; by his Command All things were made; by that Command they stand. Thy Throne, of Old; when th' VVorld was nothing, stood; Thou, from and to Eternity, art God, The Floods, O Lord! the Floods o'th' mighty rise; Their o'regrown VVaves the lower Banks despise. O Mightier, Lord! when thy Frown checks their Pride, All their swoln VVaves in a low Calm subside. In vain then they against thy Servants rise, VVhom thy Truth guards, and thy sure Promises: VVhom, with the Beauties of thine House, thou'lt bless, And the true Decencies of Holiness. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XCIV. [Deus Ʋltionum.] JUdge of the World! who from thy Pow'rful Throne Behold'st what ever on the Earth is done; Regard the Proud! and on his guilty Head Pour down the Vengeance he has merited.
How long shall He successful mischiefs boast? In whose pursuit the Peace o'th' world is lost. He rends in pieces the afflicted Poor, And does thy weak, unguarded Flock devour. Adds Grief to those, already in distress; Slays the VVidow, Stranger, and the Fatherless: Forgets the Recompence of the most High; For God (says he) does not our Actions see. Dull thoughtless Fool! When wilt thou learn? Shall he VVho made the Ear, not hear? the Eye, not see? Shall He, who by his Judgments does reclaim The Heathen; and teach them to fear his Name; Not punish thee? He knows thy thoughts, weak Man! Knows thy short reasonings, and those Thoughts are vain. But bless'd is he, who thus thy Fear is taught, And by thy Chastisement, to knowledge brought. For he will Patience learn; and will attend The Sinner's fall, and his condemned End. Knowing that God is Just; and will not leave Th' Oppresled, nor th' Oppressor will forgive. But to his Judgments, Justice shall give Laws; And by those Laws, th' Upright shall guide their ways. In vain from other Pow'rs we aid expect; God does alone Revenge; alone, Protect. He saved me; and when my Foot had slip'd, Sustain'd by him, I my firm Station kept. And, 'midst the anxious thoughts perplex'd-my Mind, On him reflecting, Joy and Comfort find. For I consider'd, Just God does not own The Ʋnjust Counsels of the impious Throne:
Whose black Consults favour th' unrighteous Cause; Rules for Injustice frame; oppress by Laws; Pursue the Just; and in his Blood consent, Condemning by a Law, the Innocent. Wherefore, by the Just God; my sure defence; Who saves me from the Sons of Violence; Shall all their formal mischiefs be o'rethrown; Turn'd on themselves, and they themselves cut down Psalm XCV. [Venite exultemus.] O Come, and let us Sing unto the Lord! And with our Voices, let our Hearts accord. Let us before him, our Thanksgivings bring, And Psalms, and Praises, in his Presence Sing. For God is Great; above all Gods, is Great; King, o're all other Gods, and Powers, set. The lowest Depths of th' Earth, are in his Hand; And by his Strength the threatning Mountains stand. He made the Sea, and does that Sea command; Withdrew its Waves, and rais'd up the dry Land. O come then! and fall down! and kneel before The Lord our Maker! and his Name adore! For he's the Lord our God; and we the Sheep Which his Hand leads, and his own Pastures keep. O hear our Shepherd's Voice! Bring Hearts prepar'ad Not such as in the Desart: Proud and hard:
Where your Rebellious Fathers tempted me; And did those works, of which they doubted, see. That Generation griev'd me Forty Years; Their Heart (said I) knows not my way, but errs. Wherefore I sware, into my Land of Rest They should not come; nor be with Canaan bless'd. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XCVI. [Cantate Domino.i] SIng a new Song to God: Let all conspire In his great Praise, and make the World one Quire. Give him continual Honour! Let each Day His known Salvation to the next conveigh. Sing loud! that Mankind may at distance hear; And all the World, their and our God revere. Sing, God is Great! and greatly to be Prais'd; His Glory far 'bove other Gods is rais'd. He made the Heav'ns; made that Idolater, Who made his God; the stupid Heathen's fear. Before him, Honour bows; him Majesty Surrounds; Beauty adorns his Sanctu'ry. To him, O all ye Sons of mortal Men Ascribe all Glory! and all Pow'r resign.
Enter his glorious Courts with Praise; and bring The great, the acceptable Offering. Bring Holiness; Soul's undefil'd, and clean; Graces of Heav'n; and Beauties all-Divine; Then Worship; Off'ring that pure Sacrifice; Such as becomes his House of Holiness. Instruct the Heathen; tell them God does reign; That he made th' world; and does his work maintain And tell them, he is Judge of all; that he Will come, and judge the griev'd Earth Righteously Be glad, O Earth then! and ye Heav'ns rejoyce! Thou, Sea and all thy Wonders, joyn your Voice God comes! let all his joyful works attend The mighty Presence; for our God descends. Cloath'd with new Verdures let the Fields be glad And the fair Trees with fresher crowns be clad; God comes! he, to relieve th' Oppress'd, does come; Bring Justice back; and give the World its Doom. Psalm XCVII. [Dominus regnavit.] GOd reigns! let the glad Earth lift up its Voice And all the losser Worlds, the Isles rejoyce. A Night of Clouds round his bright Throne is spread His Throne by Truth, and Right established. Consuming Fires, and Flames before him run; Destroy his Foes, and melt the Mountains down.
The Heav'ns above declare his Righteousness; And all the World does its Great God confess. Ye, who make Gods, theft Worship that fond Pow'r, Confounded be! God, All ye Gods adore! Sion, O mighty Lord! thy Judgments heard, Which Judah's Daughters in their Songs declar'd. They Sung thy Judgments on those Gods sent down; Exalting thee, in their Confusion. O ye, who love the Lord, love what he loves! He hates all III, and Good alone approves. The Soul that walks in its Integrity, God keeps; and rescues from his Enemy. Immortal Joyes and Glories wait th' Ʋpright! Prepared for them in the Fields of Light. Rejoyce ye Just Ones! let your happy Days Be spent in the memorials of his Praise. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm XCVIII. [Cantate Domino.] TO new Thanksgivings, let new Mercies move; That we may sing the Wonders of Gods Love. For he Himself, lent his immediate Hand! And God for us, our Victory has gain'd. His Righteousness to all the Heathen's known; The Conquests of his great Salvation.
His Truth of Old, engag'd to Israel, Israel redeem'd, and all the World can tell. Tell then, Redeemed World! his Praises tell, Who sav'd his Gentiles, and his Israel. Bring the inspired Hymn! Give it a Voice! VVith all the Pow'rs of Harmony rejoyce. Bring the loud Cornet, Trumpet, or the Flute; VVith the soft purlings of the mellow Lute. Through Nature, at th' approaching of its King As from one Soul diffus'd, One Joy shall spring. The Earth and Sea rejoyce; the Floods, and Hills, A kindly slowing Warmth of Gladness fills. For God is come to judge the VVorld; and he Shall judge with Justice, and with Equity. Psalm XCIX. [Dominus regnavit irascantur, &c.] GOd reigns! His Throne guarded by th' Cherubim; Tremble, O Earth! approach and Worship him The Lord, in Sion, where h' has fix'd his Seat, And over all the Pow'rs of Earth is Great. Is Great in Holiness; in Judgment Great; And indispensing Equity, and Right. Fall how before him! and exalt alone His Holiness, who is the Holy One. To Moses, Anon and to Samuel, Calling on him, he aid his Will reveal.
To them, from out the Cloudy Pillar, spake; Who, nor the Lawes he gave, nor Statutes, brake; Yea, when they fell he heard; and them forgave; Their sin did punish, but th' Offenders save: O fall before him; and exalt alone His Holiness, who is the Holy One. Psalm C. [Jubilate Deo] O All the Regions of the Earth, Bless God! who gave the World its Birth. Your Souls to him, and Voices raise! Learn, and express the Joys of Praise! God made, and peopled all the Lands; Man's not the Work of his own Hands. And what he made, he feeds and keeps; Th' Almighty Shepherd never seeps. O then, with Joy, make your address I' th' Temple of his Holiness! With grateful Hearts aloud proclaim The Honours of his Honour'd Narne. For God is Good; is Good alone; All Ages have his Mercies known; His Truth beyond them shall endure Stedfast, and, as his Mercy, sure.
Psalm CI. Misericordiam & Judicium. MY Song, of Mercy, shall, and Judgment, be; Which showr'd on Ʋs, our Praise returns to Thee Wnen, in my soul, shall these Perfections shine? That what Thine Empire Crowns, may stablish Mine. I will design no wicked Act; from Me I'll rend the faithless guiles of Policy. All crooked, vex't, convenient Truths, I hate; Just Truth, shall Our great Reason be of State. I'll crush the flattring Slanderer, who reveales Whispring, fair Lies; as hiding what he tells. I will not brook the Proud, who does disdain True Worth, and values in himself what's vain. But will, th' upright alone, and guiless Soul, Splendid in vertues, in my Court enroll: And who, most glorious, in that Court would shine, Must, first be Vertue's Servant, and then Mine. The glosing Sycophant shall not there remain; Nor, who with Lies, his spotted Soul does stain. All Sinners, I'll root out; curs'd, and abhor'd, None Such must dwell ith' Sion of Our Lord.
Psalm CII. Domine exaudi. REgard my pressing Griefs, my mournful Cry My Godland with thy present help draw nigh. For, like a Smoak, my wasting Life expires; Breath'd off, by lingring Grief's continual fires. Like Grass scorch'd, up my Heart is withered; And I, or'e fill'd with Grief, mind not my Bread. I am so spent, so wasted with my Moans, That onely skin covers my steshless Bones. So moans the Pelican ith' Wilderness; So moans alone ith' shades, but She moans less: So moans alone, the Bird that shuns the Light, Ith' Desart of the unfrequented Night. So moans the Sparrow; so She sits alone, Fixt to her solitary, watchful Moan: And so, my sleepless Eyes, Griefs hold awake; Break my lone Rests, and Slumbers overtake. Mine Enemies insult or'e my faln State, And 'gainst me joyn'd, Swear their confederate Hate. Ashes have been my Bread, and I've drank up My Tears, which flowing swell'd the mournful Cup. Because of thy fierce Indignation, Which raisd Me that it more, might cast Me down.
Like Shadows, my declining Days do pass; Languish, like dying Flowers, or withring Grass. But thy Day ever was, ever will be; Nor Morn, nor Evening bound Eternity. Rise Lord, and thy destroyed Sion build; Let Mercy rise, now Judgments are fulfil'd. For we behold her Dust with tender eyes; Love the Remains; and th' Sacred Ruines Prize. Then, shall the Kings of th' Earth thy Power owne; All Kings, of All the Earth, set up thy Throne. When God, rebuilding Sion, shall advance His Glory in its fam'd Deliverance. When to the Prayer of the Destitute He bends his Ear, and grants their lowly sute. This shall be wrote for Them of After-daies, That what One Age has witness'd, All may Praise. God from above, from out his Holy Place, Look'd down on the distress'd of Humane Race: To hear th' appealing Captives sentenc'd breath; And free him from Captivity and Death, That He may turn his Breath of Sighs, to Praise; And in th' Assembly, thy just Honours raise. And unto All the world, thy praise may tell, That All the world may become Israel. He weakned me whilst I my Race did run; And Life grew weary ere its course was done.
Then cry'd I to my God; Immortal power! Give not to Death, my short, untimely hour: Thy years do an eternal circle run; A boundless space, unfinish'd, unbegun. Thou laid'st th' unknown Foundations of the Earth, When Time, (now Old) and Being, first had Birth: From the same Pow'r, Heavn's immense Fabrick came, And all the Gloryes of the stupendious Frame: They'r bright, but dying Gloryes; for all these Must fade; and th' Ages of their Circuits, cease: And chang'd by Thee, appear in Other Sc; New Heavn's; New ranged Orbs; New-unknown Beams. But Thou, All changing, art Unchang'd Alone; O Thou Eternal! ever, ever, One. The Children of thy Servants, firm shall stand; Established by thine Almighty Hand. Psalm CIII. Benedic Anima mea. O Thou my Soul summon up all thy Powers! Praise Him, who every Blessing on thee showres. Who, all thy sin, all thine offence forgives; And all thy frail Infirmities relieves. Who saves thy Life; turns back Destruction; And thee, with mercy does, and goodness crown. Who fills thy soul with Good; Life's wasts repairs; Sets back thine Age, renew'd like Eagles years.
Who, the Oppressor,, and th' Oppressed sees; Judges th' Oppressor, and th' Oppressed frees. He shew'd his waies to Israel; who did prove His Miracles of Judgment, and of Love. He stops his Anger; is, to Vengeance slow; But Mercies and Compassions ever flow. His Anger lasts not; but he bounded hath The swift contracted Moments of his wrath. Limits his Judgments, which unequal be To our full Measures of Iniquity, For, like the space from Earth, to Heav'n above, So great, to those who fear him, is his Love. He, further hath remov'd our fins away Than are the East, and Western bounds of Day. His Chastisements, are like a Fathers, mild; Who does correct, but not destroy the Child. For God knows our weak frame; how he ith' Clay, Kindled the flame of Life, the Lamp of Day: How, like the Grass, or Flow'r the tender Clay Grew up, grew fair awhile, grew fresh, and gay; And like that Flow'r, and like that Grass, how soon Blasted, the fading Flow'r of life is gone. But an Eternal state of unchang'd Bliss The Righteous God continues unto His. To His, who fear him; keep his Covenant, Faithful to the Conditions of his Grant. Thy Throne, O God! prepared is on high; And over All the Earth's thy Monarchy.
Ye glorious Ministers of Light, who stand Round his bright Throne, and wait the great Command, Bless'd Angels! who in Pow'r and Strength excell, And ready are to execute his will, Praise Him! and praise Him, all ye heav'nly Hosts Who Him obey! Praise Him, through all the Coasts Of Being, All his Works! My Soul! Praise Him; Joyn in th' high Praise, for thou art One of them. Psalm CIV. Benedic Anima mea. RIse O my Soul! and Thou My God! it raise, That I, by Thee inspir'd, may sing Thy praise. O Thou Eternal! O alone most high! With Honour circled, and with Majesty; Who dwell'st in the immense recess of Light Vested with Glories, which forbid our sight! Who spread'st out Heav'n, the Curtain of thy Tent; Guilding with glittring Orbs the Firmament; The firm Foundation of whose Pillars sleep In the unfathom'd Bosom of the Deep: Thy Chariot are the Clouds, sustained by The stormy Winds, upon whose wings they fly. Spirits thine Angels are; who minister To Thee; and thy bright Agents, slaming fire. Thou hast the Earth firmly established On Nothing; on the soft Air's floating Bed: It's Face at first was Sea; which flowing round Cover'd the uninhabitable ground.
Which, by thy vayce of Thunder check'd, retir'd Sunk down to th' Deep, and the Dry land appear'd. Like Mountains, now their Billows swell, and then Subside, and the faln Wave's a Vale agen. In vain they swell, and roar; they know their bound, And must no more invade th' usurped ground. Down from the Hills, the breaking Fountains flow, Which gliding on, through the rich Vallies go: These a Relief to thirsty Creatures yield, To all the Beasts oth' Forrest, and oth' Field. The neighb'ring Birds ith' Branches lodg'd, sing high Natures rich bounties, Food, and Liberty. The thirsty Hills He waters from above, No place on Earth's abandon'd by thy Love. The Clouds into the Bosom of the Earth The Seeds of Plenty drop; from whence their birth The tender Grass, and pow'rful Herb derive; Which, all thy Creatures, Beasts, and Men relieve. Men, taught t' improve thy Gifts;  from the Vine, The Corn, and Olive, gather Bread, and Wine, And Oyle: Thou giv'st Man strength, and dost allow For Joyes, for the glad Heart, and cheerful Brow, No Tree is sapless; bounteous Lebanon Sweats Balms, and Gums, and yields virtues unknown. There, the Birds nest; and to their safe heights flies 'The Storke; the Goat from a bold Precipice Looks down on danger, tim'rous Creatures dwell In Rocks; safe, in the Refuge of a Cell. Her certain Seasons the uncertain Moon Does know; and the Sun knowes his going down.
Thou makest Darkness that it may be Night; When Beasts of Prey do rowse, who shun the Light. The Lions roaring, seek their meat of God, And ravage in the Night the silent wood. When Day appears the Heard disbands, and then Each severing, betakes him to his Den. The day man's labour measures; he ith' morn Goes forth to work, and does at night return. Almighty Power and Wisdom! how immense Are th' undefin'd extents of Providence! Diffus'd through All, and over All the Earth, All have Relief from Thee, as All had Birth. Seas share thy gifts; Thousands ith' fertile deep Of Creatures, small and great, or swim, or creep. By Ships Lands sever'd mutual blessings hold; Ophir has Balsam, and Judea Gold. There moves Leviathan, and his numerous train, And all the sporting Monsters of the Main. All these, O Father! wait thy hand, and Thou In thine Own time do'st apt supplies allow. What thou do'st give they joyfully receive; And thine extended hand does All relieve. If thou do'st hide thy face, they drooping lye; And if thou tak'st away their breath, they dye. If thou send forth thy Spirit they revive; Dust wakes, the dying, or the dead shall live. Live ever! who do'st live Eternally; O Great! O Good! O termless Majesty! Who in thy self do'st ever bless'd abide; Pleas'd in thy works, and by them magnifi'd.
Earth trembles at thy Presence; the high Hills Touching he melts; and Day with horrour fills. Soul! while thou liv'st praise God; dying expire In praise, and mount to the immortal Quire. What Heav'n have I, when thus I joy in Thee! Can think, but cannot speak the Extasie. Let sinners perish! be their hated root Ne'er to be planted, from the earth torn out. Rise O my Soul! and Thou my God! it raise, That I, by Thee inspir'd, may sing thy praise. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CV. Confitemini Domino. O Bless the Lord, and call upon his Name, And his great deeds to all the world Proclaim Speak Him! Praise Him! O be our God alone, And His great works, the Subject of our Song. Seek God! Rejoyce in God! what soul can miss Of Joy, who makes his God his Happiness? Seek then, O seek his strength! his saving Pow'r; His favour seek; seek his face evermore. Think O ye sons of Jacob! think upon His righteous Lawes, his great salvation. He is our God; the worlds great God; His fear And his great judgments are known every where.
His Cov'nants unto Abraham made, stand fast, And firm to thousand thousand ages last, Made firm by Law; when to his Seed, of old He gave our Land, and Canaan foretold: Whilst they were yet but few, few and unknown; Seiz'd but of a believ'd Possession. Whom, through unknown Lands wandring, he sustain'd Peoples wild Rage, Princes wild Lusts restrain'd. Sacred to Me, Touch not th' Anointed Head! My Prophets to my self are severed. He call'd a Famine; but before h' had sent Joseph, unjustly doom'd to punishment. Held doubly Captive; for the bitter Chain Piere'd his griev'd soul, unmeriting the pain. Until thy word approv'd him to be thine, Who thy repeated Vision could divine. Freed by the King, he manag'd All alone, And Pharaoh only sate upon the Throne. He taught his Senate wisdom; to fulfil Unknown before, the Precepts of his will. Israel, invited, then, to Aegypt came; And Jacob was a sojourner in Ham. Where, He, to Aegypts jealousy, increas'd, By thine Almighty, fruitful promise, bless'd. Joseph was then forgot; his Merits were All sacrific'd to faithless, jealous Fear. Moses and Aaron then were sent; who gave Proofs of thy power to destroy, and save.
He spake.— Night rose, and his black Mantle spread; Darkness rebell'd not, though th' Aegyptians did. Nilus ran Bloud, and slew their Fish; the Field Cover'd with Frogs, Pharaoh's own Palace filld. Swarms of loath'd Insects he upon them flings, All arm'd with different invenom'd Stings: Hail-stones for Showers fell down; and Flames for Rain; Their blasted Vines and Fig-trees bare in vain. What scap'd the Flames, the Locusts did devour; The withering Grass, and half-scorcht, dying Flower, Pharaoh still hardned, the Almighty word In all the first born sheath'd th' Avenging Sword. Th' Aegyptians terrifi'd, urg'd them to be gone; Rich with hose spoyles, the ransom'd Host  on; All vigorous; cover'd with shade, and light, Th' alternate Wing spread o're them day and night. The Clouds rain'd Quails; and the Clouds Manna gave; And Rivers gusht out from the Rocks he clave. For he his sacred Oath had not forgot, To Abraham made, and those of him begot. Therefore, from Bondage he set Israel free; Set free ev'n 'bove the Joys of Liberty: For he gave them, what Others Toyles did yield, Their Sweat; and th' Plenties of the labour'd Field. Thus, God hath blessed thee, O Israel! Keep thou his Laws, and he will bless thee still.
Psalm CVI. Confitemini Domino. O Bless our God! because our God is Good; Because his Mercies have no Period. But who can speak enough his Acts? How great! How good! when they in All are infinite. Happy the Just who still work Righteousness; Offring pure Souls, cleans'd and prepar'd for Bliss. With those thy Favours which extended be To thy belov'd Ones, Lord! remember Me. O visit me with thy Salvation That I may see Israels Redemption! That Both joyn'd, They with Me, and I with Them May joy one Joy in thy Jerusalem. Such as our Fathers were, Such, Lord! are We; A Race of Sinners, their true Progeny. When freed from th' Bondage Aegypt held them in, Th' ungrateful Multitude ev'n then did sin: Sinn'd on the Bounds of Aegypt; whilst they stood By the next wonder, the miraculous Flood. Yet then he helpt them, that he might make known His Power in their full Redemption. He spake— The Sea rose high on either side, And op'ned the deepe valley of its Bed: The Host descended the dread way, which gave Them, Safety; but th' Aegyptians a Grave Then they believ'd again, and Then, sung high His Glory in the Red-Sea's victory.
But soon forg at his works; and to fulfill Their Lust, call'd for another Miracle. He gave't, but with it, gave a deadly Gust, And took their Lives the price of their dear Lust. Gainst Moses, then, and Aaron murmured, Envying those Guides by whom their God them led. Earth cleft; and having Nathan swallowd down, Coverd Abiram's Congregation. Then swift destruction on the Remnant came, Rapt by the Torrent of an angry flame. At Horeb, they out sinn'd Themselves; for there The ransom'd Israelite turn'd Idolater. Worshipt an Image; th' Image of a Beast; A God, in Hay, and plenteous Fodder blest. Forgat, renounc'd, the true, the living God, The God who sav'd Them from th' Aegyptian Rod. Forgat, what th' Red-Sea's Coast, what Aegypt tells, Aegypt, the dreadful Scene of Miracles. And now Th' had been destroy'd; But Moses stood Twixt them and vengeance, and turn'd back the Flood. Then, they contemn'd the Land, the Promis'd Land; Murmur'd, and hearkned not to God's Command. Wherefore he sware, that Race should ne'er possess His Canaan, but fall in th' Wilderness. Then, they serv'd Baal; and eat the Sacrifice Offer'd to th' Dead, serv'd whom, and how they pleas'd. This call'd a Plague; but from it they were freed By Phineas's still celebrated Deed. Then sinn'd at Meribah; where Moses spake Unfitly, and was punish'd for their sake.
They brake the Covenants upon which he gave Canaan to them, and did the Heathen save. Mingled with them; and by their customs led, Deserted God, and to the Devil fled: Learnt their abominabel Rites; and threw Their Babes to Devils, whom ith' fire they slew. Accursed Gods! Accursed Sacrifice! To whom, th' unpittied, flaming Infant dyes. Thus, by their own Inventions led away, From their first God, their first love, went astray. And leaving Him, his Israel were no more, But Canaan was the Canaan 'twas before, God loath'd them then; left them ith' Enemies power, To whose Religion they were slaves before. He oft deliver'd them, they as oft did sin, Snares of their own Opinions held them in: These bound them Captive; yet when they did cry He heard, and straight his Covenant was nigh; And God repented. O the unknown Love! The placable, the facile wraths above! He tenderly beheld them; swag'd their woes; Slackned their Chain by th' Pity of their Foes Save us Dear Lord! gather thy Remnant in; That thy Redeem'd may their Redemption sing. Bless'd ever, O for ever blessed be The God of Israel to Eternity! Let Israel, and all the world, joyn in An endless, universal praise! Amen. Hallelujah.
The FIFTH BOOK of the PSALMS, PARAPHRAS'D. PSALM CVII. Confitemini Domino. O Bless our gratious God! for ever bless! His Mercy's endless, shall his Praise be less? O let the Lord's Redeemed the Lord bless! Whom he hath saved from their Enemies. The scatter'd Remnant he hath gathered; Which round the Coasts of all the Earth were spread. The wandring Exiles, lost ith' Wilderness, No City found; All vast and harbourless. Consum'd with Hunger, and consum'd with Thirst, Fainted; their way unknown as at the first. No Refuge now, but God; to him they cry In this their last, dying Necessity.
He heard; And to a Place inhabited, By a near way, the famisht Party led. O Man! O that thou would'st Proclaim aloud The Mercies, and the Goodness of thy God! O that his wonders more Thou would'st confess! And that thou more could'st know him,more could'st bless, He satisfies the longing soul with good; Gives it the Plenty of Convenient Food. Such as sate nigh the deep, th' eternal shade Which hovering ouer them death's black wing had made, Who ith' low Cavern of the Dungeon lye, Fetter'd with chains; fetter'd with misery. Because against their God they did rebel, And slighted the greai counsel of his Will; Their stubborn heart he brake with heaviness, And made them see there was no help but his. Wherefore to God, till now despis'd, they cry'd; He heard; who never th'returning Heart deny'd. He brake their Chain; and from their Dungeon they Were freed into the Liberties of Day. O Man! O that thou would'st proclaim aloud The Mercies and the goodness of thy God! O that his wonders more thou would'st confess! And that thou more could'st know him, more could'st bless For he hath broke the Gates of Brass; and He Strook off the Fetters of Captivity. They whom their sins and follies had cast down, And on the Bed of Languishing had thrown, Now dying, for their sick tasts loath'd all food, And could not the expence of Life make good:
Cast up their eyes to him; beg a Reprieve; He sent his Word, bad them rise up and Live. O Man! O that thou would'st proclaim aloud The mercies and the goodness of thy God! O that his wonders more thou would'st confess! And that thou more could'st know him, more could'st bless Let's joyfully present Our Offering, For Incense, Praise; for Blood, Thanksgivingsbring. They who descend into the deep, behold A Scene of wonders dreadful to be told. He speaks—The stormy Winds inc the Flood, Whose waves, swoln high, menace the stooping Cloud. They mount the dreadful Precipice, and then By a steep, horrid Gulph, are swallow'd agen. They faint, the giddy Ship like a Drunkard reels, Art now despairs, the Ship no Rudder feels. The sacred Anchor they cast forth, they pray; He hears, he checks the storms, and th' winds obey. Then on the gentler Bosom of the Main Smoothly they glide, swiftly their Port attain. O man! O that thou would'st proclaim aloud The mercies and the goodness of thy God! O that his wonders more thou would'st confess! And that thou more could'st know him, more could'st bless. That they would in the Congregation, His Name exalt, and his great Facts make known. Who varyes the prone state of Mortal Things, Makes thirsty Deserts where before were Springs; Curses the fruitful soyles sinners dwell in, And blast the fairest Paradise for sin.
Makes fertile the parch'd Deserts withered scene, Fills it with Pooles; leades streaming Rivers in. There plants the hungry soul; bless'd in their Fields, And bless'd by th' Arts their peopled City yields. They Vineyards plant; labour the fertile Land; And wait th' Encrease from the great Donor's hand. He them and theirs doth multiplying bless; And suffers not their Cattle to decrease. Yet when for sin they were again brought down, To Plagues, to Vengeance, and th' Oppressor thrown, When they return'd to him with hearts prepar'd, The higher than the highest did regard. Threw scorn upon the Great; sham'd his success; And turn'd the Ravager to th' wilderness; Rais'd up the faln down; set him on a Rock 'Bove dangers, and encrcai'd him like a Flock. Behold ye just! and praise; learn praises from What ye behold; but let th' unjust be dumb. Who so these things revolves in his deep mind Is wise; and shall th' Almighties goodness find. Gloria of four Verses. Psalm CVIII. Paratum est Cor meum. MY hearts prepar'd, O God! Thou do'st inspire My soul; It kindles and returns the fire.
Wake Glory! wake my soul! ere rising day Chaces Night's falling languid fires away. Sing his loud Praise among the Nations! Extend it wide as his Dominions. Extend it 'bove the Clouds! 'bove th' Heavens extend! Mercy and Truth reach thither where's no end. Exalt thy self 'bove th' Heavens O thou most High! And through allth' earth diffuse thy Majesty. That thy Beloved, who thy help do crave May be delivered; O hear and save! And thou wilt save; wilt the torn Remnant bless; For thou hast sworn, sworn in thy Holyness, I will, in triumph, Sichem's Land divide, And give to mine Succoth's rich vallies pride. Mine is Manasses, mine fair Gilead's Fields; Ephraim's my guard; Judah my Scepter wields, Moab shall serve; Edom I down will tread; And the bold Philistins in triumph lead. Who into Edom's Forts secures my way? And its proud Towers shall in Ruines lay? Who Lord! but thou? who thine Inheritance Deserring, ruind'st; returning shalt advance. O turn to thy distressed ones again! Be Thou our help, for All Man's help is vain. Trod down by thee, our enemies shall flee, And we shall rise; Great God! we follow thee.
Psalm CIX. Deus laudem. GOD of my praise! appear in my defence, And vindicate aspersed Innocence. For the dissembling, false, malitious tongue Blasts my cleanefame, conspiringin my wrong. I gave no cause; they make this false return For th' Good I did; whil'st I in prayer mourn. For th' Good Idid they now my En'myes prove, Convicted of no Crime to them, but Love An impious Person be thei Governour, And Satan be his only Counsellour. When he is sentenc'd, let him be condemn'd, And his appealing prayer be contemn'd. Ith' mid'sl of Life cut off his shortned daies, And to his Function another raise. His Widdow and his Orphans beg their Bread, From their own wasted dwellings curs'd and fied: Give him a prey to the Extortioner! And to a Stranger his rapt spoyles transferre. Let no eye pitty Him, or His; but All His Race in the next Age extinguish'd, fall. His Parents Crimes be ever New; till he And his loath'd Memory together dye. Because he shut up his Compassion, Oppress'd the Poor, th' expos'd, the helpless one.
Trod down again th' Afflicted; and yet more The grieved Heart brake that was broke before. Cursing was his delight; let it return; And the devouring pest his own heart burn. He hated Blessing; Blessing shall be far And fly the soul that Cursing loves, and war. Curses embrace him! flow into his breast Like Oyl! be girded to him as his Vest. Let it be thus unto mine Enemies Who my wrong'd Innocence defame with Lyes. But, for thine honour, let me ever prove Thy mercyes, and the goodness of thy Love. For I am poor and helpless; Mercy extend! And swage the anguish of my wounded mind! As shadows hast, hasts my declining day; Chac'd, as storms chace the Grashopper away. Fasts have impair'd my strength; all that go by Shaking their heads, revile my misery. Help Lord! so help, that they convinc'd may see All my deliverance was wrought by Thee. Bless Thou! that they, confounded, may confess They him in vain do curse, whom Thou do'st bles Let that confusion cover them! whilst I Rejoyce, and my Redeemer magnify. Whilst, before All, thy Goodness I adore; Who, from unrighteous Judges, sav'st the poor. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm CX. Dixit Deminus. TH' Eternal Lord said to my Lord, sit thou At my Right hand, till thy faln en'mies bow, Subdu'd, beneath thy feet: Thy Scepter shall From Zion sent, rule high, rule over All. Hearts shall be then the willing Sacrifice; Hearts, roab'd ith' beauties of true Holiness. The humid dews oth' Morn are as thy Birth, In thousand thousand Gems shed o're the Earth. Thou art, God sware, who cannot his Oath break, A Priest for ever as Melchisedeck. The Lord in thy great day, at thy Right hand Shall strike through Kings, and give Thee their Com∣mand, He shall the Nations judge; and th' Regions fill With Carcasses of those who do rebel. Shall be, by sufferance, to Honour led; Drink oth' low Brook, and then advance his Head Psalm CXI. Confitebor Tibi. I will in every place thy Name confess, Ith' Great Assembly praise thee, and ith' less.
Gods works are Great; the pleasure of all Those Who find them Out; Or rap't with wonder, loose. All full of Glory; full of Honour, All; And his firm Righteousness Perpetual. No Day can blot out what's renew'd each Day; Whilst on his works, his signal Blessings stay. And ev'ry Moment, All his Creatures prove The Goodness of their Lord, and Present Love. Of Those who fear Him, He supplies the want; Mindful for ever of his Covenant. His People saw the Power of his Hand, When He gave them the vanquishd Heathens Land. His stable works on firm Foundations rise; Their Natures, All, Eternal verities. And, As his Works, his Laws for ever be; All done in Truth; All done in Equity. On the lost, captiv'd Soul, in Bondage thrown Mercy lookt down, and sent Redemption. He stablished his Cov'nant without End; O Holy ever! ever Reverend! Wisdom is founded in God's Fear; All They True Understanding have, who him obey; And who, their Wills, guide by that stedfast Rein, Immortal Praise, and Glory shall attain. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm CXII. Beatus Vir. WHO, in the Law of God doth place his Bliss, And fears his Maker, Happiness is his. His Seed upon the Earth shall potent be, And Blessings follow his Posterity. A flowing Plenty pours in full supplies; But his ne'er wasting store is Rightcousness. On the just Soul, th' upright, compassionate, Who Pity does extend, but not his Hate; Midst his dark thoughts, midst the despairing Night Of Terrors, breaks in a descending Light. He, with Discretion, governs his Affairs; Lends to the Poor, and his faln State repaires. Nor Time, nor Malice, blast his Memory; Those wreaths, his vertues crown, ne'er withring dye. Midst the World's Changes, He unchang'd appears, Nor rais'd by Hopes, nor terrifid by Fears. Amidst great Rumors, unconcern'd He stands; Resign'd up to the Conduct of God's Hands. He trusts his Cause unto his God; and sees God glorified upon his Enemies. He, by dispersing, has encreas'd his Store; And made his fruitful Treasury, the Poor. Glories hereafter, Glories here below Wait him, who reaps the Honour to bestow.
With Malice pin'd, th' Unjust shall melt and dye; He, and his Hopes, shall perish utterly. Gloria of four Verses. Psalm CXIII. Laudate Pueri. YE Servants of the living God, Praise Him! Whose Praise, no place can circumscribe, nor time. O're all the Earth, as the Sun sheds his Rays, So undefin'd the Circuits are of Praise. Above the Heav'ns is his Dominion; And over all the Kings of Earth, his Throne. Who's High, like God? Who must descend, to know Th' Affairs of Heav'n; yet stoops to these Below. Rais'd from the Dust, th' ignoble He makes Great; And among Princes, does the lowly set. He makes the Barren, fruitful; makes Her be The Mother of a happy Progeny. Psalm CXIV. In exitu Israel. WHen God his Israel from Aegyt led, And the triumphant Host Himself did head, His Holy Place was Judah; his high Throne Israel, the Seat of his Dominion.
The Sea beheld the glorious March, and fled; Jordan ran frighted back into his Head. Mountains astonished Heights, Horrour convells, Dancing like Rams; like Lambs, the lesser Hills. Jordan! what aild'st thou? And what ail'd thee, Sea? What Earthquakes, Hills! did in your Bowels lye? But how can Earth but tremble at its God? Who, from Flints, pours a Spring; from Rocks, a Flood. Psalm CXV. Non Nobis Domine. NOT unto Ʋs be Praise; Not unto Ʋs; But be thy ruth, and Mercy glorious. Where was their God might then the Heathen say, If we should boast, We gave Our selves the Day. 'Twas not Our Arm gave us the Victory; But thine from Heav'n; for what thou will'st shall be. Their Gods, are Gold and Silver; form'd by Man; Gods, that can do less than their Makers can. They gave them Mouths, and Eyes, Noses, and Ears; Yet the blind God sees not, tasts, smells, or hears. Their useless Hands and Feet, nor feel, nor walk; Nor through their Throat, the breathless Idols talk. Who makes Them, as much Idol is as They; Or who to th' carv'd, or painted God, does pray.
But trust in God, Thou House of Israël! Make Him thy Hope; He can defend, and will. O House of Aaron! on thy God rely; Hee'll be thy Strength; Hee'll thy Defender be. And O All Ye who fear the living Lord, Trust Him! for He will sure Relief afford. And this, both Aarons House, and Israël, Whom He their God remembred has, can tell. All those who fear the Lord, his Blessings share; The Great are his; the Poor Man is his Care. To you, and yours God shall extend his Love; The God who made the Earth, and th' Heav'ns above. The Heav'ns O God! the Heav'n of Heav'ns is thine; These Praise Thee; Earth's giv'n to the Sons of Men. But on the Earth, They who ith' Grave do sleep Coverd with Night, a lasting Silence keep. The Living then, the Living must Praise Thee, As we do now, and will eternally. Psalm CXVI Dilexi quoniam. MY soul O God! is ravish'd with thy Love; For Thou hast heard, and sav'd Me from above. The Breath Thou hast redeem'd, Thee Praise shall give, And I will ever bless Thee whilst I live.
Caught in Death's Snares, and drag'd to th' Brink oth' Grave, Now falling, his Almighty help I crave. O Thou! who woundest, and again mak'st whole, Who to the Grave hast brought, bring back my Soul. Our God is good; Our God is righteous; From Him, All Mercy, All Compassion flows; He does the Simple, the ensnared free; I was in Misery, and He helped Me. Turn then unto thy Rest, My Soul! O bless'd! O Care of Heav'n! Return unto thy Rest! For he, thy weak, thy falling Step retriev'd, Dry'd up thy Tears, and gasping Breath repriev'd. Wherefore, sustain'd by Thee, I'll walk upright Ith' Land oth' Living; walk, as in thy sight. Midst my Afflictions, I did still believe; Said, Man's Help's false; God only can relieve. What, O my Soul! shall we return to God, For All the Benefits He has bestowd? Let's tast, and Live! Receive that Cup will crown Us with the Joys of his Salvation. I'll pay my Vows. How pretious is the Death Of Thine, to Thee, who thus lend'st back their Breath! Behold the Soul Thou hast delivered! Brake every Chain, and made it free indeed. I'lI bring the Heart which I have vow'd to Thee; And on that Altar, Praise shall th' Incense be.
All shall behold; All shall with Me accord; And All Jerusalem shall Praise the Lord. Psalm CXVII. BLess God, O All ye distant Regions! Whom Place does sever, but whom, mercy joyns. Mercy renewing still; His Truth and Love Are everlasting as the Days above. psalm. CXVIII. Consitemini Domino. O give we thanks unto our gracious God, Because his Mercies have no Period. Let Israel's House, and Aarons, bless their God; And say His Mercies have no Period. And O! Let All who fear the living God Confess his Mercies have no Period. To straits reduc'd, and hard nccessity. Calling He Me enlarg'd, and set Me free. The Lord is on my side; Whom should I fear? Who's He can hurt, when the Almighty's near? I, on my Foes, his just Revenge shall see, For, with mine Aids, God joynes Auxiliary. Nor Small, nor Great, nor Subject, nor his Prince, Confirm, as does Our God, Our Confidence.
A dreadful Multitude, not to be told, Compass'd Me round about, enrag'd and bold. But in the name of God, I'll charge the Foe; Break Him, and in that pow'rful Name o'rethrow. They swarm'd like Bees, but fell to that Great Name; So Thorns, make a loud Noise but dye ith' flame. Vain Wretch! Who mad'st at Me that I might fall; As if o're Him God aids, Man could prevail. God is my Strength; and He my strength's my Song: And He, alone, is my Salvation. The just, triumphant, sing through all their Land The Conquests of his high, victorious Hand. Sing, how no force, nor pow'r, can e're withstand The Conquests of his high victorious Hand. I shall not dye, but live; and him, who rais'd My Soul from Death, my Soul shall ever Praise. The Lord hath chastned, and corrected Me, But sav'd; O Goodness 'bove Severity! Let All the Gates of Praise be op'ned then, That with Thanksgivings I may enter in. This is the Gate; this is the glorious Gate; Which all the Just, with Praise, shall enter at. Thee, O my God! I'll Praise; Thee, Praise alone; Who art become my strong Salvation. The Stone, refus'd, the Stone, a Scandal made, Binds now the Building on the Angle laid. This is Gods doing; This, He did for Ʋs; His Deed, and Love, alike, are marvellous.
O Sacred Light! O blessed Day of Dayes! Design'd for Glories, set apart for Praise. Now, save us Lord! Now, give us Happiness; And fill our Souls with thy descended Bliss. Hail! O immortal Love! Hail! Light of Light! Thy Glories in thy Temple wee'l recite. God, is the God, who gives us Light, and Bliss; To th' Horns oth' Altar binde the Sacrifice, Thee, O our God! I'll Praise; still honour thee; Thee worship still; still, I'll The magnify. O give we thanks unto our gracious God! Because his Mercies have no Period. Psalm CXIX. Beati immaculati. 1 Part Aleph. HAppy those blameless Souls, whose righteous Path The just Law of their God directed hath. Whose whole Affection, and aspiring Love, Taught by his Laws, seek Him who is above. No stains pollute their Soul; Nor can they stray Who shun the false, keep the commanded way. O that my erring, my declining ways Were measur'd and directed by thy Laws! So shall no vice seduce Me; no Offence, Nor conscious Guilt shame my sttain'd Innocences
O then instruct me in thy Righteousness. And with a Heart unfeign'd I shall thee bless. My Soul, O Lord, desires to keep thy way; O leave me not! but guide Me that I may. Gloria of two Verses. 2 Part. Beth. How shall vain youth subdue its prone desires? Thy Law will either quench, or cleanse its Fires. That Law is all my Love; Lord! I seek thee By seeking It; O guide and govern Me! Thy Law's my Rule; I'Ve wrote it in my Breast; O be it by thy self more deep impress'd! I have set forth thy Law; declar'd thy word; And the unknown Delights thy ways afford. There I incorruptible Treasures find; Gold, that will follow hence, and crown the Mind. Thy word I'll study; and then frame my will T' obey; and what I Know, with Joy, fulfill. Part 3. Gimel. Lord let me live! so live, as to serve Thee: Unveil mine Eyes I may thy wonders see. I'me here a stranger, and like One, I stray; Direct my wandring Soul in thy right way. My longing Soul thy Judgements still desires; And fainting, languishes in no Other Fires.
The Proud, Thou cursest, who contemn thy Law; O save Me from their Scorn, who it obey. Princes revile Me cause I Thee obey; And follow the great Counsels of thy way. Gloria of two Verses. Part 4. Daleth. Low as the Dust, and cleaving to the Dust, Lord raise the Soul that in thy Word does trust! I have confess'd my ways, and Thou hast heard; O teach Me thine! and teach Me to regard. Make Me to understand! Wake my dead Eyes! Reveal! and I shall teach thy Mysteries. My Soul, despairing, melts thro Heaviness; O cheer it with thy faithful Promises! I love fair Truth; abominate a Lye; Teach Me thy Truth, O Lord of Verity! I love thy Law, confound Me not! but free The Captive, and enlarg'd, He'l follow Thee. Part 4. He. Instruct Me Lord! and I'll observe thy Law For ever; and with my whole Heart, obey. But guide Me, Lord! that in the Paths I know, And love, by thine Assistance I may go. Teach me thy Lawes! by them, in Thee to trust; Dethrone my self, and All the Gods of Lust!
O close mine Eyes to Vanity! and then Fix'd on thy Statutes, wake them up agen. O Lord of Truth! confirm thy word to Me; Encrease my Confidence and Fear in Thee. Thy Law is good; Turn back the shame I dread From Those, who scorn those ways by which I'me led. My longing Soul faints for thy Laws, and Thee; Behold it Lord! and quickning, satisfy. Gloria of two Verses. Part 6. Vau. Since Thou hast Promised to help, and I Did ever on that Promis'd Help rely; Help! that my Foes may see, how thy Defence Was never vain, nor vain my Confidence. O may my Mouth still boast that Promis'd Word! And equal to my Hopes, Relief afford! So shall I keep thy Laws continually; Bound by those Laws, whose Bonds are Liberty. Before the Great, thy Laws I will declare; And boast, what above All, I love and fear. Unto thy Laws I've lifted up mine Hand And vow'd t' observe and keepthy lov'd Commands Part 7. Zain. Unto my wounded Soul, My God! apply That Word, on which Thou mad'st Me to rely.
Joys, thence, ith' Agonies of despairing Grief, Quickning my anguish'd Soul, give it New Life. Tho mock'd by th' Proud, who dare blaspheme thy Law, I'me not asham'd of thy derided way. For I find Comfort when I think upon Thy Judgements 'gainst my Foes, and for thine Own. A Horrour seizes Me when I perceive Th' Apostate wretches who without Thee live. Thy Laws are my continual Song; for they Are my sole Comfort in my House of Clay. Thinking on Thee, Darkness to Me's no Night; Who keep thy Precepts, dwell in unseen Light. Gloria of two Verses. Part 8. Cheth. Thy Word's my Portion, Lord! I nought possess Beyond that Wealth, rich in thy Promises. O satisfy my longing Soul! afford Thy promis'd Aid according to thy word. I did, reflecting, judge of mine Own way; Abhorr'd it, and sought thine without delay. I'me rob'd of All by th' spoiler, and unjust; But 'bove their Reach, They've left Me still my Trust. At Midnight Lord! I will arise, and bless Thy pow'rful Judgments, and thy Righteousness. Those who observe thy Precepts, and fear Thee, I love; and joyn in their Society.
Thy Mercies, Lord! the spations world do fill O teach my grateful Heart to do thy will. Part 9. Teth. Lord! As thy Word, so have thy Mercies been; Instruct Me! for that word I've trusted in. In my Prosperity I went astray, Affliction has reduc'd me into th' way. Teach Me thy Laws! that I may, knowing Thee, O onely Good! gain true Felicity. The Proud have falsly flanderd me, but I Fram'd by thy Laws, my Actions justify. They swell, and reap all the Worlds Happiness. Whilst I, another way am led to Bliss. Afflictions are my Guide; by Them, I'm brought To know thy Laws, by surer Methods taught. There, I possess a Treasure firm, and stable. And 'bove their Thousands, choose th' invaluable. Gloria of two Verses. Part 10. Jod. Perfect, O God! the Creature of thine Hands; Finish his Mind, inspir'd with thy Commands! All They who fear Thee will rejoyce with Me, When the Successes of my Hopes they see. My Hopes far higher, from Afflictions rise; For out of Faithfulness thou dost Chastise. But midst those Tryals, thy Supports afford! For such, Lord! is the Promise of thy Word.
O Raise Me then! Grant that my Soul may live! Live, bless'd in the Delights thy Laws do give. Shame Those, Me wound with causeless violence; Who only think on Thee, and thy Defence. They who fear Thee, and have thy Judgements known, Shall turn to Me, and Both, trust Thee alone, Grant, in thy ways, my Heart may Persevere! For I shall ne'er be asham'd that God I fear. Part 11. Caph. My Soul doth faint for thy Salvation, But firmly trusts what thy sure word makes known. But when, O Lord? When wilt Thou comfort me? When shall my longing Eyes Deliverance see? I'm like a Bladder, in the Smoak, or Guard; Wrinckled, and shrunk; yet still I trust thy Word. My days are few, and to their period tend, Shall They, ere thou redress my Wrongs, have end? They falsly persecute me; their Laws are Snares; Unlike, thy just ones Lord! i' my Help declare. They'd almost ruin'd me, yet I kept thy Law; My God relieve me, for I'le still obey! Part 12. Lamed. Thy word that made the Heav'ns, as Heav'n endure, Ages pass off, thy faithfulness stands sure Cause of All Things! All Things on Thee do stay; For All Thy Servants are, and Thee obey.
If in thy word I had not found Relief, I soon had Perish'd, in my fatal Grief. Quickned by it, I'le never it decline; O save me! for by keeping it I'me thine. In Vain the Sinner threats, his Hate must end; But thy Salvations beyond end extend. Gloria of two Verses. Part 13. Mem. Lord! How I love; and what abundant Cause Have I to love, and to observe thy Laws! The Subtleties of Foes;  Science Wise; And Prudence of the Aged, fall to these. My Actions do express my Love, for they Shun Ill; He falsly loves who walks astray. These, taught by Thee, I keep; Honey has less Of sweetness, than to Souls, thy Promises. Thy Precepts, Me unto true Wisdom raise; Therefore I hate the low false sensual ways. Gloria of two Verses. Part 14. Nun. Thy Word is to my Feet, as in the Night To the stray'd Traveller a directing Light. I've sworn, and have resolved to persist In keeping of thy Judgements; Lord! assist. I am cast down, O raise me up again! And, as thy Word has promised, sustain.
Teach Me thy Laws! so teach, that I may keep! And take from th' Heart, the Sacrifice oth' Lip. A Death still threatned, a prepared Snare, Make not my stedfast Soul, from thee, to erre. Thy Word's the Joy, and Portion of my Mind; And what that Word directs, I'll keep to th' End. Part 15. Samech. I hate vain Thoughts, and wild Opinions hate; But on thy Law, and known Truths meditate. Lord! All my safety's in thy Word and thee; Depart ye workers of Iniquity! Sustain my Life! Thy Promises are just; And let Me not be ashamed of my Trust. Sustain Me Lord! so shall I ever be Safe, and observe thy Laws continually. Thy Judgements, on the Dross of all Mankind, Does my experienc'd Trust to thy Laws bind. But Lord! I dread, and fear what most I trust; Ev'n their Examples fear, for who is Just? Part 16. Ain. I do what's Right; Cast me not out to Those Who unto Me and Righteousness are Foes. And, that th' Oppressour do not injure Me, Be Thou thy self the great Security! Mine Eyes look up to Thee, and looking faint; Till thou thy promised Salvation grant,
Pity thy Servant, for thy Servant's thine; Inform his Soul, and to thy Laws incline. 'Tis time, O Lord! t' exert thy powrful Hand, For they've made void, and cancell'd thy Command. Because the wicked, hate; thy Law, I prize; Shun Ill; and above Gold, choose Righteousness. Part 17. Pe. How wonderful, O Lord! thy Precepts are; Wherefore my ravish'd Soul does them revere, For, when thy Word Our faln Heat reinspires, The Simple's Wise; and Souls renew their Fires. My Soul O God! which pants, and gasps for Thee, And thy Command, possess! and satisfy. O Look! so Lord! in Mercy look on Me, As Thou art wont on Those who honour Thee. Guide my frail steps, by thy just Rules defin'd; And be thy Word sole Regent of my Mind! From man, oppressing man, thy servant free! Shine, Lord! and Teach; shine, Lord! and succour me. O shine on him, who, jealous for his God, For Sinners pours down a continual Flood. Gloria of two Verses. Part 8. Tsaddi. Lord! Thou are Just; and All thy Acts upright, All thy Commands are Verity, and Right. My Zeal consumes me, when I see my Foes Desert thy Laws, and their Own Counsells choose.
Choose what's adulterate, and refuse the Gold Which the just Test of the last fire does hold. Lord! I am Poor; low, and of no repute; Of All things but thy precepss, destitute. They still remain, and will eternally; For Righteousness and Truth immortal be. I'me Pain'd, and griev'd, but thy Word yields Relief Ith' lingring Torments of an anguish'd Life. Thy Laws, O God! Eternal are; O give My Soul true knowledge, that it still may live. Gloria of two Verses. Part 19. Koph. With my whole Heart, to Thee, My God! I cry; Lord save! and my Soul, rescu'd, shall serve Thee. Night slowly comes, and the Morn rises late, I, Both prevent; and on Thee meditate. Lord hear! Hear Lord! as Thou art wont to hear; And my Soul's drooping, languid Heats repair. Lord! thine, and my declared Foes draw nigh; But Thou art nigh too, Lord of Verity! I've known of Old, thy Testimonies be All sure; All stablish'd to Eternity. Gloria of two Verses. Part 20. Resh. My God! consider mine adversity; And, cause thy Word's my Trust, deliver Me.
Plead Thou my Cause! my oppressed Soul relieve! And, As thy Word has promised, revive. The impious Wretch, thy Health descendsnot on; Who keeps no Law, finds no Salvation. Thy Mercy's great; Raise Me, O Lord! and free Me from my numerous Foes, who still serve Thee. I love thy Law, and for transgressours grieve; Think how I love, my God! and me revive. Thy Word, and thy just Judgements stedfast be; All measurd by the same Eternity. Part 21. Schin. Princes me Persecute without a Cause, But 'bove their Threats, Lord! I revere thy Laws. And 'bove their joys, who ample spoils do find, Thy Word's Eternal Treasure joys my Mind. I hate the low, base treachery of a Lye, But honour thy great Law of Verity. Sev'n times a day, thy Name I magnify Great God! because thy Judgements righteous be. What unknown Peace have they, whose Conscience, Fram'd by thy Laws t' it self gives no Offence. My God! I wait for thy Salvation; For thy Commandments I have lov'd, and done. I keep thy Laws, fear Thee, and walk upright; For thou art still in mine, I, in thy sight. Gloria of two Verses. Part 22. Tau.
Hear Lord! and teach; hear, Lord save! From Ignorance, and from Adversity. Teach me O Lord! and my instructed Tongue free Me Shall make thy righteous Precepts my glad Song. Thy Precepts are my Choice; my Joys alone; Help Lord! grant thy desir'd Salvation. Reverse thy Judgements, Lord! Let my Soul live! And taught by Thee, my Soul shall Praises give. Like a lost Sheep, wandring, I've gone astray; O seek! O turn the stray'd into the way. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CXX. Ad Dominum. I cry'd to God in mine Adversity, Save, Lord! from the false Lip, and tongues that lye. Darts sharp as thine; Coals quick as thine own Fire, (Know thy reward, false Tongue!) shall be thy hire. Unhappy me! condemn'd to Mesech's Tent, In savage Kedar thrown to Banishment; My Soul hath dwelt, long dwelt, midst th' Enemies Of what all earthly Blessings blesses, Peace.
I offer Peace, and it's fair steps prepare; But their rough brutish Souls are all for War. Psalm CXXI. Levavi Oculos. SHall I to th' Mountains tops look up, and thence From th' Refuge of their Heights, expect defence? False Refuge! I've no hope but in his name Who made the Earth, and th' Heavens stupendious Frame. He, thy weak, steps, firm, and assur'd will keep; His care who watches o'r thee ne'er does sleep; The Guards which have the care of thee receiv'd Ne'er sleep; All watchful still, yet ne'er reliev'd. Himself's thy Guard; no Sun shall hurt by day, Nor in the night, the Moon's pale humid Ray. His constant favour shall thy ways attend, Shall keep thy Soul, shall keep it without end. psalm. CXXII. Laetatus sum. NOw the returning year presents the days When our glad Feet, shall meet ith' house of Praise. Our Feet Jerusalem! shall stand in thee, O bless'd! O City built by Unity.
All Tribes to th' Ark of witness come, not one Dissenting Israelite straggles alone. For thy fair Mount, the seat of Judgments on; Th' exalted Seat of his Anoynted's Throne. O pray for th' Peace of our Jerusalem! They, who shall seek thy Bliss, God shall bless them. Peace be within thy Walls! and Plentiousness The fruit of Peace, within thy Palaces. For my lov'd Brethrens sakes, all Israel's Pace, May thee, all Bliss, all happiness embrace! But more, for th' House of God, may all be powr'd On thee that's good, from his own goodness showr'd. Psalm CXXIII. Ad Telocavi Oculos. ALL-seeing power! who, from thy sacred Throne On all the Creatures of thy Hand look'st down, Behold thy People! who, with tender Eyes, As chastned servants wait, low, and submisse Wait for thy Mercy; and shall still attend. Till thou, appeased, shalt their chastnings end. Have Mercy Lord! for with the lowest scorn Of the Disdainful, Sloathful, Proud w' are torn. We, low in Misery, and dejected lye; And their Contempt treds on that Misery. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm CXXIV. Nisi quia Dominus. IF God himself had not our strength sustain'd, And his own Arm our vanquish'd Right main∣tain'd Our Foes had swallow'd us alive; when they To Fury, quitting all that's Just, gave way. To th' Rage of the deaf Waves we had been thrown, And by the Torrent of the Proud born down. But bless'd be God, who snatch'd our Souls away, And from their Jaws, rapt the despayring Prey. As the lost Bird flatter'd into the Net By the deceit of th' treacherous Fowler set, Mounts up when some kind Hand breaks the false Snare: Our cheated Souls,so caught, so rescu'd are. Father of Being! from whom we took our Breath, Thou onely who giv'st Life, canst save from Death. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CXXV. Qui Confidunt. WHo, under the Almighty's shade Gather'd, his wing, their trust have made, Shall firm as his own Sion stand; Which ne'er can move, by him sustain'd.
And, as our safe Jerusalem Hills compass; so the Lord does Him. The Rod of the Ungodly must Not rest ith' Portion of the Just: Least He, thinking Himself forgot, Murmur, and perish with his Lot. O Thou! who dost all Good impart, Do good to the upright in Heart. But Those, who do perversly stray With Sinners God shall them destroy. Whilst that 'fair Wing where Peace doth dwell Shall overshadow Israël. Psalm CXXVI. In convertendo. WHen Judgement was appeas'd, and from on High, Mercy lookt down on our Captivity; Amaz'd as men who joyful Visions see, We thought we had but dreamt a Liberty: But, when we found it true, the Vision fled, But the dear Ravishments, and high Joys abide. The very Heathen said, what has God done? What wonders Israel's, God, for Israel shown? What th' Heathen, Lord! attest, we, more confess; Confess thy Mercies, and confessing, bless. Return, O Lord! and all thy Israel free; Bring back the whole redeem'd Captivity,
Turn us, as Southern Floods that plenty bring; So turn back, Lord! the flowing Remnant in. The Soul shall reap in Joy, which sows in Tears; The bounteous Harvest shall discount its Fears. Who weeping sows, but sows good Seed, shall come, Shall doubtless come with Joy, and full Sheaves home. Psalm CXXVII. Nisi Dominus. EXcept the Lord the prosp'rous Building raise, Man, the Foundation of a Ruine lays. Except the City's Guard, God undertakes, The careful sleepless Watchman in vain wakes. In vain, ye early rise; and late sit up; The Bread of Sorrow eat, and drink its Cup; From anxious cares, He, his belov'd doth keep; He gives what's fit; and the Contented, sleep. Their happy Issue's an Inheritance; And does th' encreased Parent's strength advance. They are like Arrows in a strong mans Hand; And He, by Them, his Enemies, shall withstand.
Psalm CXXVIII. Beati Omnes. BLessed art Thou who dost thy Maker fear; And in his righteous ways dost persevere. Thy lab'ring Hand shall what's enough, supply; O happy Man! O safe Felicity! Like as the Vine thine House does beautify; So fair thy Wise shall, and so fruitful be. Children about thy Table shall be spread Like Olive Plants; and there, contented, sed. Thus, shall the Man be bless'd who fears the Lord; Bless'd with the Blessings Sion does afford. Thou, Aged, shalt thy Children's Children see: And all thy days, Israels Prosperity. Psalm CXXIX. Saepe expugnaverunt Me. FRom my youth up, They oft have Me assail'd May Israel say; but never have prevail'd. The Ploughers plough'd long Furrows on my Back; But God, who's just, the Cords oth' wicked brake. So perish all their cruel Snares, and They Who, to their Malice, Sion would betray!
Be they like Grass, which on th' House-tops does spring; Does dying, spring; and grows up, withering. Which, nor the Hand, nor Bosom fills with Sheaves: Nor Any passing by, One good wish gives. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CXXX. De profundis. FRom out the Depths of Horrour, Fear and Care, Where conscious Guilt still wakes and black des∣pair, To thee, O Lord! my anguish'd Soul does fly, Lord hear Me! and admit my woful cry. If Thou, O Righteous Judge! shouldst be extream And let thy Justice urge, and try each Crime, O! Who? Who may abide? Who's He, of All The Sons of Men but must, condemned, fall? But Mercy, O our God's! with thee, that we For Mercy, may revere thy Majesty. That Mercy, Lord! I wait; wait for as they Tir'd with a restless Night, who wait for Day, And Lord! I shall not wait in vain; O just Of Promise! O faithful of that Word I trust! Trust then in God, My Soul! his Love's unknown; The Plenty of his full Redemption.
O Israel! trus My Soul! trust God with them. Hee'l Them, and Thee, from all Our Sins redeem. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CXXXI. Domine non est. LOrd! I'm not proud! have no disdainful Eye; Scorn not the Mean, nor Him who's lefs than Me. Nor does my bold presumptuous Reason pry Proud of its Strength, on Mysteries too high. But like a weaned Child, my Soul I wean From Pride without, and greater Pride within. For what, Proud Clay! can thy Self profit thee? O Israel! trust in God; thy self deny. Psalm CXXXII. Memento Domine. REmember David's Troubles, Lord! and how He to th' Almighty sware, and vow'd a Vow, I'll not come in mine House; will not ascend My Bed; no Sleep shall to mine Eyes descend, Until I find a Dwelling for my God; And separate a Place for his abode. Lord! we have heard, thy Ark to-fore has stood At Ephraeta; where we found it in the Wood.
But in thy Sanctu'ry 'tis seated Now, Where we, before thy Footstool; lowly bow. Arise, O Lord! Thou, and the dispossess'd Ark of thy Strength, and come into thy Rest. Let Stoles of Righteousness thy Priests invest! And by thy Saints, be thy glad Praise express'd. Bless thine Anointed, Lord! for David's sake: To whom, Thou didst thysfaithful Promise make; If thy Sons keep my Laws, their Sons shall set For ever, on the Throne of David's Seat. As their Obedience to my Laws  shown, So lasting shall their days be on the Throne. The Lord hath Sion made his Own Abode, The Choice, and the Peculiar of its God. Here will I fix my everlasting Seat; Here, ever rest; for Sion's my Delight. Plenty shall make her Stores, and give forth Bread To th' Poor; who by her Bounty shall be fed. I'll cloath her Priests with my Salvation; With whom, my joyful Saints in Praise shall joyn. There David I'll exalt; and round his Head Wreath'd with his Pow'r, a circling Glory spread. Upon his Foes, I'll pour Confusion; But on Himself, plant his still flourishing Crown. Gloria of Four Verses.
psalm CXXXIII. Ecce quam bonum. O Unity! Coelestial Unity! Where Good, and Pleasant, in One, joyned be; Where Peaceful Brethren do consent in Thee, How bless'd to All, is the bless'd Harmony! As when on Aaron's consecrated Head The pretious Unguents, and the Dews were shed, Flow'd down his Beard; from whence, the lowest Hemm Oth' sacred Vest, was lav'd by th' Balm-like stream. And as from Hermon's Hill, descending Rain Falling, enriches all the humble Plain: Or, as both Sion's Tops, the melting Dew And th' Valley's with'ring Verdure does renew. On All the Peaceful, so, from God descends A Present Bliss, and One that never ends. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CXXXIV. Ecce Nunc. YE Servants of the Lord, who by Night, stand In his bless'd Courts, fulfilling his Command,
Lift up pure Hands! Lift up pure Hearts on high! And bless, and Praise Him in his Sanctu'ry. And Thou, who dost Him Praise ith' Sanctu'ry, The Lord from out his Sanctu'ry bless Thee! Psalm CXXXV. Laudate Nomen. O Praise the Lord ye Servants of the Lord Who tread his Courts! All in his Praise accord! Sing Praise! Speak Praise! The God is good we Praise Sing Praise! for pleasant are the Heavn'ly Lays. Sing Praise O Israel! his Name advance Who hath chose Thee for his Inheritance, For 'bove all Gods, Our God is God alone; And 'bove all Powers his exalted Throne. For what e'te He has will'd is done; in Heav'n In Earth and Sea; his Will, Them, Laws has giv'n Natures Recesses He buried low ith' Deep, Which, unto Man, dark and unfathom'd sleep. He licenses and th' stormy Tempests binds; Ʋnbarrs his Treasury, and lets forth the Winds. The Lightnings break forth, and mixt Rains pour down; And threat on All Confusions like their Own. His Judgements unto Aegypt were made known, Fertile in wonders t' its Destruction.
He mighty Kingdoms smote, and Potent Kings; And did their Power in Subjection bring. Og, Basan's King; and Sehon, th' Amorite's; And Canaan gave to his Own Israelites. These wonders, Lord! for ever shall be told; And their renew'd Memorials ne'er wax old. Wonders, which by thy Judgemenys are made known Upon thy Foes; and Mercies on thine Own Can Gods of Gold, which the vain Heathen please, Such wonders do? Such Miracles as these? Can the dumb Mouth, the sightless Eye deas Ear, Reagard the Idol-like Idolater? The God, his living Workman's far beneath; No stroak, no softest Pencil e'er form'd Breath. Who makes Gods, or Them worships, does degrade The Man; the Man's false as the God He made O Israel's House and Aaron's bless the Lord He can, alone, defence and help afford. O House of Levi Praise that God with Them! From Sion, who dwells at Jerusalem. Gloria of two Verses.
Psalm CXXXVI. Confitemini. O bless our God, who Mercies still bestows, Yet the unwasted Fountain ever flows. O bless the Lord! the Lord of Gods! for sure His everlasting Mercies do endure. By his Almighty Power, All Things were done, And every wonder is from Him alone. Whose wisdom the vast Arch of Heav'n has spread, And rais'd the Earth 'bove the Seas liquid Bed. Mercies thus, He still bestows, Yet th' immortal Fountain flows. By Him Light was; By Him, the glittring Flood Diffus'd at first, in Orbs collected stood. He made the Sun; and to his brighter Ray Deputed has the Government of Day. To the Stars sparkling Fires, and Moon's pale Light, He has assign'd the Region of the Night. He smote the first-born of th' Aegyptians, And thence his Arm brought his inheritance. Mercies thus, he still bestows, Yet th' immortal Fountain flows. Who the Red Sea did into parts divide, And his, through th' glorious, dreadful Valley led; On Pharaoh's Host the Sea return'd again; Coverd, and not a Witness did remain. He through the Wilderness his People led; Led Them by wonders, and by wonders fed.
Who, potent Kings, and mighty Princes smote; And into their Possessions Israel brought. Mercies thus, he still bestows, Yet th' immortal Fountain flows. Sehon, the Amorite's and Og, Basan's King; And Israel did into those Conquests bring. When we afflicted were, low, and oppress'd, He, from Above, regarded the distress'd. He set us free, brake off our Captive Bands, And rescu'd us from out our Enemies hands. Whose Bounty, to all Flesh, Relief does yield, To Man, and All the Creatures of the Field. Praise Him who all Good bestows, Yet th' immortal Fountain flows. Psalm CXXXVII. Super flumina. WHilst griev'd we sate by th' Streams of Babylon, As the Streams glided on, our Tears ran down. Our Harps untun'd, upon the Willows hung; Neglected, hung; disorder'd, and unstrung. Th' insulting Victor bad his Captives sing. "Sing one oth' Songs sacred to Sion's King! O how can we midst th' impious Heathen flung In their strange Land, sing a devoted Song? O Sion! O Jerusalem! Can I, Can my Soul, ever, unremember Thee?
Cleave to my Mouth my hated tongue! and let Forgetting Thee, my Hand its Art forget! Or when, 'bove Sion's Tears, I Joys shall prize: O Sion! All my Grief; and All my Bliss, Mind Edom's cryes in thy Jerusalem's Day! Down with that Temple! All in Ruins lay! O Babylon! And thy Day too will come; Who thy Race ended, must abide thy Doom; May he, who vengeance takes, be prosperous! And deal with Thee, as Thou hast dealt with us. And make thy Children in thy Plagues partake; And with the Root th' untimely Branches take. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CXXXVIII. Confitebor tibi. THee, O my God! with my whole Heart I'll bless; And before All the Gods, thy Name confess. To words thy holy Temple I will bow, And for thy Love, and Truth due Praises vow. For above All Things, Thou thy word hast set; Ev'n 'bove  thy fam'd Name made great. When I invok'd, Thou didst new Powers inspire; And in my Soul, wak'dst its extinguish'd Fire.
All Kings shall by thy word instructed be; And then All crowned Heads shall sing to Thee. Sing in thy ways; Sing that All Glory's thine; And All their Scepters unto Thee resign. The Lord thus high, on th' Humble yet looks down; But stands far off, and on the Haughty frowns. Though Trouble, Grief, and Foes encompass Me, Thou shalt restrain their fury, and save Me. Perfect the Creature, Lord! whom Thou didst make; Restore thine Image, nor the laps'd forsake. Psalm CXXXIX. Domine probasti. ALL-present Lord! No Act of mine can be Hid from the view of thine All-searching Eye. Thou knowst when I lye down: when I arise; Nothing withdraws from Thee; nought veiled lyes. To Thee the viewless shadow of a Thought, Before its texture was design'd, was brought. Thou art about my Bed; 'bout all my ways; From Thee nor any Deed's remov'd, nor Place. Not one word's in my Tongue, Thou dost not know; When ev'n our Thoughts are loud are whispers low? Thou, on the Clay, thine artful Hand hast laid. And of th' unfashion'd Substance, Man hast made. My self amazes Me; I cann't attain To the deep knowledge of the wonder, Man.
Where, from thy Spirit, then shall I retreat? What Land to Thee lies undiscover'd yet? Could I climb up to Heav'n, Thou, Lord! art there; Or make my Bed in Hell, Thou wouldst be near. Or mounted on the Morning's Wing, should flee Where breaking Light dawns from the farthest Sea; Ev'n there thine Hand would hold upon Me lay, And seize Me midst the twilights of the Day. If I should say, Darkness fhall cover Me, Darkness it self, Lord! is not dark to Thee. Midnight to Thee is Noon; and Shade is Light; Where thy bright Presence comes, there is no Night. My Reins are thine; form'd and design'd by Thee, Who in my Mother's Womb hast coverd Me. Lord! Thou hast made Me, made the fearful Frame; O! may the Soul that knows it, Praise thy Name. Thou, whilst the Mass, rude, and inform did lye, And moulding was to th' sbape of Man, didst see; Didst then on the imperfect Substance look, Wrote down in the Idea of thy Book. Which dayly, into Parts grew out of None; Unknown then to my self, and yet unknown. O Wisdom infinite! How high! How dear! Great God! th' unfathom'd Depths thy Counsels are! I can't th' incomprehended Number tell; Silence alone denotes th' ineffable. When I awake, Thou present art to Me; Let thy work bless thee, Lord! and wake to Thee.
Slay the Bloodthirsty Man, and the Prophane, Who boldly take thine awful Name in vain! Those, who hate Thee, and against Thee do rise, I truly hate; for th' are mine Enemies. Search, Lord! my Heart, and Thoughts; and when I stray, O guide Me in the everlasting way! Psalm CXL. Eripe Me Domine. FRom Those, who violent, and malicious be, And Discords dayly move, Lord! rescue Me! Who speak, as Serpents sting; untruths devise; Strike through just Fames; and poyson with their Lyes. Lord! keep Me from those impious wretches, who Where e'er I go, designmine Overthrow. All fair untruths, and hopeful to betray, Like Nets, and Snares, They cover in my way To Thee, My God! distress'd, I cry; Lord hear! As Thou ith' Day of Battle didst appear. Defeat their Counsels! Blast their Policies! And let Them not exalt Themselves by Lyes. Return th' infected Breath! and let the Pest, Whence it first brake, pierce the in venom'd Breast. The Snare, the Fire, the Pit, their Portion be! And, cast down, let them perish utterly,
Vengeance shall hunt, and seize the violent; Whose flowing words, fair specious mischiefs vent. For God will vindicate th' Aspersed's Name; Assert his Cause and violated Fame. That by the Just his Name may still be bless'd; And They, for ever, in his Presence, rest. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CXLI. Domine clamavi. LOrd! unto Thee I call; Hear my loud cryes! And swiftly let my Prayer to Thee arise! My Prayer, as Incense, sweet, and flaming rise! And th' Hands lift up, be th' Evening Sacrifice! Set, Lord! a watch before my Mouth! and keep From all that's Ill, the guarded Doors oth' Lip. O let my Heart be to no Vice inclin'd! But spotless keep the Candor of my Mind. In Sinners works let me take no Delight! Nor stain my Soul to serve my Appetite. Let the Good check Me, erring; by their stroke My Head no more shall, than by Balms, be broke. I will repay the Debt; and when They mourn I'll pray for Them, and the kind Balm return. When their false Guides, slain, in their rough ways, lye, They'll hear my words; and warn'd attend to Me.
Our Bones, by th' Grave lye scatter'd all about, (As Chips from Wood) from Carcasses hew'd out, But unto Thee, O Lord! I lift mine Eyes; Thou art my Help; do not my Soul despise. Th' ungodly's wily Snares, and curious Trap, Preserv'd by Thee, Lord! May I still escape. Let the unrighteous fall in his Own Pit! But let Me still avoid, or break the Net. Psalm CXLII. Voce mea ad Dominum TO God, I pour'd my Supplication, And unto Him, my troubled State made known. When griev'd, Thou sawst my way; How in that way More anxious made, the False their Snares did lay. I look'd for Help, but no man would Me know; To mine Affliction, every One was Foe; Then to my God I cry'd; Lord! Thou alone Ith' Land oth' Living, art my Portion. Lord! I'm brought low; My God deliver Me! And from my powerful Persecutors, free; Give back my Liberty! and th' Righteous joyn'd All with Me, shall All in Thee rejoyce.
Psalm CXLIII. Domine exaudi. HEar, Lord! my Prayer; Consider mine Address For thy Truth's sake, and for thy Righteousness; Judge not thy Servant! for in thy pure sight Who's spotless found? who shall be found upright? My Foes, successful, have prevail'd; strook down My Life; and in the low, dark Dungeon thrown; Like One that's Dead, I'm coverd o're with Night; Shut from the Day, and the departed Light. Lost to All Joys, and buried unto Life, Benumm'd with Cold, I've no Sense but of Grief. But yet my Soul looks forth; looks back, and sees The wonders of thy Old Deliv'rances. I muse on All thy works; and in my Mind Free, and enlarged, a whole World I find. O free me quite! To Thee I lift my Hands, Gasp for thy Help, as for Rain, thirsty Lands. Hear, Lord! I faint; O hear Me speedily! My Life's expiring; and the Grave draws nigh. Lord! with the breaking Light, let Joy return! And thy Salvation with the rising Morn. Teach me to know the Path where I should tread! And in th' instructed way, my frail steps lead.
Lord! Save my Soul from its fierce Enemies; Which to thine Arms, for Aid, and Shelter flies. Let thy good Spirit my faint Soul possess! And lead me into th' Land of Righteousness. For thine Own Glory, Lord! Raise my faln State! And to thy Mercies Honour, vindicate. Cut off my Foes, and sink Them to the Grave! Let not thy Servant be his Enemies Slave. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CXLIV. Benedictus Dominus. BLess'd be the Lord teaches my Hands to War; My Hope; my Fortress, and Deliverer. Subdues my People; Crowns Me with Success; And ends my War in Victory, and Peace. Lord! What is Man Thou shouldst thus honour Him? Thus high, the low, th' unvalu'd Thing esteem? Like the prone shade hasts his contracting Span! And the same poise weighs Vanity, and Man. Lord! Bow the Heav'ns; and let the stooping Cloud The flaming Mounts in glorious Horrors shrowd! The piercing Lightnings break their close array! And their disorder'd Troops thy Thunder slay. Thus on my Foes! On Me descend in Love! The Arm that slays can rescue from Above,
Stretch forth that Arm! and from the mighty wave Draw forth my Soul, and from strange Children save: Whose perjurd Lips no sacred Vows can bind, Their Hand Plights Faith, but from a faithless Mind. Then, to the Harp, my voice I'll higher raise; And made victorious, sing another Praise, Sing, that our God alone Salvation brings To David, and to his Anointed Kings. Save Me from Those whose Lips no vows can bind, Whose Hand plights Faith but from a faithless Mind. That like young Plants, vigorous, and flourishing, (Our hopeful Branches) All our Sons may spring. And, like the Temple's polish'd Marbles, may Our Daughters, fair, and graceful be as they! May our bless'd Stores be with all Plenty fill'd! And our Sheep Thousands and ten thousands yield. Our Cattle, strong to break the labour'd Ground; No Cryes, no Ravages, our Quiet wound. Bless'd are such People; yea, thrice bless'd, are They Whom God Protects, and who that God obey. Gloria of Two Verses. Psalm CXLV. Exaltabo Te Domine. THee, Day by Day, Great God! I'll magnify; Will Praise Thee now, Praise Thee Eternally.
The Lord is Great, above all Praise is Great; No Limits to his boundless power are set. Age shall tell Age; This, shall tell That succeeds; None shall not know, and none not sing thy deeds. I will declare thy glorious Acts, sing high Thy Works, and th' Honour of thy Majesty. Mankind shall hear and spread thy distant Name, And All record the Stories of thy Fame. Thy Acts of Terrour, and thy Acts of Love; The Judgements, and Compassions from Above. The Lord is Good; The Lord is slow to Wrath; His boundless termless Love no measure hath. All Mankind his abundant Goodness prove, And All his works share his extended love. All thy works, Lord! Thee magnify, and All Thy Saints confessing thee, before thee fall. They sing thy Power, sing thy Majesty; Sing thy great Kingdom, and thy Praise on high, That unto All, thy Kingdom may be known, And All flesh honour thine exalted Throne. Thy Kingdom an eternal Kingdom is, Beyond the Ages of Posterities. The Lord sustains the falling; Those faln down He raises up, and lifts them from the Ground. All Eyes do wait on thee; thy Providence Thy Blessings to All Creatures does dispence. By thine extended Hand they're satisfied, And at thine inexhausted Stores are fed.
The Lord in all his doings, righteous is; And all his works express his holiness. The Lord, to All who call upon Him's nigh; To All who call upon Him and obey. He'll hear their Prayer, and will save All them Who fear, and faithfully rely on Him. God shall the Righteous bless; but th' hated Root Of the ungodly shall be cursed out. Bless Thou the Lord, my Soul! and joyn with Me All Flesh to bless his Name eternally. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CXLVI. Lauda Anima mea. SOul! Praise the Lord; from him, thou dost receive Thy Being; and in him dost move and live. O! While that Breath of Life, that Being stays, The Donour of that Breath and Being Praise. Trust not in Princes! in no Mortal trust! No lasting Help can come from him that's Dust. For when his vanish'd Life is fled away All his Thoughts perish; and the Great Prince is Clay. But bless'd is He, and faithful is his Trust, Who hopes in God, the Portion of the Just. Mens Trusts in Death, or in Oblivion sleep, Th' ETERNAL does eternal Promise keep.
Who, Heav'n, and Earth, and Sea, and all the Coasts Of Nature made peopled with numerous Hosts. The Friendless, Helpless, Poor; th' Oppress'd relieves; And Food unto the pining Hungry gives. Restores the Blind, and makes the dark Eye see; Strikes off the Prisoner's Chain, and sets him free. Raises the bow'd and faln down; keeps the upright; For They're Gods Care, who are their God's Delight. The Widdow, Stranger, and the Fatherless, God does protect, but does th' unjust depress. Such, Sion! is thy King; whose endless Reign Shall from, and to Eternity remain. Psalm CXLVII. Laudate Dominum. SIng Praise! 'tis good unto our God to sing; Praise is a decent, joyful Offering. The Lord his faln Jerusalem rebuilds, Recalls his exiles to their banish'd Fields. To the griev'd, anguish'd Soul, does Joys impart, And pours His Balm into the wounded Heart. The Stars, the Ornaments of Heav'ns glittring Frame, Though infinite, He calls Them forth by Name. Great is our God, his immense Power is Great; And like his Wisdom, All is infinite.
<!-- img 140, though it has the page numbers to appear correctly in sequence here, is in fact a duplicate of image 95, because of the odd pagination of the book overall. Image 95 contains pp. 136-137 (psalms 88-89); image 140 appears where a different pp. 136-137 (psalms 147-148) are expected, because the pagination goes from p. 199 to page 100 and restarts from that point. -->
Let Heav'n and Earth their great Creator bless! And great above them Both, his Praise express. He shall the Power of his People raise, And They with all his Saints their God shall Praise. Psalm CXLIX. Cantate Domino. SIng a New Song! ith' Saints Assembly sing! Bless Sion! thy Creator, and thy King. Praise him by every graceful Motion; The Dance, and th' various conspiring Tone. For God delights in his; and he will crown The Meek with beauties of Salvation. With Glory let the joyful Saints rejoyce! And in their Bed lift up their cheerful voice. His Praise be in their mouths! and in their hands A two edg'd Sword to cut through th' Heathen's Bands To triumph ith' Success their Conquest brings Upon their Captive Nobles, and their Kings. To reap the Glories which his Promise grants; Such Honour, telling them, have All his Saints. Gloria of two Verses. Psalm CL. Laudate Dominum in. O Praise God in his Pow'r and Holiness! His noble Acts excelling Greatness bless! Unite each differing Vibration, From Air, from Strings, and trembling Bodies thrown! The Trumpet, Harp, and waving Cimbal joyn! And let their diffring Tones conspire in One.
Each living Soul, that Soul unto him raise! And coyn its Breath of Life into his Praise. Amen. HYMNS Ʋsed in the Church Service. [Te Deum laudamus.] THEE, O our Ood! we praise; and thee Confess to be the only Lord. To bless thy Name, O thou most High! All the dissenting World accord. Angels and Heav'ns joynth' loud Hymn; And all the high Coelestial Pow'rs. The Cherubim and Seraphim Thus pass their bless'd, Eternal Hours. " O Holy, Holy Lord most High! " O Holy God of Sabaoth! " Full of thy glorious Majesty " All Earth is, and all Heav'n is both. Th' Apostles add themselves to th' Quire, And all the Prophets, full of Thee, Thy present Vision does inspire With Raptures for Eternity. Triumphant Martyrs bring their Palms, And Songs, and Crowns of Victory; And we, thy Militants, our Psalms, With all thy Church confessing thee.
All Glory to the Majesty on High! The ever blessing, blessed Trinity. As i'th' Beginning was, is now; shall be When Time shall pass into Eternity, Gloria of six Verses. O Holy! Holy! Holy! Lord most High, Coequal, Coeternal Deity! Who mad'st us; didst Redeem; and dost inspire Our Soul's faln heat with new Coelestial Fire, We bless thee now, and shall Eternally, O Holy! Holy! Holy Lord most High! Gloria of eight Verses. To God who did create the World's great Frame; To God by whom lost Man's Redemption came; To God who Graces sends, God th' Holy Ghost, We now, give Praise, with all the Heav'nly Host. Thy early praises i'th' Beginning were; When all the Morning Stars made up the Quire:Job. 38. v. 7. Thee, all thy Works, Angels and Men adore; As we do now; and shall do evermore. Hallelujah.
PSALM I. To this Tune may be Sang all those Psalms, whose Verses are Five Feet, and their Stanza Eight Verses BLessings Crown his fair Soul who does not stray, Led by false Councels in the Sinners way. Who hath not sate in the proud scorners Seat, Who mock at Piety and God forget; But in Gods Law hath set his whole
Delight; And makes that Law his study Day & Night He's like the Fruitful Tree, whose spreading Root, Fed by the living Streams yield timely Fruit. Mr. MICH. WISE.
PSAL. XIX To this Tune may be sung any Psalm, whose Verses are Five Feet, and the Stanza Six Verses. THe Heav'ns declare a God; Th' extended Sky tell that their Maker was not less than he. Day without voice tells day, and night tells night. Twisting Time's wind∣ing chain of shade and light. What Land's unknown to
night, or shuts out day! which part the world, and run divided way. PSALM LXVII To this Tune may be Sung any Psalm whose Verses are Five Feet, and its Stanza Four Verses. BE merciful O God! chace away Night; And bless us with the vision of thy light. That unto all the Earth thy way be known, Thy u╌ni╌ver╌sal glad Sal╌va╌ti╌on. Mr. Michael Wise.
Those Psalms whose Ʋerses are Four Feet, and their Stanza Four Ʋerses, may be sung to the usual Tune of the 100 Psalm. Or of this Gloria. TO God the Father, God the Son, and God the Spirit; Glory be, as was when Time its Race begun, and shall be for Eternity.
PSALM XV. To this Tune may be Sung any Psalm whose Verses are Four Feet, and their Stanza Six Verses. LOrd who among the Just shall dwell? Or who rest on thy Holy Hill? He, who a guileless Life does lead, And in the paths of Justice tread. In whose firm Soul Truth sets her Throne; Whose Lip's above Detraction.
PSALM XI. Those Psalms whose Verses are Four Feet, and their Stanza Eight Ʋerses, may be sung to the known Tunes of the LI. Psalm, or the Lamentation. ANd cannot God Defend? The God in whose Pro∣tection I re╌lie; Cannot He succour lend? But like a Bird to the Hills for safe╌ty I must flie. Mr. MICH. WiSE
PSALM XLVI. O Present still! O still protecting Lord; Who help to thy distressed dost afford. What can us fright? should the fix'd Laws o'th' World, Be broke, and Mountains into Seas be hurl'd. Though Hills through Tempests, rock; Seas overgrow; O're immense Cliffs
the vaster Billows flow; 'Midst its own Calm, Sion the Storm derides; Sion the Holy place where God resides. Fear not any mortal Powers! Who can hurt, when God is Ours? Mr. Michael Wise.
PSALM XXIV. The Earth is God's and All that is therein; All Things all Creatures, and the Sons of men He, it's foundations on the floating Bed Oth' Flouds hath set; and Firmly stablished. PSALM XXXII. How bless'd! how happy is the man, whose sin God covers, and his stained Soul makes clean. Thrice happy he, whose sins are all forgot, And in whose guiless Soul is found no spot.
PSALM XLIX. Hear O ye Sons of Men who ere ye are, High, low, rich, poore, secure, or full of Care, One with Another; for All equal be In the great doom Pass'd on mortality. PSALM LXVI. Let all the World their different voyces raise! And the one onely Language, speak of Praise. Sing forth his honour All! Each his part beare, And in his Glory, joyn the distant Quire. See Psalm 67. among the foregoing Tunes.
PSALM XCI. Who, the Almighty his Defence has made, May rest secure under the powr'ful shade, 'Tis God alone whose strength can succour me, All my dependence, Lord! and Hope's in Thee. PSALM XCVI. Sing a new Song to God! Let All conspire In his great Prayse, and make the World one Quire. Give him continual honour! Let each day His known Salvation to the next conveigh.
PSALM CXXXIII. O Unity! Coelestial Unity! Where Good, and Pleasant in one joyned be, Where peaceful Brethren do consent in Thee, How bless'd to All, is the bless'd Harmony.
