B3558 12594016 64001
ONEALE AND COLONELL BRƲNSLOW, Chiefe of the Rebells in Ireland; their Apprehension at Grohoyne in the Pro∣vince of Munster; With the terrible Battell then Fought. Written in a Letter directed to the Bishop of ARMAGH from a Doctor of Divi∣nitie, Resident in Dublin. As also a Description of the taking of a Ship upon the Coasts of Barbary, bound with Let∣ters of commendations to the King of Spaine; and to desire ayde against the Protestants. depiction of ship at sea LONDON Printed for Andrew Coe and Marmaduke Boat. 1642.
THE MANNER OF Apprehending of Oneale, the Arch-Rebell of Ireland, and Colonell Brunslow; expressed in a Letter to the Bishop of ARMAGH. Right Reverend and beloved Father in God; THave thought good, after a great deale of In∣telligence of our miseries, to present one Cor∣diall, being the onely hopes of our happy en∣suing fortunes, and the generall progredient of the Rebells overthrow, whose cancred spleene is turned into as much feare of the iust vengeance of the Almigh∣tie, for their insulting pride and bloudy massacring of his people. I will abreviate my description as much as I may, and thus begin: At Grahayne and Burderdah, being two small Villages upon the Plaine, adjoyning to the Forrest of Morpetenter, in the County of Munster, Oncale with his following Re∣giments having been dispersed by the Scots in the last Bat∣tle repaired thither, in respect of the conveniency of the place for Skirmish, as also the neernesse of the Wood for a present Refuge. Intelligence being given to Sir Simon Harcourt of their abode, and knowing they must of ne∣cessitie be unprovided, by reason of their so late flight; He put forward with five thousand men, whom he dis∣posed of (after his arrivall) in manner following.
First, He placed  Forrest, to hinder their sight  hundred of his best men, well horst, to ransacke in the vallyes, thereby to procure the Irish to follow them; with the residue he resolved to give an unexpected onset upon the Enemy. This plott accordingly prevailed; for they no sooner perceived the Horsemen, but they forth∣with sent eight hundred of their best men, well provided after them; our men seeming to flye, whilest they fol∣lowed; Oneale with the residue of his men, all out of or∣der, stood beholding of this delightfull prospect, hoo∣ting and making such a clamour, that our men came upon them unawares, slaying many, some being taken priso∣ners, amongst the rest Oneale and Brunslow, with divers of their Officers, and those that fled, being many slaine by, the Amhush. Much joy wee have with us at this great overthrow. Oneale and Brunslow are now prisoners in Dub∣lin; and our comfort is much increased. Thus having given you the true Relation of this Novell; Desiring your prayers for us as we for you, I rest Yours in all humilitie, ED VVARD BOND.
Certain News from the Coasts of BARBARIE. AMbrosius Christopher an expert Mariner, and well skilled in Sea▪ fights, setting sail the 28, day of February for the Isles of the Ganaries, about nine of the clock in the morning, after that they had sailed three dayes with a very prosperous gaile, and were not far now from their wished Harbour, descried not above a League before them a little Galley, which seeing the English colours waving upon the top∣masts, presently endeavoured with all her Oares to secure her self by flight. The master of the ship having no evill intention, yet seeing a ship flee before she was chased, could not but wonder what the matter should be; and as the common Proverbe is, A flier must needs have a fol∣lower: he left off his own necessarie journie, and presently hoysing up all his sails made after her, but she going a great deal more swiftly than he, by reason that the ship had onely a side winde, and that not strong enough nei∣ther, he was forc'd to send a swifter messenger after her: so discharging two Peeces from the chase, he had so good fortune that one took away a great peece of her sterne, the other did break her orelap presently. She af∣ter such a shrowd message let down her Ancher and staied still. So the Master of the ship presently sent out his long boat for her well manned, and brought her up; being
asked from whence they came, and whither they were bound, answered that they came from Ireland, and were going for Spaine. Being askt by whose instigation they fled, shewed the Captain of the ship: The master asking him the reason why he had caused the Galley to flie two or three times, he would answer nothing, being as it seems sworn to the Rebels to do their businesse faith∣fully: But being threatned with the Rack if he would not confesse, at last he told that he had Letters from the Earl of Tyron, to the King and Peers of Spaine: the Master presently desired to see them, but he drawing them out of his pocket, would have thrown them into the Sea, had not they struck against one of the ropes, and fallen back again into the ship, he thinking them irrecoverable if they fell into the Sea. When the ship was now under sail, the Master taking them up, and reading them found this to be the superscription. The united Lords of Ireland to the King and Peers of Spaine, with all health. The Copie of the Letter. MOst excellent Prince, and you Nobles of the King∣dom of Spaine, you know very well what a hard task we have in hand, having undertaken to wrest the Kingdom of Ireland out of the hands of the Englishmen, who for many yeers have kept it very strongly: neither are ye ignorant (unlesse all our Letters have been inter∣cepted, what good successe our proceedings have had hitherto; having almost opened to you an entrie to that Kingdom, which heretofore hath so strongly opposed, and having made free passage for any of your Forces into Ireland, our name also becoming terrible not here onely, but also in England. It doth concern you many wayes to
aid us in this enterprise, and to have no lesse hand in it than we: it being first for the Religion that we fight; next for a Kingdom, if it shall please you onely to take it, or help us in taking of it. We after it is overcome desiring nothing more than to be subject to the King of Spaine, and to enjoy our lands, which by the tyrannie of the English men are snatcht out of our hands. We therefore lacking nothing but Ammunition and victualling, for we have abundance of men, and more then we can furnish with Armes, insomuch that when we receive an overthrow, we are a great deal more sorie for our losse of Arms than of men. Next may it please you to send us some provi∣sion of Corn, and Beans, and Pease, for our Souldiers; for we have abundance here of Beeves and Mutton. So expecting help, and ever still praying for your Majesties and your Kingdoms happinesse, I rest From before Dublin at our Camp, Febr. 26. Yours to command, John Tyron.
The apprehension of Don Pedro De's Ʋaldres. NO sooner had the King of Spaine received intelli∣gence from Ireland, but immediately he dispatches from his Court one Don Pedro des Valdres, a man verie famous not long since in Germanie and elsewhere, with Letters to strengthen the hope of the Rebels, and to pro∣mise them aid. But mark also how he was apprehended, for coming from Castile in a tall ship, he was encountred by a ship of Ipswich, being not above 200. in burden. This Don Pedro being a hot fellow, and a continuall Ene∣mie to the English Nation, as he hath shewed himself in many places before, would needs the one bout with her: the master of the ship being a man of a good spirit, did not refuse to hazard his ship and himself for the honour of his Countrey. In which action he behaved himself so bravely, that he took the ship and Don Pedro in it, being dangerously wounded: He had about him Letters of great consequence. Don Pedro died of his wound not long af∣ter. The rest that were in the ship are carried to Ipswich, to stay there whilest they hear from the Parliament. FINIS.
