B4187 11983158 51901
THE Continuation of the Complete History of ENGLAND, by Robert Brady Dr. in Physic. 1700. Printed for S. Lowndes, and A. & I. Churchill. portraits of Edward I, Edward II, Edward III, and Richard II
A CONTINUATION OF THE Complete History OF ENGLAND: CONTAINING The LIVES and REIGNS OF Edward I. II. & III. AND Richard the Second. By ROBERT BRADY, Doctor in Physic. In the SAVOY, Printed by Edward Jones, for Sam. Lowndes, over-against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand; and Awnsham and John Churchil, at the Black Swan in Pater-Noster-Row, 1700.
A CONTINUATION Of the Compleat  History of England, &c. King EDWARD the First. KIng Henry the Third died on the 16th of November, 1272. and was buried at Westminster the 20th of the same Month; and so soon as he was buried, John Earl of Waren, and Mat. Westm fol. 401. n. 40. 50. A. D. 1272. The Nobility and Clergy swear Fealty to Edw. I. when beyond Sea, after the Death of his Father, and appoint Guar∣dians of the Kingdom. The Guardi∣ans Names. They enter upon the Go∣vernment; all Writs and In∣struments is∣sued by them in the King's Name. Gilbert Earl of Glocester, with the Clergy and Laity, went to the great Altar, and sware Fealty to his First-born Son Edward, who was then in the Holy Land, not knowing whether he was living; afterward the Nobility of the  Nation met at the New Temple, London, and a new Seal having been made, they appointed faithful Ministers and Guardians that might keep the King's Treasure, and the Peace of the Kingdom. Postmodum ad novum Templum Londini nobillores Regni pariter con∣venerunt, & facto sigillo novo constituerunt fideles ministros & custodes qui Thesaurum Regis, &c. These Guardians were, Walter Giffard Arch-Bishop of York, Ed∣mond  Plantagenet, Son to Richard Plantagenet Brother to King Henry the Third Earl of Cornwal, and Gilbert de Clare Earl of Glou∣cester, who entred upon the Exercise of the Government, by the Advice and Appointment of the Nobility, without any possible Pri∣vity or Knowledge of the King; yet all the Writs, Proclamations, and Instruments concerning the Government were Issued in the King's Name; as appears by the Append. n. 1. A Writ to proclaim the King's Peace. Writ directed to all the Sheriffs in England, to proclaim the King's Peace throughout their  whole Counties in all Cities, Burghs, Fairs, Mercates, and other Places: Which was in this Form; Edward by the Grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitan, &c. Whereas our Father King Henry of Famous Memory being Dead, the Government of the Kingdom is come to us by Hereditary Suc∣cession, &c. We command the, &c. Witness, W. Arch-Bishop of York; Ed. of Cornwall, and G. of Glocester, Earls; at Westminster the 23d of November, in the First Year of Our Reign: But three  Days after the Interrment of his Father. There was also a Writ of almost the same Tenor in the King's Name, directed to the Abbats of Dore and Hagenham to Receive the Oath of Fidelity from Append. n. 2. Leulin, Prince of Wales sum∣mon'd to take the Oath of Fealty. Leulin Son of Griffin Prince of Wales: Dated by the Hand of Walter de Merton, then Chancellor,
(and at least a great Assistant to the Guardians) on the 29th of November, in the First Year of Our Reign; but he appeared not, sent any answer to the Abbats, as by the Return from them, and the Constable of Montgomery Castle annexed to the Writ it self, is manifest. Writs likewise for keeping the Peace in Ireland, were Directed Pat 1 Ed. I. Part. 2. M. 20. De Conserva∣tione pacis in Hibernia. A Writ for the Conserva∣tion of the Peace in Ire∣land. to Maurice Fitz-Maurice, Justiciary of that Nation, inhibiting  all under the Pain of Life and Member, and Disheriting, That they presumed not to infringe the Publick, or King's Peace, with Promise to Maintain all People of that Land in their Rights, Goods, and Estates, and do them full Justice against great and small; Ib. M. 20. De fidelitate, Archiepiscopor. Episcop. &c. Regi facienda. With Command to the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights, and Freemen of Ireland, to take the Oath of Fealty before Commissioners there appointed. Both these Records Dated by the Hand of Walter de Merton, Chancellor,  on the 7th day of December, at Westminster. Besides these, they Issued other Writs in the King's Name, one for Assessing of Append. n. 3. 4. A Writ to the Sheriff of Surry and Sus∣sex, to Sup∣press the Rabble, and Plunderers. Tallage, dated Jan. 27. and to the [6] She∣riff of Surry and Sussex; another to raise the Posse Comitatus, for suppressing the Rabble, who were up there, Plundering, Robbing, and Murdering the King's Subjects, dated the 6th of June, both in his First Year; so that they took upon them the Whole Admi∣nistration  of the Government in his absence: and he was so far pleased with the Proceedings of his Chancellor, (especially against the Bishop of Carlisle for Excommunicating the Sheriff of Cumber∣land, because he Bundel Brov. 1 Ed. I. n. 14. in the Tower. Distreined the Goods of an Abbat in his Diocese for the King's Debt, prohibiting him to put in Execu∣tion the Excommunication, or Prosecute him in Court Chri∣stian, for that the Correction and Pleas concerning the Transgression of the King's Officers belonged to himself, according to the Custom of the  Kingdom) that he wrote him a Letter of Append. n. 5. Thanks when he was acquainted with them, for his Diligence in the Dispatch of his, and the Kingdom's Business, Directing and Incouraging him to go on as he had begun, promising to Ratifie whatever he should do in Ways of Justice, Commanding him not to spare any of what State or Condition foever, but to proceed against them by Rigor of Justice, if otherwise he could not restrain their Ex∣cesses. This Letter is dated August the 9th, in the First Year of  his Reign, at Melun, upon the River Seyn in France. Upon the News of his Father's Death he set all things in or∣der, and disposed them as well as he could, and came from the Holy Land into Sicily, and was received by the Mat. West. f. 402. n. 10, 20, 30, 40, 50. The King came from the Holy Land into Sicily, from thence to Rome, and so into France, where he did Homage to that King for Aquitan. King thereof with great Honour, who Conducted him to the Roman Court, where he spent some time with Pope Gregory the Tenth, his Friend, Familiar, and Acquaintance in the Holy Land; From  thence he passed into Burgundy, where at the foot of the Moun∣tains, some English Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and Barons met him, from whence he came into France, where he was Honourably received by King Philip the Hardy his Cousin German, and did Homage to him for the Hereditary Lands he held of him, who there∣upon granted him the possession of them.
After this he took his Leave of the King and Peers of France, Ibm. f. 403. n. 10. A. D. 1273. He receives the Homage and Service of his Vassals there. and went into Aquitan to Receive the Homage and Service of his Vassals there, in which he found much difficulty from several that Refused to do their Feudal Duties to him, but chiefly from Ibm. n. 20. and Mezer. Fr. Hist. f. 315. A. D. 1272/3. The Viscount of Bearn de∣nies his Ho∣mage. He is forced to do it. Gaston Monaco Viscount of Bearn, who because a Predecessor or two had done Homage and Sworn Fealty to the King of Aragon, and he had been much obliged to Alphonso the Second then King,  denied his Homage; King Edward seised upon his Person, and kept him Prisoner among his Retinue, from whence making his Escape, he was driven out of his Country; And upon an Ap∣peal to King Philip, as Soveraign Lord of Aquitan or Guyenne, in favour of King Edward, He compelled Gaston to hold his Lands of him. In the Second year of his Reign, having settled his Affairs be∣yond  Sea, Mat. West▪ f. 467. n. 20. A. D. 1274. The King comes for England. he took Ship at Bologn in Picardy, and landed in England on the 25th of July; At his landing Gilbert Earl of Glo∣cester, and John Earl of Warren, received him more Honourably then other Nobility, conducting him to their Castles of Tonebridge in Kent, and Rigate in Surrey, where they Treated and Feasted him with great Jollity many days. On the 19th of August he and his Queen Elianor were Ibm n▪ 30. He and his Queen Crowned at Westminster. Crowned at Westminster by Robert Kilwarby Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Alexander King of Scots, and John  Duke of Britan, being present. Toward the middle of October following, he issued out Pat. 2 Ed. I. M. 6. He makes in∣quiry after the Rights of his Crown, his Military Tenants, and Civil Officers, &c. whether they had done their Duties. Writs of Inquiry by the Oaths of Twelve Legal Men, to Two Commissioners in every County, to Inquire what his Royalties, and the Liberties and Prerogatives of his Crown were, who were his Tenants in Capite, and Military Service, and how many, and what Fees they held of him; Of his Tenants  in Antient Demeasn, how they had behaved themselves, and in what Condition their Farms were; Of Sheriffs, Coroners, Es∣cheators, Bayliffs, and their Clerks, whether they had Extorted Money from any Man, by reason of their Office, had Wronged any Man, or Received Bribes for Neglecting, or being Remiss in their Offices, &c. The whole Inquiry containing 34 Articles. About the beginning of November the King of France sent to  the King of England, to Append. n. 6. A. D. 1275. The King summoned as a Peer of France. appear in his Parlement to be holden on the Morrow of the Quindene of the Feast of St. Mar∣tin in Winter (that is November 26.) to be at the Tryal of a Case between Robert Duke of Burgundy on the one part, and Robert Earl of Nevers, and Yobend his Wife on the other part, concern∣ing the Dukedom of Burgundy, and the Appurtenants. Who by reason of his Weighty Affairs in his own Kingdom, sent Mau∣riceHe sends his Excuse. de Credome, Otto de Grandison, and Roger de Cliff, to make his  Excuse, with his Commission or Letter of Credence, dated at West∣minster, November 11. He was summoned as a Peer or great Vassal of France. By his Writ dated at Cl. 3. Ed. I. M 21. Dors. A. D. 1275. The Parle∣ment Pro∣rogued before meeting. Woodstock the 27th of December fol∣lowing, he Prorogues his General Parlement he propounded to
have holden 15 days after the Purification, to the Morrow of the Octaves of Easter. Quia Generale Parliamentum nostrum, Quod cum Prelatis & Magnatibus Regni proposuimus habere London, ad Quindenam Purificationis Beatae Mariae Virginis proximo futur. Quibusdam certis de causis prorogavimus usque in Crastinum claus. Paschae proxim. sequent. &c. Teste Rege apud Woodstock 27 die Decemb. Directed to Robert Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. In which Parlement holden upon the Monday after Easter in  the year 1276, he made Excellent Laws both for Church and State, and for the Ease and Benefit of both. The Preamble where∣of here follows. Stat. at Large, 3 Ed. I. A. D. 1276. Excellent Laws made both for Church and State. These be the Acts (in French, the Esta∣blishments) of King Edward, Son to King Henry, made at West∣minster, at his first Parlement General, after his Coronation on the Monday of Easter Ʋtas, (in French, on the Morrow of the Close of Easter, which was the same day) the 3d year of his  Reign, By his Council, and by the Assent of Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Realm, being thither summoned, because our Sovereign Lord the King had great Zeal (in the French, Will) and Desire to Redress the State of the Realm, in such things as required Amendment, for the common Profit of Holy Church and the Realm, and because the State of the Realm, (so in the French) and of Holy Church, had been evil kept, and the Prelates and Religious People of the Land,  grieved many ways, and the People otherwise Intreated then they ought to be, and the Peace less kept, and the Laws less used, and the Offenders less punished then they ought to be, by reason whereof the People of the Land feared the less to offend; The King hath Ordained and Established these Acts, (in the French, Things) underwritten, which he intendeth (in the French, un∣derstandeth) to be necessary, and profitable for the whole Realm. First, the King Willeth and Commandeth, That the Peace of Holy Church, and of the Land, be well kept and maintained inWith a saving to the King of the Rights of the Crown. all Points, and that common Right be done to all, as well Poor as Rich, without Respect of Persons. This Statute is called West∣minster the First, and contains 51 Chapters, and the 50th was, A In Tottel's Magna Charta 'tis Chap. 49. in Mag. Charta Printed 1602, 'tis Chap. 50. saving to the King of the Rights of his Crown, notwith∣standing these Grants were made, to the Honour of God, and  Holy Church, for the common Good of the People, and the Ease of such as were Grieved. Thomas Wickes says, this Statute was made by the Advice of the Lawyers, Jurisperitorum Chronic. 1. 102. Regni sui co-ope∣rante Consilio, by which he gained the Hearts and Affections of the Plebesans, Quo corda plebeiae multitudinis, inaestimabili sibi Dilectio∣nis sincertitate conjunxit. Toward the latter end of July Ib. f. 103. Gasto de Bearn submits him∣self. Gasto de Bearn. (before-men∣tioned)  was sent to the King, by the King of France, who sub∣mitting himself, and giving Security, after a short Imprisonment, was permitted to go into his own Country.
About Ib. f. 104. Simon Mont∣fort's Daugh∣ter, and Prince Lewellin's Mistress made Prisoner. Candlemass this year, Aelionara, Daughter to Simon Montfort, who had been Contracted to Lewellin, Prince of Wales, in her Father's Life-time, was sent from France to be Married unto him, and taken in the Severn not far from Bristol, and im∣prisoned. Nothing of Moment to be found from this time until after  Michaelmas following, when there was a Parlement Totel's Mag. Charta, Print∣ed 1576. p. 39. B. A. D. 1276. The Statute of Bigamy. holden, in which the Constitutions, called the Statute of Bigamie, that had been recited in the presence of certain Bishops of England, and other of the King's Council; at which time all the King's Coun∣cil, as well Justices, as others, did agree they should be put in Writing, and published for perpetual Memory, and that they should be firmly observed, Ib. in fine Status. were confirmed, or, as 'tis said in the Close of this Statute, were made. The Fifth Constitution, or  Chapter of this Statute, from whence it hath its Name, was an Interpretation of the Sixteenth Canon of the Second Council of Lyons, holden on the First of May 1274, and the Second of this King under Pope Gregory X. in these Words; Labbe, Tom. 11. Part. 1. Alteroationis antiquae Dubium, presentis Dubitationis Oraculo Decidentes. Biga∣mos omni privilegio Clericali Declaramus nudatos, & coereitioni fori saecularis addictos, consuetudine contraria non obstante. Ipsis quoque sub anathemate prohibemus Deferre Tonsuram vel habitum Clericalem.  That is, in determining the old wrangling Question, we declare, that such as have been twice Married, are deprived of all the Privileges of Clercs, and left to Secular Jurisdiction or Coertion, any Custom to the contrary notwithstanding, and we forbid them under a Curse, either to be Shaven, or wear a Clerc's Habit. Certain Prelates or Ordinaries, did take the meaning of this Canon to extend only to such as were Bigami, or had been twice  Married after the making of it; and they claimed such as had been twice Married before that time, when they were Arraigned for Felony, and required to have them delivered to them, as such as ought to have the Benefit of Clergy. This Challenge pro∣duced the following Interpretation of the Canon concerning Totel's Mag. Charta ut su∣pra, p. 40. a. b. The Reason of the Statute. Bigamists, whom the Pope in his Council of Lyons, de∣prived of all Privilege of Clercs, by a Canon therein made, see∣ing certain Prelates demanded such as had been so, before that  Constitution, and were accused of Felony, to be delivered unto them as Clercs; It is Agreed and Declared before the King and his Council, that the Constitution be so understood, That those who were Bigamists as well before as after the making of it, for the time coming, should not be delivered to the Prelates, but should have Justice done them as Laymen. In this Parlement, the Clergy and Laity Granted to the King  a Fifteenth of all their Goods, but seeing The. Wike's Chron. f. 103. the Pope had or∣dained in the Council of Lyons, That the Tenth of all Ecclesia∣stic Revenues should be paid to the support of the Holy Land, and that the Clergy, had courteously given him and his Brother Two years Tenths since his Father's Death, he urged them not to pay this Fifteenth, but Treated with the Bishops, and greatest of
them, for a Voluntary Contribution as they should think fit; What this Contribution or Aid was, 'tis not said, but it was not to be drawn into Example or Custom, as appears by the King's Protestation in his Letters. Rex omnibus, &c. salutem Pat. 4. Ed. I. M. 6. A. D. 1276. Licet Comites, Barones, ac alii Magnates, & Communitas, regni nostri Quintam-decimam Omnium Bonorum suorum, & etiam Venerabilis pater R. Cantnar.  Archiepiscopus, & sui Suffraganei propter urgentia negotia nostra subsidium de Bonis suis nobis spontè & gratiose concesserunt, &c. That is, the King to all, &c. Greeting. Whereas the Earls, Ba∣rons, other great Men, and the Community of our Kingdom, Granted us a Fifteenth of all their Goods, and the Venerable Father the Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Suffragans, for our urgent Occasions, on their own free Will and Courtesie, granted us an Aid of their Goods. We by these our Letters do Protest,  That this Gift proceeded only from their free Good Will, and not in the Name of a Fifteenth, and that it shall not be urged as an Example, or as a Due, or Drawn into Custom by us, or our Heirs. Witness the King at Westminster the First of November. Leolin Prince of Wales wasMat. West. f. 408. n. 10. Leolin Prince of Wales re∣fuseth to come to the Parle∣ment at West∣minster. called to this Parlement, as he had been to others, but would not appear; yet sent Meslengers that he might have Peace, and for the Daughter of the Earl of  Leicester, whom he intended to Marry, and to obtain this, of∣fered a great Sum of Money. Which the King Refused, neither would he Consent to the Matrimony, unless he would Restore the Lands which he had seised and invaded in the Marches, to the just Proprietors, and Repair the Castles in England which he had destroyed. But the Prince not Complying with these Terms, he sent Forces to secure the Marches and English Borders from the Irruptions, Rapin, and Devastations of the Welsh, which proved  not sufficient to restrain them, they still continuing their Inva∣sions and Depredations upon the English. And therefore the King, in the Fifth year of his Reign, issued out his Writs, to all the Noblemen and others that held of him by Military Service, dated atRo. Scut∣ Ed. I. M. 8. A. D. 1277. Windsor, December the 12th, for the Summoning his Army to meet at Worcester 8 days after St. John Baptist next coming, which were to this Effect. WhereasIbm. The King summons his Army against him. Lewelin the Son of Griffin, Prince of Wales, and his Complices, our Rebels, have invaded our Lands, and the Lands of our Subjects in the Marches, and do daily invade them, and com∣mit Murders and other Wickednesses, and the same Lewelin refuseth to obey us as he ought, to the great Prejudice and Contempt of us, and to the manifest Disinheritance and great Damage of you (the Person to whom the Writ was directed) and other of our Subjects, for which we have now cansed our Army (Exercitum Nostrum) to be summoned,  A. D. 1278. that it be at Worcester Eight days after St. John Baptist, to Repress the Rebellion of the said Lewelin and his Assistants. We Command you, to be ready with your Horses and Arms, and with your Service due to us, to go with us from thence against the foresaid Lewe∣lin, &c.
With this Army the King marched fromThe. Wikes, Chron. f 105. Flint and▪ Re∣thelan Castles built. Chester towards Wales; in his way there was a great Wood, and so thick as his Army could not pass it; part of which was cut down, and a very large and wide Way made into Lewelin's Country, where he Built the two Castles of Flint and Rothelan; seised the Welsh∣men's Lands, and Goods, and wasted their Country, drave them into their usual place of Retreat, the Mountains of Snowdon;  and with the assistance of the Men of the Five Ports took theAnglesey taken. Isle of Anglesey. The Prince of Wales finding himself not able to resist the Force of the English, desired Peace, which wasWalsing∣ham, f. 48. n. 10, 20. Granted unto him upon the following Articles. 1. That all English Prisoners should be Released freely, without  Peace granted to the Prince of Wales, and the Articles. claiming any thing from them. 2. That for this Peace, and the King's Good Will, he should pay at the King's pleasure, 50000 l. Sterling. 3. That Four Cantreds, and all the Lands Conquered by the English, (except Anglesey) should be and remain to the King and his Heirs for ever. And for Anglesey, the Prince was to pay to the King 1000 Marks every year. The first Payment to begin at Michaelmass then at hand; and for his Ingress or Entry upon it 5000 Marks; and if the  Prince died without Heirs, the King to have the Possession of it. 4. That he should come into England to the King at Christmass to do his Homage. 5. That all the Homages in Wales, should be to the King, except of Five Barons that lived in the Confines of Snowdon, because he could not be called Prince unless he had some Barons under him, for his Life, but after his Death, the Homages of those Five Barons, should remain to the King and his Heirs for ever. For the Security and Observation of these Articles, he deliver∣ed to the KingIbm. Security for the perfor∣mance of Ar∣ticles. Ten Hostages of the best Persons in Wales, without being restrained, or disinherited. And the best Men of every Cantred, and of Snowdon, by Consent of the Prince, were to Swear upon the Holy Reliques, That whensoever the Prince broke any of these Articles, unless upon Admonition he corrected himself, they would Estrange themselves, (abalienarent se ab eo)  and become his Enemies in all things they could. Also, besides these things,Ibm. he was to satisfie his Brothers for the Injuries he had done them, they were Three, Owen, and Roderic, whom he had put into Prison, and David, whom he had forced to fly into England. The Laity as an Aid towards this War,Ibm. n. 20, 30. gave the King the 20th part of their Goods. If the Reader desires to be better informed, or to see this Welsh Affair in a clearer light, let him look back into the Life of Hen. III. fol. 578, 579, 580. and fol. 663. D. E. F. &c. Upon this PeaceIbm. n. 30. Leolin Marries the Daughter of Simon Montfort. Eleanor, the Daughter of Simon Mont∣fort, was given in Marriage to Lewelin by the King, whose Pri∣soner
she had been: The Solemnity was performed at his Charge, and He with his Queen was present at it. About this timeIbm. n. 40. A. D. 1279. The Earldom of Pontieu the Inheritance of the Queen of England. the Countess of Pontieu, the Queen's Mo∣ther, died, who had been Queen of Castile; whose Inheritance, the Earldom of Pontieu, descended to her Daughter; with whom the King passed the Seas about the Feast of Ascension, and was Honourably Received by his Cousin Philip King of France, and  the most Powerful of his Kingdom, at Amiens,Alezer. f. 319. A. D. 1279. The King and Queen do Ho∣mage for se∣veral Coun∣treys in France. The King gives up his Right in Normandy. who there re∣ceived the Homages of the King and Queen of England, for the Countries of Agenois, Limosin, Perigord, Xantoigne in Aquitan, and the Earldom of Pontieu in Picardy, and other Lands, and de∣livered unto them the Perpetual Possession of them. For this King Ed∣ward gave up all his Right in the Dutchy of Normandy, only reser∣ving 30 Livers of Paris, to be paid Annually out of the Exchequer. It was in this year, that so great a number of Jews were Hanged and Fined for Clipping and Falsifying the King's Coin, as appears by some Writs about this Matter; tho' the Story is placed by Math. Westminster in the year before. He saysF. 409. n. 20. Jews Hanged for Clipping and Counter∣feiting the King's Coyn. in the Month of November all the Jews in England were taken and imprisoned in one day for Clipping and Counterfeiting the King's Money, who accused many Christians as guilty of the same Crime; They were Legally Tried and Convicted before Special Justices ap∣pointed  for this Service, (viz. Walter Heliun and John Cobham) as the Writs inform us, as Pat. Roll. 7. Ed. 1. M. 1. de domibusA. D. 1279. Judaeorum suspensorum vendendis, for the Sale of the Jews Houses that were Hanged, as Escheated; and Pat. 7. Ed. 1. M. 11. de potestate vendendi Domus & Redditus Judaeorum Dampnatorum, Power given to sell the Houses and Rents of the Condemned Jews. Also Pat. 7. Ed. 1. M. 1. de finibus a Judaeis recipiendis, for the Receiving Fines of the Jews, such as Compounded for their  Felonies and Faults.Ibm. There were no less then 280 of both Sexes Hanged in London, and in other Cities of England, (Maxi∣ma multitudo) a very great number, besides such as were Fined. The Friers Preachers in England, who desired to Preach to thePreachers to Convert the Jews. Obstinate Jews, thereby to Convert them to the Christian Faith, and turn them from their Wicked Practices and Unbelief; apply∣ing themselves to the King, obtained aPat 8. Ed. I. M. 27. A. D. 1280. Writ to all Sheriffs,  Bayliffs, and other Liege People, to admonish and induce the Jews in all Places to come and hear their Preaching without Blas∣phemy or Disturbance, at such times as the Friers Preachers should direct. The Title of the Writ in the Margin of the Roll De prae∣dicando Judaeis, about Preaching to the Jews. And to promote their Conversion, and for their Support when Converted,Ibm. Part. 1. M. 15. Dors orintus. Maintenance granted to the Converted Jews. the King granted, that toward their Maintenance they should have half the forfeited Estates of the Jews distributed for their Main∣tenance,  and the other half should go to the House of Converts, (now the Rolls in Chancery-Lane, London) for the Support of Con∣verts there; and further, that the Moiety of the forfeited Estates of the Jews, and all Deodands, be distributed in Alms according to the Patent pro sustentatione Judaeorum Conversorum, for the Su∣stentation of the Converted Jews.
Yet for all this Incouragement the Preachers made no Work ofThey remain obstinate and unconverted. it, the Jews remained so still, they were the same Ʋsurers, and Bro∣kers, (accounted then Wicked People) as before, and the same Infidels; Only some Poor Jews, rather to get a Livelihood, then out of Affection to Christ or Christianity, pretended to be Converts; for about Ten years after they were all Banished the Kingdom, as appears by these Writs, De Judaeis Regno Angliae Exeuntibus,  Of the Jews going out of England. Claus. 18 Ed. I. M. 6. And De passagio & conductu Judaeorum Angliae, for the Passage and Con∣duct of the Jews of England. Pat. 18 Ed. I. M. 14. In the Tenth of this King,Mat. West. f. 410. n. 50. A. D. 1282. The Welsh sur∣prise the King's Justi∣tiary. Lewelin Prince of Wales, and his Brother David, on Palm-Sunday night, surprised the Lord Roger de Clifford, the King's Justiciary there, killed many of his Servants, wounded, bound, and sent him Prisoner to the Moun∣tain  of Snowdon, committing great Ravages, killing the People, and destroying a great part of the Marches. The King scarce believing the News at first, upon better Infor∣mation, sent the Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices of the Bench, (Justiciarios de Banco) to Shrewsbury, to put the Laws in Execution, and followed them with an Army, built a large Bridge over the River Conwey of Boats, or, as the Historian says, Ships,  and possessed himself of the Country about Snowdon, and gave many Shares of those Lands to his Barons, and others that had faithfully assisted him. Over this Bridge many of the Nobles of the King's Army passed out of Anglesey, to view and observe the Country, who affrighted with the Multitude and Clamour of the Welsh coming upon them, hasting to return from whence they came, were drowned in their Passage. The Welsh incouraged by this Accident, which they would have a Miracle, (non infortunio  sed miraculo ascribentes) pressed their Prince to Act like a Man of Courage, and it would not be long, e're, according to Merlin's Prophecy, he should wear the Crown of Brute. Whereupon, with a great Army, he descended into the Plains, and left his Brother David to defend the Mountains. Where Edmund, the Son of the Famous Roger Mortimer, then dead, with some other Marchers, set upon them, and without considerable damage to themselves,The Welsh routed, Lew∣lin's Head struck off. slew a great number of the Welsh, in which Conflict Lewelin's  Head was struck off, presented to the King, and sent to London, and set upon the Tower. WalsinghamF. 50. n. 10, 20. A. D. 1283. Relates this Story in the year 1283, the 11th of Edward I. and that this Battle was six days before the Feast of St. Lucy that year; and says, that the Welsh besieged Rothelan Castle (now Radland) in Flintshire, and that upon King Edward's coming towards them, they quitted the Siege, and retired. Tho.  Wikes Reports it in the year 1281, and varies also from the others in the Story it self, and whether any of them be true in that, or not, certain it is, they are all false in the time, as is evident from the Records hereafter cited.
The King, Append. n. 7. to the Sheriff of Norf. and Suff. Greeting; Where∣as Lewelin the Son of Griffin, and other Welshmen, his Accom∣plices, and our Enemies and Rebels, have so often in the times of us and our Progenitors disturbed the Peace of England, and do still continue in the same Course; And, for that by the Advice of our Great Men, and the whole Community of the Land, we propound finally to repress their Rebellion and Instability, so as it shall not be in their  power to disturb the Peace of the Nation when they please, altho it seems to be a very great Charge and Difficult Ʋndertaking. We Command you, that you cause to come before us on the Octaves of St. Hillary, (i. e. Jan. 20.) at Northampton, or before our Commissioners, all those of your Bayliwick that have 20 l. a year and upwards, who are able and fit to bear Arms, who are not at present with us in our Expedition against the Welsh. And Four Knights of each County for theFour Knights summoned to meet for eve∣ry County. For every Ci∣ty, Burgh, and Mercat Town two Men. Community of the same Counties, having full power from them, and  also of every City, Burgh, and Mercate Town, Two Men, (Duos homines) for the Communities of the same, to hear and do those things, which on our behalf we shall cause to be shewn unto them, &c. Witness the King at Rothelan the 24th day of Novem∣ber, in the 11th year of his Reign. The like Precept was to the Sheriffs of all Counties in England, to cause to meet, &c. at Northampton, except, to the Sheriffs of Yorkshire, Cumber∣land, VVestmerland, Northumberland, and Lancashire, who  were Commanded to cause, &c. to meet at York. The like Pre∣cept was to the Rot. Wall. 11 Ed. I. M. 4. Archbishop of Canterbury, to cause all his Suf∣fragans, Abbats, Priors, and other Prefects of Religious Houses, Procurators of Deans and Chapters of Collegiate Churches, to come before the King or his Commissioners at the same time and place, to hear and do as before, and further to give their Coun∣sel and Assistance, happily to finish what he had begun, to the Praise and Honour of God, the Magnificence of his Fame, (&  ad magnificentiam nostrae famae) to the perpetual Peace and Tran∣quility of the whole Kingdom, Witness as before. The like was to the Arch-Bishop of York, for the Meeting of the Clergy of that Province at York. After this the King wrote Rot. Walliae. 11 Ed. I. M. 4. De potestate data petendi & procurandi subsidium Regis in Expeditione Regis Wall. The King de∣mands a Sub∣sidy, and in∣joins the form of it. Pope Nich. died, Aug. 22. 1280, and Martin IV. succeeded Febr. 22. the same year. Walsingham says it was in the year 1281, and according to Truth. to the Venerable Fathers in Christ, the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Deans, Chapters of the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches of the Province of York, and their  Proctors. To the Knights, Freemen, Communities, and all others of every County beyond Trent, that were to meet on the Octaves of Hillary or 20th of January then near at hand, That for the Suppressing of the Welsh, &c. and Establishing a perpetual Peace in England, which he intended with his whole Heart, he had given Power to the Arch-Bishop of York, and Anthony Bek, Arch-Deacon of Duresm, his Secretary, to ask and procure, in his Name, according to the Form to them, by him delivered and  injoined, a Subsidy to his Use, of his Subjects of every Bishop∣rick, and County beyond Trent, (plenam damus potestatem petendi & procurandi nomine nostro juxta formam per nos eis inde Traditam, & injunctam, subsidium ad opus nostrum, &c.) Commanding and Requiring them to give Credit to what the Arch-Bishop, and Anthony, should say about the Premisses, and to perform what they
should propound to them on his behalf (Ex parte nostra.) Wit∣ness the King at Rothelan the 6th day of January, in the 11th of his Reign. The Welsh affrighted at the Death of their Prince, Mat. Westm fol. 411. n. 20. The Welsh de∣liver up their Castles in Snowdon. delivered all their Castles in Snowdon, and the very middle of Wales; and the Clergy and Laity (Clerus & Populus) granted first a Fif∣teenth, and afterwards a Thirtieth part of all their Goods, to the  King for an Ayd. David, the Brother of Lewelin, Ibm. And Walsing∣ham, f. 51. n. 20, 30. f. 52. lin 6. A. D. 1284. David, Prince Lewelin's Bro∣ther, Judici∣ally Condem∣ned, &c. Wales wholly subdued. was taken by the King's Spies, and such as he had appointed for that Business, who re∣fused to see him when brought to Rothelan Castle, altho with great importunity he desired to be brought before him, was sent to Shrewsbury, and there Judicially Condemned, Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered. From this time Wales became Subject to England,  received it's Laws, and the King placed his Sheriffs in it. King Edward having undertaken the Croysado for the Holy-Land, and by reason of these Welsh Wars, and other things he was about to settle in his own Kingdom, not being able in his own Person to perform it, intended his Brother Edmund, Earl of Cornwall, for that Service; and there being Six years TenthsSix years Tenths grant∣ed for the Aid of the Holy Land. Collected from the Clergy, according to the Canon and Grant  of the Second Council of Lions, laid up and secured in several Monasteries, and other Places, for Aid of the Holy Land; Pope Martin the Fourth sent Two Preaching Friers into England, for the Exportation and Return of this Money by his Agents and Forreign Merchants, issued the following Writ to hinder it. The King to Edmund Earl of Cornwall, Greeting: Append. n. 8. The King for∣bids the Car∣rying of Mo∣ney out of the Land to the Pope, who sent for it. Because for certain Causes we will not, that the Six years Tenths Granted by  the Clergy of Our Kingdom for the Aid of the Holy Land, and now Collected, be carried out of the Kingdom; We Command, that you cause to come before you all the Merchants of London, as well those of Companies as others, and Injoin and Inhibit them on Our behalf, under the Peril of Losing Life, Member, and all their Goods, that they no manner of ways Carry, Cause, or Permit to be Carried, the Mo∣ney arising from the said Tenths out of the Kingdom; and if you find any Merchants or others doing so, That you cause them and the Money  to be Arrested, and safely kept, until you receive other Commands from Ʋs. Witness the King at Hertlebury the 24th of May, in the 10th of Our Reign. The like Command was to the Major and Sheriffs of London, and to Stephen Pencestre Warden of the Five Ports. And he did not only Issue this Prohibition, but sent Commissio∣ners to the Places where it was laid up, to see how much there was, and to order the safe keeping of it for the right Use.  Cl. 11 Ed. I. M. 7. Dors. de Decima. The Priors of Ely and Norwich refused to let the King's Offi∣cers see or secure the Money in their Monasteries, whereupon he commanded Ibm. the Sheriffs of Norfolk and Cambridgeshire, to cause them, with 3 or 4 of their Discreet Monks, to come to him wherever he was, to answer the Contempt. Witness the King at Aberconwey in Snowdon the 15th day of June.
The Two Friers, (viz. Garnerius, and Ramerius de Florentia, ordinis Praedicatorum) that brought the Pope's Orders for the Return or Transportation of these Tenths, brought also his Claus. 10. Ed. I. M. 5. Dors. litera directa Papae de cruce assu∣menda. The Pope writes to the King about his Voyage to the Holy Land. Letters to the King for the taking upon him the Cross, and assigning the time of the General Passage of the Christians of all Nations into the Holy Land; They pressed the King for an Answer, who commended their Prudence very much to the Pope, and only wrote  back by them, That his Holiness should receive Answer by Messen∣gers of his own from Chester the 10th of June. By these Messengers, Claus 11. of Ed. I. M. 7. Dors. Bulla di∣recta Regis su∣per Decima. The King sends Answer by his own Messengers. who were Robert Dean of York, and John Clazel his Chaplain, (as we are informed by the Pope's Bull to the King about this Matter) he desired, That the Tenths that were gathered in his Kingdom, might be assigned to his Brother Edmund, Earl of Campaign and Britany, (as the Pope there stiles  him) who was ready to undertake the Cross for the Succour of the Holy Land, at the time of the General Passage. But the Pope excusing the Delay of his Return to his Petition, Ibm. refused to Grant his Request, and giving both him and his Brother great Encomiums, and many fine Words, earnestly moved him to go in his own Person, as was expected, for the Glory of GOD, and his Own Honour. This Bull is Dated apud Ʋrbem Veterem, (now Orvieto) on the 8th of January, in the Second year of his Pope∣dom,  1283. After this, according to the Registrum Peccham. f. 66. The King and Pope disagree about the Tenths and Business of the Holy Land. Relation in the Pope's Letter, or Bull, directed to John Peccham, Archbishop of Canterbury, re∣cited in his Answer to it, directed to the Pope; The King is Charged, with Breaking open the Locks, and Seals of the Places where this Money was kept, and removing of it whither he pleased, to the great Offence of the Divine Majesty, and much  Contempt of the Apostolick See, whereas he ought not to have done it without his License, having sent (as 'tis there said) frivolous Letters for his Excuse. In which Bull or Letter, he Commands him, by virtue of his Obedience, to go to the King, and admonishThe Pope sends the Arch. Bishop to Admonish the King. and induce him on his behalf, (ex parte nostra moneas & inducas) to restore and send the Money back from whence it was taken, without any defalcation, within the space of a Month, and to tell him he would not, nor ought to suffer the Holy Land to su∣stain  such a great Loss, and that unless he complied with the Ad∣monition, he would proceed against him and the Nation, according to the Quality of the Fact, and as he should think fit. Enjoin∣ing the Arch-Bishop to give him an Account what he did in this Affair, and what the King's Answer was. Dated at the same Place as before, the 5th of July, in the Third year of his Ponti∣ficate. The Arch-Bishop's Return Ibm. The Arch-Bishop's Ac∣count to the Pope concern∣ing the King and the Tenths grant∣ed for the Holy Land. to the Pope was this. Huic  igitur Sanctitatis vestrae Mandato vires & vota subjiciens reverenter, &c. In Obedience to your Holiness's Commands, I went im∣mediately to the King in the Marches of Wales, and delivered your Letters into his own Hands; and having openly and plainly Expounded your Letters and Command to me, and
shewn the Authority of it, before him and his Great Men, I ad∣monished the King to the performance of Three Things. 1. That he should restore, and cause to be carried to the Places from whence it was taken, the whole Money of the Tenths, with such readiness and alacrity, as might expiate the Crime of taking it away. 2. That for the future he should forbear such Actions, adjoin∣ing,  That tho the Apostolic Elementy retained him in the number of her Dearest Sons, yet if he should be afterwards found in such Offences, she neither could nor would with-hold from him the Rod of Correction. (Non posse eam, nec velle virgam ei Correctionis sub∣trahere) lest sparing the Man, it should assent to those Divine Affronts or Injuries it had not Corrected. (Ne parcendo homini Divinis Injuriis quas non corrigeret, assentiret.) 3. That he should not trouble or prosecute those that had the Money in keeping. Quibus silenter & Reverenter auditis, &c. To which, he having patiently, and reverently heard them, and having deliberated with those about him, he thus answered. To the First, That there was no necessity of the Pope's send∣ing  his Letters, or the Arch-Bishop to him in this Case, when as he had Two Months since commanded the Money to be re∣stored. To the Second, That he intended no undue thing (nihil inde∣bitum intendebat) against the Church for the future. To the Third, He said he wondred, why it should be put upon  him not to Molest the Guardians of the Money, when it was always his firm purpose, not to do injury to any Innocent Person. When he sent this Account of his Proceeding to the Pope, he also advertised him, That it was affirmed by such Testimony as ought to be believed, that the King had restored the Money; but  of that he could not write him the precise Truth, unless from those that knew the Weight, Number, and Measure of it, (Nisi per illos qui ipsius noverunt Pondus, Numerum, & Mensuram.) This Answer of the Arch-Bishop to the Pope is dated the 29th of November. While the King Mat. West. f. 411. n. 50, A. D. 1284. King Ed. II. Born. remained in Wales, for the Establishing and Settling his own, and the Nation's Affairs there, his Son Ed∣ward  (who succeeded him) was born at Caernarvon on St. Mark's-Day; where he continued until toward the latter end of April the year following, and then having finished his Work, Ib. f. 412. n. 30. A. D. 1285. he came into England, and was received at London in great Triumph the last day of that Month.
Matthew of Westminster Reports, That the King ofIbm. n. 40, 50. France, Philip IV. called the Fair, not long after his Father's Death, sent his Ambassadors to King Edward, to come over into France, and employ his Mediation for a Peace between himself, and the Kings of Arragon and Spain. He complied with his desire, and on the 24th of June passed the Sea, and was attended with many Bi∣shops,A. D. 1286. Earls, and Barons, and was received Honourably by the  King and Nobles of France, and Conducted to St. Germans, where he staid some time, and demanded the Lands which his Grand∣father King John had lost, and obtained Ten thousand Pounds Sterling of the King of France, to be yearly paid at the Tower of London, together with some Arrears for Normandy, which was his Inheritance. Mezeray's Story is otherwise, heF. 322. A. D. 1286. says ever since the Death  of Philip III. Edward King of England had omitted no Endea∣vour to confirm the Treaties with his Successor. In the year 1286, landing in France about Pontieu, he was received at Amiens by several Lords sent from the King to meet him; from thence he came to Paris, where he was Magnificently Treated, and was present at the Parlement, which was held after Easter, and went from thence to Bourdeaux. The apparent Cause of his Voyage, was the Desire he had to compose the Business of the King of Ar∣ragon  with the King of France, because Alphonso, the Eldest Son and Successor of Peter, had Married or Espoused his Daughter Elianor; He forgot not likewise then to press earnestly he might have some Consideration for Normandy, and those other Coun∣treys, which both his Father and himself had Renounced, but could obtain nothing in either of these Points. Being at Bur∣deaux, he solemnly Received the Ambassadors of the Kings of Aragon, Castile, and Sicily, all Enemies to France, which gave no  little Jealousie to King Philip; Thus the French Historian. And there is nothing to be found of his Mediation, or what Effect it had. He staid in France above Three years, without doubt to Transact his own Affairs; And at hisMat West. f. 414. n. 10. A. D. 1289. King Edward punished his Justices for Bribery. Return, Aug. the 4th, he made a Progress through England, and punished his Justices that had taken Bribes in his absence, perverted Judgment, and  committed Errors, according to the quantity of their Faults. Alexander III. King of Scotland, diedBuchan. rer. Scot. lib. 7. f. 85. a. n. 10. Printed at Edinburgh, A. D. 1582. Alexander K. of Scots dies. by a fall off his Horse on the 19th of March 1285; and before himself all his Children died: his Daughter Margaret was Married to Eric King of Norwey, who by him left one only Daughter named Marga∣ret, called the Maid of Norwey, Heiress to the Crown of Scot∣land. Alexander thus dead without Issue, except this Grandchild,  and she then in Norwey with her Father, there was a Conven∣tion of the States of the Kingdom at Scone, in which they Treat∣ed of creating a new King, and settling the State of the King∣dom,Ib. lib. 8. in mitio, f. 86. a. n. 10. in quo conventu de novo Rege creando, & Statu Regni componendo ageretur, which King's creation (as the Author expres∣seth it) was only providing a Husband for the Maid of Norwey,
as appears by the following Story, where were chosen Six Guar∣diansSix Guardians or Governors of the King∣dom chosen. Margaret the Maid of Nor∣wey his Grand∣child and Heir. or Governors of the Kingdom, to Rule it in the Name of Margaret the Maid of Norwey, as will presently appear: To whom King Edward, knowing the Grandchild of his Sister, (King Alexander's Queen) the only Child of the King of Nor∣wey, and sole Survivor of Alexander's Posterity, to be the Lawful Heir of the Kingdom of Scotland, sent Messengers thither to require her for a Wife for his Son.Ibm. n. 20. A Match propounded between her, and Edw. II. Edwardus Anglorum  Rex gnarus suae sororis neptem Regis Norwegiae filiam unam ex Alex∣andri posteris esse superstitent, eandemque Regni Scotorum legitimam hae∣redem, legatos ad eam deposcendam filio suo uxorem in Scotiam Misit. To proceed in this Match the PopesPat. 17. Ed. I. M. 3. Cedula intus de facto Nor∣wegiae. Dispensation was procured, they being Cousin Germans, to legitimate the Marriage. This obtained, King Edward writes to Eric King of NorweyIb. M. 4. Cedula. about this Affair, assuring him, That the Guardians, the  Great Men, Prelates, and the whole Community of the Kingdom of Scotland, had unanimously consented to it. And the King of NorweyIb. M. 3. 4. A Treaty a∣bout that Match. wrote to King Edward, and sent Commissioners there named, to Transact with him, That by his Advice and Assistance his Niece might be obeyed as Queen and Heir of Scotland, and that she might Govern as Kings do in other King∣doms, Ʋt ipse apponeret auxilium & consilium, qualiter praedictae Re∣ginae nepti suae obediretur, ut Domina, Regina, & haeres, Regni Scotiae,  & quod ipsa inde Ordinare possit pariter & Gaudere prout aliis faciunt Reges Regnis.Ibm. King Edward wrote also to the Guardians of Scotland, to send Commissioners to Treat with those of Norwey about the Emendation, Peace and Quiet of that Kingdom, and ordering the State of the Queen, (& reformatione Status Reginae) who sent them accordingly, with whom he joined Commissio∣ners of his own. All these Commissioners named in this Instru∣ment, met at Salisbury on the 26th of October, where and when  it was agreed: First, That the Queen and HeirIbm. The Articles of that Trea∣ty. (Regina & Haeres) should come into England or Scotland before the Feast of All-Saints next coming, if she had no reasonable Excuse, free from any Con∣tract of Marriage or Espousals, for which the Commissioners of Norwey did undertake. Secondly, That if she came so into England, King Edward pro∣mised,  That when Scotland was so secured in Peace and Quiet, as she might safely go thither, and stay there, if the Scots re∣quired, he would send her thither free from all Contracts of Mar∣riage and Espousals, so as the Scots before they should receive her, gave good Security to him, and the King of Norwey, they would not Marry her without their Consents. Thirdly, The Scots Commissioners likewise promised, for them∣selves  and the Nation, they would secure it before she came thither.Ibm. Quod inibi ut in suum Regnum venire poterit, & pro suae voluntatis libito Commorari, prout ipsius Terrae vera Domina, Regina & Heares; Quodque de premissis omnes securitates praestabunt, quae rationabiles fuerint, & quas dicti Duntii Norwegiae ipsos fa∣cere
posse dicunt. That she might come and remain there at her pleasure, as true Lady, Queen, and Heir, and that concerning the Premisses, they would give all Rational Security, that the Commissioners of Norwey should say they might give. Fourthly, If any of the Guardians or Officers of Scotland were suspected, they should be Removed,Ibm. and new ones put in their Places by the Commissioners of Norwey, and Scotland, and  such as the King of England should appoint for that purpose, and if the Scots and Norwegians could not agree in this Matter, then the English Commissioners were to determine what was to be done, and not only in this, but in all Matters whatsoever, that should happen in settling the State and Reformation of Scotland. For the performance of all this it wasIbm. agreed there should be a great Meeting of the English and Scots at and near Rokesburgh,  at Midlent next following, where the Scots were to give Security for the Performance of these things, and for the Emendation of Scotland before such as the King of England sent thither.Ibm. To this Agreement in Three Parts, Two in French for the English and Scots, and a Third in Latin for the Commissioners of Nor∣wey. The Respective Commissioners set to their Seals, and it was Dated at Salisbury on Sunday the Feast of St. Leonard, (i. e. No∣vember 6.) 1289. By his LettersAppend. n. 9. King Edward writes to the Nobility of Scotland to assist the Guardians. dated the same day at Clarendon, directed to the Prelates, Great Men, and the whole Community of Scot∣land, King Edward Requires them to obey and be assisting to the Guardians, who were appointed in the Name of his Kinswoman Queen Margaret, to Govern that Kingdom. This securing Scotland to the Right Heir, and making it in so  quiet a Condition, as it might receive her with safety, and providing her an Husband, was the ordering of the State of theThe meaning of Buchanan's King-Crea∣tion. Kingdom, and King-Creation, as Buchanan artificially insinuates in his Republican Expressions. For further facilitating of this intended Marriage, and that it might proceed, with the Assent and Approbation of the Guardi∣ans, Bishops, Abbats, Earls, Barons, and whole Community of  Scotland, King EdwardPat. 18 Ed. I. M. 8, 9. A. D. 1290. confirmed to them certain Articles agreed on, by special Commissioners on both Parts. The English Commissioners on behalf of the King and his Heirs Granted: First, That they should Have, Ʋse, and Enjoy, their Laws, Li∣berties,Concessions of King Edward for promoting the Match be∣tween his Son and the Hei∣ress of Scot∣land. and Customs, they had before Enjoyed. Secondly, That if Edward and Margaret should die without  Heirs, the Crown should Revert to the next Heir of the Kingdom. Thirdly, That the Kingdom of Scotland might remain separated, divided, and free in it self, from the Kingdom of England, without subjection, by its true Bounds and Limits, as it had been before time. This was Granted with a saving of the King's Right before this Treaty.
Fourthly, That the Chapters of Cathedral, Collegiate, or Conventual Churches, might not be compelled to go out of the Kingdom to ask Leave to Elect or Present their Elects, or to do Fealty to the King of Scotland, nor any Tenents in Capite, or other Persons forced out of the Kingdom, to do their Homage, Fealty, and Services, or prosecute any Suits, or other things which were used to be done there, but that they might be done in their usual Places, before the Chancellor of Scot∣land  or Vice-Roy. Fifthly, That the Parlements for what concerned Scotland, might be holden within that Kingdom. The King was toIbm. Swear to the Observation of these Things; And the Commmissioners promised further, That he should oblige himself and Heirs to make Restitution of the Kingdom in the Case aforesaid in  100000 l. Sterl. to be paid to the Church of Rome in Aid of the Holy Land; and, That he should Consent, the Pope might constrain him and his Heirs, by Excommunicating them, and interdicting the Kingdom, as well to the Restitution, as Payment of the Money, if he did not. It was lastlyIbm. Agreed and Promised by the English Com∣missioners, That King Edward at his own Charges should pro∣cure  the Pope to confirm these Articles within a year after the Marriage of Edward and Margaret, and that within the same time, & infra idem Tempus Communitati Regni Scotiae liberari, to be delivered to the Community of the Kingdom of Scotland, who could be no other then the Nobility and Military Tenents. These Articles and Concessions were Sealed by the Commissio∣ners on Tuesday before the Feast ofJuly 10. St. Margaret, on the 15th  of the Kalends of August, (that is July 18.) A. D. 1290; and the Letters Patents of Confirmation of this Agreement were Sealed with the King's Seal at Northampton, August 28. On the same day the King appointedAppend. n. 10. King Edward appointed a Lieutenant in Scotland, to Queen Mar∣garet and his Son. the Bishop of Dur∣ham to be Lieutenant to Queen Margaret, and his Son Prince Ed∣ward, in Scotland, for Preserving the Peace and Government thereof, with the Advice of the Guardians, Prelates, and Great Men,  according to the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom. And the Guar∣dians and Noblemen of Scotland, with the Governors and Ca∣ptains of the Castles and Forts, ingaged themselvesPat. 18 Ed. I M. 8. to de∣liver them up, when their Queen and her Husband should come into that Kingdom. This whole Transaction at large is to be found in the Patent Rolls of the 17th, M. 3, 4. and of the 18thQueen Mar∣garet dies. of Ed. I. M. 8, 9. in the Tower of London, in the Record Office there. But before this intended Marriage could be consummated, in her Voyage towards England or Scotland, the Queen died,Rot. de su∣perioriate Regis Angliae in Reg∣no Scotiâ, &c. Annis 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, Ed. I. in  Land. Several Com∣petitors for the Crown. af∣ter whose Death there arose a Contention between several Pre∣tenders to the Right of the Crown and Kingdom of Scotland, which put that Nation into Confusion; KingIbm. Edward, as
Superior and direct Lord thereof, called his Parlement at Nor∣ham in the Confines of Scotland, Ibm. (Indicto apud Norham in con∣finiis Regni Scotia suo Parliamento) and went thither to determine the Controversie about the Right of Succession between the Com∣petitors. On the 10th of Imb. A. D. 1291. King Edward claims the Su∣periority and Direct Domi∣nion over Scotland. May, A. D. 1291, and Nineteenth of Ed. I. by the King's Command, the Nobility, Prelates, Knights,  and many others of both Kingdoms, met at that place, (Congre∣gatis apud Norham ad Regis Mandatum utriusque Regni Nobilibus, & Praelatis, Militibus, & perpluribus aliis in Multitudine Copiosa) where Roger Brabancon, the King's Justiciary, in the presence of a Pub∣lick Notary, and Witnesses purposely called thither, in praesentia mei Notarii publici & Testium vocatorum ad hoc specialiter & rogato∣rum) in the King's Name told them the Reason of his coming, and of their being there called together, which was, That he  taking notice in what Confusion the Nation had been since the Death of Alexander their last King, and his Children, for the Affection he had for them, and all the Inhabitants thereof, whose Protection and Safe∣guard was well known to belong to him, for the doing right to all that claimed the Kingdom, and Preservation of the Peace: To shew them his Superiority, and Direct Dominion, out of divers Chronicles and Monuments preserved in several Monasteries, to use his Right; to do Justice to all, without Ʋsurpation or Diminution of their Liberties,  and to demand their Assent to, and Recognition of his Superiority and Direct Dominion. The Justiciary having thus spoken in the King's Name, and the Bishops, and other Ecclesiastick Prelates, Earls, Barons, Great Men, and other Nobles of the Communalty of the Kingdom of Scotland, there present, having understood his Meaning, (Quibus Ibm. The Nobility of Scotland re∣quire time to Consider of his Claim. per praefatum Dominum Rogerum, nomine Regis Angliae, peroratis,  & à praefatis Episcopis, & aliis Praelatis Ecclesiasticis, Comiti∣bus, Baronibus, aliisque Nobilibus, de Communitate dicti Regni Scotiae ibidem praesentibus plenius intellectis) they required time to Consult with such of their Orders as were absent, which the King granted until the next day only. When, Ibm. it being the 11th of May, they met again in the Church of Norham, and then they earnestly press the King to give  them longer time to Answer, with such as were absent, to his Demands concerning their Recognition of his Superiority and Di∣rectHe gives them time, and di∣rects them to produce Evi∣dence against his Claim. Dominion over the Kingdom of Scotland, which he said was his Right, (Quod dicebat esse suum jus.) Upon Deliberation he gave them time until the Second of June next coming; and on that day precisely they were to Answer his Demand, and if they had any Evidence, Writings, or Antiquities, which might exclude him from the Right, and Exercise of his Superiority  and Direct Dominion, or overthrow his Reasons and Arguments for it, they were then to exhibit, and shew them, protesting he was ready to allow them what the Law permitted, and to do what was just.
And that they might the better understand his Title, and makeHis Title. their Objections against it, the Ibm. Bishop of Durham was ap∣pointed to Declare it to the Nobility, and Prelates there present: The Declaration he made, and Arguments he used were Historical, and taken from the Ibm. Manuscripts of Marianus Scotus, William of Malms∣bury, Roger de Hoveden, Henry de Huntingdon, Ralph de Di∣ceto, and the Chronicle of St. Albans. That is, Math. Paris; That the Scots had been Conquered by several of our Saxon Kings; That se∣veral  of their Kings had submitted to them, sworn Fealty, done Ho∣mage, and received the Crown and Kingdom from them; and that the Scots had also submitted and been Governed by such Kings, as the English Saxon Kings had given that Kingdom to, and placed over them; That after the Conquest the very same things had been done, submitted to, and complied with, in the Reigns of William the First, Second; Henry the First, Stephen, Henry the Second, Richard the First, King John, and Henry the Third. Most of which Authorities Cited as Matter of Fact in this long Deduction, are to be found in the Historians above-mentioned now in Print, according to their several Years and Dates. Except that in the Year 1189. in the Month of December, 'tis only said in Hoveden, That William King of Scots came to Canterbury, and did Homage to Richard the First, for what he held of him in England; and 'tis omitted in the same Deduction, Hoveden, f. 377. a. b. That he  Released for the Consideration of 10000 Marks Sterling, all what his Father Henry the Second, by Bargains, Agreements, New Charters, and Imprisonment had Extorted from him, Reserving only the Homage due to him for the Lands he held in England: So as he was to be in the State and Condition with King Richard, as his Brother Malcolm King of Scotland had in been the time of his Progenitors. And also, That Alexander his Son, upon the Marriage of Henry the Third's Daughter, did his Homage to him  as his Liege-Lord, for the Lands he held of him in England; but being demanded to do the like for the Kingdom of Scotland, and acknowledge his Superiority according to the Practice of his Pre∣decessors, Modestly Mat. Paris f. 829. N. 50. refused it, and was not earnestly urged to do it, lest it might disturb the Jollity of the Marriage Enter∣tainment. After the King's Title to the Dominion of Scotland had been  Declared and Published, on the ot. de Su∣perioritate Re∣gis Angliae, &c. Second of June, the Bishops, and other Ecclesiastick Prelates, together with the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles of the Community of the said Kingdom of Scotland, met right against Norham Castle, (where King Edward then was) in a Green Plain on the other side of the River Tweed, as also the Noble Men that claimed the Kingdom. The Scots Nobility meet about King Edward's Ti∣tle. Congregatis Ex opposito castri de Norham, ex alia parte fluminis de Tweda in qua∣dam area viridi, Episcopis Prelatisque aliis Ecclesiasticis  Regni Scotiae, unà cum Comitibus, Baronibus, aliisque Nobili∣bus de Communicate dicti Regni. Necnon & Nobilibus Uiris Jus ad dictum Regnum vendicantibus, &c. The Bishop of Bath and Wells was sent to Demand in the King's Name, What they had done since the last Meeting, Ibm. and whether they would Say, Ex∣hibit, Propound, or shew any thing that could or ought to ex∣clude
the King of England from the Right and Exercise of the Su∣periority and direct Dominion of the Kingdom of Scotland; andThey do not say or pro∣duce any thing against it. that they would Produce and Exhibit it, if they believed it Ex∣pedient for them, si sibi crederent Expedire, protesting in the Name of the King of England, he would favourably hear them, and allow what was Just, or Report what they said to him, and his Council. That upon Deliberation they might do what Justice required. They tho' often required, answered Nothing, pro∣pounded  or exhibited Nothing; wherefore the Bishop recapitu∣lating what had been said and urged for the King's Title, and what had been done in these several Meetings in which they of∣feredHe resolves to proceed in Hearing and Deciding the Titles of the Competitors to the Crown. nothing against it, declared to them, the King would make use of his Right of Superiority and direct Dominion in Scotland, in Deciding the Controversie between the several Competitors for that Kingdom, which according to the Notary's Form and Method is thus tediously Expressed; Ibm. Idcirco vobis omnibus & singulis  tam Episcopis, Prelatisque aliis Ecclesiasticis, quam Comitibus, Baronibus, Nobilibus, & Magnatibus aliis de Communi∣tate dicti Regni Scotiae hic Congregatis, Idem Dominus noster Rex Angliae, per nos Robertum Bathoniensem & Wellensem Episcopum insi∣nuat & Denuntiat, Quod cum ex parte vestra per vos & vestrum ali∣quem, nihil sit propositum, exhibitum, vel oftensum, quod jus, Execu∣tionem, seu Exercitium juris sui, hujusmodi Superioritatis & Directi sui Dominii praedicti debeat aliqualiter impedire; Intentionis suae est  Jure suo praedicto uti, & in ipso negotio inter contendentes de Jure Suc∣cessionis Regni Scotiae procedere. Then beginning with Robert de Brus Lord of Anandale, and oneAll the Com∣petitors ac∣knowledge Edward I. to have the Su∣periority and direct Domi∣nion over the Kingdom of Scotland, and that they would receive Justice from him. of those that Claimed the Right of Succession to the Kingdom of Scotland, he ask'd him in the Presence of all the Bishops, Prelates, Earls, Barons, &c. Whether in Demanding the said Right, he would Demand, Answer, and Receive Justice, before the King  of England, as Superior and Direct Lord of the Kingdom of Scot∣land, who presently, publickly, openly, and expresly, in the Pre∣sence of all and every one of them, and the Publick Notary, no body Contradicting or Gainsaying, answered, That he did acknowlege the King of England, Superior and Direct Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland, and that he would from and before him, as his Superi∣or and Direct Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland, Demand, An∣swer, and receive Justice. Ibm. Idcirco ex parte dicti Domini Re∣gis  Angliae & de ipsius mandato speciali, incipiendo a vobis Domino Roberto de Brus, Domino Vallis Anandiae, &c. interrogando quaeri∣mus, hic in praesentia istorum Praelatorum, Comitum, Baronum, & ali∣orum Nobilium utrius{que} Regni hic Existentium, an super Petitione Juris vobis Competentis ad dictum Regnum velitis coram ipso Rege An∣gliae utpote Superiori Domino vestro Regni Scotiae, stare juri, & ab eo petere, Respondere, & Recipere Justiciae Complementum. Qui statim, publice, palam, & Expresse, in praesentia omnium & singulorum ibidem  praesentium, & mei Notarii infra scripti, respondens dixit, Quod Do∣minum Regem Angliae recognovit Superiorem & Directum Dominum dicti Regni Scotiae, & concessit se velle &c. ab ipso, & coram ipso, ut∣pote Superiori & Directo Domino suo Regni Scotiae, Petere, Respon∣dere, & Recipere Justiciae Complementum.
All the other Competitors there present, viz. Ibm. The Compe∣titors who they were. Florence Earl of Holland, Lord John Hastings, Patrick of Dunbar Earl of March, William Vescy, William de Ros, Robert de Pinkney, and Nicolas de Soules, had the same Question put to them, and made the same Answer. John Baliol was absent, and upon his Ibm. John Baliol submitted as the other Competitors. Procter's Request, the Meeting was continued untill the next Day, the Third of June, to be in the Parish Church of Norham; When he gave the same An∣swer  to the same Questions. And they did not only make this Recognition publickly in this great Assembly; but they made the following Letters-Patents thereof to the King. Append. N. 11. The Instru∣ment by which the Competitors made their Submission. To all those that shall see or hear this Letter. Flo∣rence Earl of Holland, Robert de Brus Lord of Anandale, John Baliol Lord of Galloway, John Hastings Lord of Abergavenny, John Comyn Lord of Badenaugh, Patrick de Dunbar Earl of March,  John Vescy for his Father, Nicholas de Soules, and William de Ros, Greeting in the Lord: Whereas we intend to pursue our Right to the Kingdom of Scotland, and to Declare, Challenge, and A∣verr the same, before him that hath most Power, Jurisdiction, and Reason to Try it; and the Noble Prince Edward, by the Grace of God King of England, having informed us by Good and sufficient Reasons, That to him belongs the Sovereign Seigneurie of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Cognizance of Hearing, Trying, and Determining our Right. We  of our own Good Will, without all manner of Force, do Grant to Re∣ceive right from him as Sovereign Lord of the Land; and we Will also and Promise, That we will have and hold firm and stable his Act, and he shall Enjoy the Realm, to whom it shall be adjudged before him: In Witness whereof we have set our Seals to this Writing, Made and Gran∣ted at Norham the Tuesday after the Ascension, in the Year of Grace, 1291. This done Rot. de Superioritate Regis Angliae in Regno Scotiae ut Supra. The Rights of the Preten∣ders to the Crown of Scotland how to be tryed. The King and his Council treated with the Pre∣lates,  Noblemen, and Competitors for the Crown of Scotland, how this Business might be best proceeded in; and also the Reformation of the State of the Nation. It was agreed by the Ʋnanimous Con∣sent of the Noblemen and Prelates of both Nations, (Nemine Con∣tradicente) That John Baliol and John Comyn should chuse Forty Persons, and Robert de Brus should chuse other Forty fit Persons, whose Names should be delivered to the King three Days after, viz.  on the Fifth of June, to whom he was to add Twenty Four, or more or less, who should Hear and Discuss the Rights of all the Pre∣tenders, to make a Faithful Report thereof to him, That he might give the Definitive Sentence. All this was done on the Second and Third of June; but be∣cause by the Letters-Patents of Recognition, or Instrument above, he had not sufficient Power to put in Execution his Sentence to  whomsoever the Kingdom should be adjudged, unless he were in actual Possession thereof. Ibm. The Competitors came before him on the 4th of June, and very many of the Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, and Noblemen of both the Kingdoms, when he had Pos∣session given him of the Kingdom and Castles of Scotland, by the Competitors, with the Consent of the Community of the same
Kingdom, Nemine Contradicente, according to the following In∣strument or Writing: To all those who shall see or hear this present Letter, Ibm. The King had the Possession of Scotland given him, in order to the Declaring who had most Right, and putting him in Possession. We Flo∣rence Earl of Holland, &c. as before, Greeting in GOD, Whereas we have Given and Granted with one assent of our own Good Will, without Force, to the Noble Lord Edward King of England, That he as Sovereign Lord of the Land of Scotland, should Judge, Try, and  Determine the Claims and Demands, we intend to propound, and aver for our Right in the Kingdom of Scotland, and to Receive Right be∣fore him as Sovereign Lord of the Land, promising to have and hold his Act firm and stable; and that he should Enjoy the Kingdom, to whom he should give it; But for that the said King of England cannot make any manner of Cognisance or accomplish his Judgment, nor put his Judg∣ment in Execution, nor the Execution take Effect without the Posses∣ssion or Seisin of the same Land, or the Castles thereof, we Will,  Grant, and Assent, That he as Sovereign Lord, to perform the Things aforesaid, shall have Seisin of all the Land and Castles in Scotland, until Right be done to the Demandants, upon Condition, That before he be put in Possession he shall give sufficient Security to the Demandants, to the Guardians and Community of the Kingdom of Scotland, to Restore it, and the Castles, with all the Royalty, Dignity, Seigno∣ries, Franchises, Customs, Rights, Laws, Ʋsages, and Possessions, and all manner of Appurtenances in the same State and Condition they  were when he received them, saving to the King of England the Homage of Him that shall be King: So as they may be Restored within two Months, after the Day the Right shall be Determined and Affirmed; and that the Profits of the Nation which shall be Received in the mean time, may be kept in the Hands of the Chamberlain of Scotland that now is, and one to be joined with him by the King of England, so as the Charge of the Government, Castles, and Offi∣cers of the Realm might be deducted. In Witness whereof, we have  set our Seals to this Writing, Made and Granted at Norham, on Wednesday after Ascension, in the Year of Grace, 1291. On the Fifth of June, Ibm. The Names of the Examiners of the Titles of the Com∣petitors deli∣vered to the King. the Names of the Eighty elected to Examine, Hear, and Report the Rights of the Competitors, were delivered to the King, on the Sixth they were ordered to appoint the Place and Day for their Examination, and Hearing the Petitions of the Demandants, (Petitiones Petentium) and  Discussing their Right; Ibm. Berwick the Place of Meet∣ing for that Purpose. Berwick upon Tweed was appointed for the Place, which the King accepted; but not agreeing on the Time the King as Superior and Direct Lord of the Kingdom by the Unanimous Consent of the Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms there present, appointed the Second of August a Peremptory Day for the Competitors to propound their Ti∣tles. On the 11th of June Ibm. The Guardi∣ans of Scot∣land deliver their Guar∣dianships to the King, &c. the Bishops of St. Andrews and Glasco,  John Comyn Lord of Badenaugh, and James Seneschal or Stewart of Scotland, the then Guardians of the Kingdom, and all the Castel∣lans, or Constables of Castles, delivered up their Guardianships and Bayliwicks to the King as Superior Lord, Suas Custodias, & Bl∣livas Domino Regi, &c. reddiderunt; and when he had received
them, he committed the Guardianship of the Kingdom to theHe makes the same Persons Guardians. same Persons, to Govern it under him, and in his Name; Ibm. and presently the Bishops and Noblemen of Scotland, by the King's Command, chose Alan Bishop of Cathnes their Chancel∣lor, and presented him to the King, who allowed him, and ad∣joined Walter of Agmundesham, his Clerk, to him, as an Associate; and on the next day they were both Sworn. These things done, Ibm. Fealty Sworn by the Guar∣dians, and Pretenders to the Crown. the Guardians, and Pretenders to the  Crown, and all and singular the Bishops, and other Ecclesiastick Pre∣lates, Earls, Barons, Great▪ Men, and the Communities of Cities and Burghs there present, that were bound to do and Swear Fealty to the King, had notice to do it on the Morrow to the King of England, as Superior and Direct Lord of Scotland, in the same place where they were then assembled, in the Green Plain beyond the River Twede, in the Bounds of Scotland, Ibm. which  was done and Sworn accordingly, and then the King caused his Peace to be proclaimed publickly. From this 13th of June to the 3d or 4th of August, all the Bishops, Earls, Barons, Noblemen,And whole Kingdom of Scotland. Free-Tenents, or Tenents in Military Service, Communities, and all others that were bound to do and Swear Fealty to the King of Scotland, (Qui fidelitatem Domino Regi Scotiae facere tenebantur) were (to save Expences and Labour) Sworn by Commissioners in all parts of the Kingdom, and a very great number of their  Names Recorded in this Roll; and in every place, when they had Sworn, the King's Peace or Pardon was proclaimed. The Form for taking the Oaths and Fealties of Absents, was made by the Agreement and Express Consent of all the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other Noblemen of Scotland there present. While the King was thus employed in Deciding this Contro∣versy, his Mother Queen Walsingh. f. 57 n. 40. Queen Elia∣nor, Queen Edward's Mo∣ther, dies. Elienor died about Midsummer, and  he returned into England to see her Interred, and the Funeral solemnized with all due Honour; When that was over, he re∣turned toward Scotland. And was at Berwick Rot. supe∣ritatis Regis Angliae, &c. ut supra. The Compe∣titors appear before the King. on the 3d of August, which day be∣ing continued with the day preceding, according to his Assigna∣tion, the Competitors appeared before him and his Council, in the Assembly of the Prelates and Noblemen of both Nations, and with  them the Twenty four English Auditors and Examiners of their Titles chosen by the King, and the Fourscore chosen by Robert de Brus, and John Baliol, and such others as would Consent to the Election made by them, to Discuss their particular Rights, and make Report thereof to the King. There appeared no less then Twelve Demandants that put in their Pleas for the Crown of Scotland, all entred in this Roll, and  Petitioned to have the Kingdom delivered to them; besides, the King of Norwey, who by his Proctors and Messengers, demanded it, as Heir to his Daughter Margaret: Ibm. The Twelve Competitors Names. The others were Flo∣rence Earl of Holland, Patrick de Dunbar Earl of March, William de Vescy, William de Ros, Robert de Pinkny, Nicholas de Soules, Pa∣trick Galightly, Roger de Mundevill, John Comyn, John de Hastings, John de Balioli, and Robert de Brus.
The Petitions, Ibm. The Compe∣titors Petiti∣ons, with their Reasons, Reported to the King. with the Reasons of their Claims having been propounded and shewn to the Auditors, they Reported them to the King, before the Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms, in the presence of all and every of the Demandants, and of the Publick Notary; The King assigned them by their own Consent, Monday next after the Feast of the Holy Trinity, which would be on the Second day of June, in the year 1292, for the further  Proceeding in this Controversy. The King Ibm. being that day at Berwick upon Twede, and the Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms there assembled, with the Auditors that had been Elected, and those appointed by the King to discuss and hear the Rights of the Parties claiming, after an Attentive Hearing came to the King and related what had been done; who with the Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms  strictly Examined them, and For that he found there would be great delay, and much time spent, to the peril and danger of the Kingdom, it was ordered by the Express Consent of all Pretenders, and by the Assent of Prelates and Noblemen aforesaid, That the Rights and Titles of Robert de Brue, and John Baliol, shouldRobert de Brus, and John Ba∣liol's Titles to be first Dis∣cussed. be first Examined and Discussed, and that afterwards all others might prosecute their Claims, if they thought fit. The King, Ibm. The Eighty Auditors Sworn to Ad∣vise the King how to pro∣ceed in this Judgment. tho he might have Judged the Case without  them, as Superior Lord of Scotland, yet that he might do it with more Security and Prudence, he caused the Eighty Auditors to take an Oath, that they would advise him how, and by what Laws and Customs he was to proceed to Judgment in this Case. These Eighty pretended great Difficulties, and desired the Twenty four English the King had appointed, might be added to them. These Twenty four pretended as great, or greater Difficulties; and there∣fore  I dare not undertake the Charge, or Consult upon the Busi∣ness before them, without the Advice of the Prelates, Noble, Great,They desire the Advice of the Prelates and Noble∣men of Eng∣land. and Wise-men of England, that were absent; wherefore by the unanimous Assent of all present, the King assigned the Morrow of the Feast of the Translation of St. Edward the Confessor, (that is the 14th of October) for the further Proceeding in this Business, in his Parlement in the same place, in Parliamento suo loco eodem. At Ibm. The Prelates and Noble∣men of both Kingdoms meet at Ber∣wick. The King asked their further Ad∣vice. How the Right of Suc∣cession was to be determined in Scotland. that day the Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms  appeared at Berwick, as also the Auditors; the King asked them as he had done before, by what Laws and Customs, Judgment was to be given in the present Case; and if there were found no Laws or Customs to proceed by, how it was to be given; and whe∣ther otherwise concerning the Kingdom of Scotland, than con∣cerning Earldoms, Baronies, and other Tenures. They all An∣swered with one Voice, (Nemine Contradicente) That Judgment  was to be made by the Laws of the Kingdom, if any; If not, the King might and ought by Advice of his Prelates, Noble, and other Great Men of his Kingdom, make a new one. And that as to the Right of Succession in the Kingdom of Scotland, Judg∣ment was to be given as concerning Earldoms, Baronies, and other individible or impartible Tenures.
The King having Received these Answers, Ibm. The Titles of Robert Brus and John Ba∣liol Examined. he ordered the Auditors to Repair to the Church of the Friers Preachers in Berwick, and favourably to hear John de Baliol, and Robert de Brus, from day to day what they had to say or propound; Robert de Brus began first, shewing the Reasons and Arguments for his Claim, and then John Baliol set forth his, in a long Plea, and answered all what Robert de Brus had said. The Auditors Re∣lated  what had been urged on both sides to the King; They both personally appeared before him, who asked them if they would speak any thing further; they answered, No; Whereupon the King openly and publickly before the Prelates, and Noblemen of both Kingdom, his whole Council, and the Auditors, asked what Advice they would give him; which of the two, according to what they had shewn, and set forth, had Right of Succession in the Kingdom of Scotland; and the force of all their Arguments on both  parts, was drawn into this Question. An Ibm. The main Question be∣tween them. remotior in uno Gradu in successione, exiens de primogeni∣ta, debeat secundum leges, & consuetudines, utriusque Regni, excludere proximiorem in Gradu exeuntem de secundogenita? Vel proximior in Gradu exiens de secundogenita, debeat secundum leges & consuetudines ipsorum Regnorum excludere remotiorem in uno gradu exeuntem de primogenita? Ad quae unanimiter Responderunt, nidlo Reclamante vel  contradicente, Quod Remotior uno Gradu linealiter descendens de pri∣mogenita, secundum leges & consuetudines utriusque regni praeferendus est proximiori in Gradu exeunti de secundogenita, in qualibet haeredita∣ria successione. That is, Whether the more remote by one De∣gree in Succession, coming from the Eldest Sister, ought, accord∣ing to the Laws and Customs of both Kingdoms, to Exclude the nearer by a Degree coming from the Second Sister? Or, Whe∣ther the nearer by a Degree coming from the Second Sister, ought  by the Laws and Customs of those Kingdoms, to Exclude the more remote by a Degree, coming from the Eldest Sister? To which they unanimously answered without a Negative, The more remote by one Degree lineally descending from the Eldest Sister, according to the Laws and Customs of both Kingdoms, is to be preferred to the nearer by one Degree coming from the Se∣cond Sister, in every Hereditary Succession. That the Reader may more clearly understand this Question and  Answer, it will be necessary to leave the Record a while, and set forth the Pedigree of both these Noble Persons. Henry PrinceThe Pedi∣grees of Ro∣bert Brus and John Baliol. of Scotland, Son to David I. who died before his Father, left Three Sons; VVilliam called the Lyon, Malcolm called the Maiden, (because never Married) and David Earl of Hunting∣ton. William the Lyon had Alexander the Second, his only Son and  Child; and he had Alexander the Third, his only Son and Child, who Married Margaret▪ Daughter to Henry the Third, King of England, and Sister to Edward the First; by her he had Two Sons, Alexander and David, who died without Issue, and one Daughter named Margaret, Married to Eric King of Norwey, by
whom she had one only Daughter named also Margaret, and cal∣led the Maid of Norwey, and was Queen of Scotland; who dying without Issue, (as was said before) the whole Line of VVilliam the Lyon failed, and the Crown reverted to David Earl of Huntington, Heir to Margaret. David Earl of Huntington had Three Sons, Henry and Robert, who both died young, and Iohn, Surnamed Scot, Earl of Chester,  who died without Issue; and three Daughters, Margaret the Eldest Married to Alan Lord of Galloway, by him she had one only Daughter; Dergovilla, Married to Iohn Baliol, by whom she had Iohn Baliol, one of the Competitors for the Crown, in this Record so often mentioned. His Second Daughter was Isabel, Married to Robert Bruce, by whom she had Robert her Son, the other of the Two Competitors  here also mentioned. And Adama, a Third Daughter, Married to Henry Hastings, from whence the Earls of Huntington. By this Pedegree it appears, That Robert Bruce, Son to Isabel the Second Sister, was a Degree nearer to his Mother, and so in a Collateral Line to the Crown, than Iohn Baliol, who was Grand∣child  to Margaret the first begotten or Eldest Daughter, in a Di∣rect or Right Line to the Crown; Which gives the meaning of the Question and Answer; The Ground of which was a ControvertedThe meaning of the forego∣ing main Question. Point amongst the Feudists, Whether the next in Blood, tho of a Collateral Line (especially if a Male) should not succeed, before one more remote in the Right Line, some holding one way, some the other. Upon the Answer above-mentioned, Rot. de su∣perioritate Re∣gis Angliae, &c. ut supra. The Titles of John de Baliol and Robert de Brus Re-exa∣mined. as 'tis in the Record,  the King caused the Matter to be exactly Re-examined before the Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms, and Assigned to Robert de Brus and John de Baliol the 6th day of November, to hear their Sentence; Which was pronounced by the King Judicially, by the Advice of the Noblemen and Prelates of both Kingdoms, the Auditors aforesaid, and others of the Council. That Robert by his Petition should receive nothing concerning the Kingdom of  Scotland; Quod praedictus Robertus per Petitionem praedictam nihil ca∣piat de Regno Scotiae. And as to John Baliol, there could nothingRobert de Brus Excluded. be done upon his Petition until the other Competitors were heard. When the King commanded John Baliol, the other De∣mandants and the Auditors, to go to the same place for the dis∣patch of their Petitions. Amongst whom Robert de Brus per∣sonally appeared, and protested he would prosecute his ClaimJohn Baliol's Sentence de∣ferred. to the Kingdom of Scotland, or a Third Part of it, after another  Form and Manner then he had done before. Then also came Ibm. John Hastings pretended the Kingdom of Scotland to be Partible, and claimed a Third Part. John Hastings, Son to Henry Hastings, and claimed his Third part of the Kingdom of Scotland as of a Par∣tible Inheritance; because, as he said, the Right of the Inheritance descended to Margaret, Isabel, and Adama, Daughters of David
Earl of Hurtington, as to one Heir, and from them it ought to descend to John Baliol, Robert de Brus, and John Hastings, as Heirs, to the said Margaret, Isabel, and Adam; and gave this Reason, because all the Lands, Tenements, Fees, Liberties, Demeasns,His Reasons why it was a Partible Inhe∣ritance. and Honours that were holden of the Crown of England in Capite, were Partible. Then that the Homage and Service due from the King of Scotland to the King and Crown of England, shew it to be under the Common Law, and so Partible. Robert Brus Ibm. Robert Bruce made the same Claim, and used the same Reasons. his Arguments and Reasons were the same; And he said further, he claimed to hold his Third Part in Capite, of his Lord the King of England, Superior Lord of Scotland, by Homage; and Requests of his said Lord, he may receive Ju∣stice according to the Common Law of England. And altho their Ibm. The King's great Care be∣fore he gave Sentence. Arguments and Reasons had been suffi∣ciently  answered in the Defence of John Baliol before the Audi∣tors, and related to the King, yet willing to deliberate with his Council, and the Auditors, upon these things, he Inquired of them, Whether the Kingdom of Scotland was Partible, who all answered it was not; Upon which Answer, the King appointed Monday next after the Feast of St. Martin as a peremptory day, for all the Competitors to hear their Judgments, in his Parlement at Ber∣wick, intending in the mean time to Deliberate and Examine  things with Knowing Men of Both Kingdoms, the Auditors, and others of his Council, that he might be fully informed what with Justice ought to be done. On the 7th Ibm. A. D. 1292. 20th of Edw. the First. of November 1292, which was the Monday after the Feast aforesaid, the Nobles and Prelates of both King∣doms, the Auditors, other great Men, and a great Multitude of the Populacy, in the Hall of the Castle of Berwick, the Publick  Notary, who signed these Acts of Court, with other Witnesses, Congregatis coram Edwardo Rege Angliae, superiori & Domino Regni Scotiae, in Aula Castri de Berewico super Twedam, utriusque Regni No∣bilibus & Praelatis, ac Auditoribus memoratis, aliis Magnatibus, & Popularibus in Multitudine copiosa, praesente ibidem me Notario infra∣scripto, cum Testibus subscriptis, &c. The Competitors claiming the Kingdom, having had notice and summons to be there, viz.Judgment given against Eight of the Competitors. Eric King of Norwey, Florence Earl of Holland, William de Vescy,  Patric Earl of March, William de Ros, Robert de Pinkny, Nicholas de Soules, and Patrick Galightly, not having appeared, but with∣drawing themselves, as not having prosecuted their Petitions, it was adjudged, and Iudicially pronounced by the King, with the Consent of the Noblemen and Prelates of Both Kingdoms, That they should obtain nothing by their Petitions; Consideratum est per idem Dominum Regem, & judicialiter pronunciatum, de con∣sensu utriusque Regni Nobilium & Praelatorum quod per Petitiones suas  nihil consequantur. And because Ibm. And against Two others. John Comyn, and Roger de Mundevile, did not prosecute their Petitions, they had the same Judgment.
But as to the last Ibm. Petition of Robert de Brus, whereby he claimed the Third part of the Kingdom for his Share, as of a Partible Inheritance, because it appeared by his first Petition be∣fore the King, That he demanded the whole Kingdom of Scotland, he thereby acknowledged and granted, That the Kingdom was Im∣partible, and one intire Inheritance. Which Recognition and Con∣cession he could not then deny; and for that it had been agreed  and adjudged by the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Noble and Great Men, and the whole Council of both Kingdoms, That the Kingdom ought to be possessed by one Heir only, because of its own Nature it was impartible, as other Kingdoms, therefore it was Adjudged and Iudicially Declared by the King, That he should gain no∣thing by what was said in his Petition. Et quia per Praelatos, Co∣mites, Barones, Proceres, & Magnates, totumque Consilium utriusqueRobert de Brus his Second Petition cast out. Regni concordatum est & consideratum, quod praedictum Regnum uni  haeredi debeat remanere, pro eo quod de sui natura est impartibile, sicut & alia Regna. Idciro per eundum Dominum Regem consideratum est & judicialiter pronunciatum, quod dictus Robertus ex his quae in dicta sua Petitione continentur, nihil consequatur omnino. The same Ibm. John Hastings his Petition not allowed. Judgment had John Hastings, and for the same Reasons, That he should get nothing by his Petition, Quod nihil capiat per Petitionem suam. As to the Petition of Ibm. The Reasons why the King∣dom of Scot∣land was ad∣judged to John Baliol. John Baliol, who demanded the whole Kingdom as his Right, the King caused it again to be Examined many days by the Council of both Kingdoms, and after a full Discussion, it was found, adjudged, and agreed, by all the Noble∣men, Prelates, Auditors, and Wisemen, of both Nations, (Comper∣tum fuit manifestè, & per omnes utriusque Regni Nobiles, Prelatos, Auditores, & Sapientes Consideratum & Concordatum est, &c.)  That the Kingdom of Scotland was impartible, and ought to re∣main to one Heir, and because the King was Judge of the Right of his Subjects, by the Laws and Customs of the Kingdoms, which was approved, agreed, and affirmed by all the Noblemen and Pre∣lates of both Kingdoms, (Quod ab omnibus Regni utriusque Nobili∣bus & Prelatis est approbatum, concordatum & dictum,) And by the same Laws and Customs, in the Case before them, it was Agreed and Iudicially Declared, That the more remote by Descent in the  first Line, was to be preferred to a nearer in the second Line, in the succession of an impartible Inheritance. And also, That none of the Competitors denied him to be Heir of the first Line, and therefore was to be preferred before all others as next Heir to the Kingdom of Scotland by Hereditary Succession. And therefore the King of England, as Superior and Direct Lord of Scotland, Ad∣judged, (consideravit) That the said Iohn Baliol, should Recover and have Seisin of that Kingdom, with all its Appurtenances accord∣ing  to the Form of his Petition, upon Condition, That he should rightly and justly Govern the People subject to him, that none might have occasion to Complain for want of Justice, nor the King as Superior Lord of that Kingdom, upon the Suit of the Parties, to interpose his Authority and Direction. The Right of the King
of England and his Heirs always Reserved in such Cases, when he would make use of it. And accordingly Ibm. & Append. n. 13. King Edw. di∣rects his Writ to the Guar∣dians of Scot∣land, to give John Baliol possession of the Kingdom. King Edward gave him his Writ of Seisin for the Kingdom of Scotland, directed to William and Robert Bishops of St. Andrews and Glasco, John Comyn, James Seneschal or Stewart of Scotland, and Brian Fitz Alan his Guardians of the Kingdom of Scotland, to deliver him seisin thereof, with its Per∣tinencies,  saving the Right of him, and his Heirs, dated at Ber∣wick the 19th of November, in the 20th year of his Reign, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo; Which was a mistake of the Clerk, it should have been the 21st, he beginning his Reign November the 16th. With this Rot. Scotiae, 20 & 21 Ed. I. M. 7. This is the same Roll De supe∣rioritat. &c. there were also Writs of the same Date directed to the several Castellans, and Governors of Castles in Scotland, to  give him possession of them. The next Ibm. Rot. superioritat. &c., He Swears Fealty to K. Edward. day, being the 20th of November, A. D. 1292, and in the year of the Reign of King Edward, ending the 20th, and beginning the 21st, (Et Anno Regni Regis Angliae Edwardi vicesimo siniente, & vicesimo primo incipiente) at Norham, he sware fealty to him, as his Liege and Superior Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland. In Testimony whereof he made to King Edward his  Letters Patents of the same Date. His Oath of Fealty, and these Letters Patents are to be found both in Latin and French in this Record. Afterwards he was put into [2] Corporal possession of the King∣domAnd was placed in his Throne at the Monastery of Scone. at the Monastery of Scone near St. Johnstown or Perth, and placed in his Royal Seat according to the Custom of Scotland. Duncan Earl of Fife ought to have placed him in his Throne, but  being under Age John St. John was deputed by King Edward, Rot. Scot. ut supra, M. 33. The same Roll. in Nova Creatione Regis, to do it for him. On St. Stephens-Day, A. D. 1293, and the 21st of King Ed∣ward's Reign, Rot. supe∣rioritat. &c. ut supra. The same Roll. A. D. 1293. 21 Ed. I. Anno a Nativitate Domini 1293, incipiente, Die Festi Stephani protomartyris, Anno Regni Regis Angliae vicesimo primo, ipso apud Novum Castrum super Tinam Existente, &c. He did Ho∣mage to him at Newcastle in this Form in French; Ibm. The Form of John Baliol's Homage. My Lord  Edward, King of England, Superior Lord of the Kingdom of Scot∣land, I, John King of Scotland, become your Liege-man (or Vassal) for the whole Kingdom of Scotland, with its Pertinencies, and all what belongs to it; which Kingdom, I claim and hold, and ought of right to hold for me and my Heirs Kings of Scotland, Hereditarily of you and your Heirs Kings of England, and shall bear Faith to you and your Heirs Kings of England, of Life and Limb, and Te∣nent Honor, against all Men that may live and die; And of this  Homage he made his Letters Patents of the same Date, Witnessed by Sixteen Bishops, Judges, and the greatest Men of England, and Twenty of the same Quality of Scotland, who at his Request put to their Seals.
Within four Ibm. days after Homage done in this manner to King Edward, on the last of December, upon a Complaint made to him by Roger Bartholomew, Burgess of Berwick, against some of his Auditors, or Judges, by him deputed in Scotland. He presently appointed his Justices there present Auditors of the Complaint. Justiciarios ibidem praesentes hujusmodi Querelae constituit Auditores, (whereof Roger Brabazon, Chief Justice of the King's-Bench,  was one) strictly commanding them they should do quick Justice according to the Laws and Customs of his Kingdom; before whom, and others of the King's Council, there was a Petition ExhibitedA Petition exhibited, that King Edw. would observe his Promises. on behalf of the King of Scotland, and by his Advice and Di∣rection, by William Bishop of St. Andrews, John Earl of Boghan, Patrick de Graham, Thomas Randolph, and other Great Men of Scot∣land. That whereas the King of England, and Superior Lord of Scotland, had lately In the 18th of his Reign, in the Treaty of Marriage between his Son Edward, and the Maid of Norwey Queen of Scotland. promised to the Noblemen and Prelates of  that Kingdom, That he would observe the Laws and Customs there∣of, and that Pleas of things done there might not be drawn out of it. They beseeched the King of England, and his Council there present, in the Name of the King of Scotland, That he would please to observe his Promise, and Command his Officers firmly to do the same. Roger Brabazon Ibm. The Petition answered. answered this Petition, Quod dicta petitio  videbatur frustratoria, &c. That it seemed idle and not to the pur∣pose, for that it was manifest, and ought to be so to all the Noble∣men and Prelates of the Kingdom, That the King had performed all his Promises, and not acted contrary to any of them; and as to the Complaints concerning his Judges and Officers, lately deputed by him as Superior and Direct Lord of that Kingdom, who then did Represent his Person, the Cognisance of Complaints concerning them belonged only to him, and no other, and he had especially reserved it  to himself; and also, that because in Judgments of the very Superior Lord, or of those that Represented his Person, no Subjects could pre∣tend to it; and further said, That if the King of England had made any Temporary Promises when there was no King in Scotland, he had performed them, and that by such Promises he would not now be restrained or bound. And the King of England made Protestation Ibm. The King's Protestation concerning the Petition and his Pro∣mises. before all the  Noblemen and Prelates of both Kingdoms, then present, That not∣withstanding his Temporary Promises and Concessions, he did not take himself to be bound, his Protestations otherwise publickly made, remaining in force, and that he intended, and would ad∣mit, and hear all Complainants whatsoever, and all other Business touching the Kingdom of Scotland, and its Inhabitants, by reason of his Superiority and Direct Dominion which he had, and of right ought to have, in that Kingdom, as his Progenitors in their times had,  if they Lawfully, and for Just Causes came before him; and upon those Complaints every where, and at all times, if he pleased, to do them Justice; and to Ʋse and Exercise his Superiority, and Direct Dominion, and to call the King of Scotland himself, if it were ne∣cessary, and the Quality of the Cause required it, to appear before him in his Kingdom of England.
Upon this Ibm. John King of Scotland, &c. acquaints K. Edward of all his Promises, &c. Resolution of King Edward, and the Answer of the Justices to the Petition, John King of Scotland acquitted him of all Promises, Bargains, Agreements, and Obligations he had made to the Guardians and others of the Kingdom, Custodibus & Probis homi∣nibus Regni, while by reason of the Superiority of his Dominion, he held the Kingdom of Scotland in his hands, until he had done Justice to such as Demanded the Kingdom, and especially the Grant and Instrument made at Northampton, the 28th Day of Au∣gust  And Confes∣seth they had been perform∣ed. in the 18th Year of his Reign, in which the Promises and Grants set forth in the Petition were contained. With Confession that they had been all performed, when he had adjudged and fully Delivered the Kingdom to him, Ibm. which Release or Acquittance was Scaled with his own Seal, and confirmed with the Seals of the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other Noblemen of his Kingdom; and Dated the Second of January 1293. in the Twenty First year of King Edward's Reign, and the First of King John of Scotland. Within a short time after this Protestation, and Release, there happened a great Case in Scotland, which was brought by way of Appeal unto King Edward, by Ibm. The E. of Fife Appeals the K. of Scotland, before the K. of England. Magdulph Earl of Fife, against John King of Scotland. To whom he Directed his Writ to appear Ryley Pla∣cita Parl. f. 154. 155. He appears not, and a Se∣cond Writ is directed to him. before him on the Morrow of Holy Trinity, where-ever he should be in England, to answer what Magdulph had to say against him: But then not appearing, the King directed another Writ to  Summon him to appear before him Fifteen Days after Michaelmas, to answer as before. Ibm. f. 157. The E. of Fife's Complaint. The Earl of Fife's Complaint was, That when King Edward was last at Berwick, he commanded William Bishop of St. Andrews, and his Fellow Guardians of the Kingdom of Scotland, That they should do Right to Magdulph concerning his Lands and Tenements of Rerys and Crey, of which he had been Disseised by the said Bishop as Guardian of Fife, Tunc Custodem Co∣mitatus de Fife. Of which according to the Precept he had reco∣vered  Seisin by the Jugment of the Guardians: When John King of Scotland disseised him again of the same Lands and Tenements; and that he might not further prosecute his Right, imprison'd him, and caused an unjust Judgment to be given against him, in Con∣tempt of the King of England and Superior Lord of Scotland, and to his own great Damage. The King of Scots Ibm. f. 158. The King of Scots appears. appeared before the King and his Council  in his Parliament after Michaelmas, and denied all Contempt of the Lord his King, and said he had not Day to Answer the said Mag∣dulph; who Replied, He had that very Day appointed him to Answer, by the King's Ibm. fol. 154, 155. the Writ it self. The Particu∣lars of the Pleadings on both sides. Writ delivered to him by the Sheriff of Northumberland at Strivelin, on the morrow after St. Peter, in Bonds (that is the 2d of August) which sufficiently appeared by the Return of the Sheriff; and the King of Scots being asked, whether he had the Writ delivered to him by the Sheriff, con∣fessed  it, and was then urged to answer Ibm. f 158. when, He said he was King of Scotland, and that he dare not Answer to Magdulph's Com∣plaint, or any thing that concerned his Kingdom, without the Advice of his Subjects, sine Consilio These Probi homines could not be the Common or Ordinary Peo∣ple. proborum hominum Regni sui; and Magdulph demanded Judgment against him as saying nothing. Ibm. f. 159. Then he was told by the King he was his Liege-Man, and
did unto him Homage and Fealty for the Kingdom of Scotland, and was ordered to come thither to answer, or say why he would not or ought not to answer before him; and he said as before,The K. of Scots dare not An∣swer without advice of his People. That he Could not, nor Dare answer to any thing that concerned his Kingdom, without consulting his People, inconsultis probis ho∣minibus Regni sui. Ʋpon this he was told he might require another Day, he answered, He would require none. It was then agreed, That the Principal Plea belonged to the King, and that he made  no Defence against Magdulph; Ibm. and because he would not re∣quire Day, or shew Cause why he ought not to Answer, in Elu∣sion of the King's Jurisdiction and Superiority, it was Judged a Contempt and Disobedience to him; and that Three of his Princi∣pal Castles of Scotland should be Seized into his Hands, and so re∣main till he had given Satisfaction for his Contempt and Disobedi∣ence. But before the Pronounciation of the Sentence, he came before the King and his Council, and made Supplication to the King  with his own Mouth, ore suo proprio, and Delivered it unto him with his own hand in Writing, in Ibm. f. 159, 160. He Petitions K. Edward for leave to advise with them, and for longer time. French, to this purpose. Sire jeo suy vostre home du Royalme de Escoce, &c. Sir, I am your Man of the Realm of Scotland, and pray you for what I am come hither, for which concerns the People of my Kingdom, as well as my self, That you would forbear me while I speak with them, that I may not be surprized for want of Advice, for that those that are with me, will not, nor ought to advise me without others of the Realm; and when I  have advice from them, I will answer at your first Parlement after Easter, and will behave my self towards you as I ought to do. The King advising hereupon at the Instance of the Great Men of his Coun∣cil, and with the Consent of Magdulph granted his Prayer, and gaveKing Edward grants his Re∣quest. him Day until his Parlement after Easter, on the Morrow of the Holy Trinity. This is what is to be found in Ryley's Parliament Pleas, about this Case; and now we return to the Record again. Which Rot. de Su∣perioritate Re∣gis Angliae, &c. ut supra. The K. at War with France and Wales. Parlement at St. Edmunds-Bury. A. D. 1295. 23 Ed. 1. tells us, That on that Day the Parlement ceased, or was not holden, (Parliamentum cessavit, sive non tenebatur) for that the King was Engaged in War lately raised against him in divers Countreys, as with the King of France in Gascony, and with the Welsh in Wales. Yet the suit between the King of Scots and Mag∣dulph, which had begun before the Justices of the King's-Bench in Parlement, was Continued and Prorogued, (Loquela, &c. Continu∣ata fuit & Prorogata.) To the Parlement next to be holden, which  was afterwards Summoned to be at St. Edmunds-Bury, on the Feast of St. Martin in Winter, (that is November 11.) which was in the 23d Year of King Edward, and in the Year from the The Publick Notary that Drew up this Record, al∣ways begins the Year at Christmas. Nati∣vity of the Lord, 1295. The King of England Ibm. Magdulph pro∣secutes his Plea in that Parlement. The King of Scots appears not, but sends his Excuse. was at St. Edmunds-Bury that day, and there held his Parlement, where Magdulph strenuously prosecuted his Plea. But the King of Scots instead of appearing in Person,  sent the Abbot of Abirbrothok with other Noblemen of that King∣dom, to King Edward, with Letters, to Excuse him that neither then or before he appeared in his Court in the Parliaments by passed, at the Day given, or appointed him. Quod nec tunc, nec prius juxta quod Diem habuerat, ad Curiam suam, in praeteritis Par∣liamentis, accesserat Excusavit, pretending certain Causes of Excuse that he could not come in his own Person.
This Abbot Ibm. The Abbot and others that came to Excuse the K of Scots, De∣mand Satisfa∣ction for In∣juries done them. The Answer to their De∣mands. and those that came with him, brought not only an Excuse, but a Quarrel, and Demanded of King Edward Satis∣faction for many and great Injuries, Oppressions, and Grievances, sustained by the Scots from his Subjects. To whom after delibe∣ration, this Answer was given, That the King of England for cer∣tain Causes was coming toward the North parts, and that the King of Scots should then have sufficient Recompence to his own Content,  for all Injuries could be proved done to the Scots, by his Subjects of England; and then appointed him a Day in the same Parlement, by the Continuation and Prorogation of the Justices representing his Person, against Magdulph, the First Day of March next fol∣lowingThe King of Scots summon∣ed to appear at a Parle∣ment at New∣castle. at Newcastle upon Tyne. Then expecting his being there, enjoyn the Abbot, and those with him, to give Notice to their King he should then Personally appear, to Treat with the King of England about the Premisses, and other Things touching the  State and Tranquility of both Kingdoms, and their Inhabitants. While the King was intent upon this Business, Ibm. The King of Scots Confede∣rates with the K. of France. he had cer∣tain Information, That the King of Scots, with his Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Noblemen, Communities of Cities, and Towns, and others of the Chief Inhabitants of the Kingdom, had made a Confe∣deracy and League with the King of France against him, Sealed with both their Seals, and Counter-changed. Ibm. For Dispatch  whereof, the King of Scots at the Instance of his Bishops, Earls, &c. sent four Procurators or Commissioners, William, Bishop of St. An∣drews; Matthew, Bishop of Dunkeld, John de Soules, and Ingram de Ʋmfreville, the Sum of the League was, First, That, Edward King John's Son, should Marry the DaughterThe Articles of the Confe∣deracy. of Charles of Valois, Earl of Anjou, the King of France his Brother. Secondly, That the King of Scotland in the present War, should assist the King of France, against the King of England, and all Con∣federates as well by Sea as Land, against the Emperor of Germany, and others. Thirdly, That he should at his own Charges make War against the King of England, when he was Employed in, or Diverted by War in other Places. Fourthly, That as well the Earls, Ibm. Barons, Prelates, and other Noblemen, as far as of right they might, and also the Communities of ths Kingdom of Scotland, should as soon as they could, send him their Letters-Patents, under their Seals, of their Consent to these Things. Fifthly, That if the King of England Invaded Scotland, the King of France was to make War upon him in other Parts, to divert him,  or if required, to send Forces into Scotland at his own Charges until they came there. Sixthly, That if the King of England went out of his Kingdom, or sent many Forces abroad, the Commissioners promised, that especially in this Case, the King of Scotland should enter England with his
whole Power, as far as he could, making War in the Field, besieging Towns, wasting the Countries, and by all possible ways Destroying England. Sevently, That they should not make Peace on either side, without the Consent of the other. The League it self, and the Procuratory-Letters are to be found  in this Record, and in Hen. de Knighton Col. 2473. Toward the Ibm. King Edward goes to New∣castle. time appointed, the King of England prepared for his Journey to Newcastle, and sent before him the Abbots of New∣minster and Wellebeck to the King of Scots, to give him notice of the Adjornment, and time of his coming, by whom he also Demanded certain Castles in the Marches to be Delivered to him, for his own and Subjects security, from the present Dangers, which when past,  he should Receive again; and that he might so Receive them, without Difficulty, he sent by the Abbots his Obligatory-Letters for the Performance of his Promise. On the First of Ibm. The King of Scots came not. March 1296, and the 24th of his Reign, the King was at Newcastle and staid there many Days, Expecting the King of Scots, he came not; the King of England moved nearer Scotland, to Banburgh and War, where he also Summoned and Ex∣pected  him for some time, yet he neither came, nor sent to Excuse himself; but Returned the Homage and Fealty for himself, and all others of the Kingdom, to King Edward, and Defied him, by theAfter a second Summons he Defies him. Following Instrument or Writing. TO the Ibm. Hen. de Knighton Col. 2477. The Instru∣ment by which he re∣turned King Edward his Homage, and Defied him Magnificent Prince Edward by the Grace of GOD, King of England, John by the same Grace, King of Scotland; Whereas you and others of your Kingdom, you not being Ignorant, or  having cause of Ignorance, by your violent Power, have Notoriously and Frequently done grievous and intolerable Injuries, Contempts, Grievan∣ces, and strange Damages against us, the Liberties of our Kingdom, and against God and Justice, Citing us at your pleasure upon every slight Suggestion out of our Kingdom, unduly Vexing us, seising our Castles, Lands, and Possessions in your Kingdom unjustly, and for no fault of ours, taking the Goods of our Subjects as well by Sea as Land, and car∣rying them into your Kingdom; Killing our Merchants, and others of  our Kingdom, carrying away our Subjects and Imprisoning them: For the Reformation of which things we sent our Messengers to you, which remain not only unredressed, but there is every Day an addition of worse things to them; For now you are come with a great Army upon the Borders, for the Disinheriting us, and the Inhabitants of our King∣dom, and proceeding have inhumanely committed Slaughter, Burnings, and violent Invasions as well by Sea as Land. We not being able to sustain the said Injuries, Grievances, and Damages any longer, nor to  remain in your Fealty or Homage, extorted by your violent Oppression, we Restore them to you for our Self, and all the Inhabitants of our Kingdom as well for the Lands we hold of you in your Kingdom, as for your pretended Government over us.
Ibm. Knighton says this Letter was without Date; [2] Walsing∣ham[1] Ib. 2. f. 66▪ n. 20. says it was sent about the beginning of April, when the Guardian, and Lector of the Frior Minors of Roxburgh, brought it to the King. Before this Restitution of Homage and Fealty, the Scots sent Knighton, ut supra, col. 2477. n. 20. to Rome, to have Absolution from their Oaths and Homage; and upon false Suggestions made to Pope Celestin, they were absolved by his Bull. Deinde Scoti miserunt ad Curiam  Romanam, pro absolutione habendâ de Juramento suo praestito Regi Angliae, & de Homagio suo illi facto, & per falsam suggestionem factam Celestino Papae, sunt absoluti per Bullam Papalem. This is a true Abstract of the In fine Ro∣tuli. Vide Rot. Scotiae 19 Ed 1. usaque 24. and with Cham∣berlains of the Exche∣quer in the 3d Treasury at Westminster, in a long Painted Box, in a great Wooden Chest the O∣riginal. Roll or Record of the Supe∣riority of the Kings of England over the Kingdom of Scotland, and of the Homages, and Fealties of the King and Kingdom of Scotland in the 19th, 20th, 21st, 22d, 23d, of Edward the First,  A. D. 1291, 1292, 1293, 1294, 1295, containing 34 Membranes or Skins of Parchment drawn up by Andrew, sometimes Clerk to William de Tang, and Publick Notary by the Popes Authority, who was present with the Witnesses to every Act, (who were the best Men of both Kingdoms) heard, and saw the things done, and signed every Membrane, with his usual Mark or Sign; now remaining in the Tower of London, and Printed at large from the Roll, in Mr. Pryn's Second Volume of the History of  King John, Henry III. and Edward I. Not known to any of our Historians, and therefore the Truth of these Transactions not understood, which makes a considerable part of the History of his Reign. And this Record doth convince Buchanan of Partia∣lity and Falshood, of what he hath written in the latter end of his Seventh, and beginning or most part of his Eighth Book of the History of Scotland, and likewise Arch-Bishop Spotswood, and Sir Richard Baker, of great Errors and Mistakes in following  him. The Scots pursue their Designs of Knighton, col. 2478. n. 10, 20. The English commanded to quit Scot∣land. freeing themselves from subjection to the English, and Command, That all the English that had Lands and Possessions in Scotland, should without delay quit the Nation, or come forth with all the Strength they had to De∣fend it against the English. The King again Ib. col. 2478. n. 20. The King a∣gain summons the King of Scots. He and they deny Subje∣ction, pre∣tending the Pope's Abso∣lution. summoned the King of Scots to come to him, and with Force to assist him according to his Oath: The Scots answered unanimously, That neither they nor their King was any ways bound to him, or to obey his Commands, because they were absolved by Pope Celestin from their Oath, and from all Subjection he had extorted from them. From Restitution of Homage and Fealty, and Defiance, they pro∣ceed  to Arms, Walsingh. f. 66. n. 50. Mat Westm. f. 427. n. 40. The Scots Arm, &c. enter England, Plunder, Burn, Wast, Kill, and Destroy where-ever they come. To obviate these Insolencies, and Chastise them according to their Deserts, King Edward entered Knighton, col. 4280, 4281. A. D. 1296. King Edward enters Scot∣land. Scotland on Wednesday in Easter-week, besieged and took Berwick Castle with a great Slaugh∣ter
of the Scots; From thence he sent part of his Army to Re∣duce the Castle of Dunbar lately Revolted, which was done, by the Death and Destruction of a great many Scots; Ten thousand, says my Author, Seven Barons, an Hundred Knights, and Thirty one Esquires, were taken in the Castle; The Scots Army coming to Relieve it, Twenty two thousand of them were slain. FromBeats the Scots. thence King Edward marched to Edinburgh, which Castle he took in Eight days; From thence he marched to Sterlin, where the Earl  of Ʋlster came to him out of Ireland with a great Body of Men; and hither the King of Scots, and many of his great Men, sent to beg his Mercy; Ibm. They Beg, and submit to Mercy. King Edward appointed them to meet him at Brechin some few days after, where they submitted to his Mercy and Favour, without making any Terms, or Conditions whatever. The King's Hist. Angl. f. 67. n. 40, 50. Submission runs thus, as 'tis Translated from  Walsingham's Latin Version of the French Original. John, by the Grace of God, King of Scotland, to all that shallThe Tenor and Form of the King of Scots Submis∣sion. hear or see these present Letters, Greeting: Whereas we by Evil and False Counsel, and our Simplicity, have greatly offended and pro∣voked our Lord Edward, by the Grace of God, King of England, &c. To wit, for that being in his Faith, and Homage, we have Allied our self to the King of France, who then was and is now his Enemy, pro∣pounding  Marriage between our Son and the Daughter of his Brother Charles, and assisting him by War and otherways with all our Power. Furthermore by our Perverse Counsel aforesaid, we Defied our Lord the King of England, and put our self out of his Faith and Homage, and sent our People into England, to Burn, Spoil, Plunder, Murder, and commit other Mischiefs, fortifying the Kingdom of Scotland, that was his Fee, against him, putting Garrisons into Towns, Castles, and other Places. For which Transgressions our Lord the King of Eng∣land,  entred Scotland by force, Conquered and took it notwith∣standing all we could do against him, as of right he might do, as Lord of the Fee, seeing after we had done Homage to him, we Rebelled against him. We therefore being yet free, and in our own Power, do render unto him the Land of Scotland, and the whole Nation with its Homages: In Witness whereof, we have caused to be made these our Let∣ters-Patents, Dated at Brechin the 10th Day of July, in the FourthA. D. 1296. Year of our Reign. This Acknowledgment is also Recorded in the Roll of the Oaths of Homage and Fealty of the Scots a second time, made on several days, and in several places, Rot. Scot. 24, &c. Ed. 1. Peceia 8. He renoun∣ceth all Con∣federacies a∣gainst King Edward, and rendered to him his King∣dom, and all Homages and other Rights of that and his People, &c. where he Renounceth all Confederacies, and unlawful Contracts, made in the Name of himself, his Son, and the Inhabitants of Scotland, against his due Homage and Fealty, he had done to the King of England for his own Kingdom. And further rendred to him his Kingdom, and all  Homages, and all other his Rights, with their Pertinencies, suamque Regiam Dignitatem, necnon omnes Terras & Possessiones, &c. and his Royal Dignity, and also his Lands and Possessions, with all his Goods moveable and immoveable, gratanti animo & spontanea vo∣luntate, purè & absolutè, with a Gratefull Mind, and free Will, purely and absolutely, into the Hands of Antony Bishop of Du∣resm,
receiving them in the place, and Name of the King, Vice & nomine Regis Angliae Recipientis. These things were done at Brechin the same day, before a Publick Notary, whom he com∣manded to publish, and make an Instrument of them, in perpetuam rei memoriam. The Bishop of Duresm, John Comyn of Badenaugh the Elder, Bryan Fitz-Alan, Knights, and Alexander Kenedy, Clerk, Chancellor to the King of Scotland, being specially called as Wit∣nesses. The Submission of James Stewart of Scotland is first Recorded in this Rot. Scot. 24, 25, 26 Ed. 1. Peceia prima. Append. n▪ 14. The Submis∣sion and Re∣nunciation of James Stewart of Scotland. Roll, which was, That neither by force or fear, but on his own free Will, as he said, he came to the Faith and Will of the King of England, and renounced for him and his Heirs, all Confederacies, Contracts, and Agreements whatsoever made in his Name with the King of France, or his Adherents, against his Lord the King of England, if any such were freely, purely, and  absolutely, spontè, purè, & absolutè; and then took his Oath of Fealty in the Form following, and made thereof, and sealed his Letters Patents. To all those that shall see or hear these Letters, Ibm. The Form of it▪ James Senes∣chal or Steward of Scotland, Greeting: For that we are come to the Faith and Will of the most Noble Prince, our Dear Lord Ed∣ward,  by the Grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain: We promise for us and our Heirs upon the pain of Body and Estate, and whatsoever we can incur, That we will Assist and Serve him well and Loyally against all Persons that may live and dye, at all times when Required or Summoned by our Lord the King of England, or his Heirs; and we shall not know of any Damage done to them, but we will hinder it, to the utmost of our Power, and shall Discover it to them: And for the performance of this, we bind us and our Heirs and all our Goods, and further have  Sworn it upon the Holy Gospels. In Witness whereof we have caused these Letters Patents to be made, and sealed with our Seal. Given at Roxburgh the 13th day of May, in the 24th year of the Reign of our Lord the King of England. All the Bishops, and other Ecclesiastick Prelates, Abbats, andThe same Submission and Renun∣ciation of the whole King∣dom of Scot∣land. Convents, Priors, Friers, Parsons, Vicars, Abbesses, Nuns, Earls, Barons, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Aldermen, Communalties of  Cities, and Burghs, and other Commoners, or Inhabitants in Scot∣land, Recorded and Named in four Rot. Scot. 24. Ed. 1. A. D. 1294. 24. Ed. 1. large Rolls in the Tower of London with this Title, De Juramentis homagii & fidelitatis Edwardo Regi Angliae nominatim praestitis, per unamquamque indivi∣duam personam Regni Scotiae; Of the Oaths of Homage and Fealty made to Edward King of England, by every individual Person of the Kingdom of Scotland by Name) made the same Submission▪ Renuntiation, and Oath, at several Places, and several Times, and  made their Letters Patents of it, especially in the Parlement holden Ib. Pecia, 20, 21, &c. Append. n. 15. at Berwick on the Octaves of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 22d of August, in the year from the Nativity of our Lord 1296, by the Consent of the Noblemen and Prelates of both Kingdoms. These Rolls were not delivered unto the Kings Keeper of his Rolls, Claus. 34. Ed. 1. Dors. 91 until the 34th of his Reign; and they
were drawn up by the same Notary, Andrew before-mentioned, who was present, heard, and saw what was done, as 'tis Re∣corded at the end of the Roll, Pecia 35; And the same Instru∣ment of Homage and Fealty with the Chamberlains of the Ex∣chequer in the 3d Treasury at Westminster, with other Things and Instruments in small Boxes in great Wooden Chests. This done, Walsingh. f. 68. n. 10. & n. 30, 40. King Edward appoints a Governor of Scotland, and other Officers there. He sends John Baliol to the Tower, &c. King Edward caused the Stone used by the  Kings of Scotland as a Throne, to be brought to Westminster, appointed John Warren Earl of Surrey and Sussex, Governor of Scotland, Hugh de Cressingham Treasurer, and William Ormesby Ju∣stitiary, sent King John Baliol to the Tower of London, where he was decently attended; and the Noblemen of Scotland, which he brought into England, were forbidden to pass the River Trent un∣der forfeiture of their Heads. From Scotland we are to return to England and France, where we find the Peace between them, which had continued for some time, broken: The Quarrel at first began between the Mat. West. f. 419, 420, 421, &c. Walsingham, f. 57. n. 50. &c. A. D. 1291, 1292, 1293, 1294, &c. Peace broken between France and England. English and French Seamen, who plundered one anothers Ships, and seised them where-ever they met at Sea, or in Harbour; from single Ships, they brought Fleet against Fleet, each side complained to their Kings, and Satisfaction was demanded on both sides; Seve∣ral Endeavours were used to Compose these Differences, the Two  Queens of France, Consort and Dowager, mediated a Peace, and were forward in it. The Pope sent Two Cardinals to the Two Kings to the same pur∣pose, divers Means were contrived for Satisfaction on both parts, but none took effect; The King of England offered an Interview, or a Reference to Commissioners to end all Controversies, and adjust the Losses and Damages of the Subjects of both Nations,  but neither was accepted; The King of France charged him, ThatThe Charge against King Edward. his Subjects and Merchants were Robbed, spoiled of their Goods, and imprisoned by his Consent, and also with Contempt and Rebellion, in denying his Superiority and Dominion in Aquitain; For which he peremptorily Mat. West. f. 419. n. 40. the Writ or Citation it self, which is very long. He is Cited to appear at Paris. And upon non-appear∣ance adjudged to have for∣feited his Lands in France. cited him to appear at Paris Twenty days after Christmas-Day, to answer what should be objected against him, to stand to the Law, and hear Judgment: King Edward neglected the Citation or Summons, and was by the Ʋniversal Sentence of the Peers  adjudged to have forfeited all his Lands in France, and the Constable was sent with an Army to take possession of that Dukedom. Upon this seising of Gascony, King Edward Ib. f. 421. n. 20. A. D. 1294. 22 Ed. I. called a Parle∣ment after Whitsunday next following, in which it was Resolved to Recover Aquitain or Gascony by Force and Arms; whereupon Ib. n. 50. he sent the Arch-Bishop of Dublin, and the Bishop of Durham, with other Great Men, to the Emperor of Germany, (called then  King of Almain) to make an Alliance with him against France, and for 100000 l. Sterling paid unto him, (a good Sum in those days) the King and Emperor became acquainted, who were scarce known to one another before; all Difficulties between them were overcome, and great Things were expected from this Alliance. The King intending to pass into France with an Army, was de∣tained
at Portsmouth by Ibm. f. 422. n. 10. contrary Winds from Midsummer-day, to the Exaltation of Holy Cross (i. e. the 14th of September.) On the Vigil of St. Mathew the Apostle, he called another Ib. f. 422. n. 30. Par∣lement, (or happily this might be the same) wherein to support the War the Clergy granted a Moyety of their Benefices and Goods, at three Payments, whereof the first to be at the Feast of All-Saints next coming, the second Fifteen days after Easter, and the third Fifteen days after Midsummer, the Writ appointing the Col∣lectors  in the Diocese of Canterbury bears Date Septemb. 30, and is to be found amongst the Records of Trinity-Term, 22 Ed. I. Rot. 68, with the King's Remembrancer in the Exchequer. On the Claus. 22. Ed. I. M. 6. Do s. A Tenth granted by the Laity the first day of the Parle∣ment. Morrow after St. Martin, or the 12th of November next following, the Earls, Barons, Knights, &c. gave a Tenth part of their Goods on this very first day of the Parlement, and the Commissions to the Pat. 22. Ed. I. M. 2. in cedula The Citizens, &c. pay a Sixth part. Taxors and Collectors of it, are Dated  the same day. The Citizens, Burgesses, and Tenents of the King's Demeasns paid a sixth part of their Goods, but not granted in Parlement, there were Commissioners sent unto every City, Burgh, and Town of his Demeasns, Inter Re∣corda 23 Ed. I. n. vel. Rot. 73 penes Re∣mem. Regis in scacar. to Require and Induce them, to pay a certain Sum charged upon, or demanded of them toward the War, which at this time was a sixth part of their Goods, which was  required first, and granted in London, as an Example to other Places; The Commissions for all Counties in England bear Date the 21st of Novemb. 23d of Ed. I. The King wanting more Money to carry on the War against France, in his Claus. 23. Ed. 1. M. 3. Dors. Dated, Sept. 30. Sum∣mons to Par∣lement. Writ of Summons, directed to Robert Win∣chelsey Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, to a Parlement to be holden on the Sunday next after St. Martin, or the 10th of November, told  him, That he could not but sufficiently understand, since it was known all the World over, That the King of France had frau∣dulently surprised Gascony, and not content therewith had provided a Navy and Army to invade England, and destroy theThe King of France pro∣vides a Fleet and Army to Invade Eng∣land. Nation and Language, if his Power were answerable to his De∣testable Purpose; To prevent these Dangers and Designed Mis∣chiefs this Parlement was called, but it sat not on that day, the King being busied at Winchelsea in Equipping his Fleet for the De∣fence  of the Kingdom, and so could not be there, and for this cause, as 'tis said in the Ib. M. 2. Dors. de parlia∣mente proro∣gando. Writ it self, it was Prorogued be∣fore meeting, unto the Sunday next before St. Andrew, which was in the 24th of his Reign, the 23d ending November 16th. In a short time the Clergy gave the King a Tenth of all their Moveable Goods, toward Maintaining the War; The Earls, Barons, and Knights, and others of the Kingdom, Comites, Barones, Milites, & omnes alii de Regno in subsidium Guerrae nostrae, gave an Eleventh  part of their Moveable Goods, Nobis Pat. 24 Ed. I. M. 22. De undecima & septima le∣vand. & Col∣ligend. undecimam fecerunt, &c. And the Citizens, Burgesses, and good Men of his Demeasn Ci∣ties and Burghs, granted him a Seventh part, &c. Et Cives & Burgenses, & alii probi homines de Dominicis nostris Civitatibus & Burgis, septimam nobis concesserint, &c. The Writ for Levying and Collecting this Seventh and Eleventh is dated Decemb. 4. very few days after their meeting, in the 24th of his Reign.
The King of Scots by the Instigation of his People, taking ad∣vantageThe Scots take advantage by this War with France. of this Rupture between England and France, obstructed the Vigorous Prosecution of the War against the French, and thinking to Disingage himself and them from the Power of King Edward, behaved himself, and suffered as hath been related be∣fore in its due place. The Walsingh. f. 62, 63, &c. And also the Welsh. Welsh these two or three last Years, having, as they  thought, opportunities by King Edward's being Diverted by his Wars with France and Scotland, attempted several times under divers Leaders, to Free themselves from Subjection to the English, were at length reduced to perfect Obedience. Fol. 325. A. D. 1295. Mezery the French Historian says, both these Nations put themselves in Arms a∣gainst King Edward, by the Instigation and Procurement of the King of France. Immediately Walsingh. f. 68. N. 30, 40. after the King and whole Kingdom of Scot∣land upon their Defections, were reduced to obedience, and had the second Time done Homage, and sworn Fealty to King Edward (as we have heard before) he issued his Writs for a Parlement to be holden at St. Edmunds-Bury on the Morrow of All-Souls, orParlement at St. Edmonds-Bury. A. D. 1296. Third of November, Dated the 26th of August, in the 24th of his Reign, at Berwick upon Tweed. Append. N. 16. In that directed to the Arch∣bishop,  he tells him, That he, the other Prelates, and Clergy, late assembled at Westminster, when they Granted the Tenth of their Rents and Benefices, for the Defence of the Kingdom, until the Feast of St. Michael then next coming; which Grant was ac∣cepted by him, in hopes of a more plentiful Aid for the future, from him, and others, which they promised should be sufficient for the same Cause, unless in the mean time there was a Peace or Truce made between him and the King of France: Therefore he  enjoined him to be with his Prior, Archdeacon, and Procurators of the Clergy, at Bury at the time appointed, to order the Quan∣tity and Manner of the Subsidy. The Writs to the other Bishops, the Abbots, &c. were like to this. Those to the Noblemen and Sheriffs, were only to Treat about the Dangers impending upon the whole Kingdom, and Remedies to prevent them. In this Parlement the Citizens and Burgesses gave an Eighth Part  of their Goods, the rest of the Laity granted a Twelfth Part, the Clergy Nothing, by reason of a Constitution made that Year and Published by Pope Boniface. Walsingh. Ut supra. N. 40, 50. The Clergy deny the King a Subsidy. He Summons another Parle∣ment. A quo Parliamento a Civitatibus & Burgis concessa est Regi octava, a populo vero reliquo (i. e. a Comiti∣bus, Baronibus, & Militibus) Duodecima pars bonorum, Clerus ob constitutionem Bonifacii Papae hoc Anno editam, &c. Regi pro Guerra sua subsidium petenti Denegavit. The King in hopes of a better Answer, deferred this Business, to be treated on in another Par∣liament  to be holden at London on the morrow of St. Hilary, Ja∣nuary the 14th. In the mean time, Mat. West. fol. 428. N. 30. The K. shut∣up the Barns and Granaries of the Clergy. the King caused to be shut up and secured all the Barns, Granaries, and Store-houses of the Clergy, and the Archbishop sent the Pope's Bull to be published in all Cathe∣drals,
forbidding, under the Pain of Excommunication, any thing to be paid to Secular Princes, out of Ecclesiastick Revenues. The Bull or Constitution runs thus: Boniface, &c. For the Perpetu∣al[5] Append. N. 17. Pope Boniface his Bull. Pro∣hibiting the Clergy to pay Taxes to Se∣cular Princes. Memory of the Matter, &c. 'tis often delivered from Antiquity, that Lay-men are spiteful to Clergy-men, and the Experience of the present Times manifestly declares it, while not content with their own Bounds, they strive after what is forbidden, and let themselves loose to do Evil, not wisely attending, that for them to have any power over Clercs, or  Ecclesiastick Persons, and their Goods is prohibited, yet they impose grie∣vous Burthens upon Prelates, and Ecclesiastics, Regular, and Secular, they Tax them, and Exact and Extort from them a half Part, a Tenth, a Twentieth, or some other part of their Revenues and Goods, endeavouring many ways to bring them into Servitude and under their Power. And with Grief we relate, some Prelates and Ecclesiastics fearing where no fear is, seeking transitory Peace, fearing more to offend Temporal, than Eternal Majesty, they acquiesce in such Abuses, without  Authority from the Apostolic See. We therefore desiring to obviate such Acts, with Advice of our Brethren, by Apostolic Authority do Ordain, That those Prelates, Ecclesiastics, Religious or Secular, of what State, Order, or Condition soever they be, who shall Pay, or grant to Pay, any Taxes, or Impositions, an Half, a Tenth, Twentieth, an Hun∣dredth, or any other Part or Portion whatever, of the Revenues of their Churches or Goods, to Lay-men, under the Name of an Aid, Assistance, Lending, or Gift, or under any other Pretence or Colour whatsoever,  without the Authority of the same See. Also those Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Great Men, Captains, Officers, and Governors, by what Names soever they are known, or any other of what State or Condition soever, that shall Impose, Exact, or Receive such things, or shall Arrest, Seize, or presume to take the Goods of Ecclesi∣astics, deposited and secured in Churches, or that shall Command them to be Arrested, Seized, or Taken; likewise all who Knowingly shall give any Advice, Assistance, or Favour in these Matters, for that very  Thing, and in that Moment, shall incur the Sentence of Excommunica∣tion. The Communities or Ʋniversities, or Bodies-Politick, that shall be Guilty of these things, we put under Ecclesiastic Interdict, strictly commanding the Prelates, and Church-men, by Virtue of their Obedi∣ence, and under pain of being Deposed, that they acquiesce not in these things, without Express Licence of the said See. And that under Pre∣tence of any manner of Obligation, Promise, or Concession now made, before this Constitution, Prohibition, or Precept shall come to their Know∣ledge,  or afterwards they shall not Pay, or the foresaid Seculars Receive any thing any manner of way. And if they do Pay, or the others Re∣ceive, that very Moment in doing it they shall fall under the Sentence of Excommunication, nor shall they be absolved from Excommunication or Interdict, without special Licence, and Authority from the Apostolic See, unless at point of Death: For we intend not by Dissimulation to pass by such an horrid Abuse of the Secular Powers; Notwithstanding any Privileges under any Tenor, Form, or Conception of Words whatever,  Granted to Emperors, Kings, and others abovesaid, which we will not shall any way help, him or them against the Premisses: Therefore no Man may lawfully Dare to do any thing contrary to this Constitution, Prohibition, or Precept. Dated at St. Peter's in Rome the 6th of the Kalends of March, in the Second Year of our Pontificate; That is, February 24th 1296, in the 24th of Ed. 1.
Notwithstanding the Clergy denied the King an Aid according to this Papal Prohibition; yet he proceeded in his War, and made Confedera∣tio inter Regem & Comitem Flandriae. pat. 25 Ed 1. Part. 1 M. 18. The Confede∣racy between K. Ed. and the E. of Flanders. a Confederacy with the Earl of Flanders against the King of France; Complaining, That he being a Peer of France, and in Homage to the High and Puissant King Philip, he oppressed and used him according to his own Will, contrary to Reason, Justice, and his own Desert; and therefore, because he was so Strong  and Powerful, not acknowledging any Superior, by Advice of his Prelates, Earls, and Barons, he made Alliances and Covenants, with his Friends, to endure from that time forward for Ever, (a touz jours perpetuelement) and particularly with the Earl of Flanders. First, That if the King of France, or his Heirs, should make WarThe Articles. upon him or his Heirs, then the King of England should Aid and As∣sist him against the King of France, and all his Assistants, by his Al∣lies  beyond Sea, and by his own Subjects, Faithfully and according to his Power. Secondly, That the Earl of Flanders, and his Heirs, Earls of Flan∣ders, and their Allies, should Aid the King of England, his Heirs, and Allies, in the same manner, and that within two Months after no∣tice from the King of England, in this present War, he was to make upon the King of France. Thirdly, That neither the King of England, nor his Heirs, nor the Earl of Flanders and his Heirs, should make Peace, Truce, or Suf∣ferance, (i. e. Cessation of Arms) with the King of France and his Heirs, without the Assent, Grant, and Consent of each other. Fourthly, That the Earl of Flanders might better and more surely sustain and undergo so great an Affair, and so great a War, as he had  Covenanted to do, against the King of France, his Allies, and Assi∣stants. Et pur ceo que cuens de Flandres, peust mieuz & plus surement, sustenir & endurer si grant bensoign, & si grant fais de Guerre come il convendra contre le Roy de France é ses Alliez, é ses Aidantz. King Edward granted for him and his Heirs, to the Earl of Flanders, and his Heirs, every Year during the War, Sixty Thousand Four of these Livres made a Pound Ster∣ling; so that this was the value of 15000 l. Ster∣ling. Livres of Black Turnois, or other Current Money at Two Payments, within the Earldom of Flanders, (Chescun an Durant le  susdit Guerre seissante Mile Livres de Turnois Noirs, &c.) at every Payment Thirty thousand Livres; the First to begin at Christmas, 1297. (an Noel qui serra l'an de Nostre Seigneur Mil deux centz quatre vintz é Diseseptz) and the Second at the Nativity of St. John Baptist following. These Payments were to endure so long as the War should endure. Fifthly, That these Alliances made between them might no ways be  defeated, neither by the Command of, or Purchase from the Pope, or any other, nor for any thing that might be any ways Obtained or Granted without their joint Consent. Ne par Commandement, ne par pur∣chaz D'Apostoille, ne d'autri, ne pur choise qui sait impetree, ne ottrogee, &c.) and if any thing was obtain'd it was agreed on both Parts to Reject, and not use it.
For the Faithful Performance of this Agreement, King Edward solemnly Sware to the Earl of Flanders by his Proxies Monsieur Hugh le Despenser, and Monsieur Walter Beauchamp, Steward of his Houshold. And by that Oath he further Agreed and Covenanted with the Earl of Flanders, That his Son Edward when he was of Age should Grant, Agree to, and Confirm this Form of Alliance and Confederacy: Which was Dated at Ipswich, and Sealed with  his Seal, on the Morrow of Epiphany, or the 7th of January, 1296. in the 25th of his Reign. Et pur ce totes ces choses soinet plus seu∣rez tenuz, & Gardez mieux, & plus fermement, nous en noun de so∣venance, & de Tesmoignage avous cestes presentes Letters fait seale de nostre Seal; Les queles jurent faites & Donees a Gippewiz lendemain de la Epephany l'an de Grace, Mil deux centz quatre vintz & sesse; & de nostre Regne vintisme quint. The Record is long and Tauto∣logical, but this is the very Substance of it. Besides Ibm. the Annual Sum here granted, for the further Sup∣port of Guy Earl of Flanders, and Marquis of Namur in this great Undertaking against the King of France, in another Instrument in the same Roll and Membrane, and in Respect of the Alliance he had made with him, and the Covenants and Alliances mentioned in his Letters aforesaid, King Edward gave him Three hundred thousand Livres Turnois Noirs, (That is Seventy five thousand Pound Sterling)  to be Received by his own People, without any Deduction, That is to say, 200000 Livres upon his Assent to the Covenants; 6000 Livres at Christmas following; 24000 at Candlemas follow∣ing; and 70000 Livres at Easter, or Fifteen days after, or at the farthest at Whitsunday: This Sum is obscurely hinted in the preceding Confederacy, and this Grant is Dated at Ipswich the same Day and Year. Yet farther, as Part of this Alliance in another Record in the same Roll and Membrane, 'tis agreed, That Edward the King's Eldest Son, so soon as he was of Age should Marry Philippe Daugh∣ter of the Earl of Flanders, if the Match was not Guy Earl of Flanders, with his Wife and Daughter Philippe, had been allured to Paris above a Year before, by seemingly very kind Letters from the King of France, where they were all made Prisoners; the Father and Mother were Released about Twelve Months after, but the Daughter was kept with Design to prevent this Match, which would have been very Disadvantageous to France; Mezeray Hist. Fol. 325. A. D. 1294. hindred by the King of France, her Death, or any other occasion that might happen, si le dit Marriage naloit este accomplir par lempeechement du Roy de France, ou par la mort de la dite Phelippe, ou par autre occa∣sion, quele que Ele avenist; but if so, then he was to Marry his  other Daughter Isabel. And this was to be performed without any hindrance of King Edward, or any other; to which, he was not to consent, nor to any Absolution of the Pope or others, against these things, Nene consentiones a la absolucion Encontee ces chose, ne autre Empeechment d'Apostoille, ne d'autrui. Dated at Ipswich the same Day and Year.
The Clergy Walsingham, F. 69. N. 30. The Clergy meet at Lon∣don, and deny the King Aid a Second time. met the Second time at London, according to the King's Appointment, on the morrow of St. Hilary, that is, the 14th of January, when they continued their Resolution, and Denied to give him an Aid or Subsidy for the Carrying on his War against France, according to the Pope's Inhibition Ibm. F. 69. N. 30. pro∣cured by the Archbishop, with the Consent of the Clergy. All our Historians report the Refusal of the Clergy, but noneThe Reasons of this Deni∣al. of them is so Express in giving the Reasons for it as Knigh∣ton, Col. 2491. N. 10. 20. where he tells us, That after the Clergy had refused to give the King an Aid, Robert Winchelsey Archbi∣shop of Canterbury spake thus to the Bishops, Satis vobis constat Domini mei, nec latere potest, quod sub Omnipotenti Deo duos etiam Dominos habemus, Spiritualem & Temporalem; Spiritualem vero Do∣minum Papam, & Temporalem Dominum nostrum Regem, & quamvis  utri{que} obedientiam debeamus, Majorem tamen Spirituali, quam Tem∣porali, &c. My Lords, You know well, that under Almighty GOD we have two Lords, a Spiritual and Temporal Lord; the Spiritual the Pope, and Temporal our King; and altho' we owe Obedience to both, yet greater to the Spiritual than Temporal; but that we may please both, we will send special Messengers at our own Charge to our Spiritual Father the Pope, to have leave to Grant something, or at least Direction what we ought to do  in this Case. Ʋt Licentiam aliquid concedendi habere possumus, vel saltem Responsum habeamus ab ipso, quid facere Debeamus. Credimus, &c. for we believe the King, as well as our Selves, doth Fear, and would avoid the Sentence of Excommunication. After this Denial▪ he went on Progress or Pilgrimage, to visit his Tutelar Ibm. f. 44. lin. 8. The King goes on Pilgri∣mage. Saint, or Protectress in Dangers or Adversity, the Lady of Walsingham in Norfolk, where his Procurators, See a par∣ticular Instru∣ment about this Matter in the Record above. Hugh  le Dispenser, and Walter de Beauchamp Steward of his Houshold, at his Command and in his Presence, (it not being the Usage for him any ways to Swear in his own Person) did Swear (en la Chapelle de nostre Dame a Walsingham) in the Chapel of the Lady of Walsingham, for him and his Heirs, Kings of England, and in his Name, according to the Power given them, (which he ac∣knowledged) That they should Perform and Fulfill all Matters and Things contained in the Instrument of Alliance between him and  the Earl of Flanders, Nous qui de usage avoms, que nous en propreProcurators to swear to the Articles of Confedera∣cy, on behalf of the King. Persone ne jurromy, reconissoms que le dit Monsieur Hue & Monsieur Wautier fesoms nous▪ Procureurs, & lour donans poer e mandement, &c. par le testmoign de cestes presentes▪ Lettres, &c. by Witness of these present Letters, Dated at Walsingham, (le jour de la Chandeleur) on the Candlemas-Day, in the Year of Grace, 1296, and of our Reign the 25th. Anthony Ibm. in another In∣strument. Bishop of Duresm, Walter Bishop of Chester, and Hugh le Dispenser (pur ceo que en sa propre Persone le Roy nad mie use a jurer) for that the King uses not to Swear in his proper Per∣son, did in like manner, by the Power and Authority given themThe King's Proctors sworn to the Covenants of Marriage, &c. by the King, Swear, That he should Fulfill and Keep all the Arti∣cles of the Covenants of Marriage between his Son and the Earl
of Flanders Daughters; This Instrument is also dated at the same place, on Tuesday after Candlemass, Le Mardy apres le Chan∣deleur. A few days after the Confirmation of this Confederacy, the KingThe King moved at the unkindness of the Clergy. being much moved at the Backwardness, Unkindness, and Stiff∣ness, of the Clergy to assist him in this War against France, gave Command, Append. n 18. Ordered the Lay-fees, &c. of the Clergy to be seised. That all the Lay Fees of the whole Clergy,  as well Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and▪ Religious, as of other Clercs whatever, and of whatever State or Condition they were, toge∣ther with their Goods and Chattels found upon the same, should be seised into his hands, until the Sheriffs should receive other Commands from him; Which Writs or Warrants to all the She∣riffs of England were dated at Ely in his return from Walsingham, February the 12th. This Writ was rigidly Executed, as appears by the Protecti∣ons hereafter mentioned, and the Report of all Historians; and as the Monk of Fol. 429. n. 30. The Clergy put out of Protection. Westminster says, the Clergy were also put out of the King's Protection, and so as the Lawyers were prohi∣bited to plead for them before the Barons of the Exchequer, or any Temporal Judge; and that all in Orders were commanded freely to pay to the King the Fifth part of their Revenue, or quit their Estates; Sponte offerre sibi suorum proventuum quintam  partem, aut invitè cedere omnibus Bonis suis. The first that com∣plied and obeyed this Command, were some Shaveling Prelates in Court, but in the Cure of Souls manifest Pirates, that they might bring in others to the like Compliance. The Monk thinks he Latines this very sharply and wittily, Ibm. Huic mandato pri∣mitus obtemperaverunt quidam Tonsorati in Curia Regali Praelati, in Cura vero animarum Pilati manifesti, ut inducerent pari modo animos caeterorum. However it was, before this Writ issued, the Clergy especi∣allyThe Clergy of the Province of York com∣ply with the King, and receive his Protection. of the Province of York, and more particularly of the Dio∣ceses of York and Carlisle, having great Apprehensions of the King's Anger, and their own Condition, by early application, and granting the Fifth of their Benefices and Goods, for the Defence of themselves and their Churches, against the Invasion and At∣tempts of the Enemies of the Kingdom, obtained his Protection  Append. n. 19. for themselves, Tenents, Lands, Rents, Goods, and all their Possessions whatever, which were to be protected, maintained, and defended, from all Injury, Trouble, and Damage, until the Feast of All-Saints next. This Writ of Protection bears Date at Walsingham, Febr. 6. in the 25th of his Reign, and only by Privy Seal, but on the 18th of the same Ibm. month passed the Great Seal, by Warrant from the King. The same Append. n. 20. Protection was given to the King's beloved Clerk Iterius de Ingolisine, Arch-Deacon of Bath, his Tenents,Many others submit, and receive the King's Pro∣tection. Lands, Rents, and Possessions, and for the same time, that is, un∣to the Feast of All-Saints. Dated at Kings-Langley in Hertford∣shire the 18th of February; and the same was granted Ibm. to John de Melingham, Lambert de Trikingham, John de Lacy, Ra∣dulph
de Staunford, John de Drokensford, and an Hundred and twenty others, dated at the same time and place; and to as many as would submit, and seek for them. Besides these Writs of Security and Protection, to such whoseWrits of Re∣stitution granted to the Clergy. Lands were not seised, nor Goods taken, he also granted Writs of Restitution to those whose Lands and Possessions had been seised, and their Goods taken. As for Example, take one Append. n. 21. for  many, which was granted to the Prior and Brethren of the Hos∣pital of St. John's of Jerusalem in England. Dated at Ambresbury in Wiltshire the 25th of February, in the 25th of his Reign. Great Numbers of other Writs of Protection and Restitution, grant∣ed to Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, Abbats, Abesses, Priors, Friers, and other Ecclesiastick or Religious Persons, may be seen and perused in the Close Roll 25 Ed. I. M. 22. to M. 26. Many there were that through Negligence, or want of Satisfaction  They enter into Recog∣nisances to save their Estates. concerning the King's Proceedings, or to avoid Trouble, or some other Cause, had not complied, and taken out their Protections, these the King by his especial Favour (as he says in the Writ) admitted to enter into Recognisance, to pay the Fines or Composition set upon them, by one Knight, and the Sheriff of the County, his Commissioners, and so their Estates and Goods were free from seisure. Others there were that invented and spread News amongst the People, by which Discord might happen between the King and his Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, to the Distur∣bance of the Peace, and Subversion of the Kingdom, who also publish Admonitions, and Excommunications against the King's Officers for seising and taking the Lands and Goods of those as refused to pay Taxes, and such as had Complied and Received the  King's Protection. The Writs or Commissions themselves Tran∣slated from the French Append. n. 22. Record, with the Proceedings there∣upon, do here follow. Edward by the Grace of God, &c. To Monsieur Adam de Wells, and the Sheriff of Lincoln, Greeting: Whereas of late we have con∣ceivedThe Writs or Commissions for taking Recogni∣sances of the Clergy. Displeasure and Indignation against some Clerks of holy Church, not without their desert, who being within our Realm, and under our  Protection, wholly refused to give an Aid for the Defence of the whole Realm, and the English Church; We knowing they are not sufficiently mindful, or knowing of the Perils which may happen to the whole Realm and Church of England through their default, willing to do them spe∣cial favour at this time, tho they deserve it not, have assigned you both, or one of you, (if both cannot meet together) to receive in our Name Recognisances of Prelates and others of holy Church, whatever they be, in the County aforesaid, according to their Estates, who will  have our Protection, in the Form that is sent, and enjoined you by us; and to certifie our Chancellor of the Names of those that have made such Recognisances, and to certifie also the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer of such Recognisances having been received; so as ne∣vertheless the Recognisances be made between this and Easter next, and not after. And hereby we Command you to do the things afore∣said,
according to the Form here-under directed. In Witness whereof we have caused to be made these our Letters Patents to be in force for the time abovesaid. Given at Clarendon the first day of March, in the 25th of our Reign. The Second Writ or Commission. Edward, &c. To Monsieur Adam de Wells, and the Sheriff of  The second Writ or War∣rant for the apprehension of Inventors, or Dispersers of News. Lincoln, Greeting; We perceiving that Inventers of News, by which Discord may arise between us and our Prelates, our Earls, or Barons, and our other Great Men, tending to the Disturbance of our Peace and Subversion of the Kingdom, making themselves ready with mortal Enmity, and force of Arms to assault the Realm, not wil∣ling to let such Malice pass without Restraint, We assign you to enquire and search by all ways you can, for Malefactors, and Disturbers of our Peace, and Dispersers of News, or such as do or would hinder  the execution of our Commands, or give or publish Sentence of Ex∣communication,And Publish∣ers of Excom∣munication against the King's Mini∣sters and Sub∣jects. privately or openly against our Ministers, and Sub∣jects, or Adherents, for Executing our Commands for the Profit of our Realm, or against Persons of holy Church, that have put themselves under our Protection for to save themselves, and their Churches; and we hereby Command you, That you take and imprison such, of what Estate or Condition soever they be, that you find guilty of any of these things, until you receive other Commands from us: And We Will,  That if both cannot intend this Business, then one of you that shall be nearest the places, where any of these things may happen, may Execute the Matters aforesaid. And 'tis to be remembred, that the Knights and Sheriffs underCommissio∣ners assigned for the Exe∣cution of the Writs or Warrants in all Counties. written, are assigned in the same Form above written, in the Counties under-written; That is to say, Aleyn Plokenet, and the Sheriff of Somerset, and Dorset, in those  Counties. Bueges de Knovill, and the Sheriff of Stafford, and Shropshire, in those Counties. John Tregoz, and the Sheriff of Hereford, in that County. Thomas de Berkelee, and the Sheriff of Glocester, and Worcester∣shire, in those Counties. John de Segrave, and the Sheriff of Warwick, and Leicestershires,  in the same Counties. Robert Fitz-Payn, and the Sheriff of Wiltshire, in that County. Ralph Pipard, and the Sheriff of Bedford and Bucks, in those Counties. John Lovel, and the Sheriff of Oxford and Berks, in those Counties. Thomas de Furnival, and the Sheriff of Derbyshire, in that County. John le Bretun, and the Sheriff of Middlesex, in that County. Robert de Tateshale, and the Sheriff of Norfolk, and Suffolk, in those Counties. John Engayn, and the Sheriff of Northampton, and Rutland, in those Counties.
Henry Tregoz, and the Sheriff of Surrey, and Sussex, in those Counties. Robert Fitz Roger, and the Sheriff of Essex, and Hertford, in those Counties. Reynald de Argentem, and the Sheriff of Cambridge, and Hun∣tington, in those Counties. William de Leyburne, and the Sheriff of Kent, in that County. Henry Teys, and the Sheriff of Southampton, in that County. Gefrey de Camvill, and the Sheriffs of Cornwall, and Devonshire, in those Counties. John de Lancaster, and the Sheriff of Lancaster, for that County. Reynold de Grey, in the County of Chester, with the Four Cantreds. John de Havering, in North-Wales. William de Brehuse, and Walter de Pederton, in West-Wales. Instructions, and Proceedings upon the first Writ or Commission. It is to be Remembred, That the Knights and Sheriffs shall doInstructions for these Commissio∣ners, and Sheriffs. the things above-written, according to the Articles following. It is ordained, That the Banerets and Sheriffs, shall take Pledges of the Lay People, such as shall be sufficient to answer the Sums  they engage for, and that the Clergy that cannot find Lay Sureties, shall bring to the Sheriff Goods to the value of what they are to pay, to remain with him until they have paid it. And the Thing demanded or taken in this Form shall be for themselves and their Churches, for the common Profit of the Realm, and for to have their Protections; That is to say, of every Prelate, or Parson of a Church, or Clerk Beneficed, the  double of the last Aid paid to the King, for that the Business and Necessity is now much greater then at that time. And the Banerets and Sheriffs shall cause to be Enrolled the Sums Recognised, and every Man's Name, with the Names of the Pledges or Sureties, and send the Roll to the Exchequer that the Money may be Levied. And the Banerets and Sheriffs shall give to every Clerk that  shall have entred into Recognisance as aforesaid, a Certificate un∣derA Commissi∣on to the Co∣roners in every County to Swear them. their Seals to the Chancellor, to obtain the King's Protection; Then follows a Commission to the Coroners in every County to Swear the Commissioners. The King to his Coroners in the County of Surrey, Greeting; We send you Two pair of our Letters Patents, with the Form inclosed in  these Presents, to be delivered to Henry Tregoz, and our Sheriff of Surrey and Sussex, commanding you, That you deliver to them the said Letters with the Form, and that you receive an Oath of them, That they shall faithfully do and perform those things for which they were by those Letters assigned by us according to the said Form. The like Letters were directed to the Coroners of the Counties under∣written, &c.
These Commissioners and Sheriffs acted according to their Com∣missionsThey acted according to their Instru∣ctions. and Instructions, as appears by many of the Original Re∣cognisances, and Certificates, with the Seals annexed to them, yet remaining amongst the Records in the Tower, upon which the Ecclesiasticks and Clerks had Protections granted them, and Writs for the Restitution of their Temporalities, Goods, and Chattels. The Certificates were in divers Forms: For Example, To the Noble Peer, and our King's Discreet Append. n. 22. The Forms of the Certifi∣cates of such as Fine to the King to have his Protecti∣on. Chancellor, or his Deputy Gilbert de Knovil, Sheriff of Devon, if it pleased him, Health or Greeting, and as much of Reverence and Honour as he could: Know, Sir, That the Abbat of St. Dogmael by his Proctors or Substitutes, Robert de la Pitt, and William de Culecumbe, came to me the first day of April, and granted to the King double the Aid he last paid, for the Defence of himself, his Churches, and  the Common Profit of the Realm, and to have his Protection, and for this he found a Surety. In Witness whereof, I have sent my Let∣ter Patent and Close. To Sir John de Langeton, the King's Chancellor, John de Se∣grave, and the Sheriff of Warwick, and Leicester, Greeting; Know we have Received Master Robert de Craft Parson of Bede∣worth, and Eylmerthorp, into the King's Protection. In Witness  whereof we have sent this Bill sealed with our Seals. William de Plympton Parson of West Bedeford, before Sir A∣leyn Plokenet, and the Sheriff of Somerset, made a Fine of Eight Shillings, which is the Double of his Tenth according to his Recog∣nisance, for to have the King's Protection, and for the Defence of himself and Churches, and the Common Profit of the Realm. Pleges for the Fine Thomas de Kynhammer, and Adam Vincen,  Lay-men. In Witness whereof the said Sir Aleyn hath set his Seal to this Bill. To the Venerable and Discreet John de Langeton, the King's Chancellor, Adam de Welle, and R. le Vener, Sheriff of Lin∣coln, deputed to take the Recognisances of the Clergy of that Coun∣ty, Greeting; Know that William de Brumton made Fine with the King to have his Protection and his Lay-fee restored, and this we  signifie to you. To Sir John de Langeton, the King's Chancellor, Henry de Thistelden, Sheriff of Oxford, Greeting; Whereas William, Vicar of the Church of Wyteny, came before me at Oxford, and made Fine xvii s. iiii d. which is the Double of the Tenth of his Vicarage, as he saith. I have given him this Bill or Certificate, sealed with my Seal, to obtain the King's Protection. Given at Oxford the 12th day  of March, in the 25th year of the Reign of King Edward. Where the Fines and Sums are not mentioned in the Certifi∣cates, they are noted in an Account of them, at the end of the Bundles of Certificates, in this manner.
Henry de Gudeford gives the King to have his Protection x 1. Philip de Willugby entred into Recognisance to satisfie the King for his Lands and Tenements, and Chattels found upon them, and hath Protection for himself and Tenents. Hugh Parson of Kingston, before Sir Aleyn Plokenet, and the  Sheriff of Somerset, made Fine of viii s. which is the Double, &c. And so the Certificates of very great numbers of others are con∣tained, and to be seen in the Bundles in the Tower. What was done upon the second Commission appears by the Writs directed to the Sheriffs for Discharging and setting at Li∣berty such Rectors, Vicars, Priests and Clerks, as had been impri∣soned for publishing of the Popes Bull and Sentence of Excommuni∣cation,  and other Misdemeanors against the King and his Crown. While the Execution of this first Commission was in Agitation, there was an Assembly of the Clergy to be in Mid-Lent at London, to which Assembly the King directs this Writ. EDward, Append. n. 23. The Clergy forbidden to ordain any thing in pre∣iudice to the King or his Affairs, in their Synod. by the Grace of God, King of England, &c. To the Honourable Fathers in God the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and  other Prelates, and to all those of the Clergy who at Mid-Lent next coming are to meet at London, Greeting; We forbid you all, and every one of you, upon as much as you can forfeit to us, That you, or none of you, do ordain, or cause to be ordained, or assent to any Ordinance in that Assembly, that may turn to the prejudice or grie∣vance of us, or any of our Ministers, or those that are in our Peace or Allegiance, and in our Protection, or Adherents, or any of them. Given at Sturmister the 21st day of March, in the 25th of our  Reign. And Hugh le Despenser had a Commission of the same Date, to go in his own Person, and take such with him of the Council as he thought fit, to publish this Prohibition at the day of their meeting, Pat. 25. Ed. I. p. 1. M. 9. The Result of this Synod we have in Fol. 430. lin. 4 A. D. 1297. The Result of that Synod. Matthew of West∣minster,  who tells us, That the Archbishop, and certain other Bishops, his Suffragans, meeting at St. Paul's, London, on the 26th of March, to consult of the State of the Church; Two Lawyers, and Two Frier Preachers stood up, and in hopes of gaining Royal, and Temporal Favour, argued and endeavoured to prove, that the Clergy in time of War, notwithstanding the Pope's Pro∣hibition, might Lawfully give and pay Taxes to the King. And furthermore, it being forbidden any one, under Pain of Impri∣sonment,  to publish the Sentence of Excommunication against the King himself, or those which lately sought his Protection, they all departed; The Arch-Bishop having first charged their Con∣sciences with this saying, Salvet suam animam unusquisque. Let every Man save his Soul.
What was done upon the second Commission appears by theWhat was done upon this second Commission. Writs directed to the Sheriffs for Discharging and setting at Li∣berty, upon Security given, such Rectors, Vicars, Priests, and Clerks, as had been imprisoned for publishing of the Pope's Bull, and Sentence of Excommunication, and for other Misdemeanors a∣gainst the King and his Crown. The King to the Sheriff Append. n. 24. of Devon, Greeting; We Command  thee, That thou settest at Liberty, first taking Security, that they give us Satisfaction when we demand it, those Chapellanes which thou didst lately take and imprison, for publishing a certain Sentence, and other Transgressions against us and our Crown, according to what we more fully enjoined thee by Word of Mouth. Witness the King at Plimpton the 11th day of April, in the 25th of his Reign. This Writ was followed by another, directed to the Sheriff of  Cornwall, to the same purpose, but more particularly for the de∣livery of such as were named in the Writ. The King to the Sheriff of Cornwall, Greeting; Append. n. 25. We Com∣mand thee, That if our beloved in Christ William Bodrugan, Arch∣deacon of Cornwall, will undertake to have before thee Master Cle∣ment de Rupe, Master Ralph de Treredenek, William Vicar of the Church of St. Sevara, (and Thirty three others) which were taken  and detained in Prison at Launceston for publishing of a certain Papal Letter, (i. e. the Bull) as 'twas said, so as they may appear before us at our Pleasure to make Satisfaction for their Faults, if they have committed any of this Kind; Then that you cause without delay to be delivered from the Prison aforesaid those Rectors, Vicars, Priests, and Clerks, which upon that occasion, and no other, were detained in the same; Witness the King at Plympton the 17th of April, in the 25th of his Reign. King Edward's Engagements to the Earl of Flanders, and his other Confederates, required his going over Sea, and about Ten days after, at this place, he directs his Warrants Append. n. 26. The King gives Com∣mand to his Fleet to be ready to pass beyond Sea. to the Ba∣rons and Goodmen of his Ports of Hastings, Favesham, Sandwich, Hethe, Winchelse, Romenhale, Dover, and Rye, commanding them to have the whole Service of their several Ports that was due to him, ready Armed and Equipped at Winchelse, on the Morrow of  St. John the Baptist next coming, to go whither he should com∣mand them. And he Required them further, That besides their Service, they should fit out and arm all other Ships of FortyAll Ships of Forty Tuns Burthen com∣manded to be ready. Tuns Burthen or above, to be ready at the same day and place, to go with their other Ships into his Service; but that he would not this should be made an Example for the future. Witness the King at Plympton the 27th of April, in the 25th of his Reign. On the same day, and at the same place, he directs his War∣rants  Claus. 25. Ed. I. M. 19. Dors. to the Bayliffs and Good-men of Yarmouth, and to the Mayors and Bayliffs of all Ports in England, the Occasion being Extraordinary, to arm and set out all the Ships of 40 Tuns, and above, of their several Ports, so as they might be at Winchelsey on the Morrow of St. John Baptist, as before.
He sent also his Warrants and Orders of the same Date Ibm. M. 19, 20. to the Warden of the Cinque-Ports, and the Sheriffs of all Counties in which there were Sea-Ports, to repair to them, and take care the Ships should be Armed and Equipped, and ready at Win∣chelsey at the time he had Commanded. Soon after Claus. 25. Ed. I. M. 17. Cedul. Summons to all that had 20 l. per An∣num to go with the King. the King wrote to all the Sheriffs of England,  and Reginald de Grey, Justiciary of Chester, to give notice to all those in their several Bailiwicks or Counties, that had 20 l. per An∣num or above, as well within Liberties, as without, whether they held of him in Capite, or not, to provide themselves with Horse and Arms, and to be ready to go with his own Person, for the Defence of themselves, and whole Kingdom, whensoever he should send for them. Witness the King at Plympton the 5th day of May, in the 25th of his Reign. On the 15th of May for the Dangers and Perils that might happen to him, and his Kingdom, by the Treachery of his Ene∣mies, reciting the former Warrant, and having appointed the time of his passage beyond Sea, he Append. n. 27. Of whomso∣ever they hold to pass with his Body be∣yond Sea. commanded all the She∣riffs of England, and Reginald de Grey, to summon all that had 20 l. per Annum, of whomsoever they should hold the same, to be with him at London, provided with Horse and Arms as they ought  to be, on Sunday next after the Octaves, or Eight days after St. John Baptist, to pass with his Body beyond Sea, to the Honour of God, of himself, and their selves, for the safety and common Profit of the Kingdom. Witness the King at Loders (in Dorset∣shire) the 15th of May, in the 25th of his Reign. At the same time he sent his Ibm. He summons his whole Mi∣litary Service to go with him. Warrants to the same Persons, to summon the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other  Ecclesiastick Persons, and also Widows, and other Women, within their Counties, that held of him in Capite by Military Service, or Serjanty, or of Wards in his Hand, or Tuition, to be at the same time and place with their whole Service of Horse and Arms, to pass with his Body, &c. Witness as above. Then also he wrote Ibm. And writes to all the Earls, Barons, and Bishops, particularly to be ready. to Edmund Earl of Cornwall, reciting his first Writ, &c. to be ready with Horse and Arms, at the same  time and place, to pass with his Body, &c. Witness as above. In like manner he wrote to Roger le Bygod Earl of Norff and Marshall of England; To Humfry Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, Constable of England; To William Beauchamp Earl of War∣wick, Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundel, Robert de Ver Earl of Oxford, John de Warena Earl of Surry, Gilbert de Hunfranvil Earl of Anegos, and 122 Barons, and great Men there named; And after the same manner he wrote to all the Bishops particularly. On the 24th of this month the King wrote Ibm. n. 28. again to all the Sheriffs of England, and Reginald de Grey, Justiciary of Chester, toThe Sheriffs to certifie all that had 20 l. per Annum in their Coun∣ties. Execute his former Writ of Summons, and to certifie under their Seals the Names of all such as had 20 l. per Annum or above, of whomsoever they held it, in their Bailiwicks or Counties. Witness
the King at Portsmouth the 24th of May, in the 25th of his Reign. While the King was thus preparing for his Voyage, Walsingh. f. 70. N. 10, 20, 30, 40. The Scots arm under William Waleys their Leader. Kill the Eng∣lish. the Scots by the Instigation of William Waleys whom they chose their Leader, in this Month of May, (upon the King's Justitiary William de Ormesby's Banishing many of them that refused to do Homage, and Fealty to King Edward) armed themselves, and  Killed all the English they met with, practising strange Cruelties upon them; which he having notice of, laying to Heart the Af∣fliction of his Friends in Flanders for want of his Assistance, directedThe Earl of Surry sent to Suppressthem He sent Henry de Percy. William Waren Earl of Surrey with the Militia beyond Trent, to march into Scotland, to suppress this Insurrection. The Earl rai∣sing an Army in the North Parts, sent his Nephew Henry de Percy with it into Scotland, who marching toward the Scots found the Heads of them, the Bishop of Glascow, the Steward of Scotland,  Andrew de Mornia, and William Walleys, inclineable to Peace, up∣on Condition of the Safety of their Lives and Limbs, Lands and Goods, so as all things might be Pardoned to that time. HenryWho accepts from them Terms of Peace. de Percy admitted the Peace, upon promise of Hostages, and Arti∣cles in Writing, if it should please the King, who, made ac∣quainted with the Terms, Consented to it, that his Voyage might not be hindered. When the Earl of Surrey went into Scotland to see the Performance of these things, the Scots shifted from  time to time, delaying to deliver Hostages; whereupon the Bishop of Glascow, and William Douglas, lest they might be thought Traytors, yielded themselves, the Bishop was secured in Roxburgh Castle, and Douglas in Berwick. In order to the King's Voyage into Flanders, as hath been noted before, the Militia was Summoned to meet at London on the Sun∣day after the Octaves of St. John Baptist, which are July the First.  Mat. Westminster Fol. 430. N. 20, 30, 40. A. D. 1297. The Earls of Norfolk and Hereford, Con∣stable and Marshal, re∣fuse to do their Duty and Service. says, They were summoned to meet on the Morrow of the Translation of Thomas the Martyr, (i. e. Becket) which is July the 8th, and may agree with the Record, (if the First of July that year fell on a Sunday) when the Earls of Nor∣folk and Hereford, the Marshal and Constable, being Required by the King, Refused to do their Duty, and Request him to appoint some other of his Houshold to that Service, and retired; and on the 25th of July [8] he wrote again to all his Ports, to send  [8] Claus. 25. E. 1. M. 9. Dors their Ships to Winchelsey, with what speed they could. The King, no doubt, in hopes of a perfect Reconciliation be∣fore he went over Sea, Append. N. 16. The King re∣stores to the Archbishop of Canterbury all his Lands and Goods. wrote to the Sheriffs of Kent, Surrey, Middlesex, Sussex, and Essex, upon the earnest Request and Media∣tion of the Prelates of that Province, and out of Special favour, to Restore to the Archbishop of Canterbury all his Lay-Fees, together with his Oxen, Carts, or Waggons, and all other his Goods and  Chattels being upon the same, in the state they were then in: Witness the King at Westminster, July the 11th, in the 25th of his Reign. And that he might extend his further favour to all the Clergy that had submitted, and were reconciled, he gave a general Pro∣tection
to them, that had not received it before, and Ibm. N. 30. He grants a General Pro∣tection to all the Clergy. wrote to the Sheriffs of London and others, at the Request and Prayer of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops and Prelates of his Kingdom, Supplicating him in behalf of the Clergy, That they should Maintain, Protect, and Defend all the Clergy in their Bayliwics, their Tenements, Lands, Goods, Rents, and all their Possessions; not permitting them to receive any Injury or Molestation in their Persons or otherwise, though they had not his Protection. Witness  the King at St. Pauls, London, 31st of July, in the 25th of his Reign. It ought not to be omitted here, That notwithstanding the Mortal Enmity and War between the two Kings of England andThe King of France Remon∣strates against the Pope's Bull prohibi∣ting Taxes. France, yet King Philip the 4th Published a sharp Remonstrance a∣gainst the Pope's Bull, which caused this Trouble and Contention between the King and Clergy in this Nation, in which he strenu∣ously  asserted the Rights of his Crown, and the Liberties of the Gallican Church, which were the very same with those of England. The Archbishop of Rhemes with the Suffragans and Abbots of hisThe Clergy of France join with him. Province, seconded their King's Remonstrance with a Supplication to the Pope, to recal his Bull, lest it might break the Peace and Ʋni∣ty of the Gallican Church and Kingdom, as being very Injurious and Grievous to the King, and Temporal Nobility, and as bringing Scandals, nay perhaps Ruine and Destruction to the Nation;  whereupon Pope Boniface the 8th, sent an Explanatory Bull toThe Pope ex∣plains his Bull for the ease of the King, No∣bility, &c. King Philip, by which he Declared, That his former Bull extended not to voluntary Grants and Aids made by the Clergy, nor to Cases of Necessity, when Taxes and Contributions were necessary for the Defence of the Kingdom, then they might be Raised without con∣sulting the Pope. That the King and his Successors (provided they were Twenty years of Age) might be Judges of the Necessity, if not of that Age, then their Council; and Lastly, He Declared, that  by this Bull, or Constitution, it was not intended to take away or diminish any Rights, Liberties, Franchises, or Customs of the King, Kingdom, Dukes, Earls, Barons, or Temporal Nobility, whereof they were in Possession before he Emitted that Bull. The Remon∣strance, Supplication, and last Bull, Dated at Orvieto or the Old City July 22. in the Third year of his Pontificate, A. D. 1297. are to be found in Peter Pithous Proofs of the Liberties of the Gallican Church. Printed 1639. Chap. Sect. or Numb. 8, 9, 10. Fol.  1085▪ 1088, 1089. By reason of the Clergies Denial to Grant the King a Seasonable and Timely Aid to carry on his Wars, he was forced upon Ʋn∣warrantable Courses against the Laws of the Realm, Knighton, Col. .249:. N▪ 60. The K. forced upon Unwar∣rantable cour∣ses to raise Money. by Raising the Custom upon Wool from a Noble, to Forty Shillings the Sack, and ordering the Owners should sell their Wool within a Month, at certain Places assigned, or they should be forfeited. For the  Victualling his Army and Ships, he took Wheat, Oates, Malt, Salt-Fish, and Flesh, as Pork, Beef, Mutton, without paying for them, as well from Lay-men, as the Clergy; by which Oppressions the Peo∣ple were very much Grieved and Disturbed, being hereby prepa∣red to follow the Dictates of any Projectors against the King.
It cannot be thought, but by this time the Archbishop and his Friends, the Constable and Marshal and their Friends understood one another, and carried on a joint Design. The Causes of the Controversie (but just now only mentioned) between the King, Constable, and Marshal, and the Reasons of their Refusing to do their Duty, their withdrawing from his Presence, and from Court, with their Denial to return when sent to, will best ap∣pear  from the King's Declaration upon Record, sent to all the Sheriffs in England. WHereas the King Append▪ N. 31. The King's Declaration of the Causes of the Consta∣ble and Mar∣shal's refusing to do their Duty, and re∣tiring from Court. always desiring the Peace, Quiet, and good Estate of his People and Kingdom, after his Voyage which he is now making, &c. All occasions by which the said Peace and Quiet may be Disturbed shall be wholly taken away. But because at this time there may be such Reports raised amongst the People, that may cause them to  behave themselves otherwise toward their Sovereign Lord, then they ought especially since the Earl of Hereford, and Earl Marshal have lately withdrawn themselves from him, or for other Matters; hereupon, for that he would have the Affairs of his Realm Ʋniform and Quiet, he makes known, and would that all should know the Truth of what fol∣lows. Lately, when a great Part of the Men of Arms of England, some upon Request, others by Summons of the King came to London, the King willing to provide for their Discharge, the settling of their  Expences, and that they might know what they were to do, sent to the said Earls as Constable and Marshal of England, to come to him for that purpose. The Earl of Hereford came, and Monfieur John Se∣grave to Excuse the Earl Marshal, that by reason of Sickness he could not come, and therefore had sent him in his stead. Presently by their assent they were ordered to make Proclamation in the City of London, That all those that were come thither, either by Summons or Request, should on the Morrow appear before the Constable and Marshal, to  know and be This was the proper Busi∣ness of these two great Of∣ficers, and without this Ordering and Enrolment, the Men at Arms were not assigned the Quantity of their Ser∣vice. Enrolled, in what manner, and how many of them would serve the King in that Voyage beyond Sea. They told the King they would perform the Order as they had received it in Writing. But the same day toward Night the Earls sent the King a Message in Wri∣ting by Sir John Esturnis Knight, in this Form. For that, Dear Sir, You commanded the Marshal by the Constable, and by order in Writing, that he should cause it to be published in the City, That all such as were come by your Summons or Request, should be on the Mor∣row  by One of the Clock before the Constable and Marshal at St. Pauls, and that they should Enroll so many Horse of one, and the other, and then to inform you of it. Your Constable and Marshal do pray you to Command some other of your Houshold to do it. And for that Sir, you know well, that tho' some are come upon Request, and not Sum∣mons, yet if they do this, they should enter upon their Office, and do Service: Wherefore they pray you to Command others. Ʋpon receipt of this Message, and Counsel taken thereupon, the King thinking they  might have done it unadvisedly, sent Monfieur Geofrey de Genevill, Monsieur Thomas de Berkeley, Monfieur John Tregz Constable of the Tower, and Guardian of London, Roger Brabazon, and Monsieur William de Bereford, to advise them Better, and that they might so order things, as they might not turn to the Prejudice of the King, nor their own Estate; and if they would not be otherwise advi∣sed,
then they should ask them if they would avow the Letter sent, and the Words contained in it, which they did; and the King being ac∣quainted with it, advising with his Council, put in the Place of the Earl of Hereford, Constable, Monsieur Thomas de Berkeley, and in the Place of the Earl-Marshal, Monsieur Geofrey de Geneville, as they desired; whereupon they withdrew themselves from the King and Court; and soon after the Archbishop of Canterbury, and many other Bishops, came to the King, beseeching him they might speak with the  Earls, which the King Granted; they sent to them to know where they might come to speak with them, they let them know by Letters they should be at Waltham the Friday on the Morrow of St. James. They went thi∣ther, the Earls came not, but sent Monsieur Robert Fitz-Roger, and Monsieur John de Segrave, Knights, who said the Earls could not then come for some Reasons. On Sunday following the Bishops and two Knights came to the King at St. Albans, and at their Requests, the Knights had Letters of safe Conduct given them for the Earls to  come to, stay with, and return from the King, yet they never came; and now 'tis given out the Earls offered to the King certain Articles for the common Profit of the People, and that he utterly refused them, of which the King knows nothing, for they never propounded, or caused to be propounded any thing to him, nor doth he know, why they are retired; amongst which Articles 'tis reported, there were certain Grie∣vances, which the King understands well, as the Aids which he often demanded of the People, by reason of his Wars in Gascony, Wales,  Scotland, and other where, which could not be Maintain'd, or his Kingdom Defended, without the Assistance of his People, of which he thinks often, that he should so much grieve, and burthen them, and prays they would have him Excused; and if it please GOD he returns from this Voyage, he would have all Men know, That according to his great Desire, according to the Will of GOD, and to the Satisfaction of his People, he will amend all things whatever, where he ought: And if he doth not return, he will order his Heir to do it as well as if he  had Returned; for he knows well, that no Man is so much bound to the Kingdom, or to love the People, as he himself. On the other side, there is great necessity of his going to assist his Ally the Earl of Flan∣ders, and his Passage is so hasty for the Peril his Friends beyond Sea are in, which if he should lose, the Kingdom might be in great Dan∣ger; And therefore they should have the Confirmation of the great Char∣ter of the Liberties of England, and of the Charter of the Forest, if they would Grant him an Aid or Gift, such as was Necessary for  him at this time; and the rather for that upon his going over, a last∣ing Peace might ensue; and if he had Refused Articles, or any thing else in Hatred, and Destruction of his People, contrary to the Com∣mon Profit of the Realm, or that he hath done otherwise against the Earls then is here said, he desires no Man to believe him; for these are the true Proceedings, and the very Truth of things to this time. Afterwards he put them in mind what Dangers and Wars may arise from Rumours, Stories, and Reports, raised between the King and  his People, &c. concluding his Declaration, That all his good People would pray, That his Voyage might have a good End, to the Honour of GOD, of himself, of them, and his Kingdom, and that a Dura∣ble Peace might follow. Given at Odymere (near Winchelsey) the 12th day of August, in the 25th of his Reign.
The King being informed there were Excommunications ready to be Pronounced and Published against his Officers, &c. sent a Prohibition Append. N. 32. to the Archbishop and all other Bishops to for∣bear it. The King to the Venerable Father in Christ, Robert, &c.The K. for∣bids the Bi∣shops to pub∣lish Sentence of Excommu∣nication a∣gainst his Officers, &c. Whereas we have been forced by inevitable Necessity for the Defence of our Kingdom and Hereditary Right invaded by the King of France, and other Enemies, and for the Preservation and Safety of the Eng∣lish  Church, and of the Persons of Ecclesiastics, and others, we have taken from them Grain, and other Goods, and the same necessity yet compels us to do the like, for which Corn and Goods we are resolved to make full Satisfaction; and now we understand that you intend to pro∣mulge, and cause to be published, Sentence of Excommunication against our Officers that took them by our Command, which if you should do, it would manifestly redound to the great and immeasurable Michief of our Crown and Dignity, the Scandal of the People, and as it may  happen, the Consequence of it may prove the Destruction of the Church, and Subversion of the whole Kingdom. We forbid you, upon Obser∣vation of the Oath of Fidelity by which you are bound to us, and upon forfeiture of all you hold of us, to publish any such Sentence against our Officers, Clercs, or Laics, or to do any Injury to them, especially when we are ready to make Satisfaction. Witness the King at Winchelsey the 19th Day of August, in the 25th of his Reign. King Edward being so far engaged to assist the Earl of Flanders  in Person, as he could not recede from his Promise, and resolved beyond persuasion to do it with what speed he could, the Earl now much pressed by the King of France, having lost some Towns, and being in fear of the Revolt of his People; Walsingh. Hist. Angl f▪ 71. N. 30, 40, 50. f 72. N 10, 20. while he was thus at Winchelsey, or Odymer, with all possible Expediti∣on providing for his Passage, the Earls sent him the following Petitions of his Kingdom in Writing, and with this Title. These are the Injuries and Grievances, which the Archbishops, Bi∣shops,The Grievan∣ces of the whole King∣dom presented to the King. Abbots, Priors, Earls, and Barons, and the whole Community of the Land, do shew unto our Lord the King, Humbly beseech∣ing him, That for his own Honour, and the Safety of his Peo∣ple he would correct and amend them. First, It seemeth to the Community of the Land, That the Sum∣mons  sent them by the King's Writ, was not sufficient, because the Place whither they were to go was not named; for according to that, they were to prepare themselves, and make Provision of Money. Secondly, Whether they ought to perform Service or not, because 'tis said in general words, the King would pass over into Flanders: It seems to the Community, that there they ought to do no Service, be∣cause neither they, nor their Predecessors, or Progenitors, ever per∣formed  their Service in that Land. And tho' it was so that they ought to do it, yet they were not able, being so oppressed with Tallages, Aids, and Takings, or Prizes, as of Wheat, Oates, Malt, Wool, Leather, Oxen, Cowes, Powdered Meat, without paying for them, by which they were supported.
Thirdly, They say they cannot pay Taxes, by reason of their Poverty proceeding from the Tallages and Takings aforesaid, because they had scarce wherewithal to support themselves, and many were in such Condi∣dition, as they had not wherewith to Till their Lands. Fourthly, The whole Community of the Land thinks it self very much grieved, That they are not used according to the Laws and Cu∣stoms  of the Land, as their Predecessors have been. Fifthly, They were Grieved and Oppressed, that Magna Charta, or the Great Charter was not observed, and that the Charter and Assize of Forests was not observed according to Custom. Sixthly, The whole Community thought it self grieved, by the Im∣position upon Wool, which was too Burthensome at 40s. per Sack, and  of Wool for common Ʋse seven Marks for the same Quantity, Ibm. f. 72. lin. 5. for that the Wool of England, amounted to almost half the value of the whole Land, and this Imposition amounted to the Fifth part of the value of it. Then they conclude, That because the Community wished the King Honour and Safety, as they were bound to do, it seemed to them it was not good for him to pass into Flanders, unless he were assured That People were true to him and his People; and also in regard of Scotland, which now began to Rebel, and would do so much more when  they knew he was beyond Sea. When the King received these Petitions he Ibm. N. 10, 20. told the Mes∣sengers, he could not Answer them without his Council, some part whereof was gone into Flanders, and some part left at London;The K. could not answer the Petitions of the Com∣munity with∣out Advice of his Council. and sent to intreat the Earls by the Messengers, That if they would not go over Sea with him, They would at least do no Mis∣chief to the Kingdom in his absence, for that he thought by the  Favour of God to return, and have it in due Order. It is Recorded in the Close Roll of this Year, that the King pas∣sed into Flanders on the 22d of August, Claus. 25 Ed. 1. M. 7. Dors. Memorandum quod Die Jovis vicesimo secundo Die Augusti Transfretavit Rex in Flan∣driam. Mat. Westminster Fol. 430. N. 50. says it was the Day following, on the Vigil or Eve of St. Bartholomew, and that the same Day the Earls and Barons came to the Exchequer, and forbad the BaronsThe Earls and Barons prohi∣bit the Levy∣ing of Taxes granted to the King.  thereof, to cause the Sheriffs to Levy the Eighth Peny of the Laity, telling them, They knew nothing of it, and that Taxes could nei∣ther be Imposed or Exacted without their Assent. Walsingham Ut Supra. F. 72. N. 40. says, That the Earl of Hereford, and Earl-Marshal, with their Con∣federates or Complices, prohibited the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer to cause to be Levied the Eighth Peny of the Laity, that was granted to the King at Bury-St.-Edmunds, and that they pre∣vailed with the Citizens of London to stand with them for theThey prevail with the Citi∣zens of London to stand with them for their Liberties.  Recovery of their Liberties. The Scots taking the Opportunity of these Commotions in England, still delayed to give Hostages and Pledges for the Peace made with Henry de Percy, tho' demanded by Earl Warren; and toward the End of Ibm. F. 72. N. 10. August took Arms again under the Leading
of Waleys, and in a short time drove almost all the English out ofThe Scots a∣gain take Arms, and drive the Eng∣lish out of Scot∣land. Scotland: William de Warren aforesaid, the Guardian of Scotland, fled from Berwick into England, and the English that were there after him, and quitted the Town, yet the Castle was kept, and well Defended by those that were in it. Upon this News from Scotland, the Ibm. N. 30. The Prince, Guardian of England. Council that the King left with the Prince whom he had constituted Guardian of Eng∣land  in his absence, to assist and advise him, persuaded him to send for the two Great Earls, and if by any ways he could re∣concile them to his Father. On the 9th of September Append. N. 33. He Writes to the Constable and Marshal to meet him at London. he wrote to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Six other Bishops, Twenty three Abbots and Priors, these Two, and Eight others, to meet on the morrow after St. Michael at London, to confer with him, and those of his Council there present, about urgent and difficult Affairs. When they came together, Walsing. Ut Supra. f. 73. N. 40, 50. they would not consent  to any other Form of Peace than that which is now called the Statute de Tallagio non Concedendo, or of not Granting Tallage; which is the same in Ibm. Walsingham, with that of Sir Ed. Coke's Second Institutes, Fol. 532. taken out of the Old Statutes, Printed by Rich. Totel, 1556. Part 2. p. 73. a. Henry de Knighton Col. 2523. N. 10, 20, &c. They come Armed and take Possession of the City Gates. tells us, They came guarded with 500 Horse, a great Number of choice Foot, and that they would not  enter into the City before they had Liberty to place their own Guards in every Gate; and then says, That by the Mediation of the Venerable Father Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, (Cujus me∣moria in Benedictione sit) whose Name be blessed, as the Historian, there was no Agreement to be made, unless the King would con∣firm the Charter of the Forest, and the Great Charter with some Articles added to it, which were the Statute before-mentioned, then put in Writing by them, and were the Grieuances sent to  the King at Winchelsey, drawn into the Form of a Charter or Statute. This was done by the King, as F. 74. N. 10. Walsingham says, (Tan∣quam ab eo, qui in arcto positus erat, cedendum Malitiae temporis cen∣suit,) as by one in streight, thinking it best to give way to the Iniquity of the time: And Ibm. for this the Laity gave an Eight Part of their Goods; the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury a Tenth, and the Clergy of the Province of York a Fifth Part. On the 15th of September before this Meeting or Great Coun∣cil,to Claus. 25 Ed. 1. M. 6 Dors. A Parlement called. the Prince had Issued Writs for a Parlement to be holden on the Octaves of St. Michael, or 7th of October, for the Confir∣mation of the Charters, as his Father had before propounded in his Declaration; and for that Confirmation Ibm. the Laity regranted the Eight Part of their Goods they had given before at Bury, and the Clergy gave a Tenth; and the whole Business was dispatch'd in three Days; for this Statute or Charter, which in Coke's Se∣condThe Chartres confirm'd.  Institutes, and our Statute-Books goes by the Title of Confir∣matione Chartarum, was Sealed and Dated the 10th of October; and is to be found upon the Statute Roll 25 Ed. 1. M. 38. with this Memorandum at the End of it, that this very Charter or Confirma∣tion,The Confir∣mation of them Sealed in Flanders. word for word, was Sealed in Flanders with the King's Great Seal at Gaunt, the 5th Day of November in the 25th year of his
Reign, and sent into England; a sure Sign Sir Edward Coke never saw the Original of this, nor of the Statute de Tallagio non Conce∣dendo, who placeth them in the 34th of this King. On the Append. N. 34. The Earl-Marshal, the Constable, and Lord Ferrers Pardoned, and by what Me∣diation. Statute-Roll there is a Destinal Pardon for the two Earls, the Lord Ferrers, &c. somewhat differing from that in the Printed Statutes. Dated at Gaunt on the same Day, procured at the spe∣cial Prayer and Request of his Son Prince Edward his Lieutenant in  England, William Bishop of Ely, William Bishop of Bath and Wells, Richard Bishop of London, Walter Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, Henry Elect of York, Edmund Earl of Cornwall, John Warren Earl of Surrey and Sussex, William Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and the others of his Council, with his Son in England. Registrum Winchelsey in Doctors-Com∣mons, fol. 227. a. b. and 228. a. b. This Pardon had been doubly granted before by the Prince, and by his Council, in two Instruments, or as they are called, Letters-Pattents, one of the Prince, the other of his Council, Dated October 10. and Sealed  with their own Seals, because the Great Seal of England was with the King: At the same time also they Ʋndertook and Bound themselves, to secure them from any Dammage which might happen to them, from the King, and procure them this very Par∣don. Things thus compos'd in England, there was a Truce, or as 'tisA Truce be∣tween the two Kings and their Allies for a short time. called in the Instrument it self, A See Bundle of Writs of Privy-Seal in the Tower. And Pryns Hist. Ed. 1. f. 757. Sufferance or Forbearing all  Acts of Hostility by Sea and Land, between the King of England, and his Allies, on the one Part, and the King of France and his Allies on the other, until the Feast of Epiphany, for the Duchy of Aquitain, and for the Earldom of Flanders, and all other Parts, until the Octaves of St. Andrew (or the 7th of December.) Dated on the Feast of St. Denis, (that is October 9th.) in the Year of Grace, 1297. in which there are the Names of the English Confe∣derates; That is to say, the King of Almayn or Emperor; the  Earl of Flanders, the Earl of Savoy, the Earl of Bar, the DukeThe King of England's Al∣lies or Confe∣derates. of Brabant, the Earl of Holland, the Earl of Montbeliard, John de Cholon, Seigneur Darly, John de Burgonig, John Lord of Moamtfan∣con, Walter his Brother, the Lord of Newcastle, the Lord Dosselier, the Lord of Fanconby, the Lord of Jour, the Lord of Conkendary, Simon de Montbeliard, Lord of Montron, Stephen Doissler Lord of New-Town, (de Ville Neove) and many others, of Burgoinge, Al∣maigne, Brabant, Holland, Gascoinge, and Arragon, and others, of  which the Names were not known: And by this Sufferance all Trade or Commerce was to be Exercised as at other times. This was inclosed in Letters Ibm. and Pryns Hist. f. 758. The Truce sent into Eng∣land. under Privy-Seal, dated at Gaunt the 15th of October, in the 25th of his Reign, and sent to his Son, enjoyning him to see it kept in all points, through the Realm; and Claus. 25 Ed. 1. M. 26. Dors. in cedula. to that purpose, on the 20th of October he sent it to all Ports in England, to be Proclaimed, and strictly Ob∣served  in all its Articles. On the next Day, setting forth that the Scots despising theirThe Scots de∣spise their Oaths of Ho∣mage and Fealty. Oatbs of Homage and Fealty, and not content to have Broken the Peace before, to have Killed his Subjects, and done many other
great Mischiefs, Ibm. They enter England, burn, and waste all before them. The King summons the Service of Earls, Barons, &c. to sup∣press them. had then Entered England, Burning and Wasting the Country, slaying his People, and destroying all before them, sent his Summons to 200 Earls, Barons, Knights, Abbats, and others, to be ready at Newcastle upon Tine, on St. Nicholas-Day, or 6th of December, with their Service of Horse and Arms, to go with his Son against the Scots, to suppress their Rebellion, and defend his own Kingdom. By Commissioners on both sides the Sufferance or forberance of Hostility was prolonged and continued until Lent then next com∣ing, the Bundle of Writs, & Pryn ut supra, f. 756, 757. The Truce between the Two Kings prolonged. Instrument whereof was sealed with their Seals, and dated at Grolingues Abby near Courtray in Flanders, Nov. 23. 1297. In this Instrument also are contained the Names of King Edward's Confederates, as before. In the 24th of this Walsingh. Hist. f. 64. 1. 5, &c. n. 10. King, in the year 1296, the Cardinals  of Albanum and Praeneste, had been sent by the Pope, first into France, then into England, (whether they came about Whitsun∣tide) to make Peace between the Two Kings, and expected theTwo Cardi∣nals sent to persuade Peace, or make a Truce for two years. King's coming out of Wales until the first of August, when they delivered their Message, and persuaded to Peace, or a Truce for Two years; The King answered he could agree to neither, with∣out the Consent of the King of the Romans, by reason of the League between them confirmed by Oath; They Request the King  to obtain his Consent, which in Reverence to the Court of Rome he granted, and they returned into France. The King, as they desired, Bundle of Letters and Writs in Jurie London, 24 & 25 Ed. I. and Pryn Hist. Ed. I. from fol. 748, 0 fol. 764. wrote to the King of Almaign or Romans, to send his Commissioners to Cambray to the Cardinals, with Power before them to Treat of and Conclude a Truce Honour∣able and Beneficial for them both. Many Commissions were granted, and Commissioners Ibm. A ways pro∣pounded for a Peace or Truce prove ineffectual. appointed on both sides at several  times, and References made to the Pope. But when all these Ways proved ineffectual, the Pope by his own Authority took upon him to denounce and declare a Truce for Two years under pain of Excom∣munication, to such as should not submit to it; Walsingh. ut supra, f. 69. n. 50. The Pope by his own Au∣thority de∣clares a Truce for two years. This the Car∣dinals published without success; as appears by their Letter or Ma∣nifesto published for the knowledge of all People, in which are con∣tained the Minutes or Heads of this Truce, and the King of France his Protestation against it, and the Pope's pretended Power  to make it. Ʋniversiis Proves des libertez de l'E∣glis Gallicane, Printed 1651, chap. 7. n. 12. £ 96. praesentes literas inspecturis miseratione divina, B. Albanensis, & S. Penestrimensis Episcopi salutem in Domino, Notum facimus, &c. To all that shall see these present Letters, B. by Divine Mercy Bishop of Albano, and S. Bishop of do make it known, &c. Then giving a short Account of the Truce, and that it was to have continued for Two years from the Feast  of St. John Baptist last past. They say, That when they presented to the King of France the Popes Letters Patents, containing the Truce, to be read, cumque dictas literas praesentaremus dicto RegiThe King of Fance pro∣tests against the Pope's Power to make a Truce. Franciae legendas, &c. He forthwith before they were read, caused in his own and their presence these Protestations to be made, That the Temporal Government of his Realm belonged to himself
alone, and no other; That he would acknowledge no Superior in it, nor subject himself any way, to any Person living, in things of his Temporal Government, but would maintain his Fees, (Sed se in∣tendereAnd denies his superiority in Tempo∣rals. feoda sua Justiciare) and Defend his Kingdom, and the Rights of it in all things, as God should enable him, by the help of his Subjects, Friends, and Assistants; Nor, that he took himself or King∣dom to be affected by the Popes Declaration of the Truce in his Letters Patents directed to him, nor the Sentence of Excommunication therein  contained; And further added, That he would not recede in Word or Deed from these Protestations; yet as to what concerned his Soul, and Spiritual Government, as his Predecessors had done before, he was ready to obey the Precepts of the Holy See, as much as he was bound and ought to do, as a Devout Son of Holy Mother Church. These things premised, the Cardinals proceeded to the publication of the Truce and Sentence, and caused the Pope's Letters to be read be∣fore the King. Done at Creil in Beauvaisis on the 19th of April,  25th of Ed. I. 1297. Datum Credulii Bellovacensis Diaecesis, &c. After this, Walsingh. Hist. Angl. f. 74. n. 30. on Innocent's-Day, or 28th of December, and 26th of Edward I. there came to him then at Gaunt the Master of the Order of Preachers, and the General of Friars Minors, who had been with the King of France about the same Business, and be∣seechedThe Pope as a Mediator, not as a Judge offers to make Peace. on behalf of the Pope, That they would send their Com∣missioners to Rome with full Power to Treat of Peace, the Pope  promising, not as a Judge, but Kind Mediator, and in prejudice to neither, to indeavour to settle Peace and Tranquillity in both Na∣tions,And publish∣ed to that purpose a Two years Truce. and restore the former Friendship between the Two Kings. And because that could not be accomplished without a Truce, there∣fore the Pope by these Messengers, published again a Two years Truce, as he had desired before by the Cardinals, under pain of Excommunication, and Interdict of both the Nations. The King of England Ib. n. 40. Both Kings submit all Differences to the Pope as a Private Per∣son only. considering it was dangerous staying in Flanders, and that he had been imprudently brought thither by the Contrivance of the Earl, that his own Kingdom was unsettled by Intestin Sedition, and that he could have no Confidence in the King of the Romans, the Pope not being his Friend, consented to the Truce. And both Kings sent their Commissioners to Rome, and Compromitted and Referred all Differences whatever between them to Boniface VIII. as Bene Gaitan, or a Private Person, but not  as Pope, as will appear by his own Instrument of the Terms of Peace hereafter mentioned. Mat. Fol. 431. n. 10, 20. Both Kings accept and agree to a Truce for two years. Westminster says, both Kings accepted and agreed to a Truce for Two years, to begin at the Feast of Epiphany or begin∣ning of Lent, when the above-mentioned short Truce ended, for themselves, and Confederates, and when King Edward came for England, and landed at Sandwich on the 21st of March. And within few days after, to make good the Promise he had made not long before his going into Flanders, Instructions and Commissions were sent forth to Append. n. 35. The King to make good his Promise, sends out Commis∣sions of In∣quiry, what Goods had been taken from his Sub∣jects. Two Knights, one sent by the King, and the other taken out of the Country, one Clerk, and one Religious Person to be assigned by the Bishop of the Diocese, to in∣quire
by the Oaths of Lawful Men of every County, in what man∣ner and how much Wooll, Woollfells, Leather, Grain, Beasts, Flesh, Fish, or other Goods, had been wrongfully and illegally taken from the Clergy and Laity, for Victualling and setting forth his Fleet, or for other Matters, since the War between himself, and the King of France. Witness the King at Westminster the 4th of April, in theA. D. 1298. 26th of his Reign. After the Notable Protestation of the King of France against the  Pope, says Peter Proves des Libertees, ut supra, f. 97. The Compro∣mise made to Bennet Cajetan, not Pope Bo∣niface, &c. Pithou, desiring to make Peace with the Em∣peror Elect, and the King of England, compromitted that whole Affair in the Person of Pope Boniface as a Private Person, and Be∣nedict Cajetan by his Family Name, and not as Pope, on purpose, that he might not usurp upon the Authority of the Kings. In this year, and about this time, Adolph the Emperor (or as the  old Historians call him, King of Almain, or of the Romans) was deposed by the Electors and German Princes, and as Hist. of France, f. 327. A. D. 1297. Adolph the Emperor de∣posed. The King of France his Money pre∣vails with the German Princes. Mezeray Stories, was first detained in Germany by private Dissentions raised by the French, or the Sums of Money King Philip gave him under∣hand, so as he did not afford the Earl of Flanders that Relief he expected; and at the same time debauched Albert Duke of Austria, by the all powerful Influence of Money from the Party, who brought over with him the Duke of Brabant, the Earls of Luxemburgh,  Guelders, and Beaumont. The same Historian also gives this Account of his Deposition, Ibm. A. D. 1298. Adolph the Emperor deposed. And how. the Money that Adolph had received on both hands was the cause of his Ruin, and on the contrary what Albertus had re∣ceived for the same end served to raise his Fortune; for this last having made use of some of it to corrupt the Princes of Germany, who were displeased for that Adolphus had given him no share of  his, it happened, that in an Assembly they had at Prague for the Coronation of King Wincheslaus, they easily suffered themselves to be persuaded, the Pope was consenting to the Deposition of Adolphus, as being useless to the Empire; and in effect, the Cabal was so strong, that they Deposed him, and Elected Albert Duke of Austria. The Two Competitors came to Blows about it near Spire the 2d of July, Adolph fighting valiantly, but betrayed, or at least forsaken by his Men, there lost his Life. The Abbat of Ʋrsperg, an old German Writer of this time, says thus, Paralip. fol. 341. Printed at Basil, 1559. The occasion of his being Deposed. Whereas there was great confusion in the Empire, and there was necessity to have a more powerful Emperor, the E∣lectors met at Ments, and Deposed him, for when Adolph had re∣ceived 75000 Marks to assist the King of England against the King of France, he kept it all to himself, and divided none amongst the German Princes, he could neither raise Soldiers, nor help the  English. This Charge in the Empire, and the Embroilment of his Affairs at home, caused King Edward to accept the Popes Mediation, as above. The King before this time had summoned the Cl. 26 Ed. I. M. 5. Dos. Militia of the Nation to meet him at Carlisle on Whitsun-Eve, with their
Horse and Arms, to go against the Scots, whose Power was nowThe King summons the Militia of the Nation a∣gainst the Scots. formidable, and their Forces numerous; yet on the 10th of April Ibm. M. 12. Cedula. Dors. A Parlement or great Council sum∣moned. he summoned the Earls and Barons, Two Knights of every Shire, Two Citizens of every City, and Two Burgesses of every Burgh, to meet and Treat with him, about certain Matters that concerned him, and the whole Kingdom; Walsingh. f. 75 n▪ 20. The Charters Reconfirmed. Here the Constable and Marshall demanded, that because the Charters had been con∣firmed beyond Sea, for the greater security they might be confirmed  again. The Bishop of Durham, the Earls of Surrey, Warwick, and Glocester, promised the King should do it, upon his Return with Victory. The King then commanded his Army to be ready at Rox∣burg upon Tweed on the Feast of St. John Baptist. The King go∣ing aside to Visit St. John of Beverly, found his Army at the time and place appointed; Ib. n. 30, 40, 50. and f. 76. n. 10. The Scots beaten at Falkirk. He marched on into Scotland; The Scots meet him with a mighty Army under the Conduct of Waleys; On St. Mary Magdalen's-Day, or 22d of July, both Armies drew up  in a large Field near Falkirk; upon the Signal given by the King, the English boldly attacked the Scots, their Horse soon gave ground, the English pursuing and killing great numbers, my Author says Sixty thousand. Waleys and the Great Men of Scotland fled into the Woods. After some stay in Scotland, where he used some se∣verity,The King re∣turns into England. in his Return at Carlisle, he gave the Constable and Mar∣shall Leave to go home, and stayed himself in the North Parts until after Christmas; when he returned into the South, and in  Cl. 27. Ed. I. M. 18. Dors. Summons a Parlement. February summoned a Parlement to meet on the first Sunday in Lent, Walsingh. f. 76. n. 20. The Pope's Award read in it. where was Read the Pope's Instrument of Award between the Two Kings, which is long, but the Effect thereof was, This In∣strument is Intituled, Pronuntiatio Bonifacii, in Jurie London, 25 Ed. I & Pryns, Ed. I. f. 758. The Articles of his Award, as Benedict Caietan, not as Pope. That whereas they by their special Messengers and Proctors, had compromitted into him as a Private Person and Benedict Caie∣tan, and as an Amicable Composer and Arbiter of all Wars, Contro∣versies, Differences, and Causes whatever moved between them; He did Award and Pronounce; 1. That there should be a firm and stable Peace between the Two Kings. 2. That the voluntary forbearing of Hostility, and the Truce lately made and confirmed between the Two Kings, &c. should be inviolably observed. 3. That the King of England should Marry Margaret the King of  France his Sister, and Endow her with 15000 l. Turnois (i. e. 3750 l. Sterling) per Annum. 4. That Isabel, the Daughter of the King of France, not then 7 years old, should at convenient time, be Married to Edward the King of England's Son, then 13 years of Age, with the Dower of 18000 l. Turnois per Annum. 5. That all Goods on either side, Ships especially, taken before the War, and then not imbeziled or destroyed, should be restored; and if destroyed and not to be found, then either King to make Satisfaction at the Request of each other.
6. That all the Lands, Vassels, and Goods, which the King of England had in France before the War, which he may have restored to him by virtue of this Compromise, he should have and enjoy under such Conditions and Security as shall be awarded. 7. That all the Lands, Vassals, and Goods, which the King of France was then possessed of, that were the King of England's before  the War, and those the King of England was then possessed of, should be put into the Hands and Possession of the Pope, and so to remain until the Kings themselves agreed about them, or he should order what was therein to be done, without prejudice to the Lands, Vassals, and Goods, or the King's, as to the Possession, Detention or Propriety of them. This Pronunciation or Award was Dated at the Pope's Palace in Rome on the 20th of June, 1298. 26th of Edw. I.  A. D. 1298. To which Award when it was read in Parlement, all the Clergy and Laity gave their Consent, Mat. West. f. 431. n. 50. The whole Parlement confirm the Pope's A∣ward. Cui assensum praebuit Plebs omnis, & Clerus. This done the Ibm. The Charters confirmed. The King re∣fused to con∣firm the Dis∣foresting. Earls, Barons, and Prelates, demanded the Confirmation of the Charter of Liberties, and of the Forest, with the Deforestation then made; He confirmed the Charters, but re∣fused to confirm the Deforestation, or parting with so much Land  out of his Forests as they demanded. Walsingham Fol. 76. n. 40. Reports, That in this Parlement, the King be∣ing desired to confirm the Charters as he had promised in Scotland, after some delay, consented, with a Salvo jure Coronae, saving the Rights of his Crown, which the Earls hearing returned home; but calling another Claus. 27 Ed. I. M. 18. Dors. Writ dated Apr. 10. Parlement to meet 15 days after Easter, he granted what they desired. The Execution of the Pope's Award was delayed, neither of the Kings being forward to deliver their Possessions, &c. in Gas∣coign into his Hands; but being resolved to make Peace if he could, Rot. Am. 27 Ed. I. M. 11. intus. he sent the Bishop of Vicenza to the King of France, before whom, and with the Consent of the King of England's Commissioners, it was Agreed, That both the Kings should per∣form that Article; and King Edward Authorized several Com∣missioners,  The King of England per∣forms the 7th Article of the Pope's Award. to deliver the Possession of his Lands, Vassals, and Goods, into the hands of the Bishop, who was to receive them in the Name of the Pope as a Private Person, and Benedict Gaitan. This In∣strument bears Date at Westminster, April 22. 1299, the 27th of Ed. I. In May following Prince Edward Ibm. Prince Ed∣ward Con∣tracted to Isabel, the King of France his Daughter. made the Earl of Lincoln his Proxy to Contract the Espousals with Isabel, the King of France his Daughter. While the Bishop of Vicenza was in France, he sollicited the Release of John Baliol King of Scots, by the King of France his Mediation to the Pope, to give it in Charge to the Bishop his Legate, who obtained it, Append. n. 36 and Pryn's, Ed. I. f. 797. A. D. 1299. 27. Ed▪ . and he was delivered to him at Whitsand in France, by Robert de Bourghersh, Kt. Constable of Dover Castle, the King's Proxy, upon Saturday before St. Mary Magdalen's Day,
or 22d of July, upon Condition, That the Pope might Direct andKing John Ba∣liol delivered to the Pope's Proxy. Order what he pleased, only as to his Person, and the Estate he had in England, as King Edward might have done, if he had been personally with him in England, saving to him and his Heirs, Kings of England, the Kingdom of Scotland, the Men, and Inha∣bitants, and all the Appurtenances to that Kingdom; It being there Read and Rehearsed before his Delivery, and in his own presence, and the presence of the Bishop of Vicenza, That he had committed  many Inhuman Trespasses and Treasons against his Sovereign Prince King Edward, contrary to his Homage and Fealty, &c. And that the Pope should not Qrdain or Direct any thing in the Kingdom of Scotland concerning the Men or Inhabitants, or Appurtenances of the same Kingdom, for John Baliol, or his Heirs which are, or may be, or any other Cause whatsoever. And upon these Terms, the Bishop in Name and Stead of the Pope, received him from the King's Proxy, on the said Saturday before the Feast of St. Margaret,  A. D. 1299. and 27th of Ed. I. Certainly at this time the Pope understood not that Scotland was his Fee, as he claimed it two years after. It may be supposed, that King John Baliol was willing to go anyHis Character of the Scots. whither rather than into his own Country, he having voluntarily, and of his own accord, without the privity of King Edward, by an Append. n. 37. and Pryns, Ed. I. f. 665. Instrument drawn by a Publick Notary the year before,  Renounced Scotland, and Resolved never to come there more, or have to do with it, because he had found such Malice, Fraud, Treason, and Deceit in the Scots, that they had designed to poyson him. This year Mat. West. f. 431. n. 50. died Two very great Men, Humfry de Bohun, Earl of Essex and Hertfordshire, and Constable of England, and William Beauchamp Earl of Warwick. The Scots were this year Troublesome, and the King had sum∣moned the Militia of the Kingdom Brevia Re∣gis in Jurie Lond. 27 Ed. I. and Pryns, Ed. I. f. 809. The King summons the Militia to go with him into Scotland. The Pope sends a Nun∣cio to com∣pleat his A∣ward. to meet him at Carlisle on the Vigil of Pentecost, to go with him into Scotland upon his own Wages, against his Enemies, and to settle such English as he had there given Lands unto, in them; in the mean time, he re∣ceived a Message from the Pope, that he was sending his Nuncio to Mounstreuit in Picardy, where should be a Treaty, to end all  Differences in pursuance of his former Award; This Message was communicated to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, other Bishops, Earls, and Barons, who advised him to remain in the South while this Treaty was over, by reason of Debates that might happen in it, which might require speedy Advice, and Resolution, and therefore wrote to all the Sheriffs of England to make Proclamation the Militia should not meet at Carlisle until the first of August. Given at Stabenheth the 7th of May, 27th of Ed. I.A. D. 1299. 27 Ed. I. Many of the Nobility and People not being satisfied, or seemed not to be so, that the Perambulations, and setting out the Bounds of the Forests, were not done so speedily as they desired, the King sent Brevia ib. & Pryn, f. 810. The People dissatisfied at the delay of the Perambu∣lations of the Forests. Writs to the Sheriffs of all Counties to proclaim and give notice, That the Commissioners for these Perambulations should
meet at Northampton at Michaelmass next, with full power to pro∣ceedSpecial Com∣missioners ap∣pointed to dispatch that Business. in that Business without delay. Dated at Lewis the 25th of June, in the 27th of his Reign. But this was not thought sufficient, for it was reported andThe People yet not satis∣fied. noised abroad, that the King intended not to observe Magna Charta, or the Charter of the Forest, nor would ever suffer the Perambu∣lations to be made, and the Bounds of the Forests to be set out, and  therefore the same day he issued a Ibm. and f. 811. The King is∣sues a Second Proclamation to quiet them. further Proclamation to give the Causes and Reasons why the Perambulations, &c. could not be made sooner, and to let the World know he was pressed too hard, and not in due manner to do these things, and that those who raised these Reports were malicious People, and desired to cause Differences between him and his Subjects, and to disturb the Peace of the Nation. Dated on the same day, and at the same place. In the beginning of September Walsingh. f. 77. n. 10. Mat. Westm. f. 432. n. 10, 20. A. D 1299. 27th of Ed. I. King Edward Married to Margaret, the King of France his. Sister. Margaret, Sister to the King of France, was Conducted into England by the Duke of Burgundy, and Earl of Britan, to whom King Edward was Married on the 12th of this month, in the Cathedral of Canterbury, by the Arch-Bishop. The Wedding was very splendid, and much Foreign Nobi∣lity attended the Solemnity. The King's Expectations were every way great from this Match, but it answered them not. On the Feast of St. Martin, or 11th of November, says Fol. 77. n. 30. Wal∣singham, the King held a Parlement at York, and from thence went to Berwick, intending to proceed further into Scotland, to Relieve Sterling Castle, then besieged by the Scots; but the Noble∣menSterling Castle delivered to the Scots. then with the King, informing and pressing him, the boggy and low Grounds were impassable in the Winter Season, divert∣ed his Intention, and so as he sent to the Besieged, wanting Victu∣als,  to yield the Castle, saving their Lives and Limbs. At Berwick the King remained until after Christmas, and the Queen at Windsor, but what he did there I find not, other than that he issued his [2] Writs dated at this place December 29th,A Parlement to begin the Second Sunday in Lent. for the calling of a Parlement at London, to meet on the Second Sunday in Lent. In which the Charter of the Forest, and Magna Charta, withA. D. 1300. 28 Ed. I. Ar∣tic. supra Char∣tas in the Pre∣amble. In which the Charters, &c. were confirm∣ed, and a new Statute made. the Statute of Winchester, were Renewed and Confirmed, and a new Statute made called Articles upon the Charters, Printed in the Statutes at Large, Coke's Second Institutes, and Totel's Magna Char∣ta, and then it was ordered they should be published by the Sheriffs four times in the year; For the observation whereof, where there was no Remedy at Common Law, there were Three Knights chosen in every County, summarily to hear and deter∣mine  from day to day, all Plaints concerning such as had offended against them (the King's Ministers not excepted) without allowing any delays, allowable by the Common Law, who had power to punish Offenders, by Imprisonment, Ransom, or Amerciament, ac∣cording as the Fault required.
To this purpose the King Claus. 28 Ed. I. M. 11. Dors. Three Knights chosen in every County to see the new Statute ob∣served. [3] Ibm. M. 8. Dors. Which was to be read and published four times in the year. issued his Writs to all the She∣riffs, Coroners, and Communities of Counties in England, to choose Three Knights, to be at York on the Morrow of Ascention, to receive Instructions accordingly; Witness the King at Westminster, March 27th, in the 28th of his Reign. And likewise sent out other [3] Writs to all the Sheriffs in England, by which he Commanded them to Read the Charters, and publish them four  times in the year, on the first County days after Easter, St. John Baptist, Michaelmass, and Christmass, and as much as in them was to see them firmly holden and kept in all their Articles. Wit∣ness the King at Westminster, March 28. in the 28th of his Reign. Within less then three weeks after, he also directed Ib. M. 7. Dors. The Reason why the King granted the Statute called Articles upon the Charters. Writs to all the Sheriffs in England, to let them know, That the People  might be more ready for his Service, and willing to assist him with Subsidies upon Occasion, he had upon special Grace and Favour Granted the Articles upon the Charters, so much to their advan∣tage; and Commanded them to proclaim them in the County Court, and all Burghs, and Mercate Towns, within their Counties or Bayliwicks, and to cause them to be firmly observed and per∣formed. Witness the King at St. Albans, the 15th of April, in the 28th of his Reign. And a fortnight before, he had directed his Ib. M. 8. Dors. He appoints Commissio∣ners to make Perambula∣tions of the Forests. Writs to se∣veral Commissioners in all Counties, where there were Forests, to make Perambulations, and to receive Instructions about them on the Morrow of the Feast of Ascention, with a Charge, that thro' their neglect, they might not remain undone. Witness the King at Westminster, April 1. in the 28th of his Reign. Yet all these Writs and Commissions satisfied not the Earls,The Earls and Barons not sa∣tisfied with these things. Barons, and others, they still murmured, and pretended, that the Perambulations would not be really made, or speedily performed; Whereupon, as Walsingham saith Fol. 80. n. 10, 20. He calls a Parlement at Stanford. The Earls and Barons came with Horse and Arms. The King grants their Demands., the King held a Parle∣ment at Stanford, to which the Earls and Barons came with Force, with intention, as 'twas said, to extort the full Execution of the Charter of the Forest then delayed; Ad quod Parliamentum con∣venerunt Comites & Barones eum equis & armis, eo prout dicebatur  proposito, ut executionem Chartae de Foresta hactenus dilatam, extor∣querent ad plenum. To whose Will the King condescended, (eo∣rum voluntati in omnibus Rex condescendit) and granted what they demanded. At this time he sent the Statute of Claus. 28 Ed. I. M. 7. Dors. The Statute of Winchester to be pro∣claimed, &c. Winchester inclosed to all the Sheriffs in England, as it had been Confirmed and Renewed, (See Articles upon the Charters, Cap. 17th) to be Proclaimed, and  with Command they should see it firmly Observed and Kept, in all and singular its Articles. Witness the King at Stanford, May the Second, in the 28th of his Reign.
Then Eight Days after, Pat. 28 Ed. I. M. 14. The Commis∣sion to three Knights, &c. renewed at the Request of the Prelates Earls, and Ba∣rons. the King being at St. Edmunds-Bury, at the Request of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and others, to Quiet (tho' perhaps not Please or Satisfie) them, he renewed his Com∣mission to three Knights and others Elected in each County, to see the Articles of the Great Charter, the Charter of the Forest, and Statute of Winchester observed; and to punish all Offences against them, not punishable by the Common Law of the Realm. And this  by speedy Justice and quick Proceedings, upon Complaints from Day to Day, without allowance of such Delays as the Common Law ad∣mitted: Yet with a Saving to the Common Law, that it might not hereby receive Prejudice, or any Plea to be holden by these Com∣missions that might be Determined by it. Witness the King at St. Edmunds-Bury, May 10. in the 28th of his Reign. There are two Writs upon the same Roll and Membrane, dated  The Sheriffs to assist these Commissio∣ners. And to Swear them faith∣fully to Exe∣cute their Of∣fice. on the same Day, and at the same Place, to the Sheriffs of every County, to be Assistant to these Commissioners, so often as they should give them Notice, and to impower them to Swear the Com∣missioners in full County, well and faithfully to Execute their Office. For the Receiving of the Returns of the Perambulations of theA Parlement called for the receiving the Returns of the Perambulati∣ons of the Forest. Forests, and Hearing and Determining all just Exceptions against  them, the King Summoned a Parlement to meet at Lincoln, eight Days after St. Hilary, or 20th of January. Claus. 25. E. I. M. 9. Dors. To meet at Lincoln Eight days after St. Hilary. The Writ to the Sheriff of Cumberland, containing, That whereas of late for the com∣common Profit of the People of the Kingdom, he had granted that the Charter of the Forest should be observed in all its Articles, and had assigned Commissioners in every County of England where there were Forests, to make Perambulations, and to make Report to him, before any Execution was done thereon. And for that his Oath, the Right of  the Crown of England, his Reasons and Claims, as also the Right, Rea∣sons, and Claims of all others might be safe. He, tho' the Commissio∣ners had brought to him what they had done, yet because the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and all other Great Men of the Kingdom, in whose presence he would have his own, and the Reasons of others propounded and heard, according to whose Advice he intended to proceed, especially for that they were bound with him by Oath to Observe and Maintain the Laws or Rights of the Kingdom and his Crown, (Jura Regni &  Coronae Nostrae) were not then present with him. And for that like∣wise, those who were to propound their Reasons concerning this Matter, had no notice of it, without whom a good End could not be put to it; and because this Business might be Dispatched without further Delay, willing to have Conference and Treaty with the Prelates, Earls, Barons and Gentlemen aforesaid, and with others of the Com∣munity of the Kingdom upon this Affair, and other arduous Matters touching himself, and the state of the Kingdom, he Commanded firm∣ly,  The Sheriffs commanded to send to this Parlement the same Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses that were in the last. enjoining him to cause to come before him at his Parlement at Lin∣coln, in the Octaves of St. Hilary next coming, two Knights of his Country or Baylywick; That is to say, those which came for the Com∣munity of the County by his Precept to the last Parlement, and also the same Citizens, and the same Burgesses, for all the Cities and Burghs within his Bayliwic; and if any of them were Dead, or Infirm, then
to cause others to be chosen, and come in their stead, so as that they might be present at the Day and Place aforesaid, with full Power to hear and do, what should be then ordained for the common Profit of the Kingdom: And to cause to be allowed to the same Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, their reasonable Expences, in coming to, staying at, and going from the Parlement; and further, he commanded the Sheriff pub∣lickly to make Proclamation in the County, That all those who would put in any Exceptions against the Perambulations, should appear before  him in Parlement, to shew them. Witness the King at the Rose, September 26. in the 28th Year of his Reign. This is the Full of the Writ of Summons in English, wherein the Reasons are given why the Perambulations, could not be Re∣ceived and Considered sooner. The Writs to the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, were in the same Form and Words as to the Rea∣sons, &c. In like manner he Ibm. wrote to the Sheriffs of all Counties there particularly named, as well those that had Forests in them, as others, except Cheshire, which then sent no Members to Parle∣ment. He Ibm. M. 2. wrote also to the Commissioners that made the Perambula∣tions, to be at this Parlement, and bring with them those Peram∣bulations,  and all things that concerned them. Amidst these importune Pressures of the Nobility, Walsingh. f. 78. N. 20. The K. march∣eth into Scot∣land with an Army. The Scots de∣mand their K. John Baliol, and to Redeem their Lands. Both their Requests de∣nied. They appear in a mighty Body, yet fly before the King. the King marched with an Army into Scotland, and coming into Gallowey, the Great Men of the Scots desired him to permit John Baliol peace∣ably to Reign over them, and that he would suffer them to Re∣deem their Estates of such English as he had given them to, de∣claring, if he would not, they would themselves as well as they  could: But he granted neither of their Petitions. Within few Days after, the Scots with their Leaders appeared in a mighty Body, thinking to Surprize the King, and his Army; but he, and his Son marching toward them, they fled to the Hills and Woods. About this Time, the Scots knowing all things Saleable at Rome, richly Present, or Bribe the Pope, moving him for his Advice and Assistance against their Lord the King of England. Scoti cog∣noscentes,  Ibm. N. 30, 40. The Scots ap∣ply themselves to the Pope for Advice and Assistance against K. Ed. Romae omnia venalia, Donis Dominum Papam uberri∣mis ditaverunt, petentes ab eo Consilium, pariter ac auxilium, contra Dominum suum Regem Angliae. The Pope complies, makes the Archbishop of Canterbury his Legat, sends him Letters to deliver to the King, with order to shew him his Commands. In Ibm. and Mat. West. f. 435, 346, 437. He makes the A. B. of Can∣terbury his Le∣gate to the King, and by his Letter claims Scotland as the Right of the Church of Rome. which he Claims the Kingdom of Scotland as belonging to the Church of Rome by full Right, (pleno jure;) Requires and Exhorts him in the Name of God, to Discharge out of Prison, and Restore to their  former Liberty, all Bishops, Clercs, and Ecclesiastic Persons, and to remove all his Officers, whom by Force and Fear, he had appointed to Govern that Nation under him, and Willed him, if he pretended any Right to the Kingdom of Scotland, or any Part of it, not to omit to send Commissioners fully instructed, within six Months after the receipt of his Letters, to his presence, he being ready
to do him Justice as his beloved Son, and inviolably to observe his Right, if he had any: Bringing back and reserving by the Tenor of these Letters, all Questions, Strifes, Controversies what∣soever, between him, the Kingdom of Scotland, the Prelates, Clercs, and Secular Persons, which then had been, were, or might be for the future, to the Cognisance, and Determination of the Roman See; Decreeing it void, if any thing should be attempted to the contrary. Dated at Anagni the 5th of the Calends of July, or  27th of June, A. D. 1300. in the 28th of Ed. 1. The Archbishop was full of Obedience, and very quick in re∣pairingHe readily o∣beys the Pope's Commands. to the King, who was then in Scotland; Ibm Fol. 438. l. 2. in the A. Bishop's Letter to the Pope, or Cer∣tificate, what he had done in this Affair. And persuades the King to comply with the Pope's Let∣ter. preparing for his Journey immediately upon the Receipt of the Pope's Com∣mands, and came to him August 25th, being then at Dinner in the midst of his Army, who appointed him the next Day for the Delivery of the Message, which was done, and the Pope's  Letters presented to the King, before Edward his Son, the Earls, Barons, and Knights of his Army in great Multitude; who causing them to be Read publickly, were patiently heard of all; when the Archbishop (a sure Friend to the Scots) Encouraged the King, and Persuaded him (Ibm. N. 50. in the same Letter. as he says himself) by all Ways and Means he could, or knew, to Obey and Comply with all things in those Letters. Then Ibm. withdrawing by the King's Command, while he Deliberated with his Noblemen, he was called again, and  had this Answer, Fol. 439. N. 10. The King's Answer to the Pope's Letter. That having received the Pope's Admonition, concerning the State of the Kingdom of Scotland, it was the Custom of England, That in such Affairs, all whom these concerned ought to be advised with: And the present Business of Scotland, having Relation to the State and Right of the Kingdom of England, there were many Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Great Men not then with him in the Army, concerned in it, without whose Advice, he could not Answer fully: Yet that he intended as soon as could, to Consult and Delibe∣rate  with the Absent as well as Present, and by their common and joint Determination send the Pope an Answer. And for this Reason, at the same Time and Place, when he issued his Writs for the Calling of a Parlement to meet on the Octaves of St. Hilary, for Receiving of the Perambulations of the Forests, the King wrote also, Claus. 28 Ed. 1. M. 3. Dors. H Sumons many Clergy∣men Lawyers to the Parle∣ment at Lin∣coln. to some of his own Clercs, several Deans of Cathedral Churches, several Archdeacons, Officials, and  others, that had the Best Reputation for Lawyers in those times, to come to this Parlement, for that he would then have special Confe∣rence and Treaty with Lawyers, and others of his Council, about the Right and Dominion he and his Ancestors had in the Kingdom of Scotland; and to the same Purpose he Ibm. And sends to the Universi∣ties for their best Lawyers. wrote to the Chancellors, and both Ʋniversities, to send to this Parlement the most Expert and Knowing Men in the Written Law, which were sent accord∣ingly. And further he sent his Writs Ibm. & M. 3. Dors. to several Deans and  Chapters, to several Abbots, Priors, and their Convents, (the Chief∣est of the Nation) to search their Archieves, and send to this Parle∣mentTo advise a∣bout his Title to Scotland. all their Chronicles, in which was to be found any thing con∣cerning the Kingdom of Scotland to make good his Title to it.
Upon Reading the Pope's Bull by the King's Order, and truly Interpreting of it to the Barons in Parlement, there was muchThe Resolu∣tion of the Ba∣rons, with their Letter to the Pope, concerning his Pretences to the King∣dom of Scot∣land. Debate amongst the Lawyers, whether, how, or after what man∣ner this Bull or Letter should be answered, as appears by an old Parlement Roll in the Tower, in the 29th of this King, and truly Printed in Mr. Pryn's Ed. 1. what of it remains, Fol. 885. where∣upon it was Resolved by the Barons See this Let∣ter in M. West. F. 443. N. 30, 40, &c. Walsi. f. 85. N. 10, 20, 30, &c. Dug∣dales Sum∣mons to Parle∣ments. f. 31, 32, 33, 34. from the Re∣cord in the Exchequer; with all the Barons Names, Printed at Oxford in La∣tin and Eng∣lish 1678. with the Names of the Earls and Barons, the Cuts of their Seals of Arms. to write to the Pope, and let  him know, That in Temporals the Kingdom of Scotland by no man∣ner of Right whatever belonged to the Church of Rome at any time; That it was an ancient Fee, or Feudal Right of the Crown and Kings of England, and that the Kingdom and Kings of Scotland, have been Subject only to the Kings of England, and no other; and further, That the Kings of England concerning their Rights in that Kingdom, or other Tempo∣ralities have never answered, or ought to answer, before any Ecclesiastic or Secular Judge, by reason of his Royal Dignity, and Custom to the  contrary in all Ages. And to signifie to him, That having diligently considered his Letters, it was, and for the future should be, the com∣mon, unanimous, and unshaken Resolution of all and every one of them, That their Lord the King, concerning his Rights in Scotland, or other his Temporal Rights, should in nowise answer judicially before him, or send Proxys or Commissioners to him, especially when it would manifestly tend to the Disinheritance of the Crown of England, and Dignity Royal, and the Notorious Subversion of the State of the Kingdom; to the Pre∣judice  of their Liberties, Customs, and Paternal Laws, which by their Oaths they were bound to Observe and Defend, and by the help of God, would maintain them with their whole Force or Power; nor would they permit the King to do such strange and unheard of things, if he should attempt it: Wherefore they Reverently, and Humbly beseech his Holi∣ness, favourably to permit the King peaceably to possess his Rights, Li∣berties, Customs, and Laws aforesaid, without Diminution or Distur∣bance. In Testimony whereof they put to their Seals (104) for them∣selves  and the whole Community of the Kingdom. Dated at Lin∣coln the 12th of February, A. D. 1301. in the 29th of Ed. 1.A. D. 1301. 29 Ed. 1. This Business was first Dispatch'd, That as soon as might be, when the six Months after the King had received the Pope's Bull should be Elapsed, in which he had appointed the King to send Commissioners to him, the Pope might receive Satisfaction why they did not come. At the same time the Perambulations of the Forests, the main Bu∣siness for which this Parlement was called, according to the pur∣port of the preceding Writ, were Exhited therein; and as 'tis contained in the Rot. Per∣ambulationum Forestar. 29 Ed. 1. in Turr. A. D. 1301. 29 Ed. 1. The Peram∣bulations of the Forests Settled and Confirmed. See the Ordi∣nance of the Forest made the 33d year of this King, in the Statutes at Large. Record, the Community of the Kingdom Granted the King a Fifteenth Part of their Moveables, they should have at Michaelmas next coming; and he Confirmed them with this Clause, Quod quicquid per istas Perambulationes ponitur extra  Forestam, Remaneat extra Forestam; & Residuum remaneat Foresta, secundam metas & bundas in perpetuum; That is, whatever by these Perambulations was Deforested, should remain so, and what was then allowed to be Forest, according to the Metes and Bounds then set out, should be so for ever. These Letters Patents, or Confirmations of all the Perambulations, bear date at Lincoln, Feb. 14.
in the 29th of his Reign. Thus were the two Charters, and the Great Business of the Perambulations of the Forest fully Settled and Confirmed. When the Laity gave this Fifteenth, Robert Archbishop of Can∣terburyThe Laity gave a xvth for this Con∣firmation. The Arch-Bp. for the Clergy would not do any thing without the Pope's Li∣cence. would grant Nothing for the Clergy, not of the Temporalities annexed to the Church, without the Pope's special Licence. Pro hoc confirmationis effectu, concesserunt Comites & Barones Regi quin∣tam  decimam partem bonorum suorum mobilium, in Festo Sancti Michae∣lis proximo tunc futuro; sed Robertus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis pro Clero nihil voluit concedere, neque de Temporolitate annexa Ecclesiae, sine Licentia Summi Pontificis speciali, as the Record hath it. After the Transaction and Settling of these Two great Affairs, those whom the King employed had time from the Chronicles sent to  this Parlement from the Monasteries, to make a See Mat. Westm. f. 439. n. 20, 30, &c. Wals. f. 81, &c. Rot. Claus. 29. Ed. I. M. 10. Dors. Printed in Ryley's Placita Parlia∣mentaria, Ap∣pend. f. 596. The King's Title to Scot∣land sent to the Pope, with a Narrative of the Perfidious∣ness of the Scots. Deduction of his Right and Title to Scotland, which was Historical, and al∣most the same, but more full and particular than that which was delivered to the Scots when he claimed the Superiority, and direct Dominion over Scotland, in the 19th of his Reign. This was sent in a Letter from the King to the Pope, with a Narrative of the whole Nation of Scotland, having done Homage and sworn Fealty to him, and owned and acknowledged him to be their King  and Supreme Lord several times; and what they had done against their Oaths, invading, burning, spoiling, and wasting England when they thought fit; and also cautioning the Pope against the false Insinuations and Suggestions of the Scots; concluding with a Pe∣tetion, That he would have a Paternal Care and Affection to his Royal Rights. Dated at Kemsey, or Kynardesey, the 7th of May, A. D. 1301. if the Year began at Christmas; if on Lady-day, or 25th of March, then 1302. in the 29th of his Reign. The King at the Request of the King of France, had granted the Scots a Truce, which was to end at Whitsunday next coming, as says the Claus. 29. Ed. I. Dors. M. —Dugd. Sum∣mons to Parl. f. 35. Writ, by which he Summoned the Earls, Barons, and Knights, (such as he pleased) to meet him at Berwic, in the Feast of St. John Baptist, with their Horse and Arms, and to go with him against the Scots, His Rebels, and notorious Traytors, to Repress their Rebellion and Pride; so the Record, Contra Scotos,  Rebelles nostros, & notorie proditores, ad ipsorum Rebellionem, & Pro∣terviam reprimendam. This Summons was dated at Lincoln, Feb. 14. in the 29th of Ed. 1. on the same Day he confirmed the Per∣ambulations. This Year, the King made his Eldest Son Edward, Wals. f. 79. n. 10. Matth. West. f. 433. n. 50. Prince of Wales & Earl of Chester. Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester; with which the Welshmen were well pleased, as being born at Caernarvon in their own Coun∣try. In Scotland he makes his Pat. 29. Edw. I. M. 2. intus & Claus. 29. Ed. I. M. 3. Dors. Procurators or Proxies to the Pope, Walter Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, Amadeus Earl of Savoy, Otto de Grandison Kt. and Gerrard Arch-Deacon of Lichfield, to desire him speedily to put an end to all Differences between him
and the French King, and to complete the long-deferred Treaty ofK. Edw. sends Procurators to the Pope to complete the Treaty of Peace be∣tween him & the K. of From. Peace, according to the Form of his Pronunciation, or Decree, made by virtue of the Compromise unto him; but the Pope was not at leisure. The Commissions, or Procuratory Letters, are dated at Glasco, Aug. 24. in the 29th of his Reign. The King staid all Winter in Scotland, Wals. £85. n. 50. A. D. 301. 30. Ed. I. where many of his Military Men lost their Horses for want of Forage. After Christ∣mas  he again, at the Instance of the King of France, Ib. . 86. in. 3. He grants the Scots a Truce. Granted the Scots a Truce until the Feast of All-Saints next coming; and toward the Spring having settled things in Scotland, returned into England. All the Arguments the King used by Letters and Messages to the Earl of Savoy and Otto de Grandison Claus. 30. Ed. I. M. 15. Dors. Two of the King's Procu∣rators to the Pope refuse the Employ∣ment., who were best acquainted with the State of his Affairs, and Differences between him and the  King of France, could not persuade them to undertake this Em∣bassie, or Procuration to the Pope; and therefore he Ibm. The other two proceed. committed the whole Affair to the Bishop and Arch-Deacon, to hear for him and in his Name the Pope's Pronunciation, Will, and Pleasure, in those things that then were not declared and determined between them, by virtue of the Compromise made by both into his Person. Ibm. Ad audiendum pro nobis & nostro nomine, Pronunciationem vestram, Vo∣luntatem, & Beneplacitum super his quae inter Regem Franciae, & nos  per vos (i. e. the Pope) virtute Compromissi, &c. restant pronunciandae & facienda. This Letter and new Commission was directed to the Pope, to give him notice of the Refusal of the First two, the Earl30. Ed. I. and Knight, and dated at Darlington in the Bishoprick of Duresm, March 5. in the 30th of Edw. I. In April following Roger le Bigod, Earl of Norfolk and Marshal of England, granted and quiet claimed for his Heirs, Rot. Claus. 30. Ed. I. M. 14. Dors. The Earl-Marshal grants his Lands, &c. to the King and his Heirs. to the  King and his Heirs for ever, All his Castles, Towns, Mannors, Lands, and Tenements in England and Wales, except the Mannors of Sterington, Wylton, Thornton, and Leversham; with the Advou∣sons of the Churches, and all other their Appurtenances in the County of York; and the Mannors of Acle and Castre, with their Appurtenances; and the Advouson of the Church of Geldeston in the County of Norfolk, with the Knights Fees, Advousons of Religious Houses and Churches, Hundreds, Honours, Liberties,  and all their Appurtenances, by what Name soever they should be called; so as neither he nor his Heirs, nor any one in his Name, should have any Right or Claim in them. Which Grant was Dated at the Abby of St. John's in Colchester the 12th of April, in the 30th of Ed. I. He also made a Grant Ibm. Also his Goods. to the King, of all his Goods and Chattels, upon and in those Castles, Mannors, Towns, &c. ex∣cept  upon the Mannors and Lands before excepted. Dated at the same Time and Place: And made Letters of Attorney of the same Date, to several Persons in every Ibm. County where he had Lands, to give Livery and Seisin accordingly.
Further, at the same Place, and on the same Day, he restored, remitted, and quiet claimed for him and his Heirs, to the King and his Heirs for ever, all the Ibm. He Releases and gives up his Earldom and Marshal∣ship. Right, Honour, and Dominion he had by the Name of Earl in the County of Nor∣folk and the Marshalcie of England, with every thing thereunto belonging. Lastly, he restored, remitted and quiet claimed the Ibm. Castles of Bristol and Nottingham, which he was to have held for Life by the Grant of the King, so as he, nor any one in his Name, should claim any Right therein. Dated at Fulham, May 15. in the 30th Year of Ed. I. The Reasons of these Grants and Restorings might be whatThe Reasons why the Earl-Marshal gave the King his Lands, and parted with his Office and Honour. Mat. Westminster reports, (tho' he mistakes the Year) in the 33d of  this King he says he then had a time of Speaking, and that he wa∣rily convented the Earl-Marshal, upon a Conspiracy, which the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and many Earls and Barons had contrived against him while he was in Flanders; who not being able to con∣tradict what the King said, begged his Pardon. For obtaining of which, he made the King Heir of all Things he had: By which means he saved his Life; and the King, as a Reward, added to his Life a Thousand Pounds Land by the Year. Which might be  the Mannors and Lands he had liberty to except. Mat. West. f. 452. lin. 2. He with the A. Bp. and o∣thers had con∣spired against the King. Et aderat tempus loquendi, Rex convenit cautè Comitem Mareschallium super quo∣dam Dedecore, & Conspiratione quam Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, & plures Comites & Barones contra eum Machinaverant, ipso tunc agente in Flandria, qui nequaquam valens ista contradicere, Gratiam Regis petiit. Pro qua obtinenda, constituit Regem haeredem suum universorum quae habuit, & sic mortem perdidit, & vitam invenit, & Rex Remu∣nerans eum, vitae Comitis mille libratas Terrae adaugendo concessit. In  like manner the King convented all the others, one by one, that were in this Conspiracy, and fined or punished them in Sums of Money. Ibm. lin. 8. Similiter Rex singulatim singulos conveniens, qui huic facto consenserant, pecuniaria poena mulctavit. Yet within this very Year of his Reign, the King Rot. Cart. 30 Ed. I. n. 24. 28, 29. Dugd. Baron. vol. 1. f. 136. col. 1. The King re∣grants his Lands, Honor and Office to the Marshal. re∣granted the Earldom and Marescalcie of England, with all his Castles, Mannors, and Lands in England and Wales, to him and  his Issue lawfully to be begotten upon the Body of his Wife Alice; and for want of such Issue, to return to the King and his Heirs Dugd. Bar. ib. He died without Issue in the 35th of this King, and the Honour and Estate came into his hands. Some great Business the King had at this time, that he had fixed in his Mind, and laid much to Heart, for which he sent Peter de Dene Canon of London, and Roger le Sanvage Knight,  to the Pope. Pat. 30. Ed. I M. 12. intus. Pryn's Ed. I. f. 93 The King sen Messen∣ges to Rome upon secret Service. Dilectos & Fideles nostros Petrum de Dene Cano∣nicum Londinensem, & Rogerum le Sauvage Militem, pro quibusdam negotiis nostris quae multum insident Cordi nostro & Domini summi Pon∣tificis praesentiam destinantes, &c. Joining with them Im. William de Geynsburgh his Lieger at the Court of Rome, and Ibm. writing to M. Cardinal Deacon of New St. Mary in the Porch or Gallery
Ibm. (Sanctae Mariae novae in Porticu Diacono Cardinali) to assist them, and effectually promote his Business with the Pope, and for so doing he should always find him ready Pat. 30. Ed. I. M. 12. intus. to do those things which were grateful to him. The same Letters were wrote and di∣rected to Six Cardinals more, Four Deacon and Two Priest Cardinals. This Letter is Dated June 13. at Chartham. The Four Deacon Car∣dinals were his Pensioners Luke de Flisco, Deacon Cardinal of St. Mary in the Broad way, Sanctae Mariae in via lata Cardinalis  Diaconus. Peter Piperne, Deacon Cardinal of New St. Mary, Sanctae Mariae novae (not in Porticu) Diaconus Cardinalis. WilliamCardinals the King's Pensi∣oners. of Pergamus, Deacon Cardinal of St. Nicholas in the Tullian Pri∣son (a Parish in Rome, as they all were) Sancti Nicholai in Car∣cere Tulliano Diaconus Cardinalis. Francis Deacon Cardinal of St. Mary in Cosmedyn, Sanctae Mariae in Cosmedyn Diaconus Cardina∣lis Ibm.. Who had every one 50 Marks Sterling yearly paid out of the Exchequer by equal Portions at Easter and Michaelmas, for  their Diligence and Sincerity in Transacting his Business. The King's former Proctors having not done any thing concer∣ning the Peace between the Two Kingdoms, he sends others to the Pope, viz. Claus. 30. Ed. I. M. 6. Dors. New Procu∣rators sent to the Pope for a final Conclu∣sion of the Peace be∣tween the two Kingdoms. William de Gainsburgh and H. de Hertpole, Two Friers Minors, and Two of his own Clerks. John de St. Clare, Cannon of London, and Philip Martell, Professor of the Civil Laws, with William de Dene Knight, or any Four or Three of  them, with full Power to give a final Dispatch to this Business, according to the Form of his former Pronunciation or Decree Pat. 30. Ed. I. M. 9. intus. Without ef∣fect.. Giving them also in their Commission, or Letters Procuratory, full and free Power, to Demand, Hear, and Receive a total Consum∣mation of his Decree, and the Peace to ensue thereupon. Both these Records are Dated at Arundel, Septemb. 9. A. D. 1302. in the 33th of this King. Their Negociation proved also inef∣fectual. As the Earl Marshal, so Humphry de Bohun, Son and Heir to that Humphry who opposed King Edward in the 25th of his Reign, and doing Homage, had Dugd. Bar. f. 183. col. 1. & Rot. fin. 27. Ed. I. M. 23. The Constable grants all his Lands, Ho∣nours, and Of∣fice to the King. Livery of his Father's Lands, in the 27th: This Year also granted all his Castles, Towns, Man∣nors, Lands and Tenements, Knights Fees, Advousons of Religious Houses and Churches, Hundreds, Honors, Liberties, and all their Appurtenances in England and Wales, to the Ro. Claus. 30 Ed. I. M. 5. Dors. King and his  Heirs for ever, without any Exception or Reservation of any thing to himself. Ibm. The King re∣grants them upon Marri∣age with his Daughter. And all his Right, Honour, and Domi∣nion he had as Earl in the Counties of Hereford and Essex, and the Constableship of England. The Grant is dated at London, the 8th of October, in the 30th of Edw. I. Which upon the Mar∣riage of Elizabeth 7th Daughter of Edward I. Widow of John Earl of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Friseland, were Dugd. ut supa. Claus. 32 Ed. I. M. 16. Cart. 32 Ed. I. n. 48. John de Sea∣grave made Guardian of Scotland. Regranted to him about two years after. After the Feast of All-Saints, when the Truce with the Scots was expired, the King sent Wals. f. 86. n. 30. John de Seagrave with an Army into Scotland, Pat. 30. Ed. I. M. 15. making him Governour of Berwick and Guardian of the Kingdom; who marching Wals. f. 87. lin. 3. with a small Party towards Edinburgh, the Scots, who lay in Ambuscado, wounded and
took him with several others; but a fresh Party coming up, re∣scuedTaken Priso∣ner, and res∣cued. and took him from those that had him Prisoner. Next Year, on the 10th of January, A. D. 1303. beginningA. D. 1303. Pryn's Ed. I. 1020 the Year at Christmas (as Walsingham always doth) [3] the King of France, willing to leave the Scots out of the Treaty, and con∣clude a Peace with England, King Edward gave his Letters Patents, or Commissions, to Amadeus Earl of Savoy, Henry de Lacy Earl of  Lincoln, and Otto de Grandison, or any Two of them, dated at Odyham, January 10. Pryn's Ed. I▪ f 1020 The Truce with the King of France pro∣longed. 31 Ed. I. A Peace be∣tween the two Kings. to Prorogue the Truce between him and the King of France, their Kingdoms and Subjects, and to settle a firm and perpetual Peace between them, their Heirs and Successors, against all Persons but the Pope and Church of Rome; and also to the same Persons and Bishop of Worcester gave Commission on the 2d of March in the same Year to the same purpose, who Trea∣ting with the Dukes of Burgoine and Britan, and other Commis∣sioners  of the King of France, concluded a firm Peace between the Two Kings and their Realms, Ibm. The Scots left out of it. leaving the Scots out of the Treaty. For the Confirmation whereof, the King made his Letters Patents, and Sealed them at the Town of St. John's or Perth in Scotland, June 10. A. D. 1303. in the 31st of his Reign. All the Procura∣tions, Patents, and other things concerning this Peace, and the Articles themselves, are in a special Roll in the Tower, which at the writing hereof I could have no opportunity to peruse. Upon this Treaty and Peace, Mat. West. f. 446. n. 20. Gascoigny re∣stored to King Edward. The Revolt of Flanders the cause of this Pace. Gascoigne was restored to King Edward, with all its Rights and Liberties, as he possessed it before the beginning of the War. The Revolt of Flanders from the Subjection of France (which had been subdued when King Edward, by reason of the Domestick Troubles, and Confusion of his own Affairs at home, was not able to assist the Flemmings) Ibm n. 30. & Mezeray's Hist. Fr. f. 330. con∣tributed much to the advancement of this Peace; for the French  attempting to regain Flanders, were every where beaten, and their Armies routed, and in all their Attempts had ill Suc∣cess. This Year the Scots armed again, under the Wals. f. 86. n. 40. f. 87. n. 10. 20. 31 Ed. I. The Scots arm again under W. Wa∣leys. They crave Peace; and have their Terms gran∣ted. Sterling-Castle besieged. Conduct of William Waleys, and the King summoned his Militia to be at Rox∣burgh in Scotland on Whitsunday, from whence by small Marches he went through the whole Kingdom to Cathness, no Force oppo∣sing  him. The Scots finding they were not able to resist, sent Mediators, and humbly craved his Peace, and that they might be permitted to compound for their Estates with them to whom they had been given; both which the King granted. In his Return from the North, passing it by as he went, he besieged Sterling-Castle, which was defended against him, and staid all Winter at Dumfermling not far from thence. Mat. Westminster says, the Great Men of Scotland, as well Earls as Barons f. 446. n. 40. 50. Magnates Regni  Scotiae, tam Comites, quam Barones, being wholly reduced and over∣come, submitted themselves to the Will of the King of England, who admitted them to his Grace and Mercy, imposing upon them a pecuniary Mulct, appointing them Days and Years, and certain Times for the payment of it.
This Year on the Ibm. f. 447. N. 30. Pope Boniface th 8th dies. 12th of Octob. died with Grief and Anguish of Mind, Pope Boniface VIII. after he had been Walsing. F. 87. N. 20. f. 89. n. 10. Benedict the 11th Chosen. accused by the King of France of Heresie, Simony, and Murder, imprisoned, and plundered of all his Goods; and the Bishop of Ostia was chosen Pope, by the Name of Benedict XI. After Winter the Ibm. f. 89. N. 40. King went in Person to the Siege of Sterling  Castle, when it was briskly plyed with Engines, yet they within made a good Defence; but being very hard pressed by the Be∣siegers, the King being there all the time, the Castle wasSterling Castle yielded upon Discretion. A. D. 1304. 32 Ed. 1. yielded upon Discretion on St. Magaret's Day, or 20th of July, the Governor whereof William Olifard who had surprized it, was sent to the Tower of London, and others to divers Castles. The King Ibm. N. 50. John Segrave appointed Guardian of Scotland. having thus subdued Scotland, according to his  Mind, returned into England, appointing John de Segrave Guardi∣an of it, and when he came to York Ibm. The Kings-Bench and Ex∣chequer remo∣ved to London. removed the Courts of Kings-Bench and Exchequer, which had been there seven Years, to their old Place at London. On the Seventh of July this Year died Mat. West. f. 448. lin. 7. A. D. 1304. 32 Edw. 1. The Cardinals Nine Months in chusing a Pope. Pope Benedict, and in nine Months the Cardinals could not agree about the Choice of another; at length, they unanimously chose the Ibm. f. 451. N. 10. Archbishop of  Burdeaux, Bertram de Angeous, upon Whitsunday the Year follow∣ing, by the Name of Clement the Fifth. Toward the latter End of the Year of the Lord 1304. and within three Months after the Beginning of the 33d year of the Reign of the King, we find it Recorded upon what Terms the Scots made their Submission after their last Insurrection, the Title of the Record is, The Terms given to, and accepted by John Comyn,  his Aydants and Assistants, were these following in this Form. These are the Things agreed on *with Monsieur Richard deRyleys Pla∣cita Parlia∣mentar f. 369. from the French Re∣cord there. Burgh Earl of Ʋlster, Monsieur Aymer de Valence, Seigneur de Mon∣tignak, Monsieur Henry de Percy, Knights, and John Benstede, Clerk, on the Part of King Edward, and John Comyn of Badenagh, for Himself and his Aydants of Scotland, as well those that were out of it, as within it. For the Faithful Keeping and Observing  whereof, the said Earl, Aymer, Henry, and John de Benstede, inThe Terms of Peace given to, and ac∣cepted by the Scots. the Name of the King, and the said John Comyn, Monsieur Ed∣mund Comyn de Kilbride, Monsieur John de Graham, Monsieur John de Vaux, Monsieur Godfry de Roos, Monsieur John de Maxwell the Elder, Monsieur Peter de Prendregyst, Monsieur Walter de Berkeley de Kerdaau, Monsieur Hugh de Erth, Monsieur William de Erth, Monsieur James de Roos, and Monsieur Walter de Rothevan, Knights, for themselves, and all their Scots assistants, who would be in the  Peace and Faith of the King, were Sworn. First, It was agreed, That all Manner of People of Scotland, who came to the Peace of the King with the said John Comyn, except the Persons after named, should be received to the Conditions follow∣ing, to wit, Their Lives and Limbs or Members were saved, They
were to be Free from Imprisonment, and not to be Disherited, except for their Ransom or Fine, and the Amends for their Faults only committed against the King. Secondly, Those under Age ought to have the same Conditions, as to their Lives, Limbs, Imprisonment, and Disheritance. Thirdly, For their Ransom, and all other Things, it should be as  the King should order in his next Parlement, which was on the Sun∣day after the Feast of St. Mathew next insuing, and the Establish∣ment of Scotland was to be as it should be then ordained. Fourthly, All the strong Holds now in the King's or his Friends Hands, should Remain so, and the Charge of keeping them, should be Defrayed out of what belonged to them, or in other Convenient manner, by those who had the Custody of them, or to whom they were Delivered. Fifthly, The Prisoners on both sides were to be set Free, except Mon∣sieur Peter de Morham, and his Father. Sixthly, That the Hostages for the Payment of the Ransoms of Pri∣soners on both sides, should be Released. The Persons Excepted, were Robert Bishop of Glascow, Monsieur  James the Steward of Scotland, John Soules, Monsieur David de Gra∣ham, Monsieur Alexander de Lindesey, Monsieur Simon Fraser, Tho∣mas Du Boys, and Monsieur William de Waleys, concerning whom it was agreed, That the Bishop as to his Body and Temporality, the Seneschal or Steward, and John Soules, should have the same Con∣ditions with the Commons (That is, have their Lives and Limbs safe, be free from Imprisonment, and not Disinherited) but with two Years Banishment out of Scotland beyond the River Trent;  That the Steward's Castle should be in the King's Possession during his Exile, and he to be at the Charge of keeping them. Concerning Monsieur David de Graham, and Monsieur Alexan∣der de Lindesey, it was agreed, They should have the same Conditi∣ons, and be Banished Scotland for half a Year, David beyond the River Tweed, and Alexander beyond Trent. As to Monsieur Simon Fraser, and Thomas Du Boys, it was agreed also, That they should  have the same Conditions, but be Banished the King's Dominions for three Years, and also out of the Dominions of the King of France, unless in the mean time they could find Favour; and as to William Waleys he was to submit himself wholly to the Mercy of the King. Further it was agreed, That the Bishops of St. Andrews and Dun∣keldin, the Earl of Boughan, (i. e. John Comyn,) the Seneschal, or  Steward of Scotland, Monsieur John de Soules, Monsieur Ingelram de Humfranvill, and the other Persons of Scotland, which were abroad, and the Confederates of John Comyn, should come to the King's Peace within Fifteen Days after Easter next, every one according to his Quality, at Dumfermling, to do Homage, and swear Fealty.
And be it known, That the foresaid Earl of Ʋlster, Aymer, Henry and John Benstede, promised in Good Faith, to use their best Endeavour with the King, to Ratifie in all points this Accord by his Letters Patents, so soon as John Comyn and others, that should come with him, had done their Homage, and sworn Fealty in due manner. In Witness whereof, one Part of the Indenture which was to remain with the King was Sealed by John Comyn, Edmund Comyn, John de Graham, John Vaux, and others, and the other  Part was Sealed by the Earl of Ʋlster, Aymer, Henry and John Ben∣stede. Dated at Strathord the 9th day of February, in the 33d year of the King; the Title of the Record is, Forma Pacis Scotiae in Adventu Johannis le Comyn, & aliorum: The Form of Peace of Scotland upon the Submission of John Comyn, and others. In the Ryley's Pla∣cit. Parliamen. f. 240. A. D. 1304. Ed. 1. 33 d. Parlement at Westminster, on the Sunday after St. Mathew the Apostle, the King enjoined the Bishop of Glascow, (how it came to be so at this time I find not) the Earl of Carrick (i. e.  Robert Brus) and John de Moubray, Ibm. f. 243 Three Scots, a Bishop, Earl, and another, to agree upon the Number and Quantity of the Scots to come to an English Parle∣ment. That they would treat a∣mongst themselves, and agree upon a Day and Place for a Parle∣ment to be called concerning the State of the Kingdom, and Peo∣ple of Scotland, the Number and Quality of the Scots who should come to it, and others who should stay in the Kingdom, and have the Care of it. Their Advice and Agreement Ibm. They agree upon the Number and Quality of those Persons. was, That the Parlement could not be well assembled before Midsummer, and the Place to be  where the King pleased; That as to the Persons Two Bishops, Two Abbots, Two Earls, Two Barons, and Two for the Commons, (& Dieux pur la Commune) were a sufficient Number, if the King thought so. And concerning the Persons that were to take care of the Kingdom, they thought, the present Guardians, and King's Ministers with the Community were sufficient for that; Ibm. A. D. 1305. 33 Ed. 1. The King ap∣points the Time of the Parlement, and consents to the Num∣ber of Com∣missioners to be chosen by the Scots. which things being Read before the King and Council, on the 26th of March, the King Answered, Willed, and Granted, (Vult &  Concedit) the Day of the Parlement should be three Weeks after Midsummer; and that it should be at London. That Ten who should be chosen by the whole Community, might come to the Parlement for the whole Community of Scotland, and that the Keep∣ing of the Nation should be as they had said. They three Petitioned the King, That those which were Elected to come to this Parlement for the Community, might have their Charges and Expences born by them. His Answer was, Ibm. f. 244. Rex  vult, &c. The King Wills, That those Ten who shall be chosen to comeThose Com∣missioners to have their Ex∣pences born. to the Parlement for the whole Community of Scotland, shall have their Expences of that Community, &c. This Parlement was Ibm. f. 503 & Claus. 33 Ed. 1. M. 13. Dors. in cedula. Prorogued from three Weeks after the Feast of St. John Baptist, to the Feast of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of August, and from thence to the Octaves of the Nativity of the same Virgin, or 15th of September, Ibm. Ibm. f. 279. at which time came the Scots Commissioners chosen by the Commonalty  of Scotland, *who met for that Purpose at Perth, on the Morrow of Ascension; the Bishops of St. Andrews and Dunkeldin; the AbbotsThe Names of those Scots Commissio∣ners. of Cowper and Menros; the Earl of Bohghan; Monsieur John de Moubray; Mons. Robert de Keth; Mons. Adam de Gurdan; Mons. John de Inchemartin; Earl Patrick, who was chosen by the Commonalty to be the Tenth, came not, and therefore by Command of the
King Monsieur John de Monteith was assigned in his stead; Ibm. The Settle∣ment of Scot∣land by those Commissio∣ners, and 20 English. These with Twenty English there named, Treated about the Establishment of Scotland, and settled the King's Lieutenant, or Guardian, the Chancellor, Chamberlain, Judges and Sheriffs, all by Name, as well of those that were born in Scotland, as English; They likewise settled the Coroners, the Castles, and Constables of Castles; They also ordered all things concerning the Laws and Ʋsages of Scot∣land, concerning the Peace, and Disturbers of the Peace, and con∣cerning  the whole Government. And the Title to this Record is, Ordinatio facta per Dominum Regem, super stabilitate Terrae Scotiae; The Ordinance made by the King for the Establishment o Scot∣land. King Edward thinking himself safe by this Establishment,The King ac∣cuseth the Arch-Bishop, &c. of Trea∣son. thought he had now a time to speak with the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, Chron. Will. Thorn. c. 2004. n. 50, 60, &c. and Antiq. Eccles. Britan. from the An∣nals of St. Au∣gustins in Can∣terbury, f. 207. n. 10, 20. whom he accused of a Confederacy with certain Earls,  and Noblemen, to Dethrone him, and keep him in Prison and Crown his Son Edward, which when he could not deny, being severely rebuked by the King, he fell down at his Feet with great howling, and much weeping, beseeching Pardon, calling the King his Lord, which he never did before n Speech or Writing; Ibm in both. So this Proud Man, hated of God and Men, who with his Pride had Blackened the Priesthood, and Clergy of all England, (Sacerdotium & Clerum per totam Angliam sua superbia deturpavit) and Exercised an  unheard of Tyranny over the People, now taken by the King in his own Wickedness, conscious of it, and affrighted with the fear of Punishment, as he lay prostrate on the Ground before the King, committed himself and his Goods to his Mercy. The King Rot. Rom. 34 Ed. I. M. 10. Walsingh. f. 91. n. 50. Mat. Wstm. f. 454. n. 10. A. D. 1306. The King prosecutes him before the Pope, who suspends him, &c. Complains of him to the Pope, and prosecutes him before him, for disturbing the Peace of the Kingdom, and causing often Commotions in it, defending and incouraging Rebels, and  intending to Disinherit him; for which Crimes, at the Instance of the King, he was cited by the Pope to his Court, and was there suspended from the Execution of his Office, (ab executione, officii sui & temporalium atque spiritualium administratione suspensus est) whilst he should purge himself of what was objected to him by the King. Upon this Suspension the Rot. Rom. 34 Ed. I. M. 5. n. 9. Pope deputed certain Persons to  administer the Spiritualities and Temporalities of the Archbishoprick, and receive the Profits to his Use. As to the last the King Ibm. The same Letter dated at Bru∣dele in Marchi Scotiae, Sept. 7. The King would not permit the Pope to re∣appoint Re∣ceivers of his Temporali∣ties, during the Suspensi∣on of the Arch-Bishop. wrote to him, it was to the manifest prejudice of his Crown and Dignity, and therefore he had caused them to be seised, as he might lawfully, and was bound to do, by his Royal Right, and according to the Custom of the Kingdom. Yet tho' the Profits of the Temporalities belonged to the Crown during the Suspension, for the particular Affection he had to his Person, he was willing, and  granted, that the Guardian thereof, should pay them to such as he should assign to receive them. Not long after the last Parlement, and the Establishment of Scotland made therein, and agreed unto by the Scots Commissioners, the King made these his Letters Patents, according to the former
Covenants and Agreements made between Richard Earl of Ʋlster, Aymer de Valence, Henry de Percy, John Benstede, and John Co∣myn, &c. in February preceding. EDward by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ire∣land,Ryley's Pla∣cita Parliam. f. 366. Letters Pa∣tents for the Establishment of Scotland. and Duke of Aquitain, to all those that shall see or hear these Letters, Greeting; For the perpetual Memory of things under∣written we let you understand, That the People of Scotland, after they  were in our Homage and Ligeance, and bound to us by Oath of Fealty, and by their Charts, or Writings, as strongly as we or our Councel knew how  order and direct, by evil Counsel rose, and made War against us, committing Robberies, Burnings, Murders, Felonies, and many other Evils and Mischiefs according to their Power in Scotland, and in England, contrary to their Homages, Fealties, and Ligeances afore∣said. And afterwards many of them returned to our Faith and Obe∣dience, and were received to our Peace and Will; and at last John  Comyn, Lord of Badenagh, and the others of his Party, came also, and were received (a nostre pees a nostre foi) to our Peace and Faith, so as for their Ransoms, and Amends, for their Trespasses, and Outrages, only against us, and for the Establishment of Scotland, (esteuessent a nostre ordinance & a nostre volunte) they should be at our Ordinance and Pleasure; We notwithstanding these Contempts, Trespasses, Outrages, and Disobediences of the People of Scotland towards us, have been so great and heavy, as there cannot sufficient  Amends or due Satisfaction be made for them at any time, as they them∣selves acknowledge, tho we cannot suffer such Crimes to pass without some Punishment, yet seeing those People have behaved themselves well and loyally since our last being in those Parts, and for the Hopes we have of their good Behaviour and Service for the future, willing to do them special Grace, Have granted, and do grant their Lives and Limbs shall be safe, and that they shall be free from Imprisonment, and not Disinherited; saving to us always the Lands, Tenements, and Lord∣ships,  the Demeasns and Appartenances of the Royalty of Scotland, which John Baliol, late King thereof, gave away, and alienated, to do our Pleasure with them; And we Pardon and Release to the People aforesaid, that have submitted and received our Peace and our Faith, the Crimes committed against us, the Anger, Rancour, and all man∣ner of ill Will we any ways had against them, so as they shall be bound to pay what is ordered by us, and our Council (solonc nostre dit (dictum) & nostre pronunciacion que sensuent en cest form)  according to our Decree and Determination, which follow in this Form. First, We Order and Decree, that John Comyn, and the othersThe Articles of that Esta∣blishment. with him which shall come to our Peace and Faith, upon the Covenants granted them, (Qui ove lui vindrent a nostre pees & a nostre foi, par mi les covenances qui leur feurent grantez) shall pay for their Ransom, (paent pur Ranzon & amends des trespas par eux faitz,  &c.) and Amends of the Crimes by them committed, Three years va∣lue of their Lands and Rents, toward the building of new Castles in Scotland, for security of the Nation, and preserving the Peace, or to other Ʋses as we shall think fit. And we Pardon the said John Comyn and David Graham their Exiles, and remaining out of Scotland according to the The Cove∣nants made with John Comyn. Covenants aforesaid.
Further 'tis Ordained by us and our Council, That the People of Scotland which submitted to us before John de Baliol, shall pay only the Rents of Two years of their Lands, except those that can shew themselves acquitted by our special Grant or Deed. The same Order and Decree was made concerning Adam de Gourdon, and Simon de Fraser Kt. Further we Decree and Determine, That the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and the Clergy of the Kingdom of Scotland, except the Bishop of Glasco, shall pay for their Ransom, and their Crimes, the value of their Rents and Lands for one year, except those that can shew by spe∣cial Deed▪ or other manner, they ought to be discharged. The Bishop of Glasco was to be upon the same Terms with  John Comyn in all respects, and also as to his Banishment, which was remitted. Further, That Ingelram de Umfrevil, because he made his Submis∣sion but a little while before these Letters were granted, should pay Five years value, &c. And that William de Baliol, and John Wychard, should pay for the same Reason Four years Rent. Further, That Hugh de Adrossan, John de Gourley, John de Naper, and John de Makilgoigny, who were of the Retinue of the said William Ingelram, and John, should pay Three years value. Further, For the time and manner of payment of these Compositions or Fines, the King's Lieutenant and Chamberlain of Scotland should make a reasonable and just Extent of the Lands of the Offenders, ac∣cording to the present value of the Lands, and according to that Ex∣tent  the Composition or Fine was to be levied and paid every year, at the usual time of Payment, half the value; and so from year to year till the whole was paid, and the other half of their Lands and Rents should remain to them for their support and maintenance. And 'tis to be known, That our Will is not, that this Determination should extend to, and be understood of such Persons of the Scots as were Prisoners upon this Occasion, nor of such as have not submitted to  our Peace or Faith. In Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters Patents to be sealed at Westminster the 15th of October, in the 33d of our Reign. The Title of this Patent is, Forma pacis Scotiae; The Form of Peace of Scotland. William Waleys could not be mentioned in this Record, havingWilliam Wa∣lers taken, Hang'd, Drawn, and Quartered. been taken about the Feast of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of August, two months before the Date of it, and  brought to London, where on the Eve of St. Bartholomew, he was Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, his Head to be fixed upon a Pole on London-Bridge, and his four Quarters to be sent into Scotland, and set up in four parts of the Kingdom.
Notwithstanding this Establishment, the Agreement and FormsA. D. 1306. 34 Ed. I. [5] Mat. West. f. 453. n. 10, 20, 30. The Scots, Bi∣shops, Noble∣men, and o∣thers Perjur∣ed twice or thrice. They Con∣spire against gainst King Edward, and set up Robert Brus. John Comyn Murthered, because he would not be Perjured. A. D. 1306. 34 Ed. I. of Peace by Consent of the Scots, and their Commissioners, when the King expected nothing but Peace, and fair Compliance, [5] in January following the same Scots that had twice or thrice done Ho∣mage, and sworn Fealty to King Edward, and the Bishops them∣selves that had Sworn Faith and Truth to him as heartily as other Men, joined with Robert Brus Earl of Carrick, in setting up  his Title, and especially the Bishops of St. Andrews, and Glasco, and Abbat of Schone, who were the great Contrivers of his De∣sign, and Assistants in it, and begun a War more troublesom and lasting then any before; and because John Comyn was very resolute in keeping his Oath, and would not join with them, being a Man of great Power and Interest in Scotland, and much pressed to do it by Robert Brus, he with his Followers killed him in the Church of the Friers Minors of Dunfres, on  the 29th of January, and upon the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin next following, he was Crowned at Scone in the presence of the Two Bishops, the Abbat, and many other Earls, Barons, and Knights. In Easter Ib. f. 454. n. 10. The Pope Ab∣solves the King from his Oath con∣cerning the Perambula∣tions of the Forests. Week ensuing, the Pope's Bull was published, absolving the King from the Oath of Deforesting, or laying out of his Forests, such Lands as were, or ought not truly to be con∣tained  in them, and abolishing and punishing all Ill Practices, and Ʋsages, Tricks and Deceits of his Officers, within and belong∣ing to them, Excommunicating such as observed it, and absolving such as broke it. In the Historians it appears not what use he made of this Ab∣solution, but in a Writ or Letters upon the 34 Ed. I. M. 13 & 14. The King troubled at the Actions of his Officers. Statute Roll, with the Ordinance he then made, Dated May 28. he Expressed  himself much troubled in Mind for the Clamours of the People, who, as he there says, were much oppressed, impoverished, and injured by the Officers of his Forests, and therefore desiring to obviate these Oppressions, and Grievances, which he could not pass by without great Scandal or Offence, (Quae absque gravi scandalo diutius sub dissimulatione praeteririe non possumus) and to provide for the Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom, he Emitted the foresaid Ordinance of the Forest, Dated May 28. in the 34th  year of his Reign, Printed in Totel's Magna Charta, 1556. Part. 2. p. 67. a. but with this Writ, or these Letters, which were Ib. Rot. Stat. 34 Ed. I. M. 13 & 14. sent into every County in England, with Command to the Sheriffs to cause them to be read, and the Ordinance contained in them, to be proclaimed in full County. The King being fully informed of the Insurrection and Pro∣ceedings of Robert Brus, and his Confederates, Mat. West. f. 454. n. 30, 40, 50. and f. 455. The King sends an Ar∣my into Scot∣land. sent Aymer  de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, Robert Clifford, and Henry Percy, into Scotland, with a good Force against the new Crowned King; and the King intending to follow them, summoned his Army to Rendezvous at Carlisle 15 days after Midsummer, and to make the Expedition more great and glorious, he Knighted, Ibm. And Knight∣ed 300 Sons of Noble∣men, &c. with his Son, on Whitsunday at Westminster, Three hundred young Gentle∣men,
the Sons of Earls, Barons, and Knights, that had wherewith∣all to maintain their Honour, and gave them their Military Gar∣ments out of his own Wardrobe; Ibm. The Scots Routed and put to Flight. Many of the Scots Tried for Perjury and Rebellion, and Hanged. These, with the Prince, were to march with him into Scotland against his Enemies; They set forward on the morrow of Holy Trinity, but before they came there, the Earl of Pembroke had fought with, and routed the Scots, and put their King to flight at Metfen near St. John's Town, or Perth, 2 or 3 days after Midsummer. In this Battel many were  killed, and many of Note taken; Ib. f. 455. n. 40, 50. and f. 456. n. 10, 20, 30. The two Bi∣shops, and Ab∣bat, the Con∣trivers of the Rebellion taken. most of which were Tryed and Hanged for Perjury and Rebellion. Afterwards, the King, Prince, and many Great Men, went into Scotland, when some received them Honourably, others left their Habitations and fled. The Army roving up and down after the Fight pursued the Fugi∣tives, some they killed, others they took alive, amongst whom were the Two Ib. f. 455. n. 30. The Bishop of St. Andrews sent Prisoner to Winchester Castle. Bishops, and the Abbat, armed under their Sur∣coates; These were sent into England, and imprisoned. The Bishop  of St. Andrews was sent to the Sheriff of Hampshire, to be kept in Winchester Castle, as the King's Enemy, Rebel and Traytor, and by the Append. n. 38. The Sheriff of Hampshire charged with him. Mittimus or Warrant he was to be kept in the strongest Tower of the Castle, and safely, and securely put in Iron Fetters, under Penalty of the Sheriffs forfeiting all his Goods, Lands, and Tenements, if he made his Escape; By the Warrant no Man was to see, or speak with him, but such as the Sheriff should ap∣point to attend him; And for further Security, the Sheriff was  to take as many Landed Men of the Vicinage as he thought fit, to assist him and the Custos or Warden of the Castle, as his Guard, under the same Penalty with the Sheriff, if he Escaped. The Bishop of Glasco was sent to the Castle of Porcester in the same County, by a Mittimus or Claus. 34 Ed. I. M. 6 intus. The Bishop of Glasco sent to Parchester Castle. Warrant in the same Form, and Words; as also was the Abbat of Schone sent to the Ibm. Castle of Mere in Wiltshire, by the like Mittimus directed to the Sheriff  of that County. The Pope being informed of the Murder of John Comyn, by his In Turri Lord. 34 Ed. I. and Pryns, Ed. I. f. 1122. The Pope Ex∣communi∣cates the Murderers of John Comyn. Bull directed to the Arch-Bishop of York, and Bishop of Car∣lisle, ordered them to Excommunicate Robert Brus, and all his Complices, until they made Satisfaction, and deserved Absolution. And the King made Inquisition Mat. West. . 456. n. 10. in Scotland by Men of Credit, (per fide dignos homines) who, and what Persons committed the  Murder, and were present at the Coronation of Robert Brus, and took them almost all, and put them to death. And for the greater Claus. 34 Ed. I. M. 3. Dors. in French, and Rily's Appen. f. 510. Ordinances made by King and Council, for the securi∣ty of the Peace of Scotland. Security of the Peace of Scotland, it was agreed by the King and his Council, That the Guardian of Scotland should cause to be proclaimed in all Cities, Burghs, and Mercate Towns, and in other Places where he thought fit; That all such who were against the King in the last War, and were not come to his  Peace, and others who committed Felonies, and other. Crimes, for which they ought to lose Life or Member, and were not taken, should be apprehended by any Persons where ever they came, and to that purpose to Levy Hue and Cry, with Horn and Mouth, and pursue them with force, from Town to Town, Country to Country, County to County, until they rendred themselves, or were taken dead or alive,
and that those who neglected to do this, should lose all their Goods, and be imprisoned during the King's Pleasure. The Guardian was likewise to inquire after the Receivers of such Persons, that they might have such Justice as they deserved. It was then also Accorded, That all those who were Guilty, and A∣bettors of the Death of John Comyn, should be Drawn and Hang'd, and those that advised, and assented to it, and those who after the  Fact knowingly and willingly, or freely received them, should have the same Judgment. And those that were guilty of his Death, that were, or should be taken by force in this War against the King, should be Hanged, or have their Heads cut off, and their Receivers to have the same Judgment. And all that were against the King in the War at any time, as well  before, as in, and after the Battel of Metfen, those who were the most notorious and dangerous of them, should be put in Prison where the King should appoint, and not to be released but by his Order. And those who willingly were of the Party of Robert Brus, or were aiding, advising, procuring or persuading the People to Rise contrary to Law, and were thereof Convicted, whether Clerks or others, were to be imprisoned during the King's Pleasure. And it was Agreed, That the People of Scotland who were forced to rise against the King in this War, should be Fined as the Guardian should see cause, and according to their Offence; and for the greater Authority, and Execution of this Agreement, the King caused it to pass under his Seal of Scotland. In the same Roll and Membrane, there is the Acknowledgment  The Senesch. or Steward of Scotland his acknowledg∣ment of his Crimes a∣gainst King Edward. made by himself of the Heinous Crimes and Offences of James the Steward of Scotland against his Liege Lord King Edward, against the Homage and Fealty he did, and sware to him, and against his Ligeance, whereupon he rendred and submitted high and low and in all things, his Body, Lands, and Tenements, and all he had or might have, to his Will, who of his special Grace Restored to him all he held in Scotland, for which being free, delivered out of Prison, and in his own full Power, he again did Homage, and  and made Oath of Fealty, as he had done in the 24th of hisHe renews his Homage and Fealty. Reign; and for the sure keeping and performing his Homage and Oath in all Points, he bound his Body, his Heirs, Lands, Tenements, all he had or could have high and low, and in all things, to the Will of the King and his Heirs; And Willed and Granted for him and his Heirs, That if he or they, should ever be in War against him orHow, and in what manner he bound himself to be true and faith∣ful to him, and his Heirs. them, or Ayding or Advising any of their Enemies secretly or openly, that then their Bodies, Lands, Tenements, and all they had or could  have, should from that time be forfeited to the King and his Heirs, in such manner as neither he, nor his Heirs, might claim them at any time. And further he Granted for him and Heirs, That if at any time it should happen they should be against the King or his Heirs, as aforesaid, That the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, or any other Pre∣lates of England, or Scotland, as many, and such as the King or
Heirs would, without Cognisance of the Cause, or any manner of Admo∣nition, Warning, or Contradiction of any one, might give the Sentence of Excommunication against him and his Heirs, and put all his Lands under Interdict. In Witness whereof he Sealed these Letters Pa∣tents,A. A. 1306. 34 Ed. I. in the Priory of Canons at Lanercost, 23d of October, A. D. 1306. and of the King's Reign the 34th. Done in the presence of five Barons, two Knights, and four Clerks, with Two Publick Notaries allowed by the Pope, to attest it. On the 3d of Claus 34 Ed. I. M. 2. Dors. A Parlement for the setling of Scotland, and Business concerning the State of the King∣dom. November, being then at the Priory of La∣nercost in the County of Cumberland, near Carlisle, the King issued his Writs of Summons for a Parlement to meet at that City on the Octaves of St. Hillary, or 20th of January. This Parlement was called for the Settling, and Establishment of Scotland, and for other Business concerning the King, and the State of the Kingdom, as appears by the Writ; What was done concerning Scotland I  find not, the Business of the Kingdom was (besides the hearing many Petitions and dispatch of much private Business) the great Oppression of Churches and Monasteries. Stat. of Carl. Riley's Placita Parl. f. 312. Cok. 2. Institut. f. 580. The chief Bu∣siness of the Kingdom was to prevent the Tallage and Tribute im∣posed upon English Mo∣nasteries by Foreign Ab∣bats. The Oppression of Mo∣nasteries, as was shewed by the grievous Complaints of the Great and Noblemen, arose from the imposition of Tribute, by their Su∣periors, (as then called) from beyond the Seas, as especially by the Abbats of the Orders of Cisteaux, Clny, Praemonstratum, of St. Augustin, and Benedict, who under pretence of visiting them  here in England, as being the Heads of their Orders, imposed upon them divers grievous and importable Tallages, Rents, and Tri∣butes, contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; by which means, what had been Charitably given to Pious Ʋses, and for the increase of Divine Worship, was turned into a Wicked Tri∣bute, not pleasing to God, (in censm Reprobum est conversum) wherefore by the Advice of the Earls, Barons, Great Men, Chief Men, and other Noblemen, and the Communities of his Kingdom,  in his Parlement at Westminster, in the 33d year of his Reign,Ordained in that Parle∣ment, That no English Ab∣bats, &c. should pay Taxes or Tal∣lages to For∣reign Houses or Abbats. he Ordained and Determined, That no Abbat, Prior, Master or Guardian, or any other Religious Person of what State, Condi∣tion, or Order soever he was, under his Power and Dominion, should pay any Rent, Tallage, Tribute, or Impositions, charged upon them by their Superiors the Abbats, Priors, Masters, War∣dens, of Religious Houses or Places, or agreed between them∣selves; Nor that they should go beyond Sea to visit such Mona∣steries,  or under any pretence whatsoever, so as the Goods or Revenue of their Monasteries, might any way by Exchange or Merchandize be conveyed out of the Kingdom, upon pain of grievous Punishment to such as should do contrary to this Statute in contempt of the King's Prohibition. Further the King inhibited all and singular Foreign Abbats, Pri∣ors,The King's Inhibition to Foreign Ab∣bats, &c. to Exact such Contributi∣ons. Masters, and Wardens of Religious Houses, under whose Sub∣jection  and Obedience, the Houses of the same Order were in his Dominions, that they should not impose any Payments, or Burthens upon them, under forfeiture of all they had in his Do∣minions, or could forfeit for the future.
Yet by these Statutes and Ordinances it was not the King's Riley t supra, f. 314. The King in∣tended not by that Instituti∣on to extin∣guish the Vi∣sitation of those Mona∣steries, &c. intention, to exclude the Abbats, Priors, and other Forreign Religiose, from the Office of Visiting only in those things which belonged to Regular Observance, and the Discipline of their Order, provided that such Visitors took nothing from the Monasteries, Priories, or Houses they Visited, or carried any thing out of the Kingdom, but their moderate, and reasonable Expences. These Ordinances and Statutes, Ibm. tho they were made in the 33d of Edw. I. as abovesaid, yet the Publication of them was suspended until this Parlement at Carlisle, that they might pro∣ceed with more Mature Deliberation, after which, and a full Debate with the Earls, Barons, (& aliis Nobilibus, & Communita∣tibusThe King Or∣dains and De∣termines in making a Law. Regni sui) and other Nobles, and the Communities of his Kingdom by their Unanimous Consent (Ordinavit & Statuit)  he Ordained and Determined, this Statute should take place from the First day of May next coming; And sent it to all the She∣riffs in England, to be published Ibm. as a Law made for the com∣mon Benefit of the People, and Melioration of the State of the whole Kingdom, Ad Communem populi utilitatem, & totius Dominii nostri meliorationem. Witness the King at Carlisle the 20th of March, in the 35th of his Reign.35 Ed. I. The other great Business was the Consideration of the Append. n. 39. Petitions of the Nobility against the Exactions of the Pope▪ Pe∣titions exhibited by the Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Community of the whole Kingdom of England, for the State of the Crown, of the Lands of Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, and the whole Community aforesaid, concerning divers new intolerable Grievances, Oppressions, Injuries, and Extortions, done to, and brought upon the Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Community, by the Authority, and Command of the Pope, and by Mr. William Testa, his Clerk or  And his Clerk William de Testa. Nuncio, or by his Commissaries, Ministers, or Vicegerents in his Name. The Articles or Heads [7] of the Petitions were; First, TheThe Articles of the Peti∣tions. Extravagant Number of Provisions of the best Spiritual Prefer∣ments given to Italians, other Forreigners, and Non-Residents, to the great prejudice and disinheritance of the Founders, Be∣nefactors, and their Successors, and to such as had the Right of  Advowson, and the Gifts of such Preferments. Secondly, The Rents and Revenues of Religious Houses, which the Pope intended to apply to the use of divers Cardinals. Thirdly, Concerning First Fruits of vacant Benefices reserved to the Pope, a thing never heard of before, concerning the Collection whereof, he had lately put forth hard Interpreta∣tions,  much prejudicial to the King, Kingdom, and whole English Church. Fourthly, About the Peter-Pence, that they were not taken according to the first Grant, but exacted to Treble the value.
Fifthly, Concerning Legacies given to Pious Uses, they were wickedly demanded and exacted by Authority of the Apostolick See, and converted to other Uses than the Testator or Donor intended. Sixthly, Concerning Debts the Creditors went to the Pope's Clerk, and offered them half the Debt, more or less, to get the  rest, who presently caused the Debtors to be Summoned and Distreined to answer before them, in open Disheritance of the King and his Crown. Seventhly, Concerning indistinct Legacies, (such as were given in general, and not in particular Words) approved by the Canon and Civil Law, the Pope's Clerks impiously appropriated to themselves, (Clerici Domini Papae impie sibi appropriare nituntur,  &c.) and to convert them to Uses contrary to the Design of the Dead. There are Two Copies of these Petitions, one in Riley's Placita Parl. f. 376. French, the most full and large; The other in Ib. f. 379. The Mischiefs of Money sent out of the Kingdom. Latin, which concludes thus, That all these things tended to draw the Money out of the King∣dom, the manifest Stripping of the Church, the Enriching of Strangers, and Impoverishing the Natives, unless Append. n. 40. God would arise and dis∣sipate  his Enemies, so as by the Secular Prince, and his Council, with the Consent of the Noble, and Great Men, so great Wickedness might be repressed. Upon which Articles of Oppressions, Grievances, Extortions, andWilliam Testa, the Pope's Agent. Injuries, William Testa was [1] called into full Parlement, and Convicted, nor could he any ways Excuse himself, but by saying he did these things by Authority of the Pope. And because these  [9] Ibm. Practices, if suffered, manifestly tended to the diminution of Di∣vineConvicted in Parlement of great Crimes against the Crown and Church. Worship, the Robbing of the English Church, the prejudice, hurt, and Disheriton of the Crown, Power, Jurisdiction, and Dignity Royal of England, the destruction of the whole Community, and per∣petual Subversion of the State of the Kingdom, the Laws and Customs of the same; from whence greater Dangers in process of time might ensue. At length having considered these Mischiefs, by Assent of the King and whole Council of Parlement, Ibm. Oppressions, Grievances, and Extortion from and by the Pope pro∣hibited. And William Testa ordered to revoke what he had done. it was Provided, Agreed, Ordained, and Judged, That the Premised Grievances, Oppressions, Injuries, and Extortions, ought not to be permitted in the King∣dom and Lands aforesaid. And Master William was in the same Parlement forbidden to do any thing contrary to this Provi∣sion, Agreement, and Judgment, by himself or any other what∣soever. And he was injoined to revoke and make void whatever  had been done by him, his Commissaries, Ministers, Vicegerents, Adherents, and Assistants, and safely to keep within the Kingdom the Money Levied upon this Account, until the King by Advice of the Council aforesaid, should otherwise direct.
And for the greater Ibm. The Clergy and Laity write to the Pope, com∣plaining of his Oppressions and Extorti∣ons. Evidence of the Matter, it was ordained and agreed by the King and Council aforesaid, That Experienced Messengers should be sent to the Pope from the King, and whole Community, to Notifie and Expound to him these Grievances, Op∣pressions, Extortions, and Injuries: And a Letter was drawn up ac∣cordingly on the Name and Behalf of the Clergy and Laity, full of Sharpeness and Reflection upon the Pope, his Ministers, and Nun∣cio's;  Riley ut supra. f. 355. l. 3. of the Let∣ter. Nos Clerus & Populus dicti Regni, &c. with this Ibm. Ti∣tle in the Margin, Litera a Regno Angliae ad Papam, the Letter from the Kingdom of England to the Pope. At the same time Writs were ordered to be directed Ibm. f. 382. 383. to all the Sheriffs of England, to Enquire by the Oaths of Lawful Men of the County, after the Names of the Ministers and Commissaries of Wil∣liam Testa, who had committed these Grievances, Extortions, &c.  William Testa's Officers Que∣stioned. And the Names of such as had caused any one to be cited before himself, or Commissaries, &c. And to attack them by their Bodies, so as they might appear before the King, eight Days after Holy Trinity where ever he was in England, to answer to him or any others that would complain, and to do and receive what the King's Court, (the Court of Kings-Bench now, which then was always35 Ed. 1. with the King) should adjudge and ordain. Witness the King at Carlisle, March 22d. in the 35th of his Reign. The Prince of Ibm. f 382. The Prince of Wales ordered to do Justice. Wales, Guardian of Scotland, and Justice of Ireland, had also command to see this Provision, Agreement, Ordi∣nance, and Judgment, inviolably observed in those Lands or Countreys. But after the After the Recess of the Parlement, the King gives William Testa, &c. Protecti∣on to go thro' the Recess of the Parlement, the King at the Re∣quest of the Bishop of Sabin and Cardinal, (who came from the  Pope into England, for the Consummation of the Peace with France, and the Marriage of the Prince of Wales, with that King's Daugh∣ter) and was then at Carlisle, commanded the Chancellor not to Seal their Writs to the Sheriffs, &c. Ibm. f. 383. & Pat. 35 Ed. 1. M. 10. intus. Kingdom, to Dispatch the Pope's Busi∣ness. And for the Reverence he had to the Apostolic See, and Affection he bore to Pope Clement, gave William Testa and Peter Amalmeni, the Pope's Clercs and Nuncio's, their Commissaries and Ministers, a Protection to go through the whole Kingdom for the Dispatch of the Business of the Church of  Rome. Witness the King at Carlisle, April the 4th, in the 35th of his Reign. He also Append. N. 41. granted to them in as much as he might or could, (Quantum in nobis est) to Collect or Keep to the Ʋse of the Pope, the Fruits of the first Year, of all Vacant Ecclesiastic Benefices withAnd gave him Liberty to take the first Fruits of Va∣cant Benefices to the use of the Pope. Cure and without Cure, in the Kingdom for three years, reser∣ved by the Pope to himself, (Non obstantibus quibuscun{que} prohibitio∣nibus  in Parliamento nostro inde factis) Notwithstanding the Prohibi∣tions made in Parlement, so as they meddle not with the Revenues of Abbies, or Priories, nor carried the Money out of the Kingdom, but by way of Exchange. Dated the same Day at Carlisle.
And further he gave them a Pat. 35 E. 1. M. 19. intus & Riley ut su∣pra. f. 384. With a Dis∣pensation to use their Offi∣ces, &c. Dispensation to use their Offices, as Pope's Clercs and Nuncios, as the Clercs and Nuncios of former Popes had done in former times, notwithstanding any former Pro∣hibition by him made; Provided they did nothing against his Crown or Dignity, or any of his Subjects, any manner of way. Dated the same Day and at the same Place. Lastly, He gave Ibm. in Utr{que} loco. And Tran∣sport their Money by way of Ex∣change. them leave by way of Exchange, and by  assistance of Merchants, to send all the Money Collected, which reasonably belonged to the Church of Rome, or to the Pope, so as they Transported not any Coined Money, or Silver in the Mass, by them∣selves, or others. Dated at the same Place and Time. Under pretence Append. N. 42. of these Letters, Grants, and Dispensations, the Pope's Clercs aforesaid, (pretextu quarum literarum, prefati Clerici,  Domini Papae, &c.) not having respect to the Prohibitions in Parle∣ment,By reason of these Indul∣gences, the Pope's Clerks return to their former Practi∣ces▪ returned to their former Practices; and being opposed in their Proceedings, by many of the Kingdom, by reason of those Prohibitions, they Petitioned the King's Council holden at West∣minster, in the Feast of Holy Trinity next following, and Exhibited their Letters, &c. And because it was found, That by them the King had revoked nothing of the Ordinance made in Parlement (EtThey Petiti∣on the King and Council for allowance of them. quia compertum fuit per easdem quod Dominus Rex nihil Revocavit  de praedicta Ordinatione in Parliamento facta,) nor Granted any thing to the same Clercs, by the said Letters, but that they might have and receive the first Fruits of vacant Benefices, as far as he could Grant them, (Quantum in Rege fuit) and hereupon forbad themTheir Petiti∣on was reject∣ed, and they commanded to desist from any such Pra∣ctices. to do or attempt any thing that might turn to the prejudice of his Crown and Royal Dignity, or any other of his Subjects: And it being found also, That every of the Grievances aforesaid were in prejudice of the King, and his Subjects. By Command of the  King being then at Carlisle, it was agreed in the same Council, That the Clercs should not do them, nor have the first Fruits of Benefi∣ces of the Patronage of the King, because it would turn to the pre∣judice of him, his Crown, and others. The Clercs understanding this Agreement, would not any further prosecute their Petitions, or appear to receive their Answer: And therefore there was a further Prohibition made, That whereas there had not been a full Delibe∣rationAnd for do∣ing any thing against the K. his Crown, and Dignity, &c. had upon their Petitions, they should not attempt any thing  any way prejudicial to Him, his Crown, and Dignity, the Noblemen, and People of his Realm. Witness the King at Carlisle, the 27th day of June, in his 35th year. This Prohibition was served Ryley ut supra. f. 385. upon them by the Mayor, Alder∣men, and Sheriffs of London; and afterwards, if the said Clercs had presumed to have been Relieved against this Prohibition, be∣fore they could attempt it, the King died, so as nothing further  was done in this Matter. In the time of this Append. N. 43. Parlement at Carlisle, either the King himself, or the Lords took notice of the great Familiarity there was between the Prince, and Piers de Gaveston, and what Influence he had upon, and Power over the Prince; but whether upon the
King's own Observation, or their pressing him to it, (I find not) nor for what particular Reasons, on the 26th of February at Lower∣cost by the King's Order and Command (not on his Death-Bed asPiers de Gave∣ston Banished England. commonly storied) he was Banished England, and to be ready to quit it at Dover, three Weeks after the Turnament or Justs, which should be Fifteen days after Easter-Day was this Year 1307. on the 26 of March, so that the day of his Depar∣ture was the First of May. Easter next coming, and not to return without the King's Leave, and Calling him back; and for the Performance of this Order, Monsieur Piers at the Day and  Place aforesaid, made Oath upon the Body of God, (i. e. The Con∣secrated Host) the Old Cross, and the King's other Reliques, and the Prince of Wales made Oath in like manner, That he would not Receive, Retain, or Permit the said Piers to be with him con∣trary to this Order, unless he was Recalled by, and had leave from his Father to return; and for his Subsistence beyond Sea, so long as he staid there, Monsieur Piers had allowed him an hun∣dred Marks Sterling by the Year. After Easter this Year, in the Heat of the Controversie and Quar∣rel between the King, Nobility, and Pope's Nuncios, as before re∣lated, Mt. Wst. f. 458. Robert Brus put to flight the Eof Pembroke and Glocester. Robert Brus having increased his Army, engaged Aymer de Vlence Earl of Pembroke, and put him to flight, killing few of his Men; Three Days after he also put to flight the Earl of Glocester, with the Slaughter of many on both fides, and after∣wards besieged him in the Castle of Ayr, until by the King's Army  the Siege was Raised, when with his Men he fled into the Woods and Mountains; Ibm. Robert Brus flies into the Woods and Mountains. yet King Edward sent into England, and un∣der great Penalty Commanded all that ought him Service to be ready at Carlisle, three Weeks after the Feast of St. John Baptist, and there sent his Son into England also, to prosecute his Match with the King of France his Daughter, by the assistance of theThe Prince sent into Eng∣land. Spanish Cardinal, Bishop of Sabin. Ibm. After the Departure of his Son, the King fell ill of a Dysenterie or Bloody-Flux, yet by small  Journeys he moved toward Scotland from Carlisle, and at Burgh upon Sands his Disease increasing, he Died the 7th of July, A. D.The King Dies. 1307.
Church-Affairs. NOT long before the Death of Henry III. the Monks of Canterbury by his License Antiquit. Brit. f. 189. n. 10, 20. God. de presul. Angl. p. 137. A. D. 1272. had chosen William de Chil∣lenden  their Sub-Prior, for their Archbishop; the Pope persuaded him, as a Person not it for that Place, to wave the Election, and make way for Robert Kilwareby a Friar-Minor, (who for Eleven years had been the Collector of the Pope's Moneys, or Revenues in England) to be Archbishop by his Pro∣vision, without the King's License, the Monks Election, and his Approbation afterwards, contrary to the King's Prerogative, the ancient Rights of his Crown, the Laws of the Realm, and Liberties  of the Church. But to provent, if it might be, for the Future the like Practices of the Pope, within less than a Month after the Death of Henry the Third, King Edward being in the Holy-Land, the Guardians of the Kingdom, and Council in his Name, by their Proctors made publick Append. N. 44. Protestation for the Vindication of the Prerogative and Rights of his Crown against these Provisions, before they Granted  the Temporalities; Ibm. shewing, That Cathedral Churches when void, ought of Right and Custom, and were wont to be filled, by the Canonical Election of the Chapter, the King's Leave having been first asked and obtained. And that after the Election, the Elect ought to be presented to the King. That he might object against him if he had any thing reasonable to propound against him; and that it seemed to the King and his Council, a great Prejudice to him, and the Church of Canterbury, whose Patron and Defender he was,  especially if this should be made an Example in other Churches, That the Pope omitted these Ʋsages, where there could not be found any Fault either in the Matter or Form of the Election, nor so expressed in his Letters of Provision, yet should assume a Power of Supplying Vacancies with Bishops: Whence lest for the future the Roman Church should proceed to do the like, or if it should do it, That the King might not receive Prejudice, or be bound to restore the Temporalities of the Churches, the King of  his especial Grace granted them to this Man; and then Iterus Bernard his Procurator and Clerc made Protestation in his Name and stead, That this Grant of the Temporalities, should not be drawn into Example for the future. This Protestation was made, and Read at Westminster in St. Stephen's Chapel, on the Vigil of St. Lucy the Virgin, (i. e. December 12th,) in the presence of Friar Ro∣bert e dwarde by the Elect, (by the Monks afterwards in com∣pliance with the Pope, or under a Pretence to Preserve their own  Right) and of the Bishop of Ester, Walter de Merton Chancellor of England, John de Chist Dean of St. Pauls, R. Burnel Arch Dea∣con of York, and many others. A. D. 1272. And on the same Day the Pat. 1. Ed. 1. M. 20. intu. Temporalties, having had suffici∣ent Testimony of his affection to the King, and taken the Oath of
Fealty to him, for that Time out of his especial Grace were Gran∣ted by his Lieutenant, or Guardians of the Kingdom. After six years,Antiqu. Brit. f. 192. n. 20, 30. A. D. 1279. this Archbishop was made Bishop of Porto in Italy, and Cardinal, and then Abdicated his Archbishopric, upon whose Cession pretending it was his Right so to do, notwithstand∣ing the Monks had Elected the Bishop of Bath and Wells, then Chancellor of England, and the former Protestation; The Pope made  John Peckham another Preaching Friar-Minor Archbishop, and Consecrated him at Rome; He was born in Sussex of Obscure Pa∣rents, and had his first Institution in the Monastery of Lewis. The Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, endeavouring to put in practice the Canons of Boniface made atCompleat Hist. of Engl. f▪ 668. Merron 42 Hen. 3. A. D. 1258. and the Provincial Constitutions of the same Boniface atSpelm. Concil. Vol. 2. f. 305. Lambeth 45 of Hen. 3. A. D. 1261. This Archbishop, in the  7th of this King, on the Third of the Calends of August, or 30th of July, A. D. 1279.Ibm. f. 320. & 323. called a Council of his Suffragans at Read∣ing, in which several Sentences of Excommunication were enjoined to be Published,Append. N. 45. which so Troubled the King, that he convened the Archbishop in his Parlement at St. Michael next following, wherein he made an open Revocation of such as pleased him not, and were against the Rights of his Crown. In the 8th of King Edward, this Archbishop and his Suffra∣gans intending to hold aSpelm. Vol. 2. f. 327. Council at London, the King fearing by their late Canons and Proceedings at Reding, they might presume to Constitute something therein against his Crown and Dignity,Append. N. 46. appointed Roger le Estrange, and Hugh Fitz-Otto Steward of his Houshold, his Commissioners, to go to them, and appeal a∣gainst such Proceedings. Next Year he called aSpelm. Ut supra. f. 328 Council at Lambeth, but the King suspecting the Loyalty of the Archbishop and Bishops, directed hisApprend. N. 47. Writ to them, Commanding them upon their Oaths of Fealty they had all taken to be Faithful to him, and Defend his Rights, and the Rights of his Kingdom, as much as they could, and enjoined them by Virtue of their Oath, and under pain of losing the Temporals they held of him, that they should in that Council do nothing against him, his Kingdom, and the Rights or  Laws, which his Predecessors and he had used by ancient and approved Custom, nor to do, assent to, or attempt any thing against them. Notwithstanding this Inhibition, the Review the Council ofSee Church Affairs in time of Hen. 3. & Spelm. Conc. Tom. 2. f. 329. Lambeth, holden under Boniface the then Archbishop, to see how far it was suspended by the King's Appeal to the Pope a∣bout it; and notwithstanding his Revocation (of some of the Canons and Sentences of Excommunication made at Lambeth, and re∣newed  at Reding) about two years before in open Parlement, he renewed them again in this Council, asIbm. f. 334. & Linwood Constitutiones Provinciales in fine, f. 30. That, against such as procured or obtained Prohibitions, against Proceedings in Spiritual Courts; That, against the Infringers and Opposers of Ecclesiastic Li∣berty; That, against such as took any thing out of or from the Houses, Mannors, or Lands of Ecclesiastic Persons against their Wills;
That, against such as took or removed any Persons, or Goods out of Sanctuary, and hindered any Victuals to be brought to such Per∣sons; and Lastly, against such as Denied to execute the King's Writs for taking the Excommunicates, or hindered the taking of them, or unjustly procured their Liberty. This Council endedSpelm. Concil. Tom. 2. f. 341. on the Sixth of the Ides, or 10th of October, and he wrote the King a Letter aboutIbm. Church-Liberty  not long after, wherein he tells him, That for a long time and very anciently, there had been great Dissention between the King and Great Men of England, and the Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy of the same, concerning the Oppression of the Church against the Decrees of Popes, the Constitutions of Councils, and Sanctions of Orthodox Fathers, in which the Bighest Authority, the greatest Truths, and Sanctity did consist; and therefore beseeched the King there might be an End put to those Dissentions, which could not  otherwise be, then by his being inclined to close with those three things, from which the Canons were Collected, and to submit his Crown to the Crown of Christ, for that the Ecclesiastic or Church-Liberties were the Jewels of his Spouse; He tells him further, That by the Express Precept of the Law, he was bound to obey the Pope. That the Determination of every Controversie that could not be Determined by inferior Judges belonged to him; That Catholic Emperors submitted all their Laws to the Holy Canons, and therefore  he ought to submit his Laws, and abolish all such as were contrary to to them. Lastly he told him, no Oath could bind to the Keeping or Performance of such things as were Repugnant to Ecclesiastic Liberty; and if he had taken any that might any way excite his Conscience against the Church, he would absolve him from it; and concludes, That he firmly believed he could not provide for the safety of his Soul, or the stability of his Kingdom, unless he closed with what he Propounded. The Epistle is Dated at Lambeth, the 4th of  the Nones, or Second of November, 1281. in the 9th of Edw. 1. But this Epistle prevailed not upon the King, nor ended the Controversies about the Regalia, or Royal Rights of the Crown, and Liberties of the People, between the Secular and Ecclesiastic Powers, whatever the Pretences of the Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, were for the Advancement of Holiness, and Religion; the Design was Dominion, whether the King or They should have  most Power. For from the first to the last Year of his Reign, they endeavoured to Incroach and Usurp upon the Temporal Ju∣risdiction, notwithstanding all Prohibitions, Attachments, Informa∣tions, and Suits against them, the Records of which would swell into a Volume, if they were all Collected from those in the Tower only of this King's Reign; and always when the King's Necessities urged him, or that he was Fatigu'd with, or Disap∣pointed in his Wars, they took the Advantage of promoting Ec∣clesiastic  Liberty, (which was any thing they called so) against the Rights, Royalties, and Prerogative of the Crown, (and never wanted Ambitious, Designing, Discontented, and Poor Noble, and other Military Men, or Gentlemen, who had made themselves so, by their own Luxury and Debauchery, and pretended to what was
then called Sanctity, and seemed to be more Holy and Religious than others) to join with, and assist them, in hopes to make themselves Great, and repair their Broken Fortunes, or succeed in the Places of others, and become Governours and Regulators of the Nation, and Ministers of State under the Church-Power. Taxes in this KING's Reign. IN the 4th of his Reign the King in Parlement had a FifteenthPat. 4. Ed. I. M. 6. A. D. 1276. Granted him by the Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Commu∣nity of the Kingdom, and by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury and his Suffragan, a Subsidy of their Goods (not said how much)  as a Free Gift only, not to be urged or drawn into Ex∣ample. In the 5th of his Reign the Laity Gave him the 12th Part ofWals. Hist. Angl f. 48. n. 20. their Goods toward the War in Wales. In the 11th of his Reign again, toward the War against theIb. f. 51. n. 40. Communia de Term. Trin. 12 E. I. Rot. 6. Dors. penes Re∣memrator The∣sourii. Inter Comu∣nia de Termino S. Mich. Rot. or. n. 5. Welsh, the Laity Gave him a 30th Part, and the Clergy a 20th  Part of their Goods. Conceditur a Populo in Subsidium Werrae suoe Tricesima, & à Clero Vicesima pars Bonorum suorum. In the 18th of his Reign, he had a 15th of all their moveable Goods Granted by the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all others of the Kingdom, or Government, as appears by the Chequer-Roll in the 19th of Edward-I. with the King's Remembrancer. In the 22d of his Reign, the Prelates and Clergy Granted theInter Recorda de Trin. Term. 22 Ed. 1. Rot. v. l. n. 68. with the King's Re∣membrancer. Mediety or half of their Benefices and Goods, to be taken a 3d Part at the Fast of All-Saints next coming, a second 3d Part 15 Days after Easter, and the third 3d Part 15 Days after St. John Baptist then nextcoming. In the same Year, at a Parlement or Council holden on theClaus. 22 Ed. I. M. 6. Dors. de militibus Eli∣gendis, & Mit∣tendis ad Conci∣lium.  12th of November, or (Crastino S. Martini) at Westminster, when Four Knights were summoned from every County, to consult and consent to such things as the Earls, Barons, and Great Men should Ordain, for themselves and whole Communities of the Counties. Upon the same day they met, viz. Novemb. 12. they gave the King a 10th Part of all their moveable Goods, &c. asHat. 22 Ed. I. M. 2. in Ce∣dula. appears by the Writ or Commission for Appointing Assessors, Taxors, and Collectors for the same Tenth; Teste Rege apud West∣monast.  12 die Novemb. Anno Regni sui 22. And in the same Month, after the 16th Day thereof, the Guar∣dian,Inter Record. de An. 23 Ed. I. n. vel Rot. 73. de sexta parte Regi Concessa in Lond. with the King's Remembran∣cet. Sheriffs, Aldermen, and whole Community of the City of London, Granted a 6th Part of their moveable Goods, as a Sub∣sidy toward his War. The Writ or Commission by which the
Taxors and Collectors were appointed, bears Date Novemb. 26. 23 Ed. I. In the same Month, and about the same time of it, there wereIb. in the same Year and Roll. Commissioners appointed to ask, require, and effectually induce in Person the Men of all his Demesne Cities and Towns in all the Counties of England, by all ways they should see expedient, to grant a 6th Part, as London had done, that it might shew Ex∣ample  to others of his Demeasn Towns. A Parlement summoned to meet the Sunday after St. Martin,Claus. 23 Ed. I. M. 4. Dors. de Parliamento te∣nendo. Ib. M. 2. Dors. de Parliamento prorogando. Pat. 24. Ed. I. p. 1. M. 22 de undecima & septima Regi Conces. Levand. & Colligend. or 11th of November; the Writ bears Date Tertio die Octobris. It met not then, but was Prorogued before meeting to the Sunday before St. Andrew, or 30th of November, by Writ dated Novemb. 2. at Odmer. The Clergy in this Parlement Gave the King a Tenth;  the Earls, Barons, Knights, & alii de Regno nostro, others of Our Kingdom, or Government, Gave an Eleventh and the Citizens and Burgesses, and other Good Men of his Demeasns, Gave him a Seventh of their moveable Goods: And the Warrant for the appointment of the Taxors and Collectors, bears date Decemb. 4. In the 24th, the Earls, Barons, Knights, et alii de Regno,Inter Comunia de term. S. Mic. An. 25 Ed. I. Rot. vel. n. 5. penes Remem. Regis in Scac∣cario. Mat. West. f. 428. n. 20. 30. This Parlement was held at Cro. animarum 24 Ed. I. St. Edmunds-Bury. Claus. 25 Ed. I. M. 6. Dors. f. 74. n. 10.  gave a 12th Part; the Citizens, Burgesses, and Tenants of his Demeasns gave an 8th Part. The Clergy gave nothing, by reason of an Inhibition the Arch-Bishop had obtained from Pope Boniface, which Inhibition, or Bull, he caused to be published at this time in all the Cathedrals See more of this matter in the History. In his 25th Year, he had an Eighth of all the Laity, and a  Tenth of the Clergy, for the Confirmation of the Great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest. Walsingham in his History says, the Laity gave a Ninth, (which agrees not with the Close Roll, which says an Eighth) the Clergy of the Province of Canter∣bury gave a Tenth, and the Clergy of the Province of York a Fifth. In the 29th of his Reign, upon his Confirmation of the Per∣ambulationsRot. Peramb. Forest. 29 Ed. I. in Turre.  of the Forests, the Laity gave them a Fifteenth of their Moveables, in the Parlement held at Lincoln, which they should have at Michaelmas next coming. Robert Arch-Bishop of Canterbury would grant nothing for the Clergy, without the spe∣cial Licence of the Pope. In the 32d of his Reign, being then in Scotland, as appearsPat. 32 Ed. I. in Xedula. by the Dates of the Commissions at Dunfermlyn and Strivelin, to  several Commissioners to Tax or Talliate, or assess Tallage in Cities, Burghs, and his Demeasns in Cities and Burghs, eitherRyley's Placita Parliament. f. 246. 264, 265. Capitation by Poll, or in Common, according to their Faculties and Wealth, as it might turn most to his Advantage. And in the 33d Year, the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Prelates, Earls, Ba∣rons, and other Tenants of his Demeasns, petitioned in the Par∣lement
holden on Sunday next after the Feast of St. Matthew the Apostle, at Westminster, that they might have leave to Talliate their Tenants of the same Demeasns, as he Talliated them, and it was granted. About this time he had a Fifteenth granted to him.Ibm. f. 260. In the 34th Year, the King intending to Knight his Son, sum∣moned  Inter Comunia Brevia de Term. S. Trin. Anno R. R. Ed. I. 34. Rot. vel n. 40. penes Re∣mem. Regis in Scaccar. the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Ba∣rons, and other Great Men to be before him and his Council on the morrow of Holy Trinity, to Treat of, and Grant an Aid upon that Occasion. He also sent to all the Sheriffs of England, to cause to come before him and his Council Two Knights of every County, and of every City Two Citizens, and of every Burgh One or Two Burgesses, as the Burgh was greater or lesser, &c. These same Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and  Ibm. also the Knights of Shires, Treating deliberately upon this Mat∣ter, and considering there was an Aid due as aforesaid, and that many Burthens were incumbent upon the King, by reason of his War in Scotland, unanimously Granted to the King for them∣selves and whole Community of the Kingdom, a 30th Part of all their Temporal moveable Goods, &c. for a competent Aid to∣ward the Knighthood of his Son, and also for an Aid toward his Expences which he was to be at in the War. Also the Citizens and Burgesses of Cities and Burghs, and othersIbm. of the King's Demeasens assembling together, and treating about the Premisses, considering the Burthens incumbent upon the King, &c. unanimously Granted unto him, for the Causes above∣said, a 20th Part of their moveable Goods, &c. The Issue of Edward I. BY his First Wife Sandford's Geneal. Hist. f. 130. & 138. Elianor, Sister to Alphonso King of Ca∣stile, and Daughter of Ferdinand III. and only Child by Joan his Second Wife, Daughter Wals. f. 48. n. 40. Meze∣ray, f. 319. A. D. 1279. and Heir of John Earl of Pontive, or Ponthien, he had John his Eldest Son, who died  young. By her also he had Wals. Hy∣podigma Nu∣striae. f. 499 n. 20. Sandf. ut supra, f 138. Henry and Alphonso, who both died young, and before their Father. His Fourth Son by her was Edward born at Caernarvon in Wales (called therefore Edward of Caernarvon) on St. Mark's Day, April 25.[4] Wals. Hist. 52. n. 10. in the 12th Year of his Reign, A. D. 1284 who succeeded him  by the Name of Edward II. By this Queen Sandf ut supra, f. 139, 140, 141, &c. Wais. Hypod. Neustr. 499. he had Nine Daughters; Elianor married to the Earl of Barr in France; Johan of Acres, or Acon, in the Holy Land, so called because there born; first married to Gilbert of Clare Earl of Glocester, and afterwards to Ralph Monthermer,
without her Father's Consent: The Third Margaret, married to John Duke of Brabant; Berenger and Alice, the Fourth and Fifth, died in their Childhoods; the Sixth, Mary a Nun at Amesbury; the Seventh, Elizabeth, married to John Earl of Holland, Zealand, and Lord of Friesland, who died without Issue, and she was afterwards married to Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford: Bea∣trix and Blanch Sandf. ut supra, f. 144., the Eighth and Ninth, died in their Child∣hoods. Issue by his Second Wife Margaret, Sister to the King of France, Daughter to Philip III. Surnamed the Hardy. Thomas de Brotherton Sandf. ut supra, f. 205. born at a small Village of that Name in Yorkshire (from whence he was so called) on the 1st of June, A. D. 1300. he was created Dugd. Bar. Part 2. f. 63. from Chart. 6. Ed. 21. n. 30, 31, 32. Earl of Norfolk by his Half-Brother  King Edward II. Decemb. 16. in the 6th Year of his Reign, and had then Granted unto him all the Castles, Mannors, and Lands in England, Wales, and Ireland, which Roger Bigod lately posses∣sessed, except those his Widow had in Dower; and in the 9th of the same King was Ibm. from Cart. 9. Ed. II. n. 32. made Earl-Marshal of England. Edmond Ibm. f. 92. of Woodstock, born there on the 25th of August, A. D. 1301. and was created Earl of Kent in the 15th of Edw. II. Elianor his Sandf. ut supra. Tenth, and only Daughter by this Queen, died in her Childhood.
A CONTINUATION Of the Compleat  History of England, &c. King EDWARD the Second. AFter the Death of Edward the First on the 7th of July, 1307, his Son Edward the Second succeeded him, being about the Age of Twenty three years; and Seven Weeks after his accession to the Crown, he summoned a Parlement by his Cl. 1 Ed. II. M. 19. Drf. A. D. 1307. Writs dated August 26th, to meet at Northampton on the Quinden of St. Michael, or 13th of October, Ibm. A Parlement summoned. concerning the Burial of his Father, his own Marriage and  Coronation, and other Arduous Business touching the State of the Kingdom; but what was done in this Parlement more Fol. 96. n. 10. Not well known what it did. Walsingham tells us, That the Money which would scarcely pass amongst the People in his Father's Life-time, was made current after his decease, under the Pain of Losing Life and Mem∣ber; and that the Cl. 1 Ed. II. M. 12. intus. Clergy, Citizens, and Burgesses gave their new King a Fifteenth part of their Goods; and the other Laicks a Twentieth. I find not what was further done here in England  in the first Five months of his Reign, other than, That his great Favourite Peirs de Gaveston returned into England, his App. n. 43. Peirs de Gave∣sion returned into England. Exile and the Obligation of his Oath not to come over, unless recalled by, or had Leave to come from King Edward the First, having been both determined by his Death. And also the Oath which King Edward made when Prince of Wales, at the same Ibm. time, That he would not Receive or Retain him without the Leave of his Father. How long he had been in England, and how long Earl of  He is made Earl of Corn∣wall and Guardian, and Lieutenant of the Kingdom. Cornwall, before the 26th of December, in the first year of King Edward's Reign, I have not seen. On that day being at West∣minster, he made him by the Name and Title of Peter de Gaveston Earl of Cornwall, his Append. n. 48. Guardian and Lieutenant of the King∣dom, for the better Conservation of the Peace and Quiet thereof, while he should be beyond the Seas, or during his Pleasure. And on the 18th of January following, being then at Dover, Ib. n. 49. The great Power given to him. he gave him Power  to grant Licences of choosing Pastors of Cathedral and Conventual Churches, to take their Fealties when Elected and Confirmed, and re∣store the Temporalities, to give Prebends and vacant Benefices, which were of his Collation or Presentation, and dispose of Wardships and Marriages which might happen in his absence. On the 19th of Ja∣nuary he Cl. 1 Ed. II. M. 11. Dors. summoned a Parlement to meet at Westminster on
the first Sunday in Lent, being then at Dover, but of it there are no Memoires in the Tower, or other-where, that I have seen. Then the King passing over Sea on the 28th of the same month, was The. de la Moor, f. 593. n. 10. Mar∣ried to Isabel, Daughter of Philip the Fair King of France, at Bologne, with wonderful Pomp and Celebrity, there being at the So∣lemnity Four Kings and Three Queens, besides the Bride; and return∣ing into England, they were both Cl. 1 Ed. II. M. 10. Dors. Crowned at Westminster on the 24th of February, where the Earl of Cornwall excelled all the  Company in rich Cloaths and Ornaments, and carried the Royal Crown Ib. & de la Moor, ut su∣pra, n. 20. before the King, which much increased the Envy of the Nobility against him. He was the [4] Son of a Gasconian Knight, who had doneWho Peirs Gaveston was. [4] Frier John Trokelow's Annals of Ed. II. f. 192. col. 2. . in Biblioth Cotton. Claudius, D. 6. Edward the First great Service in the Wars of that Country, and in respect thereof he ordered him to be Educated with his Son the Prince; which made the great familiarity between them.  Sir Tho. de la Moor, Servant to Edward the Second, gives him this Character; [5] That he had a fine Body, was of a quick and sharp Wit, curious in his Behaviour, and sufficiently Skilful[5] Ut supra: in Military Affairs, which appeared (as he says) by his Ma∣nagement of, and keeping in due Subjection the Scots, when he commanded the English Forces in that Kingdom, for which he was envied by those who saw his happy Success. By reason of the King's extravagant Favours toward, and in  The Nobility much moved by the King's favour to him. conferring Honours and Lands upon him, especially after he had Married his Niece Margaret, Sister to the Earl of Glocester, with his receiving him into so great Intimacy, and making him Chief Minister, (as may be supposed according to the Report of all our Historians) the Nobility were much moved, who pressed and advised the King he might avoid the Realm, which not being done so soon as was expected, the King declared Pat. 1 Ed. II. M. 10. to all such  as should see or hear his Letters Patents, That for no cause what∣ever he should be permitted to stay in England, longer than the Morrow of St. John Baptist, according as it had been advised by the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and agreed to by himself. Given at Westminster the 18th day of May. Accordingly he was sent into Ireland, and made the King'sHe is made the King's Lieutenant in Ireland. Pat. 1 Ed. II. M. 3. in Cedula. An. D. 1308. Lieutenant there, to Direct and Act in all things in his  Name, as if he had been himself there present. Witness the King at Reding, 16 die Junii. But long he stayed not there, for in the Second year of the King he procured a Tournement to be proclaimed at Walsingh. f 96. n. 50. A. D. 1309. The Nobility contrive how to destroy him. Waling ford, and called thither so many Military Men out of Foreign Parts, that he insulted over the English Nobility, who came to meet them, amongst whom the chief were Thomas Earl of Lanca∣ster,  Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Aymer de Valence Earl of Pembroke, and John Earl of Warren and Surry, who being much displeased, and hardly bearing the Pride of Gavestan, and the Reproach they received, every day considered and contrived how they might destroy him, De die in diem quomodo Petrum per∣derent cogitabant.
The Prelates, Earls, and Barons, taking advantage of the King's continued Exorbitant Kindness to him, and heaping upon him so great Riches and Estates, to the disadvantage of the Crown, and lessening the Revenues thereof, and the great Power he had with him, and being thereby (as may probably be concluded) the great Obstacle to the Execution of their Designs formed a∣gainstThey press the King to give them a Commission to choose Or∣dainers to make Ordi∣nances for the Government of his Hous∣hold and Kingdom. the King's Father, and himself, were impatient till they  had removed him never to return again; and to do this, they daily pressed the King to give them Authority to choose such amongst them, that might have Power to make Ordinances for the Government of his Houshold and Kingdom, which at length they obtained, and had this Grant or Commission for the making of them. THE Append. n. 50. A. D. 1309. 3 Ed. II. The Commis∣sion for that purpose. King to all those who shall see or hear these Letters,  Greeting; Whereas to the Honour of God, and for the good of us and our Realm, we have of our free Will granted to the Prelates, Earls, and Barons of our Realm, that they may choose certain Persons of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and others whom they think fit to call to them, during the time of their Power, that is, to the Feast of St. Michael next coming, and from that Feast for a year next following, to Ordain and Establish the Estate of our Houshold, and of our King∣dom, according to Right and Reason. We Grant by these our Letters,  to such as may be chosen by the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, whoever they shall be, full Power to Ordain the State of our Houshold, and of our Kingdom abovesaid, in such manner as their Ordinances be made to the Honour of God, to the Honour and Profit of Holy Church, and to the Honour of us, and our Profit, and to the Profit of our People, according to Right and Reason, and the Oath which we made at our Coronation. And we Will, that those which are chosen, and all under our Dominion, and of our Ligeance, shall  observe and keep the Ordinances to be made, in all Points, and that they may secure the Observation of them, they may Bind themselves, and Swear to one another, without being questioned by us or our Friends; and if peradventure it shall happen, that part of those which shall be chosen to make the said Ordinances, shall be hindered by Death, Sick∣ness, or other reasonable Cause, which (God forbid) so as they cannot perfect the said Ordinances, then it shall be lawful for such as are pre∣sent to Proceed by themselves, or call such other to their Assistance, as  shall be most for the Honour of us, the Profit of us and our People. In Witness of these things, we have caused to be made these our Letters Patents. Given at Westminster the 16th day of March. The very day following the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, or at least as many of them as might then be in London, Append. n. 51. An Instru∣ment made by the Nobi∣lity to the King con∣cerning the Commission above. made an Instrument to the King, wherein after they had repeated this Grant and Commission, they grant and promise for them, their  Successors and Heirs, That the Grant which their most Dear Lord their King, had made as abovesaid, should not at any other time be drawn into Custom or Usage, nor turn to the prejudice of the King or his Heirs, or of them, their Successors or Heirs, nor to the damage of any one against Right and Reason; nor, That the Grant aforesaid may in other manner be intended or claimed,
properly from his Courtesie and Free Will or Pleasure, and that the Power of the said Ordainers, as to making the Ordinances, should not indure longer than the Time limited. In Witness whereof, they put their Seals to these their Letters Patents. Given at London the 17th Day of March, in the Year of Grace 1309. and the Reign of their Lord the King the Third. They lost no time after they had their Commission; for with∣in  three days the Ordainers were chosen and sworn. They were these Claud. D▪ 2. f. 295. a. in Biblioth. Cotton. under-written: The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. Bishops of Earls of Barons. London, Gloucester, Hugh de Ver. Salisbury, Lancaster, William le Marshall. Chichester, Lincoln, Robert Fitz-Roger. Norwich, Hereford, Hugh Courtenay. St. David's, Pembroke, William Martin. Landaffe, Richmond, John de Grey.   Warwick,     Arondell.   The Oath was this, Ibm. as 'tis translated from the Old French: I will make such Ordinance as shall be to the Honour of God, theThe Ordai∣ners Oath▪ Honour and Profit of Holy Church, and to the Honour of our Lord the King, and to the Profit of him and of his People, ac∣cording to Right and Reason, and according to the Oath which our Lord the King sware at his Coronation; And that I will not forbear for any Man Rich or Poor, nor for Love or Hatred, nor any other thing:  But will make such Ordinance in Form abovesaid. Ibm. And then after the Form of taking of it, 'tis noted in Latin, That, Factum fuit, & Receptum praedictum Juramentum, &c. The said[5] N. 52. Oath was made and taken in the Form aforesaid, according to the King's Will and special Command, on Friday the 20th of March, in the Year of our Lord 1309. in the Third Year of the Reign of King Edward, the Son of King Edward, at Westminster, in the Great Painted  Chamber of the said King. The Ordinances themselves are transcribed from the Parle∣ment-Roll, and Printed in the Appendix, and were to this Ef∣fect, and according to this Sense and Tenour: For that the King was Deceived by Evil Counsel, and the Nations of Gascoigne, Ireland, and Scotland in danger to be lost, and the  Realm of England to be ruined, by Oppressions, Prizes, Takings, and Destructions; therefore Robert Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bi∣shops, Earls, and Barons, Chosen according to the King's Commission, did Ordain, to the Honour of God and Holy Church, and the Honour of the King and his Realm, in manner following:
1. That Holy Church have all its Franchises, as it had be∣fore,The Ordi∣nances. and ought to have. 2. That the King's Peace be kept throughout the Realm, so as any Man may safely go, come, and stay any where, accor∣ding to the Law and Usage of the Realm. 3. It is Ordained for the Payment of the King's Debts, the  Bettering and more Honourable Maintenance of his Estate, That nothing of Lands, Rents, Franchise, Escheat, Ward, Marriage, Office, or Bailiwick, be given to any of the Ordai∣ners during the time of their making Ordinances, nor to any other Person without the Advice and Assent of the Ordainers, or the greater Part, or Six of them at least, but that all things may be improved to the Honour and Profit of the King, and  Advancement of his Estate. 4. That the Customs be Received by Persons of the Realm, and not by Strangers, that the Issues and Profits of them, and all other things, do come entirely into the Exchequer, and be delivered thence by the Treasurer and Chamberlains for to main∣tain his House or Court, and otherwise to his Profit, that the King may live of his own, without taking any other things  than anciently due and accustomed. 5. That the Merchants, Aliens, and their Goods, be Ar∣rested, while they have given Account of the Customs, and other Profits and Issues of the Realm, they received since the Death of King Edward, the Father of this present King, before the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, and others to be joined with them by the Ordainers. 6. That the Great Charter be kept in all its Points; and that the Ordainers, and such as they shall call to their Assistance during their Power, shall declare all obscure and doubtful Points in it. 7. For that the Crown was so abased and dismembred by divers Gifts, it was Ordained, That all the Gifts Granted to  the Damage of the King, and Distress of the Crown, after the Commission to them made, of Castles, Towns, Lands, Tene∣ments, Offices, or Bailiwicks, Wards, Marriages, Escheats, and Releases whatsoever, as well in Gascoigne, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland, as in England, should be Repealed, and were declared Repealed, without any Regranting to those that had them, un∣less by common Consent in Parlement; or if any such Gifts or Releases were afterwards made, without Assent of his Baro∣nage  in Parlement, until his Debts were paid, and his Estate advanced, they should be null, and the Procurer punished in Parlement by award of the Baronage. 8. For that it had been at other times Ordained, That the Customs, Issues, and Profits of the Crown, should be recei∣ved,
by the People of the Realm, and not by Strangers, and paid into the Exchequer, for the Maintenance of the King's Houshold, &c. and it had not been done as Ordained; there∣fore it was Ordained again it should be so. 9. And for that the King ought not to undertake to make War against any one, or go out of the Realm without the common Assent of his Baronage, for many Dangers that might  happen to him and his Realm, it was Ordained, That afterwards the King should not go out of his Kingdom, or make War against any, without the common Assent of his Baronage; and if he should do otherwise, and cause his Service to be sum∣moned, the Summons should be null and void: And if it should happen the King should make War against any, or go out of the Kingdom by Assent of his said Baronage, and that it should be necessary to appoint a Guardian of the Realm, he  ought to be appointed by common Assent of his Baronage in Parlement. 10. That there be no Prises or Takings for the King, but such as are due of ancient Right, that none under colour of Purveyance take to the use of the King, or other, any Corn, Goods, or Merchandise of any one, against his Will, or with his Will, according to Cap. 19. Magna Charta, without paying the  true Value for it, under pain of being pursued by Hue-and-cry; and if taken, committed to the next Gaol, and undergoing the Common Law as a Thief and Robber. 11. That no new Customs or Maletolts levied sinee the Co∣ronation of Edward I. or Inhancement of the old, be taken of Merchants, notwithstanding the Charter made by him to the Merchant Strangers against the Great Charter, the Franchises of  the City of London, and without the Assent of the Baro∣nage, &c. 12. To the Honour of God and of Holy Church, it was Or∣dained against such as should maliciously procure Prohibitions and Aeachments against the Ordinaries of Holy Church, in case of Correction of Sin, and other things purely Spiritual, which belonged not to the Lay Court, That the Justices should  award Damages to the Ordinaries; and if the Plaintiffs had not wherewith to pay them, they should be committed to Prison, so long as the Grievance miliciously procured should require, saving the Estate of the Kingand Crown and other Right. 13. That because the King had been Guided and Counsel∣led by Evil Counsellors, therefore it was Ordained all Evil Counsellors should be removed from the King, that neither  they nor any such should be near him, or hold any Office under him, and that other fit Persons should be put in their Places; and in like manner it should be done to his Menial Servants, and the Officers of his Houshold.
14. For that many Evils happened by such Cousellors and Ministers, it was Ordained, That the King should make the Chancellor, Chief Justice of one Bench, and the other Treasu∣rer, Chancellor, and Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Steward of his Houshold, Guardian of the Wardrobe, Comptroler, and a sit Clerk to keep the Privy Seal, the Justices of the Fo∣rest on this side and beyond Trent, the Escheators on this side  and beyond Trent, and the Chief Clerk of the Common Bench, ybe Advice of vs Baronage in Parliament; and if it should happen and be necessary to chuse any such Officers when there was no Parliament, then the King should do it by the Advice he had about him, until there should be a Parle∣ment: And so it should be for the future, concerning such Mi∣nisters when need required. 15. That all Governours of Ports and Castles upon the  Sea, be placed and made according to the Form above∣said. 16. And for that the Nations of Gascoigne, Ireland, and Scotland, were in danger to be lost for want of Good Mini∣sters, it was ordained, That Good and Sufficient Officers should be placed there according to the Form of the 2d Article next  above, that is the 14th. 17. That Sheriffs be from thenceforth made, by the Chan∣cellor and Treasurer, and such of the Council as shall be pre∣sent; and if the Chancellor be not present, then by the Trea∣surer, Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices of the King's Bench, that such should be chosen only as had Lands to an∣swer the King and People for their Doings, and no others to  have Commissions under the Great Seal. 18. That the Guardians and Officers of Forests receive just Trials for their Grieving the People, Oppressions and Mis∣demeanours, and be removed from their Offices, notwithstand∣ing they have Grants for their Lives. 19. Directs the manner of Trial of Trespasses of Vert and  Venison, &c. in the Forests, according to the Charter of the Forest, and Declaration of King Edward I. which is there re∣cited. 20. For that by the Examination of Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights, and other Good People of the Realm, it was found that Peirs de Gaveston had evilly Counselled the King, and had inticed him to do ill in divers manners; That he chea∣ted  the King of his Treasure, and sent it beyond Sea; That he accroached to himself Royal Power and Dignity, in making Alliances with People upon Oath, to live and die with him against all Men; That he put from the King Good Officers, and placed about him those of his Covin and Party, as well Strangers as others; That he estranged the King's Heart from
his Liege People, so as he despised their Counsels; That he caused the King to grant Lands, Tenements, and Offices to him∣self and his Heirs, and divers other People, to the great Da∣mage and Injury of the King and his Crown; That he caused Blank Charters to be sealed with the Great Seal, in deceit and disinheritance of the King and Crown; That he maintained Robbers and Murderers, causing the King to pardon them; That King Edward, the Father of the present King, ordered him to  forswear the Realm of England, and directed that his Son the present King should for ever forswear his Company; and for several other Reasons, as the Nourishing of Concord between the King and his People, and the Eschewing of many Perils and Discords, it was Ordained the said Peirs should for ever be exiled out of England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, and all the King's Dominions either on this side or beyond the Sea, between that time and the Feast of All-Saints next following  (having Dover assigned him for his Port to pass from, and no other) and if he should be found in England, or any other part of the King's Dominions beyond that Day, then he should be treated as an Enemy to the King, Kingdom, and People. 21. That This Emeric, and those of his Company, were a Socie∣ty of Mer∣chants by the name of the Society of Merchants of Friscobald's of Florence, who Rented the King's Cu∣stoms of Wooll, Wooll∣fells, and Le∣ther, and had done so in the Ed. I. Pa. 35. Ed . M. 17. Dors. Emery, and those of his Company of Friscomband, should render an Account of the Treasure he had received, as  he was ordered within the Quinden or 15 days after St. Michael, or the Bodies and Goods of that Company which were found in the Power of the King, should be arrested, and Emery decla∣red and holden the King's Enemy, and used as such, if he was found in the King's Power on this side or beyond the Sea. 22. For that Monsieur Henry de Beaumont, to the Damage and  Dishonour of the King, had received of him the Kingdom of Man, after it had been Ordained otherwise by the Ordainers, and other Rents, Lands, Franchises, and Offices, and procured for others Lands, Rents, Tenements, Franchises, and Offices against such Ordinance; And for that he gave evil Counsel, contrary to his Oath, it was Ordained he should be outed the King's Council for ever, and not to come near the King, unless he were summoned to Parlement, or in War, if the King would  have him, or by common Assent of Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons in full Parliament; and that all his other Lands should be seized into the King's hands, until he should be satisfied the full Value of what he had received of those Lands given him by the King, contrary to their Ordinance; and if he contended against this Ordinance, then for ever to be Disinherited of all Lands of the King's Gift. 23. That it was found by the Examination of Prelates, Earls,  and Barons, That the Dame de Verscy had procured the King to give to Sir Henry Beaumont her Brother, and others, Lands, Franchises, and Offices, to the Damage and Dishonour of the King, and open Disherision of the Crown; Et ausint procure Demander hors Lettres Desus la Targe contre ley, & lentention du
Roy; It was Ordained she should go to her House within 15 days after St. Michael next coming, without ever returning to Court to stay there, and for all these things aforesaid, and for that the Castle of Bamburgh was Parcel of the Crown, it was Ordained it should be re-taken into the King's Hands, and should not be given to her or any other without the Pleasure and good Will of the King. 24. That Acquittances should be allowed for Debts paid, and  Accounts made in the Exchequer, and if the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer allowed them not, or made them not in due form, the Plaintifs should have Remedy upon Petition in Parlement. 25. For that common Merchants and many other People are received to Plead in the Exchequer Pleas of Debt and Trespass,  by reason they are avowed by Officers of the place more than before, which ought not to be, whereby Accounts and other things touching the King are often delayed, and the People much grieved, it was Ordained, That for the future no Pleas should be holden in the Exchequer, but such as concerned the King, and the Officers of the Exchequer, and their Menial Ser∣vants; And if any be received by Avowry of the Place to Plead therein contrary to the Form abovesaid, such as are Em∣pleaded  shall have their Recovery in Parlement. 26. Also, For that the People are much grieved, that the Marshal and Steward hold many Pleas which belong not to their Office, it was Ordained, they should not hold Plea of Frank Tenement or Debt, or Covenant or Contract, nor the Common Pleas of the People, but only Debts and Trespasses of the Court or King's House within the Verge, and Contracts  and Covenants of such as belong to the Court, and no others; and that they should be speedily Pleaded from day to day, and ended before the King passed out of the Limits of the Verge where the Trespass was done; and if Pleas were held other∣wise, they should be null, and such as were grieved might have Redress by Recovery of Damages in the Kings-Bench by Writ out of Chancery. 27. For that before that time many Felonies had been com∣mitted  within the Verge, which were not punished, because the Coroners of the Country were not permitted to Enquire of such Felonies, but only the Coroners of the Houshold who were Partial; The Country Coroners without the Verge were to be joined with them in the Case of Murder especially, &c. 28. For that the People were much grieved, that some Per∣sons  Bandied together to Kill and Rob them, by reason the King, by Evil Counsel, gave them their Pardons against the Law; It was Ordained, That for the future no Charters of Pardon should be granted for any manner of Felony, but in Case where the King might do it by his Oath, Process of Law, and the Custom of the Land, and if any other were granted it should be void.
29. For that many People are delayed of their Demands in the King's Court (i. e. Bench) because the Parties alledge they ought not to Answer the Demandants without the King, and also many of the People grieved by the King's Officers against Right, of which Grievances Men can have no Remedy but by frequent Parlements, it was Ordained, That the King hold a Parlement once every year, or twice if there be need, and in  convenient place; and in those Parlements, those Pleas which were so delayed, and those where the Justices should be of di∣vers Opinions, Recorded and Determined; and in the same manner Bills (i. e. Petitions) should be delivered and ended in Parlement according to Law and Reason. 30. That Money shall not be altered without great occasion, and then by common Advice of the Baronage in Parlement. 31. All Statutes made in Amendment of the Law, and for the Profit of the People by the King's Ancestors, shall be kept and maintained as before, and ought to be according to Law and Reason, if they were not contrary to the great Charter, the Charter of the Forest, or these Ordinances, and if so then to be null and void. 32. That the Law or Common Right be not delayed by Let∣ters  of Privy Seal, and such Letters to be void if procured. 33. Contains an Interpretation of the Statute of Acton Burnel. 34. Concerns the Case of Appellants or Appealors, and the Sheriffs and Gaolers Practices thereupon, now almost anti∣quated. 35. That no Man be appealed of Felonies maliciously, or Outlawed in the Country where he hath no Land or Tenements, nor put to Death or Disherited by such Suit, or Outlawry, he rendring himself to the King's Prison, &c. 36. For the abatement of Appeals in Suits and Slight Cases,  in Murder and Robbery, if the Appellees were acquitted, they should recover against the Abettors and Appellors according to the Statute. 37. Against Protections for the Delay of Suits, as well in Pleas of Land, as of Debts and Trespasses, by such as feigned themselves in the King's Service; That the Plaintiff or Deman∣dant discovering the Deceit, to have Damages awarded him at  the Discretion of the Justices, and the Tenent of the Land to be adjudged to Prison a year and day for Cheating the King and Court; and if the Deceit be found in a Plea of Debt or Trespass, upon Attaint, the Defendant shall be punished to the King, and pay Damages to the Plaintiff.
38. Also it was Ordained the great Charter of Franchises, and the Charter of the Forest of King Henry, the Son of King John, should be holden in all Points, and if there were any Points doubtful in them, they were to be declared next Parlement after this by the Baronage, Justices, and other Sages of the Law; and this was to be done after this manner, because it was not in their power for want of time. 39. That the Chancellor, Treasurer, Chief Justices, of one  Bench and the other, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Treasurer of the Wardrobe, Steward of the Houshold, all Justices, She∣riffs, Escheators, Constables, Inquirers into any Matter what∣soever it was, and all other Bayliffs, or Officers of the King, should be Sworn when they received their Offices to keep and observe all the Ordinances made by the Prelates, Earls, and Ba∣rons,  chosen and assigned for that purpose, and every one of them, without doing any thing to the contrary. 40. Also it was Ordained, That in every Parlement there should be assigned One Bishop, Two Earls, and Two Barons, to hear and determine all the Complaints of those that would impeach the King's Ministers whosoever they were, for doing any thing contrary to these Ordinances, and if all the Parties  assigned could not attend to hear and determine these Plaints, then Three or Two of them might, and punish such as should be found to have acted contrary to these Ordinances, to the King, and to the Complainants, according to their Discretions. 41. Also they Ordained, That the Ordinances abovesaid should be maintained and kept in all their Points, and that the King should cause them to be put under his great Seal, and sent  into every County of England, to be published, and firmly ob∣served as well within Franchises as without, and in like manner the Warden of the Cinque-Ports should be sent to, that he should publish them to be kept through his whole Juris∣diction. Then follows the King's Confirmation. WE these same Ordinances shewed to us, and published on Monday  The Ordi∣nances con∣firmed by the King. next before the Feast of St. Michael last past, do Agree unto, Ac∣cept, Confirm, Will and Grant for us and our Heirs, That all the said Ordinances, and every one of them made according to the Form of our Letters Patents, shall be published, and hereafter firmly observed and kept. In Witness whereof we have caused to be made these our Letters Patents. Given at London the 5th day of October, in the 5th year of our Reign. In the Parlement Roll 'tis not entered, or any mention made of the Protestation the King made when he confirmed these Or∣dinances; Pat. 6 Ed. II. part. a. M. 20. intus. Ril. Plac. Parl. f. 541. That is to say, That if they contained any thing to his Damage or Prejudice, or contrary to the Commission granted to the Ordainers, Eapro non concessis & non confirmatis
haberentur, those things were not granted or confirmed, reservingThe King's Protestation, that if the Ordinances contained any thing to his damage it should be void. to himself in that Protestation Power, by good Advice of the Ordainers, and others, to correct and amend the same, as was more fully contained in a Publick Instrument made of this Pro∣testation. The Summons to this Parlement, wherein these Ordinances were confirmed, were Dated at Cl. 4 Ed II. M. 1. Dors. A Parlement summoned to confirm these Ordinances. Berwick upon Twede, the 16th  day of June, in the 4th of Ed. II. for it to meet the Sunday be∣fore St. Laurence, or the 10th of August, which was in the 5th year of his Reign, at London. In the mean time there Cl. 5 Ed. II. M. 31. Dors. A Quarrel be∣tween two Barons. happened divers Debates, and a Quarrel between Two Barons, Nich. de Segrave, and William Marshall, who took Arms on both sides, and engaged their Friends and Confederates so to do, intending to come to this Parliament  with a Multitude of Armed Men; Ibm. They intend to come to the Parlement with a num∣ber of Armed Men on either side. The King for∣bids them. The King taking notice it would be in Contempt of him, the Hindering of the Dispatch of Business, to the Terror of the People, and Disturbance of the Peace, sent his Prohibition to them, Commanding them upon their Faith and Homage, and forfeiture of their Lands and Te∣nements, and all they could forfeit, they should not come to the Parlement so Armed, or in any other manner than they and others use to come in the time of his Father. Witness the King  at Berwick upon Twede, July 20th. After the Articles had been confirmed, several of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, thought it had been a long Session, and made it their Cl. 5 Ed II. M. 25. Dors. The Conti∣nuation or Prorogation of this Parle∣ment. Request to the King, they might retire into their own Countries, by whose Advice or Assent he continued the Parlement unto the Friday next after the Feast of All-Saints at Westminster, (Parliamentum illud usque in diem Veneris proximum  post festum omnium sanctorum celebrandum, duximus continuandum) and gave Leave to some of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, in the mean time, to go home, (Et quibusdam de Praelatis, Comiti∣bus & Baronibus, licentiam concessimus, se interim ad propria diver∣tendi) commanding Ibm. them to be at the time and place afore∣said; and further commanding the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, That he should give notice to the Deans and Priors of Ibm. Cathe∣dral Churches, also the Abbots, and Arch-Deacons, in their own  Persons, and the Clergy of the whole Province by their Proctors, to be in that Parlement 8 days after St. Martin. Witness the King at London the 8th day of October. But this short time (as he thought) for the Summons of his Clergy Ibm. pleased not the Arch-Bishop, and therefore the King, if there might be any Words in that Writ Ibm. prejudicial to him and his Church, promised they should be amended in Par∣lement,  and gave him Leave to Direct his Clergy to be at the Parlement Fifteen days or Three weeks after St. Martin, according to his Discretion. Witness the King at Eltham the 24th day of October.
The Arch-Bishop without doubt took the longest time, and accordingly others of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, delayed their coming until the Clergy should meet, unless there were a further continuance of the Parlement, which I find not; for on the 28th of November the King issued his Cl. 5 Ed. II. M. 22. Dors. The great Earls intend∣ed to come to Parlement with Horse and Arms. The King Commands them not to come in such manner. Writs to Gilbert of Clare Earl of Glocester and Hertford, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Humfrid de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, Adomar de Valen∣cia  Earl of Pembroke, Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and Ed∣mund Earl of Arundel, [7] to signifie to them, he was informed they were coming to his present Parlement, which was continued at Westminster, with Horse and Arms, after an undue manner, which would hinder the Dispatch of Business in Parlement, which concerned him and the State of the Kingdom, affright the People, and disturb his Peace, wherefore he Commanded them upon their Faith and Homage, not to come in such manner, but  only as they used to come in his Father's time without Horse and Arms, nor should attempt any other thing that might disturb the Peace. By reason of the Solemnity of Christmas this Parlement wasThe Parle∣ment Dissol∣ved. Another Par∣lement sum∣moned. Dissolved, and much Business was left undispatched, and there∣fore there was another Parlement summoned to meet concerning that Business at Ib. M. 17. Dors. Which never met. Westminster, on the first Sunday in Lent;  Witness the King at Westminster the 19th of December. This Parlement never met, the Sheriffs in all Counties had Ibm. M. 15. Dors. Com∣mand to make Proclamation, That the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, or others, should not come at the time, and to the place appointed, because the King could not be there, without any continuation of their meeting at other time and place; Witness the King at York the 20th day of January. Piers Gaveston quitted the Nation according to the 20th Ar∣ticle  Piers Gaveston quitted the Nation ac∣cording to the Ordinances. of the Ordinances, but long he stayed not beyond the Seas, for on the 18th of January we find him in England with the King at York, and recalled by him, Append. n. 53. Was recalled by the King. as having been Banished con∣trary to the Laws and Ʋsages of the Kingdom, which he was bound to maintain by the Oath he made at his Coronation; and he farther wrote to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, and all Sheriffs in England, That seeing he had in the Instrument of Exile no other Appellations but of  good and Loyal, he returned at his Commandment, and was ready to stand to Right before him, and answer to all such as would accuse him, every thing that should be objected against him, according to the Laws and Ʋsages aforesaid; Wherefore he should always esteem him good and Loyal, and commanded them to repute him so, and publish this Matter through their whole Counties; Given at York the 18th day of January; And Cl. 5 Ed. II. M. 15. Dors. two days after, writes to the Sheriffs of those Counties where he had Lands, to restore  them, with the Profits they had received, since they had seized them into his Hands. The Lords neglected not this opportunity offered them by thisThe Lords make advan∣tage of the recalling Piers Gaveston. Indulgence of the King, Declaring the Laws and Customes of the Kingdom were not observed, nor the late made Ordinances regarded.
The King to obviate the Effects of such Reports, issued a Decla∣ration,The K. issues a Proclama∣tion and De∣claration to satifi them and others. which he commanded and firmly injoined the Sheriffs of all Counties to proclaim in full County, in all Cities, Burghs, and Mercate Towns, and other Places they should think expe∣dient, That it [2] was his great Care, and chief Desire, his Peace should every where be observed, and that all the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom used and approved in the time of his Progenitors, and also all the Ordinances lately made to the Honour of God, and Holy Church,  and his own, to the profit of him and the People, which were not to the Damage or Prejudice of him, or his Crown, or contrary to the Laws and Customs abovesaid, should be maintained and kept. Witness the King at York, the 26th of January. And not long after, fearing Disturbance from the Lords, he wrote Pat. 5 Ed. 2. Part 2. M. 22. The K. writes to the Mayor of London, &c. to secute the City, &c. to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of London, to secure the City, so as by the Meetings of the Prelates, Earls, Barons,  or any others, there might happen no Hurt or Danger to him, or the City. Witness the King at York, the 8th of February. This Declaration and Order, availed not, and therefore theThe Declara∣tion avails not King (as he said) resolved to Preserve the Rights of his Crown and Dignity Royal, the Peace and Tranquillity of Holy Church, and the whole People committed to his Charge in all things. And to this Purpose Claus. 5 Ed. 2. M. 13. Dors. wrote to all Sheriffs (the nearest to the Place  where he was) to signifie his Pleasure to all People, as soon as might be, lest by contrary Reports, it might be suspected he would not do it, and commanded them to make Proclamation thereof by themselves and Deputies, once a Week, in all Cities, Burghs, Mercat-Towns, and other Places in their Counties, and that his Intention might be more plainly known, he directed, That the Sheriffs should come to him, and every one bring with him a Person of Credit, whom he could Trust, to hear what he  should further say to them, that they might publish it to the Peo∣ple, as he should then openly Enjoin them. Witness the King at York, the 24th Day of February. This way also proving ineffectual, he intended to proceed a∣micably with the dissatisfied Bishops and Barons, and according to the Power reserved in the Protestation he made, when he con∣firmed the Ordinances, he appointed Append. N. 55. A. D. 1311. 5 Ed. 2. The King ap∣points Com∣missioners to Treat with the Ordainers about correct∣ing the Ordi∣nances, ac∣cording to his Protestation. Commissioners, the Bishop of  Norwich, Guy Terre, John de Crumbewell, Hugh de Audeley, William Deyncourt, Henry Spigurnell, Henry le Scroop, Knights, (the two last Justices) and Thomas de Cobham, Robert de Pikering, Walter de Thorp, Gilbert de Middleton, John Fraunceys, and Andrew Briggs, Clercs, or as many of them as could be present, to Treat with the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, who made the Ordinances, (upon which were grounded all the Pretences of Discontent and Quarrelling with the King) to Correct and Reform by their good Advice, all such  Things in them as were Prejudicial and Injurious to him, or con∣trary to the Form of the Commission granted to them, if any such were. Witness the King at York, the 8th Day of March.
Those Prelates, Earls, and Barons, were then at Pat. 6 Ed. 2. Part 1. M. 20. intus. Ry-Plac. Parl. f. 541. London, and excusing themselves for Treating concerning the Ordinances, in the absence of the King, sent him this Answer, Ibm. The Ordain∣ers at present decline a Treaty with the King's Commissio∣ners in his absence. That in his presence, whenever he pleased to call them together, they would Treat upon the Ordinances. and should be ready to do all things according to the Protestation he made, and also according to the Protestation they made, at the time of publishing those Ordi∣nances. In the mean time, these Ordainers pursued their Designs, both open and secret, which were much promoted by a Trokelow, f. 194. b. Col. 2. & f. 195. a. Col. 1. Wals. f. 100. n. 20. 30 The Speech of Henry E. of Lincoln before his Death. Speech our Historians report to be made by Henry Earl of Lincoln on his Death-Bed, to Thomas Earl of Lancaster, who had married Alice his Daughter and Heir, That God had blessed him with greater Riches then any Nobleman in England, and that therefore he was  bound before others to honour him; and told him, He saw the Church of England that was wont to be free, now brought into Servitude by the Oppressions of the Romans, and unjust Exactions so oftenHow Holy Church was oppressed, &c. Extorted by Kings; (Cernis jam occulata fide, Quod Ecclesia An∣glicana quae solebat esse libera, per oppressiones Romanorum, & injustas Exactiones a Regibus toties Extortas nunc facta est ancilla) and the People also which were wont to enjoy many Liberties, were brought into the same Condition, by divers Tallages and Vexa∣tions  imposed on them by Kings, Adjuring him by the Blessing of God and his own, That when he had an Opportunity, he should Free and Defend the Church and People from such Oppressions, for the Ho∣nour of God, That he should pay all due Honour and Reverence to the King that was his Lord, yet cause him to remove from his Court Evil Counsellors and Strangers, (& ut malos Consiliarios & Alienigenas à Curia sua amoveat) and effectually to observe the Tenor of Magna Charta, and other Articles, (i. e. the Ordinances) Demanded by,  and Granted to the Clergy and Laity; and that in order to the accomplishing these things, he should contract a strict Alliance with Guy Earl of Warwick, who better understood them then any other. Having ended his Speech, says Ut supra. N. 50. 50. Thomas Earl of Lancaster and his Adherents resolve to Re∣lieve Holy-Church, &c. Walsingham, he took his Leave of the World, and after his Funeral, Thomas Earl of Lancaster with his Adherents, Humfrid de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Aymer or Adomar de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and the Earl of Arundel, and other Barons which the  Historian thought too many to name, with the Earl of Warren and Surry, who enclining toward the King, was brought off to the Party by the Archbishop of Canterbury, undertook to Relieve Holy Mother-Church from Oppression, and recover the due Liberty of the Kingdom. Thomas Earl of Lancaster Ibm. The Earl of Lancaster cho∣sen General of the Party. was chosen their Captain or Gene∣ral, who by common Agreement sent to the King then at York, Beseeching him either to Deliver Piers Gaveston to them, or as it  had been Ordained, command him to avoid the Kingdom; Ibm. f. 101. . 1. a. Who demand of the King to deliver Gave∣ston to them, &c. He took little notice of their Request. The King took small notice of their Supplications, left York, and went to Newcastle upon Tine, where he continued until the Feast of the Ascension, the Queen being at Tinmouth. The Lords Ibm. n. 10. The Lords Arm. The K goes to Newcastle with Gaveston. Arm, raise an Army, and with all speed march towards New∣castle, not that they would offer Injury, or create Trouble to their
Lord the King, but only take Piers Gaveston, and judge him ac∣cording to the Laws made by common Agreement, (ut ipsum pe∣trum captum, secundum leges communiter editas (i. e. the Ordinances) judicarent. When the King heard the Barons Ibm. The Barons march thither with an Army. The K. goes to Tinmouth. From thence to Scardeburgh by Ship. were coming with an Army, he with Peter fled swiftly to Tinmouth; and when they had possessed themselves of Newcastle, forthwith he again with Gaveston went into a Ship; and though the Queen then great with Child, beseeched him with Tears to stay, he took no  Pity of her, but sailed to Scardeburgh, commanding the Soldiers in the Castle to Victual it forthwith, and protect him, while he went toward Warwick-shire. Fol. 195. b. Col. 2. Trokelow writes, That the Earl of Lancaster, before he left Newcastle to pursue the King and Piers de Gaveston, sent to the Queen then at Tinemouth-Castle, (and inThe Earl of Lancaster sends to Comfort the Queen, whom the K. had left at Tin∣mouth. great Passion that the King would not stay with her) by Trusty Messengers to comfort her, Faithfully promising, That he would not give over his pursuit until he had removed Peter from the King, and  made his Excuse for not coming to her in Person, lest for her sake, he should incur the King's Indignation, Ne forte indignatio∣nem Regis causa ipsius incurreret. The Lords Walsingh. f. 101. n. 10. The Lords be∣siege Scarde∣burgh Castle. having notice of his being Shipped off, seized upon his Horses, and other Goods he had left at Newcastle, causing them to be valued, and kept secure, and then marched with what speed they could to Scardehurgh, and besieged it; Ibm. N. 20. but the Earl  of Lancaster finding no Opposition from the Country, retired with his Forces, that he might not be burthensom to the adjacent Parts, and left the Earls of Pembroke and Warren to take in the Castle, who in a short time so wearied the Guards within by Assaults, that they were not able to Defend it. Ibm. Piers Gaveston renders him∣self. Upon condi∣tion to stand to the Judg∣ment of the Barons. Then Piers seeing no remedy render'd himself upon condition to stand to the Judgment of the Barons, and that he might once more speak with the King. Ibm. The K. desired Piers his Life might be sa∣ved. The King hearing Peter was taken, desired he might speak  with him, and prayed his Life might be saved; promising if it might be so, he would satisfie the Desires of the Great Men in all things. Ibm. N. 30. The Earl of Pembroke laying hold of this Promise, persuaded the Barons to grant the King's Request, promising under pain of losing all his Lands to keep him safe, while he had spo∣ken with the King, and then to restore him to the Barons at a Day and Place prefixed, Ibm. intending to have carried him to Wallingford; in his way thither at Dadington, (now Deddington  in Oxfordshire, four or five Miles from Banbury) the Earl left him to the Care of his Servants, while he went to lodge with his La∣dy at a Neighbouring Place, Ibm. N. 40. which the Earl of Warwick ha∣ving notice of, came with a great Multitude, and noise of Armed Men that Night, and took him from the Servants, and car∣ried him to his Castle. It being then doubtful what to do with him, whether they should carry him to the King, or put him to Death, a certain Ibm. Cunning Man, and of great Advice, an∣swered,  (Quidem vir astutus & profundi Consilii respondit) That it was to no purpose, having been at such Charge and Trouble to take him, to hazard the losing of him, or to seek him again, Ibm. N. 50. adding, That it were much better that he should suffer Death, then a War should be raised in the Kingdom; when all assenting to this Advice, they took him out of Prison, and carried him to
an Ascent or Hill about a Mile North-East of Warwick, calledThe Lords put Piers Gaveston to Death with∣out Judgment. Black-Low, and there cut off his Head, on the Knighton, Col. 2533. lin. 5. day of Ger∣vaise and Protasius, the Martyrs, or 19th of June. Sir William Dugdale Baronage, Tom. 2. f. 44 Col. 1. from the MSS. K. 84. 96. b. in the Bodleian Library, reports the Earls of Lancaster, Hereford, and Arundel being at this Consultation. Thus Walsingham; But Part of this Story is otherwise upon Record. The King Append. N. 56. A. D. 1312. wrote to John de Moubray, Guardian of the County  and City of York, That Henry de Percy late by his Writing or In∣strument, before him in his Presence, upon Forfeiture of Life and Limb, Lands and Tenements, and all he could forfeit, un∣dertook to preserve and keep safe from Damage Peter de GavestonPiers Gaveston not truly dealt with up∣on his Sur∣render. then Earl of Cornwall, for a certain time, according to certain Terms and Conditions, upon which he render'd himself to the said Henry, and others without the Castle of Scardeburgh, and that  the same Henry after the said Peter had been Killed before the Time, and contrary to the Terms and Conditions aforesaid, came not to him, but withdrew himself, by which he made himself suspected, and therefore commanded him to take him without Delay, and bring him to him wherever he was. Witness the King at London, the 31st Day of July, in the 6th of his Reign. The Walsing. F. 101. N. 50. & f. 102. l. 1. &c. The Lords de∣manded the Confirmation and Executi∣on of the Or∣dinances. Great Men having obtained their Purpose, against  Gaveston, sent to the King, proudly Demanding (Proterve Postu∣lantes) their Ordinances to be Confirmed, and put in Execution, Threatning, That if it was not done speedily, they would come and force him to do it; Ibm. and forthwith they united their Forces, and Quartered themselves in the Country about Dunstable, he being then Ibm. at London. Upon this Occasion undoubtedly it was, as also upon occasion of an Answer to the like Message about Five Months before, as  above related, that the King sent Append. N. 57. The K. sent to the Chief Ordainers to come to his Presence, and treat about re∣forming the Ordinances. John de Benstede, one of his Justices, to the Earls of Lancaster, Hereford, and Warwick, who were at the making of those Ordinances, to be with him at London or Westminster, on the Sunday next after St. Bartholomew, to Treat in his Presence about Correcting and Reforming the Or∣dinances, if any thing should be found in them Injurious or Prejudicial to him; and that he should enjoin them by their Faith and Homage, that they should not come with Horse and  Arms. Witness the King, the 4th of August, at Canterbury. Notwithstanding this Notice and Inhibition, they came not, but marched about the Country with Horse and Arms, Encou∣ragingThey came not, but marched a∣bout the Country. the People to join with them, and therefore the King en∣joined Append. N. 58. Encouraging the People to join with them. certain Commissioners, (reciting the most Material Part of his Precept, as above, to John de Benstede.) And seeing they had not come to him as then Ordered and Enjoined, or sent any one to answer for them; and understanding the said Earls,  with Horse and Arms, and a great Multitude of Armed Men to be coming toward him, to the great Terror of the People, he assigned the same Comissioners, to forbid the Earls, and every oneThe K. forbids the Earls to come near him with Horse and Arms. of them, by the Faith and Homage they ought him, That they should not with Horse and Arms come nearer to him, and if the Earls would not obey the Prohibition, then to forbid all and every one
coming with them, to proceed further, under the same Forfeiture. Witness the King at Westminster, the Third Day of September. The Bishops with the Earl of Glocester, perceiving this Walsingh. F. 102. N. 10. Dis∣sention would be dangerous to the Church and Kingdom, used all their Endeavours for a Peace: Ibm. They met at St. Albans with the Pope's Nuncios, sent by him as Mediators between the King and Lords. These Nuncios, Ibm. Walsingham's false Report of the Treaty between the K and Barons. says Walsingham, sent certain  Clerks from St. Albans to Whethemsted three or four Miles distant, where the Barons then lay with their Army, with the Pope's Let∣ters, persuading them to Peace; and that they would not receive them, saying, They were not Learned, but bred up to Arms, and therefore cared not to see them: Then the Messengers desired to know if they would speak with the Nuncios, who would willingly come to them to Propound and Discourse with them about a Pro∣ject of Peace; This says the Historian, they utterly refused, send∣ing  for Answer, That there were many learned Bishops in the Kingdom whose Advice they would take, and not the Advice of Strangers, who knew nothing of the Cause of Dissention. Ibm. n. 20. The Nuncios affrighted at this Return, Early in the Morning made haste to London, after they had been at St. Albans above a Month, and that then the Bishops and Earl of Glocester, by great Industry made the Peace. But this cannot be true; for the Record of the Articles of Peace is in this Form. Ceo est le Claus. 6. E. 2. M. 8. Dors. Riley's Placit. Parl. f. 538. A. D. 1312. The Treaty of Peace be∣tween the K. and Barons. Tretiz de la Pees, &c. This is the Treaty of Peace upon certain Displeasures the King hath conceived against the Earls of Lancaster, Hereford, and Warwick, and other Barons and Great Men of his Realm, made and accorded, before the Honora∣ble Father, Monsieur Ernald by the Grace of GOD, by the Title of St. Prisca Priest-Cardinal, Monsieur Arnold Bishop of Poicters, sent into England by our Holy Father the Pope, Monsieur King Philips Son, and Bro∣ther to Queen Isabel. Lewis  of France Earl of Eureux, the Earls of Glocester and Richmond; By the Earl of Hereford, Monsieur Robert de Clifford, and Monsi∣eur John Botetorte, sent to London, with sufficient power to Do, Treat and Agree on the Part of the Earls, &c, and by the Earl of Pembroke, Monsieur Hugh le Dispencer, and Monsieur Nicholas de Segrave, Deputed by the King, to hear the said Treaty, and Re∣port it to him in the manner following. 1. First, That the Earls and Barons shall come before the KingThe Articles of Peace be∣tween the K. and Barons. in Westminster-Hall, and with great Humility on their Knees make their Submission, and Swear if he will have them, That what they did, for which he thought ill of, and intended to punish them, was not done in Despight of him, and they shall humbly pray his Forgiveness, and receive it with a good Will, and shall restore all that was taken at Newcastle upon Tine, or other where, from Pier de Gaveston what∣ever it was, viz. all his Jewels, Horses, and other things whatever  they were, &c. 2. The Second Article contains the Statute for the Security of the Earls and Barons, their Adherents and Allies, which was to have been passed in the next Parlement to be holden on the Third Sunday in Lent, with this Title, Old Sta∣tutes printed. A. D. 1540. Ne quis occasionetur pro Morte
Petri de Gaveston: That no Man be prosecuted for the Death of Peter Gaveston; and further, That the King should Release and Quit the Earls, Barons, their Adherents, Friends and Allies, all Rancor, Displeasure, Actions, Obligations, Complaints, and Accusations, which arose by the Occasion of Peter Gaveston, since he married his Dear Companion Isabel Queen of England, whether it were for the Taking, Detaining, or Death of him, or the Seizing any Town or Castle, or Besieging of them, or for bearing Arms, or imprisoning any Persons. 3. Also it was agreed, That if this Security pleased the Earls and Barons, and that they would not come to Parlement in their proper Persons, they should send their Proxeys, with sufficient Power to re∣ceive and consent to that Security, and also with sufficient Power to consent to a Security to be made in that Parlement, for the Adherents to, and Receivers of Peter Gaveston, which security was treated of and agreed, and there recited, being the same with the Ibm. Statute having  this Title, Ne quis occasionetur pro Reditu Petri de Gaveston: That no Man be prosecuted for the Return of Peter de Gaveston. 4. Also the Treaters agree, That in the next Parlement there should be Provision made by the common Assent of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, that in all Parlements, Treaties, and other Assemblies in England, from that time forward for ever, Men should come with∣out Force, and without Arms, peaceably to the Honour of the  King, and the Peace of him and the Realm; and the three Treaters promised to use their utmost Endeavour with the Earls of Lancaster and Warwick, by themselves or Poxey's, to consent to this Provision: And further it was ordered, That no Business should be propounded in this Parlement, but the Security's, and this Provision, nor any come with Arms, before the Submission was made, (which was certainly Done, or the Acts of Security had never passed) and then they might Treat of other Parlement Matters, as there might be occasion. 5. Also the Treaters promised, That after this Reconciliation was made, they would do what in them lay, with their whole Endeavour with their Peers, That the King should have an agreeable Aid of the whole Realm, for his War with Scotland. 6. Also the three Treaters complained, That the King since the Con∣duct given for this Treaty to the Lords and their Adherents, had caused  the Lands and Goods of Monsieur Griffin de la Pole, to be seized, and also of Monsieur. Fouk Lestrange; There were to be two Justices not suspected of Partiality, appointed by the King, to Examine the Mat∣ter, and do them right. 7. Also that the Goods of Monsieur Henry de Percy, which were seized by the King, be restored by Pledges or Sureties until the next Parlement. 8. Also it was agreed on behalf of the King, That all Men might safely Pass and Repass through the Kingdom of England, or elsewhere, for the Dispatch of their Business under his Protection, they doing or receiving no Wrong: This Conduct and Security to continue until Pen∣tecost
next coming, and of this, the King to grant Letters under the Great Seal, To the Earls, Barons, and their Adherents. The Collation of this Indenture was Made and Read in the Year of Grace 1312. on the Wednesday next before Christmas, in the Cardinal's Chamber at London, in the Presence of the Cardi∣nal, the Bishop of Poicters, the Bishop of Worcester, the Earl of Pembroke, and many others: In Witness whereof one Part of  the Indenture remained with the King, and the other Part was given to Master John Waleweyn, and Michael de Meldon, to be carried to the Earls and Barons. The two Securities mentioned in this Treaty, were not passed into Statutes, as was agreed in the Second Article in the Parle∣ment summoned on the 20th of January, in the Sixth of this King, to meet on the Third Sunday in Lent, nor in the next,  summoned on the 23d of May next following, to meet Fifteen days after the Nativity of St. John Baptist, but in that which wasA. D. 1313. summoned on the 26th of July, in the Seventh of his Reign, to meet on Sunday next after the Feast of St. Mathew the Apostle, as may be seen in the Old Statutes Printed 1540. Robert Winchelsey, Archbishop of Canterbury, lived to see the Ar∣ticlesRobert Winchel∣sey A Bishop of Canterbury dies of this Treaty finished, but Dying on the Histor. Sa∣cra. f. 17. By whose Per∣suasion the E. of Lancaster opposed the King. 11th of May  preceding, lived not to the passing of these Statutes, by whose Persuasion and Encouragement the Earl of Lancaster and Adherents opposed the King in his Folly. Ran. Hig∣den. Lib. 7. Cap. 41. Thomas Lancastriae ipsius Roberti (speaking of this Archbishop) animatus hortatu, cum sibi adherenti∣bus per plures annos conatus est Regiis obsistere ineptiis. The great Opinion the Earl had of this Archbishop, or thinking it a great Advantage for a Miracle-worker and Saint, to have been  a Patron of the Cause, he wrote to the Append. N. 59. The Earl of Lancaster wrote to the Prior and Convent of Canterbury for a Particular of the Miracles wrought by Winchelsey. Prior and Convent of Canterbury, praying them as he had done before, to give Testi∣mony some notorious Way, and by their Letters Patents, what Miracles God had wrought by Robert Archbishop of Canterbury that last was; and what he had wrought as well in his Life-time, as after his Death, and to inform him of the Miracles, which were hanged up in writing before his Tomb. Taking advantage of these Dissentions and Controversies in  England, Robert Brus Buchan. Hist. f. 80. b. A. D. 1313. Robert Bruce taking advan∣tage of the Dissentions in England, re∣duceth a great Part of Scot∣land to his O∣bedience. reduced the most Part of Scotland to his Obedience, and took in most of the English Garrisons, some by Force, others upon Terms, some one Year, some another. Ha∣ving taken Edinburgh, he sent his Brother Edward to besiege Ster∣ling Castle, in which was Philip Mowbray a Stout and Provident Governor, who taking notice of the Success of the Scots, had ex∣ceedingly Fortify'd and Victualed it. Edward Brus after some  time lying before it, despaired of taking it by Force, and both sides agreed on these Conditions; Ibm. n 80. That if the English did not Relieve the Castle within a Year from the Day of the Treaty, it should be Delivered to the Scots; and that the Garrison should have safe Con∣duct, to go whither they would, with all their Goods.
The next Spring, the Scots came into the Marches or Bor∣ders,A. D. 1314. 7. Ed. II. and made great Ravages and Slaughters there; and to sup∣press their Insolencies, secure the Borders from their Cruelties, and drive them back, the King summoned the Militia to Claus. 7 Ed. II. M. 8. Dors. The Earls of Lancaster, meet him at Newcastle upon Tine 3 Weeks after Easter, and march from thence against his Enemies; and all that ought him Service came: But the Trokelow, f. 198. a. col. 2. & Wals. f. 104. n. 50. Warwick and Arondel, refuse Earls of Lancaster, Warwick, Warren, and Arondel,  who refused their Service, because the King had not effectually observed, or put the Ordinances in due execution without them. The King Ib. f. 105. lin. 1. &c. to serve the King against the Scots. The Battel of Bannocks-bourn. marched with a numerous and glorious Army to the Relief of Sterlin-Castle, where he received a mighty Overthrow on the Eve and Day of St. John Baptist, or 24th of June. In this Bat∣tel (which is called the Battel of Strivelin, or Bannocks-Bourn, because Fought near Sterlin, and by the Brook or River Bannock) was slain Gilbert Earl of Clare, and several other Noble-men,  many Knights and Banerets, and a great number of ordinary Men, and many of all sorts taken Prisoners, the King hardly escaping. The Particulars of this Fatal Fight may be seen in most of our Historians. Froys. vol. 1. c. 6. f. 2. a. col. 2. There was great murmuring after this Defeat, the Barons, whereof the Earl of Lancaster was Chief, put it upon Hugh Spenser the Younger, that by his Advice the Field was lost, and that he was favourable to the King of Scots. In the Parlement holden at Westminster, eight days after St. Hi∣lary,  or 20th of January, in the 8th of his Reign (per Petitionem[2] Rot. Parl, n. 35, 36. A. D. 1314. Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum, & aliorum de Communitate Regni coram nobis & consilio nostro exhibitam, &c.) by a Petition of the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and others of the Community of the Kingdom, exhibited to the King and his Council, That Oxen, Cows, Muttons, Hogs, Geese, Hens, Capons, Chickens, Pigeons, and Eggs, were intolerably dear; it was enacted  and proclaimed in every County, That the best Ox not fed with Grain, should be sold for 16 s. and no more; and if he were fed with Corn, then for 24 s. at most. The best live fat Cow for 12 s. a fat Hog of two Years old for 3 s. 4 d. a fat Wether or Mutton unshorn for 20 d. and shorn for 14 d. a fat Goose for 2 d. ob. a good and fat Capon for 2 d. a fat Hen for 1 d. two Chickens for 1 d. four Pigeons for 1 d. and twenty four Eggs for 1 d. And those that would not sell these Things at these Rates, should forfeit them to the King. This Parlement Append. n. 60. The People in Stafford & Shropshire re∣fuse to pay a 20th part Granted by Parlement. gave the King a 20th Part of their Goods, or Moveables, which in Stafford and Shropshire some dissatisfied People refused to pay, and hindred the Collectors appointed by the King from gathering of it, Ibm. The Preten∣ces of their Denial. pretending it was granted upon certain Conditions, to wit, That he should cause the Great Char∣ter of the Liberties of England, the Charter of the Forest, the Ordinances made by the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and the  Perambulation of the Forests to be observed, which had not then been duly put in execution. At which the King was much sur∣prized and displeased, seeing he had commanded them to be ob∣served, and had assigned Commissioners in all Counties to make the Perambulations: Ibm. Therefore that he might be throughly satisfied about the Nature of the Action, and have the Names of
the Actors, he appointed one of his Clerks, with the Collectors,Commission∣ers appointed to enquire a∣bout their Pretences. to make enquiry by themselves, and if it were needful by the Oaths of lawful Men of those Parts, of all Particulars concerning the same, and certifie him distinctly of them. In the 9th of his Reign, in the Parlement at Lincoln Rot. Parl. n. 1. A. D. 1315. The cause of Summons to Parlement de∣ferred to be declared, be∣cause the Earl of Lancaster and other Great Men not come., hol∣den 15 Days after St. Hilary, the King deferred the declaring the Business of the Parlement, because Thomas Earl of Lancaster and  other Great Men were not then come; according to whose Ad∣vice he intended to proceed; yet on Ibm. The Chancel∣lor and Justi∣ces of both Benches en∣joined obing in their Briefs of such Causes s could not be determi∣ned ou of Parlement. The Scots dis∣obedient▪ to K. Ed. II. Wednesday next after the Quinden of Hilary, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Justices of both Benches, were enjoined to bring in Briefs of such Matters de∣pending before them in their several Places, which out of Parle∣ment could not be determined, that here in this Session they might do in such Cases what ought to be done. On the 12th of February, being Thursday, the Earl of Lancaster  and other Great Men being present, the cause of Calling the Parle∣ment was declared, being for their Advice and Assistance against the King's Enemies the Scots, who had possessed themselves of the greatest part of that Nation, and disowned their Obedience, Ibm. beseeching and enjoining the Prelates, Noblemen, and other his Liege Subjects being there, to advise and assist him: Supplicans & injungens Prelatis, Proceribus, & caeteris Fidelibus, & Subditis  suis ibidem existentibus, ut sibi in praemissis consulerent, & facerent sibi auxilium oportunum. After this it was agreed Ibm., That the Prelates and Noblemen (Prelati & Proceres) should meet on the morrow being Friday, to treat of Parlement Business, they met that Day, and discoursed of many things; and it was agreed and commanded by the King (Concordatum fuit & per Regem preceptum) they should meet the  next day, to treat of the same Matter, Ibm. The Prices of Victuals re∣voked. when they agreed the Proclamation about the Prices of Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Geese, Hens, and other Victuals set the last Parlement, should be revoked, and that they should be sold as formerly at reasonable Rates. The reason of this, says Walsingham, was Hist. f. 107. n. 20. because after the Price set in Parlement, they were much dearer. On Tuesday following the King, by the Bishop of Norwich, promi∣sed  to Rot. Par. ib. n. 1. The King promiseth to observe the Ordinances. observe all the Ordinances formerly made by the Pre∣lates and Great Men (per Prelatos & Proceres) and also the Per∣ambulations of the Forest made in his Father's time, saving to the King his Reasons against them (salvis Regi Rationibus suis contra Perambulationes) and thereof Writs were made accordingly. On the Friday next coming Ibm. Soldiers how raised and paid against the Scs. the Great Men and Commu∣nity of the Kingdom (Magnates & Communitas Regni) Granted to  the King in Aid of his War with Scotland, of every Town in the Kingdom one Stout Footman, except in Cities and Burghs, and the King's Demeasns; and these Footmen were to be armed, and furnished with Swords, Bows, Arrows, Slings, Lances, and other Armour fit for Footmen, at the Charge of the Towns, and their Expences to be paid until they came at the Place of Rendezvous,
and their Wages for 60 Days after and no longer, if the King's Service required it, at 4 d. the day; and Market-Towns that were further able to be charged with Men, were so to be charged, the King promising to give his Letters to the Great Men and Com∣munity of the Kingdom (Magnatibus & Communitati Regni) and to their Heirs, That this Grant should be no Precedent, nor drawn into Example for the future. The same Day the King, by Advice of the Prelates and  Great Men (Consilio Praelatorum & Procerum) ordered the Ibm. whole Service due to him, i. e. all the Horse of England, to be Sum∣moned for this cause, to be at Newcastle upon Tine 15 Days after Midsummer. The Citizens, Burgesses, and Knights Ibm. n. 2. (Cives, Burgenses, & Milites de Comitatibus qui venerunt ad Parliamentum) then Granted  the King in Aid of this War and Expedition, a 15th Part of all the moveable Goods, Ibm. Civium, Burgensium, & Hominum de Ci∣vitatibus, Burgis, & de Dominicis Regis) of Citizens, Burgesses, and Men of Cities, Burghs, and the King's Demeasns, which they had at Michaelmas then last past. On Shrove-Tuesday in the Parlement, Ibm. n 3. The King had a sincere good will toward the Earl of Lancaster and other Great Men. the Bishop of Norwich on behalf of the King, moved the Earl of Lancaster to put away all  Doubting he might have of him, for that he had a sincere Good∣will towards him, and the other Great Men (erga ipsum & alios Pro∣ceres Regni sui) and held them to be his Faithful Liege-men, and told him the King desired to have him the Chief of his Council, requesting him Ibm. (ex parte Domini Regis & Praelatorum ac Proce∣rum Regni ibidem existentium) on behalf of the King, Prelates, and Great Men there present, to take upon him to assist and advise in the Affairs of King and Kingdom. The Earl thanked the King, and  and humbly requested time to deliberate (humiliter supplicavit quod ipse possit deliberare) and then answer. Which he did in a very short time, and was Sworn of the King's Council in the Form following: Whereas our Lord Ibm. n. 4. King Edward, by the Grace of God King of England, hath, with the Prelates, Earls, and Barons of the Land, Ibm. this number only in French upon the Roll. avesques Prelates, Countes, e Barons de son Terre) in full  Parlement requested his dear Cousin, Monsieur Thomas Earl of Lanca∣ster, that he would be Chief of his Council, in all Great and WeightyHe requested the Earl to be Chief of his Council. Affairs touching himself and his Realm, with other Prelates, Earls, and Barons, which may between the King and himself take care, that he may be for the Profit of him and the Realm; The said Earl, for the great Love he had for his Lord the King, and for the Common Profit of the Kingdom, and the Ordinances Ibm. The Earl com∣plies upon such Terms as he might Govern the Kingdom. (qil ad sur merci enterement Grante a teniz) which he had upon favour entirely granted to observe,  and the right Laws to maintain in all Points, and in hope to make Amendments in such things as had been ill done in his Court and the Estate of his Realm, did grant to be of the King's Council, with the Prelates, Earls, Barons; so as at the Hour the King shall not do ac∣cording to his Directions, and others of his Council concerning the Mat∣ters of his Court and Kingdom; after such things have been shown him,
and he will not be Governed by the Council of him and others, the Earl, without Evil Will, Challenge, or Discontent, may be discharged from the Council; and that the Business of the Realm concerning him, shall not be done or performed, without the Assent of him and the other Pre∣lates, Earls, and Barons, which shall be ordained, or appointed to ad∣vise him, Ibm. (saunz Assent de luy & des autres Prelatz, Countes, & Barous qi de luy Conseiller serront ordenetz) And if any of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, shall advise the King or do other thing  which shall not be for the Profit of him and his Realm, then at the next Parlement, by the Advisement of the King and his Friends, Ibm. (solone lavisement nostres Seigneur le Roy & le seon) they shall be removed; and so it shall be from Parlement to Parlement, as to them and every of them, according to the Faults found in them. In Witness whereof, this Bill was to be entred on the Parlement-Roll; ceste Bille entre en Rouelle de Parlement. And then it follows, Billae Ibm. The Instru∣ment by which he was made Chief of the Council, entred upon the Parlia∣ment-Roll predicta formam continens supra scriptam, liberata fuit  Willielmo de Ayremin Clerico, &c. The foresaid Bill containing the Form above written, was delivered to William Ayremin Clerc, by the hands of the Lords Walter of Norwich, and Bartholomew de Badlesmer, commanding the said William, by Order of the King, to inroll it Word for Word. Over the Army above-mentioned, raised by the Parlement  against the Scots, the Earl of Lancaster was made Rot. Scot. Ed. 2. M. 6. The Earl of Lancaster made General of the Army against the Scots, and Lieutenant of Scotland. General, and the King's Lieutenant in Scotland; but what great things he did with this Army, or by his Lieutenancy, it appears not in any History I have met with. Next Year the Pope sent two Rot. Claus. 10 Edw. II. M. 2. A. D. 1317. Two Cardi∣nals sent to make Peace between Engl. and Scotland, Cardinals into England, Ganse∣lin by the Title of the Saints Marcellin, and Peter Priest Cardinal, and Lucas by the Title of St. Mary in the Broad-way, Deacon Cardinal  [9] to make Peace between the Two Kingdoms of England and Scot∣land, and reconcile the Earl of Lancaster to the King. c. 59 4. D. 50 and the King and E. or Lanc. Sir Tho. de la Moor says, they were made Friends in a Plain near Leicester, and that they embraced and kissed each other. f. 110. n. 20. Walsingham says, Peace was made between them upon certain Conditions; and that not long after the King unjustly brake them. They Wals. f. 109. n. 50. & f. 111. n. 40. d la Moor, ut supra. They Excom∣municate Rob. Brus, and put Scotland under Interdict. both say, these Cardinals brought with them the Pope's Bulls, by which they Excommunicated Robert Brus, and put the King∣dom  of Scotland under Interdict, for their Defection from, and Disobedience to the King of England, unless he and they submit∣ed to him. This Year Ibm. de la Moor says Robert Brus manfully and by force took Berwick, killing none that would yield. f. 111. n 50. A. D. 1318. Walsingham re∣ports it was betrayed by the Governour Peter Spalding, and sold to the Scots, to the great Disturbance of the King. Neither King nor Kingdom of Scotland valued much this Ex∣communicationNeither Rob. Brus nor the Kingdom of Scotland va∣lued the Ex∣communicati∣on or Inter∣dict. and Interdict, or at least Robert Brus's Friends, or those of his Party, never considered or regarded it; for in the 11th of this King, the Year following, he summoned a Par∣lement to meet on the morrow of Holy Trinity at Lincoln,
Rot. Claus. 11 Ed. II. M. 3. Dors. The Scots in∣vade England. which he revoked for this reason, That his Enemies and Rebels the Scots had invaded England, and come into Yorkshire, commit∣ing many Murders, Plundering, Wasting, and Burning the Country, so as he resolved suddenly to march against them with an Army to restrain their Incursions, and bring them to a Sub∣mission; and therefore the Parlement not to meet. According to this Resolution, in Autumn this year De la Moor, f. 595. l. 1, &c. The King be∣sieged Berwick. the King  marched with a great Army to besiege Berwick, the Scots on the other side of the Country invaded England, spoiling, wasting, and burning, as far as York, Ibm. and Walsingh. Hist. f. 112. n. 20, 30. A Truce with the Scots for Two years. which caused the King to raise the Siege of Ber∣wick, and consented to a Truce for Two years. In the Twelfth of this King, the Earl of Lancaster Governed and Directed all things; Append. n. 61. To him certain Prelates, Earls, and Barons, by the Will of the King, and Assent of many Great  Men of the Realm, and others of the King's Council, being then at Northampton, went to Discourse, and Treat about the Honour and Profit of the King, and Realm; and it was agreed between them, That Bishops, Earls, and Barons should remain with him, to Advise him in such Matters as concerned him until his next Par∣lement; and concerning this and other Matters an Indenture was made in the Form following. This Ibm. The Inden∣ture of A∣greement be∣tween the King, the Earl of Lan∣caster, and o∣ther Great Men. Indenture Witnesseth, That the Honourable Fathers, the  Arch-Bishop of Dublin, the Bishops of Ely, Norwich, and Chi∣chester, the Earls of Pembroke, and Arundel, Monsieur Roger de Mortimer, Monsieur John Somery, Sir Bartholomew de Badles∣mere, Monsieur Ralph Basset, and Monsieur John Botetourt, by the Will and Assent of the King, have Discoursed with the Earl of Lan∣caster concerning the things touching the Profit of himself and the Realm in the Form following; To wit, That the Bishops of Norwich,  Chichester, Ely, Salisbury, St. Davids, Carlisle, Hereford, and Worcester, the Earls of Pembroke, Richmond, Hereford, and Arundel, Sir Hugh de Courteny, Sir Roger de Mortimer, Sir John de Segrave, Sir John de Grey, and one of the Banerets of the Earl of Lancaster, which he shall Name, should remain with the King for one quarter of a year until the next Parlement, and that Two Bishops, One Earl, One Baron, and One Baneret of the Earl of Lanca∣ster's, at least, should always be with him, and that all considerable  Matters that might or ought to be done out of Parlement, should be done by their Assent, otherwise to be void, and amended in Parlement by the Award of the Peers; and such as should remain with the King Quarterly, shall be chosen and assigned out of them, and others in Par∣lement, to Act, and Advise the King as aforesaid. And the above∣said Prelates, Earls, and Barons, by the Will and Assent of the King, undertook, That he should Release and Acquit the Earl of Lancaster, (ses gentz, & ses meignees) his People, Followers, or Retinue, or as  now those of his Party, of all manner of Felonies and Trespasses a∣gainst the Peace, until the day of St. James this year; and that the Charters of Release and Acquittance should be plain and absolute with∣out Condition, and if better Security for them might be found at the next Parlement, they should have it, and there Confirmed by the King and his Baronage. And the Earl of Lancaster granted, That he
would make Releases and Acquittances to all those that on behalf of the King should demand them, of Trespasses done to his Person, as soon as the things aforesaid should be Confirmed; nor that he would bring Suit of Felony against any one, from the time they had his Letters, saving to him all Plaints, Actions, and Suits, which he had against the Earl of Warren, and all those that were assenting and aiding to the Felonies and Trespasses which the Earl had committed against him, against the King's Peace. And that the Ordinances be kept and ob∣served,  as they are under the King's Great Seal. And that these things abovesaid should be performed, and kept in all Points. The Honour∣able Fathers in God the Arch-Bishops of Canterbury and Dublin, the Bishops of Norwich, Ely, Chichester, Salisbury, Chester or Litchfield, Hereford, and Worcester, the Earls Marshal, Ed∣mond his Brother, the Earls of Richmond, Hereford, Ulster, A∣rondel and Anegos, Sir Roger de Mortimer, Sir John de Somery, Sir John de Hastings, Sir John de Segrave, Sir Henry de Beau∣mont,  Sir Hugh le Dispenser le fuiz, Sir John de Grey, Sir Ri∣chard de Grey, Sir Bartholomew de Badlesmere, Sir Robert de Mohant, Sir Ralph Bassel, Sir Walter de Norwich, have under∣taken by the Will and Assent of the King. In Witness whereof the Prelates, Earls, and Barons aforesaid, have put their Seals to one part of this Indenture, and the Earl of Lancaster hath put his Seal to the other; Written at Leek (whether in Staffordshire, Warwick∣shire, or Yorkshire, it appears not) the 9th day of August, in the  A. D. 1319. 12th of King Edward. After this Indenture, in the same Re∣cord, we have an Account what was done in the succeeding Par∣lement concerning the Contents of it. And now at the Ibm. beginning of this Parlement Rot. Claus. 12 Edw. II. M. 28. in sce∣dula. The Request of the Pre∣lates, Earls, and Barons, made to the King in Par∣lement. sum∣moned on the 25th of August to meet at York three weeks after Michaelmas, this Indenture was read, in the presence of all assem∣bled in the Parlement, and all things in it diligently considered,  the Prelates, Earls, and Barons agreed to Pray and Request the King for the Honour of himself, and the Profit of him and the Realm, That for the great Business that concern him, and do hap∣pen from day to day, he would please to assent, That Two Bishops, One Earl, One Baron, and One Baron or Baneret, of the Family of the Earl of Lancaster, in his Name, and for him, should be present and remain with him by Quarters of the year, to De∣liberateThe Parle∣ment is for Proceeding according to the Indenture. with, and Advise him in due manner, and that they  might Deliberate and Advise about all considerable Matters out of Parlement, until a Parlement should otherwise Determine con∣cerning them; and so as nothing of these things should be De∣bated without the Counsel and Assent of the Prelates, Earls, and others which remained with the King according to the Form of the said Indenture; and if any thing was done otherwise, it should be void, according to the same Indenture. The King understanding this Request, and desiring to be Ad∣vised,  by all ways which may or ought to make for the Ho∣nourThe King al∣loweth it. and Profit of him and his Realm, and considering that when he received the Government, he found Scotland in War against him, and since that there hath been War in Ireland, and many other Disturbances have happened in his Dominions, for which
he thought it necessary to have with him the greatest and most sufficient Advice, he did agree, and willed to have Prelates, Earls, and Barons, to advise him in the Form aforesaid; and so as his Ministers should always perform their Offices, according to the Law and Usage of the Kingdom. And whereas it was contained in the Indenture, That the Pre∣lates, Earls, and Barons there named, had undertaken, by the  Assent of the King, That he should make, to the Earl of Lan∣caster, his People or Party and Followers, Releases and Acquit∣tances of all manner of Felonies, and Trespasses against his Peace, until the day of St. James this year, and that the Charters of Release and Acquittances should be absolute, without Condition, and if better Security could be found for them in the next Par∣lement, they should have it, and also confirmed by the King and his Baronage. The King by Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Como∣naltyHe Pardons the Earl of Lancaster, &c. of his Realm in his said Parlement, granted Pardon to the Earl of Lancaster, and his Followers, of the Suit of his Peace, and whatever belonged to him by reason thereof, of all manner of Felonies, and Trespasses committed against the Peace unto the 7th day of August last past, and Pardon of Outlawry to those that should demand it, if any had been pronounced against them,  before the making of their Charters; And Commanded the Bishop of Ely, then his Chancellor, That he should make Char∣ters under his great Seal absolute, and without Condition, for for the Earl of Lancaster, and such as he should by his Letters Name to the Chancellor. Also, whereas in the same Indenture it was contained, That theAnd granted the Ordi∣nances should be kept. Ordinances should be Holden and Kept as they had passed the  Great Seal, the King Willed and Granted, that they should be so kept, and that all these things should be written upon the Parle∣ment Roll, and sent to the Chancery to be inrolled there, and from thence to both Benches to be inrolled there. By the Claus. 15 Edw. II. M. 14. Dors. in cedula. Hugh Despenser the Son, the King's Cham∣berlain. Award against the Despensers it appears, that Hugh the Son, was named and agreed to be the King's Chamberlain in this Parlement; De la Moor says, in the same year, (i. e. 12th of  Edw. II.) he was made Chamberlain by the Consent of the Pre∣lates, and others, because they knew the King hated him, yet he by Prudence and Obsequiousness, soon changed his mind, and obtained his Affection, when they prosecuted him with the great∣est Hatred. F. 594. lin. 5. Anno igitur sequenti, Praelatorum consensu & alio∣rum quorundam Hugo Despenser filius constitutus est Regis Camerarius, quem eo libentius in hunc locum promoverunt, quia eum Regi ExosumThe Cha∣racter of the Spenser's, Fa∣ther and Son. Cognoverunt. At vero is prudentia & obsequio, haud multo post di∣rempto  Regis animo, eum in sui amorem facile Commutavit, unde & illi odio eum vel maximo prosecuti sunt. Then Ibm. and n. 10. speaking of his Father, he Reports him to be a Person of great Integrity, Wise in Counsel, Stout in Arms, whose Confusion and Ignominious End was caused by his Inordinate Love towards his Son, a Per∣son of a Brave Presence, Proud Spirit, and Wicked Life, causing
by his Ambition and Covetousness, Widows and Orphans to be Disinherited, and Noblemen to be put to Death, by which he hastened his own, and his Father's Destruction. These are the short Characters given of both the Dispensers, by this Historian, and a brief Account how the Son came to be Chamberlain. In the year following, I have not read or seen any thing worth noting. In the 14th of this King, William de Braiosa, a Baron in the  Walsingh. Hist. f. 113. n. 20. The reason of the Discon∣tent of some Barons. Marches of Wales, and a Spend-thrift, who propounded to sell part of his Estate called Gowerland, that descended to him by In∣heritance, to several Lords; The Earl of Ibm. Hereford, because it was nigh his Lands, agreed with him for it; The Two Roger Ib. n. 30. Mortimers, because it lay near their Lands, thought it conve∣nient for them, and knowing nothing of his former Bargain, agreed with him also for the Land; The Lord John Ibm. Mowbray,  who had Married his only Daughter and Heir, thought himself sure of it by Inheritance. Ib. n. 40. This Land held of the King in Capite, and could not be sold without the King's License, and lying on every side next the Lands of Hugh Despenser the Son, then his Chamberlain, he obtained Leave of the King to Pur∣chase it; and then bought it of the Owner. Ib. n. 40, 50. A Confedera∣cy between the Earl of Lancaster, and a great num∣ber of Barons against the Despensers. See the Revo∣cation and Adnullation of the Process and Award against the Two Spencers, here follow∣ing. The Barons Kill and Im∣prison the Te∣nants and Ser∣vants of the Spensers. This so pro∣voked these Barons, and especially the Earl of Hereford, that he Complained of the Injury done him to Thomas Earl of Lancaster;  and they Two drawing a great number of the Barons to them, made a Confederacy to live and dye for Justice, and destroy Traytors, and especially both the Hugh Despensers, Father and Son. In pursuance of this Confederacy, the Earl of Hereford, the Barons there named, Monsieur Roger de Mortimer, the Nephew and the Uncle, Monsieur Roger Damory, Monsieur John de Mow∣bray, Monsieur Hugh de Audeley, the Father and the Son, Monsieur  Roger de Clifford, Monsieur John Giffard de Brimmesfield, Mon∣sieur Morice de Berkeley, Monsieur Hen. de Tyes, Monsieur John Maltravers, and many others of that Alliance, on the Feast of the Invention of Holy Cross, or 3d of May, entred into the Lands of Hugh the Younger in Wales (while he was with the King doing his Office as Chamberlain) by Force and Arms, and killed Ibm. They burn, pulldown, and destroy their Houses and Castles. some of his Servants and Tenants, others they kept in Prison, and some they suffered to be Ransomed; burnt, pulled  down, destroyed, or defaced all his Houses, and Castles, and took and carried away the Goods of all sorts which they found upon his Lands, or in his Houses and Castles, to a very great value. Ibm. They carry away their Goods of all sorts. From hence they rambled up and down the Coun∣try, and went into Glocestershire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, and all Counties, where Hugh the Father had Lands, and begun their Work on Barnaby-day, or 11th of June, at his Mannor of Fa∣stern in Wiltshire, and in all his Lands, Houses, and Castles, and  in all things behaved themselves as they had done in those of the Son. When they had done these Mischiefs, they marched to Sher∣bornAnd enter into a Con∣federacy. in Dorsetshire, where was at that time Thomas Earl of Lan∣caster, whose the Castle was, and others, and on Sunday after
Midsummer-day they entred into a new, or confirmed the old Confederacy. The Confederacy of the Earls and Barons against Hugh andA. D. 1320. Hugh le Despenser. This Indenture Witnesseth, That on the Sunday next after the FeastFrom the French Copy in the Regi∣ster of Christ-Church, Canter∣bury, f. 242. of St. John Baptist, in the 14th Year of the King at Sherborn in  Elemede, in the presence of the Arch-Biship of York, the Bishops of Durham and Carlisle, the Earls of Lancaster and Aenegos, it was considered, That Hugh le Despenser, the Father and the Son, had ill counselled and moved the King, to the Dishonour and Damage of him and of his Kingdom; and having heard and understood the Reasons of the Earl of Hereford, Roger de Mortimer the Nephew and Ʋnkle,Note, That the Addition of Monfieur is put before every of these Names. Hugh de Audely the Father and Son, Roger Dammory, John de Mowbray, Maurice de Berkeley, Roger de Clifford, Henry de  Teys, John Giffard, Thomas Mauduit, Gilbert Talbot, and other Great Men, and others of the Marches (i. e. of Wales) And notice of Information having been given to the Earls of Lancaster and Aene∣gos, Monsieur Robert de Holland, Fonk de Estrange, Stephen deHere also the same Additi∣on is put be∣fore every of their Names in the French Copy. Segrave, William le Latimer, John Devery, John de Harring∣ton, Adam de Swimnington, William de Kyme, Marmaduke de Tweng, Richard Walleys, Robert Pierpount, Ranulph Dacre, Ed∣mund Deyncourt, Thomas Willeby, William de Penington,  Ralph de Nevill, Giles de Trumpyton, John de Beker, Adam de Hodeleston, Michael de Haverington, Adam de Everingham, William Trussel, Robert de Rigate, Robert de Richer, John de Clifford, Henry de Bradbourn, Nicholas de Langeford, John de Brekeworth, Thomas Wycher, John de Cliff, Thomas de Lon∣guevillers, Edmund de Nevill, Gaslelin Daniel: That the Earl of Hereford, Monsieur Roger de Mortimer, and other Great Men of the Marches, and others above-named, have begun Quarrels and Com∣plaints  against Monsieur Hugh the Father and Son; and that 'tis done to the Honour of God, the Honour and Profit of the King and of his Kingdom. And it seemed to them all, that the Oppressions could not be taken off from the People, until they had Hugh the Father and Son in their possession, or they were banished: And it was with one Assent of them all there, whoever they were, That the Quarrels or Complaints before named, should be maintained to the Honour of God and of Holy Church, to the Profit of the King, the Queen, and their Children, and  the Safety of the Crown and People. And so as the Earl of Lancaster and other Great Men which began this Quarrel will maintain it, so the Earl of Aenegos, and all named after him, with them will maintain it with all their Power. And whenever the Earl of Lancaster and other Great Men shall leave the Quarrel, the Earl of Aenegos, and all those named after him, may leave it, without being accused or questioned for it. And to maintain these things, the Earls of Aenegos and all others after him, put to their Seals. This was the part of the Indenture  Agreed and Sealed to by the Earl of Aenegos. From whence they march to St. Albans, plundering Victuals[8] Wals. Hist. f. 114. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. every where in their March, and oppressing the Poor. [5] Per viam diripientes ubique Victualia & Pauperes Terrae Gravantes; from whence they sent the Bishops of London, Salisbury, Ely, Hereford,
and Chichester (then at St. Albans to make Peace) to the King atThe Barons come to St. Al∣bans, and send 5 Bishops to the King to Banish the a Spensers. The King's Answer to the Bishops. London; not only to send Hugh and Hugh the Two Traytors from his Court, but also out of the Kingdom. The King's Answer was, That Hugh the Father was beyond Sea in his Service, and Hugh the Son was at Sea for the Guarding of the Cinque-Ports according to his Duty; and that according to Right and Custom, they ought not to be Banished without answering for themselves. The King had Rot. Claus. M. 5. Dors. 14. Ed. II. He summons a Parlement. The Barons came to Lon∣don with Horse and Arms; And keep a Council by themselves, & come not to the Parlement at Westminster. And then made the A∣ward against the Despensers, as appears by the Revocati∣on, as above. The Award made by the Barons against the Spensers. fummoned a Parlement on the 15th of May,  to meet three Weeks after Midsummer, or the 15th of July, at Westminster. The Barons, upon the receipt of the King's Answer, go to London with Horse and Arms, notwithstanding the King had commanded them to come to the Parlement in due manner; there they held a Council by themselves, and came not to West∣minster as they were summoned, but remained in London with Horse and Arms 15 days after the King had begun and holden  his Parlement, when they made the Award against the Two Spencers, and concealed it from the King, who knew nothing of it, until the Hour they came with it to Westminster with Force and Arms, so as the King could not hinder the passing of it, which was to this effect: To the Honour of God and Holy Church, and of our Lord the King, for the Profit of him and his Realm, and to main∣tain  Peace amongst his People and the Estate of the Crown, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Peers of the Land and Communes of the Realm, do shew against Sir Hugh le Despenser, Father and Son, That whereas Sir Hugh the Son at the Parlement at York 3 Weeks after Michael∣mas. Claus. 12 Ed. II. M. 28. in ce∣dula. was Named, and it was there Agreed he should be Chamberlain to the King; in which Parlement it was Agreed, That certain Prelates and other Great Men should be with the King by turns, at several Seasons of the Year, the better to ad∣vise  him, without whom no great Business ought to pass. The said Sir Hugh the Son, drawing to him his Father, who was not by Order of Parlement to be near the King, or to be one of those Counsellors, between them both have usurped Royal Power over the King and his Ministers, and the Government of the Kingdom, to the Dishonour of the King, the Injury of the Crown, and Destruction of the Kingdom, Great Men, and People; and have done the Wickednesses under-written, in  contriving to turn the Heart of the King from the Peers of the Land, that they may have the sole Government there∣of. 1. That Sir Hugh the Son made a Bill or Writing, whereby he would have had Sir John Gifford of Brimmesfield, Sir Richard de Greye, and others, entred into a Confederacy to have forced the King to do what he would have him; and had almost done  it. The Tenour of the Bill is under written. 2. Homage and the Oath of Allegiance is more by reason of the Crown than of the Person of the King, and bound him more to the Crown than the Person; and this appeared, for that before the Crown descends, there is is no Allegiance due
to the Person Expectant. Wherefore in case the King carries not himself by Reason, in Right of the Crown, his Lieges are bound by Oath made to the Crown to remove the King and the State of the Crown by Reason; and otherwise the Oath ought not to be kept. Then it was demanded, whether the King was to be dealt with by Suit of Law, or by Rigour (par Suit de Loy ou par Aspertee;) By Suit of Law it could not be, for he had no Judge. In which case, if the King's will be not according to  Reason, and that he maintains nothing but Errour; therefore to save their Oath, and when the King will not redress what is injurious to the People, they must proceed with Rigour; for he is bound by Oath to Govern his Lieges, and his Lieges are bound to Govern in Aid of him, and in Default of him. 3. Also upon the Application of the Great Men and People  unto him, his Answer was according to the Pleasure of these Two, in turning the King from his Duty against his Oath, and the Hearts of the Great Men and People against their Liege Lord. 4. Also by their evil Contrivance, they will not suffer the Great Men of the Realm nor Good Counsellers to speak with, or come near the King to advise him, nor the King to speak  to them, unless in their presence and hearing, or of one of them, and when they please; they usurping Royal Power and Sovereignty over the Person of the King, to the great Disho∣nour and Peril of him, the Crown, and the Kingdom. 5. Also to attain to their Wickedness, Covetousness, and Disinheriting the Great Men, and Destruction of the People, they put out Good and Agreeable Ministers placed by Assent,  and put in others False and Wicked of their Party, who will not suffer Right to be done as Sheriffs, Escheators, Constables of Castles, and make Justices not understanding the Law, as Sir Hugh the Father, Sir Ralph Basset, Sir Ralph Camois, and Sir John Inge, and others their Friends; who caused to be in∣dicted, by false Jurors of their Alliance, the Peers of the Land, as the Earl of Hereford, Monsieur Giffard of Brimmesfield, and Monsieur Robert de Monshall, and other good People, to get their  Lands. 6. Also they falsly and maliciously advised the King to raise Arms against his People in Glocestershire, contrary to the Great Charter, and the Award of the Peers of the Land, and by their false and evil Counsel, would have made War in the Land for their own proper Quarrel, to the Destruction of Holy Church and the People. 7. Also whereas the Earl of Hereford, and the Lord of Wigmore (i. e. Mortimer) by the King's Command were assigned to make War upon Lheuelin Bren, who had levied War against him in Glamorganshire, when the Earl of Glocester's Lands, by reason of his Death, were in the King's hand; and Lhewelin had rendred
himself into the Lords hands to the King's Grace and Pleasure, and upon that Condition delivered him to the King, who re∣ceived him accordingly; but when these Lords were out of the Country, these Two, the Father and Son, usurping Royal Power, took Lhewelin, and carried him to Cardiff, after that Sir Hugh the Younger was seized thereof (as of his Share of the Earl of Glocester's Estate, one of whose Daughters and Heirs he had married) pretending to a Jurisdiction, where none was  in this case; and there caused him to be Drawn, Hanged, Be∣headed, and Quartered, feloniously for things done in the time of King Henry: And also took upon them Royal Power and Jurisdiction, which was appendant to the Crown, in Dis∣heritance of the Crown, and Dishonour of the King, the said Lords of Hereford and Mortimer, and in ill Example and great Peril in the like case in time to come. 8. Also they ill advised the King to take into his hands the  Lands and Goods of Sir Hugh Audely the Son, who was fore∣judged without due Process, contrary to the Law of the Land, by the Covetousness of the said Hugh to get some of those Lands; and by other false Compassments contrived to have the Lands of Sir Roger Dammory, and for having him attainted for en∣tring into Glocestershire, in Disheritance of the Peers of the Land. 9. Also that whereas the King had granted by his Letters Patents to the Earl of Warwick in full Parlement at Westminster, That after his Death his Executors should have his Lands until his Heir was of Age; which Grant, after the Earl's Death, was confirmed by the King at Lincoln, at the Request and Assent of the Peers of the Land in Parlement, the said Sir Hugh the Father procu∣red his Son to cause the King to repeal this Grant without cause,  and to give to the said Hugh the Father, for his own Profit, the Guard of those Lands; and also had defeated by evil Counsel what the King had granted in his Parlements by good Advice, and by Assent of the Peers of the Land, to the Dishonour of the King, and against Right and Reason. 10. Also, that they would not suffer the King to take reaso∣nable Fines of the Peers of the Land and others, when they en∣tred  and received their Fees, as it had been used before that time: But by Covetousness, to get such Lands by the Royal Power they had gained, they caused undue Impeachments to be brought, surmising the Land was forfeit, as of Sir John de Mow∣bray for the Lands of Gower, and of others, to the Damage and Dishonour of the King, and contrary to the Law of the Land, in Disheritance of the Great Men and others. Also making the King do against his Oath in Parlement. 11. Also by wicked Covetousness and Power Royal they will not suffer the King to hear or do Right to the Great Men, upon what they presented to him, for himself and themselves touch∣ing the Disheriting the Crown and them touching the Lands which were the Templers. Also by Usurped Power Royal they
self and Family; He is denied Entrance, with a Ibm. f. 115. lin. 2. &c. The Queen denied En∣trance into Leds Castle in Kent. The Garrison deny to ren∣der it to the K. Sawey Re∣turn from the Guard within, That they would not suffer the Queen, or any other, to enter there, without Command or Letters from the Lord of it. She came her self, and demanded Entrance into the Castle, and was denied, and forced to seek Lodgings other where. When she returned to the King, and complained to him of the Affront offered to her, he was very Angry, and having drawn together many Thousands of Armed Men, with many Londoners, [6]  [6] Ibm. n. 10. came Personally to the Castle, commanding the Garrison to ren∣der it to him; They Refuse to obey the King's Command, he straightly Besieges them; They hold out so long as they had Vi∣ctuals,He besiegeth and takes it, puts the Go∣vernor to Death, and many of the Warders. and when they could not longer hold out they deliver the Castle. Thomas Colepepper the Governor of it, was Drawn and Hang'd for his Rebellion against the King, (Thomas Colepeper custos castri, qui tenuerat Castrum contra Regem, tractus & suspensus est.) The Women found there were sent to the Tower of London, and  many of the Warders or Servants put to Death. Sir Thomas de la Moor tells us, it was about F. 595. n. 30, 40. A. D. 1321. 15 Ed. II. The Barons came to Re∣lieve the Ca∣stle. And sent to the King to raise the Siege, who would not. They march into other Parts of the Kingdom with their Army. Michaelmas, that the Queen demanded Entrance into the Castle, that she might Lodge there, and after a Months Siege, the Barons with their Forces came to Kingston upon Thames, on the Vigil of the Apostles Si∣mon and Jude, or 27th of October, in hopes to Relieve it, from whence they sent the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London,  and Earl of Pembroke, to the King to raise the Siege; promising him after the next Parliament, to deliver the Castle into his Hands, He not granting their Desires, they marched into other Parts of the Kingdom, and the Castle in a very short time was Surren∣der'd. In December following, Hugh Dispenser the Younger, Revoca∣tion, ut supra. Sir Thomas de la Moor, ut supra n. 50. The Banish∣ment of the Spensers re∣vok'd. appli∣ed himself to the King for the Repeal of his Exile, who com∣mitted  him to Prison, and sent his Petition to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the other Bishops and Clergy, being then in a Provincial Synod at London, to advise about, and give him their Sense upon it, who Judged the Award, as to the Exile and Disinheritance, Er∣roneous, against Right, and obtain'd by Force, without their Consent, as Peers of the Land, and therefore advised, and prayed the King to Repeal, and make it null for Ever; which was done, and the King granted him his Protection and safe Conduct, for  his Person and Estate, by his Letters Patents, Dated at Westmin∣ster, the 8th of December in the 15th of his Reign. The King kept his Christmas Walsingh. Hypdig. Neust. f. 504. n. 40. De la Moor, ut supra. A. D. 1322. 15 Ed. II. The King in∣creased his Army, and marched a∣gainst the Ba∣rons. at Cirencester in Glocestershire, where Hugh Despenser, and others persuaded him to increase his Army, and march against the Barons; He did so, and went into the Marches of Wales, and left Glocester, which was possessed by the Barons, and passing by Worcester, went to Bridgnorth, and took  in that Castle; while he was in Shropshire both the Mortimers sub∣mitted themselves, and were sent to the Tower of London. Mau∣rice de Berkeley, and Hugh Audeley, Senior, fell into the King's Hands, and were sent to Wallingford-Castle▪ Ibm. The Earls of Hereford and Lancaster join their Forces. The Earl of He∣reford and his Adherents marched toward the North, to join the Earl of Lancaster who expected them. The King marched after
them, and comes to Burton upon Trent, where the Earl of Lan∣caster had joined them; They hinder the King's Passage over the Trent by the Bridge there three Days, and Killed some of the King's Men and Servants, so as the King was forced to find ano∣ther way over the Trent, and marched toward them in the Town, which when they saw, they Fired the Town, and marched into the Field, to give the King Battel; but perceiving the King coming toward them, with a great Force, superior to them in  Number and Courage, the Earl of Lancaster with his Confederates fled Northward with their Army, and made Great Depraedations and Robberies in their way; the King pursues them to Burgh-Bridge,The Scots Friends and Allies to the Earls. The Earl of Hereford killed at Borough-Bridge. The Earl of Lancaster ta∣ken there. then marching toward their Friends and Allies the Scots; where they were stopt, by Forces brought from Carlisle by Sir An∣drew Harclay, and others from York by Sir Simon Ward; in for∣cing his Way over the Bridge, the Earl of Hereford was Killed, the Earl of Lancaster not being able to bear the shock of the Bat∣tel,  nor to fly any way, was taken by Sir Andrew Harclay, and many other Barons, Banerets, and Knights, to the Number of [2] Ninety Five.[2] De la Moor, f. 596. n. 10. The Earl of Lancaster was sent to Pontfract, where on MondayOur Lady-day this Year 1322. was on Thursday. The Earl of Lancaster im∣peached of Treason, &c. before the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, or 22d of March, he was impeached before the King for divers Treasons, Murders, Burn∣ings, Depraedations, and other Felonies, in the Presence of Edmond  Earl of Kent, John Earl of Richmond, Adomar de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, John de Warenna Earl of Surrey, Edmund Earl of Arun∣del, David Earl of Athol, Robert Earl of Anegos, and other great Men of the Kingdom, by whom he was adjudged to be Drawn,Adjudged to be Drawn, Hang'd, and Beheaded. Hang'd, and Beheaded, which then were accounted three distinct Punishments. Two whereof for the Greatness of his Bloud and Family the King pardoned, so as he was only Beheaded. This Impeachment and Judgment was Recorded in Chancery, in the 15th  of this King, under the Title of Pleas of the Crown, and was brought into the first Parlement of Edward III. at Westminster, by Henry Earl of Lancaster his Brother, for the Revocation thereof, in which Revocation that whole Record is recited, and many ofThe Confede∣racy of the E. of Lancaster, &c. with Ro∣bers Brus King of Scots, &c. the Practices, of Earl Thomas, the Confederacy between him, the Earl of Hereford, and their Adherents, with Robert Brus, Thomas Randolph Earl of Murray, and James Douglas, Two of the greatest Managers of the Scots Affairs at that time, and others, concerning  mutual Assistance and Defence, and the Ingratitude of this great Earl toward the King, are declared▪ for which Revocation see the Appendix, N. 62.N. 62. By the same Judgment, and for the same Crimes suffered these Barons, Walsing. History, f. 116 n. 30, 40, 50. The Barons that suffered for the same Crimes with the Earl of Lancaster. Warin Lisle, William Toket, Thomas Manduit, Henry de Bradborn, William Fitz-William, William Cheyny, Roger Clifford, John de Mowbray, Gocelin D'enynvill, Henry Teyes, and Bartholomew  de Badlesemer who was beheaded at Canterbury, only Roger de Damory, died of his Natural Death. The Prior and Monks of Pontfract obtained the Body of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and Buried it in their Church, on the Right Hand of the High Altar, whither came a great number of People,
Pilgrims, and Others, to Offer and Pray at his Tomb, really be∣lieving the Miracles, and great Cures of Diseases that were reported to be done by him, a Specimen whereof I shall give the Reader from an English Chronicle in Corpus Christi College Library in Cam∣bridge,Litera F. Vol. 63. Book 7. Capitulo 201. in the Sense and Language of those Times, it was wrote in. Of the Miracles that GOD worughte (wrought)  The Miracles said to be done by the Earl of Lan∣caster. for Seint Thomas of Lancaster, wherefore the King lete close (caused them to be shut) the Church Dores of Pountfret of the Prioree, for (that) no Man shall come therein to the Body for to Offren. And soon after that the Good Erl Thomas of Lancaster was Mar∣tered, a Preste that had long tyme ben blyende Dremed in his  slepyng, That he shuld gou unto the Hull (Hill) there that the Good Erl Thomas of Lancaster was done unto Deth, and he shuld have his sighte agen, and so he Dremed iij Nightis seuying, (three Nights following) and the Preste, tho (then) let lese him to the same Hulle, and when he come to that Place, that (where) he was Martered on, devoutly he made there his Prayers, and prayed God and Sent Thomas he moste (might) have his sight agen, and as he was at Prayers he layde his right Hond oppon the same  A Blind Priest restored to his Sight. Place that the good Man was Martered, and a Drop of dry Blode and small Sonde cleved on his Honde, and therewith he Strekede his Een, (Eyes) and non thorug might of God and of Sent Thomas of Lancaster, he had his Sighte agen, and thanked the Almigte God and Sent Thomas, and whenne this Meracle was Cud (known) amonge Men, the People come there in every side and knelede and made hire (their) Prayers at his Tombe, that is in the Priorye of Pountfret; and prayed that Holy Marter of Socor and of Helpe,  and God herde hire Prayer. Also there was a young Child Drenchede (Drowned) in aA Dead Child restored to Life. Well in the Town of Pountfret, and was ded iij Days and iij Nigtis, and comen and layde the ded Child upon Sent Thomas Tomb the Holy Marter, and the Child aros there from Deth to Live, as menye a Man hit saw. And also much People were out of hire Mynde, (out of their  Men out of their Wits re∣stored to them. Wits) and God hathe sent ham (them) hire Mynde agen, tho∣rug Virtu of that Holy Marter. And also God hath given thereto Criples hire goyinge (Going)Cripples, Crooked, Blind, and Sick Cured and Healed. and to Croked hire Honds, and hire Feet, and to Blyende also hire Sighte, and to menye Sike (Sick) Folk hire hele (health) that had diverse Maladies, for the love of his good Marter. Also there was a Riche Man in Coundom in Gascoigne, and suchA Man whose Flesh roted from his Side and stank, ced, and his Flesh restored. a Maladie he had that as his right side rotede, and fell away fram him, and Men migt se his Livere, and also his Hert, and so he stank that onney (no) Men migt come neyre him, wherefore his Friendes were for him Wonder sorye; but at last as God wolde,
they prayed to Sente Thomas of Lancaster, that he wolde pray to al∣migte God for that Personne, and behighte (thought) to gon to Pountfret for to done hire Pilgrimage, and the Good Man soon after slepte full softe, and Dremed that the Marter Sent Thomas come unto him, and anoyntede over all his seke Body, and there∣with the Good Man awoke and was alle hole, and his Flesh was Restored agen, that byfore was Rotede and falle awaye, for which Miracle the Good Man, and alle his Frendes lovede God and Sente  Thomas ever more after. And also two Men have been helede there of the MorivaileTwo Men cured of the Plague. (Murrain or Plague) thorug help of that Holy Marter, thoug that Evele be hold incurable. Whenne the Spensers herde that God dede such Miraclis for his HolyThe Spensers affirmed it Heresie to be∣lieve these Miracles. Marter, and they wold beleve hit in no manere wyse, but seyde  opyinlicke, That hit was great Eresie, such Vertu of him to be∣leve. And whenne Sir Hugh the Spenser the Son saw alle this Doying,Spenser the Son's Messen∣ger to the K. shed his Bow∣els at his Fun∣dament. (Doing) anon he send his Messanger fram Pountfret, That (where) he Dwelled, to the King Edward, that tho was at Graven at Skip∣tone, (at Skipton upon Craven) for cause that the King shulde un∣done the Pilgrimage. And as the Reband (Ribald) that was  Messenger wente toward for to done this Message, he come by the Hulle that this Good Man was done unto his Deth, and in the same Place he made his Ordure, (Eased himself) and when he had ydone he went toward the King, and stronge flexe (Flux) come oppon him er he come to York, and shedde all his Bowels at his Fundament: So in the Author. And when Sire Hugh the Spenser herd this Tyding som Del he  was adrad (he was somewhat fearful) and thought to undo the Pilgrimage, yf he migt be enye manere way, and to the King went and said, that they shulde ben in grete Slander thorugout all Christendome for the Deth of Thomas of Lancaster, yf that he suffred the People done hire Pilgrimage at Pountfret, and so heThe Church Doors shut where the E of Lancaster was buried, to hinder Pil∣grimes to ho∣nor his Body. Counceiled the King that he commanded to close the Chirche Dores of Pountfret, in the wch Chyrche the Holy Marter Sent Tho∣mas was Entered, (Interred) And thus they deden al Froncheyse  of Holy Chirche, so that foure yere after migte no Pilgrimage come unto that Holy Body. And for Encheson (because) that the Monks suffred Men and Women to honor that holy Body of Sent Thomas the Marter thorug counceile of Sir Hugh the Spenser the Sone, and thorug counceile also of Master Roberd Baldok the false pelede (pilled) Clerke, that was the Kings Chancelere the King concende (consented) that they shulde be That is to live upon their own Sti∣pend, Salaries and Income, and not to re∣ceive any Of∣ferings or Cis, &c. sette to here Wages, and lete make Wardeyns over her own good longe tyme, (and  sent a Guard upon them) and thorug comandment of the fore∣saide Sire Hughe the Spenser▪ fourteen Gascoignes well armed kept the Hulle When the People were shut out of the Friars Church, and a Guard set upon the Tomb, they went to the Hill where he was put to Death, and offered there. there that the Good Man Sent Thomas was done to Deth,
and biheveded, (beheaded) so that no Pilgrime migte come by that way; fulwel wende he (thought he) to haf by nome (taken away) Christis migte and his power, and the grete loose (many) Meraclis that he shewed for his Marter Thomas thorug all Cristen∣dome. And it was not at Pontfract only, that the People were af∣fected and possessed with the Saintship and Miracles of this Earl,  but in the Church of St. Paul's also in London they did the same things, which caused the King to write Append. n. 63. The Earl of Lancaster wor∣shipped in St. Paul's, London. to the Bishop and the Dean and Chapter, That he took it ill, that many of the People of God committed to their Charge, deceived by a Dia∣bolical Cheat, foolishly coming to a Table in their Church, in which the Images of divers, and amongst the rest the Effigies of Thomas late Earl of Lancaster his Enemy and Rebel, was Painted and Worshipped, and Adored as a Holy Thing, affirming Mi∣racles  The King writes to the Bishop of London, the Dean and Chapter, to hinder it. to be done there, to the Discredit of the whole Church, to the Disgrace of him and them, the manifest Danger of the People aforesaid, and pernicious Example of others; And that they knowing these Abuses, by connivance had permitted them to be done, yea, rather for Gain, and filthy Lucre sake, they had Dis∣sembled in this Matter, therefore he Commanded, and firmly In∣joined them, considering the Premisses, and that taking notice the Church was of his Patronage, and that the Bishop was by  reason of Fealty sworn to him, to preserve his Honour, and to prevent his Disgrace, to forbid the People to come to the Table, to make Prayers and Oblations, or other things tending to Divine Worship, without the Authority of the Roman Church, as they ought by the Duty of their Offices, and knew belonged to them by Canonical Sanction. Witness the King at York the 28th of June, in the 16th of his Reign. But within a month after the King was Dethroned, and his  Son at Fourteen years of Age placed in the Throne, the Pious Lady, his Queen, in her Son's Name, (for what Reasons may easily be guessed) Append. n. 64. The Queen extolling the Earl of Lan∣caster's stout Behaviour for Holy Church, and his Mi∣racles, writes to the Pope to Saint him. wrote to the Pope, extolling his glorious Virtues, and declaring what a Stout Champion he had been for the Liberty of Holy Church, and the Laws of the Land, and also how many Miracles had been wrought, and People healed, by Pious invocation upon him, and infinite Remedies granted to the great  number of those that resorted to his Tomb, desiring Process might be made for Sainting of him; Dated at London the last day of Fe∣bruary, in the First year of the Reign of Edward III. Her Mes∣sengers for Transacting this Affair, who went with this Letter, were Walter Burle Professor of Divinity, William Trussell Kt. and Mr. John Thoresby Clerk. And she thought it not enough to have the Pupil Sainted, but  would have the Tutor also He was made Arch-Bishop 23d of Ed. I. A. D. 1294. and died the 12th of May, 6 Ed. II. 1313. She also writes to the Pope to Saint Robert Winchel∣sey, Arch Bi∣shop of Can∣terbury, and the Instructer of Lancaster. Robert Winchelsey, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, inserted into the same Catalogue of Saints, and to that purpose wrote again to the Pope, in her Son's Name, about Eight days after, That he shined in Miracles, and had restored Health to innumerable Sick People, humbly and devoutly beseech∣ing his Holiness, [6] that he would vouchsafe to insert into the[6] Append. n. 65.
venerable Catalogue of Saints so Pretious a Stone, rejected of Men, but Chosen of God; Dated at Westminster the 8th day of March, in the First of Edward III. Toward the end of that month Walter Reynold, then Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops of his Province, Hist. sacra. Vol. 1. f. 173. The Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, Walter Raynold, and the Bishops of his Province, write to the Pope to the same purpose. wrote to the Pope, moved by the Example of Thomas Earl of Lancaster of famous Memory, who had wrote to him before upon the same  Subject, representing his Life to him, and what he had suffered and done for the Rights and Liberties of the Church, and sending him a few Miracles amongst innumerable others, that God had wrought for him, and upon Bended Knees humbly Supplicated his Holiness, that upon their Information he would Estimate, Diffine, Order, and Command what was further to be done in that Case, for the Honour and Glory of the Divine Name, and the wished for Exaltation of Catholick Faith. I find not that  either of these Men were actually Sainted, and it may be sup∣posed, the Pope considering how they had behaved themselves, could not think it fit, and void of Scandal, to Estimate, Diffine, Order, and Command their Saintships. Nor was it the Sense of all Men in those times, that the Earl of Lancaster deserved it, as it is Reported by Lib. 7. Cap. 42. Ranulph Hig∣den's Report of the Earl of Lancaster. Ranulph Hig∣den, the Monk of Chester, who lived at the time. De cujus iri  meritis (saith the Monk) an inter sanctos sit annumerandus, crebra in vulgo Disceptatio est, &c. of which Man's Merits, (speaking of of this Earl) there was much Dispute amongst the Vulgar, whe∣ther he was to be numbred among the Saints, some asserting heHis seeming Virtues. ought, for that he gave much in Alms, honoured the Religious, and contended to Death, as it seemed, (ut videbatur) in a just Quarrel. Others thought the contrary, That a Man who neglected his generousHis Crimes, and Cha∣racter. Wife, and defiled innumerable Women, (innumeras mulierculas pol∣luit;)  That put to Death such as did but lightly offend him, That che∣rished Renegado's from their Orders or Profession, and Transgressors of the Law, lest they might be punished by the Law; That committed all things to the Direction of his Secretary; That at the time of Contending to Death for the Maintaining of Justice, basely fled, ought not to be thought a Saint, especially when he was un∣willingly taken, and suffered unwillingly. But what Money might do, or the Shadow of, or counterfeit Miracles then cele∣brated  at the place where he was beheaded, what Issue they would have for the future, after Ages would see; Sed profecto oblationum dona, & miraculorum simulacra quae in loco suae decapita∣tionis in praesentiarum celebrantur, qualem in posterum habebunt exitum, secula videbunt post futura. However it was, the Queen was not only pleased to have him a Saint, but there must be a Chappel built upon Append. n. 66. The Queen, &c. contrives a Chappel to be built on the Hill and Place of Lancaster's Execution. the Hill  where he was put to Death, to which purpose there was an Ac∣cord made between the Prior and Convent, Parsons of the Church of Pontfract, and the Burgesses of the same Town, be∣fore the King, Queen, and Henry Earl of Lancaster, Brother to Thomas, That John de Ypre, an Hermit, abiding upon the Hill where the Noble Earl of Lancaster was put to Death, should
procure and increase Alms and good Deeds, to make a Chappel there; That there should be a Clerk assigned by the Queen and Earl of Lancaster, and a Monk whom the Prior should appoint, to remain there to receive and lay out what should be received at the Hill, for the Building of the Chappel; and it was also agreed there should be a Trunk provided with Three Locks and Keys, whereof the Clerk was to keep one, the Monk another, and a Burgess of the Town the third; Which Trunk for the security  of it, was to be removed every night to the Priory, and carried back to the Hill every day; To be opened once or twice a week in the presence of the Three Key Keepers, and the Money to be delivered to the Clerk to pay the Workmen, &c. The King's Confirmation of this Accord is Dated at York on the 5th of June, in the First year of his Reign. This was a fruitful Age of Miracles, for within less then Two  years after the Execution of the Earl of Lancaster, Append. n. 67. the King sent a Commission to Enquire after certain Persons, that report∣edMiracles re∣ported to be done by Two ordinary Men. These Two Persons were taken at Bo∣rough-Bridge. Miracles to have been done at the place where Henry Montfort, and Henry Wylington hung at Bristol, who were Condemned to be Drawn and Hanged by the King's Court for Rebellion, and after∣wards their Bodies to remain upon Gibbets; This Report brought much People thither, to the Disturbance of the Peace, and Alie∣nation of their Affections from the King, insomuch as by Force  and Arms they defended their Idolatrous Cheats, against such as were sent to disabuse the People, preserve the King's Honour, and keep the Peace. On the 14th of March, in the Fifteenth of his Reign, just be∣foreA. D. 1320. the Barons Army was defeated, and this Saint taken at Bo∣rough-Bridge in Yorkeshire, the King at Derby issued his Summons for a Parlement to be holden at York three weeks after Easter next  Easter-Day was April 11. this year, 1322. The Process and Award against the Spencers brought into Parlement. coming, into which Parlement upon the Petitions of Hugh De∣spencer, the Father and Son, (notwithstanding the Son's had been Reversed before, as above) was brought before the King, the Process and Award for their Disheritance and Exile, and upon shewing the Errors in them, they were both Revoked and made Null; Which Revocations, because they contain something of the History, and much of the Practice of, and Way of the Great Men's Living in those times, I have, with as much brevity as I  could, Translated from the Old French, not being any where Printed or Published that I know of. Whereas lately at our Parlement summoned at Claus. 15 Ed. II. M. 14. Dors. in cedula. This Writ dated at West∣minster, May 15. and 14th of Ed. II. A. D. 1320. The Petition of Hugh Spen∣cer the Son, to the King. Westminster to meet Three weeks after the Nativity of St. John Baptist last past, an Award was made against Sir Hugh le Despenser the Son, and Sir Hugh le Despenser the Father, by certain Great Men of the Realm, and then after the Feast of St. Andrew next following,  Hugh the Son Petitioned Us, shewing, That while he was in our Ser∣vice in the Office of Chamberlain, and so appointed in full Parlement, the Earl of Hereford, Monsieur Roger de Mortimer the Nephew, Monsieur Roger de Mortimer the Ʋncle, Monsieur Roger Damory, Monsieur John de Mowbray, Monsieur Hugh d'Audele the Father, Monsieur Hugh d'Audele the Son, Monsieur Roger de Clifford,
Monsieur John Giffard de Brimmesfield, Monsieur Maurice de Ber∣keley,A Confede∣racy against the Spencers. Monsieur Henry de Tyes, Monsieur John Maltravers, and many others, made a Confederacy by Oaths and Writing to pursue and destroy him, and upon this Agreement all the above-named, with theirMay the d. Retinues, came the Wednesday after the Feast of the * Invention of Holy Cross, in the 14th year of the King, to Newport in Wales, with Force and Arms, that is, to wit, with 800 Men at Arms, with the Banner of the King's Arms Displayed, and with 500 Hobelors,  and 10000 Foot, to enter upon all his Lands to destroy them, andThe Outra∣gious Practi∣ces against them. with the same Power and Force to besiege his Towns and Castles, and took them by force, and killed part of his People, Sir John Iwayn, Matthew de Gorges, and about 15 other Welshmen; and part they maimed, as Sir Philip Joce; and part they took and imprisoned, as Sir Ralph de Gorges, who was then in Prison, Monsieur Philip Joce, Sir John de Fresingfield, Sir John de Dunstable, William de Dunstable, and many others, which they freed upon Ransom; and  they took, carried, and drove away his Goods and Chattels found in his Towns and Castles; That is to say, 40 War Horses, and Armor for 200 Men compleatly Armed, and other Warlike Engines and Imple∣ments, and Victuals, Wheat, Wine, Honey, Salt, Flesh, Fish, and other Victuals, to the value of 2000 l. and burnt all his Charters, Re∣membrances, and Monuments they could find, to his loss 2000 l. They also burnt part of the Gates of his Castles, and Houses, and took the Irons out of the Windows, and Leads off the Houses, &c. and  carried them away, to the damage of 2000 l. and then names Ten Castles in Wales, and the Marches, which they took and destroyed; and with the same Force and Power, they stayed in his Lands totally to destroy them about 15 days, in which time they forced the greatest part of all the Country to Swear to be of their Party, and those that would not, they imprisoned, put to ransom, and burnt their Houses and Goods; and in the same time they robbed and plundered him of all the Moveables in and upon his Mannors, 60 large Working Mares  with Colts and Foals of two years, 160 Heifers, 400 Oxen, 500 Cowes with their Breed for two years, 10000 Sheep, 400 Hogs, and all other necessary things found upon them, as Carts, Ploughs, Vessels, all these they took, drove, and carried away (without leaving any thing) from his Mannors, Lands, and Towns in Wales, which were 24 in number, to his damage of 2000 l. They burnt his Granges, and destroyed his Crop upon the Ground, to his damage of 2000 l. and the Debts which were owing him there, by force and cruelty they made his  Debtors pay unto them, to the value of near 3000 l. with Fee-Farm Rents, and other Customs, which amounted to near 1000 l. And from Wales with the same Power and Force they came into England, upon his Castles, Towns and Mannors there, and cut up his Woods, Ʋnchaced his Chaces, Disparked his Parks, pulled down his Houses, robbed and rifled as much as they could any where find, to his da∣mage of 10000 l. and then seized upon his Friends, and his People, whereof some they put to ransom, some they rifled, and some they im∣prisoned,  to the great grievance of them, and then by the same Cruel∣ties and Hardships, they made the greatest part of the People against their wills, to be of their Party, and Sworn to them. And also with their Force and Power they came to the Parlement at Westminster, and there upon false Accusations, without calling the said Hugh to Answer, against all manner of Right and Reason, and against the
Law of the Land, Erroneously Awarded him to be Disherited and Exiled England, wherefore he prays the King, as he is bound by Right of his Crown, and by the Oath he made at his Coronation, to maintain all People in their Rights, That he would please to cause to be brought before him the Process of the Award made against him, that it may be Examined, and that the said Hugh may be received to shew the Errors in it, and if there shall be any found, he would please to Repeal and Redress them, and to do further according to Right and  Reason; and the said Hugh afterward shall be ready to stand to Right, and to answer every Complaint and Accusation according to Reason. And he sheweth the Errors of the said Process, For that theThe Errors of the Award. Great Men who pursued and destroyed him, prayed Pardon of the King for all those things, which might be Judged Felonies or Tres∣passes in that Pursuit, which they made by their own Authority, by which wrongfully they made themselves Judges of him, where they could not, or ought not to be Judges; also Error, in that the said Hugh  was not called into Court, or to answer where the Award was made; also Error, in that the Award was made without the Assent of the Pre∣lates who were Peers in Parlement; Item, Error, in that there was no Record of their Pursuit, or the Causes contained in the Award; also Error, in that the Award was made against the Form of the Great Charter, wherein is contained, That no Man shall be forejudged, nor in other manner destroyed, unless by Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; with Request to the King to take notice, that the  Great Men were summoned to come duely to the Parlement, but did not, when they came with Horse and Arms, and all their Force; Whereupon the said Hugh came and rendred himself Prisoner to the King, praying he would receive him into his Protection to prosecute his Complaint, and that Right might be done him in these Matters; and the King received him, as he ought to do, (sicome faire de∣vioms) and caused his Petition to be carried to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishops, and other Prelates, and the Clergy of the  Province of Canterbury, then being in a Provincial Council at Lon∣don, charging them by the Faith they ought him, to advise about the Petition, and let him know their thoughts concerning it; and when they had well Advised concerning it, they answered, That it seemed to them, that the Process and Award of the Exile, and Disinheritance of Hugh the Son, and Father, were Erroneous and Wrongfully made, wherefore they agreed and unanimously assented, as Peers of the Land, and prayed as Peers Spiritual, That the Award which was made  wickedly and wrongfully against God, and all manner of Right, (con∣tre Dieu & tote manere de droit) might be by the King repealed and annulled for ever; and said further, That they nor none of them ever assented to the Award; but that every one of them at the time when the Award was made, in Writing made Protestation, That they could not, or would assent to it for many Causes; and the Earl of Kent the King's Brother, the Earls of Richmond, Pembroke, and Arondel, before the King and Prelates, said the Award was wrong∣ful,  and against Law and Right, and prayed him, with the Prelates, and as they had done before, to null and make void the Award; and the Earls affirmed, That for fear of the Force, which the Great Men suddenly brought to the Parlement to make the Award, which was to them unknown and unexpected, they gave their Assent to it, and also advised the King to suffer it to pass, for which Offence and Mistake they prayed his Pardon.
And then afterwards another Petition was delivered to the King, on behalf of Ibm. Claus. 15 Ed. II. ut supra. Hugh Spensr the Father's Petition to the King. Hugh the Father, setting forth, That the same Great Men before named, and their Adherents and Confe∣derates with Force and Arms on the Day of St. Barnaby, in the 14th Year of the King, came to his Mannor of Fastern in Wilt∣shire, and Twelve others in that Shire, Six in the County of Glocester, Four in Dorsetshire, Five in Hampshire, Two in Berkshire, Six in Oxfordshire, Three in Buckinghamshire, Four in Surrey, One  in Cambridgeshire, Two in Huntingtonshire, Five in Leicestershire, One in Yorkshire, One in Lincolnshire, Five in Cheshire, and Five in Warwickshire; in all 63 Mannors there named, where they made the same Havock, committed the same Spoils, Devasta∣tions, and Destructions upon his Houses and Lands they had done upon his Sons, and used his Debtors, Tenants, Friends, and People as those of his Son; except that the loss of his Goods, moveable and immoveable, in and upon his Mannors and Lands,  were greater; as namely, two Crops of Corn, one in the Barns or Granges, the other upon the Ground; 28000 Sheep, 1000 Oxen and Heifers, 1200 Cows, with their Breed for two Years, 40 Mares with their Breed for two Years, 560 Cart-Horses, 2000 Hogs, 400 Kids, 40 Ton of Wine, 600 Bacons, 80 Car∣casses of Beef, 600 Muttons in the Larder, and 10 Tons of Cy∣der; Armour for 200 Men, and other Warlike Engines and Provisions, with the Destruction of his Houses, to his Damage  30000 l. And at the same time they entred the Abby of Lang∣ley in Wiltshire, broke up his Coffers, and carried away 1000 l. in Silver; also his Charters, Evidence, and Bonds, Cups of Gold and Silver, and other Silver Vessels and Jewels, to his Damage of 10000 l. And at the same time with Force and Arms entred the King's Castle of Marlborough (where he was the Constable) and took his Goods there found, 36 Sacks of Wooll, 6 Pair of rich Vestments, a Library, a Golden Chalice for the Sacrament,  one Cross of Gold, another of Ivory and Ebony, and other Or∣naments belonging to the Chapel; Cloths of Gold, Carpets, Coverings, and many other things, and his whole Wardrobe entirely, to his Damage of 5000 l. Excepting these Differences of Losses, the Petition is the same with his Sons verbatim, andThe Petition of the Spensers brought into Parlement. the Errours assigned in the Process and Award, are the very same; his rendring himself Prisoner to the King, and his Re∣ception into the King's Protection the same, and expressed in the  same Words. And then it follows by the King (Et nous apres, a nostre Parlement summons a Everwyk as treis semeins de Pasch en an nostre Regne Quinzisme feisems devant nous le Proces del dit Aegard a la suite les ditz Hugh le Fitz, & Hugh le Pere, en cestes Paroles, A15 Edw. II. The Writ of Summons to this Parle∣ment bears Date March 14, 1321. Easter-day was April 11. 122. l Honeur de Dieu & Seinte Eglise, &c. And we afterwards, at our Parlement at York, three Weeks after Easter, in the 15th Year of our Reign, caused to come before us the Process of the Award, at the Petition of the said Hugh the Son and Hugh the  Father, in these Words: To the Honor of God and Holy Church, &c. the whole Award being cited in this Record. After which Re∣cital it follows, (a quen Parlement, &c.) At which Parlement at York, the said Hugh the Son and Hugh the Father being brought before us in Court, prosecuting their Complaints, and praying us to do them Right; and the said Hugh the Son
for himself shewed and alledged the Errors in the Process as abovesaid; and also Hugh the Father alledged the same Errors, and prayed severally and jointly, That as the Award was made erroneously and wrongfully, against the Laws and Usages of the Realm, and against common Right and Reason, that we would annull and defeat the said Award, and that they might be re∣mitted and reconciled to our Faith, and to such Estate as they had and were in before the Award: And hereupon hearing the  The Process against them examined in Parlement. Reasons of the said Hugh and Hugh, we caused the Process to be examined in full Parlement, in the presence of the Prelates; Earls, Barons, Knights of Counties, and the People that were come, by reason of the Parlement (en presence des Prelates, Countes, Ba∣rons, Chivalers des Countes, & le People & estoit venutz pur Enche∣son du dit Parlement) And we found the said Award was madeReasons why the Award ought to be made void. without calling them to Answer, and without the Assent of the Prelates, which are Peers of the Realm in Parlement, and  against the Great Charter of the Franchises of England, which says no Freeman shall be Banished, or other way Destroyed, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or the Law of the Land, and for that they were not called in Court to make Answer, and for these Errors, and for that the Causes in the said Award were not duly proved (& pur ceo que les Causes contenues en la dit Agard ne furent pas duement approvets;) And further ha∣ving regard to that, that we caused the Parlement at Westmin∣ster  to be summoned in due manner, and commanded by our Writs the said Great Men (who made the Award) not to make Assemblies and Alliances, or come with armed Men, yet they came with all their Force to that Parlement, notwithstan∣ding our Command: And when they came to London in that manner, they held their Councils and Assemblies at London, without coming to us at Westminster according to Summons; and then we sent to them to come to the Parlement at Westmin∣ster  as they ought, yet they would not come, nor let us know their Mind, nor the cause of the Award, tho' we had begun and held the Parlement for 15 Days and more, and caused to come before us the Prelates, and some Earls and Barons, Knights of Counties, and others which came for the Commons of the Realm (& avioms fait venir, devant nous Prelates, & aucunes Countes & Barones, Chivalers des Countes, & autres que vindrent pur la Commune du Royalm) and caused it to be published, That  those that had Petitions to promote should deliver them. And after Proclamation thus made, no Petition was delivered, or Complaint made against the said Hugh and Hugh, until they came as aforesaid: And the Contrivance of the said Award they wholly concealed and kept from us, unto the very Hour they came to Westminster with Force and Arms, and made their Award against Reason, as a thing treated and agreed on amongst themselves, on their own Authority, in our absence, and en∣croached  upon the Royal Power, Jurisdiction, and Conusance of Process and Judgment of those things, which belong to our Royal Dignity; wherefore we could not at that time stop the said Award, nor do right to the said Hugh and Hugh, as it belonged to us. And further taking notice that those Great Men, after the Award made, prayed our Pardon and Release
for Confederating themselves by Oath, Writing, or in other manner, without our Leave, in pursuing them, and Trouping with Banners of ours and their own Arms displayed, and ta∣king and possessing Castles, Towns, Mannors, Lands, Tene∣ments, Goods, and Chattels, and also taking and imprisoning People of our Allegiance and others, and some they wounded, and some they killed; and many other things they did, in or∣der to destroy the said Hugh and Hugh, in England, Wales, and  other where, of which some might be called Trespasses, and others Felonies; also it appeared, those Great Men were Ene∣mies to, and hated them at the time of the Award and before, wherefore they ought not to be their Judges, in their own Prosecution of them, nor have Record (ne Record aver) upon the Causes of the said Award. And we are bound by the Oath we made at our Coronation, and obliged to do Right to all our Subjects, and to redress and cause to be amended all Wrongs  done to them when we are required, according to the Great Charter, by which we are not to sell or delay Right and Justice to any one; and at the pressing Advice and Request of the Pre∣lates, given us for the safety of our Soul, and to avoid Danger, and for to take away an ill Example for the time to come of such Undertakings and Judgments, in the like case, against Rea∣son. Wherefore we seeing and knowing the said Process and Award, made in the manner aforesaid, to be as well to the Pre∣judice  of us, the Blemishment, (or Hurt) of our Crown and Royal Dignity, against us and our Heirs, as against the said Hugh and Hugh, and for other reasonable Causes, of our Royal Power, in a full Parlement at York, by the Advice andThe Award made void by Assent of the whole Parle∣ment. Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights of Counties, the Commons of the Realm, and others being at our Parlement at York (pur le Conseil & lassent des Prelatz, Countes, Barons, Chevalers des Countez le Commun du Royalme, & altres a nostre dit Parlement a  Everwyk Estauntz) do wholly null and defeat (de tut Anentis∣soms & Defesoms) the said Award of the Exile and Disheritance of the said Hugh and Hugh, and all things in the Award (& quant que cel Agard touche) and do fully remit and reconcile the said Hugh the Son, and Hugh the Father, to our Faith and Peace, and to the Estate they had and were in before the making of the Award in all Points. And we Award, That they have again (reeient) Seisin of their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chat∣tels,  &c. And we Will and Command, That where this Award is enrolled in any Places of our Court, it be cancelled and annulled for ever. And so the Roll was cancelled and crossed, and remains so at this day, with this Memorandum written under the Award. Les choses susescrites sont anenties e chaunceles per force dun Agard que se sit au Parlement le Roy a Everwyck a treis semains de Pasch lan  du Regne nostre Seign. Quinsime, sicome est contenue en un Roule que est consu pendant a ceo Roul en le Mois de May prochien, These things above written are nulled and cancelled by force of an Award made in the Parlement at York held three Weeks after Easter, in the 15th Year of the Reign of our Lord, as 'tis con∣tained in a Roll sowed to, and hanging at this Roll in the Month of May.
In Great Stat. Roll. from Hen. III. to 21 Ed. III. M. 31. Biblioth Cotton. Claud. D. 2. f. 232. a. The Ordinan∣ces examined and annulled in Parlement, A. D. 1322. 15 Ed. II. this Parlement at York the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commons of the Realm (amongst which were the Ordai∣ners then alive) there assembled by the King's Command, cau∣sed to be rehearsed and examined the Ordinances dated the 5th of October, the 5th of Edward II. And for that by Examination thereof it was found in the said Parlement, That by the things which were Ordained, the King's Power was restrained in many things, contrary to what was due to his Seignory Royal, and  contrary to the State of the Crown: And also for that in times past, by such Ordinances and Provisions, made by Subjects over the Power Royal of the Antecessors of the Lord the King, Troubles and Wars came upon the Realm, by which the Land or Nation was in danger; It was accorded and established in the said Parlement, by the Lord the King, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Realm at that Parle∣ment assembled, That all those things Ordained by the Ordai∣ners,  and contained in those Ordinances from thenceforth for the time to come, should cease and lose their Force, Virtue, and Effect for ever; And that from thenceforward in no time, no manner of Ordinances or Provisions made by the Subjects of the Lord the King, or his Heirs, by any Power or Commission whatever, over or upon the Power Royal of the Lord the King, or his Heirs, or against the State of the Crown, shall be of value or force. But the things that shall be established for the  Estate of the King and his Heirs, and for the State of the Realm and People, may be treated, accorded, and established in Parlement by the King, and by the Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm, as hath been accustomed. This Year the King raised an Army, and about the Feast of St. James marched into Scotland; the Scots fearing his Power,  went over the Scots Sea Tho. de la Moor, f. 596. n. 20. 30. The King raiseth an Ar∣my against the Scots, and goesin Per∣son. The Army bffled. The Scots in∣vade England, plunder and burnt almost as far as York. (ultra Mare Scoticum se conferunt, that is, Edinburgh Frith) carrying with them and destroying all the Victuals on this side; and in a short time the King returns into England, his Army not having wherewithal to subsist. The Scots come over the Frith and follow him by Night-marches, and al∣most surprized him in his Camp in Blackmore-Forest; but he escaping with a few, they took the Earl of Richmond, and the King of France his Envoy, with many others, and waste the  Country with Fire and Rapine almost as far as York; they burnt Ripon, and compounded with Beverly for 400 l. Sterling, and re∣turned home laden with Spoils.[3] Wals. Hy∣po. Nustr. f. 503. n. 40. & Hist. f. 17. n. 50 f. 18. lin. 1, &c. The King & Kingdom of Scotland send to Rome to take off the Excommuni∣cation and Interdict, but prevail not. The Two Cardinals [6] sent from the Pope in the 10th of the King (as there noted) to make Peace between the Two Nations of England and Scotland, and Reconcile the King and Earl of Lan∣caster; but their Negociation being without Effect in Scotland, Ex∣communicated  Robert Brus King thereof, and put the whole King∣dom under Interdict, for their Perfidiousness to the King of Eng∣land. To take off both, the Ibm. f. 505. n. 30, 40. & Hist. u supr. Bishop of Glasco, and the Earl of Murray, were sent to Rome by King and Kingdom, but pre∣vailed not, Satisfaction not having been given to the Pope, nor King and Kingdom of England. Whereupon Robert Brus desired of
the King of England a Truce, De la Moor, ut supra. A Truce for 53 years be∣tween England and Scotland. which was granted to him for Thirteen Years. Philip the Mexer. Hist. f. 345. Fair of France left Three Sons, who all Reigned after him. Lewis the Eldest Reigned but Nineteen Months; to him succeeded Philip called the Long, he Reigned Five Years and Six Weeks, Ibm. f 349. dying on the 3d of January at Bois de Vincennes, A. D. 1322. The Youngest Brother Charles, called the Fair Ib. f. 350. Charles the Fair King of France.  succeeded him, and was Crowned at Reims on the 11th of Fe∣bruary following, A. D. 1322. all the Peers of France assisting at that Solemnity, but the King of England, and Earl of Flanders. This King not long after sent his Envoys Wals. Hist. f. 119. n. 20. f. 20. n. 10. to cite King Ed∣ward to come and do his Homage for the Dukedom of Aquitan and Earldom of Panthieu. The King sent wholly to excuse himself, or for but a time to delay it, by Advice of his Council, De la Moor, f. 596, n. 20, 30, &c. He summons K. Edward to do him Ho∣mage, who made his Ex∣cuse. the  Earl of Kent and Arch-Bishop of Dublin; they were honourably received by the King of France, but returned without obtaining what they were sent for. The King of France took these Excuses for a Denial, and sent his Unkle Ibm. De la Moor. n. 40, 50. which the K. of France took for a Denial, and sends to seize the Dut∣chy of Aqui∣tan and Earl∣dom of Pon∣thieu. A Truce be∣tween the two Kings while a Peace made. Charles of Valois, an Enemy to the English, for the Dis∣obedience of King Edward, in not doing his Homage, to seize the Dutchy of Aquitan and Earldom of Ponthieu: He took Possession  of Agen, and some other Parts of that Dukedom, and went to the Town of Regle, or Reole, which was Fortified, and the Earl of Kent, the King's Brother, in it, which was yielded; and upon a Treaty between them Two, a Truce was made, while the Two King's might agree upon a Peace. In the mean time, the King accused Adam Wals. Hist f. 119. n. 30, 40, 50. The King ac∣cused Adam Bishop of Hereford. His Excuse for not an∣swering. Bishop of Here∣ford in Parlement for Treason, for assisting his Enemies and  Traytors. He said he was a Consecrated Bishop, and Member of Holy Church, and could not answer to so hard a Charge, without the Consent of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury (who was his Judge next to the Pope) and the other Bishops his Peers. The Arch-Bishop and Bishops hearing what he said, implored the King's Favour for him, who not granting their Request, they challenged him as a Member of the Church. A few days after, the King renewed his Accusation, when the Arch-Bishops of Can∣terbury,  York, and Dublin, with Ten other Bishops, came to the Place of Judgment, and took away their Brother without making Answer, enjoining all Men, in the Name of God, not to lay vio∣lent hands upon him, Anathematizing all that should do it. After this the King being much moved, caused him to be Tried by a Jury of his Country, who found him Guilty; whereupon all his Lands and Temporalities were seized. The Claus. 1. Ed. 3. Part 1. M. 13. int. His Crimes. Record by which he was Restored to his Temporalities in the First of Edward III. reciting the Record of his Trial in the Country, gives a more particular Account of his Crimes, which informs us, That by Inquisition taken at Hereford before the Justices of the Kings-Bench, it was presented, That Adam Bishop of Here∣ford was of the Confederacy of Roger de Mortimer of Wigmore, who
was then reputed an Enemy and Rebel to the King his Father, and that he sent certain Men at Arms to his Assistance; and then being accused for these things before the Justices, and his Father,He pleads he cannot answer without offen∣ding God and Holy Church, nor without leave of the Pope. He is found Guilty by In∣quisition. he alleged, that without offending God, and Holy Church, and without leave of the Pope, he could not, or ought to answer, nor ought the Justices to proceed to take the Inquisition; and though the Bishop submitted not to the Inquisition, yet the Ju∣stices went on, and for that it was found by that Inquisition that  the Bishop was of the Confederacy of the said Roger, and sent to his assistance Men at Arms: It was adjudged by the Justices, he should as convict remain in the Custody of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and that his Lands and Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, shouldHis Lands, Tenements, &c. Adjudg∣ed to be Seised. be seized into the King's Hands, and remained so seized, until the Date of this Record, by which they were restored. Witness the King at Westminster, the 16th of February▪ in the First of his Reign. After this Judgment given by the King's Justices, this De la Moor f. 597. thro' out. He upon that Judgment en∣deavours to revive the Ha∣tred of the Nobility a∣gainst the Spensers. And incense the Queen a∣gainst them, and the King her Husband. Bi∣shop used all means to revive the Hatred of the Nobility against the Spensers, now laid asleep, and incensed the Queen against them, upon pretence they advised the King to reduce her Family to a less Number, and Retrench her Expences, which (being a Lady affecting Prodigality) caused her Hatred not only toward the Spensers, but also toward her Husband. He made use of the  Opportunity he had in many private Conferences about the times, and incited and increased her Indignation, as did likewise the Bishop of Lincoln, and both Bishops advised her, to take an Op∣portunity of making a Visit to her Brother the King of France, and her Ʋncle Charles de Valois, and beg their advice and help against the Spensers, which if she obtain'd, all things would succeed ac∣cording to her Desire. At this time Ibm. The King in∣tended to pass into France a∣bout a Treaty of Peace. according to the Truce made between Charles  of Valois, and the Earl of Kent when he delivered up Reole, (as was noted before) a Peace was to be treated of between the two Kings, for which purpose the King intended to pass the Sea him∣self; but the Earls of Winchester and Glocester, (for such were now the two Spencers) dissuaded him, lest being left at home with∣outIs dissuaded. him, or if they should accompany him into France, they might fall into the Hands of their Enemies. Ibm. The Queen makes means to go into France upon the same Af∣fair. In the mean  time, the Queen by her Flatteries urged the King▪ that she might be sent upon this Message, promising to do all things according to his Desire, by the assistance of the two Bishops Lincoln and Hereford, and others of the Noblemen, the King was prevailed with to send her into France; where she was kindly received byAnd obtains her Desire. her Brother, and Uncle, (Dum causam mariti agit) while she Transacted her Husband's Business, who staid upon the Goast all the time of Lent, and Summer, for more easie receiving Letters  from, and sending to her. (Ea interim Ibm. and Walsingh. F. 121. N. 40, 50. suas res agit.) In the mean time she did her own Business; and notwithstanding the King's Commissioners, the Bishops of Winchester, and Norwich, and the Earl of Richmond, by her Mediation the Bargain was made, or they received a Form of Peace from the King of France, That if King Edward would give his Right in the Dukedom of Aqui∣tain,
and Earldom of Pouthieu to his Son Edward, upon his do∣ingShe bargains with her Bro∣ther, that if King Edward would give Aquitan and Ponthieu to the Prince, upon doing his Homage he should have Seisin of them. Upon that A∣greement the Prince goes into France and does Ho∣mage. Homage he would give him seisin of both; These Things a∣greed on both sides, the King of France sent his Letters of Safe-Conduct for the Prince, and the King sent him with a Grant of those Lands to have and to hold them to himself and Heirs, Kings of England; adding, That if the Son should die, living the Father, they should return to him; and also other Conditions, by which it should not be Lawful for the King of France to Marry  him, nor provide a Guardian for him against his Will. De la Moor, Ut supra. & Walsing. Ut supra. A. D. 1324. 18 Ed. II. This Agreement was Confirmed by the Advice of the Prelates, and o∣ther Noblemen at Dover, the Day after the Nativity of the Vir∣gin Mary, in the Eighteenth of the King; and on the Thursday following, Edward the Son, accompanied with the Bishop of Ex∣cester and other Noblemen, went on Shipboard, and afterwards about the Feast of St. Mathew, did Homage to his Uncle of France, under Protestations made on both sides; the whole Affair being  compleated for which the Queen was sent into France. Soon after Michaelmas the King De la Moor, ut supra, & f. 589. lin. 1. &c. The K. wrote to the Queen to return with his Son into England. She makes her Excuse, ha∣ving no Mind to return. The Bishop of Excester re∣moved from her secret Council. wrote to her, That she would speedily bring her Son into England. She wrote back, That the King of France her Brother, out of great Affection would have them stay with him; and sending back the greatest Part of their Families, she employed the residue of the Year, in prosecuting her own Designs. The Bishop of Excester was sent over with the  Prince, but was now removed from the Queen's Secret Council, and Roger Mortimer and other Fugiibs the King's Enemies, were received into it.  6 Ed. 2. Part 1. M 34. Dos. And Roger Mortimer taken into it. This Roger Mortimer the Younger, upon Tryal for Treason had received Sentence to be Drawn and Hang'd, the King out of his special Grace, pardoned the Execution of that Sentence, and willed that instead thereof he should be a perpetu∣al Prisoner, and assigned certain Justices to declare his Favour, and adjudge him to Perpetual Prison; and not long after the  Time of the Queen's going over, corrupting his Keepers he made his De la Moor, F. 596. N. 50. Escape out of the Tower of London, and got into France. The King much moved at the Queen's stay, and Detaining his Son out of the Kingdom, some Ibm. . 598. . 10. Reasons why the Queen  France. to salve the Matter, said they were unwillingly Detained; others guessing that she was so bound by the Ʋnlawful Embraces of Mortimer, that without him, and the other Eugitives, she would not return. However it was, The King Claus. 19 E. 2. M. 2. Dors. The King sent and wrote of∣ten to the Queen to re∣turn out of France. The fear of Hugh Spenser the Younger was her Chief Ex∣cuse. The King an∣swers all her Excuses. sent and wrote to her oft times to return home, Expressing great Kindness to her, and grief of Mind for her absence; many feigned Excuses she had for her not coming, but the Chief was the Danger and Fear she was in of Hugh le Dispencer the Younger, which she sent to him by the Bishop of Winchester, with her Letters of Credence; in answer to which the King wrote, That he as much wonder'd as he could, seeing  and observing always in his Presence the Kind Deportment of her to him, and of him to her, and especially at her Departure, declaring a perfect Amity; and since by her Letters of a late Date to him, which he had shewn unto the King attesting the same; and therefore the Homage being done to his Brother of France, and that they were in so fair a way of Affection one to another,
he Commanded and Charged her as much as he could, That allAnd chargeth and com∣mands her to come to him in all haste. feigned Matters and Excuses laid aside she should come to him with all haste, (Par qui uous vous mandoms & chargeoms en quanque nous pooms, que totes tieles Enchesons feints, & autres choses lessees & excusations cessantes, reignes a nous od tote hast) for that the Bishop had told him, That his Brother the King of France in his Presence told her, That according to the Tenor of her Safe-Con∣duct she should not be disturbed nor stayed from coming to him  as to her Lord, and as his Wife. And then further writes to her, When she came, her Expences and way of Living should be such, as should be neither to the Dishonour of him, or her. He also Willed and Commanded her to suffer his dear Son EdwardHe also Wil∣led and Com∣manded her to send his Son to him. to come to him, as he had commanded him. And whereas at the time Walter Bishop of Excester was lately with her, he had been certainly informed, That some of his Enemies, and his Banished People, waited to Destroy him, if they had opportunity; to a∣avoid  such Dangers, and for other great Business he had with him, he commanded him upon his Faith and Allegiance to come to him with haste, leaving all other things in as much security as he could, she was to excuse his sudden coming away, it being for no other Cause. Given at Westminster the First of December. At the same time,Ibm. the King of France by the Bishop of Winche∣ster, wrote to him, and sent a Message by word of Mouth, That  The King of France wrote the Queen dare not come to K. Edward for fear of her Life and Hugh Spenser. he had been informed by Persons of Credit, that the Queen dare not come to him for fear of her Life and Hugh le Despenser; to which excuse he made the same answer he had done to his Queen, and averred by Oath, That if the said Hugh, or any other Living in his Kingdom, or in his power, should offer any Ill to her, and he could know it, he would make them severe Examples to all others, and beseeched him not to believe those that told him otherKing Edward's Answer to that, and o∣ther things. things, for that he had and ought to have greater Reason to know  and understand this Matter, than any other, and therefore prays him to prevail with his Sister to come to him as soon as she could,He prays him to send his Wife to him. for the Honour of themselves and of her, being much disturbed for want of her Company. He also earnestly prayed him to dispatch his Son Edward, andAnd to dis∣patch his Son's Business, and suffer him to come to him. deliver and surrender to him the Dutchy and Lands, which he preserved out of affection to him, that he might not be Disheri∣ted;  and further prayed him to suffer his Son to come to him with all the hast he could, as he had commanded him, it being always his Mind he should return, the same hour he should com∣mand him, so soon as he had done his Homage: And then Ex∣cuseth the Bishop of Excester's sudden leaving France, returning into England, as he had done in the Letter to his Queen, Dated as above, at the same Place.
The Ibm. like Letters were sent to His Friends and Peers of France. The Arch-Bishop of Rhems, The Bishop of Laon, The Bishop of Beavois, The Duke of Burgundy, The Duke of Britan, The Earl of Flanders, The Earl of Valois, The Abbot of St. Denis. Peers of France. The Arch-Bishop of Roan, The Bishop of Langres, Gaucher Chastillon, Constable of France. His Relations, but not Peers. The Lord of Cossi, Lewes Earl of Clermont, Robert de Artois E. of Beaumont. The next day the King Ibm. The K▪ wrote to his Son to return with∣out his Mo∣ther if she could not. wrote to his Son, that tho' he was young, and of tender Age, yet he might remember what he Commanded him, and charged him with at his departure from  him at Dover; and also what Answer he made him then. That when the King of France had received his Homage, he should take his leave of his Uncle, and return to him with his most Dear Companion, the Queen his Mother if she could come so soon, if not, he should come without her, and should not o∣mit it any manner, neither for his Mother, or any other, upon his Blessing. Dated at Westminster, the Second Day of De∣cember. His Son wrote an Answer to this Letter, as appears by Ibm. The Prince answered his Father's Let∣ter, and he wrote a Se∣cond Letter to him. a∣nother of his Father's to him in March following, wherein he acknowledges he did remember what he was charged with at Do∣ver, and especially not to marry without his Consent, and what he said there to his Father at his Departure, and promised in this Answer to do always his Commands and Pleasure to his power. Whereupon the King in this second Letter, strictly charg∣eth  The Con∣tents of the King's second Letter. him again, well to remember those things, and in no case to Marry, or suffer himself to be Married without his assent, nor before he should come to him, nor do any thing that might turn to his Damage or Trouble of Mind; and as to what his Son said in his answer, That he could not come over so soon as he commanded him, by reason of his Mother, nor leave her, being bound by Nature to perform his Duty to her; to which he rejoin'd in these Words, (Beaufitz vous saves coment nous lavoms amee, & cherie & verroie∣ment,  si ele se eust portee vers nous come faire denst, & come bone feme vers son Seigneur, &c.) Good Son, you know how much I should have Loved and Cherished her, and truly if she had carried her self to∣wards us, as she ought to have done, and as a good Woman or Wife to∣ward her Lord. But whereas she feigned an Occasion to withdraw from us, (ele se feigne encheson de se retrere de nous) by reason of our Dear
Nephew, and faithful Hugh le Despenser, who hath always loyallyThe Queen's Kindness to Mortimer. served me: You see, and all the World may see, that she openly, notoriously, and designedly, against her Duty, and against the Estate of our Crown, which she is bound to favour and maintain, hath drawn to her, and retains in her Company and Council (attrée a soi & in sa compaignie reteint de son conseil le Mortimer, &c.) Mortimer our Traitor and Mortal Enemy, proved Attaint, and in full Parle∣ment so judged, and keeps him Company every where in House and  abroad, in despight of us and our Crown, and the Laws of the Realm; Whom at another time your Ʋncle Banished his Kingdom at our Re∣quest, as our Enemy; and yet she doth worse, if worse can be, in bringing you into his Company, and making him your Counsellor, andShe makes him her Son's Companion and Counsel∣ler. making you adhere and stick to him openly and notoriously in the face of the World, to the greatest Dishonour of us and you, and in pre∣judice of our Crown, and the Laws, and the Ʋsages of the Laws of England, the which above all things you are bound to Preserve and  Maintain, (as queux vous estes sovereinment tenuz, saves, & maintenir) and therefore he Commands and Chargeth him upon hisThe King commands him to re∣turn notwith∣standing any feigned Ex∣cuses. Faith, Amity, and Legeance, and his own Blessing, that he come to him with what speed he can, notwithstanding the foresaid Excuses, or any other; his Mother having wrote, that if he would return, she would not hinder him, (car vostre Meer nous ad Escrit, que si vous voil∣lez returner ele ne vous disturbereit pas) and he could not under∣stand his Ʋncle should hinder him against the Tenor of his Safe Con∣duct.  Given at Lichfield the 18th of March. At the same time King Edward Ibm. King Edward Answers the King of France his Letter con∣cerning his Queen. wrote to his Dear Brother the King of France, That he had considered his Letters, wherein he signified to him, he had seriously Discoursed his Sister, about the Rea∣son and Things to which he had Answered, and that she had told him, she desired only to be with him, and in his Company, as a good Wife ought to be with her Lord, (& que ele vous ad dit, qele desire tant  de sire aez nue, &c.) and that the seeming Amity between her and his Nephew Hugh le Despenser was only feigned, yet it was con∣venient to keep it up to gain time, and avoid worse things. To dis∣prove what she said to her Brother the King of France, he reminded him of what great Amity and Kindness she often pretended to Hugh Despenser since her being there; and repeats the Intimacy between Mor∣timer and his Wife, and how she was wholly advised and directed by him, and did whatever he advised in the same Words and Manner as  in the last Letter to his Son, and then desires him to restore the Dutchy of Aquitain, &c. to him, without having regard to the wilful humour of a Woman, and send him his Pleasure by the Bearer. Given at Lichfield, March 18. on the same day as before. On the 15th of April next following, the King Rot. Rom. 19 Ed. II. M. 3. He writes to the Pope a∣bout the Af∣fair of his Queen. wrote to the Pope, and sent him a Transcript of what had passed between himself, the King of France, his Sister the Queen, and his Son,  by way of Narrative, and the Copies of the Letters he wrote them, with his Answers to what was reported of him in France, heartily beseeching him to read and consider them, and apply such Remedy for the removing the Matter of Scandal and Dis∣sention, and the Dangers that might proceed from thence, as he should think fit, promising wholly to be directed by his Advice. Given at Knelworth the 15th day of April.
All these Letters, all these Mediators, could not bring her intoNeither Let∣ters nor Me∣diators could bring the Queen into England, until her Design was ripe. England, until her Design was Ripe, and that she could come with Force; yet in all probability, they caused her either to quit, or be thrust out of France; Tho some of our Historians, and the French Historian Fol. 3, 352. The Histori∣ans Account of the Trans∣actions be∣tween the King and Queen at this time. Mezeray, (who understood nothing of this Story, as appears by his Writing) and all from Froysard, Report, That by the Arts of the Spencers, and the Money given  to her Brother Charles the Fourth of France, and scattered in his Court, and to the Pope himself, and distributed in his Court, that made them their Friends, so that her Brother forbad all Per∣sons to assist her, and commanded her to go out of his Domi∣nions. Take the Original from F. 1. a. col. 1. in the Prologue to the First Vo∣lume, Printed at London, 1520. Especially at Froysard. Froysart, who says he wrote his Chronicle from the Chronicles of Sir John la Bele, Canon of  St. Lambert's of Liege, an Intimate, and of the Secret Council of John of Haynault. The Barons [9] could not bear or suffer Hugh Spenser's favour with the King any longer, but sought each other amongst them∣selves,[9] Ib. f. 3. a. col. 1. c. 8. to be of a Peaceable Accord, and sent secretly to the Queen, who had been at Paris three years, (which was false by two parts of the time) signifying to her, if she could come into  England with One thousand Men at Arms, and bring her Son and Heir with her, they would all come to her, and her Son Edward; She shewed these Letters to the King of France, who promised such Assistance, and to furnish her with Money; She was providing for her Voyage, of which Hugh Spencer had no∣tice,The King of France cor∣rupted with Money. who contrived with Gifts to Buy off the King of France, and sent secret Messengers, with plenty of Gold, Silver, and Jewels into France, and especially to the King, and his Privy Council,  insomuch as the King forbad under pain of Banishment, That none of his Subjects should assist the Queen to go into England by force; and further, Hugh Ib. col. 2. Spencer, out of his Malice to the Queen, to get her under the King's Power, and his, caused the King to write to the Pope, That he would write to the King of France, to send his Wife again into England, for he would acquit himself to God and the World, that it was not his fault, that she departed from him, for he would nothing to her, but  all Love and good Faith, such as he ought to hold in Marriage. Also he sent Ibm. The Pope and Cardinals corrupted with Gold and Silver. Gold and Silver great plenty, to divers Car∣dinals and Prelates who had most power with the Pope, (who lead the Pope by such-wise, with their Gifts and subtle ways) that he wrote to the King of France, That on pain of Cursing, he should send his Sister Isabel into England, to the King her Hus∣band: These Letters were brought to the King of France by the  Bishop of Xaints, when he had read them, they were shewed to the Queen his Sister, and then commanded her speedily to avoid his Kingdom, or he would make her to avoid it with shame.
By this means Ib. cap. 9. Robert of Ar∣tois his Advice to the Queen. all the Barons of France were withdrawn from the Queen, except Robert of Artois her Dear Cousin, who privately advised and encouraged her; and gave her secret no∣tice, That her Ib. f. 3. b. col. 1. Brother would deliver her, her Son, and the Earl of Kent, King Edward's Brother, and Sir Roger Mortimer,She goes out of France to William Earl of Haynault. to the King and Hugh Spencer, and advised her to go into the Empire to William Earl of Haynault, and Sir John of Haynault  his Brother. The Earl received her with Joy at Valenciennes, and Ib. fol. 4. col. 1. He received her kindly, and brings forth his four Daughters. The Prince likes Philip best brought forth his four Daughters, Margaret, Philip, Jane, and Isabell, the Prince liked Philip best, and she kept him Company during his stay there. Walsingham Fol. 123. lin. 1, &c. tells us, that the King, as 'twas reported, (prout  dicitur) had procured the Death of his Wife, and Son Edward, and that John of Britania, Earl of Richmond, her Familiar, was to have been the Executioner, but that perceiving the Noblemen of France to have been corrupted by large Gifts, and that there was no safety to be expected there, she fled privately with her Son and Family (or Followers) to the Earl of Haynault, of whom they were Honourably and Magnificently received. Whether she was commanded by her Brother, or fled privately  out of France, certain it is she Ib. n. 20. And was con∣tracted to her. went to the Earl of Hanault, and having Contracted her Son to his Daughter Philip, (Fol. 598. n. 10. Sir Thomas de la Moor says, Married him to her, without the Advice of the Nobility;) by his Assistance, who provided Men and Ships, Walsingh. at supra. The Earl of Haynault fur∣nisheth the Queen with Ships and Forces to come for Eng∣land she came for England, with her Son, (then not Fourteen years of Age) Edmond Earl of Kent the King's Bro∣ther, Roger Mortimer, and many others, who were forced, or  fled out of England, and with 2757 Men at Arms, commanded by John of Hanault, the Earl's Brother, and landed at Ibm. & Anglia sacra, parte prima, f. 366. She lands at Harwich. Har∣wich on Wednesday before Michaelmas-day, where she was joined by the Earl Walsing. Ib. n. 30. Several Bi∣shops, Earls, and Barons, join with her. Marshal, the Earl of Leicester, and other Barons, and Knights, (cum Praelatis fere omnibus) with almost all the Prelates, but chiefly with the Bishops of Lincoln, Hereford, Dublin, and Ely, who together made her up a great Army, Ibm. which being refreshed at St. Edmunds-Bury, she went forward to seek out her  own, and the Kingdom's Enemies.[2] Ut supra, n. 20. On the 28th of September, the King issued his Proclamation a∣gainst Append. n. 68. A. D. 1329. 20 Ed. II. The King proclaims Mortimer Traytor, &c. Roger Mortimer, giving notice, That he and the other Traitors had entred his Kingdom by force, and had brought with them Aliens and Strangers, and taken upon them Royal Power over him, and that therefore he was resolved to oppose them in Person, to Arrest and destroy them and all their Company and  Adherents, as he ought and might, except the Queen, his Son, and Earl of Kent, who he would by all possible means to be as safe as before their landing; and summoned all Persons that by their Ligeance were obliged, to come with all their Force and Power, in Defence of him, themselves, and the Kingdom, and for the Ease of the People he promised to pay the Soldiers Wages;
and also promised to all Great Men his Charters of Pardon for Fe∣lony or Adherance to his Enemies, as well in times past, as at pre∣sent; and for Outlawry for what Cause soever, except the Traytor Roger Mortimer, and the great Managers of the People which came from beyond Sea with him, and those that killed Sir Roger Boler; and then promised 1000 l. Sterling and Pardon to any one should bring him the Body or Head of Roger Mortimer. Given under his Great Seal at the Tower of London, the 28th of Sep∣tember. This Proclamation has not its desired Effect, the People ha∣vingThe Procla∣mation with∣out effect. been so prepossessed with strange Notions, and Jealousies con∣cerning the King, and both the Spencers, and the strange things the Queen and Mortimer would do for Holy Church, themselves, and the Kingdom, that in her March, her Army daily increased, and the King's decreased; She did no injury Ibm. to the Bodies  or Goods of any but her Enemies, which she sought out, and[7] Ib. n. 40. every where applied their Goods to her own use, and destroyed their Farms. The Queen's Army was much De la Moor, f. 598 n. 30, 40. The Queen's Army much increased. increased by some Bishops Letters wrote to their Fellow Bishops, and other Friends, that there were so many Dukes, Earls, and Barons, with their Troops, sent by the King of France, to defend the Right of his Sister, as  all England could scarce feed them. And also by another Lye spread all over the Kingdom, ThatHer Cause carried on by Lyes. the Pope had absolved all Englishmen from their Oath of Fealty sworn to the King, and that he had thundered out the Sentence of Excommunication against all those that bare Arms against the Queen, Praeterea profiluit Ibm. Mendacium, ab exercitu in omnes Regni partes divulgatum, quod summus pontifex Romanus omnes Anglos ab∣solvit  a fidelitate jurata suo Regi, &c. For the Confirmation of which Lye, it was pretended there were Two Cardinals with the Queen in the Army, sent to her with these Favours from the Pope. Ad hujus Mendacii confirmationem, &c. The Queen upon her Landing emitted a Proclamation, Walsingh. f. 124. lin. 1, &c. That all should injoy Peace and Quiet, except the Publick Enemies of the Kingdom, the Two Despensers Father and Son, and Robert  The Queen's Proclamation. Baldock the King's Chancellor, and their Favourers, who were the Cause of the present Disturbance of the Nation; That no Goods should be taken from any without the Consent of thePunishments for Plunder∣ers. Owners, if above the value of 3 d. (then a days Wages for a Common Soldier) his Finger was to be cut off; nor 6 d. (the Wages of an Hobelor) under Pain of his Hand being cut off, (nec valorem Duodeci Sterlingorum) which I Translate 12 d. the daily Wages of a Man at Arms) upon Pain of Death. The King then at London requested Assistance of the Ib. f. 123. n 40. The Londoners refuse to give the King As∣sistance. Lon∣doners, who refused to aid him, whereupon he [3] left the City, and went Westward; In the mean time the Londoners, who were always in a fury, when they had a liberty of being Insolent, pretending Friendship to the Queen, (dum Ib. f. 124. n. 10, 20 haec aguntur Londi∣nenses,
nenses, quibus nunquam deest furia, cum adest insolendi licentia) gathering together the Rabble of all Artificers, (Congregatis de cunctis artificiis, infirmis personis, &c.) taking Arms, and seizeThe Rabble seize their Major. their Major, threatning to kill him if he would not swear to Con∣sent to their Orders, which he did, to save his Life, Fecerunt Ibm. They Conse∣derate to kill the Queen's Enemies, &c. igitur Conjurationem, &c. And they made a Confederacy, That the Queen's Enemies where-ever to be found, of what State or Condition soever they were, or such as should procure any Da∣mage  to the Liberties of the City, should be put to Death. Under pretence of this Oath, Ibm. They cut off John Marchal's Head, Hugh Spenser's Ser∣vant. they presently took John Marchal, Servant to Hugh Spenser the Younger, (& ejus caput im∣misericorditer amputarunt) and unmercifully cut off his Head, and plundered all his Goods; and on the same day continuing their Madness, (Ib. n. 30. They plunder the Bishop of Execser's House, and cut off his Head. eodem die continuantes suam Rabiem) they ran to the Bishop of Excester's House, setting fire to the Gates, entring,  and not finding him, they plundered his Jewels, Plate, and Hous∣hold-stuff; and coming out of the Fields on Horseback to the North Door of [6] St. Pauls, the mad People took, beat, wounded, and threw him off his Horse, and dragged him into Cheapside, where they proclaimed him a Publick Traytor, and cut off his Head. The Reason of their Fury against this Bishop Ibm. n. 40, 50. The Reason of their fury against this Bishop. was, That being Treasurer of the Kingdom, he had persuaded the King's Council, that the Itinerant Justices might sit in London, Ibm. who found  the Citizens had offended in many things, for which they lost their Liberties, some were Fined, and others had Corporal Punish∣ment. Next day they seised the Ibm. They seise the Constable of the Tower. Prisoners set free all Eng∣land over. Fugitives and Banished Per∣sons return into England. Constable of the Tower, and took the Keys from him, and set free all the Prisoners, and so it was all over England, and at the same time all Fugitives and Banished Persons returned. We have a further Account of the Death of the Bishop of Ex∣cester, and some of these things, from Hist. sacra. f. 366. Another Ac∣count of the Murther of the Bishop of Excester. William de Dene, a Publick Notary of the Church of Rochester, living at the time. The Arch-Bishop, 15 days after Michaelmas, intended to have held a Treaty with the Bishops at St. Pauls, about sending some of their own Order to the King and Queen as Mediators of Peace be∣tween them; The Bishop of Rochester dissuaded his going into the  City, or beyond the Thames, to Treat, being then at Lambeth, tel∣ling him the Hearts of the People were against the Bishops, and that they hated them, imputing all the Evil that had happened in the Nation to their Sloathfulness, Foolishness, and Ignorance; Next day they met at Lambeth, and Resolved to send Two; The Bishop of Winchester was willing to go for one, but could not get a Companion. Ibm. All sorts of Citizens meet at Guildhall, and contrive how to put to Death the Bishops of London and Excester, and the King's other Justices. Die Mercurii proximo ante Festum St. Lucae convenerunt apud la Gyld-Hall, &c. On Wednesday before St. Luke the Citizens, great  and small, (majores & minores) met at the Guildhall, where they contrived how they might take, and put to Death, the Bishops of London, and Excester, and the King's other Justices, and how they might Plunder the Merchants, & Mercatores in Civitate deprae∣darent, taking the occasion of the Queen's coming, Ibm. The Queen comes to Lon∣don. All her Ene∣mies that ad∣hered not to her. accepta occasione de adventu Reginae, quod Reginae adhaerere noentes proditores
Regni publice censerentur, because those that would not adhere to the Queen were publickly Reputed Traytors to the Kingdom. The Justices were then met at the Friers Preachers, and the Bishop of Excester was flying to St. Paul's Church, they caught him at the Door, beat and grievously wounded him, and drew him through the Streets and Lanes to the Great Cross in Cheapside, where the Sons of the Devil, (Filii Diaboli Virum fidelem, providum, & dis∣cretum, ac Regno valde necessarium truculenter decapitarunt) Be∣headed  a Faithful, Wise, and Discreet Man, and very useful to the Nation. And further says, Tunc conturbata est tota Ibm. Those who were called the Queen's Enemies were plundered all the Nation over. Terra, & in circuitu impii ambulantes, animalia & alia bona pacificorum, quos hostes Reginae dixerant, sub tali colore ubique depraedantes abduxerunt: Then the whole Nation was in confusion; and the Wicked cal∣ling peaceable Men the Queen's Enemies, and under that colour took away and plundered their Goods. The King not thinking himself safe there, had left London be∣fore  the Queen came thither; and finding De la Moor, f 598 n. 50. The King goes into Wales. by such as he had sent to make a Discovery, that almost all the Nobility, afrighted with false Reports (tota fere Regni Communitas falsis territa rumo∣ribus) had come in to the Queen, went in Ibm. Sets H. Spenser the Father to defend the Town and Castle of Bri∣stol. Wales; and ha∣ving appointed Hugh Despenser the Father, then Earl of Winchester, to defend the Town and Castle of Bristol, went with Hugh the Son, then Earl of Glocester, Robert Baldock, and few others to  Ibm. & Wals. f. 125. n. 10. The King lay close in the Abby of Neath in Gla∣morganshire. Chepstow, and there took Ship, intending for the Island of Lundy, or Ireland; but the Wind being cross, he could make neither, and having undergone much Hardship at Sea, he landed, and got to the Abby of Nethe in Glamorganshire, where he lay close, In the mean time, the Queen followed him with her Army, and sent these Letters abroad, to command and draw in the  People to her Assistance: Ibm. Append n. 69. The Queen's Letter, by which she commanded and drew in the People to her Assistance. Isabel by the Grace of God Queen of England, Dame of Ireland, Countess of Pontif, or Ponthieu; and we Edward, Eldest Son to the Noble King of England, Duke of Guyen, Earl of Chester, Pontif, and Monstroil, or Monstrevil; and we Edmond, Son to the Noble King of England, Earl of Kent, To all those to whom these Letters shall come, Greeting: Whereas 'tis notoriously known, That the State of Holy Church and the Realm of England, are many ways blemished and abased, by the Evil Counsel  and Abett of Hugh le Despenser, who by Pride and a Desire to Lord it, and set himself over all others, hath taken upon him Royal Power against Right, Reason, and his Allegiance; and in like manner made use of all the Evil Counsel of Robert Baldock and others his Adherents, so as Holy Church is reviled, and shamefully put under great Subjection,Her care of Holy Church, and the Pre∣lates of Holy Church. and the Prelates of Holy Church spoiled of their Goods against God and Right; Holy Church defamed and dishonoured many ways, and the Crown of England destroyed in divers manners, in Disheritance of our  Lord the King, and his Heirs, the Great Men of the Realm, by the Envy and wicked Cruelty of the said Hugh; many of them, without Fault and without Cause, put to shameful Death; some Disherited, others Imprisoned, Banished, and Exiled; Widows and Orphans wrongfully forejudged of their Right, and the People of the Land, by divers Talla∣ges and undue Exactions very often burthened, and by divers Oppressions
grieved without Mercy. By which Offences the said Hugh hath shewn himself an open Tyrant and Enemy to God and Holy Church, to our most dear Lord the King, and to the whole Realm. And we, and many others with us, and in our Company, who have long been estranged from the good Pleasure of our Lord the King, by the false Suggestions and Evil Procurement of the aforesaid Hugh and Robert, and their Adhe∣rents, are come into the Land to raise the State of Holy Church and the Realm, and to defend the People from these Mischiefs and grievous Op∣pressions,  and to maintain to our Power the Honour and Profit of Holy Church, and our Lord the King and the whole Realm, as abovesaid. Wherefore we command and pray you for the Common Profit of you and every one of you, to be Aidant to us at all times and in all places, and by all the ways you know or can, that the things abovesaid may be speedily brought to a good Effect and End. For know certainly, That all we, and all those with us, will not undertake any thing that shall not be for the Honor and Profit of Holy Church, and of the whole Kingdom, as in time you will  see and find, if God please. Given at Wallingford the 15th Day of October, in the Twentieth Year of the Reign of our most dear Lord the King. From Wallingford she marched to Oxford, and so in a shortBristol taken. time to Bristol, which she besieged, and soon took; and the next day after she came thither, De la Moor, f. 599. n. 50. H. Despenser the Father drawn and hanged. Hugh Despenser the Father, Earl of Winchester, was Drawn and Hanged upon the Common Gallows,  without Hearing or Trial, on the Aist. Sacr. vol. 1. f. 18. The Queen at Hereford a Month. Vigil of Simon and Jude, or the 27th of October. Then the Queen went into the Marches of Wales, and staid at Ib. & f. 600. The Queen goes with her Army into the Marches of Wales to find out the King, and takes him with H. De∣spenser the Younger and others. Hereford a Month, from whence she sent Henry Earl of Lancaster, and Rhese ap Howel a Clerc and Welsh-man, who knew those Parts well, with part of her Army to find out the King, and by Mo∣ney corrupted the Welsh-men, so as they discovered him to be in the  Abby aforesaid, where he was taken, with Hugh Despenser the Younger, Robert Baldock, and Simon de Reding, Ibm. who were committed to the Custody of the Earl, by the Advice of the Bishop of Hereford. Before it was known where the King was, it was supposed he had left Ap∣pend. n. 70. It was suppo∣sed the King was out of England. England, and 4 quitted the Government; whereupon on the 26th Day of October, at Bristol, the Arch-Bishop of Dublin,  the Bishops of Winchester, Ely, Lincoln, Hereford, Norwich, and other Prelates, and Thomas Earl of Norfolk, Edmund Earl of Kent, the King's Brothers, Henry Earl of Lancaster and Leicester, Thomas Wake, Henry de Bello Monte, or Beaumont, William la Zouche de Ashby, Robert de Monte alto, or Montalt, Robert de Morle, Robert de Wattevile, and other Barons and Knights in the Presence of the Queen and the Duke of Aquitan her Son, by the Consent of the whole Community of England, being then present, unanimously  chose the same Duke to be Guardian of the Kingdom, so as theThe Prince or Duke of  Aquitan made Guardian of the Kingdom. said Duke and Guardian should Govern the Kingdom in the Name and Right of the King his Father in his absence: And he took the Government of the Kingdom upon him accordingly, and passed all Matters under his Privy Seal, not having any other. Afterwards, on the 20th of November, when the Queen's and
Duke's Enemies were taken, and the King was returned into his Kingdom, the Queen, Duke, Prelates, and Noblemen aforesaid, with the Assent of the Community aforesaid, then being at Here∣ford, by reason that the Power of the Guardian ceased by the King's coming into his Kingdom, sent the Bishop of Hereford toThe Great Seal sent to the Queen and her Son. the King, then at Monmouth, to beseech him to Command, That all things that might tend to the Peace of the Kingdom, might be Sealed with the Great Seal then with him. This was done in the  presence of the Earl of Lancaster, &c. and the King was prevailed on to send the Seal to his Wife and Son to Ibm. [6] Wals. f. 125. n 30, 40. The King carried to Kenelworth-Castle. The Earl of Arundel and 2. others Heads struck off at Hereford. Seal what they would with it. Whilst the Earl of Lancaster was carrying the King through Wales, [6] by Monmouth, Lidbury, and other Places, to his Castle of Kenelworth in Warwickshire, they sent Hugh Spenser the Son, Ro∣bert Baldock, and Simon Reding, to the Queen at Hereford. Be∣fore  their coming, the Earl of Arundel, John Daniel, and Thomas Micheldene, had their Heads struck off by the Procurement and Hatred of Roger Mortimer, who Ibm. n 40, 50. Mortimer the Queen's most familiar Counsellor. was at this time the Queen's most familiar Counsellor (Consiliarius Reginae familiarissimus) without whom the Queen did nothing. Ibm. n. 40, 50. Those that brought Hugh Spenser, for their Reward had Two thousand Pounds, as she had promised. And Ibm. H. Despenser the Son drawn, hanged, and quartered. soon after he was adjudged to Death, without being put to answer, (sine Responsione) and was Drawn  and Hanged upon a Gallows 50 Foot high, and then Quartered, and his Head fixed upon London-Bridge. Ib f. 126. lin. 3. Simon Reding drawn and hanged. On the same Day Simon Reding was Drawn and Hanged for speaking hard things of the Queen. Yet Knighton Col. 2547. n. 10, 20, &c. Knighton's Re∣lation of the Judgment of H. Despenser the Son. reports Hugh Spenser the Younger was Ar∣raigned before Sir William Trussel, a Justiciary, in the Form there mentioned, which was by way of a Speech made against him, as  'tis here contracted. Hugh le Despenser Ibm. Sir W. Trussell's Speech against H. Despenser the Son. in the Parlement at Westminster, in the 15th of the King, your Father and you Hugh were awarded Traytors and Enemies of the Realm, and Banished as such, never to return with∣out the Assent of the King in full Parliament duely summoned. Con∣trary to which Award, your Father and you Hugh were found in the Court without Warrant: And you Hugh, as you returned into  the Kingdom, feloniously spoiled and robbed Two Domands (Mer∣chant-Ships so called) of Goods to the Value of Forty thousand Pounds. Hugh, after this Felony, you came to the King, and caused him to go with Force against the Peers of the Realm, and other his Liege People, to destroy and disherit them, contrary to the Great Char∣ter: And also taking upon you Royal Power, you Hugh and your As∣sistants, with Force and Arms, robbed feloniously the good People of the Realm; and by Andrew Harleye, and other Traitors your Adhe∣rents,  Murdered the good Earl of Hereford, Monsieur William Sul∣lee, and Monsieur Roger de Berfelde (at Borough-Bridge) and caused to be taken my most Honourable Lord Thomas the Good Earl of Lancaster, and caused him to be Judged by a false Record, against Law, Reason, and the Great Charter, and also to be Murdered, Martyred, and put to a cruel Death. Also in the same March (in the French
Journey) to Borough-Bridge, you caused many of my Lords (the Earl of Lancaster) Barons and Knights to be Drawn and Hanged, by false Record against Law and Reason, Col. 2548. n. 10, 20, 30. and caused other Great Men to be put in Prison and Murdered to get their Estates, as Roger Mortimer the Nephew and Ʋnkle, Hugh Audeley Father and Son, and the Earl of Hereford. Hugh, after this Destruction of the No∣bility, you Hugh, your Father, and Robert Baldock, usurping Royal Power over the King, led him and his People into Scotland against his  Enemies, where you Hugh by your Traiterous Conduct caused him to lose 20000 of his People, to his great Dishonour, and Damage of the Realm, and to return without doing any thing. Hugh, Ibm. n. 40, 50, 60. this Treason nor this Tyranny would satisfie you, until by Royal Power gained over the King, you destroyed the Franchises of Holy Church and the Prelates, as the Bishops of Hereford, Lin∣coln, and Norwich, taking their Goods out of their Churches: And  whereas you knew God had done great Things by my Lord (the Earl of Lancaster) you caused to be murdered, you placed armed Guards, and shut the Church-Doors, that none should enter to Honour God and his Saints. Hugh, after these Mischiefs, you advised the King to give unto the false Traitor the Earl of Winchester, Andrew Harkley, and self, Lands properly belonging to the Crown, in Disherision thereof. Ibm. Col. 2549. n. 10, 20. Hugh, whereas the Queen and her Son passed beyond Sea by the King's Command to save the Country of Guyen, in point to be lost by  your Traiterous Counsel, you sent over a great Sum of Money to some of your wicked Adherents, to destroy the Queen and her Son, (qest Droit heir del Realm) who is Right Heir of the Kingdom, and to hinder their coming over. Ibm. Hugh, your Father, Robert Baldock, and self, and other false Traitors your Adherents, taking upon you Royal Power, made great and small by force to swear to, and assure you, to maintain you in your false Quarrels or Pretences (en vouz faux Quereles) not having re∣gard that such Confederacies were False and Traiterous, against Legience  and the State of the King and his Crown. Ibm. n. 30, 40. And forasmuch as you Hugh, and other Traitors, knew that the Queen and her Son were ar∣rived in the Nation, by your Evil Counsel you caused the King to withdraw himself, and go from them, and carried him out of the Kingdom, to the Danger of his Body, and Dishonour to him and his People, feloniously taking with you the Treasure of the Realm, contrary to the Great Charter. Hugh Ibm. The Judg∣ment upon H. le Despenser the Son. you are found Traitor, wherefore all the good People of  the Kingdom, Great and Small, Rich and Poor, by Common Assent, do Award, That you are found as a Thief, and therefore shall be Hanged; and are found as a Traitor, and therefore shall be Drawn and Quartered; and for that you have been Outlawed by the King, and by Common Assent, and returned to the Court without Warrant, you shall be Beheaded (vous serrez decollez) and for that you abetted and pro∣cured Discord between the King and Queen, and others of the Realm,  you shall be Embowelled, and your Bowels burnt. Ibm. n. 50. Withdraw, Traitor, Tyrant, and so go take your Judgment, attainted wicked Traitor. He was at this time Earl of Glocester; and I see no Trial by Com∣mon Jury, or his Peers; and the Attaint was only this Speech made
against, and most what was objected to him, had been Pardoned by Act of Parlement. (Et sic Ibm. His Executi∣oc. statim morte plexus est Octavo Kalendarum Decembris) And so he was presently put to Death, on the 8th of the Kalends of December, or 24th of No∣vember. The Earl of Lancaster made no great haste with his Prisoner the King to Kenelworth, for in 13 Days time he was got no fur∣ther  from Monmouth than Lidbury in Herefordshire, at which Place the Append. n. 71. Writ for Proroguing a Parlement that was pretended to have been Summoned by the King to meet 15 Days after St. An∣drew, was Dated the 3d of December (Teste Rege apud Lidbury, tertio die Decembris, 20 Ed. II.) Witness the King at Lidbury theA Parlement to be holden by the Queen and her Son, if the King not in Eng∣land. Prorogued to the morrow of Twelfth∣day. The King▪ knew nothing of the Writ of Prorogati∣on dated De∣cemb. 3. 3d of December. The Writ for this Parlement, which was to meet 15 Days after St. Andrew, I believe can no where be found, which was to be holden by Isabel Queen-Consort of England, and Edward  his Eldest Son Guardian of England, he then being out of the King∣dom, as 'tis said in the Writ, Dated the 3d of December, &c. for Proroguing that Parlement to the morrow of Epiphany, or Twelfth-Day; To be holden by him if Personally present, or in his absence by his said Consort and Son. But the miserable King knew nothing of this Summons Dated at Lidbury on the 3d of December, with his Teste; for the Great Seal was that Day in the keeping of the Bishop of Norwich at Wodstock, and the next Day delivered to Roger Mortimer and the  Duke of Aquitan (i. e. Edward the King's Son) at the same Place, as it most certainly appears by the Record in the Appen∣dix,The Parle∣ment met ac∣cording to the Prorogation. [4] Hist. Sacr. vol. 1. f. 367. The first thing moved in it, was, Whether the Father or Son should be King. n. 70. The Parlement (as 'tis called) met crastino Epiphaniae, or 7th of January: The first thing moved by the Bishop of [4] Hereford, and many other Bishops joining with him, was, Whether King Edward the Father, or his Son Edward, should Reign over them? They were  not long before they Agreed the Son should have the Government of the Kingdom, and be Crowned King Append. n. 72. It was carried for the Son. The Reasons why he was deposed. for the Causes fol∣lowing: 1. First, For that the Person of the King was not sufficient to Govern; for in all his time he was Led and Governed by others, who gave him Evil Counsel, to the Dishonour of him∣self, and Destruction of Holy Church and all his People, not  considering or knowing whether it was Good or Evil; nor would remedy these things, when he was requested by the Great and Wise Men of his Realm, or suffer them to be a∣mended. 2. Also, In all his time he would not give himself to Good Counsel, nor take it, nor to the Good Government of his Kingdom; but always gave himself to Works and Em∣ployments  not Convenient, neglecting the Business of his Realm. 3. Also, For want of Good Government he lost the King∣dom of Scotland, and other Lands and Dominions in Gas∣coigne and Ireland, which his Father left him in Peace and
Amity with the King of France, and many other Great Per∣sons. 4. Also, By his Pride and Cruelty he destroyed Holy Church, and the Persons of Holy Church, putting some in Prison, and others in Distress; and also put to shameful Death, and Imprisoned, Banished, and Disherited many Great and Noble Men of the Land. 5. Also, Whereas he was bound by his Oath to do Right to all, he would not do it for his own Profit, and the Covetous∣ness of him and his Evil Counsellors which were with him; neither regarded the other Points of the Oath which he made at his Coronation, as he was obliged. 6. Also, He abandoned his Realm, and did as much as he  could to destroy it and his People; and what is worse, by his Cruelty and the Default of his Person, he is found incor∣rigible without hopes of Amendment. All which things are so notorious, they cannot be gainsaid. These Articles were Conceived and Dictated by John Stratford Author. De∣cemb. col. 2765. n. 40. Commission∣ers sent to the King at Ke∣nelworth-Castle Bishop of Winchester and Treasurer of England, and written by William Mees Clerc, his Secretary and a Publick Notary. Having  Approved the Articles, they were by Comune Agreement Knighton, col. 2549. n. 50, 60. sent to the King, then Prisoner in Kenelworth-Castle, Three Bishop's, Two Earls, Two Barons, Two Abbots, and Two Justices, amongst whom was Sir William Trussell before noted, Proxy to the whole Parle∣ment, to Resign their Homage and Fealty to the King, which he did in this manner: Append. n. 73. Homage and Fealty resign∣ed to K. Edw. I William Trussel, Procurator of the Pre∣lates, Earls, and Barons, and other People in my Procuracy named, having for this full and sufficient Power, do Resign and Deliver up to  you Edward King of England, as to the King before this Hour, the Homage and Fealty of the Persons in my Procuracy named, and do Re∣turn them upon you Edward, and make Quit or Free the Persons afore∣said, in the best manner that Law and Custom may do it; And do make Protestation in the Name of those that will not for the future be in your Fealty, or Allegiance, nor claim to hold any thing of you as King, but shall hold you as a Private Person, without any manner of Royal Dignity. Sir Thomas de la Moor f. 600. n. 40, 50. tells us who the Three Bishops were; John Straifort Bishop of Winchester, Adam de Torleton Bishop of Here∣ford, and Henry Burwash Bishop of Lincoln: Three Principal Compa∣nionsThe Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester cir∣cumvent the King, by Pro∣mises and Threats. in transacting this Affair. The Bishops of Winchester and Lin∣coln came before the rest to the King, who with his Keeper the Earl of Lancaster, persuaded him to resign his Crown to his Son, and circumvented the King, promising him as much Honour after his Re∣signation  as before; and on the other hand threatned him if he would not, the People should yield up their Homage and Fealty, and repudiate his Sons, and Choose one not of Royal Blood. With these and other importune Promises and Threats, they obtained their Desires. And then the Bishop of Hereford Ib. f. 601. lin 4. &c. brought in all the other Commissioners, sent by the Parlement, into the King's
Chamber, where the whole Matter they came for was dis∣patched, not without great Grief and Reluctancy from the King. Walsingham f. 126. n. 20, 30. reports, all the Nobility met at London, on the morrow of, or day after Twelfth-day, in Parlement, and Judged the King Ʋnfit to Rule, and for several Reasons to be Deposed, and his Son Prince Edward to be chosen King. Of which when  the Queen had notice, Ibm. The Queen outwardly sorrowful. she was full of Grief outwardly (ut foris apparuit.) But the Prince affected with this outward Passion of his Mother, would not accept the Title against his Father's Will and Consent (Et Ibm. n. 40, 50. The Prince unwilling to receive the Crown. juravit quod invito Patre, nunquam susciperet Coronam Regni.) The King when he received this News by the Commissioners, was much disturbed, and said since it could be no otherwise, he thanked them for choosing his First Born Son, ma∣king his Resignation, and delivering up the Royal Ensigns and Tokens  of Sovereignty. The Commissioners returning to the Parlement atK. Ed. resigns. London, with the King's Answer and the Royal Ensigns, made the Rabble Ibm. His Son made King. rejoice; and presently the whole Community of the Kingdom admitted Edward, a Youth of Fourteen Years of Age to be their King, on the 20th Day of January, which they would have to be the First Day of his Reign. And from that time he acted as King before his Coronation, as may appear by the Claus. 1 Ed. III. Part. 1. M. 28. Append. n. 74. Writ to all the Sheriffs of England to proclaim his Peace. The King to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, Greeting: Because Edward,Note this Writ. late King of England, our Father, by Common Council and Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and also of the Com∣munities of the said Kingdom, of his own Free Will removed himself from the Government of the said Kingdom, Willing and Granting, That we as his First-Born and Heir of the Kingdom, should take upon us the Rule and Government: And we yielding to the Good Pleasure of our  Father, by the Counsel and Advisement of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Communities aforesaid, have taken upon us the Govern∣ment of the said Kingdom and received the Homages and Fealties of the said Prelates and Great Men according to Custom. Therefore desiring our Peace for the Quiet and Tranquillity of our People to be inviolably observed, we Command, That presently after sight of these Presents, you cause our Peace publickly to be proclaimed through your whole Bailiwic, forbidding all and singular, under the pain of Disinheriting, and losing  Life and Member, That they presume not to infringe or violate our Peace, but that all Men do prosecute their Suits and Actions without violence, according to the Laws and Customs of the Land, &c. Witness the King at Westminster the 29th of January. On the First of February, being Sunday, he was Crowned. In the time between his being declared King and his Corona∣tion, the Londoners fearing themselves for their Cruelty against  the Bishop of Excester, to palliate their Wickedness, Hist. Sacr. f. 367. vol. 1. The Londoners sorce the Bi∣shops to swear to maintain and desend all the Rights & Lie ries of the City. interim Londinenses sibi metuentes de crudelitate Patrata in Episcopum Exo∣niensem, ad palliandum iniquitatem eorum, &c. forced the Arch-Bishops of Canterbury, York, and Dublin, and the other Bishops which came to the Parlement, to come to their Guild-Hall, where all the Bi∣shops, except the Arch-Bishop of York, the Bishops of London and
Carlisle, Sware to maintain and defend the Rights and Liberties of the City, in the presence of the Earl of Kent and an immense Multitude, who came to see the Silliness of the Bishops, how they Sacrificed to Mahomet: Ibm. In presentia Comitis Cantiae, & multitu∣dinis immensae, qui ad videndum fatuitatem Episcoporum, quo modo Mahumeto Sacrificabant confluxerunt. The Bishop of Rochester protestedThe Bishop of Rochester's Protestation. before a Publick Notary, and Witnesses especially called, That it was not his Intention to Swear, but saving his Order, and saving all  Things contained in Magna Charta. The King was all this time De la Moor, f. 601, 602, 603. The Nation begins to be sensible of the King's Condi∣tion. Prisoner in Kenelworth-Castle, not knowing what further they were doing. The Nation observing what had been done, seeing the Queen engaged, and the Prince carried along with them, (not then perhaps suspecting or in the least understanding the Designs of the Heads and Pri∣vado's of the Faction) began to be sensible of the King's Condi∣tion,  and to consider the Pretences of his Enemies, and to think how they might be kind to him, and prevent further Mischief.His Keeper the Earl of Lancaster pi∣ties his deplo∣rable case. Mny Lords and others begin to think how they might deliver him; the su∣spicion where∣of, caused him to be removed from Kenel∣worth-Castle, and to have new Keepers. His Keeper also, the Earl of Lancaster, began to be every way obliging to him, much pitying and commiserating his deplorable Case. Many Lords and others began to think how they might deliver him out of Captivity; the notice or rather suspicion there∣of, much startled Mortimer, the Bishop of Hereford, the Queen, and Chief Actors in this Tragedy, reflecting upon what they had  done, and fearing if the King should get his Liberty they could not be safe, or at least their Designs must come to nothing, and caused them to think of removing him from Kenelworth, and ap∣pointing him new Keepers, who were Thomas Gournay and John Maltrovers Knights, receiving him at Kenelworth-Castle by Prin∣cipal Authority, (Authoritate Principali, as Sir Thomas de la Moor phraseth it) and hurried him up and down the Nation, that it might not be known where he was; and at last brought him toHe is inhu∣manly treated  Berkley-Castle in Glocestershire, where he was inhumanly treated by his Keepers, attempting to destroy him by all ways of horrid Indignities, brutish Usages, and before uncontrived and un∣thought of Affronts: But having been frustrated in their Inten∣tions, by his natural Strength of Body and Fortitude of Mind, on the 10th of the Ibm. f▪ 603. n. 20. And barba∣rously mur∣thered. Calends of October, or 22d of September, at night in his Bed they stifled and smothered him, with large and heavy Bolsters and Pillows, and put up a red-hot Iron, thro'  a Ductil-pipe, into his Guts at his Fundament; and in this most cruel manner murdered him, that no VVound or Mark of a Vio∣lent Death might be found upon him.
Church-Affairs. IN these we may give a short Account and History of the Tem∣plars, being an Ecclesiastick Order, and in these times the Pope  claiming the Jurisdiction over, Judgment and Censure of them, as not being subject to Temporal Power. This Order began in the Mat. Paris, f. 67. n. 10▪ 20, 30, 40. A. D. 1118. A short Hi∣story and Sup∣pression of the Tem∣plars. year 1118, only Nine Knights at first entring into a Combination by voluntary Agreement, were the first Founders of it, whereof the Two Principal were Hugo de Paganis, and Godfrey of St. Omar, to whom, because they had no certain Habitation, Baldwin King of Jerusalem assigned them part of his own Palace, near the South-Gate adjoining to the Temple of the Lord, from  whence they were called Templars: Their first Profession was for the Remission of their Sins, to guard the High-ways for the safety of Pilgrims, and such as came to visit the Sepulchre, and to defend them from Thieves and Robbers. The King, Nobility, and Pa∣triarch, with other Prelates, giving Lands to support and main∣tain them. Nine years after, Ibm. in the Council of Troyes, they had a Rule and Habit assigned them by Pope Honorius, when their Numbers and Possessions began to increase; in a short time  they were so numerous, that there was in the Convent 300 Knights, besides of Brethren almost an infinite number; and they were said to have such vast Possessions, as there was no Christian Coun∣try, wherein they had them not, and so as to exceed Princes in their Revenues, and are reported by the same Ib. f. 615. n. 50. A. D. 1244. Historian, to have obtained, and been possessed of in the space of 126 years 9000 Mannors in Christendom: Their increase in Revenues and Riches begat the Envy, and their neglect and non observation of  the first Institution of their Order, their Luxury, Pride, and most horrid and detestable Crimes which were reported of, and objected against them, begat the hatred of all Christendom, so that within Sixty three years after, when they were [4] possessed of 16000 Lordships, besides other Lands, viz. Heylin's Cosmogr. lib. 3. fol. 98. a. in the year of our Lord 1307, on Friday after St. Denis, or 12th of October, by Com∣mand of the Mezeray's Hist. f. 333. King of France, Philip the Fair, with Consent of Pope Clement the Fifth, all the Templars in France were secured,  their Houses, Lands, Possessions, Goods, Treasure, Church Ornaments, and Writings seised on, and delivered to Guardians, under whose Custody and Administration they remained. In like manner it was Rt. Claus. 1 Ed. II. M. 12. Dors. De captione Templariorum, &c. A. D. 1307. ordained by the King and his Coun∣cil, that all the Templars in every County in England, Scotland, Ire∣land, West-Wales, North-Wales, and Earldom of Chester, but more particularly those in England, should be attached by their Bodies  on Wednesday next, after the Feast of Epiphany, or 6th of Ja∣nuary, and that all their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, as well Ecclesiastick as Temporal, with their Charters, Writings, and all Muniments, should be seized into the King's Hands; That the Goods and Chattels should be inventoried and prised, and Inden∣tures made of them in the presence of the Guardian, or Preceptor
of every place, and in the presence of Two Lawful Men, where∣of one to remain with the Guardian, and the other with the She∣riff, the Live Stock to be kept upon the Premises, and the Lands to be Plowed and Sown to the best Profit and Advantage; That the Bodies of the Templers should be kept safe in convenient Places, other then their own, but not to be put in vile and base Prisons, while the King should order otherwise, and that every one ac∣cording to his Condition, should receive a Competent Mainte∣nance  from these Goods. There is also contained in this Record the manner how this Ordinance was put in Execution: The Writ wherein the Instructions for the Execution of it were included, was Dated December the 20th, in the First of Edward II.A. D. 1307. The King of Puteanus de la condem∣nation des Templars, p. 8, 9. France, after he had secured the Templars, desirous to proceed in the Prosecution of them, consulted the Faculty of Divinity in Paris, who answered him by Decree;  That the Authority of a Secular Judge could not extend it self to proceed against any one for Heresie, unless he was required by the Church, or unless in case of necessity, where there was dan∣ger, he might secure Hereticks with intention to deliver them to the Church; Those that were in the Exercise of War for the Defence of the Faith, having made a Vow of Religion approved by the Church, were holden for Religious, and exempt from the Lay-Judge; and as to their Goods, they ought to be preserved  to be imployed for the end they were first given to the Tem∣plars. The Pope finding Ib. p. 9. the most wicked Procedure of the King, pretending they were Ecclesiasticks, Remonstrated to him by his Bull the great Obedience of his Predecessors to the Holy See, who never attempted to Judge Ecclesiasticks; That the Templars were immediate Subjects of the Church; That to the prejudice of his  former Bulls, he caused Execution to be done as well upon their Persons, as Goods, for which he demanded Reason, sending to him Two Cardinals, to cause him to put things in such a State, that might satisfie him; Requesting him to Command, That the Accused, and their Goods, might be put under the Power of them Two. In pursuance of his Ib. & p. 10, 11. Bull, full of Discontent, the Pope  suspended the Power of the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Prelates, and Inquisitors in France, and removed the whole Affair before his own Person, which made the Pursuit of the King void, and of none effect; Which the King resented by a Remonstrance which he made on his part; A Couragious Remonstrance, (aith the Author) and full of Resolution, (Remonstrance couragense & plin de Resolution) for he complained first, The Pope was cold to se∣cond this just Pursuit, it being without difficulty; That God  hated nothing more then those that were Lukewarm, this was to give Consent to the Crimes of the Accused, and give them Assu∣rance they need not confess their Faults; That the Pope was sub∣ject to the Laws of his Predecessors, and as some have said, that he might be Censured in a Case of Faith; That the suspension of the Power of the Inquisitors made by the Pope, was much preju∣dicial
to this Affair, giving hope to the Templars they might find favour before him, or that the Business would never be ended; That what he did was as a Catholick King, not as an Accuser, not as a Threatner, or Partial Promoter, but as the Minister of God, a Champion of the Catholick Faith, a Zelot for the Divine Law, and for the Defence of the Church, according to the Tradi∣tions of the Holy Fathers, of which he was bound to give an Account to God. The King by all ways shewing to the whole World, that he[1] Ib. p. 11. went freely on in this Affair, and by justifying himself, he had done nothing without just Occasion, satisfied the Cardinals, and caused to be conducted to Poicters, where the Pope then was, some of the principal Templars, that he might know from their own Mouths the Justice of his Procedure. The Pope Ibm. interrogated these Templars, and 72 of them con∣fessed, that at their Reception into the Order, they denied Jesus Christ, and many other Crimes, which were so horrible that he would not insert them in his Bull; Ibm. yet their Depositions were taken in Writing before the Bishop of Preneste, the Two Legates sent into France, and Three other Cardinals. These Confessions Ibm. & p. 12. without constraint, and of other most  strange things, and the freedom the King of France used, changed the Resolution of the Pope, and he saw well he had failed in the suspension of the Power of the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and Inquisi∣tors of France, (& il vid bien quil avoit failli en suspendant le pou∣voir, &c.) for by his Bull he took off the Suspension, and per∣mitted the Bishops with all diligence to proceed within their Dio∣ceses against the Templars. In the mean time the Ibm. Legates advised the Pope, the King had put the Templars under their Power, and judging they could not safely be sent out of the Kingdom without a great Guard, he ordered they should be kept within the Realm by his own People, always under the Name of the Pope and himself. The King was very jealous of his Rights and Authority, yet[4] Ibm. p. 13, 14. shewed no Discontent; however wrote to the Pope, That as he had  in no wise done injury to the Church Liberty, so he intended not by the frankness he had used in delivering what he did to the Cardinals, to do Violence to his own Rights; and for the Tem∣plars Goods, those he had deputed to keep them were his faithful Subjects, and such as had the Charge of his Demain. This Letter Ib. p. 14. drew from the Pope a Bull, by which he de∣clared, That what he had done, and should do in this Affair by  his Agents, as well in respect of the Persons of the Templars, as their Goods, should be made no advantage to him, nor prejudice to the King, or Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, or others of the French Nation, as to their Homages, Fees, and other Rights, they could pretend to, upon the Goods of the Templars, both Move∣able and Immoveable, since their being secured.
While these things were in agitation, fearing lest there might be alteration in his Proofs, there being as yet no Process made Ibm. & p. 15. the King by Deliberation of his Council, with the Advice of the Prelates, Princes, and Barons, of his Realm, issued a Com∣mission as well to Frier William of Paris of the Order of Preachers, and the Pope's Inquisitor in France, as to some Gentlemen upon the place where the Accused were Prisoners, to assist on his part in  Interrogating the Templars, in which Commission were inserted their chief Names; That when they first entred into the Order, they denied Jesus Christ three times, and spit upon the face of the Crucifix so often, that those that were received kissed those which received them on the Breech, the Navel, and Mouth, and then obliged themselves, and made a Vow to expose themselves one to another for the Exercise of the Execrable Sin of Sodomy. The Ibm. p. 15, 16. Inquisitor and Gentlemen lost no time in the Execution  of these Commissions, but laboured without intermission to perform what the King had injoined them, so as the Inquisitor on several days Heard and Examined 140 Templars, of the Temple at Paris, who all agreed, That at their Reception into the Order, they were made to deny Jesus Christ, and spit three times upon a Crucifix that was presented to them; Secondly, They all deposed, That he who was received, kissed the Receiver in the Mouth, Navel, and Breech;  Thirdly, That they had straight Prohibitions aginst the Carnal Knowledge of Women, but if pushed with Carnal Appetite, the Brethren without Fear or Conscience might use one another; Fourthly, Some of them Ib. p. 16. confessed they had Adored a Wooden Head gilt, with a great Beard, which was only brought forth at general Chapters. The Grand Master, Ibm. James de Molay or Mauleu, and Hugh  de Peraldo, being Examined amongst the rest, confessed the same things, and there was but Ib. p. 17. Three of the whole number, which affirmed they had never seen any ill in the Order. The Ib. 27, 28. Pope not having any great Confidence in the French Inquisitors, deputed Three Cardinals, to Examine the Prisoners themselves at Crinon in Tourain, that he might know whether their Informations were true; From whose Report, the Pope per∣ceiving  the Order to be more and more corrupt, thought it ne∣cessary his Inquisition should be general, and therefore dispatch't his Bulls or Commissions to all the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and Of∣ficers, in France, England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, Almain, Bo∣hemia, Poland, the Kingdoms of Arragon, Majorca, Navarre, and the Lands adjoining, the Provinces of Arles, Aix, Ambrun, Vienne, Bezanson and Tarentais, Cyprus, and all Italy, Sicily, Hungary, Achaia, Sardinia, and Corsica. To these Bulls or Commissions the Articles of Ib. p. 29, 30, 31. Append. n 75. Inquiry, di∣rected and prescribed by the Pope, were annexed, which were these:
1. Whether, when first they were admitted into the Order, they abjured Christ, the Virgin Mary, or the Saints, or were admonished to do it, or they themselves had incited others to abjure? 2. Whether they had denied Christ, or Crucified Jesus, to be true God, or that he suffered for the Redemption of Mankind? 3. Whether they affirmed him a false Prophet, and that he suffered  for his own Crimes? 4. Whether they believed the Master of the Order, not being in▪ Holy Orders, could by the Sacrament of Pennance forgive Sins, and whether he had done it? 5. Whether they thought they had any thing in their Statutes, to the  Disgrace of the Orthodox Roman Church, or that favoured Crimes and Errors? 6. Whether, when they entred into the Order, they were taught, that they might luxuriously use one another, and commit no Wicked∣ness, and whether they taught the Novices this? 7. Whether they sware to advance their Order against Right, and  what was Decent, and induced others to swear accordingly? 8. Whether he that admitted them into the Order, told them they could have no Salvation in Jesus Christ? 9. Whether they spit upon the Cross, and the Image of Christ, or stamp't upon it, or on the Holy day of Friday, or any other, pissed upon it? 10. Whether they worshipped a Cat, or Skull, or any fictitious and false Image or Idol, with Divine Worship, in their great Meet∣ings, or other Place of the Brethren; and whether they hoped for Riches, and plentiful Fruits of the Earth, and Trees from them? 11. Whether they touched the Idol with the Girdle they girt about their Shirts and Flesh? 12. Whether they libidinously and intemperately kissed the young Novices in any indecent part? 13. Whether, when they said Mass, they omitted the Holy Myste∣ries, and Words of Consecration? 14. Whether they esteemed it Wicked and Nefarious, to do these  things? The King having been at Poicters, Puteanus, ut supra, p. 33. conferred with the Pope, and they had agreed upon these Heads; That the Templars should be kept by the King, at the Request of the Pope and Bi∣shops, and in their Name; That the Bishops might Judge the
Templars within their Diocese, except those who were reserved to the Pope; That in case of Abolition of the Order, the Goods should be employed for the Service of the Holy Land; That they should give to one another Covenants, that the Money arising from those Goods of the Templars, should not be diverted to any other use. The Bishops and other Prelates Ibm. p. 34. 35. in pursuance of the Bulls,  proceeded against the Templars within their Dioceses, and did what they could to find out the Truth of the Accusations; but for that in France the Examination had been made before by Inqui∣sitors with the King's Authority, assisted by Gentlemen named by himself, with which the Pope was not satisfied, and further, be∣cause the Order was not only setled in France, but spread all over the Earth, he thought it most necessary to name Commissioners himself to proceed a-new in his Name and by his Order against  the Templars, who were the Arch-Bishop of Narbon, the Bishop of Bayeux, Mande, and Limoges, Matthew of Naples Arch-Deacon of Rouen, John de Mantua the Pope's Notary, Arch-Deacon of Trente, John de Montlaur Arch-Deacon of the Church of Maguelon, and Wil∣liam Agarris Provost of the Church of Aix, as appears by the Commission it self Dated at Poicters the second of the Ides, or[6] Ibm. p. 113. to p. 123. in the Ex∣tracts, &c A. D. 1309. Twelfth of August, in the third Year of his Pontificate, A. E. 1309. The same Ibm. 36. Month the Commissioners began to act, and sent out their Citations for the whole Order to appear before them at Paris in the Bishops Hall. On the 22d of November, they caused the Grand Master James de Molay, and Hugh de Peraldo, to come before them; but I find nothing worth noting that passed between them. One of the  Superiours of the Order, Ibm. p. 38, 39. Ponzard de Gyziac, told the Commis∣sioners, That the Templars in many Places had been grievously Racked; That all which they had confessed was for fear of Death, and that some of them died in their Torments; yet nevertheless he was resolved to defend his Order; and desired Renaud of Or∣leans, and Peter of Boulogne, Friers of the Order, might be joined with him for Advice. These Commissioners Ibm. p. 46, 47. remained at Paris, from the Month  of August, 1309. to the Month of May in the Year 1311. in which time they examined 231 Witnesses, as well Templars as others; and they almost all confessed the Crimes contained in the Articles sent by the Pope. During Ib p. 47. this time, there was a Council of the Province of Sens, held at Paris against the Templars, where the Arch-Bishop of  Sens presided. Those that undertook the Defence of the Tem∣plars, told the Pope's Commissioners, they had appealed to the Pope from the Council of Sens, and other Councils, which were holden for Matters concerning them, and requested them to take notice of it; who refused to do it, because both the Commissioners and Councils had the Pope's Power.
This Ibm. p. 48. Provincial Council, by a long Process, Sentenced many Templars, some whereof were only Absolved; others did Pennance, and were delivered; others were Condemned to end their Lives between Four Walls, and 59, as such as had relapsed, were De∣graded by the Bishop of Paris, and delivered over to the Secular Power, and by that condemned to be Burnt, which Judgment was executed accordingly; who declared themselves Innocent at their  Death, and that what had been imposed upon them was false, to the Astonishment of the People. There were Ibm. p. 152, &c. 74 Templars named in the Instrument, who of∣fered to defend the Order: They and their Procurators in the Ibm. & p. 157, &c. Instrumente and Articles of Defence, do say, That the Articles sent by the Pope were detestable, horrid, and wicked Lyes, unrea∣sonable and impossible; That the Religion of the Temple was pure  and free from such Sins and Vices; That the Articles were made and forged by false Brethren, and Enemies to the Order; and that the King of France first, and then the Pope, had been deluded and imposed upon by these Men: That the Brethren of the Temple, that had confessed and told so many Lyes, did it for fear of Death and Torments, or were suborned or taught what they should say, so as they might agree, though brought from several Parts: That the Apostates and Fugitives from the Order, and such as had been  cast out of it for their Wickedness, were sought up for Wit∣nesses and Informers: They also protest and declare it to be noto∣rious, That what the Brethren of the Temple had said, or should say while in Prison, ought not to prejudice the Order; and that they were corrupted and compelled by Promises, Money, or fear of Torments and Contumelies they had seen others suffer; whereas the false Brethren had great Promises made them, and lived splendidly. To prove these things, they desire they might be in their former  Liberty, and might appear in the General Council; and that those that could not come, might appoint their Proctors. These and many things more are contained in their Reasons, Arguments, and Articles of Defence, which were delivered in Writing and due Form of Law, to the Pope's Commissioners, as may be seen in the Instruments themselves before cited in the Margin. The Pope by his pelm. Con∣cil. vol. 2. f. 458. Labbei Concil. Tom. 11. Part. 2. col. 1539. A. D. 1308. Bull dated at Poicters on the 2d of the Ides  or 12th of August, in the 3d of his Pontificate, A. D. 1308. had Summoned a General Council to meet at Vienne in Dauphin, on the Calends or first of October, two Years after the same Calends then next coming; and from that time by a second Bull, Labbei, ib. col. 1554. Dated at Avenion on the 12th of the Calends of December, or 22d of November, in the 6th of his Pontificate, A. D. 1310. he Prorogued the Meeting of the same Council to the Calends of October then next coming, A. D. 1311.  A. D. 1311. On the 11th of the Calends of April, or the 22d of March nextIbm. Labbe. col. 1569. following, on Thursday in the Week before Easter, the Pope cal∣led a private Consistory of Cardinals and Prelates, wherein he made void and utterly annulled the Order of Templars, and on the 3d of April next coming, A. D. 1312. the second Session of this Council
began, in which by Approbation of the Council, the Pope published the Cassation as above, Philip King of France being present, with his Brother Charles of Valois, and his three Sons. The Bull by which this whole Order was dissolved, hath this Title, Ibm. col. 1557. Sen∣tentia de extinctione Templariorum a Clemente Papa V. lata in Concilio Viennensi: The Sentence of Extinction of the Templars, made by Pope Clement V. in the Council of Vienne, Dated there on the 6th of the Nones, or 2d of May, 1312. an Exemplification where∣of  is to be found in the ot. Claus. 7 Ed. II. M. 11. Dors. Tower of London, in which 'tis said the Pope dissolved the Order (non sine Cordis amaritudine & do∣lore) not without Grief and Bitterness of Heart; for their unheard∣of Wickedness and Obscenity, which, for the Filthiness of it, could not be inserted in the Bull. Yet it was not done by definitive Sen∣tence, which could not of right be given upon the Inquisition and Process had against them, but by way of Provision, or Aposto∣lick Ordinance: Labbe, ib. D. E. (Non per modum definitivae Sententiae, cum eam  super hoc secundum Inquisitiones, & Processus super his habitos, non possemus ferre de jure, sed per viam Provisionis seu Ordinationis Apo∣stolicae) by irrefragable Sanction to endure for ever; by Apostolick Authority reserving all the Goods (which in the Civilians and Ca∣nonists Sense, are both Moveable and Immoveable) to the Or∣dering and Disposal of the Apostolical See; and then annexed them for ever to the Order of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem. That the Templars were taken and imprisoned in England, and their  Goods, as well Moveable as Immoveable, seized in the same manner as in France, hath been shewn before: That also they were here Examined as there, appears by the Instrument, or Com∣mission, and Records here cited. The Pope, by his Bull, or Com∣mission, Dated at Poicters the 12th of August, 1309. appoints the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Arch-Bishop of York, the Bishops of Lincoln, Chichester, and Orleans, the Abbats of Lotyngiac in the Diocese of Paris, and St. Germans in the Meadows near Paris,  Richard de Vaux, Cannon of Narbon, his Chaplain and Hearer of Causes in his Palace, and Guido de Vich, Rector of Hoshe in the Diocese of London, to be Inquisitors into, and Examiners of the Crimes of the Templars, Claus. 3▪ Ed▪ II. M. 21. Dors. in the 3d of Edw. II. it was agreed (Acordez est que tous les Templars Dengleterre) that all the Templars of England should be brought to three Places, London and Lincoln in the Province of Canterbury; and those in the Province of York to that City, to be examined by the Inquisitors and Examiners as∣signed  by the Pope, and by the Ordinaries or Bishops of the Diocese where they were; and that the Inquisitors and Ordinaries should repair thither; and the King commanded such as had the keep∣ing of the Templars to carry them before them, as often as they should be required; and in the 4th of his Reign granted safe[2] Rot. Pat. 4 Ed. II. Part 1. M. 10. Conduct to the Pope's Inquisitors or Nuncio's, the Abbat of Lo∣tyngiac and Richard (or, as in the Record, Sicard de Vaux) with others, to go to Places aforesaid, and enquire upon the Articles  sent by the Pope against the Order of the Templars, and all and sin∣gular Persons of it. What was proved against the English Templars before these In∣quisitors,[3] Col. 130. n. 10, 20, 30. I have not seen Recorded. [5] Thomas Stubbs, in the Acts of William Greenfield then Arch-Bishop of York, gives this
very short Account of it; That at London and York, before the Arch-Bishop and Bishop of those Cities, the Templars were solemnly examined, by the Pope's appointment, upon the Articles framed against them, to which they gave competent and agreeable An∣swers; and though they were accused in many things, yet nothing was found for which the Order might seem justly to be disan∣nulled. This Arch-Bishop was in the Council, and much Honoured by the Pope; and when the Order was dissolved (Pietate motus)  moved with Piety about the Condition of the Templars in his Diocese, distributed them into Monasteries, and commanded they should be provided for during Life. Walsingham in his History likewise Fol. 99. n. 10, 20, 30▪ 40. makes a short Report of the whole Story, and tells us, That Philip King of France thought to make one of his Sons King of Jerusalem, and to obtain for him all the Rents and Revenues of the Templars; and upon this  occasion caused many of them, and the Great Master of the Or∣der, to be burnt in his Kingdom, and procured the whole Order to be made null in the Council of Vienne: But he missed of his Purpose, and the Pope, not without a great Sum of Money (non sine magnae pecuniae interventu) gave them to the Hospitalers. About this time there had been many heinous Crimes sworn against the Templars, in the Provincial Council of London, called at the Command of the Pope, the same that were sworn against  those in France. They confessed the Report, but not the Fact, un∣less one or two Ribalds (that is, most wicked and profligate Men) in every State (to wit, of Priest-Templars, Knight-Templars, Common Brethren, and Servant-Templars;) Nisi unus vel duo Ribaldi in omni statu. Yet at last they all confessed they could not purge themselves from the things charged on them; so that every one of them were thrust into Monasteries, there to do perpetual Pen∣nance, where they in all things behaved themselves well. This  Relation of Walsingham is taken out of Adam Murymonth In 1310. & 1311. who then lived, and his very Words transcribed by him. In the Sentence of Extinction of the Templars, and Donation of their Lands and Goods to the Hospitalers, all Possessors and un∣lawful Detainers of them, of what State, Condition, Excellency and Dignity soever they were, whether Bishops, Emperors, or Kings, were Excommunicated, unless within one Month after  they should be required by the Master and Brethren of the Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, or their Procurators, they parted with, and fully and freely restored them to that Order; and also all that were Aiding, Advising and Assisting in the Detaining of them; and likewise all Chapters, Collegiate and Conventual Churches, Cities, Castles, Towns, and other Places that detained them, and delivered them not when required, as aforesaid, were put under Interdict; from which Excommunication and Interdict,  they were not to be absolved, until they had made full and due Satisfaction. And besides these Punishments, all Persons and Places that detained the Goods and Estates aforesaid, and delivered them not, that held Fees of the Roman, or any other Churches, were decreed (ipso facto) in very Deed to be deprived of them.
In the end of this Council, says the last cited Ibm. A▪D. Historian, the Pope sent two Cardinals into England, to receive the Lands, Goods, and Possessions of the Templars, for the Use of the Hospi∣talers. The Earls and Noblemen, whose Progenitors had given them to the Templars (the Order being dissolved) possessed themselves of, and refused to restore them, so as the Nuncio's returned with∣out doing the Business they came for. The Pope's Append. n. 76. Letter, or  Bull, to the King, That he should give his best Assistance in pro∣moting of the Delivery of the Templars Goods to the Master and Brethren of the Hospital, or their Procurators; and further, That he should expresly Command all his Earls, Barons, Great Men, Cor∣porations, and Bodies Politick, Seneschals, Bailiffs, and other Offi∣cers, which were by him deputed to keep those Goods, to deliver them when required, was Dated the 26th of the same Month of of May, in which he passed the Sentence of Extinction. This in  all probability was the Bull, or Letter, by which the two Cardi∣nals, as Procurators, or Attorneys, came to demand the delivery of the Lands of the Templars for the Hospitalers. On the 25th of November, 1313▪ by virtue of a long tedious Rot. Claus. 7 Ed. II. M. 12. Dors. Instrument for the restitution of the Possessions, Goods, and Chat∣tels to the Hospitalers, which had belonged to the Templars in Eng∣land, in which the Pope's Proceedings against them were recited,  Albert of Black-Castle (de Castro nigro) Great Commander of the Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, and Deputy of the Great Ma∣ster, and Leonard de Tibertis, Prior of the Hospital of St. John's of Venice, and Procurator General of the Order: Their Procurators petitioned and required, That whereas the Pope had given, by Consent of the General Council, all the Houses, Churches, Chapels, Oratories, Cities, Castles, Towns, Lands, Granges, Places, Possessions, Jurisdictions, Rents, and Rights, and all Goods, Moveable and  Immoveable, with all their Rights, Members, and Appurtenan∣ces, and annexed, united, incorporated, and applied them to the Greatness and Extent of Papal Power (de plenitudine Apostolicae potestatis) to the said Hospital, &c. The King hearing this Sup∣plication, made Protestation for the Preservation of his Right, and Rights of his Subjects, notwithstanding such Restitution and Ren∣dring; and that if he made such Restitution, it was for fear of the Danger which he foresaw might come upon him and his  Kingdom, if he did it not, and which for the shortness of Time and other Causes could not be avoided: And further protested, That at a it time he and his Subjects would demand the Goods, as if they never had been restored. Three Days after, on the 28th of November, the King caused to be delivered all the Things above mentioned to the two Procu∣rators, Albert and Leonard, according to the Pope's Bull directed  to him, and to avoid the many Dangers and Damages that might otherwise happen to him, his Dominions, and Subjects, saving the Right of him and his Subjects, according to the Effect of his Protestation. The King's Letter to this purpose was directed to the Guardians Ibm. of the Lands and Tenements of the Templars in London, and Suburbs; and the like Letters were sent Ibm. to Fifty
six other Guardians of their Lands and Possessions in all Counties, and several particular Places in England, and to Audomar Earl of Pembroke, to deliver and surrender the new Temple, with all its Lands, Tenements, and Appurtenances in London, the Suburbs, and Middlesex. In like Ibm. manner he wrote to the Bishop of Lincoln, several Noblemen, and all the Sheriffs of England. And then after these Letters and Instrument, there is entred  upon Record a long impertinent Ibm. Acquittance reciting the Pro∣ceedings, as before, in their Request against the Templars, from these Procurators, by which they acknowledge themselves to be well contented and paid (bene contenti & pacati) by the King, and all others in the Restitution, &c. Dated in London on the Nones or 5th of December, A. D. 1313. The Pope by a long Bull dated on the 5th of the Kalends of Novem∣ber,  or 28th of October, in the 4th of his Pontificate, commanded Robert Winchelsey, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, A. D. 1309, to deliver an Abstract of it to the King, and to Expound it to him, which was thus Directed; Rg▪ stm Wnchelsy, f. 6. . in Doctors-Commons. Excellentissimo Principi & Domino suo, vobis Domino Edwardo Dei gratia Regi Angliae illustri Domino Hiberniae, & Duci Aquitaniae, insinuamus, & Exponimus nos Rober∣tus permissione Divina Cantuarensis Archiepiscopus totius Angliae primas, ex injuncto nobis mandato Apostolico quae inferius discribuntur. To  the most Excellent Prince, and his Lord, you Edward, by the Grace of God, illustrious King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitan, we Robert by Divine permission Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England, by the Pope's Com∣mand, do insinuate, and declare to you, the things under∣written; Which were these Grievances. 1. That his Officers, altho they were bound fervently to as∣sist  the Cardinals of the Roman Church, whom the Wisdom of God had taken into part of the Apostolick Care thereof, and to whom the fulness of Reverence was due from all Sons of the Church, (a cunctis Ecclesiae filiis debetur Reverentiae plenitudo) yet they presumed to give them great trouble, and to do unto them and their Agents, grievous Injuries, especially unto Neapoleon of St. Adrian, and Francis of St. Mary in Cosmedin, Deacon Cardinals, notwithstanding they had done such things as pro∣moted  the King's Honour, and hindred the contrary from be∣ing done. 2. There was another Cause of profound Trouble arose in the Judgment of the Pope himself, (praeterea sensibus ipsius Pontificis alia profundae Turbationis causa consurgit, &c.) That whereas some∣times imitating the Steps of his Predecessors, he had provided the Ecclesiastick Dignities, and Benefices of his Kingdom, and  other Lands, with sufficient and worthy Persons, and they having deputed certain Persons their Agents, the King's Offi∣cers glorying in Licentious Wickedness, altho they had no just Power or Jurisdiction given them in such Matters, either from God or Man, yet they rashly presumed to inhibit their Agents to act for them, or form any Processes, or cause them to be
published, whereby the Hinderers of such Proceedings dam∣nably incurred the Sentence of Excommunication. 3. Also adding worse things to the former, not fearing any Citations concerning Matters that belonged to Ecclesiastick Ju∣risdiction, granted by the Apostolick See, tho against Ecclesia∣stick Persons, they prohibit all such Citations to be executed, and also that no Man go to the Apostolick See by virtue of such  Citations, nor make Instruments upon them, or obey them under most grievous Punishment in Person and Goods, against the Canon, by which they do ipso facto, damnably incur Ex∣communication. 4. Also, for that the Pope cannot sufficiently admire, and feels the cruel Prickings in his Mind, (Item ex eo summus Ponti∣fex non sufficit admirari, diras sentit in animo Punctiones, &c.)  because the Nuncio's of the Holy See, when sent into your Kingdom about Business, they dare not publish them, before they are shown to your self, and if they do, they are chased out of the Kingdom by Terrors and Frights, and sometimes seised by your Officers as Vile and Reprobate Persons, not attending what great Detraction of Honour and Reverence from the Holy See is made thereby, in Contempt and Disgrace of the same, as by the de∣testable boldness of the said Officers concerning Mr. William Piat,  a Messenger of the Holy See, it doth most evidently appear, who, because as he ought not, would not forbear gathering the Pro∣fits of Ecclesiastical Benefices, reserved in your Kingdom by the Pope himself, according to the prohibition of your Officers in Reproach of the Holy See, and the Pope, was by your Sheriff of Yorkeshire, not attending that the Supereminent Authority of the Holy See, is Honoured, or Despised in its Ministers, committed to Prison, and there detained until he redeemed himself by  paying 10 l. Sterling. 5. Also your Officers refuse to cause to be taken such as are Excommunicated by Authority of the said See, at the Request of the said Nuncio's, or Judges sent from the Apostolick See. 6. Also your Officers and Ministers do hinder the Delegates of the Apostolick See, us, and other Ordinaries, (nos & alii  ordinarii) and all Ecclesiastick Persons, whatever, to judge of Causes meerly belonging to Ecclesiastick Jurisdiction, and strictly forbid us and them, tho unjustly, That we nor they do any ways meddle with the Judgment of them, (& minus juste nobis & eis, ne de cognitione hujusmodi intromittamus vel intromittant ali∣qualiter) and if we or they do contrary to this Prohibition, which ought not to be obeyed, the same Ministers and Officers take unduely our, and their Goods, manifestly thereby hin∣dring  Ecclesiastick Jurisdiction, which with Divine Reverence, and as an help to their Salvation, they ought with great Care to Defend; Quam debent pro reverentia Divina, & eorum salutis argumento intentis studiis defensare.
7. Also we and the Ordinaries aforesaid dare not take, or keep in Custody any Ecclesiastick Person, nor do Justice upon him, what great Fault soever he hath committed, being affright∣ed by the Threats of your Ministers. 8. Also your Officers and Ministers not taking notice that Laics have no Power given unto them over Clercs, Religious,  Ecclesiastic Persons, tho they be in Priests Orders, yea Bishops, without Licence from the Pope, or their Superiors, in Deroga∣tion of your Honour, do amercy them in Pecuniary Mulcts, (amerciant in paena pecuniaria) and otherwise unjustly condemn them at their pleasure, and force them to answer before them∣selves, seising their Persons and Goods against their Wills, in Criminal, Personal, and other Actions, altho they alledge the Priviledge of Clerks, to avoid their Jurisdiction, (ipsosque per  captionem personalem, & bonorum suorum & aliis tam super crimina∣libus quam personalibus, & aliis actionibus quibuscunque renitentes & invites, & etiam eorum forum declinantes, & Clericale privilegium al∣legantes, coram se respondere compellunt. 9. Also your Officers and Ministers do condemn Clercs in Priests Orders, as Thieves and Murderers, and cause them to be put to Death, offending thereby the Supreme King, who hath  forbidden his Anointed to be touched by any Secular Power, (in supremi Regis offensam, qui Christos suos per quamcunque secula∣rem potestatem tangi prohibuit) and in these Cases Twelve Lay∣men are admitted as Witnesses, (i. e. Jury-men) against the Clerk, who if they say they believe they committed the Fault, for which they are accused, upon this saying of the Witnesses they are condemned to Death, for which things they undoubt∣edly incur the Sentence of Excommunication, ipso facto. 10. Also your Officers and Ministers take the Goods, Rents, and Profits of Prelates and Clerks, at their pleasure, not offering or giving them satisfaction. 11. Also as well your Officers and Ministers, as the Noble∣men, pretending that Churches and all Monasteries were founded by them, do go and come into Religious Houses, and the Houses  of other Ecclesiastics, at their pleasure, and do so oppress them, and make so great Exactions upon them, that they scarce have sufficient to support themselves, they sometimes extorting by violence half, sometimes a fourth, or other certain part of their Goods. 12. Also when the Guard of Bishopricks, Monasteries, Prio∣ries, and other Benefices of holy Church belonging to them by  vacancy or otherwise, his Officers and Noblemen destroyed and wasted the Houses, Woods, Warrens, Fishponds, Parks, Beasts, Mills, and other Goods belonging to them, so as in long time they could not be repaired, or put into their former Estate; for which such as were Counselling, Aiding, or Assisting in such Destruction, incurred the Wrath of God,
and other grievous Pains; from the Commission of which Wickedness the King ought to restrain his Officers. After these Grievances Ib. f. 7. a. the Pope complains, he had often sent and wrote to the King for Redress, but could never receive any Answer from him; therefore lest the Glory of Ecclesiastic Liberty, which was the Gift of Heaven, should be sullied, (ne Ecclesiasticae Libertatis gloria, coelestis muneris dono concessa, in vestris,  regno & terris, in vestrae salutis & honoris dispendium maculetur, &c.) the Pope renewed the same Exhortations with Paternal Affection, intreating, admonishing, and persuading, in him that gives Health to Kings, (in eo qui Regibus dat salutem) that he would not suffer these Grievances, Injuries, and Troubles to be done, but that he by his Royal Protection would defend and cherish the Churches, and Persons themselves, for the Divine Reverence of the said See and of the Pope (pro divina dictae sedis, & Domini nostri  summi Pontificis reverentia. And then he demands the Annual Sum of Rent of 1000 Marks per Annum, which he was bound to pay to the Roman Church, and the Arrears of it for about 15 years in his Father's time and his. The Ib. a. & b. Pope concluding and closing with Devout Prayers  and Humble Supplications to his Royal Highness and Magnifi∣cence, seriously to consider how his Progenitors, Kings of Eng∣land, that duely Honoured God, and his Spouse the Church, in∣larged their Government, (qualiter progenitores vestri, Reges An∣gliae, qui Deum & Ecclesiam sponsam suam debite honorabant, princi∣patuum suorum culmina latius diffundebant, &c.) and how Peace and Quiet prevailed in their times, and how the Kingdom then abounded in Wealth. How also in the times of those Kings,  who stopt their Ears to the Admonition of the Church, and by an elated, or proud Obstinacy, despising her Advice, and not re∣garding her Exhortations, brought upon themselves and King∣doms great Troubles and Dangers. And therefore to avoid them, presseth him effectually to compel his Officers and Ministers to abstain from acting such Grievances, and to protect and defend the Churches, and Ecclesiastick Persons, and to pay the whole Pension or Rent, as he was obliged. After the delivery of these (Gravamina) Grievances, by the Pope's Command, he sent Append. n. 77. to him a very formal Account of it, and the King's Answer; That he had frequently Treated a∣bout the Execution of his Command, with some of his Suffragan Brethren that had received the like, and that afterwards on the 3d of the Kalends of March, or 27th of February, in the pre∣sence of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, his Brother Suffragans, the  Bishops of London, Winton, Sarum, Lincoln, Norwich, Chichester, Worcester, Excester, Bath and Wells, and St. Davids, and of some Earls and Barons of the Kingdom, he declared the Contents of his Mandate to the King, and delivered them to him written in Latin and French, with Exhortations and Admonitions; And that because the King said he would deliberate upon them, he
came to him again, with some of his Brethren, on the Ides or 15th of March, to receive his Answer, who not appearing after long waiting, he sent the Bishop of Worcester, then Lord Trea∣surer, to him, and desired he would give an agreeable and con∣venient Return to the Roman Church, and to him, concerning the things declared and delivered to him; That at length he let him know by the Lord Treasurer, and John de Longham, a Frier Preacher and his Confessor, That he could not make Answer then,  for that the Contents of the Mandate not only touched him, but all the Earls, Barons, and Great Men of the Kingdom, with whom he could not then Treat, as was necessary to be done; but hoped he might in a short time: That at last the King, with his Council, on the 2d of the Kalends of April, or 31st of March, answered in this Form; That saving the Right of his Crown in as much as he could, he would in all things, as a Devout Son of the Church, obey him, and the Holy Apostolick See; Adding,  That before the notice of these Letters, there had been Discord raised between some Great Men of his Kingdom, which was not yet composed, for which reason he could not fully Deliberate, so as to give a suitable Answer to all things in his Mandate, but so soon as the Differences between the Noblemen were made up, he intended to call a Council of his Kingdom, and send such Answers by his own Messengers, before the time prefix't for a General Council, as might be pleasing to God, acceptable to  him, and the Apostolick See, advantageous to Holy Church, and to his own and the Kingdom's Profit and Honour. In the Twelfth of his Reign he prohibited Append. n. 78. the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Prelates and Clergy, That in their principal Synod to be held at London, they should not attempt to do, or ordain any thing against his Crown and Dignity, or against the State of the Kingdom; but if they had any thing to Prosecute  or Determine concerning the State of the Church, themselves, or himself, it should be Transacted in the next Parlement he had then summoned to meet at Lincoln. In the Ib. n. 79. Fifteenth year likewise, he commanded the Arch-Bishop of Canturbury, and the other Prelates, that were to meet in the Provincial Council to be held at London, That they should not determine, do, or any ways ordain any thing prejudicial to himself,  the State of his Crown, or his Kingdom. There having been frequent Prohibitions directed to the Eccle∣siastick Courts, and many Doubts raised, about what Pleas might be holden in them, the King Ib. n. 80. wrote to his Justices, That Pleas meerly Spiritual, as punishment for Mortal Sin, such as For∣nication, Adultery, and the like, of which the punishment was some∣times Corporal, sometimes Pecuniary, especially if the Convict was  a Freeman. Also the punishment for the Church-Yard not being well fenced, or the Church not being in good Repair, or Decently Beautified, in which Cases Pecuniary Punishments could only be inflicted.
Also if the Rector demanded of his Parishioners Oblations, due and accustomed Tithes, or if one Rector sued another for great Tithes. Also if a Rector demanded a Mortuarie, where it was due. Also if a Prelate, or Patron of a Church, demanded a Pension  due from the Rector. Also for laying violent hands on a Clerk, or defaming him, were within the Cognisance of an Ecclesiastick Judge, notwith∣standing his Prohibition; and these were the Heads of such things, and Pleas, as were then controverted btween, and claimed by, both Ecclesiastick and Secular Judges. Taxes in this KING's Time. IN the Parlement at Northampton, in the First of his Reign, theIn Rot. Caput. in Custod. Cler. pipae Temp. Edw. II. Claus 1. Ed. II. M. 12. intus. Earls, Barons, Knights, and all others of the Kingdom, (&  omnes alii de Regno) or Government, granted to the King a Twentieth part of their Moveables, except their Armor, War Horses, Jewels, Robes, and Vessels of Gold and Silver, of Knights (Militum & aliorum liberorum hominum) and other Freemen, and of their Wives. The Citizens, Burgesses, and Tenents of the ancient Demeasns of the Crown granted a Fifteenth part of their Moveables, as also did the Clergy. In his Second year, at a Parlement holden at Westminster aClaus 3 Ed. II. M. 23. in Ced. Month after Easter, the Laity granted a Twenty fifth of their Moveables. In the Seventh year, in his Parlement at Westminster, the EarlsIn Rot. Comp. ut supra. Barons, Knights, Freemen, and the Communities of Counties, gave a Twentieth part of their Goods; and the Citizens, and Burgesses, and Communities of Cities, and Burghs, gave a Fifteenth. In his Eighth year he had a Twentieth part of the Moveables ofRot. Pat. 8 Ed. II. M. 12. Dors. Part 2. the Laity, granted by the Communities of Counties of the Kingdom (per Communitates Comitatuum Regni) in Parlement. In his Ninth year he had granted a Fifteenth of Citizens, Bur∣gesses,Rot. Parlem. 9 Ed. II. n. 2. and Tenents in ancient Demeasns, for his War with the Scots, in the Parlement held at Lincoln, the Community of the Kingdom,  or the Military Men, being summoned to do their Service then. In the Fifteenth year of his Reign the King Rot. Claus. 15 Ed. II. M. 16. Dors. summoned a Parlement to meet at York three weeks after Easter; and after the end of this Parlement, and after the 7th of July next following, he directed his Writs to the Prelates and Clergy to meet at a Pro∣vincial
Council at Lincoln, which the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury was immediately to summon to Treat of a Competent Ayd to be grant∣ed to him, toward his Expedition against the Scots, who had invaded England; in which Writs, as it were for a Direction, he Rot. Claus. 16 Ed. II. M. 20. Dors. recites what the Earls, Barons, Noblemen, and the Communities of the Kingdom had done in the Parlement at York, viz. That they had granted him a Tenth of the Goods of the Community of the Kingdom, and a Sixth part of the Goods of Citizens, Burges∣ses,  and Tenents of ancient Demeasns, Ibm. Praelati, Comites, Barones, & proceres, necnon Communitates Dicti Regni apud Eborum, ad tra∣ctandum super dictis negotiis & aliis nos & statum dicti Regni tan∣gentibus, nuper Convocati decimam de Bonis de Communitate ejusdem regni, & sextam de Civitatibus, Burgis, & Antiquis Dominicis no∣stris nobis liberaliter concesserunt & gratanter. The Issue of Edward II. by Isabell, Daughter of Philip the Fair King of France. ON the Day of St. Brice, or 13th of November, his EldestA. D. 1312. Ed. II. 12. Walsingh. Hist. f. 102. n. 30. Son Eoward, who succeeded him by the Name of Ed∣ward the Third, was born at Windsor. In the year 1315, his Second Son John was born at ElthamIbm. Hypodig. Neutr. f. 502. n. 30, 40. (from whence his Title) on the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, in the Eighth of his Father's Reign, he was Created Earl of Cornwall, and after several Matches propounded for him, died unmarried, about the 20th year of his Age. Joan his Eldest Daughter, Married to David King of Scots,Sandford, Ge∣nealog. Hist. &c. f. 155.  when both Children, and after being his Wife 28 years, died without Issue. Eleanor Dutchess of Gueldres his Second Daughter, she MarriedIbm. Reynald Second Earl of Gueldres, who was Created Duke of Guel∣dres, by the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria; by her he had Two Sons, Reynald and Edward, who were both Dukes successively after him,  and died without Issue.
A CONTINUATION Of the Compleat  History of England, &c. King EDWARD the Third. THis Young Man at the Age of Fourteen Years being placed in the Throne of his Father, then living and in Prison, as hath been related in the latter end of theThe young King mana∣ged by the Queen, Mor∣timer, &c. The Adhe∣rents to Tho. Earl of Lan∣caster petition former Reign, was, with all the Affairs of the Nation, managed by the Queen, with the Advice of Roger Mortimer chiefly, and other Privado's in their Designs, who had been all Favourers and Abettors of the Cause and Quarrel of Thomas Earl of Lancaster;  whose Adherents being all Friends to, and Assistants in this Revo∣lution, on the 3d of Append. n. 82. to be restored to their Lands, &c. They were all Friends to, and Assistants in this Revo∣lution. February, two Days after the Coronation, Petitioned the King and his Council in that Parlement, which had De∣posed his Father, then Sitting at Westminster, That being of the Quarrel of the Noble Earl of Lancaster (estetent de la Querele le Noble Counte de Lancastre) and therefore wrongfully Imprisoned, Banished, Disherited, might be Restored to their Estates, with the Issues of them, from the time they had been wrongfully diseised. And it was  granted by the Assent of the whole Parlement, That all the Lands and Tenements, which had been seized by reason of that Quar∣rel or Contention, which was affirmed to be good by the whole Parle∣ment (ia quele Querele par tot le Parsement est afferme bone) as well in Ireland and Wales, as in England, should be Restored, with their Issues and Arrears of Rent, except those that had been Received to the King's Use. On the same Day Stat. at Large, 1 Ed. III. The first thing printed, f. 77. All that came over with the Queen & her Son pardoned, and those that joined them after their ar∣rival. all those that came over with the Queen and her Son, and those that joined with them after their arrival, were also pardoned, &c. The long Preamble to that Pardon, Statute, or Grant, is worth notice, as containing the Cover, Pretences, and Suggestions of all the Contrinances and Designs against Edward the Second; in these Words: Whereas Hugh Spenser the Father, and Hugh Spenser the Son, late  at the Suit of Thomas Thun Earl of Lancaster and Leicester, and Steward of England, by the Common Assent and Award of the Peers and Commons of the Realm, and by the Assent of King Edward, Father to our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, as Traitors and Enemies of the King and his Realm, were Exiled, Disherited, and Banished out of the Relams for ever; and afterwards the same Hugh and Hugh
by Evil Counsel which the King had taken of them, without the Assent of the Peers and Commons of the Realm, came again into the Realm; and they with others procured the said King to pursue the said Earl of Lancaster, and other Great Men and People of this Realm; in which Pursuit the said Earl of Lancaster, and other Great Men and People of this Realm, were willingly Dead and Disherited, and some Out∣lawed, Banished, and Disherited, and some Disherited and Imprisoned, and some Ransomed and Disherited; and after such Mischief, the said  Hugh and Hugh, Master Robert Baldock, and Edmond late Earl of Arundel, usurped to them the Royal Power, so that the King nothing did or would do, but as the said Hugh and Hugh, Robert, and Edmond Earl of Arundel, did counsel him, were it never so great Wrong: Du∣ring which Ʋsurpation, by Duresse and Force against the Will of the Commons, they purchased Lands, as well by Fines levied in the Court of the said King Edward as otherwise. And whereas after the death of the said Earl of Lancaster, and of other Great Men, our Sovereign Lord  the King that now is, and Dame Isabel Queen of England his Mo∣ther, by the King's Will and Common Counsel of the Realm, went over into France, to Treat a Peace between the Two Realms of England and France, upon certain Debates then moved; the said Hugh and Hugh, Robert, and Edmond Earl of Arundel, continuing their Mischief, encouraged the said King Edward against our Sovereign Lord the King that now is his Son, and the said Queen his Wife; and by the Royal Power which they had to them encroached, as afore is said, procured so  much Grievance, by the Assent of the said King Edward, to our Sove∣reign Lord the King that now is, and the Queen his Mother, then be∣ing beyond Sea, that they remained as forsaken of the said King Ed∣ward, and as exiled from this Realm of England. Wherefore it was necessary for our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and the Queen his Mother, being in so great Jeopardy of themselves, in a strange Coun∣try, and seeing the Destruction, Damage, Oppressions, and Disherisons, which were notoriously done in the Realm of England, upon Holy  Church, Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and the Com∣munalty, by the said Hugh and Hugh, and Robert Earl of Arundel, by the encroaching of such Royal Power to them, to take as good Counsel therein as they might: And seeing they might not remedy the same unless they came into England with an Army of Men of War, and by the Grace of God with such Puissance, and with the help of Great Men and the Commons of the Realm, they have vanquished and destroyed the said Hugh and Hugh, Robert and Edmond. Wherefore our Sove∣reign  Lord King Edward that now is, at his Parlement holden at Westminster at the time of his Coronation, on the morrow after Candle∣mas, in the First Year of his Reign, upon certain Petitions and Re∣quests made to him in the said Parlement, upon such Articles above re∣hearsed, by the Common Counsel of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and by the Communalty of the Realm, there be∣ing by his Commandment, hath Provided, Ordained, and Established, in Form following: First, That no Great Man nor other, of what Estate, Dignity, or Condition he be, that came with the said King that now is, and with the Queen his Mother, into the Realm of England, nor none other then dwelling in England, that came with the said King that now is, and the Queen, in Aid of them to pursue their said Enemies, in which
Pursuit the King his Father was taken, and put in Ward, and yet remaineth in Ward, shall not be Impeached, Molested, nor Grieved in Person, nor in Goods, in the King's Court, nor other Court, for the Pursuit of the said King, taking and with-holding of his Body, nor Pursuit of any other, nor taking of their Persons, Goods, nor Death of any Man, or any other things perpetrate or committed in the said Pur∣suit, from the Day that the said King and Queen did arrive, till the Day of the Coronation of the same King. What follows in this Statute, is not much to our purpose: Those concerned in the Conspiracy against, and Design upon the King, thought them well covered by this Preamble, and themselves well secured by this First Chapter. After the end of this Parlement, there were Rot. Claus. 1 Ed. III. M. 16. Dors. The Scots re∣fuse to treat of a Peace. They break the Truce with England. Commissioners sent to the Borders of Scotland to Treat of Peace; but the Scots  refused to Treat with them, and not only so, but brake the Truce which had been made with King Edward II. raised an Army, and invaded England. Wals. f. 127. n. 40. They make their escape from Stanhop-Park. The Young King and his Mother raised an Army, and with the Stipendiary Strangers marched against them, and had almost inclosed them in Stanhop-Park, in the Bishoprick of Durham; yet in the Night they escaped, and got into their own Country, but threatned to return again: Wherefore, for the Defence of the Kingdom and other Matters, there was a Par∣lement  called, to meet on the morrow of Holy Cross, or 15th of September, at Lincoln. The Rot. Claus. ut supra. Writ in which most of this Relation is contained, bears Date at Stanhop, Aug. 7.The English and Haynalters quarrel. In their March towards the Scots, the Haynalters Domineering over the English, they Quarrelled at York, where many were kil∣led, and the most English; whether for fear of the English, or[6] Knighton, col. 2551. n. 50. Wals. ut supra. The Haynalters &c leave Eng∣land. for what other Reason, the Haynalters and other Foreigners Ibm. c. 2552. n. 40.  left England not long after, well Rewarded with Gold and Silver by the Queen and Mortimer, and others of their Faction. What was done in this Parlement, I find not. This Year there was another Rot. Claus. 1 Ed. III. M. 3. Dors. Summoned to meet at York, on the next Sunday after the Purification of the Virgin Mary, to Treat of certain Ar∣ticles propounded and declared between the Two Nations at Newcastle; but nothing was done at this Parlement, the Bishops  and other Great Men not appearing; and therefore, as is ex∣pressed in the Writ Rot. Claus. 2 Ed. III. M. 31. Dors. A Parlement at Northamp∣ton, Dated March 5. next following, he called another Parlement to meet three Weeks after Easter at Nor∣thampton. In this Parlement In A. D. 1327. A shameful Peace made with the Scots. says Murymuth, and Walsingham from him (facta fuit turpis Pax inter Anglos & Scotos) there was made a shameful Peace between the English and Scots, by the Di∣rection and Contrivance of the Queen and Roger Mortimer, by which David, Son and Heir to Robert Brus King of Scotland, was to  Marry Joan King Edward's Sister, both Children: And he was also to release all his Right and Claim of Superiority, that he and his Progenitors had in the Kingdom of Scotland, and to deliver up all Charters and Instruments concerning the same. Some great Matters having hap∣ned after this Parlement that required great Advice, there was a Rot. Claus. Ed. III. M. 15. Dors. A Parlement at Salisbury. Writ issued, Aug. 28. for another to meet at Salisbury, on
the Sunday next after the Quinden of St. Michael. In this Parle∣ment Wals. f. 129. n. 10. Three new Earls made in this Parle∣ment. there were made Wals. f. 129. n. 10. Three new Earls made in this Parle∣ment. three Earls, Iohn of Eitham, the King's Brother, Earl of Cornwal, Roger Mortimer Earl of the Marches of Wales, and the Butler of Ireland Earl of Ormond. Ibm. To this Parlement the Earl of Lancaster, the Lord Wake, and other Noblemen, came not, tho' they came armed near to the Place. Knighton, col. 2554 n. 10, 20, &c. They raise an Army for the Queen against the Earl of Lancaster. These new Earls and their Adherents raised a great Army for Queen Isabel against Henry Earl of Lancaster, and other  Great Men, who had not consented to their wicked Deeds, and with a great Force of English and Welsh marched to Leicester, and there plundered and spoiled the whole Country. The Earl of Lancaster was then in the South parts of the Nation with great Force, and marching toward Roger Mortimer and his Army, en∣camped near Bedford, intending to give him Battel, where the King's two Unkles Ibm. . 40, 50. The King's two Unkles leave the Earl of Lancaster. Thus desert∣ed, he makes his Submissi∣on. Thomas of Brotherton and Edmund Earl of Kent, left him, and submitted themselves to the Queen-Mother  and Mortimer. Seeing himself thus deserted, he made his Sub∣mission to the King before the whole Army, and was by the Me∣diation of Simon Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops, re∣conciled to him, Claus. 3 Ed. III. M. 31. Dors. making Oath with others in his Company, and giving Security by Recognisances, That he nor they should attempt any thing upon the Bodies of the King, the two Queens, nor of any others great or small of their Council, or that were about them; nor should do, or procure to be done, any Evil, In∣jury,  or Damage unto them, privately or openly, nor Assent to the doing thereof. On the 25th of Claus. 4. Ed. III. M. 41. Dors. A. D. 1329. A Parlement at Winchester. January, the First Day of the Fourth Year of his Reign, the King Summoned a Parlement to meet at Winche∣ster, on the Sunday before St. Gregory, or 13th of March, where on Wals. f. 129. n. 20, 30. The Earl of Kent adjudged to death in that Parle∣ment, For intending to deliver his Brother K Ed. out of Prison. the morrow of that Feast, or 12th of that Month, the Earl of Kent was seized, and adjudged to Death. 'Tis not agreed  amongst the Historians about the Cause of his Death: Most re∣port it was for his Designing to set his Brother King Edward II. at Liberty, being then, as was reported, and by him supposed, to be living, and Prisoner in Corf-Castle. In the Articles against Mortimer (presently to be mentioned) 'tis urged upon him, That he was the Author of the Report to the Earl of his Brother's not being dead; and that he invented it to trick him out of his Life. Edmund, Son and Heir to Edmund Earl of Kent, and his Mo∣ther Margaret Countess of Kent, Rot. Parl. 4 Ed. III. n. n. 11, 12. His Son re∣stored to the Blood and Lands of his Father. requiring the Record made against the said Earl, might, for the Errours therein, be revo∣ked, set forth in their several Petitions, That his Father and her Husband was informed by Roger Mortimer, Sir John Maltravers, and other his Accomplices, That King Edward was alive, after he was Murdered, with design to deceive him into a pretended Contri∣vance  with them, to release and deliver him out of Prison, for which he lost his Life and Estate in the Parlement at Winchester, as Mortimer confessed to the People at his Death, and that he died wrongfully. Whereupon Edmund was Restored to the Blood and Lands of his Father, and the Countess to her Dower.
might have hapned, out of regard to the King, departed and went toward their own Countries, grieving that they might not speak with, or advise their Liege Lord as they ought. 4. Also, The said Roger by the said usurped Power, caused the King to march forcibly against the Earl, and other Peers of the Land, which were appointed to be with the King to Ad∣vise him; and so prosecuted them with Force, that the said  Earl and some others of his Company that wished Good to the Kingdom, submitted to the King's Grace, saving to them Life and Member, and that they might not be Disherited, nor have too great a Fine set upon them; yet he caused them to be Fined so grievously, as half their Lands, if sold right out, would only pay it; and the others he caused to be driven out of the Nation, and their Lands to be seized, against the Form of the Great Char∣ter and Law of the Land. 5. Also, Whereas the said Roger knew well the King's Father was Dead, and Buried, he by others of his Party in deceivable manner, informed the Earl of Kent that he was alive; where∣fore the Earl being desirous to know whether it was so or not, used all the good ways he could to discover the Truth; and so long as the said Roger, by his usurped Royal Power, caused him to be apprehended in the Parlement holden at Winchester;  and so pursued him, as in that Parlement he procured his Death. Also, The said Roger, by his usurped Royal Power, cau∣sed the King to give to him and his Children, and Confede∣rates, Castles, Towns, Mannors, and Franchises, in Eng∣land, Ireland, and Wales, in Decrease of the Revenues of the Crown. 7. Also, The said Roger in deceivable manner caused the Knights of Shires, at the Parlement at Winchester, to grant to the King one Man at Arms of every Town of England, that answered in Eyre by Four and the Provost, at their cost, for a Year in his War in Gascoign; which Charge he contrived for the Advantage of himself and Party, in Destruction of the People. 8. Also, The said Roger by his Power, caused Summons to be sent to many great Knights, and others, That they should come to the King where-ever he was; and when they came, he caused them to be charged to prepare themselves to go into Gascoign, or Fine at his Pleasure; which Fines were for the Benefit of him and his Party. 9. Also, The said Roger falsly and maliciously made Discord between the King's Father and his Queen; and possessed her, That if she went to him, she should be killed with a Dagger, or otherwise Murdered: And by this way, and his other Sub∣tilties, he so ordered it that she would not come at her Lord; to the great Dishonour of her Son and self, and great Damage
to the whole Realm, perchance in time to come, which God forbid. 10. Also the said Roger by his Usurped Royal Power, had caused to be taken for him and his Party, the King's Treasure, as much as he pleased, without Tale, in Money and Jewels, in destruction of the King, so as he had not wherewithall to pay for his Victuals. 11. Also the said Roger by the said Power, caused to be shared by him and his Confederates the 20000 Marks which came out of Scotland for the Articles of Peace, without any thing received by the King. 12. Also the said Roger by his Royal Power, received the King's Duties, and Purveyance thro the Kingdom, as if he had  been King, and he and his Party had with them double the Company of Men and Horse that were with the King, in de∣struction of the People, not paying for their Quarters more then they pleased. 13. Also the said Roger by his Royal Power caused the King to grant to the Mounting of 200 Irish, of those that killed the Great Men and others, which were in the King's Faith, whereas  the King ought immediately to have Revenged their Deaths, rather then Pardoned them, contrary to the Statute and Assent of Parlement. 14. Also the said Roger contrived to have destroyed the King's Secret Friends, in whom he had most Confidence; and he surmised to the King in the presence of the Queen his Mo∣ther, the Bishops of Lincoln and Salisbury, and others of his  Council, That his said Secret Friends had excited him to Com∣bine with his Enemies beyond Sea, in Destruction of the Queen his Mother, and of him the said Roger, and this he affirmed so impudently upon the King, as he could not be believed, against what he had said; And for these things he had been appre∣hended, and for many others not as yet fit to be declared; Wherefore the King charged the Earls, and Barons, the Peers of the Land, as these things concerned himself, themselves,  and all the People of the Realm, to do right and true Judg∣ment upon him, for the Crimes above-written, as notorious, and known to be true, to themselves, and all the People of the Kingdom. The Earls, Barons, and Peers, having Examined the Articles,The Peers O∣pinion con∣cerning the Articles a∣gainst Morti∣mer. came into Parlement before the King, and they all delivered their Opinion by one of their Peers, That all things contained in the  Articles were notorious and known  themselves and the People, wherefore they as Judges in Parlement by assent of the King, did Award and Judge the said Roger as Traitor and Enemy to the KingThe Judg∣ment against Mortimer. and Kingdom, to be Drawn and Hanged, and commanded the Earl Marshall to Execute the Judgment, and to the Major, Alder∣men, and Sheriffs of London, the Constable of the Tower, and those
who had the Guard of him, to be aiding to the Earl Marshall at the Execution, which was done on Thursday next after the Monday the 26th of No∣vember was the first day of this Parle∣ment, St. Ka∣therin, being the 25th. See the Summons in Append. n. 82. first day of the Parlement, being the 29th day of November. He was not brought to Answer, but Condemned without hearing, and for that rea∣son this Judgment was Reversed as Erroneous, and made void by Act of Parlement, and his Grandchild Roger Restored to his Title and Estate, Rot. Parl. 28 Ed. III. n. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. In the Rot. Parl. 4 Edw. III. n. 2. Simon Bereford charged as a Confederate with Mort∣mer. same Parlement, the King charged the Earls, Barons,  and Peers, to give right and true Judgment against Simon de Bere∣ford Knight, who had been aiding and advising to Roger Morti∣mer, in all the Treasons, Felonies, and Wickednesses, for which he was adjudged to Death, as it was notorious and known to the said Peers, who came before the King in Parlement, and said all with one Voice, (& disirent touz come d'une voice) that the said Simon was not their Peer, wherefore they were not bound to Judge him  as Peer of the Land, but for that it was a thing notorious and known to all, that he was aiding and advising to the said Roger in all the Felonies, Treasons, and Villanies abovesaid, which were in Ʋsurpation of Royal Power, Murder of the Liege Lord, (Mur∣dre de Seigneur Lige) and destruction of Royal Blood, and that he was guilty of divers other Felonies, and Robberies, and principal Main∣tainer of Robbers and Felons, they as Peers and Judges of Parle∣ment, by Assent of the King, do Award and Adjudge him, as Trai∣tor  and Enemy to the King and Realm, to be Drawn and Hanged;Adjudged to be Drawn and Hanged. and the Earl Marshall had Command to do Execution, which was done on the Monday next after the Feast of St. Thomas the Apostle. All the Peers, Earls, and Barons in this Ib. n. 3. John Maltra∣vers Practice and Contri∣vance against the Earl of Kent. Parlement agreed, That John Mautravers was guilty of the Death of Edmond Earl of Kent, the King's Uncle, as he that chiefly, traiterously, and  falsely compassed it; and whereas he knew King Edward was dead, he cunningly, and by his false and wicked Subtleties, made the Earl think and believe King Edward was alive, the which false Contrivance was the cause of all the ensuing Evils, where∣fore as Peers and Judges of Parlement they award the said John to be Drawn, Hanged, and Beheaded as a Traytor, when he should be found;Judged to be Drawn, Hanged, and Beheaded. A Thousand Marks to him that should take him alive. Five hundred Pounds for his Head. and prayed the King to issue his Proclamation, That any one who could take him alive, and bring him to the King, should have  1000 Marks, and if he could not be taken alive, he that should bring his Head should have 500 l. of the King's Gift. Further, Ib. n. 4. The same Judgment a∣gainst Bogo de Bayons, and John Deveroil. the same Judgment was given against Bogo de Bayons, and This John Deveroil or Daverel, was a Creature of Mortimer's, and Governor of Corf Castle, where 'twas reported King Edward was, who being sent to by the Earl of Kent, told the Messenger he was there, alive and well, but that no body might see or speak with him, but such as were sent by the Queen, or Mortimer. John Deveroil, for the same Cause, and he that could take Bogo alive, and bring him to the King, should have 100 l. or bring his Head should have 100 Marks, and he that could take John alive, and bring him to the King, should have 100  Marks, or could bring his Head, should have 40 l.
The same Judgment Ib. n. 5. The same Judgment a∣gainst Thomas de Gurney, and William de Ocle, for the same cause. was given against Thomas de Gurney, and William de Ocle, for the Death of King Edward, Father of the King that then was, (pur la mort le Roi Edward, piere nostre Seig∣neur, &c.) That they falsely and traiterously Murdered him; and he that could take Thomas alive was to have 100 l. or bring his Head 100 Marks; he that could bring William Ocle alive was to have 100 Marks, or his Head 40 l. Amongst the Pleas of the Crown in this Append. n. 84. Thomas de Ber∣kele Arraign∣ed, found not guilty. Parlement is con∣tained the Arraignment of Thomas de Berkele Knight, for the Death of King Edward the Second; for that the said King was committed to the keeping of the said Thomas and John Mautravers in the Castle of the said Thomas at Berkele, when he was Murdered. The said Thomas saith, That at the time of the Murder of the Murder of the said Note, That so often as Ed. the II. is any way mention∣ed in this Re∣cord, he is acknowledged to have been King at the time of his Murder. King, he was sick at Bradelye, without the said Castle, and  knew not what was done, nor was consenting thereunto, and thereupon put himself upon his Tryal by Twelve Knights named in the Record, who found him Not Guilty, nor that he fled, or withdrew himself upon it, but that he placed under him Thomas de Gurney and William de Ocle, to keep the King, by whom he was Murdered; he had Day given him to hear his Judgment in next Parlement, and the mean time, was committed to Ralph Nevill, Steward of the King's Houshold. In this Rot. Parl. 4 Ed. III n. 13. Richard Son to the Earl of Arundel, re∣stored to Blood, Lands, and Goods. Parlement Richard Eldest Son to the late Earl of Arundel, prayeth to be restored to Blood, Lands, and Goods, see∣ing his Father was put to Death, not being tried by his Peers ac∣cording to the great Charter and the Law of the Land: But be∣cause the Attainder was confirmed by Parlement at Northampton, he mended his Petition, and prayed to be restored of the King's meer Grace, and he was accordingly restored. Also in the Ib n. 14. A Thousand Pounds per Annum given to William Montacute, for taking Morti∣mer without Bloodshed. same Parlement, the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, pray and advise the King to give and grant 1000 l. per Annum to William Montacute and his Heirs for his Service, in quietly taking Roger Mortimer Earl of March, and his Confederates, without Bloodshed, a 1000 Marks whereof was to be out of the Lands of Mortimer. Upon the same Prayer and Advice his Assistants Ib. n. 15. His Assistants were likewise Rewarded. Edward  Bohun had 400 Marks per Annum to him and his Heirs, Robert de Ʋfford 300, and John Nevill 200. In the 5th year of his Reign the King called a Parlement atA. D. 1331. Westminster, to Cl 5 Ed. III. M. 7. Dors. Part. 1. meet on the morrow after Michaelmas. The Bishop of Winchester being Chancellor, Rot. Parl. 5 Ed. III. n. 2. A Parlement called about the Business of France and Ireland. And to or∣dain how the Peace might be kept. declared the cause of Summons to be concerning the Dutchy of Aquitan, and the King's  Lands beyond Sea, whether Peace should be made, or other Issue put to the Dissentions between the King's of England and France, by reason of the said Lands; and also about the Business of Ire∣land, concerning the King's going thither, to be advised by his Lieges in that Nation; and likewise to ordain how the Peace might best be kept: When also it was agreed, That the King's
Business ought to be dispatch't before any other, & auxint, illoe∣quesThe King's Business in Parlement to be dispatch't before any other. feust Accorde que les Busoignes le Roi deusseient primerement estre exploitez, einz ce que Rien feust fait de nully autre Busoign. The Chancellor further Ib. n. 3. The Lords Advise the King to an Amicable Treaty with the King of France about the Dutchy of Aquitan, &c. applied himself to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and all the other Prelates, Earls, Barons, (& autres Grantz) and other Great Men, for their Advice, whether they thought it best, for the King to proceed with the King of France  by way of Process, or War, or Amicable Treaty; They all agree in the 3d way, by amicable Treaty with the King of France for the Restitution of Aquitan, seeing the two former might prove dan∣gerous; and to that purpose the Bishops of Winchester, Worcester, and Norwich, two or one of them, as the King pleased, with the Lords Beaumont, Percy, and Montague, Monsieur Geofry Lescrop, and Maistre John de Shordich, were to be sent to the King of France. As to the Business Ib. n. 4. The Lords Advise the King to go in Person to Ire∣land. of Ireland, it was agreed by the King, Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men in the same Parle∣ment, (si est accorde par nostre Seigneur le Roi, Praelates, Countes, Barons, & autres Grantz en Mesme le Parlement, &c.) That the King should provide himself to go thither, as soon as he could, and that in the mean time he should send over some Great Men, with Men at Arms, to aid the Justices, and other Liege People,  against such as opposed the Government. In this Parlement Ib. n. 9. The Queen Mother to have Lands and Rents of the value of 3000 l. a year assigned her. the King by assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and at their Request, granted, That the Queen his Mother, not being well paid according to her mind Three thousand Pounds (trois mill livres) yearly, which she was to receive out of the Exchequer for her support, should have Lands and Rents of the value assigned to her. Then for keeping of the Peace it was Ib. n. 10. An Agree∣ment how the Peace was to be kept. agreed in full Parle∣ment, by the King, Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men of the Kingdom, (par nostre Seigneur le Roi, Praelat, Countes, Barons & autres Grantz du Royalme en pleyn Parlement chescun des ditz Grantz eut especialment examine & assentat, &c.) every one of the said Great Men having been especially Examined and Assent∣ing, That no Great Man of the Land for the future, shall retain,  maintain, or avow, openly, or privately, by himself or others, any Robber, Evil-Doer, endicted of Felony, or Fugitive for the same, nor any sued to Exigend, Common Transgression, or of Evil fame; and the said Great Men promised with all their Power to as∣sist the Justices, Sheriffs, and other the King's Officers, in the Exe∣cution of Judgments, and other things that belonged to their Of∣fices, as well against Great Men, as others of what Condition so∣every they were. On the 27th of January, in the 6th of his Reign, the King issued his Rot. Claus. 6 Ed. III. M. 36. Dors. A. D. 1331. A Parlement called. Writs for a Parlement to meet on the Monday after St. Gregory, or 12th of March, reciting in the Summons the Cause of calling it, which the Chancellor more fully declared;
Rot. Parl. 6 Ed. 3 n. 5. To advise the King whether he should go to the Holy Land with the King of France. To wit, That the King of France, and many other Kings and Princes, (quamplures alii Reges & Principes, so in the Writ) had ordered his going toward the Holy Land, in that present Month of March, and that it much pleased him to have the Com∣pany of the King of England, for the greater performance a∣gainst the Enemies of God, and for this purpose sent Letters and Messengers to the King, for whom he demanded the Advice of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, in full Parlement,  whether it was fit for him to Accompany the King of France or not. After this Declaration Ibm. Monsieur Geoffry Lescrop, by Com∣mand of the King, and in his presence, before all the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, Reported, That the King wasNotorious Riots in the Nation. informed, and it was a notorious thing to them all, That divers People defying the Law, were gathered together in great Companies in de∣struction  of the King's Lieges, the People of Holy Church, and the King's Justices, taking and detaining some of them in Prison, until to save their Lives, they had received great Fines and Ransomes, at the pleasure of the Evil-Doers, some they put to Death, and Robbed others of their Goods and Chattels, doing other Mischiefs, and Felonies; and thereupon the said Geffry, on behalf of the King, chargedThe King de∣mands Ad∣vice about his going to the Holy Land. the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, That by the Faith and Allegiance they ought him, they would Counsel him  concerning his Voyage to the Holy Land, which he very much desired to undertake, with their Advice; and also how the PeaceAnd how to chastise and restrain the Rioters. might be kept, and how those Rioters might be chastised and re∣strained from their Wickedness. The first care by the Advice of the Ibm. The Lords advise to pro∣secute them by Law and Force. Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Great Men, was against these Wicked People; That the King should prosecute them by Law, Force, and all other good ways,  which should be advised him; and accordingly Commissions were issued, to the best Men in the Counties, and Sheriffs, to apprehend and imprison, and raise the Posse Comitatus against them, and cause them to be Endicted and punished according to their Deserts. And it was further Ibm. They were likewise to be Excommuni∣cated. Agreed by the King, Prelates, Earls, Barons, other Great Men, the Knights of Shires, and Communes, (par nostre Seigneur le Roy, Prelats, Countes, Barons, & autres Grantz,  Chivalers de Countees, Gentz du Comune, &c.) That a Sentence of Excommunication ordered by the Prelates, and Clergy, should be pronounced against them in the Church of St. Paul in London, and sent to all the Bishops in England, to be also pronounced a∣gainst them in their Dioceses. First, Ib. n 6. The Reason and Terms of the Excom∣munication, and who to be Excommuni∣cated. That all those who disturbed the Peace and Quiet of Holy Church, and the Realm, especially such as made Alliances,  by Covenants, Obligations, Confederacies, or in any other manner, were Excommunicated, and so to remain. Also Ib. n. 7. the Receivers, Favourers, and Defenders of them.
Also, Ib. n. . That all such Covenants, Obligations, Confederations, and Alliances, were made void, and annulled by the said Prelates, and that if any Oath was taken to confirm them, that was also de∣clared void. As to his Ib. n. 9. The Lords Answer about the King's going to the Holy Land. going to the Holy Land, they all concluded the time assigned by the King of France, to be too short. It was Ib. n. 10. further declared in this Parlement, on behalf of the King, by Monsieur Geffry Lescrop, That in the last Parlement, in the 5th of the King, at Westminster, it had been agreed, That the Debates moved between the Kings of England and France concerning the Lands beyond Sea, should be reconciled by Treaty, by way of Marriage, or any amicable manner; and that there∣upon the King sent his Commissioners to the King of France, who  Treated with him, and made Report to King Edward, That the King of France said to them, that if it pleased him to come toThe King asked Advice of the Lords, whether he should go into France to Treat Perso∣nally with that King. him Personally, he would do more favour to him than to any other, wherefore 'twas necessary to send speedily to the King of France; and for this purpose, he demanded the Advice of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, in full Par∣lement, whether in case the Messengers with the King of France at their return, should inform the King his Affairs would be in  a better condition, if he went over in Person, he should go or not, and in that respect all the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and otherThe Lords consent to his going. Great Men, consented to his going, in hopes all Obstacles of a Composure between them might be thereby removed, and much advantage accrew to him; They also assented, his Voyage into Ireland might be deferred until Michaelmas next coming, so as in the mean time some Men at Arms, and others, might be sent in Ayd of his good People there. The Saturday next after the meeting of this Parlement it was Dissolved. Upon the Peace made at Northampton, by the Contrivance of Mortimer and Queen Isabell to secure themselves, King Edward lost his Superiority over Scotland, and the English Noblemen and others the Lands and Estates they had there, some of whom, by  consent of the rest, went into France to Edward Baliol, Son ofEdward Baliol, Son of John, came out of France into England. John Baliol late King of Scotland, and brought him into England, at what time he claimed the Crown of that Kingdom as Heir to his Father, against David Son to Robert Brus, Walsingh. f. 131. n. 20, 30 Buchan. f. 87. b. f. 88. a. b. f. 89. a. n. 30, &c. Claims the Crown of Scotland, and recovers it by King Edwards Assistance. And was Crowned at Scone. in which Claim, by the Mediation of his Friends, he was assisted by Edward King of England, who furnished him with a small Army of English, by which his Friends were encouraged to come to him, and after several of the Regents of Scotland, and Guardians of David and  that Kingdom, as Thomas Randolf, James Douglas, Andrew Murray, and other Great Men of his Party, either dying, or having been killed or taken Prisoners, in the Engagements, Skirmishes, and Battles, between both Parties for the space of Two years, the Brusians having always been worsted, tho most in number, and the greatest People, by the constant Assistance of the English,
Edward Baliol was Crowned King on the 8th of the Kalends of September, or 25th of August 1332, at Scone, in the 6th of Ed∣wardA. D. 1332. the Third. In the Second year of his Reign he made REcognition, and anHe doth Ho∣mage, and Swear Fealty to King Ed∣ward, &c. in the pre∣sence, and by consent of the Parlement of Scotland. See the Ori∣ginal here under noted where to be found. The Form of his doing Ho∣mage. Acknowledgment, That the Kingdom of Scotland was holden of the Kings, and Crown of England, by Homage Liege, and Fealty, as of their Soveraign Lord, by ancient Right, and also  of the Manner of his doing Homage, and Swearing Fealty, in the presence and by assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights, and others of his Kingdom in Parlement assembled at Edinburgh, holding his Hands between the King of England's, in these Words: Jeo Edward par la Grace de Dieu Roi Descoce & des Isles aperte∣nences, Devenke vostre home liege pur les dits Roialm, & Isles contre  touts Gents que purront vivre & morir, & le dit Roi Dengleterre come Sovereign Seigneur des dits Roialm Descoce & Isles, receut nostre Homage en la form susdit. Et puis Apres entrasems en la foi de dit Roi Dengleterre Sovereign Seigneur de dits Roialm Descoce & Isles touchees les Saints Evangeles par les paroles que sensuit; Nous seromsAnd Swear∣ing Fealty. foial & loial, & foi & loialte porteroms a vos nostre treschier Seigneur Roi de Angleterre, & a vos heires come as Sovereignes Seigneurs de dits Roialm Descoce & Isles contre touts Gents que purront Vivre & Mo∣rir.  Et voloms, grantoms, & obligeroms, nos & nos heires affair a nostre dit Seigneur le Roi Dangleterre & a ces heires Homage liege & Fealty en le formes susescrits, au chescun changement de Seigneur ou inneument dune part ou d'autre. That is: I Edward by the Grace of God King of Scotland and the Isles thereto belonging, become your Liege Man for the Realm and Isles, against all People that can live and dye, and  the said King of England received our Homage in the form above∣said as Soveraign Lord of the Realm of Scotland and the Isles, and then afterwards we entred into the faith of the said King of England, Soveraign Lord of the said Realm of Scotland and the Isles, touching the Holy Gospels by the Words that follow: We shall be true and faithful, and faith and truth bear, to our most Dear Lord the King of England, and to your Heirs, as Soveraign Lords of the said Realm of Scotland and Isles, against all People  that live and dye; and we Will, Grant, and Oblige us, and our Heirs, to do to our said Lord the King of England, and to his Heirs, Homage, Liege, and Fealty, in the Forms above-written, upon every Change of a Lord, or Renewal of one part or the other. In the same Instrument he granted to King Edward Ber∣wick, &c. In Witness whereof he made his Letters Patents, dated at Edinburgh, Febr. 12. A. D. 1333, in the Second of his Reign. The Original under the Great Seal of Scotland, is in a  Box, Intituled, Scotia Tempore Regis Edwardi Tertii, in a great Chest with that Title, in the old Chapter House in the Cloyster at Westminster.
In the same Year of his Reign reciting that Edward III. by greatEdw. King of Scotland grants to Edw. King of England 2000 l. per An. to him and his Heirs, for his Assistance, &c. with the Town of Ber∣wick. By Assent of Parlement. Expence and Labour of him and his People, had given him great Assistance in the Recovery of his Inheritance, he granted for him and his Heirs, to give, assign, and deliver unto him 2000 l. yearly, Land and Rents, in the Borders where it should best please him. And in part of those 2000 l. yearly Rent, he gave, granted, and as∣signed the Castle, Town, and County of Berwic upon Twede, with their Appurtenances, separate from the Crown of Scotland, and an∣nexed  to the Crown of England for ever. By Assent of the Pre∣lates, Earls, Barons, Knights, and others of the Kingdom (& alio∣rum de Regno nostro) in Parlement assembled. And in further fullOther Towns, Castles, and Counties in Scotland given to K. Edward of England. Satisfaction of the said 2000 l. per An. by the same Assent in Parle∣ment, gave, granted, rendred, and assigned the Town, Castle, and County of Rokesburgh, the Town, Castle, and Forest of Jedworth; the Town and Castle of Selkirk, the Forests of Selkirk and Etrick; the Town, Castle, and County of Edinburgh, with the Constablaries  of Haddington and Linliscon; the Town and County of Pebles, and Town, County, and Castle of Dunfres, with their Appurtenances, Knights, Fees, Services, with the Advousons of Churches, Chapels, Religious Houses, Custody of the Temporalities in the time of the Vacation of Bishopricks, and all things whatsoever belonging to them, with the Subjection and Government of the People in those Places; To hold them to him and his Heirs, separate from the Crown of Scotland, and annexed to, and incorporated with the  Crown of England for ever. Dated at Newcastle upon Tine, June 12. in the Second Year of his Reign. The Original under the Great Seal of Scotland is in the same Box above noted, and is con∣firmed by several Instruments in that Box under the Great Seal. King Edward of England two Years before had Froysard. K. Edw. de∣mands Ber∣wick, and was denied. Du Chesne, f. 641. C. D. D. Bruce de∣nied Homage to K. Edward▪ sent to Da∣vid the young King of Scots, to deliver up to him Berwic as his  Heritage and proper Right, and enjoyed by his Ancestors; and to come and do Homage for the Kingdom of Scotland, holden of his Crown. He consults his Barons and Great Men, according to whose Advice he gave the Ambassadors this Answer: That he greatly marvelled at what King Edward required, seeing there could no ancient Titles or Papers be found, by which it might appear that the Realm of Scotland held of the Realm of England by Homage, orAs R. Bruce his Father had done to his Antecessors. any other way; That his Father King Robert had conquered Ber∣wic  by War against Edward II. and he would keep it; and that his Father never would do Homage to the Ancestors of Edward King of England: And desired the Ambassadors to pray their Ma∣ster, That since he had Married his Sister, he would permit him the same Liberty the Kings of Scotland had at all times en∣joyed. In the mean time, King David's Friends held Berwic, so as King  K. Edw. be∣siegeth Ber∣wick. Edward could not obtain it without Force, notwithstanding the Grant of Edward Baliol, or his Demand by Right; and therefore sent an Army under Command of the R. de Aves∣bury, p. 82. a. c. 21. A. D. 1334. 8 Ed. III. Lord William Monta∣cute, to besiege it, and within a Month followed with another Army to assist in the Siege. On Monday, on the Eve of St. Mar∣garet, or 19th of July, the Scots came with a vast Army to relieve
the Town. King Edward marched to meet them, and led up hisBeats the Scots Army, and takes it. Army himself, and in Huntene-More near Berwic, fought with, and routed them, killing, says the Historian, Forty thousand. The rest fled, when the Besieged yielded the Town and Castle. The next Year Ib p 826▪ b. c. 22. He wasts and burns Scot∣land. The Scots make a Peace with him. King Edward marched through Scotland with a great Army, ravaging, burning, and spoiling the Country, all flying before him, and none daring to oppose him. At length return∣ing  to St. Johnston, many Earl, Barons, Knights, and other Nobles of Scotland, having his safe Conduct, came to him there, and concluded a Peace with him, as followeth: These Ibm. c. 23. The Articles of the Peace. are the Points and Things accorded between the Council of the Kings of England and Scotland of one Part, and Monsieur Alexander de Moubray, Monsieur Geffry de Moubray, Mon∣sieur Godfry de Ros, Sir William Bulloke, and Eustace de  Loreigne, having Full Power from Monsieur David de Strabolgi Earl Duscelle, and Robert Steward of Scotland, to Treat, Ac∣cord, and Agree all Points between the foresaid Kings, and the said Earl and Steward on the other Part. 1. First, 'Tis Accorded and Agreed, That the Earl of Ascelle, and the Great Men, and all others of the Community of Scot∣land, which came into the Conditions, shall have Life and  Member, Lands, Tenements, Fees, and Offices in Scotland which they ought to have of Heritage, or other Right, except those that shall be excepted by comune Assent. 2. Also, 'Tis Agreed they shall have Pardon of Imprison∣ment, and for all Trespasses by them done in the Realms of England and Scotland, from the Beginning of the World, to the Day of the Date thereof. 3. Also, That the Earl of Ascelles and Monsieur Alexander de Moubray, shall have the Lands, Tenements, Possessions, Offices, and Fees they had in England, at their Departure after the Ho∣mage at Newcastle upon Tine. 4. Also, 'Tis Agreed, that the Franchises of Holy Church in Scotland, shall be maintained according to the ancient Usages  of Scotland. 5. Also, That the Laws of Scotland in Burghs, Towns, She∣riffdoms, within the Lands of the King of Scotland, shall be used according to the ancient Usages and Customs of Scot∣land, as they were used in the time of King Alexander. 6. Also, That the Offices in Scotland may be always admini∣stred  by People of the same Nation, and that the King of Scot∣land of his Royalty may make such Officers as he please, and of what Nation soever. 7. Also, 'Tis Agreed, That all those that shall be in these Con∣ditions, or this Agreement of the Earl Dascelles, that have
Lands within the Lands of the King of England, in Scotland, may have again their Lands, Tenements, Possessions, Offices, and Fees, as they had at their Departure, after the said Homage made at Newcastle upon Tine, except those that shall be excepted by common Assent. 8. Also, If they should be empleaded concerning their Lands and Tenements aforesaid, they shall have their De∣fences  and Recoveries in Court where they ought to have them. The rest are of things that concerned particular Persons, and not much material to be known now. This Accord or Articles of Peace were writ in the Town of St. John in Scotland, the 18th Day of August, in the Year of Grace 1335. and 9th of Ed∣wardA. D. 1335. 9 Edw. III. III. On the first of November next following, King David, in con∣siderationD. Bruce did Homage and sware Fealty to K. Edw. that his Predecessors and Progenitors, Kings of Scotland, in ancient times held, and of Right ought to hold the Kingdom of Scotland of the Kings of England by Liege Homage and Fealty, and that very many of them had made Personal Homage, and done Fealty to them, as appeared by ancient Records and Pleas of the Crown, as well in Parlements, as in the Iters or Circuits of the  Chamberlains and Justices of his Predecessors and Progenitors, Append. n. 85. And by Ad∣vice and Con∣sent of the 3 Estates in Par∣lement, ac∣knowledge him to be Su∣perior Lord of Scotland. by his Letters Patents made with the Advice and Consent of the Three Estates of the Kingdom in Parlement at Edinburgh, did acknowledge to hold the Kingdom of Scotland of Edward III. King of England, by Liege Homage and Fealty, as of the Superior Lord of the King∣dom of Scotland, notwithstanding all and all manner of Releases, Remissions, Quiet Claims, and other Letters whatsoever made by any King or Kings of England to the contrary. This Instrument was  Dated in full Parlement, on the first of November aforesaid, in the 5th Year of his Reign, and yet remains entire under the Great Seal of Scotland. After this Treaty concluded with the Scots, King Edward was at leisure to look after his Affairs in France; and a meer Accident contributed much to his Claim of that Crown: Mezeray, f. 377. Robert de Artois Earl of Beaumont, who had been the greatest Friend to Philip of  Valois in setting the Crown upon his Head, Ibm. f. 36. R. de Artois came into England, and advised K. Ed. to make his Claim to France. made Pretensions to the Earldom of Artois, after the Death of Mahaut, and brought several Grants under the Great Seal of France to confirm them; which being strictly examined, were found Counterfeit, and Judgment given against him by the King. Much moved at the Loss of his Pretensions and Honour, reproached the King, and provoked him to the utmost Extremity; so that though he had Married the King's Sister, he was Banished, and his Estate con∣fiscated,  who then Froys. vol. 1. c. 28. comes into England, and advised King Edward to make his Claim to the Crown of France. This being communicated to his Council, they Ibm. He consults his Friends. advise him to consult his Father-in-Law William Earl of Haynault, and his Brother John of Haynault, who had done him great Service in Conducting his Mo∣ther and self into England, before he attempted any thing in
this Affair. Ibm. Accordingly he sent Henry Burghersh Bishop of Lincoln, with two Bannerets and two Doctors, to acquaint them with his Intentions; Ibm. They approve the Design, & advise him to make Allian∣ces. who not only approved the Design, but advised the King to make further Alliances with some of the Neighbouring Princes. In pursuance of this Advice Pat. 10. Ed III. Part 2 M. 6. He Commis∣sions Will. Earl of Haynault to treat about Alliances and Retainers. by special Commission, Dated the 16th of December, he impowered William Earl of Haynault,  therein stiled (Gulielmus Comes Hanoniae, Hollandiae, & Zelandia, ac Dominus Frisiae) to Treat and Agree with such Noblemen, Persons of Note, and others, as he should think fit, about Alliances and Re∣tainers. The like Commissions, and with the like Power of the same Date, were sent to Ibm. The like Commissions he gave to others. William Earl of Juliers, the King's Brother-in-Law (being Husband to Joan, Sister to Queen Philippa) to Sir  John de Montgomery Knight, and to Mr. John Waweyn, Canon of Darlington. On the 19th of 11 Ed. III. p. 1. M. 11. They contract with several Noblemen & others in Hay∣nault, Guelder∣land, and Ju∣liers. April following, a like Commission was is∣sued to Henry Bishop of Lincoln, William Earl of Salisbury, and William Earl of Huntington, who were sent into Flanders; and be∣fore the Month of May was ended, Rot. Ale∣man. 11 Ed. III. M 9, 10, 11. A. D. 1537. What Men they were to find, and what their Wages and Stipends. they contracted with seve∣ral Noblemen and others in Haynault, Guelderland and Juliers, to  assist the King against France, together with what Number of Men every of them were to find to serve the King, and the Wages and Stipends (or as now called Pay) they were to receive for so doing. In a very short time after Ibm. 4 German Princes enter into Alliance with K. Edw. Reginald the Second Earl of Guel∣dres and Zutphen (who Married Eleonora the King's Sister) and William Marquess of Gulick came into the Alliance; as also Ibm.  Rupert Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria. Lewis the Emperor Ibm. entred into a Confederacy with King Ed∣ward, by which they obliged themselves and Heirs, to Assist each other with all their Power to recover their Inheritances and Possessions,Lewis the Em∣peror joins with him. John Duke of Lorrain, &c. with-held from them by Philip of Valois. About the same time Ibm. M 8. And many petty Earls & Lords retain∣ed to serve him. John Duke of Lorrain, Brabant, and  Lemburgh, was retained for King Edward, and many petty Earls and Lords. In the same Year, the 11th of Edward III. several of the same Confederacies are entred upon the M. 1. & 6. & 11. The Wages of Retainers better than 18 d. a day. A Man at Arms better than 18 d. a day. Scots Roll, where in some of them the Wages was expressed, which was allowed by the King to his Retainers, for every Man at Arms they brought into his Service by the Month, viz. 15 Florens of Florence, which was 45 s. Ster∣lin,  better than Eighteen pence a Day, great Wages at that time. The Allies and Confederacies on the French side were the Du Chesue, f. 646. C. The King of France his Confederates. Bishop of Liege, John King of Bohemia and Earl of Luxemburgh,
Henry Count Palatine of the Rhine, Aubert Bishop of Metz, Otho Duke of Austria, Theodore Marquess of Montferrat, Ame Earl of Geneva, Gefrey Earl of Linanges, Waleran Earl of Deux-Ponts, Henry Earl of Vandemont, John Earl of Sarbruck, Imbert Bastard of Savoy; and many other Lords and Captains of Almain, Spain, Franch-County, Dauphine, Savoy, and other Countries, the Scots, and Duke of Lorrain. Having made these Alliances against France, King Edward, be∣fore  any Acts of Hostility, Rot. Alman. 11 Ed. III. n. 13. A. D. 133 Commission∣ers sent by K. Edw. to K. Ph. to treat about the Right of the Crown of France, and to which of them it be∣longed. constituted the Bishop of Lincoln, the Earls of Salisbury and Suffolk and John Darcy, his Agents, by Commission Dated October 7. to Treat (cum Magnifico Domine Prin∣cipe Domino Philippo Rege Franciae Illustri) with the Magnificent Prince Philip the Illustrious King of France, or his Commissioners, concerning the Right of that Crown, and to which of them it be∣longed. And by another Ibm. They were also by ano∣ther Commis∣sion impower∣ed to treat a∣bout Aquitan, &c. and also a happy Peace. Commission, the same Persons were  impowered to Treat upon all Controversies and Demands whatso∣ever relating to the Dukedom of Aquitan, or other Parts beyond Sea, and also of a happy and perpetual Peace. Yet the same Day considering the famous Kingdom of France was lawfully devolved to him by Right of Succession, and that he had clai∣med that Kingdom as his Inheritance, he Appen. n. 85 B. A Commission to the Duke of Lorrain and Brabant to be Viceroy of France. made John Duke of Brabant and Lorrain his Lieutenant, Captain, and Vicar-General  there; granting and committing to him meer Empire, the Power of the Sword, and all Jurisdiction high and low, the Conusance and Decision of all Questions or Cases, as well Criminal as Civil, with Power to ap∣point Judges and Ministers as he pleased, for the good Government of the Kingdom, according to the Laws thereof. The same Commissions were Ibm. The same Commission to others. granted and made to William Marquiss of Juliers, William Earl of Henault, and William Earl  of Northampton; to each of them severally, the Words King of England and France, and King of France and England, being trans∣pised; that is, sometimes England was put before France in these Commissions, and sometimes France before England. These Commissions so made, he directed his Ibm. He sent his Writ to all the great Per∣sons of France and others to obey his Vice∣roys. Writs of the same Date, to the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Ba∣rons, and all other Persons in the Kingdom of France whatsoever,  commanding them willingly and freely to receive the said Duke, and obey him in all things as if he were present himself, letting them know, That to the Obedient he would be very kind, and to the Stubborn very severe. The same Commands were directed to them in the Names ofThe same Commands were to obey others. Marquiss of Juliers, the Earls of Hanault and Northampton, par∣ticularly and severally, with the same transposition of Words,  King of England and France. What were the Effects of these Commissions of Treaty and Lieutenancy, I find not. The Pope taking notice of these things, to prevent the War be∣tweenThe Pope mediates a Peace be∣tween the two Kings. the Two Nations, sent to both Kings Peter Priest-Cardinal of St. Praxed, and Bertrand Deacon-Cardinal of St. Mary in Aquizo,
if it might be, to take up, and end all Controversies between them. Rot. Fran. 11 Ed. III. M. 2. Dors. Upon their Application to King Edward, a Truce, in hopes of a Peace to follow, was obtained, until the morrow after Candlemas, in the 12th of his Reign: It was thence continued Rot. Alman. 12 Ed. III. M. 36. to the first of March, and from that time to Rot. Alman. 12 Ed. III. M. 36. Midsummer following, if the King of France would agree to it. But he not complying with the Terms of the last Continuation of the Truce, King Edward was advised to declare it null; which was done on the Ibm. M. 16 6th of  May; and further, to pass beyond Sea to confer with his Allies, in prosecution of his Design against France. He took the Ad∣vice, and went to Antwerp: But before he went, the Cardinals prevailed with him to direct a Rot. Al∣man. 12 Ed. III. Part 1. M. 5. A. D. 1338. Commission, Dated June 21. to John Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Durham, Robert de Ʋfford Earl of Suffolk, Sir Geofry le Scrop Kt. and Mr. John Ʋf∣ford Arch-Deacon of Ely. with full Power to treat and conclude all things in variance between them, in order to a full and final Peace.  And by another Ibm. Commission of the same Date, John Duke of Brabant, the Earl of Hanaw and Gueldres, the Marquiss of Juliers, and Sir William Dunork Lord of Onstrehout, were added to them. The Stiles of the Commissions were different; in one 'tis, Philippus de Valoys Consanguineus noster Franciae (Philip of Valoys our Kinsman of France) without other addition. In the other 'tis, Excellen∣tissimus Princeps, Dominus Philippus Rex Franciae, Illustris Consan∣guineus noster Charissimus; Most Excellent Prince, the Lord Philip  King of France, our Illustrious most dear Cousin. At Antwerp there was a Congress of the Confederates with KingAt a Congress of the Confe∣derates. Edward, where on the 22d of July, he revoked Pat. apud. Antwerp. 12 Ed. III. M. 3. 7. The Commis∣sions to treat were revoked. the Power he had given the Commissioners abovesaid, to Treat with Philip de Valois as King of France. From thence the Froys. lib. 1. c. 32. K. Edw. made Vicar-Gene∣ral of the Em∣pire. Marquiss of Ju∣liers was sent to the Emperor, who obtained a Promise from him, To make King Edward Vicar-General of the Empire, Ibm. c. 34. which was  done accordingly; and the Emperor commanded all People and Sub∣jects of the Empire to obey the King of England his Vicar, as him∣self, and do him Homage. In the 13th of his Reign, at the Request of the Cardinals, Pat. Con∣cess. homin. Angl. & Vas∣con. 13 Ed. III. M. 17. Another Treaty ap∣pointed, with∣out effect. John Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of Durham, Henry Bishop of Lincoln, the Earls of Derby, Salisbury, and Suffolk, with others, had, on the 1st of July, Authority to Treat with Philip de Valois, or his  Deputies, upon the Dignities, Honours, Rights, and Lands, belong∣ing to King Edward, and all other Differences whatever. The French Commissioners were the Arch-Bishop of Rouen, the Bishops of Langres and Beavais; the Place at Arras; but without effect. Having made this Progress toward a War with France for the obtaining that Kingdom, Wals. f. 136. n. 50. See there the whole Letter, and in Rob. A∣vesbury, p. 83. b. K Edw. writes to the Pope, and sets forth his Title to the Crown of France by Right of Suc∣cession. he wrote to the Pope, setting forth his Title to it, That the Crown belonged to him by lawful Right  of Succession, as being Grandchild to Philip the Fair by his Mother Queen Isabel; and tho', as he grants, she could not Inherit by the Constitution of France, yet when all the Sons of Philip were dead without Issue Male, (Charles the Fair being the last) he claimed it as the nearest Male to his Grandfather, and having the Right of Succession before Philip of Valois, being Son to Charles Earl of Va∣lois
his Grandfather's Brother; and affirmed, That his Mother's Dis∣ability to take the Crown, could not, nor ought not to barr him of his Right. This Letter bears Date at Antwerp, July 16. 1339. inA. D. 1339. 13th Year of his Reign. The Pope in Wals. f. 140. n. 20. The Pope's Answer to K. Edward s Let∣ter. answer to this Letter, reprehends him for join∣ing with Lewis of Bavaria the Emperor, and receiving from him the Office of Vicar-General of the Empire, seeing by his Predecessor  Pope John XXII. he had been Excommunicated, and deprived of all Dignity and Honour; who also had exercised the Power of the Apo∣stolic Sword against all his Adherents who shewed him any Favour, and gave him any Help or Advice, or called or acknowledged him Roman King or Emperor, declaring them Favourers of Hereticks. Then persuading him to Peace, and pretending great Affection to him, advised him to hearken to the Cardinals, that loved him sin∣cerely, and wished him Prosperity; and in making Peace, would  propound nothing but what was pleasing to God, and acceptable to the People. This notwithstanding, King Edward, after he had been at Ant∣werpHe entred France with an Army. above a Year, on the 19th of September, 1339. saith Aves∣bury (in October, says Walsingham) [8] entred France with a great[1] Ibm. f. 143. n. 30, 40, 50. Aves. p. 86. b. Burns, wastes, and destroys the Country. Army, and burnt, wasted, and destroyed Cambresis, or the Terri∣tory of Cambray, and the Country of Vermundois; and such as  resisted him were put to the Sword. Ibm. Puts all that resisted him to the Sword. The King of France marched towards him with a vast Army; but when he came to Fighting, he retreated for Fear. The Pope hearing of this, Wals. 144. n. 10, 20. The Pope of∣fers his Medi∣ation for a Peace. attributes the cause of not Fight∣ing to Providence, and an Act of Divine Clemency for the sparing of Christian Blood; and after many Remarks upon it and the War, beseeched the King, for the Lord's sake, and by the Mercy of  God, to think of Peace, and in the mean time to consent to a Truce in order to a Peace; and if the Cardinals, by what they should propound, could not effect it, he offered his own amicable Mediation for a happy End and Composure of all Differences. The King's Answers to the Ibm. f. 145. 10, 20, &c. K. Edward's Answer to the Pope's offer of a Mediati∣on. Pope, were his most humble Thanks for offering his Mediation, and the Care and Affection he had for his Sons, and that he should pursue his wholesom Advice;  but that Philip unjustly usurped the Crown of France, lawfully de∣volved upon him after the Death of his Ʋnkle Charles the last King thereof; That he had seized on Aquitan, and excited the Scots to Rebell against him; and therefore he intended not to neg∣lect his Hereditary Rights, but should endeavour to recover them by the Help of God; and although that Kingdom had been demanded for him before the Cardinals, who had earnestly and laudably la∣boured in the Business of Peace, yet he could not obtain a rea∣sonable  Answer, nor know what he would do or offer; and that after many Treaties he would not hearken to Reason. On the Claus. 13 Ed. III. Part. 2. M. 28. Dors. A Parlement summoned. 25th of August, not long before King Edward's Inroad into France, the Duke of Cornwal, Guardian of England, in his Name issued Writs for a Parlement to meet 15 Days after
Michaelmass; Rot. Parl. 13 Ed. III. Part. 1. n. 4. The King sent to them an Account of his Affairs in France. To which Parlement came the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Durham, and Monsieur William de la Pole, from the King then in France, to shew the Lords and Commons what he had done beyond Sea, and his Condition there, and the Mis∣chief that had befaln him, and those with him, by reason he was not supplied from England. At the same time came Letters to the Earl of Huntington, and to the Prussia Merchants, That the King was in France, near St. Quintins, with an Army of 15000 Men,  and more, so as it was hoped, with the Ayd of God, he would be honoured thro the whole World, and his Liege People safe in all Points, and preserved for ever; Then also he shewed to the Great Men and Commons, how that he and others that were with the King, for the Charge they had been at, to have his Allies and others to march with him into France, were obliged with him for 300000 l. Sterling or more, and how that the King and his Friends could not honourably depart from thence, without giving his Cre∣ditors  And requires a very great Sum of Mo∣ney. Satisfaction, and likewise, that for this Cause, and for the Maintenance of him and his Quarrel, which was undertaken by the common assent of them all, and for his Business on this side the Water, he ought to be supplied with a very great Sum. Whereupon in this great Necessity Ib. n. 5. The Great Men give him every Tenth Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb, &c. it was thought conve∣nient to Ayd him with a very great Sum, or he would be disho∣noured, and he and his People destroyed for ever; and it was  agreed by the Great Men (les Grantz ont Grante) to give him every Tenth Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb, of their Demeasnes, except of their Bond Tenents. The Commons Ib. n 8. The Com∣mons desire another Par∣lement, Give their Reason for it. And pray the Two best va∣lued Knights may be chosen in every County. declare themselves very forward and willing to assist the King, but they pray the Duke of Cornwall, Guardian of England, and the Lords, That he would summon a Parlement to meet in convenient time; That the mean while they might go  into the Country, to endeavour to have an Ayd granted answerable to the King's Necessity; and they further pray, That Two of the best valued Knights might be chosen in every County for that Par∣lement. Accordingly the Guardian issued G 13 E. III. Part. 2. M. 1. Dors. The Com∣mons give 30000 Sacks of Wooll. Writs on the 16th of November for another Parlement to meet Eight days after St. Hil∣lary,  or 20th of January, in which the Commons gave the King 30000 Sacks of Rot. Parl. 13 Ed. III. Part. 2. n. 5, 6. 7. The Clergy give nothing because, &c. Wooll upon certain Conditions comprised in Indentures made hereupon; The Clergie gave nothing, because in the Eleventh year of his Reign they gave a Adam. Marymouth, A D. 1337. Triennial Tenth toward the War coming then on with the King of France, and to pay Germans, Brabanters, and others Confederated with him against that King, Walsingh. f. 147. n. 20. the three years being not then expired. The King and Queen Ib. n. 10. King Edward writes to the Peers and Great Mn of France of all sorts, and Plebeians. Setting forth his Title to that King∣dom. kept their Christmass at Antwerp, and  afterwards went to Gant in Flanders, from whence he wrote to all the Prelates, and Persons Ecclesiastic, to the Peers, Dukes, Earls▪ Barons, Nobles, and Plebeians of the Kingdom of France, setting forth his Title as aforesaid, and telling them, That Philip of Valois intruded himself into the Kingdom by force in his Minority, and possessed it against God and Justice; Therefore lest he should seem
to neglect his own Right, and the Gift of Heavenly Grace, or sub∣mit to the Divine Pleasure, he claimed the Kingdom and Govern∣ment, in hope of Celestial help, (Ne videamur jus nostrum & DonumDeclaring what he would do if possessed of it. Celestis Gratiae negligere, &c.) declaring he would be very Gratious to the Good and Obedient, and do Justice to every one according to the Ladible Rites and Custumes of the Kingdom; To Reform all things were amiss, and add according to the Condition of the Times what was best and most expedient for them, by assent of  the Peers, Prelates, and Great Men, and his faithful Subjects. The Letter as written in Latin begins thus; Rob. Avers. p. 83. a. cap. 28. Edwardus Dei Gratia Rex Franciae & Angliae ac Dominus Hiberniae Ʋniversis Ecclesiarum Praelatis, & Personis aliis Ecclesiasticis, Paribus, Ducibus, Comiti∣bus, Baronibus, & Nobilibus, ac Plebeis in Regno Franciae constitu∣tis, veram noticiam, subscriptorum universorum, &c. Edward by the Grace of God King of France and England, Lord of Ireland, to all Prelates of Churches, &c. as above, Dat. apud Gandavum  8 die Februarii Anno Regni nostri Franciae primo, Angliae vero Decimo quarto, Dated at Gant the 8th of February, in the First year of our Reign of France, and of England the Fourteenth. Some short time after he came for England, and at Harwich on the 21st day of February he issued Claus. 13 Ed. III. pars. 1. M. 33. Dors. Summons for a Parlement. his Summons for a Parlia∣ment, to meet on Wednesday next after Midlent Sunday. The cause of Summons was declared to be, for granting the King a  great Aid, or Rot. Parl. 14 E. III. pars. 1. n. 5, 6, 7. A great Ayd desired. The King in Debt, and was to remain as a Prisoner at Brussels un∣til it was paid. The Lords, and Knights of Shires give the 9th Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb. The Citizens and Burgesses a 9th of all their Goods according to the true value. he would be for ever dishonoured, and his Lands as well on this side, as beyond the Sea, in great danger, if he should loose his Allies. And further, he was in his own proper Person to return to Brussels, and stay there as a Prisoner, until the Sum he was ingaged for there was all paid; and in case he had a suf∣ficient Aid, all these Mischiefs would cease, and his Design (with the help of God) have a good issue, &c. Wherefore upon his Re∣quest, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Knights of Shires, having  regard to the Mischiefs, &c. granted him the Ninth Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb; and the Citizens and Burgesses the very Ninth of all their Goods, according to the true value, for two years next coming, upon condition he would grant their Petitions presented to him and his Council. In this Parliament Ib. n. 9, 10. The Com∣mons make it their Request not to be sub∣ject to the King as King of France. the Great Men and Commons made it their Request, that seeing the King had taken upon him the Title  of King of France, and changed his Arms, they might not be bound to obey him as King of France, nor the Kingdom of Eng∣land put in subjection to him as King of France, or to the King∣dom of France, (le fist faire lettres patentes de Indempnite) he there∣upon caused to be made Letters Patents of Indemnity Append. n. 86.. On the 30th of May next following, declaring in the Writ Claus. 14 Ed. III. pars. 1. M. 23. Dors. A Parlement called. his intentions of going beyond Sea for the Defence and  Safety of his Kingdom of England, and the Recovery of his own, and the Rights of his Crown, he summoned a Parlement to meet at Westminster on the Wednesday after the Feast of the Tran∣slation of St. Thomas the Martyr, (that is, Thomas Becket) which Feast was July the 7th, to be holden before his Son Edward Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester, whom he had made Guardian of England.
And he not only publickly declared his intention in the Writs of Summons, but Rob. Aves. p. 89. a. c. 29. A. D. 1340. The Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, appointed the precise day to be on the 13th of June, to pass from Orwell in Suffolk into Flanders, with about 40 Ships that lay ready there, to Treat with his Confede∣rates about the War; Upon this Resolution the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, then his Chancellor, informed Ibm. Then Chan∣cellor, ac∣quaints the King with the Danger in his Passage to France. He would not believe him. He Quits his Council, and sends him the Seal. him, That Philip of Valois, his Adversary of France, foreseeing his Passage, had pri∣vately  sent a great Fleet of Men of War to encounter him in the Ha∣ven of Sluce; and advised him to provide more Ships, and reinforce his Fleet, otherwise he and his Affairs might be lost in the Passage. The King, not believing him, said he would go whatever came of it. The Arch-Bishop quitted his Council, and taking Leave de∣parted, and sent the Seal of his Office to him; yet the King thinking better on the Matter, called to him Robert de Morle his Admiral, and one Crabbe, a famous Mariner, who upon his en∣quiry  gave him the same Information and Advice the Arch-Bishop had given, whereupon he presently sent for him, and delivered to him Ib. p. 89. b. the Seal; and also having sent to the Northern and Southern Parts, and to London, within ten days he had a suffi∣cient Fleet, and more Armed Men and Archers then he could ex∣pect, or had use for. With this Fleet he sailed towards Flan∣ders, and on Midsummer Ibm. Day the English and French Fleets engaged, when the English obtained a mighty Victory, killing  Thirty thousand French, and taking and destroying Two hundred Ships. The Parliament met at the time appointed, and the cause of Summons was declared to be, Rot. Parl. 14 E. III. pars. 2. n. 2, 3. The cause of calling the Parlement. to Treat and Ordain concerning the things might happen to the King; for keeping the Peace in England, upon the Marches of Scotland, and upon the Sea; and to Advise and Determine how, and in what manner, he might  be best served by the Subsidy granted by common Assent the last Parliament, and to remove the Difficulties and Hindrances in Collecting it. Ib. n. 4, 5. On the next day, being Thursday, it was shewn to the Great Men and Commons, (as Grantz & Comunes) That since the Summons to this Parliament, God by his Grace (Dieu par sa grace) had given the King Victory over his Enemies, to the great Assurance, Repose, and Quiet of all his Liege Subjects; and how, that to perform his Design upon his Enemies, he was forced to  be aided, or loose his Allies, (il lui covendroit a force estre eidez ou perdre son alliez) and the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, were charged by the Duke and the Council, to advise how and in what manner the King might best, and to the most Profit of him, and the least grievance of his People, be served by the Aid which had been granted him, and to give their Answer on Saturday next following, (& donez lour respons samedy prochein suant.) on which day (a queu samedy) after great Treaty and Debate had  between the Great Men, and the Knights and other Commons, (entre les Grantz & les ditz Chivalers & autres des Comunes) it was agreed by all the Great Men and Commons, That there should be Men assigned to sell the Ninths granted to the King last Parliament, and directed the quickest and best way of selling them.
To this Parliament Ib. n. 6, 7. The King wrote to that Parlement. That the Ayd given last Par∣lement was great. were sent by the King the Earls of Arundell and Gloucester, and Sir William Trussell, with Letters of Credence, dated at Bruges, July the 9th, in the 14th year of his Reign in England, and first of France, directed to the Dukes, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and others assembled in Par∣liament, signifying to them, That tho the Subsidy granted in the last Parliament was great, yet because it could not in due time  be converted into Money, it did not answer his purpose as it ought: He likewise remembred them of the Victory he obtained in the Water of Zwynes on Midsummer-day: Ib. n. 8. Yet because it could not be collected in due time, it answered not his purpose. And farther ac∣quaints them, That with the Assent of his Allies, the Great Men of England who were with him, and the Country of Flanders, he had divided his Army, and intended to go and lie down be∣fore Tournay with one part of it, being an Hundred thousand Flemings Armed, besides (as must be supposed) his English Forces,  and Robert Earl of Artois with Fifty thousand, besides all his Al∣lies, and their Power, were marching towards St. Omers, that for the governing and marching of this Army he had need of a very great Sum of Money, over and above what was sufficient to discharge his Debts, which were necessarily to be paid before his march, requesting them and every one of them dearly (vous prions cheremont, & a chescun de vous) to consider the great Danger might happen, if he was not supplied with Money and  Goods suddenly, to give Satisfaction to the Country, and his Allies, and Soldiers which he had retained, in case they should withdraw themselves, or desert if not paid, and also if his Allies should go over to the Enemy, and join him if not paid. At the Close of his Letter he tells them, Ib. n. 9. That the Persons above∣named came over to declare his Condition and Business, willing them to give full Faith and Credit to what they should say. This Letter having been read, and the Messengers Ib. 9, 10. Upon the King's Letter. heard;  for the Reasons given in and by both, all were of Opinion, That the King in his great necessity could not be aided so speedily as he ought by the Ninth, wherefore the Great Men sought all the ways they could, (par quoi les Grantz sercherent totes les voies quils poaint) that the King might be speedily aided, and thought it the best, that he should have at present a certain number of Sacks of Wooll; which was propounded to the Knights of Shires for their  assents, how they might be hastily provided, and Merchants spoken to, to take them at an indifferent and equal Rate, (& sur20000 Sacks of Wooll granted for a present Supply. ce parlez as Chevaliers des Counties d'avoir louz assent coment, &c.) The number of Sacks agreed upon was 20000, for which the Merchants were to pay the King 40 s. per Sack Custom, besides the Price of the Wooll beyond Sea, Ibm. (pur equitter ert ses dettes, & pur les ploit de ses grosses busoignes) to discharge his Debts, and for the Exploit of his great Affairs: And it was left to the King's  Choice and his Counsels beyond Sea, whether the Flemings Ib. n. 11. or Almans should be paid with the Money was to be received of the Merchants.
Soon after King Edward, Rob. Aves. p. 90. b. c. 30, 31. with the assistance of the Duke of Brabant, the Earl of Haynault, (whose Forces then passed under the name of Flemings, as in the Parliament Roll) and the Com∣munities or Governments of Bruges, Gaunt, and Ipres, besieged Tournay; from which Siege he wrote Append. n. 87. a. He besieged Tournay, and wrote to the King of France. to Philip of Valois, without any Title or addition, That he had besought him by Mes∣sages, and all other ways he knew reasonable, to restore his Rightful  Heritage of France, and for that he saw he would not do him Reason, he had enter'd into the Country of Flanders, as Sovereign Lord thereof, signifying to him, That by the aid of Jesus Christ, and power of the Country, his own People and his Allies, he would put a short end to his Claim, if he would approach him and advance towards him. But for that Two so great Armies, as there was on both sides, could not long continue together without great damage to the People and Country, which thing every Christian  And sent a Challenge to him, to de∣termin the Quarrel and their Claims, by Duel be∣tween their Two Bodies, &c. ought to avoid, especially Princes and Governors of the People; he desired a brief period might be put to the Matter, and to avoid the Deaths of Christians, the Quarrel being between themselves, that the discussion of their Claims might be determined by and between their two Bodies. And if he would not consent to this way, then that it might be ended by Battel between them and an hundred of their best Men on either side. And if he would not take one of these, then that he would assign a certain day, within  ten days after the date of this Letter, to fight Army with Army before the Town of Tournay. This was his desire, not out of Pride or Disdain, but that the will of Jesus Christ might be shewn between them, for the greater repose amongst Christians. Given under his Great Seal at Clyn, in the Field, the 27th day of July, in the 14th year of his Reign of England, and first of France. To this Letter he had the following Answer returned; Ib. 87. b. The King of France his Answer to King Edward's Letter and Challenge. Philip  by the Grace of God, King of France, to Edward King of England: We having seen your Letters brought to our Court, from you to Philip of Valois, in which were contained certain Requests made to Philip of Valois; and for that your Letters were not directed, or the Requests made to us, as clearly appears by the Tenor of them, we ought not to have given you any An∣swer, nevertheless, because we understand by the said Letters, and otherwise, that you are entred into our Kingdom of France,  doing great damage to us, our Realm and our People, without Reason, not regarding what a Liegeman ought to observe toward his Lord; for you have entred into our Homage Leige, and re∣cognized us King of France according to Reason, and promised such Obedience as Men ought to promise to their Liege Lord, as appears more clearly by your Letters Patents sealed with your Great Seal, which we have by us. Our intention therefore is, when it shall seem good unto us, to drive you out of our Realm; and  that we may be able to do this, we have firm hope in Jesus Christ, from whom all our Puissance, &c. Given in the Fields near the Priory of St. Andrew, under our Privy Seal, in the absence of our Great Seal, the 30th of July, in the year of Grace 1340.
Hereupon Philip of Valois Ib. Avesh▪ ut supra. p. 91. c. 33. Philip of Va∣lois brought a great Army into the Field, but dare not fight. The English burn and de∣stroy 300 Ci∣ties, Towns, and Villages. And kill a vast number of French of all sorts. Both Armies in great want of Forage and Victuals. brought a very great Army into the Field, as was thought to raise the Siege, but he kept at such a distance off the English Army, being afraid (as says the Historian) to engage them, that he could not be provoked to fight; tho the Earl of Haynault, the Lord Walter Manny, and Reginald de Cobham, the King's Marshal, and other Officers of the Army, were sent with Parties from the Siege, who wasted the  Country, destroy'd and burnt three hundred Cities, Towns, and Vil∣lages, within six Leagues round Tournay, and killed of the French Fourteen Barons, Sixscore Knights, and more then Three hundred Men at Arms. At last both Armies being very numerous, and in great di∣stress for want of Forage and Victuals, and the King of England especially in very great want of Money, the Two Kings consented  to a Treaty of Truce until Midsummer next following. Ib. p. 91. b. c. 34. The King of England in great want of Money. Commissio∣ners on both sides to Treat of a Truce. The Commissioners for the King of England were, the Duke of Bra∣bant, the Duke of Guelderland, the Marquiss of Juliers, and Mon∣sieur John de Haynault Lord of Beaumont. Those for the King of France were, John King of Bohemia and Earl of Luxenburgh, Adulph Bishop of Liege, Raoul Duke of Lorrain, Ame Earl of Sa∣voye, and John Earl of Arminiac, who concluded a Truce be∣tween the Two Kings, their Aidants and Allies, Ibm. upon the  ensuing Articles. 1. That no prejudice, or injury, be done by either Party to theThe Articles of the Truce. other, during the Truce and Respite. 2. It was agreed, That the Two Kings, their Aidants and Al∣lies, whosever they were, should remain in the same possession and seizin, they were in at that time, of all their Goods, Lands, and  Possessions they held, or had acquir'd any manner of way during the Truce. 3. It was agreed, That during the Truce, the Kings, their As∣sistants and Allies, whoever they were, might safely go out of one Country into another, and the Merchants with all manner of Merchandise, and all other People with their Goods might go, and come as well by Land as Sea and Water, as freely as they used to  do at other times, paying their Passage Money, Tolls and Customs as anciently due. The Barons and others of Gascoigny, in the Dutchy of Guien, to be comprised in this Article. 4. It was agreed, That neither of the Kings should procure, or cause to be procured by themselves or others, any grief or prejudice to be done to the other, his Friends, or Allies by the Church of Rome, or others of Holy Church whatever they were; nor to  their Lands, or Subjects, by reason of the War or any other cause, nor for the service the Allies, and Assistants of both Kings had done, or should do for either of them. And if their most Holy Father, the Pope, or others, would do so, both Kings might oppose them to their Powers, without doing ill, during the Truce.
All Prisoners of War on both sides to be released during the Truce, upon their Paroles to return again to Prison when it was ended. 6. That there should be a Truce between the English and Scots for the same time, and certain Persons appointed upon the Bor∣ders of each Kingdom to see it observed, upon such Conditions as  had been formerly: Which if the Scots refused, the King of France was not to assist them with Force, or any other ways to relieve and encourage them. And it was agreed, That this Truce should be notified, or proclaimed in England and Scotland, 26 Days after the Date thereof; Ibm. p. 93. a. which was confirmed and sealed with the Seals of the Commissioners on both sides, in the Church of Espete∣lyn, on Monday the 25th of September, in the Year of Grace 1340. In the time of this Truce, several Commissions were issued forSeveral Com∣missions du∣ring this Truce, to make a firm Peace, with∣out effect. the ending all Controversies between the Two Kings, by a full Peace, or long Truce, as they are to be found in the Alman or Close Roll in the Tower, in the 15th of Edward III. But they had no other effect than to continue the Truce unto the Decollation of St. John Baptist, or 29th of August; from thence to the Exal∣tation of the Holy Cross, or 14th of September; and from that time  to Midsummer the next Year. While the King lay before Tournay, the Scots Knighton, col. 1580. The Scots plundered & wasted the Borders. that had not submitted to King Edward Baliol, came into England, and plun∣dered and ravaged the Country as far as Durham; but being in∣cluded in the Truce, as above, all Hostility ceased during that Truce. After the Siege of Tournay, the King went to Gant, and staid  there some time; and returning into England, on the Feast Claus. 14 Ed III. Part 2. M. 12. Dors. of St. Andrew, about midnight he arrived at the Tower, and next morning he sent for the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury to Lambeth, but found him Hist. Sacr. vol. 1. f. 20. The A. Bp. of Canterbury and others of the King's Coun∣cil imprison'd not there. He also sent for the Bishop of Chichester his Chancellor, the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry Lord Treasurer, and several others his Great Officers, Clerks of Chancery, and Ju∣stices, and imprisoned them in the Tower, except the Bishops,  whom, says p. 93. a. c. 35. Robert of Avesbury, for fear of the Clementine Consti∣tution, That Bishops ought not to be imprisoned, he permitted to have their Liberty. On the 3d of December, the Arch-Bishop went to Canterbury, and secured himself in his Church, to escape future Dangers. Most of the Persons Rot. Parl. 14 Ed III Pat 1. n. 13, 14, 15. sent for, or imprisoned by the King, were of the King's Council in England; and those who were appointed and directed in Parliament, to take care of the Payment of the King's Debts to the Town of Brussels, and other  Towns in Brabant and Flanders, and treat with the Merchants, both Foreign and English, about paying the Money, amongst whom was the Arch-Bishop. The Sheriffs Ib. Part 2. . 17 & 25 were commanded to send from all Cities and Burghs, in their several Counties, Merchants to be before the
King's Council at London, or Westminster, on Monday next after the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of August, to treat withAbout selling the Wooll, granted. them about buying the Ninth of Wooll in all Counties; where the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, some other Bishops, Earls, and Ba∣rons of the King's Council there named, as being nearest at hand, Treated with them, and contracted n. 20, &c. ad 28. for great numbers of Sacks of Wooll; the Money to be paid at Bruges within three Weeks after, or upon the Feast of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, or  8th of September; or upon the Feast of St. Michael. The Mer∣chants of Bard and Prussia bought much of this Wooll, and en∣gaged to pay the Money to the People of Louvain and Malins, and several particular Persons there named, Almans and others, that had been retained by King Edward; and also sent for divers Per∣sons to account before them, and ordered them to return the Money to the King beyond Sea. On the 30th of July n. 29. the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Lords Chancellor and Treasurer, the Earl of Arundel, Thomas Wake of Lydell, and others of his Council in England, wrote to the King to give him an account of his Subsidy; and to let him know, That the Grant of 20000 Sacks of Wooll to raise Money speedily, was not made (in the Parlement he Summoned, before he went beyond Sea, to meet on Wednesday next after the Feast of St. Tho∣mas, or 7th of July) until the Vigil or Eve of St. James, or 24th  of the same Month: And therefore he could not wonder, nor his Allies, or good People of Flanders, That neither Wooll nor Money was then come to him; for certainly as much as could be levied of his Subsidy should come to him daily, as soon as the Pains or Knowledge of Man could cause it to be sent or paid. The Arch-Bishop having secured himself at Canterbury, Hist. Sacr vol. 1. f. 21. 25. The A. Bp of Canterbury's Advice and Reproof to the King. the King sent Nicholas de Cantelpue with Letters of Credence, That he  would come to him to London, where he might personally speak with him; but he came not, pretending some about the King had threatned to kill him. Yet though he came not, he wrote to the King, and admonished him to take good Advice, and make[9] Wals. f. 150. . 10, 20, &c. use of good and wise Counsellors, and to remember that by evil Counsel his Father had, contrary to the Laws of the Land and Magna Charta, imprisoned some great Men and others, adjudged them to death, sei∣zed their Goods, or put them to grievous Ransom: And what hapned  to him for this cause! He also put him in mind, That by the Circumspection and Discretion of the Prelates, the Great and Wise Men of the Nation, his own Affairs had prospered, so as he pos∣sessed the Hearts of the People; and had met more Assistance from the Clergy and Laity than any of his Progenitors. But at present, by the evil Counsel of some English and others, who loved their own Profit more than his Honour, or the Safety of the People, he had imprisoned Clercs and others, against the Laws of the Land,  his Coronation-Oath, and against the Great Charter; the Infringers whereof were, by the Prelates of England and the Pope's Bull, which he had by him, excommunicated. Which things he had done to the great Danger of his Soul, and Detriment of his State and Honour. He tells him, he had pronounced Excommunicate all such about him that were Favourers of Treason, Flatterers of, and imposed
upon him; and as his spiritual Father beseecheth him to hold them as such, some of which by their Sloth, and Wicked Service and Ad∣vice, lost Tournay. And requested him to call together the Pre∣lates, Great Men, and Peers of the Land, to see and enquire in whose hands the Wooll, Moneys, and other things then remained, which since the beginning of the War had been granted to him for maintaining thereof; and by what means, and whose default he lost Tournay; and punish the Offenders in all things according to  Law. And as to what concerned him, saving always the Estate of Holy Church, and his own Order, he was ready in all Points to sub∣mit to the Judgment of his Peers. This Letter was Dated at Canter∣bury the First of January. In the same Month Ib. f. 151. n. 30, 40, &c He wrote also to the Chan∣cellor of Eng∣land to pre∣serve the Li∣berties of the Church. he wrote to Robert Bouser (a Lay-man) late made Chancellor of England, in the place of the Bishop of Chi∣chester, to preserve the Liberties of Holy Church, and the Laws of  the Land entire: And to let him know, that the Ninth had le∣vied and destreined for it, upon Prelates and others of the Clergy, who were not bound to pay it, as those that Rot. Parl. 14 Ed. III. Part 2 n. 14. & 17. paid the Tenth granted to the Clergy, and held nothing of the King by Barony, or were obliged to come to Parlement; and also exacted the Tenth of such as were bound to pay the Ninth, oppressing the Clergy, contra Deum & Justitiam, against God and Justice: Exhorting and requiring him in the Lord (hortamur in Domino & requirimus) not to permit the  Religious and Clergy to pay otherwise than according to the Form of the Grant of the Taxes, nor give his Advice or Assent to any thing in prejudice of the Great Charter, or that might tend to the Subversion of Church-Liberties, declaring if he should make out any Writ, Commission, or Precept to that purpose, he should not omit to exercise such Power as Holy Church had permitted him. He Wals. f. 152 n. 10, 20, &c. The A. Bp. de∣claimed in a Letter to the King all those Excommuni∣cate, wrote also to the King and his Council after this man∣ner:  (Domino nostro Regi Consilioque suo, ac omnibus & singulis dicti Consilii sui Personis monstramus nos, Johannes permissiones divina Can∣tuariensis Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae Primas, sedis Apostolicae Lega∣tus, &c.) To our Lord the King and his Council, to all and every one of them; We John by Divine Permission Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and the Pope's Legate, do declare all those that do ArrestWho impri∣soned Clercs, Clercs, put them in Prison, and detain them against their Wills, are Excommunicated by Canon. Which Sentence he published in theor oppressed the Church.  Church of Canterbury, and caused it to be published by all his Bro∣ther Suffragans, or Bishops of that Province. After the Denuncia∣tion of which Sentence, several Clercs (there named) were taken and imprisoned (in prejudicium Dei Ecclesiae Sanctae) in prejudice of God and Holy Church, against the Laws and Privileges of all Clercs, and to the danger of their Souls, who did such things, or gave Advice or Assent to the doing of them. Wherefore he be∣seeched the King to preserve untouched the Rights and Privileges of  Holy Church, and forthwith release the Clercs, and others, that had been imprisoned against the Great Charter, the Laws of the Land, and Privileges of such as were detained. And further beseeched all of the King's Council, who had presumed to advise the King to commit such things (qui talia committendi consilium Regi dare presumserunt) not to hinder the Release of those that were kept
in Prison. He also declared, That the King's Ministers or Officers, of what Condition soever, who entred the Granges, Houses, and other Places of Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Ecclesiasticks, or other Reli∣gious, without the Consent of their Bailiffs, and took and carried away their Goods; and all those that commanded these things to be done, were involved in the same Sentence of Excommunication. He wished the King would vouchsafe to apply a fit Remedy, for he could not dissemble; but that against such, as his Pastoral Office  required it of him, by his Brother Bishops of the Province, he should execute what was his and their bounden Duty. Yet it was not his Intention, that the King, Queen, or their Children, should be comprehended in this Judgment, or Sentence of Excommunication, as far as by Law or Right they might be excused Ibm. n. 50. (nostrae tamen In∣tentionis non existit Dominum nostrum Regem, Dominam Reginam, aut Liberos eorundem, dictis Sententiis involvi seu comprehendi, quate∣nus de jure poterunt excusari. As he had resolved Ib. f. 153. n. 20, 30, 40, &c. he wrote to all the Bishops of his Pro∣vince Ibm. f. 154. n. 30. and commanded them to declare Excommunicate all such as deprived Churches of their Rights, or by Malice infringed or disturbed their Liberties or free Customs; and those especially that violated the ancient Liberties and free Customs of his Church of Canter∣bury, or in any manner diminished them, or did any thing con∣trary to its Privileges. Also those that disturbed the Peace and  Quiet of the Kingdom, or that gave Advice or Assistance to, or favoured them. Also those who by any Art or Trick whatsoever (quacunque arte vel ingenio) should violate, break, diminish, or change any of the Liberties and free Customs contained in the Great Charter, or Charter of the Forest, privately or openly, by Word, Deed, or Advice, or the ancient Liberties and free Customs granted by them to the City of London, should be declared Excommunicate. And then he directs them to proceed in the same manner against  all such as imprisoned Clercs, or entred into the Houses, Granges, Ba▪ &c. of Arch-Bishops, Bishops, &c. as above. The King, moved with this Behaviour of the Arch-Bishop Ibm. f. 154. n. 30, 40. &. The King's Letter con∣cerning the A. Bp. of Can∣terbury and his Crimes. wrote to the Bishop of London, and the Prior and Chapter of Can∣terbury, in harsh and severe Language, how he had been used by the Arch-Bishop, and charged him with many great Crimes; as, that being exalted to the Throne in his Nonage, desiring to be di∣rected  by sound Counsel, believing him in Fidelity and Discre∣tion to exceed all Men, and using him as the Director of his Soul, and likewise the Affairs of his Kingdom, and receiving him into great Familiarity; and seeing the Kingdom of France devolved to him by Right of Succession, and was usurped by Philip of Valois, he with great Importunity persuaded him to make a Con∣federacy against Philip with the German Princes (idem Archiepisco∣pus nobis importuna instantia persuasit cum Princibus Alemanniae contra  dictum Philippum foedus inire) exposing us and our Affairs to the Charge and Hazard of War; promising and affirming, That he would cause abundantly to be supplied the necessary Expences from the Revenue of our Lands, and Subsidies; adding further, That we need only take care to have ready expert and stout Soldiers. Then he tells how he went beyond Sea, and entred into a War
at a vast Expence, obliging himself to his Confederates in great Sums of Money upon the promised Aid; but trusting to a bro∣ken Reed, and his Assistance in Money not coming to him, he was forced to contract improfitable Debts under the greatest Usury; and so as he could not prosecute his Expedition, but must of necessity return into England: Where declaring to the Arch-Bishop his Streights and Misfortunes, he called a Parlement, which gave him the Ninths as above, and the Clergy a Tenth;  which if fully collected, and in due time, had probably been suf∣ficient for the carrying on his War, and the Payment of his Debts, to the no small Confusion of his Enemies. Then he says the Arch-Bishop promised again to assist him effectually toward Collecting the Subsidy, and administring other Necessaries: Whence trustingto his promised Assistance, he again passed over Sea, and obtained his Sea-Victory, as before related; and after∣wards besieged Tournay, as aforesaid; when every day expecting  by the Arch-Bishop's Management to be relieved, in so great Ne∣cessities, with what had been promised him, his Hopes failed: And though by many Letters and Messengers he had signified to him, and others of his Counsellors his Adherents, the Wants and Dangers he was in for want of Money, being put off with frivolous Excuses and fine Words, by which they palliated their Fraud and Malice, he was forced unwillingly to consent to a Truce, to his Shame, and the Hindrance of his Expedition. At  length his faithful Friends, Companions, and Participants in his Adventure and Tribulation (tandem convenerunt ad nos amici Fi∣deles, Peregrinationis nostrae Comites, & Tribulationis nostrae participes) with whom he discoursed how he might most aptly be delivered from his present Misfortunes, all agreed the Fault was the Arch-Bishop's, either by Sloth or Negligence, if not Malice; murmuring against him, that he had not corrected the Insolence of the Arch-Bishop and Officers (Archiepiscopi & Officialium Insolentiam, &c.)  which if he should not do speedily, they threatned to quit his Service, and withdraw themselves from the Confederacy. Whence thinking of the Discipline and Correction of his Officers (unde nos ad disciplinam & correctionem nostrorum officialium mentis aciem di∣rigens) he removed some from their Offices for Male-administra∣tion, by subversion of Justice oppressing the People, and taking Bribes: Others of less Note he committed to Prison; and be∣lieving he might have a more full account of the Actions of his  Officers from the Arch-Bishop, to whom he had committed for a long time all the Administration of all his Affairs, he sent Ni∣cholas Cantilupe to command him to come speedily to London, that he might have Personal Discourse with him; but being always Proud, and fearful in Adversity, he pretended Danger from some about him, if he should stir out of the Church of Canter∣bury. The second time he sent to him Ralph Stafford, Steward of his Houshold, with Letters of safe Conduct, to come to, and in∣form  him about the Business of the Kingdom: But contemning his Requests and Messages, with an haughty Look he answered, That he would not meet, come to, or confer with him, but in full Parlement, which at that time it was not rationally expedient to convene (quod in his diebus ex causis rationalibus non expedit convocari.) Then recounting his great Bounty and Beneficence toward him, his extra∣ordinary
Respect and Assection to him, and the mighty Trust and Confidence he had in him, declares how ungrateful he was, and how he had deceived him, wounding his Innocence, by railing at, and reproaching the Justice, Fidelity, and Diligence of his Officers, by Preaching publickly, and sending Letters into divers Parts, That by Royal Power and against Justice, the People had lately been oppressed, the Clergy confounded, the Kingdom over-burdened with Exactions, Taxes, and Tallages. And because he falsly endeavoured to ob∣tain  the Name of a Good Pastor, which he always wanted, yet truly he was a notorious Mercenary by common Opinion, and his own publick Confession; (& quia nomen boni Pastoris, quo hacte∣nus semper caruit, &c.) he applied himself to assert the Liberty of the Church; which if it had been injured or grieved, either in Persons or Things (in rebus vel Personis) it was only and truly to be ascribed to the Remisness, crafty Intentions, and reprobate Coun∣sels of the Arch-Bishop (Archiepiscopi duntaxat remissioni, & callidis  adinventionibus, ac reprobis consiliis sunt veraciter ascribendae) wick∣edly pretending he had certain Sentences and Articles of Excom∣munication, made in general against the Violators of Church-Liberty and the Great Charter, to blacken the Good Opinion the People then had of the King, to defame his Ministers, traiterously to raise Sedition amongst the People, and to withdraw the Affections of the Earls, Barons, and Great Men from him. Wherefore being willing, as he was bound, to secure the Integrity of his Fame, to obviate the Malice of  the Arch-Bishop, and to avoid the Snares laid for him and his, he desired to publish some other of his Actions, besides those above re∣peated; to wit, That by his improvident Advice in his Nonage, he had made so many prodigal prohibited Gifts and Alienations, and done so many excessive Favours, that his Treasury was exhausted, and his Crown-Rents beyond measure diminished; and that corrupted by Bribes, he had without reasonable cause remitted great Sums of Money due to him, and had given much of his Rents and Re∣venue,  which ought to have been applied to his own use, to Per∣sons not deserving, or converted it to his own Ʋse; and presumed to attempt other things to the Detriment of his Estate, Damage of his Royal Dignity, and Grievance of his Subjects, abusing the Power committed to him. Commanding those to whom this Let∣ter was directed, to publish it, and cause others to publish it, in such Places as they should think convenient. Witness his Self at Westminster, the 12th of February, in the 15th of his Reign. On Ash-wednesday, being the 21st of February, the Arch-Bishop Preached in the Cathedral of Canterbury, and Hist. Sacr. vol. 1. f. 23. The A. Bp. published the K. 's Letters, at the end of his Sermon he told the People, there were Letters directed by the King to the Prior and Convent against him, which he desired might be read: Which was done by order of the Prior, and the Contents of them published in the English Tongue. Againstand makes his Defence. which the Arch-Bishop in every Point defended his Innocence;  and then admonished the People to pray for the King, Queen, and their Children; and to those that should do so devoutly, and also pray for the State of Holy Church, being penitent, and sorry for their Sins, he granted Forty Days Indulgence from Purgatory. And the next Day, being the Chair of St. Peter at Antioch, or the 22d of that Month, Ibm. the Abbot of St. Augustines in Canterbury, to
whom and his Convent the like Letters had been sent, publishedThe Abbot of S. Augustines published them to the Disadvantage of the A. Bp. them to the People, expounding them in Hatred to the Arch-Bishop (in odium Archiepiscopi) that so the People might have an ill Opinion of him. The very same Complaints against this Arch-Bishop the KingRot. Rom. 14 Ed. III. M. 4. The King sent to the Pope to re∣move him out of the King∣dom. sent to the Pope, tho' in somewhat smoother Language in some parts of the Epistle; and requests he might be by him removed  out of the Kingdom, for preserving the Peace of it, and pre∣venting other Dangers that might be feared to ensue, if he staid there, Dat. apud Langele 14 die Martii. The Arch-Bishop wrote an Answer to the King's Letter, which bears this Title, Hist. Sacr. vol. . f. 27. The A. Bp.'s Answer to the King's Letter, which he cal's a famous Li∣bel. (Excusatio Archiepiscopi ad famosum Libellum) The Excuse or Answer of the Arch-Bishop to the slanderous Libel; addressing himself by way of Preface to the King, telling him  There were two things by which the World was Governed, the Holy Pontifical Authority, and the Royal Ordained Power; of which the Charge of the Priests was the greatest and highest, inasmuch as they were in the last Judgment to give an account of Kings: Where∣fore he ought to know, that they depend upon the Judgment of Priests, who might not be directed by their Wills; for who could doubt but Christ's Priests were to be thought the Fathers and Ma∣sters of Kings, Princes, and all faithful People. Ibm. (Reverendo  Domino suo Edwardo Dei gratia, &c. Duo sunt quibus principaliter regitur iste Mundus, Sacra Pontificalis Autoritas, & Regalis Ordinata Potestas; in quibus est pondus tanto gravius & sublimus Sacerdotum, quanto & de Regibus illi in divino reddituri sunt examine rationem. Et ideo scire debet Regia celsitudo ex illorum vos dependere judicio, non illos ad vestram posse dirigi voluntatem. Quis enim dubitat Sacerdotes Christi Regum, & Principum, omniumque fidelium Patres & Magistros censeri?) And he proceeds to inform him, that many Bishops  had Ibm. f. 28. Excommunicated Kings and Emperors; and also to inform him what Good Kings were to do, and how to behave themselves toward Bishops, and what Reverence, Honour, and Respect was due to them. And he complains, that the Honour due to him, in regard of his Dignity, and as he was his Father, was turned into Disgrace, Devotion into Reviling, and Reverence into Contempt; (sed proh dolor, &c. Honor nobis exhibendus conversus est in Opprobium, Devotio in Blasphemiam, Reverentia in Contemptum) whilst his  Epistles sealed with the Royal Seal, but more truly slanderous Libels; Ibm. (dum Epistolas vestras Regio sigillo Signatas, quin verius Libellos famosos) dictated and written by his Enemies▪ containing many Crimes falsly imputed to him, were sent to the Bishops of his Province, Deans, Abbots, Priors, their Convents and Chapters, to be published to his, and would to God not to the injury of him too; (in nostram, utinam non in divinam injuriam.) By which unthought of, that he might not say detestable Fact, Royal Power  presumed to Judge the Lord God in his Servants and Priests; and he seemed to condemn him his Spiritual Father, and greatest Peer of the Land, against the Order of God, Human Law, and natural Rea∣son, not called, not convicted by Record, and unheard, to the Danger of his Soul, and as an ill Example to the manifest Prejudice of all the Peers of England. At last, making great Profession of his Affection
to him, and the great Services he had done him, he comes to his Answer, here following: That Ibm. f. 29. whereas he accused him, That when the Kingdom of France was devolved to him by Right of Succession, he importuned him to make a League with the Almain to recover his Rights and was only to find expert Sol∣diers, and he would find Money; which failing, you were, you say, forced to contract great Debts upon Usury. Ibm. To this he said, That in the beginning of his Government, when he  was Bishop of Winchester, it was known by whose Counsel he was Governed. That when the Kingdom had devolved to him by Hereditary Right, and so judged in the Parlement at Northamp∣ton, the two Bishops of Adam Orl∣ton. Worcester, Coventry and Litchfield, were sent into France to Claim that Kingdom in your Name, and to hinder the Coronation of Philip de Valois; which Embassie was the greatest occasion of the War. We at that time were not em∣ployed in any of your Affairs, but were hated at Court, for what  cause God knows. Afterwards, when it pleased your Majesty to call me, with others of your Privy Council, to transact the Publick Affairs, we considering the Danger of Mens Souls, Bodies, and Goods, by a devouring War, endeavoured with all our Power to make Peace between the Two Kingdoms; but Ibm. f. 30. after all Endeavours for Peace proved insuccessful, and Philip had made War upon you, then in a Parlement at Westminster, called for that Purpose, seeing the Obstinacy of Philip, it was agreed you should  League with the Germans or Almains, and others. As for the Payment of the Expences of this War, there were Agreements made with certain Merchants in a Council at Stamford, which are to be found in Chancery; which if observed, together with other Subsidies granted both by Clergy and Laity, and the great Customs of Wooll, not only in our own, but in the Opinion of all the Council, had been sufficient for the whole War, if well managed. Ibm. And your Majesty knows well, that these Agreements were not  broken or changed by us, nor did the Subsidies come to our hands; be∣cause after your first Passage we staid not in this Kingdom, but with the Reverend Fathers the Cardinals and Bishop of Durham, went into France to treat of Peace, often going backward and forward from and to your self, then in Brabant; and afterward, when there was no hopes of Peace, staid some time with you there, and were made Partakers of your Necessities, and with other Prelates and Great Men of England, became bound with you for great Sums upon  Ʋsury. The Ibm. f. 31. second thing charged upon him in the King's Letters, he says, was yet more wonderful (That when the Ninth was granted, he promised effectually to assist in the levying of it; but that by reason of the nonperformance of that Promise, when be∣fore Tournay, he was forced to consent to a Truce, contrary to his Mind;) To this he said, the whole Subsidy for the Ninth for the first Year, was assigned to his Creditors before his second Pas∣sage,  as might appear by the Assignations themselves; and there∣fore it was manifest, that he neither promised to send, nor could send any thing to the Siege of Tournay, especially not knowing when it began.
To the Ibm. third thing, (That the Necessities and great Streights he was in were brought upon him by his Fault, Negligence, and Malice, as also of his other Officers, some of whom he was forced to remove, and imprison others, lest his Friends that were with him, and Allies beyond Sea, should leave him: And when desiring to have a better Information of his Affairs, he sent for him, &c.) The Arch-Bishop affirms, he made no Promise Ibm. to send Money to him; and therefore such as Warred in his Service,  could not complain of his Fraud or Negligence. And professing again how diligent he had been, and faithful, both then and at all times in his Service, he says, Ibm. f. 2. as concerning his Faithful Friends, and those that accompanied him in his Enterprizes be∣yond Sea, who desired a fit Remedy to be applied to those ill Services, that brought him into those Inconveniences and Mis∣fortunes; it was to be believed, according to their Words, that as culpable or guilty of any Fault, they were to be punished  by just, not arbitrary Process. Then as to his Two Messengers, first Nicholas Cantilupe, bringing the King's Letters of Credence, he only cited and enjoyned him to go into Brabant to pay the King's Debts, and stay there while they were paid; so that if he had been summoned to have been at London with the King, as his Letters intimated, he must have been here and beyond Sea at the same time. As to Ralph de Stafford, he came without Letters, and by bare Word cited him to come to the King, affirming he ought  not to fear any Treachery, Ibm. and says (this notwithstanding) that tho' the King's Letters of Conduct at first view seemed suffi∣cient for his coming to, staying at, and returning from his Councils, if he had been summoned, as he was not; yet the same day he received these Letters of Conduct, the Sheriff of Canterbury brought him the King's Writ to appear at London before the King and Council upon a Contempt: So as tho' the King's Letter gave him free liberty of returning, yet by the King's Writ he was of  necessity to fall into his Enemies hands; Ibm. (quod non decuit, nec decuisset Regiam Majestatem) which became not, nor could become Royal Majesty: Nevertheless, he was, and should always be ready to answer what should be objected against him, before the Prelates and Peers, saving his State and Order; Statu nostro & Ordine semper salvis. As to what was Ibm. 34. charged upon him (for publishing Sentence of Excommunication, and commanding it to be published, against the  Violators of Ecclesiastic Liberty and the Great Charter, to blacken the King's Reputation, defame his Ministers, and traiterously move Sedition amongst the People, and to withdraw the Affections of the Earls, Barons, Nobles, and Great Men, from the King) be∣cause it seemed to affix the Crime of Treason upon him, in which case no King or Temporal Lord could be his competent Judge, he protested openly and publickly, by these Presents, That what he said, or should say, he intended not to prejudice his State in any thing,  but wholly to decline Trial by any Secular Judge whatever: Ibm. Quia praemissa proditionis crimen in Caput nostrum retorquere videntur, quo casu Rex nullus, vel Dominus Temporalis, judex noster competens esse potest, sicut satis Superius est ostensum; protestamur palam, & publice per Presentes, Quod dicta vel dicenda, in nullo, Statui nostro prejudi∣care intendimus in hac parte, sed judicis cujuscumque Secularis examen
totaliter declinari. At last, as to Ibm. f. 35. his Prodigality in giving away the Revenues of the Crown to undeserving Persons, and wasting the Product of them, and converting the King's Treasure to his own use, he utterly denies it, asserting again his Inno∣cence, and the great Service he had done, the Labour and Ex∣pences he had been at for the Crown. And near his Conclusion he says, Haec Ibm. 36. ad Libellum famosum responsa sufficiant in prae∣senti; This may suffice for Answer to the scandalous Libel at pre∣sent,  and wisheth for the King's Honour it had neither been wrote or published. The King Ibm. f. 36, 37, 38▪ The King's Reply to the A. Bp.'s An∣swer. replied very briefly to this Answer, reproves him for his insolent and undutiful Language; tells him how much he Honoured and Revered his Spiritual Fathers, and that he ought not to overlook their Offences, when he saw them tending to the Danger of him and his Government: And shews him his  Mistake, when he complained he was condemned of Capital Crimes, being absent and unheard, as if he in those Let∣ters wrote in his own Vindication only, had proceeded cri∣minally against him; and forbids him and all other Bishops to publish any Sentences of Excommunication, or other things, a∣gainst the Rights of his Crown, or derogatory to his Royal Dig∣nity and Prerogative, as they had been always used by his Pro∣genitors. During this Controversie between the King and Arch-Bishop,A Parlement called. there was a Parlement called to meet at Westminster, on Monday next after the Quinden of Easter, the Writ of Summons in ordi∣nary bearing Date March 3. at Wedestoke. Claus. 15 Ed III. Part 1 M. 37. Dors. A. D. 1341. In this Parlement the Arch-Bishop appeared, and humbled himself to the King; Rot. Parl. l. 3. p. 8. The A. Bp. humbles him∣self to the King, and begs pardon. (le dit Ercevesque se humilia a nostre Seignieur le Roy) requesting his Favour and Good-will, to which the King received him, and for which the Prelates and Great Men gave him all possible Thanks  they could think of. And then the Arch-Bishop prayed the King, That having been defamed through the whole Kingdom, he might be Arraigned before his Peers in full Parlement; (qil puisse estre aresnez en pleyn Parlement devant les Piers) which the King granted; (quen chose le Roy ottroia) but said, he would that the Business touching the State of the Kingdom and Common Be∣nefit, should be first dispatched. Afterwards Ibm. n. 43. A Committee appointed to examine the A. Bp.'s An∣swer to the King. in the same Parlement, the Bishops of Durham  and Salisbury, the Earls of Northampton, Warwick, Arundel, and Sa∣lisbury, were appointed to hear the Answer of the Arch-Bishop, to the things charged upon him by the King (de choses que lui sont surmys par le Roi) so as if his Answer was allowed; then the King of his good Grace should hold him excused (adonques le Roi de la bon grace lui tenera pur excusez.) And in case his Answer seemed not sufficient to the King and his Council, then it was to be debated in the next Parlement, and there Judgment given con∣cerning  it; and in the mean time all things Ibm. n. 49. touching the Ar∣raignment of him (totes les choses touchants la reinement Lercevesque de Cantirbery) remained with Sir William Kildesby, Keeper of the Privy Seal.
The next Parliament was in the 17th of Edw. III. when the King Rot. Parl. 17 E. III. n. 22. The things against the Arch-Bishop to be vacated in Parlement, as neither rea∣sonable or true. Note what year this was. commanded, that the things touching the Arraignment (les choses touchants larraynement Lersevesque de Cantirbirs) of the Arch-Bishop, which remained in the hands of Sir William de Kil∣desby, to be advised upon this Parliament, (pur aver ent avisement de ce Parlement, soient adnulles, & ouster de tut) should be annul∣led and totally outed or laid aside, as such as were neither rea∣sonable or true: (come celles que ne sont pas raisonables ne veritables)  and Master John de Ʋrford was commanded to bring them into Parliament, to be vacated there. The Parliament in the 15th of Edward the Third, which be∣gan on Monday next after the Quinden of Easter, being that year April 23. because the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men were not fully come (pur ce que les Prelats, Countes, Barons, & antres Grantz, ne sont pas pleinement venus) was continued Rot. Parl. 15 E. III. n. 4. from day to day until Thursday; when the cause of Sum∣mons  was Ib. n. 5. The cause of Summons to Parlement declared. declared with the common Preface, That Philip de Valois, who called himself King of France, had wrongfully seised his Lands, Seigniouries, and other Possessions in the Dutchy of Guien, and other-where; and also, as much as he could, sup∣ported his Enemies the Scots against him; That it had been agreed by the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonalty of the Land in full Parliament, that he should pass beyond Sea to purchase Friends, Allies, and Retainers, to help him to conquer his Rights, (que no∣stre  Seignieur le Roi se purchaseroit amys, alliez, & retenantz qui lui purroient aider a conquer ces droictures, &c.) to which purpose there had been granted many Aids that had been diverted, and spent by some of his Officers and others, to his great damage, and hin∣drance of all his Business; That he intended not to ask any new Subsidy, but charged and requested very earnestly the Great Men, and others of the Commons, that they would Treat together, and advise among themselves, that is to say, the Great Men by  their selves, and the Knights of Counties, Citizens, and Bur∣gesses by themselves, (si ad il chargez & priez en chargeance manere les ditz Grantz, & autres de la Comune, qils se treisent ensemble & savisent entre eux, cest assavoir les Grantz de par eux, & les Chivalers des Countees, Citeyns & Burgeys de pas eux) how he might best be served, and receive the Arrear of the Ninth for the first year; and how he might most speedily receive them for the second year, before the Feast of St. John Baptist next coming, for the Atchieve∣ment  of his great Business, with the aid of God; and to give their Answer on Saturday next following. But the Consideration of this Matter was put off, until the King's Answers Ib. n. 42. to the Petitions of the Great Men, the Commons, and Clergie, were made into Statutes, which were shewn to the King, with certain Conditions demanded by the Great Men, and Commons, upon the grant of 30000 Sacks of Wooll made to him, in compensation of the Ninth of the second year; (od  ascuns conditions que les Grantz & la Comune demanderent du Roi sur le grant, quil ferroient a lui de 30000 Then with the Custom about the value of 180000 l. Statutes made with Condi∣tions. sakes de leyn in recompensacion de la neofisme garb, aignel, & toison del an second;) The Statutes and Conditions were read before the King, and the great Officers and Justices required to Swear to the Observation of them, as it might in their places belong to them. The Chancellor, Trea∣surer,
and some of the Justices made Protestation, they neitherThe Chancel∣lor, Treasurer, and some Ju∣stices, would not consent to them. consented to the making, or form of them, nor that they could observe them, in case they were contrary to the Laws and Usages of the Kingdom, which by Oath they were bound to keep; yet these Statutes and Conditions were sealed with the Great Seal, and delivered to the Great Men and Knights of Counties, (as Grantz, & as Chivalers du Countees.) Some of the King's Answers to the Articles, or Petitions of the  Clergy brought in by the Arch-Bishop, and other Bishops, are remarkable. As to the second, That the Liberties of the Ib▪ n▪ 20. The King's▪ Answer to some of the Conditions. Church, and all Liberties granted to any other Estate, or Persons, may be observed; and that the Great Charter may be proclaimed again, and confirmed by Oath: The King's Answer was, He would the Observation of the Great Charter, and other Liberties; which being exemplified Ib. n. 28. under the Great Seal, he thought was sufficient, and that there was no need of Swearing  to it, considering that in the Kingdom there were already too many Perjured, (par trop y ad parjurs en son roialme.) To the fifth, That Ib. n. 23. several of the King's Officers, and o∣thers, have enter'd into Religiouses Houses and Parsonages, and by force taken away their Goods, and further by Oaths forced upon Religious Persons and Parsons, have enquired of things within their Houses, and them so found have carried away, his An∣swer was; Ib. n. 30, 31. That he would not that any Man should enter  into the Churches fee against their Liberties, nor would that any of his Officers should enter into the Churches, Lands, or Houses, to take their Goods; but if Laymen to defraud him brought their Goods thither, he thought himself wronged. To the seventh, Ib. n. 25. That the Kings Officers levied of Parsons, Rectors of Churches, the Ninth Sheaf, the Ninth Lamb, and the Ninth Fleece, when they ought only to have paid their Tenths, the Answer was, Ib. n. 32. He would not the Ninths or Tenths to be  otherwise paid then they were granted, that is, the Ninths by such as held a Barony, or used to be summoned to Parliament. And then the King Ib. n. 35. granted for him and his Heirs, That if any Person do any act against the form of the Great Charter, or any other good Law, that he should answer in Parliament, or other place where he ought by Law to answer. The Statutes, and the Conditions above-mentioned, are en∣ter'dWhere the Statutes and Conditions are. into the back of the Roll, and Printed in the Statutes at Large  this year, and are a true Translation of the Record in French. In the Third Chapter of the Statutes it was agreed, That the Chancellor, Treasurer, Barons, and Chancellor of the Exchequer, theGreat Officers to be sworn in Parlia∣ment. Justices of both Benches, Justices assigned in the Country, Steward, and Chamberlain of the King's House, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Treasurer of the Wardrobe, Controllers, and those that were ap∣pointed to remain and be about the Duke of Cornwall, should then be sworn in Parliament; and so from thenceforth at all times,  when they should be put in Office, to keep and maintain the Privi∣leges and Franchises of Holy Church, the Points of the Great Charter, the Charter of the Forest, and all other Statutes, without breaking any Point. In the 4th Chapter of the same Statutes it is said it was agreed,Orders about the Justices and great Of∣ficers. That if any of the Officers aforesaid, or Controullers, or Chief
Clerk in either Bench, by Death or by other Cause, be put out of his Office, that the King by assent of the Great Men, which should be nearest him in the Country, and by the good Counsel he should have about him, should put another convenient into his Office, who was to be Sworn according to the Form afore∣said: And that in every Parliament the King should take into his Hands, at the third day thereof, the Offices of all the Mi∣nisters aforesaid, and so to remain four or five days, except the  Offices of the Justices of both Benches, Justices assigned, and Barons of the Exchequer; so as they might be put to answer every Complaint: And if by Complaint, or otherwise, they or any of them should be found faulty, then to be attainted in Parliament, and punished by Judgment of the Peers, and outed of his or their Office, and another convenient put in his place: And the King was to cause Execution to be done without delay, according to the Judgment of the Peers in Parliament.  Contrived by the Clergy. It is very probable, that these Agreements concerning the Of∣ficers were the Contrivances of the Arch-Bishop, Bishops, and Clergie; for it was a great trouble to them, that the Chancellor, Treasurer, and many other Officers who were Clerks, had been put out of their Offices (as hath been related before) at the King's arrival in England; and others, that were Lay or Secular Persons, placed therein. Walsingh. f. 150. l. 13. Rex Edwardus Angliam intravit, mi∣nistros suos videlicet Cancellarium, Thesaurarium, & alios amovit;  non Clericos, imo Seculares ad placitum suum substituit. The Statutes above-mentioned were some months after theThe Statutes and Conditi∣ons above∣mentioned revoked. making of them (that is, on the first of October next following) revoked by the King, as contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land, his Prerogatives and Royal Rights, by the Advice and Con∣sent of the Earls, Barons, and other Wisemen; as appears by the Revocation it self of the same Date, directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln, Printed in this year in the Statutes at Large, and in Pul∣ton;  as likewise by a Writ directed to the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury. The King Append. n. 88. The King's Writ to the Arch-Bishop that in a Pro∣vincial to be holden at London, to the Venerable Father in Christ, John Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, Greeting: Whereas some time since in our Parliament at Westminster, as∣sembled in the Quinden of Easter last past, there were certain Petitions made, expressly contrary to the Laws and Customs of England, and not only very prejudicial, but reproachful also to our Royal Dignity; which if we had not permitted to have been  drawn into a Statute, the said Parliament had been without suc∣cess, and dissolved in Discord, and so our Wars with France and Scotland, which we principally undertook by your Advice, had very likely been (which God forbid) in ruin; And we, to avoid such dangers, permitting Protestations of revoking those things, when we could conveniently, that had so been extortedNothing be done preju∣dicial to him or his Crown. from us against our will, yet permitted them to be sealed with our Seal at that time: And afterward by the advice and assent  of the Earls, Barons, and other Wisemen, for Lawful Causes, be∣cause our consent was wanting (or as it is in the Revocation, directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln, because we never consented to the making of the Statute; but as then it behoved us, we dissi∣muled in the Premisses, &c.) we have declared it null, and that it ought not to have the name and force of a Statute. And we
understand, you have commanded a Provincial Council to meet at London, on the morrow of St. Luke next coming; in which you intend to excite the Bishops of your Province against us, and toNor to con∣firm the Sta∣tute and Con∣ditions. ordain and declare some things prejudicial to us, about confirming the said pretended Statute, and for the enervation,▪ depression, and di∣minution of our Royal Jurisdiction, Rights and Prerogatives; for the preservation whereof we are bound by Oath; also concerning the Process depending between us and you for certain Matters  charged upon you by us; and that you intend to promulge grie∣vous Censures concerning these things: We willing to prevent so great mischief, do strictly forbid, that in that Council you do not propound, or any ways attempt, or cause to be attempted any thing in derogation, or diminution of our Royal Dignity, Power, or Rights of the Crown, or of the Laws and Customs of our King∣dom, or in prejudice of the Process aforesaid, or in confirmation of the pretended Statute, or otherwise in contumely of our Name  and Honour, or to the grievance or disadvantage of our Counsellors or Servants. Know ye, that if you do these things, we will prosecute you, as our Enemy and Violatour of our Rights, with as much severity as lawfully we may. Witness the King at West∣minster the first day of October. The Revocation was confirmed, or rather the Statute vacated in Parliament the 17th of Edward the Third, in the very next Title or Number to the Acquittal of the Arch-Bishop, as followeth;  Append. n. 89. The Revoca∣tion confirm∣ed in Parle∣ment. Also it is accorded and assented unto, That the Statute made at Westminster in the Quinden of, or fifteen days after Easter, shall be wholly repealed and annulled, and loose the name of a Statute, as being prejudicial, and contrary to the Laws and Ʋsages of the Kingdom, and the Rights and Prerogatives of the King. But for that there are some Articles in the same Statute which are reasonable and agreeable to Law, (as in the Revocation in print) 'tis agreed by the King and his Council, that those Articles, and  others, accorded in this present Parliament, shall be made into a new Statute, by the advice of Justices and other Sages, which shall be perpetual. The Necessitous Condition of the King's Affairs requiring 2000020000 Sacks of Wooll to be Trans∣ported. Sacks of Wooll to be Rot. Parl. 15 E. III. n. 45. transported before Michaelmas next coming, it was provided, That no Man before that time should send over Sea any Wooll, on pain of thrice the value, and loss of Life and Member. How this Arch-Bishop was prohibited, and kept from entring in at the Door of the Painted Chamber, where the Parliament sate, by Two Serjeants at Arms placed there by the King; we have it in Birchington, the Monk of Canterbury, Hist. Sacr. vol. 1. f. 39, 40. The Arch-Bishop not permitted to enter the Painted Chamber where the Lords sate in Parlement. in his Life. On Satur∣day, the Feast of St. Vital, or 28th of April, being the sixth day of the Parliament, he came to Westminster, and to the Door of the Painted Chamber; The Serjeants told him, they could not permit him to go in; To whom he said, the King called him  to Parliament by his Writ, That he was after the King the greatest, and ought to have the first Voice, (ego sum major post Regem, primam vocem habere debens) That he challenged the Rights of his Church of Canterbury, and demanded entrance into the Chamber; but the Serjeants expresly denied it to him, and to the Bishops of London and Chichester, who were with him. Then advancing his Cross,
he told them, That he would not depart from that place until the King should command him; at length, staying there, the Ea of Northampton and Salisbury coming out, he desired them to ac∣quaint the King with what had been done; and that they would request him in his Name, to preserve the Right of the Church of Canterbury. At last, with his Fellow Bishops, and the Bishop ofAt last he was permitted to enter. Ely, he was admitted into the Chamber, where Treating with the Prelates and Peers of the Land, the King withdrew. On  Thursday following, being the 3d of May, in full Parliament, he with Ten Bishops, Eight Earls, Four Abbots, Eight Barons; (allAnd admit∣ted to favour by the suppli∣cation of Great Men. there named) the King's Chamberlain, John Darcy, Bartholomew Burghersh, the Mayor of London, the Barons of the Cinque-Ports, and Knights of the Community of England, (ac militibus com∣munitatis Angliae) appeared before the King, and supplicated him for the Arch-Bishop, who admitted him into favour; but did not then (as Birchinton affirms) excuse him wholly from his Crimes,  as is clear from the Parliament Records above cited. Not long after the Dissolution of this Parliament, Lewis the Emperor Append. n. 90. wrote to King Edward, That Philip King of France had given him Authority by his Letters, to Mediate a Peace be∣tweenThe Emperor by Letter of∣fers his Me∣diation of a Peace with France. them; which, tho incumber'd with many and weighty Affairs, he was willing to undertake, it being very expedient for, and advantageous to himself, Kingdom, and Allies; if he would give him like Power by his Letters to Treat of, and make a  Peace, or Truce for a year or two. Nor (as he says) ought the Friendship enter'd into, and contracted between him and Philip King of France, move King Edward; for since he had made Truce and Agreement (meaning the Truce at Tournay) with Philip without his knowledge, will, or assent; by advice of his Princes, who knew his Leagues, Agreements and Unions, to whom it seemed he might with Honour make Agreement and Friendship with the King of France, he had contracted and en∣ter'd  into Union with him. And for the Causes before noted he revoked his Commission, by which he had made him Vicar of the Empire; yet certainly letting him know, that in his Mediation and Treaties he would provide for him like a Brother; and if he would acquiesce in his Advice, his Cause should be brought to a good end by his assistance. And for his further intimation he sent to him one of his Chaplains, who he desired might speedily be sent back. These Letters were dated at Francfort, June the 24th. To which Letter King Edward sent his Answer, Append. n. 91. That he had received it with Respect; and then reciting the chief Con∣tentsKing Edward by his Letter refuseth to ac∣cept it. of it, commends his Zeal for making an Agreement be∣tween him and Philip of Valois, giving him notice, That he al∣ways wish't for a reasonable Peace with him, which he had pro∣secuted as much as he could with Justice; and that he then de∣sired such a Peace, as he wished for, might be procured at the in∣stance of so great a Mediatour. But because he knew his Right  in the Kingdom of France to be sufficiently clear, he would not by his Letters commit it to a doubtful Arbitration or Judgment; much wondring he should join with Philip, that had done him such notorious injury, when seeing the evident Justice he had for his Demands, and Philip's obstinacy in not complying with them, he had for that reason enter'd into a League with him. And as
to what was said, That he without his knowledge or assent had made  Truce, and entred into a Treaty of Peace with Philip, consider∣ing the Circumstances of the Fact it ought not rationally to have moved him; because at that time he besieged Tournay, and ought to follow the advice of those that were with him, and gave him their assistance; Considering also that Winter was coming on, and the distance between them, he could not be permitted to consult him. And further he put him in mind, That he had granted,  that when he had opportunity he might Treat without his know∣ledge; but so as not to make a final Peace with Philip without his consent, which he never intended to do. It seemed also to some, that the Revocation of the Vicarship was too suddenly done, when as according to the Agreement by the heighth of Imperial Power made with him, it ought not to have been done, until he had obtained the Kingdom of France, or the greatest part of it. Dated at London the 18th day of July, in the second year of his Reign  over France, and over England the Fifteenth. After the Truce at the Siege of Tournay, Frissard, . 1. c. 64. The Duke of Bretagne dies. John Duke of Bre∣tagne, who had served the King of France in his Army, in the way toward his own Country fell sick, and died without Issue: After his death there arose a controversie between Charles Earl of Blois, and John Earl of Montfort, about Succession to, and Enjoy∣ment of that Dukedom. Their Titles were thus; Arthur the second had Ib. and Robert of A∣versbury, p. 98. b. c. 40. Competitors for the Duke∣dom. Two Sons by his first Wife, this Duke John, and another  who Married, and had a Daughter only, and died before the Duke his Brother. This Daughter was Married to Charles Earl of Blois, Nephew to Philip the French King by his Sister. The same Arthur by a second Wife had a Third Son, who did bear the Title of Earl of Montfort. The Question was, Whether the Wife of the Earl of Bloys, or the Earl of Montfort, was nearest in Blood to the late Duke. Upon the Dukes Death Montfort went to Nantes, the chief City  in Bretagne, Frossard, Ibidem. The Citizens of Nantes and some others own Montfort. where he was received by the Citizens and People of the Country thereabout, as their Lord, and as nearest of Blood to his Brother, who did homage and sware fealty to him. To this place he summoned in the Ib. 65, 66, 67. The Nobility and best fort of People ap∣pear not upon his Summons. Nobility, and the best sort of People of the Country, and good Towns of Bretagne, who appeared not; whereupon he raised an Army, and took the Town and Castle of Brest, the City of Rennes, the Town and strong Castle of Hannybout, the Town and Castle of Caraches. Yet after all this the Earl Ib. c. 68. He offers to hold the Dukedom of the King of England by Homage and Fealty. King Edward accepts his offer, and pro∣miseth to de∣fend him. of Montfort, fearing the Earl of Bloys by the power of France might drive him out of the Duke∣dom, came into England, and offered to King Edward to hold it of him by Homage and Fealty, if he would defend him against the French King, and all others who should give him Trouble in this Matter. The King accepted his offer, and thought he should have great advantage by it, as not having a more commodious way of entring France than by Bretagne; calling to mind, that the  Alemans or Germans, and Brabanters, had done little or nothing for him; and only made their own advantage by spending him much Money. After Homage done, King Edward in the presence of the Lords of Bretagne, and England, that were present, pro∣mised he would aid and defend him, as his Liege-man, against the French King and all others. The Homage and Promises were written, sealed, and delivered interchangeably.
The French King observing what the Earl of Montfort hadThe French King sum∣mons him to Paris. done in Bretagne, and hearing he had done Homage to the King of England for that Dutchy; at the Request of the Earl of Bloys he was summoned to appear at Paris before the King, Twelve Peers, and other great Lords of France. He appeared according to Summons, Ib. c. 69, 70. He denies he did Homage to the King of England. and when the French King charged him with having done Homage to his Adversary, the King of England, he denied it: He then commanded him by all he held of him, that  he should not depart from Paris in Fifteen days, in which time the Twelve Peers, and other Lords, should judge of his Right. But he suddenly and privately withdrew from Paris, and returned into Bretagne. Nevertheless the Peers and Lords on the 15th day gave theirThe Peers of France give the Title of the Dutchy of Bretagne to Mary the Wife of the Earl of Bloys. Opinions concerning the Title and Inheritance of the Dutchy, That it belonged to Mary the Wife of the Earl of Bloys; and further their Opinions were, That if ever the Earl of Montfort had any  Right, he had forfeited it two ways, by doing Homage, and re∣ceiving it from any other Lord than the King of France, of whom he ought to have held it; and by disobeying the King'sThe Earl of Bloys enters Bretagne. Commands, in going from Paris without his Leave. No sooner was this Judgment passed for him, Ib. c. 71, 72. Surprised and took Earl Montfort. but the Earl of Bloys, with great assistance from the King of France, entered Bretagne, and surprized and took the Earl of Montfort in the Town of Nantes, by the Treachery of the Townsmen; from whence he was  sent Prisoner to Paris, and there died. This was done (says Foissard Ib. c. 72. A. D. 1341. Who died at Paris, being there Priso∣ner. in the year 1341, about the Feast of All-Saints, which was in the Fifteenth year of Edward the Third; after whose Death his Widow, Sister to the Earl of Flanders, a Prin∣cess of great Prudence and Courage, Ib. c. 79. and Du Chesne, f. 656. B. His Widow maintains War against the Earl of Bloys. maintained the War a∣gainst the Earl of Bloys, and kept possession of those Parts and Places of Bretagne, as had not been brought under his power. This was in the beginning of Winter, when the French Nobility, that  came with the Earl of Bloys by the King of France his Command, retired, the fury of the War then ceasing; but failed not to return in the Spring, to attempt to take from the Countess of Montfort what remained in her possession. So soon as she was informed of their return, she sent Ib. in both. She sends to the King of England for assistance. Emery de Clisson, a Lord of Bretagne, into England, to Request Assistance of the King, propounding her Son John, Heir to the Earl of Montfort, as a Husband to one of his Daughters, (who was afterwards Sdf. Genealog. Hist. f. 179. Which she received. Married to Mary his fourth  Daughter, and she enjoyed the Title of Dutchess of Bretagne.) The Proposition was readily agreed to by the King, and he sent Sir Walter Manny into Bretagne, with as many Men Friss. & Du Chsne, t supra. A. D. 1342. Upon the Marriage of her Son with the King's 4th Daughter. at Arms as Sir Emery desired, and also 3000 Archers; but these were not sufficient to defend the Country against the Force of the Earl of Bloys, who had taken Rennes, Vannes, and other Places; and would have conquered all Bretagne, if not speedily opposed. Ib. Friss. c. 86. 90. & Du Chene, f. 657. B. This Account was sent to the King by Messengers from the  Countess, and Sir Walter Manny; whereupon he sent Robert de Ar∣tois with more Men, Arms, and Archers, to reinforce Sir Walter. Du Chesne, Im C. D. Frss. c. 92. This joint Force besieged and retook Vannes; but not long after Vannes was recovered by assault, made by the Forces and Friends of Charles of Bloys; in the defence whereof Ib. c. 9. Du Chsne, f. 658. B. C. Robert de Artois was much, and dangerously wounded; who not long
after returned into England, in hopes of better Chirurgeons and Medicines, and died there. The mean while the Scots entered into England, plundered,The Scots en∣ter into, burn and waste the Borders. burnt, and ravaged the Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, and the Bishoprick of Durham; against whom the King raised an Army in the Northern Counties. King Edward very much disturbedIb. in both. An Army raised, with which for the Death of his great Friend, and at the Progress of Charles of Bloys, raised a great  Army, and appointed it by ProclamationClause 16 E. III. M. 20. Dors. A. D. 1342. the King went in Per∣son into Bre∣tagne. He wrote to the Pope to Command Prayers, &c. to be made for his Suc∣cess. to be ready to pass with him into Bretagne by Midsummer following; and then wrote to Pope Clement the Sixth to put up Prayers to the Almighty for his happy Progress, and that he would cause Preachings, Processi∣ons, and other Pious Offices to be exercised in England for a Bles∣sing upon his Armies, which at that time he intended against France and Scotland. The Letter it self being written in an ex∣traordinary strain of Piety and Devotion, and to shew the De∣votional  Latin of those times, is Printed in the Appendix.N. Notwithwithstanding his Proclamation, he could not get readyClause 16 E. III. p. 2. M. 23. Dors. until the 4th of October, when he took Shipping at Sandwich; and sailing toward France he met with the French Fleet; from which, after a sharp Engagement, they were separated by Storm. At length he landed near Vannes in Bretagne, which he besieged; andFroiss. c. 94, 98. Two Cardi∣nals sent by the Pope to mediate a Truce, which was obtained for 3 years. the French Army, under the Conduct of the Duke of Normandy, lay ready to relieve it. At which time the Pope sent  the Two Cardinals of Penestrin and Tusculum, who mediated a Truce for Three years; for the maintaining whereof the King of Eng∣land, and Duke of Normandy (as Froissard says) made Oath, according to the Articles of the Truce which do here follow, tho not exactly according to the form in Robert of Aversbury, p. 100. c. 42. or in Tho. Walsingham, f. 159. n. 10, 20, &c. which is te∣dious and without method, but according to Du Chesne,F. 659. B. who hath drawn up the whole and entire Sense of them in a short  Form. 1. For the Reverence of Holy Church, and the Support of Chri∣stianity,The Articles of the Truce. and Ease of the Subjects of both Kings, and the Honour of the Cardinals Treating Peace and Concord between them, they wouldThe first Ar∣ticle is ac∣cording to Avesbury. send some of their Blood, and others to the Court of Rome, to end all Differences and Debates before the Pope, having Power by Advice of the Pope, and Consistory of Cardinals, to alledge and propound their  Reasons; not that he should end and decide it, or give Sentence, but only for the making a better Peace and Treaty. 2. The Treators, or Ambassadors, shall appear before the Pope by the Feast of John Baptist, or Midsummer-day next coming; That before Christmass the Treaty may be ended, if nothing happens for the prolonging of it; or in case the Pope be not hindred by other Business, or that he cannot compose in that time the Differences between the Kings; yet nevertheless the Truce shall continue for Three years after  the Feast of St. Michael then next following, between the King of England and France, the King of Scots, and the Earl of Haynault, and all the Allies of the said Kings, that is to say, the Dukes of Brabant and Gelderland, the Marquiss of Juliers, Monsieur John de Haynault, and the People of Flanders, in all their Lands and Seigniories.
3. That the King of Scots, and Earl of Haynault, and other Allies of the Kings, shall send their Messengers or Ambassadors toIb. & Waling. the Court of Rome, by the Feast of St. John, with sufficient Power to consent to, and confirm the Treaty before the Pope, for what be∣longs to them; but if they would not send, the Treaty was to proceed notwithstanding. 4. That the Truce shall be observed in Bretagne between the Two Kings, and their Allies, notwithstanding they both pretend Right to  the Dutchy. 5. The City of Vannes shall remain in the Hands of the Cardi∣nals, or of one of them, to be holden during the Truce in the Name of the Pope. And after the end of the Truce, they may dispose of it as they please. 6. That the Cardinals shall labour diligently, to find some way how the Flemmings may be absolved from the Popes Censures they had in∣curred.Avesbury. 7. That the Earl of Flanders may remain in his Earldom, as Lord without Mean, but not as Soveraign, provided the People do Consent. 8. Both Kings shall endeavour without fraud, that their Subjects do not make War upon one another, in Gascoign, nor in Bretagne, during the Truce, or in any other place; and in case they should, there should be no Rupture between them. 9. That none, who were under the Obedience of one King, before  or at the time when the Truce was made, shall put himself under the Obedience of the other during the Truce. 10. That nothing shall be given or promised, directly or indirectly, to any Party to make War during the Truce. 11. That the Truce be kept, and observed by Land and Sea, and Sworn to by both Parties, and speedily published in both Armies, and within Fifteen days in Gascoign, Bretagne, and Flanders; and in England and Scotland within Forty. The residue of the Articles are the same with those of the Truce, made at the Siege of Tournay, the 25th of September 1340, in the Fourteenth of Edward the Third, before noted. This Truce was made in the Priory of St. Mary Magdalen in the Town of Malatrait, and Signed the 19th of January 1343, ac∣cording to Avesbury, and on the same day 1342, according to Walsingham. About five Weeks after this Truce was Signed,Clause 17 E. III. Part. 1. M. 25. Dors. Writs for a Parlement. Writs were sent forth for a Parlement to be holden at Westminster, on the Monday next after the Quinden of, or 15th after Easter; Teste Custode, Witness the Guardian of England, Feb. 24. &c. The chief cause of Summons of this Parlement (signified also in the Writ it self)Rot. Parl. 17 E. III. n. 7, 8, 9. was to treat and advise with the Great Men and Commons (od les Grantz & Comunes) what was best  to be done about the King's Affairs, concerning the Truce madeThe Declara∣tion of the Cause of Sum∣mons. between him and his Adversary of France; and then touching the Government and Safety of this Nation and his People. And for that Monsieur Bartholomew de Burghesh, who was with the King in Bre∣tagne at the making of the Truce, knew best how things went there, the Chancellor sent to him to come, and declare in Parle∣ment
the manner of making the Truce; who reported, That after the King had begun the War with France, by Assent of the Pre∣lates, Great Men, and Commons, (par Assent des Prelatz, Grantz, & Comunes) to conquer his Rights and Inheritance there, he many times passed the Sea with his Host; and in his last Passage had harassed the greatest part of the Dutchy of Bretagne, and by God's Assistance had taken Towns, Castles, and Forts: At last he came to the City of Vannes, which by Advice of the Great  Men with him, he besieged, where he was desired by the Pope, for the Reverence of God and Holy Church, he might send Two Cardinals with Terms of Peace, or a Truce until a Peace might be treated of, and concluded. The King perceiving the Truce to be Honourable and Advantageous for him and his Friends or Allies, assented to it, that during the continuance thereof, a Treaty of Peace might be had before the Pope, as a Mediator and Friend, but not as a Judge, or one to whom the matter was compromitted;  (come meen, amy, & noun pas come juge, ne recompromissair) which Peace, if Good and Honourable, the King would accept; if not, he would pursue his Quarrel. And he said further, That because the War was begun by the Common Assent of the Prelates, Great Men, and Commons, the King would not treat of, or make Peace, without their Common Assent. Wherefore the Prelates and Great Men were charged (furent chargez) to Assemble on Thursday the First of May (Joedy le primer jour de May) to treat, advise, and agree among them∣selves,  whether the King ought to send Envoys to the Court of Rome to propound his Rights before the Pope, or not. And in the same manner the Knights of Counties and Commons were charged (furent chargez les Chivalers des Countees & Comunes) to assemble in the Painted Chamber, to treat, &c. and to report their Answer and A∣greement in Parlement the same Day (& de reporter lour respons & lour assent en dit Parlement le dit Joedy.) On which Day the Pre∣lates and Great Men answered, Their Advice was, That the Truce  was Honourable and Advantageous to the King and all his Friends; and that every Christian ought to wish the War, which was so great and hurtful to all Christians, might end in Peace: Wherefore they agreed to the Truce, and that the King should send Messengers to Rome, to lay before the Pope, as Mediator and Friend, but not as Judge, his Rights and Demands, in order to a Treaty of Peace, according to the Form of the Truce. And then the Knights of Counties came, and the Commons (& puis vindrent les Chivalers  des Countees & les Comunes) and answered by Monsieur William Trus∣sel in the White Chamber, who in the Presence of the King, Pre∣lates, and Great Men (qi en presence de nostre Seignieur le Roy, & des Prelatz & Grantz) proposed for the Knights and Commons (pur∣posa pur les Chivalers & les Comunes) that they were fully agreed the Truce should be kept, to the end a good and honourable Peace might be made. And further, the said Commons (les ditz Com∣unes) prayed the King to send solemn Envoys, or Messengers to  treat of Peace, as abovesaid; and in case he could have an Ho∣nourable and advantageous Peace for himself and Friends, he would accept it; but if not, the said Commons (les ditz Comunes) granted to aid and assist him, and to maintain his Quarrel with all their Power; (granteront de luy aidez, a meyntenir sa querele ove tote lour poair.
Several CommissionsRot. Fran. 17 Ed. III. M. 12. 20 Maii; ib. 19 Aug. n. 6. ib. 18 Ed. III. M. 3. 4 Aug. ib. M. 2▪ Octob. 20. were made to Commissioners, to treatCommission∣ers sent to the Pope. before the Pope as a private Person, and not as a Judge, with the Commissioners of his Cousin Philip of Valois, upon all Dominions, Dignities, Honours, Lands, Possessions, Places, and Rights, concer∣ning which there was any Controversie or Dissention between them; and also concerning the Right he had or might have to the Crown and Kingdom of France; and generally about all Dissentions, Wars, Quarrels, Commotions, Questions, Damages, Injuries done, given, or  made on either side, &c. In the Cotton LibraryClopatra▪ Edw. III. f. 28. in the bottom. The Pope of∣fers Equiva∣lents to the English Com∣missioners. They refuse to treat of any thing but the Crown and Kingdom of France. there is a Treaty as it was managed at Avignion before the Pope, day by day, from the 22d of Octo∣ber, to the 29th of November, by William Bateman Bishop of Nor∣wich, John Offord Dean of Lincoln, the Arch-Deacon of Norwich, Sir Hugh Nevill Knight, and Nicholas de Flisco. The Pope offered many Equivalents to the English for the Dukedom of Guien, &c. to treat about what had been attempted against the Truce, and by  whose means it had been broken: But they would not enter upon the Treaty of any other Matter, until they were satisfied in their Demand of the Kingdom and Crown of France for King Edward. By the last Commission thereRot. Fran. Ed III. M. 2. 18 Octob. 20. were Two other Commissioners added to the former, John de Thoresby and Sir Ralph Spigurnel Knight, who appeared in the Pope's Court on the Feast of St. Catherine, or 25th of November, before himself, and delivered the King's Letters to him, and he appointed the next day at the time of Vespers to hear  them. When Mr. John Thoresby acquainted him that Sir Ralph and he had Commissions, and were sent by the King for two things, for reformation of what had been attempted against the Truce, and also that they might assist the other Commissioners in the Treaty. The Pope appointed them to come before him the 28th Day; but not being then at leisure, he appointed the next Day, when they understanding from the Commissioners of the King's Adversary, That he should have nothing in the Kingdom of France but in  subjection to him, they resolved to treat no more before they knew the King's Mind: Whereupon the Pope told them, he would send Sir Hugh Nevill to him with his Letters, and like∣wise Sir Simon de Buyssy to the King of France: And so stood the Treaty at that time, on the 29th of November, 1344. and 18th of Edward III. During the Treaty, the French King put to death at Paris Oliver de Clisson, and many other Barons and Lords of Bretagne and Normandy  (says Froissardlib. 1. c. 99 for suspicion of Treason. Du Chesne says. 660. A. B. they held secret Intelligence and private Correspondency, and made a League with King Edward under their Seals, contrary to the Ninth Article of the Truce, which was, That none in the Obedience of one King, at the time of Truce, should put himself under the Obedience of the other, while it con∣tinued. The Treaty hitherto having been without Success,Claus. 18 Ed. III Part 1. M. 14 Dors. A. D. 1334. theWrits for a Parlement  King on the 20th of April issued his Writs for a Parlement to meet on Monday next after the Octaves of Holy Trinity, or 7th of June that Year. The next Day the Names of the Lords were read and examinedRot. Parl. 18 Ed. III▪ . 5. before the King in Parlement, (item soient les nouns des Seigneurs, &c.) to see who were come, who not; and the Names of those who were not come, were given to
the King in Writing, that he might order such Punishment asThe absent Lords to be punished at the King's Pleasure. The cause of Summons de∣clared. he pleased (pour ordainer lieu punissement come lui plerra.) On Thursday the Chancellor declared the Causes of Summons to be concerning the Truce made in Bretagne, and the Breach there∣of, in seven Articles; and begins Ibm. n. 6. thus: (Seigneurs en les Trewes prises, accordez & affermez par serement en Bretaigne entre autres pointz, &c.) Lords, in the Truce made, agreed, and confirmed by Oath in Bretagne, amongst other Articles it was agreed, 1. That the Truce should be kept in Bretagne between the Kings and their Adherents (entre les Rois & lour Adherantz) notwithstand∣ing the Right they both claimed in the Dutchy. 2. Also, That none who were under the Obedience of one of the Kings (en obedience dun des Rois) should come under the Obedience of the other King (del autre Roi) during the Truce. 3. That there be no renewing of Injuries against one part or other, in  prejudice of the Truce, while it continues. 4. Also, That the said Lords, their Adjutors, and Coadjutors and Allies, whatever they be, do remain in such Possession, and such Seisin, as then they had of all their Benefices, Lands, and Possessions (des toux lour benefitz, terres, & possessions) which they held, or had any ways ob∣tained, during the Truce. 5. Also, That what was promised to the Earl of Montfort, before, and within, the City of Vannes, might be performed. 6. Also, If any one in Gascoigne, or otherwhere, continuing the Truce, move War against their Neighbour, or Enemy, who shall be in the Interest of either Party, then the said Kings ought not to meddle in it by themselves or others, directly or indirectly (que le ditz Rois ne se devient mellez par eux ne par autre, droitement, ne noun droitement.) 7. That to none of either Party shall any Gift or Promise, be made di∣rectly or indirectly, to make War during the Truce. And against these Articles several things have been done Ibm. Things done against the Truce. as the King's Council have been informed (par ascunes de Bre∣taigne) by some of Bretagne. First, That some of the Allies of him, that calls himself the King of France, have taken and imprisoned many Men at Arms of the Allies of our King, and some they sent into France, to remain in Prison there, during the Pleasure of the  King's Adversary. Also the said Adversary caused many Knights, Esquires, and other Persons of Bretagne (Chevaliers, Esquiers, & autres gentz) who were known to be in the Legiance and Obedience of our King, before the Truce made, and were comprised in it, and ought to have been protected by it, to be carried to Paris, and there put to death against the Assent and Decree of the Members, and others of his Counsel in his Parlement; and some he caused to be murdered  in their own Country, falsly and maliciously, against the said Truce, and against his Oath. And the said Adversary sent Men at Arms and Foot to a great number, into Gascoigne and Bretagne, who, after the Truce made, took Castles, Towns, Mannoros, and Fortlets, and seized Lands and Possessions being in the Possession and Obedience of our King (esteantz en la possession & en obedience
de nostre Seigneur le Roi) at the time of the Truce made, in which, amongst other things, it is contained, That no new thing should be attempted during the Truce (es queoc entre autres choses est con∣tenuez que rien serroit attemptez de novell durantes mesmes les Trewes.) And further [5] the said Adversary endeavours, by all ways he can, or knows, to take and seize all the Lands and Possessions which our King hath beyond Sea, and to procure his Allies in Brabant, Flanders, and Almain, or Germany, to leave him; and  hath a firm purpose, as our King and Council have certainly been informed, or have understood, to destroy the English Lan∣guage, and to possess England (which God forbid) if a forcible Re∣medy be not applied to his Malice (& si est il inferme propos a ce que nostre Seigneur le Roi & son conseil ont intenduz en certeyn a de∣struire la Lange Englois, &c.) On the other side (dautre part) the Ibm. Scots, who are the said Adversaries Allies, have openly declared, That when he gives  them notice, they will not observe or regard the Truce, but march into England, and do what Mischief they can. Wherefore the King Ibm. prays and charges (pur quoi nostre Seigneur le Roi pria & chargea les Prelates, &c.) the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons, That these things considered, they would give him such Advice and Assistance, as was necessary for the sa∣ving his and their own Rights and Honour. Which things being Ibm. n. 7. recited by the Arch-Bishop (les Pre∣lates,  Counts, Barons, & les autres des Commons prierent, &c.) the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and others of the Commons, pray, That they may deliberate till Monday next following. And from that Monday Ibm. n. 8. because they had not then fully de∣liberated, they pray till Wednesday, the Vigil or Eve of St. John Baptist; upon which day the Arch-Bishop, and Ten other Bishops, Five Abbots, Two Priors, Eight Earls, Six Barons, all there named, and the Commons of the Realm assembled in the White  Chamber, (& les Commons du Roialme assemblez en la Chambre blanche, &c.) in the presence of the King, having regard to the great Mischiefs and Dangers, which may come to the King, and all his Subjects and Allies, if the Malice of his Adversary was not stopt; and considering the great Charges, which the Great Men and the Commons of England, had been at, and suffered by reason of the War continuing so long, by false Truces, and Sufferances; and seeing openly, that an end of the War, or so good a Peace  The Parle∣ment prays the King to make an end of the War by Battel or Peace. as ought to be, cannot be made without great force of Men, and great Power, they pray the King with one Assent, and every par∣ticular Person of the Great Men for himself (si prierent touz dun assent, & chescune singulere persone de Grantz a par lui, &c.) that he would make an end of the War, either by Battel, or by a convenient Peace, if it might be had. And that when Ibm. n. 9. And nt to lay ade his Voyage for the Pope's Letters. the King should be ready to pass beyond Sea, to take what God should give him (pur prendre ce que Dieux lui  durra) upon the Exploit of this Business, he would not for the Letters or Command of the Pope, or any other, lay aside his Voyage, until he had made an end one way or other. The which Prayer the King fully granted, (a quele preere le Roi ottroia pleynement) but because it could not [2] be done without a great and agreeable Aid, the Arch-Bishop, Bishops, Prelates, and Procurators of the
Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, granted to the King a Trien∣nialAid for this Voyage gran∣ted by the Clergy and Commons. Tenth; (& les ditz Commons le samaday apres granterent nostre Seigneur le Roi pur mesme la cause deux Quinzismes de la Commonalte de la Cerre, & deux dismes des Citees & Burghs;) And the said Commons granted to the King for the same cause Two Fifteenths of the Commonalty of the Land, and Two Tenths of the Cities and Burghs. And Ibm. n. 10. after that the said Commons granted ano∣ther Fifteenth; (& apres le dite Commune grantent une autre quin∣zisme.)  See for the Conditions of these Grants, in the Statutes at large, 18 Ed. III. translated exactly from the French on this Roll, n. 14. to n. 23. which Statute was made from the Petitions of the Commons, and the Answers to them; and 'tis called in the todding on the Roll, the Charter of the Commons; (la Chartre enseale par la Comune) and also for the Statute, or Charter for the Clergy, bearing Date July 8. in the 18th of his Reign, which gave them many Privileges, n. 24. to n. 32. In both these Sta∣tutes,  which are now in a manner become obsolete, 'tis said, the Great Lay-men granted to pass and adventure themselves with the King, and therefore they are not found upon the Roll to be Taxed. The residue of this Year was spent in Wal. f. 164. n. 30. Froys. l. 1. c. 100. Ashmle, f. 182. Tournaments, and other Military Exercises, at Dunstable, Smithfield, and especially at Windsor, in Feastings, Revellings, Dancing, and all manner of Jollity. But it was not long after the beginning of the next Year, that King Edward Av. p. 103. a. c. 48. III news from Bretagne. received news of what had been done in Bre∣tagne; how the Noblemen, who adhered to him there, were put to death; and what havock and depopulation had been made in those Places under his Subjection. Whereupon William de Bohun Earl of Northampton, had Rot. Franc. 19 Ed III. Part 1. M. 24. The King sent Defiance to Philip of Valois. Commission, Dated April 24. to defie Philip of Valois as a Truce-breaker, his capital Enemy, Persecutor, and unjust Ʋsurper of his Inheritance the Kingdom of France. And,  as what was done in Normandy and Bretagne against the Truce, had been declared to be so by the Parlement; so he wrote Rot. Rom. 19 Ed. III. M. 2. n 4. He wrote 'to the Pope com∣plaining of him. to the Pope on the 26th of May following, almost the same thing; and made grievous Complaints to him of Philip de Valois having, in the highest manner, broken and dissolved the Truce. The effect of his Letter the Pope repeats in his Bull, or Answer to it (the Original being in the Cotton Library Cleoptra, E. 2. The Effect and Contents of K. Edward's Letter to the Pope.) That for avoiding the Dangers and Damages that might arise, by reason of the Dissen∣tions  and Wars between Edward III. and the Illustrious King of France, as the Bull hath it, (inter te, fili carissime, ac carissimum in Christo filium nostrum Philippum Regem Franciae Illustrem) he had offered many ways of Peace; that he might apply himself, as he much desired, to the Service of his Redeemer beyond Sea, but was always delayed with fair Words and Treaties without ef∣fect, to his great Damage. His second Complaint was (after a Narrative of the Truce made before Vannes) That when he re∣turned  into England, and had left a few Men only in Bretagne, and sent his Commissioners to treat before his Holiness about a Peace (as related before) he received news, which pierced his Soul, That certain Noblemen of Bretagne were, by Command of Philip, taken, carried to Paris, and put to death: And also of the great Ravage and Depopulation made in Bretagne, Gascoigne, and other
Places. 3dly, That he endeavoured by crafty and secret Treaties to draw his Allies and Subjects from him, and procured other things to be attempted, against the Truce by Sea and Land: Therefore he thought it utterly dissolved by his Adversary. And now since the Time of Treaty was ended, and no rational way of Peace ap∣pearing, nor were the things attempted against the Truce re∣formed or amended, but rather multiplied, although by his Ho∣liness's Letters the said King had been often required to reform  them (not to say any thing of his Legate, that was sent into Bre∣tagne to cause the Truce to be observed, yet took the contrary part, and blamed him that he did not what he ought toward an Accommodation) he thought himself excused by God, Holy Church, and the People; if seeing he could have no other Re∣medy in a just Cause, he declared the Truce dissolved by Philip, and defied him, as above, and renewed the War again, protesting he would attempt nothing that might offend his Holiness or the Apo∣stolick  See, which he desired and ought to revere; or that might do Injury to any one, but only with Moderation to defend him∣self, and prosecute his Rights; asserting what he did was for want of other Remedy, and against his Will, offering Peace when he might have a good one, or by good means (cum habere poterit bono modo. The Pope's Answer to this Complaint, begins with a most ob∣ligingThe Pope's Answer to K. Edward's Complaints. Compellation, calling God to Witness (Fili dilectissime, novit  Ibm. Altissimus, qui scrutator est cordium, & cognitor secretorum, &c.) Most beloved Son, the Most High knows, who is the Searcher of Hearts, and understands all Secrets, that he had faithfully endeavoured to procure a Peace between him and the King of France without par∣tiality, and would not yet spare any Pains for the effecting of it. And he tells him, That those who wrote his Letters, probably understood not the Truth of the Affair; for that there were some things put in them, and some things left out, which caused no∣table  He tells him he had not done accor∣ding to the Truce. Errors. It was agreed by the Truce, That there should be some of the Royal Blood Commissioned to Treat on either side in his Presence; and though the King of France had sent several of the Royal Blood, and many Prelates of great Authority (as it had been agreed) with sufficient Power, and were very ready to Treat; yet he had sent none such; and therefore it ought to be considered, Whether he, the King of France, or himself, were in fault, that the Peace did not proceed as it ought to have  done. As to the taking and punishing of the Ibm. Noblemen, men∣tioned in his Letters, and that therefore the Truce was bro∣ken, the Pope says he had wrote to his Magnificence, and told his Commissioners, That the King of France, in answer to the inve∣ctive Letters he had wrote to him upon that Subject, affirmed, That those Noblemen had manifestly violated the Truce, by com∣mitting Murders, by burning and wasting the Countries, and doing  That the No∣blemen put to death had broke the Truce, com∣mitted Mur∣ders, &c. other horrid Wickednesses in Bretagne, where they were taken and punished according to Justice; (quod illi nobiles violando ipsas Treu∣gas manifeste in partibus Britanniae, ac homicidia, depopulationes, in∣cendia, & alia horrenda maleficia committendo, ibidem flagrantibus hu∣jusmodi & aliis criminibus capti propter praemissa, & alia sua facinoro∣sa scelera, & deinde puniti exigente justitia extiterunt.) And that
the same Noblemen asserted they were not in Confederacy with him, but with John of Bretagne Earl of Montfort, who had also denied when at Paris, that he had any Confederacy with him, that is King Edward. Further, Ibm. That his Excellence could not but know, that as he had complained of things attempted against the Truce in Bre∣tagne, Gascoign, and otherwhere, so the King of France had likewise complained of things done against the Form and Tenour  of the Truce in the same places, and also upon the Sea, having exhibited divers Articles thereof: That therefore he had directed Letters to them both about this Matter; To which the King of France answered, he would inviolably observe the Truce, and causeAnd that the King of France would invio∣lably keep the Peace, if he would do the same. whatever had been done against it to be revoked, provided he would do the like. Then having charged him by Letter with giving as∣sistance to Charles of Bloys, taking upon him the Title of Duke of Bretagne, he wrote back often, That he never assisted him with  Men or Money, or any other way; and the same thing John Duke of Normandy, his Eldest Son, constantly and frequently af∣firmed in his presence. And whereas Ibm. Charles of Bloys denies himself to be within the Truce. he had wrote effectually to Charles of Bloys, about the Observation of the Truce; he came to him, and in his presence, and in presence of the Cardinals that mediated the Truce, declared and affirmed, he never entered into the Truce, (asseruit se nunquam truges aliqualiter inivisse, nec fuerat super hoc requisitus)  nor was ever required, or asked to do it; and that by the Words He is not named in the Truce, or amongst the Allies; yet 'tis said in the Truce, it was to be kept in Bretagne by both Kings and their Ad∣herents. of the Truce he could no ways be comprehended in it, of which he seriously gave notice to his Commissioners before their departure from his Court. At which time Ibm. The King of France com∣plies fully with the Pope's Me∣thod pro∣pounded. The King of England did not. he thought it most expedient to avoid Scan∣dal, and for other causes, to consider the Complaints made on both sides, which were long, many, and intricate, according to a Me∣thod to be propounded, and consented to by both Parties, concerning  the Revocation of what had been done against the Truce, with which he had acquainted his Commissioners, and to the same pur∣pose wrote to them both. The King of France returned his Let∣ters of Consent according to his Proposition, sealed with his Seal, readily and freely, without any limitation of time; but he pre∣fixed so short a time, as nothing could be undertaken in that Business. Then Ibm. The Pope's Excuse for his Legate in Bretagne. to what he said concerning his Legat sent into Bre∣tagne  to cause the Truce to be observed, hearing what had been at∣tempted against it; he, as it had been often related to him, as much as he could with Justice, and as he found Compliance, was more favourable to his Cause than the other, as Charles of Bloys by Letters and Messengers grievously complained to him. But whe∣ther his Legat did any thing unjust or injurious, he knew not; however upon the first Complaint of his Friends he recalled him, who at his return excused himself; and if he could be informed  truly of any such Practice, he should correct him for it. After these Ibm. And says, that against the Tenor of the Truce he seized the City Vannes. Answers, he put him in mind, That against the Tenor of the Truce he had seized upon the City of Vannes, and expelled those, who were to keep it by direction of the Cardinals, and Mediators, in the Name of him, and the Roman Church, during the Truce; who were to dispose of it afterwards as they pleased; Of which he said nothing in his Letters.
At last Ibm. The Pope de∣sires him to think serious∣ly, whether he or the King of France had violated the Truce. in a long, tedious Discourse, telling him how God had fitted him with many Endowments to prosecute his Business against the Enemies of the Christian Faith, (ad prosequendum Dei negotium adversus hostes fidei Christianae) he earnestly perswades him to undertake the Holy War; and to think diligently, Whe∣ther to himself, or to the King of France, the Violation of the Truce ought to be imputed: Withall requesting, and exhorting him in the Lord, (rogamus itaque Celsitudinem tuam regiam, & in  Domino attentius exhortantes, tibi sub virtute juramenti praestiti super eisdem treugis injungentes, &c.) enjoining him by virtue of the Oath he made, to observe the Truce, to restore the City of VannesAnd chargeth him upon his Oath to re∣store the City of Vannes. into the hands of the Cardinals, in the same Condition it was when he expelled those they appointed to keep it, in the Name of him and the Church, during the whole time of the Truce, as therein expressed; and to return to the observation of the Truce, which was until Michaelmas then next coming, and a year afterwards;  and to omit his Warlike Preparations and Insults, promising to pre∣vail with the King of France to do the like. And then Ibm He Exhorts him to return to the Treaty of Peace. he concludes with Prayers and Exhortations by the Mercy of God, to return to the Treaty of Peace, and to send knowing Commissioners, with Inclination towards, and full Power to Treat of it; and promises, That having God only before his Eyes, he will promote it without partiality, to the praise of God, the honour and profit of both parts, and would induce the King of  France to do the same. The day of the Date and Month of thisAnd promis∣eth his utmost Assistance. Bull are not legible, but the year is, being the Fourth of his Pon∣tificate, which was the 19th of Edward III. Yet this he thought not sufficient to make his Case known to the World; but, first declaring his Title to the Crown of France, (the same as when he first claimed it) he drew up, what he had wroteKing Edward again declares his Title to France. to the Pope, into a Manifesto, and publisht it with this Title, [9] (Rex omnibus ad quod praesentes hae literae pervenerint salutem, &c.)  The King, to all Men to whom these Letters, or this Manifesto,[9] Avesbury, p. 103. a. c. 48. And put forth a Manifesto. or Declaration shall come, Greeting, &c. Which were dated at Westminster the 14th of June, in the 19th year of his Reign over England, and over France the Sixth. Datae Ib. p. 104. b. apud West∣monasterium 14 die Junii Anno Regni nostri Angliae decimo nono, regni vero Franciae sexto. About Michaelmas following Ib. & Du Chesne, f. 661, 662. He sends an Army into Gascony, and takes 47 Towns great and small. King Edward sent Henry Earl of Derby, Son of Henry Earl of Lancaster, with the Earl of Pem∣broke,  and Sir Walter Manny, into Gascony with a considerable Force, where he took the strong Town Bruggerac at the first as∣sault, and forty six other Towns great and small, which Philip de Valois had injuriously taken, and detained from the King of Eng∣land; the last of which was the Town and Castle of Auberoche. After which the Earl of Derby, with the Earl of Pembroke, and Sir Walter Manny, retired to Burdeaux; upon notice whereof the Earl of Laille, King Philip's Lieutenant in Gascogne, brought toge∣ther  a great Force, and besieged Auberoche; To the Relief whereof the Earl of Derby coming, he obtained a great Victory, and took many Noblemen and great Officers. After Easter Avesbury, p. 105. a. c. 50. Du Chesne, f. 663. D. A. . 1346. 20 E. III. next year, John Duke of Normandy, Son and Heir to Philip of Valois, besieged the Town of Agillon in Guien, in which was a strong Garrison placed by the Earl of Derby, and
well provided; For the relieving of this place, and to reinforceKing Edward, the Prince of Wales, and many Noble∣men. the Earl of Derby, King Edward raised an Army, and in Person, with the Prince of Wales, then Seventeen years of Age, and many of the Nobility, intended to pass into Guien; but the Wind be∣ing cross, and the Weather stormy, he was persuaded Ib. Du Chesne & Aves. by Geoffrey of Harcourt (an Outlaw and Exile of France, Lord of St. Saviours, the Viscount in Constantin in Normandy, and one ofLand with an Army in Nor∣mandy. his Marshals) to land in Normandy, and he did so on the 12th  of July, being Thursday, land at La Hogue. What he did after his landing, and in his march toward Caen, and of his taking of that City, and other things, Avesbury Ib. p. 105. a. c. 51. hath delivered in a Transcript of the Journal of Michael de Northburg, an able Clerk, and one of King Edward's Counsellors, who went, and was with him all the while. Where he landed, Ibm. What he did there after his Landing. for the unshipping of his Horse, and re∣freshing of himself and Army, and baking of Bread, he stay'd  six days. While he stayed there, a Party went off to Barfleur, and burnt the Ships in that Harbour, Eight of which had Castles be∣fore and behind, (des queux huit avoient chastiel devant, & decere.) After the Party left the Town, the Mariners burnt it. The first of the King's March was to Valoignes, where he stay'd only one night, and found sufficient Refreshment. From thence he march∣ed to Carenten, where were found plenty of Wine and Victuals: Much of this Town was burnt, notwithstanding the King did  what he could to preserve it. From hence he marched to St. Lo, where the People with some Soldiers seemed to make resistance; in this place he found a thousand Tun of Wine, besides great store of other Goods. Next night he lodged in an Abby, and his Army was quartered about him in Field Villages, (& son host as villes champestres entour luy) which in Parties made inroads into the Country, robbing and destroying five or six miles about every day, and burning Towns in many places, (& chivacherent les  gentz del host robbantz & destruantz cinque od sis lieus, environ toutz les jours, & arderent en plusors lieus.) Three or four days after his removal from this Abby, he came before Caen; in which were the Constable of France, and the Chamberlain of Tanquerville, with a great Force for its defence. The King took it by assault with a great slaughter of Knights, Esquires, and other People; and made Prisoners the Constable and Chamberlain, with 500 Knights, and Six or sevenscore Squires. In the Town were found Wine, Victuals,  and other Goods and Chattels without number (& furent troue en la ville vines, victualles, & autres biens & chatieux santz nom∣bre.) When the King removed from Hoges, Ib. in the same Journal. Qu. whether not Rothness? How he burnt and destroyed the Country. there were about 200 Ships stay'd there, which sailed to Rothmasse, and went on Shore, and burnt the Country two or three Leagues (lieues) within the Land, and took much Goods, and brought them to their Ships: From whence they went to Cherburg, a good Town, where was a strong  Castle and noble Abby, all which were burnt, as were all things and Towns upon the Sea Coasts from Rothmasse to Hostrem upon the Haven of Caen, about Sixscore English miles. There were then also burnt Sixty one Ships of War, with fore-Castle and hind-Castle, (ount ars 61 niets de guerre od chastel devant & derere) with 23 Cayers and other small Vessels of about 30 Tuns.
From Caen he marched to Poissy upon Avesb. p. 100. c. 54. the River Seyn, where he repaired the Bridge that was broken down, and passed the River on the morrow of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 16th of August, after he had defeated several great and strong Parties, who came to hinder his passage, and killed many of them. The Bridges were every where broken down, and guard∣ed to hinder his passage, so that he could not march very fast; and therefore he had time to plunder and ravage the Country, to  burn most of the good Towns and Villages he past thro, or came near, as may be seen in Froissard L. 1. c. 122, 123; 124, 125; 126. and Du Chesne. F. 664, 665. At length he came to the River Soam in Ponthieu and Picardy, which he passed at a Ford called Blanchtaque, between Abbeville and the Sea, Avesb. p. 109. a. c. 54. The Battel of Cressy. where was placed an Army to oppose him, which he routed, killed 2000, and took a great number of Knights and Esquires; the rest fled to Abbeville. From hence King Edward marched leisurely toward Ibm. Cressy in Ponthieu, his Army burn∣ing  and harassing the Country, where the King of France joined Battel with him on Saturday the 26th of August; Walsingh. f. 166. n. 30. The Victory was obtained by the English. There were slain on the French side Avesb. ut supra. What Great Men were slain. the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Lorrain, the Earls of Alanson, Flanders, Lewis of Blois, the Earl of Harecourt, Geoffry of Harecourt's Elder Brother, and his Two Sons; the Earls of Albemarl and Savoy, the Archbishop of Nismes, and Bishop of Sens, six German Earls, and many other Earls, Barons, and Lords.  The Froiss. l. 1. c. 130. English Army was ranged in Three Battles; the Prince of Wales headed the first, the Earl of Northampton the second, and the King himself the third. Ibm. The King of France fled only with five Barons, Sir John of Haynault, who had left King Ed∣ward's Service, Sir Charles of Montmorancy, the Lord of Beaujew, the Lord Daubery, and the Lord Montfort, to Bray Castle, and so to Amiens. On Sunday morning came several Ib. c. 31. The number of the slain. Reinforce∣ments, and great Bodies of Frenchmen to their King's Army, as  they thought, not knowing what had been done, who were all routed, many taken, and great numbers stain. That day in the afternoon King Edward sent to have the dead viewed, and num∣bred Ib. c. 32. In that Battel. by Two Barons and Three Heralds; At their return to the King they gave him an account of Eleven great Princes, Four∣score Banners, ('tis Froissard's Word) Twelve hundred Knights, and more than Thirty thousand Ordinary Men. From Cressy the King marched to Avesb. f. 109. b. c. 55. A Parlement called. Calais, and laid Siege to it on the Third of Sep∣tember. Upon his last passage into France Rot. Parl. 20 E. III. n. 6. the King, and Lords that accompanied him, and also the Great Men of his Counsel that were in England, agreed and ordered there should be a Parliament summon'd to meet at Westminster on the Munday next after the Nativity of the Virgin Mary. Ibm. The King snds to in∣form the Par∣lement of his success and progress in France. To this Parliament the King sent from the Siege of Calais, Bartholomew Burghersse, John Darcy his Chamberlain, Mr. John de Thoresby Keeper of his Privy Seal,  and John de Carleton, to inform them of the State of his Affairs, and to propound and declare some things to them in that Parlia∣ment, that concerned the Honour of God and the Church, the De∣fence and Quiet of the Kingdom of England, and his War in France, and also other things that were to be done, These Letters of Credence, or this Commission, [4] was dated before Calais on the[4] Ibm.
7th of September; and directed to the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Ab∣bots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and other his faithful Subjects in Par∣liament; (& aliis fidelibus suis in Parliamento suo, &c.) which when read, Bartholomew Burgersse for himself and Companions (pur lui & pur ses compaignons) in presence of the Guardian of England, (Leonell the King's Son) the Prelates, and other Great Men there named, Ib. n. 7. shewed the Graces God had given to the King, to the Great Men, and others with him, after their land∣ing  at La Hogue, (monstra les graces que Dieu avoit donez a nostre Sir le Roi, &c.) by a short Account of his Progress and Success in Normandy, the Battle of Cressy, and his besieging of Calais, from whence he resolved not to depart, until he had taken the Town; and that then he would draw toward his Adversary, pursue his Quarrel, and not return into England, until he had ended the War beyond Sea, with the help of God. Ibm. And to desire an Aid. For the accom∣plishment of which things, the said Messengers (a queu chose pour  faire les ditz messages prierent, &c.) prayed the Prelats, Great Men, and Commons, that they would Treat and Advise about an Aid, and Means to perfect that which had been so graciously begun; for that by common assent in Parliament, at the time when the King Ibm. undertook this War, they all promised that they would assist him with their Bodies and Goods to their power, (touz lui promistrent, qils lui eideroient de corps & d'avoir a lour poair.) At the same time they produced an Ordinance Ibm. The Ordi∣nance of Nor∣mandy pro∣duced in Par∣lement. or Agreement  made by the King's Adversary, and some Great Men of France and Normandy, to destroy the whole Nation of England, and the English Language: And to put this Design in Execution, the Earl of Eu then Constable of France, and the Chamberlain of Tankerville, were to raise a great Army for that purpose; but, as it pleased God, they were both taken at Caen, and many of their Men there killed and taken, so as the intended destruction of the English was defeated. This Ordinance is Ib. n. 8. enter'd upon the Parliament Roll, and there in the Todding called, (L'Ordinance de Normandie) The Or∣dinance of Normandy; 'Tis pretty long, but the most Material things were, That the King of France his Eldest Son, John DukeWhat it was. of Normandy, as General, with the Nobles, and others of that Dukedom, should pass into England with Four thousand Men atThe design to invade and conquer Eng∣land. Arms, Knights, Esquires, and Men of good Estate, and Forty thousand Foot. And if this Invasion could not be made that year, then it  was to be the next year, and so in any other year at a convenient time, during the War. Or if this Invasion should not be made, the Country of Normandy was to serve him with the same number of Men at Arms, and Twenty thousand Foot, in any other place, where the King, Duke, or either of them should be in Person. It was Ibm. How England was to be di∣vided in case of Conquest. also agreed, That if by God's assistance England were Conquered, the Conquest should be made in the Name and Ho∣nour of the Duke; and that all that the King of England en∣joy'd  should be his, as King and Lord, with all his Rights and Honours: And what the Nobles, Barons, and other Seculars pos∣sessed, was to be enjoy'd by the Church, Barons, Nobles, and Noble Towns of Normandy, (que les Nobles & les Barouns & autres Secu∣lars y ont, serra & demorra as Esglises, as Barouns, Nobles, & as Noble villes de Normandie;) That the Pope and Church of Rome
should safely enjoy what they had without diminution; and that whatever had been taken from the Scots by War, or otherwise, should be restored fully and entirely without delay. Ibm. This Ordinance was Dated at Boys de Vincens the 23d Day of March, 1338. and, says Avesbury, p. 107. a. c. 53. it was found in Caen, when it was taken and delivered to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, that he might excite the Clergy and Laity (ut per hoc excitaret clerum & populum) to pray more willingly for Peace and the King. After these things had been declared and expounded Rot. Parl. ut supra. in Parlement, they all thanked God for the Success he had given the King against his Adversary; and said, That whatever had been given him, had been well employed, and that they would fur∣ther Aid him according to their Power. The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses desired time to consider of the Aid until ThursdayAn Aid gran∣ted. next following, when they granted him Two Fifteenths, making grievous Complaints of Oppressions and Poverty in the Grant;  Ibm. n. 11. The Com∣mons Com∣plaints and Grievances. praying the King to think how they had been annually charged with Tallages, as Fifteenths, Wooll, Ninths, Men at Arms, Hobelors, Archers, Victuals, Guard of the Sea-Coasts, and many other Taxes, by which they were almost ruined. And also in the last Parle∣ment, when they granted Two Fifteenths for the ending of the War, it was granted and certainly promised to them (grantes lour fust, & certeinment promis en le dit Parlement) they should not be charged or grieved with Payments or Tallages: Wherefore,  it seemed to them reasonable they ought now to be discharged and excused. And notwithstanding these Grants and Promises, there daily issued Commissions to Array, in all Parts of England, Men at Arms, Hobelors, and Archers, according to the Value of their Lands, or to make Composition therefore. They likewise complained of Purveyance and Free Quarter; and of the Custom and Subsidy of Forty Shillings the Sack upon Wooll. Ibm. Which Grievances, Hardships, and Oppressions (les queux Grie∣vances,  Duretees, & Oppressions) were done and suffered every day, without Assent or Grant in Parlement (sanz Assent ou Grant en Parlement) expresly against See Rot. Parl. 14 Ed. III. Part 1. n. 8, 9. Pulton's Stat. 14 Ed. III. c. 1. Record. Yet notwithstanding these Oppressions and Grievances, the Commons, to the utmost of their Abilities, granted Two Fifteenths for the final Accom∣plishment of the War, by Gods Help, and Destruction of his Enemies, to be levied in two Years, of Cities, Burghs, and ancient Demeasns, as also of the Commons of the Counties, so as Ibm. their  Petitions upon these Grievances, and others, might be recited on the morrow in Parlement, and have speedy and good Re∣medy ordered (& sur ce hastive & bon remedie ordeigner) for the Common Profit of the Land, according as the King's Four Commissioners, or Messengers, had granted on his behalf to the Commons: The first Petition of the Commons was, The Com∣mons Petiti∣ons, n. 10. That the Ordi∣nances, Promises, and Grants made in Parlement, for the fu∣ture  might be observed, for the Ease of the Commons, against the great Charges and Hardships they had felt and suf∣fered. Also, That Commissions might not be issued out of Chancery, to charge the People with the Array of Men at Arms, Hobelors, Ar∣chers, or Victuals, without Assent or Grant in Parlement; and if
any such were, the People should neither be charged with, nor bound to obey them. The Answer was, as to the first Point, Ibm. R. The King's Answer to the Commons Petitions. That it should be as they desired. As to the second, it was notorious, that the Great Men and Commons (les Grantz & Comunes) in many Parlements had promised the King to assist him to their utmost in Body and Goods (en corps & avoir e quant qils poant) in his Quarrel with France, and for the Defence and Safety of England: Wherefore  the Great Men (Ibm▪ pur quoi les ditz Grantz veantz la necessite nostre Seigneur le Roi) seeing his Necessity to be supplied with such Men before his Passage, to recover his Rights beyond Sea, and for the Defence of England, had ordered, That those who had an Hundred Shillings a year Rent on this side Trent, should find Men at Arms, Hobelors, and Archers, according to the quantity of their Estate and Tenure, to go with the King at his Wages: or if they would not go in Person, to find others; or if not that, to pay  the King what he could procure Men for: And so things were, and had been done, and no otherwise. And the King would not, that what was done in this Necessity, should be made an Example for the future, as appeared by his Letters Patents. Another Petition of the Commons, Commons Petitions, n. 18. was, That the Forty Shillings a Sack upon Wooll, might not be collected, but only the old Custom paid. To this the Answer Ibm. The King's Answer. was, That the Prelates, and others, see∣ing  the King's Necessity, before his Passage beyond Sea to recover his Rights, and defend his own Nation, agreed by Consent of the Merchants, he should have the Subsidy of Forty Shillings on every Sack of Wooll that passed beyond Sea, for two Years; and that several Merchants had advanced Money upon that Grant to the King, for the carrying on the War: And therefore it could not be annulled, without the Assent of the King and his said Great Men (& de ses ditz Grantz.) While King Edward was doing these great things in France, and was before Calais, there came an account from the Earl of Derby in Gascony, That the Duke Aves. p. 110. c. 56. The Earl of Derby's Suc∣cess in Gascony. of Normandy, and the French, had in great haste raised the Siege of Aguillon, on Sunday before St. Bartholomew; and went off in such haste, as they left their Tents and most of their Baggage behind them: That he had taken many Towns and Castles of Force and Value in that Country, and put it into good Order, and then marched into  Poictou, took Poictiers, and settled that Country, and thence came back to Burdeaux, from whence he came to England, and was at London on the Feast of St. Hillary, or 13th of Ja∣nuary. The Success against the Scots was likewise considerable this Year. Ib. p. 111. a c. 57. The Scots in∣vade England with a great Army. David their King being excited by Philip of Valois, invaded England with a great Army, and marched as far as Dur∣ham,  near which place the Arch-Bishop of York, Henry Piercy, Ralph Nevill▪ and other Great Men of the Northern Parts, with such an Army as they had then raised, met him, and gave theThe Battel of Nevill's Cross. Scots Battel on St. Luke's Eve, or 17th of October, at Nevill's Cross near Durham; where they obtained a very memorable Victory, killing the Earls of Morave and Strathern, and the Flower of theDavid King of Scots taken Prisoner. Scots Militia and Men at Arms; taking King David, the Earls of
Fife and Monteth, Malcom Fleming, that called himself Earl of Wigetown, and William Douglas, Prisoners, and many Men at Arms. By Warrant directed to Thomas Rokeby Rot. Scot. 20 Ed. III. M. 2. A. D. 1346. Sheriff of York∣shire, Dated Decemb. 20. who then had the King of Scots in his keeping, he was commanded to carry David de Bruys (that hadSent to the Tower of Lond. with Force of Arms invaded England, plundered and burnt the Country, killed the King's Subjects, and done other Mischiefs) to the Tower of London, and deliver him to the Constable thereof, or  his Lieutenant, there to remain in safe Custody. Ib. 21 Ed. III. M. 9. Dors. A. D. 1346. The Earls of Monteth and Fife were condemned for Treason; the first whereof was executed about the beginning of March, in the 21st of Edward III. and the second reprieved during the King's Pleasure. The Pope wrote Aves. p. 111. a. c. 58. The Pope sent to K. Edw. to consent to a Treaty of Peace. to King Edward from Avignion, on the 18th of the Calends of February, or 15th of January, with great Urgency and Vehemency to consent to a Treaty of Peace, and sent  Anibald Bishop of Tusculum, and Stephan by the Title of St. John, and St. Paul a Priest Cardinal, with his Letter, to be his Nuncio's, to treat of, and mediate a Peace. The King's Ib. b. c. 59. To which he would not a∣gree, unless his Heritage was yielded to him. Answer to this Letter, or Bull, was to this ef∣fect: That he was very willing to consent to a Treaty of Truce, or Peace, as he always had been, for the Benefit of Christianity; but his Adversary had always broken the Truces that had been made, and kept his true Heritage from him; which if he did not yield up,  there could be no Treaty. While the King lay before Calais, Charles Ib. p. 114. a. b. cap. 64, 65. Charles of Bloys enters Bretague with the Title of Duke. of Blois, who had taken upon him the Title of Duke of Bretagne, besieged the Town and Castle of Rochedirian, a strong Place in this Country; for the Relief whereof, Sir Thomas Dagworth, King Edward's Gover∣nour of that Dukedom, raised what Force he could there, and in Normandy, and marched toward the Siege: Of which Charles of Blois had notice, and stood all Night with his Army ready to  receive him. Next morning, which was the 20th of June, be∣foreA. D. 1347. 21 Ed III. His Army beaten, and himself made Prisoner. Sunrise both Armies were engaged; and Sir Thomas received the Charge of the French four times successively, and afterward put them into Confusion, and obtained the Field, having slain between 6 and 700 Knights, Esquires, and Men at Arms, besides ordinary Men; and then made Prisoner Charles de Blois, with seve∣ral Great Men there named, and a great number of other Knights and Esquires; (& aultres Chivalers, & Esquiers a graunt nombre.)  This Account Ibm. is from Sir Thomas Dagworth's Letter to the Chancellor of England. About a Month or five Weeks after, the King of France had a Letter from the Governour of Calais Ibm. p. 113. b. 114. a. cap. 63. Calais in great distress for want of Vi∣ctuals. of the ill Condition the Town was in for want of Victuals; That the Dogs, Cats, and Horses were most eaten; That the Garrison had agreed, if they had not speedy Relief, to issue out of the Town, and go into the Field to fight for their Lives, or die bravely, as being more Honourable  than to eat one another. On the Friday Ibm. b 115. a. b. cap. 66, 67. or 27th of July, before the Gule or first Day of August, it being that Year on the Wednesday, the King of France on an Hill on the other side of the Marsh before Calais, over against King Edward, lodged or posted his Army, which was very great, as by what follows in his Letter to the Arch-Bp. of Canterbury,
to his Chancellor, and Treasurer. Ibm. The King of France comes with a great Army to re∣lieve it. Two Cardi∣nals mediate a Treaty▪ The Cardinals the same Day came to the end of the Causway leading to Calais (vindrent mesme le jour les Cardinaux a bout de la choucee, &c.) and send their Letters to his Cousin of Lancaster, and other Great Men of his Army, requesting they might speak with them. Whereupon he gave Leave to him, and his Cousin of Northampton, to go to them; who were with great earnestness requested by them that there might be a Treaty; telling them they knew well the French  King would make such Offers of Peace, as would according to Reason be acceptable. At their instance, as one that had always been ready to accept of a reasonable Peace, and at the moment they made the Offer, he assented: And his Cousin of Lancaster built two Pavilions, or Tents, between both Armies; and there assembled, or met, before the Cardinals and Marquess of Juliers,Which held 3 days without effect. the Earls of Lancaster and Northampton, Monsieur Bartholomew de Burghersh his Chamberlain, Monsieur Reignald de Cobham, and Mon∣sieur  Walter de Manny, on his Part; The Dukes of Bourbon and Bathenes, the Chancellor of France, the Lord Ostmond, and Mon∣sieur* Offmnt. Geofry de Charny, on the Part of his Adversary, who only insisted upon Terms about the Town of Calais; yet at last offered his Commissioners, That he should enjoy the Dukedom of Guyen, and County of Ponthieu, as his Grandfather had done; which was thought a small matter to what Damage he had received. So that after Three Days Treaty without effect, on Tuesday the last  The King of France chal∣lengeth the King of Eng∣land to Battel, and then runs away with his Army. Day of July, toward Evening his Adversaries gave him notice, by some Great Men, That if he would come out of his Fastnesses, to a Place convenient to Fight in, to be set out by Four Knights chosen on either side, he would give him Battel any time between that and Friday Evening. On the next Day, being Wednesday, Ibm. and the first of August, he let him know he accepted his Of∣fer, and gave Letters of safe Conduct to Four Knights, to come and join with Four of his, to set out the Ground. Whereupn his  Adversary Ibm. Calais yield∣ed▪ on Thursday night, with his Army, in great haste marched off, as if they had been routed, and burnt their Tents, and most part of their Baggage. Ib. p. 116. a. cap. 68. A▪ D. 1347. 21 Ed. III. The next Day, which was the 3d of August, the Besieged wanting Victuals, and despairing of Relief, yielded up the Town, and themselves and all their Goods, to his Mercy and Pleasure. But King Edward being much inraged at the Inhabitants long holding out, and the great and many Injuries they had done  Hard Terms put upon the Calcsians by K. Edward, according to the French Historians. him at Sea, did not admit them to these Terms, as the French Hi∣storians Froysard, Du Chesne, de Serres, and Mezeray report, until they sent Six of their Chief Burgesses, bare-headed and bare-footed in their Shirts, with Ropes about their Necks, to deliver the Keys of the Town and Castle to him, with a total Submission to his Pleasure. He was greatly resolved to put them to death; but his Queen then in the Camp, by an importune Intercession, obtained their Lives. 'Tis very remarkable, That, as the same Historians say, at a  Meeting of the Townsmen to appoint or chuse the Six to send out, they were in great Difficulties and Perplexity: Eustace of St. Peter, the most Noted of them, to save his Fellow-Burghers, offered himself to be one; by whose Example there soon followed others to make up the Number. The same Historians. The Keys thus delivered, and the King in possession of the Town, all the old Inhabitants
were removed by his Authority, and it was new Peopled with Eng∣lish, to whom he gave all their Goods. p. 116. a. c. 8. Avesbury re∣ports none of those Terms; but gives a more fair account of of the Usage them. Robert of Avesbury hath nothing of this Relation of the Six Burghers being demanded, or thus sent out; he only says, That the Besieged wanting Vi∣ctuals, and hopeless of Relief (ipsam villam, ac se & sua omnia vo∣luntati Domini Regis Angliae reddiderunt, & idem Dominus Rex sem∣per misericors, & benignus, captis & retentis paucis de Majoribus, Communitatem dictae villae cum bonis suis omnibus gratiose permisit  abire) rendred the Town, themselves, and all they had to the King's Will, who, always merciful and kind, retained only a few of the Chief Persons, and graciously permitted the Commu∣nity of the Town to go away with their Goods. Soon after the taking of Rot. Cales. 22 Ed. III. M. 4. Calais, by the Mediation of the Cardinals, the Earls of Lancaster and Huntington, Ralph Lord Staf∣ford, Walter de Manny, and others, had Commission to Treat of a Truce with the Commissioners of Philip de Valois, which was con∣cluded,  A Truce made at Calais. affirmed, and sworn to, on the 28th of September, 1347 to continue till 15 Days after Midsummer next following. Aves. p. 116. b. 17. a. c. 69, 70. The Chief of the Articles were the same with the Truce made before Tournay. In a very short time after, having settled the Town, with his Affairs in those Parts, making Sir Amery de Pavy, an Ita∣lian, Governour thereof, Wals. f. 167. n. 50. K. Edw. re∣turns into England. he returned into England with great Glory and Renown. The Number of King Edward's Army at this time in France,  Normandy, and before Calais, besides the Lords Append. n. 92. The number of his Army. What their Pay for a year and 21 weeks. was 31294. And the whole Pay and Wages of this Number, from the 4th of June in the 20th Year of his Reign, to the 12th of October in the 21st of his Reign, being a Year and 131 Days, amounted to 127201 l. 2. s. 9 d. ob. as appears by the Particulars. Within 5 or 6 Weeks after his Return, on the 13th of Novem∣ber, he sent forth Claus. 21 Ed. III. Part 2. M. 9. Dors. Summons for a Parlement. Writs of Summons for a Parlement to meet on the morrow of St. Hillary, or 14th of January. The cause Rot. Parl. n. 4. The cause of Summons. of Summons by William de Thorp Lord Chief Ju∣stice, was declared to be for two things: First, concerning the War with France, undertaken by Consent of the Lords and Commons. The Second, how the Peace of the Nation might be kept: And that with∣in four Days, they should give their Answer to the King and his Council, what they thought of these things. The fourth Day the Commons declare, Ibm. n. 5. The Com∣mons not able to advise any thing concer∣ning the War. That they are not able to advise any thing concerning War; and therefore desired to be excused  as to that, and that the King will be advised by his Nobles and Coun∣cil; and what shall be by them Determined, they would Consent unto, Confirm, and Establish. To the second they answer, Ibm. n. 70. The Com∣mons Advice to the King about keeping the Peace. Having been long in Parle∣ment, they desire to be dismissed. Whereas they were charged to advise the King, how the Peace of the Land might be better kept, That in every County there should be Six Persons, of whom Two to be the Greatest of the County, Two Knights, and Two Men of the Law, or more or less, as need should be; and they to have Power  and Commission out of the Chancery, to hear and determine Matters concerning the Peace, &c. And then because they had been so long in Parlement, to their great Costs and Mischief; they desire the An∣swer to their Petitions, and a Dismission.
'Tis probable the King received not the Satisfctaion he expectedSummons to Parlement. from this Parlement; for within a Month and 3 Days after the firstday of the Meeting thereof, he issued Rot. Claus. 22 Ed. III. Part 1. M. 32. Dors. Writs for Summoning another (that is to say, on the 14th of February) to meet on Monday next after the Sunday in Midlent: On which Day, because the Great Men Summoned were not fully come, the Parlement was continued until the next Day, and for the same reason unto Wednesday: (Pur ceo que les Grantz gestoient somons ne furent pas  pleynement venuz fu continuez tanque le Mardy prochien suant & pui, pur mesme la cause du dit Mardy tanque a Meskerdy.) When Mon∣sieur Rot. Parl. 22 Ed. III. n. 2, 3. The cause of Summons de∣clared. William de Thorp Chief Justice, propounded the Causes of Summons (fully also contained in the Writ) which were two: The first, That according to the Truce made at Calais, between the King and his Adversary of France, certain Messengers were to be sent to the Court of Rome, on both Parts, to treat of a smal Peace between them; That King Edward had sent his competent  Messengers to find the Disposition of the Pope concerning some Pre∣paratories for the Treaty and other things, about the Feast of St. Andrew last past, in hopes to have heard from them in his last Parlement; of whom, or of what they had done, he had then received no certainty; and for that many notable things had been agreed last Truce in favour of him, his Subjects and Allies, by the Malice of the adverse Party, were not then accomplished. And also for that his said Adversary, contrary to his Faith given,  concerning the then hoped-for Peace, had provided a very great Multitude (Trop grant multitude des Gentz d'Armes) of Men at Arms, and others, with Ships and Gallies of greater Force than at that time had ever been heard of, (que cea en arere ad este oi) to invade England, destroy the Nation, the King and his Subjects, as it manifestly appeared by what he had shewn and did show every day. The other cause was to know how and in what manner the Peace of the Land might be best kept; and then the  Commons were commanded to treat together, and take good Advice how the Malice of the King's Adversary might be resisted; and for the Safety of himself and Kingdom how he might be Aided, to his greatest Profit, and the least Charge to his People. The Commons having advised together, gave the Answer follow∣ing. To their most Honourable and most redoubted Liege Lord, his poor Commons Ibm. n. 4. shew, (A lour tres Honurable & tres Redoutez Seig∣neur  Liege, monstre sa pour Comune) That at his last Parlement he sent the Noble Earls of Lancaster and Northampton (& autres Grantz) and other Great Men, to tell them, That he intended not to take any thing of, or charge them, which they had published to the whole Land, for which they had also thanked him, according to their Knowledge, as much as they could, and prayed for him Night and Day (& prient pur lui nuyt & jour) and yet at this present Parlement, upon News now come (pur noveles que sont venuz) he demanded a  The Com∣mons Grie∣vances and Complaints. very great Charge of his poor Commons (un trop grant Charge da sa povre Comune.) They desire his Nobleness and most High Lord∣ship, he would please to understand the Mischiefs and Burthens of the Commons: That is to say, the reasonable Aid which had been pardoned in his 14th Year; (that is, a Grant was made it should not be paid all his Reign) to wit, 40 s. upon every Knight's Fee to make
his Eldest Son Knight; whereas by Statute there was but 20 s. due upon every Fee: Fifteenths of the Commons, Tenths of Cities and Burghs, Men at Arms, Hobelors, Archers, taking of Victuals without paying for them, Guarding the Sea, and also the Sub∣sidy of Wooll; by reason whereof, every Sack of Wooll, that was the Treasure of the Land, was sold for 40 s. less than its Value. So as it would be a great Trouble to the Commons to bear any Charge. YetThe Condi∣tions of the Grant of an Aid. nevertheless, so as the Aid now to be granted might not be turned into  Wooll, neither by way of Loan or Value, or in any other manner; nor levied too hastily, but in the Form it was to be granted; and that the Eyres of Justices in the mean time might cease, as well of the Forest as of Common Pleas and General Enquiry in the whole Land, if this Aid should be levied: That no Subsidy upon Wooll for the future may be granted by the Merchants: That no Imposition, Loan, or other Tallage, or Charge whatsoever, shall be put upon them by the Privy Council, without their Grant and Consent in Parlement: That Two Prelates,  Two Lords, and Two Justices, might be assigned to hear and dispatch their Petitions, which were not answered in the last Parlement; and that their Petitions in this Parlement might also be answered according to Reason; and the Answers to remain in force, without being changed or altered: That the Justices do enquire of False Money, which destroys the People: That David Bruys, William Douglass, and other Chief∣tains of Scotland, may in no manner be released, neither by Ransom, nor upon their Faith: That he would restore the 20000 Sacks of Wooll  taken of the Commons by way of Loan: That an Aid to Marry his Daughter might not be taken the mean time; and, That there might be no Marshalcy in England, except that of the King, or the Guar∣dian of England, when he was out of the Kingdom. Ʋpon these Conditions, and otherwise not; (sur cestes Conditions, & autre∣ment nient;) and also that they may be entred in the Parlement-Roll, as Matter of Record (come chose de Record) by which they might have Remedy, if any thing should be done to the contrary in time  to come: The said poor Commonalty, to their very great Mis∣chief, Grant to the King (si grante la dite povre Communalte a lour trop grante Mischief a nostre Seigneur le Roy trois Quin∣zismes, &c.) three Fifteenths to be levied in three Years, to begin at Michaelmas next coming, so as every Year one Fifteenth may be le∣vied, and no more, at two Terms in the Year, St. Michael and Easter, by even Portions; and that this Aid may be assigned and reserved only for the War, and not to pay Debts. And if the War should  cease, or a Truce be made, then the Fifteenth of the last Year not to be levied. That of these Conditions, and the manner of this Grant, Let∣ters Patents shall be made, and sent into all Counties, without paying any thing for them, wherein shall be made mention of the great Necessity the King was in, after the last Parlement. And in case the War should break out toward Scotland, the Aid granted beyond Trent, should be employed for the Defence of those Parts, as it had been formerly. About this time Lewis of Bavaria being dead, several of theThe Electors offer to chuse K. Edward Emperor of Germany. Electors met at Colen, from whence they sent Ambassadors to King Edward, and offered to Elect him Emperor of Germany; Claus. 22 Ed. III M. 20 Dors. A. D. 1334. He refuseth their Offer. in Return to which Offer he sent Sir Hugh Nevill, and Ivo de Glin∣ton, Canon of St. Paul, with his Refusal of that Dignity, and great Thanks for the Honour they intended him.
The time of the Truce of Calais being near expiring, Rot. Fran. 22 Edw. III. M. 13. Several Truces con∣tinued and made. the King upon the Pope's sending Commissioners, either to prolong the Truce, or Treat of a final Peace, the former was agreed for six weeks; Which Term being ended, the Ambassadors on both sides met between Guines and Calais, and agreed to another Truce, to begin on the 13th of November, and continue to the first of September, 1349; Which Truce on the second of May that year, Rot. Fran. 23 Edw. III. M. 9, 10. Dors. was prorogued to the Feast of Pentecost, 1350. The Articles  were much the same with those of the Truce before Tournay, A. D. 1340, and of that before Vannes, A. D. 1343. This year, says Walsingham, was F. 168. n. 10. Glorious in England, for Peace, Victo∣ries, the Spoils of Caen, Calais, and other Towns and Cities in France, as also for Garments, Furs, Gold and Silver Vessels, and other rich Ʋtensils, which were seen almost in every House, and that then it was, the English Dames began to pride themselves in the Ap∣parelThe English Women imi∣tate the French in Apparel. of the French Dames. In a very short time after the Truce as above was concluded,  the Lord Geofrey Charny, Governor of St. Omers, Froysard, lib. 1. c. 150. made a Bar∣gain with Sir Amery de Pavy, an Italian or Lumbard, Du Chesne, £ 669. C. D. and f. 670. A B. The betray∣ing of Calais. Gover∣nor of Calais, for 20000 Crowns, to betray the Town to him, of which King Edward having notice, came privately thither, the night or very evening the delivery was agreed on, with the Prince of Wales, and several Earls and Barons, and lodged him∣self in the Castle, to secure it with the Men he brought with  him; The Money was brought and paid, and Twele Knights, and an Hundred Men at Arms, were let into the Castle, who were allPrevented by the King and Prince of Wales. made Prisoners by the King's Guards within it, who lay undis∣covered. Sir Geofrey was under the Town with a considerable Force, placed near two Gates, ready to enter it when they should be opened. But the mean time the Prince of Wales went forth at one Gate, and the King at the other, concealed under the Banner of Sir Walter Manny, and fought on Foot among the common Sol∣diers,  and was engaged with the Lord Eustace of Rybemont, a va∣liant Person, who struck the King twice to his Knees, yet at lastMany French∣men of Note made Priso∣ners. was overcome by him, and made his Prisoner, with Sir Geofrey de Charny and many other Frenchmen of Note. The Prince likewise prevailing against the Party he engaged with, and there were slain and drowned about 600 French, who were double the number to the English that sallied out of Calais upon them. The very evening of this day Froysard, c. 152. The King Treats the Prisoners and his own No∣bility with a Supper. the King ordered a great Sup∣per  to be provided, as well for the Prisoners as his own Nobility, and coming in amongst them, took a Chaplet of Pearls from his own Head, and placed it upon the Head of Sir Eustace of Rybe∣mont, as one that had deserved best of all Men in the Morning Action, and forgave him his Ransom. Froysard says this Action was done upon the 31st of December, 1348, the 22d of Edward the Third; and Walsingham placeth it in the year 1349, which was in the same year of the King, but the difference is inconsi∣derable,  for they both begin the year on the first of January; And Walsingham following Robert de Avesbury, reports it to have been on the 2d of January, which was indeed according to this Account in the year of our Lord 1349. The King discharged Rot. Fran. 22 Edw. III. M. 1. Sir Amery de Pavy of the Government of the Town, and put in Sir John Beauchamp.
This year the Plague first began in Dorsetshire about the firstA great Plague in England. of August, and spread it self all over the Nation, and continued until Michaelmass twelvemonth after; it was so great in both years as a Rot. Clause 22 Edw. III. Part 2. M. 7. Dors. Parlement being summoned it was twice prorogued Ib. M. 3. Dors. & Rot. Clause 23 E. III. Part 1. M. 19. Dors. for that reason, and at last respited and deferred until new Summons. This was a general and horrid Plague, it began in the Kingdom of Cathay, A. D. 1346, by a most horrible stinking Vapour, which broke out of the Earth like a Subterraneal Fire,  and consumed a great part of the Country, and infested the Air. Mezeray, f. 369. From Cathay it passed into Asia, and Greece, from thence into Africa, and afterwards into Europe, and so into France and Eng∣land. By reason of this Plague there is scarce any thing re∣markable reported to have been done in the last year thereof, 1349, in either Kingdom, which was the 23d of Edward the Third. Yet Mr. Ashmole F. 185. c. 5. Sect. 3. The Institu∣tion of the Order of the Garter. in his Institution, Laws, and Cere∣monies of the most Noble Order of the Garter, would fix the In∣stitution  of the Order this year, and seems to assert, That the first great Feast of St. George, was this year celebrated, which is scarce probable; for the Writ by which the Parlement that was to meet fifteen days after Easter, Rot. Clause 23 Edw. III. Part 1. M. 19. Dors. was prorogued until new Summons, because of the Raging Pestilence in the Nation, is dated March the 10th preceding; Easter-Day this year falling on the 9th of April, and the Quinden or fifteenth of Easter being the 23d or St. George's-Day, it cannot be thought that this great Solemnity, to which the  King sent his Heralds into Germany, France, Scotland, Burgundy, Haynault, Flanders, and Brabant, to invite all Knights and Esquires to come and shew their Military Skill and Valour in all kinds of Feats of Arms, when the Parlement was put off from meeting on that day, until new Summons, by reason of the Mortal Pestilence then raging, as 'tis expressed in Writ. However this famous Order might then be instituted, the Modal of it contrived, and the Statutes made to adorn Martial Virtue, and to increase and confirm  Faith, Honour, and Courage in the minds of the Nobility; which were then the true Endowments, Practice, and Badges of Military Men, by the observation and performance whereof they truly ac∣quired a great Name and Reputation, as the only Men of Trust and Fidelity, and not to do Honourably, Justly, Stoutly, and Faithfully, was by them esteemed the greatest Blemish, Villany, shame, and Dis∣honour imaginable. Of this glorious Order I shall write nothing further, but leave the Reader to the perusal of the Excellent, La∣borious,  and Learned Work of Mr. Ashmole. The next year Avesbury, p. 120.  74. A. D. 1350. Sir Thomas Dagworth slain. Sir Thomas Dagworth, the King's Lieutenant in Bretagne, with a small number, as he was used to do, in the month of July, going from place to place to visit the Garrisons, was surpised by an Ambush of French, and after a brave Defence, killed, as were most with him, or made Prisoners. In August following, about the Feast of St. Laurence, or 10th of that month, Ib. c. 75. as Avesbury, or according to F. 370. Philip King of France di; his Son John Crowned. Mezeray  on the 22d thereof, Philip King of France died, and his Eldest Son John was Crowned at Rheimes on the 26th of September fol∣lowing. Walsingham, f. 170. n. 50. falsely (as appears from the Parlement Rolls hereafter cited) placeth the death of King Philip in A. D. 1355, and 29th of Edward the Third.
The Spaniards Avesbury, ut supra. c. 76, 77. The Spaniards take many English Their Fleet beaten by the English. the year before came toward Burdeaux with a great Fleet of Ships, and took many English Ships coming from thence laden with Wine, and killed all the Men. And this year they came upon the English Coast; The King suspecting it was to waste, burn, and rob the Country near the Shore, fitted out a Fleet, taking with him many Noblemen, and Manning it well with Men at Arms, Archers, and Seamen, about the latter end of this month engaged them before Winchelsey, Ib. p. 121. a. c. 77. They make a Truce. and took  Twenty four large and rich Ships; after which Sea Battel the Spaniards made a Truce for Twenty years. The Truce Rot. Fran. 23 Edw. III. M. 9, 10. The French Truce pro∣rogued. above-mentioned, that had been made between Calais and Guines on the 13th of October, 1348, to continue unto the first of September, 1349, was the 2d of May preceding Prorogued (so the Word in the Record) to the Feast of Pentecost in the year 1356. In August that year Philip of Valois (as above) died, and his  Son John succeeded Ib. 24 E. III. M. 2. on the 25th of November next following, Commissioners were appointed to Treat with his Commissioners to confirm the last Truce made with his Father to the first of August then next to come, which was to be in the year 1351, and 25th of Edward III. Upon a new Treaty this same Truce Ib. M. 8. Dors. The same Truce con∣tinued. Hostilities committed notwithstand∣ing the Truces. was proclaimed to continue a whole year longer, until the first of August, next after that first of August which was to be in the year 1352, and 26th  of Edward III. Notwithstanding these Truces were in being, there was often something enterprised, by each Party against the other. Avesbury, p. 121. a. c. 78. A. D. 1351. A. D. 1351. 25 Ed. III. The French besieged the Town of St. John de Angely in Xantogne in the year 1351, and made themselves Masters of it. Ib. b. c. 80. The English surprised the Castle of Guines, the Governor having been corrupted with Money, which King Edward pleasantly excused, as F. 372. Me∣zeray hath it, saying, Truces were Merchandise, and that he did no  more than follow the Example of King Philip, who would have bought Calais. This year the King issued his Writs Rot. Clause 25 Ed. III. M. 5. Dors. on the 15th of No∣vember, for summoning a Parlement to meet on the Feast of St. Hillary, or 13th of January, which was on Friday; Rot. Parl. 25 Ed. III. Part 2. n 1. Summons to Parlement. from that day it was continued to Monday, because many of the Lords were not come, and then until Tuesday, the Fifth day of the Parlement, when Sir William de Shareshall, in the presence of the  King, Lords and Commons, Ib. n. 7. The cause of meeting de∣clared. declared the cause of Summons, setting forth the King's Title to the Crown of France, telling them, That Philip of Valois had usurped it all his Life, and not only so, but moved War against him in Gascoign and other Places, seising upon his Rights and Possessions, and doing the Mischiefs to him by Sea and Land, which they well understood, in subver∣sion of him and his Realm of England, and that in Parlements before that time the Matter had been propounded in behalf of  the King; and the Great Men, as also the Commons, had been requested to give their Counsel and Advice, (& fut prie de sibien as Grantz come as Comunes qils ent vorroient doner lour conseil & ad∣vis) what was best to be done; and after good Deliberation had, they said, They knew no other way to advise him, than to pro∣cure Allies, to go against his Adversary by main Force, and to do
this, they promised to aid him with Body and Goods, (& a ceo fair ils lui promistrent de lui aider de corps & de avoir;) Where∣upon the King made Alliances beyond Sea, and with their Assi∣stance, and the help of his good People of England, he made War upon him, because he could not have a reasonable Peace; That the King and his Adversary had often assented to Truces, yet his Adversary during those Truces imagining to subdue and deceive the King, broke them every way, continuing his Malice  against him and his Friends; That now John his Son, after his decease, continuing the same wrongs his Father had maintained, possessed the Kingdom of France, and contrary to the last Truce confirmed and sworn to by both, which he had broken in Gascoign and Bretagne, and also upon the Sea, and had sent to Scotland to continue the ancient Alliance made between them, wholly in Subversion and Destruction of the King and his People of Eng∣land: Wherefore the King first of all much thanks his Com∣mons  for the Aids they have made him, and for the Good∣will he had always found in them; pur quoi tut ad e primes nostre Seigneur le Roi mercie molt a ces Comunes des Eydes qils lui ont faitz, & de lour bone volunte qils ad totes voyes trouve en eux, &c.) and prays them (& les prie) they would advise upon these things until Wednesday, (tant a cest meskerdy preschien suant) which was next day) and be at Westminster by Sun-rising (taust apres le solail lever) in the Painted Chamber, to deliberate, and to hear if the  King would say any thing further touching the cause of his Par∣lement, and to shew the King their Grievances, if they had any, that Remedy might be given them this Parlement. Afterwards Ib. n. 8. A Committee of Lords and Commons to meet to con∣fer upon the Business of this Parle∣ment. The King sent the Lords or Great Men to them. Sir William charged the Commons on behalf of the King (le dit Sire William chargea les Comunes de par le Roi) to shorten their stay in Town, and for the quick dispatch of these Matters, and others that might be shewn them from the King, that before their departure they would go together in  some place at Westminster, to choose 24 or 30 Persons out of their whole number, to be on the morrow in the Painted-Chamber, that the King might send to them some Great Men (aucunes des Grantz) to confer with them upon the Business aforesaid. On Friday Ibm. all the Commons came before the Prince, and the other Great Men, (& les autres Grantz) in the White Chamber,The cause of Summons fur∣ther declared and inforced. where Sir Bartholomew Burghersh gave them an Account of the Malice and falshood of the King's Adversary of France, (ou fut dit  par Monsieur Barthen de Burghersh la Malice & la Fausine de son ad∣versair de France) how he had broke the last Truce, and that lately upon the Sea, in Gascoign, Bretagne, and near Calais, and indea∣voured by all the Subtilties and Contrivances his Council knew, to trouble the King and his Subjects every where, and said the Commons ought diligently to advise what seemed, and what might be best to do for the King to oppose and check the Malice and falshood aforesaid, for the safety of himself, his Kingdom  and all his Subjects. And presently after this Declaration, the said Sir William told the Commons, if they had any Petitions of Grievances done to the People, or for the amendment of the Law, they should bring them into Parlement; and told the Pre∣lates and Lords, they were to attend the Business of all Persons Petitions in the Places where they were assigned.
And then after a long Ib. n. 9. Treaty and Debate by the Com∣mons (that is, the 24 or 30 Persons chosen to confer with the Great Men sent to them by the King) with the Commonalty, and the Advice of the Great Men sent to them, as well about a con∣venient Ayd to the King to oppose the Malice of his Adversary, as about making the Petitions concerning the common People of the Land; (& puis apres longe Trete & Deliberation eues pur lesUpon Treaty of the Com∣mittee, and Advice of the Lords sent to them. Comunes ove la Comunalte, & lavis de ascuns des Grantz a eux envoies  sibien sur un eide que convendroit a Roi, &c.) The Commons came before the King, and all the Great Men in Parlement, (vindrent les ditz Comunes devant nostre Seigneur le Roi & touz les Grantz en Parlement) and shewed how the Common People of the Land were much impoverished by the late Mortal Pestilence, as by other Bur∣thens, Taxes, Taillages, and many other Payments laid upon them, but notwithstanding these Mischiefs, having regard to the neces∣sary Defence to be made for the safety of the Nation, against so  great Malice of the Enemies of the Kingdom, delivered to the King in full Parlement a Roll, (baillerent a le Roi en Parlement uneA Roll of an Ayd, and the Petitions of the Commons was delivered to the King. Roul, &c.) containing as well the Ayd which they had intirely with one accord granted, as the Petitions, (touchant la comune de la terre) concerning the Commons of the Land, to which they prayed the King to give a good and quick Answer, (bon & hastif Respons;) He granted their Prayer, and Thanked them for the great Ayds given him before, and for that now granted, and for  the good Will and Nature which he had always found in his Commons before this time, and now finds in this Affair. Then follows the Grant Ib. n. 10. The Ayd. of Three Tenths, and Three Fif∣teenths granted to the King this Parlement by the Great Men of the Land, and the whole Commons, (Grantees a nostre Seigneur le Roi en cest present Parlement par les Grantz du Roialme & par tote la Comune, &c.) for the great necessity declared to the said Com∣mons, by the King and Great Men, (par le Roi & les Grantz a∣vantditz)  to be paid as the last Tenths and Fifteenths were in Three years, &c. upon the Conditions following: To wit, Ib. n. 11. The Conditi∣ons of the Ayd. That all the Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, Pro∣fits and Excesses levied, or to be levied upon the Labourers, Artificers, Regrators, &c. go to the Commons toward this Tax, &c. as in the Statutes at Large, now nothing to the purpose; and so the Answer. That hereafter Ib. n. 12. no Tax, Taillage, Ayds or Charges be de∣manded or levied of the Commons; and that all the reasonable Petitions prayed by the Commons, may be granted, confirmed, and sealed, before the departure of this Parlement. As to Tax and Taillage, Rot. Ib. The King's Answer. 'tis not the intention of the King, or the Great Men, (ne des Grantz) they should ever be charged. As to granting their reasonable Petitions, the King is pleased it should be done. Also the Commons pray, Ib. n. 16. the Loans that were granted to the King by many Persons of the Commons, may be released, and none compelled to make such Loans for the future against his
will, for that 'twas against Reason and the Franchise of the Land; and that Restitution might be made to those that had made the Loans. The King Rot. Ib. The King's Answer. is pleased it should be so. Also, That whereas the Justices Ib. n. 17. assigned in divers Coun∣ties, have judged many Men that were Arraigned before them  as Traitors, for divers Causes unknown to the Commons to be Trea∣son, That the King by his Council, (& par les Grantz & Sages de la Terre) and by the Great and Wise Men of the Land, would please to Declare the Points of Treason in that Parlement. The Rot. Ib. The Answer. Answer was, as in the Statute of the 25th of Ed∣ward the Third, Cap. 2. The next year, about the beginning of August, Sir Walter de[6] Avesbury, c. 81, 82. p. 121. b. 122. a. b. A. D. 1352. 26 Ed. III. A great Vi∣ctory obtain∣ed over the French in Bri∣tany. Bintley, the King's Governor of Britain and Parts adjoining, with a small number of English, in respect of the great Army a Marshal of France had encompassed them with, in the Plains near the Town of Mauron, obtained a considerable Victory, having killed Sevenscore Knights, and as many Escuyers, and Men at Arms as made the number 500, besides Common Soldiers without num∣ber, and many taken Prisoners, according to his own Relation  in a Ibm. Letter to the Lord Chancellor, John Thoresby, Bishop of Wor∣cester, and soon after Arch-Bishop of York, in which he men∣tions the Names of those of the best Quality that were slain or taken. On the 6th of December Mezeray, fol. 372. Pope Clermont the Sixth dies, Innocent the Sixth suc∣ceeds. Pope Clement the Sixth died, and Cardinal Stephan de Albret, Bishop of Clermont, succeeded him the 18th of the same month, a Limosin by Birth, and took upon him the Name of Innocent VI. In the 27th of his Clause, 27 Ed. III. M. 12. Dors. A great Coun∣cil summon∣ed. Reign, he issued his Writs, July 15, by which he summoned a great Council to meet at Westminster on Monday after St. Matthew the Apostle, Rot. Parl. 27 Ed. III. n. 31. or 9. The causes of it declared. on the 7th of Octo∣ber; The King, Prelates, and Great Men (le Roy, Prelates & Grants) being in the Rot. Parl. 27 Ed. III. n. 31. or 9. The causes of it declared. White Chamber, (les coes appellez) the Commons were called, and Monsieur Bartholomew de Burghersh, the King's Chamberlain, told them, That the King thinking how he might best Ease his People, who had been often charged with Impositions, and  great Ayds, by reason of the War against his Adversary of France, who detained his Rights and Heritage of the Crown of France, had sent lately the most Noble and Excellent Persons of his Realm, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the He was created the the first Duke of Lancaster on the 6th of March, 25th of Ed. III. See pat. 25 E. III. p. 1. M. 18. Duke of Lancaster, and other Prelates, and Great Men, to Guynes, to Treat with the Deputies of his Adversary (ove les Deputes son dit adversari) in presence of a Cardinal which the Pope sent thither as a Mediator; and after this Treaty had sent his Confessor to the Pope, to let  him know, That considering the many People had been killed in this War, and desiring to spend part of his time in another War to the greater Pleasure and Honour of God, if his Adversary would make restitution of the Dutchy of Guyen to him as intirely as any of his Ancestors had enjoyed it, to hold it freely without Homage or Service, he would be willing after the end of the War,
to resign the Crown of France: That the Pope had been fartherK. Edw. upon Terms would have quitted his Title to the Crown of France. addressed to, privately to search out his Adversaries Inclinations toward another Treaty, with Protestation, That if he should not accept it, all his Rights should be entirely saved to him, as if no Offer had been made; of which the King not having received any Account from the Pope, he sent his Clerc, Master William de Witlesey Arch-Deacon of Huntington, to know what had been done in this Affair, who brought back nothing to any purpose:  Ibm. Wherefore it seemed convenient to the King, the Great Men, and his Council, That he should prepare himself for War against his Adversary, as well for the Defence of England, as to recover his Rights, for which he ought to have a great Sum of Money. Ibm. And the said Chamberlain shew them further, That the Sub¦sidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woollfels, ended at Michaelmas last past▪ That it was not the King's Intention to lay any Tax, or other: Charge upon his People; but he requested the Prelates, Great  Men, and his Commons, to grant him the Subsidy of Wooll, Lea∣ther,The Subsidy of Wooll, &c. granted for 3 years. and Woollfels, for some time; (mes il prie as Prelates, Grauntz, & ses Comunes, qils lui veullent Granter le Subside des Leines, Quirrs, & peaux lanus pur un temps.) Upon which Request and Deliberation had between the said Prelates, Great Men, and Com∣mons, they unanimously agreed and granted the King the Subsidy of Wooll, &c. to receive it as it had been taken formerly, for three Years from Michaelmas last past, if the War held so long;  (sur queu priere ene deliberation entre les ditz Prelatz, Grantz, & Comunes sassenteront unement & granterent au Roi le Subsidi des leines, quirrs, & peaux lanuz, &c.) upon Condition that the Money ari∣sing from this Subsidy, should be safely kept for the War, and not to be employed to any other Use. This Year after Christmas Aves. p. 122. b. c. 84. Charles of Blois set at li∣berty for a great Sum of Money. Charles of Blois, who took upon him the Title of Duke of Britan, and had been Prisoner in Eng∣land a long time, by the Mediation of the Great Men of that  Country, upon certain Conditions and Promises of a great Sum of Money, was released; for the Payment whereof, two Sons and a Daughter were sent into England as Hostages. King Edward continued his Inclinations to Peace, Rot. Parl. 28 Ed. III. n. 58. K. Edw. conti∣nues his Incli∣nations for Peace. St Mark was on Easter Tuesday, Easter∣day this year being Apr. 23. which were declared by Monsieur Bartholomew de Burghersh, to the Great Men and Commons (a les Grantz & Comunes) in the Parlement holden next Year, on Monday after the Feast of St. Mark, signi∣fying to them, that there was great hopes of Peace, by Treaty  between Commissioners on both Parts. Yet the King would not conclude any thing, without the Assent of the Great Men and his Commons (sanz assent des Grantz & de ses Comunes) wherefore he demanded of them, on behalf of the King, Whether they would Assent and Agree to Peace, if it might be had by Treaty? To which the Commons answered with one accord, That what Issue it should please the King and Great Men to take of the Treaty, should be agreeable to them (a quoi Ibm. les Comunes dun  assent & dun accord, responderent que quel Issue que pluist a Seigneur le Roy & les Grantz de prendre du dit Tretee feust agreable a eux.) Then the Commons were asked again, If they would Assent to a perpetual Peace, if it might be had? who all entirely answer∣ed (Oil, Oil) Yes, Yes. Whereupon Master Michael Northburgh, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Commanded Sir John de Swyneley the
Pope's Notary, Tat he should make thereof a Publick In∣strument. Not long after this Parlement Aves. p. 123. b. c 89. A Peace con∣cluded. The Peace to be confirmed by the Pope. by a Second Treaty a Peace was concluded, upon the Terms King Edward had sent to the Pope the Year before: And it was agreed, That for the Pope's Confirmation of this Peace, there were Messengers to be sent by both King's to the Roman Court, and at the same time a Truce was Ibm. made, until the Feast of St. John Baptist, which was to  be in the Year following. About Christmas Ibm. The King's Envoys to the Pope for that purpose. The French Envoys before the Pope de∣ny the Arti∣cles of the Peace., Henry Duke of Lancaster, John Earl of Arundel, William Bishop of Norwich, and Michael Bishop of London, went to the Roman Court, in behalf of King Edward; by whom the Articles of Peace were recited before the Pope, in the Presence of the French Envoys, who denied the Form of the Articles, and said their had been no such Agreement, and that they would not consent to them: And the English Envoys returned, not having  done any thing for what they were sent, except William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, who died, and was Honourable interred at Avignion. After the Expiration of the Time of Truce, King Edward on the 20th of September Rot. Claus. 29 Ed. III. M. 8. Dors. A Parlement summoned. issued his Writs for a Parlement to be hol∣den on the morrow after the Feast of St. Martin, being Thursday the 12th of October, when Rot. Parl: 29 Ed. III. n. 1. The cause of Summons de∣clared. it was continued, because the Lords were not come, until Wednesday next following the 18th of Octo∣ber.  On which Wednesday, Sir Walter de Manny declared the cause of Summons, as knowing the whole matter of it, which was as follows, in part much according to the Relation of Avesbury: Ibm. n. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. That the King had lately sent Commissioners to Calais, to Treat about a Peace with the Commissioners of his Adversary of France, in the Presence of the Cardinal of Bologne sent by the Pope: That several Points had been agreed; and that according to the Agree∣ment, he had sent the Duke of Lancaster, and others, his Am∣bassadors  to the Court of Rome, to perfect and finish the Peace before the Pope; but without effect, for the Faults found with it on the part of his Adversary; (pour defaute & coupe trove de la part son Adversair:) That while his Ambassadors remained there, the King of Navarre (who about two Years before had Married Mezeray, f. 372. The King a∣bused and cheated by the King of Navarre. Jane the King of France's Daughter) had complained often to the Duke of Lancaster of the Rot. Parl. ut supra. Wrongs and Hardships he had suffered from the King of France, affirming upon his  Oath, he would willingly enter into an Alliance with the King against his Adversary with all his Power; and pressed him so often, that at last the Duke promised an Alliance, if the King pleased: That thereupon he engaged to make himself as strong as he could with Ships, and Land Forces, and come to the Isles Guernsey and Jersey, to affirm and make good the Alliance (pur affermer, & secure lalliance:) That for this cause, upon the Duke's return into England, the King, informed of this Agreement,  caused to be got ready an Army, and Fleet of great Ships, with which he sailed out of the Thames towards the Isles; and the Winds being contrary, with much trouble got to Portsmouth, and there staid so long, as he received certain Intelligence the King of Navarre would not proceed in, or had quitted the Al∣liance (que le Roy de Navarre entre lesse la dite Alliance) against his
Promise and Oath, and was become an Allie of his Adversary. Whereupon the King returned with his Fleet and Forces (nostre Seigneur se retourna ove sa Navie & Gentz;) and seeing he could not have Peace, and the Alliance failed, and also that his Ad∣versary made himself strong with Men at Arms, and other Forces near Calais, thinking to have a speedy Battel with him, he re∣solved,The King passeth to Ca∣lais with his Fleet and Ar∣my. His Foreign Allies. with his Fleet and Army, to pass over to Calais: That when he was landed, by Advice of his Council, he Mustered his  own Forces, and those of his Allies which he found there; as those of Monsieur Henry de Flanders, Monsieur Frank de Vanhale, and other People of Almain, in great number, and marched out of Calais on the Feast of All-Souls, or 2d of November, toward theHe could not provoke the King of France to Battel. Places where, by Spies or other means, he could be informed his Adversary was, that he might bring him to a Battel: But to avoid that, he fled Night and Day, the King pursuing him, wasting and burning the Country throughout (degastant, ardent,  & bruillant le pays par tut) until by Assent of his Council, because his People were much wearied for want of Wine, having drankHis Men wea∣ried for want of Wine. only Water for near four Days (per cause que les Gentz fuerent molt lassez pur defaute de Vin, & ne buerent que de eau bien per quatre jours) he returned toward Calais, where he designed to have fought his Enemy; but he came not. Then he paid off his Allies veryHe pays off his Allies, and returns into England. frankly, they having been there a long time, and returned into England to his Parlement. After this Relation, the Ib. n. 10. Commons were told by Sir Wil∣liam Shareshull, Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, They ought to have regard to the great Trouble the King had endured, for the Defence and Safety of the Kingdom, and of his Readiness to march into Scotland against his Enemies, who had taken theSpeedy Ad∣vice desired of the Parle∣ment. The King de∣sires to finish the War with France. Town of Berwick by Force: And that to shorten the Time of Parlement, and their stay in the Town, they were to give speedy Advice what was best for the King to do, to make an end of the  War with France, which he desired sovereignly, or above all things, might be done with dispatch (quel il desire sovereignment que soit fait en hast) and how he might be best aided to do it, to the least Grievance of his People, and most Profit to himself, he gave them time to answer until Friday next following (en sur ceo les dona jour de Respons de Vendredy preschien suant) and in the mean time to prepare their Bills and Petitions, and bring them into Parlement: Ibm. n. 11. (A quen Vendredy vindrent les dites Comunes en  la presence nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, Prelatz, & Grantz, assemblez en la Chambre blanche el eue illoques une brief parlance ove les dits Grantz, Granterent uniement, &c.) On which Friday, the Commons came into the presence of the King, Prelates, and Great Men, assem∣bled in the White Chamber, and having there a short ConferenceA Subsidy of 6 years gran∣ted to the King. with the said Great Men, Granted (uniemen & dune accort) una∣nimously and of one accord to the King, the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woolfel's for six years next coming. So as during  that time, the King should not put any Impositions or other Charges upon the Commons; and then they brought their Pe∣titions before the King, who answered them. Avesbury in his p. 126. a. b. c. 95. His Expediti∣on into France. Narrative of the King's Expedition into France, tells us, That after his return to Calais, on Wednesday the Feast of St. Martin, or 11th of November, the Constable of France,
and others, met the Duke of Lancaster, the Earl of Northampton, and Sir Walter Manny, at the end of the Causway of Calais; and by Letters of Credence from their King, offered Battel to the King of England on Tuesday following. The English Lords answered by the King's Command (de Praecepto Regio) That it was his Intention, as much as he could, to avoid the Effusion of Christian Blood, and therefore desired to fight Body to Body with his Adversary; so as the whole Right to the Crown of France might be decided by this  Battel between them two: And if this was refused, That each of them should take to him his Eldest Son; and if he admitted not that, Then both to chuse Two, Three, or Four Knights, the nearest to them in Blood, to be joined to them and their Sons; that so the Right to the Kingdom of France might be finally de∣termined, and that he who was Conquered should yield it to the Conqueror. Which Offers the French refused, standing to their Proposition of Fighting on Tuesday. The English offered to Fight  the next Day, or Saturday: The French persisted in their First Offer; which the English accepted, upon Condition, That if they could not bring their King to Battel on that Day, they should render themselves Prisoners to the King of England; as in like manner they would render themselves Prisoners to the King of France, if they brought not then their King to Battel. The French refused this Offer; and the English thought they trifled with King Edward, and put Cheats upon him, that by Delay  and his great Expences he might be weary of the War. The King staid and expected the French on Tuesday, but none came.[8] Froys. lib. 1. c. 155. Du Chesne, f. 674. D. Mezer. f. 373. [8] The French Writers make a contrary Story of this: They say, That after King Edward had ravaged and burn Bolognois and Artois, as far as the Town of Hisden, which nor the Castle he could not take, he returned to Calais: That the King of France, having Rendezvoused his Army at Amiens, marched to Hisden, and pursued him to St. Omers, and from thence sent to him Ar∣nold  de Andreghen, Marshal of France, and other Knights, to let him know he would Fight with him Body to Body, or Power to Power, when and in what place he pleased; which he refused, returning into England, and King John to Paris. Before this Action of his Father's near Calais, on the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, or 8th of September, Aves. p. 125. b. cap. 93. The Prince goes into Gas∣coigne. the Prince, with the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury, and Oxford, with 300 Ships, and a good Force in them, set Sail from Plimouth into Gascoigne;  and in a short time after his arrival, Ibm. Marched to Narbon; burns and destroys the Country. marched from Burdeaux to Narbon, seated, as it was then called, on the Greek Sea, now the Mediterranean, laid waste, burnt, and destroyed all the Cities, Walled, Fortified, and other Good Towns, in his March backwards and forwards, except the City Ib. 129. b. Tholose, in which were the Con∣stable of France, the Marshal de Clermond, and Earl of Armanak, with a great Force to defend it. The time of these Burnings, Plunderings, and Destroyings, was two Months before the Return  to Burdeaux, a Journal whereof is to be seen in a Letter from the Prince to the Bishop of Winchester, then Lord Treasurer, Dated onA. D. 1355. 29 Edw. II.  Christmas-Day, and another more exact from Sir John Wingfield, one of the Chief Actors in this Cavalcade, Dated on Wednesday before Christmas-Day, in Avesbury, p. 127. a. b. p. 128. a. b. p. 129.
a. b. p. 130. a. b. Cap. 98, 99, 100. now not much to the purpose to be either transcribed or translated. The King having received News, that the Scots had surprizedBerwick sur∣prized by the Scots. the Town of Berwick, as was noted by Sir William Shareshull in his Discourse to the Parlement; so soon as it was ended, in the latter end of November, marched with a great Army toward Scotland, and kept his Christmas at Newcastle upon Tine. Ibm. p. 131. b. cap. 103. The English all this while defended Berwick-Castle against the Scots, and on the  13th of January, the King being in it, with Sir Walter Manny,Retaken by the King. the Town was surrounded with the English Army, and the Port and Castle both secured by the English Navy, the Scots threw themselves upon the King's Mercy, and yielded up the Town. For the very severe Usages and Hardships, drawn up in hardThe King of Scotland ill used by his People. Words, in the very Grants Edward Baliol King of Scotland recei∣ved from the Scots, and not being able to endure them, or con∣tend  for the Honour and Dignity due to him from his People in his old Age and feeble Condition, on the 20th and 25th Day of January, at Rokesburgh, Gave, Granted, and Confirmed, for himHe grants the Crown of Scotland, &c. to K. Edw. and Heirs, to Edward King of England, the Kingdom, Govern∣ment, Title, and Crown of Scotland, together with the Isles, and all manner of Royalties, Dignities, Honours, Prerogatives, Privi∣leges, Rights, Dominions, Homages, Services, Fees, Advowsons, Cities, Castles, Towns, Lands, Possessions, and all and singular things  which belonged to the Crown of Scotland, or might any way be∣long to it; and all his Isles, Castles, Cities, Towns, Demeasns, Lands, Possessions, Dignities, and Rights, with their Apertinences in England, or Galway, or otherwhere within the Kingdom of Scotland; to have and to hold to him, his Heirs, and Assigns;And puts him in possession of the King∣dom. and put him in possession of all these things, as well by delivery of his Golden Crown, as delivery of corporal Possession of the Soil of the Kingdom, &c. In consideration whereof, King Ed∣ward  was to allow him 2000 l. Sterling by the year for his Life, to be paid Quarterly. There were several long Rot. Scot. 29 Ed. III. M. 12. Instruments made about this Grant, as also an Exemplification of the main Indenture of the Agreement between the Two Kings, Dated at Banburgh the 20th of February Ibm. 30. Ed. III. M. 6. the Year following. Also there is King Edward's Release of the Homage done to him by Edward Baliol,Ibm. 8. Dated the 12th of March next after at Westmin∣ster, and a Proclamation, That notwithstanding this Grant, the  People of Scotland should enjoy and be Governed by their Old Laws and Customs as before, without any Change or Altera∣tion, Ibm. Dated at the same Place, on the 15th of the same Month. In the next Year, Prince Edward Wals. f. 171. n. 40. marched out of Burdeaux with his Army toward the River Loire, and designed such ano∣ther Ravage and Destruction in the Countries on both sides of it, as he had made the Year before between Burdeaux and Narbon,  which he had begun. Ibm. and Du Chsne, f. 675. D. from Froys. f. 78. a. cap. 157. Upon the News whereof, the King of France went directly from Paris to Chartres, where he drew Forces from Avergn, Berry, Burgogn, Lorain, Haynault, Vermandois, Picardy, Normany, and Bretagne, to oppose him; in the mean time guarding the Passes and breaking down the Bridges upon the Loire, while the Prince took Remorentin, and several other
Places and Castles, and had many Skirmishes with French Par∣ties, beat them, and took several Prisoners, on the South-side of the River, before the memorable Battel of Poicters; the best De∣scription whereof is in Fol. 371. A. D. 1356. Mezeray's Abridgment of Froisard's te∣dious Relation of it, as follows: While the King was at Chartres, where he was drawing all hisThe Battel of Poictiers. Forces together, he was informed that the Prince of Wales with  12000 Men, of which there were but 3000 Natural English, had pillaged Quercy, Avergne, Lemosin, Berry, and was marching to do the same in Anjou, Tourain, and Poitou; he thought fit to cut off his March upon his Retreat, and led his Army along the Loire. The Prince being advertised, left the Road to Tours, and retired by Poitou; but he could not do it so speedily, but that the King's Army overtook him within two Leagues of Poi∣tiers. The Prince finding him so near, entrenched himself amongst  the Vines and strong thick Hedges, nigh the Place called Mau∣pertuis. Cardinal de Perigord the Pope's Legate, went often from oneThe Pope's Legate endea∣vours to pre∣vent the Bat∣tel. Army to the other to prevent them from coming to Blows. Froys. 8. b. cap. 161. The King of France his Confidence destroyed him. Edward offered to pay for all the Damages he had done in his March from Burdeaux; to deliver up all his Prisoners, and not to bear Arms himself, nor any of his Subjects, for seven years time against France. But K. John believing the Victory secure and  certain, rejected all his Submissions; and blinded with Passion and Anger, instead of hemming him in, and starving him (which could not have failed in three Days time) went on headlong with the Courage and Fury of a Lion rather than of a Captain, to attack him within his Fastness, the A. D. 1356. 30 Ed. III. 19th of September: Nay, by the worst Advice in the World, he caused all his Horsemen to alight, excepting Three hundred select Men, who were to begin the Onset, and the German Cavalry, who had Orders to  second them. The thickness of the Hedges hindred these Three hundred Horse from breaking in upon them; the English-men's bearded Arrows made the Horses mad, and turned them upon the Ger∣mans, who fell into the Avant-Guard, and they were totally routed by a Gross of the Enemies, who came forth and charged them during their Disorder. Of the Four Sons the King had in this Battel, Three of them  were a little too soon carried out of the Fray by their Gover∣nours, together with 800 Lances; and this gave a fair Pretence of Excuse to all such Cowards as were glad to follow them. There was only Philip the Youngest of the Four, who obstinately resol∣ved to run the Fortune of his Father, and fought by his side. The King's single Valour sustained the Enemy's Charge a consi∣derable time; and if one fourth part of his Men had but Se∣conded  him, no doubt but he had gained the Victory. At lengthThe King of France yields himself. His Son Phi∣lip and several of the French Nobility made Prisoners. he yielded himself up into the hands of John de Morebeque an Arte∣sian Gentleman, whom he had banished the Kingdom for some Crime. Philip his Son was taken Prisoner with him. There were but 6000 French killed in this Fatal Day; but of that Num∣ber were 800 Gentlemen, and amongst those the Duke of Bour∣bon,
the Duke d' Athenes, Constable, the Mareschal de Nesle, and above 50 more of good Quality. The Young Prince, as Courteous as he was Valiant, TreatedThe Prince very kind and civil to the King of France the King as his Lord; the same Night he served him at his Table, and endeavoured to allay his Grief and Misfortunes, by the most obliging and becoming Language he could express. The next day fearing this Noble Prey might be snatched from him, and withal observing his Soldiers were so laden with Plunder,  He carries him to Bur∣deaux, with a great number of Prisoners. that they were uncapable of further Service, he took his March towards Burdeaux, and carried away the King and his Son along with him, together with a prodigious Number of Pri∣soners. According to F. 79. b. cap. 160. The French in this Battel 4 times more than the Eng∣lish. Froysard, the Men at Arms only, besides others of the French, were four times the Number of the whole English Army, they being Forty eight thousand, divided into three Battels, Sixteen thousand in a Battel; the English Army not be∣ing  esteemed above Eight thousand, by the Account of Sir Eu∣stace of Ribemont, and Two other Lords, gave to the King of France, having been sent by him to discover their Number. In this Battel the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury, Stafford,The English Noblemen thatshew most Courage in this Battel. Sir James Audeley, Sir John Chandos, Sir Reginald de Cobham, &c. behaved themselves very bravely; but beyond others, the Earl of Warwick, Sir James Audeley, and Sir John Chandos. And as 'tis said by Froysard, F. 83. a. cap. 164. the Prince of Wales, who was Coura∣geous  and Cruel as a Lion, took that Day great Pleasure to Fight, and to chase his Enemies. His Courage and Conduct, with the Assistance of those about him, was in this Battel most certainly very extraordinary and wonderful. On the 5th of May next Year, the Prince of Wales arrived atA. D. 1357. 31 Ed. III. The King of France brought Prisoner to London. Plimouth, with his Noble Prisoners the Wals. f. 172. n. 40. Knighton, col. 2615. n. 10, 20, &c. King of France and his Son, where, and in his Passage from thence to London, he  was treated with much Honour and Respect, and on the 24th of the same Month, had a Publick Entrance made him into that City, and was Lodged in the Palace of the Savoy, the King, Queen, and Great Men often making him Visits. Holinsed, f. 390. Here he staid until toward the next Spring, when he was removed to Windsor-Castle, where he and his Son passed the Time in Hawking and Hunting, and toward Winter returned to the Savoy. Soon after the King of France his Froys. . 1. c. 173. f 86. b. Arrival in England, the  Pope sent the two Cardinals of Perigord and St. Tital, into England, to mediate a Peace between the Two Kingdoms; but without effect: Yet so far they prevailed, as to procure a Truce until the Feast of St. John Baptist, which was to be in the Year 1359. orA Truce for two years by the Pope's Mediation. 33d of Edward III. out of which Philip of Navarre, the Coun∣tess of Montfort, and Dutchy of Britan, were excepted. Before this, by the Mediation of Joan Queen of Scots (or, asRot. Scot. 27 Ed. III. M. 2. 'tis phrased in the Record, Consort to David Brus his Prisoner)  Sister to King Edward, who in the 27th of his Reign had his Leave to come into England to her Husband, with moderate Attendance (cum moderata Familia) and upon the Prayer of Da∣vid Brus his Prisoner, the Prelates, Great Men, and Commons of Scotland Ibm. 28 Ed. III. M. 4 (a la Priere David de Bruys nostre Prisoner, & des Prelates, Grantz & Comunes Descoce) he granted to Treat with
them about his Deliverance: And thereupon sent to NewcastleCommission∣ers appointed to treat about the Delive∣rance of Da∣vid Bruce. upon Tine the Bishop of Duresme, William de Bohun Earl of Nor∣thampton and Constable of England, Gilbert d'Ʋmfreyvill Earl of Anegos, the Lords de Percy and de Nevill, William Baron of Grey∣stock, and Henry le Scrop, his Commissioners, with full Power to Treat with the Bishop of St. Andrews and Brechin, Patrick of Dun∣bar Earl of the March of Scotland, the Abbot of Dumfermelin, and Master Walter de Moffet Arch-Deacon of Leonesse, Commissioners for  Scotland: Where it was Ibm. Agreed, 1. That David should be Ransomed and fet free for Ninety thou∣sandHis Ransom 90000 Mercs, to be paid in 9 years. Mercs of Sterling Silver, to be paid in Nine Years by equal Pay∣ments; the first whereof to begin at the Purification of the Virgin next coming, after the Date of the Treaty, or within Fifteen days after; and to be made at Berwic, if in the hands of the English, other∣wise at Norham-Castle in Northumberland, not far from thence. 2. That there should be a Truce upon sufficient Security, by Instru∣ments and Oaths between King Edward and all his People of Eng∣land, Scotland, and the Isle of Man, and David de Bruys; and all the other People of Scotland, and their Adherents by Land and by Sea, in all Places, without Fraud or Deceit, until the said Sum was fully paid; and that Edward de Baliol, and other his Al∣lies and Adherents, should be comprised within the Truce. 3. That all People of one Part, and the other, during the Truce,  A Truce for 9 years be∣tween England and Scotland; with the Ar∣ticles. might Negociate, and have intercourse one with another, by Land and by Sea, except Castles and Fortified Towns and Places: And, that if during the Truce, any Country, Town, Land, Burgh, Possession, Castle, or Person, of what Estate or Condition soever he was at the Day of making this Agreement, should be taken or received into the Faith or Peace of one Party from the other (soit pris ou receu de une Foi ou Pees a lautre) that full Restitution should be made, without De∣lay, Contradiction, or Fraud, the same Hour they were demanded. 4. That for the Payment of the Money according to the Agree∣ment, David was to send Twenty Hostages into England, who were Twenty of the Eldest Sons and Heirs of the Earls and Best Men of Scotland, named in this Article, to remain there until the Money was paid, &c. 5. That the said David, and the other Great Men of the Kingdom of Scotland, as well Bishops and Prelates, as other Lords of the Land, should be bound by Letters and Oaths in the best manner and form could  be devised, for the Payment of the Money, and Observation of the Truce: And that the Merchants and Comunes of Aberdeen, Dundee, Perth, and Edinburgh, should be bound accordingly for themselves and all other Merchants of that Kingdom, for the Performance of the Payment and Truce. 6. That if the said David, or others that should be bound for the Payment of the Money, should fail of Payment of any of the Terms, then the Body of David was to be re-entred into the Castle of Norham, with∣in  three Weeks after every Failure, there to remain until the Sum was paid. 7. That if there should be any Rebels in Scotland against David (item in cas que auscuns Rebelx Descoce soient contre le dit Da∣vid) they should not be received, maintained, ir supported by any in the Faith of King Edward: Or if any in the Faith of King Edward▪
should rise or rebell against him, or his Officers, he should not be received, maintained, or supported by the said David, or any in his Faith or Legiance. 8. By the Advice and Assent of the Prelates, Great Men, and Sages of the Kingdom, King Edward accepted the Treaty, and promised and granted in Good Faith, That if David, the Prelates, Great Men, and others of Scotland of his Party, would observe and perform as much as belonged to them, the Things treated and agreed upon, That he would  also keep and perform, and cause to be observed the same, without Fraud or Deceit, according to the Purport of the Treaty. In Witness and Con∣firmation whereof, King Edward made his Letters Patents, Dated at Westminster on the 5th of October. This Treaty, and all others before, proved ineffectual, Hect. Boeth. f. 326 b. n. 50. A new Trea∣ty. be∣cause the Scots would not consent to the Terms and Conditions of the Release: Yet the Endeavours and Mediation before men∣tioned  were continued, and on the Third of October this Year, Commissioners on both sides met at Berwic; for King Ed∣ward, Rot. Scot. 31 Ed III. M M. 2. Dors. A. D. 1357. The Commis∣sioners on both sides. John Arch-Bishop of York, Thomas Bishop of Duresme, Gilbert Bishop of Carlisle, Henry de Percy, Ralph Neville, Henry le Scrope, and Thomas Musgrave: For Robert Steward Guardian of Scot∣land, and the Prelates, Lords, and Commons of that Kingdom, William Bishop of St. Andrews, Thomas Bishop of Catness, Patrick Bishop of Brechin, Chancellor of Scotland, Patrick Earl of March, Robert  de Irskin, and William de Levington, Knights: When it was Agreed, 1. That King David should be Released, set Free, and Ransomed forThe Articles of a 10 years Truce. K. David to be released. an Hundred thousand Mercs Sterling Money, to be paid yearly by Ten thousand Mercs; the first Payment to begin at Midsummer then next following. 2. That there should be a Truce kept and observed in England, Scot∣land,  and the Isle of Man, until the Money was paid: And, That Edward de Baliol, and all King Edward's Allies, should be included in this Truce. 3. That for Payment of his Ransom, Twenty Hostages should be delivered by King David, there named in the Conditions of their De∣livery. 4. That King David, the Prelates, and Peers of Scotland, shouldThis and the former Truce to be observ'd. be bound by Writing and Oath, for Payment of the Money, and Obser∣vation  of the Truces. 5. That if the Money was not paid as agreed, they should be obliged to return the Body of King David, who was to remain Prisoner while it was paid, according to every Term of Payment. These and some other Articles were the Conditions upon which he was released, after more than Eleven Years Imprisonment. King David was no sooner returned into Scotland after his De∣liverance,  but he began to chastise Hect. Boeth. ut supra, n. 60, 70, 80. K. David pu∣nished such as deserted him at the Battel of Durham. such as deserted him, and left the Field at the Battel of Durham: And first he deprived Ro∣bert Stewart of the Right of Succession, and declared Alexander Sutherland (who was his own Sister's Son, his Successor, Robert Stewart being Son to the Daughter of the First Wife of Robert Brus) and caused all the Nobility of Scotland to Swear Fealty to
him: But Alexander dying soon after, he established Robert Stewart in the Succession, according to his Right, and caused the Nobility again to Swear Fealty to him. He took away part of the Earl of the Marches Estate, another Great Officer in the Army, and punished others according to their Deserts. It is not much to the Purpose of this History what the TroublesThe Troubles and Confusi∣ons in France, during King John's absence. and Confusions were in France, and the Miseries of that Nation during King John's Captivity, or rather his Absence only from  the French People; they may be seen in the French Historians, by such as desire to know them. The bold Behaviour of the Provost of the Merchants and Parisians against the Dauphin, the Insolence of the Rustics against the Nobility, Gentry, and Citizens in all Places, and their Violence exercised upon the Peasants; the Practices of the King of Navarre against the Dauphin and Go∣vernment of France, by making Divisions amongst the People, and driving them into Parties and Factions; the Barbarity of the  Plundering-People, calling themselves Companions, and of the Sol∣diers Mezer. f. 76. both Foreign and Domestics, who upon Truces made between the Parties, were neither disbanded or paid. All these robbed and pillaged one another, committed Rapin without di∣stinction, wasted and burnt the Countries where they came, until the Dauphin procured himself to be declared Regent of France by the Parlement at Paris Ib. f. 377. in the Year 1358. and some little while after, until the Nation was reduced to some sort  of Settlement by that Regency, and Compliance between the Regent and Parlement, which had not been before. The last-mentioned Truce being expired without hopes of Peace, Froys. lib. 1. c. 201. the King of England and his Son the Prince of Wales, the the King of France, and James Earl of Bourbon, only amongstA Peace con∣cluded. themselves, Treated of, and agreed upon a Peace, and sent the Articles into France to the Duke of Normandy the Dauphin and Regent. He assembled the Prelates, Nobles, and People of the  Good Towns; who upon debate of the Terms, resolved to suf∣ferThe French refuse the Terms. more than they had done, and permit their King to remain Prisoner, rather than to submit to such Articles, as should so much lessen the Power of France. King Edward, at the Return of the Messengers, understanding the Resolution of the French, determined to enter France with such a Force as should make an end of the War, or procure Peace according to his De∣sire.  K. Edward rai∣seth a mighty Army. To put what he resolved on in execution, he raised an Army such as had not been Froys. . 1. c. 205. seen, and sent the Duke of Lancaster before him to Calais. . 174. li 5. a. 1100 Ships provided to transport that Army. Walsingham says there was Eleven hun∣dred Ships prepared at Sandwich to Transport this Army; from which Port he set sail on the 28th of Claus. 33 Ed. III. M 9. Drs. October, taking with him his Four Sons, Froys. ut spra, c. 207. Prince Edward, Lyonel, John, and Ed∣mond, Wals. f. 174. in. 3, 6. & 7. with most of the Nobility (fere Proceres omnes) lea∣ving his young Song Thomas of Woodstock not then four Years  old, Guardian of the Kingdom, with a Council fit to perform that Charge. Before his Froys. l 1. c. 206. The King of France and his Son sent to the Tower. Passage, he sent the King of France and his Son from their loose Confinement to the Tower, or more safe Custody, and the rest of the French Prisoners into Places of Security.
With this Army, Ib. c. 209, 210▪ 211. he marched into the middle of France, laying all waste as he marched. He was entring Was f. 174. n. 10. K. Edward marches into the middle of France, burns and wastes the Country. The French sue for Peace. Burgundy when the Duke met him, and compounded with him for Seventy thousand Florens to spare his Country from Burning and Rapin. The French kept themselves within their Places of Strength, and filled them with Armed Men, and permitted the Country to be harassed and ravaged by this Army. The Miseries and Desolation of the Kingdom of France at this  time, and in this manner, urged the Duke of Normandy and Re∣gent, the Clergy, Nobility, and all sorts of People to be desirous of, and sue for a Peace. Mezeray, f. 380. Cardinal Simon de Langres the Pope's Legate, the Abbot of Clugny, and the Dauphin's Commissioners, always followed King Edward's Camp, and earnestly sollicited for Peace. The [8] Duke of Lancaster, and other Lords, were in∣clinableK. Edw. averse. to a Peace, and pressed the King to hearken to it: He was averse, putting such Terms upon the French they could not  submit to them, until (as Lib. 1. c. 211. Was frighted into it by a Tempest. Froysard tells the Story) being before Chartres, there suddenly happened such a Tempest of Thunder, Lightning, Rain, Hail and Stones, that it killed many of his Men and Horses, when turning towards our Lady's Church there, and sted∣fastly beholding it, he made a Vow to her to Consent to Peace: And be∣ing then Lodged in a Village called Bretigny near Chartres, Commis∣sioners were appointed on both sides to Treat there accordingly. This Famous Treaty of Bretigny, was managed by Rot. Cales de negotiis co∣munibus, 3. a. Ed. III. M. 6. the  Prince of Wales, and Charles Regent of France, in the Names of both Kings. Commissioners for the English were, Sir Reginald de Cobham, Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, Sir Francis Hale, Banerets;[1] Rot. Fran. 34 Ed. III. M. 11. Dors. The famous Treaty of Bretigny. Sir Miles Stapleton, Sir Richard la Vache, and Sir Neel Loring, Knights, with others of the King's Council: On the French Party were, the Elect of Beauves, the Chancellor Charles Lord Mome∣rency, Monsieur John de Meingre Marshal of France, Monsieur Ay∣nart de la Tour Lord of Vivoy, Monsieur Ralph de Ravenal, Mon∣sieur  Simon de Bucy, Knights, Monsieur Stephen de Paris, and Peter de la Charite, with many others of his Council, named by King John himself. These Commissioners on both sides Mezeray, f. 380. A Peace made in 8 days. met the first of May at Bretigny aforesaid, within a Mile of Chartres, and concluded upon all the Articles of this Peace in eight Days time; which do here follow, Translated from the French, with Notes where they were afterwards altered and corrected by the Two Kings  at Calais Edward, Eldest Son Rot. de Tra∣ct at pacis Fran. 34 Ed. III. M. 10. See also Leibnitz Co∣dex juris Gen∣tium, from f. 208, to f. 220. to the King of France and England, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwal, Earl of Chester; To all those who shall see these Letters, Greeting: We make you know, That all the Debates and Disorders whatsoever, moved or stirred between our Lord and Father King of France and England, on the one Part; and our Cousins the King, his Eldest Son, Regent of the Realm of France,  and all those it may concern on the other Part. For the Good of Peace, it is Agreed, the 8th Day of May, 1360. at Bretigny near Chartres, in the manner following:
1. First, Ibm. That the King of England, with what he holds in Gascogne and Guyen, shall have for him and his Heirs for ever, all those Things which follow, to hold them in the same man∣ner the King of France, or his Son, or any of his Ancestors Kings of France, held them: That is to say, Those in Sove∣raignty in Soveraignty, and those in Demain in Demain, accord∣ing to the time and manner hereafter declared. The City, Castle,  and Earldom of Poictiers, with the whole Land and Country of Poictou; together with the Fief of Thouars, and Land of Belle∣ville; the City and Castle of Xaintes, and the whole Land of Xaintonge, on this side and beyond the River of Charente; the City and Castle of Agen, and the Land and Country of Agenois; the City and Castle, and whole Earldom of Perigort, and the Land and Country of Perigeux; the City, Castle, and whole Earl∣dom of Limoges; the Land and Country of Limozin; the City  and Castle of Cahors, and the Land and Country of Cahorsin; the City and Castle, and Country of Tarbe, and the Land and Earl∣dom of Bigorre; the Earldom, Land, and Country of Gaure; the City and Castle of Angolesm, and the Earldom, Land, and Country of Angolesmois; the City and Castle of Rodes; the Land and Country of Rovergne. And if there be any Lords, as the Earl of Foix, the Earl of Armagnac, the Earl of Lisle, the Earl of Perigort, and Viscount of Limoges, or others, which hold any  Lands within the Bounds of these Places, they shall do Homage to the King of England, and all other Services and Devoirs due by reason of their Lands, in the same manner they did in times past. The First Article was corrected; and in instead of the Words, Those in Soveraignty in Soveraignty, were inserted these, Those in Fee in Fee. 2. Also the King of England shall have all that any of the  Kings of England anciently held in the Town of Monstruel upon the Sea, with their Appurtenances. 3. Also the King of England shall have all the County or Earldom of Ponthieu entirely; save and except, That if any thing of the said County or Appurtenances have been alienated by the Kings of England for the time being, and to other Per∣sons than the Kings of France, the King of France shall not be obliged to render them to the King of England: And if the  said Alienations have been made to the Kings of France for the time being without mean, and he doth possess them at present, they are entirely to be released to the King of England; except the Kings of France had them by Exchange for other Lands of the Kings of England, then both were to release. But if the Kings of England for the time being, had alienated any thing to other Persons than to the King of France, and afterwards they came into his hands, he shall not be obliged to render  them. Also if the things abovesaid owe Homage, the King of France shall convey them to others, who shall do it for the King of England: And if they do not owe Homage, the King of France shall appoint a Trustee or Tenant to perform the De∣voir, within one Year after he shall part from Calais.
4. Also the King of England shall have the Castle and Town of Calais, the Castle, Town, and Seigneurie of Merk, the Towns, Castles, and Lordships of Sangate, Colongue, Hames, Wale and Oye, with Lands, Woods, Marshes, Rivers, Rents, Lordships, or Seigneuries, Advowsons of Churches, and all o∣ther Appurtenances lying between the Meeses and Bounds fol∣lowing; That is to say, from Calais by the Course of the River that goes before Graveling, and also by the Course of the same  River round about Langle, and by the River which goes beyond the Poil, and by the same River that falls into the great Lake of Guisnes, and so to Fretun, and from thence by the Valley about the Hill Calculy, inclosing that Hill, and so to the Sea, with Sangate and all the Appurtenances. 5. Also the King of England shall have the Castle, Town and County or Earldom of Guisnes, with all the Lands, Towns, Castles, Forteresses, Places, Men, Homages, Lordships, Woods,  Forests, and the Rights of them, as intirely as the Earl of Guisnes, lately dead, had them at the time of his death, and the Churches and good People being within the Limits of the County of Guisnes, of Calais, and Merk, and other Places a∣bovesaid, shall obey the King of England, as they obeyed the King of France, or Earl of Guisnes for the time being; All which things of Merk and Calais, contained in this and the pre∣cedent Article, the King of England shall hold in Demain, ex∣cept  the Heritages of the Churches, which shall remain to them intirely where-ever they be; and also except the Heritages of other People, of the Country of Merk and Calais lying out of the Town of Calais, to the value of an Hundred Livres of yearly Rent, or under, of Current Money of the Country, which shall remain to them. But the Habitations and Heritages being in the Town of Calais, with their Appurtenances, shall be to the King of England in Demain, to dispose of them at his  pleasure; and also the Inhabitants in the County Town and Lands of Guisnes, shall enjoy all their Demains intirely, and shall wholly be returned to them, saving what hath been said concerning the Borders, Meets, and Bounds in the precedent Article. 6. Also 'tis agreed the King of England and his Heirs shall have and hold all the Isles adjacent to the Lands, Countreys, and Places before named, together with all other Isles, which  he holds at present. 7. Also 'tis agreed the King of France, and his Eldest Son the Regent, for them, their Heirs and Successors, as soon as they can without deceit, and at furthest by the Feast of St. Michael, in one year after the same Feast next coming, shall render, tranfer, and deliver to the King of England, his Heirs and Successors, all Honours, Obediences, Homages, Ligeances, Vassals, Fees, Services, Recognisances, Mere, and Mixt Empire, and all manner of Juris∣diction  high and low, Resorts, Safeguard, Collations and Patronages of Churches, and all manner of Seigneuries, and Soverainties, and all the Right they have, or can have, appertains, or can appertain, to them, by what Cause, Title, or Colour of Right soever, or to the Kings and Crown of France, by reason of the Cities, Counties, Towns, Castles, Lands, Countreys, Isles and Places before named, and all
their Appurtenances and Dependances, and every one of them, where-ever they are, without retaining any thing to them or their Heirs and Successors, or to the Kings or Crown of France. And also, That the King, and his Eldest Son, should send their Letters Patents to all the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and all other Prelates of Holy Church, and to the Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Noble∣men, Citizens and others of the Cities, Lands, Countreys, Isles and Places before-named, that they should obey the King  of England and his Heirs, and their certain Command, in the same manner they had obeyed the Kings and Crown of France; and by the same Letters they should quit and absolve them after the best manner they could, from all Faiths, Homages, Oaths, Obligations, Subjections and Promises made by any of them to the Kings and Crown of France, in what manner soever. This Article was corrected; The Word (Resorts) being left out in the Correct Copy, and these Words or Sen∣tence  (and all manner of Seigneuries, and Soverainties) and these Words or Sentence (without retaining any thing to them or their Heirs and Successors, or to the Kings or Crown of France) also the last Words (in what manner soever.) 8. Also it is agreed, That the King of England shall have the Cities, Counties, Castles, Lands, Countries, Isles, and Places before named, with all their Appurtenances and Dependences,  where-ever they are, to hold to him, his Heirs, and Successors, heritably and perpetually in Demain, as the Kings of France held them, and in the same manner, saving what hath been said above, in the Article of Calais and Merk; and also the Ci∣ties, Castles, Counties, Lands, Countreys, Isles, and Places be∣fore named, Rights, Mere and Mixt Empire, Jurisdiction and Profits whatever, which any Kings of England held there, with their Appurtenances and Dependences, any Alienations, Do∣nations,  Obligations, or Incumbrances, had, or done by any of the Kings of France, in Seventy years from that time, by whatsoever Cause or Form it was, all such Alienations, Dona∣tions, Obligations or Incumbrances, are now, and shall be wholly annulled, repealed, and made void: And all things so given, alienated, or incumbred, shall be really rendred and de∣livered to the King of England intirely, and in the same Con∣dition they were Seventy years since, or to his special Depu∣ties,  as soon as they may without fraud; and at furthest be∣fore Michaelmass next come twelve-months, to hold them heri∣tably and perpetually, and to his Heirs and Successors, except what is said in the Article of Ponthieu, which is to remain in its force, and saving all things given and alienated to Churches, which shall peaceably remain to them in all Countries before and after named, so as the Parsons of the Churches pray dili∣gently for the Kings as for their Founders, wherewith their  Consciences shall be charged. 9. Also it is agreed the King of England shall have and hold all the Cities, Counties, Castles, and Countreys above-named, which anciently the Kings of England had not, in the same Estate as the King of France and his Sons hold them at pre∣sent.
10. Also it is agreed, That if within the Limits of the Coun∣treys the Kings of England anciently possessed, they should now have any thing that was not then theirs, of which the King of France was in possession on the 19th of September 1356, they shall be and remain to the King of England and his Heirs as above-said. 11. Also it is agreed, That the King of France and his Eldest Son the Regent, for them and their Heirs, and for the Kings of  France and their Successors for ever, as soon as they could without deceit, and at furthest before Michaelmass 1361, should render and deliver to the King of England, his Heirs and Suc∣cessors, and transfer to them all the Honours, Ligeances, Obe∣diences, Homages, Vassals, Fees, Services, Recognisances, Oaths, Right, Mere and Mixt Empire, all manner of Jurisdictions high and low, Resorts, Safeguards, and Seigneuries, which can or may belong in any manner to the Kings or Crown of France,  or to any other Person by reason of the King, or Crown of France, at any time, in the Cities, Counties, Castles, Lands, Countreys, Isles and Places above-named, or in any of them, their Appurtenances and Appendances whatsoever, or in Per∣sons, Vassals, Subjects, or whosoever of them, be they Princes, Dukes, Earls, Vicounts, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and other Prelates of the Church, Barons, Noblemen, and others whosoever, without reserving or retaining any thing to them,  their Heirs and Successors, or to the Crown of France or others, whatever it be, whereby they, their Heirs, and Successors, or any Kings of France, or other Person, under pretence of the King and Crown of France, may challenge, and demand any thing in time to come, from the King of England, his Heirs and Successors, or upon any of the Vassals and Subjects afore∣said, by reason of those Countreys and Places: Also all the before named Persons, their Heirs and Successors, shall for ever  be the Liegemen and Subjects of the King of England, his Heirs and Successors; and that he and they shall hold all the Per∣sons, Cities, Counties, Lands, Countreys, Isles, Castles, and Places afore named, and all their Appurtenances and Appen∣dances, and they shall be and remain to them fully, perpetu∣ally, freely, in their Seigneury, Soverainty, Obedience, Li∣geance, and Subjection, as the Kings of France had and held them in any time past; and that the said King of England,  his Heirs and Successors, shall have and hold perpetually all the Countreys before named, with their Appertenences and Appendences, and other things before named, with all perpe∣tual Franchises and Liberties, as Soveraign and Liege Lord, as Neighbour to the King and Realm of France, without acknow∣ledging any Soveraign, or performance of any Obedience, Ho∣mage, Resort, Subjection, and without doing in any time to come any Service, or making Recognisance to the King or Crown  of France, for the Cities, Counties, Castles, Lands, Countreys, Isles, Places, and Persons before named, or for any of them. This Article was Corrected, and at least Two Parts of Three left out of the Corrected Letter (as then called) or Copy, the whole Article there being no more then what follows:
Also, it is agreed, That the King of France, and his Eldest Son the Regent, for them, and their Heirs, and for the Kings of France and their Successors for ever, as soon as they can without fraud, and at furthest before Michaelmass 1361, shall render and deliver to the King of England, his Heirs and Suc∣cessors, and transfer to them, all the Honours, Ligeances, Obe∣diences, Homages, Vassals, Fees, Services, Recognisances, Oaths, Right, mere and mixt Empire, all manner of Jurisdictions high and low,  Safeguards and Seigneuries, which can or may belong in any manner, to the Kings or Crown of France, or to any other Per∣son by reason of the King and Crown of France, (ou a aucun autre person a cause du Roy & de la Coronne de France) at any time in the Cities, Counties, Castles, Lands, Countreys, Isles and Places above-named, or in any of them, their Appertenences, and Appendences, whatsoever, or in Persons, Vassals, Subjects, or whosoever of them. 12. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France and his Eldest Son, shall renounce expressly all Resorts and Soveraignties, and all the Right they have or can have in all those things, which by this Treaty ought to belong to the King of England. And in like manner he and his Eldest Son shall renounce, expressly all those things, which by this Treaty ought not to belong or be delivered to him, and all demands he makes of the King of France, and especially to the Name, and to the Right of the  Crown of the Kingdom of France, and to the Homages, Sove∣raignty, and Demain of the Dutchy of Normandy, the Dutchy of Tourain, the Counties of Anjou and Main, the Soveraignty and Homage of the Dukedom of Bretagne, and the Homages and So∣veraignties of the Country and County of Flanders, and all other Demands, he can or shall make of the King of France, for what Cause soever, except what by this Treaty ought to remain and be delivered to the King of England and his Heirs; and one  King shall part with, Release and Transfer to the other perpe∣tually all the Right which either of them hath, or can have, in all the things which by this Treaty ought to remain and be de∣livered to each of them; and of the time and place where and when the said Renunciations shall be made, the Two Kings shall agree and appoint when they meet at Calais. This Article was intirely left out of the Treaty corrected at Calais, when the Two Kings met there. 13. Also, it is agreed, That to the end this Treaty may spee∣dily be accomplished, that the King of England, shall bring the King of France to Calais, within three weeks after Midsummer, (there being no just hindrance) at his own Expence. 14. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France shall pay to the King of England, Three Millions of Crowns of Gold, whereof Two shall be of the value of a Noble of English Mo∣ney; whereof 600000 Crowns shall be paid to him or his De∣puties,  within four Months after the King of France shall ar∣rive at Calais, and within a year following 400000 Crowns to be paid at London, and so every year 400000 Crowns to be paid there until the whole was discharged.
15. It is also agreed, That for the Payment of the 600000 Crowns at Calais, and for the delivery of the Hostages here∣after named, within four months after the King of France shall be come to Calais, the Town, Castle, and Fortresses of Rochell, the Castles, Fortresses, and Towns of the County of Guines, shall be rendered to the King of England, with all their Appertenences, and Appendences; and the Person of the King of France shall be delivered out of Prison, but he is not to Arm himself or People  against the King of England, but is to accomplish what was to be done by this Treaty; And the Hostages were the great Pri∣soners taken at the Battel of Poictiers, and these following: That is to say, Monsieur Lewis Earl of Anjou, Monsieur John Earl of Poicters, the King's Sons, the Duke of Orleans the King's Brother, the Duke of Bourbon, the Earl of Blois, or his Brother, the Earl of St. Paul, the Earl of Alanon, or Monsieur Peter of Alançon his Brother, the Earl of Harcourt, the Earl of  Portien, the Earl of Valentiniois, the Earl of Briene, the Earl of Vaudemont, the Earl of Forest, the Viscount Beaumont, the Lord of Coucy, the Lord of Fienne, the Lord of Preaux, the Lord of St. Venant, the Lord of Garencieres, the Dauphin of Avergne, the Lord of Hangest, the Lord of Montmorency, Mon∣sieur William de Craon, Monsieur Lewis of Harcourt, Monsieur John de Ligny. The Names of the Prisoners taken at Poictiers were these: Monsieur Philip of France, the Earl of Eu, the Earl of Lon∣gueville, the Earl of Ponthieu, the Earl of Joigny, the Earl of Sancene, the Earl of Dammartin, the Earl of Ventadour, the Earl of Salbruche, the Earl of Auxerre, the Earl of Vendosme, the Lord of Craon, the Lord of Darnalt or Rual, the Marshal of Danchan, or d'Andeneham, the Lord of Aubigny. 16. Also, it is agreed, That the Prisoners aforesaid, which come to remain in Hostage for the King of France, shall there∣fore  be delivered out of Prison, without paying any Ransom, according to Agreement made before the 3d of May last past; and if any of them be out of England, and not in Ho∣stage at Calais, within the first month after the said three weeks, after Midsummer, without just hindrance, he shall not be quit of his Imprisonment, but be forced by the King of France to return into England, and there remain Prisoner, or pay the Pe∣nalty by him promised and incurred, for not returning. 17. Also, it is agreed, That in stead of those Hostages, which shall not come to Calais, or shall dye, or shall remove out of the Power of the King of England, the King of France shall deliver others of the same Quality, as soon as may be within four months after the Bayly of Amiens, and the Major of St. Omer, upon the King of England's Certificate, shall have no∣tice threof; and the King of France, upon his departure from Calais, may have in his Company Ten of the Hostages, such  as the Two Kings shall agree upon, so as Thirty may remain. 18. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France, within three months after he shall be gone from Calais, shall send thi∣ther, to remain in Hostage, Four Persons (de la ville de Paris) of the Town of Paris, and Two of every Town following, of St. Omer, Arras, Amiens, Beauvais, Lisle, Doway, Tournay, Remes,
Chaalons, Troyes, Chartres, Tholouse, Lyon, Orleance, Compiegne, Roven, Caen, Tours, Bourges; The most sufficient of these Towns for the Accomplishment of this Treaty. 19. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France shall be brought from England to Calais, and remain there for four months, but shall pay nothing the first month for his Guard and Keeping, but for every one of the other months he shall remain there, he shall pay 6000 Royals, as they shall be then current in France,  before his departure from Calais, and so afterwards for the time he stays there. 20. Also, it is agreed, That as soon as may be, within a year after the King of France is departed from Calais, Mon∣sieur John Earl of Montfort, shall have the Earldom of Mont∣fort, with all its Appertenences, doing Homage Liege to the King of France, and his Devoir and Service in every Case as a good and Loyal Vassal Liege ought to do to his Liege Lord by reason  of his Earldom; and also his other Heritages shall be rendred to him, that belong not to the Dutchy of Bretagne, doing Homage and other Dues belonging to them; And if he will demand any thing in any of the Heritages belonging to that Dutchy, out of the Country of Bretagne, he shall receive good and speedy Reason from the Court of France. 21. Also upon the Question of the Demain of Bretagne, which is between Monsieur John de Montfort, and Monsieur  Charles de Blois, it is agreed, That the Two Kings calling before them or their Deputies, the Parties Principals, they shall inform themselves of their Right, and shall indeavour to make them agree about all that is in Debate between them, as soon as they can: And in case neither the Kings, or their Deputies, can make an Agreement within a year after the King of France shall arrive at Calais, Friends on both sides may make the best Agreement between them they can, and as soon as they can,  and if they cannot compromise the Matter within half a year▪ they shall make Report thereof, and what they find concerning the Rights of each Party, and why the Debate remains between them, to the Two Kings or their Deputies; and then they as soon as may be, shall make an Accord, giving their final Sen∣tence upon the Right of each Party, which shall be executed by the Two Kings; and in case they cannot end the Controversy in half a year, then the Two Principal Parties of Blois and  Here seems to be some in∣consistency in this part of the Article; but it is a true Verbal Tran∣slation from the rnch. Montfort shall do what seems best to them, and the Friends of one Part and the other, shall assist which Part they please, with∣out hinderance of the said Kings, or without receiving any Damage, Blame, or Reproach from them; and if it hap∣pen that one of the Parties will not appear before the Kings or their Deputies, at the time appointed, and also in case the Kings or their Deputies shall declare an Accord between the Parties, and shall give their Opinion of the Right of one  Party, and either of the Parties will not consent to▪ and obey the Declaration, then the said Kings shall be against him with their whole Power, and in Ayd of the other which shall comply and obey; But the Two Kings shall not in any Case in their proper Persons, or by others▪ make War upon one another for the Cause aforesaid, and the Soveraignty and Homage of the Dutchy shall always remain to the King of France.
22. Also, That all the Lands, Towns, Countries, Castles, and other Places delivered to the King, shall enjoy such Liberties and Franchises as they have at present, which shall be confirm∣ed by the said Kings or their Successors, so often as they shall be duly required, if they be not contrary to this Ac∣cord. 23. Also, the King of France shall render, or cause to be ren∣dred, and confirm to Monsieur Philip of Navarre, and to all his  Adherents, after this time, as soon as may be, without Deceit, and at furthest within a Year after the King of France shall be gone from Calais, all the Towns, Fortresses, Castles, Lordships, Rights, Rents, Profits, Jurisdictions, and Places whatever, which he in his own Right, or in Right of his Wife, or his Adherents, held or ought to hold in the Kingdom of France: And that he shall not do them any Damage or Injury, or reproach them for any thing done before that time, and shall pardon them  all Offences and Misprisions for the time past, by reason of the War; and for this they shall have good and sufficient Let∣ters, so as the said Monsieur Philip and his Adherents return to their Homage, and perform their Devoirs, and be Good and Loyal Vassals. 24. Also, it is accorded, That the King of England may give, for this time only, to whom he please the Lands and Heritages that were Mons. Godfrey de Harecourt's, to hold of the Duke of Nor∣mandy,  or other Lords of whom they ought to hold, by Homage and Services anciently accustomed. 25. Also, it is agreed, That any Man or Country, under the Obedience of one Party, shall, by reason of this Accord, go under the Obedience of the other Party, he shall not be im∣peached for any thing done in time past. 26. Also, it is agreed, That the Lands of the Banished, and Adherents of one Party and the other, and the Churches of one  Party and the other, and all those that are disherited and outed of their Lands, or charged with any Pension, Tax, or Impo∣sition, or otherwise in any manner charged by reason of the War, shall be restored entirely to the same Rights and Posses∣sions which they had before the War began; and that all manner of Forfeitures, Trespasses, or Misprisions, done by them, or any of them in that time, shall be wholly pardoned; and these things to be done so soon as they well can, or at  furthest within one Year after the King shall leave Calais, ex∣cept what is said in the Article of Calais and Merk, and the other Places named in that Article; except also the Viscount of Fronsac, and Mons. John Gaillard, who are not to be comprised in this Article, but their Goods and Heritages shall remain as they were before this Treaty. 27. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France shall deliver to the King of England, as soon as well he may, and at furthest  within one Year after his Departure from Calais, all the Cities, Towns, Countries, and other Places above-named, which by this Treaty ought to be delivered to him. 28. Also, it is agreed, That upon Delivery of the Towns, Fortresses, and whole County of Ponthieu; the Towns, Fortresses, and whole County of Montfort; the City and Castle of Xainctes; the
Castles, Towns, Fortresses, and all the King held in Demain in the Country of Xaintogne, on both sides the River Charente; the City and Castle of Angoulesme, and the Castles, Fortresses, and Towns which the King of France held in Demain in the Country of Angoulmois, with Letters and Commands of Releasing of Faith and Homage to the King of England, or his Deputies. He at his proper Cost and Charge shall deliver all the Fortresses taken and possessed by him, his Subjects, Adherents, and Allies, in the Countries of France,  of Anjou, of Main, of Berry, Avergne, Burgoigne, Champaigne, Pi∣cardy, and Normandy, and in all other Parts and Lands of the Kingdom of France; except those of the Dutchy of Bretagne, and those Countries and Lands by this Treaty which ought to be and remain to the King of England. 29. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France shall give up, and deliver to the King of England, his Heirs, or Deputies, all the Towns, Fortresses, Castles, and other Lands, Countries, and  Places before named, with their Appertenances, at his proper Costs and Charge: And also if he shall have any Rebels, or Disobedient, that will not render and give up to the the King of England any Cities, Castles, Towns, Countries, Places, or Fortresses, which ought to belong to him, the King of France shall be bound to cause them to be delivered at his own Ex∣pence: And likewise the King of England shall cause to be deli∣vered at his Expence the Fortresses that by this Treaty ought to be∣long  to the King of France. And the said Kings, and their People, shall be bound to Aid one another, when they shall be required, at the Wages of the Party that shall require it, which shall be one Florin of Florence a Day for a Knight, and half a Florin for on Escuyer, and to others And it is Agreed, That if the Wages be too small, in regard of the Rate of Provisions or Victuals in the Countries, they shall be ordered by Four Knights chosen for that purpose, Two of one Party, and Two of the  other. 30. Also, it is agreed, That all the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and other Prelates and Men of Holy Church, by reason of their Temporalties, shall be subject to that King under whom they hold their Temporalties; and if they have Temporalities under both Kings, they shall be subject to each King for the Tempo∣ralty they hold of him. 31. Also, it is agreed, That Good Alliances, Amities, and  Confederacies be made between both the Kings and their King∣doms, saving the Conscience and Honour of one King and the other, notwithstanding any Confederacies they have made on this side or beyond the Sea, with any Persons, be they of Scot∣land or Flanders, or any other Country. 32. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France and his Eldest Son the Regent, for them and for their Heirs Kings of France, as soon as it may be done, shall declare themselves, and depart  from all the Confederacies they have with the Scots, and promise, That they nor their Heirs, nor the Kings of France for the time being, shall give or do to the King or Realm of Scotland, nor the Subjects thereof present and to come, any Aid, Comfort, or Favour, against the King of England, his Heirs and Succes∣sors, nor against the Kingdom, nor against the Subjects in any
manner; and that they make not other Alliances with the Scots in time to come, against the Kings and Kingdom of Eng∣land. And in like manner, as soon as it may be done, the King of England and his Eldest Son shall declare themselves, and depart from all Alliances they have with the Flemmings; and so on in the same Words and Things concerning them, as the King of France engaged to do in respect of the Scots. 33. Also, it is agreed, That the Collations and Provisions  made of Benefices, vacant in time of the War by one Party and the other, shall hold and be good; and that the Costs, Issues, and Revenues, received and levied of any Benefices, or other things Temporal whatever, in the Kingdoms of France and England, by one Party or the other, during the Wars, shall be quitted by one Party and the other. 34. Also, That the Kings above-said shall be bound to cause to be confirmed all the Things above-said by our Holy Father the Pope;  and they shall be made sure, and strengthened by Oaths, Sen∣tences, and Censures of the Court of Rome, and all other Places, in the most strong manner that can be; and there shall be ob∣tained Dispensations, Absolutions, and Letters from the Court of Rome for perfecting this Treaty, and they shall be delivered to the Parties, at furthest within three Weeks after the King shall be arrived at Calais. 35. Also, That all the Subjects of the said Kings, which come  to Study in the Universities and Places of Study in the King∣doms of France and England, shall enjoy the Privileges and Li∣berties of those Places and Universities, as well as they might have done before the War, or as they do at this pre∣sent. 36. Also, it is agreed, That to the end the Things debated and treated of as above, may be more established, firm, and valuable, there shall be made and given the Securities which  follow: That is to say, Letters (or Instruments) sealed with the Seals of both Kings and their Eldest Sons, the best that can be made or directed by their Counsel. And the said Kings and their Eldest Sons, and other Sons shall swear, and also those of their Lineage, and other great Men of their Kingdoms, to the number of Twenty on each side, That they will observe and keep, and help in the keeping of the Things treated and agreed, inasmuch as shall concern them, and without Fraud or Deceit  shall accomplish them, without ever doing any thing to the contrary, and without any hindrance of the same. And if there shall be any of the Kingdom of England or France, which shall be Rebels, and will not agree to the Things above-said, the said Kings shall use the Power of their Bodies, Goods, and Friends, to bring such Rebels to Obedience, according to the Form and Tenour of the Treaty. And further, the said Kings, their Heirs, and Kingdoms, shall submit themselves to the Co∣ertion  of our Holy Father the Pope, that he may constrain by Sentences, Censures of the Church, and all due ways, him that shall be Rebel, according to Reason. And according to these Establishments and Securities above-said, both Kings and their Heirs shall by Faith and Oath Renounce all Wars and Contention. And if by Disobedience, Rebellion, or Power of
any Subjects of France, or any just Cause, the King of France or his Heirs cannot accomplish all the Things above-said, the King of England, his Heirs, or any for them, shall not make War against the King of France, his Heirs, or Kingdom; but both together shall endeavour to bring the Rebels into true Obedience, and accomplish the Things above-said. And if any of the Realm or Obedience of the King of England, will not render the Castles, Towns, and Fortresses, which they hold in the  Realm of France, and obey the Treaty above-said, or for just cause cannot do that which by this Treaty they ought to do. The King of France, nor his Heirs, nor any for them, shall make War upon the King of England or his Kingdom; but both together shall employ their Power to recover the Castles, Towns, and Fortresses; and that all Obedience and Compliance may be given to the Treaty. And there shall be made and given on both sides, according to the nature of the Fact, all manner of Security that shall be  known, or can be devised, as well by the Pope, the College of the Court of Rome, as otherwise, holding and keeping the Peace perpetually, and all the Things as above agreed. 37. Also, it is agreed, That by this present Treaty all others, if any have been made before, shall be null and void, and never be any Advantage to either Party, nor cause any Reproach of one to the other for not observing them. 38. Also the present Treaty shall be Approved, Sworn to, and  Confirmed by the Two Kings, when theyshall meet at Calais; and after the King of France shall be gone from thence, and be in his own Power, within a Month next following, he shall make Letters Patents of Confirmation, and send and deliver them at Calais to the King of England, and receive such and the like from the King of England. 39. Also, it is agreed, That neither King shall procure, or cause to be procured, by himself or others, any Injury or Mo∣lestation  by the Church of Rome, or any of Holy Church who∣ever they be, to, or concerning this Treaty, towards either of the Kings, their Coadjutors, Adherents, and Allies, whoever they be, or their Lands or Subjects, on occasion of the War, or other thing, or for Service the Coadjutors, Adherents, or Al∣lies of either side have performed; or if our Holy Father will do it of himself, both Kings shall hinder it, as well as they can without Deceit. 40. Also the Hostages that are to be delivered to the King of England at Calais, the manner and time thereof the Two Kings shall there direct. Note, That in the Corrected Instrument or Letters of this Treaty, the Words Resort and Sovereignty, are al∣ways, and in all Articles, omitted, in respect to the King of England's enjoying them in the Places  which were to be delivered to him, where in the uncorrected Articles and Instrument they are given to him. And then it follows at the latter end, or bottom of the Articles:
And We King of England aforesaid, having seen and considered the said Treaty made in our Name and for us, for the Good of Peace, and for as much as it concerns us, do Agree unto, Ratifie, Confirm, and Ap∣prove all Things above-written; and by our Royal Authority, with the Deliberation, Counsel, and Consent of many Prelates and Men of Holy Church, Dukes, Earls, as well of our Linage, as others, and many Peers of England, as of other Great Barons, Noblemen, Burgesses, and other Subjects of our Realm, do Consent to, and Confirm the said Treaty,  and all Things contained in it: And we Swear, upon the Body of Jesus Christ, in the Word of a King, for us and for our Heirs, to Observe, Accomplish, and Keep it, without ever doing any thing to the contrary, by our self or others. And that we may firmly and perpetually maintain and keep the Things above-said, and every one of them, we bind Us, our Goods present and to come, (nos biens presens & advenir) our Heirs and Successors, to the Jurisdiction and Coertion of the Church of Rome; Willing and Consenting, that our Holy Father  the Pope may Confirm all these Things, by giving General Monitions and Commands for the Accomplishment of them, against Ʋs, our Heirs, and Successors, and against our Subjects, Communities, Colleges, Ʋni∣versities, or particular Persons whatsoever, in pronouncing Sentences General of Excommunication, Suspension and Interdict, to be incurred by us and them, so soon as we or they shall attempt or seize on Fortresses, Towns, Castles, or other Things whatsoever, or shall Do, Ratifie, or Agree unto any thing, or shall give Counsel, Favour, Comfort, or Aid,  secretly or openly, against the said Peace: From which Sentences, none to be absolved, until they have given full Satisfaction to all those that shall sustain Damage by such Practices. And further, That this Peace may be more firmly kept for ever, We Will and Consent, That all Agree∣ments, Confederations, Alliances, and Covenants, howsoever they may be termed, any way prejudicial to the said Peace at present, or after∣ward, supposing they be valid, and confirmed by Penalties or Oath, or ratified by our Holy Father the Pope, or others, they shall be cassated,  and made null and void, as contrary to Common Good, and a Peace Common and Profitable to all Christendom, and Displeasing to God. And all Oaths made in such case shall be released, and our Holy Father the Pope shall decree by his Letters, That no Man shall be bound to keep such Oaths, Alliances, or Covenants, and prohibit that no such or the like be made for the future. And if any one shall do to the contrary, it shall at that very moment be null and void; and nevertheless we shall punish them, as Violators of the Peace, in their Bodies and Goods, as  the Case and Reason shall require. And if We shall do or procure, or suffer any thing to be done to the contrary (which God forbid) we will be holden and reputed False and Perjured; and we shall be willing to incur such Blame and Infamy as a Crowned King ought to incur in such case. And We will cause the Things above-said to be Sworn unto, Kept, and Observed by Our most Dear Eldest Son the Prince of Wales, and Our Younger Sons Leonel Earl of Ulster, Edmond of Langley; and Our Cousins Monsieur Philip de Navarre, the  Dukes of Lancaster and Bretagne; the Earls of Stafford and Salis∣bury, the Lord of Manny, Guy de Brian, Reginald de Cobham, the Captal de Bruche, the Lord of Montferrat, James Audley, Roger de Beauchamp, Ralph Ferrers Captain of Calais, Eustace Dambreticourt, Frank van Hall, John de Moubray, Henry de Percy, Nicholas de Tamworth, the Lord of Cominges, Richard
de Stafford, William Grandison, Ralph Spigurnel, Gaston de Greyly, and William Burton, Knights. And We will also cause to be Sworn in like manner, so soon as We can, our other Children, and the greatest Part of the Churches, Earls, Barons, and other Noblemen of our Realm. Given or Dated at our Town of Calais, under the Testimony of our Great Seal, the 24th of October, in the Year of Grace 1360. Many Authentick Transcripts of Instruments (or, as they wereTranscripts and Originals of many In∣struments concerning the Treaty and Peace at Bretigny, where to be found. then called, Letters) concerning this Peace at Bretigny, there are upon the Rolls in the Tower of London, in the 34th and 35th Years of Edward III. most of the Originals whereof under the Great Seals of both Kings and their Eldest Sons, are to be found in a thick, long Box, with this Title: Hi continetur Pax fact a Cales, inter Reges & Regna Angliae & Franciae, die 24 Octobris, Anno Domini 1360. within a great Chest in the Chapter-House at West∣minster,  some of which are here briefly noted: The Articles of Peace uncorrected, being the same concludedThe Contents, or a short Ac∣count of them. [5] Append. n. 93. at Bretigny the 8th Day of May preceeding, which the King of France delivered to the King of England at Calais, the 24th of October, 1360. with the Attestation of the Abbat of Clugny the Pope's Nuncio, that they were delivered in his Presence, Dated the 25th of the same Month, part of the Label of the Seal re∣maining  at it. The Articles corrected at Calais, owned by the King of France and his Son, and delivered to King Edward, Octob. 24. in the Presence of the same Nuncio [5] Androynus Abbat of Clugny, whereof his Certificate bears Date the next Day at the same Place, with the Articles recited in it, and his Seal hanging to it with a Parchment Label. The Articles of Accord between King Edward and John King  of France, about the Delivery of Countries, Fortresses, Castles, Towns, and Places one to another, according as they are named in the Treaty of Bretigny, and according to the 29th Article of that Treaty, the 7th, 11th, and 12th Articles thereof not being mentioned in this Agreement, King Edward to deliver them to King John, &c. at or before Candlemas next following the Date thereof, and King John to him within a Month after, with the Hostages Names on either side to be given for Performance, and  the Names of such as Sware to it on the Part of the King of France, Sealed with his Seal at Calais, Octob. 24. 1360. Par le Roy,J. Math. In these Articles King Edward's Letter of the same Accord  is recited. The King of France his Letter of Renunciation, Testified by the Pope's Nuncio the Abbat of Clugny, in which the Renuncia∣tion it self is recited, Dated at Calais October 24. the Nun∣cio's Testification bearing Date at the same Place the Day
following, with his Seal hanging to it by a Parchment La∣bel. Note, That by Renunciation is meant, the Delivery, Releasing, Cession from, and Transferring of Countries, Cities, Towns, Castles, and Fortresses, with their Rights and Ap∣pertenences, from and by one King to the other. The Attestation of the Pope's Nuncio of the Peace concluded  between King Edward and King John, with King Edward's Re∣nunciation according to the 11th and 12th Articles of the Peace of Bretigny, which are inserted in it, as also King John's Letter of Renunciation of the same Tenor, both dated at Calais, October 24, the Attestation bearing date the 25th of the same month at the same place. King John's Append. n. 94. Oath for the performance of the Treaty in many Articles worth notice, dated at Calais the 24th of October  1360. Articles of the Peace and Treaty at Bretigny confirmed by King John, as they were Corrected at Calais, dated at Bologne the the 26th of October. Par le Roy,J. Math. This Instrument is much torn, and the Seal gone, but there  remains some Red and Green Silk by which it hung. The King of France his Letter or Chart, That he will perform all the Articles of the Treaty of Bretigny, as they were Corrected at Calais, as also all Renunciations, Covenants, &c. contained in one special Deed, Letter or Writing between the Two Kings, dated at Bologne, October 26. with his Seal hanging at it, with  Red and Green Silk twisted. Par le Roy,J. Math. Articles of the Treaty and Peace of Bretigny, confirmed by King John and his Son Charles without Correction, both dated at Bologne, October 26. 1360. Par Monsieur le Duc, with his Seal  of Green Wax hanging to them. The last Clause whereof runs thus: And many Articles of the said Accord having been after∣wards Corrected at Calais in certain manners, for that the Renuncia∣tions which were to be made by one Party and the other according to the said Treaty, were not made purely and simply we being at Calais; (that is, Prisoner, and not in his own Power) We make it known, That we will agree, and are pleased, that afterwards the Cessions, Renunciations, Transports, and Releases, shall be made by one Party  and the other, and sent and delivered at Bruges, as it is contained in Letters made about this Matter, sealed with the Seals of us and our Brother, that the same Articles as they were passed and agreed at Bre∣tigny, and as they are above recited, shall be given and delivered to our said Brother, sealed with our Seal, and the Seal of our most Dear Eldest Son Charles Duke of Normandy, and Dauphin of
Vienne. And this we promise to give and deliver at Bruges one year after the Feast of St. Andrew next coming, (that is, on St. An∣drews-Day 1361.) in case that our said Brother shall send us the Renunciations which he is to make on his part, and deliver them to us or our People at the place aforesaid; as also Letters of the Tenors of the said Treaty and others sealed with his Seal, and with the Seal of our Nephew his Son; and we will that the things abovesaid, done and accomplished as abovesaid, the said Articles as above incorporated,  (in this Instrument) shall remain in force, and have the same effect for one Party and the other, as if they had not been Corrected. And we promise truely in good Faith, and Swear without Deceit, to keep, observe, and accomplish without fraud what is abovesaid. In Witness whereof we have put to our Seal to these Letters. Given at Bologne upon the Sea the 26th of October, in the year of Grace 1360. And then follows his Son's Confirmation: And we will with all our Power observe and accomplish all that our Lord and Father hath  promised and covenanted, engageing truely and in good Faith, and have Sworn, and do Swear upon the holy Body of Jesus Christ, to hold and accomplish as much as shall or may concern us, all and every of the things as written in the Letters above, according to the Manner and Form therein comprised, without doing or causing to be done any thing to the contrary in any manner for the time to come. In Witness whereof we have caused our Seal to be put to these present Letters. Given at Bologn the 26th day of October, in the year of Grace  1360. Par Monsieur le Duc, N. de Vienes. Charles, Eldest Son to the King of France, and Regent, his Confirmation of his Father's Grants, in which is contained the Peace and Treaty of Bretigny, with the Articles as they had been  Corrected at Calais, dated at Bologn, October 26. 1360. with his Seal hanging at it with Red and Green twisted Silk. The great Append. n. 95. Letter (or Instrument) of Renunciation, ac∣cording to the Treaty of Bretigny, of John King of France, with∣out Correction of the 7th and 11th Articles, which are intirely recited in it, the 12th Article being wholly omitted, dated at Bologn, Octob. 26. 1360. his Seal affixed with Red and Green Silk twisted together, and signed Le Roy. Also his Letters of Renunciation, with the 11th and 12th Ar∣ticles of the Treaty of Bretigny intire, upon Condition King Ed∣ward and his Son, made their Renunciations, and sent them to the Augustin Friers at Bruges, sealed with their Seals on the Feast of St. Andrew, in one year after the same Feast next coming, dated at Bologne, October 26. 1360. with his Seal affixed as above, and signed Le Roy. These Letters were to be of no effect, if King Edward and his Son sent not their Renunciations to the place, and at  the time therein expressed. Charles, Regent of France, his Confirmation of these Letters of Renunciation, without Correction of Articles, and upon the same Conditions, dated at Bologn the 26th of October 1360. Par Monsieur le Duc, with his Seal hanging at it with Green and Red twisted Silk.
The King of France his Acknowledgment, the King of Eng∣land had performed his Agreement in setting him free, dated at St. Omers the first of November, 1360. with his Seal hanging to it as before. Par le Roy, J. Math. Charles, Duke of Normandy, (King John's Eldest Son) his Cer∣tificate  of the same thing, dated at St. Omers, Novemb. 2. 1360. Par Monsieur le Duc, with his Seal of Red Wax hanging at it by a Parchment Label. The Amities, Append. n. 96. Alliances, and Confederacies, between the Two Kings, confirmed by the Duke and Regent at Bologn, dated October 26. 1360. the Seal affixed with Green and Red twisted Silk; And many other Letters and Instruments there are relating to  this Treaty and Peace in this Box, and scattered up and down the Body of the Chest, and more especially particular Letters of Renunciation for every Country, Castle, City, Town, Fortress, and Place mentioned in the Articles of the Peace, which may, with others upon many and divers Subjects, be published in due time by my Worthy Friend Mr. Rymer. These Letters or Instruments seem to be very dissonant, and almost contradictory one to another, tho dated on the same days  and at the same Places, some containing the Articles agreed on at Bretigny, others as they were Corrected at Calais. In like manner the things comprehended in the Letters or Instruments for the accomplishment of this Treaty, were to be performed and exe∣cuted after a quite different Method, by some according to the Original, by others according to the Corrected Articles; but 'tis not very hard to see thro this Mystery, for both Kings and their Sons, were very strict and exact in Confirming both Copies of  the Articles, as they thought themselves obliged by Oath to do, and first confirmed them at Calais before the King of France had his Liberty, and afterwards at Bologn, when he was free from his Imprisonment, yet were not so strict and just in the observa∣tion of their Oaths in the performance and fulfilling of them, but used and made their advantage of the different Copies of the Letters and Instruments as they served their turns. All things at that time, relating to this Peace at Bretigny, that could be, having been finished at Calais and Bologne, the Froysard, lib. 1. c. 213 f. 108. b. A. D. 1360. The King re∣turns to Eng∣land with the Hostages for the Observa∣tion of the Peace of Bre∣tegny. King, his Sons, and others, with the Hostages of France, took Shipping on the Eve of All-Saints, or last of October, and came for Eng∣land, where the Lords and other Ibm. Their Free∣dom and Kind Recepti∣on in England. Hostages had all the Enjoy∣ments of the City of London, Hawked, Hunted, and Visited the Ladies in the Country without any Restraint, the King's Favour being so great towards them. It was not long after this, Ib. c. 214. Du Chesne, f. 693. D. A. D. 1361. King Edward nt Commis∣sioners into France, to take Posses∣sion of what had been a∣greed on. that King Edward sent his  Commissioners into France, to take possession of what was granted him, and what he was to enjoy according to the Peace; but se∣veral Lords in Languedoc and Gascogne refused at first to be wholly under the Power of the English, notwithstanding the King of
France had Released their Faith and Homage, which they affirmedSeveral Earls, Viscounts, and Lords, refuse to become his Subjects. Yet at last submit a∣gainst their Wills. he could not do, nor make them Subjects to another Man; The Lords were the Earls of March, Perrigort, Gominges, Arminac, the Viscounts of Chastillon and Carmaing, the Lords of Pincornet, and d'Albret; yet at last pressed by the King's Command, and prevailed upon by the King's Cousin James of Bourbon, who was sent Express to them, they obeyed against their Wills. The same Difficulties were found in Ibm. in both. The same dif∣ficulties of non-submis∣sion in Poictou, &c. Poictou, Rochelois, and  Xantoigne; The Rochellers excused themselves often, praying King John he would not put them out of his Power, that they might come under the power of the English, shewing to him they had rather every year be Taxed to the half of their Goods, then come under their Power, yet at length they submitted; declar∣ing openly, That they would obey, but their Hearts could never be moved. Froys. Ib. Du Chesne, f. 694. A. Further Diffi∣culties about Evacuating Garrisons. This done, King Edward made Sir John Chandos his Lieutenant, who had possession given him of all the Lands,  Countreys, Towns, and Fortresses, which he was to have in France, by John de Maingre Marshal of France, and Received the Fidelity and Homages of all the Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Knights, and Esquires, Towns and Fortresses, making and appointing Seneschals, Bayliffs, Governors, and all Officers, in all Places, in the Name of the King of England; and made his own Residence at Niort, a City in Poictou. Then these there were yet greater Difficulties, for notwithstand∣ing  what the English and French Commissioners for evacuating the Garrisons held by, or for the English, could do, Froys. Ib. f. 109. b. Robbers, Plunderers, and Disband∣ed Officers and Soldiers. there were some that would not yield, (but pretended they were imployed by the King of Navarre;) There were also many Strangers great Captains, and great Ibm. Make a great Body, and call them∣selves Com∣panions. Robbers or Pillagers, as Almains, Braban∣ters, Flemmings, Haynalders, and Gascoins, who would not quit their Imployments, or the Kingdom of France; but set up for themselves under the Name of Companions; and the Disbanded  Soldiers of such as gave up the Garrisons, and freely left their pre∣sent Imployments, ran into them, chose new Captains, and form∣ed themselves into a great Body of Men, Ib. & f. 110. a. so as it was feared in time they might do more Mischief in France, then the War had done. Walsingh. f. 178. l. 9 & 13. f. 181. l. 9. The greater part of their Leaders were English, or at least under the Dominion of the King of England, yet would not obey his Orders, answering they must live by what they got. To reduce these, or expel them the Nation, Froys. Ib. c 215. f. 111. 4. James of Bourbon sent with an Army to reduce them. the King of France sent his Cousin James of Bourbon with an Army, which was routed, and himself much wounded, of which Wounds he died three days after. Ibm. which was routed, and himself killed. They divide into Two Bodies. These Companions pillaged and plun∣dered the Countreys, and good Towns, where-ever they came, and by the encouragement of this Victory, or Advantage, they grew very numerous, so as they divided themselves into Two Bodies; one whereof lay at Ance upon the River Saone, not far from  Lyons, Ib. & f. 111. b. One whereof marched to∣ward Avignon And threat∣ned the Pope and Cardinals. the other marched down by the River Rhosne, leav∣ing Lyons toward Avignon, and in their way took the Bridge and Town of Holy Spirit within Seven Leagues of that Place, and other Fortresses, making themselves Masters of that River; in this Place they found great Riches, and had contrived to proceed to Avignon, and take it, or bring the Pope and Cardinals under their
Mercy. Pope Innocent and the Cardinals much disturbed at the Proceedings of these People, who besides Robbing and Plunder∣ing, committed all sorts of Ibm. A Croysado Preached up against them without ef∣fect. horrid Villanies, preached up a Croysado against them, and absolved all from Crime and Punish∣ment (a culpa & poena) who would venture their Lives to de∣stroy them; Ibm. The Artifice to divert them. but this Design did not take; and therefore they sent to the Marquis of Montferrat, who had then War with the Milanese, to come to Avignon, Ibm. where it was con∣trived,  That for a good Sum of ready Money, and the Promise of great Pay, he should attempt to get them into his Service, which had its due effect, for upon the Payment of the Money and his Promise, they quitted the Town of St. Spirit and other Places, and marched with him into Piedmont. The other Body of Companions would not stir out of France, but kept possession of what they had got, and increased in their Numbers and Out∣rages. During these Confusions in France, King Edward sent his Com∣missioners, Sir Thomas Vuedale, and Mr. Thomas de Dunclent, Licentiate in Laws, to the King of France, to make certain Re∣questsKing Edward sends to the King of France, to make good what was a∣greed by the Peace of Bre∣tigny. to him about the accomplishment, and a full effectual Dis∣patch of the things agreed, promised, and sworn to upon the Peace made between them, and especially that he would cause to be delivered and rendered intirely to him, or his Deputies, all the Cities, Towns, Castles, Fortresses, Lands, Countries, Isles and Places,  which he was bound to deliver according to the Peace aforesaid; and further, to Receive the Letters of him and his Eldest Son, which should be sent and delivered at Bruges in Flanders on the Day of St. Andrew next coming, as well those of the Renuncia∣tions, Cessions, Releases, and Transports, as of other things that ought to be performed according to the Peace, under their great Seals, in Manner and Form agreed between them, &c. This Commission was Dated on the 15th of November 1361, and  * Rot. Franc. 35 Ed. III. M. 3. 35th of Edward the Third, but whether the Commissioners went according to the Commission, or what was done upon it, I have not seen. This year there was a great Plague in England, which swept away many of the Nobility and Bishops, and amongst the rest Henry Duke of Lancaster Dugd. Bar. Vol. 1. f. 789. A great Plague in England. on the 24th of March, or last day of the year, a Person of great Worth in all respects. On the 19th of July the year following, the Prince of Wales  was made Rot. Vascon. 36 Ed. III. M. 16. A. D. 1362. The Prince of Wales made Prince of Aquitan. Homage and Fealty done to him by the Noblemen. He kept his Court at Bur∣deaux. Prince of Aquitan, and had all Guien and Gascogne given him during Life, the Direct Dominion, Superiority, and last Resort of those Countreys reserved to his Father. Not long after this the Prince, his Princess, and Family removed into Aquitan, where having received the Homages and Fealties of the Noblemen and others, he kept his Court at Bourdeaux in great State and Splendor. He made Sir John Chandos his Constable of Aquitan, and Guischard d'Angle (a Native of France, but by the Peace of  Bretigny a Subject of England) his Marshall, who continued faithful. This year Walsingh. f. 179. n. 10. Pope Innocent dies. An Englishman chosen Pope. died Pope Innocent the Sixth in August, to whom succeeded Gillerin, an Englishman, and Benedictin Abbat, by the Name of Ʋrban the Fifth, who was Consecrated on the First of November.
King Edward was very kind to Four of the chief of the French Hostages, Froys. c. 218. f. 113. 6. A. D. 1363. Great Liberty given to four French Ho∣stages. The Duke of Anjou made his Escape. the Dukes of Orleans, Anjou, Berry, and Burbon, who gave them Leave to go over to Calais, and stay there for some time, and to go about into the Country for 4 days at any time, so as they always returned to Calais before Sun-set on the last day of the four. The Duke of Anjou upon this Li∣berty made his Escape, the others returned with the King of Cyprus into England. Toward the Ibm. & c. 219. The King of France comes into England. end of this year King John of France came for England, and landed at Dover the day before the Eve of E∣piphany, or 4th of January, upon the Mezeray, f. 382. News he received of the Escape of his Son, the Duke of Anjou, to repair his Honour, and shew he had no Hand in that Act, and to dispose King Edward to the Expedition of the Holy War, he having accepted the Command of Generalissimo, by the Preaching and Perswasion ofHis Errand. Pope Ʋrban the Fifth: After he had been Nobly Treated here  by the King and Nobility, Ib. f. 383. A. D. 1364. He falls sick, and dies there. he fell sick at the Savoy in London about Mid-March, and died on the 8th or 9th of April follow∣ing, for whom the King of England made a Magnificent Funeral, but his Body was carried into France, and interred at St. Denis upon the 7th of May; and upon Trinity Sunday next following,His Son Charles Crowned King. his Eldest Son Charles the Regent of France, and Duke of Nor∣mandy, was Crowned King at Rhemes. This year the King held a Parlement, 15 days after Michael∣mass,  A Tax grant∣ed to the King. Rot. Parl. 36 Ed. III. n. 35. wherein * was granted unto him of every Sack of Wooll Transported 20 s. of every 300 Woollfells 20 s. of every Last of Leather 40 s. besides the Ancient Custom. Notwithstanding the Peace of Bretigny, wherein Mezeray, ol. 384. War in Bre∣tagne between Blois and Montfort. were not comprehended the Naverrois and Dukedom of Bretagne, the War continued there, Charles of Blois having been assisted by the French, and John de Montfort by the English. After many Skir∣mishes, Sieges, and the Battels of Cocherel and Auvray, in which  last Charles of Blois lost his Life, and then by a Treaty at Guer∣rand a Peace was concluded Ibm. f. 385. A. D. 1364. Froy. c. 229. f. 125. a. A Peace be∣tween them. upon these Terms; That Montfort should enjoy the Dutchy, upon Condition of doing Ho∣mage and Fealty for it to the King of France; That the Widow of Charles should enjoy the Title of Dutchess during her Life; and in case Montfort died without Heirs, the Dutchy to remain to the Heirs of Charles of Bloys. About the same time, or not long after, there was Peace  Ibm. f. 125. b. between France and Navarre, when many Soldiers and Companions knew not what to do. Ibm. A Peace be∣tween France and Navarre. The Compa∣nions waste the Country. They refuse to serve a∣gainst the Turk. Froysard says, most of the Captains of the Companions, who horribly wasted and plun∣dered the Country, were Englishmen, and Gascons under the Obedience of the King of England, and that the King of Hun∣gary wrote to the Pope, the King of France, and Prince of Wales, that those People might be employed in his Service a∣gainst the Turks, who offered them Gold, Silver, and Passage,  but they would not quit France, which they called their Cham∣ber. Yet within a year or two, the Pope and King of France found an Opportunity to employ these Companions they so much feared. Ib. f. 126. Mzr. f. 386. An Expedient to imploy them. Alphonso XI. King of Castile had by his Wife a Son called Peter, and by another Woman had several natural Sons, or Ba∣stards,
the Eldest whereof was was Henry. Peter had the NamePeter the Cruel King of Castile an E∣nemy to the Church. Henry the Ba∣stard Legiti∣mated by the Pope, made King. of Cruel and Wicked, from his Actions of the same Denomina∣tion, and was reputed a great Enemy to the Church; where∣upon great Complaints were made to the Pope, who upon Sum∣mons refusing to come to Avignion, was by Advice of the College declared an Infidel, Cursed, and Condemned, and Henry the Ba∣stard Legitimated, and made capable of Receiving the Kingdom. Froys. ib. The Kings of France and Ar∣ragon make War against Peter, and drive him out of his King∣dom. By this Encouragement the Kings of France and Aragon made  War upon him, and sent under the Command of Bertrand du * Gues∣clin, the Famous Commander of the Companions, a great Body of those Men, and a great Number of other Voluntiers under ex∣cellent Officers, to assist the Bastard Henry against Peter, who drove him out of his Kingdom. Peter applies himself to the Prince of Wales, Ibm. c. 231. A. D. 1366. He applies himself to the Pr. of Wales, who under∣takes his Quarrel, who sends into England to his Father, and by his Advice, and the Concurrence of the Gascon Lords, undertakes his Quarrel, upon Condition of  Payment of his Men, and that the King of Navarre would per∣mit them to pass through his Country. [2] His Brother the Duke of Lancaster came to his Assistance out of England, and with as many Companions as he could gather up, under the Com∣mand of Sir Hugh Caverly and others, the Gascons, and Forces his Brother brought with him, he enters Castile. Ib. c. 234. Beats Henry, (The March, Number of Men, and Chief Commanders, are described and named by Froisard) on Saturday April 3. 1366. The Ib. c. 237, 238. and restores him. Battel  was fought between Navar and Navaret in Spain, where Henry the Bastard received a total Rout, and Peter was restored to his Kingdom. Some time after the Battel, Ib. c. 239. f. 142. The Pr. sends to K. Peter for Pay for his Soldiers, and could not get it. the Prince sent to King Peter for Pay for his Soldiers, who excused himself, and let him know his People could raise no Money, so long as the Companions were in the Country; and that they had three or four times robbed his Treasurers coming to him with Money, and therefore desired  him to send them away. The Prince not being well, Ibm. The Pr. not being well, returns with his Army in∣to Aquitan. nor the Air of Spain (then thought to be infectious) agreeing with him or his Army, he was advised to return to Aquitan; and Order was given accor∣dingly. Upon his return, he promised the Army to pay them so soon as he got Money, though King Peter had not kept his Promise. The Gascon Lords went to their own Homes; the Ib. c. 240. Companions kept together expecting their Wages, and exercised  their Trade of Robbing and Plundering. The Prince desired Ibm. The Compani∣ons rob and spoil the Country. them to leave his Country, it not being able to sustain them: Some staid; others that would not displease him, marched to∣wards France, under English and Gascon Officers, passed the River Loire, and went into Champagne, where their Numbers encreased much, and they were so strong as none dare encounter them, though many Complaints had been made to the King of France concerning them: They harassed the Countries where-ever they  came, and the Ibm. People wondered the Prince of Wales should send them thither to make War.* So Mezeray; Froysard, Clsqui; Walsingham, Cleikin; others Clequin and Guesciline.
Who wanting Money to pay his Debts, contracted by theThe Pr. wants Money. Spanish Expedition, and his own Expences, and in some measure to satisfie his Soldiers and Military Men, he was advised Ib. c. 241. to call together the Bishops, Abbats, Barons, and Knights of Aquitan at Niort, where Chimney-Money was propounded and urged byChimney-mo∣ney propoun∣ded; Many dissatis∣fied about it: the Bishop of Rhodes Chancellor of Aquitan, a Frank upon every Chimney. Some consented to it, others dissented; but the main Answer was, They would consider and advise about it; and  then departed. Ibm. Yet it was ex∣acted▪ The Prince commanded them to return at a Day assigned: Many returned not, nor would suffer Chimney-Money to be paid. Ibm. against the Advice of some of his Council. He rigorously exacted the Collection of it. Sir John Chandos, one of the Chief of his Council, advised him to the contrary; but seeing he could not prevail, left him, pretending Business in Normandy at his own Estate St. Sa∣viours le Vicount, where he abode six Months. In the mean time, Ibm. Many Great Men of Gas∣con complain to the King of France of the Oppressions of the Pr. of Wales the Earl of Arminac, the Lord d'Albret,  the Lords Gomenges, Pincornet, and divers other Barons, Pre∣lates, Knights, and Esquires of Gascon, made great Complaints, and appealed to the French King as their Superious Lord, to whose Court was, as they affirmed, the last Resort for maintaining their Liberties and Franchises against the Oppressions and Evil Usages of the Prince of Wales. Ibm. The King of France Sum∣mons him before him in his Cham∣ber of Peers. He managed them cunningly, giving them such Answers as satisfied them at present; yet knew not his meaning, until he had covertly prepared for War; and  then he sent a Ib. c. 243. & Du Chesue, f. 699. D. A. D. 1369. The Prince his Answer. Summons to the Prince of Wales upon their farther Instance, Dated January 25. at Paris, to appear there before him in his Chamber of Peers, and do the People Right, according to their Complaints. His Answer was, That if he must come, he would, attended with Sixty thousand Men. This Summons was soon after followed with a Defiance, Froys. e. 246. Du Ches. f. 700. D. The King of France desies the King of England: In∣vades Ponthicu and Aquitan. sent to the King of England, and the Invasion of Ponthieu and  Aquitan. The chief Reasons why the French King began the War again with England, were (besides the above-mentioned) a pretended Du Chesne, f. 693. B C. The Reason of this War. Agreement the Two Kings should make at Bologne, on the 26th of October, 1360. when the Treaty at Bretigny had been corrected and confirmed by them both; by which it was accorded, That whereas for some Difficulties which then hapned, the Renun∣ciations  to be made at Calais could not be perfected, both Kings in the Year following should send their Deputies to Bruges, to be there on the Feast-Day of St. Andrew, bringing with them the Treaty of Peace and Renunciations, in Letters Patents, Sealed with their Seals: And until that time, they should be of no ef∣fect: And that to the King of France should remain the Resorts and Soveraignties as before: Ibm. That if any of the Subjects of one Party or the other should contravene the Peace, exercising  Robbing and Killing, Pillaging, Burning, or Taking or Detaining Fortresses, Persons, or Goods, in one Kingdom or the other, upon the Subjects, Adherents, or Allies, and should not cease, or make Reparation within one Month after Demand. From thence they were to be holden as Banished both Kingdoms, Guilty of Treason, and to be punished without Remission or Connivance.
And further, That one King do not Receive the Enemies of the other, but preserve their Honour Reciprocally. And that KingIbm. Edward on his Part deputed no body to Bruges at the time appointed, to make the Exchange of the Treaty and Renunciations.Ib. f. 694. A. B. That instead of delivering the Fortresses and Garrisons he held in France at his own Charge, as he was expresly bound by the Treaty, he kept many in his own Name under pretence of Wages due to the Soldiers as then unpaid; and seized upon  others, and continued the War in effect by those of his Party, who changed their Names, and called themselves Companions; who would not yield the Places they held, without an unreasonable Redemption or Payment for the quitting of them. Further, That he took no notice of the Difference between his Son-in-Law John Montfort, and Charles Earl of Blois, concerning the Dutchy of Bretagne, as by the Treaty he was equally bound to do, as the King of France was, but suffered the War to continue there  to weaken the Force of France, and to prevent the Return of the Companions into England, lest that might have been too great Charge and Trouble to him. That he never kept his Faith with France. Lastly, That he had done Homage and sworn Fealty to the King of France as to his Superiour Lord for the Dutchy of Aquitan, Earldom of Ponthieu, &c. Mezeray Fol. 388. writes, That King Edward thought himself ab∣solute Soveraignt in Guyen by the Treaty of Bretigny; but as on  his side he had not Disbanded his Soldiers; and moreover he had committed divers Hostilities, the King of France pretended that Treaty was null and void; and that therefore he remained still a Vassal to the Crown. And that it was upon this foot thatAll the Lands the King of England held in France de∣clared so feit, and to be con∣fiscated for Rebellion, Contempt, and Disobedi∣ence. he sent to declare War against him. And afterwards his Parle∣ment being assembled on Ascension-Eve, sitting in his Seat of Justice, made a Decree by which for Rebellion, Contempt, and Disobedience, they declared forfeit and confiscated all those Lands  the King of England held in France. But beyond this Pretence, in the Declaration of the Confiscation of the Dukedom of Aquitan, against King Edward and the Prince of Wales, by Charles V. King of France, Dated at Vincennes the 14th of May, 1370. it is positively affirmed, That the Superiority and Resort of the whole Dukedom of Aquitan, and the other Lands delivered and assigned to the English by that Treaty, were especially and expresly reserved to his Father, himself, and Suc∣cessors.  See the Instrument it self in Codex Juris Gentium Diplo∣maticus, Fol. 229. Paragraph 1. wherein they are said to have violated the Peace they solemnly Sware to maintain; and for that their Rebellion, (there so called) their Contempt, and Ʋsur∣pation of the Superiority and Resort of the Dukedom of Aquitan, and other Lands, and many other Crimes there mentioned, that Dukedom, &c. was decreed Confiscate, and to be annexed to the Crown of France. The War being open, the King Claus. 43 Ed. III. M. 24. Dors. A. D. 1369. Summoned a Parlement to meet on the Octaves of Holy Trinity, or the next Sunday after that Feast, being May 27. this Year. Rot. Parl. 43 Ed. III. n. 1. A Parlement called. The cause of Summons. The King, Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, being in the Painted Chamber, the Bishop of Winchester, then Chancellor, shewed the cause of Summons, telling them, That the King in all his
great Business touching himself and the Kingdom, had in all times done and wrought (de tout temps ad fait & overs, &c.) by the Counsel and of the Great Men and Commons of the Realm, who he found in all his Affairs Good and Loyal, for which he thanked them, and would not any thing should be unknown to them. He further told them, That with their Advice andAn account of the Trans∣actions be∣tween K. Ed∣ward and his Adversary of France. Counsel he had made Peace with his Adversary of France, upon certain Conditions, That he should cause to be delivered unto  him certain Lands and Countries beyond Sea, and also pay him certain Sums of Money at certain times appointed in the Peace; and that he should lay aside the Use of Resort in all the Lands and Countries of Gascon, and all the Lands and Countries which the King held beyond Sea; and that he was to part with the Name and Title of the King of France for the same time (purHis unfaith∣ful Dealing with K. Edw. mesme le temps.) That his Adversary had wholly failed to make Delivery of the Lands and Countries so Agreed to be Delivered  by the Peace, and of his Payment also. That nevertheless he had received the Appeals of the Earl of Armynak the Lord de la Bret, and others, which were the King's Lieges in Gascon, and by virtue of their Appeals had caused to be Summoned the Prince of Gascoigne to appear before him at Paris (le Prince de Gascoigne dapparer devant luy a Paris, &c.) the first Day of May last past, to Answer their Appeals against the Form of the Peace. Ibm. n. 2. And further, That he had sent a great Number of Men at  Arms, and others into the Countries of Gascoigne, and there by force had taken Towns, Castles, Fortresses, and other Places; killed some of the King's Liege People, taken others, and impri∣soned them, in expectation of great Ransoms. The like also he had done in Ponthieu. And because of these things done in the Principality against the Form of the Peace, Ibm. n. 3. the Prince sent solemn Messengers to inform the King, he had called to him the most Wise Men of the Principality, and treated with, and  propounded to them, whether by reason of these things, he might not, by Right and Reason, retake upon him, and use the Name of King of France; who answered and affirmed the King might do it by Right and Good Faith (de Droit & bon Foi) Ibm. Upon which Point the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and the other Prelates, were charged by the King (furent chargez par le Roy,) to treat and shew their Advice and Counsel (lour Avys & Conseil.) On Wednesday following, the Ibm. n. 8. King Edward by Advc of Parlement retakes upon him the Title and Name of King of France. Arch-Bishop and Prelates, after mature Deliberation had upon the Charge, with one accord answered and said (respondrient & desoient) That the King for the Causes above-said, might retake and use the Name of King of France, by Right and good Conscience: To which Agreed the Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and Commons in full Parlement; (& a ce Ibm. accorderent les Ducs, Countes, Ba∣rons, & autres Grants, & Comunes en pleyn Parlement.) Which  Name of King of France he did retake, and had his Great Seal, and other Seals altered, and that Title Ibm. engraved upon them. On the same [9] Day, and Thursday, the Estate of the King[8] Ibm. 9, 10. was laid before the Great Men and Commons (feust monstre as Grants & Comunes lestat le Roy) and because the War was open, (par cause de la Guerre queste overte) he should be at great Charges
as well by Sea and Land, which he could not maintain without their Aid, he requested them they would treat and advise how he might be best assisted to his greatest Profit, and the least Charge and Damage to the People. The Prelates, Dukes, Earls, and Barons, by themselves, and then the Commons of one accord, Granted (les Prelates, Ducs, Barons, par eux, & puys les ComunesA Subsidy of Wooll, &c. granted to maintain the War. dun acord Granteront, &c.) to the King a Subsidy of Woolls of every Sack 43 s. 4 d. and of the Woollfels every Twelvescore  as much, and of every Last of Leather 4 l. which passed beyond Sea for three Years, besides the ancient Custom, to begin at Mi∣chaelmas next coming, of Denizons: Of Strangers, for every Sack of Wooll 4 Marcs, of every Twelvescore Woollfels, 4 Marcs, and of every Last of Leather 8 Marcs. He not only provided for Money this Parlement, but Ib. n. 25. K. Edward's Offer, To all Per∣sons whatever that would maintain his Quarrel a∣gainst France. declared, That for the Compensation of such Lords, or others of whatsoever Estate, Degree, Condition, or Nation they were, who would  maintain his Party and Quarrel against his Enemies of France, should hold Heritably what they should Recover and Conquer, be they Dutchies, Earldoms, Vicounties, Cities, Towns, Castles, Fortresses, or Lordships, situate in France, by what Name or Title they were called, of him as of the King of France, by the Services and Dues accustomed, except and reserved expresly to him and his Heirs, all his Demeasn Royalties, Services, Homages, Dues, Resorts, and Soveraignties belonging to the Crown of France; except also  Church-Lands, and the Lands of all such as without Force or Difficulty would obey, adhere to, and stay in Obedience to him on their own Good-will, and him Aid, Counsel, and Comfort in his Quarrel, &c. This Year Wals. f. 184. n. 20. The Death of the Queen. The Offer as above, no ad∣vantage to K. Edward. [3] Froys. C. 272. Du Ches. f. 704. D. He sends his Letters of Indemnity and Pardon into Aquitan. on the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of August, died Queen Philip, Just and Sincere, as the Historians say, to the English Interest. There is nothing extant which makes it appear, that the Offer  above-mentioned advanced King Edward's Cause; and therefore next Year he sends his Letters of Indemnity and Pardon, with great Promises of Reformation, into Aquitan: [3] That he being informed of certain Troubles, Grievances, and Molestations done, or supposed to be done, by his Dear Son the Prince of Wales in his Seigniory of Aquitan, being obliged and desirous to remedy all things tending to evil Surmises, Hatreds, and Contentions, between him and his Loyal Friends and Subjects, did Announce and Pronounce, Certifie and Ra∣tifie,  of his meer Good-will, and by great Deliberation of his Council, to that purpose called, and did Will and Command, That the Prince of Wales should forbear and remit all manner of Actions done, or to be done, and restore to all such as had been grieved or molested by him, or by any of his Officers and Subjects in Aquitan, all their Costs, Expences, or Damages raised, or to be raised, in the Name of Aids or Chimney-Money. And did further pardon all such as had revolted and forsaken his Homage and Fealty, upon Condition, that after the sight of these  Letters, within one Month they returned to their Obedience. And if any Persons made any just Complaint against his Dear Son the Prince, or any employed by him; that in any thing they were grieved or oppressed, or had been in times past, he would cause them to have reasonable Amends, for the maintaining of Peace, Love, Concord, and Ʋnity be∣tween him and his People of the Dutchy. And that all Men might
be satisfied of the Truth of these Letters, he willed they should have Copies of them; and then declared he had Sworn to maintain and make them good, by the Body of Jesus Christ, in the Presence of his Dear Son John Duke of Lancaster, the Earls of Salisbury, Warwick, Here∣ford, and many other there named. Dated at Westminster, in the 44th Year of his Reign, on the 5th of November, in the Year of our Lord 1370. Mezeray F. 389. The King of France joined Religion and Eloquence to his Arms; And sent Preachers a∣broad, to ju∣stifie his Cause. taking notice of these Letters, tells us, That to  the Force of Arms, the King of France joined Religion and Elo∣quence, which could do all things on the Hearts of the People. He ordered Fasts and Processions to be made all over his King∣dom, and sometimes went barefoot himself with the rest; when at the same time the Preachers made out his Right and Title, with the Justice of his Cause, and the Injustice of the English: Which had two Ends; the one to bring back again those French Pro∣vinces, which had been yielded by the Treaty of Bretigny; the  other, to make those that were under him willing to suffer the Contributions, and all other Inconveniencies of War. The Arch-Bishop of Thoulouse alone, by his Persuasions and Intrigues, regained above Fifty Cities and Castles in Guien; amongst others, that of Cahors. The King of England would have practised the same Methods on his part, and sent an Amnesty, or General Par∣don, to the Gascons, with an Oath upon the Sacred Body of Jesus Christ, to raise no more new Imposts; but all this could  not reclaim those Minds, that had bent themselves another way. King Edward Ib. c. 249. 250. Forces sent into France to the Prince. Some of the Companions joined with them. sent Forces over to the Prince, with Edmond Earl of Cambridge his own Son, and the Earl of Pembroke his Son-in-Law; who with a great number of Companions, under the Command of Hugh Caverley, an Experienced Officer which came from Aragon, Rendezvoused at Angolesm, and were put all under his Command by the Prince. What things of Note they  did, I find not. Before this time, Ib. c. 241, 242. Henry the Ba∣stard killed Peter King of Castile, and fixed himself in the Throne Henry the Bastard had, by the Assistance of Peter King of Aragon, the King of France, and the Power of Bertrand de Guesclin and his Companions, seized the Kingdom of Castile, and killed King Peter, and fixed himself in that Throne. The King of France wrote to Henry to Ib. c 276. Bertrand de Guesclin and his Compani∣ons serve the K. of France a∣gainst K. Edw. permit him, and to Bertrand himself, to come into France, and to enter into his Ser∣vice; who made all the haste he could, and came and joined  the Duke of Anjou at Tholouse. About the same time the Ib. c. 279. The Duke of Lancaster ar∣rived at Bur∣deaux with more Forces from England. Duke of Lancaster arrived at Burdeaux with more Forces from England, who marched forth∣with to the Princes Rendezvous at Cognac, where he met with the Earls of Cambridge and Pembroke; who all joining with the Forces of Xantong and Poictou, which the Prince had Summoned in, made a great Body of Men. In the mean time, Ib. c. 280. Limoges deli∣vered to the French. the Duke of Berry lay before Limoges, who being reinforced, with Forces sent under the Conduct of Bertrand de Guesclin, caused the City to Treat, and was soon de∣livered by the Bishop and Citizens into the hands of the French, to whose King they gave their Faith and Homage.
While these things happened in Aquitan, the Command of the Ib. c. 280. Mezer. f. 390. The English harass and burn the Countries a∣bout Paris. Army about Picardy was given to Sir Robert Knolls, which terrified the Country as far as the Loir; it harassed Vermandois, Champaign, la Brie, and the Isle of France, burnt all round Paris, yet nothing could move the King of France to send out of Paris any Force against them. The Prince much inraged with Froysard, c. 283. The Prince inraged with Limoges, takes it by Storm, puts to the Sword 3000 Men, Women, and Children. Burns and destroys the Town. Limoges for rendring as it did, was resolved to execute his Revenge upon it, set his Mi∣ners  to work to undermine the Wall, which they did in the space of a month, so as a great part of it fell into the Ditches, when the Town was taken by Storm, and more than Three thou∣sand Men, Women, and Children, of the Inhabitants, put to the Sword, the Town burnt and destroyed by the Prince's Com∣mand. The Bishop likewise should have had his Head strucken off, had not the Duke of Lancaster begged him of the Prince, and the Pope by sweet Words and kind Intreaty prevailed with the  Duke to send him to Avignon. Ib. c. 280. The weak Condition of the Prince. [4] Ib. c. 287. His return to England. The Prince at this time was carried in a Horse Litter, being so weak he could not ride. This was the last Warlike Athievement of the Prince, being [4] ad∣vised by his Physicians and Chirurgeons to return into England for his Health's sake; He took their Advice, and with his Prin∣cess, his young Son Richard, the Earls of Cambridge and Pembroke, came for England, leaving the Ibm. A. D. 1370. Affairs of Aquitan to the Management of his Brother John Duke of Lancaster. By this  time Du Chesne, f. 707. B. Bertrand de Guesclin had Baffled the Army of Sir Ro∣bert Knolls, that had Braved all France, and recovered from the English many Towns and Fortresses, for which Services he wasBertrand de Guesclin made Constable of France. made Constable of France on the Second of October. In the latter end of the 44th year of Edward the Third, on the 8th of January, he Rot. Claus. 44 Ed. III. M. 1. Dors. issued Summons for a Parlement to meet on Monday in the first week of Lent, being the Feast of St. Matthias, or 24th of February, in the 45th of his Reign, on  A Parlement summoned. which day the King, Prelates, Great Men, and Commons, (Grantz & Coes) assembled in the Painted Chamber, Rot. Parl. 45 Ed. III. n. 1. The Cause of Summons. and the Bishop of Winchester, then Chancellor, declared the cause of Summons to be, That by their assent last Parliament, the King did retake upon him the Name of King of France, because his Adversary had broke the Peace, and used the Resort, which by that belonged to him; for which cause and others he had been at great Ex∣pences, and sent some Great Men and others, to a great num∣ber,  to recover and conquer his Right, (par son droit avoir & con∣quere) and that the King had received News from his Friends and Allies, That his Adversary had made himself stronger then he had done before, (que son adversair se fait plus fort, quil nad fait devant) and directed so great a number of People to be brought together, as seemed to him, were able this year to put him out of possession of all his Lands and Countreys beyond Sea, as well in Gascoign, as at Calais, Guines, Pontheu, and other Places; and  further, That he had such a Fleet ready, as seemed sufficient to destroy the whole English Navy, (a destruire toute la Navy Den∣gleterre;) and also, That he prepared to send over a great Army into this Land, to destroy, conquer, and subject it to his Power; Wherefore the King required and charged the Great Men and Commons, (par quoi le Roi requert & charge les Grantz & Coes)
That they would Advise about these Points, and Counsel him, how the Kingdom might be safely guarded, the Navy preserved from the Malice of his Enemies, how his Lands beyond Sea should be kept, the War there maintained, and the Conquest of them carried on. Upon these Ib. n. 8. Causes thus propounded, and many ways of Ayd, Touched, Treated of, and Debated between the Great Men and Commons, (& plusours voies de eide touchez, tretez, parlez &  debatuz per entre les Grantz & Comunes) in consideration of the great Costs and Charges the King was to be at for the Causes abovesaid, the same Great Men and Commons (mesmes les GrantzA Subsidy of 50000 l. granted to be levied ratably upon every Parish. & Comunes) on the 28th day of March granted a Subsidy of 50000 l. to be levied of every Parish of the Land 22 s. 3 d. so as every Parish of greater value should contribute ratably to those of less value. But at the Great Council holden at Ib. n. 6. A great Coun∣cil at Win∣chester. The number of Parishes could not an∣swer 50000 l. as it was to be levied up∣on them, and therefore they were Taxed higher. Winchester Eight days  after Trinity Sunday, the Chancellor shew the Great Men and Commons there assembled, (fust monstre par le Chancellor as Grantz & Comunes illoeques assemblez) That the number of Parishes in Eng∣land would not answer the Sum of 50000 l. as might appear by the Certificates of all the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and Sheriffs, made and returned into Chancery by the King's Warrant; Ib. n. 10, 1. Note, That the Transacti∣ons of this Council, and the precedent Parlement, are entered in the same Roll, and the numbers continued as if it were one and the same Assembly. Which Certificates being Examined, (& sur se plusors tretes & parlances eues) and many Treaties and Conferences had upon the Matter;  at last in full accomplishment of the Sum of 50000 l. the said Great Men and Commons (les ditz Grantz & Comunes) granted of every Parish within the Kingdom of England Cxvis. the Sum of 22 s. 3 d. first granted, being comprised therein, except the County of Chester, and the Church Lands, which were Taxed to the Tenth, so as always the Parishes of greater value should be contributary to those of less value. The Ib. n. 12, 13. Commission of this Grant was read before the King,  Great Men, and Commons, and the Names of the Collectors given in by the Knights of the Shires, and also the Names of the Lords and others that were assigned to see the Tax was duely and rea∣sonably Assessed and Levied; and the Petitions of the Commons that were not answered in the preceding Parliament, were an∣swered in this Council, amongst which this following is very observable. For that Ib. n. 15. it had been declared to the King in this present Par∣lement  by all the Earls, Barons, and Commons of England, ThatThe Com∣mons Petiti∣on, that Lay∣men, and no others, might be made the great Officers of the King∣dom. the Government of the Kingdom had for a long time been managed by Men of the Church, whereby many Mischiefs and Damages had hap∣pened in time to come, in Disherison of the Crown, and to the great Pre∣judice of the Kingdom: It would please the King, That Laymen, of sufficient Abilities, and no others, might for the future be made Chan∣cellor, Treasurer, Clerc of the Privy Seal, Barons of the Exche∣quer, Chamberlanes of the Exchequer, Controller, and other  Great Officers and Governors of the Kingdom, and that this Mat∣ter might be so Established, that it might not be Defeated, or any thing done to the contrary in time to come, saving to the King the E∣lection and Removal of such Officers, yet so as they should be Lay∣men.
The King's Answer was, Ibm. He would do in this Point, whatThe King's Answer. seemed best to him by Advice of his Council. The Members of this great Council were, Rot. Clause 25 Ed. III. M. 29. Dors. The Members of the great Council at Winchester. four Bishops, four Abbats, six Earls, six Barons, and such, and so many of the Com∣mons as the King named in his Writs to the Sheriffs, which were of the last Parlement; for Kent there were only Ibm. Thomas Apuldre∣feld, one of the Knights of the Shire, Edmund Horner, one of the Citizens of Canterbury, and John Fynchynfeld, one of the Ci∣tizens  of Rochester. About this time Froys. c. 295. John Duke of Lancaster Married Constance, the Eldest Daughter of Peter the Cruel, King of Castile, &c. the true Inheritrix of that Kingdom, and took upon him the Title of King in her Right. Ib. John Duke of Lan∣caster's Title to Castile. [9] Ib. c. 296. Whereupon Henry the Bastard of Castile, made a League Offensive and Defensive with the King of France. [9] After Michaelmas he came for England, for Instructions how to carry on the Affairs of Aquitan, leaving Governors and De∣puties  in Guien and Poictou, his Wife and her Sister Isabel, who was afterward Married to Edmond his Brother, Earl of Cambridge, came with him. And this Winter Ibm. Two Armies to be sent into France. were divers Councils holden about the Affairs of Aquitan, and other Parts in France, and how the War was to be maintained there next Summer; at last it was resolved there should be Two Armies sent thither, one into Guien, and another by the way of Calais. In the Spring Rot. Vasc. 46 E. III  Henry the Ba∣stard of Ca∣stile assists the King of France with a Fleet. the Earl of Pembroke was made LieutenantThe Earl of Pembroke Lieu∣tenant of A∣quitan. of Aquitan, and was ordered to go by Poictou into Guien, with a Fleet and Forces, and to land at Rochell. The King of France knowing what was designed in England, sends to Henry the Ba∣stard of Castile to assist him with a Fleet, who sent one greater and far more powerful than that of England. Froysard, c. 297, 298, 299. A. D. 1372. The English Navy de∣stroyed. The Earl of Pembroke taken Prisoner. The Two Fleets met at the Entrance of the Bay of Rochell on the 22d of June, where they fought two days; most of the English Navy  was destroyed or taken, and the Earl made Prisoner. The Ro∣chellers saw all this, but gave no assistance to the English, tho de∣manded of them. The Ship also was sunk, in which the Trea∣sure was for the payment of the Soldiers in Aquitan. The Earl of Pembroke was sent Prisoner into Spain to Henry the Bastard, who about Walsingh. y prodig. Neustr. f. 530. n. 10. He dies. three years after sent him to Bertrand Guesclin for a Sum of Money he owed him. The Sum of his Ransom was agreed on at Paris; but coming for England to raise the Mo∣ney,  being very weak, he died before he reached Calais, and the Constable of France lost the Price of his Redemption. After this Fight at Sea, and the Destruction of the English Fleet, Froysard, c. 304. Rochell de∣clares for the King of France. Rochell declared for the King of France, and all Ro∣chelois. In Poictou the Constable reduced many Towns and Forts, and besieged Ib. c. 305. Mezer. f. 392. The Town of Thovars forced to Capitulate. The Terms granted unto them. Thovars, whither most part of the Lords and Chief Men of that Country were retired, as to a Place of Se∣curity; In a short time they were forced to Capitulate and A∣gree,  That they should put themselves, their Lands and the City under the Obedience of the King of France, unless upon their sending to the King of England, he himself, or one of his Sons, came with an Army to relieve them by next Michaelmas-day.
The Messengers Froysard as above. King Edward resolved to go into France with an Army. sent from Thovars informed the King, Prince, and Council, of the Condition of Poictou, and Xantonge, and especially of that Place: The King resolved to go over himself, and was advised to take with him that Army which was to march into France by the way of Calais; Ibm. He summons the Noble and Military Men, to pass with himself and Prince of Wales. and be∣sides, he sent forth Summons for a very considerable number of the Military Men, and many of the Nobility, to be ready to pass the Sea with him, and the Prince of Wales, into Poictou. On Rot. Clause 46 Ed III. M. 12. Dors. A. D. 1372. Prayers made for success. Monday, August 30. (Orders having been given for Publick Prayers to be made in all Churches for good success upon the Voyage) he took Ship with many of the chief Nobility, and with 400 Vessels Froysard as above. The Voyage unhappy by reason of con∣trary Winds. of all sorts, sailed toward the Coast of France, and Poictou, but the Wind was always contrary, so as he could not land; Having kept the Sea about five weeks, and the time limited for Relief, or Surrender of the Town, being past, he returned to England in the beginning of October.  Ib. c. 306. Poictou, Xan∣togne, and Ro∣chelois lost. This unhappy Voyage, with the Disaster of the Earl of Pembroke, lost all Poictou, Xantogne, and Rochelois. On the very day Pat. 46 Ed. III. Part. 2. M. 25. Richard, Son to the Prince of Wales, made Guar∣dian and Lieu∣tenant of England in his absence. he put to Sea, he made his Grandchild Richard, Son to the Prince of Wales, then scarce Seven years old, Guardian, and his Lieutenant of the Kingdom during his absence, appointing him a Council fit for the Management of the Publick Affairs: Two days after, on the first of September, Clause 46 Ed. III. M. 11. Dors. Summons of Parlement. he issued Writs of Summons for a Parlement to meet 15 days after Michael∣mass;  but before that time King Edward was come into England, and by his Ib. M. 10. Dors. Which Pro∣rogued by Writ. Writs dated at Winchelsea on the 6th of October, he prorogued this Parlement to the morrow of All-Souls, or 3d of November. Sir John Knivet Rot. Parl. 46 Ed. III. 11. 1, 2, 3. Further De∣claration of Summons. declared in part the Causes of Summons, the Parlement being adjourned until Friday; after that Monsieur Hugh Bryan, in the White Chamber, acquainted Ib. n. 7. The Revenues of Guien not sufficient to support the Government of it, &c. the Pre∣lates, Duke, Earls, Barons, and Banerets, (les Prelates, D,  Countes, Barones, and Banerets) That the Prince, who had the Principality of Guyen by the Grant of the King, had often signi∣fied to him, when there, by Letters and Messengers, That the Revenues and Profits arising from the Principality did not, nor could suffice to maintain him, and support the Government, and Wars against their French Enemies, and other necessary Charges, without great assistance from the King; and that the Prince ha∣ving made these things appear to the King and Council when  first he came into England, had surrendred Ib. n. 8. The Prince resigns it into the King's Hands. into the King's Hands the Principality, and all he could claim there by virtue of his Grant, in the presence of the King's Council, and some other Great Men. On the next day, being Ib. n. 9. Yet a further Declaration of Summons. Saturday, Sir Hugh Bryan, before the Prince, Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Commons, in the White Chamber, more especially declared the Causes of Sum∣mons, That the King, by Advice of the Great Men, (des Grantz)  had ordered many Great Men, (plusours des Grantz) with suffi∣cient Power, some into Gascoigne, others to Calais, to oppose the Malice of his Enemies, and make War upon them by all the ways they could; That afterwards, for sudden News that came to the King, he made ready with all his Power to put to Sea, or go to Sea, (ove tout son poair daler sur la Meer) against his Enemies,
to do what he could against them, but by reason of the Wind being contrary, and other Causes reasonable, (par contrariousete de vent, & autres causes reasonables) he came back into England, and caused to be summoned and prorogued this Parlement, that the Great Men who were with him upon the Sea might be there, that by the good Advice and Counsel of them and others, andThe French make them∣selves stronger by Sea and Land, then ever they had done before. also of the Commons, (& anxi une la Coe) he might do the best he could for the safety of the Nation, and to resist and oppose  the Malice of his Enemies, who had made themselves much stronger by Land and Sea then ever they were before, (qui plus safforcent de guerer si bien par terre come par Meer, que unques fesoient a devant.) And then Ibm. beseecheth the Prelates, Prince, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Commons, on behalf of the King, (& supplia as ditz Prelates, Prince, Ducs, Countes, Barons, & as Coes de par le Roi) that they would advise upon this Matter, and give such Counsel  (& donner tiel conseil) and Ayd to the King, as seemed to them best profitable for the Nation, and to restrain the Malice of his Enemies. Queux Ib. n. 10. These Com∣mons were the Knights of Shires. Prelates, Prince, Ducs, Counts, Barons & Coes eu sur les pointes de lour charge, & as dependantz dycelles plein deliberation, &c. which Prelates, Prince, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Commons, ha∣ving had full Deliberation upon the Points of their Charge, and the Dependences thereon, and also considering the great and  outrageous Charges and Expence the King was to be at for the Defence of the Nation, and Maintaining the War against his Enemies, granted him the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Wooll∣fells,A Subsidy upon Wooll, &c. for Two years, to begin at Michaelmass last past, of every Sack of Wooll which passed out of England 43 s. 4 d. of every Twelvescore Woollfells as much, of every Last of Leather 4 l. of Denizens, besides the old Custom, and of Strangers or For∣reigners four Marks of every Sack of Wooll, as much of every  Twelvescore Woollfells, and Five Pounds six shillings eight pence of every Last of Leather. And whereas Ibm. A Fifteenth granted. the Subsidy and Custom so granted could not be sufficient for the great Expence and Charge the King was to be at for the Causes abovesaid, as it was openly shewed unto them, the same Prelates, Prince, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Com∣mons, having regard thereto, Ib. n. 11. granted One Fifteenth for one year to be levied as the last was. On the 23d of Ib. n. 12. November the King, Prelates, Duke, Earls, Barons, and Commons, assembled in the White Chamber, when the Chancellor declared to the King how kind the Lords and Com∣mons had been to him, in granting him the Subsidy and Fif∣teenth, who much Thanked them for their great Ayd; and and then the Ib. n. 13. Petitions of the Commons were read and an∣swered, when the Knights of Shires had leave to depart, Ib. n. 14. and sue out Writs for their Wages or Expences, (pour lour depenses;)  but the Citizens and Burgesses were commanded to stay, Ib. n. 15. The Grant of the Citizens and Burgesses. who the same day assembled before the Prince, Prelates, and Great Men, and for the safe coveying of their Ships and Goods granted 2 s. upon every Tun of Wine coming in, or passing out of the Kingdom, and 6 d. in the Pound of all Goods for a year.
The next Year the King Rot. Fran. 47 Ed. III. M. 18. A. D. 1373. John Duke of Lancaster the King's Lieute∣nant in France and Aquitan. made his Son John King of Ca∣stile and Leon, and Duke of Lancaster, his Lieutenant, as well in the Kingdom of France as in Aquitan (tant en nostre Roialme de France come in Aquitaigne) and other where, giving him Power to take and receive in his Name, and by his Authority, to his Peace, Grace, Obedience, and Subjection, all the Cities, Towns, Burghs, Castles, Fortresses, and Places in those Parts, and their Inhabitants, that would come and return into his Peace,  Grace, &c. and to remit and pardon all manner of evil Pra∣cticesThe great Power given unto him. (toutes maneres de Malefices) Trespasses, Excess, Theft, Homicide, and all manner of Treasons: To re-call all Banished and Exiled Persons, and to re-establish and render to them all their Goods they had forfeited, and to restore them entirely to their Countries, with all their ancient Privileges they were used to enjoy. To give to those that deserved well in his Wars Towns, Castles, Fortresses, Lands, and Rents, &c. in Heritage, during their  Lives, or for Years, according to their Deserts. To raise Forces, Taxes, Subsidies, and Aids for the Wars; to collect and to levy them. To shorten this full, long, and extraordinary Grant and Commission, he had Power to do whatever he could do himself, if present. It was Dated at Westminster June 12. 1373. and 47th of his Reign of England, &c. The Duke of Lancaster having this Power, Claus. 57 Ed. III. M. 25. Dors. Prayers having been made for his good Success, Mezeray, f. 393. Froys. c. 310, 311. arrived with an Army at Ca∣lais  on the 20th of July, which he divided into three Bodies or Battels, marched through, and pillaged Artois, Picardy, Cham∣pagne, Fores, Avergne, and Limosin; and so into Guyen and to Burdeaux, where he came about Christmas with a shattered andHis ill Con∣duct. unserviceable Army, having Wals. f. 187. lin. 16. lost many Men, and most of his Horses, for want of Rest, Victuals, and Forage, without any Battel or considerable Engagement. Mezeray F. 393. The King of France his Po∣licy reports it to have been the constant Resolution  of this King of France, not to hazard any main Battel against the English; but directed his Forces should be so lodged every Night, as next Morning to follow them, always galling and di∣sturbing them, falling upon their Parties, and Detachments keep∣ing so near them, as to prevent their being supplied with Provi∣sion and Forage, and by that means to defeat great Armies byin marching his Army. little and little, and make them unserviceable; which was the present case: The Duke of Lancaster, though he marched Tri∣umphantly  in the beginning, yet toward the latter end of his March, being constantly followed and attended by the Dukes of Anjou and Burgundy, and Constable of France, his Army was baf∣fled without Fighting, and mightily weakened. While the Duke of Lancaster marched thus through FranceSummons to Parlement. from Calais to Burdeaux, his Father Summoned a Parlement to meet on the morrow of St. Edmund the King, or 21st of Novem∣ber, which was that Year on Monday: In the Writs of Rot. Claus. 42 Ed. III. M. 13. Dors. A. D. 1373. Sum∣mons  to the Sheriffs, were these unusual Clauses, being enjoyned to cause to be Chosen Two Dubbed Knights, or the most Wor∣thy, Honest, and Discreet Esquires of the County, and the most expert in Feats of Arms, and no others; (Ibm. What Knights, Esquires, Citi∣zens, and Bur∣sses were to be chosen. Quod de Comitatu tuo Eligi facias duos Milites Gladiis cinctos, seu Armigeros de dicto Co∣mitatu Digniores, & Probiores, & in actibus Armorum Magis Ex∣pertos
& Discretos, & non alterius Conditionis:) And of every City of that County Two Citizens, and of every Burgh Two Bur∣gesses (de Discretioribus & magis Sufficientibus, qui in Navigio, ac in Excercitio Merchandisarum noticiam habent meliorem) of the most Dis∣creet and Sufficient, who had the greatest Skill in Shipping and Merchandizing. The King, Prince, Prelates, Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Commons, being assembled in the Painted Chamber (le Roi, Prince,  Prelatz, Countes, Barons, Grantz, & Comunes en la Chambre de Peinte assemblez) Sir John Knivet then Chancellor, declared the cause of Summons, Rot. Parl. 47 Ed. III. n. 2. The cause of Summons de∣clared. The Peace broken by the French. telling the Lords and Commons they knew well, That after the Peace between the King and his Adversaries of France, apparently broken by them, the King had many times sent great Numbers of Men at Arms, and others, over Sea to recover his Rights, and to restrain the Malice of his Enemies; and lately had sent his Son the King of Castile and Leon, and Duke of Lancaster,  with many great Men, and others in great Number, to oppose the Malice of his Adversaries, This must be in the be∣ginning of their March, and before the Armies of France atten∣ded their mo∣tion, and hin∣dred their glorious and easie Progress. who by their Good and Noble Conduct (queux par my lour bon & noble Government) and Feats of Arms, have done great Damages and Destructions to his Enemies, as they knew well, to the great Honour, Quiet, and Tranquil∣lity of the King, the Clergy, and all others of the Kingdom: That the Sum granted last Parlement to the King in Aid of his Wars, tho' great and heavy upon the People, yet the King ex∣ponded  a great Sum of his own more than that. Further, Ibm. n. 3. That the Great Men and others, who ventured their Lives and Fortunes for, and to defend them from their Enemies, ought to be well refreshed and comforted with Force and Aid many ways (busoignent bien de estre refreschez & confortez de Force & de Eide par plusors vies) and that as speedily as might be, as it was well known to many of them who had been in the same Condition.The Enemy of France makes him∣self strong, &c. That also the Enemy of France made himself as strong as he  could, not only by his own People and Allies, but by Strangers of divers Countries, and by all the ways he could, both by Land and Sea. Wherefore (he said) the King beseeched and charged them (Ibm. n. 4. par quoi nostre Seigneur le Roi, vous supplie & charge) That considering the Perils and Damages might happen to the Kingdom and all the People for these Causes, they would consult upon the matter, and give the King such Advice, as might be for the Safety of him, the Kingdom, and themselves. And further said, Ibm. The King willeth, That all Petitions and particular Business re∣main in sus∣pence, until his was dis∣patched. That the Business requiring speedy dispatch, the King would that all manner of Petitions, and other particular Business might remain in suspence, until this had a good Issue: (Le Roi voet que toutees manere de Petitions, & autres singulers Busoignes de moergent en suspens tanque cette soit mys a bon fin.) And then commanding the Commons (& commanda as Comunes) to consider and give good Counsel and Advice upon  the Points above-said, told them they might depart for that Day, and come thither again on the morrow. At which time Ibm. n. 5. The Com∣mons desire a Committee of Lords to treat with them. some of the Commons, in Name of the rest, went to the Lords, and prayed they might have some Bishops, Earls, and Barons, with whom they might treat and confer, for the better Issue of the Matter was enjoined them (sur la matire
que lour estoient enjoynt) and desired the Bishops of London, Winchester, and Bath and Wells, the Earls of Arundel, March, and Salisbury, Mon∣sieur Guy Bryan, and Monsieur Henry le Scrop. And it was agreed they should go to the Commons, and Treat with them in the Chamberlain's Chamber. And there having been Deliberation between the Great Men and Commons, until Tuesday the Eve of St. Andrew, on which Day the King, Prince, Prelates, Great Men, and Commons, being in the White Chamber, the Commons Granted  (les Comunes granteront) the King an Aid for the Wars against his Enemies, and delivered a Schedule thereof to the King, which was read, and begins thus: (Les Seigneurs & Comunes Dengleterre ont Grante a nostre Seigneur le Roi en ceste present Parlement la Quin∣zeine,The Grant of a Tax. &c.) The Lords and Commons of England have Granted to the King in this present Parlement a Fifteenth, &c. The effect of the Grant was, Two 15ths to be levied in two Years, according to the ancient manner; to be paid at the Feasts of the Purification  and Penticost: If the War ended the first Year, the Second 15th not be paid. Also Six pence upon every Pound value of Mer∣chandise going out of the Kingdom, except upon Woolls, Lea∣ther, and Woollfells, Wine, &c. And of every Ton of Wine Two shillings for two Years, upon the same Condition. Like∣wise the Subsidy of Wooll to be received after Michaelmas next coming, without Condition for the first Year, and under the same Condition for the second. These were granted so as no  other Charge or Imposition might be upon the People of England for those two Years. The Commons prayed what was granted might be spent in maintaining the War; and that no Knights of Shires or Esquires, Citizens or Burgesses returned for this Parlement might be Collectors of this Tax. All things now went backward in France; nothing from thenceThe French Towns and Countries in Aquitan re∣volt. but the loss of Towns and small Countries in Aquitan, either by Force or Revolt, many voluntarily and by Inclination becoming  French, and putting themselves under the Obedience of that King. The Particulars might swell the History; but the know∣ledge of them at present is not of much moment. Fol. 8. lin. 7. Walsingham says, That when the Duke of Lancaster came out of Gascony into England, in the 48th of Edward III. about the Month of July, all Aquitan revolted from the King of England except Bur∣deaux and Bayon. The Pope in this Posture of Affairs was very sollicitous to pro∣cure  The Pope me∣diates a Peace. a Peace between the Two Nations, and used all Endeavours towards it, and oftentimes prayed and required both Kings by his Letters, solemn Messengers, and lastly by his Nuncio's, the Arch-Bishop of Ravenna and Bishop of Carpentras, who frequently went backward and forward between both Parties, to make them inclinable and condescend to a good Peace and Accord between each other, as may be seen in the Rot. Frn. 49 Ed III. M. 2. Record of the following Truce, both in the Preface of the Commission to John King of  Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, by Edward III. and in the Commission of King Charles of France to his Brother Philip Duke of Burgundy: (Savoir faisons que come nostre tresseint Pierele Pape, eit plu∣sours foitz nous prie & requis par ses Lettres & fait prier & requirer, par ses solennes Messagers, & Darreinment par Reverentz Piers in Dieu l'Ercevesque de Ravenna, & l'Evesque de Carpentras, de incliner &
condescendre a bon Paix & Accord ovesque nostre Adversair (so in both Commissions) &c. The Commission to the Duke of Bur∣gundy, bears Date at Paris the first of March, 1374. and 11th of King Charles of France, and 48th of Edwad III. and that to the Duke of Lancaster was Dated at Westminster, June 8. and 49th of Edward III. This Ibm. A Truce in order to a Peace. Treaty was managed chiefly by the Two Dukes before the Two Nuncio's, and by their Mediation at Bruges in Flanders,  which produced a General Truce, in order to a Peace between the Two Kings, their Subjects, Friends, Allies, Aidants, and Adhe∣rents, and for all their Dominions, Lands, Countries, and Places whatsoever, Ibm. A. D. 1375. to begin on the 27th of June, 1375. the Day of the Date of the Truce in 49th of Edward III. and end the first Day of July, 1376. and 50th of Edward III. The Heads of the Articles were these: All taking of Persons, Fortresses, and other Places; Ibm. The Heads of the Articles. all Pilla∣ging,  Robberies, Burnings, and all other Feats of War (touz Pilleries, Robberies, Arceurs, & tout autre fait de Guerre) through all the Realms, Lands, and Dominions of one Party and the other, to cease du∣ring the Truce. Neither Party to suffer any Subjects or Allies of the other, to change their Obedience, Subjection, or Alliance. All Subjects of either Party to remain in the Countries of the other  without Arms, and to Trade and dispatch all other Business there with∣out Disturbance; but not to enter into Castles, Fortresses, or fortified Towns without Licence. Prisoners taken to be released. No New Forts to be erected. None of the Subjects or Allies of one Party to do Injury to the Subjects or Allies of the other, or their Friends, by way of Company, Robberie, or otherwise; if they did, to be punished so soon as it came to the know∣ledge  of their Lords, without Request. All Attempts and Injuries to be repaired without delay. If the Lands of either Party were invaded by Companions, upon Request they were to assist each other in freeing their Countries of them. None to demolish the Houses of one Party or the other, nor destroy Fruit-Trees. If any evil Action, Attempt, or Enterprize happen, it shall not be a  Breach of the Truce, nor shall War be made therefore. This Truce was Sealed by the Two Dukes and Pope's Nuncio's at Bruges, on the 27th of June, 1375. There were certain Ibm. Mutations, Declarations, and Mo∣difications made, by way of Supplement, in reference to this Truce, by the Pope's Nuncio's of the same Date; namely, That Henry King of Castile (the Bastard) and the Lands he  held, should be comprized in the Truce. That the Duke of Bretagne should in like manner be comprized in it: That War should cease there, and the King of England and Duke to remove their Forces out of the Dukedom without delay during the Truce, all but 200 Men to guard the Towns and Places the Duke held there.
The Two Kings to have Ibm. Commissioners at Bruges on the 15th of September next coming, to Treat of Peace. The residue of the Articles are of less moment. These were confirmed by John King of Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, with Protestation, That the Title of King of France, given to King Charles, Adversary to his Father, nor the Title of King of Castile, given to Henry his Adversary, might in no man∣ner prejudice either of them or their Titles. In Winter, the 48th of Edward III. the Rot. Fran. 48 Ed. III. M. 6. Earl of Cambridge and Duke of Bretagne were made the King's Lieutenants in France; but went not till the next Claus. 49 Ed III. M 46. Spring, for whose good Success Publick Prayers were appointed to be made. In this Expedition Froys. cap. 313. there went with the Earl and Duke several Noblemen and Per∣sons of Quality, and in a short time he recovered many of his Towns in Bretagne; and had laid siege to the Town of Cam∣pelly,  when Sir Nicholas Carswell and Sir Walter Ʋrswick, were sent to him by the Duke of Lancaster, to quit the Siege, and give over that War, as being included in the Truce made at Bruges. On the 28th of December next following the Truce, Claus. 49 Ed. III. M. 6. Dors. Summons to Parlement. Writs of Summons were sent forth for a Parlement, to meet on the 12th of February: Afterwards, before it met, by Writs Dated Ibm. M 4. Dors. the 20th of January, the King thought fit to Prorogue it (duximus  prorogandum) to the Monday after the Feast of St. George; but it sate not till the next Day, when the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Ba∣rons, and other Great Men, and Commons, Justices, Serjeants of the Law, and others assembled in the Painted Chamber before the King; Rot. Parl. 50 Ed. III. n. 2. (A quel Lendemain s'assemblerent les Prelates, Ducs, Contes, Barons, & les autres Grantz, & Comunes, Justices, Sergeantz de Ley, & autres, en la Chambre de Peynte:) And there Sir John Knivet declared the Causes of holding the Parlement; which  were three: 1. The First and Principal was, To advise about the Good Govern∣mentThe cause of Summons. and Peace of the Realm of England. 2. The Second, For the Defence and Safety of the Kingdom, as well by Sea as Land. 3. The Third; To take Order for the Maintenance of the War with France, and otherwhere, and how and in what manner it might  be done, for the best Profit, quickest Dispatch, and greatest Honour of the King and Kingdom. And then told them expresly, That what the King always had done, was by their good Counsel, Comfort, and Assistance (tout dys par lour bons Conseilx, Confortes, & Aides) for which the KingThe Lords advise by themselves, and the Com∣mons by themselves. entirely thanked them, and desired they would diligently advise about these Matters, the Prelates and Lords by themselves, and the  Commons by their selves, and give their Good Answer (lour bone Re∣sponce) as soon as they well could. The Commons Ibm. n. 8. A Committee of Lords as∣signed by Par∣lement to go to the Com∣mons, &c. went to their ancient Place, the Chapter-House of the Abbey of Westminster, and the Prelates and Lords went by themselves; and there were assigned in Parlement (fuerent assig∣nez in Parlement) the Bishops of London, Norwich, Carlisle, and
St. Davids, the Earls of March, Warwick, Stafford, and Suffolk,They agree about the Grant of a Subsidy. the Lord Percy, Sir Guy de Bryan, Sir Henry Lescrop, and Sir Ri∣chard de Stafford, to go to the Commons and assist them, in Treat∣ing, and Conferring upon the things before declared: They agreed upon the Grant of a Subsidy, which begins as fol∣loweth: Les Seigneurs & Coes Ib. n. 9. assemblez en cest present Parlement eantz consideration.) The Lords and Commons assembled in Parlement,  having Consideration of the very great Charges and Expences the King hath, and must be at, for the maintaining of his Wars, his Noble Estate, and otherwise, granted him the Subsidy ofOf Wooll, &c. Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells, as it was granted him in the Par∣lement holden at Westminster in the 47th of his Reign, from the Feast of St. Michael next coming, when the Subsidy then granted ended, to the end of three years; and the Commons humbly pray the King to be excused, That they gave him no other Sub∣sidy  or Ayd for his Wars, for that they were brought so low, and so disabled by the Pestilence, the Murrain among their Beasts, and destruction of their Grain and other Fruits, that they could not do otherwise at present, but promised if any extraordinary Case should happen, they would Ayd him to the utmost of their Power, as they had done before, beyond all the Commons of the World to their Liege Lord. After this the Commons considering Ib. n. 10. the Mischiefs of the  Land, do shew unto the King and Lords of Parlement, That it would be for the Honour and Profit of the King, and the whole Land, which is grieved in divers manners by many Adversities, as well by the Wars of France, Spain, Ireland, Guyen, Britain, and other-where, so that the Officers about the King, withoutThe Com∣mons pray Ten or twelve Persons may be added to the King's Council, &c. other assistance, were not sufficient for so great Busines; where∣fore they pray the King's Council may be inforced or augmented with Lords, Prelates, and others, to the number of Ten or Twelve,  who should be continually with the King, so as no great business should pass, without their Assent and Advice, nor small Matters without the Advice and Assent of Six or Four of them at least, as the Case required. The which Request the King understanding Ibm. The King grants their Prayer upon Condition. it was honour∣able, and very profitable to him and the whole Realm, granted, provided always that the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Privy Seal, and all other the King's Officers, might execute their Offices,  without the presence of any the said Counsellors; which the King was to assign from time to time of such as he pleased, who were to be Sworn to keep this Ordinance, and to do Right to every one, according to their Power, without receiving any Reward for so doing. That none of Ib. n. 11. The King's Officers not to receive Gifts, &c. the King's Officers should receive any Gifts, Fees, or Rewards, other then their Salaries, Liveries, and Travel∣ling Charges. The Commons make Protestation, Ib. n. 15. The Com∣mons ready to ayd the King with Body and Goods. Complain of Evil Counsel∣lors and Of∣ficers. That they were, and al∣ways have been, and will be ready to Ayd the King with their Bodies and Goods, to the utmost of their Power; but they say, 'tis true, That if the King had always had about him Loyal Coun∣sellors and good Officers, he had been very rich in Treasure, so as he should not have needed much to have charged his Subjects
with Subsidy, Taillage, or otherways, having respect to the great Sums of Gold which were brought into the Kingdom for the Ran∣som of the Kings of France and Scotland, and other Prisoners. They also say, it further seems to them, That for the singular Pro∣fit and Advantage of some Private Persons about the King, and their Confederates, the King and Realm were much impoverished, and many of the Merchants undone; wherefore they thought it a profitable thing to the King and his whole Kingdom, to have  all these things duely amended as soon as might be. And the same Commons promise the King, That if he will do Justice, and speedy Execution upon such as should be found Culpable, and do with them as Law and Reason required, they undertake he would be so rich as to maintain his Wars, and support his other Affairs for a long time, without any great Charge to the Com∣mons; and they say further, That in doing this, he should do a thing Meritorious and pleasing to God, and much for the In∣couragement  Three special Points to be amended. of them, freely to aid him according to their Power: And then propound Three especial Points to be en∣quired into and amended. First, Whereas Ib. n. 16. the Staple of Wooll and other Staple Merchan∣dises and Bullion, was lately ordained in Parlement to be at Calais, and no where else, for the great profit of the King and Kingdom, the Advantage and Amendment of the Town, for the Concourse of Mer∣chants, and their continual Residence there, the said Staple, Bullion  and Trade is removed from thence, and like to be lost, by the pro∣curement and counsel of the said Private Persons about the King, and their Confederates, for their singular Profit, to the great damage and prejudice of the King and his Realm, and destruction of the Town of Calais. Secondly, Whereas Ibm. the King had need for divers Sums of Money for his Wars and otherwise, some Persons by consent and con∣trivance of the said Private Persons about him, made agreement  for divers Sums to the use of the King upon Usury, taking more from the King for Interest then they Bargained for, to the Deceit and grie∣vous Damage of the King. Thirdly, Whereas Ibm. the King was Debtor to divers People upon Record in great Sums several had by Assent and Contrivance of the said Private Persons, bargained with his Creditors for the 10th, 20th, or 100th Penny, and procured the King to pay the whole Debt, in Deceit of the King, and his Creditors, for the singular Profit of  themselves and Confederates. Upon these, or some of these Points, Ib. n. 17. Richard Lyon impeached by the Commons. several were im∣peached by the Commons; First, Richard Lyon Merchant of Lon∣don, and Farmer of the King's Subsidy and Customs: He put him∣self upon the King's Grace, and submitted his Body, Lands, and Goods to the King's Pleasure: Ib. n. 19. His Judg∣ment. He was adjudged to be Im∣prisoned during the King's Pleasure, to loose the Franchise of the City, never to bear Office under the King, nor approach his  Council or Court. All his Goods and Chattels were seised into the King's Hands, and Inquiry was made in all the Ports con∣cerning his Extortions, since his being Farmer of the Customs. The Lord Latimer was Ib. n. 21. The Lord La∣timer accused. accused (par clamour des Communes) by the Clamour of the Commons, upon the Heads and Articles, and as a Confederate with Lyon, who tho he seemed to make a
good satisfactory Defence, yet by the Prelates and Lords (in plein Parlement) in full Parlement, was adjudged Ib. n. 28. His Judg∣ment. to be Imprisoned, and make Fine and Ransom at the Will of the King; and fur∣ther, upon the Petition of the Commons, the King granted he should never have Office under him, or be of his Privy Council: He was Ib▪ n. 29. His great Bail. Bailed by Four Bishops, the Arch-Bishop of York being one, Three Earls, the Prior of St. John of Jerusalem, and Twenty six Barons, with promise, That during the Parlement he should  appear before the King and Lords, to answer further to the Ar∣ticles, of which he was accused. William Ellys Ib. n. 31. William Ellys accused. of Great Yarmouth, was also accused (par la surmyse des Communes) by the Surmise of the Commons, as Deputy to Richard Lyon, Farmer of the Subsidy of 6 d. in the Pound of all Merchandises granted to the King; of many Extorsions in Collecting of them, and other Evil Practices: Ib. n. 32 His Judg∣ment. Notwith∣standing his Answer, which seemed satisfactory and sufficient, he  was awarded to Prison, and to make Fine and Ransom at the King's Will, and to give his Prosecutors several Sums for Inju∣ries pretended to be done to them. It displeased the King Ib. n. 35. Alice Perer▪s Forfeiture and Banish∣ment. that Women should pursue and solli∣cite Business in the King's Court, and therefore forbad all Women, especially Alice Perers, for the future to do it, upon pain to forfeit whatever the said Alice could, and to be banished the Realm. Sitting this Parlement, the Prince of Wales, King Edward's  The Death of the Prince of Wales. Eldest Son, died on the 8th of June, being Trinity Sunday: Ib. n. 50. The Commons humbly pray the King, That for the great Comfort of the whole Kingdom (en grand confort de tout le Roi∣alme) he would order the Noble Child or Youth, Richard of Bur∣deaux,His Son Ri∣chard of Bur∣deaux brought into Parle∣ment, and made Prince of Wales, &c. Son and Heir of Edward, late his Eldest Son, Prince of Wales, to come into the Parlement, that the Lords and Commons might see and Honour him as the true Heir apparent of the Realm; Which Request was granted; and at the same time the Bishops,  Lords Temporal, and Commons, applied to the King, to make him Prince of Wales; Which was done. The Commons Petition, Ib. n. 57. The Com∣mons Petition about Justices of the Peace. That Justices of the Peace may be named in every County by the Lords and Knights of the County in Parlement, and Sworn before the King's Council, and not to be re∣moved without consent in Parlement, and that they might be allowed Wages. The King's Answer was, Ibm. Ro. The King's Answer. They should be named by him,  and his continual Council, and as to Wages he would advise. The Major, Aldermen, and Commons of London, shew unto the King, Ib. n. 143. The Grie∣vances of the City of Lon∣don. they were impoverished and brought to nothing by reason their Franchises granted and confirmed by him and his Noble Progenitors, were restrained, and in a great measure taken from them, and assign their chief Grievance to be, That any Stranger might have a House and dwell in the City, be a Broker, and buy and sell all sorts of Merchandises by Retail, and Stranger  sell to Strangers, that they may again sell the same Goods to others, to the great raising the Price of Merchandises, and making them Dear; Whereas in times past, no Strange Mer∣chant used any of these Practices, against the Franchises of the City, by which the Merchants of the City were much impoverished, the Navy or Shipping much impaired, the Private Transactions
of the Nation discovered by those Strangers to his Enemies, by Spies and others lodging in their Houses: And then pray, itThey pray Remedy. would please the King and his good Council, in Charity, to order in that Parlement, that Merchant Strangers should be restrained in these Practices, and that the Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the said City, might enjoy their Franchises, notwithstanding any Statute or Ordinance made to the contrary. The King's Answer was, Ibm. Ro. The King's Answer upon Condition, &c. That upon Condition the City  might be under good Government, to the Honour of him, and Profit of the Kingdom, from thence forward no Stranger should have a House to be a Broker, nor Sell any Goods by Retail within the City or Suburbs, notwithstanding any Statute or Ordi∣nance to the contrary, saving to the German Merchants of the Has-Towns, their Franchises, Granted and Confirmed to themHis Letters Patents to the same purpose. by the King and his Progenitors. According to the Purport, and Effect of this Answer, the Major, Aldermen, and Citizens of  London obtained the King's Letters Patents, Dated the 4th of November next following. The Commons Petition the King, That whereas great Riots Ib. n. 164. The Com∣mons Peti∣tion against Riots. were committed in several parts of the Nation, by great numbers of Armed Men, that the Sheriffs might raise the Posse Comitatus, or Power of the County, to suppress them, and that the Sheriffs and Justices of Peace might inform the King's Council of such Rebels (de tiels Rebelles) as refused to go with them. The Answer was, Ibm. Ro. The King's Answer. The King by Advice of his great Council would order Remedy, if need were, but in the mean time let the Statutes concerning that Matter be put in due Execution. This Parlement ended July the 6th, in the 50th of Ed. III. Whether the Two Kings sent their Commissioners to Bruges on the 15th of September 1375, as was agreed on, or if so, what was done then, I find not, however the Truce continued; for inThe last Truce continued. the next year, in a Commission to Thomas de Felton, Seneschal or  Steward of Aquitan, and others, Dated the 28th of May, in the 50th of Edward the Third, for Reforming whatever had been done against the Form of the Truce in that Dutchy, and punish∣ing the Offenders, it appears, that the Truce had then been lately renewed and prolonged from the last day of June next coming, when it was to have ended, to the first of April, which should be in the year 1377, or 51st of Edward the Third. HolinshedFol 411. col. 1. n. 60. says, it was again continued to the first of May, and then the  War opened. But the King many months before the Expiration of the Truce,The King of France design∣ing against King Edward. had notice of a Design forming against him by the King of France, having made an Alliance with Spain and Scotland to that purpose, wherefore on the first of December, in the 50th of his Reign, he issued Clause 50 Ed. III. M 6. Dors. Part 2. He calls a Parlement. Writs for a Parlement to meet on the Quinden of St. Hillary, or 27th of January next coming, at Westminster, which was held by Commission to the Prince of Wales, then about  10 years of Age, the Bishop of St. Davids being Chancellor. Who Rot. Parl. 51 Ed. III. n. 11, 12, 13▪ The Declara∣tion of the Causes of Summons. in his Declaration of the Causes of Summons, moved the Lords and Commons to a due Love, Affection, and Obedience, toward the King and his Grandchild the Prince of Wales, and then tells the chief Cause of Summons was for the Defence of the Land, for that the King having at the Request of the Pope
agreed to a Treaty of Peace, and that there was a Truce made for a time, while a Peace might be made, which Truce his Ad∣versary of France had broken, and was preparing for War, and by the assistance of Spain, Scotland, and other Enemies, to destroy the King, Kingdom, and English Language; To obviate this De∣sign, and the Malice of his Enemies, and to Maintain the Peace of the Nation within and without, by their Counsel and Ad∣vice, was his great Intention, as also to know how the Expence  of the War should be provided for; and for that it was not fit for a Bishop to say any thing against the Pope, Monsieur Robert de Ashton, Chamberlain to the King, was appointed to propound how further Provision might be made against his Ʋsurpations▪ as should by a Bill be shewed in this Parlement. At another Ib. n. 18. meeting of the Prelates, Lords, and Commons in Parlement, the Commons in the King's Name were directed to go to their Old Place the Chapter House of the Abby of Westminster,  there to treat and advise how due Resistance might be made to the Enemies of the Nation, for the safety of the King, King∣dom, Navy, and themselves, and how Money might be most spee∣dily raised to the least Grievance of the People; The Prelates and Lords Treating likewise about the same Matters, there wasA Committee of Lords ap∣pointed by Parlement to Treat with the Com∣mons. assigned in Parlement, to have Conference with the Commons for their better Information, the Bishops of Lincoln, Chichester, Here∣ford, and Salisbury, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, Salisbury, and  Stafford, the Lords Percy, Roos, Fitzwalter, and Basset. To Maintain his Ib. n. 19. Wars, considering the great Charges the King was to be at for them, the defence of the Kingdom and o∣therwise, the Lords and Commons Grant him Four pence of theA Tax grant∣ed. Goods of every Person (des biens de chescune persone) of the King∣dom, Male and Female, above Fourteen years of Age, except very Beggers; and most humbly pray their Liege Lord, he would please to excuse them, that they could grant him no greater Sub∣sidy,  being most willing to have done it, but that they were so impoverished of late by great Losses at Sea, as otherwise, (pur grands perdes sur la meer come autrement) that they were unable at present. And the Commons Ib. n. 20. Treasurers for the Tax. prayed the King, he would please to Name Two Earls, and Two Barons, that should be Trea∣surers as well of this Subsidy, as of that the Clergie was yet to grant, and also of the Subsidy of Wool, Pelts, and Leather granted  the last Parlement, and that they might be Sworn in their pre∣sence, That what was Received by them, should wholly be ex∣pended upon the Wars, and not otherwise; and that the High Treasurer of England should receive nothing, or any ways meddle herein. But afterwards, when they had Ib. n. 21. Who were laid aside, and the High Treasurer made Recei∣ver. considered what Sum, the Wages of such Four Treasurers, would amount unto by the year, (quel somme les Gaiges des sieux quatre Tresoiriers, resident ur  celle fait amonteroit per an) the Commons departed from this Re∣quest, and prayed the High Treasurer might be Receiver to the use of the War in manner accustomed. The Ib. n. 32. The Com∣mons Peti∣tion, Commons in this Parlement beseeched the King, That the Patent lately granted (viz. November the 4th, as above)▪ by the great Council, to the Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the
City of London, upon the Article, That no Strange MerchantThat the Pa∣tent granted to London, might be granted to other Cities and Burghs. ought to Sell to another Strange Merchant, any Goods or Mer∣chandise, to Sell again, in manner as in the said Patent is more fully contained, might be renewed, and granted as well to other Cities and Burghs as to them, with a Charter or Clause of Confir∣mation; Of which Patent the Copy follows: Edward Ib. Rot. Parl. 51 Ed. III. n. 33. The Patent it self. King of England, &c. To whom these present Letters  shall come, Greeting: Our Beloved and Faithful the Major, Alder∣men, and the rest of the Citizens of the City of London, by their Petition exhibited before us and our Great Council, containing amongst other things, That for that all Strangers do freely sell all sorts of Mer∣chandise whatsoever, within the Liberty of the said City, that they may be sold again as the Citizens do; whereas the said Strangers, accor∣ding to the Liberty of the said City anciently obtained, ought not, nor could so do: Whereby as well the said Citizens are much impoverished,  and Goods and Merchandise much more dear, &c. for Relief of the Citizens, and Common Profit of our People, under a grievous Forfei∣ture to us to command they shall be restrained. We being favourably en∣clined to the said Petition, Will and Grant, That no Stranger with∣in the Liberty of the City aforesaid, shall sell any Merchandise to a Stranger, or any ways presume to do it, that they may be sold again, un∣til by the Noble and Great Men of our Kingdom (per Proceres & Magnates Regni nostri) it shall be duly debated in our next Parlement,  whether our present Grant may for the future redound to the Disprofit, or Common Profit of our People: Saving always to the Lords of our Kingdom, and all others, that they may buy such Merchandise of all Men in Gross for their own Ʋse; and saving also to the German Hanse Merchants the Liberties Granted and Confirmed to them by us and our Progenitors. In Witness whereof we have caused to be made these Letters Patents. Witness our self at Westminster, Novemb. 4. in the Year of our Reign of England 50th, of France 37th. The Answer to the Petition above, with which this Patent was delivered and presented by the Commons, was, Le Roy Ibm. Ro. The Answer to the Peti∣tion. voet estre informe: The King will be informed. At the same time the Ib. n. 34. A Petition of the Commons and Citizens of London a∣bout their Corner. Commons, with the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, Petition the King, That for divers Mischiefs that often happened in the said City, by reason the Coroner was not Justiciable (nest pas justisable) by the Major, Aldermen, or other Officers: That they might chuse a Coroner of  themselves, and remove him when they pleased, as it was pra∣ctised in many Cities and Towns of the Land, they answering to the King in manner as appertained to the said Office. The King's Answer was, Le Roy Ibm. my voet, mye depart a son ancien Droit: The KingThe King's Answer to it. will not depart from his ancient Right. The Commons Petition the Ibm n 35. The Com∣mons Petition that Foreign∣ers might be removed out of the Land, &c. King, That for many Causes well known to his Privy Council as to them, That it would be pro∣fitable  to the Kingdom, that all manner of Foreigners were com∣manded out of it during the Wars, unless they were Merchants and Artificers which were not Adherents to his Enemies, and such as their stay were advantageous to the Reaalm; and for that he was their Liege Lord (& pur le que voz esterz nostre Seig∣neur Liege, &c.) and had the Power of doing Justice in Right of
his Crown, in all things Temporal within his Kingdom, and that they have no Obedience of any thing Temporal, but to him as their King and Liege Lord: That he would please to Order and Com∣mand, That none of his Lieges be Farmer or Servant to any that have Estates in England, unless to such as inhabit there, or such as were in his Legiance, and had special Leave to live out of the Kingdom: And that he would please to Command his Sage Coun∣cil, to add more to this matter, that might be needful for the  Amendment and Profit of his Kingdom. And they all his said Commons make Protestations before God Himself, and all the Prelates and Clercs which were at that Parlement, That their In∣tent and Will was, That the True Estate of Holy Church shall not by them be Blemished in any Point, but otherwise pre∣served and kept safe, according to your Pleasure. The Answer was, Le Roy & les Ibm. Ro. The King's Answer. Grantz de la Terre s'adviserent, & en or∣deneront  que mien & y soit Affoire: The King and the Great Men of the Land will Advise, and order what is best to be done. And further in this case they Petition, Ibm. n. 36. They Petition against Provi∣sors. That all Provi∣sors of Benefices from Rome, and that their Officers or Servants may be put out of the King's Protection, if they Sue, Prosecute, or any way Disturb, or cause to be Excommunicated the True Patrons. This was the Answer: The Pope hath promised Redress, Ibm. The King's Answer. and if he makes it not, the Laws in this case shall be in force. Amongst their Petitions in this Parlement we find the Ibm. n. 75. The Com∣mons pray the Judgment a∣gainst the Lord Latimer may be rever∣sed. Commons pray the King and Noble Lords of Parlement, That where∣as in the last Parlement, by untrue Suggestions, and without due Process, the Lord Latimer, one of the Peers of the Realm, and sufficient to be of the King's Council, as well for his Wars as otherwise, was outed of all Offices, and Privy Council with the  King (estoit oustrez de toutz Offices, & des Privez Consielx entrour le Roy;) That he may by Award of this present Parlement, be restored to his former Estate and Degree, to the great Profit of the Kingdom. The King Ibm. Ro. The King grants their Prayer willeth, at the Prayer of several Prelates and Lords of Parlement (d'aucuns Prelates & Seigneurs de Parlement) and also at the Prayer of the Commons. In the last Day of the Parlement, when the Petitions of the Commons had been read and answered, the Speaker Sir Thomas Ibm. n. 87. The Speaker prays, That the Judgments against all such who had been Impeach∣ed last Parle∣ment, might be reversed. Hungerford, said before the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, That whereas many People, as well Men as Women, had been Impea∣ched in the last Parlement without due Process, and were Judged in certain Peynes, and foreclosed of the commune▪ Liberty, which every Loyal Subject ought to enjoy; and therefore prayed it would please his Majesty, to restore them to their former Estates,  Dignities, and all other things, notwithstanding those Judg∣ments: The King presently demanded, If their Request was made for all that were impeached? And he answered, Their Request was all. It was then told them, They must declare distinctly in Writing, for whom and why they Petitioned: And presently the same Day Seven Bills (i. e. Petitions) were delivered to the
Clerk of the Parlement, whereof the first Two do here fol∣low: To our most Ibm. n. 88. The same Prayer for the impeached Persons in particular. Dread and Noble Lord our Lord the King pray the Commons of your Realm, That whereas your Liege Rich. Lyon, by hasty Process was adjudged to the Tower of London during your Majesty's Pleasure; That it would please your Gracious Lordship (que ple a vostre Graciouse Seigneurie) to Grant him your Favour to be restored to the Law, his Goods, Lands, and Tenements; for according to Law no  cause of Forfeiture could be found in him. To their Ibm. n. 89. most Dread and Gracious Lord the King and his Sage Council in this present Parlement, his Commons make Supplication (sup∣plient ses Comunes) That whereas Alice Perrers, by untrue Suggestion, and undue Process, was in the last Parlement foreclosed of the Common Liberty, which every Loyal Liege of the King, as well Men as Wo∣men, ought freely to enjoy, unless they be convict of a Crime or evil Deed, for which they are to forfeit it, they would please, for the Love of  God and right Justice, to have Consideration, That the said Alice was never present in Parlement, nor otherwise duly admitted to answer any thing for which she was Judged, and for this cause to repeal the Judg∣ment, if any were, and cause her to be restored entirely to her former Estate; the said Judgment, or any Prohibition made against the said Alice in the same Parlement notwithstanding. The other Five Bills or Petitions were according to this Form for five other Persons; namely, John de Leycester, Adam  de Bury, Walter Sporier, John Peachy of London, and William Ellys of Yarmouth. But there was not, nor could be any Answer made to them,The Parle∣ment ended. Ibm. n. 95. because the Parlement ended the same Day before any thing could be done in them. Sitting this Parlement, the Claus. 51 Edw. III. M. 16. King was informed the French were gotten to Sea, and had done much hurt upon the Coasts;  wherefore he endeavoured to prolong the Truce: To which pur∣pose, on the 20th of Rot. Fran. 51 Ed. III. M. 7. Feb. he appointed several Commissioners to Treat with the Commissioners of the King of France, before the Pope's Legates; but nothing was done in the matter; the Legates only propounded a Match between Richard Prince of Wales, and Mary the King of France his Daughter. And afterwards thereThe Truce continued. was another Meeting of Commissioners at Monstreul, without other effect than continuing the Truce until the first of May next follow∣ing,  as was before noted out of Holinshed. Mezeray Fol. 394. says King Edward was now much desirous of Peace, and was willing to relinquish many Articles of the Treaty of Bretigny; but was prevented by Death. On the 26th of April, another Rot. Fran. 51 Ed III. M. 3. Commission was made to the Bishop of St. Davids, John Bishop of Hereford, and others, by which Power was given them to Treat at Monstreul with the French Commissioners, and to compose all Differences, Wars, and  Contentions: But by reason of Jealousie and Suspicion the Com∣missioners had one of another, they never met. This Year John Wals. f. 191, 192. Knighton, col. 2647. n. 10. Wyclif was convented before the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury and Bishop of London, for his Opinions con∣trary to the Opinions of those Times, at the Black-Friers, London,
where were present John Duke of Lancaster and the Lord Percy.How Wycliff behaved him∣self at this time. See the ltter end of Church. Affairs in this Reign. The Citizens of London their Rage against John Duke of Lancaster. The Duke gave the Bishop of London some harsh words; which gave the Citizens such Disturbance, that they in a great Tumult would have murdered him, and pulled down or set fire to his House called the Savoy, had not the Bishop interposed, and kept them from doing it. To save himself he left his Dinner, and gat pri∣vately away to Kemington near Lambeth, where the Prince was with his Mother: So that not finding him, they only in the  Streets reversed his Arms, as if he had been a Traitor. For Holinsh. f. 412. n. 30. Hypod. Nstr. f. 53. n. 40. King Edward's Death. this the present Major and Aldermen were put out of their Pla∣ces, and others put in by the Duke's Power, who then in the King's Weakness and Infirmities was his Assistant and Viceroy, and had Directed all the Affairs of the Nation for some time; of which Infirmities and Sickness daily encreasing, Wals. Hist. f. 192. n. 30. Hypod. Neustr. f. 531. n. 50. he Died at his House of Shene, June 21. 1377. having Reigned 50 Years, 4 Months, and 28 Days. Church-Affairs. THE old Controversie was still continued, inter Regnum & Sacerdotium, between the Secular and Ecclesiastic Govern∣ments, or between the King and Pope concerning the Regalia in Church Matters, and concerning the Clergy. In the 4th of his Reign, the King Append. n. 97. wrote to the Pope (which was John XXII.) concerning the Treasury of York having been given by Provision  to a Cardinal, against the Rights of his Crown and Prerogative, and to the inestimable Damage of the Kingdom, that he would revoke his Provision; and supplicates him to direct the Cardinal not to contend against William de Maza his Clerk, that was in Possession of it by his Presentation, about such a Novelty and Ʋsurpation; it being his, and always had been the Right of his Progenitors, in the Vacancy of the Arch-Bishoprick; and to strengthen that Right, vouches a Precedent in the Court of  Kings-Bench, in the time of his Grandfather Edward I. He also Ibm. wrote to Robert de Wodehouse Arch-Deacon of Rich∣mond, That he had notice, that he and some others were contri∣ving, by divers Processes, to put the Cardinal in corporal Posses∣sion of the Treasury of York, to the great Prejudice of his Crown; and strictly prohibited him, That he should do nothing to the impairing of his Right; and if any thing had been done by himself, or others by his procuring, he should without delay re∣voke  it: And so behave himself in this matter, as he might not have cause grievously to chastise him as a Violator of the Rights of his Royal Dignity. After the same manner Directed his Writs to these under-written:
The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, The Bishop of Lincoln, Manser Marmyon, The Bishop of Worcester, The Bishop of Salisbury, The Prior of Lewis, The Prior of Linton, The Dean of the Church of Auk∣land, Mr. Richard de Byntworth, The Arch-Deacon of Lincoln, Mr. Ischer de Concoret, Mr. Guido de Calm. In the 10th of his Reign, the King Append. n. 98. wrote to the Pope (Benedict X.) That his Progenitors had long since Founded and Endowed the Church of England, and freely collated to the Ca∣thedral Churches by their Royal Right: That afterwards upon the Petition of the Clergy, and for the Reverence and at the Request of the Pope that then was, the King that then was Granted to the Chapiters of the Cathedral Churches, Power of Chusing a Bishop  when the See was void, saving to him and his Successors the Pre∣rogative, That when the Church was void, the Chapiter should let him know it, and make their Request to have Licence to Chuse a Bishop; and when he was Chosen, to present him to the King for his Assent, before he proceeded further in the Business of his Election: And then after he had been Confirmed, he was to request of the King the Temporalities belonging to the Bishoprick, and do him Fealty for them. And what was done against this  Form, was void. That the Bishoprick of Norwich being vacant, he had given the Prior and Chapiter leave to Chuse, who pre∣sented their Elect to him; but having a desire to be fully satisfied concerning something he had heard of him, before he gave his Consent, by the Advice of Wise Men, he gave him a short Day to receive his Answer: But he scornfully rejected this way of Pro∣ceeding, and prosecuted the Business of his Election in the Court of Rome, to his Reproach, and in Contempt of his Royal  Right, the Depression of his Royal Prerogative, and manifest Dan∣ger of Disheritance. Wherefore he implored his Favour to take the Premisses into due Consideration, and deny him Audi∣ence for the Confirmation of his Election, until he had obtained his Assent, according to the Form aforesaid; which he was ready to grant without difficulty, if there was no reasonable cause for which he ought not to do it: Concluding, That if he should not take notice of this Supplication of the Elect of Norwich to the  Pope, yet his Subjects would not suffer it. The King supposing Rot. Rom. 16 Ed. III. n. 2. his Sacred Palace (who were such to whom the Pope referred the Hearing of Causes in his Palace) though otherwise good Lawyers, yet might be ignorant of the Laws and Customs of England, wrote to them, and gave them notice, That all Causes about Right of Patronage whatsoever, were pleaded, determined, and ended in his Court before his Justices, and ought not to be discussed any  where else: Then, That if any Man Married a Woman that was Patroness of any Church or Ecclesiastic Benefice, and had Issue by her, and she died before him, upon any Vacancy he was to pre∣sent during his Life, and his Clerc was to be instituted by those unto whom it belonged: And further, That if any Tenents in Capite died possessed of Lands, to which the Patronage of any
Benefices were annexed, that if there hapned any Vacancies after the Death of the Tenant, while the Lands were in the King's hands, it was his Right to present to them. And therefore de∣sired, that if any of these Matters came before them, they might be duly considered, and nothing done in prejudice of his Court, or the Laws of his Kingdom. And in these Stat. at large, 14 Ed. III. Presentments, as also of those made in the Vacancies of Arch-Bishopricks, Bishopricks, a Plenarty, or that the  Church was full, was no more an Exception or Plea against the King, than if they had been made in Right of his Crown, un∣til by the Statute for the Ibm. Clergy, made upon the Petition of the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and Clergy, in the 14th Year of his Reign, Chap. 2. he granted it should be a Barr to him and his Heirs. Before that, the King had his Remedy against the Incumbent, if he had not been duly presented: For then Institu∣tion, though upon a wrong Presentation against a common Per∣son,  made a Plenarty; but to make it against the King, Induction or actual Possession of the Church, was also required: Yet before this Statute neither could be pleaded against him. In the 17th Year of his Reign, there was Complaint made in Parlement Ro. Parl. 17 Ed. III. n. 39. of Strangers holding so many Benefices in England; That the Alms which wont to be, were not performed; That much of the Treasure of the Land was carried beyond Sea, for the Maintenance of the King's Enemies, the Secrets of the Na∣tion  discovered, and by this means the Able and Loyal Clercs of the Nation the less advanced: That of late there were many Car∣dinals made, to Two whereof the Pope had granted, by his Bulls, Benefices in this Land, to the value of Six thousand Marks: (Sur ce ore de novel plusours Cardinalx sont faitz, dont le Pape par ses Bulles ad grantez as deux de eux, Benefitz en ceste Terre a la Montance de vj. M. Marcs.) That the Commons understood, that one of the Cardinals, namely, he of Perigort, was the most fierce Ene∣my,  and the most against the King's Designs of any in the Court of Rome: That in time the Nation by such Grants would be filled with Strangers, and in a short space no Clerc of his Country, though the Son of a Great Lord, or other, would find any Be∣nefice to which he might be advanced; and this to the great Damage of the King and whole Commons, by reason of such Reservations and Provisions: For which things the Commons pray Remedy (par la dite Comune ne le poet, ne le voet plus endurere) for that  they could not nor would longer endure it; because all the Foun∣dations and Advowsons of Arch-Bishopricks, Bishopricks, Abbeys, Prio∣ries, Churches Parochial, and the whole Spiritual Revenue of this Land, were of the Foundations of the Kings, Earls, Barons, and the Commons, (sont des Fundacions des Roys, Countes, Barons, & de la Comunes:) That it would please the King to write to the Pope under his Great Seal, and the Peers and Great Men of the Land under their Seals, That he would cease from putting these Bur∣thens  upon the Nation, and revoke what he had done. And if any of the Peers or Great Men would not Seal such a Letter, the Commons would not hold him a Well-wisher to the King's Profit, or theirs: And in case the Pope should not comply with what was desired, they pray the King to encourage and maintain such as should, and would endeavour to remove this Burthen, and
put such out of his Protection as would not. They also pray him to Command all the Peers and Great Men of the Land, to stay at this Parlement quietly, until these things should be perfected and sealed as above: Et la Comune pri a nostre Seigneur le Roy qil voille comander as touz les Piers & Grantz de la Terre qils demoer∣gent en pees a le Parlement tanque ceste choses soient perfaites & enseales sicome desus est dit.) And for the great Damage that might hap∣pen in the mean time, he would please to grant his Prohibitions  to the Ministers, and Proctors of the Great Bishops, not to med∣dle in this matter, until the Pope had wrote back his Plea∣sure. The Ibm. Ro. Answer to this was, That the King understood the Mischief, and would that the Great Men and Commons should order Remedy and Amendment, and he would agree to it (& voet que entre les Grantz & les Comunes soit ordeigner Remedie & Amendment, & il sacorder.) And also the King would and  agreed, That Letters should be wrote to the Pope about this matter, as well by himself, as also by the Great Men, and by the Commons. And Ibm. n. 10. then the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, and the whole Communalty of the Realm (& puis fu prier a nostre Seig∣neur le Roy en ce Parlement par Counts, Barons, & autres Nobles, & tote la Comunalte du Roialme) prayed the King, That for to avoid and set aside the Damages, Grievance, and Oppression of the  People, and Holy Church of England (& de Seint Eglise d'An∣gleterre) which were done there by the Reservations and Provi∣sions of the Court of Rome (par Provisions & Reservations de la Court de Rome) as well of Benefices, as of First-Fruits; and by Impo∣sitions of Tenths, and other Burthens, in Disheriting as well the King and his Crown, as the said Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, he would please to command to be considered certain Petitions of the Earls, Barons, and Commons of the Realm in the time of his Grand∣father,  in his Parlement holden at Carlisle, in the 35th Year of his Reign; and also the Agreement and Judgment made upon them in that Parlement. Their Prayer was granted, and search was ordered to be made in the Rolls and Remembrances of the said Parlement, where amongst other things it was found, That up∣on the shewing of the Earls, Barons, and Commons their Petitions,The Statute of Provisors made at Car∣lisle, Ed. I. That Holy Church in this Nation had been founded in the State of Prelacy, by his Grandfather and his Progenitors, the Earls, Ba∣rons,  and their Antecestors, to inform the People in the Holy Faith, and for Prayers, Alms, and Hospitality, to be made, done, and kept in the Places where the Churches were founded, for the Souls of the Founders and their Heirs, and all Christians: And that certain Possessions and Lands, in Fee and Advowsons, to a very great Value, were assigned to the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Houses of Religion, by your said Grandfather and his Progenitors, Earls, Barons, and other Great  Men of the Realm and their Ancestors; and that they in the time of Vacancy of such Prelacies and Houses, as Lords and Advowees or Patrons, had and ought to have the Presentments and Collations of all manner of Benefices of the Advowry or Patronage of such Prelates, to give them to Englishmen, Writ of the King's Coun∣cil. who had Great Place with his Grandfather, and the Great Men above∣said,
for their Knowledge and Advice, when they had occasion to make use of them: And that the Pope that then was, had appropriated to himself the Gifts of such Possessions and Bene∣fices, by his Provisions and Reservations, and gave and granted Dignities, Prebendaries, and Churches, to such as never Resided in England, and to Cardinals and others, as well Strangers as Englishmen, which could not Reside here, as if he had been true Patron and Advowee of Right, as he was not: For which things  if they should be suffered, within a short time, there would be no Benefice in the Gift of such Prelates, but by such Provisions would be in the Hands of Strangers, contrary to the Will and Intent of the Founders; and so the Elections of Arch-Bishops and Bishops would fail, Prayers, Hospitalities, and Alms, which ought to be performed, would cease, and his Grandfather, and other Lay Patrons, in times of vacancy, would lose their Pre∣sentments and Collations, and the said Council would For want of Bishops, and able Dignified Persons of his own Nation, of which then the King's Council most∣ly consisted. perish,  and the Goods of the Nation in a great measure carried out of the Kingdom, to the undoing of the State of the Holy Church of England, (de seinte Esglise Dengleterre) and the Disinheriting of his Grandfather and his Crown, (& des autres Nobles du dit Roialme) and of other Nobles of the Realm, and in Offence and Destruction of the Laws and Rights of the Kingdom, to the greatest Damage and Oppression of the People, and Subversion of the State of the whole Nation, contrary to the Will and Ordi∣nance  of the first Founders. By the Assent of the Earls, Barons, Nobles, and Commonalty, considering intirely the Errors and Damages aforesaid, in the said Parlement of Carlisle, it was Provided, Ordained, Decreed and Considered, That the forenamed Grievances, Oppressions, and other Damages and Errors aforesaid, from thenceforth should not be suffered, to be done in any manner; Whereupon the said Grandfather, by his Writs, forbad all such as it concerned, to  attempt or do any thing that might turn to the Blemishing of his Royal Dignity, or in prejudice of the Nobles, or his People; and further, he commanded all the Sheriffs, by his Writs, That if by Enquests taken, any could be found doing to the contrary, they should take their Bodies, and bring them safely before him at a certain day, to answer as well to him as others that would complain against them, and to do further, and re∣ceive what the Court should award in this Case. Wherefore our Lord the King, (Edward the Third) in this present Parlement, at the Suit of the Commonalty, making Sug∣gestion, by their Petition before him and his Council, of many Errors, Damages, and Grievances, that many times happened by such Provisions and Reservations, as well of Benefices, as First Fruits, and other things whatsoever; Of Impositions of Tenths, and other Burthens by the Pope lately made; To the Slander, Dishonour, and Depression of the whole Church of England,  and Disinheriting of our Lord the King and his Crown, and o∣ther Nobles of the Kingdom, and in Offence and Destruction of the Laws and Rights thereof, and most grievous Damage of his People, and Subversion of the State of the whole Realm, against the Will of God, and the good Design of the Founders of these Benefices, and against the Provision, Ordinance, Accord, De∣cree,
and Consideration aforesaid, made by his Grandfather and and Council; and they pray the King he would please to have regard to the Church of England, to the Indemnity and Disinhe∣riting of himself, the Earls, Barons, Nobles, and Commonalty, and Ordain Remedy; He by assent of the Earls, Barons, and Nobles, and the Commonalty of his Realm, Provided, Ordained, Accorded, Decreed and Considered, That as well within the Franchise of the Cinque-Ports as other-where upon the Sea Coasts,  and thro all the Counties of the Kingdom, as well within Fran∣chise as without, open Proclamation should be made, That none of what Estate or Condition soever he was, be he Stranger or Denizen, should from henceforward bring, or cause to be brought, upon grievous forfeiture to the King, Letters, Bulls, Process, Reservations, Instruments or other things prejudicial to the King or his People, to deliver to Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Ab∣bats, Priors, Earls, Barons, or any others within the Realm, and  that none by virtue of such Provisions or Reservations receive Be∣nefices of Holy Church, and that none upon the forfeiture afore∣said, receive or take such Letters, Bulls, Process, or Instruments touching such Provisions, and Reservations, nor by reason there∣of make Institution or Induction, or any other manner of Exe∣cution of them; and that none do, or suffer to be done any other thing that may be prejudicial to the King or his People, or Blemish the Rights of his Crown, or the Provisions, Ordinances,  Accords, Decrees and Consideration beforesaid. And also it was further agreed. That diligent search should be made in all Places needful for all and every one coming into the Kingdom, and that all who shall be taken by such Search, or Enquest to be taken, or by other Information, bringing Letters, Bulls, Process, Reservations, Instruments, or other things prejudicial to the King or his People; and all those who by them, receive any Benefices, and place themselves in, or be received into them; And also  those that by Authority of such Letters, Bulls, Process, Reservati∣ons, or Instruments, shall or do make any Appeals, Citations, or Process against the Patrons of the Benefices, or those they have Presented, or any others, or shall Prosecute or cause to be Pro∣secuted in any Court whatever, where they have done, or pro∣cured to be done any thing in prejudice of the King, or the Earls, Barons, Nobles, and Commonalty aforesaid, or of the Pro∣visions, Ordinances, Accords, Decrees, and Consideration, and  against the Proclamation and Inhibition aforesaid, shall be taken and arrested by their Bodies, and the Letters, Bulls, Process, and Instruments upon such Provisions, and Reservations, shall be taken from them, or others wherever they are to be found, and sent before the King's Council with their Bodies, that brought them into England, Wales, Ireland, or the County of Chester, or Prosecuted any Execution of them; with the Bodies of all o∣thers that shall be taken and arrested for the cause abovesaid, to  take and receive what the Court shall award; and that hereupon Writs to that purpose be sent thro the whole Realm. According to this Agreement, a Proclamation and Writs were issued, but without effect; for in the Parlement Clause 18 Ed. III. Part 1. M. 14. Dors. next year, which began Eight days after Holy Trinity, the Commons prayed the King, Rot. Parl. 18 Ed III. n. 33. That the Provisions, Ordinances, and Accord made
in the Parlement of the 17th year of his Reign, concerning the Provisions and Reservations (de la Court de Rome) of the Court of Rome, might be confirmed and made a perpetual Statute. It was also Ib. n. 36. ordered, That the King present to the Prebends, Dignities, Churches and Chappels, of such as lived in his Ene∣mies Countreys, or seize them into his Hands, and employ the Profits in Defence of the Land, and Holy Church, except so  much as should maintain the Houses, and provide for Divine Service; Ib. n. 37. and that any one who should bring any thing pre∣judicial to this Order from beyond Sea, should be taken and car∣ried back again. And further, That these Writs, and Proclamation, were of no effect, it appears by another Append. n. 99. Proclamation this year, directed to the Sheriffs of London, in which all these Provisions, Ordi∣nances, and Agreements, are recited; and in which it is said  further, That some Provisors, (such as had received Benefices, &c. by the Pope's Provisions) as well Strangers as Denizens, their Proctors and Messengers, not considering the said Provisions, Or∣dinances, Concords, Decrees, Proclamation, and Inhibitions, nor the Punishments contained in them, had brought Letters, Bulls, Process, Reservations and Instruments into the Kingdom, prejudicial to the King and his People, and had delivered them to Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and others as well Denizens  as Strangers, to be Executed, since and contrary to the Procla∣mation and Inhibition aforesaid; and the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and others receiving them, by virtue thereof, admitted and in∣ducted very many Provisors and their Proctors, or Substitutes, into Benefices, which they possessed, to the disinheriting and in∣tolerable prejudice of the King, his Crown, and People, against the Form of the Provisions, Concords, Decrees, Considerations, Proclamation, and Inhibitions aforesaid. And you (that is,  the Sheriffs of London) have attempted somewhat against that Proclamation and Inhibition, and have hitherto neglected to obey our Command therein, at which we are much troubled; and then he comes to the Inhibition according to the Points of the former Agreement, Provision, and Ordinance, (including all those that admitted or inducted any into Benefices according to the Pope's Bulls and Reservations) under the greatest Forfeiture that could be made; and concludes, They should so behave  themselves in the Execution of this present Proclamation, and Command, as he might not have cause to prosecute them as Fa∣vourers of his, and the Kingdom's Enemies. Witness the King at Westminster the 30th of January, in the Eighteenth year of his Reign of England, and of France the Fifth. By the King and the whole Council. In the same manner all the Sheriffs of England received the King's Commands, That they put in Execution the Proclamation in their several Counties and Shires, and also Bartholomew de Burghersh Constable of Dover Castle, and Keeper of the Five Ports.
In a Parlement holden on the 8th of September, in the 20th of his Reign, by Leonel his Son, Guardian of England, Rot. Parl. 20 Ed. III. n. 30. the Commons Petition, that the Alien Monks might be made to go out of England before Michaelmass next coming, and that those that stayed beyond that Feast might be Outlawed, and the Ab∣bies and Priories which they possessed might be seized into the King's Hand, and Englishmen placed in them according to the Advice of the Ordinary of the Place: For that the young English  Scholars, who had, and then did neglect their Studies, and those that should be the Teachers of their Faith, and would under∣take it if they had any hopes to be incouraged: And that the good Priories were in the Hands of Strangers, who carried the Revenues beyond Sea, so that for this reason their Faith was like to come to nothing: That the strange Monks were only Laymen, and the King their Patron. The Ib. Ro. Answer, That the Religious Aliens were Spiritual Per∣sons,  and in their Houses by Institution, which thing could not be Tried in Parlement, (quele chose ne poet Estre trie en Parlement;) And as to their Lands and Benefices, they were in the King's Hands, and he received the Profits of them, but as to Outing of them, it could not be done without Consulting the King. It was also Prayed, Ib. n. 32. That Strangers, Enemies in England, who should remain there after St. Michael, and should be Out∣lawed, Command might be given to seize their Possessions and  Goods to the King's Use, and he to cause Englishmen to inform the Parishioners and support the Chanteries, for that those that were advanced in England were Taylors, Shoemakers, and Chamber∣lains to Cardinals, (sont Taillours, Suours, & Chamberleyns as Car∣dinalx) so that the Parishioners were not informed by them, and their Faith decreased daily. The Ib. Ro. Answer was near the same with the other, That they were Spiritual Persons, and the King had taken the Profits as a∣bovesaid,  and as to Outing them of their Benefices, it could not be done without the King's Assent. Notwithstanding these Proceedings in Parlement against the Pope's Bulls, his Provisions and Reservations, and the Proclama∣tions and Inhibitions thereupon, the same Course was conti∣nued; for in the 25th of his Reign Rot. Parl. 25 Ed. III. Part 1. n. 13. the Commons, in a long Petition to the King and Peers of the Land, (Item prie sa dite Comunes a nostre dit Seigneur le Roy & a les Pieres de la terre veer &  regarder un tres Grand Mischief, &c.) pray them to take notice of the great Mischief and Destruction of late coming upon the Kingdom by the Pope's Reservations, by Brocage, and purchasing his Provisions, and many of the former Grievances complained of, which turned to a greater Ruine of the Nation then the whole War, and Request the King would please with his Council to ordain Remedy in that Parlement, for that the longer these things were suffered, there would be the greater difficulty in Re∣forming  them; and it was then Ibm. Agreed the Answer to this Petition should be made a Statute; for which see Statutes at Large, and Pulton in this year. And in a Second Parlement the same year, the Commons Ib. Part 2. ▪ 43. pray this Statute concerning Provisions and Reservations might be published and put in Execution against such as acted to the contrary.
The Answer Ibm. was, That the Statute should be recited before the Council, and if need were, it should be better worded and amended, so as the Estate of the King and Kingdom might in all things be safe and preserved. In the 27th of the King, Statute a Large, 27 E. III. c. . upon the grievous Complaint of the Great Men and Commons, That divers of the King's People, had been drawn out of the Kingdom, to answer things, the Cognisance whereof belonged to the King's Court; And that the  Judgments given in the same Court, were impeached in another Court, in prejudice and disherison of the King and his Crown, and all the People of the Realm, in destruction and undoing of the Common Law. It was accorded and assented by the King, Great Men and Commons, That any of the King's Ligeance who should practice such things, and upon warning given him to appear be∣fore the King and Council, or before his Justices at the time ap∣pointed, to undergo the Law, and did not, should be put out  of the King's Protection, and his Lands, Goods and Chattels forfeit to the King, his Body to be Imprisoned, and Ransomed at the King's Will. During this Contest between the King and Pope, or Secular and Ecclesiastick Power then so termed, the King was very kind to the Clergie, in confirming their old, and granting them many new Liberties and Priviledges, as appears by the Statutes made for the Clergy in Print, in the Statutes at Large in the 14th, 18th,  and 25th of his Reign. From this time all things were pretty quiet, no considerable things complained of in Parlement against the Pope and his Pro∣visions, until the 47th of his Reign, when the Commons Rot. Parl. 47 E. III. n. 30. Re∣quest Remedy against them, for that by reason thereof he re∣ceived the First Fruits of Ecclesiastical Dignities, and by that Means the Treasure of the Realm was conveyed away, which they could not bear. The Answer was, Ib. Ro. The King had Embassadors at the Court of Rome concerning these Matters, before whose Return he could not give them Satisfaction. In the Fiftieth year of his Reign, Append. n. 100. the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, which came to this Parlement for the Commonalty of the Realm, do pray the King and his Council, and supplicate on behalf of the Commonalty, That he would please to have good Consideration to the Things underwritten, and Faults following,  and Ordain convenient Remedy, which will be the most pleasing to God, and kind to Holy Church, the most profitable to him and his Kingdom that ever was done, it being their holy Faith and firm Hope, that those who please God, and holy Church, shall be accepted in whatever they do: First, That he would please to think, and re-think, how his Noble Progenitors, Kings of England, and other Great Men of  the same Land, (& autres Grands de mesme la terre) built Churches, and in process of time, by great Devotion endowed them with Riches, Rents, Lands, and great Possessions, Franchises and Tem∣poralities, which, with what the King himself had given, a∣mounted to more then the Third part of his Kingdom; and think how all these things were given upon such Devotion and
Intent, that the Profits rising from them should be spent upon the Places where they were given, to the Honour of God, and Maintenance of the Places belonging to them in Hospitality and Alms, and divers Works of Charity, in the Service of God and Holy Church, in Chaplains, Clerks, and Poor, that Prayed Night and Day, for their Holy Father the Pope, for Holy Church, for the King and Kingdom, for Peace, for their Founders, Pa∣trons and Benefactors, for their Souls, and all Christian Souls.  And think, how the Kings and other Great Men, (& autre Grands) by their great Devotion and Gifts to Holy Church, were in peaceable possession to give the Churches, and Benefices, as Holy King Edward gave the Bishoprick of Worcester to St. Wul∣stan; and afterward by Devotion of the Kings, it was granted, and by the Court of Rome confirmed, That the Cathedral Churches should have free Election of their Prelates, so as the Bishopricks by true Election, and other Benefices of Holy  Church, were given Charitably, not out of Covetousness, or by Simony, to the most Worthy of the Clergy, of Strictest Lives, and holy Conversation, that could be found, such as would reside upon their Benefices, Preach, Visit, and Confess their Parishioners, and spend the Goods of Holy Church to the Honour of God, and in Works of Charity, according to the Devotion and Intent of the Donors. And so long as these good Customs were used, the Kingdom was prosperous, the  People good and Loyal, there was Peace and Quiet, and suffi∣cient of Treasure, Grain, Cattle, and other Riches; but since these good Customs have been perverted, Covetousness and Si∣mony advanced, the Kingdom hath been full of Adversities, (le Roialme ad este plien des diverses adversitez) as Wars, Pesti∣lence, Famine, Murrein amongst Cattle, and other Grievances, whereby the Kingdom was so much empoverished and destoyed, that there were not the Third part of the People or other Things  in it, for the Cause abovesaid, and what follows: Also it is to be thought on, That no Man in the World, who loved God, Holy Church, the King, and Kingdom of England, but had great Reason to think Sorrowfully of things, and Weep, That the Court of Rome, that was wont to be the Fountain, Root, and Source of Sanctity, and Destruction of Covetousness, Simony, and other Sins, had so craftily, by little and little, more and more in process of time, gained the Collations of Bishopricks, Dig∣nities,  Prebendaries, and other Benefices of Holy Church in England, of which the Pope always received the Tax or First Fruits, and by his Bulls made several Translations that he might get the more, by which Means, and by other Payments, and Charges, the Bishops became so much in Debt to the Court of Rome, that they sold the Timber of their Bishopricks, had Ayd of their Poor Tenants, and the Clergy, and all Methods were taken, to destroy the Church, and Realm of England. Also it ought to be thought on, That there are many, that when they have purchased one Benefice of the Court of Rome, and payed the Tax or First-fruits, and the Brokers of Benefices residing in the Wicked City of Avinion, (en la pechere use Cite D'Avenon) they let them to Farm, and send the Rents to their Brokers to purchase more and greater Benefices, even as a Caitif
or miserable Person not worth, or good for any thing, by Si∣mony or Brokage, shall be preferred to Churches and Preben∣daries to the Value of 1000 Marcs, whereas a Doctor of Decrees, and a Master in Divinity must be satisfied with a small Benefice of 20 Marcs: So as Clercs lose all their Hopes of being advan∣ced as such. And for the same cause People forbear to put their Children to School; so as the Clergy fails, which is the Sup∣port of the Church, and our Holy Faith declines, and comes to  nothing. Also it ought to be thought on, That Strangers, Enemies to this Land, and others beyond Sea, have Benefices, Riches, and Rents of Holy Church in England, which never saw, or will see their Parishioners, whereby the Service of God and Holy Church, and all Works of Charity are neglected, the Parishioners like to suffer in Body and Soul, their only care being to get the Profits of their Benefices out of the Kingdom: And so it is that Holy  Church is more destroyed by such wicked Christians, than by Turks and Saracens. Also it is to be thought on, That the Law of Holy Church is such, that the Benefices of Holy Church ought to be given freely out of pure Charity, without Price or Prayer, without the Gift of Gold, Silver, or any thing else: And that Law and Reason will, that what is given by Devotion to Holy Church, ought to be spent to the Honour of God, according to the Devotion and Intent  of the Donour, and not out of the Realm upon their Enemies. Also it is to be considered, That God committed his Sheep to the Pope to Pasture, and not to Shear them; and that the Lay Patrons followed these Examples, and sold their Churches as God was sold to the Jews, who put him to Death. Wherefore they desired the King would please to observe this was the 50th▪ Year of his Reign, which was called the Year of Jubilee, the Year of Grace and Joy, and it would be the greatest  Grace and Joy that ever happened to this Kingdom, and the most pleasing to God and Holy Church, and all those that love them; if the things above-said were laid to heart, and agreeable Remedy provided for them. And then propounded, the King and Great Men should write to the Pope, as had been before or∣dered in Parlement. The King's Answer was, That he had ordained sufficient Re∣medy  before, by Statutes and otherwise, that he was then apply∣ing to, and pressing the Pope concerning this matter, and was fully resolved to do it from time to time, until he had perform∣ed their Desires, as well concerning the things comprised in this large Bill next foregoing, as that which was to follow, which was very near the same. The Title of this Bill in the Todding, or in the Margin of the Parlement-Roll, is, (Bill encontre le Pape, & le Cardinaux) The  Bill against the Pope and Cardinals; and the other, which fol∣lows this on the Roll, and was almost the same, had this Title: The Bill and Articles against the Pope and Clergy; (Billes & Articles encontre le Pape, & le Clergy.) To both which the King answered as above.
It is worth notice, That though the Second Bill was near the same with the First, yet in that the Commons informed the King Rot. Parl. 50 Ed. III. n. 45. 104. there were several Spies who resided in London, who had their Spies and Informers in all parts of the Kingdom, that gave them notice when any Dignities or great Benefices were void▪ that they might send to the Cardinals, and other Persons residing in the Court of Rome, to purchase them of the Pope. Seeing in these Complaints there hath been so often mention  made of Provisions and Reservations, for the better understanding thereof, here follows the Translation of one of them, according to the true Form: John, Bishop, Append. n. 101. the Servant of the Servants of God, to the future Memory of the thing: Whereas we have understood, That the Church of Rochester, by the Death of Thomas Thomas de Windham; he died the last of Feb. 1316. See Gdwin. Bishop thereof, is at present void; We for the good Estate of that Church, intending the  Provision of it, for this Turn, for certain Causes that have persuaded us to do so, Have, by the Authority of these Presents, fully Reserved it to the Ordinance and Disposition of the Apostolic See, Decreeing whatsoever shall be done, and by whomsoever, knowingly or ignorantly contrary to this Reservation, void. It may not therefore any way be lawful for any Man to infringe this our Reservation and Constitution, or rashly enterprize any thing against it. But if any one shall presume to attempt any such thing, he shall know that he incurs the Indignation of Almighty  God, and of his Apostles St. Peter and Paul. Dated at Avignion the 18th of March, in the first Year of our Pontificate or Popedom, in the 9th of Edward II. This Reservation Ibm. was published at the Arches of London, on the 30th of March, and on the 31st of the same at Rochester before the Monks: But they having Chosen their Prior Hamon Heth Bishop, the Day before the Date of the Reservation and Provision, after three Years Trouble in waiting at Avinion, and  elsewhere, at great Expences, the Pope confirmed him in the Bishoprick. See the History of this Provision and Reservation, in Historia Sacra, Vol. 1. fol. 357. In the 50th and 51st Years of this King, Wals. Hy∣pd. Neustr. f. 531. n. 10, 20. A. D. 1377. John Wyclif. John Wyclif, Doctor in Divinity, by Preaching and Reading at Oxford, published many Opinions contrary to those of the then Church and Religion pra∣ctised here. The Pope (Gregory XI.) hearing of it, sent his Opi∣nions  inclosed in his Letter, or Bull, Directed Spelm. Con∣cil. vol. 2. f▪ 621. to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London, to examine him and his Opinions, and take his Confession concerning them. The Pope Ibm. f. 623. wrote another Letter to them, That if they found his Opinions to be such as he had inclosed to them, then they should keep him in Bonds and safe Custody, until they should receive other Commands from him. He Ibm. f. 624. wrote likewise a third Bull or Letter, to use all Diligence to preserve the King, Queen, their  Children, and the Great Men of England, from these Errors and Heresies, and keep them steady in the Faith; and to require them strictly (requiratis astrictissime) to shew them Favour, and give effectual Assistance, &c. All these Bulls or Letters are of the same Date at Rome, May 22. and Seventh of his Pontificate, A. D. 1377.
Upon these Bulls, John Knight. col. 2647. n. 10, 20. Wyclif was cited to appear before the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and many other Doctors, in the Church of the Friers Preachers in London, where he thus ex∣plained himself concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, and in these Old English Words: I knowleche, Ib. n. 40, 50, 60. That the Sacramens of the Autr is very Goddus Body in fourme of Brede; but it is in another maner Goddus Body  then it is in Hevene▪ For in Hevene it is sene fote, in the forume and figure of Fleshe and Blode; but in the Sacrament Goddus Body is be myracle of God in fourme of Brede, and is he nouther of sene fote, ne in Mannes figure, but as a Man leves for to thek the kynde of an ymage, whether it be of Oke or of Ashe, and settys his thouzt in him of whom it is the ymage; so myche more schuld a Man leve to thenk on the kynde of Brede, but thenk upon Christ; for his Body is the same Brede, that is the Sacrament of the Autere, and withalle clemes alle  Devotion, and alle Charite that God wolde gif him, Worschippe he Christ, and then he receyves God gostly more medefully than the Prist that syngus the Masse in lesse Charite. For the bodely etynge ne profytes nouth to Soule, but in as myku as the Soule is fedde with Charite. This Sentence is provyde be Crist that may nouzt lye; for, as the Gospel sayes, Crist that night that he was betrayed of Judas Scarioth, he tok Brede in his Hondes, and blesside it, brak it, and gaf it to his Di∣sciplus to ete; for he says, and may not lye, This is my Body. What Satisfaction this Explication gave to the Arch-Bishop, and those before whom he was convented, the Author says not: Hist. f. 191. n. 50. Walsingham says it was feigned and vain, and that the Arch-Bishop and all others, the Duke of Lancaster, and Lord Henry Percy being present, commanded Silence to Dr. Wyclif, forbidding him for the future not to meddle with, or treat upon that mat∣ter, or suffer others to discourse or speak upon it; and that he  and his Followers were silent for some time. He was neither imprisoned nor censured during his Life. His Opinions are variously and differently worded and stated, as well those that were reputed and censured as Heresies, as those accounted Errors; and so involved in the Terms of Scholastic Divinity then used, as they are now scarce intelligible. They are to be found in Spelman's Second Volume of the Councils, Henry de Knighton, Wood his Antiquities of Oxford; but the  plainest and clearest that were esteemed Heresies, are in Fol. 531. lin. & Hist. Angl. f. 191. n. 30, 40. Wal∣singham's Hypodigma Neustriae, which are here translated: 1. That the Eucharist in the Altar after Consecration, is not the True Body of Christ, but its Figure. 2. That the Church of Rome is not the Head of all Churches, more than any other Church; nor was there any greater Power given to Peter than to any other Apostle. 3. That the Pope of Rome had no greater Power in the Keys of the Church than any other Priest. 4. That the Temporal Lords (that were Patrons) might lawfully and meritoriously take away the Temporals from a Delinquent Church.
5. If a Temporal Lord knew a Church to be Delinquent, he was bound, under the Pain of Damnation, to take the Temporal from it. 6. That the Gospel was a sufficient Rule for the Life of a Christian, and that all other Rules of Saints, under the Observation whereof divers Religious live, add no more Perfection to the Gospel than Whiteness to the Wall. 7. That the Pope, nor any other Prelate of the Church, ought to have  Prisons to punish Delinquents; but every Delinquent might freely go whither he would, and do what he would. These are all his Opinions Walsingham recounts in this Reign; yet he Taught and Preached many more in the University of Oxford, where he had many Followers, and some Learned Men, as likewise in other Places, which were Censured in the next Reign. Taxes in this KING's Time. IN the 6th Year he had granted him a Fifteenth of Counties, and  Wals. f. 132. lin. 7. a Tenth of Cities and Burghs, for one Year. In his 8th Year he had the same, and a Tenth granted by theIbm. f. 134. n. 10. Clergy. In his 10th Year he had the same Tax from Laity andIbm. f. 136▪ n. 20. Clergy. In his 11th Year he had a three Years Tenth given him by theAdam Mury∣muth, A. D. 1337. Clergy in Convocation; a three Years Tenth given him by Citi∣zens and Burgesses in Parliament, and by others a three Years Fif∣teenth,  to maintain the War then beginning with France, and to pay Germans, Brabanters, and other Confederates on the Borders of Germany, against the King of France. In the 13th Year the Great Men gave him the Tenth Sheaf ofRot. Parl. 13 Ed. III. Part 1. n. 5. all manner of Grain of their Demeasn Lands, except their Bond-Tenants the Tenth Fleece and the Tenth Lamb. This was in the first Parlement this Year 15 Days after Michaelmas. The Commons excuse themselves, and desire to go into the  Ibm. n. . Country, and endeavour to procure an Aid answerable to the King's Necessity. A Parliament was Summoned to meet eight Days after St. Hil∣lary,Rot. Parl. 13 Ed. III. Part 2. n. 5, 6, 7▪ or 20th of January, in which the Commons gave the King 30000 Sacks of Wooll. In his 14th Year, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, for them andIb. 14 Ed. III. Par. 1. n. 5, 6, 7. their Tenants, the Knights of Counties for themselves, and Com∣mons  of the Land (les Chivalers de Countees pur eux, & pur les Co∣munes de la Terre) granted to the King the Ninth Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb; the Citizens and Burgesses gave the very Ninth of all their Goods, according to the true Value, for two Years next coming. Those that lived not in Cities and Burghs, nor lived upon Tillage or Shop, paid the Fifteenth Part of all their Goods, ac∣cording to the true Value.
Upon the King's writing to them for speedy Supply, seeing theIbm. Part 2. n. 9, 10. Ninths could not be levied time enough for his Service, the Lords and Commons agreed to have 20000 Sacks of Wooll speedily pro∣vided.Ibm. 15 Ed. III. n. 56, &c. In the 15th, the Ninths were revoked, in respect of this Grant of 20000 Sacks of Wooll. In the 18th, the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury granted aIb. 18 Ed. III. n. 9, 10. three Years Tenth, and the Commons granted for the Commons of the  Land Two Fifteenths, and Two Tenths of Cities and Burghs. And af∣terwards the Commons granted another Fifteenth. The Lords pro∣mised to go, or went with the King in Person, and therefore gave nothing. In the 20th Year, the Commons granted Two Fifteenths to be le∣viedIbm. 20 Ed. III. n. 11. in two Years, in Cities, Burghs, ancient Demeasns, as also of the Commons of the Counties. In the 22d Year the Commons granted Three Fifteenths, to beIb. 22 Ed. III n. 4.  levied in three Years, so as one Fifteenth be levied in one Year, and no more. In the 25th Year, the Great Men of the Realm and the Commu∣nalty,Ibm. 25 Ed. III. Part 2. n. n. 9, 10. by the Advice of some Great Men sent to assist them, granted the King Three Tenths and Three Fifteenths, to be paid in three Years. In the 27th Year, the King made it his Request, That the Prelates,Ibm. 27 Ed. III. n. 31, or 9. Great Men, and Commons, would grant him the Subsidy of Wooll∣fells,  and Leather, for some time; to which Prayer they una∣nimously consented and granted that Subsidy in manner as it had been received before that time for three Years. In his 29th Year, the Commons came into the presence of the King,Ibm. 29 Ed. III. n. 11. Prelates, and Great Men, assembled in the White Chamber; and ha∣ving there a short Conference with the Great Men, granted una∣nimously of one accord the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Wooll∣fells, for six Years next coming, so as during that time, no  other Impositions or Charges be put upon the said Com∣mons. In the 36th Year, the Great Men and Commons (les GrantzIbm. 36 Ed. n. 35. & Comunes) granted unto the King of every Sack of Wooll trans∣ported 20 s. of every 300 Woollfells 20 s. and of every Last of Leather 40 s. besides the ancient Custom of half a Marc a Sack of Denisons, and 10 s. of Strangers, half a Marc of every 300 Woollfells of Denisons, and 10 s. of Strangers, and one Marc  of every Last of Leather of Denisons, and 20 s. of Strangers for three Years. In the 42d Year, the Prelates and Great Men (les Prelates &Ibm. 42 Ed. III n. 9. Grantz eu Deliberation plein ove les Comunes dune accorde Granterent, &c.) having had full Deliberation with the Commons, granted the Subsidy of Wooll, Woollfells, and Leather for two Years; of every Sack of Wooll, and every Twelvescore Woollfells, 36 s. 8 d. of every Last of Leather 4 l. besides the ancient Custom as  before. In his 43d Year, the Lords and Commons granted to him theIbm. 43 Ed. III n. 9, 10. Subsidy as above for three Years; of every Sack of Wooll 43 s. 4 d. which passed beyond Sea; of every Twelvescore Woollfells as much, and of every Last of Leather 4 l. besides the ancient Custom; of Strangers, for every Sack of Wooll four Marcs, of
every Twelvescore Woollfells four Marcs, and of every Last of Leather eight Marcs, besides the ancient Custom. In the 45th Year, the Great Men and Commons granted a Sub∣sidyIb. 45 Ed. III. n. 6. of 50000 l. to be levied of every Parish of the Land 22 s. 3 d. so as the Parish of greater Value, should contribute ratably to those of less Value. This 22 s. 3. d. of every Parish, answered not the Sum ofIb n. 10, 11. 50000 l. and therefore not long after at Winchester the Great  Men and Commons granted 5 l. 16 s. of every Parish, the 22 s. 3 d. being comprised in it; so as the Parishes of greater Value should contribute to those of less. In the 46th Year, the Lords and Commons granted for two YearsIb. 46 Ed. III. n. 10. the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells, as it was granted in the 43d Year. And for that the Sum of this Subsidy was not sufficient for theIb. & n. 11. King's Expences, they granted a Fifteenth for one Year, to be le∣vied  as the last was. The Citizens and Burgesses in this Parlement, for the safe Con∣voyingIb. n. 14, 15. of their Ships and Goods, granted 2 s. upon every Ton of Wine, and 6 d. in the Pound of all Goods for a Year. In the 47th Year, the Lords and Commons granted a Fifteenth,Ib. 47 Ed. III. n. 5. as it had been in ancient manner levied, for two Years; they also gave Tonnage and Poundage for two Years, as it was given last Year, of all Merchandise exported and imported, except of Woolls,  Woollfells, and Leather, and then grant the Subsidy of them for the next Year coming. In the 50th Year the Lords and Commons granted the Subsidy ofIb. 50 Ed. III. n. 9. Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells, for three Years, as it had been granted in his 47th Year. In his 51st Year, the Lords and Commons grant him 4 d. of everyIb. 51 Ed. III. n. 19. Person of the Kingdom, Males and Females, above the Age of Four∣teen Years, except very Beggers; and desire to be excused they  could give no greater Subsidy. The Issue of Edward III. by Philippa of Haynalt. HIS Eldest Son was Edward of Woodstock, so called because  born Wals. Hist. f. 130. n. 40. Hypod. Neustr. f. 510. n. 50. there, June 15. 1329. or 1330. He was Prince of Wales, and Married Joan Countess of Kent (called for her great Beauty, The Fair Maid of Kent.) She was Daughter to Ed∣mond of Woodstock, sixth Son of Edward I. but second by his Queen Margaret, Sister to Edmond Son of Edmond of Woodstock, and Sister and Heir to his Brother John, who both died without Issue. Sandf. Ge∣neal. Hist. f. 184, & 215. She was first Married, after the 25th Year of her Age,  and 26th of Edward III. to Sir Thomas Holland Knight of the Gar∣ter, and in her Right made Earl of Kent, by whom she had Issue two Sons, Thomas Earl of Kent, and John Duke of Excester. He died Decemb. 26. in the 34th of Edward III. 1360. And her Se∣cond Husband was William Montague Earl of Salisbury, from whom she was in a short time Divorced by Consent. With this Lady
the Prince fell in Love, and was Married to her in the 31st Year of his Age, and 35th of his Father's Reign, 1361. By Wals. f. 180. n. 30. A. D. 1365. her he had, first, Edward of Engolesm (so called because there born) who died in the 7th Year of his Age. His second Son by her was Richard of Ibm. f. 181. lin. 5. A. D. 1366. Burdeaux (so also called because born there) succee∣ded his Father as Prince of Wales, and his Grandfather in the Kingdom, by the Name of Richard II. William of Hypod. Neustr. f. 512. n. 30. Hatfield, Second Son of Edward III. born there  1336. in the 10th of his Father's Reign, who died very young. The Third Son of King Edward and Queen Philip Ibm. f. 513. n. 30. was Liv∣nell, born at Antwerp, Created Duke of Clarence, and Married to Elizabeth de Burgh, Daughter and Heir of Sandf. ut supra, f. 219. 222. William de Burgh, Earl of Ʋlster, Lord of Clare, Canaught, and Trim, by whom he had only one Daughter named Ibm. Philippa. She was by her Grandfather, after the Death of her Father, at the Age of 13 Years, Married to Edmond Mortimer Earl of March and Lord  of Wigmore, in the 42d of Edward III. 1368. by whom she had Roger Mortimer their Eldest Son and Heir to both their Honours and Titles, who left Ibm. f. 225. Edmond Mortimer his Son and Heir, Earl of March and Ʋlster, Lord of Wigmore, Clare, Trim, and Canaught, and True Heir to the Crown of England after the Death of King Richard II. He died without Rot. Parl. 39 Hen. VI. n. 18. Issue, as also his Brother Roger and Sister Alianor, leaving Anne their Sister sole Heiress to her Father Roger Mortimer and Brother to Edmond. The Fourth Son of Wals. f. 148. n. 10. Edward III. and and his Queen Philip, was John of Gaunt, born there: He was first Earl of Richmond, and afterwards Duke of Lancaster. He Married Blanch the Daugh∣ter and Coheir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, with Maud her Sister, by whom he had his only Son and Child Henry Earl of Derby, Duke of Hereford and Lancaster, called Henry IV. King of Eng∣land. After the Death of Maud without Issue, he in Right of Blanch enjoyed all the vast Estate of her Father Henry Duke of  Lancaster, with his Titles, and was then, in the 36th of Ed∣ward III. advanced to the Title of Duke of Lancaster, &c. Dugd. Baron. Tome II. Fol. 115. Col. 1. The Fifth Son of King Edward and Queen Philip, was Hypod. Neustr. f. 514. n. 50. Ed∣mond of Langley, a Mannor near St. Albans in Hertfordshire, where he was born; by his Father made Earl of Sandf. ut supra. f. 357. Cambridge, and by King Richard II. Ib. f. 358. was Created Duke of York: He Married Ib. f. 360. Isabel younger Daughter and Coheir of Peter King of Castile,  by whom he had Edward his Eldest Son, who died Ib. f. 365. without Issue. He had also by her Richard Earl of Cambridge, called of Coningsburgh, a Town of that Name in Yorkshire. Brooks Ca∣talogue of Hon. He Mar∣ried Anne Mortimer above-mentioned, by whom he had Richard Duke of York and Earl of Cambridge, Ibm. who Married Cecilie Nevil, the youngest Daughter of Ralph Earl of Westmerland, by whom he had Henry his Eldest Son, who died young, and Edward his second Son Duke of York, and afterward King of England, by  the Name of Edward IV. William of Sandf. ut supra, 178. Windsor (a second of that Name William) was their Sixth Son, who died so young, as there is nothing memo∣rable left of him. The Seventh and Youngest Son of Edward III. and Queen Philip, was Ibm. & f. 227. Thomas of Woodstock, there born, Duke of Gloucester. He
Married Elianor the Eldest of the two Daughters, and Heiress of Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford, &c. The Eldest Daughter of King Edward and Queen Philip, was Ibm. Isabel Lady Coucy and Dutchess of Bedford, Married to Ingelram Lord of Coucy and Earl of Soyssons, who by her Father was Crea∣ted Earl or Duke of Bedford. Their Second Daughter Ib. f. 179. Joan, had the Title of Queen of Spain; she was by Proxy Married to Alphonso King of Castile and Leon,  and conveyed into that Country, and not long after died of the Plague. Their Third Daughter Ibm. was Blanch de la Tour, so named be∣cause born in the Tower of London; she died an Infant. Mary their Fourth Daughter, Ib. Hypod. Neustr. f. 516. lin. 9. Dutchess of Britan, was Wife of John Montfort Duke of Britain in France. Margaret their Fifth and Sandf. ut supra. Youngest Daughter, was Wife to John Hastings Earl of Pembroke.
A CONTINUATION of the Compleat  History of England, &c. King RICHARD the Second. KING Edward the Third Rot. Clause 1 Ric. II. M. 45. A. D. 1377. died June 21st, Anno Do∣mini 1377, and this young King, his Grandchild, suc∣ceeded him in the Eleventh year of his Age, when itKing Richards Coronation. was agreed he should be Crowned on the 16th of July following. John, King of Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, came before King Richard and his Council, and claimed as Earl[2] Ibm. Three Offices claimed by the Duke of Lancaster. of Leicester the Office of Steward of England, as Duke of Lan∣caster,  to carry the King's principal Sword called Curtana, on the day of his Coronation, and as Earl of Lincoln, to be the King's Carver the same day; all these Offices he pretended to have in Right of his Wife Blanch then dead; and the Titles to them being Examined by the most knowing of the King's Council, it was adjudged Ibm. by the King and his Council, he might Exe∣cute them by himself, and sufficient Deputies, Ibm. and on the Thurs∣day next before the Coronation, (which was also on a Thursday)  he sate (de precepto Regis) by the King's Writ, as Steward of England, to hear the Claims of all that pretended to have Offices, and perform Services on that day. On the very day Walsingh. Hist. f. 193. n. 40, 50. of King Edward's Death, yet before he was known to be dead, there were sent some of the chief Citizens by the City of London, to the Prince then at Kingston with his Mother, who by John Philpot, that was one of them, acquainted him, That his Father was undoubtedly dying, and had the ma∣nifest  Signs of Death upon him, and beseeched his Favour to,The Citizens of London de∣sire the King's Protection. and Protection of the Citizens, and his City of London, which was his Chamber, it being unspeakably disturbed he was so far from it, being ready not only to venture their Estates, but also, if needful, to lay down their Lives for him; with Request to him he would come and Reside there; and further prayed him, he would vouchsafe to put an end to all Discords and Differences between the Citizens and the Duke of Lancaster, Ib. f. 194. n. 10, 20. which was  performed next day by several Persons sent to London for that purpose. Froysart F. 196. a. col. 2. says, England was then to be Governed by the Duke of Lancaster, by Accord of all the Land; yet soon after the Coronation, Walsingh. f. 198. n. 20, 30. perceiving all things in the Kingdom were like to become new, and his Care not to be valued amongst new
Men, and fearing if any thing should happen amiss to the King or Kingdom, it might be imputed to him, and that he should for the good he did, receive small or no Thanks, with the King'sThe Duke of Lancaster with the King's Leave, retired from Court. Leave he retired from Court, and went to his Castle of Kenel∣worth; before his departure, he promised the King, if he should need his assistance to come to him, with a greater appearance then any Lord in England, or do any other thing that might tend to his Profit or Honour. The French on the 21st of August Ib. n. 40, 50. The French land in the Isle of Wight. landed in the Isle of Wight, burnt and plundered some Towns, and received a Com∣position of the Inhabitants to save the rest; They then burnt Ib. f. 199. n. 20, 30. Hastings in Kent, and indeavoured to burn Winchelsey, but were repulsed, as also at Southampton by Sir John de Arundel, the Earl's Brother. On the 4th of that month Rot. Clause  Ric. I. M. 37. Drs. A Parlement called. Writs were issued for a Parle∣ment to meet Fifteen days after Michaelmass; The Cause of Sum∣mons  was declared by the Arch-Bishop of Rot. Parl. 1, 2▪ 3, 4, 5, 6. Canterbury, and rehearsed by Monsieur Richard Lescrop, Ib. n. 11. The Cause of of Summons. which were, That the Commons would advise the King, how in the best manner his and the Kingdom's Enemies might be resisted, and how the Expences of such Resistance was to be born with the greatest Ease to the People, and Profit and Honour to the Kingdom. The Commons Ib. & n. 12. The Com∣mons desire to have a Com∣mittee of Lords for their assistance. pray the King, That for the Arduity of their Charge, that is, the Declaration of Summons, (que pur l'ar∣duite  de lour charge) and for the feebleness of their Powers and Senses, (& la Feoblesce de lours poairs & sens) That it would please the King to grant them to have the Prelates and Lords under-written for their Ayd and Assistance, to Commune or Treat especially with them in their Affairs, for the more hasty and good Exploit of the Business wherewith they were charged; Ib. n. 13. that is, the King of Castile and Leon Duke of Lancaster, the Bishops of London, Ely, Rochester, and Carlisle, the Earls of March,  Arundel, Warwick, and Angos, the Lord Nevill, Monsieur Henry Lescrop, Richard Lescrop, and Richard de Stafford, which was granted by the King in Parlement. The Duke of Lancaster immediately Ibm. The Duke of Lancaster makes his Ex∣cuse to the King for not being of that Committee. His Relation how he had been accused of Treason, and Excuse. stood up, and falling upon his Knees towards the King, humbly prayed him to hear him a little, in a weighty Cause that concerned himself; and then said, the Commons had chosen him for one of the Lords to Commune with them of the said Matters, but desired the King  would please to Excuse him, for that the Commons had spoken Evilly of him, and so ill, that he had committed manifest Trea∣son, if their Report was true, which God forbid, being always careful not to do any such thing, as the truth was notably known; and said further, None of his Ancestors of Noe, Tmas Erl of Lan∣caster, and his Brother Henry Grandfather to his Wife Blanch, in the time of Ed. II. one side or other, was ever Traytor, but good and Loyal, and it was a marvellous thing he should stray out of the Line, (& marveillous chose ser∣roit, sil vorroit forveier hors de lyne) for that he had more to loose  then any other in the Kingdom; And more he said, That if any Man, of what Estate or Condition soever he was, should be so hardy, as to affirm Treason or other Disloyalty upon him, orHis general Challenge to defend him∣self by his Body. other thing done by him, prejudicial to the Kingdom, he was ready to defend himself by his Body, or otherwise by Award of the King and Lords, as if he were the poorest Knight Bachelor of the Realm.
Whereupon Ib▪ n. 14. The Lords Excuse him. the Prelates, and all the Lords stood up, and with one Voice Excused and prayed him, to leave off such Words, for they thought no Man living would say any such thing. The Commons Ibm. The Com∣mons Excuse him. also said, it was apparent and notorious, that they thought him free from all Blame and Defamation, (les Comunes avoient le dit Duc excusez de tout Blasme & Diffame) inas∣much as they had chosen him to be their principal Ayd, Comforter,  and Counsellr in this Parlement, praying with one Voice to have them excused. Then the Duke said, the Words had been long thrown about the Kingdom falsely, and he wondered how any Man could or would begin or continue such a thing, for the Disgrace and Dan∣ger that might thence arise, because the first Inventor of such Speeches, by which Debate might be moved between the LordsHe moves for a Law against the Inventors of such Re∣ports. of the Land, was a manifest and very Traytor, for such Debates  might turn to the Destruction of the Kingdom for ever; and he prayed, that a good Ordinance, and a just and speedy Punish∣ment might be provided in that Parlement, for such Talkers and Inventors of Evil Reports or Dreams, (sur tieux parlours & trou∣vours de mesongs) to avoid such Mischiefs for the time to come; but for the time past all should be forgiven, as to his own Person. After this, Ibm. n. 17, 18. The Com∣mons pray Three things of the King and Lords. First, That Eight conti∣nual Counsel∣lors may be appointed. for that the King at present was Innocent and  of Tender Age, for the amendment of several Mischiefs, and the Salvation of the Realm, which was then in greater Danger then ever it was before, the Commons prayed the King and Lords of Parlement for Three things especially: First, That they would in that Parlement, Appoint and Name Eight Persons of divers Estates, to be the continual Counsellors of the King, for the Business of the Kingdom, together with the King's Officers, to be such Persons as best knew, and most dili∣gently  would and could take pains, in the amendment of the Mischiefs, and for the good Government and Salvation of the Realm, and the Commons might know the Names of those Coun∣sellors, which also may be the Expenditors, and Directors of what was to be given toward the Wars. Secondly, That they would please to Ib. n. 19. Secondly, Such to be appoint∣ed as were to be about the King's Person. Name and Appoint in that Parlement, such as should be about the King's Person, People of Virtuous and honest Conversation, that might Educate him  accordingly, and that the Charge of the King's House might be born with the Revenue of the Crown, so as what was granted for the Wars might only be employed that way. Thirdly, That the Ib. n. 20. Thirdly, That the Land might be ob∣served. Common Law and other Statutes, and Or∣dinances of the Land, might be Observed, Ratified and Confirm∣ed, and the People Governed by it, and that it might not be de∣feated, with Masterships, and Singularities of any about the King, &c. saving in all things the Regalities, and Dignity of the King,  to which the Commons would not any prejudice should be done any way by their Demands. The Answer to these Demands Ib. in the end of the number. The general Answer. was, That the Prelates and Lords would Advise together, commanding the Commons to return to their place, (commandant as communes de retournir a lour place) and Treat of their other Charges given to them, (& tretir
de lours autres arges a lours douez) between that time and Thurs∣day next, (a quel jour ils furent commandez a retournir en parlement, &c.) to hear the Answer to their Requests. The first Ibm. n. 21, 22. The particu∣lar Answer to the first Request. Request of the Commons was Repeated before the King and Lords, and by them granted, so as the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Keeper of the Privy Seal, Justices of the one Bench, and the other, and all other Officers of the Realm, may execute their Offices without the presence of such Councellors, who by  Advice of the Lords were Ib. n. 23. Nine, the Bishops of London, Car∣lisle and Salisbury, the Earls of March and Stafford, Messires Ri∣chard de Stafford, and Henry Lescrop Banerets, and Messires John Deverose, and Hugh Segrave Bachelors. Which Ib. n. 25. Nine Prelates, Earls, and others, chosen in Coun∣cil for this year, (esluz en conseil pur ce An) were Sworn before the King himself, to do what they were chosen for, in the presence of many Lords of Parlement. As to the Second Request, to [8] Name and Assign such asTo the second Request. should be about the King's Person, the Lords of Parlement there answered, That it seemed to them for many Causes too heavy and hard a Request, (trop chargeant & dure Request) to place any Person about the King that should not well please him; or to Remove any Officer or Servant, if it were not by his Express Will, and for notable fault to be proved against such Officers and Servants; Wherefore the Lords would not willingly meddle  with these Matters, (peront les Seigneurs ne verroient voluntres entre mettre.) To the other Ib. toward the end of the number. part of this Request the Lords Answered, They would by good Deliberation speak with the Great Officers of the King's Houshold, and if by their advice it could be done, saving the State and Honour of the King, what they desired should be performed. For the Ib. in the end of the number. To the Third. Third, at present it seemed reasonable to all the  Lords it should be granted. The Lords and Commons Ib. n. 27. Two Fif∣teenths and Two Tenths granted. perceiving the great danger of De∣struction the Nation was in, by reason of the great Wars, as well by Sea as Land, for the defence of the Kingdom, and resistance of its great Enemies, granted to the King Two Fifteenths without Cities and Burghs, and Two Tenths within Cities and Burghs, for Two years; praying the King, That as well the Money of the Tenths and Fifteenths, as the Tenths granted by the Clergy, and  Money for the Subsidy of Wooll, might be in the keeping of Espe∣cial Treasurers by the King's Appointment; which were WilliamSpecial Trea∣sures appoint∣ed to receive them. Walworth, and John Philypot, Merchants of London, who were to give an Accompt of their Receipts and Disbursements, in man∣ner as the King and his great Council should order. In this Ib. n. 41, 42, 43. Parlement Alice Perrers was brought into the Lords House, where Sir Richard Lescrop, Steward of the King's Houshold, by the Command of the Prelates and Lords, Recited in the pre∣sence  of the said Alice, an See this Or∣dinance here in the 50th of Ed. III. Alice Perrers accused in Parliament. Ordinance made in the Parlement holden at Westminster in the 50th of Edward the Third, That no Woman, especially Alice Perrers, should prosecute any Business in the King's Courts by way of Maintenance, upon pain of for∣feiture, and Banishment out of the Kingdom; and the said Se∣neschal or Steward surmised to the said Alice and the Lords, That
she had incurred the pain of it, and forfeited against the Ordi∣nance in Two Points: First, That Sir Nicholas Dagworth was or∣dered by the King's Council to go into Ireland upon several great Matters profitable to the King and his Realm, the said Alice, af∣ter the Ordinance made, perswaded the King, and procured at the Court at Havering by her singular Suit, That the said Nicholas should be countermanded, and his Voyage staid, to the great da∣mage of the King and Realm. Secondly, That one Richard Lyons,  for certain Misprisions, of which he was Convict in the said Par∣lement, submitted himself to the King's Grace, viz. his Body, Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, so as he was imprisoned, and all his Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels seized into the King's Hands, of which Lands and Tenements he gave some to the Earl of Cambridge, and others to Thomas of Woodstocke, then Earl of Buckingham, for Term of their Lives. All which Forfeitures and Imprisonment, the King taking pity of the said Richard by  the Perswasion of the said Alice, and her singular Persuit and Procurement, at his Court at Shene, with the assent of his Coun∣cil pardoned, and also pardoned the said Richard 300 l. due from him in the Exchequer, and further granted 1000 Marks of his Treasure as a Gift, which things being contrary to the said Ordi∣nance, the Steward demanded of the said Alice, how she would Excuse her self of the said Articles, who answered she was not cul∣pableHer Answer. or guilty of these Articles, which she was ready to aver and  prove, by the Witness and Testimony of John de Ipre, at that time Steward of the King's House, William Sheet Controller, Sir Allen Buxhall, Nicholas Carren Keeper of the Privy Seal, and others of the Court of the said King, and present at the time of the supposed Forfeiture. Upon this, Day Ibm. was given her to Wednesday next after, in the mean time it was ordered by the assent of the Lords, That the Articles should be tried by Witness, or by Inquest of such as  were of the House of the said King, and thereupon certain Persons were Sworn, and Examined before the Duke of Lan∣caster, the Earl of Cambridge, the Earl of March, the Earl of A∣rundel, and the Earl of Warwick: First, Roger Beauchamp, lateWitnesses Sworn against Alice Perrers. Chamberlain of the said King, being Sworn, said, That in the presence of Alice Perrers, a Bill was given him to carry to the King at his Court at Havering, which Bill he took, and as he un∣derstood it, it contained the Revocation of Sir Nicholas Dagworth  from Ireland, because he was Enemy to Monsieur William de Wind∣sore, he refused to carry the Bill, because the Council had or∣dered the contrary; and the said Alice requested him to do it, which he did, and the King asked him what they talked about, which when he informed him of the Contents of the Bill, he answered the Petition was reasonable; and when Monsieur Roger replied, his Council had ordained to the contrary, the King an∣swered, he was Soveraign Judge, and it seemed to him the Bill  was reasonable, and commanded him to call back the said Ni∣cholas, which was done accordingly. Concerning Richard Lyons he said he knew nothing. The Duke of Lancaster Examined, said, That one day he came to Havering, and found Dame Alice Perrers there, when Roger Beauchamp shewed him a Bill contain∣ing as above, about which he fell into Discourse with the King,
who concerning Sir Nicholas Dagworth going to Ireland, said, it was not reasonable one Enemy should Judge another, and there he thought fit to countermand his Voyage; in which having satisfied the King, as done by his Consent in Council; but the King not long after coming from Alice Perrer's Chamber, came to the Duke, and prayed him dearly he would not suffer Dagworth to go toward Ireland, but the Duke could not comply, by reason it was ordained by King and Council, and on Monday  morning when he took his Leave of the King in Bed, he com∣manded him upon his Blessing he should not suffer Dagworth to go toward Ireland, notwithstanding the Ordinance made the day before; and also he was countermanded. And to the Article of Richard Lyons, he said, in his Conscience he believed Alice Perrers was the chief Promoter of that Business, but was not present. Monsieur Philip de la Vache Sworn, says nothing to the pur∣pose. Nicholas Carren Sworn, says, That he was commanded to come to Shene to the King, where he found Richard Lyons, and they were both commanded to come before the King in Bed, where he found Dame Alice Perrers sitting at the King's Bed's Head, where was shewed, that the King would pardon the said Richard 300 l. due to the King upon Account in the Exchequer, and also give him a Thousand Marks of his Treasure, and restore him what was given him to his Sons the Earl of Cambridge, and Tho. of Wood∣stock,  and commanded him the said Nicholas to let his Sons know so much; and that the King rehearsed these Grants of his Grace, &c. before divers Knights and Esquires he called from behind the Curtains of his Bed to Witness the same. Monsieur Alein Bux∣hall Swears the same; except Alice Perrer's sitting at the King's Bed's Head; and further, That Alice desired him to acquaint the Earls of their Father's Pardon to Lyons, which at her Instance the King commanded him to do. There were more Sworn, who said  as they believed, and much to this purpose, and presently there were made to come before the Duke and other Earls, MonsieurA Jury Sworn. Roger Beauchamp, Alein Buxhall, John de Burle, Richard Stury, Philip de la Vage, John de Foxle, Tho. Garre, Knights; Nicholas Carren, John Beauchamp of Holt, John Beverle, George Felbrigge, John Salesbury, William Street, Piers Cornwall, Tho. Londn, Hel∣min Leget, Esquires, of the King's House, Sworn, and charged to speak plain Truth, whether the said Alice was culpable, who  They find her Guilty. found her guilty, and accordingly to the intent of the Statute made 50 Edw. III. considering the damages and villanies by her done, she was sentenced by Parlement to be banished, her Lands,Her Sentence and Punish∣ment. Chattels, Tenements in Demesn and Reversion to be forfeited, and seized into the King's Hands; And it was ordained by the King and Lords in that present Parlement, That all her Land in Feoffees hands or purchased in Trust, should be also forfeited. But it was the Intention of the King and Lords, and this Law, made parti∣cularly  Which was not to be made an Ex∣ample for o∣thers. for the prevention of such odious things, should not be made use of, or made an Example against any other Person, or in any other Case. The Commons Ib. n. 49. pray, for that King Edward was guided by unfit Counsellors, (par auscuns Conseillers nient Covenables) as had been authentickly proved, That they might be removed from all
the King's Counsels, and so as such, nor other such, should beKing Edward guided by Evil Counsel∣lors, such to be removed from this Kings Coun∣sels. The King's Officers not to maintain Suits. near him, nor in office with him, and that other fit Persons might be put in their places; and that no Officers of the King's Court, great or small, do keep up Quarrels or Suits in the Country by Maintenance, nor meddle with any thing but what belongs to his Office. As to the first Request, (le Roy le voet) the King willeth; and as to the second Request touching Maintenance, the King will  straightly forbid, any Counsellor, Officer, or Servant, or others[4] Ib. Ro. The King grants the first. And will for∣bid the se∣cond. with him, or in the Kingdom, to uphold any Quarrel, or Suit by Maintenance, See Stat. at Large, first of Rich. II. cap. 4. under pain of loosing their Offices, and Services, and to be Imprisoned, and Ransomed at the King's Pleasure. The Commons also Rot. Parl. 1 Ric. II. n. 50. The Com∣mons pray all great Officers of the Court and Kingdom may be ap∣pointed in Parlement during the King's Mino∣rity. pray, That during the King's Minority, the Chancellor, High Treasurer, Chief Justices of one Bench and the other, the Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the Steward and Treasurer of the Houshold, the Chief Chamberlain, and Clerk of the Privy  Seal, the Wardens of the Forrests of this side Trent and beyond, might be made and provided by Parlement; and if it should happen that any of these Ministers or Officers should be laid aside, be∣tween one Parlement and another, That then another be put in his place, by his great Council, until next Parlement. It was agreed, That Ib. Ro. It was agreed, that some of those Officers should be chosen by the Lords in Par∣lement. while the King was under Age, that the Counsellors, Chancellor, Steward of the Houshold, and Chamber∣lain, should be chosen by the Lords in Parlement, (soient esluz par  les Seigneurs en Parlement) saving always the Estate and Heritage of the Earl of Oxford to the said Office of Chamberlain; and as to the other Officers abovenamed, the King should make them by the assent of his Council. The Commons of the Kingdom shew to the King, and Council of Parlement, That in many parts of the Kingdom of England, Ib. n. 88. The Com∣mons com∣plain of the Practices of the Villanes. A nostre Seigneur le Roi, & a Conceil du Parlement monstrent la Comune du Roialme qen plusours parties du Roialm d'Engleterre, &c.)  the Villanes, and Land Tenents in Villenage, as well of Holy Church, as Lay Lords, which owed Services and Customs to their Lords, had withdrawn them of late, and did daily withdraw them, by procurement of certain Advisers, Maintainers, and Abettors in the Country who received Money of them, by colour of Exem∣plifications purchased in the King's Court out of Domesday Book, of the Mannors and Towns where they dwelt, by vertue where∣of, and the ill Interpretations of them, they said they were quit  and discharged of all manner of servage, as well of their Bodies as Tenures, and would not suffer any Distress to be taken, or Ju∣stice done upon them, threatning their Lords Servants to Kill or Maim them, and gathered themselves together in great Routs, and agreed by Confederacy to aid one another by force to resist their Lords; Therefore to prevent the Mischiefs which might in∣sue, Ibm. and to avoid the like Danger that lately happened in France, by such Rebellion and Confederacy of the Villanes against  their Lords, they prayed due Remedy. The Answer was, Ib. Ro. The Answer to the Com∣plaint of the Commons. That as to the Exemplifications, Grants, and what had been done in Chancery, it was declared in Parle∣ment, that they could not, nor ought not to be of any value, or hold place, as to the freedom of their Bodies, nor change the con∣dition of their Tenure and Customs anciently due, nor do preju∣dice
to their Lords concerning them; who if they would, might have Letters Patents of this Declaration under the Broad Seal; and also the Lords that found themselves grieved, might have special Commissions to Justices of Peace, and others, to enquire of all such Rebels, and their Offences, and their Counsellers, Ad∣visers, and Abettors; and to imprison all those that shall be brought before them, without Bail, Mainprise, or otherwise, until they were prosecuted and acquit, &c. See Statutes at large,  1 Rich. II. which agrees with the Parlement-Roll in many things, though not in all. The Commons pray further, Ibm. n. 95. That a Parlement may be holdenThe Com∣mons Petition for a Parle∣ment. in a convenient Place once a Year, to redress Delays in Suits, and to end such Cases wherein the Judges were of different Opi∣nions. They had this Answer: Ibm. Ro. The Answer to that Peti∣tion. The Statutes therefore made shall be observed and kept; and as to the Place where the Parlement  shall be holden, the King will do his Pleasure. The Citizens of London demanded, Ibm. n. 131. The Citizens of London de∣mand they may have their own In∣terpretation of their Char∣ters. That upon the King's special Grace, for the Enlargement of the Franchise of their City, that if any Article in the Charters granted by him or his Progenitors to the said Citizens, should prove difficult or doubtful, and might be taken in divers Senses, then that the Sense they claimed to have it in, might be allowed. This was the Ibm. Ro. The Interpre∣tation of Charters be∣longs to the King, &c. Rencounters between the English and French, &c. Answer: That the Interpretation of the King's  Charters belonged to him; and if any Doubt arose, the King, by Advice of his Council, would make such Interpretation as should be according to Reason and Good Faith (& bone Foy.) Several Walf. A. D. 1377, 1378. 1 & 2 R. II. Rencounters, Burning and Plundering each others Towns on the Coasts, and some in the Countries, taking and sur∣prizing of some small Towns and Castles happened between the English and French at this time. The Town of Ibm. The Town of Ard betrayed. Ard was betrayed to the French. Sir Thomas de Hilton Governour of Aquitan, marched with a few English against a Body of French, was overcome by them, and taken Prisoner, with many Noblemen of that Country of the English Party. About the same time the English having notice, that there were many Spanish Ships in the Harbour of Sluse in Flan∣ders, set out a great Fleet to surprize them, under the Command of Thomas of Woodstock Earl of Buckingham, the Duke of Bri∣tan,  who was then in England, and others, which by Storm was scattered at Sea; but after the Storm, came together again upon8 Spanish Ships taken, and 22 of other Na∣tions. the Coast of England, where they suddenly refitted, and put to Sea again, and took Eight Spanish Ships near Brest, and Twenty two others of several Nations laden with French Goods. Hugh Caverly Governour of Calais, burnt Twenty six French26 French Ships burnt. Ships in the Haven of Bologne, burnt the Low Town, and retur∣ned with much Plunder of Goods and Cattel. The Men of Rye and Winchelsy sailed toward Normandy, landedThe Men of Rye and Win∣chelsy land in Normandy▪ kill and burn &c. in a small Town and Port, where they killed all they met in the Streets, except such as they thought able to redeem themselves by Money; those they carried Prisoners to their Ships; and then burning the Town and Country, returned home with a rich Prey.
About this time the Duke of Lancaster desired to have the Mo∣neyThe Duke of Lancaster e∣quips a great Fleet. granted the last Parlement, upon promise to secure the King∣dom from Invasion of all Enemies for one Year, and to do some other great Good to the Nation; which at length he obtained; and provided a great Fleet, and also for his Assistance hired Nine Ships at Bayon, which in coming hither encountred a Fleet of Spaniards, and took Fourteen Ships laden with Wine and other Merchandise. Henry the Bastard, that called himself King of Spain, hearingHenry the Ba∣stard King of Spain prepares a great Fleet to opposehim. what those of Bayon had done, and that the Duke of Lancaster was putting to Sea with a great Fleet and Force, fearing him, by reason of his Title to his Kingdom, prepared a great Navy to oppose him, and if he could to take him Prisoner. The DukeThe Duke delayed his putting to Sea. The English Fleet beaten by the Spani∣ards. delayed the time of his putting to Sea; the Chief Officers of the Fleet were disturbed at it, and sailed without him; and having been some days at Sea, met the Spanish Fleet, by which they were  beaten, and Sir Hugh Courtney, a Famous Soldier, taken, with many others. This Misfortune, says Walsingham, was imputed to the Duke, for that he made such long Delays; but whether he was in Fault, knew not. And while he was thus Dilatory, John Mercer a Scot, with aShips taken out of Scar∣burgh Haven by John Mer∣cer a Scot. J. Philpot sets out Men of War at his own Charge; Takes Mercer with all his own and 15 Spanish Ships that had joi∣ned him: Was questio∣ned for it, but discharged. small Force of French, Scots, and Spaniards, took some Ships in Scarburgh Haven, killing some of the Mariners, and carried them with him to Sea. John Philpot, a rich Citizen of London, considering the Negli∣gence, if not the Falsity of those who were to defend the Na∣tion, and provide against such Inconveniencies, at his own Charge set out some Men of War, which met with Mercer, and 15 Spa∣nish Ships that had joined him, and behaving themselves bravely, took him and all the Ships with him, recovering the Ships that were taken at Scarburgh, and taking great Riches in the Spanish and other Ships. John Philpot was taxed by the Lords for pre∣suming  to set forth Men of War, without Advice of the King's Council; but he made such a Defence before the Earl of Stafford, and others, that called him to account, as he was suffered to de∣part, without further Trouble for that matter. Still the Duke delayed his going to Sea, it not being known for what Reason, until the Spring and beginning of Summer were over; but by his Persuasion the Earls of Salisbury and Arundel set sail, and landed in Normandy, who compounded with the  King of Navarre, then become Enemy to the King of France, for the Town and Port of Cherburgh, then very considerable, inThe King of Navarre sells Cherburgh in Normandy to the English. The Duke of Lancaster puts to Sea; Lands in Bri∣tany; Returns in∣gloriously. which was placed a Garrison of English; and so the Earls re∣turned. At length the Duke of Lancaster went to Sea, and with him the Earls of Buckingham, Stafford, Warwick, and others of the English Nobility, with a great Force; they landed in Britany, where Sir Robert Knolls burnt several Towns, and lost many of  his stoutest Men. The Duke besieged St. Malo; but it was so well defended as he raised the Siege, and returned home. Wal∣singham says, at first the Townsmen would have yielded, so as the Town might have been preserved from being burnt and plundered. The Duke would not accept it, but upon Discretion, and that he might do with it what he pleased. In the mean
time the French landed in Cornwal, and burnt Fowey, or Foy, andThe French land in Corn∣wal; Burn Foy and other Towns. A Truce be∣tween the English & Scots, who had burnt Roxburgh, &c. and several other Towns, without Resistance. The Scots taking the Advantage of the present time, burnt Rox∣burgh, and spoiled the Country thereabout; whereupon a Truce was made between the English and them for some time. On Rot. Parl. 2 Ric. II. n. 1, 2. Part 1. A Parlement at Glocester. The Scots make Alliance with the French. Thursday the 21st of October (it having met the Day before) the Parlement sate at Gloucester, in the Great Hall of the Abby there. The Bishop of St. Davids, then Lord Chancellor, de∣clared  the cause of Summons; wherein he took notice of what had been done by the Scots at Roxburgh; and that since, Ibm. n. 7. not∣withstanding the Truce, they had made Alliance with the French against England. Next Day Monsieur Richard le Scrop, Steward of the Houshold, enlarged upon the Causes of Calling the Parlement; and making excuse for his own Inability, Ibm. n. 15. Declaration of Summons. told the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, as the Chancellor had said before, That the Nation  was encompassed with Enemies, who daily encreased: That the Ports of Cherburgh and Brest, which of a long time had not been in the hands of the English, besides Calais, Burdeaux, and Bayon, with the Countries about them, were very chargeable to main∣tain; Calais, with its Marches, or Limits about it, stood the King in 24000 l. every Year, and Brest 12000 Marcs; and the other three Places according to the same Rate. Afterwards Ibm. n. 16 The Speaker's Request and Protestation in behalf of himself and Commons. Sir James Pickering, Speaker of the House of  Commons, with the Commons came before the King, Prelates, and Lords in Parlement (& puis le Comunes reviendrent devant le Roy, les Prelates en Parlement, & illoeques Monsieur James de Pickering, &c.) making Protestation, as well for himself as for the whole Commons of England: First, for the Commons, That if he should utter any thing to the Prejudice, Damage, Slander, or Disgrace of the King or his Crown, or in lessening the Honour or Estate of the Great Lords, it might not be taken notice of by the King, and that the Lords would hold it for no∣thing,  as if nothing had been said; (& primerment pur la dite Comune, que si per cas il y dist choses que purreit soner en Prejudice, Damage, Esclandre, ou Villaine de nostre Seigneur le Roy ou de sa Co∣rone, ou en anientisement del Honour & Estate des Grants Seigneurs du Roialm, que ce ne feust acceptez par le Roy, & les Seigneurs eins te∣ pur nul, come Riens nent este dit;) for that the Commons so∣veraignly desired (soveraignment desirent) to maintain the Honour and Estate of the King, and the Rights of the Crown in all  Points: As also to preserve the Reverence due to the Lords in all Parts. So much for the Commons. For his own Person, he made Protestation, That if by Indiscretion he spake any thing by Common Assent of his Companions, it might be amended by them before their departure, or afterwards▪ He then Ibm. n. 17. rehearsed in short Words the Articles of the Charge (il rehearceast en courtes Paroles les Articles de les Chargez a eaux donez:) And first for the Liberties and Franchises, for the  Liberties and Franchise of the Church. Good Laws and Customs. Honour of God granted to Holy Church, and for the King's Promise of preserving the Good Laws and Customs of his Kingdom entirely, and punishing such as should any thing do against them; the Commons humbly thanked him with their whole Hearts, kneeling upon the Ground (les genulx a Terre) and pray∣ing God they might be put in due Execution.
As to the Aid the King Ibm. n. 18. The Com∣mons Preten∣ces why they ought or could not grant an Aid. demanded of his Commons, for the Defence and Safety of the Kingdom, and for the Safeguard of his Lordships, Lands, Towns, and Forts beyond Sea, and toward his Wars; the Commons said (la Comune dit) That in the last Parlement in his first Year, the same things were shewn unto them in behalf of the King, at which time they answered, It was apparent the King had not so great need for an Aid, seeing he had in his hands the Priories alien, the Subsidies of Wooll, the  Revenues of the Crown, the Lands of the Prince his Father, and many other Great Lordships, by the Nonage of the Heirs of them; and that therefore there must be great Plenty of Money in the Treasury. To which the King's Council then answered, That lately the Charge of the Coronation had been very great, and that the Money upon those Funds they mentioned came in very slowly, nor could they be collected soon enough for an Expedition that Year. And it was then further said, That if the Commons  would furnish the King with  great Sum of Money, to make such an Expedition as might be for the Destruction of his Ene∣mies (en destruction des ses Enemies) they hoped he might have Money sufficient afterwards from time to time to maintain the War and defend the Kingdom. And thereupon the Commons then said, That in hopes of that Promise, to be discharged of Tal∣lage for a great time after, they granted a greater Sum than had been given to any King to be levied in so short a time: And all  things considered, it seemed to the Commons, that there must be a great Sum in the Treasury, besides what had been expended in the last Voyage; so that the King had no need to charge the Commons, who were in a lower Condition than ever, by reason of that Payment, and lately by the Murrein amongst their Cattel, and their Enemies Burnings upon the Sea-Coasts: That their Corn and other Chattels were at so low a Rate, that no Money could be raised at present. And hereupon they prayed the King  to excuse them, not being able to bear any Charge for pure Po∣verty (pur pure Povertee.) To all which, Ibm. n. 19. A full An∣swer to those Pretences. The Com∣mons charged with untruth. Monsieur Richard le Scrop answered, making Protestation, That he knew of no such Promise made in the last Parlement; and saving the Honour and Reverence due to the King and Lords, what the Commons said was not True; (le dit de la Comune en celle partie ne contient my veritee:) And as to the Sub∣sidy last granted, that a great part of it was in the Treasury, to  wit, of the Two Fifteenths and Two Tenths, and afterward of Wooll in that Parlement, he vouched the Testimony of William Walworth and John Philpot, who by their Consent were appointed Receivers of them, that every Penny thereof was expended upon the War, and that not one Penny came to the High Treasurer of England, or any other to the Use of the King: That the Revenues of the Crown, besides the Annuities and other Charges upon them granted by his Grandfather and Father, were too  small; and without the Customs of Wooll, and Lands of the Priors aliens, the Honour and Estate of the King could not be maintained: And therefore they were to know, that according to Reason they ought to relinquish their Complaint, if they plea∣sed (a celle pleint vos faut par Reson cesser, si vous plest.)
Whereupon the Commons, Ib. n. 20. The Com∣mons request to know how the Money had been ex∣pended; To know the Names of the Great Officers and Gover∣nours of the King's Person for the Year ensuing. after a short Deliberation, made it their Request to the King, he would please to shew them how and in what manner the great Sums given for the War had been expended; and also, that he would please to let them know the Names of such as should be the Great Officers of the Kingdom, and who his Counsellors, and Governours of his Person, being yet of tender Age, for the next Year, as it had been before Ordained in Parlement. To which it was Ib. n. 21. The Answer to both those Requests. answered, on the behalf of the King, by the said Monsieur Richard, That though there never was any ac∣count given of Subsidies, or any other Grant made in Parlement or out of Parlement, to the Commons, or any other but to the King and his Officers; yet he willed and commanded of his own motion, to please the Commons, not that it was of Right for him so to do, or that he was forced to it do, by reason of their Re∣quest  now made, That William Walworth then present, with some of his Council assigned thereto by him, should in Writing clearly shew them the Receipts and Expences, so as it should not be drawn into Example for the future. As to the Officers, the King had caused them to be chosen by the Advice of the Lords: And as to his Counsellors, they should be such as pleased him (& serra les Counsellers de tieux come luy plerra) whose Names they should receive in certain (si plest au  Roy.) The King commanded, charged, and prayed them, and also allThe Com∣mons com∣manded and prayed to dis∣patch their Parlement Bu∣siness. the Lords present prayed them, (& nostre Seigneur le Roy vous commande & charge, enpriant, & ainsi vous priont touz les Seigneur cy presentz) That having due Consideration of the great apparent Dangers on all sides, they would provide for the Defence of the Kingdom, which not only concerned the King, but all and every one of them, and think how the War might be main∣tained,  and give as speedy an Answer as they could, that the Parle∣mentTo save the Charge of the poor Com∣mons in pay∣ing their Wa∣ges. might have an end, and good effect, in ease of the King, Lords, and themselves, for the Profit of the Kingdom, and Discharge of the poor Commons, that every day paid their Expences during the Parle∣ment; which was one of their principal Charges given the first day. Another was, That if any Fault was found in any part of the Kingdom, or Government, in the Laws, or any other manner, that they would bring in their Petitions concerning it, and they  should have due Remedy. The Commons desire to have the time limited to bring inThey desire the Parlement may be conti∣nued to Nov. 2. It began Octob. 20. their Common Bills, or Petitions; and that it might be pro∣longed to the Feast of All Souls, or 2d of November next coming, that Day to be accounted in (& ce lour estoit ottroiez) which was granted. Also the Ibm n. 22▪ They pray  have a Copy of the Enrol∣ment of the last Subsidy of 15ths and 10ths. Granted it the King's Plea∣sure, not their Request. Commons prayed the King to have a Copy of the Enrolment of the last Subsidy of Fifteenths and Tenths, as  they had been enrolled upon the Roll of Parlement, for them to advise upon (& ce lour estoit ottroiez, come de la voluntee, nostre Seigneur le Roy, & ne mye a lour Requeste:) And this was granted as the King's Pleasure, and not upon their Re∣quest.
They pray Ib. n. 23. How and in what manner a Committee of Lords and Commons were chosen to Treat and Confer. And the Re∣ports to be made. likewise, That Five or Six Prelates, and Lords, might come to the Commons to Treat with them about their Charge; The Lords Answer, they neither ought or would do it in that manner, which had never been seen but in the Three last Parle∣ments; but the Custom was, for the Lords to choose a small num∣ber of Six or Ten, and the Commons as many of themselves, and Treat together without noise, and report what they had done, to their Companions of one part and the other; according to this  Method the Lords would act, and no otherwise, and to this the Commons assented, to proceed as had anciently been used. After Ib. n. 24. The Com∣mons upon Perusal of the Inrolment, pleased with the Accounts. Say, they were not bound to bear any Forreign Charge. the Commons had seen and Examined the Inrolment, Receits, and Expences, they were well pleased with them, as ho∣nourable to the King and Kingdom; They only said, That 46000 l. which was expended in keeping several Countreys, Places, and For∣teresses, as the Marches of Calais, Brest, and Cherburgh, Gascoigny and Ireland, was not to be charged upon them, nor as it seemed  to them, were they bound to bear any Forreign Charge. To which Ib. n. 25. The Answer to that. it was answered, That Gascoigny, and the Forts beyond Sea, were Barbicans, and as it were Outworks and Defences to England, and if they were well Guarded, and the Sea well kept, the Kingdom would be quiet, otherwise it could not be so. The Commons Ibm. A further Proposition of the Com∣mons to avoid an Ayd. The Answer to that. then propounded this Charge to be born by the Goods of King Edward the Third, which the King possessed,  and was much inriched by them. Whereto it was answered, That those Goods were justly prised, and delivered to those his Grandfather was indebted, except some Necessaries reserved for his own House, for which he had paid in part, and was to pay in whole for the satisfaction of his Creditors; and therefore the King commanded, and the Prelates and LordsThe King Commands, and the Lords pray them, to give an ef∣fectual An∣swer to their Charge. prayed them, as they had done before, (& purce nostre Seigneur le Roy vous commande, & les Prelates & Seniors vous priont come  devant, &c.) to advise about their Charges, and give good and ef∣fectual Answers, with as much haste as might be, for the common Profit of the Kingdom, and the Ease of the Lords, and them∣selves. At length, notwithstanding these Excuses, the Ib. n. 29. Prelates, Lords and Commons, perceiving the great Perils wherewith theThe Prelates, Lords, and Commons, grant a Sub∣sidy of Wooll, Leather, &c. Land was encompassed, and the great and outrageous Expences the King was to be at, for the Safety and Defence thereof, granted to  him the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells, for Three years; Of Wooll 43 s. 4 d. the Sack; Of Woollfells as much, that is, for every 240 of them, (accounting Sixscore to the Hundred;) and for Leather 4 l. 6 s. 8 d. every Last, which were Exported by Denizens and Strangers, besides the ancient Custom. And as an additional Grant, they gave more 13 s. 4 d. for every Sack of Wooll, as much for every 240 Woollfells, and for every Last of Leather 26 s. 8 d.And 6 d. in the Pound upon Mer∣chandise. Also they Ib. n. 30. gave 6 d. in the Pound for every Pound value of Merchandize, as well of Denizens as Strangers, both Imported and Exported, for One year. The Scots Walsingh. f. 219. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. A. D. 138. on Thursday before St. Andrew, or the 30th of November, in the night, surprised Berwick Castle, and killed Sir Ro∣bert Boynton the Governor, but suffered his Wife and Children
and their Friends to depart, upon Condition to pay 2000 MarksBerwick sur∣prised by the Scots. within 3 weeks, or deliver themselves Prisoners; but the Earl of Northumberland gathered a sufficient Force, and in Nine days retook it by Assault, putting to the Sword all the Scots he foundRetaken by Assault. in it, except one that was to discover this Contrivance, and the Scots Designs. The King of France Walsingh. f. 219. n. 50. The Britans forced to Swear to de∣liver their Forts and Castles to the King of France upon demand. about this time assembled a Parlement at Paris, when upon pain of Death he forced the Noblemen of  Britany that were there, to Swear to yield to him the fortified Towns and Castles they held, whenever he would demand them▪ At their return home, they Manned and Victualled their Castles, and Places of Strength; To reduce them, he sent Bertrand de Clequi with a good Army, which the Britans forced to retire out of their Country. Sir Robert Rous Ib. f. 220. lin. 13. Governors of Towns changed. was recalled from the Government of Cherburgh in Normandy, and Sir John Harleston put in his place;  and in the stead of Sir Hugh Calverley, the Earl of Salisbury was made Governor of Calais; who not long after his coming, entered into France beyond the Marches, plundered the Country, and brought with him a great Prey. Sir Hugh Calverley, Ib. n. 20, 30, 40. and Sir Thomas Percy, were joined in Commission to keep the Sea, who with a great Force of Armed Men sailed to the Coast of Britany, where they took Seven Ships of Burthen, and One Man of War, and sent them into Bristol;  and afterwards set on Shoar a Party of Men to plunder the Country, (ad depraedandune patriam couvicinam) who were all taken by Geffry Cormel, a British Knight, that lay there in Am∣bush, who commanded his Men not to hurt any of them; and by a safe Conduct from Sir Hugh Caverley, delivered them all toThe Britans offer to yield their Towns and Castles to the English. him without Ransom, and informed him, That if he would land, it would much please the Lords and Inhabitants of the Country, who were ready to deliver unto him their strong  Towns, and Castles, if he would remain there for the Guard of the Country; who Excused himself, and said he had other Mat∣ters to prosecute, and could not then satisfie their Desires. The Duke of Britan, by his own Subjects, with the assistanceA League Of∣fensive and Defensive be∣tween King Richard and the Duke of Britan. of the King of France, had been forced out of his own Country in the time of Edward the Third, and was now in England, and made a very strict League, Offensive and Defensive, with King Richard, between them and their Subjects, and no Peace to be  made with France, but by mutual Consent; The Original being in the Old Chapter-house at Westminster, Dated March 1. in the Year of Grace 1379, at Westminster. Before this, Rot Clause 2 Ric. II. M. 13 Dors. A Parlement called. on the 16th of February, Writs were issued for a Parlement to meet 15 days after Easter, in which the Lords and Commons, considering the great Necessities of the Kingdom, the Malice of it's Enemies, of France and otherwhere, upon Con∣dition the Mark upon every Sack of Wooll, and the 6 d. in the  Pound which was given in the last Parlement at Gloucester, should be remitted, did then grant Rot. Part. 2 Rich. II. n. 13. The Subsidy of Wooll, &c. granted. And a Sum of Money upon particular Persons. the Subsidy of Wooll for one year after the Feast of St. Michael next coming, of every Sack of Wooll, as it had been granted before the Parlement at Gloucester, and likewise a Sum to be paid by divers Persons of the Kingdom, as there ordered and named. For which see the Appendix, Numb. 102.
Not long after this Parlement, the Walsingh. f. 225. n. 50. The Duke of Britan called home. A. D. 1379. and 3d of Ed. III. A great Mor∣tality in the North. Britans called home their Duke, who was convoyed by Sir Thomas Percy, and Sir Hugh Calverley, and landed at a Port near St. Malo on the 4th day of August, where, and in all Places, he was received with a mighty Welcome, and strange Rejoicings, as well of the Lords and Great Men, as Common People. This Summer there happened Ib. f. 228. n. 10, 20, 30. The Scots har∣rass and plun∣der the Coun∣try. a great Mortality of People in the North parts of the Kingdom, whereby the Country be∣came  almost desolate; The Scots took this advantage, invaded the Borders, harrassed, robbed, and plundered the same, killing many of the People that were left alive, driving away vast numbers of Cattel, scarce leaving any thing behind them, not so much as Hogs, which they never drove away before. About the Ib. f. 231. n. 50. f. 232. n. 10, 20, &c. A Fleet and Army to as∣sist the Duke of Britan. Feast of St. Nicholas, or 6th of December, this Third year of the King, a Fleet, with an Army, to assist the Duke of Britan against the King of France, who had invaded his  Country, and taken several of his Towns and Castles, was to have passed into that Dukedom, under the Conduct of Sir John Arun∣del, Sir Hugh Calverley, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir William Elinham, Sir Thomas Morews, Sir Thomas Banestor, and many other Knights and Esquires, great Soldiers; so soon as they were out at Sea, there arose an horrible Tempest, which scattered the Fleet, andThe Fleet de∣stroyed by Tempest. drove them they knew not whether, Sir John Arundel's Ship was lost, and himself drowned, as likewise Twenty five more, and  above 1000 Men; Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Hugh Caverley, and Sir William Elinham, with others of Note, hardly escaped. At the same time, says F. 335. n. 40. The French and Spanish Fleet destroy∣ed by the same Tempest. Walsingham, the Spaniards and French had brought together a mighty Fleet out of France, Spain, Portugal, and other Countreys subject to them, to hinder the landing of the English in Britany, but met with the same Storm and Tempest, and lost more Men and Ships then the English did. On the 20th of October last past the King had sent forth Rot. Clause 3 Ric. II. M. 32. Dors. A Parlement called. Writs for a Parlement to meet on Monday next after St. Hil∣lary, or the 14th of January, wherein the Commons, by their Speakers, Rot. Parl. 3 Ric. II. n. 12. A. D. 1380. The Com∣mons pray the Continual Council may be discharged. The Five great Officers not to be changed until next Parle∣ment. pray, That the Prelates and other Lords of the Continual Council, may be discharged, and no such to be re∣tained, seeing the King was of good Discretion and Stature (de bone Discretion & Bel Stature) in respect of his Age, which agreed with the Age of his Grandfather, at the time of his Coro∣nation,  who then had no other Counsellors, but the Five Principal Officers of his Realm; Praying further, Those Five Officers, that is to say, the Chancellor, Treasurer, Guardian of the Privy Seal, Chief Chamberlain, and Steward of the Houshold, not to be re∣newed or changed until the next Parlement. They likewise Ibm. n. 13, 14. A Commissi∣on of Inquiry into Courts, the State of the King's House, Re∣ceits and Ex∣pences, &c. Pray a Commission to certain Commissio∣ners, to Survey and Examin, in all Courts and Places, the State of the King's Houshold, the Expences and Receits in all the Offices,  &c. This was granted, and a Commission made to the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, and Stafford, William Latimer, Guy Bryan, and John Montacute, Banerets, John Hastings, John Gildesborough, and Edward Dalyngrugge, Knights, William Walworth, and John Philpot, Citizens of London, and Thomas Graa, Citizen of York, &c.
Then the Ib. n. 16. The Lords and Com∣mons grant a Fifteenth and half, and Tenth and half. For an Expe∣dition into Britany. Lords and Commons, perceiving the King and Kingdom were set round with Enemies, who with great Force endeavoured all they could, as well by Land as Sea, to destroy them both, and further to extinguish the English Language, there∣fore for the Defence and Safety of the Kingdom, and for the good Success of the Expedition ordered into Britany, and Destructi∣on of the said Enemies, grant freely, tho it was very hard to be born, to the King One Fifteenth and half without Cities and  Burghs, and One Tenth and half within Cities and Burghs; with Prayer, That his Subsidy, and what was remaining of that given the last Parlement might only be applied to the Expedition into Britany, and no where else. Considering also, Ib. n. 17. The Subsidy of Wooll, and granted a further time. that the Subsidy of Woolls, Leather, and Woollfells, was to end at Michaelmas next coming, and that from thence the King was not able to endure the great Charges he was to be at, to maintain the War in the Marches of alais,  Brest, Cherburgh, in Gascoigny, Ireland, and the Marches of Scot∣land, they grant him the same Subsidies, from the time they were to end, until Michaelmass next after; praying the King, there might not be a Parlement to charge the Poor Commons, until a year after Michaelmas next coming. The Scots toward the latter end of this Walsingh. f. 240. n. 30, 40. A. D. 1380. The Barbarity of the Scots in Cumberland and Westmer∣land. Summer invade Cumberland and Westmerland, raging, killing, and burning every where, and driving away, as the Historian says it was reported,  40000 of all sorts of Beasts; and went to Penreth, where was then a great Fair and Conflux of People, they killed some, car∣ried away others Captive, and with them, all the Goods of the Town and Fair. The Earl of Northumberland was preparing to Ibm. drive them out of the Country and Borders, and force them to make Satis∣faction,Which was to be consi∣dered on the March-Day. or do the same things in Scotland, when he received a Prohibition from the King not to do any thing, but to expect the  March Day, which was a day appointed for the English and Scots to meet every year, and adjust things done by either Nation upon the Borders. In the same year, Mezeray, f 398. The Death of Charles King of France. on the 16th of September, died Charles the Fifth King of France, called The Wise; On his Death-Bed he left the Regency to his next Brother the Duke of Anjou, directing him to make some Agreement with the Duke of Britan if pos∣sible. His Eldest Son Ibm. f. 400, 401. His Son Charles suc∣ceeds him Charles succeeded him, being then about Twelve years of Age, and was Crowned at Rheims on the 4th of November. At this time there were great Ib. and f. 402, 403. Great Tu∣mults and Disorders in France. Tumults and Disorders in France, by reason the Duke of Anjou had not taken off the Im∣posts, as his Brother had Commanded on his Death-Bed, but settled new ones, especially upon the City of Paris. The like Ibm. and Walsingh f. 241. n. 20, 30. The same in Flanders. Mutinies, Confusions, and Tumults, were then in  Flanders, by the Seditious People against their Earl, especially those of Ipre, and Gaunt, having received great Provocations from him, as Walsingham relates it. After the Froysard, c. 360. Disaster of the Fleet and Army under the Com∣mand of Sir John Arundel, Sir Thomas Percy, &c. the Duke of Britan this Summer about Whitsuntide, sent to the King for As∣sistance
against the King of France. Thomas of Woodstock; EarlThe Duke of Britan sends to the King for Assistance. of Buckingham, Ibm. as General, the Earl of Stafford, and many Barons, Knights, and Esquires, of great Note and Skill in Arms, were appointed and retained for this Expedition, and Ibm. landed at Calais on the 19th of July 1380, and marched from thence into Britany thro' Champagne, and other Countreys, by small Marches, without any considerable Disturbance, Ib. c 363, and 365. wasting the Countreys as they went, staying 2, 3, 4 days, or more, at every  place or good Town, where they rested and took up their Quar∣ters; When they came near Britany, the Englishmen wondered they Ib. c. 368. The Duke's negligence. heard not from the Duke, the Earl sent to him Sir Tho∣mas Percy, and Sir Thomas Trivet, who met him on the way go∣ing to the Earl; When they came together at Rennes, they re∣solved to besiege Nantes, as the most obstinate and Rebellious Ib. c. 369. The English besiege Nants. Town in Britany, the Duke to assist the Earl in this Siege with his whole Force; The English remained 15 days at Rennes to  make themselves ready, and went before the Town; They with∣in the Town had notice of these things, who sent to the Duke ofThe Duke's further Neg∣ligence. Anjou, to send them some French Officers and Soldiers, to join with them for the Maintenance of the Place, and they had them. The English lay before Ib. c. 374. They raise the Siege. Nantes Two months and four days, and never heard of the Duke or his Men, when on the day after New-years-day they raised the Siege, and marched towards Vannes, where the Duke was, and there, and several other Towns near  upon the Coast of Britany, the English were Quartered all Win∣ter. Ibm. The Earl's intention was at the Spring to march into France, and to that purpose sent into England for more Forces; The King and his Council approved his Design, and engaged to send another Army to land at Cherburgh in due time to join him. All this while the Duke had Ibm. The Duke of Britan makes his Peace pri∣vately with France. had Commissioners at Paris, privately making his Peace with the Duke of Anjou, which was  concluded upon these Articles: First, it was agreed, That the Duke of Britan should provide Ships to carry back the English into their own Country. Secondly, That the Garrison of Cherburgh,The Articles of that Peace. which was with the Earl before Nantes, should, if they would, return thither by Land, and have Safe Conduct. Thirdly, That after the departure of the English, the Duke to go into France, and do his Homage and Fealty to the French King, as his Natural Lord. Ibm. Soon after this Agreement, the Duke came to Vannes, and  privately acquainted the Earl with it, excusing himself by the ob∣stinacy of his People, and that otherwise he must have lost his Country. Ibm. On the 11th of April the Earl, with the English, set Sail from Vannes, and other small Ports near, and came for England. About Michaelmass Holinshed, f. 428. and Walsingh. f. 244. n. 20, 30. The Duke of Lancaster went with a great Force into the North parts. And did no∣thing. the Duke of Lancaster, the Earls of Warwick and Stafford, with other Lords, and great Soldiers, with a great Force, went into the North Parts, to Account with the  Scots for their late Invasion, and lay so long in Northumberland, as they ruined the Country more then a Scottish Irruption would have done; They made a Truce with the Scots for half a year, and so returned, bringing nothing from Scotland but some Horses, which they divided amongst themselves.
On Monday next after the Ro. Parl. 4 Ric. II. n. 1, 2. A Parlement at Northampton. Feast of all All-Saints, there was a Parlement holden at Northampton, which was adjourned until Thursday, at which time the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, then Chancellor, tho many Temporal Lords were absent in the Marches of Scotland, with the Duke of Lancaster, declared the Causes of their Meeting, Ib. n. 3, 4. The Cause of Summons. saying it could not be unknown to them, That the Earl of Buckingham had been sent over into France with an Army, which had cost the King more then was given him last  Parlement, besides the Expedition into Scotland, the Defence ofThe King's Necessities and great Charge. Forced to Pawn his Jewels. Guien, and his Charge in Ireland, had put him to so great Ex∣pences as he had been forced to pawn his Jewels, the Subsidy of Wooll's coming to little by reason of the present Riot or Con∣fusion in Flanders; That the Soldiers in the Marches of Calais, Brest, and Cherburgh, were in Arrear more then Three months, and there was fear they might desert for want of their Pay; That they were to Consider the King was mightily in Debt; That he  was bound by Covenant and Indenture, to pay the Earl of Buck∣ingham and others in that Expedition, for another half year, which was near ended; and that the King was to be at a very great Charge for Guarding the Coasts; And at last desires them to Advise the King, how this Charge might be born with the most Ease, and the Kingdom best defended against all its Enemies by Land and by Sea, in as short time as they could. And when the Ib. n. 10. The Com∣mons, with with their Speaker, in presence of the King. Pre∣lates, and Lords. Desire to know what Sum was de∣manded, to supply the King's Neces∣sity. Commons had Treated one day about their  Charge, (Et Apres les dites Comunes avoient entre comuner & tretes un jour de lour dit charge) they returned into the Parlement in pre∣sence of the King, Prelates, and Lords, and there Monsieur John Gildesburgh, Kt. their Speaker, demanded a more clear Declara∣tion of what had been said to them, and especially what Sum they would demand to support the Charge, praying no more might be required then was necessary, (& illoeges Monsieur Johan Gildesburgh Chivaler quavoit les paroles pur la Comune, demandast de  par la Comune illoeque davoir pluis clere Declaration de leur dite, & per especial de la some totale, quelle leur verroit ore demander, pur les ditz charges supporter empriantz que celle somme fuist tielment mode∣fiez, que pluis ny fust demandez que ne convendroit necessairement) for that the Commons were poor, and of small Estate to bear the Charge any longer; Ib. n. 11. The Sum de∣manded was 160000 l. whereupon a Schedule was delivered in by the King's great Officers, and Council, containing the Sums necessary, which amounted to One hundred and sixty thousand Pounds  Sterling. The Commons pray Ib. n. 12. The Com∣mons think it an Outrage∣ous and im∣portable Sum. And pray the Prelates and Lords would Treat and Propound the Ways how a porta∣ble Sum might be le∣vied. the King, and Lords, (la Comune empriantz a nostre Seigneur le Roy, & as Seigneurs du Parlement) for that they thought the Sum demanded, was much outrage∣ous, (que la somme de eulx ore demandez si est moelt outrageous) and importable, That they would use such moderation, as nothing might be demanded but what was portable, and necessary now to have, for the Causes above set forth; And further, they pray, That  the Prelates and Lords would Treat by themselves about the Matter, and propound the Ways by which any such Sum portable might be levied and collected. After the Ib. n. 3: The Lords cause the Commons to come before them. Lords had advised about the Matter, they caused the Commons to come before them, (ils firent la Comune venir autre foitz devant eulx) and told them what they had thought
on; First, That a certain Sum of Groats might be granted of every Person of the Kingdom, Males and Females, the more sufficient to help the less sufficient. Secondly, if that pleasedAnd pro∣pound several Ways of rais∣ing Money to them. not, to have for a term an Imposition upon all manner of Merchan∣dises bought and sold thro the Realm, every time they should be sold, to be paid by the Vendor. And, Thirdly, Their Advice was to raise a certain Sum by Tenths, and Fifteenths. But be∣cause the last were very grievous to the poor Commons, (a la  poure Comune) and that Impositions had never been tried before, nor could it be known to what Sum they would rise, nor in what time a notable Sum might be raised, and therefore the Lords pitched upon the Groats, and propounded four or five to be levied upon every Person as above, so as the most able might be constrained to assist the less able; This way of Tallage seeming to them the best and most easie. The Ib. n. 14. The Com∣mons desire One Third of the Tax might be born by the Clergy. Commons, when they had a long time Treated upon  the manner of the Levy, they came into Parlement and made Protestation, they came not to grant any thing that day, but they thought if the Clergie would support a Third part of the Charge, they would grant 100000 l. to be raised by a certain number of Groats, so as the Laity might pay 100000 Marks, and the Clergie 50000, for that they possessed a Third part of the Kingdom; and prayed the King and Temporal Lords, to move it to them, spee∣dily to resolve and take upon them the Charge. To which the Clergie Ibm. The Clergy claim the Li∣berty of the Church, and affirm their Grants ought not to be made in Par∣lement. Replied, That their Grants were never made in Parlement, nor ought to be, and that the Laymen neither ought or could constrain them in that Case, and claim the Liberty of the Church, which it had enjoyed before that time, and desire the Commons might be charged to do what they ought, and were bound to do, (come ils deivent & sont Tenuz del faire) and they would do in the present necessity as they had done before. At last the Ib. n. 15. Three Groats granted upon every Person. Lords and Commons agreed to give Three Groats  of every Person of the Kingdom, Males and Females, of the Age of Fifteen years, of what Condition and Estate soever they were, except very Beggars; The Sufficient People in every Town to contribute to the assistance of the less able, so as none paid above Sixty Groats, including those for himself and Wife; The whole to be for the Support of the Earl of Buckingham, and the other Lords, and People with him in Britan, and for De∣fence of the Kingdom, and Safeguard of the Sea: Two parts to  be paid Fifteen days after St. Hillary, and the other at Whit∣sunday next after. No Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses of this Parlement to be Collectors of this Money, but that the King would order thro the Kingdom such as should equally levy it, accord∣ing to the meaning of this Grant. Toward the latter end of this Fourth year of Richard the Se∣cond,Many Riots and Insur∣rections in the Nation. there happened many Riots, Insurrections, and Rebellions in many places of the Kingdom; The Historians tell us this  Three Groat Tax, and the Insolence, Incivility, and Rudeness of the Collectors to young Maidens, was the cause of them; TheyThe Three Groat Tax the supposed cause of them. might at first be the pretence, and give occasion to put in execution what the Leaders and Contrivers of the intended general Insurrection of the Villanes, Natives, Bond-Tenents, and Clowns, designed in the First of this King, the Demands and Practices of these Men being built upon the same foundation.
These Insurrections began first in Kent and Essex: In Kent, un∣derThey began in Kent & Es∣sex, Wat Tiler, Jack Straw. the Leading of Wat Tiler; in Essex, under the Conduct of Jack Straw. The Wals. f. 47. n. 40, 50. & f, 248. A. D. 1381. Bulk of the People were Villains, Bond-Te∣nants, Country Clowns, such as were in Debt, and knew not how to satisfie their Creditors, and Criminals, who feared the Severity of the Law. The Kentish Rebels Rendezvoused upon Black-heath, to a vast number, on Ibm. & f. 249, 250, 251, 252, 253, &c. Their Preten∣ces. Wednesday, June 12. Their Pretences  were Liberty, changing the Evil Customs of the Nation, and cutting off the Heads of all the Lawyers great and small, and all that had any Offices in the Law, or Relation to it any way, where-ever they could find them; for that the Nation could not enjoy a true Liberty until they were killed. Ibm. The King sent to them to know the Reason of that Commotion, and the gathering together of such a Multitude. They told the Messengers they met to speak with the King about certain matters, and ordered them to go back,  and let him know he must come to them, and hear what they desired. Some about the King persuaded him to go forthwith: The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Simon de Sudbury then Chancellor, and Sir Robert Hales Prior of St. Johns of Jerusalem, then Lord Trea∣surer, earnestly dissuaded him, moving him rather to think of suppressing, than going to speak with such a Rabble about Busi∣ness. Ibm. Of which these rude People having notice, they threaten to cut off their Heads: And forthwith marching towards  London, came to Southwark, where they pulled down Froys. c. 383. Their Practi∣ces. Houses, brake open the King's Prisons, and let forth the Prisoners, who joined with them. The Bridge-Gate was shut against them; but by the Assistance of their Friends in the City, and by their Me∣naces and Threatnings of the Citizens, if they had not free Passage into the City, the Ibm. & Wals. ut supra. Gates were opened, and they pas∣sed backwards and forwards into and out of the City as they pleased, giving out they came only to search for Traytors to the  Kingdom; and at that time paid for what they called for, which got them Reputation with the low and ordinary Citizens, of whom a great many joined with them. Next Day, which was the Feast of Corpus Christi, or 13th of June, they marched through the City to the Savoy, the Duke of Lancaster's House, whom they called Traytor, and hated above all Men: This Ibm. House they burnt and beat down, and destroyed all the rich Furniture, throwing his Gold and Jewels into the Thames, as likewise all his  Plate, first breaking it into small pieces, and made it by Procla∣clamation Capital for any one to retain any thing to his own use, that they might shew the People what they did was not out of Covetousness. Ibm. From hence they went to the Temple, then an Habitation for Lawyers; this they demolish, and burn all their Books and Papers, with the Records that were there kept. Ibm. From this Place they go to Clerkenwell, where they destroy all the Goods in the Hospital of St. John, and set fire on that  Magnificent Building. Ibm. They now divided themselves into Three Bodies; one went to Heybury, a Mannour belonging to the Hospital of St. Johns near London, where they were busie in de∣stroying and plundering all the Goods belonging to it, and pul∣ling down a Noble House that stood there. Ibm. A second Body of them, which were most of Essex and the Countries adjoining,
lodged themselves upon Mile-end-Green; and the third about St. Katherines and Tower-hill. Next Day being Friday, and June 14th, Frs. c. 384. Wals. t supra. the King with several Noblemen went to Mile-end-Green, and telling them he was their King, asked those People (being about 60000) what they would have? They told him, They desired he would make them free, themselves, their Heirs, and Lands, and that they might not be called or reputed Bond-men. The King granted their  Desire, on condition they would return home, and leave Two or Three only of every Parish or Town, to stay and bring with them their Append. n. 103. Charters of Freedom, Sealed with the Great Seal, which should contain what they demanded. With this, and with mighty and most quick Dispatch, having received some of their Charters, they were satisfied, and went to their own Places and Countries. At the very same time Froys. & Wals. ut supra. the Kentish-men, and those with  them, who placed themselves on the Tower-hill and about St. Ka∣therines, went into the Tower, the Gates being open without Re∣sistance, though there were in it 600 Archers, and 600 other Armed Men, who were so terrified and astonished at the Num∣ber, Noise, and Practices of this vast Multitude, that they never regarded who went in, or who went out; from whence they took out the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor, Sir RobertThey cut off the Heads of the A. Bp. of Canterbury, Sir R. Hale, &c. Hales Lord Treasurer, John Leg, one of the King's Serjeants at  Arms, and a Franciscan Frier, and upon Tower-hill cut off their Heads. After this they went into the City, and cut off the Ibm. Heads of many English and Flemings there. They drew out of the Church of the Augustin Friers 13 Flemings, and out of other Churches 17 more, and cut off their Heads in the Streets (that be∣ing their only way of Murther) with mighty Shouts and Re∣joycing. Next Day, being the 15th of June, Ibm. they began to do as  they had done the Day before, cut off many Heads, pull down and burn Houses. The King then sent to them to let them know their Companions at Mile-end-Green, upon their receiving Charters of Freedom, were separated, and gone home to live quietly, with offer to them of Charters according to the same Form, if they would accept them. Ibm. Wat Tiler their Great Leader replied, He would embrace Peace, if he liked the Conditions: Thinking this way to have delayed the King and Council, so as  that Night he might have put his Design in execution; which was to kill the King and the Great Men that adhered to him; to have pillaged, plundered, and burnt the City, knowing all the poor People were with him. Ibm. There were three several Charters sent, but none pleased him. The King at last sent to him, that he would come and treat with him about the Articles he insisted upon to have inserted in the Charter; and when the Messenger desired him to make haste, he bid him if he were so much in haste, re∣turn  to the King; he would come when he pleased. Ibm. When he came with his Multitude behind him into Smithfield, where the King was, he behaved himself with such intolerable Rudeness to∣ward the King and those about him, and making such Demands as could not be granted; the King commanded William Walworth Major of London to Arrest him, who with great Courage struck
him a Blow on the Head, with which he sunk upon his Horse,Wt Tiler kkt down by the Major of London, and killed. and others of the King's Servants and Citizens thrust him thro' the Body in divers places, when he fell dead off his Horse almost under the King's Horse's Feet; Ibm. who finding his Followers much moved at their Captain's Death, lest they should proceed to do further Mischief, rode up to them, with his Military Men and Friends about him, and spake to them not to be troubled for the Death of such a Rogue and Traytor; telling them he was their  King, and would be their Captain and Leader, bidding them fol∣low him into the Fields, where they should have what they would ask. In the mean time, the Major of London got 1000 Men into Arms, and put Sir Robert Knolls at the Head of them,His Followers lay down Arms, and beg pardon. who marching into the Fields in good Order, so daunted the Rustic Rebels, that they threw down such Arms as they had, laid themselves upon the Ground, and begged Pardon. Ibm. Where∣upon Proclamation was immediately made in London, that the  Citizens should have no Correspondency with them, nor permit any one of them to come into the City. The Military Men about the King ask him to permit them to serve the Rebels as they had served others, to cut off an Hundred or two of their Heads. He would not consent, lest the Innocent might sufferThe King's great Mercy to them. with the Guilty, many having been drawn in by Fear, and such fair Pretences, as they could not know but they might be Good and Loyal. And beyond this unknown Mercy, he sent them  the Charter he had Granted to those of Essex and other Coun∣tries. At the same time, and on the same Days, Wals. f. 254 255, 256, 257, &c. The villai∣nous Practices of those about St. Albans. the Tenents and Villains of the Abby, and the Townsmen of St. Albans, with the Rustics of the whole Shire of Hertford, and Countries near, as∣sembled at St. Albans, requiring of the Abbat and Convent to be Manumised and made Free; to have the Liberties of the Town en∣larged, and to have the Charters and Grants of Privileges and Li∣berties  to the Abby delivered to them: Which by the King's Order were so delivered, and were with great Triumph burnt in the Mar∣ket-place. They also had from the Abbat and Convent Letters of Manumission and Freedom dictated by themselves, threatning if they would not grant such, to burn and demolish the Abby, cut off the Heads of the Abbat and all the Monks. And in the mean time, while they obtained these things, they cut off the Heads of such as they thought were their Enemies, or would not do as they  did, burnt and pulled down their Houses, and destroyed their Goods, following and performing in all things the Dictates and Orders of their Great Master Wat Tiler, which they had received from him, and seen practised in London on Corpus Christi Day, many of these Villains and Rustics and St. Albans-men being thenThe chief Leaders of them. there. William Gryndecobbe a Servant to the Abby, and William Cadyndon a Chandler in the Town of St. Albans, being the chief Men in this Tumult, who had received their Instructions, as  above, at London. They made, Proclamation for all of their own Condition to come in to them, with such Arms and Weapons as they had, under pain of losing their Heads, having their Houses burnt, if they had any of their own, and the loss of all their Goods found in them, These they caused to make Oath they would adhere to King Richard, and the True Commons of England. Where-ever
they came they broke open the Prisons, and set the Prisoners free. Ib. f. 259. n. 40. While they were in the height of these villanous Practices, they received news of the Death of Wat Tiler, and that the Ci∣tizens of London assisted the King against the Kentish and Essex∣men that staid with them. This, and some sent from the King to make Proclamation, upon forfeiture of Life and Member com∣manding them to be quiet, and return to their own Homes,  humbled and made them abstain from their most barbarous and out∣rageous Actions. Yet they kept together, and would not separate, tho' much persuaded to it, using their ordinary Practices against the Abbat-Monks, their Friends, Lawyers, Gentlemen; and all that would not do as they would have them. And for whatever they did, pretended the King's Append. n. 104. Consent, Order, and Authority; which caused the King, to undeceive the People, to send his Ibm. They pretend the King's Order and Authority for what they did. Writs to all Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, and others his Faithful  People, to make Proclamation to the contrary, and to oppose them every where in their tumultuous Risings and Actings against the Peace; commanding them to desist from such Assemblings, and go home. Dated at London June 17. in the 4th of his Reign. At the same time, and on the same Days, as if Corpus Christi Day had been the Signal Day, Wals. f. 261. n. 30, 40, 50. The same Tu∣mults and Practices at St. Emonas-Bury. y. Straw and R. Westbrom their Leaders. They cut off the Heads of the Chief Ju∣stice of Eng∣land, the Pri∣or; &c. the same sort of People Tu∣multuated in Suffolk, under the Conduct of John Straw a wicked  Priest, and Robert Westbrom of Edmonds-Bury, where they per∣petrated the same Villanies, and committed the same Insolencies, as in other Places. They came to Bury, and got into their hands the Charters of Liberties and Grants of Privilege to the Abby there, to free, as they said, the Towns-men from the Power and Jurisdi∣ction of that Place. They cut off the Heads of Sir John Cavendish Chief Justice of England, the Prior, and John de Lakinheath a Monk of that Monastery, and set them on the Pillory in the Market∣place. In Norfolk Ibm. f. 263. n. 10, 20, &c. The like Peo∣ple and Pra∣ctices in Nor∣folk, under the Conduct of John Litier a Dyer; at the same time a vast Number of such People, under the Conduct of John Littister a Dier of Norwich, took up∣on them the same Pretences, and were the very same in all their Actions. These compelled the Lord Scales, Sir William Morley, Sir John Brewes, Sir Stephen Hales, and Sir Robert de Salle, to remain with them, who seemed to do and allow what they did; except Sir Robert Salle, who publickly condemning and abhorring what they  did, had his Brains beat out. The other were Litister's Favourites, who now called himself King of the Commons, who had his RoyalWho stiled himself King of the Com∣mons, and had his Royal Of∣ficers. Officers, amongst whom Sir Stephen Hales was his Carver. These Rebellious People. whether they were wearied with, or repented of what they wickedly had done, and confidered what they must do, sent Two of the Knights, Sir William Morley and Sir John Brewes, with Three of their own, in whom they put most Con∣fidence, to the King, where-ever he should be, to obtain a Charter  of Manumission and Pardon, and that it might be more large than the Charters granted to other Counties. They had given them a great Sum of Money which had been received of the Citizens of Norwich, to preserve their City from Burning, Slaughter, and Plundering, that they might thereby obtain what they desired.
Henry Spencer Ibm. n. 50. f. 264 n. 10, 20, 30, 40. The Conduct, Courage, and Bravery of H. Spencer Bishop of Norwich. Bishop of Norwich being then in Rutlandshire, hearing of this Insurrection in Norfolk, was coming thither with eight Lances only, and a few Archers at Icklingham near Barton-Mills, he met with the Two Knights and their Three Companions going to the King, and upon strict enquiry finding out the Three Traitors, he presently caused their Heads to be cut off; and pro∣ceeded into Norfolk, where the Military Men and Gentlemen came to, and marched with him to North-Walsham, where the Rebels  were encamped; he with the Force he had with him being the first Man that charged the Enemy, affaulted their Trenches, and obtained the Ditch. The Fight was sharp for a while, but the Rabble soon fled: In the pursuit many of them were killed. Li∣tisterThe chief Movers of this Rebellion drawn, hang∣ed, and be∣headed. and the Chief Movers of this Rebellion were taken, who were Drawn, Hanged, and Beheaded, with many others thro' the whole Country; by which means it was reduced into a peaceable Con∣dition. Col. 2639. n. 10. Knighton says this Martial Bishop did the same things  in Cambridge and Huntington-shires; if so, 'tis more than probable he also reduced those of Bury St. Edmonds, and the whole County of Suffolk, being part of his Diocese, into good Order.Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, The Countries where these Insurrections and Tumults were being now pretty quiet, Commissions of Oyer and Terminer were Issued for the Trials of the Chief Contrivers and Managers of them. Wals. f. 267 n. 10, 20, 30. for the Trial of the Rebels. Those taken in London tried before the Lord Major. J. Straw and others behea∣ded. Those of London, and such of Kent, Essex, Sussex, Norfolk, and Suffolk, as were found within the Liberties of the City, were  Tried before the Lord Major, of whom the Chief were John Straw, John Kyrkeby, Alan Treder, and John Starling, who Gloried that he Murthered the Arch-Bishop. These had their Heads cut off, and several others not named. At St. Albans Ibm. f. 276. n. 30, 40. Gryndecobbe, Cadyndon, John the Barber, and 15 others hanged at St. Abs. William Gryndecobbe, William Cadyndon, and John the Barber, with 15 others, were Condemned, Drawn, and Hanged. Of the Chief Men of the Town were Imprisoned Richard Walyngford, John Garlek, William Berewill, Thomas Putor, and  many other of the ordinary sort. Of the Country were impri∣soned 80 Persons, who afterwards by the King's Mercy were set at liberty. John Ball Ib. f. 275, 276. John Ball a Priest hang'd, drawn, and quartered. also a Priest was taken at Coventry and brought to St. Albans, where he was adjudged to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, and was executed on the 15th of July, having been some Days Reprieved by the Mediation of the Bishop of London. Ib. f. 275. n. 10, 20. His Speech on Black-heath to the Malefa∣ctors. This Man had Preached to please the People above Twenty  Years. He made a Speech to the vast Multitude of Malefactors at Black-heath, and took for his Subject the Old Rime, Whan Adam Dalfe, and Eve Span, Who was than a Gentleman? From which he inferred, Ib. n. 30, 40. The Heads of his Speech. That by Nature all Men were equal: That Servitude was introduced by the injust Oppression of Wicked  Men, against the Will of God; for if God had intended to have created Servants in the beginning of the World, he would have appointed who should have been Servants, and who Lords or Ma∣sters; advising them to consider, that then was the time given them by God, in which they might shake of the Yoak off Servitude if they would, and enjoy their long-desired Liberty. And to this end
further advised them to be Stout, and hasten to procure it; first, by killing all the Great Men of the Kingdom; then the Law∣yers, Justices, and Jury-men; and lastly, to destroy all such as they knew would be injurious to them for the future: So as then they might acquire Peace and Security; and there would be equal Liberty, the same Nobility, the like Dignity, and the like Power amongst them. This Speech, with the Ibm. f 265. n. 20, 30, 40. John Straw's Speech and Confession at the time of his death. Confession of John Straw at the time of his  death, discovers the full Intention of these Riots, Rebellions, and Tumults. He said, that when they assembled at Black-heath, and sent to the King to come to them, their Purpose was to have slain all the Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen that came with him; and to have carried the King with them from Place to Place, that the Rabble might with greater Boldness come to them, when they should see him, as it were, the Author of their Insurrections: That when there should have been great Numbers got together in all  Countries, they were to have killed the Lords or Knights who were able to advise against, or resist them; especially the Hospi∣talers. At last they were to have killed the King, and all Bishops, Monks, Canons, and Rectors of Churches, that were Endowed, and had Lands and Possessions, sparing only the Friers Mendicants, who were sufficient to celebrate and perform Divine Rites thro' the whole Nation. These things done, when there had been none Greater, none more Potent, none more Knowing than themselves,  they would have made such Laws as they pleased, by which the People were to be Governed. They intended also to have made Kings, as Wat Tiler in Kent, and in every other County One. On the Night also of that Day whereon Wat Tiler was killed, the poor Rabble being on their side, they intended to have burnt the City of London, and to have divided all the Rich Goods found there amongst themselves. This he affirmed to have been their Design, as he desired God would help him at his going out of the World;  W. Walworth, and other chief Citizens of London Knighted. and then had his Head struck off. For their Good Service in de∣stroying Wat Tiler, preserving the City, and giving him Assistance, the King Knighted Stow's An∣nals, p. 463. William Walworth Major, John Philpot, Nicholas Brembre, and Robert Laund, Aldermen; and gave to Sir William Walworth 100 l. per Annum Land; and to the other 40 l. per Annum to them and their Heirs for ever: And not long after, Knighted Nicholas Twiford and Adam Francis, Two other Alder∣men. In the Wals. f. 278. n. 50. 279. lin. 4. time of these Insurrections and Rebellions, the Duke of Lancaster was in Scotland, where he concluded a Truce for Two Years, before they heard of the Tumults and Riots in England. Ibm. n. 30, 40. A two Years Truce with the Scots. A Quarrel be∣tween the D. of Lancaster & Earl of Nor∣thumberland. In his return, he was denied Entrance into Berwic by the Earl of Northumberland, which mightily incensed him against the Earl. On the 16th of July Rot. Claus. 5 Rot. II. M. 40 Dors. A Parlement called. Writs were sent forth for a Parlement  to meet at Westminster, on Monday after the Exaltation of Holy Cross, or 14th of September, which was afterwards Prorogued to the Ib. M. 39 Dors. morrow of All-Souls, which was Monday, when it was Rot. Parl. 5 Ric. II. n. 1. Adjourned to the next Day, many Lords and Prelates being absent; and so unto Wednesday, when by reason of the Quarrel between the Duke of Lancaster and Earl of Northumberland, who came to
the Parlement with great Force of Armed Men and Archers, the KingThey came to the Parlement with great Force of ar∣med Men. caused the Parlement to be Adjourned unto Saturday, in which Wals. f. 280. n. 40, 50. The K. ends the Quarrel. time the King composed the Differences between them, and ended the Quarrel. The Cause of Summons was Rot. Parl. 5 Ric. II. n. 8. The cause of Summons. declared to be, That they might consider how to procure the Quiet and Peace of the Nation, and settle it after the late Tumults and Insurrections, to confirm or re∣peal  the Revocation the King had made of the Grants of Liberty and Manumission by Force and Coertion obtained by the Na∣tives, Bond-Tenants, and Villains: That the King was much in∣debted, and in great Necessity for Money to maintain his Court and the Wars. The whole Parlement, Lords and Commons, Ibm. n. 13. The Liberties and Manu∣missions of the Villains, &c. repealed by Authority of Parlement. declared the Grants of Liberties and Manumission, to Natives, Villains, and Bond-Tenants, to be by Coertion in Disheritance of them, and Destruction of the  Realm, and therefore to be null, and repealed by Authority of Par∣lement. The Commons Ibm. The Com∣mons desire certain Pre∣lates and Lds. to treat with them. The King prayed the King to have certain Prelates and Lords to comune with them about their Charge, for that the Matters very highly concerned the State of the Realm, and it was much to the Purpose to have their Advice. The Answer Ibm. n. 14. grants their Request. was, They should give in the Names to the King in Writing, of such as they desired, that he might advise  about it. Which was done; and the King granted their Desire; (le Roy lour Grantast al Effect qils furent Demandez.) And the Commons further Ibm. n. 16. The Commons pray the King the Prelates by themselves, the Great Lds. by themselves, and the Ks. by themselves, and the Justi∣ces by them∣selves, might treat about their Charge, and their Ad∣vice reported to the. This was con∣trary to the Practice and Custom of Parlement, which the K. would have observed. prayed the King, That the Prelates by themselves, the Great Lords Temporal by themselves, the Knights by themselves, the Justices by themselves, and all other Estates singly might be charged to treat and comune about their Charge, and that their Advice might be reported to the Commons.  To which it was answered, Tha the King had charged the Lords and other Sages, to comune and treat diligently upon the said Matters: But the ancient Custom and Form of Parlement had always been, That the Commons should first report their Ad∣vice, upon the Matters given them, to the King and Lords of Parlement, and not on the contrary; and therefore the King would that the ancient and good Customs and Form of Parlement should be kept and observed. After the Commons had conferred Ibm n. 17. The Commons complain of the ill Go∣vernment of to Kingdom. with the Lords, they re∣turned into the Parlement, and made great Complaint of the ill Government of the Realm, which if not amended, the Kingdom would be in short time ruined. They complained of the Govern∣ment about the King's Person, his Court, the over-great Number of his Servants, of the Chancery, Kings-Bench, Common-Pleas, Ex∣chequer; of grievous Oppressions in the Country (par la Outra∣geouse Multitude de Braceurs, des Quereles, & Mainteinours, qi sout  come Roys en Pais, que Droit, ne Loy est a poy fait, &c.) by the great Multitude of Bracers of Quarrels, and Maintainers, who be∣haved themselves like Kings in the Country, so as there was very little of Law or Right, and of other things, which they said were the cause of the late Commotion, Rumor, and Mischiefs of the Land, and requested they might be amended.
The King Ibm n. 18. Certain Lords and others as∣signed to sur∣vey and exa∣min the Go∣vernment of the King's Person and Kingdom. These Lords and others were assigned and chosen by the King. See n. 27. by Advice of the Lords and his Council, granted that certain Prelates, Lords, and others, should survey and examin the Government of his Person and Court, and to think of sufficient Remedies. The Persons chosen to make this Enquiry, were, The Duke of Lancaster, the Elect of Canterbury, the Arch-Bishop of York, the Bishops of Winchester, Ely, Excester, and Rochester; the Earls of Arundel, Warwic, Stafford, Suffolk, and Salisbury; the Lords  Zouch, Nevil, Grey of Ruthin, and Fitz-Walter; Monsieur Richard le Scrop, Monsieur Guy de Bryan, and others; & autres. Ibm. The King's Confessor not to come to Court. The King's Confessor was charged to abstain from coming to, and remain∣ing at Court, by the Request of the Commons and Assent of the Lords. The Commons Ibm n. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. The Com∣mons Petition the Duke of Lancaster, and others, assign∣ed to appoint Officers, &c. Petition the Duke of Lancaster, and others, assigned by the King to that purpose, to place the most valued Of∣ficers  about the King's Person, and in his Court; to appoint a Chan∣cellor, Barons, and Officers in the Exchequer, Judges of one Bench and the other; That they might know their Names, and what they were to do, and the Method they were to take in the Regu∣lation of the Nation, after these things were done. They also Ibm. n. 25, 26. They petition for an end of the War. Petition an End might be made of the War, which was in great part maintained by the Goods which the Enemies of  the Nation took by Sea and Land from the English, to the great Slander of the Government and Nation, and Destruction of the whole Realm. They likewise Petition, That certain of the Chief Ibm. n. 28, 29. They Petiti∣on certain Persons may inspect the Grievances a∣bove noted. No answer made to this. Clercs in Chancery, certain Justices, Barons of the Exchequer, and others Learned in the Law not there named, might consult of the Grie∣vances above; and that certain Merchants not named, might de∣clare the Causes of the Low Prices of our Commodities, carrying over  our Money, Washing and Clipping thereof. But I find no report made of this Matter, or Remedy ordered: There is something in the Statutes at Large in this Year, about Exportation of Money, and the Exchequer, Cap. 2. & 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The Commons Ibm. n. 30. brought into Parlement a Schedule, contain∣ingThe Com∣mons pro∣pound 3 sorts of Pardons to be granted by the King. The first. Three Articles for Three sorts of Pardons, if the King would please to grant them: The first was, for the Lords, Gentlemen, and others, that in Resistance of the Riotors and Traytors, caused some  of them to be slain without due Process of Law; for which see the Statutes at Large of this Year, Cap. 5. The Statute there exactly agrees with the Record. The second Ibm. The 2d sort. to appease and quiet the wicked People concerning Treason and Felony committed in the Riots and Tumults, which was granted Ibm. n. 32. Several Town, excepted out of these Par∣dons. to all and singular Persons, except such as were of the Towns of Canterbury, St. Edmonds-Bury, Beverly, Scharburgh, Bridgewater, and Cambridge; except also the Persons whose Append. n. And those that killed the A. Bo. &c.  Names were after written, and were brought into Parlement as the Chief and Principal Excitors and Movers of the Insurrections in the several Countries; and those that killed the Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury, Lord Chancellor, the Prior of St. Johns Lord Treasurer, and John Cavendish Lord Chief Justice; and except such as had escaped out of Prison, and had not then rendred themselves: Pro∣vided,
that such as received Damages and Losses by these Insurrections,Provided not∣withstanding, those which had received Damages might recover Recompence by Law. should not by this Pardon be foreclosed from recovering Recompence by due course of Law. The Third was, for Ib. Rot. Parl. 5 Ric. II. n. 32. The Third sort of Par∣dons. the good People that kept themselves in Peace, and were no ways consenting to, or concerned in the Tumults and Insurrections. The Forms of the Pardons were now drawn and read, tho the King had not yet passed them. Afterwards, upon Ib. n. 95. The Towns above all Pardoned, except St. Ed∣monds-Bury. the Petition of the Commons, That the Towns above-named might, with other Towns, receive the Be∣nesit of the Pardon, excedpt those Persons that were specially excepted, which the King except the Town of St. Edmond's-Bury, that for their outrageous Ibm. Ro. And except the Persons whose Names were deliver∣ed into Parle∣ment in Writing. and horrible Wickedness, so long continued, he would not have comprised in his Grace; and except also the Persons whose Names were delivered into Parlement as the chief  and principal Beginners, Abettors, and Procurers of the late Out∣rageous Treason. After the Business of the Pardons, the Commons make a Ib. n. 34. The Com∣mons rehearse their Grie∣vances. Re∣hearsal of their Requests and Grievances they would have amended, and desire to have a view of what was done in that Matter. The King tells them, Ibm. & n. 35. The King tells them of his great Ex∣pences and Necessity. he had been at great Expence in quiet∣ing  the Nation in the late Tumults, and otherwise, as was declared to them before by his Officers, and that he was to be at further great Expences by reason of the Queen's coming, her Marriage and Coronation, which were suddenly to be Celebrated; also in guard∣ing the Seas, and keeping his Fortresses beyond Sea, and for the defence of the Realm at home, for the discharge of which Debts, and the supply of his Expences, he had nothing in Treasure or o∣therwise. The Commons Ib. n. 36. They answer, they neither dare, or would grant any Tallage. answered, That considering the Evil Hearts, and Rancour of the People thro the whole Realm, they neither dare nor would grant any manner of Tallage. They desire the Ib. n. 37, 38. They desire the Parlement may be ad∣journed, and to see the Me∣thod of his Grace and Favour. Parlement may be adjourned till after Christmass, which was granted; and then they also desire again to see the Method of his Grace and Favour. The King Ib. n. 39. The King ad∣viseth of his General Par∣don, until the Commoos should do what belong∣ed to them. Replied, it was not the Custom of Parlement to have a General Pardon, and such favour from the King, when the Commons would not grant him any thing; and told them, he would advise of his Grace and Pardon until they should do what belonged to them; and said further, it was Customary to grant Pardons the last day of the Parlement, when he answered their Supplications and Petitions in Writing. Whereupon Ib. n. 40. The Prelates, Lords, and Commons, grant the Subsidy of Wooll. the Commons came into Parlement before the Lords, saying they had advised, and considered the great Charge of the King as well here as beyond Sea; and then the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, granted a Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells, until Candlemass next coming, as it was last granted,
which was read in Parlement, as also the Declaration of theThe Com∣mons much joyed at the King's Grace. King's Grace, at which the Commons were much joyed, and thanked the King most humbly and intirely for the same. In this Ibm. n. 45. The Practice of the Town of Cambridge against the University. Parlement there were great Complaints made of the Mayor, Bayliffs, and Commonalty of the Town of Cambridge, for their Evil Practices, as well out of the Town in the Country, as in it, against the Ʋniversity, in the time of the late Tumults, as by the Ib. n. 54. Bill exhibited against them may appear, wherein it is  set forth, That they went to Corpus Christi or Benedict College, where they seised the Charters, Writings, Books and Records, broke down the Scholars Chambers, and took and carried away Goods and Chattels to a great value, (a grant value;) Also, That they compelled the Masters and Scholars under Pain of Death, and Destruction of their Habitations, to renounce all manner of Franchises and Privileges granted to them by any King whatsoever, and submit to the Govern∣ment of the Town for ever; Also, By threatning Death they caused the  Masters and Scholars to enter into Bonds to pay them great Sums of Money, and forced them to give a General Acquittance and Release of all Actions Real and Personal; Also, That by threatning Death they compelled the Masters and Scholars to deliver to them their Charters and Privileges, which they burnt in the Market-Place, contrary to the King's Proclamation and Prohibition. The King issued his Ib. n. 46, 47. Writs, To John Masterman, the present Mayor, (who was then one of the Ib. n. 48. Burgesses for the Town in  this Parlement) and Bayliffs, and to Edward Lystere, the late Mayor, and Bayliffs, when the Riot and Tumult was, to appear in Parlement, to acquit themselves if they could before him and his Council, reciting in his Writs most what they had done in prejudice of the Chan∣cellor, Masters and Scholars of the Ʋniversity; They appeared; and were ordered to deliver up the Renunciation Bond, and Release above∣mentioned under the Ʋniversity Seals, which were cancelled in Parle∣ment, and are entred upon the Roll. The Bill against them being then  read in their presence in Parlement, they were asked what they had to say, why their Franchises and Privileges should not be taken into the King's Hands as forfeit; at that time they were not charged with any Crime, but, as they were told, were only to answer concerning their Fran∣chise, which they did by Ib. n. 57. Counsel, and denied the Matter of Fact; and further said, if any such things were done, they were done by the Traitors and Malefactors of the Counties of Essex, Hertfordshire, and Kent, which came to their Town in great numbers; but it appearing  they were always present at these Wicked Practices, and that the Renun∣ciation, Bond, and Releases of the Ʋniversity, were in their keeping, and that upon the King's Precept they would not deliver them, it was thought evidence enough that they were guilty of the whole; when they submitted themselves wholly to the King's Grace, to do what he pleased with their Franchise; some part whereof, by advice and assent of theSome of their Franchises granted to the University. Prelates and Lords, the King gave to the Ʋniversity, and the Resi∣due he re-granted to the Town. On the 13th of December, because Ib. n. 64. The Parle∣ment ad∣journed. Christmass was near, and the time of the Queen's coming into England was also near, and for that her Marriage and Coronution were to be solemnized, (le Parlement soit ajourne par nostre seigneur le Roy de lassent des Pre∣lates, &c.) the King adjourned the Parlement by the assent of the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, unto the Friday next before
the Conversion of St. Paul; and did Will and Command, That theAll things by the King's Command to remain as they were, until it met again. Pleas, Causes, and other Matters moved in that Parlement, and were undetermined, and all other things, with their dependences, should remain as they were, in the same condition, until the Friday abovesaid. At the meeting again Ib. n. 66. The Duke of Lancaster's Proposals of going into Spain, &c. of the Parlement, there was a great Dis∣pute about a Voyage Monsieur Despainge, the Duke of Lancaster, offered to make into Portugal, if the Kingdom would provide him  60000 l. to pay the Wages of 2000 Men at Arms, and 2000 Ar∣chers, for half a year. The Pretences or Reasons for this Voyage were, for the saving of such English as were then there, that he might recover his Right he had there; for the safe-guard of the Sea, and the Realm of England, (& si Dieux plest) and if God pleased, for the greater destruction of its Enemies; Offering also to repay this Sum in Three years, either in Money, or acceptable Service. Upon this Offer and Voyage the Lords had a long Debate, some ap∣proved  He obtained not what he desired. his Reasons, others not, so as he obtained not what he desired. Yet the Ib. n. 67. Lords and Commons, on the 25th of February, considering the Necessities of the King, and the multitude of hisThe King's Enemies ma∣ny by Sea and Land. Enemies by Sea and Land, with the great Expences he must be at for the defence of the Kingdom, and resistance of such Ene∣mies, granted on their Free-will to the King the Subsidy of Wooll, Woollfells, and Leather, as he received it upon the last  The Subsidy of Wooll, &c. granted for Four years. Grant, from that day until the Feast of St. John Baptist next coming, and from thence for Four years. Whether such Defence or Resistance should be by the Voyage of Monsieur de Lancaster into Spain, or any other manner whatever, with this express Protestation of the Commons, That it was not their intention to be obliged by any Words to Quarrel, Conquer, or have War withThe Com∣mons protest against Quar∣relling, &c. with Spain. Spain particularly, any way whatsoever, but only for the De∣fence of the Kingdom, and Resistance of its Enemies, by the ad∣vice  of the Lords, as it should seem best to them to ordain, (par lavis des seigneurs del dit Roialme come meultz lour semblera a or∣deiner. Between the summons and meeting of the next Parlement, Walsingham, f. 290. n. 20, 30, &c. The Great Seal taken from Richard le Scrop. the Great Seal was taken from Richard le Scrop, who had received it by approbation of Parlement, because he would not pass some large Gifts of Estates, which had escheated to the Crown, to some  Ambitious Knights and Esquires, inferior Servants to the King, and given to Robert Braybroke, Cl. 6 Ric. II. M. 24. Dors. Which dis∣quieted the Great Men. Bishop of London, on the Vigil of St. Matthew the Apostle, or 20th of September, by which action the King much disquieted the Great Men and Community of the Kingdom. In the Sixth of the King a Rot. Parl. 6 Ric. II. n. 1, 2. A Parlement: The Cause of Summons, the Defence of the Land, and to provide Means to make it. Parlement was summoned to meet on Monday, Eight days after Michaelmas, and was adjourned  until Wednesday by the King's Command, when the King and Lords met in the Painted Chamber, before whom the Names of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, were called over; The Bishop of London, then Lord Chancellor, amongst others, declared the cause of Summons to be for the Defence of the Land against its Enemies, and to provide Means to make it.
The Bishop of Hereford, by the King's Order, made a N. 9, 10. A further De∣claration of the Cause of Summons. Two ways propounded to deal with the Enemies of the King∣dom. fur∣ther Declaration of the cause of Summons, and propounded Two ways to deal with the Enemies of the Kingdom, one by making use of the Flemings, who offered their Service; and the other, to close with the profer of Monsieur Despaign or Duke of Lancaster, who offered to go into Spain for half a year with 2000 Men at Arms, and as many Archers, if he might have 43000 l. to pay  them, for which he would oblige himself to repay either in Mo∣ney or Service. These Matters being of so high a Nature, Ib. n. 14. The Com∣mons desire such Lords as they named to Confer with them a∣bout their Charge. the Commons make their Request to the Lords, to have such as they named to Commune with them about their Charge; which Request was granted, and the Lords Names entered upon the Roll. The Lords and Commons Ib. n. 15. A Fifteenth and Tenth granted. upon Conference, granted a Fif∣teenth  and Tenth, by reason of the great danger the Nation was in, for the Defence of it against the great Preparations of the French, to be imployed as the King, by Advice of his Council, and the Lords of the Realm, should think fit. After this the Ib. n. 23. The Lords inclinable to the Duke of Lancaster's Proposal. Duke of Lancaster's Profer came again into Consideration, upon which the Question was put to every particular  Prelate, Earl, Baron, and Baneret, whether they thought his Voyage into Spain, with the number of Soldiers propounded, would be profitable to the King and Realm, or not; They thought it might be so, only believing the Force too small to make War with so strong a Kingdom. At this time Mezeray, A D. 1381, 1382. great Riots and Tumults in France and Flanders. The King of France subdues a great part of Flanders. there were great Riots, Tumults, and Rebel∣lions in France and Flanders; The Flemings had driven their  Earl out of his Country, he applies himself to the King of France, as his Sovereign Lord, for Relief; They crave Assistance of the King of England. The King of France marched into Flanders, and subdued a great part of the Country; The Earl besieged Gaunt, which was the Head of the Rebellion, and in danger to be taken. To prevent the King of France his further Progress in Flanders,  his Designs against England, and his Preparations to besiege Calais, as he had been informed, Rot. Clause 6 Ric. II. Part 1. M. 4. Dors. King Richard offers to go in Person with an Army into France. as it is said in the Writ of Sum∣mons to another Parlement this year, to be held on Monday in the third week of Lent, was the chief cause of calling it. And the Bishop of London, Lord Chancellor, declared further, the King had offered to go in Person into France with a Royal Army, but since that he received news the French had over-run all Flan∣ders except Gaunt, and therefore this Parlement was Rot. Parl. 6 Ric. II. Part 2. n. 2, 3. called  for Advice, whether the King should go in Person to the Relief of Gaunt and Recovery of Flanders, and how to provide where∣withall for the Performance. After the Commons had advised two or three days (sur lour charge) upon their Charge, it being so great, and so highly con∣cerned
his Person, they Ib. n. 8. The Com∣mons pray some Lords named by them to Treat with them. prayed the King, to grant certain Prelates, Earls, and Lords named by them, to Treat with them about it, viz. The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Ely and Hereford, the Earls of Cambridge, Stafford, and Northumber∣land, the Lords Nevill, Fitz-Walter, and Cobham; The which Prelates, Earls, and Lords, the King granted to Treat with the Commons, (Ibm. The King granted their Prayer, tho it was in his choice to as∣sign them, or name others. combien que feust, est & doit estre, en le Election de nostre dit seigneur le Roy d'assigner a ce les ditz Prelates & Seigneurs  issuit nomez ou autres a sa propre nomination) altho it was, is, and ought to be in the Election of the King to assign the Prelates and Lords for this purpose, or others of his own proper Nomina∣tion. When the Commons had Ib. n. 9. The Com∣mons say, the ordering of the King's Voyage be∣longs not to them. Treated long with the Prelates and Lords, they by James Pickering, their Speaker, said, The King's Passage, and the Ordaining of his Voyage, or any other  great Voyage, belonged not to them, but to the King himself and Lords, yet Ib. n. 10. But they say, neither he nor any of his Three Uncles ought to leave the Kingdom at that time. by way of Advice, and not by Counsell, seeing what Troubles were in every part of the Land, and that the Accord and Truce with the Scots were near at an end, and they were raising great Force toward the Borders, and it being doubtful, whether they would now comply with any Proposals of Peace or Truce, unless driven to it, they thought neither him∣self, nor any of his Three Ʋncles, of Lancaster, Cambridge, or  Buckingham, could be spared out of the Kingdom, until that, and the Borders aforesaid, were well quieted and settled. But advised him to accept of the Bishop of Norwich his Ib. n. 11. They advise the King to accept the Bishop of Norwich his offer for the Relief of Flanders. pro∣fer of raising 3000 Men at Arms, and 3000 Archers well mount∣ed, to Relieve Gaunt, Reduce Flanders, and afterward to War in France, upon condition he might have the Fifteenth and Tenth granted by the Layety and Clergy, and the 2 s. per Tun upon  Wine, and Sixpence in the Pound upon Goods, for the Guard of the Sea. The Ib. n. 19. They pray the King cer∣tain Lords might be as∣signed to be about his Per∣son to advise him, &c. Commons pray the King, That for his Honour and Profit, and the Quiet and Comfort of themselves, of his great Grace he would please to Command, that certain Lords might be assigned to be about his Person, of the most Wise, Honest, and Discreet Persons of the Kingdom, to advise and counsel him; and  further, That he would please by advice of the Lords, so to or∣der his Houshold, that he might live upon the Revenues of his Realm, and that the Subsidy of Wooll, Money arising from Wards, Marriages, and Escheates, might be imployed to support the War, &c. The King Ibm. The King's Answer. answered, That he would take such sufficient Persons, Lords and others, about his Person, as seemed to him  most for his Honour and Profit; and as to the Government of his House, it should be done by the Advice of the Lords and o∣thers of his Council, in such good order as should seem best, sa∣ving his Honour.
The Bishop of Norwich Ib. n. 20. The Bishop of Norwich his 2d Offer. Accepted by the King and his Council, and approved by the Com∣mons. having had time to consider of his first Profer, makes a second, To serve the King one Year with 2500 Men at Arms, and 2500 Archers well Arrayed and Moun∣ted, for the whole Fifteenth granted by the Laity; of which Number, 1000 Men at Arms, and 1000 Archers, should be ready to pass the Sea for the Relief of Gaunt and the Country of Flanders, within 20 Days after the first Payment; and that he would take upon him to pay the Charge of Shipping, and other  Charges. Ibm. This Profer was accepted by the King and his Council, and much approved of by the Commons. This Bishop some time before had received Ws. f. 291. n. 30, 40. The Bishop of Norwich had Bullsfrom Pope Urban for a Croysado, against the Anti-Pope Clement. Bulls from Pope Ʋrban for a Croysado, and to sign all with the Cross that would go with him into France for the Destruction of the Anti-Pope, who called himself Clement; and to Sanctifie the War against all his Adherents; which were the Knighton, col. 2671. n. 20, 30, &c. The Ladies give their Jewels, Neck∣laces, Rings, &c. toward this Croysado. French, Scots, Flemings, and many other Nations. By virtue of these Bulls, he collected a great  Sum of Money, besides Jewels, Necklaces, Rings, Dishes, Spoons, and other Silver Implements, especially of Ladies and other Women: And many gave Ibm. to be pardon∣ed and absol∣ved from their Sins. beyond their Ability (as it was believed) to obtain the Benefit of Absolution and Pardon for their Sins: For otherwise they were not absolved, unless they contributed according to their Ability. Many found Men at Arms, others Archers, and many went in their own Persons. The Form of Absolution was this: By Apostolic Authority to me committed, Append. . 105. The Form of the Absoluti∣on. I do Absolve thee A. B. from all thy Sins which thou dost with a contrite Heart confess, or would confess if thou didst remember them; and give thee a Full Remission of them, the Retribution of the Just; and do promise the Increase or Addition of eternal Salvation. And I Grant to thee the same Privileges that are Granted to such as go to the Defence of the Holy Land; and do impart to thee the Benefit of the Prayers  and Suffrages of the Holy Catholic Church. To publish this Croysado, and to absolve according to this Form, there were a sufficient number of Preachers sent beyond Sea, and all England over, besides all the Mendicant Friers, to stir up the People to contribute, with a Clerc to take the Names, and receive Money of the Contributors, not omitting Labourers. Knighton, Col. 2673. Toward the latter end of Wals. f. 298. n. 30, 40. The Bishop passeth be∣yond Sea with his Ar∣my. May, the Bishop passed the Sea with his Army, staid a few Days at Calais, besieged Graveling, and took it by Assault. Dunkirk yielded without much trouble, where some Flemings joining with the French and Britans, to the number of 30000, came toward the Town; Ibm. f. 301. lin. 11. Knight. ut su∣pra, n. 50, 60. His great Success. He besieged Ypre. against whom the Bishop, tho' but with a small Number in respect of theirs, marched out of Dunkirk and gave them Battel, taking many, and killing 3000; Walsingham says 12000. Afterwards he took in Cassal,  Dixmude, Burburgh, Fern, Newport, and Popering. Then he besieged the Knight. ib. His Army left the Siege, and revolted from him. Town of Ypre a long time, assaulted it often, and was always repulsed and beaten off; and at length, without his Know∣ledge, the Army left the Siege, and Revolted from him. The Bat∣tering Engines were all left behind, with one great Gun called Can∣terbury-Gun Ibm. col. 2672. lin 3. (cum una magna Gunna vocata Gunna Cantuariensis.)
The Bishop followed his Army, and went to Dunkirk, with Sir Hugh Caverse and part of it, and from thence to Gravelin. Sir Thomas Trivet, Sir William Elingham, and others, went to Burburgh with other part of the Army, and fortified it. Ibm. n. 10, 20, 30. The King of France takes Burburgh, The King of France comes suddenly upon them with a great Army, besieged the Town, assaults it, and was beaten off with loss: Yet within few Days they treated, and yielded the Town to the King of France, upon Condition to march away with Horse and Arms, and all their  Goods; and so they did to Calais. After Wals. f. 304. n. 50. & f. 305. n. 10, 20, 30. and Gravelin. Burburgh was taken, the French Army marched before Graveling, and summoned the Bishop to yield the Town. The French offered him 15000 Marks to quit the Town, with liberty to demolish it, and to depart and go whither he would, and all with him, with all their Goods. He desired Time to consider of the Terms, and appointed a Day to give his Answer; and in the meant time sent to England for Relief; which not coming at or  before that Day, he accepted the Terms, levelled the Town to the ground, and came for England after Michaelmas. And thus ended the Croysado, or the Pontifical War. Before the Return of the Bishop of Norwich, Writs Dated the 20th of August had been Claus. 7 Ric. II. M. 37. Dors. A. D. 1384. A Parlement called. The Reasons of calling it given in the Writ of Sum∣mons. sent forth for a Parlement to meet on Monday before All-Saints. In which Writs, notice was given, That by Advice and Assent of the Council the Parlement was called, for their Mediation and Assistance in a Treaty of Peace to be  had then, between the King, his Kingdom, Dominions and Sub∣jects on the one part, and Robert King of Scotland, his Lands, Dominions, and Subjects on the other part; and for other Diffi∣cult and Urgent Business which concerned him, the State and Defence of the Kingdom, and Church of England. Sir Michael de laPole then Chancellor, Rot. Parl. 2 Ric. II n. 3. The same and other Causes of Summons declared by the Chancel∣lor. shewed the Causes of Parlement to be, for that the Truce with the Scots was to end at Candlemas next; and whereas the Duke of Lancaster had been  sent to renew it, he was returned, and brought back, That the Scots would send Commissioners to London, to manage the Treaty about it. Another Cause was Ib. n. 4, 5 to provide against Three Powerful Ene∣mies, Spain, France, and lately Flanders: And here he offered several Reasons to prove it was better for us to begin and make War upon them, than they upon us, or suffer them to invade us: Further shewing, That these Wars were not to be imputed to  the King, seeing that with the Crown they descended to him. And the last Cause was Ib. n. 6. for the Maintenance of good Laws, and Security of the Peace, when he put them in mind of giving Aid to support these great Charges. When the Duke of Lancaster Wals. f. 309. n. 20, 30, 40. Commission∣ers to be sent to the Parle∣ment of Scot∣land from England; and the same from Scotland to English Parle∣ments. The Scots kpt not this Agreement. was sent to Renew the Truce with Scotland, it was agreed, That for the Ease of both Nations, and to save Charges, there should be sent Commissioners of both Na∣tions to every Parlement of either Nation, who should represent  the Injuries done to each other upon the Borders, and receive Satisfaction according to the Judgment of the Lords. The Scots sent not to this Parlement, but did much Injury upon the Borders, and received a Force from France, to join with them against the English: But hearing there were Preparations making against them toward, or just after the end of the Parlement, they sent
their Commissioners, who were rejected, and sent home without Treaty. The Chancellor Rot. Parl. 7 Ric. II. n. 11. The Chancel∣lor quickens the Lords to dispatch the King's Busi∣ness, &c. Laying aside other Debates. spake to the Lords a second time, and told them, The King commanded them to have due Consideration of the necessary Matters that had been declared to them, and of the apparent importable Mischief, and of the great Necessity he had for Money to prevent them: And that they would Treat by themselves diligently upon these things with as much speed as  might be, laying aside the Debate of any other Matter in the mean time, and to report their Advice from time to time to him: And said further, the King commanded them to treat from Day to Day, and dispatch what they came for, and not to depart from Parlement without his special Licence, under the Peril that might happen. And then Ibm. n. 12, 13. The Lords and Commons grant 2 half 15ths. the Lords and Commons considering the outra∣geous Charge the King was to be at, by reason of the War on  every side then open, granted two half Fifteenths, upon Con∣dition the Clergy would contribute and grant as became them. In this Parlement Ibm. n. 18. The Bishop of Norwich accu∣sed by the Chancellor. His Crime and Punish∣ment. the Bishop of Norwich was accused by the Chancellor in several Articles, for his Miscarriages in his late Expedition: One was, That he had promised to serve the King with such a Number of Men for a whole Year, and served but half a Year; and then returned with his Army ruined, &c. Of  which Article he could not clear himself; Ibm. n 23. and therefore was ad∣judged to make Fine and Ransom at the King's Pleasure, and the Temporalities of his Bishoprick to be seized for that Pur∣pose. Sir William Ellingham, Sir Thomas Trivet, Sir Henry de Ferrers,4 Knights ac∣cused for sel∣ling Fortres∣ses. and Sir William de Harnedon, were accused in Parlement before the Lords, Ibm. n. 24. for receiving Money for the Delivery of several For∣tresses, the Sums in the whole amounting to 20000 Franks in  Gold. They all made pitiful Excuses, and craved the King's Mercy. Ibm. n. 25. The Judg∣ment against them. Judgment was pronounced by the Chancellor, That they should refund what they had received to the King, and remain in Prison until they had made Fine and Ransom to him. Before Wals. f. 308. n 10. A Truce with the French for half a year. Christmas, the Duke of Lancaster went into France to Treat of Peace between the Two Kingdoms; but brought back with him a Truce only until Midsummer next following,  when he was to return again upon the same Errand. In the beginning of February, Ibm. n 20, 30. Sedition mo∣ved in the Ci∣ty of London. A Shoemaker the great Pro∣moter of it. How it was stayed. John Northampton alias Com∣berton, who had been Major the Year before, moved Sedition in the City of London, and went up and down the Streets often with great Numbers of People following him; and when the present Major Sir Nicholas Brembre prepared to oppose him, a Shoe∣maker, one of his Favourers, moved the Rabble to stand by him; who by the Advice of Sir Robert Knolles, was taken out of his  House, and had his Head cut off. Which Act stayed the Insur∣rection and Commotion of People at that time, who, as it was then said, had conspired to Murther the Major and many other worthy Men of the City.
This Shoemaker's Name was John Constantyn, who was the Cause of great Disturbances, Commotions, and Insurrections in the City; who was not drawn out of his House, and presently beheaded by the Advice of Sir Robert Knolles, tho' very proba∣bly he might be the Person that did seize, or ordered him to be seized; Pat. 7 Ric. Ii M. 16. p. 2. but was taken on the 11th of February at the Head of the Rabble, and carried presently to the Guild-Hall, and ar∣raigned as one of the first Movers of Sedition, by Witnesses sworn  and examined, and his own Confession, was adjudged to Death, and had his Head cut off; which Judgment was presently Recorded, and was afterward confirmed by the King, Claus. 7 Ric. II. M. 9. on the 9th of February preceeding. John Northampton was sent to Corfe-Castle, there to be kept Prisoner until the King, by Advice of his Coun∣cil, should otherwise dispose of him. In Lent the Duke of Lancaster, Wals. f. 308. n. 40, 50. & f. 309. The Duke of Lancaster mar∣ched with a great Force into Scotland. and his Brother the Earl of Buckingham, went with a very great Force towards Scotland, of  Knights, Esquires, and Archers; but staid so long upon the Bor∣ders, as all the Victuals were consumed, whereby the Inhabitants received more Injury than by the Invasion of the Scots. Toward Easter he entred Scotland, where by his Delays the Scots had time enough to secure their Goods and Persons; and finding nothing but Hunger and Cold, returned with a hard Report, having lostReturns with a hard Re∣port. many Men and Horses. After their Departure, the Scots invaded the North Parts, plundered the Country, and burnt Towns, as  the English had done in Scotland. This Year Rot. Claus. 7 Ric. II. M. 10. Dors. A. D. 1385. A Parlement at Salisbury. The Duke of Lancaster ac∣cused of Trea∣son by a Frier. The Frier murthered be∣fore he came to make good his Informa∣tion. there was another Parlement holden at Salisbury, on the Friday after St. Mark, or 25th of April. In this Parle∣ment, says Walsingham, Fol. 309. n. 20, 30, 40, 50. a Carmelite Frier accused the Duke of Lancaster, that he designed to kill the King and usurp the Kingdom. The Duke desired he might be secured until he made good the Accusation against him; and was so: But the Night before the Day on which he was to do it, he was most  barbarously murthered. Tho' he says he was accused in Parle∣ment, yet as he relates the Story, it was before the Council; and must be so; for there is nothing of this Accusation on the Parlement-Roll. About the Wals. f. 310. n. 30. A. D. 1385. 8 Ric. II. The Duke of Lancaster goes into France; makes only a Truce for 3 quarters of a year. His extrava∣gant Expen∣ces. beginning of August, the Duke of Lancaster went into France to Treat about a Peace, or Truce. He staid there long with many Noblemen, and made a Truce only to the first of May next coming; and then returned, after the Expence of  50000 Marks. While the Ib. n. 40, 50. John of Nor∣thampton's Trial and Judgment. Duke was in France, the King called many of the Noblemen together at Reding, where John of Northampton was Tried for his late Practices in London, when he was Convicted by the Testimony of his Clerc; and Sentence was to be given upon him in the King's Presence. He said such Judgment ought not to pass upon him in the Absence of his Lord the Duke; which  brought ill Suspicions upon him. The Judge told him, That he was to acquit himself by Duel of the Crimes laid against him, or by the Laws of the Land to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered. To which making no Answer, he was condemned to perpetual Prison above 100 Miles from London, and sent to Tintagel-Castle in Cornwal, and the Goods to be seized to his King's Use.
Some time after, the King Ibm. f. 314. n. 50. The Duke of Lancaster was to have been Arraign∣ed of High-Treason. intending to Arraign the Duke of Lancaster upon several Articles of Treason before Sir Robert Trisi∣lian Lord Chief Justice, whereas he ought to have been Tried by his Peers; he Victualled and Manned his Castle of Pontfract, and stood upon his Guard, until his Peace was made by the Princess of Wales his Mother. On the Rot. Parl. 8 Ric. II. n. 1, 2, 3. A Parlement. The cause of Summons. morrow of St. Martin, or 12th of November, a Parle∣ment assembled at Westminster. The Chancellor shewed the King's  great Care of the Church, Commons, and Laws of England; and further shewed how the Nation was invironed with Enemies, the French, Spaniards, Scots, and Flemings; and that the chief cause of calling the Parlement was, to provide for the Safety and Defence of the Kingdom; and to consider how this Provision might best and most speedily be made, and so as the poor People might be least burthened; and withal let them know the King offered to go in his own Person for Defence of the Kingdom,  against any Enemy, by the Advice of his Council. These things considered, Ibm. n. 10. Two 15ths granted. the Lords and Commons granted the King, for the Defence of the Kingdom, the Safeguard of the Sea and Marches of Scotland, Two Fifteenths; one to be paid at Lady-Day next coming; the other at Midsummer; upon condi∣tion, that the last half Fifteenth granted at Salisbury might not be paid: And in case the King went not in his own Person against his Enemies, or that Peace or Truce should be made with  them, then the latter of these Two Fifteenths not to be Levied. In this Parlement Ibm. n. 13. The Judg∣ment against Alice Perrers repealed. Alice Perrers, the Wife of Sir William Windsor, petitioned to have the Judgment and Order made against her in the 50th of Edward III. and the Judgment and Statute made against her in the first of this King, to be repealed; and that she might be restored to all her Lands and Tenements. Ibm. Ro. Which was granted by Advice and Assent of the Lords and  Commons, so as the Gifts and Grants of any of the Lands, Tene∣ments, and Houses repealed, may remain in force. There is nothing more concerning Scotland and England in our Historians for this Year, but alternate Invasions, as they found or made Opportunities, and burning and plundering each others Countries. Next Year Knight col. 2674 n. 60. The French and Scots join to invade Eng∣land. John de Vienna Admiral of France, came from thence with a great Fleet, and in June transported an Army into  Scotland to join with the Scots to invade England. The King prepares an Army to march into Scotland, and sends the Duke of Lancaster with a good Force before to secure the Borders. Ibm. col. 2675. n. 10. The King marcheth in∣to Scotland with a great Army. On the 7th of July, the King was at Leicester, and the Queen with him; and there went before, came with, and fol∣lowed him the Flower of the English Militia, Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquires, Valets, and others to a vast Number. With this Royal Army the King marched into Scotland; but could not  find the Scots, or at least could not follow them into the Woods, Forests, Fastnesses, or the High-lands, whither they drove with them their great Cattel. Ib. n. 20, 30, 40. The Scots fly into the Woods and High-lands. Finding nothing in the Country, he burnt Edinburgh, and many other Towns, cut down Woods, and burnt them likewise. While these things were doing by the English toward the High-lands, about Edinburgh, and in the
East-Marches, the Scots and French slipt the English, entred theThe French and Scots march into England, West-Marches, burnt Penreth, plundered the Country, took many Captives, and made an Attempt upon Carlisle; but hearing of the coming of the English, got again into their own Country, Wals. f. 317. n. 30. and do more Mischief there than the King with his Army did in Scotland. A mighty Fleet prepa∣red by car∣rying more out of England, than the King with his Royal Army carried out of Scotland. While the English Army was in Scotland, the King of France  was providing a mighty Fleet and Army at Sluis in Flanders to invade England. Froysart Vol. 2. cap. 53, 53, 54. the King of France to in∣vade England. says this Navy was Twelve hun∣dred and eighty seven Ships in September, 1386. at Sluis and Blanqueberg; and adds, since God created the World there was never seen so many great Ships together. The Land-Forces were according to this mighty Fleet, and the King having notice of these vast Preparations, provided accordingly both by Sea and Land, to intercept them or hinder their Descent. Ibm. c. 59. The Wind  held contrary, so as they could not pass toward England until after St. Andrew, or 30th of November, when a Council being called it was resolved, it being so late in the Year, the Expedition was laid aside until April or May following. Ib. c. 60. Froysard says he had an Account of the great Provision the Dauphin of Avergn made for this Voyage from himself. In the 9th of this King, a Parlement was Claus. 9 Ric. II. M. 45 Dors. A. D. 1386. holden at West∣minster on the Friday next after St. Luke, in which the Lords,  Great Men, and the Communities of Counties, Cities, and Burghs Rot. Parl. 9 Ric. II. n. 10. A Tax gran∣ted for the Duke of Lan∣caster's Voy∣age into Spain. (Memorandum quod Domini, Magnates, ac Comunitates Comitatuum, Civitatum & Burgorum concesserunt Domino Regi, &c.) granted to the King for the Voyage of John King of Castile and Leon Duke of Lancaster into Spain, and safe keeping of the Sea and Marches of Scotland, a Tenth and Fifteenth, and half a Tenth and Fifteenth; the 10th and 15th to be paid at Candlemas, and the half 10th and 15th to be paid at Midsummer; for the receipt and expending  whereof, there were special Treasurers appointed in Parlement, and Supravisors to see it done. And this Ibm. Voyage into Spain was agreed and granted by the King, Prelates, Noblemen, Great Men, and Communities aforesaid in full Parlement. In the King's Entrance into Knighton, col. 2675. n. 50. Scotland, the King conferred several Honours upon the Persons following, at Hounslow-Lodge in Tividale, says the Record, which were confirmed in this Parlement. The King's Unkle Rot. Parl. 9 Ric. II. n. 14. Several Titles and Honours confirmed in Parlement. Edmond Earl of Cambridge being created Duke of York, was confirmed in that Title, and had from the King 1000 l. a Year to support his Dignity, to be paid out of the Exchequer to him and his Heirs Male, until the King could settle Lands upon him and his Heirs of the like Value. Then also was Ibm. n. 15. Thomas Earl of Buckingham and Essex the King's Unkle, being created Duke of Gloucester, confirmed in that Title, with the like Gift and Settlement to support his Dignity. Michael de la Pole Ibm. n. 16. being created Earl of Suffolk, was con∣firmed in that Dignity, and had for the support of his Honour 20. l. a Year out of the Farm of the County, and 500 l. a Year out of the Estate of the former Earl (which had escheated to the King for want of Heirs) after the Decease of the Queen and Isabelle Countess of Suffolk.
The Earl of Ib. n. 17. Oxford being created Marquess of Dublin, was confirmed in that Title, by consent of the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, and had by the same consent, the Land and Lordship of Ireland, &c. except some Royalties belonging to the Crown, pay∣ing 5000 Marks yearly into the Exchequer. In this Parlement the Ib. n. 32. The Com∣mons Petition the King's Houshold might be viewed every year, and if need were Regulated. Commons Petition the King, That the State of his Houshold might be viewed every year, by the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Clerk of the Privy Seal, and what was  amiss to be mended at their Discretion; And also, That the Sta∣tutes of ancient time made concerning the Houshold, might be kept and duely executed in all their Points. As to the first Article of the Ib. Ro. The King's Answer. Petition, The King will do it when he please; As to the second, Le Roy le Voet, The King Willeth. It was also then Enacted, Ib. n. 33. That all Lords and other Per∣sons, having any Lands on the Marches beyond Tine, do dwell  thereupon, saving that the King may shew favour when he please. The Commons desired to know, Ib n. 39. who should be the King's Chief Officers, and Governors of the State of the Kingdom. The Answer Ib. Ro. was, The King hath enough sufficient Offi∣cers at present, and will change them at his pleasure. On Easter Knighton, col. 2676. n. 30, 40, 50, 60. A. D. 1387. The Duke of Lancaster's Day next following, the Duke of Lancaster, with his Wife, came to take his Leave of the King, to whom  he gave a Crown of Gold, and the Queen gave another to his Wife, and the King commanded all about him, to call and Ho∣nour him as King of Spain. Ibm. Voyage into Spain, and what he did there. On the 9th of July, all things being prepared for the Expedition, he set sail with 20000 Men for Spain, whereof in the Marshall's Roll 2000 were Men at Arms, and 8000 Archers, in which Army several very great Men were the Chief Officers. Ib. col. 2677. n. 10, 20. He had with him his Wife Constance, the Eldest Daughter of Peter King of Castile, &c. for his Tyrannies called  the Cruel, who died without Issue Male, by whom he claimed that Kingdom, and Katherin his only Daughter by her, and Two Daughters by his first Wife Blanch, Daughter and Heiress to Henry Duke of Lancaster, Philip, and Elizabeth. Peter King of Castile was Son of Alphonso the Sixth, King of Castile, &c. upon whom Henry II. a Bastard Son of Alphonso, usurped the Kingdom. He Married his Daughter Philip, by his first Wife Blanch, to the King of Portugal; and his Daughter Katherin, the true Heiress  of the Kingdom of Castile, by his Wife Constance, to John the Son of Henry the Bastard and Usurper, Walsingh. f. 342. n. 30, 40. but so as if they had no Issue, the Inheritance of the Crown was to be and remain to the Son of Edmond Duke of York, Brother to the Duke of Lancaster, who had Married Isabel the Younger Daughter of King Peter the Cruel. Upon these Terms, and a mighty Sum of Money paid by Henry the Bastard to the Duke, and an Annuity of 10000 l. a year to him and his Dutchess Constance for their Lives, a Peace  was concluded between the Ʋsurper and the Duke, and the Affair of Castile or Spain settled; after which he went into Aquitan, and stayed there and in Spain more then Two years, and then re∣turned into England in the beginning of November 1389. Knigh∣ton Ut supra. says, the Money paid down to the Duke of Lancaster, was an immense Sum, and that he was told by one of his Family and
Retinue in this Voyage, that for the second Payment the King of Spain sent him Forty seven Mules laden with Gold in Chests. Walsingh. f. 323. n. 60, &c. Knighton, ut supra, n. 40, 50, 60. As he sailed into Spain, he landed some Forces in Britany, and re∣lieved Brest, that was then besieged by the Duke of that Coun∣try. This year Writs were issued for calling a Parlement on the First of October at Westminster, dated Rot. Clause 10 Ric. II. M. 42. Dors. The Duke of Suffolk, Mi∣chael de la Pole, Aug. 8. wherein Mi∣chael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, and then Chancellor of England,  was impeached by the Commons in several Articles; Rot. Parl. 10 Ric. II. n. 6. impeached by the Commons. The first and chief Article was, That he was Sworn as Chancellor to pro∣cure the Profit of the King, That he purchased of the King Land, Rents, and Tenements to a great value, contrary to his Oath, not considering the Necessity of the King and Kingdom, and that / he being Chancellor at the time of the Purchase, caused the yearly Rent of the Lands to be undervalued, very much in deceit of the King. The residue of the Articles were much of  the same Nature, for Deceiving the King, but in less Matters, except one, wherein he was charged, That by his fault some of the Tax given last Parlement was diverted to other Uses then for which it was given, so as the Sea was not so well Guarded as it ought to have been. To this he Answered, Ib. n. 7. His Answer to the Ar∣ticles. That while he was Chancellor, he neither purchased any Lands of the King, nor did he give any to him, unless when he made him an Earl, yet confessed he had  400 Marks a year of the King by way of Exchange; for so much he had by inheritance out of the Customs of Hull, where∣of some part was assigned to him by one Tydeman de Limbergh, and others before he was Chancellor, and some part came to him by Descent; and his Brother in Law Sir Richard le Scrop, shewed the said Earl, by his Valiant Acts in sundry Battles, and his Worthy Behaviour and Counsel in several Offices at home, did justly deserve what he had; He Answered to every Article;  Ib. n. 10. The Com∣mons not sa∣tisfied with his Answer. he sufficiently proveth the Oath had another intendment then what was then put upon it, and further proveth, that not∣withstanding his Oath, he did both lawfully take and buy. But the Commons were not satisfied with his Answers, and therefore at their Request, by the King's Command, he was Arrested, and committed to the Constable of England, and afterward let to Mainprise; and had further Ib. n. 13. The Judg∣ment against him. Judgment, That for Breach of his Oath contained in the first Article, all the Lands he had of  the King's Gift in that Article should be seised into the King's Hand, to have to him and his Heirs for ever, together with all the Mean Profits and Issues of the same, saving to him the Name and Title of an Earl, and 20 l. a year granted out of the Pro∣fits of the County of Suffolk. Ib. n. 14, 15, 16. The like Judgment was given in every Case and Article, where he was charged with Deceit of the King. Sitting this Parlement the King was at Knighton, col. 2681. n. 30. The King sent for to come to Par∣lement, by the Duke of Gloucester and Bishop of Ely Eltham, his pre∣sence  was desired there, and by assent of the whole Parlement, Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and Thomas Arundell Bishop of Ely, were sent to him, who saluting him on behalf of the Noblemen and Commons, related to him their Thoughts or Requests, in Words to the same sense that the Historian writes their Speech in, Ibm. Qui salutarent eum ex parte procerum & Communium Parlementi sui
sub tali sensu verborum ei referentes vota eorum; and then be∣ginsTheir Speech to the King upon this Oc∣casion. the Speech, which was in such Language as Subjects in any times did not use towards their Kings and Princes, so that 'tis most probable Knighton was both the Author of the Words, and Speech, as indeed most Historians are of the Speeches and Orations found in them. Ib. n. 40, 50, 60, &c. The Speech reckons up all King Richard's Faults most severely, and what Wicked and Evil Coun∣sels he followed, and what desperate Courses he intended to pursue,  in delivering what he had in France to, and putting himself un∣der the Protection of that King, threatning him several times with an old Statute, and a laudable and approved Custom they had, which could not be gainsayed, to warrant what they said to him, and urged him to perform; Ib. Col. 2683. I. 1. And at last the Speech∣maker, whether the Duke of Glocester, or Thomas Arundell Bishop of Ely, or Knighton, tells King Richard, they had one thing more to intimate to him on behalf of the People in these  Words; Ib. I. 3. Habent enim ex antiquo Statuto, & de facto non longe retroactis temporibus experienter, quod dolendum est, habito, si Rex ex maligno Consilio quocunque vel inepta Contumacia aut Contemptu seu proterva voluntate singular aut quovis modo irregulari, se alienaverit a populo suo, nec voluerit per jura Regni & Statuta ac laudabiles ordi∣nationes cum salubri Consilio Dominorum & procerum Regni gubernari & Regulari, set Capitose in suis insanis Consiliis propriam voluntatem suam singularem proterve Excercere, extunc licitum est eis cum Communi  assensu & consensu populi Regni ipsum Regem de Regali solio abrogare, & propinquiorem aliquem de stripe regia loco ejus in Regni solium subli∣mare; That is, For the People have it by an old Statute, and by The Case of Edw. II. Fact, (which cannot be expressed without Grief) by Expe∣rience not very long since committed, That if a King, by any Malignant Counsel whatever, or foolish Contumacy or Con∣tempt, or froward arrogant Wilfulness, by any singular or ir∣regular Means, did alienate himself from his People, nor would  be Governed or Ruled by the Laws, Statutes, and Laudable Or∣dinances of the Kingdom, with the wholesom Advice of the Lords and Noblemen, but like a Blockhead frowardly exercise his own singular Will in his Mad Counsels, then it was lawful for them, with the Assent and Consent of the People of the Kingdom, to Dethrone that King, and place in the Throne in his stead some one more near a-Kin to him of the Royal Family. On the 24th of October next following, Thomas Arundell, Bishop  of Clause 10 Ric. II. M. 35. The great Officers of State chang∣ed. Ely, was made Chancellor in the place of the Earl of Suf∣folk; and on the same day John Gilbert, Bishop of Hereford, was made Pat. 10 Ric. II. p. 1. M. 16. Treasurer instead of John de Fordham, Bishop of Dur∣ham; John de Waltham was also made Keeper of the Privy Seal. In the Pat. 10 Ric. II. p. 1. M. 7. Eleven Com∣missioners ap∣pointed to Govern the Kingdom. Their Names. Patents of this year, of his own free-will, at the Request of the Lords and Commons, the King changed these Great Officers; and further, by advice and assent of the Lords and Com∣mons in full Parlement, in aid of the good Government of the  Kingdom, the good and due Execution of the Laws, and in Re∣lief of his own Estate, and that of his People, he appointed Eleven Commissioners, William Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Alexander Arch-Bishop of York, his Uncles Edmond Duke of York, and Tho∣mas Duke of Glocester, William Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Bishop of Excester, Nicholas Abbat of Waltham, Richard Earl of Arundell,
John Lord Cobham, Richard Lescrop, and John Devereux, to be his great and Continual Council for one year next coming after the dateAnd Power. of these Letters Patents; by which he gave them Power to Survey and Examine all his Officers, Courts, Houshold, and the Government of the whole Kingdom; To receive all his Revenue, as also all Subsi∣dies, Taxes, and other Payments; To do what they would in the King∣dom, and to amend all things according to their Discretions; and these Powers, greater perhaps then any King ever exercised,  were given to any Six of them, with his Three Great Officers; Willing, That if diversity of Opinion happened between his Coun∣sellors and Officers, that the Matter should be determined by the greater part of them; commanding and charging all Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, the Steward, Treasurer, and Controller of his Houshold, the Justices of one Bench and the other, and other his Justices whatsoever, Barons, and Chamberlains of the Exchequer, Sheriffs, Escheators, Majors, Bayliffs, and all other his Officers, Ministers,  and Lieges whatsoever, that they be attending, obedient, counsel∣ling, and aydant to the said Counsellors and Officers, so often and in what manner they should direct. Dated at Westminster the 19th day of November. Upon this Commission a Statute was made, and the whole Recited in it. See Statutes at Large, Cap. 1. in the Tenth of Richard the Second, the Parlement Roll of this year, and the Pleas of the Crown in the Parlement the 21st of this King. This Parlement ended on the 20th of Rot. Parl. 10 Ric. II. n. 36 The King's Protestation in Parlement. November, and the last thing entred upon the Roll before that Memorandum is, That the King made open Protestation in full Parlement with his own Mouth, That for any thing was done Ib. n. 35. in that Parlement, he would not that prejudice should come to him or his Crown, but that the Prerogative and Liberties of his Crown should be safe and preserved. This year Richard Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel, was made Rot. Franc. 10 Ric. II. M. 13. and M. 18. Admiral of the whole Fleet in the West and North parts of  the Kingdom; he got ready the Fleet, and put to Sea early in the Spring, and on the 24th of March discovery was made of a great Walsingh. f. 326. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. The English take an Hun∣dred and more Ships from the Fle∣mings, French, and Spaniards. Navy of Flemings, French, and Spaniards, laden with Wine, and well Guarded with Men of War; after a sharp En∣gagement, wherein he took many Armed Ships, killed and took many Soldiers of different Quality, the rest fled; he pursued them two days, and in the whole took an Hundred and more Ships great and Small, wherein were Nineteen thousand Tuns of  Wine. Col. 2692. n. 40, 50, 60. Knighton in his Relation of this Engagement says, there were One hundred twenty six Ships taken, in which were a∣bout Twelve or thirteen thousand Tuns of Rochel Wine, and that the Admiral of Flanders was taken with many others; Ib. and Col. 2693. n. 10. He refitted his Ships, and sailed into Britany, and relieved Brest be∣sieged the second time by that Duke, demolished the Castles he had built about it, and between Lady-Day and Midsummer tookA. D. 1388. One hundred and sixty Ships well laden. This Summer the King with his Queen went Ib. n. 20, 30, 40, 50, 60. The King and Queen's Progress. The Commis∣sion and Sta∣tute made last Parlement Questioned. a Progress into the West and North Parts of the Kingdom; in his Return he held a Council at Nottingham on the 21st of August, where many Questions about the Commission and Statute made last Parlement, and those that procured and forced the King to grant them, and how they were to be punished, were propounded to the Two Chief
Justices, and other Judges, who answered, they ought to be pu∣nished as Traytors, as will be more fully related in the following Account of this year. In this Council were present, Alexander Arch-Bishop of York, Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresilian Chief Justice of the King's-Bench, and Nicholas Brembre of London, Knight, his great Favo∣rites and Advisers in all things, who were heard before all others, and according to common fame only they. On the Ib. Col. 2696. n. 40, 50, 60. The King splendidly re∣ceived by the Major and Citizens of London. The Duke of Glocester, Earls of Arundel and Warwick, march with a great Force toward Lon∣don. 10th of November the King came to London, where he had a Wonderful Splendid Reception by the Major and Citizens, who went out to meet him, says the Historian, with an innumerable Multitude of Horsemen richly Clad, and conducted him and his Queen to St. Paul's Church, and from thence to his Palace at Westminster, his great unhappy Favourites accompany∣ing him; Next day, on the Feast of St. Martin, the King and his Favorites had notice the Duke of Glocester, the Earls of Arun∣del  and Warwick, were marching toward London with a great Force, from Haringay Park near Highgate, who wrote Ib. Col. 2699. n. 30, &c. Their Letter to the Major, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of the City. to the Major, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of the City, to let them know, They were and always would be Obedient and Loyal Lieges to the King, and that they ought not to wonder at their assembling in such a manner, for that in the last Parlement it was ordained by the King, That certain Lords there appointed and Sworn for the Honour of God, the good of the King and Kingdom, to have the Government of his Council and the  Realm for one year; which Government had been, and was then greatly disturbed by Alexander Arch-Bishop of York, Robert Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresilian false Justice, and Nicholas Brembre false Knight of Lon∣don, all and every one false Traytors to the King and Kingdom, who falsely and Traiterously by their Engines, Counsel, and Conduct of the Ho∣nourable Person of the King, carried him into divers Parts far from his Council, in the Ruin of him and his Realm, and falsely Counselled him  against their Oath to do divers things in Disheritance and Dismembring his Crown, being in point to loose his Heritage beyond Sea, to the great in∣famy and destruction of the whole Nation; and falsely made several Dif∣ferences between the King and Lords of his Council, so as some of them were in fear and danger of their Lives, as they had informed the King by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Duke of York, the Bishops of Winchester, and Ely, and divers other great Lords. To Redress these things, and Punish the Traytors according to Law, they were assem∣bled,  Requiring and Charging them (the Major, &c.) by vertue of their Allegiance, That they should make full Proclamation (vous re∣quirons & chargeoms par vertue do vostre legiance que vous eut facez plein proclamation, &c.) thro' the whole City, that this is our in∣tent and no other, and that for the Honour, Profit, and Salvation or Safety of the King, Kingdom, and all his Loyal Lieges, and that you will be Aiding and Comforting with all your Endeavour and Power, not favouring or aiding the Traytors, nor any of them, as you desire the  Honour of God, the King and Kingdom, and the safety of your City, and that you neglect not this as you will avoid the danger that may happen in time to come, and that you certifie us in this Matter on Friday next, which was the 15th of November.
On that day the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Ely, and other Lords, were Ib. col. 2700. n. 10, 20, &c. Several Per∣sons sent to inquire after the Duke and Earls. They Agree to come to the King. They pretend there were People placed in several Places to sur∣prize them, which were searched. The manner of their Ad∣dress to the King. His Kind Re∣ception of them. sent from the King, to inquire after the Duke and Earls, and having found them, the Duke and Earls Agreed to come to the King on Sunday following, when the King sat Two hours in his Throne in Westminster-Hall expecting them: The Reason of their Stay was, they had been informed, that at the Mews, and in the Arch-Bishop of York's House, there were Men placed to surprize them, which and all other suspicious  Places being searched, they came into the King's presence, many Lords, Great Men and Commons accompanying them: When they came into the Hall, and first saw the King, they saluted him on their Knees, and coming to the foot of the Steps, or Stairs, up to the Throne, they again saluted him on their Knees, and the King making Signs to them to come up the Steps, at the top of them they the Third time saluted him on their Knees: The King arose, and took every one by the Hand, as his Friend, and sat  down again. They then Excused themselves to the King, saying, They did not think or intend any Evil against his Person, and told him their Grievance was concerning the Five Traytors, and gave the King a full Account in Writing what they charged them with; He then promised publickly, That he would cause them to appearAnd Promise to them. next Parlement, and stand to the Judgment of the Laws of the Land, and prefix't a day for the meeting of the Parlement; Ib. col. 2071. n. 10. He Excuseth the Duke and Earls by Pro∣clamation. and set forth a Proclamation on the 19th of November to  Excuse the Duke and Earls, and that he thought them not Traytors, as he had been told by some of his secret Advisers, but Worthy Men, and took them into his special Protection; signifying also to the People, That Alexander Arch-Bishop of York, Robert Vere Duke of Ireland, Robert Tresilian Justice, and Nicholas Brembre Knight of London, were also in his Protection until the next Parlement, when they were to Answer what could be objected against them; and therefore commanded, That no Man under any pretence  should do them any Injury, or give them any Trouble. The Five Favourites absented themselves, and lay privately where they could; Ib. col. 2072. n. 20, 30, &c. The Duke of Ireland sent into Lanca∣shire and Che∣shire, to raise Forces for the Security of the King. The Duke of Glocester, the Earl of Derby, &c. raise a great Force. only the Duke of Ireland went into Lancashire and Cheshire, where, as 'tis said in this Author, the King wrote to Sir Thomas Molineux, Sir Ralph Vernon, Sir Ralph Radcliffe, the Sheriffs and other Great Men of those Shires, to Raise a Force, and Conduct him to him, which they did to the number of Five thousand Men. The Duke of Glocester, the Earls of Derby,  Arundel, Warwick, and Nottingham hearing of it, with what speed they could raised a great Force; in the mean time the Duke of Ireland, on the Eve of St. Thomas the Apostle, or Twentieth of December, was come into Oxfordshire, and intend∣ed to pass Ib. col. 2703. The Action at Radcot-Bridge. the River Isis at Radcot-Bridge, upon which the Duke of Glocester had placed a Guard, and so Broken it, as it it was impassable; when the Duke of Ireland, seeing the great Force of his Enemies, with very great danger adventured to pass  the River on Horseback, and made his Escape. The Duke of Glocester and Earls Ibm. col. 2704. n. 10, 20, &c. The Duke & Earls march with their Ar∣my to London. went to Oxford, where they consulted what to do; from thence they marched to St. Al∣bans, and staid there on Christmas-Eve and Day, with their Forces. On St. Stephen's Day they marched towards London, and shew themselves before the City in the Fields near Clerkenwell, with a
delectable and incredible Force (cum delectabili & incredibli Armata manu) divided into Three Bodies. From hence Two Knights and some Squires were sent to the Major and other Chief Persons of the City, to come to the Lords, to certifie them, Whether they would stand with them, and with the Commons of the Kingdom (& cum Communibus Regni) or with the Duke of Ireland, and with the Traitors of the King and Kingdom. The Major Nicholas Exton, with the Best Men of the City, came to them, delivered  The Major send them the Keys of the Gates. the Keys of the Gates, submitted themselves to them, and offered them free Passage into the City with all their People. But before they entred, they sent in some Knights and Squires to search the Gates, Towers, and Strong Places, lest by Treachery they might be assaulted; and when all things were found secure, they entred and staid there. When it was agreed between the King andWhat they did in the City. Lords they might come and speak with him in the Tower, where he then was; Ib. n. 40. the King sent them the Keys of the Gates, and  all the Munitions: And here again they sent Knights and Squires to search all Places before they entred, lest there should be any secret Practices and Treachery against them; and when they thought themselves secure, the Duke of Glocester, the Earls of Derby, Arun∣del,They go into the Tower to the King. Their Dis∣courses with him. Warwic, and Nottingham, went into the Tower, and left their Army with the Rabble in the Plain before it. After Salutation, the King took them into his Chamber, where they had a long Discourse about what they came for; and he seeing the imminent  Dangers, favoured them in what they desired. Ib. n. 50, 60. He granted what they asked. They asked of him, That all of his Court suspected of Treason and Falsity (de proditione & falsitate suspecti) might be seized, and every one imprisoned in several Castles. The King granted what they asked. The Earl of Derby persuaded the King to go upon the Tower-WallThey shew the King from the Tower-Walls their Numbers. to view the People gathered together for saving of himself and the Kingdom. When he saw them, he wondred at the Number and Strength of the Kingdom. Then the Duke of Glo∣cester  told him, there was not the Tenth Part of the People that would join with them to destroy the false Traitors of the King and his Kingdom. After this, Ibm. col. 2705. n. 10, 20, 30. Many sent to Prison; Others remo∣ved from Court. the King commanded many there named to be sent to the Castles of Nottingham, Dover, Bristol, Rochester, Glo∣cester, &c. to be kept until next Parlement to answer their Deme∣rits. There were also then Removed from the Court John de Fordham Bishop of Durham, the Lords Beaumont, Zouch, Burnel,  and Lovell, Sir Thomas Camoys, the Son of the Lord Clifford, Sir Baldwin Bereford, the Bishop of Chichester the King's Confessor, the Lady Mohun, the Lady Poynings, and the Lady Molineux. Ibm. col. 2706. n. 10. The Judges taken off the Benches, and sent to the Tower. And on the first Day of the Parlement, Sir Roger Fulthrop, Sir Robert Belknap, Sir John Cary, Sir John Holt, Sir William Burgh, all Judges, and John Loketon Serjeant at Law, were taken off the Benches doing their Offices, and sent to the Tower. On the 17th of Claus. 11 Ric. II. M. 24. Dors. A Parlement called. The Cause of Summons. Decemb. Writs were issued for a Parlement to  meet on the 3d of February, or on the morrow of the Purifica∣tion of the Virgin Mary next coming. On that Day Thomas Fitz-Alan Bishop of Ely and Chancellor of England, Brother to the Earl of Arundel (from whence his Name of de Arundel from that Title) declared the cause of Summons to be, Rot. Parl. 11 Ric. II. n. 1. part 1. To consider by what means the Troubles in the Kingdom for want of good Govern∣ment
might be ended, the King better Advised, the Realm better Go∣verned, Misdemeanours more severely punished, and good Men better encouraged; how the Kingdom best defended, the Sea best kept, the Marches of Scotland best guarded, Guyen preserved, and how the Charges of these things was most easily to be born. And then gave no∣tice, That who would complain in that Parlement of such things as could not well be redressed by the Common Law, might carry their Petitions to the Clercs in Chancery, there named, appointed to  receive them. Thomas Duke of Glocester Ibm. n. 6. The Duke of Glocester's sus∣picion of him∣self. The King de∣clares him not guilty. kneeled before the King, and said he understood the King had been informed, that he was about to depose him, and make himself King; and profered to stand to the Award of his Peers in Parlement. The King de∣clared openly, That he did not think him Guilty, and had him fully excused. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal then present, Ibm. n. 7. claimed as  their Liberty and Franchise, That all great Matters moved in that Parlement, and to be moved in other Parlements in time to come, touching Peers of the Land, should be discussed and judged by the course of Parlement, and not by the Law Civil, or the Com∣mon Law of the Land used in lower Courts of the Kingdom: Which Claim, Liberty, and Franchise, the King (benignement) kindly al∣lowed and granted in full Parlement. The Five Ibm. n. 8. The Protesta∣tion of the 5 Lords Appel∣lants. Lords Appellants Thomas Duke of Glocester, Henry  Earl of Derby, Richard Earl of Arundel, Thomas Earl of Warwic, and Thomas Earl of Nottingham and Earl-Marshal, made open Pro∣testation in full Parlement, That what they did touching their Appeal and Suit in that Parlement, and had done before, and all the Men and People being in their Company (or of their Retinue or Assembly) and with them in all that Affair, was done principally to the Honour of God, and in Aid and Safety of the King and all his Kingdom, and the Safety of their Lives. The Lords and Commons Ibm. n. 11. Half a 10th and half a 15th granted. granted half a Tenth, and half a Fifteenth before the Parlement ended, with Protestation, That it was done of Necessity; and that it might be no Prejudice to the Lords and Commons in time to come, because it was granted: And further they pray the King, That notwithstanding the Grant so made, the Parlement might hold on its course, and be Adjourned, if need were; and that all things touching the said Parlement might be done and executed as if the Grant had not been made,  until the end of the Parlement in manner accustomed. And the King granted their Request, as a thing he ought to do of Rea∣son. Friday the 21st of March, which was the 46th Day of Parlement, Ibm. n. 12. in fine. The Prelates, Lords, and Commons swear. the Prelates, Lords, and Commons made the Oath following upon the Cross of Canterbury in full Parle∣ment. Tou shall Append. n. 106. Their Oath. Swear, That you will keep and cause to be kept the good Peace, Quiet, and Tranquillity of the Kingdom: And if any will do to the contrary thereof, you shall oppose and disturb him to the utmost of your Power. And if any People will do any thing against the Bodies of the Persons of the Five Lords; that is to say, Thomas Duke of Glocester, Henry Earl of Derby, Richard Earl of Arundel and
Surrey, Thomas Earl of Warwic, and Thomas Earl-Marshal, or any of them, you shall stand with them to the end of this present Parlement, and maintain and support them with all your Power, to live and die with them against all Men, no Person or any other thing excepted, saving always your Legiance to the King, and the Pre∣rogative of his Crown, the Laws and good Customs of the King∣dom. The Lords and Commons grant to the King, in Defence of the  The Subsidy of Leather, Wooll, &c. Realm, a Subsidy upon Leather, Wooll, and Woollfells, Rot. Parl. 117 Ric. II. n. 16. granted upon condition. upon Condition the Five Lords Appellants should have out of it 20000 l. by Assent and Grant of the King, for their Costs and Labour, and Expences before that time, for the Honour, Profit, and Safety of the King and whole Kingdom. The Commons Ib. n. 23. The Commons Request to the King. pray, That no Person, of what Estate so∣ever, do intermeddle with the Business of the Kingdom, nor the  Council of the King, but those assigned in his Parlement, unless it be by Order of the Continual Council. And prayed also, That they might have Power to remove all Persons from the King which they thought fit to remove, and put others in their Places. As to the first Point of this Article Ibm. Ro. His Answer. (le Roy le voet) the King granteth it. As to the second, if any Lord of the Council, or other Lord of the Kingdom, will inform the King that he  had about him any Person not Sufficient, or Honest, he wil∣leth, That if it be proved, he shall be put away and re∣moved, and another Sufficient, by Advice of himself, put in his Place. In this Ib. part 2. Alexander A Bp. of York, the Duke of Ireland, and Earl of Suf∣folk, accused. Parlement, Thomas Duke of Glocester, Constable of England, Henry Earl of Derby, Richard Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Thomas Earl of Warwic, and Thomas Earl-Marshal, did  accuse and appeal Alexander Arch-Bishop of York, Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, and Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk; saying, I. That as False Traitors and Enemies to the King and King∣dom, taking Advantage of his tender Age, and the Innocency of his Person, informed him, and put upon him for Truth false things of their own Invention, against Loyalty and Good  Faith, and made him entirely their own: so as they had his Love, firm Faith, and Credit, while he hated his Loyal Lords and Lieges, by whom he ought to have been Governed: And encroaching to themselves Royal Power, in Disfranchising the King (en Defranchisantz nostre dit Seigneur le Roy) blemishing his Sovereignty, and lessening his Prerogative and Royalty, and made him so Obedient, as he was Sworn to be Governed, Counselled, and Conducted by them; by virtue of which  Oath, they kept him in Obedience to their false Imagina∣tions and mischievous Deeds, contained in the following Articles. II. Also whereas the King is not bound to make any Oath but on the Day of his Coronation; or for the Common Profit of himself and Kingdom, the aforesaid Alexander, Robert, and
Michael, False Traitors, and Enemies to the King and Realm, made him Swear and Assure them, That he would Maintain, Support, and Live and Die with them: And also whereas the King ought to be of more free Condition than any other of his Kingdom, they have put him more in Servitude than any one, against his Honour, Estate, and Royalty, against their Legiance as Traitors to him. III. Also the said Robert, Michael, and Alexander, by the  Assent and Counsel of Robert Tresilian false Justice, and Nicholas de Brembre false Knight of London, by their false Contrivance would not suffer the Great Men of the Kingdom, nor good Counsellors to come near the King, nor would suffer him to speak with him, unless in their Presence and Hearing, accroach∣ing to themselves Royal Power, Lordship, and Soveraignty upon the Person of the King, to the great Dishonour and Peril of the King, the Crown, and his Realm. IV. Also the said Alexander, Robert, Michael, Robert Tresilian false Justice, and Nicholas de Brembre false Knight of London, by their false Wickedness evilly advised the King, so as his appea∣rance he ought to make to the Great Lords and his People Liege, and the Favours and Right, to which they requested his Ans∣wer, were not to be obtained, but at their Pleasure and Al∣lowance, in staying the King from his Duty, and against his Oath, and turning the Hearts of the Great Lords from him,  with Design to estrange his Heart from the Peers of the Land, to have amongst them the sole Government of the King∣dom. V. Also by the said Encroachment of Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, and Michael de la Pole, by the Advice and Counsel of Alexander Arch-Bishop of York, caused the King, without As∣sent of the Kingdom, by their Abetments, without any De∣serts of the Persons, to give divers Lordships, Castles, Towns,  and Mannors, as well annexed to his Crown as others, as the Land of Ireland, the Town of Okeham, and the Forest thereof, and other Lands which were the Lord Audley's, and other great Estates, to the said Robert de Vere, and others, whereby they are greatly enriched, and the King become poor, and had not wherewith to support and bear the Charges of the King∣dom, unless by Impositions, Taxes, and Tributes, put up∣on his People, in Disheriting his Crown, and undoing the  Realm. VI. Also by the Encroachment of the said Alexander, Robert, and Michael, by the Assent and Advice of Robert Tresilian false Justice, and Nicholas Brembre false Knight of London, caused the King to give divers Lands, Mannors, Tenements, Re, Offices, and Bailiwics, to People of their Kinred, and other Persons, of whom they received great Bribes; and also to make them of their Party in their false Quarrels and Purposes;  as in the Case of Robert Manfield Clerc, John Blake, Thomas Ʋske, and others, to the undoing of the King and King∣dom. VII. Also, Robert de Vere, &c. Michael de la Pole, &c. Ale∣xander Arch-Bishop, &c. by Assent and Counsel of Nicholas Brembre, &c. encroaching to themselves Royal Power, caused
the King to give very great Sums of Gold and Silver, as well of his own Goods and Jewels, as the Treasure of the Kingdom, as Tenths, Fifteenths, and other Taxes, granted by divers Parle∣ments, to be expended in Defence and Safeguard of the King∣dom, and otherwise, which amounted to the Sum of 100000 Marks and more, to Robert Vere Duke of Ireland, and others: And further, they caused many good Ordinances and Purposes made and ordained in Parlements, as well for the Wars as De∣fence  of the Kingdom, to be interrupted, to the great Injury of the King and Kingdom. VIII. Also by the said Encroachment, and by great Bribes taken by the said Robert, Michael, and Alexander, divers Persons not sufficient or fit, had the Guard and Government of divers Lordships, Castles, and Countries of War, as in Guyen and otherwhere, as well on this side as beyond the Sea; whereby the People and Countries of those Parts, Liege and Loyal to the  King for the greater Part, were destroyed, and great Dominions of late rendred into the hands and possession of the Enemy, with∣out Assent of the Realm, which were never in the hands of the Enemy since the Conquest of them, as in the Marches of Scot∣land and otherwhere, in Disherison of the Crown, and great Inju∣ry of the Realm, as in the Case of Harpedene, Craddock, and others. IX. Also by the Encroachment of the foresaid Alexander, Robert, Michael, Robert, and Nicholas,, divers People have been  hindred of the Benefit of the Common Law of England, and put to great Delays, Losses, and Costs; and Statutes, Judg∣ments, justly made upon the necessary Causes in Parlement, have been reversed and nulled, by Procurement of the said Misdoers and Traitors, and this by Reason of the great Bribes by them received, to the greatest Injury of the King and Kingdom. X. Also the Five aforesaid accroaching to them Royal Power,  as false Traitors to the King and Kingdom, caused and coun∣selled the King to grant Charters of Pardon for horrible Felo∣nies and Treasons, as well against the State of the King as of the Party, against the Law and Oath of the King. XI. Also, whereas the Great Lordship and Land of Ireland, hath been beyond Memory Parcel of the Crown of England, and the People thereof for all that time have been the King's Lieges without mean to him or his Royal Progenitors; and  our Lord and his Noble Progenitors King's of England, in all their Charters, Writs, Letters, and Patents, and also under their Seals in Augmentation of their Names and Royalty, sti∣led themselves Lords of Ireland; the foresaid Robert Duke of Ireland, Alexander, &c. Michael, &c. as false Traitors to the King by the said Encroachment, gave Advice that the King, in∣asmuch as was in him, had granted, that Robert de Vere should be King of Ireland; and to accomplish this wicked Purpose,  the foresaid Traitors counselled and excited the King to send Letters to the Pope to ratifie and confirm their Traiterous In∣tention, without the Knowledge and Assent of the Kingdom of England, or Land of Ireland, in parting the King's Legiance in respect to both Nations, in decrease of the Honourable Name of the King, and in open Disherison of his Crown of Eng∣land,
and full Destruction of his Loyal Lieges and the Nation of Ireland. XII. Also, whereas by the Great Charter, and other good Laws and Usages of the Kingdom, no Man ought to be taken, put in Prison, or to Death, without due Process of Law, the fore said Nich. Brembre false Knight of London, took by night certain Persons out of the Prison of Newgate, Chaplanes and others, to the Number of Twenty two, some Debtors, others accused  of Felony, and some Approvers in the Case of Felony, and some taken and imprisoned there upon suspicion of Felony, and led them into Kent to a Place called the Foul Oke, and there encroaching to himself Royal Power, as a Traitor to the King, and without Warrant or Process of Law, caused their Heads to be cut off, all but one, who was Appealed of Fe∣lony by an Approver, and him he suffered to go at large at the same time. XIII. Also the foresaid Alexander, &c. Robert, &c. Michael, &c. Robert, &c. Nicholas, &c. Traitors to the King and King∣dom, took great Bribes in many Cases, in the Name of the King, for Maintenance of Quarrels or Suits; and one time took Bribes of both Sides or Parties, as shall be more fully shewed, if need be. XIV. Also these Five caused some Lords and others Loyal Lieges to be put out of the King's Council, and so as they  dare not speak in Parlement about the good Government of the King's Person or Kingdom. XV. Also, whereas in the last Parlement all the Lords, Sages, and Commons there assembled, seeing the imminent Ruin of the King and Kingdom, by the Perils and Mischiefs aforesaid, and for that the King had forsaken the Counsel of the King∣dom, and holden himself altogether to the Counsel of the said Five Evil-doers and Traitors; and also for that the King of  France with his Royal Power was Shipped at Sea, ready to have Landed in England, to have destroyed the Kingdom and Language thereof; and there was no Ordinance then made, or Care taken for the Safety of the King and Kingdom; They knew no other Remedy than to shew the King fully how he was ill Governed, Led, and Counselled, by the Traitors and Ill-doers aforesaid; requiring him most humbly as his Loyal Lieges, for the Safety of him and his whole Realm, and to  avoid the Perils aforesaid, to remove from his Presence the said Evil-doers and Traitors, and not to do any thing after their Advice, but according to the Counsel of the Loyal and Dis∣creet Sages of the Realm: And hereupon the said Traitors and Evil-doers, seeing the Good and Honourable Opinion of the Parlement, to undo this Good Purpose, by their false Counsel caused the King to Command the Major of London to kill and put to death all the said Lords and Commons, except such as  were of their Party; to the doing whereof, these great Traitors and Evil-doers should have been Parties, and present, in undo∣ing the King and Kingdom. XVI. Also, That those Five Traitors, &c. when the Major and Good People of London utterly refused, in the Presence of the King, to Murder the Lords and Commons, by their said
Traiterous Accroachment, falsly Counselled the King, and pre∣vailed with him to leave the Parlement for many Days; and caused him to certifie (& fist certifier) That he would not come to the Parlement, nor Treat with the Lords and Commons of the Business of the Kingdom, for any Peril, Ruin, or Mischief that might happen any ways to him or the Realm, if he were not first assured, by the Lords and Commons, that they would not speak or do in that Parlement against any of the Misdoers, saving  that they might proceed on in the Process which was then commenced against Sir Michael de la Pole; to the great Ruin of the King and Kingdom, against the ancient Ordinances and Liberties of Parlement. XVII. Also the said Lords and Commons, after they under∣stood the King's Mind, by the wicked Excitation and Counsel of the Five, &c. was such, as he would not suffer any thing to be commenced, pursued, or done, against the said Mis- or  Evil-doers (mesfesours) they dare not speak or proceed against the King's Will; and then in Parlement was read the Counsel and Advice of the Lords and Justices, and other Sages and Commons of Parlement, how the Estate of the King and his Royalty might be best saved, against the Perils and Mischiefs aforesaid, and they knew not how to find any other Remedy than to ordain, That Twelve Loyal Lords of the Land should be the King's Council for One Year; and that there should be  made such a Commission and Statute, by which they should have full and sufficient Power to Ordain, &c. according to the Effect of the Commission and Statute; by which Commission and Statute, no Man was to Advise the King against them, un∣der Forfeiture, for the first Offence, of his Goods and Chattels; for the second Offence, Life and Member: Which Ordinances, Statute and Commission were made agreeable to the Assent of the King, the Lords, Justices, and other Sages and Commons  assembled in the said Parlement, to save the King, his Royalty and Realm: The said Traitors and Misdoers, by their Evil, False, and Traiterous Informations of the King, that the said Ordi∣nance, Statute, and Commission were made to Defeat his Royalty; and that all those who procured and counselled the making of them, and those who excited the King to Consent to them, were worthy to be done to Death as Traitors to the King. XVIII. Also, after this, the said Five Misdoers and Traitors, cau∣sed the King to assemble a Council of certain Lords, Justices, and others, many times without the Assent and Presence of the Lords of the Great Council; and made divers Demands of them very suspicious, of divers Matters; by which the King, Lords, and Common People were in great Trouble, and the whole Realm also. XIX. Also to accomplish the said High Treason, the Misdoers  and Traitors, Alexander, &c. Robert, &c. Michael, &c. by the Assent and Counsel of Robert Tresilian, and Nicholas Brembre, caused the King to go through the Kingdom with some of them, and into Wales, and caused him to make come before him the Lords, Knights, and Esquires, and other good People of those Parts, as well of Cities and Burghs, as other Places; and made some to
enter into Bond, others by their Oaths, to stand with him against all People, and to effect his Purpose, which at that time was the Will and Purpose of the said Misdoers and Traitors, by their false Imaginations, Deceits, and Accroachments abovesaid: Which Securities and Oaths were against the Good Laws and Usages of the Land, and against the Oath of the King, to the great Ruin and Dishonour of the King and Kingdom. XX. Also by force of such Bonds and Oaths, all the Realm was put into great Trouble by the said Evil-doers and Trai∣tors, and in peril to have suffered many importable Mis∣chiefs. XXI. Also, to bring about their Traiterous Purposes, the said Five caused the King to go into several Parts of the Kingdom for some long times, whereby the Lords as∣signed by the said Ordinance, Statute, and Commissi∣on,  could not Advise with him about the Business of the Kingdom; so as the Purport and Effect of the Ordinance, Sta∣tute, and Commission, were Defeated, to the great Ruin of the King and Kingdom. XXII. Also the said Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, by the Counsel and Abet of the other Four Traitors, accroaching to himself Royal Power, without the King's Commission, or other sufficient usual Warrant, made himself Justice of Chester, and  by himself and Deputies held all manner of Pleas, as well Common, as of the Crown, and gave Judgments upon them, and made Execution thereof; and also caused many Original and Judicial Writs to be sealed with the Great Seal used in those Parts: And also by such Accroachment of Royal Power, he caused to rise with him a great Part of the People of that Country, some by Threats, others by Imprisonments of their Bodies; some by seizing of their Lands; others by many  Dishonest Ways by colour of the said Office; and all this, to make War upon, and destroy the Lords, and other the King's Loyal Lieges, in undoing the King and whole Realm. XXIII. Also the said Traitors Robert de Vere, &c. Alexander, &c. Michael, &c. by the Counsel and Abet of Robert Tresilian and Nicholas Brembre, incroaching to themselves Royal Power, caused to be delivered John de Blois Heir of Britan, who was  Prisoner and Security to the King and Kingdom, without Assent of Parlement and the King's Great Council, and without War∣rant, to the great Strengthening of the Adversary of France, the great Ruin of the King and Realm, and against the Sta∣tutes and Ordinances aforesaid, made in the last Parle∣ment. XXIV. Also, the said Five Traytors caused the King to have a great Retinue of late, of divers People to whom he gave  Badges, which was not done in ancient time by any Kings his Progenitors, that he might have Power to perform their false Treason aforesaid. XXV. Also the aforesaid Five Misdoers and Traytors, in full accomplishment of all their Treasons aforesaid, and to make the King give Credit to them and their Counsel, and hold
them more Loyal and greater Sages then others of his Kingdom, and the more to colour their false Treasons, they caused the King to make come before him in several Places of the King∣dom, divers Justices and Lawyers, Robert Tresilian, Robert Belk∣nap, John Cary, John Holt, Roger Fulthorp, William Burgh, his Ju∣stices, and John de Loketon, Serjeant at Law, and with them John Blake Referendary, and others; which Justices, Serjeant, and John Blake, being asked in the presence of the King by the Mis∣doers,  Whether the foresaid Ordinance, Statute and Commis∣sion, were made in Derogation of his Royalty and Preroga∣tive or not? and divers other Questions; To which they an∣swered in manner following. Be it Remembred, That on the Twenty first day of August, in the Eleventh year of King Richard the Second, at the Castle of Nottingham before the King, Robert Tresilian Chief Justice, and  Robert Belknap Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, John Holt, Ro∣ger Fulthorp, and William Burgh, Knights, Justices Associate of Robert Belknap, and John Lokeson the King's Serjeant at Law, in the presence of the Lords and other Witnesses underwritten, personally there being, were required by the King upon their Faith and Allegiance to answer faithfully to certain Questions, and speak the Law concerning them, according to their Dis∣cretion. First, It was demanded, Whether the new Statute, Ordi∣nance, and Commission made in the last Parlement at Westminster,The Opinion of Judges, &c. concerning the Statute and Commis∣sion. did derogate to or from the King's Royalty, and Prerogative? They unanimously answer, It did, especially for that they were contrary to the King's Will. 2. Also it was demanded, How those were to be punished that procured the Statute, Ordinance, and Commission to be  made? They unanimously answer, With Death, unless the King would shew them favour. 3. Also it was demanded, How they were to be punished that Excited the King to Consent to the making of that Statute, Or∣dinance, and Commission? They unanimously answer as to the last Question. 4. Also they were demanded, How they were to be punish∣ed, that forced or straitned the King (qui compiderunt sive Arcta∣runt  Regem) to consent to the making of the Statute, Ordi∣nance, and Commission? They unanimously answer, They were deservedly to be punished as Traytors. Likewise they were demanded, How they were to be punished, who hindred the King from Exercising those things which belonged to his Prerogative and Royalty? They also unanimously answer, They were to be punished as Traytors. 5. Also it was demanded, Whether after the Parlement was  met, and the Business of the Kingdom, and the Cause of the Meeting of the Parlement, by the King's Command, declared, and certain Articles appointed by the King, upon which the Lords and Commons ought to proceed, if the Lords and Com∣mons would proceed upon other Articles, and not upon the Articles limited by the King, until they had the King's Answer
to their own Articles, notwithstanding the King had injoined them to the contrary? Then, Whether the King ought to have the Government of the Parlement, and indeed to govern effectually, so as upon the Articles limited by the King, they ought first to proceed? Or, Whether the Lords and Com∣mons ought first to have Answer from the King to their own Articles, before there were further Proceedings? (Nunquid Rex debeat habere in ea parte Regimen Parliamenti, & de facto Re∣gere  & effectum, quod super Articulis limitatis per Regem primo de∣beant procedere, vel an Domini & Comunes primo debeant habere Re∣sponsum a Rege super Articulis per eosdem expressis, antequam ulterius procedatur) They unanimously answer, That in such Case the King should have the Government, and so in order in all other Articles touching the Parlement to the end of the same; and if any one acted contrary to this Government of the King, he was to be punished as a Traytor. 6. Also it was demanded, Whether the King when he pleased might not Dissolve the Parlement, and Command his Lords and Commons to depart from thence? They unanimously an∣swer, He might, and if any one afterward proceeded as in Parlement against the King's Will, he was to be punished as a Traytor. 7. Also it was demanded, Whether when the King pleased to Remove any of his Justices and Officers whatsoever, and  Judge and Punish them for their Faults, the Lords and Com∣mons without the King's Consent or Pleasure, impeach those Officers in Parlement for their Offences? They unanimously an∣swer, They cannot, and if any one acted to the contrary he was to be punished as a Traytor. 8. Also it was demanded, How he was to be punished who moved in Parlement, that the Statute might be sent for, by which Edward the Second, the King's Great Grandfather, was  adjudged in Parlement, by the Inspection of which Statute, the new Statute, Ordinance, and Commission, were conceived in Parlement? They answer unanimously, That as well he who so moved, as the other who by pretext of that Motion, carried that Statute to the Parlement, were deservedly to be pu∣nished as Criminals and Traytors. 9. Also it was demanded, Whether the Judgment given in the last Parlement at Westminster against the Earl of Suffolk,  was Erroneous and Revocable? They answer unanimously, That if it were now to be given, the Justices and Serjeant aforesaid would not give it, because it seemed to them it was Revocable as Erroneous in every part of it. In Testimony of all which the Justices and Serjeant aforesaidWitnesses to the Opinions of the Ju∣stices. put to their Seals, these being Witnesses, the Reverend Fathers Alexander Arch-Bishop of York, Robert Arch-Bishop of Dublin, John  Bishop of Durham, Thomas Bishop of Chichester, John Bishop of Bangor, Robert Duke of Ireland, Michael Earl of Suffolk, John Ryp∣pon Clerc, and John Blake Esq Dated in the Place, Day, Month, and Year aforesaid.
XXVI. These Five are Accused, That they drew away the Heart, and Good Will of the King from the said Lords and others which agreed to make the Commission and Ordinance in the last Parlement, who accounted them his Enemies and Traytors, and being sure the Justices favoured their Design, contrived that those Lords and others should be Arrested, En∣dicted, and Attainted, by false Enquests of Treason, and put to Death, and they and their Blood or Issue Disherited; and  these false Arrests, Endictments, and Attainders, should be made in London or Middlesex, and for that cause they made a False and Wicked Person, one Thomas Husk, Under-Sheriff of Middlesex, who by their Assent, Procurement and Command, undertook the said false Endictments and Attainders should be made and accomplished, (Emprist que les ditz faux enditements & atteinders serroient faitz & accompliez.) And for the better ac∣complishment of their Treason, the said Traytors caused the  King to write Letters of Credence by one John Rypon false Clerc of their Covin, to the Mayor of London, to Arrest the Duke of Gloucester and others, and by force of those Letters, one John Blake carried to the Mayor a Bill of Information a∣gainst them, by which they were to be Indicted and Attainted; The Effect of which Bill was, That it seemed for the better that certain of the Lords, Knights, and Commons of the last Par∣lement, which were notoriously impeachable, (les queux sount  notoirement empeschable) should be privately Endicted in London and Middlesex of Conspiracy and Confederacy, for that they at a certain day there, Falsely and Traiterously Conspired be∣tween themselves, and Confederated themselves to make in the same Parlement a Statute and Commission against the Royalty of our Lord the King, and in Derogation of his Crown, and procured the same Statute there afterwards at a certain day to be made, and also procured our Lord the King to assent against  his Will to have it made, and also constrained him to have it made against his Will; and they Traiterously against their Li∣geance hindered the King from using his Royalty, to the great Disherison of him, and Derogation to his Crown, against their Ligeance, swearing to maintain each other in this Mat∣ter. And further, the said Evil-Doers and Traytors, (Mesfesours & Traytours) set a Watch to give notice of the Duke of Lan∣caster's  landing in England, that he might be Arrested just upon his arrival. XXVII. Also these Five Evil Doers and Traytors after having informed the King, so as he believed the Statute, Ordinance, and Commission, were made in Derogation of his Royalty and Prerogative, they strongly possessed him that all those, who made or caused to be made the said Statute, Ordinance, and Commission, had a purpose to Degrade and Depose him; and  that they would not give over that purpose, until they had perfected it; for which Cause the King held them as his Ene∣mies and Traytors. XXVIII. Also, after this False and Traiterous Information, when the Five aforesaid had procured the King to hold the Loyal Lords as Enemies and Traytors, the said Misdoers and
Traytors advised him by every way possible, as well by the Power of his own People, as by the Power of his Enemies of France, and others, to destroy and put to Death the said Lords, and all others who assented to the making of the said Statute, Ordinance, and Commission, and that it might be done so privately as none might know it but such as did it. XXIX. Also, to accomplish the High Treason aforesaid, Alex∣ander, &c. Robert de Vere, &c. and Michael, &c, by their Advice,  caused the King to send his Letters of Credence to his Adver∣sary the King of France, some by one Nicholas Southwell Valet of his Chamber, and others, by other Persons of small Account, well Strangers as English, requesting and praying the King of France, That he would with all his Power and Advice be Aid∣ing and Strengthening him to Destroy and put to Death the Lords and other English, which the King held to be his Enemies and Traytors as above, to the great Trouble and Dissatisfaction  of the whole Kingdom. XXX. Also the last named Three, encroaching to themselves Royal Power, caused the King to promise the King of France by his Letters and Messages, That for the Ayd and Power he was to receive from him, to accomplish this High Treason and Murder, he would give and surrender, and give unto him the Town and Castle of Calais, and all other Castles and Fortresses in the Marches or Confines of Picardy and Artois, the Castles  and Towns of Cherburgh and Brest, to the great Dishonour, Trouble and Ruin of the King and Kingdom. XXXI. Also, after the last named Three were sure of having Ayd and Assistance from the King of France, by Excitation and Contrivance of the said Traytors, a Conference was to have been in the Marches of Calais about a Truce for Five years, between the Two Nations, at which Conference both Kings were to be present, and also the English Lords, which the King  then held to be his Traytors, and there Thomas Duke of Glo∣cester Constable of England, Richard Earl of Arundell and Surry, and Thomas Earl of Warwick, and others, were to be put to Death. XXXII. Also, for performance of this High Treason, the last named Three caused the King to send for Safe-conducts to the King of France, some for himself, some for the Duke of Ireland, and some for John Salisbury, John Lancaster, Knights,  with other People, with them, to go into France, to put in Execution this Wicked Purpose and Treason; which Safe-con∣ducts were ready to be produced. XXXIII. Also the foresaid Nicholas Brembre false Knight of London, by Assent and Advice of Alexander, &c. Robert de Vere, &c. Michael, &c. and Robert Tresilian false Justice, en∣croaching to themselves Royal Power as before; some of them went Personally into London, and without the Assent and Know∣ledge  of the King, there openly in his Name, made all the Crafts of that City to be Sworn to hold and perform divers Matters not Honest, as is contained in the said Oath upon Re∣cord in Chancery, and amongst other things, That they should keep and uphold the King's Will and Purpose, to their Power, against all such as were or should be Rebels, or against the
King's Person or his Royalty, and that they were ready to live and die with him, in destruction of all such, who did or should design Treason against the King in any manner, and that they should be ready, and come readily to their Mayor, for the time being, or that afterwards should be, when and what hour they should be required, to resist so long as they lived, all such as did or should design any thing against the King in any of the Points aforesaid; at which time the King  by Evil Information of the said Misdoers and Traytors, and by the false Answer of the Justices, firmly held the said Lords and others, who contrived the Statute, Ordinance and Com∣mission, to be his Rebels, Enemies and Traytors, which Infor∣mation was then unknown to the People of London; and also, That by obscure Words contained in the Oath, the Intent of the Misdoers and Traytors was to engage the People of London to raise their Power to destroy the Loyal Lords. XXXI▪ Also, the said Nicholas, Alexander, Robert de Vere, and Michael, Traytors to the King and Kingdom, encroaching to themselves Royal Power, of their own Authority, without Warrant from the King or his great Council, caused to be pro∣claimed thro' the City of London, That none of the King's Lieges should Ayd or Comfort Richard Earl of Arundell and Surry, a Peer of the Land, and one of the Lords of the King's great Council, during the Commission, or to sell him Armor,  Victuals, or other things necessary, and to avoid all of his Party as Rebels, upon forfeiture of whatever they could for∣feit to the King, shewing a Patent from the King, for making such Proclamation, in of the King's Loyal Lieges. XXXV. Also, the said Nicholas Brembre, by Assent and Coun∣sel of Alexander, Robert de Vere, and Michael, made to be pro∣claimed in the City of London, That no Person should be so hardy to speak one Word of ill of the said Misdoers and Tray∣tors,  upon pain to forfeit whatever they could forfeit to the the King, also encroaching to themselves Royal Power. XXXVI. Also, the said Five Traytors to the King and King∣dom, caused the King to send to his Council certain Persons to be Sheriffs thro' the Kingdom, named to him by the Evil-Doers and Traytors, to the intent they might make such Par∣lement Knights, as they should name, to the undoing of the good Loyal Lords, and the good Commons, and also the good  Laws and Customs of the Kingdom. XXXVII. Also, the Five Misdoers and Traytors, during the time of Protection, to hinder the Appeal, falsely Counselled, and caused the King to Command by his Letter divers Knights and Esquires, his Sheriffs, and other his Ministers of divers Counties, to levy and assemble all the Power they could to come with the Duke of Ireland against the Lords Appellants, to make sudden War upon and destroy them. XXXVIII. Also, during the time of Protection of the said Robert de Vere, &c. Michael, &c. Alexander, &c. Nicholas, &c. caused the King by his Letters to notifie to the Duke of Ireland, they were all appealed of Treason, by Thomas Duke of Glo∣cester Constable of England, Richard Earl of Arundell and Surry, and Thomas Earl of Warwick, and how he had given them day
until the next Parlement, and how he had taken into his spe∣cial Protection both Parties, with all their Goods and Chattels; and it was further contained in the King's Letters, That if the Duke of Ireland had sufficient Power, he should not cease to march on with all his Force to come to him; and soon after they caused the King to write to that Duke, That he should take the Field, with all the Force he could get together, and that he would meet him with all his Power, and that he  would adventure his Royal Body with him, and that he was in great danger, and also the whole Nation, if he was not re∣lieved by him; and this the Duke ought to discover to all the People with him, and that the King would pay all his Wages and Costs, and of all the People assembled with him. By force of which Letters, the Wicked and Traiterous Excitations, as well of the Duke and his Adherents, and all the other Mis∣doers and Traytors, he raised a great number of Men at Arms,  and Archers, as well in the Counties of Lancaster and Chester, and in Wales, as other Places of the Kingdom, to destroy and put to death the Lords and all others who ordered and assented to the making of the Statute, Ordinance and Commission, to the Ruin of the King and his Kingdom. XXXIX. Also, the said Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, false Traytor to the King and Kingdom, assembled a great Power of Men at Arms and Archers in Lancashire, Cheshire, Wales, and  many other Places, to the intent to have Traiterously destroyed with all his Power the said Lords, Thomas Duke of Glocester Constable of England, Henry Earl of Derby, Richard Earl of Arundel and Surry, Thomas Earl of Warwick, and Thomas Earl Marshal, and other the King's Lieges, to the Undoing and Ruin of the King and whole Kingdom, and so Rod or Marched with a great Force of Men at Arms and Archers, from the County of Chester to Radcot-Bridge, accroaching to himself Royal Power,  Displaying the King's Banner in his Army, against the State of the King, and his Crown. This Impeachment was Exhibited on Monday the first Rot. Parl. 11 Ric. II. Part 3. This Roll is not numbred. The Appeal∣ed summoned to appear. day of the Parlement, being the 3d of February, when the Lords Appellants affirmed they were ready to prove every Article as it should be awarded in Parlement, to the Honour of God, the Honour and Profit of the King, and the whole Realm; where∣upon  the Appealed were called in Parlement before the King and Lords, to appear and make Answer to the Appellants; and the same Demand of their Appearance was made in Westminster-Hall, and at the great Gate of the Palace of Westminster, to come and Answer the Appellants; and because they came not, being so solemnly called, the Duke of Glocester and the other Appellants prayed the King, and Lords, to Record their De∣fault, and proceed to Judgment; Thereupon, Ibm. the King  and Lords Deliberate upon their Demands until next day, be∣ing Tuesday, when the Justices, Serjeants, and other Sages of the Law of the Kingdom, and also the Sages of the Law Civil, were charged by the King to give their Loyal Counsel to the Lords of Parlement, how they should proceed in the Case of Appeal. The said Justices, Serjeants, and Sages of both Laws
having Deliberated, answered the Lords in Parlement, ThatHow they were to be Tryed. they had noted and well understood the Tenor of the Ap∣peal, and that it was done, neither according to the Order of one Law or the other; Upon which the Lords in Parlement Deliberated, and by the common assent of the King and Lords, it was declared, That in such high Crimes which touched the Person of the King, and the State of the whole Realm, perpe∣trated by Persons that were Peers of the Realm, with others,  the Case could not be brought under other Judicature then that of Parlement, nor other Law then the Law and Course of Parlement, and that it belonged to the Lords in Parlement, their Franchise, and Liberty, of ancient Custom of Parlement, to be Judges in such Cases, and to Judge of such Cases by the assent of the King, to the Ibm. intent that the King and Lords of Parlement shall not be Ruled or Governed by the Civil Law, and also that so high a Case should be no where Tryed but in  Parlement, by Process or Order used in any Inferior Court of the Kingdom, which Courts are but the Executors of the an∣cient Laws and Customs of the Real, and Ordinances and Establishments of Parlement, and the Lords were advised by assent of the King, That this Appeal was made and affirmed, well and duely Stated, and the Process of the same good and effectual according to the Laws and Course of Parlement; Up∣on which the Appellants press the King and Lords again to  Record the Default, and that Nicholas Brembre, who was only in Custody, might be brought to answer; The Appealed were again called to come and Answer to the said Appellants, and came not, nevertheless the King and Lords advised for their better Deliberation until the Morrow, being Wednesday the 5th of February, at which time the said Appellants prayed the King and Lords in Parlement they would Record the De∣fault of the Appealed as before: Whereupon the Arch-Bishop  of Canterbury for himself and all other Bishops his Suffragans, and all other Lords Spiritual of his Province, made Ibm. and Append. n. 108. Pro∣testation, and delivered it in Writing into Parlement, for the saving of their Right of Peerage Sitting and Voting in Parle∣ment, tho at present there were such Matters there in Agitation as by the Sacred Canons they might not be present. Then the Appealed Ibm. The Appealed appear not. by Command of the King and Lords,  were solemnly called to appear as before, and the Appellants alledging they had full notice of the Appeal, and the King and Lords being satisfied it was so; by reason they came not, their Default was Recorded, whereupon the Duke and Earls Appel∣lants, prayed the King and Lords as before, they might be Judged Convict of the High Treasons contained in the Appeal, and the said Nicholas brought to Answer. The King and Lords took time to Consider and Examine the Articles, whether they  could give such Judgment in this Case as should be to the Honour of God, the Honour and Profit of the King, and the whole King∣dom. The King Commanded the Lords to Examine the Articles, who did, with great labour and diligence, until Thursday the 13th of February, and then declared many of the Articles con∣tained Treason, as the First, Second, Eleventh, Twelfth, Fif∣teenth,
and Sixteenth, as also the Eighteenth, Twenty ninth, Thirtieth, Thirty first, Thirty second; the Thirty seventh, Thirty eighth, and Thirty ninth were Treason. And then upon due Information of their Consciences, pronounced the Appealed Guilty, and Judged them to be Ibm. Their Judg∣ment. Drawn and Hanged as Trai∣tors and Enemies, to the King and Kingdom; and that their Heirs should be Disherited for ever, and their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels forfeited to the King; and that the Tempo∣ralities  of the Arch-Bishoprick should be taken into the King's hands: And for that the like Case had not been seen in the Kingdom concerning the Person of an Arch-Bishop or Bishop, the Lords would Advise by Assent of the King, what they may best do for the Honour of God, and of Holy Church, and the Safety of the Laws of the Land. Then the Duke and Earls Appellants prayed Sir NicholasSir N. Brembre brought to answer. Brembre might be brought to Answer; and on Monday the 17th  of February, the Constable of the Tower brought him into Parle∣ment, Ibm. where the Articles of Appeal were read to him; to which he pleaded Not Guilty in any Point of them; and said he was there ready to make good what he said by his Body, as a Knight ought to do. The Lords answered, Battel did not lie in that Case; and that they would examin the Articles touching the said Nicholas, and take due Information by all true, neces∣sary, and convenient Ways, that their Consciences might be  duly informed what Judgment to give in this Case, to the Ho∣nour of God, the Honour and Profit of the King and his Kingdom, as they would answer it before God, according to the Course and Law of Parlement. During this Examination, on Wednesday the 19th of February, Sir Robert Tresilian was taken, and brought into Ibm. Sir R Tresilian taken and brought into Parlement. Parlement; and being asked if he had any thing to say which had happened since Judgment passed upon him, why execution thereof should  not be made; for that he had nothing to say, it was comman∣ded he should be carried to the Tower, and from thence drawn through the City of London, and forward to the Gallows at Tyburn, and there to hang by the Neck, and that the Execution should be done by the Marshal of England, taking to his Assistance the Major, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of London: And he was Executed the same Day. On the morrow, Ibm. Sir N. Brembre Sentenc'd and Executed. which was the 20th Day of February,  Sentenc'd and Executed. Sir Nicholas Brembre was brought into Parlement, when the Lords, by diligent Examination, due Proof and Information, found him Guilty of High Treason; and they Awarded, by As∣sent of the King, as a Traitor and open Enemy to the King and Kingdom, he should be Drawn and Hanged, his Heirs for ever Disherited, and his Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels for∣feit to the King: And he was Executed on the same Day, and in the same manner as was Robert Tresilian. It was the Intention Ibm. The Parle∣ment Judge the King in∣nocent, not∣withstanding the Appeal and Articles▪ of all the Lords of Parlement, Spiri∣tual and Temporal, as well the Lords Appellants as all others, and by them agreed, That considering the tender Age of the King before that time, and the Innocency of his Royal Person, that nothing contained in the Appeal, nor in any Article thereof, nor in the Judgments given, should be accounted any Fault or
Dishonesty in his Person in no manner, for the Cause above∣said, nor should turn in Prejudice of his Person by any Contri∣vance or Interpretation whatever; but that the false Treason and Default abovesaid, should be charged upon the Appealed, and that the Judgments given against them, should have full Force and Virtue, notwithstanding any thing could be said or alledged to the contrary. Upon Ibm. Several others impeached by the Commons. Monday the 2d Day of March next following, Sir  Robert Belknap late Chief Justice of the Common Bench, Sir Roger Fulthorp, Sir John Holt, Sir William Burgh, late his Companions of the same Bench, Sir John Cary, late Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and John Loketon, late Serjeant to the King, were accused and im∣peached by the Commons in Parlement, for putting their Hands and Seals to the Questions and Answers aforesaid, by the Procure∣ment of the Appealed and Convicted Persons of Treason, to cover and affirm their High Treasons, &c. (pour coverer & affer∣mir  lour hautes Tresons) a Copy whereof was exhibited and read before them; and they were answered, as was surmised by the Commons, in the said Copy; and they answered, They could not gainsay it, but that the Qustions were such as were asked them; but the Answers were not such as they put their Seals to. Sir Robert Ibm. Sir R. Belknap his Excuse. Belknap pleaded, That the Arch-Bishop of York, in his Chamber at Windsor told him, That he devised the Com∣mission  and Statute, &c. That the King hated him above all Men; and that if he found not some way to make void the Statute and Commission, he should be slain as a Traitor. He answered, That the Intention of the Lords, and such as assisted at the ma∣king of them, was, That they should be for the Honour and good Government of the State of the King, &c. That he twice parted from the King dissatisfied, and was in doubt of his Life; and said the Answers were not made by his Good-will, but contrary to  his Mind, by the Threats of the Arch-Bishop of York Duke of Ire∣land, and Earl of Suffolk; and that he was Sworn and Commanded in the Presence of the King, upon pain of Death to conceal this matter, as the Counsel of the King: And prayed for the Love of God he might have Gracious and Merciful Judgment. Sir John Holt Ibm. Sir J. Holt made the same Excuse. alledged the same matter of Excuse, and made the same Prayer. Sir William Ibm. Sir W. Burgh and Sir J Cary the same. Burgh and Sir John Cary pleaded the same mat∣ter of Excuse, and made the same Prayer. Sir Roger Ibm Sir▪ R. Fultorp and J. Loketn the same. Fulthorp and John Loketon make the same Excuse and Prayer. To which Ibm. Notwithstan∣ding their Ex∣cuses, the Commons pray they may be Judged, Con∣victed, and Attainted as Traitors. the Commons answered, They were taken and  holden for Sages in the Law; and the King's Will was, That they should have Answered the Questions as the Law was, and not otherwise, as they did, with Design and under colour of Law to Murder and Destroy the Lords and Loyal Lieges, who were Aid∣ing and Assisting in making the Commission and Statute in the last Parlement, for the good Government of the State of the King
and Kingdom; and therefore the Commons pray they may be Ad∣judged, Convicted, and Attainted as Traitors. Upon Ibm. which the Lords Temporal took time by good Deli∣beration to examin the Matter and Circumstances of it, and for that they were at, and knew of the making of the Statute and Commission, which they knew were made for the Honour of God, andTheir Judg∣ment. for the good Government of the State of the King and whole Kingdom; and that it was the King's Will they should not have otherwise  Answered than according to Law, and had Answered as before. They were by the Lords Temporal, by the Assent of the King, adjudged to be Hanged and Drawn as Traitors, and their Heirs Disherited, their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels to be forfeit to the King. On Ibm. J. Blake im∣peached. Tuesday, March 3. John Blake and Thomas Ʋsk were brought into Parlement; and first John Blake was impeached by  the Commons, That being retained of Council for the King, drew up the Questions to which the Justices made Answer, and contri∣ved with the Persons Appealed, that the Lords and others the King's Loyal Lieges, that caused the Commission and Statute to be made in the last Parlement, to have them indicted in London and Middlesex for Treason; and that they might be arrested, and falsly, traiterously and wickedly murdered; and that he was aiding and advising in the Treasons aforesaid, to the Appealed. Then Thomas Ibm. T. Usk accused. Ʋsk was accused for procuring himself to be made Ʋnder-Sheriff of Middlesex, to the end to cause the said Lords and Loyal Lieges to be Arrested and Indicted, as hath been said before, and was Aiding and Counselling the Appealed in the Treasons aforesaid. John Ibm. Their Ans∣wers▪ Blake answered, he was retained of Counsel for the King by his Command, and sworn to keep secret his Advice; and whatever he did was by the King's Command, whom he  ought to obey. And Thomas Ʋsk gave the same Answer. Where∣upon the Lords Temporal took Deliberation until the morrow being the 4th of March, when the said John and Thomas were again brought into Parlement; and good Advice and Delibera∣tion having been taken by the Lords, pronounced them Guilty of the things whereof they were accused. Ibm. And Judg∣ments. And whereas they al∣ledged for their Excuse the King's Command, it made their Crime the greater; for that they knew well, that the Appealed and Ad∣judged  accroached to themselves Royal Power, as said is before, and it was their Command, and not the King's; and then the Lords Awarded, by Assent of the King, they should both be Drawn and Hanged as Traitors and open Enemies to the King and King∣dom, and their Heirs Disherited for ever, and their Lands, Te∣nements, Goods, and Chattels forfeited to the King; and they were Executed the same Day. On Ibm. Sir . Bnp and 5 others▪ Friday the 6th of March, Sir Robert Belknap, Sir Roger  Fulthorp, Sir John Holt, Sir William Burgh, Sir John Cary and John Loketon were brought into the Parlement; and the Lords were advised, That they were at the making of the Commission and Statute in the last Parlement, and Sir John Cary knew well they were made to the Honour of God, and the good Government of the State of the King and the whole Kingdom; and so on as before.
And then they had Judgment again passed on them as before;By the Medi∣ation of the Bishops, had their Lives spared. and at that very Moment came the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and all the Bishops of both Provinces, and prayed the Lords Tempo∣ral, the Execution as to their Lives might be respited, that they might obtain their Lives of the King. He ordered Execution should be stayed, and granted them their Lives: As to the other part of their Sentence, that was to remain in force, and their Bodies in Prison during the King's Pleasure; until the King,  by Advice of the Lords, should direct otherwise concerning them. On the same Ibm. The Bp. of Chichester and the King's Confessor im∣peached. Friday, Thomas Bishop of Chichester and the King's Confessor, impeached and accused by the Commons, That he was present at the Places and Times, when the Questions were put to the Justices, &c. and the Answers made, and ex∣cited them by Threats to answer as they did, knowing the false Purposes and Treasons designed by the Traitors adjudged; and  aided and assisted them, and would not make Discovery to any of the Lords that caused the Commission to be made last Parle∣ment, whereby Remedy might have been had for the Safety of the King and Kingdom. Ibm. To which the Bishop answered of his own free Will, That he did not excite them to do or say any thing: And further said, They were not excited or charged to say any thing but what the Law was. And touching the Con∣cealment of the Treasons, he had made such Assurance and Affi∣ance as he could not discover. And said further, That the Trai∣tors were about the King, and had such Power over him, before he had so great Interest in the King, as to prevent such Mischiefs as might come upon him. The Commons replied, He had upon the Matter confessed himself Guilty, and prayed he might be Attainted. Upon this Answer of the Bishop, the Replication of the Commons, and all Circumstances of the Accusation, the Lords took time to give such Judgment as might be for the Ho∣nour  of God, and Profit of the King and Kingdom. Ibm. Sir S. Burley and 3 others impeached. Du∣ring which time▪ on the 12th of March, Simon Burley Kt. John Beauchamp of Holt, Kt. John Salisbury Kt. and James Barners Kt. were brought into Parlement, and at the Request of the Commons impeached. The Articles exhibited against them were Sixteen: Ibm. The Articles against them. The first Article in the Appeal was the first Article in this Impeachment. In the second Article they are accused as Traitors and Enemies of  the Kingdom, for that they knew of all the Treasons in the Ap∣peal mentioned, and that they were Aiding, Assisting, Counsel∣ling and Assenting to all the Traitors attainted; and that Simon Burley and John Beauchamp, were Principal Actors in all the Trea∣sons. In the eighth Article they were accused for Conspiring and Designing, with the Five Appealed, to destroy and put to Death those who were Assenting to the making of the Commis∣sion and Statute in the last Parlement. The rest are of less mo∣ment;  but all relating to the Articles of the Appeal. Ibm. They all answer, Not Guilty. The Commons replied, They were Guilty. The Lords take time to examin and consider the Im∣peachment. Upon this, and the Bishop of Chichester's Impeach∣ment, the Lords Temporal until Friday the 20th of March, on which Day the Parlement was Adjourned unto the Monday next
after, or on the morrow of the Quinden of Easter, or 13th of April. On which Monday, the Lords Temporal took time to De∣liberate upon these Matters until the 5th of May, when Simon Burley was brought into the Parlement, and the Lords by due and sufficient Examination and Information, found him Guilty of what he was Impeached in the eighth Article, which had been adjudged Treason; and by Assent of the King Awarded heThe Judg∣ment against Sir S. Burley, who was exe∣cuted. should be Drawn, Hanged, and his Head Chopped off. The  King Pardoned his Drawing and Hanging; but his Head was Chopt off the same Day on Tower-Hill: His Heirs were Disheri∣ted for ever, and his Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels forfeit to the King, as part of the Judgment. On the 12th of Ibm. The 3 others had the same Judgment, and executed. March, John Beauchamp, John Salisbury, and James Barners, were brought into Parlement, and had the same Judgment. Beauchamp and Barners had their Drawing and Hang∣ing  Pardoned, and had their Heads struck off on Tower-Hill; and were all Executed on the same 12th of March. On the same Day the Ibm. Judgment a∣gainst the Bp. of Chichester. Bishop of Chichester was sent for into Parlement, where the Lords Temporal found him Guilty of Treason, as it was laid in the Impeachment, and by Assent of the King they Awarded his Heirs should be Disherited, his Lands, Te∣nements, Goods and Chattels forfeit to the King, and the Tempo∣ralties  of his Bishoprick seized into the King's hands. As to his Person, the Lords would advise what to do for the Honour of God and Holy Church, and the Safety of the State of Prelacy, and of the Laws of the Land. And then in the same Parlement it was Ibm. He was with 6 others ba∣nished into Ireland. Ordained, That this Bishop, Sir Robert Belknap, Sir Roger Ful∣thorp, Sir John Holt, Sir William Burgh, Sir John Cary, and John Loketon, should be sent into Ireland to several Towns and Places, there to remain during their Lives. Ibm. Their allow∣ance from the King by Or∣der of Parle∣ment. And it was also then  Ordered, That Sir Robert Belknap and Sir Roger Fulthorp, for their support during their Lives, should have Forty Pounds a Year; Sir John Holt and Sir William Burgh Forty Marks a Year; Sir John Cary and John Loketon Twenty Pounds a Year of the King's Gift; and each of them to have Two Servants to wait on them: And that the Bishop of Chichester might have annually Forty Marks for his Sustenance during his Life, if any of his Friends would give him so much. Upon Stat. at Large, 11 Ric. II. c. 1. Four Petiti∣ons of the Commons, R▪ Prl. 11 R c. II▪ part 1. n. 37. That the Commission and Statute should be con∣firmed. Also what the Duke of Glo∣cester, Earls of War▪ Ar∣d, Dby▪ and Nottingm did. Petition of the Commons, the Ordinance and Commis∣sion made the last Year, were confirmed, and all that was done in that Parlement; and also what the Duke of Glocester, Earls of Warwick and Arundel did, and all that the same Duke and Earls, with the Earls of Derby and Marshal, or any of them did, or any other of their Company, or of their Aid, or of their Adherents, or any of them, by their Assemblings, Ridings, Marchings in  Arms, Appeals, and Pursuits, as things done to the Honour of God, the Safety of the King, Maintenance of his Crown, and Safety of the whole Kingdom. And also in pursuance of the same Peti∣tion, had a full Pardon for all things they had done or com∣mitted.
Upon a second Petition of the Commons, Ib. chap. 2. n. 38. That several should be par∣doned. all those that had been of the Retinue, Company, Force, Aid, Counsel, Assent, or Adherence, of them that were Attainted or Judged in this Par∣lement, for all things they had done were pardoned, except some there named. A third Ib. chap. 3. n. 38. That what was done in the last Parle∣ment should be confirmed, Petition was delivered in the same Parlement, That the Appeals, Pursuits, Accusations, Process, Judgments, and Execu∣tions made and given in this Parlement, be Approved, Affirmed,  and Established, notwithstanding the Lords Spiritual were absent; and that by Imagination, Interpretation, or any other Motion, none of the same be reversed, broken, or annulled in any manner. And whosoever should make pursuit to break, annul, or reverse any of them, shall be judged to have Execution as a Traitor: Pro∣vided always, that this Acceptance, Approbation, Affirmance,That what was done in that Parle∣ment, not to be drawn in∣to Example for the time to come. and Stablishment touching the Assemblies, Appeals, Pursuits, Accusations, Process, Judgments, and Executions, be in force in  this Case only, and that they be not drawn into Example or Consequence in time to come. And though divers Points were declared for Trea∣son in that Parlement, which were not declared by Statute before, That no Justice have Power to give Judgment of other Case of Treason, nor in other manner than they had before the begin∣ning of this Parlement. A fourth Ib. chap. 3. & n. 38, 39. That none of the Appealed or Impeached to be restored to the Law. Petition was then also delivered, That none of the Traitors attainted by the Appeal or Accusations of the Commons, who  were alive, should be reconciled or restored to the Law, by Par∣don or any other manner, saving the Grace and Pardon that was made in this Parlement; and any one that should endeavour to have such a thing done, should be Judged and have Execution as a Traitor. The Ib. & Ro. Parl. 11 Ric. II. n. 10. n. 39. Ro. Answer to all these Petitions, was, That the King,The K. grants all four Peti∣tions. upon the Assent of the Lords and Commons, granted the Petitions in all Points, and willed his Grant should be firm and stable, ac∣cording  to the Contents of the Petitions, without blemish for ever. Then the Rot. Parl. 11 Ric II. n. 46. The Com∣mons petition the King to renew his Co∣ronation-Oath, the Pre∣lates their Fealty, and Lords Tem∣poral their Homage. Commons humbly pray the King, for the nourish∣ing of greater Love, Peace, and Quiet for the future in all Parts of the Nation, That he would please to renew his Coro∣nation-Oath; and that the Prelates might renew their Fealty, and the Lords Temporal their Homage, notwithstanding they had done it before. The Preparation and Introduction to this great Ceremony, was the Mass of the Holy Ghost sung in the Church of Ib. n. 47, Which was done. West∣minster, on Wednesday the 3d of June, and in the 121st Day of the Parlement; and a Sermon Preached by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, when the King of his Free-will, after Mass and Sermon were done, did renew His Oath with great Solemnity in the said  Church, (le Roy de sa Franche volunte, renovella son dit serement ove grant Solemnity en la Eglise de Westminster) at which time the Pre∣lates sware Fealty to him, and the Temporal Lords did him Homage. This done, the Prelates, Lords Temporal, and Commons, made openly a New Oath, as followeth:
You shall Append. n. 107. A new Oath. Swear, That you shall not Assent or Suffer, as much as in you is, that any Judgment, Statute, or Ordinance made in this present Parlement, shall in any manner be annulled, reversed, or repealed, in any time to come; and further, That you shall support the Good Laws, and Ʋsages of the Kingdom, and to your Power firmly keep, and cause to be kept, the good Peace, Quiet, and Tran∣quillity of the Kingdom, without disturbing it in any manner. So God help you, and the Saints. And the Rot. Parl. 11 Ric. II. n. 49. Those that brake the new Oath Excommuni∣cated. Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Prelates, Excommu∣nicated all such as should break the Peace and Quiet of the Realm, and do contrary to this Oath. On the next day this Par∣lement ended, being Thursday the 4th of June, which, says Knighton, was called the Ʋnmerciful Parlement, Parliamentum sine Misericordia, Col. 2701. line 2. This Oath was urged Clause 11 Ric. II. M. 13 or 14 Dors. in Cedula. This Oath generally ad∣ministred to Gentlemen, &c. upon all Gentlemen and Dignified  Persons of the Clergie in all Counties in England, and upon all the Majors, Bayliffs, and Aldermen of all Cities, Burghs, and Towns, by the King's Writ directed to the Sheriff, and one spe∣cial Commissioner to administer it, dated June the 4th, 11th of Richard II. This year the Knighton, col. 2728. n. 40. The Scots en∣ter England, burn and waste the Country. A Battel be∣tween the English and Scots. Scots invaded the West Marches of England near Carlisle, burnt and plundered the Country, and carried a∣way with them Three hundred Persons. They also about the be∣ginning  of August invaded the East Marches, and burnt, plun∣dered, and wasted the Country. In this Invasion were many of the most considerable Men in Scotland, with the Chief Strength of that Kingdom; Henry Percy, Son and Heir to the Earl of Northumberland, called Hot spurre, opposed, and fought with them near Newcastle, he with his own Hand killed Earl Douglas, the most Potent of the Scots, and Mortally wounded the Earl of Mur∣ry, yet he himself was taken, with his younger Brother, and  Twenty one Knights, and many other Men at Arms and Ar∣chers, and carried into Scotland. There were also many Scots taken, amongst whom was was James Lindsey, the Queen's Bro∣ther. This Fight was on the Ib. c. 2729. l. 2. A. D. 1389. 12 Ric. II. A Truce made at Leu∣lingham for 3 years, 1 R. II. Wednesday before St. Laurence, or 10th of August, in the 12th of Richard the Second. The number of the Slain were Eleven hundred. This year there was a Truce concluded at Leu Linghame, a Place between Calais and Boloign, from the First of August, A. D.  1389, to the Sixteenth of August 1392, between the King of France and all his Allies, the Kings of Spain, of the Romans, Portugal, the King of Scots, &c. And the King of England and all his Allies, The Ori∣ginal in the Chapter-House at Westminster. confirmed by the King of Scots at Perth on the 16th of July 1390. About the Walsingh. f. 342. n. 10. The Duke of Lancaster's Re∣turn into England. beginning of November this year, the Duke of Lancaster returned from Gascony into England, where and in Spain he had been Three years; and about the beginning of  December the King was at Reding, Ib. n. 40. He reconciles the King and Great Men. where he called a great Council; The Duke of Lancaster being there, reconciled the Mind of the King to the Great Men, and their Minds to him; and so as they seemed after the Dissolution of the Council to depart satisfied.
The King while he was at Reding issued his Rot. Clause 13 Ric. II. M. 5. Dors. A. D. 1390. A Parlement called. The King de∣clared to be of Age. Writs on the 6th of December for a Parlement to meet at Westminster on the Monday next after the Feast of St. Hillary, William of Wickham, Bishop of Winchester, was then Chancellor, who by the King's Com∣mand, in opening the Cause of Summons before all the Estates, declared the Rot. Parl. 13 Rich. II. n. 1. And takes upon him the Government. King of full Age, and that he intended to Govern his People in Peace and Quiet, and to do Justice and Right to all Men, and that as well the Clergie as Layty should enjoy all their  Liberties. On the 20th of Ib. n. 6, 7. The Chancel∣lor and Trea∣surer quit their Places, as also all Privy-Coun∣sellors. January, and Fourth day of the Parle∣ment, the Bishop of Winchester delivered the Seal to the King, and the Bishop of St. David's being Treasurer, delivered the Keys of the Exchequer to the King, and all the Lords of the Council prayed the King to be discharged, and that others might be put in their Places; When they were discharged, they required openly in Parlement, That if any Person could, he would Complain of any thing  ill done by them; both Lords and Commons affirmed all things well done; Whereupon the King delivered the Seal again to the Bishop of Winchester, and the Keys of the Exchequer to the Bishop ofThe King re∣ceives them again into their Places, and the Privy-Council. St. Davids, and received those to be his Counsellors that were so before, together with his Ʋncles of Lancaster and Glocester, and made Protestation, That for any thing then done, he would at Plea∣sure retain, or put out of their Offices those Counsellors. In this Parlement Ibm. n. 21, 22. John Duke of Lancaster made Duke of Aquitan. John Duke of Lancaster was made Duke  of Aquitan by the King, with Consent of the Prelates, Lords Temporal and Commons, to hold the Dukedom of the King as of the King of France, saving only to him as to the King of France the Direct Dominion, Superiority, and Resort of the same Dutchy: He there did Homage to the King, and Humbly and Heartily Thanked him for it, and the Honour he did him, and declared, That tho' he could not maintain the State of the Dukedom in time of War without the Ayd of the King and Realm, yet he  would do what he could to the utmost; The King told him, the Charges should be born, as between the Duke and his Council should be agreed; To which the Commons affented. The King by assent of Ib. n. 23. Edward. Son to the Duke of York made Earl of Rutland. The Two Arch-Bishops and Parlement created Edward, the Eldest Son of the Duke of York, Earl of Rutland, and gave to him during the Life of his Father 800 Marks issuing out of the Castle, Town and Dominion of Okeham in that Shire, and the Office of Sheriff. The Arch-Bishops of Canterbury and York, for themselves and whole Clergy of their Provinces, made their Protestation in open Parlement, Ib. n. 24. Clergy's Pro∣testation not to assent to any Law made against the Pope. they intended not, nor would assent to any Statute or Law to be made against the Pope's Authority, which at their Request was entered upon the Roll. In the Rot. Parl. 14 Ric. II. n. 1. A. D. 1391. Parlement on the Morrow of St. Martin, or 12th of November, in the Fourteenth of this King, the Bishop of Win∣chester Chancellor, declaring the Cause of Summons, took notice  of the Truce with France, and that about Candlemass the King would send to make a final Peace. The Duke of Ib. n. 12. The Dukes of York and Glo∣cester desire 1000 l. a year to be settled on each of them. York and Glocester desire the King's Assistance of a Thousand Pounds a year to each, according to his Promise, in Tale special; He ordered the Justices to draw such Assurance, and commanded they might be readily paid.
And it is to be remembred, (Ib. n. 15. The Prelates, Lords and Commons pray, That if any thing had been done a∣gainst his Pre∣rogative, it might be re∣dressed. Fait a Remember, &c.) That the Prelates, Lords Temporal and Commons, prayed the King in full Parlement, That the Royalty and Prerogative of him and his Crown, might always be safe, and preserved, and that if any thing had been done or attempted contrary to them, it might be Redressed and Amended; and further, That he should be as Free in his time, as any of his Noble Progenitors, Kings of England, were in their  times; Which prayer seemed Honest and Reasonable to the King, and therefore granted it in all points. The Judgment against Ib. n. 36. The Judg∣ment against John of Nor∣thampton re∣pealed. John of Northampton, late Major of London, Repealed upon the Petition of the Commons, and Oath made by the then Major, and all the Aldermen of London, That he was not guilty of the Treasons, &c. for which he was con∣demned. These things done, the Lords and Commons Ib. n. 37. The ords and Commons Thank the King for his Good Govern∣ment, &c. gave humble Thanks to the King for his good Government, and his Zeal shewn to them, and he gave them Thanks for the Grants to him made. In the Parlement holden on the 2d of November, in the 15th of King Richard, the Ibm. 15 Ric. II. n. 15. A. D. 1392. The Duke of Lancaster sent into France to Treat of Peace. Commons propound to the King, Mon∣sieur  de Guyen, (that is, the Duke of Lancaster) to go Treat with his Adversary of France about a Peace, and it was granted. The Commons Petition the King, That no Native or Ib. n. 39. The Com∣mons Petition Villans may not purchase Land in sec. nor send their Sons to School. The King's Answer. Villan, of Bishops, Abbats, or other Religious Persons, might purchase Lands in Fee; and, That no Villan might put his Son to School, whereby he might obtain Learning, and this for the maintenance and safety of the Honour of all the Freemen of England. To this it  was Answered, Le Roy sad visera: The King will Advise, which was a Denial. The Knights of Shires Ib. n. 51. The Knights of Shires Pe∣tition Villans may not have the Privilege of Cities and Burghs. The King's Answer. Petition the King and Lords, That such Lords whose Villans went from them into Cities and Burghs, where they lived as Freemen under the protection of their Fran∣chises, and were detained by the Inhabitants of those Places, might have power to enter such Places, and seize and bring away  their Villanes. The Answer was the same with the foregoing. According to the Request of the Commons the Walsingh. f. 347. n. 10, 20. Mezeray. f. 413. The Truce between Eng∣land and Fr. continued for a year longer. Duke of Lancaster went into France to Treat of a final Peace, he was splendidly received at Amiens, by the King, and chief Nobility of that Kingdom, who met him there; The Issue of the Treaty was, That the Truce should continue for One year longer; for the Observation of which both Kings made Oath. The King about this time wanted Money, and sent to the City of London to borrow a Thousand Pounds, who Knighten, Col. 2740. n. 10. &c. Wal∣singham, ut su∣pra. n. 50. &c. The City of London deny to lend the King a Thousand Pounds. And almost killed a Lum∣bard that lent it him. denied to lend him it, and abused and beat a Lumbard so grievously, that offered to lend it, as they near killed him; for this and other things, by advice of a great Council held at Nottingham, their Li∣berties
were seized, and being convinced they had forfeited them,Their Liber∣ties seised. The Major and Sheriffs imprisoned. Their Liber∣ties restored by the Media∣tion of the Duke of Glo∣cester. the Major and Sheriffs were sent to Prison, and Sir Edward Da∣lyngrug was made Guardian of the City; On the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of August, the King with a great Train of the Nobility, with his Queen, went into the City, where he was most Honourably and Nobly Received, and Presented, both himself and Queen; and not long after, by the Mediation of Friends, especially the Duke of Glocester, the Liberties of the City  were Restored, with Power of choosing a Major as before. In the Parlement holden on the Quindene of St. Hillary, in theThe Earl of Arundel a∣gainst the Duke of Lan∣caster. Seventeenth of this King, the Earl of Arundel declared several things the King had done for the Duke of Rot. Parl. 17 Ric. II. n. 11. A. D. 1393, 1394. He asks the Duke's Par∣don in Parle∣ment. Lancaster, that were against his Honour and Profit, but they were such as the King answered them all himself, and justified them; and he was by the King and Lords ordered to ask his Pardon in full Parlement, which was done. The King, Lords, Knights of Honour, and Justices in this Par∣lement, Ib. n. 16. The King, Lords, &c. assent to a Peace to be made with France. assented to a Peace, so as the King did not make Ho∣mage Liege, and saving also and always, the Liberty of his Person and the Crown of England, and of his Lieges of the same King∣dom; and that he and his Heirs might Resort and have Regress to the Name, Title, and Right of the Crown and Kingdom of France, if the Peace should be broken by his Adversary and his Heirs; and also, That such Moderations and Modifications should  be made, that no Consiscation (that is, seisure of the Dutchy of Guyen) might happen. Knighton says, this was only a Truce for Four years and four months, as well by Sea as Land, Col. 2741. n. 20. The King charged the Commons, to give their Ib. n. 17. Advice in this Matter; They Answer by a Schedule given in by the Hands of Mr. John Bussy their Speaker, wherein the said Articles of Peace between the King and his Adversary of France, were read,  and partly understood by them, and they had considered ThreeThree Points too high for the Commons to give their Advice in. Points that were too high for them, upon which they dare not Treat or give Advice; to wit, Homage Liege, Soveraignty, and Resort, yet referring all, and giving their Consent (for the good of Peace) to what the Lords, Knights of Honour, and the Justices had consented to before, so as Homage should be done for, and have Relation to the Dutchy of Guyen only, and in no wise to the Crown and Kingdom of England. What the Articles of this  Peace were, it doth not appear upon the Parlement Roll. But the next year, by Edward Earl of Rutland, Thomas Earl Marshall and of Nottingham, and Messire William Lescrop Com∣missioners for the King of England, and the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy, Orleans, and Burbon, or any other Two or three of them, Commissioners for the King of France, The Origi∣nal in the Chapter House at Westminster. there was a Truce general by Sea and Land, agreed for 28 years, which was to begin at Mi∣chaelmass 1398, when the Truce at Leulingham, and the prolonga∣tions  of it were to end. During which Truce, all taking of Pri∣soners, Goods and Chattels, Fortified Towns, Fortresses, and other Places, all Pillagings, Robberies, Burnings, Demolishing Houses, and Walls, destroying Fruit Trees and others, and all other Feats of War, (& tout autre faits de Guerre) were to cease between the Kingdoms, Lands, and Seigneuries on both Parts, and between
the Kingdoms, Lands, Seigneuries, and Subjects of their Friends, Allies, Aydants, and Adherents whatsoever: And that there should be freedom of Intercourse, Commerce, Trading and Merchandising between the People and Subjects of one Party and the other. In this Truce there is not any mention of Homage Liege, Sove∣raignty, or Resort: The Treaty, Agreement, and Articles thereof was Ratified by the King of France on the Eleventh of March 1395, and was afterwards Ratified by the King of England, and  the Ratifications Exchanged in the year 1396, when on the Feast of St. Simon and Jude, or 28th of October, both Kings at an In∣terview not far from Calais, sware to the performance of them. John Duke of Ib. 20, 21. The Dukes of Lancaster and Glocester pray Judgment a∣gainst Sir Tho-Talbtt and o∣thers, for Con∣spiring their Deaths. Guyen and Lancaster Steward of England, and Thomas Duke of Glocester Constable of England, Petition the King and Lords for Judgment against Sir Thomas Talbot, and o∣thers not named, for Conspiring their Deaths, and raising Force to do it in the County of Chester; That they would Declare the Na∣ture  of the Offence, and ordain Punishment for it. The King was informed and advised, the Matter contained in the Bill or Petition was open and High Treason, and that it touched him and all the Realm; and he and all the Lords Judged and Declared it to be so. And because the Matter contained in the Bill of Com∣plaint, was notorious and open known to the King and Lords, and all the States of Parlement, and thro' the whole Kingdom, and therefore it was ordered and awarded that Writs should issue re∣turnable  into the Kings-Bench, to take his Body; That Procla∣mation should be made for him to render himself to stand to the Law, if not he was to be holden for Convict, as attainted of Treason, and all who received him were to incur the same Pain and Forfeiture he ought to do. If the Ib. n. 52. Suggestion of a Bill in Chancery was not true, the Chancellor had Power given him to award Damages at his Dis∣cretion. See Stat. at Large, 17 Rich II. Cap. 6. In the Eighteenth of his Reign the Knighton's Col. 2742. n. 10. Walsingh, f. 351. lin. 2. The King went into Ire∣land with an Army. King about Michaelmass, went with an Army into Ireland, to subdue the Irish, who were then in Rebellion, and with him went the Duke of Glocester, the Earls of March, Nottingham, and Rutland. The Duke of York Guardian of the Kingdom in his absence, Rot. Clause 18 Ric. II. M. 23. Dors. A Tenth and Fifteenth given. called a Parlement to meet Fifteen days after St. Hillary, to Consider of the Prosperous and Happy Government of Ireland, and to that purpose sent the Duke of Glocester over into England, to procure Money from the  Parlement; and the Lords and Commons Rot. Parl. 18 Ric. II n. 6. A. D. 1395. The King settled Ire∣land. granted to the King a Tenth and Fifteenth for the Conquest of that Country; and in May next following, having settled that Nation, and left the Earl of March Deputy, returned into England. In the Twentieth of King Richard, in the Parlement Ib. 20 R II. n. 14, 15, 16. The Com∣mons frame certain Ar∣ticles against the King's Royalty and Liberty. The Speaker charged to tell who brought in that l. hol∣den on the Feast of St. Vincent, or 22d of January, the Commons had framed certain Articles in a Bill, as the King told the Lords he was informed, against his Royalty and Liberty, such as his Pro∣genitors  enjoyed, which he was Resolved to uphold and maintain; and Commanded the Lords Spiritual and Temporal to let the Com∣mons know it; and Commanded the Duke of Lancaster to Charge Mr. John Bussy, the Speaker, upon his Allegiance, to tell who brought in the Bill. That which moved and troubled the King therein, was about the Expences of his House, and the Bishops and
Ladies that frequented the Court. The Commons made their Ex∣cuse and Submission to the King in manner following. On Saturday, the Morrow of the Feast of Candlemass, Ib n. 16. The Com∣mons deliver the Bill to the Lords. the Lords Spiritual and Temporal were with the Commons, and shew them the Will and Command of the King, and they delivered the Bill to the Lords, and the Name of him that brought it to them, to wit, Thomas Haxey; Which Bill was afterwards deli∣veredThomas Haxey brought the Bill into the House of Commons. to the Clerk of the Crown by the Clerk of the Parlement  by the King's Command, and presently after the Commons came before the King in Parlement by his Command, and there with all Humility and Obedience they could, shew great Grief, as appeared by their Countenances, for that the King had taken such conceit against them, Humbly praying the King, to hear and acceptThe Com∣mons Excuse and Submis∣sion. their Excuse; That it never was their Intent or Will to speak, shew, or do any thing which should be an Offence, or Displeasure to his Ma∣jesty, nor against his Royal Estate or Liberty, and especially about this  Matter touching his Person and the Government of his House, or about the Lords and Ladies in his Court, nor of any other Matter that touched himself, knowing well that such things do not belong to them, but solely to the King himself, and his Ordering; and that their In∣tention was, for the great Affection they bare to the King as faithful Lieges, That the Lords might pray the King, to consider his Honour∣able Estate, and do concerning it what he pleased; And upon this the Commons submit themselves to the King's Will and Favour, hum∣bly  praying his Royal Majesty to have them Graciously Excused, be∣ing always ready to save his Royal Estate and Liberty, and to per∣form in Body and Goods as Loyal Lieges are bound, what shall be for the Honour and Safety of his Royal Majesty. Whereupon Ib. n. 17. The King fully Excus∣eth them. the Chancellor, by Command of the King, told the Commons, That upon his Royal Benignity, and Gracious Seignoury, he had them fully Excused. On Wednesday after Candlemass, Thomas Haxey, Clerc, was in Par∣lement  Thomas Haxey Judged a Traytor. Judged to Ib. n. 23. Death as a Traytor; and soon after Sen∣tence, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, (Thomas Arundel) and all the other Prelates, came before the King in Parlement, with great Humility, and made full Protestation, That their intire and full Intention was, and always should be, That his Royal Estate and Royalty should be always saved and preserved without dimi∣nution, Ibm. The Arch-Bishops and Bishops make Protestation, the King's Royalty ought to be preserved. They beg the Life▪ Body, and Custody of Thomas Haxey, which were granted them. (Et maintenant apres de Juggement rendu devers Tho∣mas Haxey Clerc en Parlement a la mort come traitour viendrent avant  le Roy en Parlement ovek grant humilite Lerceveque de Canterbris & touz les autres Prelates & firent plein protestation, que lour entier & plein intention est & tout dis serraque le Royal Estate & Regalie du Roy soit tout dis savez & Gardez sanz Blemissement.) And then they pray the King to give them the Life of Thomas Haxey, and the Custody of his Body, not as of right belonging to them, but of his special Grace. Both which the King granted. The King by assent Ib. n. 40. and Stat. at Large, 20 Rich. II. Cap. 6. Sir Robert Belknap, &c. called out of Ireland. of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,  and the Commons, of his Special Grace granted to Robert Belknap, John Holt, and William Burgh, Knights, Banished into Ireland, that they might return into England, and practise Law there with∣out impeachment, notwithstanding the Statute made in the Eleventh year of the King's Reign, saving always against them all the other Points contained in the Statute.
In the 21st of King Richard's Reign, Clause 21 Rich. II. Part 1. M. 27. Dors. he summoned a Par∣lementA Parlement summoned. to meet on the Monday after the Exaltation of Holy Cross, or 14th of September. It was made into a Stat. at Large, 21 R. II. Cap. 1▪ Holy Church, the Lords, and all Comonal∣ties, to enjoy their Liber∣ties and Fran∣chises. Statute this Parlement, That Holy Church, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all Cities, Burghs, and other Commonalties of the Realm, should have and enjoy all their Liberties, and Franchises, as they had reasonably had and enjoyed them in the time of his Noble Progenitors Kings of England. For that several Judgments were heretofore undone, Rot. Parl. 21 Ric. II. n. 9. be∣cause the Clergie were not present, the Commons prayed the King, they might appoint a general Proctor, who might have sufficient Authority to act for them. The Two Ib. n. 10. Sir Thomas Pry general Procurator for the Cler∣gy. Arch-Bishops, and the Clergie of both Provinces, constituted and appointed Sir Thomas Percy their Procurator, as by their Instrument doth appear. The Commission and Statute made upon it in Stat. at Large▪ 21 Rich. II. Cap. 2. This agrees with the Record. The Commis∣sion and Sta∣tute made in the 11th year of the King Repealed. the Eleventh  year of this King, are repealed, and made void at the prayer of the Commons, as being made Traiterously, by constraint and com∣pulsion, against the King's Will, his Royalty, Crown and Dignity, and it was Ordained and Established by the King, with the Assent of the Lords and Commons, That no such Commission, or the like, should be made, and that he that should indeavour, or procure any such to be made, or the like, in time to come, &c. being thereof duely Convict, should suffer as a Traytor. The Pardons granted to the Duke of Rt. Parl. 21 Rich. II. n. 12, 13. The Pardons to the Dke of Glocester, Earls of A∣rundel, and Warwick▪ made void. Glocester, and Earls of Arundel, and Warwick, in the Parlement of the Eleventh of this King, are made void, as done by force only against the King's Will, as also the Pardon granted to the Earl of Arundel at Windsor, in the 17th year of this King, is revoked and annulled. On the Ib. n. 14. The Com∣mons declare, with the King's Leave, their intent wa to accuse Persons dur∣ing the  of this Parle∣ment. They h the King's Leave. 20th of September, the Commons made Protestation to the King in full Parlement, That tho they would shew and de∣clare certain Matters and Articles they had then Advised of, and  Agreed amongst themselves, nevertheless it was, and is their In∣tent and Will, by Leave of the King, to accuse and impeach Person or Persons as often as they should think fit, during the time of this Parlement; (ne nit meins il feust & est lour intent & volonte par conge de nostre Seigneur le Roy d'accuser & empescher person ou persons a taunts de foitz come leur sembleroit affair, durant le temps de cest present Parlement) And they prayed the King he would please to accept their Protestation, and that it might be entered of  Record on the Parlement Roll, which the King granted, and com∣manded it to be done. Then on the  . 15. The Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury accus∣ed of Trea∣son. same day, before the King in full Parlement, they accused and impeached Thomas Arundel Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury of High Treason, for that he being Chief Officer of the King, (to wit) his Chancellor (when he was Bishop of Ely) was Traite∣rously aiding, procuring, and advising in making a Commission directed to Thomas Duke of Glocester, Richard Earl of Arundel, and others,  in the Tenth year of the Reign of the King, and made and pro∣cured himself as chief Officer of the Realm to be put into it, to have Power with the other Commissioners to put it in Execution▪ Which Commission was made in prejudice of the King, and openly a∣gainst his Royalty, his Crown and Dignity, and that the said Thomas put in Ʋse and Execution the said Commission.
Also, for that Ibm. the said Thomas Arch-Bishop, in the Ele∣venth year of the King, procured and advised the Duke of Glo∣cester, and the Earls of Warwick and Arundel, to take upon them Royal Power, and to Arrest the King's Lieges, Simon Burley, and James Barners, and Judge them to Death contrary to the Will and Assent of the King; and upon this the said Commons pray the King, the said Thomas may be put in safeguard in an honest manner. And the King Ibm. said, because the Accusation and Empeach∣ment touched so high a Person and Peer of the Realm, he would be advised. Also the Twenty first day of Ib. n. 16. The Com∣mons pray Judgment against the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. September next following, the Commons prayed the King, That as they had Empeached and Accused the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, that he had assented, or was in the Contrivance to cause the Commission to be made (qil feust d'assent de fair fair la dit Commission) on the Nineteenth of  November, in the Tenth year of the King, and of the Execution of the same, which was expressly against the King, his State, and Dignity, That he would please to Ordain such Judgment against him as the Case required; Hereupon the King caused to be Re∣corded in Parlement, That the Arch-Bishop was before him in the presence of certain Lords, and confessed, (que en la use de la dit Commission il soy misprist, & luy mist en la Grace du Roy.) That he was mistaken or erred in the use of the Commission, and put him∣self  under the King's Grace. Whereupon the Ibm. He was ad∣judged Tray∣tor, and to be Banished. King and all the Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas Percy, having sufficient Power from the Prelates and Clergie, as appeared upon Record, in the said Parlement, adjudged and declared the Article, which the Arch-Bishop con∣fessed to be Treason, and touched the King himself, and also judged and declared him a Traytor; and thereupon it was award∣ed in Parlement, That he should be Banished out of England, his  Temporalties seized, and his Goods and Chattels forfeited to the King, who was to appoint the time of his Exile. And then the King Ib. n. 17. assigned him time of Passage from the Eve of St. Michael until Six weeks next following, from the Port of Dover into France; and further, That he should forfeit all his Lands, Tenements and Possessions which he had in Fee Simple, by Descent, Purchase, or otherwise, at the day of the Treason committed or after, or that any one held to his use, to  the King and his Heirs for ever. The Commons interceeded with the King for his Favour to∣ward such as were named in the Ib. n. 26. The Com∣mons inter∣ceed with the King for such as were nam∣ed in the Commission, and did not act. Commission, and made Commissioners, but neither procured it, consented to it, or acted in the Execution of it; Three whereof were alive, the Duke of York, the Bishop of Winchester, and Richard Lescrop Knight, and Four dead, William late Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Alexander late Arch-Bishop of York, Thomas late Bishop of Excester, and Nicholas late Abbat of  Waltham, whose Loyalty and Innocency was acknowledged in Par∣lement; The Declaration whereof was made a Statute by the King, with the Advice and Assent of the Lords, at the Prayer of the Commons.
They further Ib. n. 27. humbly beseech the King, That he would please to consider how at the time when Thomas Duke of Glocester, Richard Earl of Arundel, and Thomas Earl of Warwic, did rise (soy leverent) and march against their Allegiance and the King,The Com∣mons move the King in behalf of the Earls of Derby and Notting∣ham. the said Duke and Earls would have come and marched to have searched out the King, if he could be found in England, and to have killed a very great Number of his Lieges; and to have ac∣complished their evil Purpose and Intent, if they had not been  disturbed by the Honourable Persons of the King's Blood, Henry of Lancaster, Earl of Derby, and Thomas de Mowbray Earl of Notting∣ham, conceiving and understanding the Actions of the Duke and Earls were notoriously against their Legiance, and the Estate of the King; and therefore willing to do their Duty to him, depar∣ted from their Company, and came to the Honourable Presence of the King, It would please him, the Commons having specially recommended the Persons of the Earls of Derby and Nottingham  to him, openly to declare in this Parlement, their Estate, Name, and Fame, and the Loyal Behaviour of them (lour Estate, & le▪The King's Kindness and Favour to them. Noun, & le Fame, & le Loyal Port de eux.) Whereupon the King sitting in his Royal Dignity in Parlement, answered, This matter was better known to him than any other; and witnessed and declared the good Behaviour, Loyalty and Fame of the Two Earls, and held them for Loyal Lieges, and that they should be reported for such amongst all his Lieges through the Realm; and that they should be excused with∣out  Impeachment, Molestation, or Grievance for the Cause aforesaid in any time to come. And further, That the King, by Assent and Ad∣vice of all the Lords in Parlement, and at the Prayer of the Commons, Ordained and Established, That this Declaration and Grant should have the force of, and be holden for a Statute. That all Judgments, Ibm. n. 32. Ordinances, Declarations, and Establish∣ments of this Parlement shall have the force of Statutes. On Michaelmas-Day, being Saturday, Ib. n. 35. Henry Earl of Derby created Duke of Here∣ford Several others created Dukes and Earls. the King in Parle∣ment  Created Henry Earl of Derby Duke of Hereford, Edward Earl of Roteland Duke of Albemarle, Thomas Holland Earl of Kent Duke of Surrey, John Holland Earl of Huntington Duke of Exce∣ster, Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham Duke of Norfolk. The same Day John Beaufort Earl of Somerset was Created Marquess of Dorset, Thomas de Spenser Earl of Glocester, Ralph Nevill Earl of Westmerland, Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester, and William le Scrop Earl of Wiltshire. On the same Day the King Ibm. n. 36. The Parle∣ment adjour∣ned to Shrews∣bury. Adjourned the Parlement unto the 15th of St. Hillary, or 27 of January next coming, to Shrews∣bury, all things to remain in the same Condition they were, to be there finished and determined. The next Day being Sunday, Ibm. n. 37. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal Swear before the King. the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral, after Mass Celebrated in the Abby-Church at Westminster, upon the Altar, before the Shrine of St. Edward, made Oath in the presence of the King, in the Form following. The Prelates  first, saving the Honesty of their Estate (savant L'oneste de lour Estat) That is to say,
The Arch-Bishop of York,The Bishops first. The Bishop of London, The Bishop of Winchester, The Bishop of Ely, The Bishop of Duresme, The Bishop of Salisbury, The Bishop of Excester, The Bishop of Bangor, The Bishop of Worcester, The Bishop of Hereford, The Bishop of Chichester, The Bishop of St. Asaph, The Bishop of Carlile, The Bishop of Landaf, The Prior of St. John of Jeru∣salem, The Abbat of Westminster, The Abbat of Canterbury, The Abbat of St. Albans, The Prior of Canterbury. The OATH. You shall Ibm. n. 38. & Append. n. 109. Swear, That well and truly you shall Hold, Sustain, and Maintain, without Fraud or Deceit, all the Statutes, Establish∣ments,  Ordinances, or Judgments made or given in this Parlement, without doing any thing to the contrary of any of them, or the Dependen∣cies on, or Parcel of them; nor that you will ever Repeal, Revoke, Cassate, make Void, Reverse, or Adnull, nor ever suffer them to be Repealed, Revoked, Cassated, made Void, Reversed, or Adnulled, so long as you live; saving to the King his Royalty, Liberty, and the Right of his Crown. And so soon as they had Sworn, the Lords Ibm. n. 39. The Lords Temporal take the same Oath. Temporal, in the  same Place, in the Presence of the King, made the same Oath; that is to say, The Duke of Guyen and Lan∣caster, The Duke of York, The Duke of Hereford, The Duke of Albemarle, The Duke of Surrey, The Duke of Excester, The Duke of Norfolk, The Marquess of Dorset, The Earl of Oxford, The Earl of Stafford, The Earl of Northumberland, The Earl of Salisbury, The Earl of Glocester, The Earl of Westmerland, The Earl of Worcester, The Earl of Wilts, The Lord de Camoys, The Lord de Bourgchier, The Lord de Powys, The Lord Fitz-Walters, The Lord de Roos, The Lord de Harrington, The Lord de Burnell, The Lord de Berkely, The Lord de Darcy, The Lord de Willonghby, The Lord Grey of Codnore, The Lord Grey of Ruthin, The Lord de Scales, The Lord de St. Amand, The Lord de Furnivall, The Lord de Ferrers, The Lord de Seymour, The Lord de Lovell, The Lord de Bardolph, The Lord de Morley, William Beaumont, Lord of Burgavenny, Ralph de Cromwell, Ralph de Lumly, Philip le Dispenser, And did Swear further in these Words: Ibm. n. 40. & Append. n. 110. You shall Swear, That in time to come you shall never suffer any Man living to do any thing contrary to the Statutes, Establishments,
Ordinances, and Judgments, made or given in this present Parlement,The Additio∣al Oath of the Lords Temporal. nor to any Dependencies on, or Parcell of them: And if any one shall do so, and be duly Convicted, you shall use your entire Power and Dili∣gence, without Fraud or Deceit, to prosecute him before the King and his Heirs Kings of England, and cause him to have Execution as an High and False Traitor to the King and Kingdom; saving to the King his Regalie or Royalty, Liberty and Right of his Crown. Then the King asked the Knights of Shires there present for the  Parlement, If they Ibm n. 41. The Knights of Shires af∣firm the said Oaths. would hold and keep the same Oath? Who promised with loud Voices to keep it, holding up their Hands on high, as a Sign of their Affirmance of their said Oaths. And immediately after, Monsieur Thomas de Percy Ibm. n. 42, 43. Sir Tho. Percy made the same Oath for the Clergy. made the same Oath the Lords Temporal had made, for and in the Name of the Clergy, as their Procurator General, and by Authority above∣said. This done, the King, the Prelates, and Lords Temporal Ibm. The great Ex∣communicati∣on pronoun∣ced against any one should do con∣trary to the Premisses. went from the Shrine of St. Edward, and came before the High Altar of the Church, and there for the Establishmment and Affirmance of these things, the Prelates and Ordinaries of the Provinces of Can∣terbury and York, with one Assent did pronounce the Sentence of the greater Excommunication, against all and every of the Subjects of both Provinces, that openly or privately, by Deed, Coun∣sel, or Advice, should contravene or do against any of the  foresaid Premisses, the King's Royalty and Prerogative in all things saved. According to the Adjournment Ibm n. 44. 21 Ric. II. A. D. 1398. The Parle∣ment met at Shrewsbury. the Parlement met at Shrewsbury on Monday after the Quinden of St. Hillary, when the Chancellor told them, That at first this Parlement was Summoned for the Honour of God, and that Holy Church might enjoy all its Liberties and Franchises; and that all the Lords, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, should have and enjoy all their Liber∣ties  and Franchises, as they reasonably enjoyed and used them in former times. Ibm. Also that there should not be more Go∣vernours in the Kingdom than One; and that the Laws might be duly obeyed and executed, as it was more fully contained in the Beginning and Pronunciation of the Cause of this Par∣lement. Also the Ibm. The King de∣sired to know how the Charge for the Defence of the War should be born. Chancellor shewed to the Commons, the King would be informed by them how the Charge should be born for  the Defence of England, Ireland, Guyen, the March of Calais, and also the March of Scotland, in case they kept not the Truce made for four years, which was to end at Michaelmas next coming. The Lords Appellants in this Parlement, Ibm. n. 47. & Stat. ac Large, 21 Ric. II. c. 12. The Lords Appellants in this Parle∣ment, Moved the Parlement in the 11th of this King, might be re∣voked. Edward Duke of Albemarle, Thomas Duke of Surrey, John Duke of Excester, John Marquess of Dorset, John Earl of Salisbury, Thomas Earl of Gloce∣ster, and William Earl of Wiltshire, Prayed the King, and shewed  that certain Lords Convict and Attainted, the Duke of Glocester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwic, by Coertion and Compulsion made him Summon a Parlement at Westminster, on the morrow after Candlemas, in the 11th Year of his Reign; and then reciting what had been done that Year, and particularly the Questions and Answers put to, and made by Sir Robert Tresilian, the other
Judges, and King's Serjeant at Nottingham, that the whole Parle∣ment might be revoked, the Commons joined with them in the same Prayer, to which the Lords Spiritual and Temporal As∣sented. After the Reading the Ibm. The Ans∣wers made to the Questions propounded at Nottingham, judged good and lawful. The Judges, Justices, and Serjeants of that Opinion. Questions and Answers, as well be∣fore the King and Lords, as Commons, all the Estates of Parle∣ment were asked, What they thought of the Answers? And they said, They thought the Justices made and gave their Answers duly  and lawfully, as good and lawful Liege People of the King ought to do. And Sir Thomas Skelton, Learned in the Law, William Hanke∣ford and William Brenchly, the King's Serjeants, said, The Ans∣wers were good and lawful, and that if the same Questions had been put to them, they would have given the same. William Thirning, Chief Justice of the Common Bench, said, The Declaration of Treason not declared, belonged to the Parlement; but if he were a Lord or Peer of Parlement, if he had been asked, he would  have said in the same manner. In like manner said William Riice of the Common Pleas; and Sir Walter Clopton, Chief  of the King's Bench said the same thing. Wherefore the  were judged and affirmed to be good and sufficient in th ment. upon by Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the  of the Clergy, and Commons, and by Advice of the Justi and Serjeants aforesaid there being, it was Ibm. The Parle∣ment as above annulled. Awarded and  Judged Ordained and Stablished, That the Parlement holden in the said 11th Year, shall be clearly annulled, and holden for none, as a thing made without Authority, and against the Will and Liberty of the King, and the Right of his Crown; and that all the Judgments, Statutes, and Ordinances made in the same, with all things depending upon them, shall be revoked and annulled, reversed and repealed, and holden for none; and that all Lands, Tenements, Fees, Advousons, and all other Possessions seized as for∣feit  by colour of the said Judgments, shall be restored and delivered to them which were judged or put out, or to their Heirs, and to them that have in other manner Cause of Action, or Title of Right, with all manner of Liberties or Franchises as they had at any time, with Restitution of Goods and Chattels. On Wednesday the third Day of this Meeting, Ibm. n. 51. The Commons desire, that the greatest Security that can be, may be given, for not undoing what was done in this Parlement. John Bussy the Speaker alledged, That before that time, many Ordinances and Statutes made in divers Parlements, had been reversed by di∣versity  of Opinions, and other Reasons and Subtilties; and on be∣half of the Commons prayed the King, That the greatest Security that could be given, might be taken for the not undoing the Or∣dinances and Judgments made in this Parlement. Whereupon the King charged all the Estates in Parlement to give them their Ad∣vice for the best and most firm Security in this case. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal answered, That they had Sworn before to hold and keep the said Judgments, Establishments, and Statutes,  This Salvo was not in their Oaths. which they would maintain with all their Power, as much as in them was. The King also demanded of the Justices and Ser∣jeants, If they knew any other more secure way for the perpetual keeping and observing of the Ordinances and Judgments, &c. Who answered, The greatest Security that could be, was esta∣blished by Parlement. And then the Lords Temporal and Spi∣ritual
renewed their Oaths before the King in Parlement upon theLords Spiritu∣al and Tem∣poral renew their Oaths. Cross of Canterbury; and also the greatest part of the Commons held up their hands in Affirmance of their Oaths; and likewise the Proctors of the Clergy, and the Knights being about the King. And then after Proclamation had been made in audience of all the People, To know if they would Ibm. The People Consent to these things. Consent to this manner of Security? To which they answered, lifting their Hands on high, and crying with loud Voices, It pleased them well, and  fully consented thereunto. Thomas le Despenser Petitions Ib. n. 55. to the end of n. 66. The Repeal of the Judg∣ments against the Despensers, 14th & 15th of Ed. II. con∣firmed, and the Reverse of that Appeal in the 1st of Ed. III. repea∣led. the King in full Parlement, wherein he recites the Petitions of Hugh the Father, and Hugh the Son, to the King in full Parlement holden at York three Weeks after Easter, in the 15th Year of Edward II. In which Parlement the Exile and Disherison of both were an∣nulled for these Reasons: First, They were not Appealed, or  called to Answer, nor due Process made against them according to Law. Secondly, Because the Prelates who were Peers of the Realm (& que les Prelatz que estoient Piers du Royalm) did not Consent to the Exile and Disherison (A dit agard de Disherison & Exile ne assenteront point.) Thirdly, Because it was against Magna Charta, that any Man should be Exiled or Tryed, or otherways Destroyed, without Judgment of his Peers. This Adnullation was after∣wards made void in 1 Edw. III. They pray that Statute may be  made void; and it was made void, and all the Articles and things contained in it, for the Reasons abovesaid. Et sur ceo le Roy fist examiner diligement les Prelatz, Ducs, Barons, & Comunes Summonez a son Parlement, what they thought, whe∣ther the Statute of Edward III. was defeasable? Who upon good Deliberation said it was, for the Causes before expressed; also considering that the Repeal made by King Edward III. was at such time as his Father Edward II. was living, being very King, and  in Prison, that he could not resist the same. The Record of this matter is long; and also the Proceedings against the Spencers in the 14th and 15th of Edward II. and Sta∣tute the first of Edward III. are recited, which see in those Years. On Ibm. n. 67. The Duke of Hereford's Sul∣mission and Confession to the King on his Knees. He begs par∣don. Thursday the last Day of the Parlement, the Duke of Hereford in full Parlement humbly kneeled before the King, and said to him, My Liege Lord, I know well that many Riots, Distur∣bances,  and evil Deeds have been made and done within your King∣dom, to the Offence of you and your Royal Estate, in the which I my self was present amongst others; not with an ill Intent or Purpose to offend you, not knowing then it was any Fault or Offence against you. But, Sir, since I now know well, and confess my Offences and evilThe King's Mercy and Pardon to him. Deeds in so doing, I cry you Mercy, and beg your Pardon. Where∣upon the King graciously accepted the humble Prayers and Con∣fession of the Duke, and granted him Pardon in full Parlement,  for what he had done in the things abovesaid, and what belonged to him for the same. And further, the King granted him to be his Good Lord: And this he declared to all the Estates in Parlement, how he had given him full Pardon for the Matters aforesaid.
The Commons on the same Day by Ibm. n. 75. The Subsidy of Wooll, &c. granted to the King for Life, with a xth and half and xvth and half. Assent of the Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal, granted to the King the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells for his Life, and one 10th and 15th, and half a 10th and 15th. Upon which Grants, Ibm. n. 76. Out of which the Commons pray the Suf∣ferers of Rat∣cot-bridge, &c. may have 3 or 4000 Marks. the Commons prayed the King to be∣stow 3 or 4000 Marks on those that suffered at Ratcot-bridge, and  to pay the Lords Appellants their Expences. And then the same Day follows a Ib. n. 77. & Stat. at Large, 21 Ric. II. c. 15. A General Pardon▪ General Pardon, for all things done before that Day, which was Thursday, as above, the last of January, and last Day of Parlement; provided that they who rode and gathered themselves forcibly against the King, in the 11th Year of his Reign, with the Lords then Convict and Judged, should have no Benefit of the Pardon, if they Sued not  forth their Charters between that and Midsummer. Upon the Grant of this Pardon, Ibm. n. 78. Upon Condi∣tion. the King by his own Mouth declared, That if the Lords and Commons, which in time to come shall Sit in Parlement, should lett or disturb him in the Collection of the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells, so granted as above, it should be void. Also the same Ibm. n. 74. & 80. & Stat. at Large, 21 Ric. II. c. 16. A. D. 1398. Certain Per∣sons appoin∣ted to deter∣mine all mat∣ters undis∣patched this Parlement▪ Thursday (the last Day of the Parlement) the Commons prayed the King, That whereas they had before  them divers Petitions, as well for special Persons as others, not Read or Answered; and also many other Matters and Things had been moved in the Presence of the King, which for short∣ness of time could not well be determined; It would please the King (que plerroit au Roy, &c.) to commit full Power to certain Lords and others whom he pleased, to Examin, Answer, and Dis∣patch the Petitions, Matters, and Things abovesaid, and all De∣pendencies on them. To which Prayer the King Assented,  and thereupon by Authority and Assent of Parlement, Ordained and Assigned John Duke of Lancaster, Edmond Duke of York, Ed∣mond Duke of Albemarl, Thomas Duke of Surrey, John Duke of Excester, John Marquess of Dorset, Roger Earl of March, John Earl of Salisbury, Henry Earl of Northumberland, Thomas Earl of Glo∣cester, Thomas Earl of Winchester, and William Earl of Wiltshire, or Six of them; John Hussey, Henry Green, John Russell, Henry Chelmswike, Robert Tey, and John Golofre, Knights, coming for  the Commons of the Kingdom to that Parlement, or Three of them, shall Examin, Answer, and fully Determin all the said Petitions, and the Contents of them, (come toutz autre Matiers & Choses moe∣vezAnd all other matters, ha∣ving the whole Power of Parlement deputed to them. en Presence du Roy, &c,) as all other Matters and Things moved in the Presence of the King, and all other Dependencies upon them not Determined, as they shall think best by their Good Advice and Discretion in this behalf, by Authority of the said Parlement: And then it was Dissolved. On Wednesday the 30th of January, and Day before the Parle∣ment ended, the Duke of Hereford accused the Duke of Norfolk of Words, &c. spoken against the King's Person, as will more fully appear in the Pleas of the Crown of this Parlement.
On the first of August this Year at Nottingham, Pleas of the Crown▪ 21 Ric. II. on the Parlement Roll. The Duke of Glocester and Earls of Arun∣del appealed of Treason. before the King sitting with his Crown on, in the Great Hall of the Castle there, Edward Earl of Rutland, Thomas Earl of Kent, John Earl of Huntington, Thomas Earl of Nottingham, John Earl of So∣merset, John Earl of Salisbury, Thomas Lord Despenser, and William le Scrop the King's Chamberlain, brought a Bill of Appeal of Trea∣son, against Thomas Duke of Glocester, Richard Earl of Arundel, and Thomas Earl of Warwic. Ibm. The Bill having been read, by  Advice of the Lords and those of his Council about the King, they had Day given them to the Parlement, which was to begin on the Monday next after the Exaltation of Holy Cross, or 14th of September, which was that Year on the Friday; so as the Par∣lement began the 17th of that Month. First, the Bill Ibm. The Effect of the Bill of Appeal, and the Articles against them. sets forth, That the Duke of Glocester and Earl of Arundel, designing to accroach and have the Govern∣ment of his Royal Person and Kingdom, his Liberties and all his  Dignities, as well within the Kingdom as without, when the Parlement sate at Westminster in the 10th Year of his Reign, sent a Peer of the Land to him, who on their Behalf and by their Command told him, That if he would not Consent to make to Them, and Others they should Name, such a Commission, whereby they might have the Government, as above, he should be in Danger of his Life; and the Lords and Commons of Parlement would depart without his Leave; and then he should  see in what a strait Condition he would be in. So that by their Power, and for Fear, he granted such a Commission as they desired. And then follows the Commission Dated at Westminster, Nov. 19. in the 10 of his Reign; by virtue whereof the Commissioners took the Government upon them. Also, Ibm. the Duke and Earl of Arundel, to accomplish their Traiterous Purpose, and to have your Person ordered as they pleased, and the Government of your whole State, Laws, Ma∣jesty,  and Dignity, prevailed with Thomas Earl of Warwic and Thomas Mortimer to join with them in their Traiterous Design; who by Agreement, as Traitors to the King and Kingdom, all met and assembled on the 13th of November, in the 11th Year of your Reign, at Haringay in Middlesex, with a great Number of People Armed and Arrayed: And made divers of your Liege People, in several Parts of your Realm, to rise, and march with them against you, contrary to their Legiance: And  would not come before your Presence, until they were secured by your Oath they might come and return safely; which not∣withstanding, they all came before you in your Palace at West∣minster, with great Force of Armed Men, and traiterously Con∣strained you to take them into your safe Protection against your Will. Also, Ibm. the Duke, the Earls of Arundel and Warwic, and Thomas Mortimer, continuing their Traiterous Purpose, by Force  of People, did take and imprison divers of your Liege People, and amongst others Sir Simon Burley, and brought him to your Parlement held on the morrow of the Purification, in the 11th of your Reign, and there suggested divers Points of Crime and Treason against him. And the Advice of every Lord then pre∣sent was asked, concerning the Crimes of the said Simon; and
afterwards the Duke and Earls would know your Advice or Opinion, (voloint savoir vostre avys) and you answered plainly, He was not Guilty in any Point objected against him. And after that, the Duke and Earls caused you to come into a secret Place at Westminster, and shew you the Points of the Crimes abovesaid. To whom you then answered, The said Simon was not any ways Guilty of any of those Points. And there they took upon them traiterously to have you constrained to have  consented to the Judgment they designed against him; and you would not consent to any Judgment to be given against the said Simon. Yet nevertheless, e said Duke and Earls took upon them Royal Power, in Prejudice of you, and in Dero∣gation of your Crown, and without your Assent, and contrary to your Will, in your Absence, and in the Absence of many other Peers of Parlement, without their Assent, and against their Wills, awarded the said Simon should be Drawn, Hang∣ed,  and Decollated; and thereupon they caused his Head to be struck off traiterously, against your Peace, Crown, Majesty, and Dignity. Also, Ibm. the foresaid Duke, Earls, and Thomas Mortimer, continuing their Malicious, False and Traiterous Purpose and Force, at Huntington, on Thursday after the Feast of St. Nicholas (or 6th of December) in the said 11th Year, Traiterously agreed and intended to have gone with their Force to any Place of  the Kingdom where they might have found you, to have surrendred to you their Homage Liege, and to have Deposed you; and this they would have done, had they not been hindred by Henry de Lancaster Earl of Derby, and Thomas Mow∣bray Earl of Nottingham. And the Duke and Earls continuing their Traiterous Intention and Force, by Agreement between them, caused the Records in your Treasury, of the Time of your Great Grandfather King Edward, to be searched, how he  Demised himself of his Crown (or Quitted his Crown) and they shew to you in Writing the Causes of the Demise of his Crown, in your Palace at Westminster, in the time of Parle∣ment, in the 11th Year (coment vostre dit besail soy demyst de sa Coroun, & monsterent en escript a vous tres redoute Sr. les causes del demys de sa Coroun deinz vostre Royal Palyes de Westminster a dit Parlement lan unzisme.) And they said falsly and traiterously, That they had Cause sufficient to Depose you, but for the Re∣verence  they had for your most Noble Grandfather and most Noble Father: And said also, That in hopes of your better Go∣vernment, they would suffer you to continue in your Royal Estate and Regalty. Which Ibm. Treasons so imagined (or contrived) done and perpetrated, by the foresaid Duke, Earls, and Thomas Morti∣mer, against your Royal Person, Estate, Majesty, and Dig∣nity, as is above declared; We Appellants (there named) your  Loyal Lieges, have been and are ready to prove against the said Duke, the Earls of Arundel and Warwic, and Thomas Morti∣mer, as you, most Dread Lord, and this High and Honourable Court your Parlement shall Order. Thus far the Articles of the General Appeal against these Four Persons.
Which having been read, Ibm. the Appellants prayed the King the Appealed might be brought before him in Parlement to make their Answer: And accordingly Ralph Lord Nevill Constable of the Tower there present, had Order to bring before the Parle∣ment Richard Earl of Arundel, then his Prisoner; and did so on the 21st of September. On the fourth Day of the Parlement,The Trial of the Earl of Arundel. when by Command of the King and the Peers, the Duke of Lan∣caster Steward of England, told him, That he was Appealed of di∣vers  High Treasons; and the Appeal having been read to him, his Answer, That he had a General Pardon in the Parlement, hol∣denHis Plea. in the 11th of the King's Reign, and a Charter of Pardon made to him within six Years, and prayed the Allowance of them. To whom it was said by the Duke of Lancaster, by Command ofOver-ruled. the King, and Advice of all the Peers of Parlement, That the Par∣don made in the 11th Year, was made by constraint upon the King, by the Duke, Earls, and others of their Party, accroaching  to themselves Royal Power, in Prejudice of the King, his Royal Estate, his Crown and Dignity: And that the Charter of Pardon was made in Deceit of the King, and expresly against him, his Royalty (sa Regalie) and Dignity; wherefore the said Pardon and Charter, by Assent of the King and all Estates of Parlement, upon the Request of the Commons, had been in this Parlement Repealed and made Void. And then the Earl was asked if he would say any other thing; and Sir Walter Clopton Chief Justice of the King's Bench, by  the King's Command, declared to him the Law, and the Punish∣ment he must undergo, if he said nothing else; and told him if he did not plead further, he would be Convict and Attainted of all the Matters objected against him. Notwithstanding this, and the Repeal of the Charter and Pardon, he demanded the Allowance of them. The Appellants in their proper Persons prayed the King it would please him to give Judgment upon him, as Convict of allHis Judg∣ment. the Points he was Appealed. Whereupon the Duke of Lancaster,  by Command of the King and all the Lords Temporal, and Sir Tho∣mas Percy having Power sufficient from the Prelates and Clergy, as appeared by Record in this Parlement, Awarded the Earl of Arun∣del Culpable and Convict of all the Points of which he was ap∣pealed, and adjudged him Traitor to the King and Realm; and that he should be Drawn, Hanged, Headed, and Quartered; and be∣causeThe Aggra∣vation of his Treasons. the Treasons were so high as to have surrendred their Homage Liege, and Deposed the King, and the Levying of War having  been so notorious, the said Duke of Lancaster, by Command of the King, the Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas Percy, having Power as above, by Assent of the King, Awarded, That all the Castles, Mannors, Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Fees, Advousons, and every other manner of Inheritance, as well in Fee-taile as Fee∣simple, which were the Earl of Arundel's on the 19th of November, in the 10th Year of the King, or afterwards; and also all the Lands and Tenements of which other Persons were ineoed to his  Ʋse the said 19th of November, or afterwards, should be forfeit to the King and his Heirs; and also all his Goods and Chattels should be forfeited to the King, who pardoned the Execution of his Judgment to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, but was Beheaded near the Tower of London on the same Day. The King and Lords, as well Spiritual and Temporal, would not, nor was it their In∣tention,
that the Lands, and Tenements, Fees, Advowsons, Re∣versions, or any other Inheritance the said Earl of Arundel was in∣feed to the use of another, by reason of this Judgment should in any manner be forfeit. On the same day the Earl of Arundel was Append. n. 111. brought into Parlement, Tryed and Convicted, the King directing his Warrant to Thomas Earl Marshall Captain of the Town of Calais, and to hisA Warrant to the Earl Marshall to bring the Bo∣dy of the Duke of Glo∣cester into Par∣lement. Lieutenant, That he should bring the Body of Thomas Duke of  Glocester in his Custody, with all speed he could, to Answer to di∣vers Articles of Treason in Parlement, according to the Law and Cu∣stom used in England, objected against him by the Appellants; and to do further, and receive what should be ordered by him and his Council concerning him in Parlement. Dated at Westminster the 21st of September, in the 21st year of his Reign, by the King and Council in Parlement. The Ibm. The Earl Marshal re∣turned he was dead. Answer of the Earl Marshall was, That he could not  bring him before the King and his Council in that present Par∣lement, for that he being in his Custody in the King's Prison at Calais died there. This Return was made September 24. Upon Pleas of the Crown. 21 Ric. II. Reading of this Writ and Return in Parlement, the Appellants in their proper Persons prayed the King, That the Duke of Glocester might be declared Traytor and Enemy to him, as having levied War in the Kingdom against his Person, contrary to his Li∣geance, and that all his Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, as  they ought in this Case, notwithstanding his Death might be for∣feit; Whereupon the Commons also of this Parlement prayed the King and Lords, That it being notoriously known to the King and all the Estates of the present Parlement, and to all the Kingdom, that the Duke and others of his Party assembled at Haringay in the County of Middlesex, with a great number of People Armed and Arrayed, to make War against the King, contrary to their Li∣geance, and came with such Force into the presence of the Person  of the King▪ which was to levy War against their Liege Lord; That he might be adjudged Traytor, and that his Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels might be forfeit, notwithstanding his Death, as they ought in this Case. Upon this all the Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas Percy, having Power as abovesaid, having been fully Examined, said, That the said Crime and Treason were notoriously known to them, and the whole Kingdom; whereforeHis Judg∣ment. all the Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas Percy, by assent of the  King, declared him guilty of levying of War, and Traytor, and adjudged all his Castles, Mannors, Lands, &c. which he was pos∣sessed of on the 13th of November, in the Eleventh year of this Reign, as in the Earl of Arundel's Judgment, forfeit to the King and his Heirs; And that none of his Issue, or Heirs of his Body, or their Issue or Heirs, in time to come, should ever bear the Royal Armes of England intire, nor with difference, (ne ove defe∣rence) or in other manner whatsoever, nor should inherit the  Crown of England. Upon Ibm. the 25th of September the Appellants in full Parle∣ment prayed the King, That if there were any thing upon Record, whether by Confession of any Person appealed, or other Person whatsoever, touching their Appeal, that it might be openly known, and declared in full Parlement; Then by Command of the King,
and Advice of all the Lords Temporal, Append. n. 112. The Confes∣sion of the Duke of Glo∣cester, when Prisoner, be∣fore Sir Wil∣liam Rickhill. a Commission bearing Date the 17th of August this year, was read, directed to Monsieur William Rickhill one of the Justices of the Common Bench, and a Confession made before him by Thomas Duke of Glocester by force of that Commission; and the Return of that Commission was then also Read, which follows in these Words: This is the Answer Pleas of the Crown in Parlement▪ 21 of Ric. II. of William Rickhill to the Commission of his Liege Lord. THomas Duke of Glocester be the name of Thomas of Wood∣stok the zer of the King Richard Twenty one, in the Castle  of Cales, by vertue of a Commission of the King, as it is more plainly declared in the same, directed to William Rickhill Ju∣stice hath Declared. I know and confessed to fore the same William all the Matters and Points I wrote (that is, wrot) in this great Roll annexed to this Scedule, the which Scedule and great Roll both Sealed under the Seal of the aforesaid William, and all the Matters and Points I know (that is, declared) and confessed by the foresaid Duke in the Castle of Caleys, the foresaid Duke be  his own Hand fully and plainly I wrot, delivered it to the same William Rickhill in the presence of John Lancaster, and John Lovetot, and all that ever the foresaid William Rickhill dede touching this Matter, it was I doe (that is done) in the pre∣sence of the foresaid John and John, and in none other man∣ner. I Thomas of Woodstok Ibm. the Zer of my Lord the King  twenty one, be the vertue of a Commission of my Lord the King the same Zer directed to William Rickhill Justice, the which is comprehended more plainly in the foresaid Commis∣sion, knowleche that I was one with sterynge of other Men, to assent to the making of a Commission, in the which Com∣mission I among other restreyned my Lord of his freedome, and took upon me among other Power real, (that is, Royal) truly not knowing e witting that time that I did against his  Estate nor his Royalty, as I did after and do now; And for∣asmuch as I knew afterward that I had done wrong, and take upon me more then me ought to do, I submitted me to my Lord, and cried him Mercy and Grace, and yet do as truly and as meekly as any Man may, and put me high and low in his Mer∣cy and in his Grace, as he hath always been full of Mercy and Grace to all other. Also, in that time that I came Armed into my Lord's pre∣sence,  and into his Palace, howsoever that I did it for drede of my Life, I knowlech for certain that I did Evil, and against his Regalte, and his Estate, wherefore I submit me lowly and meek∣ly to his Mercy and to his Grace.
Also, in that I took my Lords▪ At Rdt Bridge. Letters of his Messages, and opened them against his leave, I knowlech that I did Evil, wherefore I put me lowly in his Grace. Also, in that, that I sclaundred my Lord, I knowlech that I did Evil and Wickedly in that that I spake to him in sclaunde∣rous wise in audience of other folk, bot by the way that my Soul shall too, I meant none Evil therein, nevertheless I wot and knowlech that I did evil and unkindly, wherefore I submit  me high and low in his Grace. Also, in that I among other communed and asked of certain Clerks whither that we might give up oure Homage for dread of our Lives or not, and whither that we were assentid thereto for to do it, trewly and be my troth, Ine have now none full mind thereof (that is, he did not remember it) but I trowe ra∣ther yee, then nay, wherefore I submit me high and low ever∣more in his Grace. Also, in that that I was in place there it was communed, and spoken in manner of deposal of my Liege Lord trewly I know∣lech well, that we were assentid thereto for two days or three, and then we for to have done our Homage and our Othes, and put him as highly in his Estate as ever he was, but for south (that is, sooth) there I knowlech that I did untrewly and un∣kindly as to him that is my Liege Lord, and hath been so good and kind Lord to me, wherefore I beseeche to him not∣withstanding  my unkindnesse, I beseche him evermore of his Mercy and of his Grace as lowly as any Creature may beseche it unto his Liege Lord. And as of any new thing or Ordenance, that ever I should have witting or known, ordained or assentid, privy or appert, that should have been against my Lord's Estate, or his Lust, (that is, Will) or any that longeth about him, syth that day that I swore unto him at Langeley on God's Body, trewly and▪  by that Ooth that I there made, I never knew of gathering a∣gainst him, ne none other that longeth unto him. And as touching these Points that I have made Confession of, to for William Rickhill Justice, in the which I wot well that I have offended my Lord, unkindly and untrewly as I have said before, how that I have in all these Points offended him, and done against him, trewly and as I will answer before God, it was my meaning and my weaning (that is, weening or think∣ing)  to do the best for his Persone and for his Estate; Never∣theless I wot well, and know well nowe, that my Deeds and my Workings were against my intent, bot by the way that my Soul shall to, of these Points and of all other the which that I have done of negligence and of unkunning it was never myne intent, ne my will, ne my thought for to do thing that should have been distresse or harmeing against salvation (that is, safety) of my Liege Lords Persone, as I will answere before  God at the Day of Judgment. And therefore I beseech my Liege and Soveraign Lord the King, that he will of his high Grace and Benignity accept me to his Mercy and his Grace, as I that put my Life, my Body, and my Goods wholly at his Will, as lowly as meekly as any Creature can do, or may do to his Liege Lord, beseeching to
his high Lordship that he will for the Passion that God suffered for all Mankind, and the Compassion that he had for his Mo∣ther on the Crosse, and the Pitty that he had of Mary Magda∣len, that he will vouchsafe for to have Compassion and Pitty, and to accept me to his Mercy and to his Grace, as he that hath ever been full of Mercy and of Grace to all his Lieges, and to all other that have nought been so nigh unto him as I have been, though I been unworthy. After this Return to the Commission had been read, the Apel∣lants prayed, That William Rickhill, approved for his Loyalty andWilliam Rick∣hill declares in Parlement the manner of the Duke of Glocester's Confession. Discretion, might be commanded by the King upon his Ligeance, to declare the truth touching this Confession, who in the presence of the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in Parlement, said, and declared, That about Eight of the Clock be∣fore Noon, he came within the Castle of Caleys to the Duke of  Glocester, being then in good Memorie and out of Prison, (este∣ant alors en bone memorie & hors de duresse de prison) and shew him the Commission and the cause of his coming to him in the presence of John Lancaster and John Lovetoft, and prayed him that what he had to say he would put down in Writing, and then departed. Then returning to him about Nine of the Clock afternoon the same day, the Duke read in writing the said Confession with his own Mouth, and gave the same to William Rickhill with his own Hand. And  further, William Rickhill said to the Duke, if there was any thing more touching this Matter he would speak it in satisfaction to the King, for the knowledge of the whole Truth of the Matter, whereupon the Duke said he had forgot one thing that then came into his Memory, to wit, That he said to the King, that if he would be King, he must not intercede for Sir Simon Beurle to save him from Death, and prayed William Rickhill he would shew this to the King by Word of Mouth, (& pria le dit William Rickhill  qil verroit Monster ceste Matire au Roy par Bouch.) On Ibm. The Tyal of the Earl of Warwick. Friday the 28th of September, the Constable of the Tower brought into the Parlement Thomas Earl of Warwick, who was told by the Duke of Lancaster Steward of England, by Command of the King, and all the Lords Temporal, That he was appealed by Edward Earl of Rutland, and the other Appellants there named, of divers High Treasons, which were comprehended in Two only Articles, That of assembling with Force and Armed Men at Har∣ringay,  H pleads y, and puts himself in the King's Grace. His Judg∣ment the same with the Earl of A. Which the King Pardon∣ed by the Me∣diation of the Prement and Appel∣lants. Being to re∣main Prisoner  the Isle of Wg during his Life. &c. and that about Sir Simon Beurley, and were drawn up in the same Words as in the Earl of Arundel's Case. To which he answered, That he well understood those Treasons and Wicked Deeds, and was Guilty of them, and put himself in the King's Grace. Wherefore the Duke of Lancaster, by Command of the King, all the Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas Percy, having Power as aforesaid, pronounced the very same Judgment against him in all things as he had done against the Earl of Arundel; Which  the King moved with Pity, to the Reverence and Honour of God, at the prayer of the Appellants, the Commons of Parlement, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Remitted and Pardoned, and granted him his Life; and his Sentence was, That he should remain Prisoner in the Isle of Man so long as he lived, upon Condition, That if any Means were made to the King, or his Heirs, for any further
favour, or if he should make his Escape, then the Judgment should be put in Execution, and the King's Grace should be void. The Commons Ibm. Thomas Morti∣mer impeach∣ed by the Commons. He fled to the Irish Rebels. Proclamation agreed in Par∣lement to be made for his Return and Appearance in Parlement. before the King in Parlement affirming the Appeal to be Good and Lawful, impeached Thomas Mortimer of Treasons comprised in the said Appeal; but he being in Ireland, fled unto the Mountains to the Irish Rebels: Proclamation was agreed in Parlement to be made in England and Ireland, That he should be in England within Three Months to answer to the im∣peachment  of the Commons, or be declared Traitor, and all his Man∣nors, Castles, Lands, Tenements, &c. which he was possessed of on the 13th of November, in the Eleventh of the King, together with all his Goods and Chattels, forfeited to the King. The Ap∣pellants and Commons had time given them until the meeting of the Parlement adjourned to Shrewsbury to the Quinden of St. Hil∣lary, or 27th of January, when he not appearing, the Duke of Lan∣caster, and all the Lords Temporal, and William Lescrop Earl of  Wiltshire, having sufficient Power from the Prelates and Clergie, as appeared by Record in Parlement, by assent of the King, gave Judg∣mentHis Judgment in his Ab∣sence. against him according to the Tenor of the Proclama∣tion. On the Ibm. Sir John de Cobham im∣peached by the Commons. 28th day of January the Commons in the Parle∣ment at Shrewsbury shew the King, how in the Parlement at West∣minster they had accused and impeached John de Cobham Knight, for that he had been counselling, aiding, and procuring the Com∣mission  to be made, and caused himself to be put into it, being made in prejudice of the King, and openly against his Royal Dignity and Crown, and for that in the Eleventh year of the King, with others Convict in this Parlement, accroaching to themselves Royal Power, sit∣ting in Judgment, awarded, That the King's Lieges, Simon de Buerle, and James Bernes, Knights, should be Drawn, Hanged, and Be∣headed, without the King's assent, and contrary to his will, in his absence, and in the absence of many Peers of Parlement, who arose,  and would not sit in such Judgment, and against their Will traiterously against the Peace, the King, his Crown, Majesty, and Dignity; And the same day the Duke of Surry, in whose Custody he was, brought him into Parlement to answer, who was told by the Duke of Lan∣caster, that he was accused and empeached by the Commons of the Treasons aforesaid, and commanded him to answer at his Peril; Who hearing the Impeachment, said, That as to the making of the Commission, he was not guilty, and touching the use and exercise of  the same, he said he would not use or meddle with it without the King's Command, and therefore he went to the King and told him, he with others were made Commissioners, but would not act accord∣ing to the Commission without his Command, who commanded him to act: To that the King answered, he was under such Government at that time, that he could say no otherwise, by reason of such as were then about him; and that the Commission was made against his Will, the said John Cobham could not gainsay it. Touching the Judgments and  Award made against the said Simon and James, he said he was told by those that then were Masters, that it was the King's Will such Judgments and Award should be made. Then the Commons prayed the King to give Judgment against him as Convict and Attaint of the use and exercise of the Commission and the Judgments and Award given and made against the said Simon and John, notwithstanding
his Answers; Whereupon the Duke of Lancaster, by Command ofHis Judg∣ment. the King, all the Lords Temporal and William Lescrop Earl of Wiltshire, having sufficient Power from the Prelates and Clergie, as abovesaid, by assent of the King, awarded the said John de Cobham Convict and Attaint of the use and exercise of the Commission, and the Judgments and Award traiterously made against the said Simon and James, and therefore adjudged him Traytor, and to be Drawn, Hanged, Headed, and Quartered, and that all his Castles, Mannors,  Lands and Tenements, &c. which he had on the 19th day of November, in the Tenth of the King's Reign; and so on accord∣ingWhich was Pardoned by the King. Being to re∣main Priso∣ner in the Isle of Jersey dur∣ing Life. to the Judgments given in the Earl of Arundel's Case. All which Judgments the King of his special Grace Pardoned, yet so as he was to be Prisoner in the Isle of Jersey during his Life, and upon the same Conditions the Earl of Warwick was to be Priso∣ner in the Isle of Man. On Wednesday the Ibm. The Duke of Hereford ac∣cused the Duke of Nor∣folk by a Sche∣dule in Writ∣ing. 30th day of January, in the Parlement  as above, Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford, came before the King with a Schedule in his Hand, and said to the King he came by his Com∣mand into his presence at Haywode, where he told him, he under∣stood Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, had spoken many dishonest Words in slander of his Person, and that they were spoken to him as he was informed; Upon this the King charged him upon his Li∣geance, That he should truly repeat the Words as they were spoken. The Duke of Hereford, not thro' Malice or Enmity, or  other Cause, but only to obey the King's Command, as he was bound, (come il est tenuz) wrote down the Words which the Duke of Norfolk spake to him, as before he had conceived and born them in his Memory, and were in the Schedule which he delivered to the King; With Protestation to add or diminish at all times, and when he pleased, as it should be needful, saving always the substance of the Libel: Which was this; Sir, in the Month ofThe Tenor of the Schedule. December, in the Twenty one year of your Reign, the Duke of  Hereford Travelling between Bramford and London, the Duke of Norfolk, with a great Train, met and Discoursed with him of divers Matters, amongst which he told him they were in Point to be undone, and the Duke of Hereford demanded why? and he answered, for the Fact at Radcot Bridge; The Duke of Hereford said, How can this be, for he hath done us favour, and declared us in Parlement to have been good and loyal to∣wards him. The Duke of Norfolk answered notwithstanding  that; it will be done by us, as had been done by others be∣fore, for he will vacate this Record. The Duke of Hereford replied, This would be a great Wonder, since the King had said it before the People, that he should afterwards make it be annulled. And further the Duke of Norfolk said, This was a Marvellous World and false, for I know well saith he, That if  Monsieur, your Father, and you, had been taken or killed, when you came to Windsor after the Parlement;  and that the Dukes of Albemarle and Excester, the Earl of Wor∣cester and he, were agreed never to undo any Lord without just Cause and Reasonable; and that the Malice of this Fact was in the Duke of Surrey, the Earl of Wiltshire, and Earl of Salisbury, drawing to them the Earl of Gloucester, who had Sworn to undo Six other Lords, that is to say, the Dukes of Lancaster, Here∣ford,
Albemarle, and Excester, with the Marquess and himself. And also he said they purposed to Reverse the Judgment of Earl Thomas of Lancaster; and hereby we and many others should be Disherited. The Duke of Hereford said, God forbid; for it would be a great wonder if the King should Assent to this; for it seemed to him, by his chearful Countenance, and his promise of being a good Lord, and also that he knew he had sworn by St. Edward to be a good Lord to him, and all  the others. The Duke of Norfolk answered, He had done the same to him many times, and sworn by the Body of God; and that for this he was never the better to be trusted. And fur∣ther said to the Duke of Hereford, That the King was about to draw the Earl of March and others, to the Agreement and Purpose of the said Four Lords, to destroy the others afore∣said. The Duke of Hereford replied, If it be so, we can never trust them. The Duke of Norfolk said, For certain not; for  although they cannot accomplish their Design at present, yet they will be contriving ten Years from this time to destroy us in our Houses. Hereupon, Thursday the 31st of January (and last Day of theMatters con∣tained in the Schedule how to be deter∣mined. Parlement, it was Ordained by the King, with the Assent of all the Estates in Parlement, That the Matters comprised in this Schedule, should be determined and ended by the Good Advice and Discretion of the King, and certain Commissioners  assigned by Authority of Parlement, as it doth appear in the Roll of Parlement; to wit, the Duke of Lancaster, the Duke of York, the Dukes of Albemarle, Surrey, and Excester; the Mar∣quess of Dorset; the Earls of March, Sarum, Northumberland, and Glocester, or Six of them; the Earl of Worcester, or the Earl of Wiltshire, Procurators of the Clergy, or one of them; John Bussy, Henry Grene, John Russel, Robert Teye, Richard Chelmes∣wyk, and John Golafree, Knights of the Parlement, Four or Three  of them. And afterward, on the 19th Day of March next following,The Dukes of Hereford and Norfolk appear before the K. at Oswaldstre. Their Case to be tried by Chivalry or Duel. after the Dukes of Hereford and Norfolk had been before the King at Oswaldstre, it was agreed by the King, and the Lords and Knights abovesaid, That the Process in the Determination of these Matters, should hold the course of the Law of Chi∣valry, if sufficient Proofs could not be found, until it should be determided between the Dukes by course of Law. Wherefore Ibm. 22 Ric. II. A. D. 1398. on the 16th Day of September, in the 22d of the King's Reign, at Coventry, the Dukes of Hereford and Nor∣folk were told by the King's Command, That on Wednesday next after the Quinden of St. Hillary, or 27th of January, in the Year of the King's Reign Twenty one, in the Parlement at Shrewsbury. The Duke of Hereford delivered the King a Bill, the Tenour whereof follows; and was the same Word for Word with the Schedule before translated from the French  Record. And then it follows, That after this Parlement was ended, the Dukes appeared at Oswaldstre the 23d of February, when Day was assigned them to be at Windsor on Sunday the 28th of April, where they both appeared, and had the next Day assigned. In
the mean time, the King and his Council held at Bristol, perusingBattel or∣dered be∣tween the two Dukes. The Battel joined be∣tween them. the Act at Oswaldstre, by Advice of Those that had the Autho∣rity of Parlement, Ordained Battel between them, if sufficient Proofs could not be found. And on Monday the 29th of April they both appeared, when the Battel was joined (a quell Lundy fuist la Bataille joint) by Advice of the Dukes, Earls, Barons, Banerets, and Chivalry of England there in great Number assembled for this cause, as well as of those who had the Authority of Parlement;  and this because no sufficient Proofs could be found in the meanThe Dukes ready to per∣form what was ordered them at Co∣ventry. time. On the 16th of September, the Dukes were ready at Coven∣try (pour faire lour Devoir) to perform what was ordered, when the King of his Especial Grace took the Battel into his hand; (nostre Seigneur le Roy come Droiturel, Naturel, & Soveraign Seigneur de sa Grace especial prist la Batail en sa mayn;) And it was said to the Duke of Hereford, That the King by full Advice, Authority,The King, by Advice of those who had the Au∣thority of Parlement, stayed the Battel: And banish'd the Duke of Hereford for 10 years. Note, the Duke of Hereford's Father, John Duke of Lan∣castir, was chief in this Advice and Judgment. [6] Ibm. The Duke of Norfolk banish∣ed by the same Advice and Authori∣ty. and Assent of Parlement (le Roy par plein Avys, Auctorite, & As∣sent  du Parlement) Willed, or Ordained, and Adjudged, for the Peace and Tranquillity of him, his Kingdom, and Subjects, and to eschew Debates and Troubles, especially between the Dukes, their Friends, and Well-willers, That the Duke of Hereford should go out of the Kingdom for Ten Years, and be gone within Eight Days after the Day of St. Edward the Confessor, or 13th of October, upon pain to incur Treason by Authority of Parlement. Also it was Or∣dained by Authority, and under the pain aforesaid, That the Duke of  Hereford should not come in the Company of Thomas Duke of Nor∣folk, nor of Thomas Arundel, nor send or cause to be sent, or receive or cause to be received, by Message or otherwise, to or from either of them. It was then also [6] said to the Duke of Norfolk, That foras∣much as at Windsor the 29th of April, in the 21st of the King, he had confessed certain Points of the Appeal, or Schedule above∣said, which he had denied at Oswaldstre, on the 23d of February  foregoing; which were very likely to have bred great Trouble within the Kingdom; The King desiring to punish as Rightful Lord all such as were the Authors of such Troubles and Debates, and also willing to avoid the Occasions of them, Adjudged and Ordained by the same Advice, Authority, and Assent of Parle∣ment, That Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk should void his Realm (voidera son Roialme) for term of Life, and that he shall be out of the Kingdom by the 20th of October next coming, and remain  in Germany, Bohemia, and Hungary, and in other Parts of Chri∣stendom, upon pain to incur Treason by Authority aforesaid; and that he should not come in the Company of the Duke of Hereford, nor of Thomas Arundel, nor send or receive, &c. as before in the Duke of Hereford's Case, upon the same pain. And it was Ordained by Authority of Parlement, as above, That if either of the Dukes, or any other, do procure any thing to be done against the least point, in the Ordinance, or what was  done on the 16th of September, shall incur the pain of Treason, as if it had been done against any Ordinance of the Parlement begun at Westminster, and adjourned to Shrewsbury; or if they or any other for them shoulk seek for any manner of Pardon or Licence to return home, they were to incur the same pain by the same Authority.
On Tuesday, on the morrow of St. Edward, the 14th of October next following, the King with the Stat. at Large, 21 Ric. II. c. 16. These things, though in the 22d year, are entred on the Parlement Roll 21st, as part of that Parlement. Ordinances and Statutes made at Bri∣stol. Dukes of Lancaster, York, Albemarle, Surrey; and Excester; the Marquess of Dorset, the Earls of March, Salisbury, and Glocester; John Bussy, Henry Green, and John Russel, by Virtue and Authority to them committed in Parlement at Bristol, made certain Ordinances and Statutes, Five whereof are printed in the Statutes at Large, Cap. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. the last whereof relating only to our Purpose, and varying in  Print somewhat from the Roll, I have added to it what was wanting: Also the King on the same Tuesday, on the morrow of St. Edward, by the same Assent of the Lords and Knights of Counties so assigned by the said Rot. Parl. 21 Ric. II. n. 85. so entred, though it was in the 22 Ric. II Not to be re∣pealed under pain of Trea∣son. Authority of Parlement, doth Ordain, That every Person that procureth or pursueth to Repeal or Reverse any of the said Statutes or Ordinances made by the King, by the Assent of the said Lords and Knights, as∣signed by Power and Authority of Parlement, and that duly  proved in Parlement, shall be Adjudged and have Execution as a Traitor to the Kingdom, in like manner as they which Pursue or Procure to be Repealed the Statutes and Ordinances made during the time of the said Parlement. After this Provision made for the sure keeping of the StatutesThe Oaths of the Bishops and Lords en∣larged. and Ordinances made by the King, with the Assent of the Lords and Knights assigned by Power and Authority of the Parlement, the Oath of the Bishops, when they received their Temporalties of the  Temporal Lords, when they had Livery of their Lands and Tene∣ments, were enlarged with these Additions: To the Bishops Oath was added, Ibm. n 86. The Additi∣ons to the Bi∣shops Oath. You shall Swear, That well and truly (vous jurez que Bien & Loyalment, Tendrez, Sustendez, & Esterrez sanz fraud on mal Engyn ove touz les Estatutes, Establishments, Ordenances,  & Jugements faits, &c.) you will Hold, Ʋphold, and Stand with, without Fraud or Deceit, all the Statutes, Establishments, Ordinances, or Judgments made and rendred in the Parlement summoned and begun at Westminster, on the Monday next after the Exaltation of Holy Cross, in the Year of the Reign of our Lord King Richard II. after the Conquest Twenty one, and from thence adjourned to Shrews∣bury, to the Quinden, or 15 Days after St. Hillary then next coming, and there ended. And also all the Statutes and Ordinances made after  the said Parlement, by the King and Lords, and Knights of Shires coming for the Commons to that Parlement, without going or doing to the contrary of any of them, or the Dependants on, or Parcel them; nor that you will ever Repeal, Revoke, Cassate, make Void, Reverse, or Adnull, nor ever suffer them to be Repealed, Revoked, Cassated, made Void, Reversed, or Adnulled, so long as you live; saving to the King his Regaly, Liberty, and Right of his Crown. To the Oath of the Ibm. Temporal Lords, was this further Ad∣dition: You shall Swear, That you will never suffer in time to come any ManThe Addition to the Oath of the Lords Temporal. living to go or do anything to the contrary of any of the Statutes, Establish∣ments, Ordinances, and Judgments above-said, nor any Dependants on, or
Parcell of them: And if any one shall do so, and be thereof duly Convict, you shall use your utmost Power and Diligence, without Fraud or De∣ceit, to prosecute him before the King and his Heirs Kings of Eng∣land, and cause him to have Execution as an High Traitor to the King and Kingdom; saving to the King is Regalie, Liberty and Right of his Crown. At Handenstank, on the 26th of October this Year, Commissio∣ners  A. D. 1398. 22 Ric. II. Commission∣ers of Eng∣land and Scot∣land to take care of the Articles of the late Truce. for both Nations met: For Scotland, Sir William Bortwic, Sir John of Remorgny, Knights, and Adam Forster Esquire: For England, John Bussy and Henry Green Knights, William Feriby Clerc, and Laurence Drew Esquire. Their Business was to take care of the Release and Exchange of Prisoners that had been taken on both sides since the Truce of Leulingham in the Year 1389. and to re∣gulate the Practices of the Borders on both sides, and secure them from Rapin, Thefts, Robberies, Burnings, and taking and carry∣ing  away Prisoners into either Country, during the time of the late Twenty Eight Years Truce between England and France, which was effectually done in Eleven Articles. The Instrument it self under the Seals of Scots Commissioners, in true Scottish Lan∣guage, being with the Under-Chamberlains in the Exchequer, in a little Box, tituled Scotia. About Hypodig. Neustr. f. 553. lin. 5. The Death of the Duke of Lancaster. Candlemas next following, John Duke of Lancaster died, and the King, with the Committee that had the Authority of Par∣lement,  met at Westminster on Tuesday the 8th Day of March, when it was declared, That Henry Duke of Hereford, Rot. Parl. n. 87, 88. after the Judgment given against him at Coventry, had procured Letters Pa∣tents from the King, that during his absence, by his Attorneys he might Sue and have Livery of any Lands descended to him, and his Homage respited. Which Letters Patents were declared to be against Law. Whereupon the King, by Advice of the Com∣mittee, and Assent of Parlement, Revoked those Letters Pa∣tents,  as also the like Letters Patents made to the Duke of Nor∣folk. On Plac. Co∣ron. 21 Ric. II. n. Judgment a∣gainst Sir R. Plesington. the same Day Robert Plesington Knight, though dead be∣fore, was adjudged Traitor for being in the Action with the Duke of Glocester, Earls of Arundel and Warwic, at Haringey, and all his Castles, Mannors, Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels to be forfeit. After which, many Bishops and Lords Temporal Sware as follows. Which Append. n. 113. The Oath of the Bishops, Lords, and Knights. Judgments, Ordinances, and Establishments, so Made, Ordained, and Agreed on the said Tuesday the 18th of March, and all the Statutes, Establishments, Ordinances, and Judgments, Made and Rendred in the said Parlement, or at Coventry, or other∣where, by Virtue and Authority of the same Parlement, firmly to hold and keep, as well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, and certain Knights for Counties, by Authority of Parlement there being, the same Tuesday were Sworn in the Presence of the King  upon the Cross of Canterbury (de les tenir, sustenir, & de esteer ove ycelles) to hold, uphold, and stand with them without Fraud or Deceit, according to the Form and Effect of the Oaths by them made before, as contained in the Parlement-Roll.
The Names of the Bishops, Lords, and Knights, do here follow: The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, The Arch-Bishop of York, The Bishop of London, The Bishop of Winchester, The Bishop of Ely, The Bishop of Norwich, The Bishop of Excester, Chancel∣lor, The Bishop of Rochester, The Bishop of Hereford, The Bishop of Salisbury, The Bishop of Lincoln, The Bishop of St. Asaph, The Bishop of St. Davids, The Bishop of Chester, The Bishop of Chichester, The Bishop of Landaff, The Abbat of Westminster, The Abbat of St. Edmondsbury, The Duke of York, The Duke of Albemarle, The Duke of Excester, The Marquess of Dorset, The Earl of Stafford, The Earl of Salisbury, The Earl of Northumberland, The Earl of Glocester, The Earl of Westmerland, The Earl of Worcester, The Earl of Wiltshire, Trea∣surer, The Earl of Suffolk, The Lord Grey of Ruthin, The Lord Ferrers of Groby, The Lord Lovell, The Lord Camoys, Sir John Bussy, Sir Henry Green, Sir John Russell, Robert Teye, After this, the Chancellor by the King's Command required open∣ly all those that had been Sworn, and would observe the Judg∣ments, Oath, and Ordinances, should hold up their Right Hands; which was done by all the People in the King's Presence. On the 23d of April Placit. Co∣ron. ut supra, n. The Judg∣ment of H. Bowet. following, the King, and Committee that had the Authority of Parlement, were at Windsor, where Henry Bowet Clerc, was brought before them; where it was  shewn the King, That the Duke of Hereford, since the Judgment given against him at Coventry, had by Petition amongst other things, obtained from the King Letters Patents, That if any Lands of Inheritance descended or fell to him in his absence, for which he ought to do Homage, he might by his Attorneys Sue for, and have Livery of them, and his Homage and Fealty respi∣ted: Which Letters Patents being granted by Inadvertency, without due Advice, or mature Deliberation, as they ought to  have been, and being then viewed and diligently examined, it was found that they were clearly against the said Judgment, because the Duke of Hereford, after that Judgment, was not a Person capable to have or receive Benefit by the Leters Patents; and for that they had been adjudged void, as appeared by the Parlement-Roll: And therefore because Henry Bowet Clerc, had been the Chief Contriver and Manager of the said Petition, the King, by the Assent of the Committee who had the Authority of  Parlement, adjudged him Traitor, and to be Drawn, Hanged, Headed, and Quartered; and all his Lands and Tenements, as well in Eng∣land as Gascony, and all his Goods and Chattels to be forfeited. But because he was the King's Chaplain, he pardoned the Execu∣tion of the Judgment, and granted him his Life, with this, That he should be Banished England for ever.
While these things Hypodyg. Neustr. f. 552. n. 50. were doing here, there came News from Ireland, That Lieutenant Roger Earl of March was there slain by the Irish; To Revenge whose Death, and subdue the Irish, the King levied a considerable Force, and went into Ireland withThe King goes into Ire∣land. several Bishops, and many of the Nobility. Toward which Ex∣pedition he Raised Money by undue Ways, and taking up Carriages, Victuals, and other Necessaries, without paying for them, by which and many other Imprudent, Rash, and Ʋnadvised Practices, he had  made himself and Government uneasie to the People. The Duke taking advantage of King Richard's absence, thinks of coming for England Walsingh. Hist. fol. 358. n. 10, 20, 30. The Duke of Hereford lands in England. to demand his Inheritance, with Thomas Arundel Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and the Son and Heir of the Earl of Arundel, and a small Company, he took Ship in France, and hovering a while about the English Coast to spie whe∣ther there were any ready to resist them, at length landed at Ra∣venspur in Yorkeshire, where there came into him Henry Percy Earl of  Northumberland, and Henry his Son, Ralph Earl of Westmerland, and other Lords, so as in a short time he had an Army of 60000 Men; They marched speedily to Bristol, and besieged the Castle, and took it, and within it William Lescrop Treasurer, Sir John Bussy, and Sir Henry Green, all the King's Counsellors, who the next day by the Clamor of the People had their Heads struck off. The Duke of York, the King's Uncle, and Guardian of the King∣dom, with several Bishops, Noblemen, and the King's Council, con∣sulted  how they might oppose the Duke, but could do nothing. King Richard, when he heard in Ireland of his Landing, Ibm. n. 40, 50. The Nobility and People desert King Richard. se∣cured the Sons of the Duke of Lancaster and Glocester in Trim Castle, and with the Dukes of Albemarle, Excester, and Surrey, the Bishops of London, Lincoln, and Carlisle, and many others, Ship∣ped themselves with all speed, that they might raise such a Force as might hinder the Duke's Progress. But when he landed, un∣derstanding his own Condition, That the People and greater part  of the Lords had forsaken him, and gone in to Duke Henry, he laid by all thoughts of Fighting, and likewise dismissed his Fa∣mily, giving them notice by his Steward Sir Thomas Percy, That they might provide for, and reserve themselves for better Times. The King shifting up and down, here and there for many days, the Duke always following him with his Army, at length fixed at Conway Castle, and desired to have Discourse with the Arch-Bishop and Earl of Northumberland, to whom he declared, He would  quit his Government, if he might have his Life secured, and an Ho∣nourableHe offers to Quit his Go∣vernment, his Life and an Honourable Maintenance secured. Which was Granted. Provision made for himself, and Eight Persons he should Name; These things granted and confirmed, he went to Flint Castle, where after a short Discourse with the Duke of Lancaster, they mounted their Horses, and went to Chester Castle that night, the Duke's numerous Army following him. At Chester Clause 23 Ric. II. M. 3 Dors. Writs for a Parlement in King Ri∣chard's Name: He is secured in the Tower of London. summons were issued in King Richard's Name  for the meeting of a Parlement on the Morrow of St. Michael, or 30th of September, dated there on the 19th of August, in the 23d of his Reign. In the mean time the King was brought to, and secured in the Tower of London until the Parlement should sit.
Holingshed tells us, Chronicle, f. 501. a. col. 2. The Duke's Obeysance to King Richard at their first meeting. And Declara∣tion of the Cause of his coming into England. The Duke re∣ceived at Lon∣don with great Rejoycing.  The Instru∣ments of the King's Resig∣nation and Deposition contrived by his Order. the Duke at the first meeting of King Richard, which was at Conway Castle in Carnarvonshire, as he came towards him, made a Reverend Obeysance, and going on, did so a second, and third time, the King taking him by the Hand, and bidding him Welcome; whereupon humbly Thanking him, said, The Cause of his coming was to have Restitution of his Inheritance, unto which the King readily assented; and called for Wine, and when they had drank, mounting their Horses, they rode to Flint, and to Che∣ster,  where they stayed two or three days, and went from thence to Nantwich, and so the common Rode to London, where the Duke was received with all imaginable Expressions of Joy, and the King sent to the Tower, where we hear no more of him until Michael∣mass-Day, against which time the Instruments of his Cession, Re∣signation, and Deposition, with the Articles against him, were pre∣pared; which are here recited from the Parlement Roll exactly Translated. The Roll of Parlement summoned and holden at Westminster in the Feast of St. Faith the Virgin (or 6th of October) in the Year of  King Henry the Fourth after the Conquest the First. Membrane xx. The Record and Process of the Renunciation of KingThis Record is Printed in X. Authores, Col. 2744. and in Pryn's Plea for the Lords, p. 425. which I have compared with the Ori∣ginal. Richard the Second after the Conquest, and the Acceptation of the same Renunciation likewise,  with the Deposition of the same King Richard, as it here follows. BE it Remembred, Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. IV. N. 10. That on Monday in the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, in the Twenty third year of the Reign of King Richard, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,  and other Notable Persons; That is to say, The Lord Richard le Scrop Arch-Bishop of York, John Bishop of Hereford, Henry Earl of Northumberland, and Ralph Earl of Westmerland, the Lord Hugh Burnell, Thomas Lord Berkley, the Prior of Canterbury and Abbat of Westminster, William Thyrninge Kt. and John Markham Justices, Thomas Stow, and John Burbache, Doctors of Law, Tho∣mas de Erpingham, and Thomas Gray, Knights, William de Feryby, and Dionyse Lapham, Publick Notaries, being Deputed to that  purpose, came into the presence of King Richard within the Tower of London about Nine of the Clock, when the Earl of Northumberland said before the King, That at Ib. n. 11. Conway in North-Wales, and then at Liberty, He promised to Thomas Arch-Bishop of Canterbury and himself, That he would Quit the Crown of England and France, and Renounce all Right to
it, and to Kingship, for the Causes there by himself confessed of his Inability and Insufficiency, and this he would do after the best Manner and Form he should be Advised by the Skilful in the Law. The same King before the said Lords and others above-named, kindly answered, That he would with Effect perform, what he had promised, but first desired to have Con∣ference with his Cousin Henry Duke of Lancaster, and the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, before he did it; and desired a Copy of  the Renunciation he was to make might be delivered to him, to Deliberate upon, which was done, and the Lords departed. Ib. n. 12. On the same day after Dinner, the King much desiring the coming of the Duke of Lancaster, and long expecting him, at length he and the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, with the Lords and Persons above-named, came to his presence in the Tower, the Lords Roos of Willoughby, and Abergavenny, and many o∣thers then being present. And after he had Conference with  the Duke of Lancaster and Arch-Bishop, looking about him with a Chearful Countenance, as it seemed to the People about him, the King called them all to him, and said publickly he was ready to make his Renunciation as he had said before; and presently taking the Parchment Schedule of his Renunciation into his Hands, tho it was told him, to spare the Labour and Trouble of Reading it, he might have it done by another, he said he would read it himself, which he did distinctly, and ab∣solved  his Lieges, Renounced, Quitted, and Sware, Read and Said other Things, and Subscribed his Name with his own Hand, as 'tis more fully contained in the Latin Record, the Tenor of which follows. The Resignation of Richard the Second. IN Ib. n. 13. Name of God Amen, I Richard by the Grace of God  King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, do Ab∣solve the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and other Prelates whatsoever, of Churches Secular or Regular, of what Dignity, Degree, State, or Con∣dition they are; Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Vassals, Valvas∣sores, and my Liege Men whatsoever, Ecclesiastick or Secular, by what∣ever Name they are called, from the Oath of Fealty and Homage, and  all others to me made, and from all Bond of Ligeance, Regality, and Government or Command, by which they have been, or may be bound to me; and them, their Heirs, and Successors for ever from the same Ob∣ligations, Oaths, and other Things whatsoever, I free, release, and quit, and make them free, absolved, and quit, as to my Person, according to the whole Effect of the Law, which may follow from the Premisses, or any of them; And I do purely, freely of my own accord, simply and absolutely, in the best Manner, Way, and Form that I can by this Writing,  Renounce, wholly Resign, and by Word and Deed, put from me, and recede for ever, from all Royal Dignity and Majesty, the Crown and Lordship, and the Power of the said Kingdoms, and Lordship, and other my Do∣minions and Possessions which may any way belong to me, and to all Right, Colour of Right, and Title, Possession and Dominion, that I ever had, have, or may have, in the same or any of them; also the Go∣vernment
and Administration of the said Kingdoms and Lordship, and all mere and mixt Empire in the same; and to all Honour and Royalty therein, saving to my Successors Kings of England, in the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Premisses, for ever their Competent Rights. And I do Confess, Acknowledge, Repute, and truly of certain Know∣ledge, Judge my self to be insufficient for the Government of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, and for my notorious Demerits not unwor∣thily Deposed. And I Swear by these Holy Gospels of God by me Cor∣porally  touched, That I never will Contravene this Resignation, Renun∣ciation, Dimission, and Cession, or will any way oppose them in Word or Deed by my self or others, nor will suffer them to be opposed or con∣travened, as much as in me is, publickly or privately, but the same Renunciation, Resignation, Dimission, and Cession, will for ever hold firm, and will firmly hold and observe them in the whole and every part, as God and his Gospels help me. Ego Richardus Rex antedictus propria manu hic me subscribo.  I King Richard beforesaid write my self with my own Hand. And Ib. n. 14. presently he added to his Renunciation and Ces∣sion, That if it was in his Power the Duke of Lancaster should succeed him, but seeing it was not, he desired the Arch-Bishop of York, and Bishop of Hereford, who he had appointed to  declare his Renunciation and Cession to the States of the King∣dom, to intimate his Will and Pleasure to them; and as a further Mark of his Intention, he pulled his Signet Gold Ring off his own Finger, and put it upon the Dukes, desiring it might be made known to all the States of the Kingdom. On the Morrow, Ib n. 15. being Tuesday, the Feast of St. Hierom, the Parlement met in Westminster-Hall, where the Arch-Bishop of York, and Bishop of Hereford, publickly declared the King's  Cession and Renunciation, with the Subscription of the King's Hand; and also the delivery of the Signet to the Duke of Lan∣caster. The Cession and Renunciation was first read in Latin, then in English; and the States and People there present were asked, if for their own Interest, and the Profit of the Nation, they would admit the Cession and Renunciation, they unani∣mously answered, They would admit it. After Ib. n. 16. which Admission, it was publickly proposed,  That besides that, it would be much expedient, and advantageous to the Nation, and to take away all scruples and sinister suspicions, that many Crimes and Defects committed by the said King during the time of his Government, for which, as confessed in his Cession, he might be worthily Deposed, might be drawn up in Writing, and pub∣lickly read and declared to the People. The Tenor of all which Articles is such. Here the Entry upon the Roll is confused and impertinent,  and such must be the Translation. The Form Ibm. of the Oath which the Kings of England usually take at their Coronation follows, which is exacted and received from them by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, as it is
contained in the Pontifical Books of the Arch-Bishops and Bishops; Which Oath was received from Richard King of England, the Second after the Conquest, by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and afterwards Repealed, as may be found upon Record in the Rolls of Chancery. Thou Ib. n. 17. shalt wholly preserve the Peace of the Church, and People of God, and Concord in God, according to thy Power, and shall An∣swer,  I will preserve them. Thou shalt cause to be done in all thy Judgments, equal and right Justice, and Discretion in Mercy and Truth according to thy Power, and shall Answer, I will do it. Thou dost Grant that just Laws and Customs are to be holden, and dost Pro∣mise to Protect and Confirm them to the Honour of God, which the Communalty have chosen, according to your Power, and shall Answer, I Grant and Promise. To these such Questions may be added which are just, which  the King is to Confirm by his Oath upon the Altar before all Persons. The Objections against the King concerning his  Deposition do follow. FIrst, Ib. n. 18. It is Objected to King Richard, That for his Evil Government, by giving the Goods and Possessions of the Crown to Unworthy Persons, and indiscreetly dissipating of them; and for this cause imposing grievous and intolerable Bur∣thens  upon the People, and otherwise committing other innu∣merable Evils: Having by his Assent and Command, by the whole Parlement, chosen and assigned certain Prelates and o∣ther Lords Temporal, who with all their Power should faith∣fully labour, at their own Costs, about the just Government of the Kingdom, made a Conventicle of his Accomplices, pro∣posing to impeach of High Treason the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, so imployed about the Government of the  Kingdom, and violently drew the Justices of the Kingdom to Confirm his Wicked Purpose for fear of Death and Torment of Body, endeavouring to destroy the said Lords. Secondly, The same Ib. n. 19. King lately at Shrewsbury, caused to come before him, and others that favoured him, in a Cham∣ber many Persons, and the greater part of the Justices, where, by Threats, and divers Terrors, he induced, caused, and forced them singly to Answer to certain Questions on his behalf,  touching the Laws of his Kingdom, against their Will, and otherwise then they would have answered, had they not been forced; By Colour of which Answers the same King propound∣ed to have proceeded to the Destruction of Thomas Duke of Glocester, the Earls of Arundel, and Warwick, and other Lords, with whom he was very Angry, especially because they desired
him to be under Good Government; but by Divine Providence, and the Resistance and Power of the said Lords, the King could not bring his Design to effect. Thirdly, When the Lords Ibm. n. 20. Temporal, in Defence of themselves, resisted his Malice and Craft, the said King pre∣fixed a Day for the Parlement to do them and others Justice, who upon Faith and Confidence therein, remained quietly in their own Houses; the King privately, with his Letters or  Commission, sent the Duke of Ireland into Cheshire, to raise Arms against the said Lords, Great Men, and Officers of the Commonwealth, Publickly exciting his Banners against the Peace he had Sworn to, from whence Homicides, Captivities, Dissentions, and other infinite Evils followed in the whole Kingdom, for which cause he incurred Perjury. Fourthly, That although the said Ibm. n. 21. King had Pardoned the Duke of Glocester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwic, and all  their Assistants in full Parlement, and for many Years had shewn chearful Signs of Peace and Love towards them; yet the same King always bearing Gall in his Heart, taking Oppor∣tunity, caused to be seized the Duke of Glocester, and the said Earls of Arundel and Warwic; and sent the Duke to Calais, to be imprisoned under the Keeping of the Earl of Nottingham, one of his Appellants; and without Answer, or lawful Process, caused him to be strangled, and inhumanly and cruelly mur∣dered.  The Earl of Arundel Pleading his Charter of Pardon, and Demanding Justice in Parlement, was encompassed with great Numbers of Armed Men, and had his Head Damnably struck off; and committed the Earl of Warwic and Lord Cob∣ham to Perpetual Prison, confiscating their Lands, against Ju∣stice, the Laws of the Land, and his express Oath, giving them to their Appellants. Fifthly, At the time Ibm. n. 22. when in his Parlement he caused  the Duke of Glocester, and Earls of Arundel and Warwic, to be adjudged, that he might more freely exercise his Cruelty upon them; and in others fulfil his injurious Will, he drew to him a great multitude of Malefactors out of the County of Chester, who marching up and down the Kingdom with the King, as well within his own House, as without, cruelly killed his Lieges, beat and wounded others, plundering the Goods of the People, refusing to pay for their Victuals; violating and  ravishing Men's Wives, and other Women. And although Complaints were made to the King of these Excesses, yet he took no care to apply Remedy, or do Justice in them; but favoured those People in their Wickedness, confiding in them and their Assistance against all others of his Kingdom; where∣fore his Good Subjects had great matter of Commotion and Indignation. Sixthly, Though the said Ib. n. 23. King caused Proclamation to  be made through the Kingdom, That he caused his Unkle the Duke of Glocester, and the Earls of Arundel and Warwic, to be Arrested not for any Rebellious Congregations, or marching with Horse within the Kingdom; but for many Extorsions, Oppressions, and other things done against his Regality and Royal Majesty; And that it was not his Intention, that any
of their Company at the time of the Congregation and March∣ching with Horse aforesaid, should for that Reason be Questio∣ned or Disturbed: Yet the same King afterwards, in his Parle∣ment, Impeached the said Lords; not for Extorsions, Oppres∣sions, or other things aforesaid, but for Rebellious Tumults and Congregations and Marching with Horse, adjudged them to Death; and caused many of their Company for fear of Death, to make Fine and Ransom as Traitors, to the great Destruction  of many of his People; and so he craftily, deceitfully, and maliciously Deceived the Lords, their Followers, and People of the Nation. Seventhly, After many of these Ibm. n. 24. Persons who had paid their Fines and Ransoms, and had obtained his Letters Patents of full Pardon; yet they received no Benefit by them, until they made new Fines for their Lives, by which they were much impoverished: And this was much in Derogation to the Name  and State of a King. Eightly, In the last Ibm. n. 25. Parlement holden at Shrewsbury, the same King propounding to Oppress his People, subtilly procured and caused to be granted, That the Power of Parlement, by Consent of all the States of the Kingdom, should remain in some certain Persons, who after the Parlement should be Dis∣solved, might Answer the Petitions depending in Parlement, then undetermined, under pretence whereof they proceed∣ed  to other General Matters touching that Parlement, ac∣according to the King's Will, in Derogation to the State of Parlement, great Disadvantage to the Kingdom, and a perni∣cious Example. And that these Actions might seem to have some Colour and Authority, the King caused the Rolls of Par∣lement to be changed and blotteed, contrary to the Effect of the Grant aforesaid. Ninthly, Notwithstanding the said King at his Ibm. n. 26. Corona∣tion  sware, That he would do in all his Judgments equal and Right Justice and Discretion, in Mercy and Truth according to his Power; yet the said King, without all Mercy, rigorously amongst other things Ordained, under great Punishments▪ That no Man should intercede with him, for any Favour toward Henry Duke of Lancaster then in Banishment; in so doing, he acted against the Bond of Charity, and rashly violated his Oath. Tenthly, That though the Ibm. n. 27. Crown of England, the Rights  of the Crown, and Kingdom it self, have been in all times so Free, as the Pope, or any other Foreign Power, had nothing to do in them; yet the said King, for the confirming of his erro∣neous Statutes, supplicated the Pope to confirm the Statutes made in his last Parlement; whereupon he obtained his Apo∣stolic Letters, or Bull, wherein were contained grievous Cen∣sures against all such as should presume to contravene them. All which things are known to be against the Crown and Royal  Dignity, and against the Statutes and Liberty of the Kingdom. Eleventhly, Though Henry now Duke of Lancaster, Ibm. n. 28. by the King's Command, exhibited his Bill or Accusation against the Duke of Norfolk, concerning the State and Honour of the King, and duly prosecuted it, so as he was ready to make it good by Duel, and the King had ordered it; yet the same
King put it by, and without any lawful Cause Banished theHis own Fa∣ther John D. of Lanca∣ster was the First Commis∣sioner in this Judgment▪ in Parlement. See Pleas of the Crown. 21 Ric. II. Duke of Lancaster for Ten Years, against all Justice, the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom, and the Military Law, Damnably in∣curring Perjury. Twelfthly, After the said King had graciously granted Ibm. n. 29. to the now Duke of Lancaster, by his Letters Patents, That while he was in Banishment his Attorneys might sue for Livery of any Inheritance might fall to him for which Homage was due,  which should be respited for a reasonable Fine; he injuriously revoked those Letters Patents, against the Laws of the Land, in∣curring Perjury. Thirteenthly, Notwithstanding it had been Ordained, Ibm n. 30. That every Year the King's Officers, with the Justices, and others of his Council, should Nominate and Chuse the Sheriffs of all Counties according to their Discretion; yet he Commanded others of his Party, and such as would do as he would have  them, to be Sheriffs; to the great Grievance of his People, contrary to the Laws of his Kingdom, notoriously incurring Perjury. Fourteenthly, That whereas Ibm. n. 31. the said King Borrowed se∣veral Sums of Money from Lords and others by his Letters Patents▪ promising faithfully to pay them at a certain Term; he did not perform his Promise; whence his Creditors were much grieved; and not only they, but many others thought  him an unfaithful King. Fifteenthly, Whereas the Kings Ibm. n. 32. of England used to live upon the Revenues of the Kingdom, and Patrimony of the Crown in time of Peace, without Oppression of his People; yt the same King during his whole time, gave the greatest part of his Revenue to unworthy Persons, and imposed Burthens upon his Subjects as it were every Year; by which he excessively oppressed his People, and impoverished his Kingdom; not em∣ploying  these Goods to the Advantage of the Nation, but pro∣digally wasting them in Ostentation, Pomp, and Glory, owing great Sums for Victuals and other Necessaries of his House, though his Revenues were greater than any of his pro∣genitors. Sixteenthly, The same King Ibm. n. 33. not willing to keep and pro∣tect the Just Laws and Customs of his Kingdom, but do what he pleased; when those Laws were declared to him by the Ju∣stices  and others of his Council, desiring Justice might be done accordingly, he said expresly with an austere Countenance, That the Laws were only in his Mouth and Breast; and that He only could Make and Change the Laws of this Kingdom. And being so seduced, he would not permit Justice to be done to many of his Lieges; but by Threats and Terrours, for∣ced many to cease from the Prosecution of Common Ju∣stice. Seventeenthly, That whereas Ibm. n. 34. Laws made in Parlement do always bind, until revoked by another Parlement; yet the same King, desiring to enjoy such Liberty as no Laws might bind him, and to do what he pleased, he cunningly procu∣red such a Petition, on behalf of the Community of his King∣dom, to be exhibited in Parlement, and to be granted, That
he might be as free as any of his Progenitors before him. By colour of which Petition and Grant, he often commanded and caused many things to be done contrary to the Laws not re∣voked, doing expresly and knowingly against the Oath taken at his Coronation. Eighteenthly, Though it had been Ordained, Ibm. n. 35. That no Sheriff should continue in his Office above a Year, and could not be again Chosen to that Office in three Years after, the same  King, for his singular Profit, and sometimes for the Benefit of others, suffered some Sheriffs to remain in their Offices for two or three Years, contrary to the Tenour and Effect of the Sta∣tute, incurring Perjury; and this was Notorious, Publick, and Famous. Nineteenthly, Although by Law and Ibm. n. 36. Custom, the People ought to be free to Chuse Knights to represent them in Parle∣ment, to propound their Grievances, and provide Remedies for  them; yet the said King, that he might obtain his own rash Will in his Parlements, directed by Writs often to the She∣riffs, to send such as he Named, some of whom he induced by Favours, others by Threats and Terrours, others by Bribes, to consent to things Prejudicial to the Kingdom, and grievous to the People; and especially by granting to him the Subsidy of Wooll for his Life, and another Subsidy for certain Years, too much oppressing the People. Twentiethly, the same King, Ibm. n. 37. that in all things he might act Arbitrarily, unlawfully made and commanded all the Sheriffs to Swear beyond their usual Oath, That they would obey all his Commands sent to them under the Great Seal, Privy Seal, or Signet; and in case they should know any in their Baili∣wics or Jurisdictions, should speak any Ill publicly or privately to the Disgrace or Scandal of the King's Person, they should arrest and commit them to Prison, there to remain while they  received other Commands from the King, as it might be found upon Record; which Practice might likely tend to the De∣struction of any of his Subjects. 21. The same King, Ibm. n. 38. that he might supplant his People, and get their Estates to enrich himself, caused the People of Sixteen Counties, by Letters under their Seals, to submit to him as Traitors; by colour of which, he obtained of them great Sums of Money to procure his Favour: And although  to please the People those Letters Obligatory were restored to them; yet their Procurators had full Power to bind themselves for them to the King, which he caused to be done; and so deceived his People, and subtilly extorted their Goods from them. 22. Although the same King Ibm. n. 39. Sware at his Coronation to Preserve the Liberties granted to the Church of England; yet by reason of his Voyage into Ireland, he by his Letters  Commanded many Religious Persons, Abbats and Priors, some to send him Horses, others Waggons, others great Sums of Money; and by his way of Writing, he forced many by Fear to comply with his Demands; whence they were impoverished and oppressed, in manifest derogation to Ecclesiastic Liberty; by which Pretext he incurred Perjury.
23. In many Great Ibm. n 40. Councils, when the Lords and Ju∣stices were charged to Counsel him faithfully, in things t ha touched his own, and the State of the Kingdom, they were often so sharply rebuked and reproved, that they dare not speak Truth, in giving Advice concerning the State of the King∣dom. 24. The Treasure, Ibm. n. 41. Reliques, and Jewels of the Crown, which ought to be preserved in the Treasury for the Honour  of the King, and Conservation of the Kingdom, if any thing might happen; the said King carried with him toward Ireland, without the Consent of the States of the Kingdom; whence the Kingdom had been greatly impoverished, if God had not other∣wise provided for the taking of those Goods from him against his Will. And further, he caused the Records concerning the State and Government of his Kingdom to be rased, in great Prejudice of his People, and Disinheritance of the Crown, and very  likely, as it was believed, for the Support of his ill Govern∣ment. 25. He was so Variable Ibm. n. 42. and Dissembling in Words and Writing, and so Contrary to himself, specially in Writing to the Pope, Kings, and other Lords, without and within the Kingdom, and also to his Subjects, that no Man living, know∣ing what he was, could confide in him; yea, he was reputed so Unfaithful and Inconstant, that he was not only a Scandal  to his own Person, but to the whole Kingdom, and all Stran∣gers that knew him. 26. Though the Lands, Tenements, Ibm. n. 43. Goods and Chattels of all Free-men, by the Laws of the Land, ought not to be seized without Forfeiture; yet the said King intending to ener∣vate those Laws, in the Presence of many Lords and others of the Community of the Kingdom, he often said and af∣firmed, That the Life of every Subject, his Lands, Tene∣ments,  Goods, and Chattels were his, to be disposed as he pleased without Forfeiture; which was altogether against the Laws and Customs of his Kingdom. 27. Although it had been made a Ibm. n. 44. Law, which had hi∣therto been confirmed, That no Free-man might be taken, &c. nor any ways destroyed, nor that the King should proceed against him, but by lawful Trial of his Peers, or the Law of the Land; yet according to the Will, Command, and Appoint∣ment  of the said King, very many of his Lieges being malici∣ously accused, for having spoken publickly or privately Words that might tend to the Scandal and Disgrace of the King's Per∣son, were taken, imprisoned, and brought before the Con∣stable and Marshal in the Court Military; where being accused, they could not be admitted to give any other Answer than Not Guilty; and could defend themselves no otherwise than by their Bodies, their Accusers being young Men, Iusty, and  sound; whereas they were old, impotent, lame, and infirm; from whence not only the Destruction of Lords and Great Men, but of singular Persons of the Community of the Kingdom very likely might have followed: When therefore the said King willingly contravened this Law, it was no doubt but he incurred Perjury.
28. Altho the People of Ibm. n. 45. England, by virtue of their Ligeance, were sufficiently bound to their King, and if they offended in any manner, he might Correct and Punish them by the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; yet the said King de∣siring to supplant and too much oppress his People, that he might more freely execute, and be able to follow the Fancy of his foolish and unlawful Will, he sent his Letters into all Counties of his Kingdom, That all his Lieges, as well Spiritual  as Temporal, should take certain Oaths in general, which were too burthensome to them, and which very likely might cause the final Destruction of his People, and that under their Let∣ters and Seals they should confirm these Oaths; Which Com∣mand the People obeyed, lest they should incur his Indignati∣on, and for fear of Death. 29. When the Parties Ibm. n. 46. contending in the Ecclesiastick Court, in Causes merely Ecclesiastick and Spiritual, indeavoured  to procure Prohibitions to hinder Process in the same from the Chancellor of England, who out of Justice refused to grant them, yet the same King often granted them under his Signet, wickedly infringing the Church Liberties granted in Magna Charta, which he had Sworn to Preserve, damnably incurring Perjury, and the Sentence of Excommunication Pronounced by the Holy Fathers against the Violators of Church Liberties. 30. The said King in Parlement, Ib. n. 48. compassed about with  Armed Men, without Reasonable Cause or Legal Process, con∣trary to the Laws of the Kingdom, Banished Thomas Arundel Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and his Spiritual Father, being then absent by his Contrivance. 31. Upon perusal of the said Ib. n. 48. Kings Will under his Great Seal, Privy Seal, and Signet, there was in it this Clause. Also we Will, That the Debts of our House, Chamber, and Wardrobe being paid, for which we allow Twenty thousand  Pounds, and the Leprose, and Chaplanes we appointed to be maintained at Westminster, and Bermondsey, for which we allow Five or six thousand Marks. The Residue of our Gold shall remain to our Successor, upon Condition he Approves. Rati∣fies, Confirms, Holds, and causeth to be Holden and Observed, all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Judgments, made, had, or done, in the Parlement held at Westminster on the 17th of Sep∣tember, in the 21st of our Reign, and continued or adjourned  to Shrewsbury, and all things done at Coventry on the 16th of September, in the 22d of our Reign, as also what was done at Westminster on the 18th of March, in the same year, by Autho∣rity of the same Parlement. But if he shall Refuse to do these things, then we Will that Thomas Duke of Surrey, Edward Duke of Aumarle, John Duke of Excester, and William le Scrop Earl of Wiltshire, my Debts, &c. as aforesaid being paid, shall have the said Residue for the Defence of the Statutes, Ordi∣nances,  Judgments, and Stabiliments aforesaid, to the utmost of their Power, yea, to Death, if it be necessary. Upon all which things we burthen their Consciences, as they will An∣swer it at the Day of Judgment. By which Article it appears evidently, That the same King endeavoured pertinaciously to maintain those Statutes and Ordinances, which were Erroneous,
Wicked, and Repugnant to all Law and Reason, not only in his Life, but after he was Dead, neither regarding the Danger of his Soul, or the utmost Destruction of his Kingdom or Liege People. 32. In the Eleventh year of the said Ib. n. 49. King Richard, at his Mannor of Langley, in the presence of the Dukes of Lan∣caster and York, and many other Lords, desiring, as it seemed, That his Uncle the Duke of Glocester, there also present, might  Trust and have Confidence in him, of his own accord, Sware upon the Venerable Sacrament of the Lords Body placed upon the Altar, That he would pardon unto him all things which were said to be committed against his Person, and that he should never receive any Damage for them; yet afterwards the said King, notwithstanding this Oath, caused the Duke for those Offences horribly and cruelly to be Murdred, damnably incur∣ring the Guilt of Perjury. 33. After a Knight of the Shire, Ib. n. 50. who had a Vote in  Parlement, impeached the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury publickly be∣fore the King and all the States of the Kingdom, upon certain De∣fects committed against the King, with little Truth, as 'twas said: Altho he offered presently to answer what was objected against him, and desired to be admitted by the King so to do, sufficiently trusting, as he said, to demonstrate his Innocency, yet the same King contriving by all the Ways and Means he  could to oppress and reduce to nothing the State of the Arch-Bishop, as the Event shewed, kindly spake to, and earnestly desired him, that he would say nothing then, but expect a more fit time: That day being past, for five days and more together, the King deceived him, advising and perswading him not to come to Parlement, but to remain at his own House, promis∣ing, that in his absence he should not receive injury; but the said King in that Parlement Banished the Arch-Bishop during  his Pleasure, being absent, and not called to answer, without any reasonable Cause, confiscating all his Goods against the Laws of the Land and all Justice, by which he incurred Per∣jury. Further, the King intending to palliate his inconstancy, by flattering Words endeavoured to cast the Injury done him upon others: Whence the Arch-Bishop having Discourse with the King, the Duke of Norfolk, other Lords, and Great Men, lamenting said, He was not the first had been Banished, nor  should be the last, for that he thought within a short time the Duke of Norfolk, and other Lords, would follow him; and constantly told the King, That the Consequences of the Pre∣misses would fall upon his own Head at last; To which the King, as if he had been astonished, presently answered, he thought it might so happen, he might be expelled his King∣dom by his Subjects; and further said, if it should be so, he would go to the Place where he was; and that the Arch-Bishop  might believe him, he shewed him a great Jewel of Gold, which he would send to him as a Token, that he would not defer his coming to the Place where he was. And that the same Arch-Bishop might have greater Confidence in him, he sent to him, advising him, That he should privately send all the Jewels belonging to his Chapel to be safely kept, lest under
the colour of the Judgment of Banishment they might be seised; it being so done, the King caused the Goods to be put in Coffers, which he caused to be Locked, and Sealed by one of the Arch-Bishops Clerks, by whom he sent the Keys to him; and afterwards caused the Coffers to be broken, taking the Goods, and disposing of them as he pleased; The same King also faithfully promised the Arch-Bishop, That if he would go to the Port of Hampton, in order to go out of the Kingdom,  that by the Queen's intercession he should be recalled; And if it should so happen as he should go out of the Kingdom, yet after Easter next coming, without fail, he should return into England, nor should he any way loose his Arch-Bishoprick: This he faithfully Promised, Swearing to it, touching the Cross of Thomas the Martyr Arch-Bishop of Canterbury: Which Pro∣mises notwithstanding, the King caused the Arch-Bishop to go out of the Kingdom, and wrote to the Pope for his Translation;  and thus, and otherwise, by the Frauds and Cheats of the King, was the Arch-Bishop, a Man of good Faith, craftily Circum∣vented. These were the Thirty three Articles read in the Parlement against King Richard. And because it seemed Ib. n. 51. to all the States of the Kingdom,  it being singly and in common propounded to, and asked of them, That these Causes of Crimes and Defects were sufficient and notorious to Depose the same King, his Confession also, and other things considered, contained in his Renunciation and Cession; all the States aforesaid unanimously consented, to proceed to the Deposition of him, for the greater Security, and Tranquility of the People, and Profit of the Kingdom, and accord∣ingly appointed certain Commissioners, the Bishop of Asaph,  the Abbat of Glastonbury, the Earl of Glocester, the Lord Berke∣ley, Thomas Erpyngham, and Thomas Grey, Knights, and William Thirnyng Justice, to pronounce Sentence of Deposition against King Richard, from all Royal Dignity, Majesty, and Honour, in the Name, and by Authority of all the States, as in like Cases, according to the ancient Custom of the Kingdom had been observed. The Commissioners take upon them their Charge, and the Commission being drawn up in Writing, the  Bishop of Asaph read it in these Words: In the Name of God, Amen: Ib. n. 52. We John Bishop of Asaph, John Abbat of Glastonbury, Thomas Earl of Glocester, Thomas Lord Berkeley, Thomas de Erpyngham, and Thomas Gray, Knights, and William Thirning Justiciary, by the Spiritual and Temporal Peers and Great Men of the Kingdom of England, and by the Communities of the same, representing all States thereof, being  specially deputed Commissioners for the things underwritten, duely consi∣dering the many Perjuries, Cruelty, and many other Crimes committed by King Richard in the time of his Government, and publickly Exhi∣bited and Recited before the States, which were so publick, notorious, manifest, and famous, as they could no way be denied; and also his Confession, acknowledging, and truely of his own certain knowledge,
judging himself to have been altogether insufficient for the Government of the Kingdoms and Lordship aforesaid; and that for his notorious Demerits he was worthy to be Deposed; which things by his own Will and Command were published before the States. Having had diligent Deliberation upon these things, for the greater Caution to the Govern∣ment of the Kingdoms, and Dominion aforesaid, the Rights and Ap∣pertinences of the same, in the Name and Authority to us committed, do Pronounce, Decree, and Declare, that very Richard to be Deposed  deservedly from all Royal Dignity and Honour, and for the like Cau∣tion, we Depose him by our Definitive Sentence in this Writing, expressly inhibiting all and singular Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Knights, Vassals, and Valvassors, and all other Men and Subjects of the said Kingdoms and Dominion or Places belonging to them, for the future to obey the said Richard as King. Furthermore, the said States Ib. n. 53. desiring there might be  nothing wanting, which was or might be required in this Mat∣ter, being severally asked, agreed to certain Persons to be their Proctors or Agents, named by the Commissioners, to go to King Richard to resign their Homage and Fealty had been made to him, and give him notice what had been concerning his De∣position and Renunciation. And presently it appeared from the Ibm. Premisses, and the  Occasion thereof, That the Kingdom of England was vacant, when Henry Duke of Lancaster rising from his Seat, and stand∣ing so right up, as he might sufficiently be seen of the People, humbly crossing himself in his Forehead and Breast, first cal∣ling upon the Name of Christ, challenged the Kingdom of England, being void, with the Crown, and all its Members, and Appertinences, in his Mother Tongue, (lingua materna) in this Form of Words. In the Name of Fader, Ibm. Son, and Holy Ghost, I Henry  of Lancaster, chalenge this Rewme of England, and the Croune, with all the Membres, and the Appurtenances, als I am descendit by ryght lyne of the Blode coming fro the Gude Lord King Henry therde, and throghe that ryght, that God of his grace hath sent me, with helpe of my Kyn and my Frendes to recover it; The which Rewme was in poynt to be ondone for default of Governance, and undoying of the gude  Lawes. After this Claim, Ibm. n. 54. as well the Lords Spiritual as Tem∣poral, and all States there present, were asked, one by one, what they thought of it, who without any difficulty or delay, unanimously consented the Duke should Reign over them; and immediately, so soon as he shew the States of the King∣dom, King Richard's Signet, which he gave him as a Token of  his Intention, as was said before, the Arch-Bishop taking King Henry by the Right Hand, led him to the Royal Throne, and when the same King had Kneeled, and Prayed a while before it, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Arch-Bishop of York as∣sisting him, placed him therein, the People for great Joy Shout∣ing mightily.
When the Shouting was over, Ib. n 55. the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury made a short Preachment, or Collation, as 'tis called upon the Roll; his Text, or Theme, was, Vir dominabitur Populo, 1 Sam. c. 9. v. 17. The English Version of the whole Verse, ac∣cording to the Vulgar Edition, runs thus: And when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said unto him, Behold the Man whom I spake to thee of, this same shall Rule over my People; Iste dominabitur Populo meo. In this Collation he makes a Comparison between King Richard,  who he makes a Child, and his whole Government a Childish Acting, and King Henry a Perfect Wise Man. In this Compa∣rison he makes use of several Places of Scripture, but how pro∣perly, or how to the purpose, belongs not to this Place to say: At length he insinuates, That by Childish Government the Na∣tion had been in great Danger; but now they were freed from it, because a Man will Reign; to wit, he that says not as a Child, but one of Perfect Reason: I came not to do my own  Will, but the Will of him that sent me, that is, God: And therefore we may not only say of this Man, That he will think of things in Wisdom, but also as a Man, and not as a Child; (In sensu cogitabit circumspectionem Dei) He will in earnest think of the Circumspection or Providence of God; (id est, circum∣quaque diligenter aspiciet ut Dei voluntas non sua fiat;) that is, he will look diligently every way about him, that God's Will, not his own, may be done; and so in the Place of a wanton  Child, a Man Rules over the People, and such a Man, that it may be said, The King shall Reign, and he shall be a Wise Man, and do Judgment and Justice in the Land. Which Collation ended, Ib. n. 56. King Henry, to quiet the Minds of his Subjects, said publickly these Words: SIRES, I Thank God and zowe Spirituel and Temporel, and all the Astates of the Lond, and do zowe to wyte, it es noght my Will that no Man thynk, that be waye of Conquest I wold Disherit any Man of his Heritage, Franches, or other Ryghts that hym aght to have, no put hym out of that that he has, and has had by the gude Lawes and Custumes of the Rewme, except those Persons that has ben agan the gude Purpose and the comune Profyt of the Rewme. And forthwith Ib. n. 57. it being considered that the Throne being  Vacant, by the Cessation and Deposition of King Richard, the Power of all the Justices, Sheriffs, and other Officers through the Kingdom ceased, lest Justice might be delayed to the Grievance of the People, he Named his Principal Officers and Justices, who took the usual Oaths. And forthwith Proclamation was made by the King's Command, That on Monday next after the Feast of St. Michael a Parlement should be held in that Place;  and that on Monday next following, on the Feast of St, Edward, the Coronation should be at Westminster; and that who claimed any Service, then might put in their Petitions before the Steward, Constable, and Marshall of England, where they should receive full Justice. And for the shortness of Time as∣signed for the Sitting of the Parlement, the King made Prote∣station,
it was not his Intention it should be any Prejudice to the States of his Kingdom, or that it should be made an Example for the future; but that it was only for the Profit of the King∣dom, and specially to spare the Labour and Expences of his Lieges, and that the Grievances of the People might have speedy Remedy. All which things being finished, Ibm. n. 58. the King rose from his  Throne, and beholding the People with a chearful Counte∣nance departed, and the same Day in the White Hall (in Alba Aula) he had a great Entertainment for the Noble and Gentle∣men, who were there in great Numbers. These things were done on Tuesday the 30th of September. And afterwards on the next day, Ibm. being Wednesday, the  Deputies or Proctors before mentioned, went to Richard late King in the Tower, as they had been enjoined, William Thir∣nyng Justiciary, for himself and Fellow-Proctors, in the Name of all the States and People, notified to Richard, and fully declared the Admission of his Renunciation, and the Manner, Cause, and Form of the Sentence of his Deposition; and presently Resigned the Homage and Fealty that had been made to the late King Richard, as follows. The Words Ibm. n. 59. which William Thirnyng spake to Monsieur Richard late King of England, at the Tower of London in his Chamber  there, on Note, this Wednesday was Octob. 1. Wednesday next after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel. SIRE, IT is wele known to zowe, That ther was a Parlement somond of all the States of the Reaume for to be at Westmynstre, and to begynne  on the Teusday in the morrow of the Fest of Seint Michell the Arch∣aungell that was zesterday, by cause of the whiche Sommons, all the States of this Lond were there gadyrd; the whiche States hole made thes same Persones that ben comen here to zowe nowe her Procuratours, and gafen hem full Auctorite and Power, and charged hem for to say the Wordes that we sall say to zowe en her Name, and on their Behalve; that is to wytten, The Bishop of St. Assa for Ersbisshoppes and Bisshoppes; the Abbot of Glastenbury for Abbotes and Priours, and all other Men of Holy  Chirche Seculers and Rewelers; the Erle of Gloucestre for Dukes and Erles; the Lord of Berkeley for Barones and Banerettes; Sire Thomas Irpyngham Chamberleyn for all the Bachilers and Commons of this Lond be South, Sire Thomas Grey for all the Bachilers and Commons by North, and my Felawe Johan Markham and me for to come with hem for all thes States; And so, Sire, these Wordes, and the doying
that we sall say to zowe, is not onlych our Wordes, bot the Wordes and the Doyings of all the States of this Lond, and our Charge and in her Name. And he answered and said, That he wyst wele, that we wold not say but as we were charged. Sire, ze remembre zowe wele, That on Monday on the Fest of St. Michell the Archaungell, ryght here, in this Chambre, and in what Presence ze Renounsed and Cessed of the State of Kyng and Lordeship, and of all the Dignite and Wyrshipp that longed therto, and assoiled all zour Lieges of her Legiance and Obey∣sance  that longed to zowe uppe the Forume that is contened in the same Renunciacion and Cession, whiche ze redde zour self by zour Mouth, and affermed it by zour Othe and zour own Writing; upon which ze made and ordeyned zour Procurators the Ersbysshopp of Zork, and the Bysshopp of Hereford, for to notifie and declare in zour Name thes Re∣nunciacion and Cession at Westmynstre, to all the Stotes and all the People that was ther gadyrd bycause of the Sommons forsayd; the whiche was done zesterday by thes Lordes zour Procuratours, and wele herde  and understonden, thes Renunciation and Cession were pleinelich and frelich accepted, and fullich agreed by all the States and People forsayd. And over this, Sire, at the instance of all thes States and People there were certain Articles of Defauts in zour Governance redde there, and though wele herd and pleinelich understonden to all the States for∣sayd, hem thoght hem so trewe and so notoric and knowen, that by the Causes, and by mo other os thej sayd, and having consideration to zour owne Wordes in zour own Renunciacion and Cession, that ze were not  worthy, no sufficient ne able for to Govern for zour owne Demerites, os it is more pleinerlich contened therein, hem thoght that wos reasonable und cause for to Depose zowe, and her Commissaries that her made and ordeined, os it is of Record ther declared and decreed, and adjudged zowe for to be Deposed and Pryved, and in dede Deposed zowe and Pryved zowe of the Astate of Kyng, and of the Lordeship contened in the Renunciacion and Cession forsayd, and of all the Dignity and Wyrsshipp, and of all the Administration that longed therto. And we Procura∣tours  to all these States and People foresayd, os we be charged by hem, and by hir Auctorite gyffen us and in her Name, zelde zowe uppe for all the States and People soresayd Homage Liege, and Feaute and all Legeance and all other Bondes, Charges, and Services that longe therto; And that non of all thes States and People fro this tyme forward ne bere zowe Feyth, ne do zowe Obeysance os to thar Kyng. And he answered and seyd, That he loked not therafter; but he seyd, That after all this, he hoped that is Cosyn wolde be good Lord to hym. And further to compleat his Design, on the Rot. Claus. 1 Hen. IV. part 1. M. 37. Dors. Summons of Parlement. 30th of Sep∣tember, he, by Information of the Arch-Bishop, That by the Ac∣ceptation of the Renunciation of King Richard, his Cession and De∣position, this Parlement was determined, issued in his own Name Writs to the Lords, and for Elections of Members, Knights, Citi∣zens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, to meet on Monday next following, being the Day of St. Faith; and all this to be done, and Returns made in six Days time. So as these were the  same Members who had been Summoned by King Richard to meet on the morrow of St. Michael, as appears beyond Contradi∣ction from the Writs Append. n. 114. for their Expences, which were Dated on the 19th of November, the last Day of the Parlement, and they were allowed their Expences for Fifty one Days, besides the time of coming to, and returning from Parlement; in which Fifty one Days
was included the 30th of September, and all the Days between that and St. Faith's Day, the 6th of October, to make up the Num∣ber. In this Parlement Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. 4 n. 1. Pronunciation du Parlement, or Declarati∣on of cause of Summons. The Cause of Summons. Summoned and Holden at Westminster by King Henry IV. on Monday, the Day of St. Faith, which was the 6th of October, in the first Year of his Reign, sitting on his Royal Seat in the Great Hall at Westminster; in the Presence of him and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, and many  other Gentlemen and Commons in great Number, Thomas de Arundel Arch-Bishop of Canterbury declared the Cause of Summons, and rehearsed how on Tuesday last past, on the morrow of St. Mi∣chael, King Richard II. after the Conquest, summoned his Parle∣ment to be then holden, which Summons was of no force or ef∣fect, by reason of the Acceptation of the Renunciation made by King Richard, and the Deposing of him, as without doubt he had informed King Henry before he issued his Writs for this  Parlement. And then proceeds, That on the same Tuesday, Ibm. n. 2. in Presence of King Henry, the Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons, he shewed, that this Honourable Kingdom of England, being the most abounding Angle with Riches, had been a long time Governed by Children and the Counsels of young People, so as the Kingdom was in point of Perdition and great Desolation and Mischief, mightily to be lamented, if it had not been that Almighty God of his Great Grace and Mercy had sent  a Knowing and Discreet Man for the Government of the Nation, who by the Aid of God will be Governed and Counselled by the Sages and Ancients of his Kingdom, for the Aid and Com∣fort of himself and the whole People. And said further, That Men ought especially to consider how this Honourable Kingdom could so long continue under such mischievous Government, Waste, and Destruction, which if it had been under Good and Just Government, by Sage and Sufficient Counsel, as it ought of  Right, it would have been in Riches, Goods, and other Advan∣tages the most considerable of any Kingdom in the World; Ibm. n. 3. (Et sur ceo mesme Lercevesque prist pur son Theame le Parole de Machabeorum primo in disent Incumbit nobis ordinare pro Regno.) And then the Arch-Bishop took for his Theme the Words in the first of Machabees, saying, Incumbit nobis ordinare pro Regno, 1 Mac. Chap. 6. Vers. 57. They are the last Words of a very long Verse, and nothing to his Purpose, nor what went before, or what  follows after. The English Version is thus: The Affairs of the Realm depend upon us. But to go on with his Harangue, Incumbit nobis ordinare pro Regno (cest a dire, &c.) That is to say, It is the King's Will to be Counselled and Governed by the Honourable Sages and Discreet Persons of his Kingdom, and by their Com∣mon Counsel and Assent, do the best for the Government of himself and his Realm, not desiring to be Governed by his own Will, voluntary Purpose, or singular Opinion, but by Common  Advice, Counsel, and Assent, as abovesaid. And the same Arch∣bishop said further (& mesme Lercevesque dit outre) There was not such a Kingdom in the World, that could live without the Assistance of other Kingdoms, so Honourably, so Graciously, and so Fully (si honourablement, ne graciousment, ne plentiousment) as might the Honourable Kingdom of England, which God keep
safe and maintain. Ib. n. 4. And upon this he alledged certain Au∣thority, saying, Quod inter omnia regna hoc principatum tenet, Of all Kingdoms this is the chief; and shewed, That to the Govern∣ment of every Kingdom, Three things especially were required, that is to say, Justice, The Observation of the Laws, And, that every Person should rule and govern himself according to his Estate, and Degree, alledging many Causes for which this King∣dom ought to be graciously cherished and held in the greatest  Honour: And said further, it was the King's Will to make good these Three things by the help of God; and further said, That it was the King's Will in especial, that Holy Church should have and enjoy all her Liberties and Franchises; and that all the good Statutes and Or∣dinances made in the time of his Noble Progenitors, should be firmly observed and kept, and that all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Cities and Burghs, and all others, should have and enjoy their Liber∣ties and Franchises, according to the Grants made by his Noble Proge∣nitors  abovesaid. And that no Man ought to speak of, or Censure any thing done this Parlement, for it was the Will of the King in his Faith and Conscience to do equal Justice to all Parts, according to the Will, Ayd, and Grace of God given unto him. This was the Arch-Bishops Discourse upon his Theme: Ib. n. 5. And then he told the Lords and Commons, That on Monday next King Henry, by the Grace of God, purposed to be Crowned at Westminster, for the Performance of which Solemnity, Advice and Deliberation  ought to be had in divers manners the mean time, and therefore on behalf of the King he requested them to continue the Parle∣ment (de continuer cest Parlement) until Tuesday the Morrow after the Coronation, and after that day forward the King would use his Diligence for the Exploit of Parlement, (& que de celle jour en avant mesme le Roy ferroit sa diligence pur lesploit de Parlement) that is, for the Dispatch of Parlement Business. Whereupon, by the King's Command, Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland and  Constable of England, asked all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, if they agreed to the Continuance, who severally Exa∣mined, (queux ont severalment examinez) agreed to the said Con∣tinuance. After this follows the Names of the Triers of Petitions in Par∣lement, and the whole Process against Richard the Second, tho Transacted on Michaelmass-Day and the day following, a Week before this Parlement began, as hath been shewn. And immediately the Rot. Parl. 1 Hen IV. n 66. The Parle∣ment 21st of Rich. II. an∣nulled. whole Parlement of the 21st of Richard the Second, with all Circumstances and Dependences thereupon, were revoked and annulled for ever. And the Parlement holden Ib. n. 67. The Parle∣ment of the 11th of Ri∣chard II. con∣firmed. in the Eleventh year of King Richard the Second was revived and confirmed to be kept ac∣cording to the effect and purport of the same, as being for the good and common profit of the Kingdom (pur le bien & comune profit du Roialme.) The Lords and others Ib. n. 68. The Lords and others Judged 21st of Rich. II. restored, &c. and their Heirs, &c. that were fore∣judged in the 21st of Richard the Second, are restored to the same State and Condition they were in at the time of their Judgments given.
Upon Ib. n. 71. Henry's Eldest Son made Prince of Wales, and Heir of the Crown. the Motion of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Lords and Commons having severally been asked about the King's Eldest Son, answered and assented, That Henry his Eldest Son should be made Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and also if his Father should dye, he being alive, they would accept him as Right Heir of the Kingdom and Crown, and obey him as their King and Liege. On Thursday the 23d of October Append. n. 115. the Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury,  on behalf of the King, charged all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all others there, being upon their Allegiance, that what should be then spoken or propounded should be kept secret, and no ways discovered to any Man living; and then it was demanded by the Earl of Northumberland, for the security of the King, and all the Estates of the Kingdom, what should be done with King Richard to keep him in safe-guard, saving his Life, which the King would have done by all means. To which Question all the Lords Spiritual  and Temporal, whose Names do there See Appen. as above. King Richard ordered to be imprisoned. follow, being severally Examined, answered it seemed to them, he should be put into safe and secure Guard, and in such a Place where there was no Concourse of People, and that he be kept by sure and sufficient Persons, and that none that had been Servant to him, should be about his Person, and this should be done in the most secret man∣ner that might be. Upon propounding this Question, Thomas Merks Bishop of  Carlisle, gave his Reasons against these Proceedings in the follow∣ingThe Bishop of Carlisle's Speech there∣upon. Speech, as it is to be found in the First Part of Sir John Hayward's P. 100, 101, 102, &c. The Speech. Life of Henry the Fourth, Printed at London 1599. This Question, Right Honourable Lords, concerneth a Mat∣ter of great Consequence and Weight; the determining where∣of will assuredly procure, either safe Quiet, or dangerous Di∣sturbance,  both to our particular Consciences, and also to the Common State: Therefore before you resolve upon it, I pray you call to your Considerations these Two things: First, whe∣ther King Richard be sufficiently Deposed, or no? Secondly, whether King Henry be with good Judgment, or Justice, chosen in his Place? For the first Point we are to Examine, Whether a King being lawfully and fully instituted by any just Title, may upon imputation either of Negligence, or of Tyranny, be  Deposed by his Subjects? Secondly, What King Richard hath omitted in the one, or committed in the other, for which he should deserve so heavy Judgment? I will not speak what may be done in a Popular State, or in a Consular, in which although one beareth the Name and Honour of a Prince, yet he hath not Supream Power of Majesty; but in the one the People have the highest Empire, in the other the Nobility and Chief Men of Estate, in neither the Prince. Of the first sort was the  Commonwealth of the Lacedemonians, who after the Form of Government which Licurgus framed, often-times Fined, often∣times Fettered their Kings, and sometimes Condemned them to Death: Such were also in Caesar's time, the Petty King's of every City in France, who were many times Arraigned upon Life and Death, and (as Ambiorix Prince of Leodienses confes∣seth)
had no greater Power over the People, then the People had over them. Of the second Condition were the RomanTranquil. in Caligula. Taci∣tus in prooemio. Emperours at the first, of whom some, namely, Nero and Maximinus were openly condemned, others were suddenly sur∣prized by Judgment and Authority of the Senate; and such are now the Emperours of Germany, whom the other Princes by their Aristocratical Power do not only restrain, but some∣times also remove from their Imperial State; Such are also  the Kings of Denmarke, and Swevelande, who are many times by the Nobility dejected, either into Prison, or into Exile; Such likewise are the Dukes of Venice, and of some other Free States in Italy; and the chief Cause for which Lewes Earl of Flaunders was lately expelled from his Place, was for drawing to himself Cognisance in Matters of Life and Death, which high Power never pertained to his Dignity. In these and such like Governments, the Prince hath not  Regal Rights, but is himself subject to that Power which is greater then his, whether it be in the Nobility or in the Com∣mon People; but if the Soveraign Majesty be in the Prince, as it was in the Three first Empires, and in the Kingdoms of Judea and Isreal, and is now in the Kingdoms of England, France, Spain, Scotland, Muscovia, Turkey, Tartaria, Persia, Ae∣thiopia, and almost all the Kingdoms of Asia and Africk; altho for his Vices he be unprofitable to the Subjects, yea hurtful,  yea intolerable; yet can they Lawfully neither harm his Per∣son, nor hazard his Power, whether by Judgment, or else by Force; for neither one, nor all Magistrates, have any Autho∣rity over the Prince, from whom all Authority is derived, and whose only Presence doth silence, and suspend all inferiour Jurisdiction and Power. And as for Force, what Subject can at∣tempt, or assist, or counsel, or conceal Violence against his Prince, and not incur the high and heinous Crime of Trea∣son. it is a common saying, Thought is free; free indeed from Pu∣nishment of Secular Laws, except by Word or Deed it break forth into Action; Yet the secret Thoughts against the Sacred Majesty of a Prince, without attempt, without endeavour, have been adjudged worthy of Death; and some who in Auricular Con∣fession have discovered their Treacherous Devices against the Person of their Prince, have afterwards been Executed for the  same. All Laws do exempt a Mad Man from Punishment, be∣cause their Actions are not governed by their Will and Purpose, and the Will of Man being set aside all his Doings are indiffe∣rent, neither can the Body offend, without a corrupt or erro∣neous Mind; yet if a Mad Man draw his Sword upon his King, it hath been adjudged to deserve Death. And lest any Man should surmise, that Princes, for the Maintenance of their own Safety and Soveraignty, are the only Authors of these  Judgments, let us a little consider the Patterns and Precepts of Holy Scripture. Nebuchadnezzar King of Assyria wasted all Pa∣lestine with Fire and Sword, oppugned Hierusalem a long time, and at last expugned it, slew the King, burnt the Temple, took away the Holy Vessels and Treasure, the rest he permitted to the Cruelty and Spoil of his Unmerciful Soldiers, who defiled all
Places with Rape and Slaughter, and ruinated to the Ground that flourishing City. After all the glut of this Bloody But∣chery, the People which remained, he led Captive to Chaldea, and there erected his Golden Image, and commanded, That they which refused to Worship it, should be cast into a Fiery Furnace. What Cruelty, what Injustice, what Impiety is comparable to this? And yet God calleth Nebuchadnezzar his Servant, and  promiseth him Hire and Wages for his Service: And the Pro∣phets Jeremiah and Baruch, did write unto the Jews, to prayJerem: 25. 9. Ezceh. 29 18. Jerem. 29. 7. Baruch, 1. 11. for the Life of him, and of Baltazzar his Son, that their days might be upon Earth as the days of Heaven: And Ezechiel with bitter Terms abhorreth the Disloyalty of Zedechia, be∣cause he revolted from Nebuchadnezzar, whose Homager and Tributary he was. What shall we say of Saul? Did he not put all the Priests to Execution, because one of them did Re∣lieve  Holy and Harmless David? Did he not violently Perse∣cute that his most Faithful Servant and Dutiful Son in Law? During which Pursuit, he fell twice into the Power of David, who did not only spare, but also Protect the King, and re∣proved the Pretorian Soldiers for their Negligent Watch, and was touched in the Heart for cutting away the lap of his Gar∣ment; and afterwards caused the Messenger to be slain, who upon Request, and for Pitty, had  lent his Hand (as he said) to helpSo did Domitian put to death Epaphroditus, Nero's Li∣bertine, because he helped Nero (although in Love) to kill himself. So did Seerus kill all the Killrs of Pertinax his Predssr; and likewise. Vitellius did put to Death all the Murderers of Galba. Theophilus Emperor of Graecia caused all those to be sain, who had made his Father Em∣peror by killing Leo Armenius. And Alexander the Great put to cruel Execution those that had sain Darius, his Mighty and Mortal Enemy. forward the voluntary Death of that Sacred King. As for the contrary Examples, as that of Jehu, who slew Jehoram and A∣hazia Kings of Israel and Juda, they were done by express O∣racle and Revelation from God, and are no more set down  for our imitation, then the Robbing of the Aegyptians, or any other Particular and Priviledged Commandement; but in the general Precept, which all Men must ordinarily follow, not only our Actions, but our Speeches also, and our very Thoughts are strictly charged with Duty and Obedience unto Princes, whether they be Good or Evil: The Law of God ordaineth,Deut. 17. 12. Psal. 105. Exod. 22. 28. Act. 23. 5. Roman. 13. 1, 13. Titus 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 17. 2 Tim. 2. 2. That he which doth Presumptuously against the Ruler of the People shall dye: And the Prophet David forbiddeth, to touch  the Lords Anointed. Thou shalt not (saith the Lord) rail upon the Judges, neither speak Evil against the Ruler of the People. And the Apostles do demand further, That even our Thoughts and Souls be obedient to Higher Powers. And lest any should imagine, that they meant of good Princes only, they speak generally of all, and further to take away all doubt, they make express mention of the Evil. For the PowerRom. 13. 2. John 19. 11. and Authority of Wicked Princes, is the Ordinance of God;  and therefore Christ told Pilate, That the Power which he had, was given him from above; and the Prophet Esay calleth Cy∣rus, being a Prophane and Heathen Prince, the Lord's Anointed.Esay 45. 1. For God stirreth up the Spirit, even of Wicked Princes, to do his Will, and (as Johosaphat said to his Rulers) they execute2 Chron. 36. 22. not the Judgment of Man, but of the Lord; in regard where∣of
David calleth them Gods, because they have their Rule andPsal. 28. Authority immediately from God; which if they abuse, they are not to be adjudged by their Subjects, for no Power within their Dominion is superior to theirs, but God reserveth them to the sorest Tryal: Horribly and suddenly (saith the Wise∣man)Sap. 6. shall the Lord appear unto them, and a hard Judgment shall they have. The Law of God commandeth, That the Child should be put to Death for any contumely done unto the Parents: But what if the Father be a Robber? If a Murderer? If for all excess of Villanies, odious and execrable both to God and Man? Surely he deserveth the highest degree of Punishment, and yet must not the Son lift up his Hand against him, for no Offence is so great as to be punished with Parricide; but our Country is dearer unto us then our Parents, and the Prince is Pater Patriae, the Father of our Country, and therefore more  Quintil. in de∣clam. offic. lib. 1. sacred and dear to us then our Parents by Nature, and must not be violated, how Imperious, how Impious soever he be: Doth he Command or Demand, our Persons or our Purses, we must not shun for the one, nor shrink for the other; for (asNehem. 9. 37. Nehemiah saith) Kings have Dominion over the Bodies, and over the Cattle of their Subjects, at their Pleasure. Doth he enjoin those Actions which are contrary to the Laws of God? we must neither wholly obey, nor violently resist, but with a  constant Courage submit our selves to all manner of Punish∣ment, and shew our Subjection by Enduring and not Perform∣ing: Yea, the Church hath declared it to be an Heresie, toAlphons a Castro in lib. de haeresi, in Verb Tyrannus. Dom. Sto. lib. 5. de just & jure. hold that a Prince may be Slain or Deposed by his Subjects for any Disorder or Default, either in Life, or else in Govern∣ment, there will be Faults so long as there are Men; and as we endure with Patience a Barren year, if it happen, and un∣seasonable Weather, and such other Defects of Nature, so must  we tolerate the Imperfections of Rulers, and quietly expect either Reformation, or else a Change. But, alass, good King Richard! what such Cruelty? What such Impiety hath he ever committed? Examine rightly those Imputations which are laid against him, without any false Circumstance of Aggravation, and you shall find nothing ob∣jected either of any Truth, or of great Moment. It may be that many Errours and Oversights have escaped him, yet none  so grievous to be termed Tyranny, as proceeding rather from Unexperienced Ignorance, or Corrupt Counsel, than from any Natural and Wilful Malice. Oh! how shall the World be pestered with Tyrants, if Subjects may rebel upon every pre∣tence of Tyranny? How many good Princes shall daily be suppressed by those by whom they ought to be supported? If they Levy a Subsidy or any other Taxation, it shall be claimed Oppression: If they put any to Death for Traiterous Attempts  against their Persons, it shall be exclaimed Cruelty: If they do any thing against the Iust and liking of the People, it shall be proclaimed Tyranny. But let it be, that without Authority in us, or Desert in him, King Richard must be Deposed, yet what Right had the Duke of Lancaster to the Crown? Or, what Reason have we
without his Right to give it to him? If he make Title as Heir unto King Richard, then must he yet stay until King Richard's Death, for no Man can succeed as Heir to one that Liveth. But it is well known to all Men, who are not either wilfully Blind, or grossly Ignorant, that there are some now alive, lineally de∣scended from Lionel Duke of Clarence, whose Offspring was by Judgment of the High Court of Parlement holden the Eighth year of the Reign of King Richard, declared next Successor to  the Crown in case King Richard should die without Issue. Concerning the Title from Edmund Crouchbacke, I will pass it over, seeing the Authors thereof are become ashamed of so ab∣surd Abuse, both of their own Knowledge and our Credulity, and therefore all the Claim is now made by Right of Conquest, by the Cession and Grant of King Richard, and by the general Consent of all the People. It is a bad Wooll that can take no co∣lour; but what Conquest can a Subject pretend against his So∣vereign,  where the War is Insurrection, and the Victory High and Heinous Treason? As for the Resignation which King Ri∣chard made, being a pent Prisoner for the same Cause, it is an Act exacted by force; and therefore of no force or validity to bind him; and seeing that by the Laws of this Land, the King alone cannot alienate the ancient Jewels and Ornaments pertaining to the Crown, surely he cannot give away the Crown it self, and therewithall the Kingdom. Neither have we any Custom that the People at Pleasure  should Elect their King, but they are always bound unto him, who by right of Blood is right Successor; much less can they confirm and make good that Title, which is before by Violence usurped; for nothing can then be freely done, when Liberty is once restrained by fear. So did Scilla by Terrour of his Le∣gions, obtain the Law of Velleia to be made, whereby he was created Dictator for Fourscore years; and by like Impression  of Fear, Caesar caused the Law of Servia to be promulged, by which he was made Perpetual Dictator; but both these Laws were afterwards adjudged void. As for the Deposing King Ed∣ward the Second, it is no more to be urged, than the Poysoning of King John, or the Murdering of any good and Lawful Prince; We must live according to Laws, and not to Examples, and yet the Kingdom was not then taken from the Lawful Succes∣sor: But if we look back to Times lately past, we shall find that  these Titles were more strong in King Stephen, then they are in the Duke of Lancaster; for King Henry the First being at large Liberty, neither restrained in Body, nor constrained in Mind, had appointed him to succeed; (as it was upon good Credit certainly affirmed) the People assented to this Designment, and thereupon without Fear and without Force, he was Anointed King, and obtained full Possession of the Realm: Yet Henry (Son of the Earl of Anjowe) having a nearer Right by his Mo∣ther  to the Crown, (notwithstanding his Father was a Stranger, and himself born beyond the Seas) raised such rough Wars upon King Stephen, that there was no end of spoiling the Goods and spilling the Blood of the unhappy People, besides the ruines and deformities of many Cities and Holds, until his Lawful Inheritance was to him assured. It terrifieth me to re∣member
how many Flourishing Empires and Kingdoms have been, by means of such Contentions, either torn in pieces with Intestine Division, or subdued to Foreign Princes, under Pre∣tence of Assistance and Aid; and I need not repeat how sore this Realm hath heretofore been shaken with these several Mis∣chiefs; and yet neither the Examples of other Countries, nor the Miseries of our own, are sufficient to make us to beware. O Englishmen! worse bewitched than the foolish Galathians!  Our unstayed Minds and restless Resolutions do nothing else but hunt after our own Harms! No People more Hated Abroad, and none less Quiet at Home! In other Countries the Sword of Invasion hath been shaken against us; in our own Land the Fire of Insurrection hath been kindled amongst us: And what are these Innovations but Whetstones to sharpen the one, and Bellows to blow up the other? Certainly I fear that the same will happen unto us, which  Aesop fableth to have been fallen unto the Frogs, who being desirous to have a King, a Beam was given unto them: The first Fall whereof did put them in some fear; but when they saw it lie still in the Stream, they insulted thereon with great Contempt, and desired a King of quicker Courage; and then was sent unto them a Stork, which stalking among them with stately Steps continually devoured them. The Mildness of King Richard hath bred in us this Scorn, interpreting it to be Cowar∣dise and Dulness of Nature. The Next Heir is likewise rejected.  I will not say that with greater Courage we shall find greater Cruelty: But if either of these shall hereafter be able to set up their Side, and bring the Matter to Trial by Arms, I do assuredly say, That which part soever shall carry the Fortune of the Field, the People both ways must go to wreck. And thus have I de∣clared my Mind concerning this Question, in more Words than your Wisdom, yet fewer than the Weight of the Cause  doth require; And do boldly conclude, That we have neither Power nor Policy, either to Depose King Richard, or to Elect Duke Henry in his Place; That King Richard remaineth still our Soveraign Prince, and therefore it is not lawful for us to give Judgment upon him: That the Duke whom you call King, hath more offended against the King and the Realm, than the King hath done either against him or us; for being Banished the Realm for Ten Years by the King and his Council (amongst  whom his Own Father was Chief) and sworn not to return again without special Licence, he hath not only violated his Oath, but with impious Arms disturbed the Quiet of the Land, and dispossessed the King from his Royal Estate, and now demandeth Judgment against his Person, without Offence proved, or De∣fence heard. If this Injury and this Perjury doth nothing move us, yet let both our Private and Common Dangers some∣what withdraw us from these violent Proceedings. After they had thus disposed of Richard II. and done for Henry what he could desire, the Commons petitioned, That all such as came into the Kingdom with him, or came to him afterward, and acted with him and against King Richard, might not be impeached, grieved, or vexed, but pardoned.
The King's Answer was Roi. Parl. 1 H n. IV. n. 139. The Confe∣derates and Followrs of Henry IV. pardoned. (le Roy voet fair pardon en maners come fust fait l'an primere le Roy Edward teirce) The King willeth to give such a Pardon as was made or given in the first Year of Ed∣ward III. for which see Statutes at Large, 1 Edw. III. Cap. 1. and 1 Hen. IV. Cap. 2. where are both Pardons in the same Words, only what ought to be altered as to Names and Circumstances, was altered. The Deposed King, after the Sentence of his remaining in secure  and safe Custody, was immediately sent to the Castle of K. Richard sent to Leeds-Castle, and from thence to Pontfract. Leeds in Kent, and from thence to Pontfract-Castle in York-shire. The King of France, whose Daughter he had Married, prepared a great Fleet, and raised an Army, to invade England, and destroy him and the Church of England, also the People of the King∣dom by Sea and Land, as 'tis said by King Henry in his Writ Append. n. 116. King of France pre∣pares to re∣lieve K. Ri∣chard. to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, to cause all the Eccle∣siasticks of his Province to Arm and Array what Men they could  to oppose him. This Writ bears Date January 17. in the first of his Reign. After this, and before the 29th of the same Month, the King of France had notice of King Richard's Death. Append. n. 117. His Death changes his Mind. How K. Ri∣chard was Murthered not certain. Up∣on which Day he confirmed the Truce he had made with him in the Year 1396. for 28 Years. How this unfortunate Prince died, was killed, or murthered, 'tis uncertain: Many say he had Meat set before him, but not be∣ing  suffered to eat, he died of forced Famine. Walsingham Histor. f. 363. n. 50. says, he voluntarily starved himself, and died on St. Valentin's Day, or the 14th of February, in Pontfract-Castle; which agrees not with the Date of the King of France's Instru∣ment, as above, unless it might be given out he was dead before he really was so. Hollinshed Chronic. f. 517. col. 1. tell us, That one Writer (but names him not) that pretends to know more of King Richard's Death than others,  reports, That one Day King Henry sitting at Dinner, fetched a great Sigh, and spake these Words: Have I no faithful Friend that will deliver me of him, whose Life will be Destruction to me, and Distur∣bance to the Kingdom! Upon which Speech, one Sir Pierce de Extone presently left the Court, and went with Eight Men all Armed to Pontfract-Castle, entred the Chamber where King Richard was Pri∣soner, and beat out his Brains. Mr. Camden in his Britania, F. 567. speaking of Pontfract-Castle,  says, Hic Richardus Secundus Rex Angliae, quem Henricus Regno spoliavit, fame, frigore, & in auditis tormentis scelerate sublatus est. Here Richard II. from whom Henry IV. took or robbed him of the Kingdom, with Hunger, Cold, and unheard-of Torments, was wickedly killed. Froysert, who was then Writing his Chronicle, Vol. 2 c. 249. f. 319. f. col. 1. says, he could not tell by what means King Richard died. The Parlement N. 9. Roll, in the first of Edward IV. speaks thus  That Henry IV. taking upon him Ʋsurpously the Crown and Name of King of England, and Lord of Ireland, and not therewith Sa∣tisfied or Content, but more grievous Things attempting, Wic∣kedly of Unnatural, Unmanly, and Cruel Tyranny, the same King Richard Anointed, Crowned, and Consecrated, and his Liege and most High Lord in the Earth, against God's Law, Man's
Allegiance, and Oath of Fidelity, with uttmost Punition attor∣menting, murdered and destroyed with most vile, heinous, and lamen∣table Death. Church-Affairs. AS in the last Reign, so in this, the Pope practised his En∣croachments upon the Church and State. In the First Parle∣ment  of this King, the Rot. Parl. 1 Ric. II. n. 77. Commons Petition, That whereas in the Treaty between King Edward and the Pope, he granted to ab∣stain from all manner of Provisions, by way of Reservation of Benefices, especially of such Dignities as were Elective; yet the Court of Rome had no regard to the King's Messengers sent thither about this matter; and the Pope continued his Practice, contrary to the Treaty, Grant, and Accord with King Edward, to the great Prejudice of the King and his Subjects, whereof they pray Re∣medy. What Remedy they had, I find not; but next Year against certain Rebel Ib. 2 Ric. II. n. 78. Cardinals, there was an Act passed, That Vrban was duly Chosen Pope, and that he was True Pope, and as so, and Head of Holy Church, ought to be Accepted and Obey∣ed: And to this all the Prelates, Lords, and Commons Agreed. The next Year the People Stat. at Large, 3 Ric. II. c. 3. Complained and Petitioned, shewing, That Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, Abbeys, and  Priories, and other Benefices of the Kingdom, were filled with Men of another Language, and of strange Lands and Nations, and sometimes Enemies of the King and Kingdom, which never made Residence in the same, or perform'd the Charge thereof: Whereupon the King, by Advice and Common Assent of all the Lords Temporal, Ordained, That none of his Liege People, of what Condition soever they were, should take or receive any Procuracy, Letter of Attorney, Farm, or other Admini∣stration  by Indenture, or in any other manner of any Benefice within England, but only of the King's Subjects, without his special Licence by Advice of his Council; nor send out of the Kingdom any Gold, Silver, or other Treasure or Commodity, by Bill of Exchange, Merchandise, or any other manner; And those that did the contrary, to incur the Pain and Punish∣ment contained in the Statute of Provisors. This Prohibition, upon Complaint and Petition of the Commons,  by Assent of the King and Lords Temporal, proved ineffectual for the End intended, and therefore it was reinforced: And it was agreed by the King in his 7th Year, the Lords Temporal and Commons, that the same Ib 7 Ric. II. c. 12 & Roi. Pal. 7 Ric. n. II. 49. Statutes shall keep his Force and Ef∣fects in all Points; and that all Aliens that have purchased or shall purchase any Benefice, Dignity, or Thing of Holy Church, and in his
Proper Person take Possession of the same, or use it himself within the Kingdom to his own Benefit, or of any other without spe∣cial Licence of the King, shall be comprised in the same Statute. But this Reinforcement had not its due Effect; Ibm. 12 Ric. II. c. 15. and therefore it was Ordained and Assented, That no Liege-man of the King, of what Estate or Condition that he be, great or little, should pass over the Sea, or send out of the Realm of England, without  special Leave of the King himself, to provide or purchase for him∣self Benefice of Holy Church, with Cure or without Cure: And if any do, and by virtue of such Provision, accept by him or any other, any Benefice of the same Kingdom, that at that time the same Provisor shall be out of the King's Protection, and the same Benefice void; so that it should be lawful to the Patron, as well Spiritual as Temporal, to present to the same an able Clerc at his Pleasure. Nor could this hinder Provisions, Gifts, and Sale of Benefices of all sorts by the Pope; for in the Ibm. 2d Statute made 13 Ric. II. c. 2. & Rot. Parl. n. 32. next Year, the Com∣mons require the King the Statute of Provisors, made in the 25th of Edward I. might be recited in Parlement; and then it was Ordained and Established, That if any make Acceptation of any Be∣nefice of Holy Church, contrary to that Statute, and duly proved, and be beyond Sea, he should abide Exiled and Banished out of the Realm for ever, and his Lands and Tenements, Goods and  Chattels forfeit to the King: And if he be within the Kingdom, he should be also Exiled and Banished, and incur the same For∣feiture, and avoid the Realm within six Weeks next after such Ac∣ceptation. And if any one receive such Person after that six Weeks, he shall be Banished, and incur the same Forfeiture. And it was then also Ib. c. 3. & Rot. Parl. n. 44. Ordained and Established, That if any Man brought or sent within the Kingdom or the King's Power, any Summons, Sentence, or Excommunication against any Person,  of what Condition that he be, for the cause of making Motion, Assent, or Execution of the Statute of Provisors (as above) he should be Taken, Arrested, and put in Prison, and forfeit all his Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels for ever; and moreover incur the Pain of Life and Member. And if any Prelate make Execution of such Summons, Sentences, or Excommunications, That his Temporalties be taken and abide in the King's hands, till due Redress and Correction be thereof made: And if any Person of  less Estate than a Prelate, of what Condition that he be, make such Execution, he should be Taken, Arrested, and put in Pri∣son, and make Fine and Ransom by Discretion of the King's Council. Notwithstanding this Care, and these Laws made against the Pope's Practices in this Kingdom, Ibm. 16. Ric. II. c. 5. & Rot. Parl. n. 20. the Commons in the Parle∣ment, in the 16th of this King, shewed unto him, grievously Com∣plaining, That forasmuch as he and all his Liege People ought of  Right, and of old time were wont to Sue in the King's Court to recover their Presentments to Churches, Prebends, and other Bene∣fices of Holy Church, to which they have Right to Present, the Conisance of Plea of which Presentment belongeth only to the King's Court, of the old Right of his Crown used in the time of his Progenitors Kings of England; and when Judgment was given
in the same Court upon such a Plea and Presentment, the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and other Spiritual Persons which had Institution of such Benefices within their Jurisdictions, were bound and had made Execution of such Judgments by the King's Commands all the time aforesaid without interruption; for no Lay Person could make such Execution; and also were bound of Right to make Execution of many other of the King's Commands, of which Right the Crown of England hath been peaceably seized  until this Day. But now of late divers Processes have been made by the Bishops of Rome, and Censures of Excommunication upon certain Bishops of England, because they had made Execution of such Commands, to the open Disherison of the Crown, and Destru∣ction of the King, his Laws, and all his Kingdom, if Remedy be not provided. Ibm. They further Complain of the Pope's Transla∣tion of Bishops from Bishoprick to Bishoprick, and sending some out of the Kingdom who were fit to be of the King's Council, and able  to give him Advice without his Assent and against his Will. Ibm. So that the Crown of England which hath been so free at all times, That it hath been in Subjection to no So the Words in the Parlement-Roll, 16 Ric. II. n. 20. Earhtly Sovereign, but immediate∣ly Subject to God and to none other, in all things touching the Regaly, or Royalty of the Crown, should be submitted to the Bishop of Rome, and the Laws and Statutes of this Realm by him defeated and destroyed at his Will, in perpetual Destruction of the King, his Crown, and Re∣galy, and all his Realm, which God forbid. Wherefore they Ibm. de∣clare,  That they and all the Liege Commons of the Kingdom, would be with the King his Crown and Regaly in the Cases aforesaid, and in all other Cases attempted against him, his Crown and Regaly in all Points to live and die. Ibm. And further they pray the King, and him re∣quire by way of Justice, That he would ask all the Lords in Par∣lement, as well Spiritual as Temporal severally, and all the States of Par∣lement, What they thought of the Cases aforesaid? Whereupon the Lords Temporal so asked, answered every one by himself, That the  Cases aforesaid were clearly in Derogation of the King's Crown, and of his Regaly, as it was well known, and had been a long time known, and that they would be with the Crown and Regaly in these Cases especially, and in all others which shall be attempted against them in all Points, with all their Power. The Answer of the Lords Spiritual to the King's Demands, much to the purpose of that of the Lords Temporal, will best appear from the Arch-Bishop's Protestation (so called) upon the Parlement-Roll, as 'tis transcribed  in the Appendix, n. 118. and there translated. After which Answers given, Ibm. the King, by Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, at the Prayer of the Commons, Qrdained and Established, That if any Purchase or Pursue, or cause to be Purchased or Pursued in the Court of Rome or else∣where, any such Translations, Processes, and Sentences of Excom∣munications, Bulls, Instruments, or any other things which touch the King, against him, his Crown, Regaly, or Kingdom, as is afore∣said;  and they that bring them within the Realm, or receive them, or make thereof Notification, or any other Execution within the Kingdom, or without, they, their Notaries, Procurators, Maintainers, Abetters, Fautors, and Counsellors, shall be put out of the King's Pro∣tection, their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels forfeited, and also attached by their Bodies, if to be found, and brought
before the King and his Council, there to answer; or that Process be made against them by Praemunire facias, io manner as it is Or∣dained in other Statutes of Provisors. After this, there is no∣thing further that I have seen about these Controversies, the Pope being quiet all his Reign; yet I shall take notice of some things done by the King relating to these Affairs, which were omitted in their due Place. He caused James Dardain Rot. Claus. 12 Ric. II. M 39. Dors. the Pope's Collector in England,  to Swear he would be Faithful to him and his Crown; That he would not do, permit, or procure to be done any thing Prejudi∣cial to him, his Kingdom, Laws, and Rights; And that he would not put in Execution any Papal Letters or Mandates, or permit them to be put in Execution, that were Prejudicial to the King, his Regaly or Royalty, Laws or Rights, or to his Kingdom; That he would not receive or publish any of the Pope's Letters, but such  as he should deliver to the King's Council as soon as he could; That he would not send any Money or Plate out of the King∣dom, unless he had special Licence from the King or his Coun∣cil; nor that he would introduce any Novelties by or without Command, without the King's Licence; And that he would keep the King's Laws and Rights without violation. This Oath was taken August 27. in the 12th of Richard II. before his Coun∣cil, as appears by the Record it self. Then he wrote to Ib. 13 Ric. II. part 1. M. 17. De decimis Papae non sol∣vendis. William Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, That he could not but know that he was bound by Oath, for the Conservation of the Rights and Customs of the Kingdom, and for the Indemnity and Right Government of his People; and also that no Impositions upon the People could be made or levied any ways whatsoever, without Common Counsel or Consent of the Kingdom. And further, That he had been Pe∣titioned by the Commons lately assembled in Parlement at West∣minster,  to provide Remedy against the Impositions upon the Clergy, at that time published and exacted by the People: And also that any one that should bring in any Pope's Bulls to le∣vy such Impositions or create such Novelties not formerly used, which might bring Damage to him or his Kingdom, nor should publish such Impositions and Novelties, or collect or levy them, should be adjudged and suffer as a Traitor to him and his Kingdom. And it was granted by him, with Assent of the  same Parlement, nothing should be levied or paid that might tend to the Burthen and Damage of the Kingdom or Liege People. This notwithstanding, he was informed of a new Im∣position upon the Clergy by the Pope, which by his Autho∣rity, or the Authority of his Suffragans by his Command, was to be levied without Common Advice and Assent of the King∣dom, which he might not suffer to be done, saving his said Oath: And then Commanded, by the Faith in which he was  bound to him, and under forfeiture of all he could forfeit, to revoke all that had been done for the levying and exacting of this Imposition, and to return what had been paid and levied, enjoining him not to pay or contribute any thing to this Sub∣sidy or Imposition, under the foresaid Faith and Forfeiture. Witness the King at Westminster, the 10th Day of October.
The like Writ and of the same Date Ibm. was directed to the Arch-Bishop of York, and all the other Bishops of England, as also to the Guardians of the Spiritualities of the vacant Bishoprics; and several Collectors of this Imposition. The like Writ was likewise directed to James Dardain, then the Pope's Nuncio; Rex Ibm. Jacobo Dardain Nuncio Domini sum∣mi Pontificis in Anglia, &c. to desist in exacting of this Imposition, sub forisfactura Vitae & Membrorum, under the Forfeiture of Life and Members, and all things he could forfeit. Witness as be∣fore. This Imposition was the Payment of a Tenth by the Clergy to the Pope, by him laid upon them, as appears by the Todding or Title of the Record, De Decimis Papae non solvendis, Concerning Tenths not to be paid to the Pope. In the 14th of his Reign, Ibm. 14 Ric. II. M. 13. Dots. De Pro∣clamatione. he caused Proclamation to be made through England, to call from Rome, under forfeiture of  Life and Member and all they could forfeit, many Persons that went thither to procure the Nulling and Vacating of di∣vers Statutes made by him, and his Progenitors, with Consent of Parlement, for the Common Profit of the Kingdom; and to perpetrate many other Evils there, to the Contempt and Pre∣judice of his Person, to the great Damage of the Kingdom and People, and to the manifest Cassation of the Laws and Customs thereof; That they should be in England by the Feast of St. Mar∣tin  in Winter (or 11th of November) at furthest: And that no Man, of what State or Condition soever he was, should bring any Pope's Bulls, Processes, or Instruments for the Adnul∣ling or Vacating of any the Statutes, Laws, or Customs aforesaid, or obey them, or put them in Execution under the Forfeiture aforesaid. Witness the King at Westminster the 3d Day of May. By the King Himself and Council. This Proclamation Ibm. was directed to the Sheriff of Kent, and all other Sheriffs of England; to his Uncle John Duke of Lan∣caster, or his Chancellor in that Dukedom; and to John Stanley his Justiciary in Ireland, or his Lieutenant; and also his Justiciary of Chester, or his Lieutenant. The Statutes the Persons recalled by this Proclamation, went to Rome to have made void by the Pope, were the Statute of Provi∣sors last made; the Statute of Quare impedit, and Praemunire facias,  and others like to them, which the Pope said were against and in∣jurious to Ecclesiastic Liberty. For the particular Account whereof, see Walsingham's History, Fol. 344. n. 40, 55. and Fol. 345. n. 10. A. D. 1391. 14 Ric. II. In the 20th Year Ibm. 20 Ric. II. M. 3. Dors. of his Reign, on the 19th of September, he caused Lewis Bishop of Vultura in Apulia, the Pope's Collector, to take the same Oath before himself in Chancery which James Dardain had taken in the 12th of his Reign before his Council.
John Wyclif and his Followers. THE Opinions of John Wyclif prevailed very much in the Ʋniversity of Oxford, and not a few Learned Men main∣tained  them in the Schools, and Preached them up there, and in many other Places and Countries. In the 4th of this King, 1381. William de Berton, Speim. Council. Vol. 2. f. 267. Chancellor of the Ʋniversity, calling together many Doctors of Divinity, and many Professors of, and Skilful in the Canon-Law, they Judged upon Examination of those Opinions, That they were Erroneous, Repugnant to the Determinations of the Church, and Contradictory to Catholick Verity; and therefore forbade every one, of what Degree or Condition soever, under the pain  of the greater Excommunication, publickly to Hold, Teach, or Defend the same in the University. Upon the further spreading of these Opinions, amongst the Great Men and Populacy, Ibm. f. 629, 630, 631. William Courtney Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, and Seven other Bishops of this Province, Fourteen Do∣ctors of Canon and Civil Law, Seventeen Masters of Divinity, and Six Baccalaurs of Divinity, on the 17th of May, 1382. met in a Chamber of the Frier-Preachers in London, where having considered  and deliberated upon the Conclusions and Opinions then di∣vulged, unanimously, on the 27th of the same Month, Declared and Decreed some of them Heretical, others Erroneous, and contrary to the Determinations of the Church. The Heretical Opinions were these: That the material Substance of Bread and Wine, remained after Con∣secration  in the Sacrament of the Altar. Also, That the Accidents do not remain with a Subject after Conse∣cration in the same Sacrament. Also, That Christ is not in the Sacrament of the Altar, Identically, Truly, and Really in his proper Corporeal Presence. Also, That if a Bishop or Priest be guilty of mortal Sin, he can nei∣ther Ordain, Consecrate, or Baptize. Also, That if a Man were duly Contrite, all external Confession was  superfluous and unprofitable. Also, Pertinaciously to assert that Christ Ordained Mass, had no Gospel-Foundation. Also, That God ought to Obey the Devil. Also, If the Pope be an ill Man, and by consequence a Member of the Devil, he hath no Power over the Faithful of Christ given him by any one, unless perhaps by Caesar. Also, That after Urban VI. no Man is to be received as Pope, but  we ought to live as the Graecians under our own Laws. Also, To assert, That 'tis against Holy Scripture, that Ecclesiastics should have Temporal Possessions.
The Pernicious Erroneous Conclusions were these: That no Prelate ought to Excommunicate any one, unless he first knew he was Excommunicated by God. Also, That any one who did so Excommunicate, became thereby an Heretic, and Excommunicate himself. Also, A Prelate Excommunicating a Clerc, who Appealed to the  King and his Council, is in very Deed a Traitor to God, the King, and Kingdom. Also, They that leave off Preaching or Hearing the Word of God, or Gospel Preached, for the Excommunication of Men, are Ex∣communicated, and shall be had for Traitors to God in the Day of Judgment. Also, To assert that 'tis lawful for any one, tho' a Deacon or Priest, to Preach the Word of God, without Papal or Episcopal Authority, or  other which sufficiently appeareth. Also, To assert that none is a Civil Lord, none is a Bishop, none is a Prelate, while he is guilty of Mortal Sin. Also, That Temporal Lords may at their Pleasure take away Temporal Goods from Ecclesiastics, being habitual Delinquents, or that the Populacy, when they will, may correct Delinquent Lords. Also, That Tythes are pure Alms, and that the Parishioners for the Sins of their Curates may detain them, and as they please give them to  others. Also, That particular Prayers applied to one Person, by Prelates or Religious, are no more Benefit to that Person, than general Prayers are to him, caeteris paribus, all other things being equal. Also, In that very thing, that any one takes upon him whatsoever private Religion, he is made more unfit and unable to observe God's Commandments. Also, Saints instituting whatever private Religions, as well those  with Possessions, as Mendicants, they have sinned in so institu∣ting. Also, That Religious, living in Private Religions, are not Chri∣stians. Also, That Friers are bound to get their Food by the Labour of their Hands, and not by Begging. Also, He that gives Alms to Friers, or to a Frier-Preacher, is Ex∣communicate, and he that receives it. On the 20th Day of June, Ibm. f. 631, 632. in the same Year and Place, Nicholas Hereford, Philip Rapygdon a Canon Regular, both Pro∣fessors of Divinity, and John Ayshton Master in Arts, and Scholar in Divinity, the Chief Followers of VVyclif, appeared Perso∣nally before the Archbishop, the Doctors, and others. When Nicholas and Philip were commanded to answer, and to speak fully and plainly what they thought of the Conclusions  above, they gave in their Answers in Writing, protesting as otherwise they had done, That they intended to be Humble and Faithful Sons of the Church, and of Holy Scripture, and obey in all things the Determinations of the Church; and if they should com∣mit any Errour against this Intention in Word or Deed, they submitted themselves to the Correction of the Archbishop, and all
others to whom it belonged to Correct them. This Protestation premised, they Answer, That the Substance of material Bread and Wine remains in the Sacrament of the Altar after Consecration; Ad sensum contrarium isti Decretali, Firmiter Credimus, Concedimus, quod est Haeresis. To the contrary Sense of the Decree, we firmly be∣lieve (that is a Decree that began with those Words, Firmiter Credimus) We grant 'tis Heresie. To the Second Conclusion, That the Accidents do not remain  without a Subject after Consecration in the same Sacrament; Ad sensum contrarium isti Decretali, Cum Marthe a Decree in the De∣cretals that began with those Words) Concedimus quod est Hae∣resis. To the contrary Sense of that Decretal, Cum Marthe, We grant it Heresie. To the Third Conclusion, Quod Christus non sit in eodem Sacra∣mento, identicè, vere, & realiter in propria praesentia corporali; That Christ was not in the same Sacrament Identically, Truly, and  Really, in his proper corporal Presence: They answer, (Licet ista conclusio sit ad verba incomposita & intelligibilia, tamen ad sensum contrarium illi Decretali in Clementinis, Si Dominum (a Decretal that began with those two Words) Concedimus quod est Haeresis. Al∣though that Conclusion consists of uncouth and unintelligible Words, yet to the contrary Sense of that Decretal in the Clemen∣tines (Si Dominum) We grant it Heresie. And briefly, as to the whole Matter of the Sacrament of the Altar, and every other,  we profess we will, as well in Words as Sense, Agree with the Holy Scripture, the Determinations of the Church, and Opinions of the Holy Doctors. The Fourth and Fifth Conclusions they plainly granted to be Heresies. To the Sixth, That God ought to Obey the Devil, they an∣swer, Ad hunc sensum, quod Deus in propria Persona vel Essentia debet obedire Diabolo obedientia necessitatis, concedimus est Haeresis; Accor∣ding  to this Sense, that God in his proper Person or Essence ought to Obey the Devil with an Obedience of Necessity, We grant it is Heresie. And thus Evasively and Sophistically they Answered to most of the Conclusions or Opinions, both Heretical, as they are ter∣med, and Erroneous. Their Answers pleased not the Archbishop and his Assessors; they desired them more express. They said they then knew not how  better to Answer to the Three First, because they answered in Wri∣ting, and would Answer no otherwise. To the Sense and Text of the Sixth Conclusion, because they had not answered fully and expresly, they were asked, Whether God ought any Mode or Manner of Obedience to the Devil; In∣terrogati an Deus debeat aliquem modum Obedientia Diaboli, respondetur quod sic. They answered, Yea; to wit, the Obedience of Charity; scilicet Obedientiam Charitatis; because he loved him, and punished  him as he ought; Quia diliget eum & punit eum ut debet. And to prove that God ought thus to Obey the Devil, they offered them∣selves against any Man, under pain of being burnt; Obtulerunt se sub poena incendii ad quemcunque.
After these first and second Answers, the Archbishop asked all the Doctors, what they thought of them, who said one by one, That the answers to the first, second, third, and sixth Conclusions, were insufficient, heretical, and deceitful, and to the others erroneous and perverse. Whereupon the Archbishop again admonished them to answer fully, plainly, and expressly, without subtle, sophistical, or logick words, and gave them eight days time to do it, but they refused to do it;  and there is nothing more of them in this place. Ashton an∣swered more impertinently, and nothing to the purpose, as if he understood not what was demanded of, or said to him. The first we hear of them further is from the King's Append. n. 119. Writ, dated July 13. in the Sixth of his Reign, which was July next following, in which and in several others about this Matter, the King takes upon him the Title of Defender of the Faith, before the  Pope's pretended gift of that Title to Henry the Eighth. This Writ was directed to the Chancellor and Proctors of the Ʋniversity of Oxford, to inquire after all such of whatever Profession, or Degree, or others within the Limits and Jurisdiction of the Ʋni∣versity, that favoured or believed any Heresies or Errors, and e∣specially such as had been condemned by VVilliam Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Assessors, or that believed, held, or defended any of those Heresies, Errors, or the like, or that received John  VVyclif, Nicholas Herford, Philip Reppydon, or John Ashton, or any one noted of the same Heresies or Errors, into their Houses, or conversed with them, or defended, and shew them favour. And if they found any such, to banish and expell them the Ʋni∣versity and Town of Oxford, within seven days after they knew any of them, until before the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, by manifest Purgation, or denial of their Opinions, they shew their Innocency; and they were further to search the  Colleges and Halls for Books Composed by John VVyclif, and Nicholas Herford, and to do all this upon the Faith and Ligeance they were bound to the King. and under forfeiture of the Liber∣ties and Privileges of the Ʋniversity, and what else they might or could forfeit; With Command to the Sheriff of the County, and Major of Oxford, and all other Sheriffs, Majors, Bayliffs, Of∣ficers, and other his Subjects, to obey and assist them in the Exe∣cution of the Premisses. Mr. Wood in his History and Antiquities of Oxford, Lib. 1. fol. 192. col. 2. tells us, That John Ashton made his Recantation and Confession before the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury on the 19th of July following in Latin and English, whereupon, by his Letters, he was restored to his Ʋniversity Exercises and Reading in the Schools, which he performed without the least touch of Heresie. Henry de Knighton Reports Col. 2655▪ 2656. the Recantations and Confessions of Nicholas Herford, and others, and of John Ashton, in the  English of those times. In the Name of God, Amen. Wytes alle cristen men that we Nichol of Herford, and my fellow Pristus, unworthy in presence of our gostely fader the Erchebishop of Canturbery the nyngtende day Juny, ʒeer of grace a thousand thre undred
fourscore and two, in the house of the Freres prechoures at London, when we weren required to sayne what we felyde of diverse conclusions we maden this Protestation and ʒit we maken, That our entent was and is to be trewe sones and meke of holy Chirche and ʒif happy as God schilde that we erren agaynes this entent in wordus or in workus, we submytte us mekelyche to the correction of oure forsayde fadur the Erche∣bishop of Canturbery, and of alle other to whom it longyth to  redresse them that erren and afturwarde to wam were requirede to say oure beleve of the Sacrament of the autere as to ʒoure understondyng onth the peple we knowlechene fyrst that the Prist takus in his hondes thorowe the vertue of the Sacramen∣tal wordus is made and turnyde veralyche into Christus body, tho same that was taken and ben of the mayden Marye, and that sufferide deth on the crosse for man kynde, and that laye in the sepulcre, and that ros fro deth to lyve the thridde day,  and stey up into hevene and syttes in joye in the blisse of the fadur, and that schal come at the day of dome, to dome the quikke and the dede, and the wyne is also turnyde verayliche into his blode, so that leves aftur the consecration of brede and wyne none other substance than that ilk that is Christus flest and blode. And furthermore we beleve that the hole body of Christ is hole in the Sacrament, and hole in everyche partye of the Sacrament of the autere. And also we beleve that  Christ is verayliche in the same Sacrament in his bodely pre∣sence to savacion to alle hem that worthelyche receyven that same Sacrament, to hem that unworthelyche receyven to her dampnation, and this oure beleve, and in this we bene thorou grace of God, we will dye in remission of our synnes. And therefore we pry alle cristen men to whom this confession schal come to that ʒe bere us witness of this beleve at the day of dome before the heyʒest judge Jhesu Christ, and pray for us for  charite. In the Name of God, Amen. Y John Aston, Prist, unwor∣thely required of my Lord the Erchebishop of Canturbery the nyntene day of June in the ʒer of grace, &c. ut supra, in the hous, &c. to say what I felyde in the matyr of the Sacrament of the autere. Y have knowlechyde & ʒit I do that the selfe bred that the Prist holdes in his hondes is made thorou the vertue  of the Sacramental wordus verely the self cristus body that was borne of the maden Marye, and takun and suffrede deth on the Crosse, and thre days lay in the sepulcre, and the thridde day ros from deth to the lyve, and steyed up into Heven, and syttes on the ryght hond of God, and in the day of dome schal come to dome the quikke and the ded, and over this I beleve generally alle that holy writte determynet in worde and in understonding, or what ever holy Kirke of God determynes  of all this, when I was required specially to say what I felde of this proposition: Material brede leves in the Sacrament aftur the Consecration. I make this protestation, that I never thouʒt ne tauʒt ne prechide that proposition. For I wote wele that the mater and speculation thereof passes in heyʒte myn un∣derstondyng, and therefore als mykele tellys openly for to leve
in this matyr I beleve and of this matyr or of any other touching the ryght beleve of holy Kirke, that is nouʒt ex∣presside in holy writte, I beleve as our modur holy Kirke be∣leves, and in this belyve I will dye, and of this thing I beseke all men and alle wymmen to whom this confession come to, to bere me witnesse before the highest juge at the day of dome. As Wyclifs Followers increased very much, their Opinions mul∣tiplied,  and they Published and Preached different Opinions one from another. Col. 2657. n. 60. 2658, 2659, 2660, 2661. The same Author notes above Sixty he heard preached at Leeste, different from, or over and above what were first published by Doctor Wyclif. And further this Author Reports, Col. 2706. n. 60. 2707, 2708. That the number of the Lollards mightily increasing, they also taught many new and very strange Opinions, Twenty five he notes, whereof several not taught before, amongst which, with some others, the Sixteenth is  that of the Quakers about Swearing. Quod non licet aliquo modo jurare; it is not lawful to swear in any manner, and when they witnessed any thing, these were their Words, I am sykyr it is soth, I am sure it is Truth; Or thus, Without doubt it is so. All I find further of the Wyclyfists or Lollards in this Reign, are chiefly several Writs or Commissions upon the Arch-Bishop's Petition granted to him, and his Suffragans and others, to impri∣son the Preachers and Dispersers of Errors and Heresies, Pat. 9.  Ric. II. M. 12.▪ Also a Commission to certain Persons to search for, and seize Books containing Heresie, &c. and bring them be∣fore the Council, and make Proclamation, That none should buy or sell them under Pain of Imprisonment, and to arrest and im∣prison all such as complied not with the Proclamation, Pat. 11. Ric. II. M. 20. There were many in the City of London about this time, that frequented Conventicles in Private Places, where the Opinions and Conclusions of VVyclif and his Followers were  Debated and Taught. The King sends his Writ to the Major and Sheriffs of London, to make Proclamation from time to time within the City and Liberties, That no one of whatever State, Degree, Sex, or Condition they might be, should presume to make any such Conventicles or Meetings under pain of forfeiting, whatever they could forfeit, and imprisnment of their Bodies, during the King's Pleasure. Claus. 15. Ric. II. M. 18. Dors. in all these Writs and Commissions, King Richard took upon himself the  Title of Defender of the Faith, in these Words, as an Introduction to what he would do against Errors and Heresies, (Nos zelo fidei Catholicae, cujus sumus & esse volumus Defensores) We for the Zeal of the Catholick Faith, of which we are, and will be Defenders. I shall mention one Record more of a Memorandum of an unusual Oath taken by some of this sort of Men, when they relinquished what they had defended and taught, and returned to the Practices, Opinions, and Ʋsages of the then Church. Be it remembred, Clause 19 Rich. II. M. 1. that on the First day of September, in year of the Reign of King Richard the Second after the Con∣quest the 19th, VVilliam Dynett, Nicholas Taylour, Ni∣cholas Poucher, and VVilliam Steyour of Nottingham, per∣sonally appearing in Chancery, every one by himself took an Oath in the Form following:
I VVilliam Dynett befor yhowe Worschipfull Fader and Lord Archbishop of borke, and yhour Clergie, with my free will and full avysede swere to God and to all his Seyntes upon this holy Gospelle, that fro this day forthward I shall worship ymages with preyng and offeryng unto hem in the worshipp of Seintes that they be made after. And also I shall never more despyse pygremage ne states of Holy Chyrche in no degree. And also I shall be buxum to the Lawes of Holy Chyrche, and  to yhowe as myn Arch-Bishop, and to myn other Ordinaries and Curates, and keep tho Lawes upon my power and meyn∣teyn hem. And also I shall never more meynteyn ne techen ne defenden errours, conclusions, ne techynges of the Lollards ne swych conclusions and techynges that men clepeth Lollards Doctryne. Ne I shall her books ne swych books, ne hem or ony suspect or diffamede of Lollardery resceyve ne company with∣all wittingly or defend in tho Matters: And if I know ony swych,  I shall withall the hast that I may do yhowe, or els your ne r officers to wytten and of her bokes. And also I shall excyte and stirr all tho to good Doctrine, that I have hindered with myn Doctryne upp my power. And also I shall stonde to your de∣claration wych es heresie or errour and do thereafter. And also what penance yhe woll for that I have done for meynteyn∣ing of this false Doctrine, —— I shall fulfill it, and I sub∣mit me thereto up my power. And also I shall make no other  Glose of this myn oth, but as the words stonde. And if it be so that I come agayn, or do agayn this oth, or any party thereof, I yhelde me here cowpable as an Heretyk, and to for∣feit all my goods to the Kings will without any other process of Law, and thereto I require the Notary to make of all this, which is my will, an instrument agayns me. Et ex habundanti idem VVillielmus Dynett eodem die vo∣luit  & recognovit quod omnia bona & catalla sua mobilia nobis sunt forisfacta in casu quo ipse juramentum predictum, seu aliqua in eodem juramento contenta de caetero contravenerat ullo modo. And moreover the same VVilliam Dynett, the same day, granted and acknowledged, that all his Goods and Chattels were forfeit to us, in case he any ways con∣traven'd  the said Oath, or did any thing against what was contemned in it.
Taxes in this KING's Reign. THE Lords and Commons perceiving the great danger ofRot. Parl. 1 Rich▪ II. n. 27. Destruction the Nation was in, by reason of the great Wars, as well by Sea as Land, for the defence of the Kingdom, and  resistance of its great Enemies, they granted to the King Two Fif∣teenth without Cities and Burghs, and Two Tenths within Cities and Burghs, for Two years: Praying the King, that as well the Money of the Tenths and Fifteenths, as the Tenths granted by the Clergy, and Money for the Subsidy of Wooll, might be in the keeping of Especial Treasurers, by the King's appointment, which were William Walworth, and John Philypott, Merchants of London, who were to give an Account of their Receipts and Disbursements  in manner as the King and his great Council should order. In this Parlement the Commons, for the arduity of their ChargeIb. n. 11, 12. and feebleness of their Powers and Knowledge, prayed the King to have John King of Castile, and Leon Duke of Lancaster, and Four Bishops, Four Earls, and Four Barons, there named by them, for their Ayd, and to confer with them about the hasty and good ex∣ploit, or dispatch of the things wherewith they were charged. In the Second of Richard the Second in Quindena paschae, part  Rot. Parl. 2 Ric II. n. 13. in quindena Paschae. 2. n. 13. upon Condition the Marc a Sack added upon Wooll, and Sixpence the Pound upon Merchandise given in the last Parle∣ment at Glocester, might be remitted, the Lords and Commons granted the Subsidy of Wooll, as it was before that Parlement, for One year, from Michaelmas next coming, and likewise a Sum upon divers Persons of the Kingdom, for which see the Appendix, n. 102. The Prelates, Lords, and Commons, perceiving the great Perils  Rot. Parl. 2 Ric. II. Die Mercurii prox▪ post Festum Sancti Lucae, p. 2. n. 29. with which the Land was environ'd, and the great and outrageous Expences the King was to be at for the salvation and defence there∣of, granted to him the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells for Three years, of Wooll 43 s. 4 d. the Sack, of Woollfells as much for every Two hundred and forty, (accounting Sixscore to the Hundred) and for Leather 4 l. 6 s. 6 d. every Last which were exported by Denizens and Strangers; and as an additional Grant they gave more 13 s. 4 d. for every Sack of Wooll, as much  for every Two hundred and forty Woollfells, and for every Last of Leather 26 s. 8 d. Also they gave Sixpence in the Pound for every Pound valueIbm. n. 30. of Merchandise, as well of Denizens as Strangers, imported or ex∣ported, for One year. The Lords and Commons upon the same Reasons and Suggesti∣ons,Rot. Parl. 3 Ric. II. n. 16. Die lunae prox▪ post festum sancti Hillar. Ibm. n. 17. as in the last Parlement, granted the King One Fifteenth and half without Cities and Burghs, and One Tenth and half within. And seeing the King could not Maintain the Charge of the War without them, they granted the Subsidy of Wooll, Woollfells, and Leather for One year, after the Term the last granted should expire.
The Lords and Commons gave Three Groats of every Lay PersonRot. Parl. 4 Ric II. Die Lunae prox. post Festum omnium Sanctorum. of the Nation, Males, and Females, except very Beggars, and so as the richer or more sufficient in every Town, should help the poorer, so as no one paid above Forty Groats. In the Fifth year the Parlement began on the Morrow of All-Souls,Rot. Parl. ▪ Ric. II. n. 4. and 67. or 3d of November, in which the Lords and Commons granted the Subsidy of Wooll, Woollfells, and Leather, as it was last granted, until Candlemas next: On the 25th of February, it  being then expired, they grant the same Subsidy as it was last received, to Midsummer next following, and from that time for Four years. In the Sixth of Richard the Second, in the First Parlement thatRot. Parl. 6 Ric. II. n. 15. year, the Lords and Commons perceiving the danger the Nation was in, granted a Fifteenth, and a Tenth. In the Seventh of Richard the Second, in the First ParlementIb. 7 Ric. II. n. 13. that year, the Commons with the assent of the Lords, gave Two  half Fifteenths. In the Second Parlement this year holden at Salisbury, the LordsIb. 7 Ric. II. n. 10. and Commons considering the great Charge the King had been, and was to be at for Maintaining his Estate, his many Wars, and Defence of the Kingdom, granted Half a Fifteenth, and Half a Tenth. In the Eighth of Richard the Second, the Lords and CommonsIbm. n. 10. grant Two Fifteenths upon Conditions there mentioned. In the Ninth of Richard the Second, the Lords, Great Men,Ibm. n. 10. and Communities of Counties, Cities, and Burghs, granted to the King for the Voyage of the Duke of Lancaster into Spain, keeping of the Sea, and Marches of Scotland, a Tenth and Fifteenth, and Half a Tenth and Fifteenth. And then the Prelates and Noblemen, and Great Men, (Pro∣ceresIbm. n. 11. & Magnates) and the Communities aforesaid, granted to the King the Subsidy of Wooll, Woollfells, above the ancient Custom  of 6 s. 8 d. a Sack, 42 s. 4 d. of Denizens, and 46 s. 8 d. of Strangers, and of Leather and Pelts or Woollfells, (pellibus lanutis) in like manner according to the Rate. In the Tenth of Richard the Second, the Lords and CommonsIbm. n. 18. grant to the King Half a Tenth, and Half a Fifteenth, also Three Shillings per Tun upon Wine, and Twelvepence in the Pound upon other Merchandise, coming in and going out, upon Condition the the Commission made to Fourteen continual Counsellors might no ways  be repealed, and that they might execute the Power granted by that Commission without disturbance. In the Eleventh of Richard the Second, the Parlement beganIbm. n. 11. on the Morrow of the Purification, or 3d of February: the Lords and Commons then granted Half a Tenth, and Half a Fifteenth. The Lords and Commons also grant until Whitsunday next comingIbm. n. 12. 3 s. per Tun upon Wine, and a Shilling in the Pound upon Goods; also they grant the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells, for  the same time, as it was last paid. The Lords and Commons then likewise grant to the King 43 s.Ibm. n. 16. 4 d. the Sack upon Wooll, above the ancient Custom upon Denizens, and 46 s. 8 d. upon Strangers, upon every Two hundred and forty Woollfells, or Woollskins, the same Duty, upon both Deni∣zens and Strangers, as upon Wooll.
Upon every Last of Leather Six Marks, and 6 s. 8 d. upon De∣nizens, besides the ancient Custom, and upon Strangers Seven Marks besides the ancient Custom, from Whitsunday (which was this year the 23d of May) until Midsummer, and from thence to Midsummer next following. The Lords and Commons grant a Subsidy of Wooll Transported,Rot. Parl. 13 Ric. II. n. 20. &c. 33 s. 4 d. the Sack upon Denizens, and 36 s. 8 d. the Sack upon Aliens. In the Fourteenth of Richard the Second, the Lords and Com∣monsIb. n. 14 Ric. II. n. 16, 17. grant the King for Three years a Subsidy of Wooll, &c. Three Shillings upon every Tun of Wine, and Twelve Pence upon every Pound of Merchandise, as in the Eleventh year, so as the same may be only employed for the defence of the Realm, &c. In the Fifteenth of Richard the Second, the Lords and Com∣monsIb. 15 Ric. II. n. 10. grant Half a Fifteenth, and Half a Tenth, if the King went into France in his own Person to Treat of Peace or Truce;  and besides a whole Fifteenth and Tenth if there should be War. In the Sixteenth of Richard the Second, the Commons by as∣sentIb. 16 Ric. II. n. 11. of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, grant to the King for Three years the Subsidy upon Wooll, &c. Three Shillings the Tun upon Wine, Twelve Pence per Pound upon Merchandise. In the Seventeenth of Richard the Second the Lords and Com∣monsIb. 17▪ Ric. II. n. 12. grant to the King for Three years, Six Pence upon every  Pound of Merchandise, and One Shilling and six pence upon every Tun of Wine. In the Eighteenth of Richard the Second, the Lords and Com∣monsIb. 18 Ric. II. n. 6. grant to the King a Tenth, and a Fifteenth for the Conquest of Ireland. The Commons by assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,Ib. 20 Ric. II. n. 18. granted to the King Twelve Pence in the Pound of all manner of Merchandises, and Three Shillings of every Tun of Wine for Three  years. The Commons on the last day of the Parlement at Shrewsbury,Ib. 21 Ric. II. n. 75. which was Thursday the last of January, by assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, granted to the King the Subsidy of Wooll, Leather, and Woollfells during his Life, and One Tenth, and One Fifteenth, and Half a Tenth, and Half a Fifteenth. His Wives. THE First was Walsingh. f. 281. n. 40. Ann, Daughter to Charles the Fourth Emperor of Germany, who having been his Wife Ib. f. 350. n. 40. Twelve years, died without Issue. His Second was Ib. f. 353. n. 30. Isabell, Eldest Daughter to Charles the Sixth King of France, to whom he was Married the 28th of October  1396, being then not above Seven or Eight years of Age, and therefore never Bedded her, having been Dethroned and Mur∣thered about Three years after. FINIS.
The Authors and Records from whence the Materials are taken. NIcholas Trivet, a Monk of Bridlington, wrote the Life of  Edward the First, and lived in or about the time, a Ma∣nuscript in the Norfolk or Arundell Library in Gresham-College, London, N. 220. the second Treatise, pag. 52. This is Tran∣scribed by Walsingham. Adam Murimoth was a Canon of London, and as he writes ofA Manuscript in the Pro∣logue to his History. himself, was of sufficient Age to consider what Authors wrote, and to write himself; he begins his History in A. D. 1303. and the first Three years Story he had out of the Chronicles of  Westminster; The residue he wrote was, what he saw and heard in his own time, which was to the Twenty first of Edward the Third, in the Custody of Dr. Covell Master of Christ's College in Cambridge; Much of him also Transcribed by Walsingham. Robert of Avesbury wrote the Life of Edward the Third, andP. 76. in the Rubrick to the first Chapter. Pitsaeus, P. 899. as he Reports of himself, was Keeper of the Registry of the Court of Canterbury, he lived in the time of Edward the Third; a Manuscript in Sir Simmonds Dewes's Library at Stow Lanthorn  in Suffolk. Thomas de la More Kt. Servant to Edward Second, and out-lived him, Printed at Francfort, A. D. 1603. Frier John Trokelow's Annals of Edward the Second, a Manu∣script in the Cotton Library, Claudius D. 6. Puteanus, or Monsieur Dupuy, Counseller and Library Keeper to the King of France, wrote the History of the Condemnation of the Templars, from the great Register of the Process against  them, in the French King's Treasury of Records, from Page 113, to Page 222; and out of the Inventory of the King's Papers and Instruments concerning the same Matters, from Page 70, to Pag. 111. Froysard was a Clerk in King Edward's Court, and Servant to Queen Philip, and often in King Richard's Court, as he says of himself in the last Chapter of his Second Volume. Ranulph Higden, or the Monk of Chester, Mathew of Westminster,  and Walsingham, are known Authors, and mentioned before in my First Volume of this History. The Close, and Patent Rolls, the Rolls of Rome, France, Gas∣coign, Scotland, the Parlement Rolls, and others in the Tower of London.
Advertisements to the Candid READER. THE Church-Affairs are mostly such as hap∣ned,  and were Contested inter Regnum & Sacerdotium, between the Ecclesiastic and Secular Government, relating to the Politic State of the Kingdom, or indeed between our Kings and the Popes: For certainly all our Intestin Troubles, Com∣motions,  and Wars, in some of the Former Reigns, and in These, were Fomented, Managed, and Car∣ried on, in a great measure, by the then Clergy, and even those called the Barons Wars; who to make their Own Advantage, and repair their For∣tunes,  when reduced to a low Condition by their own Vanity and Profuseness, were their great Assistants, with Religion and Holy Church in the Front of their Designs. That the Translations of the Latin and French are Literal and Verbal, as near as might be, accor∣ding to the very Meaning of the Words. And, That some particular Parts of the Cita∣tions in Latin and French, are more frequent than  they might have been; because many Men, without the Words of the Authors themselves, are loth to understand or believe such things as are delivered by them.
The INDEX. A. ABbeys in England to pay no Taxes to foreign Houses Fol. 87, D Adam Bishop of Hereford accused of High Treason Fol. 147, DE His Excuse for not answering Fol. Ib. His Lands adjudged to be seized Fol. 148, A His Endeavours to incense the Nobility against the Spencers, and the Queen against the King Fol. Ib. BC His motion in Parlement whether King Edward II. or the Prince his Son should Reign over them Fol. 161, D He, with the Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln, the Con∣trivers of King Edward's Deposition Fol. 162, E Adolphus the Emperor deposed, and the manner of it Fol. 63, D The occasion of his being deposed Fol. Ib. F Alexander III. King of Scotland dies without Issue Male Fol. 14, F His Grand-daughter Margaret the Maid of Norwey his Heir, Fol. Ib. Anglesey Isle, when taken Fol. 7, F Appellant Lords in Richard II.'s Reign, with their Protestation, Fol. 371, C The Lords and Commons Oath to stand by them, Fol. Ib. F Their Articles against several Lords and others, Fol. 372, &c. Their Impeachments exhibited Fol. 383, E They desire that what was done in Parlement, 11th of King Richard, might be revoked, Fol. 401, F Appealed Lords and others refuse to appear, Fol. 384, E Judgment pronounced against them Fol. 385, A None of them to be restored, Fol. 390 C Ard betrayed to the French Fol. 333, D Articles of Peace between King Edward III. and John King of France, Fol. 263, &c. Artois (Robert de) his Advice to Edward III. to claim the Crown of France Fol. 198, E Arundel (Richard Earl) restored by Edward III. to the Blood, Lands, and Goods of his Father Fol. 191, C He is made Admiral, and his great Success at Sea Fol. 367, DE One of the Appellant Lords in Richard II.'s Reign Fol. 371, C Is appealed of High Treason, Fol. 405, A His Trial and Judgment Fol. 407 (Thomas) Bishop of Ely made Chancellor Fol. 366, E Is Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Impeached of high Treason, Fol. 397, B Is adjudged a Traitor, and to be Banished Fol. 398, C His Preachment upon the Deposition of King II. Fol. 433, A His Speech at the opening the first Parlement of Henry IV. Fol. 436, A Ayston (John)a Wyclivite in Oxford Fol. 459, F Proceedings against him Fol. 460, 461 His Confession and Recantation Fol. 462
B. Baliol (John) and Brus (Robert) their Titles to the Crown of Scotland, how to be Examined; the main Question and their Pedigrees Fol. 25, A C E John his Title adjudged good by Edward I. King of England, Fol. 28, D Possession granted him by King Edward's Writ Fol. 29, A He swears Fealty to King Edward Fol. Ib. C The Form of his Homage, and by whom Witnessed Fol. Ib. E He appears at London on the Earl of Fife's Complaint Fol. 31 E His Plea granted by King Edward Fol. 32, A He excuses his Appearance in the English Parlement Fol. Ib. F His Demands of Satisfaction for Injuries Fol. 33, A He Confederates with the King of France Fol. Ib. C He returns his Homage, and defies King Edward Fol. 34, D He is beaten, and submits: He renounces all Confederacies against King Edward Fol. 36, C E He is committed to the Tower at London Fol. 38, A He is again released, and on what Conditions Fol. 66, A His Character of the Scots Fol. Ib. C Edward his Son claims and recovers the Crown of Scotland Fol. 194, E F He does Homage and Fealty to Edward III. King of Eng∣land Fol. 195, A B His Grant to King Edward for his Assistance Fol. 196, A B His ill Ʋsage by his Subjects, and Grant of the Crown of Scotland to King Edward Fol. 256, BC Ball (John) his Speech to the Rabble Fol. 349, E Bannock-Bourn Battel Fol. 120, B Barons. See Nobility. Bateman (William) Bishop of Norwich his Death Fol. 253, B Beauchamp (Sir John) made Governour of Calais Fol. 246, F Belnap (Robert) and other Judges Opinions concerning the Statute and Commission Fol. 378, C The Witnesses to their Opinions Fol. 379, F They are accused of High Treason Fol. 380, A His Excuse Fol. 386, C Sentence against him Fol. 387, A His Life spared upon Mediation of the Bishops Fol. 388, A He is Banished into Ireland Fol. 389, C He is again recalled Fol. 396, F Bereford (Simon) adjudged a Confederate of Mortimer's, and execu∣ted Fol. 190, BC Berkley (Tho.) acquitted of the Murther of Edward II. Fol. 191, B Bertrand de Guesclin made Constable of France Fol. 290, C Berwick surprized by the Scots, and retaken by the English Fol. 256 A, 339 A Bigod (Roger) Earl of Norfolk and Marshal grants his Lands, &c. to the King and his Heirs Fol. 74, D He surrenders his Earldom and Marshalship, with the occasion of it Fol. 75, AB Regranted to him by the King Fol. Ib. C
Bintly (Sir Walter) his Victory over the French Fol. 251 C Blake (John) Impeached, with his Answer and Sentence Fol. 387, BD Bohun (Humphrey) grants his Lands, Honours and Offices to the King Fol. 76, D He is restored upon Marriage of the King's Daughter Fol. ib. E Bouler (Robert) made Lord Chancellor Fol. 211, B The Arch-Bishops Letter to him to preserve the Liberties of the Church Fol. ib. C Bowet (Henry) adjudged a Traitor for his Advice to King Richard, in favour of the Duke of Hereford Fol. 418, D Brabason (Roger) his Answer to the Scots Petition to King Edward, Fol. 30, C Brember (Sir Nicholas) accused of Treason by the Lords Appellants Fol. 373, 374 He pleads Not Guilty, but is Condemned and Executed Fol. 385, BE Bristol taken by Queen Isabel Fol. 158, C Brittans offer to yield their Towns and Castles to the English Fol. 339, D Their Duke's Alliance with King Richard Fol. ib. E He sends to England for Assistance and makes a Peace with the French King Fol. 342, AD Bruce alias Brus (Robert) his Title to the Crown of Scotland Fol. 26, B He is excluded by King Edward I. Fol. ib. E He is made King of Scotland, and Crowned Fol. 84, B He is put to flight by the English Fol. 85, A 92 C He reduced the greatest part of Scotland to obey him Fol. 119, E F He is Excommunicated, but doth not regard it Fol. 123, E His Confederate Thomas Earl of Lancaster Fol. 135, E He obtains a Truce with England for 13 Years Fol. 147, A David his Son denies Homage to Edward III. Fol. 196, E He submits, and owns him his Superiour Fol. 198, C Burgh (Sir William) impeached of High Treason Fol. 386, A His Excuse in answer to it Fol. ib. E He is condemned Fol. 387, A His Life spared Fol. 388, A He is banished into Ireland Fol. 389, C He is recalled Fol. 396, F Burley (Simon) and others impeached Fol. 388 He is found Guilty, Condemned, and Executed Fol. 389, A C. CAlais besieged by Edward III. King of England Fol. 237, E Is in great distress Fol. 241, E Is surrendred Fol. 242, D Cambridge Rioters their Practices against the Ʋniversity Fol. 354, A How punished Fol. Ib. E (Edmund Earl) the King's Ʋnkle created Duke of York Fol. 369, E
Cardinals Pentionars to King Edward I. Fol. 76, A Nine Months in Chusing a Pope Fol. 78, C Carlisle (Tho. Merks Bishop) his Speech in behalf of Richard II. Fol. 438, D Cary (Sir John) impeached, his Answer and Excuse Fol. 386, A E Sentence against him Fol. 387, A His Life spared Fol. 388, A He is banished into Ireland Fol. 389, C Cavendish (Sir John) Lord Chief Justice Beheaded by Rebels Fol. 348, D Caverly (Hugh) Governour of Calais Fol. 333, F His Success against the French by Sea Fol. Ib. & 339, C Chandois (Sir John) Governour of King Edward III.'s Dominions in France Fol. 281, B Is made Constable of Aquitain Fol. 282, F Charles Crowned King of France Fol. 283, B His Declaration of War against England, and on what ac∣count Fol. 285, D He sends out Preachers to justifie his Cause Fol. 289, A His great Preparation both by Sea and Land Fol. 294, A His Policy in marching his Army Fol. 295, D E His Death Fol. 341, E Charles his Son succeeds Fol. Ib. He prepares a great Fleet to invade England Fol. 363, A Charter of the Forest and the Great Charter, with some Articles added, confirmed Fol. 59 D, 67 E F, 72 F To be published four times in the Year by the Sheriffs Fol. 59 D Three Knights chosen to see them performed Fol. 69 A Of London, its Interpretation belongs to the King and Coun∣cil Fol. 334, C Church-Affairs in the Reign of Edward I. Fol. 93, &c. In the Reign of Edward II. Fol. 165, &c. In the Reign of Edward III. Fol. 308, &c. In the Reign of Richard II. Fol. 445, &c. Clergy deny King Edward I. a Subsidy Fol. 40, E He shuts up their Barns and Granaries Fol. Ib. F Their Reasons for not granting an Aid Fol. 44, A Their Lay-Fees seized, and are put out of the King's Pro∣tection Fol. 45, A B Those of York, and many others, comply, and are received, Fol. Ib. E F What they payed for the King's Protection Fol. 49, B Are forbidden to Ordain any thing in their Synods against the King or his Affairs Fol. 50, C Are imprisoned for publishing the Pope's Bull, and on what Terms released Fol. 51, A Would not grant an Aid without the Pope's Licence Fol. 73 A They write to the Pope about their Oppressions Fol. 90, A Such as oppressed them declared Excommunicate Fol. 211, D They refuse to be Taxed by the Commons Fol. 344, C They protest against any Law to be made against the Pope's Authority Fol. 392, E Cobham (Sir John) impeached Fol. 412, C Judgment given against him pardoned Fol. 413, A
Colepepper (Tho.) Executed Fol. 134, B Commissioners sent from England to the Scots Parlement Fol. 359, F Appointed by King Richard II. to govern the Kingdom Fol. 366, F Their Names and Power Fol. 367, A Declared Traiterous and void by the Judges, &c. Fol. 368, A Their Names that were appointed to Depose King Richard Fol. 431, D Commission: See Statute Committee of Lords and Commons how chosen Fol. 338, A Common People refuse to pay an Ayd given by Parlement to Edward II. Fol. 120, F Their Complaints and Petition in Parlement to Edward III. Fol. 239 Commons in Parlement assembled grant an Ayd upon Conditions Fol. 245, 250 Their Petition against Churchmen being made great Officers, Fol. 291, E Their Complaint against Evil Councellors, and ill Manage∣ment of the King's Revenue Fol. 300, 301 They Impeach several for Mismanagement Fol. Ib. Their Petition about Justices of the Peace, and for Allowance of Wages Fol. 302, D Their Petition to remove Foreigners Fol. 305, F They desire a Committee of Lords for their Assistance Fol. 327 B Their Petition about the Government of the Realm Fol. 328, D, &c. The Answer they received Fol. 329, A, &c. They pray that Great Officers may be chosen in Parlement during King Richard II's Minority Fol. 332, B Their Complaint against Villans Fol. Ib. F They Petition for a Parlement to be held every year Fol. 333, A Their Reasons against granting an Ayd Fol. 336, A They require to know how Money granted was Expended Fol. 337, A The Answer they received by Richard le Scroope Fol. Ib. Their Proposals to Excuse an Ayd Fol. 338, C They grant a Tax of Three Groats on every Person Fol. 344, D Their Complaint of ill Government Fol. 351, E Their Petition for Three sorts of Pardons Fol. 352, E They refuse to grant any Tallage Fol. 353, D They Protest against a Breach with Spain Fol. 355, D They Petition for a yearly Review of the King's Houshold Fol. 364, A They Swear to stand by the Lords Appellants Fol. 371, F They confirm the Statute and Commission, and their Pro∣ceedings Fol. 389, F They would not have what was done made a President Fol. 390, B They Assert King Richard's Prerogative, and Thank him for his good Government. Fol. 395, A, B They Petition that Villans may not have the Privilege of Cities and Burghs Fol. Ib. E
The Three Points they thought too high for their Advice Fol. 394, D They frame Articles against the King's Royalty Fol. 395, F Their Excuse and Submission for the same Fol. 396, B They declare void the Statute and Commission Fol. 397, B Their Petition to the King in behalf of several Lords Fol. 398, F They Petition in behalf of such as came along with Henry  the IVth. into England Fol. 451, F Competitors for the Crown of Scotland Fol. 21, A, 23, F Comyn (John) Pardoned by King Edward I. Fol. 82, F Is Murdered by the Scots Fol. 84, B His Murderers Excommunicated Fol. 85, E Cressy's great Battle Fol. 237, B D. DAgworth (Tho.) his Victory in Bretagne Fol. 241, D Is slain Fol. 247, E Darby (Henry Earl of) sent with an Army into Gascony by King Edward III. with his Success Fol. 235, E His great Victories there Fol. 240, D, E Is one of the Lords Appellants Fol. 371, C Dardain (James) the Pope's Collector and Nuncio in England, his Oath to King Richard II. Fol. 448, A David, Brother to the Prince of Wales, Judicially Condemned and Executed Fol. 11, A King of Scotland overthrown and taken Prisoner Fol. 240, F He is sent to the Tower at London Fol. 241, A Is released of his Imprisonment, and on what Conditions  Fol. 259, A He returns into Scotland, and punished Deserters Fol. 260, E He declares Robert Steward his Successor Fol. 261, A Despencer: See Spencers Dynet (William) accused for being a Wyclivite. Fol. 463, F His Oath of Abjuration Fol. 464, A E. EDward I. beyond Sea when his Father died. Fol. 1, C The Nobility Swear Fealty to him when absent Fol. 1b. He doth Homage to the French for Aquitain Fol. 2, F He received the Homage and Service of his Vassals there Fol. 3, A His Return into England, and Coronation, and Inquiry into the Rights of the Crown Fol. 1b. C, D Is Summoned into France, and sends his Excuse Fol. 1b. E He Prorogues his first Parlement before their Meeting Fol. 4, A Excellent Laws made in his first Parlement Fol. 1b. E &c. His Ʋsage of the Welch Fol. 7, A
The Earldom of Poictou comes to him by his Queen Fol. 8, A He gives up his Right in Normandy Fol. 1b. B His Summons to the several Counties, Cities, and Burghs Fol. 10, A He demands a Subsidy, and injoins the Form of it Fol. 1b. E, F He undertakes the Croysado, and forbids the sending the Money collected for it to the Pope Fol. 11, C, D His Answer to the Pope's Letter Fol. 12, A His Son Prince Edward born in Wales Fol. 13, F He goes into France, and stays there 3 years Fol. 14, E He punishes his Justices at his return for Bribery Fol. 1b. F He demands Margaret, Grand-daughter to Alexander III. King of Scotland, for his Son Fol. 15, A His Concessions to the Scots for promoting the Match Fol. 16, F He appoints a Lieutenant in Scotland for Queen Margaret  Fol. 17, C He Claims the Crown of Scotland on Queen Margaret's Death Fol. 18, A His Title. Fol. 19, A He receives and restores the Guardianship of Scotland Fol. 22, F The Scots Swear Fealty to him Fol. 23, A His Sentence against Ten of the Competitors Fol. 27, E, F He Adjudges the Right to John Baliol Fol. 28, D He grants him Possession, and receives his Fealty Fol. 29, A, D His Protestation to the Scots Petition Fol. 30, E He hears and grants the King of Scots Plea Fol. 32 He is Defied by the King of Scotland Fol. 34, D He Beats the Scots to a Submission Fol. 36, A He sends their King to the Tower, and appoints them a Go∣vernour Fol. 38, A The Peace between him and the French broken Fol. 1b. C His Alliance with the Emperor Fol. 1b. F He shuts up the Barns and Granaries of the Clergy for refusing him a Subsidy Fol. 40, E His Alliance with the Earl of Flanders Fol. 42, A His Son Prince Edward to Confirm it, when at Age Fol. 43, A He is angry with the Clergy Fol. 45, A His Pilgrimage to Walsingham in Norfolk Fol. 44, D His Writs to restore the Clergy that complied Fol. 46 And against Spreaders of False News and Publishers of Ex∣communications Fol. 47, 57 His Orders for fitting out his Fleet Fol. 51, E All of 20 1. per Annum to provide to go with him Fol. 52, A His Summons to his whole Military Service Fol. 1b. Several Lords refuse their Duty and Service Fol. 53, E His Grant of a general Protection to the Clergy Fol. 54, A His Ʋnwarrantable Ways to Raise Money Fol. 1b. F His Declaration concerning such as refused their Duty and Service Fol. 55 They present him their Grievances Fol. 57, D He goes into Flanders, and Promises Remedy at his Return Fol. 58, D
He confirms the great Charter Fol. 59, F, 64, 65 A Truce between him and King Philip Fol. 60, C, &c. The Names of his Allies and Confederates Fol. 1b. D He overthrows the Scots at Falkirk Fol. 64, B His Marriage with the French King's Sister Margaret Fol. 67, B He grants the Statute of Articles upon the Charters Fol. 68, B His march into Scotland with an Army Fol. 70, D His Answer to the Pope's Claim of the Kingdom of Scot∣land Fol. 71, C His Title to Scotland sent to the Pope, with an Account of their Perfidiousness Fol. 73, C He grants a Truce to the Scots, and returns into England Fol. 74, A His Messengers to the Pope Fol. 75, F He concludes a Peace with France Fol. 77, A, B He accuses the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury of Treason Fol. 81, B His Ordinances for the Security of Scotland Fol. 85, F He Banishes Piers Gaveston Fol. 92, A His Death Fol. 1b. D His Wives and Issue Fol. 98, 99 Prince Edward, Eldest Son to Edward I. made Guardian of Eng∣land Fol. 59, A Is Contracted to Isabel, Daughter to the French King Fol. 65, E Is made Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester Fol. 73, F Is Knighted with 300 more Fol. 84, F His Familiarity with Piers Gaveston displeased the King Fol. 92, A II. began his Reign Fol. 100, B His Marriage and Coronation, and Favours to Gaveston Fol. 101, A Ordinances for the Government of his Houshold Fol. 102, 103 His Confirmation of them Fol. 110, E He recalled Gaveston Fol. 112, E He appoints Commissioners to Correct the Ordinances Fol. 113, E He goes to Newcastle with Gaveston Fol. 114, F His Request to the Lords to spare Gaveston, refused Fol. 115, D He Prohibits his Lords coming to him Armed Fol. 116, F He makes a Peace with them Fol. 117, D He is overthrown by the Scots Fol. 120, B His Promise to observe the Ordinances Fol. 121, E He Summons his whole Military Service against the Scots Fol. 122, A His good will towards the Earl of Lancaster Fol. 1b. C His Indenture of Agreement with him Fol. 124, C He allowed the Lords Petition Fol. 125, F He Pardoned the Earl of Lancaster and his Followers  Fol. 126, B And the Lords that Acted without Law against the Spencers Fol. 133, D He besieged Leeds Castle, and takes it Fol. 134, A He revoked the Spencer's Banishment, and marched with an Army against the Lords Fol. 1b. D
He made a Truce with the Scots for 15 years Fol. 147, A He excused his Homage to the French King, and made a Truce Fol. 1b. B, C He quits Aquitain and Ponthieu to his Son Prince Ed∣ward Fol. 149, A His Message to his Queen and Son to return into England Fol. 150, 151 His Queen's Behaviour towards him Fol. 152, A He writ to the Pope about the Affair of his Queen Fol. 1b. F He Proclaims Mortimer a Traytor, but without effect Fol. 154, F, 155, B He retired into Wales Fol. 157, B He sent the Great Seal to the Queen and Prince Fol. 159, A He is carried Prisoner to Kenelworth Fol. 161, A He is Deposed, and for what Reasons Fol. 1b. E, F His Resignation to his Son Prince Edward Fol. 163, C Is Inhumanely Treated and Murdered Fol. 164, C, D, E His Issue Fol. 181, C Prince Edward, Eldest Son to Edward II. contracted to the Earl of Haynault's Daughter Fol. 154, D Is made Guardian of the Kingdom Fol. 158, F III. is declared King Fol. 161, D His unwillingness to accept the Crown Fol. 163, B His Affairs Managed by his Mother and Mortimer Fol. 182, C, 186, A He Pardoned those that came over with the Queen Fol. 1b. He sent Mortimer and his Adherents to the Tower Fol. 186, B He Tryed and Executed several of his Father's Murderers Fol. 190, 191 The Reward he gave for taking Mortimer Fol. 191, D, E He Propounds to his Parlement the Business of France and Ireland Fol. 1b. F The Advice he received Fol. 192, A, B, 194, B, C He assisted Edward Baliol to recover the Crown of Scotland Fol. 1b. F He received his Homage and Fealty Fol. 195, A, B And 2000 1. per Annum for Assistance Fol. 196, A, B He besieged Berwick, and beat the Scots Fol. 1b. F He concludes a Peace with them Fol. 197, A He is advised to claim the Crown of France Fol. 198, E, F The Alliances he made in order to it Fol. 199 He appoints Commissioners to Treat of his Right Fol. 200, B He Constitutes the Duke of Lorrain Vice-Roy of France Fol. 1b. C He is made Vicar-general of the Empire Fol. 201, D His Title to the Crown of France Fol. 1b. F He enters the French Dominions Fol. 202, C He acquaints his Parlement with it, and demands an Ayd Fol. 203, A His Debt to his Allies Fol. 204, C An Ayd granted to clear it, and the Commons Request to him Fol. 1b. D, E His great Victory over the French Fleet Fol. 205, C
His Letter to his Parlement for more Money, which was granted Fol. 206, A, E He Besieged Tournay, and Challenged Philip of Valois Fol. 207, A, B He concludes a Truce Fol. 208, B, C At his return into England he sent several of his Council to Prison Fol. 209, E He is reproved by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury Fol. 210, D His Letter concerning the Arch-Bishop, and his Crimes Fol. 212, E His Letter answered, and called a Libel by the Arch-Bishop Fol. 215, B His Reply to the Arch-Bishop's Defence Fol. 218, B He presses for further Supplies Fol. 219, D His Answer to the Statutes and Conditions Fol. 220, A His Revocation of them confirmed in Parlement Fol. 222, C He refused the Emperor's Mediation for a Peace Fol. 223, E, F He received the Homage of John Earl of Montfort for the Dukedom of Bretagne Fol. 224, E He Married his Daughter to the Duke's Son Fol. 225, E He enters Bretagne with an Army Fol. 226, A He agrees to a Truce with France for 3 years Fol. Ib. D He acquaints his Parlement with it, and their Agreement to  it Fol. 227, 228 He appoints Commissioners to Treat of Peace without effect Fol. 229, A His Parlement prays an end of the War, and grant an Ayd Fol. 231, E He again sent Defiance to Philip of Valois Fol. 232, C He Complains to the Pope against him, and the Pope's Answer Fol. Ib. E, F, 233, C The Success of his Arms in Gascoigny Fol. 235, E He and his Son Prince Edward land in Normandy Fol. 236, A His great Successes there Fol. Ib. B, &c. His Victory over the French at Cressy, and the Number slain Fol. 237, B, &c. His Answer to the Commons Petition in Parlement Fol. 240, A He beats the French Army, and takes Calais Fol. 242, C, D His Ʋsage of the Calesians Fol. Ib. E, 243, A He agrees to a Truce Fol. 243, B The Number of his Army, and their Pay Fol. Ib. C He refused the Offer of the Empire Fol. 255, F He prevents the betraying of Calais Fol. 246, D His Ʋsage of the French Prisoners Fol. Ib. E He Institutes the Order of the Garter Fol. 247 His Title to France set forth in Parlement Fol. 248, E He offered Terms of Peace to the French Fol. 252 His readiness to Remedy his Subject's Grievances Fol. 250, 251 His Agreement to Peace refused by the French Fol. 253, A, B 261, D His Expedition into France Fol. 254, F His Army wast and destroy the French Country Fol. 262, A
He concludes a Peace with France Fol. Ib. C, D The Articles of the Peace Fol. 263, &c. He sent his Commissioners to take possession of what was grant∣ed him by the Peace Fol. 278, F Some French Lords refuse to become his Subjects, but are forced to it Fol. 281 His Kindness to the French Hostages Fol. 283, A He assumed the Title of King of France by the Advice of his Parlement Fol. 287, E His Offer to such as would Maintain his Title Fol. 288, B His Letter of Indemnity sent into Aquitain Fol. Ib. D His Voyage into France unfortunate Fol. 293, A, B He sent Assistance to his Son Prince Edward Fol. 289, C His Answer to the Commons Petition Fol. 292, A His Fleet beaten nigh Rochell Fol. Ib. D His Town in Aquitain Revolt Fol. 297, D He agreed to a Truce with the French King Fol. 298, A His Answer to the Commons and Londoners Petitions Fol. 302, 303, 305, 306 His Death Fol. 308, B His Issue by Queen Phillippa Fol. 323 Prince Edward, Eldest Son to Edward III. made Guardian of England Fol. 204, F His great Victory over the French at Cressy Fol. 237, C He prevents the betraying of Calais Fol. 246, C His Expedition into France, and his Success Fol. 255, E His Victory over the French at Poicters Fol. 257 His Civilities to King John and his Son Philip Fol. 258, A He is made Prince of Aquitain Fol. 282, E He ayds the King of Castile, and restores him Fol. 284, C His Illness, and return to Aquitain Fol. Ib. D His Necessities for want of Money Fol. 285, A The Complaint of the French Nobility against him Fol. Ib. B His Answer to the French King's Summons Fol. Ib. D He taketh Limoges by Storm Fol. 290, A He returns ill into England Fol. Ib. B His Death Fol. 302, C Ellys William impeached for Extortion Fol. 302, B England's Superiority over Scotland Fol. 35, B How to be divided if Conquered by France Fol. 238, F English Women imitate the French in their Apparel Fol. 246, A F. FItz-Alan (Richard) Earl of Arundel Admiral of the English Fleet Fol. 367, D He takes above 100 of the Enemies Ships Fol. Ib. E Is one of the Appellant Lords Fol. 371, C Flint Castle when and by whom built Fol. 7, A
French King's Charge against King Edward I. Fol. 38, D He seized on Gascony Fol. Ib. F He provides to invade England Fol. 39, D Fulthorpe (Sir Roger) impeached, and his Answer Fol. 386, A E Sentence against him Fol. 387, A His Life spared Fol. 388, A G. GArter. See Order. Gascony restored to King Edward I. Fol. 77, C Gaston Vicount Bearn refused his Homage to Edward I. Fol. 3, A Gaveston (Piers) his Familiarity with Prince Edward Fol. 91, F Is banished by the King Fol. 92, A His return into England, and is made Earl of Cornwal, and Lieutenant of the Kingdom Fol. 100, D E His Destent and Marriage with the King's Neece Fol. 101, B Is made Lieutenant of Ireland Fol. Ib. E The Nobility contrive to destroy him Fol. Ib. F He fled out of the Kingdom, and is recalled Fol. 112, D He yields himself to the Lords Fol. 115, D He is Executed without Judgment Fol. 116, A Gloucester (Thomas Duke) with other Lords march with great Forces towards London Fol. 368, A Their Letter to the Mayor and Sheriffs Fol. Ib. B C Their Approach to the King, with the manner of their Ad∣dress and Reception Fol. 369, A, B, C They are excused by Proclamation, yet march on towards Lon∣don Fol. Ib. F The Keys of the City-Gates delivered to them Fol. 370, A They go to the King, and obtain what they asked Fol. Ib. B C He offers to purge himself, and is declared Guiltless Fol. 371, A His desire to have 1000 l. per Ann. settled on him by the King Fol. 392, F His Grants in Parlement repealed Fol. 397, C He is appealed of High Treason Fol. 405, A His Death at Calais Fol. 408, B Is adjudged a Traitor Fol. Ib. D His Confession before his death Fol. 409, D Godfrey of St. Omar Founder of the Order of the Templars Fol. 165, A Gournay (Tho.) one of the Keepers and Murderers of Edw. II. Fol. 164 C Judgment against him for the same Fol. 191, A Grievances of the Kingdom presented Fol. 57 D, 58 Guardians of the Kingdom, who Fol. 1, D They proclaim the King's Peace Fol. Ib. They do the same for Ireland Fol. 2, A Their Writ to assess Tallage, and suppress Tumults Fol. Ib. C Guines surprized by the English Fol. 248, C Guy Earl of Flanders his Alliance with Edward I. Fol. 42, A
H. HAles (Sir Robert) Beheaded by the Rebels Fol. 346, C Haynault (Earl of) furnisheth Queen Isabel with Ships and Forces Fol. 154, D Haxey (Thomas) his Bill in the House of Commons against the King's Royalty Fol. 396, A Is adjudged a Traitor Fol. Ib. D Hereford (Henry Duke) his Submission to King Richard Fol. 403, E He accused the Duke of Norfolk Fol. 404, F The Schedule of his Accusation Fol. 413, B The matter contained in it to be determined by Duel, Fol. 414, D The King prevents the Battel, and banishes him Fol. 415, B C He lands in England Fol. 419, B The Nobility and People join him Fol. Ib. C D His Obeisance to King Richard, and Reception at London Fol. 420, A He claims the Crown Fol. 432, D His Speech to the Lords and Commons Fol. 433, D He summons a Parlement in his own Name to be returned in six Days Fol. 435, E His Eldest Son made Prince of Wales Fol. 438, A His Followers and Confederates pardoned Fol. 452, A Adam (Bishop.) See Adam. (Nicholas) a Professor of Divinity in Oxford, a Wiclivite Fol. 459, F The Proceedings against him Fol. 460, 461 Higden (Ran.) his Character of the Earl of Lancaster Fol. 139, C Holt (Sir John) impeached, and his Answer Fol. 386, A E Sentence against him Fol. 387, A His Life spared Fol. 388, A He is banished into Ireland Fol. 389, C He is again recalled Fol. 396, F Hugo de Paganis one of the Founders of the Order of the Templars Fol. 165, A Hungerford (Tho.) Speaker of the Commons, prays the reverse of se∣veral Impeachments Fol. 306, E I. JEws hanged for Clipping and Coining Fol. 8, C Maintenance allowed to the Converted Fol. Ib. The Obstinate are Banished Fol. 9, A John Duke of Bretagne died without Issue Fol. 224 The Competitors for his Dukedom Fol. Ib. C King of France Crowned, Fol. 247, F He is Overthrown by Edward the Prince of Wales Fol. 257 He and his Son Philip taken Prisoners Fol. Ib. E
They are brought to London Fol. 258, D And sent to the Tower Fol. 261, F He agrees to a Peace with Edward III. Fol. 262, E His return into England, Errand, and Death there Fol. 283, B Isabel Queen to Edward II. denied entrance into Leeds-Castle Fol. 134, A She writes to the Pope to Saint the Earl of Lancaster Fol. 138, E F She built a Chapel on the Hill where he was Executed Fol. 140, A She obtains Leave to get into France Fol. 148, E Her Excuse to the King for staying there Fol. 149, 150 She takes Mortimer into her Service Fol. Ib. D Her Behaviour towards the King Fol. 152, A She leaves France, and goes to the Earl of Haynault  Fol. 154, A She lands at Harwich, and is joined by the Nobility Fol. Ib. E F The Increase of her Army and her Cause carried on by false Reports Fol. 155, C D Her Care of Holy Church Fol. 157, E She takes Bristol, and marches into Wales to find out the King Fol. 158, C D She held a Parlement with the Prince her Son Fol. 161, B Her seeming Sorrow for the King her Husband Fol. 163, A She and Mortimer hath the whole Government Fol. 186, A K. KEnt (Edmund Earl of) Ʋncle to Edward III. adjudged to death in Parlement, and for what Fol. 185, D His Son restored to his Blood and Lands Fol. Ib. F Kilwardy (Robert) Elected Arch-Bishop of Canterbury without the King's Licence Fol. 93, B His Election protested against Fol. Ib. E Knights Four summoned for every County Fol. 10, B Knivet (Sir John) Chancellor his Declaration in Parlement of the  Necessities of Edward III. Fol. 293, 294, 296, A Knolls (Sir Robert) Ravages and Burns the Country about Paris Fol. 290, A His great Care to suppress Tumults Fol. 361, A L. LAncaster (Thomas Earl of) resolved to defend Holy Church Fol. 114, E He demanded Gaveston of King Edward II. Fol. Ib. F He marched after the King and Gaveston Fol. 115, A A great Admirer of Robert Winchelsey Arch-Bishop of Canterbury Fol. 119, D
He refused to serve the King against the Scots Fol. 120, A Is made Chief of the Council to Edward II. Fol. 122, E And General of the Army against the Scots Fol. 123, C The Agreement between him and the King Fol. 124, C He joins with the Earl of Hereford Fol. 134, F Is taken Prisoner, Condemned, and Executed Fol. 135, B Miracles done by him after his Death Fol. 136, A His Image adored at St. Paul's Fol. 138, A Queen Isabel writes to the Pope to Saint him Fol. Ib. D E The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury doth the same Fol. 139, A His Character by Higden Fol. Ib. C D (Henry) his Son shews Compassion to Edward II. Fol. 164, B His Submission to Edward II. and Queen-Mother Fol. 185, B He died of the Plague Fol. 282, D (John Duke) made Governour of Acquitain Fol. 290, C His Title to the Kingdom of Castile Fol. 292, A Is made the King's Lieutenant in France Fol. 295, A His ill Conduct in his Army Fol. Ib. C The three Great Offices he claimed at King Richard's Coro∣nation Fol. 326, C His Retirement from Court Fol. 327, A His Challenge to his Accusers Fol. Ib He is chosen Head of the Committee for the Assistance of the  Commons Fol. Ib. He sets out a Fleet, and is beaten by the Spaniards Fol. 134, A B His Expedition against the Scots Fol. 342, F He concludes a Truce with them Fol. 350, F The Quarrel between him and Northumberland ended Fol. 351, A His Proposals to go into pain Fol. 355, A His Expedition against the Scots unsuccessful Fol. 361, B He is accused of Treason by a Fryer Fol. Ib. D His extravagant Expences in France Fol. Ib. E His Voyage into Spain, and Claim of that Crown Fol. 364, C He is created Duke of Aquitain Fol. 392, C The Earl of Arundel asks his Pardon in full Parlement Fol. 394, A He is made Lord High Steward at the Trial of the Earl of  Arundel and others Fol. 407, A He was First Commissioner in the Judgment given against his Son Henry Duke of Hereford 415, 426, in the Mar∣gin. Latimer impeached by the Commons Fol. 301, F Laws made in the First Purlement of Edward I. Fol. 4, C Letters Pattents of Edward I. for the Establishment of Scotland Fol. 82, A Lewelin Prince of Wales summoned to take the Oath of Fealty to Ed∣ward I. Fol. 1, F His Marriage of Sim. Monfort's Daughter Fol. Ib. F He surprized the King's Justiciary, and is slain Fol. 9, B E Limoges delivered to the French Fol. 289, F Is retaken by Prince Edward Fol. 290, A
Lincoln (Henry Earl) his Speech about Holy Church to Thomas Earl of Lancaster Fol. 114, B Littister (John) King of the Commons, his Pretences and Practices Fol. 348, E Loketon (John) impeached, his Answer and Excuse Fol. 386, A E Sentence against him Fol. 387, A Is banished into Ireland Fol. 389, C Londoners join with the Lords in refusing to pay Taxes to Edward I. Fol. 58, F They refuse to assist King Edward II. Fol. 155, F They Murder the Bishop of Exeter, and a Servant of the Spencers Fol. 156, B They compel the Bishops to swear to defend their Rights Fol. 164, A They present their Grievances to Edward III. Fol. 302, E F Their Patent from him, and Petition about their Coroner Fol. 305, A E They deny to lend King Richard II. a Thousand Pounds Fol. 393, F Their Liberties seized by him, and restored Fol. 394, A Lords. See Nobility. Lyon (Rich.) impeached by the Commons, and his Punishment Fol. 301, F M. MAgdulph Earl of Fife his Appeal to King Edward I. Fol. 31, C Maltrovers (John) one of the Keepers and Murderers of Ed∣ward II. Fol. 164, C Marchall (John) Servant to th Spencers, murdered, and by whom Fol. 156, A Margaret Maid of Norwey, Grandchild and Heir to Alexan∣der III. King of Scotland Fol. 14, F Articles of Marriage between her and Prince Edward Fol. Ib She died in her Voyage to England Fol. 17, F Marshal and Constable take Possession of the City-Gates Fol. 59, C D Mautravers (John) his Practices against the Earl of Kent punished  Fol. 190, D E Merks (Thomas) Bishop of Carlisle's Reasons against the Procee∣dings in Parlement against King Richard II. Fol. 438, D Montacute (Will.) his Reward for taking Mortimer Fol. 191, D Monfort his Controversie with the Earl of Blois for the Dukedom of Bretagne Fol. 124, 125 Mortimer (Roger) taken into Queen Isabel's Service Fol. 149, D Is proclaimed a Traitor by Edward II. Fol. 154, F His Familiarity with the Queen Fol. 159, B His Management of Affairs under Edward III. Fol. 182 B, 186 A He agrees to a shameful Peace with the Scots Fol. 184, F He is sent to the Tower Fol. 186, C The Articles in Parlement against him Fol. 187, A Is condemned by his Peers, and executed Fol. 189, F
Mowbray (Tho) Duke of Norfolk accused by the Duke of Hereford Fol. 413, B The matter contained in his Accusation to be determined by Duel Fol. 414, D The King prevents the Battel, and banished him Fol. 415, B C D N. NAnts besieged by the English Fol. 342, B Nevill's Cross Battel Fol. 240, F Nobility swear Fealty to Edward I. when beyond Sea Fol. 1, C Their Petition against the Pope's Exactions Fol. 88, C And against sending Money out of England Fol. 89, C Their Murmurs and Contrivance against Gaveston Fol. 101, D F Their Ordinances for the Government of the King's Houshold Fol. 103, &c. Are angry at recalling of Gaveston Fol. 112, F They order him to be executed without Trial Fol. 116, A They demand of the King the Execution of their Ordinances, and encourage the People to join them Fol. Ib. C E They treat with the King about Peace Fol. 117, D Their Petition to him in Parlement Fol. 125, D Their Confederacy against the two Spencers Fol. 127, &c. Their Message to the King to banish them Fol. 129, A They come armed to Parlement, and their Award against them Fol. Ib. B C They desire Security for their acting without Law, Fol. 132 D Many of them Executed with the Earl of Lancaster Fol. 135, F They join with Queen Isabel against Edward II. Fol. 154, D Several of them Executed by Queen Isabel's Order Fol. 159, B They judge King Edward II. unfit to Govern Fol. 163, A They renew their Fealty and Homage to King Richard II. Fol. 390, F The Oath they then took Fol. 391, A Such as broke it to be Excommunicated Fol. Ib. They again renew their Oaths to King Richard Fol. 400, 403 They join Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster Fol. 419, C D Northampton (John) a Mover of Sedition in London, and how ap∣peased Fol. 360, F His Trial and Judgment Fol. 361, F Judgment against him repealed Fol. 393, B Nottingham (Thomas Earl) one of the Lords Appellants Fol. 371, C
O. OAths taken by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Fol. 391, A Administred to all Gentlemen, &c. Fol. Ib. B Renewed to King Richard II. Fol. 400 The Breakers thereof Excommunicated Fol. 401, B Great Officers of the Kingdom to be sworn in Parlement Fol. 220, E To be chosen by the Lords in King Richard's Minority Fol. 332, C They resign their Places to the King, and receive them again from him Fol. 392, B Ordainers appointed, their Names Fol. 103 They decline to Treat with the King's Commissioners Fol. 114, A Order of the Garter instituted, when, and by whom Fol. 247, B Ordinances of King Edward I. for Security of Scotland Fol. 85, F For Government of Edward II. his Houshold Fol. 102, B Are confirmed by the King in Parlement Fol. 103, 110, 111, A Are examined and annulled Fol. 146, A Of Normandy, what it was Fol. 238, D P. PArliaments held in the Reign of Edward I. Fol. 96, 97, 98 In the Reign of Edward II. Fol. 180, 181 In the Reign of Edward III. Fol. 321, &c. In the Reign of Richard II. Fol. 465, &c. That held in the 11th of Ricard II. annulled Fol. 402 That again confirmed, and that held 21 Rich. II. annulled  Fol. 437, E Pavy (Amery de) made Governour of Calais Fol. 243, B His Design to betray it prevented Fol. 246, C He is removed from the Government of it Fol. ib. F Peacham (John) made by the Pope Arch-Bishop of Canterbury Fol. 94, A His Letter to the King about Church-Liberty Fol. 95, A Perambulation of the Forest settled and confirmed Fol. 72, F Percy (Henry) his Promise in behalf of Gaveston Fol. 116, A (Thomas) made General Procurator for the Clergy Fol. 401, B Perrers (Alice) banished Fol. 302, B She is accused in Parlement Fol. 329, F She is found Guilty Fol. 331, E Her Sentence and Punishment not to be made a Precedent Fol. Ib. Repealed in Parliament Fol. 362, D Peter King of Castile Excommunicated by the Pope Fol. 284, A He craves and receives Aid from Edward Prince of Wales Fol. Ib. He refused to pay the Prince's Army Fol. Ib. Is slain by Henry Bastard of Castile Fol. 289, D
Philip the French King remonstrates against the Pope's Bull prohibiting Taxes Fol. 55, B His Clergy doth the like Fol. Ib. His Protestation against the Pope's Power to make a Truce between him and Edward I. Fol. 61, F He corrupts the German Princes Fol. 63, C Of Valois his Alliances against Edward III. Fol. 200, A His Commissioners appointed to Treat of Peace Fol. Ib. His Fleet beaten by the English Fol. 205, C His Answers to Edward III.'s Challenge Fol. 207, D He is overthrown by him at Cresly Fol. 237, B His attempt to relieve Calais unsuccessful Fol. 242, B His Death Fol. 247, F Philpot (John) set out Men of War at his own Charge Fol. 334, C Is questioned for it, and discharged Fol. Ib. Pickering (Sir James) his Petition in behalf of the Com∣mons Fol. 335, C Plesington (Sir Robert) adjudged a Traitor Fol. 407, D Pole (Sir Michael) made Lord Chancellor Fol. 359, D He accuseth the Bishop of Norwich Fol. 360, C His Sentence against Four Knights Fol. Ib. D Is made Earl of Suffolk Fol. 363, F He is impeached; his Answer and Judgment Fol. 365, ACE Is accused of High Treason Fol. 372, D Pope prohibits the Clergy from paying Taxes to Secular Princes Fol. 41, A His Explanatory Bull Fol. 54, C He by his own Power declared a Truce for Two Years be∣tween England and France Fol. 61, D Protested against by the French King Fol. Ib. F Accepted as Mediator, and not as Judge Fol. 62 His Award between the Two Kings Fol. 64, 65 He sent a Nuncio to compleat it Fol. 66, E His Claim to the Kingdom of Scotland Fol. 70, E He suspended the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury Fol. 81, C He appointed Receivers of his Temporalities, but refused by the King Fol. Ib. F He absolved Edward I. from his Oath Fol. 84, C His Exactions in England Petitioned against by the No∣bility Fol. 88, C He mediates a Peace between Edward III. and King Philip Fol. 200 F, 202 D His Reservation of the Bishopric of Rochester to the Apostolic See Fol. 319, B Price of Provisions set by the King Fol. 120, C Revoked again by him Fol. 121, D Probi Homines in Scotland, who they were Fol. 31, F
R. Rapyngdon (Philip) Professor of Divinity in Oxford, a Wyclivite Fol. 459, F Proceedings against him Fol. 460, 461 Reading (Sim.) Executed for speaking ill of Q. Isabel Fol. 159, C Reynolds (Walter) Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, writes to the Pope to Saint Tho. Earl of Lancaster Fol. 139, A Richard, Eldest Son to Edward Prince of Wales, Guardian of Eng∣land Fol. 293, C Is Created Prince of Wales Fol. 302, D II. his Coronation Fol. 326, B His Command to his Parlement to dispatch their Business Fol. 337, D His Necessities forced him to Pawn his Jewels Fol. 343, A His Mercy to the Followers of Wat. Tiler Fol. 347, B He Knighted the Lord Mayor, and other Citizens of Lon∣don, for their Services in Suppressing them Fol. 350, D His Grants of Liberties and Manumissions to Villans, re∣voked in Parlement Fol. 351, B He appoints certain Lords to Examine into Mismanagements of his Affairs Fol. 352, A He Excepted several Towns and Persons out of his General Pardon Fol. 352, F His Offer to go in Person with an Army into France Fol. 356, E The Parlement Advise him to the contrary Fol. 357, C His intent to Arraign the Duke of Lancaster Fol. 362, A His Expedition into Scotland Fol. Ib. F His Answers to the Commons Petition about his Houshold Fol. 364, A He is sent for to Parlement by the Duke of Gloucester and Bishop of Ely Fol. 365, F He changed the Great Officers of State Fol. 366, E He appointed Commissioners to Govern the Kingdom Fol. Ib. F His Protestation in Parlement Fol. 367, C He questioned the Commission and Statute made in the last Parlement Fol. Ib. F His Judges Opinions of them Fol. 368, A His Reception by the Mayor, and City of London Fol. Ib. He Excused the Duke of Gloucester and others by Procla∣mation  Fol. 369, C He granted their Requests Fol. 370, C He sent the Judges, taken off the Benches, to the Tower Fol. Ib. E His grant of the Commons Petitions Fol. 390, D The Lords Spiritual and Temporal renew their Fealty and Homage to him, and he his Coronation Oath Fol. Ib. F Is declared to be of full Age Fol. 392, A He seized, and restored the Liberties of the City of London  Fol. 394, A He concluded a Peace with France Fol. Ib. B He goes into Ireland Fol. 395, D His Kindness to several Lords Fol. 399, B, C He made several Dukes and Earls Fol. Ib. D The Lords and Commons Oaths to him Fol. 400, 401
He Pardoned the Duke of Hereford Fol. 403, F He appointed, at the Commons Request, certain Persons to determine Matters undispatched in Parlement Fol. 404, D He prevented Battle between Hereford, and Norfolk, and banished them Fol. 415, B Statutes and Ordinances made by him and others appointed Fol. 416, A He goeth again into Ireland Fol. 419, A His Nobility and People desert him, and join Hereford Fol. Ib. D He offered to quit the Government Fol. Ib. E He is sent to the Tower, and a Parlement summoned in his Name Fol. Ib. F The Process of his Renunciation, and Resignation Fol. 420, 421 Articles objected against him Fol. 423, &c. William Thyrning's Speech to him in the Tower Fol. 434, E Bishop of Carlisle's Speech in his behalf Fol. 438, D He was removed to Ludlow, and from thence to Pontfract Fol. 452, A The French King attempts his Relief, but without effect Fol. Ib. B The manner of his Death uncertain Fol. Ib. D, &c. His Wives Fol. 467 Rickhill (Sir William) appointed to take the Confession of the Duke of Gloucester at Calais Fol. 409, A His Declaration of the same in Parlement Fol. 411, B Rioters how to be prosecuted Fol. 193 Rochellers declare for the King of France Fol. 292, F Roger Earl of March slain in Ireland Fol. 419, A Rushook Tho. Bishop of Chichester, Confessor to Richard II. im∣peached by the Commons Fol. 388, A His Answer Fol. Ib. B Is found guilty and banished Fol. 389, C S. SCotland and Scots, their Agreement with Edw. I. about Margaret,  King Alexander III's Grandchild and Heir Fol. 15, 16 K. Edward's Concessions to them about the Match Fol. Ib. Their Nobility desire time to Consider of King Edward's Claim of the Crown of Scotland after Margaret's Death Fol. 18, D, E The Competitors produce nothing against his Claim Fol. 20 Their Names and Submission to King Edward's Decision, and how their Rights were to be tried Fol. 21, A, B, D The Guardianship of the Kingdom committed to King Ed∣ward Fol. 22, E They Swear Fealty to him Fol. 23, B How the Right of Succession to be determined Fol. 24, F The Kingdom not partible Fol. 27, B They send for Absolution to the Pope Fol, 35, A
They Command the English to quit Scotland Fol. Ib. D They enter England, are beaten, and then they submit Fol. Ib. & 37, E, & 64, B They again Revolt and Submit Fol. 53, A They force the English out of Scotland Fol. 59, A They apply themselves to the Pope Fol. 70, E The Terms of Peace granted them by King Edward Fol. 77, F, 78, E The Names of Persons excepted Fol. 79, C, D What Number to come to the English Parlement Fol. 80, C, D The Settlement they made of the Kingdom Fol. 81, A The Articles of the Establishment Fol. 82, 83 They break their Oaths, and Crown Robert Bruce Fol. 84, B Are routed, and many Tried for Perjury, and Rebellion Fol. 85, B Their Submission, and Homage to King Edward renewed Fol. 86, D They Ravage the English Borders Fol. 120, A, 340, A Their great Victory over King Edward II. Fol. Ib. B The Kingdom Interdicted Fol. 123, E They agree to a Truce for Two years, continued for 13 years Fol. 124, A, 147, A They break the Truce Fol. 184, B A Peace concluded with them by Mortimer Fol. Ib. Their Country wasted and burnt by Edward III. Fol. 197, A They agree to a Peace with him Fol. Ib. B Their Alliance with the French Fol. 335, A Their Barbarity in the English Borders Fol. 341, C Their Commissioners sent to the English Parlement rejected Fol. 359, F They join the French to invade England Fol. 362, E And are beaten Fol. 391, C Scrope (Richard) Lord Chancellor, charged the Commons with untruth Fol. 336, E His Answer to their several Petitions Fol. 337, B The Great Seal taken from him Fol. 355, E (Tho.) Earl of Wiltshire, made Procurator for the Clergy Fol. 412, B Segrave (John) made Guardian of Scotland Fol. 76, F Sharewell (Sir William) set forth K. Edward III's Title to France Fol. 248, E, F Soldiers how raised against the Scots, and payd Fol. 121, F Southwell (Nic.) Valet to King Richard II. Fol. 381, A Spanish Fleet beaten by the English Fol. 248, A Spencer (Hugh) blamed for the Loss the English sustained from the Scots at Bannock-bourn Fol. 120, B Is made Chamberlain to Edward II. Fol. 126, E His Fathers Character Fol. Ib. F How they provoked the Nobility Fol. 127, B, C The Lords Award against Father and Son Fol. 129, C Their Banishment revoked Fol. 134, D Outragious Practices against them Fol. 141, 143 Errors of the Award against them assigned Fol. 142, A And why it ought to be revoked Fol. 144, B
The Award voided in Parlement Fol. 145, C The Father made Governor of Bristol Fol. 147, C He is taken and Executed Fol. 148, C The Son Executed Fol. 149, B The Judgment against them both reversed Fol. 403, B (Henry) Bishop of Norwich his great Courage and Conduct Fol. 349, A His Offer for the Relief of Flanders Fol. 357, D His Proffer accepted by the King and Council Fol. 358, A He Published a Croysado against the Antipope Fol. Ib. B His great Success against the Flemings Fol. Ib. F He surrendred Graveling, and returned into England Fol. 359, B His Accusation, and Punishment Fol. 360, C Statute of Bigamy on what account made Fol. 5, B, D Of Winchester proclaimed Fol. 68, F And Conditions where to be found Fol. 220, E Are revoked by the King Fol. 221, C Statutes and Commission what and when made Fol. 367, A Declared void in Parlement Fol. 397, B And Ordinances made by the King and others appointed out of Parlement Fol. 416, A Not to be repealed under pain of Treason Fol. Ib. The Bishops and Temporal Lords Swear to observe them Fol. 417, F Sterling Castle delivered to the Scots Fol. 67, D Besieged by, and yielded to King Edward I. Fol. 78, A Steward (James) his Submission to King Edward I. Fol. 37, C Stratford (John) Arch-Bishop of Canterbury his Behaviour to Ed∣ward III. Fol. 210, 215 He submitted, and begged the King's Pardon Fol. 218, D Proceedings against him vacated Fol. 219, A Is forbidden to enter the Painted Chamber Fol. 222, F Is permitted upon Mediation of some Great Men Fol. 223, A Straw (Jack) his Pretences and Practices Fol. 345, 348 His Tryal and Execution Fol. 349, C His Confession at his Execution Fol. 350, A Sudbury (Simon) Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, beheaded by the Re∣bels Fol. 346, C T. Talbot (Sir Tho.) accused for Conspiring the Death of the Dukes of Lancaster and Gloucester Fol. 395, B Tarleton (Adam Bishop) See Adam Taxes granted in the Reign of Edward I. Fol. 96, 97 Taxes granted in the Reign of Edward II. Fol. 180 Taxes granted in the Reign of Edward III. Fol. 321, &c, Taxes granted in the Reign of Richard II. Fol. 465, &c. Templars by whom founded, their Original, and Suppression Fol. 165, &c. Testa (William) the Pope's Agent, convict of Crimes against the Crown Fol. 89, D
His Officers questioned Fol. 90, B The King granted him Protection, and License Ib. D. F Thyrning (William) his Speech to Richard II. in the Tower Fol. 434, E Tiler (Wat.) his Pretences and Practices Fol. 345 His Insolent Behaviour to the King Fol. 346, F His Death Fol. 347, A His Followers pretended the King's Authority for what they did Fol. 348, B Tresilian (Robert) Lord Chief Justice, accused of Treason by the Lords Appellants Fol. 373, 374 His, and the other Judges Opinions concerning the Statute and Commission Fol. 378, &c. The Witnesses to their Opinions Fol. 379, F Is brought into Parlement, Sentenced, and Executed Fol. 385, D Trussell (William) his Speech against Hugh D'espencer the Son Fol. 159, E He resigned up the Nobility's Homage to Edw. II. Fol. 162, D V. VAlentia (Aymer) sent against the Scots Fol. 84, F His Success against them Fol. 85, A Vere (Robert) Duke of Ireland, raised Forces in Lancashire and Cheshire, for Richard II. Fol. 369, D He is accused of Treason Fol. 372, D Usk (Tho.) impeached; his Answer, and Judgment Fol. 387, C, D, E W. Walworth (Wm) Lord Mayor of London, slew Wat. Tiler Fol. 347, A He is Knighted by Richard II. for his Service Fol. 350, D Walys (Wm) chosen by the Scots for their Leader Fol. 53, A Is beaten, and flee's into the Woods Fol. 64, C Is taken and Executed Fol. 83, F Was one that encouraged the Lords against Edw. II. Fol. 119, C Warren (John) appointed Governor of Scotland Fol. 38, A He suppressed the Scots Fol. 53, B Warwick (Tho. Earl) one of the Appellant Lords Fol. 371, C His Pardon revoked Fol. 397, C Is appealed of High Treason Fol. 405, A Is Tryed, and pleaded Guilty Fol. 411, E His Life granted him by the King Fol. Ib. F Welch routed, and their Prince slain Fol. 9, C Are totally subdued Fol. 11, B Writ for sending the same Knights, Citizens and Burgesses who were sent last Parlement Fol. 69, F Wyclif (John) Convented before the Arch-Bishop, and Bishop of London Fol. 307, F He Explains himself concerning the Sacrament of the Altar Fol. 320, A The Heresies laid to his Charge Fol. Ib. F Proceedings against his Followers in Rich. II's Reign Fol. 458 FINIS.
THE APPENDIX. N. 1. Claus 1. Ed. 1. M. 11. de pace Regis Edwar. Proclandâ. EDwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, & Dux Aquitaniae, Vicecomiti Eborum Salutem. Cum Defuncto jam celebris memoriae Domino Henrico Rege Patre nostro, ad nos Regni gubernaculum Successione Haereditariâ, See the mean∣ing of the Words (ac pro∣cerum Regni voluntate) in the next Re∣cord. ac Proce∣rum  Regni voluntate, & Fidelitate nobis praestita sit devolutum, per quod Nomine nostro qui in exhibitione Justitiae & Pacis conser∣vatione omnibus & singulis de ipso Regno sumus exnunc debitores, pa∣cem nostram dicti Magnates, & Fideles nostri jam fecerant Procla∣mari. Tibi praecipimus quod per totam Ballivam tuam in singulis Ci∣vitatibus, & Burgis, Feriis, Mercatis, & locis aliis pacem nostram publicè clamari, & firmiter teneri facias inhibendo omnibus & singu∣lis sub periculo exhaeredationis, vitae & membrorum pacem nostram  infringere praesumat. Nos enim omnibus & singulis in omnibus Ju∣ribus & rebus ipsos contingentibus contra quoscun{que} tam majores quam minores parati sumus & erimus plenam auctore Domino Justici∣am exhibere. Testibus W. Ebor. Archiepiscopo, E. Cornub. & Glou∣cest. Comitibus apud Westm. vicesimo tertio die Novemb. Anno Regni nostri primo. Consimiles literae diriguntur singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam. N. 2. Bundela Bre∣vium, &c. An. 1. Ed. 1. N. 1. in the Tower. EDwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, & Dux Aquitaniae, omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint Salu∣tem; Cum defuncto jam celebris memoriae Domino Henrico Rege Patre nostro (cujus animae propitietur Altissimus) ad nos Regni guber∣naculum successione haereditariâ pervenerit, ob quod pacem nostram no∣mine Regio firmiter observandam solempniter & publice fecimus pro∣clamari, ac Prelati, Comites, Barones, & caeteri, Proceres reg∣ni Sacramentum fidelitatis, & alia quae ratione coronae & dignitatis regiae,  ab ipsis fieri seu praestari, nobis in absentia nostra potuerunt, plenarie & sine omissione aliqua These words (Prompte & libenti animo) expound and give the mean∣ing of the Words in the former Writ, (ac procerum Regni volun∣tate) i. e. rea∣dily, freely, on their own ac∣cord, without Direction, or Command. prompte & libenti animo nobis praestite∣rint; Ac dilectus & fidelis noster Leulinus filius Griffini Principis Walliae, nobis consimile Sacramentum fidelitatis praestare teneatur, de∣dimus dilectis nobis in Christo, Abbatibus de Dore, & de Hagenham, nomine nostro potestatem recipiendi fidelitatem ipsius Leulini. Ita tamen quod si non ambo ipsorum Abbatum potuerint interesse, alter eorum, qui praesens fuerit nihilominus plenam habeat potestatem re∣cipiendi  nomine nostro fidelitatem Leulini praedicti. In cujus rei te∣stimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Datas per ma∣num Walteri de Merton Cancellarii nostri apud novum Templum Londini, 29 die Novemb. Anno Regni nostri primo.
The Return to this Writ. EXcellenti viro, & omni veneratione dignissimo, Domino W. de Merton. Domini Regis Cancellario; suus semper R. Speing∣hose Constabularius de Montgomeri Salutem, & devotam cum omni ho¦nore Reverentiam. Venerandae Dominationi vestrae duxi significandum.  Quod viri religiosi de Dore & de Hagenham Abbates juxta Mandatum Domini Regis per vos eis directum, in Octab. Sancti Hilarii persona∣liter accesserunt ad vadum ultra Montgomeri, obviam Domino L. filio Griffini Principis Walliae, ad accipiendum abeo, nomine dicti Domini Regis Sacramentum fidelitatis, quibus associavi quosdam de homini∣bus▪ Ballivae meae, qui apud dictum vadum multum ultra Horam Nonae (much beyond Noon) adventum dicti Domini expectantes: nec ipse venit, nec aliquod Mandatum eis direxit (sent them any Message) va∣leat Veneranda dominatio vestra semper in Domino. N. 3. Pat. 1. E. 1. M. 18. de Tal∣lagio assidendo REX Magistro Richardo de Clifford Eschaetori suo citra Tren∣tam, salutem. Sciatis quòd assignavimus vos ad assidendum Callagium in Villâ Bristoll, & ad talliandum omnes illos in eâdem Villâ separatim per capita, vel in Communi prout in aliis tallagiis villae praedictae fieri consuevit. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod praemissa saciatis in formâ praedictâ. Mandavimus enim omnibus & singulis de  Villâ praedictâ quòd vobis ad hoc intendentes sint, & respondentes  sicut praedictum est. In cujus, &c, Dat. per manum W. de Merton, apud Westminst. vicesimo septimo die Januarii. N. 4. Pat. 1. E. 1. M. 16. de con∣servatione pa∣cis per Angl. REX Vicecomiti Surr' & Sussex salutem. Intelleximus ex cla∣mosâ & gravi querimoniâ multorum, quòd plures Malefactores in Ballivâ tuâ commorantes, & per eam discurrentes, depraedationes, ho∣micidia, & alia cnormia perpetrant, contra pacem nostram, quam tu  ipse in praedictâ Ballivâ tuâ specialiter conservare teneris. Et quia sa∣tis constat, quòd hujusmodi malefactores diu in Ballivâ tuâ morari, & receptari non possent, si tu pro pace nostrâ ibidem conservandâ diligen∣tiam apponeres, sicut deberes; de sicut posse Comitatuum praedicto∣rum in hujusmodi necessitatibus, ad tuam esse summonitionem & di∣strictionem. Tibi praecipimus, quòd sicut teipsum diligis, & sicut de receptatione & consensu praedictorum malefactorum esse volueris liber & immunis, & ne ad te tanquam inde culpabilem nos capere debe∣amus,  talem & tantam diligentiam contra hujusmodi malefactores ap∣ponas, tam per te, quàm per posse Comitatuum tuorum praedictorum, ne tibi post praesens mandatum nostrum imputari debeat, quod per tuam negligentiam & consensum talia in tuâ Ballivâ amodo perpetrentur. Scire etiam facias omnibus Ballivis, sive in libertatibus, aut alibi in Comitatibus tuis, & clamari quod ipsi eandem diligentiam pro con∣servatione pacis nostrae in suis custodiis apponant, & taliter se habeant in hac parte, ne pro hujusmodi depraedationibus, homicidiis, & trans∣gressionibus  ad eos tanquam inde culpabiles nos capere debeamus. Et si qui de Comitatibus praedictis, sive de libertatibus, aut alii in hoc negligenter se habuerint, aut tibi ad tuum mandatum ad hoc assistere noluerint, tu hoc nobis sicut teipsum indempnem & absque periculo conservare volueris, sine dilatione significes, ut contra eos, tanquam hujusmodi depraedationibus, & homicidiis consentientes exinde proe∣damus. In cujus, &c. Dat. &c. apud Westm. sexto die Junii.
N. 5. Bundela Be∣vium in Turr Lond. N. 11. EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, & Dux Aquitaniae dilecto Clerico & Cancellario suo Waltero de Merton Salutem. Super diligentiam, quam circa nostra & Regni nostri negotia apposuistis Grates vobis referimus speciales, rogantes, quatenus id, quod laudabiliter inchoastis, saeliciter continuare curetis, in his, quae ad officium vestrum pertinent. Cuicun{que} facientes Justitiam exhi∣beri, alios autem ad id pariter inducentes; non parcentes conditioni  aut Statui cujuscun{que}. Quin Rigor Juris ipsos coherceat, quos aequi∣tatis suavitas nequit ab injuriis cohibere. Ea nam{que} quae ritè feceritis circa ista faciemus (disponente Altissimo) robur firmitatis constan∣tissimè obtinere. Dat. apud Melun. Super Sekene (i. e.) (super Se∣quanam) or the River Seyne in France. Nono die Augusti, Anno Reg∣ni nostri primo. N. 6. Pat. 3. Ed. 1. M. 2 REgi Franc. Rex Angl. Salutem. Mandatum vestrum nuper re∣cepimus  continens, quòd ad instans Parliamentum vestrum, om∣nium Sanctorum, viz. in Crastino quindenae Festivitatis Beati Martini in hieme cognitioni causae, quae vertitur in Curiâ vestrâ inter nobiles viros, Robertum, Ducem Burgundiae, ex unâ parte, & Robertum Comitem Nivernensem, & Yobendam uxorem ejus Comitissam Ni∣vernensem, ex alterâ super Ducatum de Burgundia ac pertinentias, nec non processibus super hoc habendis persnaliter interessemus; ve∣rum quia ob ardua Regni nostri negotia, quae habemus tractanda ad  illum diem tunc vobis accedere non valemus; Dominationi vestrae sup∣plicamus, quatenus absentiam nostram in hac parte si placet habere velitis favorabiliter excusatam, dantes insuper, dilectis & fidelibus no∣stris Mauritio de Credome, Ottoni de Grandison▪ & Rogero de Clifford▪ hujusmodi excusationem nostram plenius faciendam, cum nostro mandato speciali plenariam potestatem. Teste Rege apud West∣minster' undecimo die Novembris. N. 7. Rot. Wall. 11. Ed. 1. M. 4. Dors. N. 1. REX Vicecomiti Norf. & Suff. salutem. Quia Lewelinus filius Griffini, & alii Walenses Complices sui inimici, & Rebelles nostri, totiens temporibus nostris, & Progenitorum nostrorum Regni Angliae, pacem Regni turbârunt, & rebellionem suam, & maliciam jam resump∣tam continuare non desistunt, animo indurato, propter quod negoti∣um, quod ad ipsorum versutiam reprimendam jam incepimus de consi∣lio procerum; & magnatum regni nostri, necnon & totius Communitatis ejusdem ad praesens proponimus, ad nostram & totius regni pacem &  tranquilitatem perpetuam Domino concedente finaliter terminare com∣modius etiam & decentius esse perpendimus; quòd nos & incole ter∣re nostre ad ipsorum maliciam totaliter destruendam, pro communi utilitate laboribus & expensis fatigemur, hac vice licet onus difficile videatur, quàm hujusmodi turbatione per Walenses ipsos nunc habitâ pro voluntate sua futuris temporibus cruciari, prout tempore nostro, & Progenitorum nostrorum contigit. Manifestè tibi praecipimus, firmi∣ter injungentes quod venire facies coram nobis in Octab. Sancti Hilarii  apud Northampton, aut coram fidelibus nostris, quos ad hoc duxe∣rimus deputand. Omnes illos de Balliva tua ad arma potentes & aptos, qui habent ultra viginti libratas terre & qui nobiscum in expeditione nostrâ Wall. non existunt, & quatuor milites de utro{que} Comitatu praedicto pro Communitatibus eorund. Comitatuum habentes plenari∣am potestatem. Et de qualibet Civitate, Burgo, Villa Mercatoriâ, duos
homines similiter potestatem habentes pro Communitatibus eorund. ad audiend. & faciend. ea, quae sibi ex parte nostra faciemus ostendi. Et nulli de Ballivâ tua ultra viginti libratas terre habenti, & ad arma potenti, & apto, amore, favore, & munere, seu timore, vel alia quacun{que} ratione parcere vel differre praesumas. Nec etiam aliquem ultra viginti libratas terre non habentem, licet ad arma aptus, seu potens suerit, co∣ram nobis, vel fidelibus nostris praedictis aliquatenus venire facias ex cau∣sa praedicta. Et de nominibus omnium illorum, quos sic venire sece∣ris,  Nos vel praedictos fideles nostros, ad predictos diem & locum per praefatos quatuor milites reddas certiores & habeas ibi nomina quatuor militum illorum. Et hoc breve & haec omnia sicut te & tua diligis facere non omittas. Teste Rege apud Rothelan. vicesimo quarto die Novembris. Eodem modo mandatum est Vicecomitibus, Nott. & Derb. Salop Staff. Cant. Hunt. Essex. Hertf. Buck. Bedf. Somerset. Dors. Surr. Suss.  War. Leic. Oxon. Berk. Lanc. Midd. Northampt. Rotel. Lincoln. Cornub. Devon. Wilts. Heref. Wigorn. Glouc. & Southt, quod ve∣nire facias apud Northampt. & Vicecomitibus Eborum, Cumbr. West∣mer. Northumbr. & Lanc. quod venire facias, &c. apud Eborum. N. 8. Claus. 10. Ed. 1. M. 4. intus de decima ex∣tra Regnum non deferenda. REX dilecto Consanguineo & Fideli suo Edmundo. Comiti Cor∣nubiae salutem. Quia quibusdam certis de causis, nolumus quod decima sex annorum nuper a Clero Regni nostri in subsidium terrae san∣ctae  concessa & jam in eodem Regno collecta, ad praesens extra idem Regnum deferatur, vobis mandamus quod venire faciatis coram vo∣bis omnes mercatores London. tam de Societatibus quàm alios, & eis∣dem injungatis, & sub periculo amissionis vitae & membrorum, & omni∣um bonorum suorum, quae possident in Regno nostro, inhibeatis ex par∣te nostrâ, ne Pecuniam de dictâ decima provenientem, nullo modo de∣ferant, aut deferri faciant, seu permittant extra Regnum. Et si quos Mercatores aut alios Pecuniam de dicta decima provenientem, extra  dictum regnum deferre volentes inveniri contigerit, tum ipsos cum dictâ Pecuni â arrestari, & salvo custodiri faciatis, donec aliud inde a nobis habueritis in mandatis. Teste rege apud Hertlebir. 24 die Maii. Et mandatum est Majori & Vicecomitibus London. &c. Item mandatum est Stephano de Penchestre Custodi Quin{que} Portuum, &c. N. 9. Pat. 17. Ed. 1. M. 3, 4. REX Praelatis, Magnatibus, ac toti Communitati Regni Scotiae sa∣lutem & dilectionem sinceram. Quia negotia quae contingunt  Karissimam Consanguineam nostram, Margaretam Dominam, & Re∣ginam regni ejusdem ad honorem Dei, & tranquilitatem totius Commu∣nitatis ejusdem regni, ac commodum & profectum ipsius consanguineae nostrae, bene & fideliter prosperari, totis desideriis peroptamus; vos requirimus & rogamus attentè, quatinus Custodibus ad regimen dicti regni nomine praedictae nostrae consanguineae deputatis, taliter inten∣dentes sitis & obedientes. Quod nos & Domina vestra antedicta pos∣sumus & debeamus fidelitatem vestrum merito habere commendatam,  proponimus siquidem, &c. ad partes Scotiae aliquos de nostro consilio destinare per quos, ac etiam per ipsius terrae custodes de statu ejusdem regni, quem appetimus tranquillum & pacificum semper esse, certificati erimus, Deo dante. Dat apud Clarendon. sexto die Novembr. These Letters were also entred upon the Close Roll.
N. 10. Pat. 18. Ed. 1. M. 9. REX venerabilibus Patribus Willielmo Sancti Andreae, & Ro∣berto Glascuensi Episcopis, ac nobilibus viris Johanni Comyn, & Jacobo Senescallo Custodibus Regni Scotiae, caer{que} Episcopis, Ab∣batibus, Prioribus toti{que} Clero, Comitibus, Baronibus, ac toti Com∣munitati regni ejusdem salutem. Cum ad leges & consuetudines Regni Scotiae observandas, ex Sacramenti, praestiti debito teneamus, Nos de probatâ fidelitate, & notâ industriâ praedilecti nostri venerabi∣lis Patris, Domini Antonii, Dei Gratia Dunelmensis Episcopi plenissi∣mè  confidentes, ad pacem, tranquilitatem, & profectum totius regni Scotiae, ac etiam ad Supportationem oneris caeteris ipsius regni Scotiae incumbentis, eundem Episcopum ad vos mittimus, & tenore praesentium assignamus, ad tenendum in eodem regno locum, charis∣simae consanguineae nostrae, Dominae Margareta▪ filiae magnifici Prin∣cipis Domini Erici, Dei Gratia Regis Nwgiae illustris, Dominae & Reginae vestrae, ac charissimi nati nostri Edwardi & ad justificandum, & ratificandum regnum praedictum, una cum caeteris ipsius custodi∣bus,  de consilio Praelatorum & Magnatum ejusdem regni, secundum leges & consuetudines inibi hactenus observatas. Quare Ʋniversita∣tem vestrum attentius requirimus, & rogamus, quatinus ob honorem nostrum, Dominae vestrae, & nati nostri, eundem Episcopum ad praemissa benignè & Curialiter, sitis intendentes, & obedientes eidem in hiis omnibus, quae ad Gubernationem & statum ipsius regni pacificum requi∣runtur. In cujus, &c. Dat. apud North. 28 die Augusti. N. 11. Rot. de Supe∣rioritate Regis Angliae in reg∣no Scotiae, &c. Annis 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Ed. . in Tur. Lond. Et Mat. West. fol. 415. N. 10, 20. A Tous iceulx qui ceste present Lettre verront ou orront Florence Counte de Holland, Robert de Brus Seigneur du val Danaund, Jan Baliol Seigneur de Galewie, Jan de Hastings Seigneur de Aber∣genne, Jan Comyn Seigneur de Badenaw, Patrique de Dunbar, Counte de la Marche, Jan Vesey pur sen pere, Nichol de Seules, & Guilaume de Ros, Saluz en Dieu. Con nous entendons d'aver Droyt et Reyaume de Escoce celle droyt munstrer, chalanger & averer devant celuy qui plus de poer Jurisdiction, & reeson eust de trier nostre  droyt, & le noble Prince Sire Edward par le Grace de Dieu, Rey d'Angleterre nous eit enforme per bons & suffisant reesons que a ly ap∣pent & aver dict la Sovereing Seignorie du dit Reyaume d' Escoce, & la conisance de Oir, Trier, & Terminer nostre Droyt. Nous de nostre propre volunte sans nulle mane de force ou distresse volons, ortions, & grantons de receiver droyt devan luy come Sovereing Seigneur de la terre. Et volons ja le menis, & promittons que nous averons etendrons ferm & stable son fait, & qui celuy em∣pertera  le Reyaume a qui droit le durra devant luy. En Testimoyne de ceste chose nous avons mis nous Seaules a' cest Escript fait & donne a' Norham le Mardi prochien apres le ascenscion l' an de Grace 1291. N. 12. lb▪ in Rot. &c. & Mat. West. N. 40, 50. A Tous iceulx, &c. (as above) Florence Counte de Holland, &c. (as before) Saluz en Dieu. Com nous avons otrie & grant de nostre bon volunte, & com une assent sans nulle destresse a Noble  Prince Sire Edward, par la Grace de Dieu Rey d' Angleterre quil come Sovereign Seigneur de la terre D'escoce pensoier, trier & terminer, nos Chalenges & nos Demandes que nous entendons Mun∣strer & Averrer pur nostre droyt en la Reyaume D'escoce & droyt re∣ceiver devant luy; Come Sovereign Seigneur de la terre pro∣mettant Sale mins que son t aurun & tendron erme & stable, &
qui l'emportera le Reyaume a qui droyt le durra devant luy. Mes pur ceo que l'avant dit Rey d' Angleterre, ne pust nule manere coni∣sance fair ne accomplier sans judgement ne dict estre sauns execution, ne execution ne peut il feire duement sauns la possession & seysine de nesme la terre, & de chasteaus: Nous volons, ottrions, & grantons, que il come Sovereine Seigneur a per fair les chose avant dits & a la seysine de soule la terre & de chasteaus D'escoce, tant que droyt soyt fait & performy a Demandons en tel manere que avant ceo qu'il & la  seysine avant dit face bon suerte & suffisant as demandans, & a Gar∣deins, & a comune de Reyaume D'escoce, a feir la reversion de mesme la Royaume, & chasteaus ou toute la Royaunte, Dignite, Seignorie, Fran∣chices, Custume, Dreitures, Leys, Ʋsages & Possessions, & toutes ma∣neres de apurtenances en mesmes, l'estat q'il estoient quant la seysine luy fust baille & livere a celuy qui le droyt emportera par jugement de la Royaume save au Rey d' Angleterre, le homage de celuy qui serra Roy Isynt que la reversion soit fait dedens les de uzmois, aprez le jour que le  droyt sera trie & affirme & que les issues de mesme la terre en le sone tens receus soient sauvement, mis en depos & bien garder par le maine le Chamberleyn D'escoce qui ore est & de celuy qui serra assigne a luy de par le Rey d' Angleterre, & de sous lour seaus saune renable suste∣nance de la terre & des chasteaus & de Ministers du Reyaume, en Testimoyne de ceste chose avant dit nous avons meis nos seaus a' cest escript fait & donne Norham le Mercredie, apres l' Ascension l'an du Grace 1291. This also was sent to several Monasteries by the King's Command, to be Inserted into their Chronicles for perpetual memory. N. 13. In Rot. de su∣perioritate Reg. Angl. &c. EDwardus, Dei Gratia, Rex Angliae, &c. & Superior Dominus Regni Scotiae dilectis & fidelibus suis Willielmo Sancti Andreae, & Roberto Glascuensi Episcopis, Johanni Comyn, Jacobo Senes∣challo Scotiae, & Briano, filio Alani, Custodibus suis Regni Sco∣tiae,  salutem. Cum Johannes de Baliolo nuper in Parliamento nostro apud Berewicum super Twedam, venisset coram nobis, & peti∣visset praedictum Regnum Scotiae sibi per nos adjudicari & seisinam ip∣sius regni sibi ut proximiori Haeredi Margaritae filiae Regis Norwegiae, Dominae Scotiae & Neptis, quondam Alexandri ultimi Regis Scotiae jure Successionis liberari. Ac nos auditis, & intellectis Petitionibus, & rationibus tam praedicti Johannis quam aliorum petentium predictum regnum. Et eisdem Petitionibus, & rationibus diligenter examinatis,  invenerimus praefatum Johannem de Baliolo esse propinquiorem Hae∣redem praedictae Margaretae quoad dictum Regnum Scotiae obtinen∣dum, propter quod idem regnum Scotiae & seisinam ejuldem eidem Johanni salvo jure nostro & haeredum nostrorum reddimus. Vobis man∣damus quod seisinam praedicti regni Scotiae cum omnibus pertinentiis suis infra idem regnum existentibus, & quae ad manus nostras tanquam ad Superiorem Dominum ipsius regni Scotiae post mortem praefatae Margaretae devenerunt, sine dilatione praedicto Johanni de Baliolo  deliberari faciatis, salvo jure nostro & haeredum nostrorum cum volu∣erimus inde loqui. Salvis & etiam nobis Releviis & Debitis quibus¦cun{que} quae de exitibus supradicti regni Scotiae, us{que} ad diem confecti∣onis praesentium debebantur seu deberi poterunt quoquomodo. Teste me∣ipso apud Berewick super Twedam, 13 die Novembris, regni nostri vi∣cesimo.
N. 14. Rot. de jura∣ment. Homag. & Fidelit. &c. Rot. Scot. 24. Edw. 1. pecia prima. IN Nomine Domini Amen. Anno à Nativitate ejusdem 1296. in∣dictione nonâ Mensis Maii 13. praesentibus venerabili in Christo Patri Domino Antonio permissione divina Episcopo Dunelmensi, ac nobilibus viris Domino Johanne Warren, Rogero Northfolch, Humphredo Hereford, W. de Warwick, Patricio de Dunbar & Marchiâ. Gilberto de Anegos Comitibus, Testibus vocatis, & roga∣tis  cum aliis tam Baronibus, quam Militibus, quam Clericis & Laicis in multitudine copiosâ, praesente etiam me Notario Subscripto. No∣bilis Vir Dominus Jacobus Seneschallus Scotiae Miles, non vi, nec metu coactus, ut dicebat, sed spontaneâ sua & libera voluntate venit ad fidem & voluntatem Domini Regis Angliae, & confaederationes, contractus, conventiones, & pacta quocun{que} nomine censeantur, si quae ipsius nomine vel consensu cum Rege Francorum vel sibi adhaeren∣tibus contra dictum Dominum suum, Dominum Regem Angliae unquam  initae extitissent, quantum in ipso fuit & ipsum contingebant vel contingere poterant quovismodo pro se & suis perpetuo annullavit, & invalida, & nulla fore pronunciavit, sponté{que} purè & absolutè quate∣nus de facto processerant, eisdem cum omni commodo, quod exinde sibi & suis poterit aliqualiter pervenire expresse renunciavit organo vocis suae. Et tactis sacrosanctis, & osculatis Dei Evangeliis dicto Domino suo Regi Angliae fidelitatem fecit in subscriptâ formâ & super fidelitate suâ sic factâ suas Patentes Literas sub nomine suâ conceptas conficiens,  veri sui Sigilli impressione pendente consignavit; quarum Literarum tenor in omnibus & per omnia est talis. A Tous ceaus qui cestes Lettres verront ou orront James Seneschal D'escoce saluz, pur ceo que nous sumes venut a la foy e la volunte du autres Noble Prince Chier Signeur Sire Edward, par la Grace Dieu Roy D'engleterre, Signeur D'irland, & Duc's D'aquitaigne, nous pro∣mettons  pur nous e pur nos Heires sur pein de Cors e D'avoir e sur quant que nous penssoms encoure que nous serroms en sa eide, e li serveiroms bien & Leawment contre totes gentz qui perront vivre & morir totes les foiz que nous serroms requis ou garniz de par nostre Signeur le Roy D'engleterre avant dit ou de par ses Heires; E que nous leur Damage ne scavoms que nous nel destorbeoms a tot nostre poer e le leur faceoms assavoir, e a cestes Choses tenir e garder obligeoms nous e nos Heires e tous nos biens e outre ceo avoms jurez sur Seints  Evangelies. En Testmoyance de que chose nous avoms fait faire cestes Lettres overtes Seales de nostre Seal. Donees a Rocksburgh le trezim jour de Maii, lan de regne nostre Seigneur le Roy D'engleterre avant dit vintisme quart. N. 15. Ibid. Rot. Scot. 24, 25, 26. Ed. 1. de juramen. & fidelit. &c. POST haec vero (That is, after the King, and the Steward of Scotland, with many Noblemen, and others, had Renounced, done  Homage, and Sworn Fealty,) Indicto Domini Regis Angliae Parliamen∣to consentientibus utrius{que} Regni Nobilibus & Prelatis in Octavis assumptionis Beatae Mariae Virginis, Anno Domini & Indictione prae notatis (i. e. 1296 Indictione 9.) apud Berwic super Twede, congre∣gatis{que} ibidem praedicti regni Scotiae tam Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prio∣ribus cum aliis Ecclesiarum Prelatis quam Nobilibus viris Comiti∣bus,
Baronibus, & aliis Militibus, & Proceribus dicti regni cum Communitatibus Civitatum & Villarum, vicesimo octavo die Augusti, praesentibus Nobilibus viris Domino Johanne Warreniae, Domino Rogero Northfolck, Domino Willielmo de Warwic, Pa∣tricio de Dunbar & Marchiâ, & Domino Gilberto de Anegos Comi∣tibus: Domino Johanne de Hastings, Domino Johanne Wake, Domino Hugone le Despenser, Domino Briano filio Alani, Domi∣no Petro Corbett, Radulpho, filio Gulielmi, Johanne, filio Mar∣maduci,  Walterd de Hundercumbe, & Roberto de Hilton, Baro∣nibus, cum Domino Rogero Brabanson, Milite & Magistro, Jo∣hanne de Cadomo, Publico authoritate Papae Notario, Testibus ad Subscripta vocatis specialiter, & rogatis cum aliis tam Militibus & Clericis quam Laicis in Multitudine copiosâ, & me Notario Sub∣scripto, (i. e. Andrea Gulielmi de Tang, Clerico, &c.) venerunt in dicto Domini Regis Angliae Parliamento memorato, non vi, nec me∣tu coacti set spontaneâ & liberâ suâ voluntate supradicti Nobiles & Prae∣lati  dicti Regni Scotiae, nec non & Milites, Proceres, & Regnicolae, qui praefato Domino Regi Angliae fidelitatem fecerunt, ut praemitti∣tur, diebus & locis subscriptis, unà cum omnibus, & singulis nomina∣tis inferiùs, & fidelitatem eandem praedicto Domino Regi Angliae prius factam ut praedicitur, cum revocatione, cassatione, irritatione, & annullatione, confaederationum, contractuum, conventionum & pactorum quorumcun{que} nomine censeantur, si quae unquam suo nomi∣ne vel consensu clàm, vel palàm, cum Domino Philippo Rege Fran∣corum,  contra dictum Dominum Regem Angliae initae fuerant, quali∣tercun{que} sive per ipsorum vel Domini Johannis de Baliolo, quon∣dam Regis Scotorum Procuratores vel Nuncios, generales vel speciales destinatos in Franciam; & renunciationes easdem factas (ut supra∣scribitur) innovarunt, omologarunt, laudârunt & etiam approba∣runt. Et de communi omnium Praelatorum, & Nobilium dicti regni Scotiae consensu unanimi, & voluntate praefato Domino Regi Angliae Fidelitatem iteratò & Homagium pro omnibus Terris suis infra  dictum regnum Scotiae existentibus fecerunt, & tactis Sacrosanctis & osculatis Dei Evangeliis in forma Subscriptâ fidelitatem suam firmarunt corporalis vinculo juramenti, & super fidelitatibus suis & homagiis sic factis, sicut infra patet, iterum suas Literas Patentes fecerunt suis Sigil∣lis pendentibus consignatas. Quarum Literarum incipiendo primo ad Praelatos, Episcopos, Abbates, & Priores, subsequenter vero ad Nobi∣les, Comites, Barones, & alios Milites, & sic ultimo descendendo ad Communitates Villarum, & alios Incolas regni Scotiae memorati seria∣tim  in omnibus & per omnia Tales sunt Tenores. A Touz ceaus qui cestes Lettres verront ou orront Robert Eves{que} de Glasca, Henry Eves{que} de Abirden, Thomas Eves{que} de Can∣dida Casa, saluz. Pur ceo que nous sumes venuz a la foi, e a la vo∣lunte due tres Noble Prince nostre Chier Seignor Sire Edward par la Grace de Dieu, &c. Nous promettons par nous e pur nous Suc∣cessors  sur peine de Cors, e d'avoir, &c. (and as in that before of James, Seneschal of Scotland, verbatim) e a cestes choses tenir, e guarder nos Oblegioms nous, e nos Successors e tous nos biens, e ou∣tre ceo avoms jurez sur Saints Evangils, &c. En Testimoignance des ques choses nous avoms fait fair cestes Lettres overtes de nos Seales. Donez a Berwic sur Twede, le vint Eutisme jour d' Au∣gust
lan du Reign nostre Seigneur Roy D'engleterre avant dit vintisme quart. After this manner are all the Fealties of the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights, Communities of Cities, and Towns, and other Inhabitants of Scotland Recorded. N. 16. Claus. 24. Ed. 1. M. 7. Dors. de Parliament. tenendo. REX Venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuariensi  Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati, salutem. Vestra Paternitas plene novit qualiter vos, & alii Praelati & Clerus regni nostri apud Westminster (On Sunday before St. Andrew, or the thirtieth of No∣vember, then last past, before the date of this Writ) ultimo congregati in concessione decimae Redituum, & Beneficiorum vestrorum Ecclesi∣asticorum pro defensione regni ejusdem us{que} ad Festum Sancti Micha∣elis proxime futurum nobis facta, & a nobis sub spe uberioris sub∣sidii  in futurum a vobis & aliis praestandi admissa, bonum & sufficiens nobis pro futuro tempore subsidium ob eandem causam, nisi interim inter Regem Franciae & Nos pacem reformari vel treugas iniri contin∣geret dare promisistis unanimiter liberaliter & libenter; cujus quidem reformationi Pacis vel initioni treugarum dictus Rex Franciae hacte∣nus non consensit; Quocirca vobis Mandamus in fide, & dilectione quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes quod in crastino animarum proximè futuro apud Sanctum Edmundum personaliter intersitis prae∣munientes  Priorem & Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae Archidiaconum, to∣tum{que} Clerum vestrae Dioceseos facientes{que} quod Idem Prior & Archi∣diaconus in propriis Personis suis & dictum Capitulum per Ʋnum, idem{que} Clerus per duos idoneos Procuratores plenam & sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo & Clero habentes una cum vobiscum in∣tersint modis omnibus tunc ibidem ad Ordinandum de quantitate & modo subsidii memorati. Teste Rege apud Berwick super Twede, vicesimo sexto die Augusti. N. 17. H. de Knigh∣ton, Col. 2489. N. 60. & in Biblioth. Cot. Tiber. E. 4. N. 2 BOnefacius, &c. Ad perpetuam rei memoriam; Clericis Laicos infestos opido tradit antiquitas: Quod & praesentium experi∣menta temporum manifeste declarant, dum suis finibus non contenti nituntur in vetitum, & ad illicita sua fraena relaxant, nec prudenter attendunt quomodo sit iis in Clericos Ecclesiasticasve Personas & bona interdicta potestas: quinimmo Ecclesiarum Praelatis, Ecclesiasticisve Personis regularibus & secularibus imponunt onera gravia, ipsos talli∣ant  & eis collecta imponunt, & ab ipsius suo{que} proventuum vel bono∣rum dimidiam decimam seu vicesimam vel quamvis aliam portionem aut quotam exigunt & extorquent, eos{que} moliuntur multipharie subjice∣re servituti, & suae subdere ditioni. Et quod dolendo referimus non∣nulli Ecclesiarum Praelati, Ecclesiasticaeve personae trepidantes ubi tre∣pidandum non est, transitoriam pacem quaerentes, plus timentes Ma∣jestatem Temporalem offendere, quam aeternam, talium abusibus non tam temerariè quam improvide adquiescunt, sedis Apostolicae Auctoritate  non optentâ. Nos igitur talibus actibus obviare volentes de fra∣trum nostrorum consilio Apostolicâ Auctoritate statuimus, quod qui∣cumque Praelati Ecclesiasticaeve personae, religiosi vel seculares, quorum∣cum{que} ordinum, conditionis, sive status, collectas vel tallias, dimidi am, decimam, vicesimam seu centesimam suorum & Ecclesiarum sua rum proventuum vel bonorum Laicis solverint, vel se soluturos con∣cesserint,
aut quamvis aliam quantitatem, portionem, aut quicquam ipsorum proventuum vel bonorum aestimationem vel valorem ipsorum sub adjutorii mutui, subventionis, subsidii, vel doni nomine, seu quovis alio timore vel modo vel quaesito colore, abs{que} auctoritate sedis ejus∣dem, necnon Imperatores, Reges seu Principes, Duces, seu Comites, vel Barones, Proceres, Capitanei, Officiales vel Rectores, quocum{que} nomine censeantur, civitatum, castrorum, vel quorumcum{que} locorum constitutorum ubilibet & quivis alius cujus∣cum{que}  Provinciae, conditionis, & status qui talia imposuerint, & exe∣gerint vel receperint, aut apud aedes sacras deposita Ecclesiarum vel Ec∣clesiasticarum personarum ubilibet arestaverint, seisierint, vel occupari mandaverint, aut occupata, seisita, seu arestata receperint, necnon omnes qui scienter in praedictis dederint consilium, auxilium, vel favorem pub∣lice vel occulte, eo ipso Sententiam Excommunicationis in currant. Vniversitates quae in hiis culpabiles fuerint Ecclesiastico supponimus interdicto. Praelatis & Ecclesiasticis Personis in virtute obedientiae & sub depo∣sitionis poenâ districte mandantes ut talibus abs{que} expressa licentiâ dictae sedis nullatenus adquiescant. Quod{que} praetextu cujuscum{que} obligationis, promissionis, & concessionis factarum hactenus vel faci∣endarum in antea priusquam hujusmodi constitutio, prohibitio, seu praeceptum ad noticiam ipsorum pervenerit nil solvant, nec supradicti seculares aliquod quoquo modo recipiant. Et si solverint vel prae∣dicti  receperint, in sententiam Excommunicationis incidant ipso facto. A supradictis autem Excommunicationis & interdicti sententiis nullus absolvi valeat, praeterquam in mortis articulo, abs{que} sedis Apostolicae Auctoritate & Licentiâ speciali. Cum nostrae intentionis existat tam horrendum secularium potestatum abusum, nullatenus sub dissimula∣tione transire, non obstantibus quibuscum{que} privilegiis, sub quibuscum{que} tenoribus seu modo aut verborum conceptione concessis Imperatoribus, Regibus, & aliis supradictis, quae contra praemissa in nullo volumus  alicui vel aliquibus suffragari. Nulli igitur hominum liceat hanc pa∣ginam nostrae constitutionis, prohibitionis seu praecepti infringere seu ausu temerario contraire. Dat. Romae ad Sanctum Petrum Feb. 25. 1297. 24. Ed. 1.VI. Kalen∣darum Marcii, Pontificatus nostri Anno secundo. N. 18. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 23. De Laicis feodis Cleric. capiend. in man. Reg. REX Vicecomiti Lincoln. Salutem. Propter aliquas certas causas tibi precipimus, quod omnia Laica feoda totius Cleri de Balliva  tua tam Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, & Religiosorum quam aliorum Clericorum quorumcum{que} cujuscum{que} status existant una cum bonis & catallis in eisdem inventis, sine dilatione capias in manum nostram & ea salvo custodire facias, ita quod nec ipsi, nec aliquis per ipsos manum ad ea apponant, donec aliud inde preceperimus. Et hoc nullatenus omittas. Teste Rege apud Ely, duodecimo die Februarii. Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.  Teste ut supra.
N. 19. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. M. 14. intus. It passed under the Great Seal Feb. 18. that Year. EDwardus, &c. Capitaneo Marinariorum & eisdem Marinariis ac omnibus Ballivis & fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes literae per∣venerint, salutem. Cum Praelati & Clerus Ebor. & Karliolen. Civi∣tatum & Diocesium prudenter intuentes inevitabilis necessitatis an∣gustias quibus Ecclesiae suae & totum regnum Angliae occulata fide ex∣ponuntur, & subjacent hiis diebus, us{que} ad quintam partem Benefici∣orum & bonorum suorum istius anni juxta taxationem nuper factam  de Beneficiis Ecclesiasticis de quibus decima, ultimo in subsidium Terrae Sanctae concessa, data fuit, ordinaverint & constituerint se po∣nere ad defensionem suam, & Ecclesiarum suarum, & ad resistendum machinationibus & invasionibus hostium, qui alias applicantes in dictum Regnum, Dei timore postposito, Ecclesias combusserint, vasa sacra & alia ornamenta divino dedicata cultui rapuerunt, personas Ec∣clesiasticas etiam decrepitas in eisdem inhumaniter trucidarunt, qui{que} caparatis prioribus & novis & incognitis eidem regno navium & armo∣rum  adinventis generibus, ad invadendum regnum illud se fortius solito praepararunt. Nos ipsorum circumspectam providentiam com∣mendantes, suscepimus in protectionem & defensionem nostram specialem, praedictos Praelatos & Clerum, & singulos eorundem homines, terras, res, redditus, & omnes possessiones suas: Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod praedictos Praelatos & Clerum & singulos eorum homines, terras, res, redditus, & omnes possessiones suas manuteneatis, protegatis, & de∣fendatis, non inferentes eis, vel inferri permittentes injuriam, mo∣lestiam,  dampnum, aut gravamen. Et si quid eis forisfactum fuerit, id eis sine dilatione emendari faciatis. In cujus, &c. us{que} ad festum omnium sanctorum futur. prox. duratur. Nolumus autem, sed fir∣miter inhibemus, ne de bladis seu aliis bonis & catallis praedictorum Praelatorum & Cleri, seu alicujus eorum ubicun{que} consistant ad opus nostrum aut aliorum quorumcum{que} fine licentia & voluntate eorun∣dem Praelatorum & Clericorum aliquid interim capiatis, seu capi faci∣atis, quo minus de eisdem bonis & catallis suis liberè disponere & or∣dinare,  ac commodum suum facere possint, prout sibi melius viderit expedire. Teste meipso apud Walsyngham, 6 die Februarii, Anno reg∣ni nostri vicesimo quinto. N. 20. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. Part. 1. M. 15. de protectione Clericorum. REX omnibus Ballivis & Fidelibus suis ad quos, &c. Sciatis quod suscepimus in protectionem & defensionem nostram specialem di∣lectum Clericum nostrum Iterium de Ingolisma Archidiaconum Bathou. homines, terras, res, redditus & omnes possessiones suas. Et ideo vobis  mandamus quod ipsum Iterium, homines, terras, res, redditus, & omnes possessiones suas manuteneatis, protegatis, & defendatis. Non inferentes eis vel inferri permittentes injuriam, molestiam, dampnum aut gravamen. Et si quid eis forisfactum fuerit, id, eis sine dilatione faciatis emendari. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes us{que} ad festum omnium sanctorum proximo futurum duraturas. Nolumus autem sed firmiter inhibemus, ne de bladis seu aliis bonis & catallis ipsius Iterii ubicum{que} consistant ad opus no∣strum  aut aliorum quorumcum{que} sine licentia & voluntate ejusdem Iterii aliquid interim capiatis, seu capi faciatis quo minus de eisdem bladis, bonis, & catallis suis liberè disponere & ordinare, ac commo∣dum suum facere possit, prout sibi melius viderit expedire. Teste Rege apud Langeley decimo octavo die Februarii.
Consimiles literas de protectione habent subscripti, videlicet. Johannes de Metingham. Lambertus de Trikingham. Magister Johannes de Lacy. Radulphus de Staunford, Capellanus. Johannes de Drokenesford. Henricus de Lem. Robertus de Walmesford. Thomas de Hoyvill, Clericus. Robertus de Scardeburgh. Ricardus de Roffen. Willielmus de Burnton. Magister Edmundus de London. Magister Thomas de Sodinton. Magister Adam de Aumodesham. Henricus de Gudeford, Clericus. Elias de Bekingham. Magister Thomas de Hale, Clericus. Humfr. de Waleden. Henricus de Lichefeld. Nicolaus Tutwyn de Louseby. David le Graunt. Henricus de Stanton. Magister Thomas de Lichefeld. Magister Thomas de Abberbiry. Will. Bathon. & Wellen. Episcopus. Will. de la Dune. Nicolaus de Bolyngbrok. Will. de Felstede. Nicolaus de Misterton, Clericus. Johannes de Berwyk. Adam de Osgodby. Will. de Langele. Henricus de Dunolm. Prior de Wymondham. Radulphus de Alegate. Magister Robert. de Sancto Albano. Nicolaus de Misterton. Robertus de Middleton. Ricardus de Keston. Hugo de Hengham. Andreas de Kenebolton. Johannes de Stafford. Robertus de Aete, Clericus. Henricus de Skenhelt. Adam de Waldingfeld. Johannes de Certesey, Clericus. Magister Petrus Aimerici, Parsona Ecclesie de Pecham. Magister Guido de Tillebrok, Cleric. Johannes Episcopus Wynton. Phillippus de Wilughby. Will. de Burn, Clericus. Egidius de Barenton. Magister Thomas de Erlee. Ricar. le Hostage de Loutheburgh. Galfr. de Norwico, Clericus. Ricardus de Merton, Clericus. Audoenus de Monte Gomeri. Johannes Skip de London. Robertus de Bardelby. Henricus de Thurston. Magister Reginaldus de Braundon. Raulphus de Rimnale. Petrus de Lyndeseye. Richar. Bernard de Hunnewyk. Johannes filius Johannes de Arderne. Et idem Reginaldus habet aliam prtoectionem pro nomine suo so∣lum. Bartholomeus de Florentino. Magister Jacobus Sinebaud. Priorissa de Haliwell. Will. de Canvil. Magister Radulphus de Juyngho. Gilbertus de Robiry. Walterus de Wengham. Johannes Baldok. Magister Thomas de Abberbury. Will. de Norwico. Thomas de Basing, Clericus. Robertus de Heriere. Galfridus de Farham. Simon de Farham. Priorissa Sancte Helene London. Rogerus de Skermynger, Clericus. Johannes de Silverston. Magister Walterus de Dounbrigge. Egidius de Audenardo. Magister Andreas de Farentino. Magister Will. de Essex, Clericus. Magister Thomas de Skerunge, Cler. Thomas de Lavenham. Walterus de Leycestr. Rogerus de Leycestr. Clericus. Magister Simon, Parsona Ecclesie de Heyford Waryn. Henricus de Hales. Walterus de Felstede, Clericus. Will. de Byrlay. Will. de Troubragg, Clericus. Hugo de Notingham, Clericus. Magister Henr. de Bray, Clericus.
Magister Petrus de Dene. Simon de Wovecoto, Clericus. Hugo de Roubury, Clericus. Willielmus Eliensis Episcopus. Johannes de Kirkby, Parsona Eccles. de Northmimmes. Robertus de Mar. Robertus de Corneherth. Johannes de Wengham, Precentor Ecclesie Sancti Pauli London. Magister Johannes de Sancto Claro. Wil. de Persoure. Henricus de Rolling. Henricus de Fodringey. Johannes de Reda. Edmundus de Hoo. Magister Ricardus de Gravesend, Archid. London. Walterus de Norwico. Henricus de Bacthorp, Clericus. Nicolaus de Remyn, Clericus. Nicolaus de Hatfeld, Clericus. Johannes Chaynell. Abbas de Hyda Wynton. Nicolaus de Burton. Nicolaus de Sparkford, Clericus. Magister Edmundus de London, Par∣sona Ecclesie de Whitlisford. Idem Edmundus Canonicus libere Capelle Regis beate Marie in ca∣stro Regis Hastings. Richardus de Bereford, Clericus. N. 21. Pro Priore Ho∣spital. Sancti Johannis Jerus. in Anglia. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 22. REX Vicecomiti Westmerland, salutem. Licet tibi nuper prece∣perimus quod Laica feoda Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, & totius Cleri in Balliva tua una cum bonis & catallis in eisdem in∣ventis in manum nostram caperes, & ea salvo custodires quous{que} aliud inde precepissemus. Quia tamen dilectos nobis in Christo Pri∣orem & Fratres Hospitalis Sancti Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia per lite∣ras  nostras patentes duraturas us{que} ad festum omnium Sanctorum pro∣ximo futurum suscepimus in protectionem & defensionem nostram speci∣alem, omnibus & singulis inhibentes ne de equis vel aliis averiis suis, carectis vel cariagio, seu bladis, lardario, aut aliis bonis vel rebus suis quibuscum{que} ubicum{que} consistant ad opus nostrum aut aliorum, quorumcu{que} sine licentia & voluntate ipsorum Prioris & fratrum, aliquid interim capiant, seu capi faciant, quo minus de eisdem equis, & aliis averiis suis, carectis, cariagio, bladis, lardario, & aliis bonis  & rebus suis libere disponere & ordinare, ac commodum suum fa∣cere possint, prout sibi melius viderint expedire Tibi precepimus quod Laica feoda ipsorum Prioris & fratrum in Ballivâ tuâ in manum nostram pretextu mandati nostri predicti capta una cum bonis & catal∣lis in eisdem inventis eisdem Priori & fratribus sine diminutione aliqua restituens, nichil de equis, vel aliis averiis, carectis, cariagio, bladis, lardario, aut aliis bonis, seu rebus suis predictis capias, seu capi facias contra tenorem protectionis nostre predicte. Teste rege apud Ambres∣bury,  vicesimo quinto die Februarii. Consimiles literas habent iidem Prior & fratres singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam. Teste ut supra. N. 22. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. Part 1. M. 12. De Recogniti∣onibus à Prae∣latis & aliis Personis Eccle∣siast. recipiend. EDward par la Grace Dieu, &c. a Monsieur Adam de Welles, & au Viscunte de Nichole, saluz. Come nad gueres vers aucuns  Clerks de seinte Eglise de nostre Roiaume demorantz en nostre pro∣tection e en nostre defense, qui du tot refuserent a faire aide a la de∣fense de tot le Reaume e de Leglise dengleterre, eussoms concevue pas sauwz deserte rancour e indignacion. Nous ja seit ce quil eent este meyns remembrantz, e meyns conisantz les perils que porroient ave∣nir a tot le Reaume e a Leglise dengleterre e a eus meismes aussint
par lur defaute lur voillantz faire especiale Grace a ceste foiz tot nel eussent il deervie, Avoms assigne vous ambedeux, ou le un de vous, si ambedeux ne pussetz estre ensemble a receyure en nostre noun reconisauncez de Prelatz e dautres Persones de seinte Eglise qui quil soient en le Conte avantdit solouc lur richesses qui vodrount aver no∣stre protection en la furme que vous est baillee & enjoynte de par nous, e a certifier nostre Chancelier des nouns de ceus qui teus re∣conisances averont faites e a certifier ausint le Tresorier & les Barouns  de nostre Eschekier de tieux reconissances eusint receues. Issent ne por quant que tieux maneres de reconissances soient faites entre cy ce la Pasque procheynement avenir e ne mye outre. E pur ceo vous mandoms que les avantdites choses faces en la forme desusdite. En tes∣moignance de que chose nous avoms fait faire cestes nos Littres overtes a durer par le tenz avantdit. Don a Clarendon le premer jour de Marz, lan de nostre Regne vintyme quint. De promul∣gantibus Sen∣tentias & Ex∣communicati∣ones in Mini∣stros Regis ca∣piendis & im∣prisonandis. EDward, &c. A Monsieur Adam de Welles e au Viscunte de Nicole, saluz. Nous aparcevantz que troueurs de nouelles par les queux descord purreit surdre entre nous, nos Prelatz, nos Contes, nos Barons, & nos autres grantz gentz, safforcent a la subversion de nostre Roiaume e a la destourbaunce de nostre pees nient meyns que ceux qui safforcent dassailer nous e nostre Roiaume par mortele enemiste e par force darmes. Ne voillantz teu manere de malice passer saunz estre refrenee, Assignoms vous pur enquere e serchier en totes les  maneres que vous peussez pluis diligeaument queux meffeseours e di∣sturbeours de nostre pees conteront nouelles & destraxions en la fourme avantdite ou qui desturberont ou vouderont ou procuront desturber lexecucion de nos maundementz, ou qui durront sentences de escumenge ou feront monicions ou les sentences donees ou monicions faites privee∣ment ou apartement pronuncieront ou voudront puplier contre nos Mi∣nistres e nos sugges ou, contre queux autres quil seient aerdauntz a nous e a nostre foi qui feront execucion de nos maundementz pur le  profit de nostre Roiaume, ou contre persones de seynte eglise qui se mettent en nostre proteccion pur sauver e defendre eux e lur Eglises, ou qui feront rien ou voudront faire par art ou par engyn, par quey la peisiblete de la pees e du Roiaume seit desturbee e lexecucion de nos maundementz qui nous eoms commaundez pur le pru du Roi∣aume e de tot nostre poeple soit rerie ou empeschie en nule manere. E pur ceo vous maundoms que touz ceux de quel estat ou condicion quil soient, qui des choses avantdites ou daucune de eles troessez co∣pables,  preignez e en nostre prison sauvement gardez taunt que vous eneez autre maundement de nous. E voloms que si vous ambedeux ny peussetz entendre adonk lautre de vous qui serra pluis pres des par∣ties ou nules des choses avantdites avendront face reddement e saunz delay lexecution de cestes bosoignes en la fourme avantdite. E feat a remembre que les Chivalers, e les Viscontes de souz escritz sont assignez en auteuz fourmes de suis escrites en les Contees de sous,  escritz, cest asavoir. Aleyn Plokenet e le Visconte de Sumers e de Dors en memes les Con∣tiez. Bueges de Knouil e le Visconte de Salopshire e de Stafford en memes les Counteez.
Johan Tregoz e le Visconte de Hereford en meme la Countee. Thomas de Berkelee e les Viscontes de Glouc. & Wynecestr. en me∣mes les Counteez. Johan de Segrave e le Visconte de Warr. e de Leyc. en memes les Counteez. Robert Fitz Pain e le Visconte de Wilteshire en meme la Countee. Rauf Pipard e le Visconte de Bedf. & de Buk. en memes les Counteez. Johan Lovel e le Visconte de Oxendord e de Berk en memes les Coun∣teez. Thomas de Furnival e le Visconte de Derb. en meme la Countee. Johan de Bretun e le Visconte Middlesex en meme la Countee. Robert de Tateshale e le Visconte de Norff. & Suff. en memes les Counteez. Johan Engayne e le Visconte de Northt. e de Rotel. en memes les Counteez. Henr. Tregoz e le Visconte de Surr. e de Sussex en memes les Counteez. Robert Fitz Roger e le Visconte de Essex e de Hertf. en memes les Counteez. Reynald de Argentem e le Visconte de Cantabr. e de Hunt. en memes les Counteez. William de Leyburne e le Viscount de Kent en meme le Countee. Henr. Tieys e le Visconte de South. en meme la Countee. Geffrey de Cammill e les Viscontes de Cornewayll e Deveneshire en memes les Counteez. Johan de Lancastr. e le Visconte de Lancastr. en meme la Countee. Reynard de Grey en la Countee de Cestr. oue les quatre Cantredz. Johan de Havering en Norwales. Williame de Brehuse e Wauter de Pederton en Westwales. Fet a remembrer que les avantditz Chivalers e Viscountes frount le choses sus escrites solome les articles que sensiwent. Ordene est que les Baneretz e les Viscountez qui sont a ceo assignez en les Counteez preignent plegges des gentz lays tieux que seient suffisauntz pur les somes reconues. E que les Clerks qui plegges lays ne poent trouer Baillent en le poer le Visconte de lur chateus taunt com le graunt quil frount amontera jekes a taunt quil eent paiez. E seit la chose demandee e prise en ceste fourme pur la defense de eus  memes e de lur Eglises e pur le commun profist du Reaume e pur la proteccion aver, cest asaver de chescun Prelat ou parsone de Eglise ou Clerk beneficie, al amuntaunce du double del eyde que chascum fist darrein au Roi, pur taunt que la busoigne est ore dassez greignure que adonk ne fu. E facent les Baneretz e les Viscontes enrouler les sommes reconues e  chescuny noun e les nouns de plegges ou de la seurte que serra prise issint que cel roule seit livere al Eschekier pur les deners fere lever. E facent les Baneretz e les Viscontes a chescun Clerk qui avera reconu en la fourme avantdite, bille, seale de lur seaus au Chaunceler pur la protexion le Roi aver, e pur les autres briess qui lour covendront.
REX Coronatoribus suis in Comitatu Surr. salutem. Mittimus vobis duo paria literarum nostrarum patentium una cum forma presentibus interclusa & tradenda Henr. Tregoz & Vicecomiti no∣stro Surr. & Sussex vobis mandantes quod praedictas literas una cum forma praedicta eisdem Henrico & Vicecomiti vice nostra tradatis & juramentum ab eis recipiatis quod ea ad que per nos assignantur per easdem literas secundum dictam formam fideliter facient & com∣plebunt. Teste ut supra. Consimiles litere diriguntur Coronatoribus in Comitatibus subscriptis quod in forma subscripta juramentum recipiant, &c. ut supra, videlicet. Coronatoribus in Comitatu Derb. quod a Tho. de Furnival & Vicecom. Derb. juramentum recipiant, &c. Coronatoribus in Comitatu Northampton▪ quod a Johanne Engayne, &  Vic. Northampt. & Rotel. &c. Coronatoribus in Comitatu Essex quod a Roberto filio Rogeri, & Vic. Essex & Hertford, &c. Coronatoribus in Com. Middlesex quod a Johanne le Bretun, & Vic. ejusdem Comitatus, &c. Coronatoribus in Comitatu Kantie quod a Willielmo de Leyburn, & Vicecomite, &c. Coronatoribus in Comitatu Lancastr. quod a Johanne de Lancastr. &  Vicecomite, &c. AU noble Peer discret Chanceler nostre Seignur le Roi, ou a son Lieutenant le seon Gilbert de Knovil Viscount de Devon si luy plest, saluz. E quant quil poet e fet de Reverence e d'onur sachez sire que le Abbe de seint Dogmael pur les Procuraturs Roberd de la Pitte, e William de Culecumb vint a moi le primer jour de Averill, e ad graunt a nostre Seigneur le Roi le double del eyde que il fist derreinement pur  le defense de luy memes e de les Eglises e pur le commun profit du Roy∣eaume e pur le protection averre de ceo ma il trovee mainpernour. En testimoniaunce de queu chose jeo mis Envoy cest ma lettre patent e close. A Sire Johan de Langeton Chaunceler, nostre Seignur le Roi, Jo∣han de Segrave, e le Viscounte de Warwick e Leyc. saluz. Sachez nus aver recia Mestre Robert de Craft, persone de Bedeworth, e de Eyl∣merthorp a la protection nostre Seignur le Roi. En temoigne de quele  chose nus vos Enviomus ceste Bill ensele de nostre Seil. William de Plympton persone de West Bedeford devant. Seir Aleyn de Plokenet, e le Viscounte de Somerset, ad fet fine de 8 s. ke est a Double de sa Dyme solom sa Reconusance pur la protection le Roi aver e pur la defense de luy e sa Eglise e pur le commun pru du Reaume plegg▪ de lafin Thomas de Kynghammere, e Adam Vincen lays. En te∣monaunce de ceste chose lavantdit Seir Aleyn ad mis sun Seel a ceste Bylle. Venerandae discretionis viro Domino J. de Langeton Domini Regis Cancellario, Adam de Welle & R. le Vener Vic. Linc. ad recognitio▪nes cleri in Com. Linc. accipiendas Deputati, salutem. Sciatis quod Wil∣lielmus de Brumpton finem fecit cum Domino Rege pro protectione habenda, & laico feodo rehabendo & hoc vobis significamus.
A Sire Johan de Langeton Chaunceler nostre Seignour le Roy, Henr. de Thistelden Viscounte de Oxenford, saluz. Cum nag∣geres ke William Vikere del Eglise de Wytteneye vint devant moy a Oxenford a la foy nostre Seignour le Roy e sa fin fist pur dise set souz e quatre deners, ki est a la double de la Dyme, de la Vicarie a ce que il dit. Jeo a memes cely William ceste Bille ay done pur la protection nostre Seignour le Roy aver, selee de mon Seal. Done a  Oxenford le 12 jour de Mars le an du Reign le Roy Edward vintyme quint. N. 23. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. P. 1▪ M. 9. De∣fensio Regis ne Prelati ali∣quid ordinent in prejudic. re∣gis. EDward par la Grace de Dieu Roy D'engleterre, &c. As hono∣rables Peeres en Dieu Erceves{que} Eves{que} & as autres Prelatz, & a touz ceus de la Clergie qui a ceste demy quaresme prochein avenir serront a Londres assemblez, saluz. Nous defendoms a vous touz & a chescun de vous, sur quan{que} vous nous peussez forfaire que vous ne  nul de vous nules choses ne ordenez, ne faciez, nassentez a nul ordeyne∣ment a la dite assemblee que peussent tourner a prejudice ou a grevance de nous, ou de nul de nos Ministres, ou de ceux qui sont a nostre pees & a nostre foy & en nostre protection, ou de nos adherdantz ou a nul de eux. Donees a Sturmenistrum le 21 jour de Marz. N. 24. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 19. De capellanis de∣liberandis à prisona. REX Vicecomiti Devon▪ salutem. Precipimus tibi quod Capel∣lanos illos quos nuper pro publicatione cujusdam sententie & aliis  transgressionibus contra nos & Coronam nostram per ipsos factis, ut dici∣tur, cepisti & in prisona nostra detines, sine dilatione aliqua deliberes, ab eadem recepta prius securitate ab eisdem de emendis nobis faci∣endis pro transgressionibus predictis, si que fuerint cum inde loqui vo∣luerimus versus ipsos, secundum quod tibi injunximus plenius oretenus. Teste Rege apud Plympton undecimo die Aprilis. N. 25. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. M. 18. De Cle∣ricis deliberan. à prisona per Manucaption. REX Vicecomiti Cornubie, salutem. Precipimus tibi quod si di∣lectus nobis in Christo Willielmus de Bodrugan, Archidiaconus Cornubie, velit manucapere coram te de habendo Magistrum Clement de Rupe, Magistrum Radulphum de Treredenek, Willielmum Vicarium Ecclesie de Sancta Sevara, Magistrum Marsilium, Johannem Vicarium Sancti Pauli, Reginaldum Vicarium de Sancta Crewenna, David Ca∣pellanum Ecclesie Sancte Beriane, Radulphum Capellanum Ecclesie Sancti Winieri, Ricardum Vicarium Ecclesie de Launantha, Johannem le Petit Parsonam Ecclesie Sancti Melani, Ricardum Vicarium de Mor∣winstowe,  Petrum Capellanum de Kylkampton, Robertum Vicarium Ecclesie de Stratton, Sampsonem Vicarium Ecclesie de Pokkewille, Philippum Vicarium Ecclesie de Launceles, Robertum Capellanum de Marwinchurche, Ricardum Capellanum de Wike, Willielmum Capella∣num de Jacobstowe, Thomam Capellanum de Wyteston, Ricardum Capellanum de Tamerton, Paganum Capellanum de Boyon, Magi∣strum Ricardum de Toliford, Simonem Capellanum de Eglosros, Ni∣colaum Vicarium Ecclesie de Sancto Austolo, Johannem Vicarium Ec∣clesie  de Sancto Claro, Philippum Vicarium Ecclesie de Sancto Win∣noco, Gilbertum Vicarium Ecclesie de Dinloo, Reginaldum Capellanum de Laureython, Willielmum Glise Capellanum de Autone. Johannem Capellanum de Esse, Johannem Olivere Capellanum de Sancta Domi∣nica, Vincentium Capellanum de Suthylle, Ricardum Vicarium Eccle∣sie de Sancto David, & Willielmum Vicarium Ecclesie de Sancto Ge∣nasio,
captos & detentos in prisona nostrâ de Launceneton pro publica∣tione cujusdam litere Papalis, ut dicitur, coram nobis ad voluntatem nostram pro emendis de transgressionibus, si quas contra nos fecerint in hac parte nobis faciend. tunc ipsos Rectores, Vicarios, Presbyteros, & Clericos, a prisona praedicta, si eâ occasione & non alia detineantur in eadem sine dilatione facias deliberari per manucaptionem praedictam. Et hoc pro alio brevi nostro de manucaptione ab ipsis prius pro facto illo capiend. tibi directo, nullatenus omittas. Teste Rege apud  Plym∣pton decimo septimo die Aprilis. N. 26. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. M. 18. De Ser∣vitio & Navib. de Hast. &c. REX dilectis & fidelibus suis Baronibus & probis hominibus portus sui de Hastings, salutem. Propter aliqua arduissima negocia, nos & vos & omnes alios fideles nostros de nostro regno tangentia hiis diebus: Vobis mandamus in fide quâ nobis tenemini firmiter injun∣gentes quod totum servitium quod nobis debetur de vobis & de navi∣bus portus vestri praedicti habeatis coram nobis apud Winchelse in  crastino Sancti Johannis Baptiste proximo futuro promptum & paratum & bene munitum ad eundum ubi tunc precipiemus. Ita quod pro de∣fectu servitii vestri predicti dicta negotia nullatenus retardentur. Ce∣terum vos rogamus mandantes quod preter servitium vestrum prae∣dictum, omnes alias naves de portu vestro praedicto tam quadraginta dolia vini, quam quadraginta dolia, & supra portantes coram no∣bis ad praedictos diem & locum venire faciatis promptas & paratas & bene munitas ad eundum cum aliis navibus vestris in nostrum servitium  ut praedictum est. Volumus autem & concedimus quod adventus ista∣rum navium ultra servitium vestrum praedictum tunc ibidem trahi non possit in consequentiam in futurum. Intentionis nostre siquidem non existit. Teste Rege apud Plympton vicesimo septimo die Aprilis. Consimiles literae diriguntur Baronibus & probis hominibus portuum subscriptorum, videlicet. Baronibus & probis hominibus de Faversham. Baronibus & probis hominibus de Sandwico. Baronibus & probis hominibus de Hethe. Baronibus & probis hominibus de Winchese. Baronibus & probis hominibus de Hastings. Baronibus & probis hominibus de Romenhale. Baronibus & probis hominibus de Dovorr. Baronibus & probis hominibus de Rye. N. 27. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. M. 15. cedula Dors. De Sum∣monitione eo∣rum qui ha∣bent 20 libra∣tas per annum. REX Vicecomiti Eborum, salutem. Cum pro dampnis & peri∣culis que nobis & toti regni nostro per insidias inimicorum no∣strorum evenire possent cautius praecavendis nuper tibi precepimus quod scire faceres omnibus illis de balliva tua infra libertates & extra qui habent viginti libratas terre & redditus per annum, & illis simi∣liter qui plus habent, videlicet tam illis qui non tenent de nobis in  capite, vel de quocun{que} tenent, ut de equis & armis sibi providerent & se prepararent indilate. Ita quod sic essent prompti & parati ad veniendum ad nos & eundum cum propria persona nostra pro sal∣vatione & defensione ipsorum & totius regni nostri quandocum{que} pro ipsis mandaremus, ac nos passagium nostrum ad partes transmarinas pro salvatione hujusmodi jam duxerimus statuendum. Tibi precipi∣mus
in fide qua nobis teneris firmiter injungentes quod omnes & sin∣gulos de Balliva tua tam infra libertates quam extra, viginti libratas terre & redditus & amplius habentes ut praedictum est de quocum{que} teneant, sine dilatione roges ex parte nostrâ & requiras, firmiterque injungas eisdem quod sint ad nos ad Londinum die Dominicâ proximo post Octabas Sancti Johannis Baptiste, proximo futuras cum equis & armis, videlicet, quilibet eorum prout statum suum decuerit, para∣ti transfretare cum corpore nostro ad partes praedictas, ad Dei, nostri  & ipsorum honorem, pro salvatione & communi utilitate dicti regni. Et ita te habeas in hoc mandato nostro celeriter exequendo, ne si contingat, quod absit, transfretationem nostram per defectum tuum impediri, ad te graviter capere debeamus. Teste rege apud Londres quintodecimo die Maii. Consimiles literae diriguntur singulis Vicecomitibus Angliae, & Reginaldo Grey Justiciario Cestriae. N. 28. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. M. 16. Dors. De certificand. Regi de nom. habent. viginti libratas Terrae & redditus. REX Vicecomiti Lincoln. salutem. Cum nuper tibi preceperi∣mus quod omnes & singulos de Balliva tua infra libertates & extra, tam illos qui viginti libratas terrae & redditus per annum habent, quam illos similiter qui plus habent, de quocum{que} teneant, sine dila∣tione rogares & specialiter requireres ex parte nostrâ firmiter{que} injun∣geres eisdem quod essent ad nos London die Dominica proxima post  Octabas Sancti Johannis Baptiste proximo futuro, cum equis & armis, videlicet quilibet, eorum prout decuerit statum suum parati transfre∣tare cum corpore nostro ad partes transmarinas ad Dei, nostri & ip∣sorum honorem ut speramus & pro salvatione & communi utilitate regni nostri. Tibi precipimus firmiter injungentes quod mandato no∣stro predicto diligenter & celeriter executo, nos de nominibus omnium illorum de Ballivâ tuâ quos sic rogaveris ad dictam diem Dominicam distincte & aperte sub sigillo tuo certiores reddere non omittas. Teste  rege apud Portesmouth vicesimo quarto die Maii. Consimiles literae diriguntur Reginaldo de Grey Justiciario Cestriae, & singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam. N. 29. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 21. Pro Cantuar. Arch. de Laicis Feod. restituendi. REX Vicecomiti Kantiae, salutem. Licet tibi nuper praeceperimus quod omnia laica feoda Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, & totius Cleri de Ballivâ tua una cum bonis & catallis in eisdem inventis sine  dilatione caperes in manum nostram & ea salvo custodires donec aliud inde praecepissemus. Volentes tamen ad instantem requisitionem Prae∣latorum Cantuariensis Provinciae venerabili Patri R. Cantuar. Ar∣chiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati, gratiam facere specialem: Tibi praecipimus quod eidem Archiepiscopo omnia laica feoda sua, una cum bobus, carucis & omnibus aliis bonis & catallis suis in eisdem existenti∣bus, quae praetextu mandati nostri praedicti in manum nostram cepisti in eo statu quo nunc sunt restitui facias indilate. Teste rege apud  Westm▪ undecimo die Julii. Consimiles literae diriguntur Vicecomiti Surr. Sussex. Midd. & Essex.
N. 30. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 9. Dors. pro clero pro∣tectionem Regis non ha∣bente. REX Vicecomitibus London. salutem. Licet aliqui de Clero qui sunt infra Ballivam vestram protectionem nostram forsan non habuerunt tempore retroacto, ad instantiam tamen & rogatum venera∣bilium Patrum R. Archiepiscopi Cantuar. & aliorum Episcoporum & Prelatorum regni nostri nobis pro eodem Clero supplicantium. Volentes Clerum eundem ab omni molestia & inquietantia indebita vi∣delicet protegi & defendi. Vobis mandamus quod omnes & singulos,  de Clero praedicto, homines, terras, res, redditus & omnes possessio∣nes eorundem in Ballivâ vestrâ deinceps manuteneatis, protegatis, & defendatis, non permittentes quantum in vobis est, quod Praefato Cle∣ro aut eorum alicui in personis & rebus inferatur injuria, dampnum, mo∣lestia, vel gravamen, non obstante quod aliqui de Clero praedicto pro∣tectionem nostram non habuerunt, sicut praedictum est. Teste rege apud Sanctum Paulum London. tricesimo primo die Julii. N. 31. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. P. 2 M. 7. PUR ceo que le Roy desire tutz jours la pees & la quiete e la bon estat de tutes les gentz de sun Reaume e nomement que apres sun passage quil ly ore fayre al honur de deu e pur recoverir sun dreit heritage dunt il est par graunt fraude deceu par le Roy de France, e pur le honur e le commun profit de sun Reaume tutes encheisouns par queles la dite pees ou quiete pussent estre en nul manere trobleez, soient du tut otes acunes gentz purroient dire & fere entendre au  Puple aucunes paroles noun verrois des queles le mesme Puple pur∣roit estre mu de eux porter enuers lur seyng. liege autrement que fair ne dussent come endroit de coe, que le Count de Hereford, e le Counte Mareschal, se aloyngerent nad guers de lui, ou endroit de au∣tres choses lui Rois sur ceo e sur lestat de lui e de sun Reaume e co∣ment les busoignes du Reaume sunt alees ja une piece, fait afavoir & voet que tuz ensachent la verite la quele senseut. Nad guers quant graunt partie de gentz darmes D'engleterre les uns par priere, les au∣tres  par somons▪ du Roy vindrent a Lundres, le Roi voillaunt purveer a la deliveraunce de mesme les gentz, e aleviance de lur despens e de lur deseres: Maunda au ditz Counteez come a Conestable e Mareschal D'engleterre quil venissent a lui a certein jour pur ordiner la delive∣raunce des dites gentz, au queu jour le dite Conte de Hereford e Monsieur Johan de Segrave qui escusa le Conte Mareschal par maladie vindrent au Roi, e en lour presence e par lur assent fust ordine quil feissent crier parmy la Cite de Londres que tutes les gentz que estoi∣ent  iloques venuz par somons ou par priere feussent lendemain a seynt Poul devaunt les ditz Conestable c Mareschal pur savoir e metere en remembraunce coment e de cumbien chescun de eux voleit servir ou eyder le Roi en cest veyage de la outre, e lur dist le Roi que selon la dite ordinaunce la quele lur fust baylle en escrit il feissent faire la dite crie. Et eux receu le dit comaundement e la dite bille sen alerent, puis mesme le jour a la nuyt les dites Contes enveyerent au Roi par Monsieur Johan Esturmi Chivaler, une bille escrit en ceste forme. Pur  ceo chier sire que vous mandastes au Mareschal par le Conestable e par une bille quil feist crier parmy la Vile de Londres que tuz iceux que sunt venuz par vostre somounse ou par priere fussent demayn devaunt eux a seint Poul a hour de prime e quil feissent metere en roule com∣bien des chivaus des uns e des autres e coe vous faissent asavoir. Vous prient vostre Conestable e vostre Mareschal que ceste chose vousissez co∣maunder
a autre de vostre Hostel. Et pur ceo sire que vouz bien sa∣vez que eux sunt cy venuz par vostre priere e ne mye par somonse, sil ceo faissent il entroyent en lur office pur service fere, par quay il vous prient que vous les voillez comaunder a autre. Et le Roi resceu la dite bille e en conseyl sur ceo, pur ceo quil lui semble quil avoient meyns avisement maunde e ne volayt mye quil enfussent suspris enveya a eux Monsieur Geffrey de Geneville, Mons. Thomas de Berkeley, Mons▪ Johan Tregoz, le Conestable de la Tur, le Gardeyn de Lundres, Mons. Roger  Brabazon, e Mons. Willame de Bereford, pur eux meuz aviser sur ceo e quil purvessent en teu manere quil ne feissent chose que peust turner en prejudice du Roi ne de lur estate demeyne, e si autrement ne se vousissent aviser que lors lur fust demande sil avoueynt la dite bille & les paroles iloques contenues les queles il avouerent tut outre. Et quant ceste avo uement fust reporte au Roi il en sur ceo conseil mist en lu du Conte de Hereford Conestable, Mons. Thomas de Berkeley, e en lu du Conte Mares∣chal, Mons. Geffrey de Geneville pur ceo que les ditz Contes aveynt re∣quis  que le Roy comaundast a autres si com il est contenu en la dite bil∣le e sur ceo senaloyngerent les Contes du Roy e de sa urt. E tost apres ceo le Ercevesk de Caunterbur. e plusurs Eveskes D'engleterre vin∣drent au Roy e lui prierent quil peussent parler as ditz Contes e le Roy lur granta, par quay le dit Ercevesk & les autres Prelatz, prierent as ditz Contes quil lur faissent asavoir ou il lur plerroit devenir pur parler a eux, e les Contes remaunderent par lur lettres quil serroint a Waltham le vendredi Lendemayn de la feste de Seint Jak, au queu jour les ditz  Ercevesk & Eveskes vindrent a Waltham e les ditz Contes ne vindrent mye, mes enveyerent illoges Mons. Roberd le fiz Roger, e Mons. Johan de Segrave Chevalers, que distrent de par les Contes, quil ny purroyent ve∣nir adunk par aucuns resuns. E pus a la priere des ditz Prelatz e des ditz Chivalers qui vindrent au Roi a Seint Auban le dimayng prochey∣nement, suant le Roy graunta sauf conduct as ditz Contes e enbaylla ses lettres a ditz Chevalers contenentz suffisent terme denz le quel les ditz Contes peussent sauvement e suz sun conduyt venir au Roi &  demorer e returner e ovesques celes leteres se departirent les ditz Che∣valers du Roy a cele foiz mes unques puis les Contes au Roy ne vin∣drent, ne enveyerent, ne uncore, ne venent, ne enueyent que le Roi sache; ore puit estre que acunes gentz unt feit entendaunt au pueple que les Contes mustrerent au Roy certeins▪ articles pur le comun profit du pueple e du Reaume e que le Roy les deveit aver refuse e escundit tut outre, de quey le Roy ne seit reiens, kar riens ne lui mustrerent nene firent mustrer, nene seit pur quey il se retrestrent. Eynx entendi  de jour en jour quil venissent a lui. Entre les queux articles contenu est a coe que hom dist de acunes grevances, que le Roy ad fait en son Reaume les queles il coneyt bien com des eydes quil ad demaunde soventefeez de ses gentz la quele chose lui ad convenu fere par encheison des gueres, qui lui unt este meues en Gascoyne, en Cales, e en Escoce & ayllurs des queles il ne poeyt lui ne son Reaume defendre saunz eyde de ses bones gentz, dunt il lui poyse mult, quil les ad taunt grevez & taunt travaillez, e leur prie quil lui envoyllent avoir pur excuse, com celui que ad les  choses mises ne mye pur achater terres ne tenementz, ne chasseus, ne viles, mes pur defendre lui e eux meismes e tut le Reaume. Et si Dieu lui doynt james returner du veyage quil fait coe il voet bien que tuz sachent quil ad volente e graunt desir del amender bone∣ment a la volente de Dieu e au gre de son pouple tauntavant ou il
devera. E sil avenist quil ne returnast mye il vyt ordener que son Heir le fra ausi com sil meismes returnast de ceo que fera amender, que son car il seit bien que nul nest taunt tenuz au Reaume nedeamer les bones gentz de saterre come il meismes. Dautre part puis quil ont enpris depasser le outre pur eyder le Conte de Flandres, qui est son alliez e nome∣ment pur metere en la busoygne de lui e de son Reaume tele fin com Dieu vodra kar meuz vant de mettre fyn in le busoigne au plus tost que hom purra, que de languy ensi longement les graunt Seigneurs,  qui nad guers furent a Lundres oue lui pur ceo que il virent bien quil ne poait nene puyt si graunt chose pursuier ne meyntenir du soin, e que le veyage est si hastif pur le graunt peril en quey les amys le Roy de dela sont, par les queux sil perdissent le Reaume purrayt chayr en graunt peril apres qui Dieu defende. E pur avec le confermement de le graunt Chartre des Fraunchises D'engleterre e de la Chartre de la Forest, le queu confermement le Roys leur ad graunte bonement, si li graunte∣rent un commun doun tel com lui est mult bosoygnable en poynt de ore.  Dunt il prie a tutes les bones gentz e a tut le pueple de son Reaume qui unques ne lui faillerent que ceste doun ne leur envoye mye puys quil veyent bien quil ne esparnye son cors, ne ceo que ils ad pur aleg∣ger eux e ly de graunte suffreytes quil unt suffert e suffrent uncore a graunt meschief de jour en autre e puys quil scyvent ausint que la bu∣soigne est plus graunde quele ne estoit unques mes a nul jour. E pur ceo que par cest aler avendra si Dieu plest bone pees e pardurable par unt chescun, se deit meyns tenir agrevez de cest doun e par qui il  purrount estre le plus tost delivers des angusses e de travaus quil unt e unt en avant ceste houre. E si nuls feissent entendauntz avant le pays que le Roy eust refuse Articles ou autre chose contre le commun profit du Reaume pur son pueple honir e destrure, ou quel eust autrement overe envers les Contes que en la manere de susdite, il prie que hom ne luy creye mye. Kar ceo est le droit processe e outre la verite co∣ment les choses sunt aler deskes a ore. E se avise chescun coment graunt descord ad este autre foiz en cest Reaume par iceles paroles  entre le Seyngr e ses gentz de une parte e dautre e les damages que ensunt avenuz. E si hom crust coe cestes autrement que eles ne sunt purroit avenir que ryote ensurdroit, la quele serroit plus perillouse e plus greve que nestoit unques mes nule en ceste terre. E sunt escu∣mengez tuz iceux qui troblent la pees de ceste Reaume en quele ma∣nere, que ceo soit e tuz iceus qui as turbeurs en argent ou en chivaus ou en armes, ou autrement dounent ou sunt eyde ou favour privement ou apertement, de quelques condicion ou estat quil soient de la quele  sentence descumenge, nuls ne puit estre asouz saunz especial comaunde∣ment del Apostoil, sors{que} en article de mort sicome pert par une bulle que le Roy ad du temps le Pape Clement, la quelle graunt partie les Prelatz & des autres grauntz Seigneurs de ceste terre unt bien entenduz. Par quey il est mestier que chescun sen gard. E prie le Roy tutes les bones gentz de son Reaume que pur ceo quil al honur de Dieu e de lui e de eux e du Reaume e pur par-durable pees e pur metere en bon estat son Reaume ad enpris cest veyage afere e il ad graunte afiaunce, que  les bones priers de ses bones gentz lui purrunt multeyder e valer a me∣tere ceste busoigne a bon fyn, quils voillent prier e fere prier ententive∣ment pur lui & pur ceux qui ovesk lui vient. En tesmoigne, &c. Donez a Odymere le xii jour de Aug. Au tele lettres sount envoiz a tous Viscontes de Engleterre.
N. 32. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 8. Dors. Prohibitio Re∣gis contra Ex∣communicat. REX venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Archi∣episcopo totius Angliae Primati, salutem. Cum nos inevitabili ne∣cessitate cogente pro Regni & Haereditarii juris nostri per Regem Francie & alios inimicos nostros invasi & hostiliter impugnati defen∣sione ac Ecclesie Anglicane & Personarum tam ecclesiasticarum quam aliarum ejusdem regni presidio & tutelâ de bladis & aliis bonis earum∣dem personarum, capi fecerimus & ad capiendum seu capi faciendum  pro salvatione nostrâ & suâ dicti{que} regni adhuc eadem necessitas nos compellat; de quibus bladis & bonis volumus & firmiter proponimus sa∣tisfactionem ut res exegerit facere congruam & condignam, & jam in∣tellexerimus quod vos contra Ministros nostros, bladorum & bonorum praedictorum de mandato nostro captores intenditis quandam Excom∣municationis sententiam fulminare vel ipsos Excommunicatos facere nunciari, quod si sic fieret in gravem & enormem dignitatis & coronae nostre Regie lesionem, ac populi scandalum manifestius redundaret &  nichilominus ex hoc ejusdem Ecclesie destructio & totius regni sub∣versio verisimiliter sequi possit. Vobis prohibemus sub debito fideli∣tatis & juramenti quibus nobis tenemini ac forisfactura omnium que de nobis tenetis firmiter injungentes, ne in Ministros nostros Clericos aut Laicos, aliquam Excommunicationis Sententiam promul∣getis seu etiam puplicetis aut promulgari seu publicari aliquatenus oc∣casione hujusmodi captionis faciatis, vel eisdem Ministris gravamen ali∣quod inferatis maxime cum parati simus satisfacere ut est dictum. Teste  rege apud Winchelse decimo nono die Augusti. Consimiles litere diriguntur singulis Episcopis Anglie. Teste ut supra. N. 33. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 6. Dors. REX venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Ar∣chiepiscopo Anglie totius primati, salutem. Quia super quibus∣dam arduis & urgentibus negotiis nos & vos ac totum regnum no∣strum  tangentibus, volumus quod Edwardus filius noster carissimus tenens locum nostrum in Anglia vobiscum Colloquium habeat & tracta∣tum. Vobis mandamus in fide & dilectione quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes quod in instanti crastino Sancti Michelis Lon∣don, ad eundem filium nostrum modis omnibus personaliter intersitis cum eodem & ceteris de consilio nostro qui ibidem aderint super dictis negotiis tractaturi, & vestrum consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut ho∣norem Regis diligitis. Apud Sanctum Paulum London nono die Sep∣tembris. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, videlicet. Episcopis. W. Bath. & Well. O. Lincolniensi R. Herefordensi R. Norwicensi Roffensi S. Electo Sarum
Abbati de Sancto Edmundo. Abbati Sancti Augustini Cantuar. Abbati de Waltham. Abbati de Sancto Albano. Abbati Westmonasteriensi. Abbati de Evesham. Abbati de Burgo Sancti Petri. Abbati de Abyndon. Abbati de Ramsey. Abbati de Thorney. Abbati de Malmesbury. Abbati de Cyrencester. Abbati de Croyland. Abbati de Bardenay. Abbati de Rading. Abbati de Glaston. Abbati de Gloucester: Priori Sancti Suithini Wintoniensi. Priori Ecclesie Christi Cantuariens. Priori Eliensi. Priori Norwicensi. Priori Hospitalis Sancti Johannis Jerusalem in Angliâ. Magistro Militie Templi in Angliâ. Johanni de Segrave. Johanni Lovell. Roberto filio Rogeri. Roberto de Tateshale. Fulconi filio Warini. Edmundo de Mortuo Mari. Alano la Zusche. Nichelo de Segrave. Rogero le Bigod Comiti Norfolcien∣si, & Maraschallo Anglie. Humfrido de Bohun Comiti Here∣fordensi & Essexensi. N. 34. Rot. Stat. in Turri Lond. M. 28. 25. Ed. 1 EDward par la Grace, &c. Sachies que come de par nos amez & feaux Humfrey de Bohun, Conte de Hereford & de Essex, & Co∣nestable D'engleterre, & Roger Bygod, Conte de Norff. & Mareschall D'engleterre nous seit fet entendaunt quil se douterent que nous eussiens conceu vers eux rancour & indignation pur aucunes desobesances quil avoient fetes, ne ad geres, a ceo que hom disoit i'en ce quil ne vin∣drent pas a nous a nostre comandement, & a ce que hom disoit quil avoient aucuns de nos Comandementz desturbez & targez & aucunes ali∣ances & assemblees des gentz darmes faites countre nostre volunte &  deffense; Nous regardantz que des choses avantditz nul maffait nest per eus sui uncore, coment que paroles eent este dite a la request & priere especiale de Edward nostre chier fuiz & nostre Lieutenant en Engleterre, & des honourables peres Willame Eves{que} de Ely, Willame Eves{que} de Ba & de Welles, Richard Eves{que} de Londre, Wauter Eves{que} de Coventre & de Lichef. & Henry Elit de Everwyke, & des nos ames & feaux Edmond Conte de Cornwaill, Johan de Garenne Conte de Surreye & de Sussex, Willame de Beauchamp, Conte de Warrewyke,  & des autres de nostre Conseil demorantz en Engleterre pres de lavant∣dit nostre suiz releissoms & pardonoms pleinement as ditz Contez, & a Johan de Ferrers, & a toutz leur menengs, & toutz leur aliez, tote manere de rancour & de indignation qui nous avoms conceu vers eus si nule ensoit per les enchesons avantdites ou nule de eles. Issint que nul des dits Contes ne Johan de Ferrers, ne null de leur menenges, ne de leur aliez avantditz, ne soient chalenges, encheisonez ne grevez par nous ne par nos heirs en null temps pur nule des choses avantdites. E ausi  perdonoms & releissoms a toutz autres de nostre Roiaume qui furent so∣mons ou priez de passer oves{que} nous, & ne passerent, totes maneres de rancour & de indignation, si nule eussiens conceu vers eus per cele en∣cheson. En tesmoignance des queux choses nous avoms fait fair cestes nos Lettres overtes. Donees a Gaunt le quint jour de Novembr. L'an de nostre Regne vintisme quint.
N. 35. Pat. 26. Ed. 1. M. 21. De in∣quirendo super Gravaminibus populo Regni factis, in singu∣lis Comitati∣bus Angliae. REX dilectis & fidelibus suis Wilhelmo Inge, & Johanni de Coke∣feld, salutem. Cum nuper ante transfretationem nostram in Flandriam habuerimus voluntatem & desiderium gravamina populo regni nostri nomine, nostro facta, facere emendari & super hoc miseri mus literas nostras patentes, per Comitatus singulos dicti regni, Nos hujusmodi negotium effectui debito mancipari volentes assignavimus vos in Comitatibus Lincoln, Roteland, Northampton, Norff. & Suff.  una cum Clericis & religiosis quos locorum Diocesani ad hoc duxerint deputandos ad inquirendum per Sacramentum proborum & legalium hominum de Comitatibus praedictis per quos rei veritas melius sciri po∣terit: super hujusmodi gravaminibus, veluti de rebuscaptis in Ecclesiis, necnon de lanis, pellibus, coriis, bladis, animalibus, carnibus, piscibus, & omnimodis aliis rebus in Ecclesiis, & extra similiter captis, & aspor∣tatis per Comitatus predictos tam de Clericis quam de Laicis, sive pro custodiâ maris vel alio modo quocum{que} post guerram inter nos &  Regem Franciae inchoatam, & ad ea omnia & singula audienda & ter∣minanda, tam ex officio vobis per presentes commisso, quam ad sectam cujuslibet conqueri se volentis & ad faciendum ulterius in premissis jux∣ta formam ordinationis per nos & consilium nostrum inde factae, quam sigillo nostro vobis mittimus consignatam, & prout de jure, & secun∣dum legem & consuetudinem regni nostri fuerit faciendum. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod ad certos dies & loca quos ad hoc provideritis premissa faciatis in forma predicta, salvis nobis amerciamentis & aliis  ad nos inde spectantibus. Mandavimus enim Vicecomitibus nostris Comitatuum predictorum quod ad certos dies & loca, quos eis scire faciatis, venire faciant coram vobis tot & tales probos & legales ho∣mines de Ballivis suis, per quos rei veritas in premissis melius sciri poterit, & inquiri, & similiter locorum Diocesanis, quod hujusmodi Clericos & Religiosos cum vos vel alter vestrum eis scire feceritis vel fecerit una vobiscum deputent ad premissa. In cujus, &c. Teste rege apud Westmonasterium, quarto die Aprilis. Eodem modo assignantur subscripti in singulis Comitatibus subscriptis, videlicet. Willielmus de Den & Roger Bryan, in Comitatibus Essex, Hertf. Cant. Huntind. Middlesex. Johan. le Savage  & Joh. de Bonquell, in Comitatibus Kanc. Sussex, Surr. Sutht. Wilt. Johannes Randulf & Ric. de Coleshull, in Comitatibus Berk. Somers. Dors. Devon. Cornub. Ad. de Crokedayk  & Rob. de Knittele, in Comitatibus Glouc. Wigorn. Heref. Salop. Staff.
Wil. de S. Quintino & Petrus Becard, in Comitatibus Eborum, Lanc. Notting. & Derb. Johannes de Burne & Joh. de Toyleby, in Comitatibus Boking. Bedf. Oxon. Leyc. Warr. Ibid. Articles of In∣quiry. COme le Rey avant son passage vers Flaundres eust volunte & de∣sir, de faire redrescer & amender les grevances faites a son peo∣ple, en noun de luy, e sur ceo envoiast ses Lettres par tutz les Contes D'engleterre, pur ceste chose mettre en effect ordine est par ly e par son conseil que les enquerrours que sont assignez pur enquerre de tieu manere des grevaunces enquergent des choses prises hors de seinte eglise e des prises de leines, peaus, quirs, blees, bestes, chars, pessons,  & de tutes autres maneres des choses parmi le Roialme des Clers, & de Lais, puis la guerre commencie entre nous & le Rey de France fust ceo pur garde de la mer ou en autre maniere. E enquergent meismes ceaus par queux & as queux & de quei, & de combien, & de la value, & coment, & queu maniere ices prises & grevances, furent feites au people. E cestes choses oont & terminent ausibien par office come a sute de partie e quant la verite de ces choses serra atteinte, le quel que ceo soit par garaunt ou saunz garaunt, ceo que serra pris saunz ga∣rant  soit returne a ceaux que le damage ount receu, si le tortfesantz eient de quey e outre ceo puniz pur le trespasse. E sil neient de quey ceaus as queus les garantz & le Commissions sont venuz come Vis∣cuntes, Clers, assignez, Baillifs, & autre tieu manere de Ministres respoignent pur leur surmis qui averont feit tieu prises. E que de ceo que serra trove pris par garaunt le Rey seit certifie e il enfra taunt quil se tendront apaiez par reson. Et fuerunt inde septem paria & fuerunt Patentes. N. 36. Brevia 26. 27. Ed. 1. in Tur. Lond. Pryns Ed. 1. F. 797. A Tous ceus qui ces Lettres verront ou orront, Renaud par la suf∣france de Dieu, Evesque de Vicence, Messages nostre Seignour l' Apostoille, saluz en Dieu pardurable. Nous feisons savoir a vostre uni∣versite que venant a Whitesand en Royaume de France a nostre pre∣sence Monsieur Robert de Bourghersh Chivaler Conestable de Dovre, & procurator de tresoble Prince & Roy D'engleterre, establiz en ceste fourme Edward par la Grace de Dieu Roy D'engleterre, Seignour  D'irland, & Dues D'aquitaine, a touz ceux qui cestes presentes ver∣ront ou orront, saluz. Saches que nous fesons ordenoms, & esta∣blissons nostre ame & feal Robert de Bourghersh nostre Conestable de Dovre, nostre certein Procuratour, & li onoms plener poair par ces presentes de baillier & delivrer en nostre noun a Whitesand Johan de Baillol, au reverent Piere Renaut, par la Grace de Dieu Evesque de Vicence, Message l' Apostoille en la fourme que sensuit. Cestassa∣voir que li dit Apostoille peusse dire & ordener tant soulment de la  persone le dit Johan & des terres les queles meismes celi Johan out jadis en Engleterre, sicome il plerra a la bone volunte du dit Apostoille en mesme la manere que nous purriens dire, se meisme celui Johan demorast vers nous personalment en Engleterre. Sauve a nous & a nos Heirs Rois D'engleterre, le Royaume D'escoce, les hommes, les inhabitantz & totes les appourtenances des meisme le Royaume. En tes∣moignance
des queux choses nous avoms fait faire cestes nos Lettres overtes. Donees a Canterbir le quattezime jour de juygnet, l'an de nostre Regne vint & septisme. Rehercea & leust les paroles desouz escrites. En noun de Dieu, Amen. Come Sire Johan de Baillol qui est ici presentz par devent vous reverent Piere Evesque de Vicence, Message de nostre Seignour l' Apostoille pur multz de trespass e treisons Inhumeinement demonstrez & faitz par li a tresgrant Prince son Souveraigne Seignour sanz meyn Sire Edward par la Grace de Dieu  Roy D'engleterre encontre son hommage, & le devoir de sa feaute purement par son gree & sanz condition souz meist du tot a la vo∣lunte du dit Roy le Royaume Descoce du quel il estoit jadis Rois, & tout le droit quil avoit en cel, ou a cel & au pueple de meisme le Royaume & a ce touz ses biens, sauve tout soulement a li vie & membre, & non emprisonement. E que puis il par son agreable co∣rage & par sa franche volunte purement & sanz condition, se rendest a son Seigneur avantdite Roi D'engleterre, & le dit Royaume Descoce, oue  les hommes & ses autres droitures & aportenances universeles & sa Royale Dignitie, & son Royale honeur & outre ce toutes ses terres & totes ses possessions, oue touz ses moebles & non moebles & soi movants, sicome appiert par un Instrument publique fait de ce, a la requeste du dit Johan de Baillol, je Robert de Bourghersh Procureur du devantdit Roy D'engleterre, par commandement de li & come Procureour, bail & assigne lavantdit Johan present, a vous Sire Reverend Evesque de Vicence, Message nostre Seigneur l' Apo∣stoille,  pur la Devotion, reverence, & honeur du tres Seint Piere no∣stre Seigneur l' Apostoille & de la Seint Eglise de Rome, es maneres & es conditions que sensivient. Cest assavoir que nostre l' Apostoille peusse due & oideiner tant soulement de la persone le meisme Jo∣han, & des terres les queles meismes celi Johan ont jadis en Engle∣terre, sicomme a plerra a la bone volunte de nostre Seigneur l' Apo∣stoille, en mesme la manere que mon Seigneur li Rois D'engleterre por∣roit dire si meismes celi Johan demorast vers luy personelment en En∣gleterre.  Sauve a mon Seigneur le Roy D'engleterre, & a ses Heirs Rois D'engleterre le Royaume Descoce, les hommes, les Inhabitantz, & totes les aportenances de mesme le Royaume. Cestassavoir & en∣tendre que nostre Seigneur l' Apostoille ne peusse oideiner ne dire du avantdit Royaume Descoce, des hommes, des enhabitantz, ne des ap∣portenances de mesme le Royaume pur le devantdit Johan de Bail∣lol. ne pur ses Heirs, qui sont, ou qui purroient estre, ne pur nul de ses appurtenances par quecunque cause, que ce soit. Et nous  avantdit Evesque, le desusdit Johan de Baillol a nous baille avoms ensi resceu en lieu & en noun de nostre Seigneur l' Apostoille. En tesmoign des queux choses nous avoms mis nostre seal a ces pre∣sentes Lettres. Donees a Whitesand le Samady devant la fest No∣stre Dame la Magdalene, au quel jour nous resceumes le devantdit Johan de Baillol en la manere desusdite par le Procureur devantdit, l'an de nostre Seigneur, 1299.
N. 37. In Tur. Lond. A. D. 1298. Pryns Ed. 1. Fol. 665. IN Nomine Domini, Amen. Anno à Nativitate ejusdem millesimo ducentesimo nonagesimo octavo, Indictione undecimâ prima die Mensis Aprilis in Camera Hospitii venerabilis Patris A. Episcopi Du∣nelmensis extra London, ipse de statu & conditione Regni Scotiae & inhabitantium idem regnum coram nobili viro Domino Johanne de Balliolo verba faciens—Idem Johannes motu proprio in prae∣sentiâ mei notarii & testium subscriptorum inter alia quaedam verba  dixit & protulit Sermone Gallico, hunc habentia intellectum, videli∣cet, quod dum ipse dictum regnum Scotiae, ut Rex & Dominus ipsius regni tenebat atque regebat, tantam invenit in hominibus ejusdem regni malitiam, fraudem, proditionem, & dolum, propter eorum ma∣lignitatem, nequitiam, dolositates, & alia nonnulla excrabilia & detesta∣bilia facta ipsorum, qui eum tunc Principem eorum potionari, sicut veraciter intellexerat, machinabantur, intentionis suae non est prae∣dictum regnum Scotiae, ingredi vel intrare aliquo tempore in futurum,  seu de ipso regno, aut pertinentiis suis per se, vel per alium, aut alios intromittere ullo modo. Nec etiam dictis & aliis multis de causis ali∣quid habere commune cum Scotis. Adjiciens idem Dominus Johannes quod alias rogaverat praefatum Dominum Episcopum Dunelmensem ut magnifico Principi & Domino suo, Domino Edwardo Regi Angliae illustri, hanc suam esse intentionem, voluntatem, & firmum proposi∣tum explicaret, & adhuc sibi cum instantia supplicat, quatenus prae∣missa eidem Domino Regi ex parte suâ dignetur & velit exponere &  plenius aperire. Actum Anno, indictione, die & loco praedictis, praesentibus memerato Domino Episopo Dunelmensi, & Nobili viro Radulpho de Sandwyco, Constabulario Turris London, & nonnullis aliis existentibus tunc ibidem. Et ego Johannes Erturi de Cadomo, Apostolicae sedis authoritate No∣tarius Publicus, hiis omnibus interfui, propria manu scripsi, & mei signi annotatione, in hanc publicam formam redegi. N. 38. Claus. 34. Ed. 1. M. 6. intus Pryn ut supra F. 1124. REX Vicecomiti Suth'ton. salutem. Quia inimicum, rebel∣lem, & proditorem nostrum Willielmum Episcopum Sancti An∣dreae mittimus ad Castrum nostrum Wynton, carcerali custodiae man∣cipandum, exigente hoc multiplici culpa sua, Tibi precipimus quod dictum Epscopum in tuam custodiam recipias & corpus ejus infra tur∣rim dicti Castri in loco tutiori, & fortiori ejusdem turris includas, &  salvo ac securè in compedibus ferreis custodias, sub forisfacturo vitae & membrorum ac omnium terrarum & tenementorum, bonorum & catallorum tuorum quae ex nunc forisfacta censemus, si de custodia hu∣jusmodi aliquod periculum immineat in futurum. Proviso, quod locus predictus intus & exterius taliter muniatur, & firmetur quod de custo∣diâ ipsius inclusi nullum timeatur periculum, quod{que} ad accedendum ad ipsum seu videndum, vel etiam ad alloquendum nemini possit pa∣tere aditus vel facultas, set nec ipse Episcopus quemquam videat, seu  etiam alloquatur, praeter illos quos ad deserviendum ei necessario tuo periculo deputabis, & quos per singulos menses mutare & alios subro∣gare poteris ad cautelam, si pro securitate tuâ videris expedire, ut cujuslibet conspirationis & collusionis suspicio evitetur. Et ut custo∣dia ejus securior habeatur, omnes aditus & Portae Turris praedictae se∣curius firmentur, & pons versatilis levetur continue, & claudatur;
ad quam custodiam, fideles & bonos assignabis sub fidejussoria cautione custodes, pro quibus tu ipse nobis volueris sub praenotatis poena & pe∣riculo respondere. Ad haec quia complicem suum consimili vel fortè majori infamiâ maculatum Robertum scilicet Episcopum Glasguensem fidelitatem suam erga nos & coronam nostram frequenter & temerè violantem, mittimus ad Castrum nostrum Porcester, incarcerandum ibidem, Tibi precipimus, ut posito prius in tuto in turri Wynton, praefato Episcopo Sancti Andreae modo & forma praeexpressis, dictum  Episcopum Glasguensem in propria persona tua, ducas salvo & securè us{que} Porcestre, & juxta tuam & Custodis nostri Castri praedicti cir∣cumspectionem industrem, ipsum Episcopum in tuciori & fortiori loco Castri praedicti, in compedibus ferreis includas, locum insuper prae∣dictum muniri & firmari vestro & ipsius Custodis Castri praedicti peri∣culo facias, modo quo superius exprimitur de Episcopo Sancti Andreae, seu etiam meliori, quia tam te quam praedictum custodem Castri no∣stri praedicti de custodia ipsius Episcopi volumus aequanimiter onerari.  Et ut fortius & firmius custodiantur, volumus & mandamus, ut ad∣jungas tibi & Custodi nostro castri praedicti aliquos homines fideles, & idoneos, terras tenentes de visneto castri praedicti vel loco vicini∣ori, quos ad hoc sufficientes videris, qui dictam custodiam una vobis∣cum recipiant & habeant, sub poenis & periculis praenotatis. De su∣stentatione vero dictorum Episcoporum famulantium eis & Custodum suorum, quam per te exhiberi volumus secundum Indenturam quam ti∣bi mittimus praesentibus interclusam cujus altera pars remanet penes  Thesaurarium nostrum, allocationem debitam tibi habere faciemus. Qualiter autem, & quam provide & secure ordinaveris de custodiâ praedicta, & quot & quos terras tenentes, tibi & dicti Custodi Castri de Porcestre adjunxeris ad eandem, dicto Thes. nostro sub tuo & illorum sigillis qui una tecum onus subibunt Custodiae memoratae significes, sine mora. T. R. apud Dunolm. 7 die Aug. N. 39. Rileys Placita Parl. F. 379. CUM in Parliamento Domini Regis apud Karliolum in Octabis Sancti Hillarii, Anno Regni Domini Regis Edwardi 35. pro∣positae fuerunt petitiones per Comites, Barones, & alios Magnates, & Communitatem totius Regni Angliae pro statu Coronae Regiae, necnon terrarum ipsius Regis Scotiae, Walliae, & Hiberniae, & tota communi∣tate praedicta super variis novis & intollerabilibus gravaminibus, op∣pressionibus, injuriis & extorsionibus proefatis Comitibus, Baronibus, Magnatibus, & communitate, authoritate & mandato Domini Papae, ac  etiam per Magistrum Willielmum Cesta, Domini Papae Cleri∣cum, necnon ejusdem Magistri Willielmi Commissarios, Ministros, seu Vices-gerentes & ipsius nomine illatis, multipliciter in regno, & terris praedictis, prout in articulis contentis in praedictis petitionibus, qui tales funt, inferitur. N. 40. Ib. F. 381. HAEC omnia ad extrahendam à regno pecuniam, ad exinanitio∣nem Ecclesiae manifestam, & ad ditandum alienigenas, spoliatis indigenis, tendere dinoscuntur, nisi exurgat Deus & dissipentur inimici ejus, ut per secularem Principem & ipsius Consilium de consensu Proce∣rum & Magnatum tanta malicia reprimatur.
Super quibus oppressionem, gravaminum, & extorsionum & injuria∣rum Articulis praefatus Magister Willielmus Testa quatinus ipsum contingunt in pleno Parliamento praedicto allocutus, convictus extitit, nec inde se potuit aliqualiter excusare, nisi tantum quod dixit, quod authoritate Domini Papae praemissa fuerat executus. Et quia facta Magistri Willielmi Testa in praemissis, si tolerarentur, manifeste cederent in divini cultus diminutionem, & Ecclesiae Anglicanae exi∣nanitionem,  necnon in praejudicium, laesionem, & exhaeredationem Coronae, potestatis, jurisdictionis, & dignitatis Regiae Anglicanae, de∣structionem{que} totius communitatis praedictae, ac status regni, legum & consuetudinum ejusdem subversionem, quod absit, perpetuam. Et unde majora pericula possent processu temporis evenire. Demum, consideratis periculis praedictis, ex assensu Domini Regis, ac toto Consilio Parliamenti praedicti, provisum fuit, concordatum, ordi∣natum,  & consideratum, quod praemissa gravamina, oppressiones, in∣jurias & extorsiones fieri non permitterentur in regno, & terris prae∣dictis, & prohibitum est praedicto Magistro Willielmo in Parliamen∣to praedicto, quod de caetero contra provisionem, concordiam, consi∣derationem, praedictas, nec procedat, nec per se, seu alium quem∣cum{que} in praemissis intromittat vel aliquo praemissorum. Et Injunctum est eidem Magistro Willielmo, quod quicquid per ipsum, Collegas, Commissar. Ministros, Vices-gerentes, aut alios quoscun{que} sibi adhaeren∣tes,  seu intendentes attemptatum est, actum seu executum in prae∣missis, & quolibet praemissorum revocet, ut cassum, irritum, & inane, & totam pecuniam per eos in hac parte levatam, salvo custodiri faci∣atis, & secure infra regnum praedictum, quous{que} Dominus Rex, de Consilio praedicto, aliud super hoc duxerit ordinandum. Et ad ma∣jorem hujus rei evidentiam, ordinatum est, & concordatum per Do∣minum Regem & Consilium praedictum, quod Nuncii experti ad dictum Dominum Papam ex parte dicti Domini Regis, & totius communi∣tatis  praedictae, transmittantur ad praedicta gravamina, oppressiones, extor∣siones, & injurias notificanda & exponenda. Et praeceptum est sin∣gulis Vicecomitibus regni praedicti, quod per sacramentum proborum & legalium hominum de Ballivis suis, per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit, diligenter inquirant de nominibus Comissariorum, & aliorum Ministrorum praedicti Magistri Will. Testa, qui praemissa, oppres∣siones, gravamina, extorsiones, & injurias in Comitatibus praedictis, taliter perpetrarunt aut fecerunt necnon, de nominibus eorum, qui co∣ram  dictis Commissariis, vel Ministris, aliquem aut aliquos, citari vel vocari fecerunt, seu dicta gravamina executi fuerunt. Et omnes illos quos in praemissis culpabiles invenerint, attachient per corpora eo∣rum, ita quod eos habeant coram Rege in Octabis Sanctae Trinitatis ubicunque tunc fuerit in Anglia, ad respondendum tam Domino Re∣gi, quam aliis inde conqueri volentibus super praemissis. Et ad fa∣ciendum & recipiendum quod Curia Regis consideraverit in hac par∣te, & Vicecom. habeant ibi nomina eorum quos inde culpabiles inve∣nerint,  & Brevia.
N. 41. Pat. 35. Ed. 1. M. 19. Riley ut supra. F. 383. REX omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod ob reverentiam sedis Apostolicae, & affectionem quam erga Sanctissimum in Christo Patrem Dominum Elementem Divina Providentia Summum Ponificem, gerimus & habemus, conce∣dimus quantum in nobis est, quod dilecti nobis, Magister Williel∣mus Testa Archidiaconus Dravensis, in Ecclesia Coventrensi, & Petrus Amalmeni Canonicus Burdegalensis, sedis Apostolicae nuncii  fructus primi anni a tempore reservationis inde per Dominum Papam sibi factae, de beneficiis Ecclesiasticis cum cura & sine cura, vacantibus in regno nostro provenientes us{que} ad triennium secundum mandatum Apostolicum, non obstantibus quibuscun{que} Prohibitionibus in Parliamen∣to nostro inde factis: Ita videlicet, quod de fructibus de Abbatibus seu Prioratibus vacantibus in eodem regno provenientibus se nullatenus intromittant, ad opus dicti Domini summi Pontificis, modo debito col∣ligere custodire{que} valeant & tenere. Hoc tamen observato, quod  pecuniam inde provenientem extra idem regnum praeterquam per vi∣am Cambii non deferant seu deferri faciant, quovis modo sine licen∣tia speciali. Teste Rege apud Carliolum quarto die Aprilis, Anno regni 35. Per ipsum Regem. N. 42. Riley ut supra, F. 384. PRaetextu quarum literarum praefati Clerici Domini Papae non habentes respectum ad prohibitiones eis inde in dicto Parliamento factas ad omnia praedicta extorsiones & gravamina facienda reverterunt; & quia dicti Clerici postea occasione prohibitionum illarum per plures de regno impediti fuerunt, quo minus extorsiones suas & gravamina sicut prius facere possent: Et idem Clerici in Concilio Domini Regis apud Westmonasterium, ad festum Sanctae. Trinitatis proximo sequentis, quasdam petitiones super impedimento eis facto porrexerunt, & protu∣lerunt  coram Concilio ibidem literas suas supradictas. Et quia com∣pertum fuit per easdem, quod Dominus Rex nichil revcavit de prae¦dicta Ordinatione facta in Parliamento nec aliquid eisdem Clericis con∣cessit per literas praedictas nisi quod primos fructus Ecclesiarum vacan∣tium, quantum in Rege fuit colligere, possint & habere, & super hoc quod nichil facerent, nec attemptarent, quod cederet in praejudicium Coronae seu dignitatis Regiae, aut aliorum fidelium Regis, & quod singula gravamina praedicta in praejudicium Regis & aliorum fidelium  suorum cedunt, de mandato Domini Regis tunc apud Karliolum existen∣tis. Concordatum fuit in eodem Concilio quod praefati Clerici nulla de gravaminibus praedictis facerent nec primos fructus Ecclesiarum de patronatu Regis, pro eo quod in praejudicium Regis Coronae cederet, nec aliorum haberent. Intelligentibus autem dictis Clericis de concordia hujusmodi, petitiones suas ulterius in Concilio prosequi, seu ibidem ad responsionem earundarum habenda accedere noluerunt. Ideoque ordi∣nata fuit & facta eisdem prohibitio subtus scripta.
N. 43. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. N. 13. Dors. FET a remembrer que le dimeine le xxvi. jour de Feuerer a La∣nercost nostre Seigneur le Roy ordena e comanda par acunes re∣sons que maintenant apres les tres simeins apres le prochein tornement que serra ore a la Quinzeine de Pasque prochein avenir Monsieur Piers de Gavastion seit prest a passer la Mer a Dovre vers Gascoign a demoergey sanz revenir pardecea tant que au repel nostre Seigneur le Roy avantdit & par son conge, e a cele ordinance tenir sanz venir en∣contre  en nul point, le dit Monsieur Piers fit Serment au jur e au leu desusditz. Sur le cors Dieu, sur la croiz neitz, e, sur les autres reliques nostre Seigneur le Roy. E outre ceo Monsieur Edward Prince de Gales fiz nostre Seigneur le Roy fit sur le Serement sur le cors Dieu e sur les autres Reliques quil ne receitret, ne retendroit pres de li ne ovesque li le dit Monsieur Piers contre Lordenance avantdite sanz repel ou sanz conge de nostre Seigneur le Roy sicom est avantdit. E par comandement du dit nostre Seigneur le Roy feust ordenez que le dit Monsieur Piers  eit par au en aid de es Despens tant come il demmora es parties de dela a la volente & au repel nostre Seigneur le Roy sicom est avantdit, Cen Mars Deterlings ou la value des chipoteis a resceivre des issues de la terre de Gascoigne. E doit le primer an commencer le jour apres ceo qui serra passe la mer a Dovre jusques a Whitesand pur aler en Gascoigne a demorer y solonc la dite ordenance & dite prendre la dite summe a la volente le Roy e tant que le Roy eit fit enquere ceo que le dit Monsieur Piers, ad pardecea e pardela e des profitz quil  ad eu puis quil vint en Engleterre issint que quant lechose serra ben enquise e que le Roy ensoit pleinement avise quil puisse ordener dacrestr ou damenuser lestat du dit Mons. Piers solonc cco que plerra au Roy e quil vorra que bon soit. N. 44. Claus. 1. Ed. 1. M. 11. Dors. Pryns Ed. 1. F. 122. CUM Ecclesiis Cathedralibus in regno Angliae viduatis, & de jure debeat & solet de consuetudine provideri per electionem Ca∣nonicam  ab hiis potissimè celebrandum Collegiis, Capitulis, & perso∣nis ad quas jus pertinet eligendi, petita tamen prius ab Illustri Rege An∣gliae super hoc licentia & optenta, & demum celebrata electione, persona Electi eidem Regi debeat praesentari, ut idem Rex contra personam ipsam possit proponere, si quid rationabile habeat contra eam. Videtur eidem Domino Regi, & suo consilio, quod sibi & Ecclesiae Cantuariae, cujus ipse patronus est pariter & desensor fiat praejudicium in hac parte, prae∣cipue si res trahitur in aliis Ecclesiis Angliae in exemplum, quod  Summus Pontifex hiis omissis in hoc casu, ubi nec in materia, nec in forma electionis inventum est fuisse peccatum, nec in ipsius lit∣teris expressum potestatem sibi assumpserit ipsi Ecclesiae providendi. Unde ne de caetero ad consimiles provisiones procedat Romana Ecclesia: Et si ad eas processerit, nec dicto Domino Regi per eas praejudicium gene∣retur, ut Temporalia alicujus Ecclesiae Cathedralis sic proviso reddere teneatur, Domine Electe Cantuariensis Temporalia Cantuariensis Ec¦clesiae idem Dominus Rex vobis concedit ad praesens de gratia sua spe∣ciali.  Et ego Iterus Bernard ejusdem Domini Regis Clericus vice & nomine ipsius protestor, quod concessio Temporalium in casu consimili facta Domino Nicholao Wintoniensi Episcopo, cum protestatione ta∣men, & nunc in persona vestra denuo iterata, cum protestatione con∣simili, ad consuetudinem vel exemplum futuris temporibus minime pertrahatur. Facta autem & lecta fuit ista protestatio apud West∣monastr.
in Capella Sancti Stephani die Lunae in vigilia Sanctae Luciae Virginis, in praesentia fratris Roberti de Kilwardeby Cantuar-Electi▪ praesentibus & ad hoc specialiter vocatis venerabili Patre W. Dei Gratia Exon. Episcopo; & discretis viris Dominis W. de Merton Canc. Angliae, Magistro Johanne de Chistall Decano Sancti Pauli Lon∣don. R. Burnell Eborum Archidiacono, Herveo de Borham, fratre Johanne de Derlington, Magistro Willielmo de Cornera, Johanne de Kirkeby, Willielmo de Saham, & Johanne de Shalemesford, Monacho  Cantuar. & multis aliis. Anno Domini 1272. N. 45. Claus. 7. Ed. 1. M. 1. Dors. MEmorandum, quod venerabilis Pater J. Cantuar. Archiepisco∣pus, venit coram Rege & consilio suo in Parliamento Regis Sancti Michaelis, anno regni Regis septimo apud Westmonastr. & con∣fitebatur & concessit quod de statutis, provisionibus & declarationibus eorundem, quae per ipsum promulgatae fuerunt apud Rading. mense  Augusti anno eodem, inter quasdam Sententias Excommunicationis quas idem Archiepiscopus ibidem promulgavit: Primo, deleatur & pro¦non pronunciata habeatur, illa clauula in prima sententia Excommuni∣cationis quae facit mentionem, de impetrantibus literas Regias ad im∣pediendum processum in causis quae per sacros Canones, &c. Secun do, quod non excommunicentur Ministri Regis licet ipsi non pareant mandato Regis, in non capiendo Excommunicatos. Tertio, de illis qui invadunt Maneria Clericorum, ut ibi sufficiat poena per Regem  posita. Quarto, quod non interdicat vendere victualia Eboracensi Archiepiscopo vel alii venienti ad Regem. Quinto, quod tollatur Magna Charta de foribus Ecclesiarum. Confitetur etiam & concessit, quod nec Regi nec Haeredibus suis, nec regno suo Angliae, ratione ali∣orum Articulorum in concilio Rading. contentorum, nullum generetur praejudicium in futurum. N. 46. Pat. 8. Ed. 1. M. 10. intus. REX Venerabili in Christo Patri J. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati & omnibus Episcopis & aliis Praelatis & absenti∣um Procuratoribus London. conventuris, salutem. Dilectos & fideles nostros Rogerum Extraneum & Hugonem filium Dttonis Senes∣challum hospitii nostri ad vos duximus transmittendos ad appellandum pro nobis ne in Concilio seu Congregatione nuper apud London. convoca∣ta, contra Coronam & Dignitatem nostram aliqua statuere praesumatis. In cujus, &c. Teste Rege apud Wynton. 6. die Januarii. Anno Regni nostri octavo. N. 47. Pat. 9. Ed. 1. M. 6. intus. REX Venerabilibus in Christo patribus J. eadem gratia Cantuari∣ensi Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati & omnibus Episcopis & aliis Praelatis in instanti concilio de Lambeth conventuris, salutem. Vin∣culo juramenti nobis estis (ut nostis) astricti, quo nobis in omnibus ad Coronam & dignitatem nostram spectantibus omnem quam poteritis fide∣litatem observare debetis. Quapropter vobis mandamus in fide & fi∣delitate quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod ad defensio∣nem  & conservationem Jurium nostrorum & regni nostri, omnem quam poteritis diligentiam adhibere curetis, & sub vinculo juramenti memorati, & paena amissionis Temporalium quae de nobis teneis, vobis omnibus & singulis firmiter inhibemus, ne in praejudicium nostri vel ejusdem regni in concilio nunc apud Lambeth convocato, nec etiam contra nos vel jura nostra, quibus praedecessres nostri Reges Angliae &
nos ex antiquâ & approbatâ consuetudine usi sumus, procurare vel attemptare aliqua praesumatis; aut etiam alicui hujusmodi procurare seu statuere volenti, assensum praebeatis, sic ergo vos habeatis in hâc parte, quod vos debeamus potius specialiter commendare, quam de contrariis quod absit, increpare. Teste Rege apud Lyndhurst 18. die Septembris. N. 48. Rot. pat. 1. Ed. 2. parte 1. M. 2. De Custode Regni Angliae constituto. REX Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comiti∣bus, Baronibus, Militibus, libere Tenentibus, Communitatibus, Vicecomitibus, & omnibus aliis Ministris, Ballivis & fidelibus suis ad quos presentes littere pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod cum nos pro quibusdam negotiis, nos & statum Regni nostri tangentibus sumus ad partes transmarinas favente Domino in proximo profecturi. Nos de circumspectione & industria & fidelitate dilecti & fidelis nostri  Petri de Gavaston Comitis Cornubie specialiter confidentes, ipsum Comitem Custodem nostrum dicti Regni ac locum nostrum in eodem Regno Tenentem pro pace & tranquillitate Populi dicti Regni nostri melius conservanda, constituimus per presentes, quamdiu in dictis par∣tibus transmarinis moram fecerimus vel aliud inde duxerimus ordinand. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod eidem Comiti tanquam Custodi nostro dicti Regni & locum nostrum tenenti in eodem, in hiis quae ad dictam custodiam pertinent, intendentes sitis & respondentes. In cujus, &c.  quamdiu nobis placuerit duratur. Teste Rege apud Westmonasteri∣um, dce xxvi. Decemb. N. 49. Rot. pat. 1. Ed. 2. parte 2. M. 28. De potestate data Custodi Angliae, ordinandi de custodiis & conferendi Beneficia. REX Omnibus ad quos, &c. Salutem. Sciatis quod nos de fide∣litate & industria dilecti & fidelis nostri Petri de Gavaston  Comitis Cornubie, quem Custodem nostrum Regni nostri, dum nos in partibus transmarinis ad quas jam profecturi sumus, morari contigerit, vel aliud inde ordinandum duxerimus, constituimus specialiter confi∣dentes eidem Comiti concedendi, vice nostra licentiam eligendi, omnibus illis qui licentiam hujusmodi ad futuros sibi eligendi Pastores, tam in Ecclesiis Cathedralibus quam Conventualibus, quas interim Pastorum so∣latio destitui contigerit in forma debita petierint, & postmodum Electi∣onibus illis assensum nostro nomine adhibendi, necnon ab Electis hujus∣modi,  cum Electiones de ipsis faciendas confirmari contigerit, fideli∣tates capiendi ac eifdem Temporalia quae ipsis restituenda fuerint resti∣tuendi, & similiter Prebendas Ecclesias & alia beneficia quecumque inte∣rim vacantia quae ad nostram Collationem seu presentationem pertinue∣rint nostro nomine conferendi, seu ad ea praesentandi & etiam ordinandi de custodiis & maritagiis que nobis interim accidere contigerit, prout sibi per nos plenius est injunctum, necnon fidelitates haeredum illorum qui de nobis tenent in capite vel alio modo, & quos interim decedere con∣tigerit,  cum haeredes illi plene aetatis fuerint, capiendi & eis terras & te∣nementa sua prout justum fuerit nostro nomine reddendi plenam tenore praesentium concedimus & committimus potestatem. In cujus, &c. Teste Rege apud Dovor. xviii. die Januarii. Per ipsam Regem.
N. 50. Pat. 3. Ed. 2. M. 16. intus. Ryley. plac. Parl. fol. 526. LE Roy a touz ceux qui cestes lettres verront ou orront saluz. Come nous al honur de Dieu, & por le bien de nous, & de no∣stre Roiaume, eoms grantez de nostre fraunche volunte as Prelatz, Contes & Barons de nostre dit Roiaume quil puissent eslire certeines persones des Prelatz, Contes & Barons & des autres les queux il lour semblera suffisauntz dappeller a eux, durant les temps de lour poiar, cest a saver jesqes a la feste de seint Michel procheine avenir, & de la  dite feste en un an prochein suiant, per ordener & establir lestat de no∣stre hostel, & de nostre Roiaume, solonc droit & reson: Nous grantoms par cestes nos lettres a ceux qui deyvent estre esluz, queux quil soient, par les ditz Prelatz, Contes & Barons, plein poair de ordener lestat de nostre hostel, & de nostre Roiaume desusditz, en tien manere que lour ordenances soint faites al honur de Dieu, & al honour & au profit de seint Eglise & al honur de nous & a nostre profit, & au profit de nostre people, solonc droit & reson & le serment que nous feismes a no∣stre  coronnement. Et voloms que les esluz & toux ceux qui sont de nostre seigneurie, & de nostre ligeance les ordenaunces que faites serront par les Prelatz, Contes & Barons qui a ce serront esluz, & autres par eux a ce appellez, tiegnent & gardent en touz lour pointz, & quil se puissent a ce asseurer, lier, & entrejurer, sanz chalenge de nous. Et si par aven∣ture aviegne que partie de ceux qui serront esluz, pur les dites orde∣naunces faire soient destorbez par mort, ou par maladie, ou resnable encheson que Dieu deffende, per quei il ne puissent les dites orde∣nances  prefaire, que adonques bien lyt a eux qui serront presentz pur meismes les ordenances faire, daler avant en les dites ordenances par eux, on appeller autres a eux, a celes ordenances faire solonc ce quil verront que-ce soit plus a honur de nous, & au profit de nous, & de nostre people. Et en tesmoignaunce de queu chose nous avoms fait faire cestes noz lettres overtes. Don a Westm. le xvi. jour de Marz. N. 51. Registrum Winchelsey fol. 15. b. at Doctors Com∣mons.Note that in this Register, things are En∣tered Con∣fusedly, nei∣ther according to the time when done, or Order of the folio's. A Touz ceuz que cest lettre verront ou orront R. par la soeffrance de Dieu Ercevesque de Canturburi &c. R. de London. J. de Nichol. S. de Sarum. H. de Wync. J. de Norwyz. J. de Baa & Wells. J de Cicestre. W. de Wyrc. W. de Excestre. V. de Saynt Davi. par mesmes le soeffrance Esvesques. G. de Clare de Gloucestre & de Herif. T. de Lancastr. H. de La∣cy de Nichol. Humfr. de Boun de Heref. & Essex. J. de Britania de Rich∣mond. Adomar. de Valencia de Penbrok. Guy de Beauchamp de Warwic & E. de Arundel Countes: H. de Lancastre. Henr. de Percy, Hue de Ver, Roberd de Clifford & Roberd Fiz Payn, Will. le Mareschal, John Lovel,  Rauf le fiz Will. Peyn de Tipetot, John de Botourt. Barth. de Badlesmer, J. de Grey, John de Crumwell salutz in nostre Seygnr. Come nostre treschier Seygnr par la grace Dieu Roy de Engleterre & al honor de Dieu & pur bien dit Seygnr le Roy, e de son Royaume ait Grante de sa Franche volunte a nos e as autres Prelates, Countes e Barons du dit Roy∣aume: Que nous puissouns eflire certeigns persons de nos & des au∣tres les queux il nos semblera suffisaunz de Apeler a nous durant le temps de nostre poer, cest a saver, jesque la feste saynt Michel pro∣schein  avenir, e de la dite feste en un an proscheyn suiant; per Ordener Establier lestat del ostel du dit nostre Seygnr. le Roi, e de scen Roiame solom Droyt e resoun, e que ceux qui deivent estre eslutz qui quil soient eyent pleyn poer de ordener lestat del ostel du dit nostre Seygnr. le Roi ê de son Roiame desusditz en tieu manere, qui les ordenances soi∣ent faites al honor de Dieu e al honor, ê profist de seynt Esglise ê al
honor du dit nostre Seygnr le Roi, ê a son profist, ê al profist de soen poeple solom droyt & resoun ê la serment que le Dit nostre Seygnr. le Roi fist à son Coronnement. Ea ceo le dit nostre Seygnr le Roi eyt volu que les eslutz e touz ceux qui seyent sa seignurie ê de la liaunce, les ordenances que faites serrunt per les▪ Prelates, Countes, & Barons qui a ceo serrunt eslutz é autres par eux a ceo apellez Teignent & Gar∣dent en touz lur poinz, é quil ceo puissent a ceo a seurer,—lier, & entrejurer saunz chaleng du dit nostre Seygnr le Roy ou de soens, e si  aventure aveygne que partie de ceux qui serront eslutz pur les dites ordenances faire soient desturbez par mort, ou par maladie, ou re∣sonable enchesoun, que Dieu defende, par quoy il ne puissent les dites ordenances perfaire que a donk bien lit a eux qui serront presents pur mesmes les ordenances faire de aler avant en les dites ordenances per eux ou apeler autres á eux a ces ordenances faire solom ceo quil ver¦ront que ceo soit plus al honor del dit nostre Seygnr le Roy é al profist de luy e de soen poeple, sicome plus pleynment este continues  en les lettres overtes que nostre dit Seygnr le Roy nous ad fet sur les choses desusdites; Nous Grantounz é pro mittons pur nos, nos succes∣sors ê nos heyres, Que le grant que nostre Seygnr. le Roy ad fait en le ma∣nere desusdits ne soit autrefoits tret en custome, ne en usage ne ne Turne en prejudice du dit nostre Seygnr le Roy ne de ces heyres, ne de nos, nos successors & nos heyres. N. 52. Rotulus Parliamenti de Anno quinto Edwardi Secundi. LE Roy a tous ceux as queux cestes lettres vendront Saluz. Sachez que come le seissizme jour de Marz l'an de nôtre regne i∣erce, al honeur de Dieu & pur le bien de nous & de nostre royaume eussoms graunte de nostre fraunche volunte par nos lettres overtes as Prelats, Counts & Barons de dit Royaume quil puissent eslire certeins persones des Prelats, Counts & Barons les queux il lour sembleroit suf∣fisaunt  appelier a eux & cussoms auxint graunte par mesmes les lettres a ceux qui deussent estre esluz, queux quil fuissent, par les ditz Prelatz, Countees & Barons plein poar de ordeiner lestat de nôtre hostiel & de nostre royaume desusditz en tieu maniere que leur ordinances fussent faites, al honeur de Dieu & al honeur & profit de seint Eglise, & al ho∣neur de nous & a nôtre profit, & au profit de nôtre poeple solonc droit & reson, & le serement que nous feimes a nôtre coronnement, si come plus pleinement est contenuz en nos dittez lettres, & lonourable  Piere en Dieu Robert par le grace de Dieu Ercevesque de Canterbirs Primat de tote Engleterre, Evesques, Countes, & Barons a ceo esluz par le vertu de nos dites lettres eient ordeine sur les dites choses en la forme que ce ensuit. Por ceo que par mauvais consail & deceivant nôtre Seigneur le Roy & tous les soens sont en totes terres deshonurez & estre de la Coronnement des pointz abeissee & demembree & ses terres de Gascoigne, Dirland & Descoce en point destre perduz si Dieu——ment & son Royaume Dengleterre: en point de re∣veler  pur oppressions, prises & destruccions les queux choses sewes——nôtre Seigneur le Roy de sa fraunche volunte graunta as Prelatz, Countes, & Barons, & as autres bons gentz—de son Royaume que certein gentz fussent esluz de ordeiner & establir lestat de son hostiel & de son Royaume, si come plus pleinment piert par la commission nôtre Seigneur le Roy de ce faite dounte nous Robert
par le grace de Dieu Ercevesque de Canterbirs Primate de tote En∣gleterre, Evesques, Countes, & Barons esluz par la vertu de la dite commission ordinoms al honeur de Dieu & de seint Esglise & lon̄ur de Roy & son Royaume en la manere que ce ensuit. 1. De franchise de seint Esglise. Enprimes nous ordenoms que les ordinances avant faites par nous & monstrez au Roy soient tenuz & gardees les queux sont prescheinement souz escriptz. Enprimes ordeine est que seinte Esglise  eit totes ces franchises si avant come ele deit avoir. 2. De la pees le Roy garder. Derechief ordene est que la pees le Roy soit fermement garde par tout le roiaume issent que chescune puisse sauvement alier, venir, & demorir solonc la ley & lusage du royaume. 3. De douns faites par le Roy sanz as∣sent des Or∣denours. Derechief ordene est par les dettes le Roi acquitier & son estat relever & le plus honourablement maintenier, que nul doun de  terre ne de rente, ne de franchise, ne deschite, ne de garde, ne de mariage, ne baille, se face a nul des ditz ordenours durant leur poar del dit ordei∣nement, ne a nul autre saunz conseil & assent des ditz ordenours ou de la greinour partie de eux ou sis de eux, au miens mes totes les choses des queux profitz poetz surdre soient en prueez al profit le Roy jusques son estat soit avenaument releve & autre chose soit sur ce or∣deine al honur & profit du Roy. 4. Des custumes liverer a Les∣chequir. Derechief est ordene que les Custumes du Royaume soient gardees, & resceuz par gentz du royaume meismes & non a pas par aliens, & que les issues & les profitz de mesmes les custumes ensem∣blement ove totes autres issues & les profitts issauntz du royaume, des queux choses que ces soient entierment viegnent a Eschequier le Roy & par le Tresorer & les chamberleins soient livereez pur loustiel le Roy meintenier & aillours a son profit, issint que le Roy puisse vievre du soen saunz prisez faire autres que ancienes dues & acustumez &  totes autres ceissents. 5. De Marchantz alienz arestoir. Derechief ordeine est que toutes les Marchants aliens qui ount recenz les profitz des custumes du royaume ou des autres choses appurtenances au Roy puis la mort Roy Edward piere nôtre Seigneur le Roy qui ore est, soient arestuzove leur biens ou quil soient trovez denz le poer le Roy Dengleterre, jusques il eient renduz resonable ac∣counte de quant quil eient recuz des issues du roialme deinz le temps  avantditz, devant le Tresorer & les Barons del Eschequier, & autres jointz a eux par les ditz ordeinours. 6. De la graunde. Chartre tenir. Derechief ordeine est que la graund Chartre soit gardee en toutz ses pointz en tiex manere que sil yeit en la dite Chartre nul point oscur ou dotif soit desclaree par les ditz ordeinours & autres que il verront a eux a ce appeller quant il verront temps & deurant leur poer. 7. De douns le Roy repeer. Et puis derechief pur ce que la Corone est tant abeissee & de∣membree par diverses douns, nous ordeinoms que tous les douns que sont donez au damage du Roy & distresse de la Coronne puis la Com∣mission a nous faite de chasteux, villes, terres, & tenements, & baillies, gardes & mariages eschetes & reles, queconques queles soient,
aussibien en Gascoigne, Irlande, Gales & Escoce, come en Engleterre soient repellez. Et nous les repellons de tout sanz estre redonnez a meismes ceux sanz comun assent en Parlement. Et que si tieu ma∣nere des douns ou reles soient desoreines donez encountre la fourme avantdite saunz assent de son Baronage & ce en Parlement tant que ses dettes soient acquittes & son estat avenauntment relevez soient tenuz pur nuls & soit le parvoar puny en Parlement par egard del Baronage. 8. De totes ma∣nees issues du roiaume live∣rer a Lesche∣quir. Por ceo que autrefoirz fut ordein que les coustumes du roy∣aume fussent resceuz & gardez par gentz du royaume & non pas par aliens, & que les Issues & les profitz des meismes les custumes ensemblement ove totes les autres issues & profitz issantz du roy∣aume, queux que eux fussent, entierment venissent al Eschequir le Roy & par le Tresorier & les Chambreleins fussent resceuz & livereez pur loustiel le Roy maintenir & aillours a son profit issent  que le Roy puisse vivre de soen, sans prisez fair autres que aun∣cienes dues & droitureles, les queux choses ne sont mye tenues dount nous ordeinous que les dites custumes ensemblement ove to∣tes les issues du royaume, come avant est dit, soient resceuz & gardeez par gentz de royaume & livereez al Eschequier en la forme susdite. 9. Que le Roy ne alier hors d royaume. Por ceo que le Roy ne doit emprendre fait de guerre contre nul y ne alier hors du son roiaume sanz comune assent de son Ba∣ronage pur moults des perils que purront avenir a lui & a son▪ royaume, nous ordeinoms que le Roy desoremes ne aile hors du son roialme, nemprenge contre nul y fait de guerre sanz comune assent de son Baronage & ceo en Parlement & si autrement le face, & si sur cele emprise face somoundre son service soit la so∣mence pur nule, & sil aveigne que le Roy empreigne fait de guerre contre nully ou aile hors de terre par assent de son dit Baronage &  busoigne quil mettre Gardein en son roiaume, dount le mette par commune assent de son Baronage, & ceo en Parlement. 10. Que totes pri∣ses cessent. Et por ceo quil fait a dotier que le people de la terre se∣leve pur prises & diverses oppressions faites einz ces heures, nome∣ment pur ceo que autre foiz estoit ordeine que nostre Seigneur le Roy resquist de soen saunz prises faire autres que les auncien∣ces dues & accust & totes autres se ceisassent & noun  pas pur ceo prises sont faites de jour en jour contre cel ordein∣ment come avont, nos ordeinoms que totes prises cessent desoremes sauves les prises auncienes droitureles & dues au Roy & as autres as queux eles sont dues de droit, & si nules prises se facent en∣countre lordeinement suisdit par qui que ce soit ou de quele con∣dition quil soit, cestassavoir, si nul par colour de purveiance faire al oeps nôtre Seigneur le Roy ou a autre preinge blees, mers merchandises ou autre manere des biens contre la volunte de ceux  a qui il sont & ne rend. maintenant les deniers a la verroie value sil ne puisse de ceo avoir respite de la bone volunte le vendour so∣lonc ce que est comprise en la grande Chartre des prises faites parM. Charta. c. 19. Conestables des Chasteaux & leur bayliffs & estre la forsprise des pri∣ses dues suisdites nient contreesteant commission que il eit, soit levee sur si la menee par huy & cry & menes a la prescheine gaole le Roy▪
& de luy soit fait commune ley come de Rebour ou de laron si de ce soit atteint. 11. De noveles cu∣stumes & mal∣toutes leveez. Ensement novelles custumes sont levees & auncienes enhauncees, come sur leyns, draps, vins, avoir de poiz & autre choses par quoy les Marchauntz viegnent pluis rielment & meins de bien meignent en la terre & les Marchauntz estrangers demorant plus longes quil ne soleint faire, par la quele demore les choses sont le  plus enceries quil ne soleint estre au damage du Roy & de son poeple, nous ordeinoms que totes maneres des custumes & maltoutes leveez puis le coronement le Roy Edward fiz le Roy Henry soient entierment ousteez & de tot esteintz par toutes jours, nient contreeste∣ant la Chartre que le dit Roy Edward fist as Marchantz aliens, pur ceo que il fut fait contre la grand Chartre & encontree la fraun∣chise de la Citee de Lundres & saunz assent del Baronage. Et si nuly de quele condition quil soit rien preigne ou leve outre les  auncienes custumes, dues & droitureles, ou destourbance face pay quey les Merchantz ne peussent de leur biens faire leur volunte, Et de ceo soient atteintz soient agardez as pleintifs leur damages eauntz regard al purchase al a suite as coustages & per ces que il averont en & al offence de la grande Chartre & eit le Trespas∣sour la prisone solonc la quantite du trespass & solonc descretion des Justices, & mes ne soit en service le Roy sauve nequedent au Roy les custumes de leyn, peaux, & de quirs, cestassavoir, de ches∣cun  Saack de leyne demy mark, & de CCC. peaux lanuz demy mark, & de last de Cuir un mark, si avoir le doit & desoremes vi∣egnent demoergent & ailent les estraunges Merchantz solonc les aun∣cienes custumes & solonc ce que auncienement soleint faire. 12. De damages aver de latta∣cheur. Al honeur de Dieu & de seint Eglise encountre ceux qui par malice purchasent prohibitions & attachements encountre or∣deineirs de seint Esglise en cause de corrections de peche & des  autres purement espiritueles que nule manere partiegnent a la ley court, Nous ordeinoms que par les Justices que atteignent tieu malice & que ancienement les malicious plaintiffs soient agardes damages as ordeiners a tort travailles, ou si les ditz pleintiffs nei∣ent dount paier, soit agarde prisone du temps solonc la grievance maliciousment procuree sauve lestat du Roy & de la Corone & autre droit. 13. De mal con∣seilers le Roy ouster. Et pur ceo que le Roy ad estee mal guide & consaillez par mauveis conseillers come est susdit, Nous ordeinoms que tous les mauvais conseille soient oustez & remuez de toutz issuit que eux ne autres tieux ne soient mes pres de luy ne en office le Roy re∣tenuz, & que autres gentz covenables soient meis en lour lieus. Et en meisme la manere soit fait des menengs & des gentz de office que sont en loustiel le Roy que ne sont pas covenables. 14. De officers & Ministers de Roy faire. Et pur ceo que moultz des mauz sont avenuz par tieux conseillers & tieux Ministers▪ Nous ordeinoms que le Roy face Chanceller, Chiefe Justice del une Bake & de lautre, Tresorier, Chancellier & Chief Baron del Eschequir, Seneschal de son hostiel, Gardeyne de la Gardrobe & Contreroller, & un Clerk covenable pur garder son Privie Seale, un Chiefe Gardeine de ses Forestes
de cea Trent & un autre dela Trent & aussi un Escheatour de cea Trent & un autre dela, Chief Clerke le Roy en le commune Banke par le conseil & consent de son Baronage & ceo en Parlement. Et sil aviegne par ascune aventure que il covient mettre ascuns des ditz Ministres avant ceo que parlement soit dunque le Roy permetter par le bon conseil que il averoit de li jesques au Parlement. Et issint soit fait desoremes des tieux Ministres quant mestier serra. 15. Del Gardeyns des Cynkports. Membr. secun. d. Ensement nous ordeinoms que touz les chief gardeyns des portz & chasteaux sur la mere serront mis & faitz en la fourme susdite, Et que ceux gardeins soient de la terre mesmes. 16. De Ministres faire en terres. Et pur ceo que les terres de Gascoigne, Dirland & Descoce sont en peril destre perdues per defaute des bones mini∣sters, nous ordeinoms que bones & suffizantz ministres soient mis a la gard faire en les dites terres en la fourme contenue en la  second Article precheine. 17. De Viscountes faire en coun∣ties. Estre ceo nous ordeinoms que Viscountz soient de∣sormes mis par la Chaunceller & Tresorier & les autres de con∣seil qui serront presents. Et si Chanceller ne soit present soient mys par le Tresorer & Barons del Eschequir & par les Justices de Bank, Et que tieux soient mis & faitz qui soient co∣venables & suffisantz & qui eient terres & tenements dount il pu∣issent  respondre au Roy & au people de lour faitz & que nuls autres que tieux ne soient meis & que eux eient comission desouz le grant Seale. 18. De Gardeyns de forestes. Por ceo que commune fame est & ovesque cemeinte de mounstrance ad este fait que diverse oppressions come desheri∣taunces, faux enditements & emprisonements sur ce grevous raun∣ceo & des autres moultz de maneres des grevaunces que  Gardeyns, Bayliffs, Ministres des forestes & autres ount fait par colour de lour Baylies & de lour offices, des queles grevances le people que tant est grevez ne seose overtement pleindre ne leur pleintz faire en la Court le Roy, tant come ils sont en leur bail∣lies & offices. Nous ordeinoms que des touz Gardeins, Bailiffs Ministers, des forestes que avaunt le temps le Roy qui ore est soleient estre remuables a la volunte le Roy, aussi∣bien de ceux as queux leur baillies & offices sont voluntriement  grantees a terme de vie, nouncountre esteant tieu grant come des autres leur baillies & offices soient seisies en la main le Roy, Et que bones gentz & loiaux soient assignez Justices denquere sur les grevances avantdites, & de oier & determiner toutes les grevances & les pleints de touz i ceux qui devers les ditz Gardeins, Bailiffs, Ministres des Forestes suivre vodront pur le Roy ou pur eux mesmes solonc la ley & la custume de royalme, Et si avant come ley le soeffre soient les pleints termines entre cy & la Pask pre∣chein  avenir ou avant cy home poet & bone manere solonc ley, & si les ditz Gardeins, Bayliffes & Ministres soient trouvez coupables des grevances avant dites adonques soient remuez pur touz jours, & si non rient leur Baillies & Offices.
N. 19. Des Endite∣ments de la Foreste. Et pur ceo que plusours gentz sount desheritez, reintz & destruitz par les sovuraines gardeins des forestes de cea Trent & de la, & par les autres ministers countre la fourme de la Chartre de la Foreste & encountre la declaracion que le Roy Edward fiz le Roy Henry fist en la fourme que ensuyt cestassavoir nous volouns & grantouns pur nous & pur nos heires que de trespass faitz en nos forestes de vert & de veni∣son que les forestiers en qui baillies tieux trespass serront faitz presen∣tent  mismes les trespass as proscheines Swainemotes devant Forre∣stiers, Verdours, Regardours, Agistours & autres Ministres de mis∣mes les forestes ur & tieux presentments devant les Forestiers, Ver▪dours, Regardours, Agistours & autres Ministres avantdites par ear∣ment aussibien des Chevaliers come des autres prodes homes & loi∣aux & ne my suspicionons des parties veisinaux & plus proscheins en tieu trespass eont issint presentez purra a verite mientz & plus pleinement estre enquis, & tiele verite issent enquise soient  tieux presentments par commune accord & assent de touz les mini▪stres avantdites solempnement afforciez & de lour seaux ensealez. Et si en autre manere soit nul enditement fait oit desormez a nul tenuz, & pur ceo que les chiefs Gardeins les forestes ne eant my la eite four∣me tenuz jusques en cea nous ordeinoms que desormes nul ne soit pris nemprisonee pur vert ne pur venison, sil ne soit trovez a main oevre, ou en la fourme avauntdite enditez & adunque si lesse se Sou∣verain Gardein de la Foreste a meinprise jusques al dire de la Foreste  sans rien prendre pur la deliverance. Et si le dit Gardein faire ne le voile eit brief en Chancellerie que ancienement fut ordenee pur tieuz enditez destre a meinprise jusqes en Eyre. Et si le dit Gardein apres le dit brief resceu ne face tieux enditez sanz delay deliverer a mainprise sanz rien prendre dunque eit le Plantiff bref en Chancellerie au Viscount datacher le Gardein devant le Roy a certeine jour a respondre per quoi il nad replein celui qu'est en si pris & le viscount appellez les Ver∣diers face deliverer celui que est pris per bone mainprise en la presence  des Verdiers & les nouns des meinpernours face liverer a mismes les verdiers a respoundre en Eyre devaunt Justices. Et si le chief Gar∣dein de ceo soit atteint soient agardeez as Pleintifs ses damages au tre∣ble & le dit Gardein a la prisone & reint a la volunte le Roy & mes ne soit en office le Roy & desormes soit escrit a eux come as chiefs Gar∣deins de la Forest pur ceo que Justices ne devient il être ne recordavoir forsque en Eyre. Et pur ce que home dit que les chiefs Gardeins des Forestes encountre la fourme suisdite ount pris & leves fines, Amer∣ciements,  & raunceons, nous ordeinoms que les ditz Gardeins & les autres chiefs Gardeins rendent leur accomptes des prises suisdites de∣vant le Tresorier & le Barons d'Leschequir entre cy & le Noel pros∣chein avenir. N. 20. De Piers de Gaveston. Pur ceo que conue chose est que par l'examinement de Prelatz, Counts & Barons, Chivaliers & autres bones gentz du royaume tro∣vez que Piers de Gaveston ad malmenez & mal conseilez nôtre Seig∣neur  le Roy lad entice a malfaire en diverses maneres & deceivances en accoilant a luy tout le Tresor le Roy & lad esloigne hors du roi∣aume en accreaunt a luy roial poer & roial dignitee come en alliance faire degentz par serementz de vivre & morir ouisque li encontre toutes gentz, & ceo par le tresor que il purchase de jour en jour enseignurant sur lestat le Roy & de la Corone en destruccion du Roy
N. 25. De plez tenir en Eschequir. Pur ceo que communes Merchantz & autres plusours du people sont resceuz de pleder a Leschequir ples de dette & de trespass par le reson qu'il sont avoues par les Ministres de la dite place plus avant que estre ne deveroient dount les accomptes & les autres choses tou∣chantz le Roy sont se pluis delaiez, & ovesque ceo moltz gentz du people grevez, Nous ordeinoms que desormes ne soient tenuz plees en la dite plees del Eschequir, forsque les plees touchantz le Roy & ces Ministres que sont responsables en Leschequir par la reson de lour  offices & les Ministres de meisme la place & pour & lour servants que tout le pluis sont demourantz ouesque mesnengs eux en les lieux ou Leschequir demoert. Et si nul soit resceu par avouerie de la dite place de pledier en la dit Eschequir encontre la fourme suisdit eiet le empledez leur recoverier en parlement. N. 26 De plez tenir en la Mares∣chaux. Ensement put ceo que le people se sent moult grevez que Senes∣chau & Mareschaux tiegnent moultz des plees que a leur office ne  appendent & auxi de ceo que eux ne voilent recevoir Attournez au∣xibien pur les Defendents come pur les Pleintiffs, Nous ordeinons que desormes rescevent Attournez auxibien pur les Defendents come pur les Pleintiffs, & que il ne tiegnent plez de frantenement ne de dette ne de covenant ne de contract, ne nul commune plee des gentz du people fors tant soulement de trespass del houstiel & autres tres∣pass faitz de deinz la verge & de contractes & covenauntes que ascun del houstiel le Roy avera fait as autres de meisme loustiel & en meisme  loustiel & nemy aillours, Et que nul play de trespass ne pledent autre que ne soit attache par eux avant que le Roy isse hors de la verge ou la trespass serra fait, Et les plederont hastivement de jouren jour en jour issint que il soient par pledez & terminez avant ceo que le Roy isse hors de les boundes de cele verge ou le trespass fut fait, Et si per cas dedeinz les boundes de cele verge ne poent estre terminez seissent tieux ples devant le Seneschall & se purchasent les pleintiffs par la commune ley ne desoremes ne preigne le Seneschall conisance de dettes ne dau tes  choses forsque des gentz del hostiel avantdite & encontre gentz del hostiel avantdit, ne nul autre plai ne tiegnent par obligation fait a la distress du Seneschall & des Mareschalx ne que nul de loustiel ne qui suivent loustiel soient mis en Enquest devant eux forsque la ou les Pleintiffs & les Defendents sont du dit hostiel & des faitz faitz en mê me loustiel. Et si le seneschal & Mareschal rien facent contre cest or∣deinement soit lour fait tenuz pur nul. Et que ceux que se sentiront grevez contre la dite ordenaunce eient bref en chancellarie pledable  en bank le Roy & recoverent lour damages vers eux que tiegnent le play & que les ount tret en play par discretion des Justices eauntz re∣gard a lour purchase, costages, grevances & perts solonc la quantitee du trespass, Et mes ne soient en service le Roy. N. 27 De office de co∣roner deinz la verge. Et pur ceo que avant ces heures moltz des felonies faitz de-deinz, la verge ount este despunies pur ceo que les coroners du pays ne se sont pas entremys denquere de tieu manere des felonies de deinz la  verge mes le Coroner del houstiel le Roy de quel issue nad my este fait en due manere ne les felons mis en exigendz ne utlegez ne rien de tiel selonie presentee en lire que est a grand damage le Roy & a meinz bone garde de sa pees, Nous ordeinoms que desoremes en cas de mort de homme en office de Coroner appent & les vewes des corps morts & as Enquestes de ceo saire soient mandez les Coroners du Pais
ou des franchises par la ou les morts serront trovez qui ensemblement ove le Coroner del houstiel face l'office que append & le mette en son roulle, et ceo que ne purra mye devant le Seneschal estre termi∣nez pur ceo que les felons ne purront estre attachez ne trovez ne pur autre encheson demoerge le proces a la commune ley. Issint que les exigendes & les Utlagaries & les presentments de ceo faitz soient monstrez en lire par le Coroner du pais ansi come des autres selonies faites dehors la verge, mes pur ceo ne soit lesse que les Attache∣ments  ne soientz faitz freschements sur les felonies faites sil peussent trovez. N. 28. De les Chartres le Roy de sa pees. Por ceo que le people se sent molt grevez de ceo que gentz sont embandiz de tuer les gentz et robber per tant que le Roy par au∣ves conseil leur donee si legeirment sa pees contre fourme de ley Nous ordeinoms que nul felon de futif ne soit covert ne defendus desoremes de nul manere de felonie par la Chartre le Roy de sa pees  a lui grantee ne en autre manere, si noun en cas ou le Roy poet faire grace selonc son serement, & ceo par proces de ley & la custume de roiaume, & si nule Chartre soit desoreenavant granteez & fait en autre manere a nuly rien ne vaile & pur nul soit tenu, et que nul appert melfesour encountre la Coronours & la pees de la térre par nuly soit eidez ne meintenuz. N. 29. De Parlement tenir de an en an. Por ceo que moltz gentz sont delayez en la court le Roy de leur de∣mand par tant que la partie allegge que les demandantz ne devient estre responduz sanz le Roy & auxint moltz de gentz grevez par les ministres le Roy encontre droiture des queles grevancez homme ne purra avoir recoverier sanz commune Parlement. Nous ordeinoms que le Roy tiegne Parlement une foiz per an ou deux foiz si mestier soit & ceo en lieu covenable, et que en meismes les Perlements soient les pleds que sont en la dite fourme dez laiez & les pledz la ou les Iustices sont en diverses opinions recordez et terminez & en mesme  la manere soient les billes terminez que liverez serront en Parlement si avant come ley & reson le demande. N. 30. De leschange de moneye. Por ceo que a toutes les foites leschange de moneye se fait el roialme tout le people est grantment grevez en moltz des maneres, Nous ordeinoms que quant mestier serra & le Roy voille eschange faire quil la face par commune conseil de son Baronage, & ceo en Parlement. N. 31. De touz esta∣tuz gardir. Ensement nous ordeinoms que touz les estatutz que sont faitz en amendment de la leie & au profit du people par les Auncestres nostre Seigneur le Roy soient gardez & maintenuz, si avant come estre devient par lei & reson. Issint que eux ne soient pas contraires a la grand Chartre ne a Chartre de la foreste nencountre les ordeinments par nous faitz. Et si nul Estatut soit fait countre la fourme susdite, soit tenuz pur nul; & tout outrement defaitz. N. 32. Que ley de ter∣re ne soit de∣layez par Let∣tres du privie seal. Por ceo que la ley de la terre & commune droit ount este sovent delayez par lettres issuez dessus la privie seal le Roy a graunt grevance du people Nous ordeinoms que desoremes la ley de la terre ne commune droit ne soient delayez ne destourbez par lettres du dit seal. Et si rien soit fait en nule des places de la court nôtre Seigneur
N. 38. De la grand Chartre & la Chartre de la Foreste. Ensement nous ordeinoms que la grant Chartre de Franchises & la Chartre de la Forest, que le Roy Henry Fiz le Roy Johan fist soient tenuez en touz leur pointz, & que les pointz que sont dotifs en les dites Chartres des Franchises soient esclareriz en le prochein parlement apres cesti par lavisement de la Baronage & des Justices & des autres sagez gentz de la leie, & ceste chose soit fait pur ceo que nous ne avions mye en poer le faire le durant notre temps. N. 39. De serement de Ministres. Ensement nous ordenoms que Chancellour, Tresorier, Chief Justi∣ces de lun Bank & de lautre, Chauncellour de Leshequier, Tresorier de la Gardrobe, Seneschal del houstiel le Roy, toutes Justices, Vis∣contes, Eschetours, Conestables, Enquerours a queu chose que ceo soit & touz autres Bailliffs & Ministres le Roy soient jurez a toutes les fois quil receivent lour baillies & offices de gardier & tenier toutes les ordinaunces faites par les Prelatz Countes & Barons a ceo esluz & assignez & chescun de les saunz venir countre nul point de les. N. 40. De gentz assig∣nez en parle∣ment. Ensement nous ordenoms que en chacun Parlement soient assignez un Evesque, deux Countes & deux Barons doier & terminer totes les pleintes de ceux qui pleindre se vodrount des ministres le Roy queux quil soient qui serront contrevenuz les ordeinaunces susdites, Et si les dites Evesque Countes & Barons ne puissent touz entendre ou soient destourbez de oier & terminer les dites pleints ad unque le facent trois ou deux de eux & ceux qui sont trovez contrevenuz  encontre les dites Ordenances soient puniz devers le Roy & devers les Pleintiffs par la descretion des dites assignez. N. 41. De commune ordenance pu∣blier. Ensement nous ordenoms que les Ordenances suisdites soient main∣tenuz & gardez en tous leur pointz & que notre Seigneur le Roy les face mettre desous son grant seale & envoier en chescun Counte Dengleterre a publier tenir et fermement garder aussibien deinz franchises come dehors. Et en meisme la manere soit maunde au  Gardein de Cynk Portz quil par mye totes sa baillie les face publier, tenir et garder en la fourme avantdite. Nous meismes celes ordeinances a nous monstrees & le Lundy preschein devant le fest de seint Michel dreinpasse publiez agreans acceptoms et affermoms et voloms et grantoms pur nous et pur nous heires que toutes les dites ordeinaunces et chescune de les faites. solonc la fourme de nos lettres avantdites, soient publiez par tout  nôtre roiaume et desoremes fermement gardez et tenuz. En tesmoig∣nance de queux choses nous avoms fait faire cestes nos lettres patents donez a Loundres le quint jour Doctobre lan de nôtre regne quint. Finis de Anno 5o. Ed. 2di.
N. 53. Claus 5. Ed. 2. m. 15. Dors. Le Roi au Visconte Deverwyke saluz. Come Monseur Peres de Ga∣veston Counte de Cornewall, nadgueres fust exile hors de nostre Reaume contre les leis & les usages des mèmes le Roiaume as queus garder et mein∣tenir nous sumes tenus par le serment que nous feismes a nostre corone∣ment en le quel exil il fu nome autre que bon & leal & meismes celiu Counte par nostre maundement seit ja revenu a nous en dit Reaume prest dester a droit devant nous a touz que de rien li vodront chalen∣ger solon les leis & les usages avantditz par quei nous li tenoms bon  & loial & a nostre fei & a nostre pees & unques a autre ne li tenismes nous de nostre real poer vous commandoms que por tel li teignuz & ceste chose facez par tote vôtre baillie publier. Don a Everwyk le xviii jour de Janevoir. Au tieles lettres sont maundes as cliescunes Viscontes Dengleterre. et a remembrer que le dit forme fu fete par le Roy meismes & le seal et les breefs par lin liure a lespigurnel pur sealer le jour et le lieu con∣tenuz  es ditz breefs et il tantost quant les breefs furent seales en sa presence les prist en sa maine et les mist sur son lit. N. 54. ibidem. Rex vicecomiti Ebor. Salutem. Quia inter cerera nostris curis in∣cumbentia, corditer affectamus, et in summis desideriis reportamus quod pax nostra ubique infra regnum et potestatem nostram inviola∣biliter observetur, et quod omnes leges et consuetudines que in eo∣dem Regno temporibus progenitorum nostrorum quondam Regum  Angliae usitatae fuerunt et approbate, ac etiam quod omnes ordinationes nuper facte ad honorem Dei & sancte Ecclesie & nostrum & ad commo∣dum nostrum & populi regni ejusdem que in dampnum seu prejudicium nostriaut corone nostre non redundent & legibus & consuetudinibus su∣pradictis non contrariantur, teneantur & observentur, tibi praecipimus, fir miter injungentes quod praemissa omnia in pleno Comitatu tuo nec non in civitatibus, Burgis, villis mercatoriis et locis aliis quibuscun∣que in eodem Comitatu tam infra libertates quam extra, ubi expedi∣re  videris facias publice proclamari, et hec sicut teipsum indempnem conservare volueris nullo modo omittas. Teste Rege apud Eboracum xxvii die Januarii. per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam. N. 55. Pat. 5. Ed, 2. part. 2. m. 17. intus. Ril. pla∣cita parl. f. 530. Rex omnibus ad quos &c. salutem, Sciatis quod cum quedam ordi∣nationes per Prelatos, Comites, & Barones regni nostri ad id electos  nuper facte fuissent, et per nos sub certa protestatione concesse viz. quod si in dictis ordinationibus alique nobis dampno sa seu prejudicialia seu alias contra formam commissionis eis per nos in hac parte facte contigerit inveniri ea pro non concessis & non confirmatis haberentur▪ reservata nobis in eadem protestatione potestate hujusmodi dampnosa & praejudiciala per bonum consilium dictorum ordinatorum & aliorum corrigendi, refor∣mandi, prout in Instrumento publico inde confecto plenius continetur. Nos de circumspectionis industria ac fidelitate probata venerabilis  patris. J. Norwycen Episcopi, et dilectorum et fidelium nostrorum Guidonis Ferre, Johannis de Crumbewell. Hugonis de Aldeley. Willielmi Deyncourt. Henrici Spigurnel. Henrici le Scroop militum, ac dilectorum Clericorum nostrorum Magistrorum Thome de Cobham. Roberti de Pikering. Walteri de Thorp. Gilberti de Middleton. Johannis Fraunceys. &
int obedire, tune aliis secum venientibus inhibitionem ex parte nostra factam in forma superius annotata. In cujus, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. iii. die Septembris. N. 59. Regist. Eccles. Christi Can∣tuar. f. 227. Litera Comitis Lancastrie pro miraculis Domini Roberti Archiepiscopi. A Gentz de honourable religioun et nos chers amis le Priour et Convent del Esglise de Centerbire Thomas Counte de Lan∣castre et de Leycestre Seneschal Dengleterre, saluz, et cheres. Sires nous vous prions come avant ses heures vous avons prie que vous voilles tesmoigner per voie notoire et per vos lettres patentes queux miracles Dieux oevere pur Lercevesque Robert de Canterberi quei darrein feust, et ad oevere pur ly ausi bien en sa vie come apres sa mort, Et les miracles que pendent en escrit devant sa ombe. Et vous enveyoms Sires nostre ame Clerk Mestre Rauf de Hoghton, a qui Sires vous prions que vous voillez doner credence des choses que il vous dirra de par nous touchantz la dite besoigne. Sires  nostre seignur vous gard. Don a nostre Chastel de Pountfr. le 7. jour daveril. There is no Answer to this Letter to be found in the Register noted in the Margin, nor any Account of the Archbishop's Miracles. N. 60. Rot. Pat. 8. Ed. 2. parte 2. m. 12 Dors. REX Ballivis, Ministris et omnibus Ballivis et fidelibus suis de Comitatibus Stafford et Salop, tam infra libertates quam extra ad quos presentes Litere pervenerint, salutem. Cum nuper assigna∣vimus  dilectos et fideles nostros Johannem Giffard de Chylington, et Jo∣hannem de Perton in dicto Comitatu Staff. Willielmum de Lodelowe, et Reginaldum Charles in dicto Comitatu Salop. ad vicesimam nobis nuper in Parliamento nostro per Communitates Comitatuum Regni nostri concessam assidend. et taxand juxta formam ipsis inde ex parte nostra liberatam et ad pecuniam de predicta vicesima provenientem colli∣gend. et levand. et ad Scaccarium nostrum certis terminis libe∣rand. unam viz. medietatem in Quindena sancte Trinitatis proximo  preteritâ et aliam medietatem in Crastino Exaltationis sancte Crucis proximo sequente, ac iidem Johannes, Johannes, Willielmus, et Reginaldus nobis significaverint, quod quidam ipsos quominus vice∣simam predictam ad opus nostrum Levare possunt impediunt, pre∣tendentes dictam vicesimam nobis per Communitates predictas sub certis conditionibus concessam fuisse, viz. quod nos magnam Cartam de libertatibus Anglie, Cartam de Foresta, et ordinationes per Prelatos, Comites et Barones de Regno nostro factas et per nos approbatas observari  ac Perambulationem de Forestis nostris fieri faceremus, et quod nos premissa nondum fecimus executioni debite demandari, super quo cogimur admirari vehementer, presertim cum nos Cartas et Ordina∣tiones predictas in omnibus suis Articulis observari mandaverimus et quosdam fideles nostros assignaverimus in singulis Comitatibus Regni nostri ad Perambulationes de Forestis nostris predictis faciend. Nos tam super impedimento predicto, quam super nominibus impedientium certiorari volentes, Assignavimus dilectum Clericum nostrum Adam  de Limbergh ad informand. se una cum dictis Collectoribus super premissis et ad inquirendum si necesse fuerit per Sacramentum proborum, et legalium hominum partium illarum, per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit, super omnibus et singulis Articulis premissa contingentibus plenius veritatem et ad nos inde distincte et aperte certificandos. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod eidem
Ade et Collectoribus predictis, in omnibus et singulis premissis sitis intendentes, consulentes, et auxiliantes, quociens et quando per ipsum Adam ex parte nostrâ super hoc fueritis premuniti: Mandavi∣mus enim vicecomiti nostro Comitatuum predictorum quod eis∣dem Ade et Collectoribus in premissis pareat et intendat, et coram eis ad certos dies et loca quos idem Adam eidem vicecomiti scire faciet venire faciet, tot et tales probos et legales homines de Balliva sua per quos, &c. Teste Rege apud Thunderle viii. die Junii. Per ipsum Regem & Concilium. N. 61. Claus. 12. Ed. 2. m. 22. Dors Rileys placit parl. f. 560. FAit a remembre que come nadgaires certains Prelatz, Countes et Barons de la volunte nostre Seigneur le Roy et assent des plusours grantz du Roialme et autres du conseil le Roy lors estauntz a Norhampton suissent alez devers le Counte de Lancastre de parler et treter ovesques lui sur le profit et lonur nostre Seigneur le Roy et de son Roialme, et en la parlannce et tretiz entre les ditz Pre∣latz,  Countes et Barons et le dit Counte de Lancastre parle et trete fust, que Evesques, Counts et Barons fuissent demorantz devers nostre Seig∣neur le Roy pur lui conseiller es besoignes que li touchereient tant{que} en son prechein Parlement et de ceo et dautres choses endenture fait en la forme que sensuit. Ceste endenture tesmoigne coment les honurables Pieres L'ercevesque de Dyvelyz, et les Evesques de Norwicz, Ely, et Cicestre, et les Countes de Pembrocke, et Arundel, Monsicur Roger de Mortimer, Monsieur Johan Somery, Sire Bartholm.  de Badlesmere, Monsieur Rauf Basset et Monsieur Johan Botetourt de la volente et lassent nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, unnt parle od le Counte de Lancastre sur les choses touchantes le profit nostre Seig∣neur le Roy et du Roialme en la forme que sensuit, cest a saver que les Evesques de Norwicz, Cicestre, Ely, Salesbury, seint David, Kardoil, Hereford, et Worcestre, les Countes de Pembrock, Riche∣mund, Hereford et Arundel, Sire Hugh de Courteny, Sire Roger de Mortimer, Sire Johan de Segrave, Sire Johan de Grey, et un des  Banretz le Counte de Lancastre quil voudra nomer, por un quartier, demoergens pres de nostre Seigneur le Roy tant{que} a prechein Parlement, issint que deux des Evesques, un des Countes, un des Barons et un des Banretz le dit Counte de Lancastre au meins demoergent pres du Roy adesseement, et que tutes choses que a charger facent, ce porront et deveront faire sanz Parlement, se facent par lour assent, et si autrement soient fait, soit tenuz por nient et adresce en Parlement, par agard des Peers, et  toutes choses covenables soient redresseez par eux et au Par∣lement soient esluz de eux et des autres qui deyvent demorer pres de nostre Seigneur le Roy par quarters, so∣lonc se quil serront esluz et assigne en Parlement, a faire, et conseiller nostre Seigneur le Roy en la forme avantdite. Et les susditz Prelatz, Countes et Barons de la volente et lassent nostre Seigneur le Roy unt enpris que le Roy fra au dit Counte de Lan∣castre et a ses gentz et ses meignees reles et acquitances de totes  maneres de felonies et trespass faitz countre sa pees, tant{que} au jour de Seint Jak cest an, et que les chartres de reles et acquitances soient simples et sanz condicion, et si meillur suerte pust estre trove por eux au dit prechein Parlement soit faire a eux, et il∣luqes afferme devant nostre Seigneur le Roy, et son Barnage. En le avant dit Counte de Lancastre ad graunte quil fra relees et
ipsum Dominum Regem quod scrutatis rotulis Domini Regis E. patris Domini Regis nunc de Cancellaria sua de anno predicto de∣portare faceret hic in Parliamento, &c. recordum et processum predicta; qui quidem Cancellarius postea recordum et processum predict a protulit hic in hec verba. Placita Corone coram Domino Edwardo Rege filii Domini Regis Edwardi tenta in presentia ipsius Domini Regis apud Pontem tractum die Lune proximo ante feum Annuntiationis beate Marie Virginis anno regni sui quintodecim. Cum  Thomas Comes Lancastr. captus et proditionibus homicidiis incendiis depredationibus et aliis diversis feloniis ductus esset coram ipso Domi∣no Rege presentibus Edmundo Comite Kanc. Johanne Comite Riche∣mond, Adomro de Valentia Comite Pembr. Johanne de Warenna Co∣mite Surr. Edmundo Comite Arundel, David Comite Athol, Rober∣to Comite Danegos, Baronibus & aliis Magnatibus regni, Do∣minus Rex recordarur quod idem Thomas homo ligeus ipsius Do∣mini Regis venit apud Burton super Trentam simul cum Humfrido  de Bohun nuper Comite Hereford proditore Regis et regni invento cum vexillis explicatis apud Pontem Burgi in bello contra Domi∣num Regem et ibidem interfecto et Rogero Damory proditore adjudicato & quibusdam aliis proditoribus & inimicis Regis & regni cum vexillis explicatis ut de guerra hostiliter resistebat & im∣pedivit ipsum Dominum Regem homines & familiares suos per tres dies continuos quo minus Pontem dicte Ville de Burton transire potuerunt prout debuerunt, & quosdam homines ipsius  Domini Regis ibidem felonice, interfecit, ob quod Dominus Rex propter predictam malitiam & resistentiam dicti Comitis & alio∣rum reprimend. & pro tranquilitate & pace regni & populi et jure Corone sue regie manutenend. & ad repellend. et amovend. vim predictam seditione taliter congregatam quesivit transitum aliunde ultra aquam de Trente et potenter exinde equitavit versus pre∣dictos  Comitem & alios, et predictus Thomas Comes hoc per∣pendens simul cum aliis predictis proditoribus ut proditor et ini∣micus Regis et regni posuit ignem in Villa de Burton predicta et partem domorum et bonorum ejusdem Ville felonice combus∣sit et extunc predictus Comes simul cum aliis predictis prodito∣ribus exiit Villam predictam usque in Campum ibidem vexillis explicatis et acies suas bellicosas direxit hostiliter ad debellandum ipsum Dominum Regem contra homagium fidelitatem et ligean∣tiam suam quibus eidem Domino Regi erat astrictus expectando ad∣ventum  Domini Regis in eodem campo, et super hoc cum dictus Thomas Comes perpendisset ipsum Dominum Regem venire et ipsis appropinquare cum magna potentia, idem Thomas Comes simul cum aliis comproditoribus suis predictis confusus posuit se in fugam et fugit et sic fugiendo Domino Rege ipsos potenter prosequente fecit diversas depredationes & roberis, quousque idem Thomas Comes simul cum predictis proditoribus cum equis et armis ac vexillis explicatis  venit ad pontem Burgi ubi quidam fideles Domini Regis, plenam potestatem a Domino Rege habentes ad resistendum inimicis et proditoribus Domini Regis modis et viis omnibus quibus possint, pro Domino Rege interfuerunt, et predictus Thomas Comes simul cum aliis proditoribus cum equis et armis et vex∣illis explicatis insultum secit hostiliter in predictos fideles Do∣mini Regis ibidem existentes et quosdam de ipsis fidelibus Domi∣ni Regis felonice interfecit et eos debellavit, quousque idem Tho∣mas
Comes simul cum aliis proditoribus predictis ibidem confu∣sus captus fuit et quidam ex illis proditoribus capti et quidam interfecti fuerunt et quidam fugam fecerunt, et sic non remansit in predicto Thoma Comite quin ipse simul cum aliis proditori∣bus suis ipsum Dominum Regem superasset et devicisset. Que qui∣dem proditiones homicidia combustiones depredationes debellatio∣nes hostiles cum equis et armis et vexillis explicatis manifesta sunt et notoria et nota Comitibus Baronibus et aliis Magnatibus et  populo regni. Et ideo consideratum est quod predictus Thomas Comes pro predicta proditione trahatur, et pro predictis homi∣cidiis depredationibus incendiis et roberiis suspendatur, et pro pre∣dicta i. e. The Robberies and Spoils they committed in their flight, and setting up∣on, and Kil∣ling the Kings subjects at Burgh Bridge. fuga in hac parte decapitetur. Et super hoc licet predictus Thomas Comes temporibus retroactis nequiter et maliciose contra ho∣magium et fidelitatem et ligeantiam suam pluries male se gesse∣rit et habuerit versus Dominum Regem, scilicet cum Dominus Rex habuisset apud Novum Castrum super Tynam victualia equos, & arma∣turas,  jocalia & alia diversa bona ad magnam summam & quanti∣tatem, que quidem bona predictus Thomas Comes cum equis & armis et magna multitudine armatorum cepit, depredavit & aspor∣tavit, quam quidem depredationem et transgressionem ejusdem, Dominus Rex de gratia sua speciali remisit & pardonavit predicto Tho∣me Comiti & aliis malefactoribus ejusdem depredationis ad attrahen∣dum propositum ipsius Thome Comitis in melius, ac insuper pre∣dictus Thomas Comes collegatis sibi diversis hominibus vi armata venit  ad diversa Parliamenta Domini Regis & pluries impedivit ipsum Do∣minum Regem tenere Parliamenta prout ad ipsum & coronam suam tenere pertinebat, et pluries ad hujusmodi Parliamenta juxta man∣data Domini Regis venire non curavit, set inobedienter contemp∣sit ac etiam diversas congregationes & conventiculas illicitas con∣tra Dominum Regem sepius fecit per loca diversa & contra pro∣hibitionem Domini Regis. Item cum plures malefactores & pacis Domini Regis perturbatores quos dictus Thomas Comes sibi attraxe∣rat  & colligaverat homicidia depredationes & alias diversas felonias fecisset per quod judicium mortis subiisse meruerunt, & idem Tho∣mas Comes pro manutenentia & receptamento eorundem malefacto∣rum consimile judicium subiisse meruit secundum legem & con∣suetudinem regni. Item cum Thomas Comes postea veniens ad Parliamentum Domini Regis tentum apud Eborum cum magna mul∣titudine armatorum induxit Dominum Regem ad pardonandum se∣ctam pacis sue versus ipsum & malefactores predictos in premissis  usque circiter cumerum mille personarum, quamvis idem Thomas Comes prius juraverat de quibusdam ordinationibus tenendis ne Do∣minus Rex sectam pacis sue remitteret in hujusmodi casibus emergen∣tibus de morte hominis. Item cum Dominus Rex pro attrahendo ipsum Comitem in bonum ut predicitur ei toto posse suo contrarian∣tem diversa dona magna de terris dominii & libertatibus obtu∣lisset per plures vices et quedam dona diversas gratias & pardona∣tiones per Cartas suas eidem Thome Comiti fecisset, idem tamen  Comes totis viribus contra Dominum Regem rebellis extitit & ino∣bediens semper in malitia sua facienda perseverans. Item idem Thomas Comes misit quosdam Milites de familia sua ad Civita∣tem Eborum ad attrahendum communitatem ejusdem Civitatis & custodiam ejusdem in manu ipsius Comitis, ac etiam idem Thomas Comes regalem potestatem diversimode sibi usurpavit &
sum inde arrenavit seu ad responsionem posuit prout moris est secun∣dum legem &c. et sic absque arenamento et responsione idem Tho∣mas erronice et contra legem terre tempore pacis morti extitit ad∣judicatus: unde cum notorium sit & manifestum quod totum tempus quo impositum fuit eidem Comiti predicta mala et facinora in pre∣dictis recordo et processu contenta fecisse et etiam tempus quo captus fuit et quo dictus Dominus Rex pater &c. recordabatur ipsum esse culpabilem &c. et quo morti extitit adjudicatu, fuit tempus pacis,  maxime cum per totum tempus predictum Cancellaria et alie placee Cur. Domini Regis aperte fuerunt et in quibus lex cuicumque fiebat prout fieri consuevit, nec idem Dominus Rex unquam in tempore il∣lo cum vexillis explicatis equitabat, predictus Dominus Rex pater &c. in hujusmodi tempore pacis contra ipsum Comitem sic recordari non debuit nec ipsum absque arenamento et responsione morti adjudicasse. Dicit etiam quod erratum est in hoc quod cum predictus Thomas Comes fuisset unus Parium et Magnatum regni, et in Magna Carta  de libertatibus Anglie contineatur quod nullus liber homo capiatur im∣prisonetur aut disseisiatur de libero tenemento suo vel libertatibus seu liberis consuetudinibus suis aut utlagetur aut exulet nec ali∣quo modo destruatur, nec Dominus Rex super ipsum ibit nec super eum mittet nisi per legale judicium parium suorum vel per legem terre, predictus Thomas Comes per recordum Regis ut pre∣dictum est tempore pacis erronice morti suit adjudicatus absque arenamento seu responsione seu legali judicio parium suorum con∣tra  legem &c. et contra tenorem magne Carte predicte, unde pe∣tit errores predictos corrigi et predictum judicium tanquam er∣roneum adnullari &c. et ad hereditatem suam ut frater & heres ip∣sius Thome admitti &c. Et quia inspectis et plenius intellectis re∣cordo et processu predictis ob errores predictos et alios in eisdem recordo et processu compertos consideratum est per ipsum Do∣minum Regem Proceres Magnates et totam communitatem regni in eodem Parliamento quod predictum judicium contra predictum  Thomam Comitem redditum, tanquam erronium revocetur et adnul∣letur, et predictus Henricus ut frater et heres ejusdem Thome Comitis, ad hereditatem suam petend. et habend. debito pro∣cessu inde faciendo prout moris est admittatur, et habeat brevia Cancellario et Justiciar in quorum placeis dicta recordum et pro∣cessus irrotulantur quod eadem recordum et processus irritari faci∣ant et adnullari &c. Nos autem ad majorem securitatem ipsius Henrici predicta recordum et processus tenore presentium duximus  exemplificand. In cujus &c. Teste Rege apud Ebor' tertio die Marcii. N. 63. Claus. 16. Ed. 2. m. 2. Dors. REX venerabili in Christo patri Stephano eadem gratia Epis∣copo London, salutem. Auribus nostris intonuit, quod mo∣leste gerimus quod pletique de populo Dei vestro commisso re∣gimini diabolica fraude decepti ad quandam tabulam in ecclesia ve∣stra Sancti Pauli London existentem in qua statue, sculpture, seu  imagines diversorum & inter cetera Effigies Thome quondam Co∣mitis Lancastr' inimici & rebellis nostri, sunt depicte, fat ue acce∣dentes, eam absque auctoritate Ecclesie Romane tanquam rem sanctificatam colunt & adorant, asserentes ibi fieri miracula, oppro∣brium totius Ecclesie, nostri & vestri dedecus, & animarum po∣puli
predicti periculum, manifestum ac perniciosum exemplum aliorum: quodque vos scientes abusiones hujusmodi in populo vobis vigere eas connivendo fieri permisistis, quin potius causa questus seu turpis lucri fieri dissimulastis, de quo non medi∣ocriter conturbamur. Vobis igitur mandamus firmiter injungentes quatenus premissis deliberatione provida pensatis advertentesque quod dicta Ecclesia de nostro patronatu existit, quodque vos ratione fidelitatis nobis prestite tenemini honorem nostrum velle salvare,  & nostrum dedecus declinare, dictum populum ne ad tabulam pre∣dictam accedere, orationes, oblationes, seu alia ad cultum divinum tendentia absque auctoritate ecclesie Romane ibidem facere presu∣mant, modis omnibus cohibeatis, prout ex officii vestri debito ad vos juxta canonicas sanctiones noveritis pertinere. Taliter vos habentes in hac parte quod Dei & nostram indignationem evitare possitis, & populus predictus per vestre doctrine prudentiam sa∣lubriter instructus, a predictis abusionibus penitus desistat, & ve∣stre  laudis preconium in eodem populo dilatetur ac conceptam erga vos & ecclesiam vestram predictam benevolentiam merito continuare debeamus. Et quid super hiis facere decreveritis no∣bis per vestras literas absque mora dispendio rescribatis. Teste Rege apud Eborum vicesimo octavo die Junii. Eodem modo scribitur Decano & Capitulo Ecclesie Sancti Pauli London mutatis mutandis. N. 64. Rot. Rom. 1. Ed. 3. no. 15. SAnctissimo in Christo patri domino Johanni divina providen∣tia Sacro-Sancte Romane ac universalis Ecclesie Summo Pon∣tifici, Edwardus eadem gratia Rex Anglie, Dominus Hibernie & Dux Aquit. devota pedum oscula beatorum. Cum ad extol∣lenda condignis laudibus Sanctorum merita, & veneratione cele∣bri recolenda, cunctis fidelibus sit eo frequentius insistendum quo per ipsorum suffragia placato summo Judice, peccatorum remissio  facilius impetratur, ex hac pia meditatione, non autem ex san∣guinis vel carnalitatis affectu, Apostolice celsitudini, cui hujus∣modi judicandi potestas est divinitus attributa, publicam humi∣liter presentamus letitiam ac effusam in Ecclesia Dei Divini mu∣neris largitatem. Ecce Dominus Deus noster, qui in sanctis suis semper est mirabiliter gloriosus sidus novum miri lminis splen∣dore conspicuum producensque celitus multiplicis pacis radios salu∣tares, felicis videlicet recordationis dominum Thomam quondam  Comitem Lancastr' ipsumque consanguineum carissimum in Anglia suscitavit, qui dum rebus agebat humanis, honestus extitit, affabilis, & benignus, justus, providus & fidelis, pie compaciens & mise∣ricorditer intelligens super pauperes & afflictos, ac divini nomi∣nis amore succensus & in soliditate fidei confirmatus, quadam floruit prerogativa constantie singularis, nam statutis & ordinati∣onibus regni Anglie secundum Deum pro utilitate reipublice & defensione libertatis Ecclesie, digesto regni consilio rationabi∣liter  promulgatis, juratus corporaliter & astrictus promissam Deo fidem inviolabiliter tenuit, & insurgentes ex adverso Regis & Regni perfidos seductores zelo justitie corripuit magnanimiter & contrivit, propter quod ut in mari magno ventis & procellis ni∣mis et indignationibus expositus, oblocutionibus et mendaciis
attritus, et plerumque fictis allectus blanditiis, nec cessit adversi∣tatibus, nec peccatorum oleo mulcebatur: set tanquam rota re∣gens et dirigens indirecta, inceptum sue navigationis continua∣bat incessum, confiens semper de superni Gubernatoris auxilio, et demum post plurima atque longa que sic in puritate spiritus et spe celestis retributionis peregit certamina, justus ab injustis ca∣pitalem devote subiit sententiam, et sic in Domino feliciter ab∣dormivit, qui jam velut fluvius de loco voluptatis ad irrigandum  egrediens paradisum in partes divisus terram Anglie sancti sui sanguinis effusione rubricatam, rore celesti temperat salubriter & fecundat, dum ad piam ejus invocationem tot gloriosa supra natu∣ram divinitus fiit miracula & infinita satis remedia, favente Deo, per ipsius preces & merita conceduntur. Super quo fama celebris conscendens ex manifestis judiciis laudabiliter in excelsum, de∣votionem populorum ad ipsius tumulum in non modica multi∣tudine confluentium in Domino confortat plurimum & accendit.  Ne igitr tanta lucerna diutius lateat sub modio, set super can∣delabrum posita, lucem prebeat ampliorem, Sanctitatem vestram cui tantum negotium credimus divinitus reservatum, humilius quo possumus, exoramus, quatinus famam tam publicam quam vos verisimiliter latere non credimus, ex hiis nostris scripturis si pla∣cuerit assumentes & ad inquirendum primo canonice de veritate premissorum aliquibus viris idoneis auctoritatem impendentes Apostolice potestatis, circa ipsum probatis, que sufficere poterunt  in hac parte ad Dei honorem & decorem Ecclesie exequi dig∣nemini quod vestra decreverit sanctitas opportunum: Digne namque venerari debet ab hominibus, quem Christus tanta de∣coravit gloria sanctitatis pro cujus quidem prosecutione negotii, dilectos nostros Magistrum Walterum de Burle sacre pagine profes∣sorem, Dominum Willielmum Trussell militem, ac magistrum Jo∣hannem de Thoresby Clericum vestre beatitudini recommendamus & mittimus ad expeditionem congruam premissorum. Eterni∣tas  illa a qua fluunt tempora & momenta, vobis multiplicet successus prosperos et longevos. Dat' London ultimo die men∣sis Februarii. N. 65. Ibm. no. 15. Pape Rex &c. celestis altitudo consilii Electorum merita tam misericorditer quam juste discernens, multitudinem dulcedi∣nis sue absconditam multifarie depromens, disponit mirifice de mercede. Ecce disiderantissime pater quod felicis memorie Rober∣tus  nuper Cant' Archiepiscopus qui super fidei & veritatis funda∣mento firmatus pressuras varias, contumelias & injurias pro ipsa veritate sustinuit, disponente veritate que Deus est, variis mira∣culorum jam fulget insigniis, ut vite ipsius veritatem, virtutum, & opum veritas manifestet, hec equidem attestetur ipsius in carne conversacio, in curam sanctitatis vestre satis nota. Hec probat languidis innumeris sanitas restituta. hec referimus, & de∣ferunt in vestre sanctitatis notitiam Prelati & Proceres regni no∣stri,  supplicantes humiliter & devote quatinus ut lapidem tam pre∣tiosum, ab hominibus reprobatum, a Deo autem electum, & vestris jam temporibus pia Dei miseratione revelatum, ascribere dignetur beatitudo vestra Cathalogo sanctorum venerando. Conservet &c. Dat' apud Westmonast. octavo die Martii.
N. 66. Pat. 1. Edw. 3 parte 2. m. 14. REX as touz ceux as queux cestes lettres vendrount, saluz. Nous avoms regardez une endenture faite par le Priour et le Covent de Pountfreit persones del eglise de Pountfreit et les Burgeis de mesme la ville en les paroles que sensiuent: Acorde est et assentu devant nostre Seigneur le Roy et ma Dame la Royne, et le Counte de Lancastr, par le Priour et le Covent de Pountfreit personnes del Eglise de Pountfreit, & les Burgeis de mesme le vil∣le  la ville de la Pontecoste que Johan de Ipre Heremyte demoerge au Tertre on le Noble Counte de Lancastre fuist mis a la mort Accreaunt & purchaceaunt les almoignes et les byen faitz quil purra Aperfaire une Chapelle illoeque, Et aussint quil y demurge un Clerk que ma Dame la Royne et le dit Counte vodrount as∣signer ovesque un Moigne que le dit Priour voudra assigner, a receiure et despendre a la fesaunce de la dite Chapelle les de∣ners que vendrount au dit Tertre par apport ou de donor ou en  autre manere que les ditz Priour et Covent ount graunt a mesme l'overaigne et de ceo le dit Clerk rendra loial account. Et aus∣sint acorde est quil y eyt un trunk ou boiste a trois loks que de∣merge au dit Tertre pur receuir le dit apport et les offrendres que illoesque vendrount dount une clief demerge devers le Moign, que serra depute depar le Priour & un autre clief devers un Burgeis de mesme la ville et la tierce clief devers le dit Clerk le quel Trunk on boiste soit remue de nuyt en nuyt si mestier  soit el mys en Saunete en la dite Priorie de souz la garde de eaux trois et chescun jour report au dit tertre et chascune Symeigne une foiz ou deux voide en la presence de eaux trois et les de∣vers liveres au dit Clerk par endenture a paier as ouerours par la surveue de eaux et que la Counte de mesmes les despens soit prise chescune Symeigne par les ditz Moigne et Burgeis que prendrent devers eaux la summe de la Semaigne en une roule et si par cas rien demoerge outre les despens a fin de chescune symeigne  soit Countee et mys en depos en la Priorie de souz les Seals de eaux trois a rependre come il verrount mestier, pur les dites oueraignes et prendra le dit Clerk que fra les acountes et les despens iiiid. le jour et le Heremite iiid. du dit apport. Et a fin del an soit lacounte oy par ascun que serra depute par ma Dame la Roigne et par le dit Counte & que mesme celi que serra assigne Auditour eit poer de remuer chescune de eaux sil troesse defaute en eaux et mettre autre convenable en lour lieu Sauve le Moigne  que serra remue et assigne a la volente de dit Priour pur sau∣ver el garder le stat & les droitz de lour eglise avantdite en tes∣moignance de queu chose ma Dame le Roygne le dit Counte et le dit Priour a cestes endentures entrechaungeable ount mys lour seals. Done a Euerwick la veille de la Pentecoste avantdite lan de reigne nostre Seigneur le Roy, Edward primer. Nous totes les choses contenues en la dite endenture et chescune de ycelles quant que en nous est ratefioms, approvoms, et confermoms sicome  en mesme celle endenture plus pleinement est contenuz en tes∣moignance de queu chose nous avoms fait faire cestes nos let∣tres ouertes. Don a Euerwik le quint jour de Juyn.
N 67. Rot. pat. 17. Ed. 2. parte 1. m. 12. Dors. De inquirendo de illis qui fingunt Miracula fieri circa corpora apud Bristol suspensa. REX dilectis & fidelibus suis Johanni de Docusser, Radulpho de Dereford et Johanni le Botiller de Lamiltyt, salutem. Scia∣tis quod cum nuper Henricus de Monte forti, & Henricus de Wylyngton nuper inimici & Rebelles nostri ea occasione per con∣siderationem  Curie nostre per equos tracti & apud Bristoll suspensi fuissent, & virtute considerationis in furcis pendentes remansuri quamdiu corpora eorum subsisterent ut alii vitarent mala & fa∣cinora talia contra nos perpetrare: Reignaldus de Monte-forti, Willielmus de Clyff, Willielmus Cureys, & Johannes frater ejus una cum quibusdam aliis malefactoribus & pacis nostre per∣turbatoribus causas fraudulosas per quas affectionem Populi a nobis clongare & Populum eundem contra nos movere possent malitiose fa∣bricantes  apud Bristoll ad locum ubi corpora dictorum Inimicorum et rebellium nostrorum adhuc suspensa remanent pluries accesserunt, & miracula ibidem fieri falso fingentes idolatrie figmenta ibidem fe∣cerunt & publicarunt, & per alios fieri & publicari procurarunt et illos qui ad locum predictum pro hujusmodi figmentis idolatrie saciendis accesserunt contra alios qui sic accedentes pro nostre & regie dignitatis nostre honores repellere nitebantur, vi & armis  manutenuerunt & alia enormia ibidem fecerunt, in nostri et re∣gie dignitatis nostre et considerationis predicte opprobium et scan∣dalum manifestum et contra pacem nostram. Nos volentes con∣temptus et transgressiones predictas, si taliter perpetrati fuerint transire impunitos, Assignavimus vos et duos vestrum Justiciarios nostros ad inquirendum per Sacramentum proborum et legalium hominum de Comitatu Gloucestr. per quos &c. de nominibus ma∣lefactorum  predictorum qui una cum prefatis Reignaldo &c. et Jo∣hanne contemptus & transgressiones predictos perpetrarunt, & de contemptibus & transgressionibus illis plenius veritatem & ad eosdem contemptus & transgressiones audiendos et terminandos secundum legem &c. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod ad certos dies & lo quos vos vel duo vestrum ad hoc provideritis inqui∣sitionem illam faciatis & contemptus et transgressiones predictos audiatis & terminetis in forma predicta facturi &c. salvis &c. Mandavimus enim Vicecomiti hostro Comitatus predicti quod ad  certos dies & loca quos vos vel duo vestrum ei scire faciatis, veni∣re faciant coram vobis vel duobus vestrum tot &c. per quos &c. In cujus &c. Teste Rege apud Liverpol xxiiii die Octobris. N. 68. Claus. 20. Ed. 2. m. 7. Dors. Proclamatio contra Roge∣ra De Mortuo mari & alios Regnum An∣gliae hostiliter ingressos. LE Roi au Viscont de Hereford salutz. nos vos Mandoms et Chargeons firmement, Enjoignant sur queconque vos poes forfaire devers nos de corps & davoir, que vewes cestes letters  santz delay as jours de countees, feires, Marchees, et autre lieux per tout deinz vostre Baillie auxibien deins Franchises come de∣hors au meins deux foites, au trois per checun semain faces so∣lempnement crier & publier apertment & entendablement les choses southescrites, en la manere Southescrite sans Rien ajouster on amenuser, issent que la people permisse Clerement saver nostre volunte en ceste forme.
PUR ceo que Roger de Mortimer et altres Treitres et enemys de nos & nostre Roialme sont entres nostre Roialme afforce∣ment & ont menez ovesque eux aliens Estrangers, Et se affor∣cent apprendre Roial poiar sur nos, pur que nos meismes voloms afforcement aler sur nos Enemies, pur les arester et destrue si∣come affiert & tout ceux qui sont en lour Compaigne on adher∣dants a eaux, sauve la Roigne, son fitz, et le Countee de Kent, Queux  nos voloms, Que soient sauves si avant que home poet. Et tout soit, Que en tieu Case chescun de Roialme est tenuz per sa ligeance de venir ove tout sa force, & tout son poer en defence de nos & de luy meismes & du Roialme. Jademains noz de nostre Grace especiale grant a ore voloms pur le eise de nostre people, Que toutz yceux auxibiens Gentz d'armes, hobelours, & homes a pie armies, come arblasters, archers, & altres homes a pie arraies qui vendront per devers noz daler ovesque noz sur noz ditz Ene∣mys  soient a lour valu prestment paiez de lour Gages. Cest assa∣voir home darmes xiid. le jour, Hobelour vid. home a pie armee de doble Garnement ivd. & d'une Garnement iiid. Et Archer iid. & au∣xint voloms noz que tote maner des Grants qui voillent aver nostre Char∣tre de pees pur felonie, ou adherdance a noz Enemys auxibien de temps passe, come a temps de ore, on pur utlagarie pur queconque cause que se soit, forepris le dit Treitre Roger de Mortimer, & les autres grants mesnours des gents qui sont venues de outre meer en sa Compaigne.  Et forspris ceux qui tueront Sir Roger de Beler veignant au Chan∣cellarie, & ejent lour Chartres, issint quils noz suent a noz gages en destruction de noz Enemys. Et si ascun ou ascuns menent ou rendrent a noz le corps du dit Treitre Roger de Mortimer, ou noz port sa Teste, noz voloms quils eient noz chartres de pees de quiconque felonie adherdance, utlagarie, ou de autre chose faite countre nostre pees, & grantoms de les fair payer mille livres Dasterlings. Et les choses susditz si peinblement & di∣ligeaument  enfaces. Que defaut ne soit trove en voz pur quoi noz devoms a vos prendre grevoisement. Don souz nostre Grant seale a nostre Tower de Londres la xxviii jour de Septembre. En mesme le manere est maunde a toutz les Vicountz de Angleterre, N. 69. Inter Respon∣siones AdaeHe∣refordensis E∣piscopi in Au∣thor. Decem. Col. 2764. ISabelle par la grace de Dieu Reyne Dengleterre, Dame Dirlan∣de, Contesse de Ponntiff, Et nous Edward aisne fiz au noble Roy Dengleterre Duces, de Guyenn, Counte de Cestre, de Ponn∣tyf & Monstroyl, Et nous Edmund fiz au noble Roy Dengle∣terre Counte de Kent, a toux iceaux que cestes lettres vendrient salutz. Por ceo que conue chose est notoriement que lestat de Seint Eglise & del Roialme Dengleterre est en moult des maneres durement blemy & abesce par mavoys counsail & abet Hugh le Des∣penser, que pur orgoil & coveytise de Seigneutier & mestrier sur  toux altres ad purpris roial poiar countre droit & reson & sa lige∣aunce, & en tele manere le ad use par le mavoys consail R. de Baldock & autres adherdans a ly, que seint Eglise est revile, & mise hountosement a grant subjection & les Prelas de seint Eglise de lour biens countre Dieu & dreiture despoilez & en trops des maneres ledenges & dishonurez & le Coronne Dengleterre destrue en divers
maners, en desheritaunce de nostre Seigneur le Roy & de ces heirs les graunts du Roialme par envie & mavys crualte de dit Hugh plusours saunz coupe & saunz cause a hountouse mort liverez, les uns desheritez, les altres enprisonez, banniez, & exilez, veues, orpha∣nyns de lour droit a tort forjugiez & le people de la terre par di∣verses taillages & noun dues exactions tropsovent reynez & par di∣vers oppressions saunz nulle mercy grevetz. Par queax mesprises le dit Hugh se monstre apert tyrant & enimy de Dieu & de seint  Eglise de nostre treschier Seigneur le Roy, & de tout le Roialme. Et nous & plusours autres que sount ovesque nous e nostre Compa∣igne que loungement avoms este aloignez de la bone voillaunce nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, par la fause suggestion & mavoys procure∣ment des avaunt dits Hugh, & Robert & lour adherdaunts sumes venuz en ceste terre pur lever lestat de seint Eglise & del Roial∣me & le people de la terre del dits meschiefs, & grevous oppres∣sions garder & mayntener a nostre poiar, lonur & profit de seint  Eglise, & nostre dit Seigneur le Roy & de tout le Roialme sicome est desutz dit. Pur quoi nous vos mandoms & prioms pur commun profit de vous toux & chescun de vous endroit de sey nous soietz aidaunt bien & leaument toutz les foitz, que vous verretz lieu & temps, & par toutes les voies que vous saveretz & pourretz a ceo que les choses desutz dites puissent hastivement venir a effect & a bon fin, car soietz certaynes que nous toux, & toux iceaux que sunt en nostre Compaignie ne enpensoms a faire cho∣se  que ne serra pur lonur & le profit de seint Eglise & de toute le Roialme sicome la verret & troveretz par temps, si Dieu plest. Don a Wallingford le xv. jour Doctobre, lan del regne nostre treschier Seigneur ly Roy vintysme. N. 70. Claus. 20. Ed. 2. m. 3. Dors. MEmorandum quod vicesimo sexto die Octobris Anno regni Edwardi filii Regis Edward vicesimo, ipso Rege a regno  suo Angliae cum Hugone le Despenser Juniore & Magistro Roberto de Baldock inimicis Isabelle Reginae Angliae, consortis ipsius Domi∣ni Regis & Edwardi filii ejusdem Domini Regis primogeniti, & Ducis Aquitaniae & aliis eorundem Domini Regis & Ducis & Regni Angliae notorie inimicis recedente, eodem regno suo sine regimine dimisso; Venerabilis Pater A. Dublinensis Archiepiscopus, I. Win∣toniensis, I. Eliensis, H. Lincolniensis, A. Herefordensis, W. Norwi∣censis, Episcopi, & alii Prelati, & Dominus Thomas Norfolciae, &  Edmundus Cantiae, Comites, fratres ipsius Domini Regis, Et Henricus Comes Lancastriae & Leycestriae, Thomas Wake, Henricus de Bello-Monte, Willielmus la Zouch de Asbye, Robertus de Monte-Alto. Robertus de More, Robertus de Watevile, & alii Barones & Mili∣tes tunc apud Bristol. existentes in presentia dictae Dominae Reginae ac dicti Ducis, de assensu totius communitatis dicti Regni ibidem existentis, eundem Ducem in Custodem dicti Regni unanimi∣ter eligerunt. Sic quod idem Dux & Custos nomine & jure ipsius  Domini Regis patris sui ipso Rege sic absente, dictum Regnum regat ac gubernaret, & idem Dux eodem die regimen dicti regni in forma praedicta idem assumpsit, Et ea quae juris erant sigillo suo privato in custodia Domini Roberti de Wyvel Clerici sui existente, eo quod aliud sigillum pro dicto regimine non adhuc habuit, exercere in∣cepit. Postmodum vero vicesimo die Novembris proxime sequen∣tis, captis inimicis praedictis, & dicto Domino Rege in dictum Regnum
suum revertente, iidem Domina Regina & Dux, Prelatique, & Pro∣ceres predicti, de assensu communitatis predicte tunc apud Here∣ford existentes, pro eo quod potestas ipsius Custodis per adventum dicti Domini Regis sic infra regnum suum cessavit, predictum Dominum Herefordensen Episcopum ad ipsum Dominum Regem in nuntium miserunt, supplicando eidem Domino Regi, quod et ipse precipere vellet, quod de magno sigillo suo penes dictum Domi∣num Regem tunc existente, fierent ea quae pro pace in eodem regno  conservanda, & justicia exhibenda essent facienda. Idemque Epi∣scopus Herefordensis dictum Dominum Regem apud Munemuth tunc existentem, & in praesentia dicti Comitis Lancastriae & Leycestriae, & Magistri Thomae Chaundes Archidiaconi Herefordensis, ac aliorum plurimorum, omnia sibi injuncta eidem Domino Regi exposuit per ordinem. Et idem Dominus Rex auditis sic sibi expositis, habita inde aliquali deliberatione, penes se, respondebat quod placuit sibi mittere dictum sigillum suum magnum preatis consorti  suae & filio, Et quod iidem consors & filius dictum sigillum sub privato uo sigillo tunc clausum aperire facerent, & non solum ea quae jure & pace essent facienda, sed etiam quae gratiae forent, sub dicto magno sigillo fieri facerent. Et idem Dominus Rex dictum magnum sigillum liberari fecerit Domino Willielmo le Blunt Militi, deferendum in comitiva dicti Domini Herefordensis Epi∣scopi, ad praedictm Reginam & Ducem predictum forma iis libe∣randum. Quae idem Episcopus ad Reginam & Ducem praedictos  vicesimo sexto die Novembris proxime sequentis apud Martlee re∣diens exposuit viva voce. Et nihilominus eadem in quodam instrumento publico inde confecto continentur. Dictus vero Willi∣elmus le Blunt predictum magnum sigillum sub dicto privato sigillo sic clausum predicto die prefatis Reginae & Duci apud Martley in praesentia dicti Herefordensis Episcopi liberavit. Die vero Dominica proxime sequenti, viz. in i. e. 30. No∣vembris. festo sancti Andreae Apostoli apud Ciren∣cester in Camera ipsius Reginae infra Abbatiam ibidem iidem Reginae  & Dux existentes, dictum magnum sigillum sic clausum in presentia Domini Rogeri de Mortuo-Mar, Johannis Comitis Guarenne, dicti Do∣mini Roberti de Wyvell, Richardi de Ellesfold, & Johannis Gifford Cleri∣corum, et aliorum plurimorum tradiderunt ex parte dicti Domini Re∣gis prefato Domino Norwicensi Episcopo, & praeceperunt sibi quod il∣lud aperiret, & faceret quod ad officium Custodis dicti magni sigilli per∣tineret. Et idem Episcopus dictum magnum sigillum in manibus suis recepit, & eodem die in Capitulo dictae Abbatiae sigillum illud aperuit,  & inde Brevia consignavit, & post consignationem sigillum illud sub sigillo suo conclusit. Et sic remansit dictum magnum sigillum in Custodia dicti Episcopi Norwicensis itiner andum per vias versus Wodstocke usque ad i. e. ad quar∣tum Diem De∣cembris. diem ovis proxime sequentis, quo die ipse restituit sigillum illud sub sigillo suo praefatis Rogero & Duci apud Wodestoke, Et occur∣rentibus negotiis apertum fuit idem sigillum pro expeditione eorundem, & post consignationem quamlibet reclusum fuit idem sigillum sub sigillo dicti Norwicensis Episcopi, & restitutum prefatis  Rogero & Duci custodiendum. Die vero Mercurii ante festum sancti Thomae Apostoli proxime sequentis Mr. Henricus de Cliffe Custos Rotulorum Cancellarie qui tunc venerat sigillum suum apposuit dicto magno sigillo una cum sigillo dicti Norwicensis Episcopi, & iidem Episcopus & Magister Henricus post consignationes, sigillis suis appositis, dictum sigillum praefatis Reginae, & Duci singulis die∣bus restituere.
N. 71. Rot. Claus. 20. Ed. 2. m. 4. Dors. De proroga∣tione parlia∣menti. REX venerabili in Christo Patri J. eâdem gratia Episcopo Ci∣cestr. salutem. Licet nuper super diversis & arduis nego∣tiis, nos et statum Regni nostri tangentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in Quindena Sancti Andreae proximo futura, teneri & ibidem per sabellam Reginam Angliae consortem nostram charis∣simam & per Edwardum filium nostrum primogenitum, Custodem ejusdem Regni, nobis extra idem Regnum agentibus, ac per vos &  caeteros Praelatos, Proceres, & Magnates Regni praedicti haberi vo∣luissemus colloquium & Tractatum; vobisque mandâssemus, quod dictis die & loco personaliter interessetis, cum praefata Consorte nostra, & dicto filio nostro, Custode Regni praedicti, & cum caete∣ris Praelatis, Proceribus & Magnatibus, dicti regni super praedictis negotiis tractaturi. Quia tamen quibusdam de Causis certis ne∣cessariis & utilibus, praedictum Parliamentum & Tractatum usque in Crastinum Epiphaniae Domini proximo jam futurum, apud di∣ctum  locum Westm. tunc tenendum duximus prorogandum, vobis significamus quod ad dictam Quindenam apud dictum locum Westm. ex causâ Parliamenti & Tractatus praedictorum vos accedere non oportet: Vobis insuper in fide & dilectione, quibus nobis tene∣mini, firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod omnibus aliis prae∣termissis, in dicto Crastino personaliter sitis apud dictum locum Westm. nobiscum, si ibidem tunc personaliter simus, vel in absentia no∣stra cum praefata Consorte nostra, & cum dicto filio nostro ac cum  caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus, & Magnatibus dicti Regni super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; praemunientes Decanum & Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae predictae & Archidiaconos Clerumque vestrae Dioceseos quod iidem Decanus & Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis, dictumque Capitulum per unum, & Cle∣rus praedictus per duos Procuratores, ab ipsis Capitulo, & Clero sufficientem potestatem habentes, dicto loco in dicto crastino in∣tersint, ad conentiendum hiis, quae tunc ibidem de communi con∣silio  Regni nostri contigerit ordinari: Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. Teste Rege apud Ledbury tertio die Decembris. The Seal was not at Ledbury on the 3d of December, and there∣fore the Writ could not be sealed there that Day, for the great Seal was then in the Custody of the Bishop of Norwich, at Woodstock or in his Way thither, as appears by the next pre∣ceeding Record. and on the 4th of that Month was delivered to Roger Mortimer and the Duke of Aquitain, afterwards Ed. 3d.  at Woodstock, so that in all probability▪ This Writ Issued with∣out the Kings Privity or Knowledge. N. 72. Authores De∣cem. Col. 2765. n. 50. 60. ACcorde est que sire Edward fiz aise du Roy ait le governe∣ment del Roialme & soit Rois coronne par les causes que sensiwent. 1. Primerement. Pur ceo que la persone ly Roy nest pas suffisaunt de governer. Car en touz son temps ad il este mene  & governe par autres que ly ount mavoisement consaillez a dis∣honeur de ly & destruction de seint Eglise, et de tout son peo∣ple saunz ceo que il le vousist veer on conustre le quel il fust bon ou mavoys ou remedie mettre, ou faire le vousist quant il fuist requis par les graunts & sages de son Roialme, ou suffrir que a∣mende fuist faite.
2. Item. Par tout son temps, il ne se voloit doner a bon counsail ne le croire ne a bon governement de son Roialme meys se ad done toux jours as ouraignes & occupations nient covenables entrelessaunt lesploit des bosoignes de son Roialme. 3. Item. par defaute de bon governement ad il perdu le Roialme Descoce, & autres terres & Seignuries en Gascoyne & Hyrland, les quex son pere li lessa en pees & amiste ly Roy,  du Roy de Fraunce & dets moults des autres graunts. 4. Item. Par sa fierte & qualte & par mavoys consail ad il destruit seint Eglise & les persones de seint Eglise tenuz en pri∣soun les uns, et les altres en destresce, & auxint plusours graunts & nobles de sa terre mys a hountouse mort enprisons exuletz & desheritez. 5. Item. la ou il est tenuz par son serement a faire droit a  toux il ne lad pas volu faire pur son propre profyt & covety se de ly & de ces mavoys counsailires que ount este pres de ly, ne ad garde les autres pointz del serement quil fist a son coronne∣ment, si com il feust tenuz. 6. Item. Il deguerpist son Roialme & fist taunt come en ly fust que son Roialme, & son people fust perduz, & que pys est, pur la cruelte de ly & defaute de s personne il est trove incor∣rigible sauntz esperaunce de amendement, les quex choses sount  si notoires quil ne poount estre desditz. N. 73. Knighton. Col. 2550. N. 10. VEra series Procuratorii. Jeo William Trussel Procuratour des Prelatez, Contez & Barons & altres gentz en ma procu∣racye nomes eyant al ceo playne & suffisant pouare, les homages & fealtez au vous Edward Roy Dengleterre come al Roy avant ces oeures depar les ditz persones en ma procuracye nomes, renk & rebaylle sus a vous Edward & deliver & face quitez les  persones avantditz en la meillour manere que ley et custome don∣nent, E face protestacion en non de eaux quils ne voillent deor∣mes estre en vostre fealte, ne en vostre lyance, ne cleyment de vous come de Roy riens tenir. Encz vous tiegnent deshorse pri∣veye persone sanz nule manere de reale dignite. REX vicecomiti Eboracensi salutem. Quia Dominus Edwar∣dus nuper Rex Angliae pater noster, de Communitatis consi∣lio  et assensu Praelatorum, Comitum et Baronum, et aliorum Mag∣natum, nec non Communitatis totius regni praedicti spontanea volun∣tate se amovit à regimine dicti regni volens et concedens quod nos tanquam ipsius primogenitus & heres ipsius Regni, gubernationem et regimen assumemus; Nosque ipsius patris nostri Beneplacito in in hac parte de consilio et advisamento Praelatorum, Comitum, Baro∣num, Magnatum, et Communitatum praedictorum, annuentes, gu∣bernacula suscepimus dicti Regni, et fidelitates & homagia ipso∣rum  Praelatorum, et Magnatum recipimus, ut est moris. Deside∣rantes igitur pacem nostram pro quiete et tranquillitate populi nostri inviolabiliter observari, tibi praecipimus quod statim visis praesentibus per totam Ballivam tuam, pacem nostram facias pub∣lice proclamari universis et singulis ex parte nostra inhibendo, sub poena, et periculo exhaeredationis et amissionis vitae et membrorum,
ne quis dictam pacem nostram infringere seu violare praesumat, sed quilibet actiones et querelas absque violentia quacunque pro sequatur, secundum leges et consuetudines Regni nostri. Nos enim parati sumus et semper erimus omnibus et singulis con∣querentibus tam divitibus quam pauperibus in curiis nostris plenam justitiam exhibere. Teste Rege apud Westmonasterium 29 Januarii. N. 75. L'abbei Con∣cil. Tom. xi. part 2. col. 534. B. C. D. Puteanus Con∣demnation des Temples. 2. p. 29. 30. 31. 1. Cum ordinem cooptabantur in ipsis sacrorum suorum initiis Christumne, aut Deum, aut virginem Deiparam, aut Divos abjurassent vel ut abjurarent moniti fuissent, aliosve ipsi ad abju∣randum, incitassent? 2. An Christum, vel Jesum, crucive suffixum verum Deum esse, vel passum pro humano redimendo genere negassent? 3. An fuisse pseudo-prophetam, & pro suis ipsis afflictum criminibus affirmassent? 4. An Ordinis magistrum, qui nullis erat sacris initiatus, cre∣derent  per poenitentiae Sacramentum eluere animae sordes, & pec∣cata posse, & an ipse id fecisset? 5. An quae occulta habebantur in eorum legibus, ea orthodoxae Romanae Ecclesiae vituperationi esse criminaque ac eorem fovere putarent? 6. An in ipso ordinis ingressu docerentur posse inter se luxu∣riose commisceri, idque esse faciendum, neque ullum ob id per∣petrari flagitium, & an haec Tyrones etiam docerent? 7. An Ordinis, sui amplitudini studere vel contra quam fas esset jurassent ad idque jurandum alios induxissent? 8. An qui cooptabant eos in Ordinem ne spem salutis suae in Christo Deo positam haberent illis ediceret? 9. An conspuissent crucem imaginemve Christi Dei, aut pe∣dibus protrivissent ac conculcassent, & die veneris sancto, vel alio in eam minxissent? 10. An Cattum craniumve aut similacrum quodpiam & ido∣lum hujusmodi fictum & commentitium divina veneratione co∣luissent, in magnis comitiis, aliove sracrum loco: divitiasque ab eo & terrarum arborumve uberes fructus speravissent? 11. An quo cingulo interulam carnemve cingebant, eo idolum quodpiam hujusmodi tetigissent? 12. An Tyrones, adolescentulos praesertim libidinose, intempe∣ranterque, atque aliâ quam deceat, parte osculati fuissent? 13. An dum rem divinam facerent sacra mysteriorum, & con¦secrationis verba omisissent? 14. An scelestum & nefarium facinus ducerent, haec committere? N. 76. Rot. Claus. 7. Ei. 2. M. 11. 12. Dors. CLemens Episcopus servus servorum Dei Charissimo in Chri∣sto filio Edwardo Regi Angliae illustri salutem & apostoli∣cam benedictionem. Nuper in Generali Concilio per nos Vi∣enne disponente Domino celebrato post longam deliberationem prehabitam & maturam acceptabilius fore Altissimo magis hono∣rabili  fidei orthodoxae cultoribus & subventioni Terrae sancrae uti∣lius bona quondam domus & ordinis militiae Templi ordini Hos∣pitalitatis sancti Johannis Jerusal' concedere quam ordini de nova creando unire aut etiam applicare consilium deliberationis nostrae providit set quia tunc aliquibus asserentibus melius fore bona ipsa ordini noviter creando conferre quam dicti Hospitalis ordini
applicare tunc noster affectus speratum effectum super hoc opti∣nere nequivit. Tandem vero sic per Dei gratiam actum fore dinoscitur quod vi. Non. praesentis mensis Maii eodem sacro ap∣probante Concilio Hospitali seu ipsius Hospitalis ordini supradictis praefata bona concedenda & applicanda duximus ac etiam unien∣da, Bonis ejusdem ordinis militiae Templi in Regnis & terris carissimorum in Christo filiorum nostrorum, Castelle, Aragonie, Portugallie, & Maioricarum Regum illustrium extra Regnum  Franciae consistentibus dumtaxat exceptis quae ab unione, concessi∣one, & applicatione hujusmodi ex certis causis excipienda duxi∣mus, & etiam excludenda, ipsa dispositioni nostrae & sedis Apo∣stolicae specialiter reservantes quousque de illis aliter pro dictae Terrae subsidio per nostram & dicte sedis providentiam extiterit ordinatum. Quocirca Magnificentiam regiam rogamus & hor∣tamur attentius quatinus pro reverentia salvatoris eujus in hac parte negotium promovemus, ac dictae sedis & nostra.....Magi∣gistro  & Fratribus seu Prioribus & Praeceptoribus Hospitalis ejus∣dem in quibuscumque partibus & Provinciis Regni & terrarum tuarum constitutis seu Procuratori vel Procuratoribus eorumdem quod praedicta bona in eisdem regno & terris tuis consistentia in∣tegre & pacifice valeant assequi & habere regii favoris praestes auxilium prout extiterit oportunum. Et nihilominus omnibus Comitibus, Baronibus, Ducibus, Principibus & aliis nobilibus, Communitatibus & Universitatibus, Senescallis, Ballivis, caeteris∣que  Officialibus dicti Regni quocumque nomine censeantur, & aliis qui ad custodiam bonorum ipsorum de tuo mandato fue∣rint deputati per literas tuas mandes expresse ut eadem bona Magistro & Fratribus seu Prioribus & Praeceptoribus, vel Procu∣ratori aut Procuratoribus antedictis et singulis eorundem a quibus super hoc fuerint requisiti sine diminutione qualibet quantum in eis fuerint restituant & assignent eis circa nanciscendam, habendam, & retinendam possessionem bonorum ipsorum per te & of∣ficiales eosdem & aliis executoribus super executione hujus∣modi  concessionis nostrae deputatis & imposterum deputandis su per eadem executione de liberalitate regia efficaciter assistendo, cum pro parte ipsorum extiteris requisitus: sic igitur in praemissis te promptum & liberalem exhibeas quod praeter retributionis aeternae premium quod inde mereberis tibi laudis humane prove∣niat incrementum & nos celsitudinem tuam dignis valeamus in Do¦mino laudibus commendare, Dat' Liberon, Valenti. Dict. xvii. Kal.  Junii. Pontificiatus nostri anno septimo. N. 77. Registrum Winchelsey, et the Registers Office in Drs. Commons. fol 8. 2. b. SAnctissimo in Christo Patri &c. Sanctitatis vestrae mandatum sub literis vestris Bullatis clausis xvi. Kalend. Martii Anno Domini 300o. 9o. michi per venerabilem patrem Dominum Piat Epm. praesentatum recepi, continens Tenorem qui sequitur: CLEMENS &c. volens autem Mandatum Apostolicum prae∣dictum quantum ad me pertinuit exequi reverenter cum non∣nullis fratribus & suffraganeis meis qui mandatum consimile re∣ceperunt  super executione ejusdem mandati frequentes tracta∣tus habebam. Et post tractatus eosdem ac nonnullos accessus ad palatium Domini E. Dei gratia Regis Angliae illustris apud West∣monasterium juxta London in quo tunc temporis morabatur, quam citius ad ipsius praesentiam accedere potui, quod fuit 3•. Kalend.
Martii, eidem in presentia venerabilis patris Domini Patriarchae Jerusalem & venerabilium fratrum suffraganeorum meorum, scil. Dominorum London. Winton. Sarum, Lincoln, Norwic. Cicestrien. Wigorn. Exon. Bathon & Wellen. & Meneven. Ecclesiarum Episco∣porum, & aliquorum Comitum & Baronum Regni Angl. contenta in eodem Mandato eidem Domino Regi vice mei & confratrum meorum exposui, & in scriptis tam in latino quam Gallico tradi∣di, Exhortationes & monitiones feci prout in instrumento publico  quod super expositione & traditione ac exhortatione & moniti∣one praedictis fieri feci & sanctitati vestrae transmitto plenius con∣tinetur. Et quia idem Dominus Rex dicebat se velle deliberare super expositis eisdem & traditis, postmodum Idibus Martii pro habendo Responso accessi una cum aliquibus fratribus meis ad praedictum palatium dicti Regis, in quo tunc temporis praesens fuit, & quia sui praesentiam mihi non exhibuit, post longam ex∣pectarionem, ad ipsum venerabilem fratrem Dominum, W. Dei  gratia Episcopum Thesaurarium suum mittens, Rogav ut Ecclesiae Ro∣manae & michi congruum & conveniens responsum daret & face∣ret, ad sibi antea per me exposita, et tradita, de quibus est men∣tio suprafacta, & tandem idem Dominus Rex michi, & venera∣bilibus fratribus tunc praesentibus per dictum Dominum▪ The saura∣rium & Johannem de Lonham de ordine praedicatorum Confesso∣rem suum, Mandavit pro tunc Respondere non potuit, pro eo quod contenta in Mandato vestro▪ Apostolico praedicto, non solum  ipsum Dominum Regem, sed omnes Comites, Barones, & alios proceres regni sui tangebant, Quorum omnium tunc praesentiam ad tractatum cum eis super mandatis vestris Apostolicis, eidem Domino Regi per me prius tractatis & expositis ad voluntatem suam non potuit obtinere. Et quorum praesentia in Responsioni∣bus faciendis sibi necessaria existebat. Sed sperabat quod super hoc remedium ordinaretur per Dei gratiam infra breve prout in Instrumento publico quod de hoc fieri feci plenius est con∣tentum.  Verum idem Dominus Rex cum consilio suo 2o. Ka∣lend. Aprilis, respondit sub hac forma. Quod salvo jure coronae suae voluit vobis & sanctae sedi Apostolicae, sicut Devotus filius Ecclesiae quatenus poterit in omnibus obedire, adjiciens quod ante notitiam vestrarum literarum, Discordia quaedam inter quos∣dam Proceres Regni sui exorta extitit, quae usque ad diem prae∣dictum sedata non fuerat vel sopita, propter quod non potuit plenè deliberare, ut ad singula in mandato vestro contenta re∣sponsum  congruum exhiberet, sed cum dictam Discordiam per∣penderet jam sedandam, intendebat Regni sui consilium convo∣care & super dandis Responsis convenientibus ad singula dili∣genter tractare, ac per suos proprios Nuncios citra tempus ve∣stri generalis consilii praefinitum, Responsum dare▪ Deo placens▪ vobis & sedi Apostolicae acceptabile, ac sanctae Ecclesiae fructuo∣sum, ad ipsius & Regni sui Commodum & Honorem. N. 78. Rot. pat. 12. Ed. 2. part. 2. m. 37. Ne aliquid attemptetur contra Coronam in Congregatione Praelatorum. REX venerabilibus in Christo patribus eâdem gratia W. Ar∣chiepiscopo Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati, & omnibus Episcopis Cantuariensis Provinciae ac aliis Prelatis & Cleri absentis Procuratoribus ejusdem Provinciae apud London in proximo conven∣tur.
Salutem. Mandamus vobis firmiter inhibentes ne instanti con∣gregatione apud London convocata, aliquid contra Coronam seu Dignitatem nostram, vel statum Regni nostri statuere seu attemp∣tare aliqualiter praesumatis. Si quae autem statum Ecclesie aut vestrum tangentia, seu alias erga nos habueritis prosequenda, ea in proximo Parliamento nostro apud Lincoln, jam convocato ad quod vos Prelati summoniti estis, ad quod quantum bono modo poterimus festinamus, in quo etiam interesse debetis, tra∣ctari volumus, & super eisdem tunc ibidem fieri quod de com∣muni  consilio ad honorem Dei & Ecclesie sue salvis statu & dig∣nitate nostris fide faciendum. In cujus &c. Teste Rege apud Shene xvi die Februarii. N. 79. Pat. 15. Ed. 2. part. 1. m. 8. Per ipsum Regem. REX venerabilibus in Christo patribus W. eadem gratia Ar∣chiepiscopo Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primati, ac caeteris  Episcopis & Praelatis, Cantuar. Provinciae ad concilium Provinciale apud London in proximo conventuris: Mandamus vobis in fide & Dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter inhibentes, ne in dicto Concilio quicquam in nostri aut status Coronae nostrae, vel Regni nostri praejudicium statuatis, faciatis, seu quomodo libet, ordinetis. Teste Rege apud Pountfreyt super Thamesiam 30. die Novembris. N. 80. Spelman. Con∣cil. vol. 2. fol. 486. Per ipsum Regem. REX Justiciariis salutem. Circumspecte agatis de negotio tangente Dominum Norwicensem, & ejus clerum non pu∣niendo eos, si Placitum tenuerint de hiis, quae mere sunt spiritua∣lia, viz. de Correctionibus quas faciunt Prelati pro mortali pec∣cato, viz. pro Fornicatione, Adulterio & hujusmodi pro quibus aliquando infligitur poena corporalis, aliquando pecuniaria; ma∣xime si convictus fuerit liber homo. Item, si Praelatus puniatur pro Cimeterio non clauso, Ecclesiâ discooperta vel decenter non ornata, in quibus casibus alia poena non potest infligi, quam pecuniaria. Item, si Rector petat a Parochianis suis Oblationes, Decimas debitas, & consuetas, vel Rector agat contra Rectorem de De∣cimis majoribus, dummodo non petatur quarta pars alicujus  Ecclesiae. Item, si Rector petat Mortuarium, ubi Mortuarium dari consuevit. Item, si Prelatus, Advocatus Ecclesiae petat a Rectore Pensionem sibi debitam, omnes hujusmodi petitiones faciendae sunt in foro Ecclesiastico. Item, de violenta manuum injectione in Clericum, & in causa Diffamationis, concessum fuit alias, quod Placitum inde teneatur in Curia Christianitatis, dummodo non petatur pecunia, sed agatur de correctione peccati. In omnibus predictis Judex Ecclesiasticus cognoscere debet, non obstante Regia prohibitione, li∣cet
prrigatur, quod non faciat, nisi prius habeat regiam consul∣tationem &c. N. 81. Claus. 1. Ed. 3. parte prima. M. 23. Dors. petitiones pro illis qui fue∣rint de Quere∣la Thomae Co∣mitis Lanca∣striae FAit a Remember que le tierce jour de Feverer lan du Regne le Roi Edward fitz au Roi Edward, fitz au Roi Edward, fitz a Roi Henry primer furent mostrez en parlement adoques tenu a Westmr. ascunes petitions, per les Chivalers et le Comune de la Querele le Count de Lancastre, en la form que ensuit. A nostre Signeur le Roi &c. prient les Chivalers et le Comune a tort Desheritez, Emprisonez, Bannz: Exilez questeint de la Que∣rele le noble Counte de Lancastre quils peussent estre Restitutez a leur erres ove les issues puis le Temps que les furent a tort eiiz. A quee peticion fust res pondu per comune assent de tot le  parlement que totes les terres et tenz que furent seisiz pur cause de la Querele la Counte de Lancastre la Quele pur tot le parle∣lement est afferme bone, auxibien, en Ireland, Gales, come en Engleterre, soient Restitutez ove les issues et arrerages de ferme Dnt le Roi ne fuist mie sei. N. 82. Rot. Claus. 4. Ed. 3. M. 19. Dors. REX venerabili in Christo Patri S. eadem gratia Archiepscopo Cantuar▪ totius Anglie primati, Salutem. Qualiter nego∣cia  nos et statum regni nostri contingencia postquam suscepimus gubernacula regni nostri ucusque in nostrum dampnum et de∣decus, et depauperationem populi nostri deducta erant, vestram credimus prudentiam non latere, propter quod non valentes hoc urgente conscientia, ulterius sustinere, set desiderantes toto corde statum et regimen regni nostri secundum juris et rationis exi∣genciam ad honorem Dei et tranquilliatem et pacem sancte Ecclesie, ac totius populi ejusdem regni reformari ordinaimus, de consilio  & assensu Prelatorum, & Magnatum nobis assistentium Parliamen∣tum nostrum apud Westm. die Lune proximo post festum sancte Ka∣terine virginis proximo futuro tenere, et vobiscum, ac cum ce∣teris Pelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni habere super premissis cum deliberacione plenaria, consilium et tractatum vo∣bis in fide et dilctione quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injun∣gendo mandamus, quatinus omni excusacione voluntariâ cessante dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis nobiscum, & cum ceteris  Prelatis, Magnatibus, & Proceribus predictis super premissis tra∣ctaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut nos et ho∣norem nostrum e tranquillitatem dicti regni nostri diligitis nul∣latenus omittatis, Scientes quod diem summoicionis dicti Parlia∣menti, ob intenum desiderium quod habemus quod negocia sta∣tum ipsius regni nostri contingencia feliciter disponantur, de as∣sensu Prelatorum & Magnatum predictorum abreviavimus ista vice, & nomus quod abreiatio hujusmodi cedat alicui in prejudici∣um, vel trahatur in consequentiam in futurum. Et premunire  acias Priorem & Capitulum Ecclesie vestre Christi Cantuar' Ar∣chidiaconos totumque clerum vestre Dioce. quod iidem Prior & Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis dictumque Capitulum per unum, idemque▪ Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos plenam & sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo & clero habentes dictis
die & loco intersint ad faciendum & consentiendu hiis quae tunc ibidem de communi consilio, divinâ favente clementia, ordinari con∣tigerit super negociis antedictis. Teste Rege apud Leycestr. xxiii. die Octobris. N. 83. Rot. Parl. 4. Ed. 3. n. 1. Judicium Ro∣geri de Mor∣tuo Mari. Ces sont les tresons felonies & malveistes a nostre Seigneur le Roi & a son people par Roger de Mortymer, & autres de sa covyne. Primerment par la on dine feust al Parlement nostre Seigneur le Roy prochynement tenuz apres son coronement a Westminster que quatre Evesques, quatre Countes & sys Barons demoerreient pres du Roy pur luy conseyler issint tote foiz que quatre y feus∣sent, cestassauer, un Eves{que} un Counte et deus Barons au meyns et que nule grosse busoigne soit faite sanz lur assent, et que chescun respondesist de ses faitz pur son tems, apres quen parle∣ment,  le dit Roger de Mortymer nient eant regard au dit assent accrocha a lui roial poe et le gouvernement du Roialme sur le∣stat le Roi et ousta et fist outer et metre Ministres en lostiel le Roi et allours parmy le roialme a sa volunte de tieux que feurent de on acord, et myst Johan Wyard et autres entour le Roi despier ses faitz et ses ditz, issint que nostre dit Seigneur le Roi feust en tiele manere environ de cez Enemys de tieux quil ne poet ien faie de sa volunte forsque come un home que demo∣ra  en garde. 2. Item par la ou le piere nostre nostre Seigneur le Roy fust a Kenilworth par ordenance et assent de peres de la terre a de∣morer illoeques a ses eses parestre servi come afferoit a un tiel Seignour, le dit Roger par le roial poer al acroche ne lessa tant quil le eust par devers lui a sa volunte et ordina quil feust mande au Chastiel de Berkele ou par lui et par les sones feust  treterousement felonessement et falsement murdre et tue. 3. Item le dit Roger par le▪ dit Roial poer a lui acroche fist deendre par Brief le Roy desouz le grant Seal que nul ne ve∣nist au parlement de Salesbirs a force et armes sur quant quil poet forfaire devers le Roy la vynt le dit Roger od autres de sa covyne a force et armes au dit parlement encountre le dit de∣fens par quoy plusours Peres de la terre, come le Counte de  Lancastr' et autres sachantz la manere de sa venue ne vyndrent point, et coment par la ou les Prelates estoient assemblez au dit parlement en une maison de consailler sur les busoignes nostre Seigneur le Roi et son roialme le dit Roger [brisa] debrusa les oens de la Meason ove gentz des armez sur les ditz Prelatz et les manassa de vie et de membre si nul de eux fuissent si hardys á dire ou faire rien que feust a contraire de sa volunte en nul point. Et a meisme le parlement  par son dit poer fist tant que le Seigneur le Roi lui fist Counte de la Marche et lui dona plusous terres a lui & a ses heirs, en Desheritance de sa Corone. Et puis le dit Roger et ceux de sa covyne menerent le dit nostre Seig∣neur l Roi armez sur le dit Counte de Lancastre et les autres Piers de la terre tantque a Wyncestr' la ou ils estoient venantz
devers le dit parlement a Saesbirs, pur quoi le dit Counte de Lan∣castre et autres Pieres, pur eschure le peril quent pust estre ae∣nur a la reverence du Roy lur Seigneur lige departerent & aillerent envers lour pays dolent quils ne poient a lur Seigneur lige parler ne conseiller come ils deveyent. 4. Item le dit Roger par le dit roal poer a luy acroche fist le dit nostre Seigneur le Roi chivaucher forciblement sur le Counte  de Lancastre & autres Pieres de la terre questoient ordnez deste pres du Roy pur lui conseiller et tant les chacea par force que le dit Counte et aucuns autres de sa compaigne que vleient le profist le Roi et du roiale e mistrent a a grace du Roi, Sauve a eux vie et membre & quils ne euent desheritez, ne mettre a trop grand Ransom. Mes fist mettre a si haute ranson come a la value de la moite de totes les terres a vendre a touz jours et les autres fist enchacer hors de terre et seiser lur terres contre la  fourme de la grande Chartre et contre lei de terre. 5. Item par la ou le dit Roger savoit bien que le piere nostre Seigner le Roi estoit mort & enterre, il par autres de sa covyne en deceyvante manere fist entendre al Counte de Kent que le dit piere nostre Seigneur le Roi fist en vie par quo le di Counte de Kent feust molt desirous de saver la verite le quel il fust en vie, on nemie, & ce fist espier par totes les bones voies  quil savoit tantque le dit Roger par son dit roial poer a lui a∣croche fist prendre au parlement tenuz a Wyncestr. le dit Counte de Kent et tant procurez et pursuire par son dit roial poer que le dit Counte fust mis a la mort au dit parlement. 6. Item le dit Roger par son roial poer a sui acroche fist le Roi doner a lui et a ses enfauntz et a ses alliez Chastelles, Vil∣les et Manoirs fraunchises en Engleterre, Ireland & Gales en des∣cres  de sa coronne. 7. Item le dit Roger en deceyvante manere fist les Chiva∣lers des Countez grauntier au dit parlement de Wyncestre au Roi de chescun Ville Dengleterre que respoint par quatre & le Provost en Eyre un homme darmes a lour coustages en sa guerre de Gascoigne par un an la quele charge le dit Roger avoit com∣passe a tourner en autre profist pur ui & autres de sa covyne  en destrucion du people. 8. Item le dit Roger par son dit roial poer fist mander lettres desouz la targe as plusours grantz Chivalers et autres quils venis∣sent au Roi queu part quil feust et a ur venue les fist charger quils sadressassent daler en Gascoigne ou quils feissent fynz et ran∣souns a sa volunte, des queux atoms firent fynz et rannsouns et tot le plus est devenue au profist le dit Roger et autres de sa  covyne. 9. Item le dit Roger faussement & maliciousement mist descord entre le piere nostre Seigneur le Roi et la Roine sa com∣paigne, et la fist entendre que si ele feust venue a lui quil la eust
tue dun cotel ou en autre manere de murdre, par quoi par cele cause et par ses autres sotilitees si fist il tant que la dite Roine vynt poynt devers son dit Seigneur a grant dishonour du Roi et de la Roigne sa miere et grant damage de tut le roialme par as en temps a venir, que dieux desend. 10. Item le dit Roger par le dit roial poer a lui acroche si ad pris et fait prendre pur luy et les autres de sa covyne du  treor le Roi a sa volunte sanz oumbre en deniers et jueux en destruccion du Roy, issint que le Roi nad rien de quoi payer pur son viure. 11. Item le dit Roger par son dit roial poer si ad fait pren∣dre par devers lui & autres de sa alliance xx. marz que sont venuz hors Descoce pur la fourme de la pees sanz ce que riens de ce soit venuz au profist le Roi. 12. Item le dit Roger par son dit roial poer fist ses prises parmy le roialme si come il eust este Roi, et entre lui et ceux de sa covyne mesnerent al double dez gentz et chivalx en la com∣paignie le Roi, que ne fist nostre Seigneur le Roi en destruccion du people sanz faire payment autre que a lur volunte demeigne. 13. Item le dt Roger par son dit roial poer fist le Roi gran∣ter  a la monntance de CC. Chivalers a ceux Dirland quavoient tuez les Grantz et autres de la terre Dirland que furent a la foi le Roi en celes parties par la ou le Roi devoit plus tost par re∣son auer vege lur mort & pardone, conntre fourme destatut et assent du parlement 14. Item le dit Roger compassa dauer destrui les Nurriz le Roy & ceux que furent ses plus secrez des queux le Roi plus  saffia & surmist au Roi en la presence la Roigne sa Miere et les Evesques de Nicole et Salesbirs et autres du conseil le Roi que les avantditz ses secrez lui exciterent destre de la covyne de ses enemys per dela en destruccion de la Roigne sa miere et du dit Roger, la quele chose il aferma tant sur le Roi que le parole le Roi ne poeit estre reu a contraire de son dit et cele Venderdi dedeinz la nuyt quil estoit prisz a la nuyt suant; donc par les causes susescrites et par molt des autres causes que ne sont pas  touz a monstrer a ore si fist le dit nostre Seigneur le Roi prendre le dit Roger en la manere et par auisement & eide de ses pri∣vetz & Nurriz come il vous ad souent monstre. Dont le dit nostre Seigneur le Roi si vous charge Countes & Baronns les Pieres de son roialme que desicome cestes chose touchant principaument a lui a vous et a tout le people de son roialme que vous facez au dit Roger droit et loial jugement come à un tiel d'aver qui de totes les Culpas. Culps. Coups. Litera. L. in u. mutata. coupes susescrites si est veritable∣ment  coupable a se quil entent et que les dites choses sont no∣tories & conues pur veritables a vous et a tut le poeple du roialme. Les queur Countes, Baronns & Piers les articles par eux examinez revyndren avant le Roi en mesme le parle∣ment
et disoient trestouz par un des Piers que totes les cho∣ses contenues es ditz Articles fuerent notoires et conues a eux et au people, et nomement larticle tochant la mort Sire Edward piere nostre Seigneur le Roi quore est; par quoi les ditz Countes, Barons et Pieres come juges du parlement par as∣sent du Roy en mesme le parlement agarderent et ajugerent que le dit Roger come treitour et enemy du Roy et du Roialme feust treyne et pendu, et sur ce estoit comande au Counte Mares∣chal  a faire lexecution du dit jugement, et au Maire Aldermaunes et Viscountes de Lonndres, Conestable de la Tour et auxint la ceux que avoient la garde de lui destre aidantz au dit Counte Ma∣reschal a la dite execution faire. La quele execution estoit fait et perfourmy le Jeodi prechein apres le primer jour du parlement questoit le xxix jour de Novembre. N. 84. Rot. parl. 4. Ed. 3. n. 16. PLacita Corone tenta coram Domino Edwardo Rege tertio post Conquestum in pleno Parliamento suo apud Westm. die Lune proximo post festum Sancte Katerine Virginis Anno Regni Regis ejusdem Edwardi Quarto. THomas de Berkele Miles venit coram Domino Rege in ple∣noContra Tho∣mam de Ber∣kele Gloucestr. Wygorn. parliamento suo predicto & allocutus de hoc quod cum Dominus Edwardus nuper Rex Anglie pater Domini Re∣gis nunc, in custodia ipsius Thome & cujusdam Johannis Mau∣travers  nuper extitit, liberatus ad salvo custodiendum in Castro ipsius Thome apud Berkele in Comitatu Gloucestr. et in eodem Castro in custodia ipsorum Thome et Johannis murdratus exti∣tit & interfectus qualiter se velit de morte ipsius Regis acquie∣tare, dicit quod ipse nunquam fuit consentiens auxilians seu procurans ad mortem suam nec unquam scivit de morte sua us∣que in presenti Parliamento isto, Et de hoc paratus est se ac∣quietare prout Curia Regis consideraverit, & super hoc quesitum  est ab eo ex quo ipse est Dominus Castri predicti & idem Domi∣nus Rex in custodia ipsorum Thomae & Johannis extitit liberatus ad salvo custodiendum et ipsi custodiam ipsius Regis receperunt et ac∣ceptarunt, qualiter se excusare possit, quin de morte ipsius Regis respondere debeat. Et predictus Thomas dicit, quod verum est quod ipse est Dominus Castri predicti et quod ipse simul cum Johanne Mautravers custodiam ipsius Regis recepit ad salvo custo∣diendum, ut predictum est, set dicit quod eo tempore quo dici∣tur  ipsum Dominum Regem esse murdratum & interfectum fuit ipse tali & tanta infirmitate apud Bradelye extra Castrum predictum detentus, quod nichil ei currebat memorie. Et super hoc dictum est ei quod ex quo cognovit quod ipse simul cum dicto Johanne custodiam ipsius Domini Regis optinuit, ut predictum est, et ipse Custodes et ministros sub se posuit ad custodiam de eo faciendam si per aliquam infirmitatem se excusare possit quin respondere de∣beat in hâc parte. Et predictus Thomas dicit quod ipse posuit  sub se tales Custodes et Ministros in Castro predicto pro custodia facienda, in quibus se confidebat, ut de seipso, qui Custodiam ipsi∣us Regis simul cum predicto Johanne Mautravers inde habuerunt. Unde dicit quod ipse de morte ipsius Domini Regis, auxilio, assensu seu procuratione mortis sue, in nullo est inde culpabilis. Et de hoc de bono et malo ponit se super patriam. Ideo venit inde ju∣rare
coram Domino Rege in Parliamento suo apud Westmona∣sterium in Octabis Sancti Hillar' proximo futuris &c. ad quem diem venit predictus Thomas coram Domino Rege in pleno Parliamento suo & similiter juravit, scilicet Johannes Darcy, Jo∣hannes de Wysham, Willielmus de Trussel, Rogerus de Swyn∣nerton, Constantinus de Mortimer, Johannes de Sancto Philiberto, Richardus de Rivers, Petrus Husee, Johannes de Brynnton, Ri∣chardus de la Rivere, Rogerus de Debenhale, & Richardus de  Croupes omnes milites qui dicunt super sacramentum suum quod predictus Thomas de Berkele in nullo est culpabilis de morte predicti Domini Regis patris Domini Regis nunc nec de assensu, auxilio, seu procuratione mortis ejusdem. Et dicunt quod tempore mortis e∣jusdem Domini E. Regis, patris Domini Regis nunc, fuit ipse tali infir∣mitate gravatus apud Bradelye extra Castrum suum predictum, quod de vita ejus desperabatur. Ideo idem Thomas inde quietus. Et Jurato∣res quesiti si idem Thomas unquam subtraxit se occasione predictâ, di∣cunt  quod non. Et quia predictus Thomas posuit Custodes & mini∣stros sub se, scilicet Thomam de Gurney & Willielmum de Ocle ad cu∣stodiam de ipso Domino Rege faciendam, per quos idem Dominus Rex extitit murdratus & interfectus datus est ei dies coram Domino rege nunc in proximo Parliamento suo, de audiendo judicio suo &c. Et pre∣dictus Thomas de Berkele interim committitur Radulpho de Ne∣vill Seneschallo Hospitii Domini Regis. &c. N. 85. A. In a Box intituled Scotia within a great Chest of  the same Title in the old Chapter-house in the Cloyster at Westminster. DAvid Dei gratiâ Rex Scotiae omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis ea consideratione quod predecessores & progenitores nostri quondam Reges Scotiae ab antiquio∣ribus temporibus tenuerunt & de jure tenuisse debuerunt regnum  Scotiae de Regibus Angliae per legium, bomagium & fidelitatem & pro eodem regno simpliciter, pure & sponte, homagia, legia & fidelita∣tes quamplures eorum personaliter fecerunt prout per antiquiora re∣corda & placita Coronae tam in Parliamentis quam in Itineribus Ca∣merariorum & Justiciariorum predecessorum & progenitorum nostro∣rum praedictorum nobis satis constat. Concessimus & per presen∣tes obligamus nos, haeredes & successores nostros Reges Scotiae tenere praedictum Regnum nostrum Scotiae de excellentissimo Do∣mino  nostro & fratre Edwardd Rege Angliae, haeredibus & suc∣cessoribus suis Regibus Angliae, tanquam de dominis superioribus regni Scotiae per legium, homagium, & fidelitatem, & eisdem fidem tenere ac cum eisdem contra omnes homines vivere & mori in perpetuum, omnibus & omnimodis relaxationibus remissio∣nibus, quietclamantiis & aliis literis quibuscunque per Reges An∣gliae seu per aliquem eorum in contrarium Regibus Scotiae factis sive concessis non obstantibus. In cujus rei testimonium has literas no∣stras  fieri fecimus patentes in perpetuum duraturas ex consensu & consilio trium statuum regni nostri in praesenti parliamento tento apud Edenburgh existentem in presentia Henrici de Bellomonte Comitis de Bougham & Constabularii Scotiae, Giiberti Vmfranvile Comitis de Angos Domini de Prudhow & Mareschalli Scotiae, & Henrici Percy Domini de Alnewick ad hoc specialiter deputatorum
per Dominum Dominum nostrum & fratrom superior' Dominum Scotiae. Dat. primo Novembris in pleno Parliamento, Anno regni nostri quinto. N. 85. B. Rot. Scot. 11. Ed. 3. m. 1. EDwardus dei Gratia Rex Angliae & Franciae & Dominus Hiber∣niae & Dux Aquitaniae, nobili & potenti viro Johanni Duci Bra∣bant & Lotring, consanguineo suo carissimo, Salutem. Sciatis quod cum attendentes inytum regnum Francie ad nos fore jure successo∣rio  legitime devolutum, ipsum regnum ut hereditatem nostram le∣gitimam agnoverimus ut eidem nos immiscere voluerimus sicut de∣cet, nos debito regimine dicti regni summe soliciti, ac de vestris pro∣bitate magnifica, fidelitate solida, & industria circumspecta intime. confidentes vos in regno predicto locum nostrum tenentem Capitaneum, & nostrum Vicarium generalem facimus & praeficimus per presentes, con∣cedentes & committentes vobis merum imperium & gladii potestatem ac jurisdictionem omnem, altam & bassam, cognitionem & decisionem  omnium tam criminalium quam civilium quessionum, cum potestate, judices & ministros prout expedire videritis deputandi, nec non ple∣num exercitium omnium & singulorum nobis & nostro regimini in∣cumbentium in hac parte, & quae nos sacere possemus & deberemus si presentes essemus ibidem. Et ideo dilectionem & fidelitatem ve∣stram attente rogamus quatenus onus & honorem hujusmodi mag∣nammiter assumentes circa statum pacificum regionis ipsius ac recu∣perationem  et conservationem nostrorum jurium in eadem, omnem solicitudin em quam poteritis efficaciter impendatis ac circa debitum et salubre regimen dicti regni et regnicolarum ejusdem, sic instanter et proinde laboretis votivum propositum quod ad observationem ju∣rium dicti regni ut convenit optinemus ipsis nostris fidelibus plenius exprimentes ut vestras fidelitatem et prudentiam debeamus merito commendare et repensiva retributionis alacrius premiare: Mandavi∣mus enim Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comiti∣bus  et personis aliis quibuscunque in dicto regno existentibus, ut vo∣bis et deputandis per vos in premissis pareant humiliter et intendant. In cujus &c. Dat. apud Westmonast. viio. die Octobris. Item consimiles commissiones facte fuerunt Gulielmo Marchioni Juliacensi fratri Regis carissimo transpositis dictis nominibus, Rex Anglie & Francie, & Rex Francie & Anglie. Item consimiles commissiones Gulielmo Comiti Hanov. Holand. &  Seland ac Domino Friscie transpositis verbis &c. ut supra. Item consimiles commissiones Wilhelmo de Bohun Comiti North ampt. consanguineo regis carissimo &c. ut supra sub eadem data. EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Anglie & Francie Dominus Hibernie &  Dux Aquitanie, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, & personis aliis quibuscunque in dictoregno Francie existentibus, Salutem. Cum nos attendentes inclitum reg∣num Francie ad nos fore jure successorio legtimè devolutum, ip∣sum regnum ut hereditatem nostram legitimam agnoverimus ut eidem nos immiscere voluerimus sicut decet, & de debito regi∣mine dicti regni summè soliciti ac de probitate magnifica, fide∣litate solida, & industria circumspecta, nobilis & potentis viri
Johannis Ducis Brabant. & Lotring. consanguinei nostri carissimi intime confidentes ipsum in regno praedicto locum nostrum te∣nentem Capitaneum & nostrum vicarium fecerimus & praefece∣rimus generalem, concedentes & committentes eidem Duci me∣rum imperium & gladii potestatem ac jurisdictionem omnem al∣tam & bassam, cognitionem & decisionem omnium tam crimi∣nalium quam civilium questionum cum potestate Judices & mi∣nistros prout expedire viderit deputandi, necnon plenum exer∣citium  omnium & singulorum nobis & nostro regimini incum∣bentium in hac parte, & quae nos facere possemus & deberemus, si presentes essemus ibidem. Vobis omnibus & singulis firmiter in∣jungimus, & mandamus quod prefatum Ducem ad exequenda pre∣missa libenter & devota recipitatis & sibi tanquam persone nostre sic pronis affectibus pareatis & intendatis humiliter in premissis ut devo∣tionis vestrae promptitudinem debeamus meritò commendare, scituri pro certo quod ad humiles esse volumus cum favoris exuberantia  gratiosi, & in rebelles prout exegerit vestra protervia saevientes. In cujus &c. Dat. ut supra. Item consimilia mandata diriguntur eisdem sub nomine Gu∣lielmi Marchionis Juliacen. N. 86. Rot. Parl. 14. Ed. 3. parte p. 9. 10. Stat. at large. 14. of Ed. 3. EDward by the grace of God, King of England and Fraunce, and Lord of Ireland, to all those which these Letters shall  hear or see, greeting. Know ye, that whereas some People do think, that by the reason that the Realm of Fraunce is devolute to us as right Heir of the same, and forasmuch as we be King of Fraunce, our Realm of England should be put in Subjection of the King, and of the Realm of Fraunce in time to come; we having regard to the Estate of our Realm of England, and namely, that it never was, nor ought to be in Subjection, nor in the Obeisance of the Kings of Fraunce, which for the time have been, nor of the  Realm of Fraunce. And willing to provide for the Suretie and Defence of the said Realm of England, and of our liege People of the same: Will, and graunt, and stablish for us and for our Heirs and Successors, by assent of the Prelats, Earls, Barons, and Commons of our Realme of England in this our present Parlia∣ment summoned at Westminster, the Wednesday next after the Sunday in Middle-lent, the XIV. Year of our said Reign of our Realme of England, and the first of Fraunce, that by the cause or  colour of that, that we be King of Fraunce, and that the said Realm to us pertaineth, as afore is said, or that we do us to be named King of Fraunce in our Stile, or that we have changed our Seals, or our Arms, nor for Commandements which we have made, or from henceforth shall make as King of Fraunce, our said Realm of England, nor the People of the same, of what E∣state or Condition they be, shall not in any time to come be put in Subjection, nor in Obeisance of us, nor of our Heirs nor Succes∣sors,  as Kings of Fraunce, as afore is said, nor be Subject nor O∣bedient, but shall be free and quite of all manner of Subjection and Obeisance aforesaid, as they were wont to be in the time of our Progenitors Kings of England for ever. In witness of which things, &c. Dated at Westminster, &c. the XIV. Year of our Reign of England, and the first of Fraunce.
N. 87. a. Avesbury. Cap. 31. PHilip de Valois que longe tems avoms pursui devers vos per messages toutz altres voies que nos favoms-resonables a fin que voz noz vousistez avoir rendu nostre droit heritage de Fraunce le quele voz noz avetz longe tems detenu a graunt tort & coupe. Et pur ceo que nos veoms bien que voz estes en entente de per∣severer en votre injuriouse detenue, sauntz noz feare reson de nostre demaunde, sumez noz entrez en la terre de Flaunders come  Signeur Soveraign de cele & passer permi le pais & voz signifi∣oms que pris ovesque nous laide nostre Seigneur Jhesu Christ & nostre droit ouesque le poar du dit pais & ouesque noz gentz et aliez regard le droit que noz avomps a leritage que voz noz detenez a vostre tort, noz treioms vers vouz pur mettre briefe fin sour nostre droiturele chalenge si vouz vuilletz a proscher. Et pur ceo que si graunt poar des gentz assemblez que viegnent de nostre part, et que bien quidoms que voz amesnetz de vostre part, ne se  purroient mye longment tenir ensemble sauntz faire graunt destruc∣cion al people al pais, la quele chose chescun Chrestiens doit escheure et specialement Princes et aultres que se teignent governours de gentz, si desirroms moult qui briefe point se preist et pur escheure mortalite de Chrestiens, ensi come la querele est apparent a noz et voz, que la dis∣cucion de nostre chalenge se feseit entre nos deux corps a la quele chose noz voz offroms pur les causes susditz, comment que nos puissoms bien veer la graunt noblesse de vostre corps vostre sen auxint & avisement, et en  cas que vous ne voroiez cele voie adonques soit mys nostre chalange pur affiner icelle battaile de voz mêmes od cent persones des plus suffi∣sauntz de vostre part & nos mesmes od aultres tauntz de noz gentz lieges. Et si vous ne voilletz lune voie ne lautre que vous noz assignez cer∣tein jour devant la ville de Tourneye pur combatre poar encountre poar de deinz et jours proscheins apres la date du ceste lettre, et nos offrez doz susditz voloms tut le mounde estre conutz quest nostre desir ne mye pur orguille ne surquidance meas que pur les causes sus∣dites  a fin que la volente nostre Seigneur Jhesu Christ monstre entre nous repos poet de pluis en pluis estre entre Chrestiens que le poar des ene∣mys Dieux feussent resistez et Christiente enfraunchie et lavoie sour ceo que eslire voilletz des offrez des susditz noz voilletz signifier par le portour du cestes lettres et par les vostres a lui fesant hastive deli∣verance. Done soutz nostre graunt seal a Chyn es Champs de leez Tourneye le xxvii. jour du moys de Juyl, l'an de Grace 1340. seelee d'un grand seau de cire vert. N. 87. b. Avesbury. Cap. 32. Responsio dicti Domini Philippi de Valesio ad literam suprascriptam. PHilip par la grace de Dieux Roi de Fraunce a Edward Roy Dengleterre Nous avomps veu voz lettres apportez a nostre court de part vous a Phelip de Valeis en queles lettres estoient contenutz ascunes re∣questes que vous feistes al dit Ph. deValeis. Et pur ceo que les ditz lettres ne venoient pas a nous & que les ditz requestes nestoien pas faitez  a nous come apeirt cleirment par le tenor des lettres, noz ne noz feissoms nul response nient mye pur ceo que noz avomps entenduz par les ditz lettres et autrement que voz estez entrez en nostre roialme de Fraunce emportant graunt damage a nous et nostre roialme et a nostre people, mes de volente sauntz nul reson, & noun regar∣dant ceo que homme lige doit garder a son Seigneur, car vous estez en∣trez
encontre vostre homage lige en noz reconnissaunt sicom reson est Roi de Fraunce et promis obeisaunce tiel come lon dit promettre a son Seigneur lige si com appeirt pluis clerement par voz lettres pa∣tentz seales de vostre graunt seale les queles noz avomps depar devers noz et de queles vous devetz avoir a taunt devers vous nostre en∣tente si est quant bon nous sembler a de voz getter hors de nostre roialme al honure de nous et de nostre roialme et en profit de nostre people, & a ceo faire avoms ferme esperaunce en Jhesu Christ, dount  tout puissance nous vient quar par vostre entreprise queste de volente & noun resonable d'este empeschez la saint voiage doutre meer et graunt quantite dez gentz Chrestiens mis a mort le service divine ape∣tisez & seint Eglise en meindre reverence. Et du ceo questcript avoiez que vous entendez avoir lost de Flemyngz nous qui doms estre certeins que les bones gentz et les Comunes du pais se porteront par tiele manere par devers nostre Cosin le Counte de Flaundres lor Signeur sauntz meine et noz lor Seigneur Soveraign quils garderont  lor honure et lor loialte. Et que ceo quils ount mespris jusques a cy ceo aad este par malvais consail dez gentz que ne regardent pas au profit comune ne al'honure du pais meas a profit de eaux taunt soulment. Done soutz les Campes pres de la Priorie Saint Andreu soutz le seal de nostre secret en l'absence du graunt, le xxxme. jour de Juyl, l'an du grace. M. CCC. xl. N. 88. Rot. Claus. 15. Ed. 3. parte 3. m. 25. Dors. REX venerabili in Christo patri J. eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. totius Angliae primati, salutem. Cum pridem in Parliamento nostro apud Westmonast. in Quindena Pasche proximè praeterito convocato, quedam, legibus & consuetudinibus regni nostri Angliae expresse contraria, & regie dignitati nostre nedum valde pre∣judicialia set probrosa fuissent minus importune petita, quae nisi per mo∣dum statuti tune permisissemus consignari dictum parliamentum fuisset sine omni expeditione in discordia dissolutum, & sic Guerre nostre Francie & Scotie, quas de Consilio vestro ut scitis principaliter assumpsimus, fuis∣sent  (quod absit) verisimiliter in ruinâ, & nos ad evitanda tanta pericu∣la premissis protestationibus de revocando cum possemus commode que sic a nobis quasi invitis extorta fuerint, illa sigillo nostro sigillari permiserimus illa vice, & postmodum ea de consilio & assensu Comitum & Baronum & aliorum peritorum ex causis legitimis, quia defecit consensus noster, de∣claravimus esse nulla, nec nomen vel vim habere statuti, ac jam accepi∣mus quod vos unum consilium provinciale in Crastino sancti Lucie proximo futuro apud London convocari mandastis in quo Coepiscopos vestre Provin∣cie  contra nos concitare & aliqua nobis prejudicialia circa roborationem dicti pretensi statuti, & in enervationem, depressionem, & diminutionem, jurisdictionis, jurium & prerogativarum nostrorum Regalium ad quorum conservationem astringimur vinculo Juramenti, nec non circa processum inter nos & vos super quibusdam ex parte nostra vobis oppositis pendentem statuere, declarare & super hiis censuras graves intenditis promulgare: Nos volentes tanto prejudicio, ut convenit, obviare, vobis districtè pro∣hibemus ne quicquam quod in derogationem, seu diminutionem regie dig∣nitatis,  potestatis, & jurium coronae nostrorum seu legum & consuetudi∣num dicti regni nostri, aut in prejudicium processus memorati, vel etiam in roborationem dicti pretensi statuti, vel alias in contumeliam nostri no∣minis, & honoris, aut in gravamen vel dispendium consiliariorum, vel obsequialium nostrorum cedere poterunt, in dicto consilio vel alibi propo∣natis, statuatis, aut aliqualiter attemptetis, aut attemptari faciatis,
Scituri quod si secus feceritis ad vos ad inimicum nostrum & nostrorum violatorem jurium, gravius quo licite poterimus capiemus. Teste Rege apud Westmonast. primo die Octobris. N. 89. Rot. parl. 17. Ed. 3. n. 23. ITem accordez est & assentuz que le statut fait a Westminster a la Quinziem de Paske, l'an du Regne nostre Seigneur le Roy quin∣zisme soit de tout Repellez & anientez & perde noun de statut, come celle qu'est prejudiciel & contraire a leys & usages du Roialme & as Droigts & Prerogatives nostre Seigneur le Roi, mes pur ce que ascunes  Articles furent comprise en meisme le statut que sont raisonables & ac∣cordantz a ley & a reson, il est accordez per notre Seigneur le Roi & son conseil que des tieux Articles & autres accordez en cest present Parlement soit fait Estatut de novell per l'avis des Justices & autres sages & tenuz a touz jours. N. 90. Avesbury. p. 97. b. c. 39. LUdovicus dei gratiâ Romanorum Imperator semper Augustus, Prae∣clarus, Edwardo Regi Angliae fratri suo charissimo, salutem, & sincerae dilectionis affectum. Licet innumera grandiaque negotia nostris incumbant humeris & circa illa multipliciter & assidue di∣strahamur, tamen cum discordia inter te & preclarum Philippum Re∣gem Franciae, affinem nostrum perdilectum, ex qua tibi & tuo Regno quamplurima personarum & rerum dispendia ipsa non sedata in fu∣turum poterunt evenire, se nostris representat obtutibus, mentem no∣stram  specialius angit & excitat, ut ad tollendam illam, studium & operam nostrae solicitudinis apponamus. Propter quod scire te volumus quod praefatus Philippus ad requisitionem nostram dedit no∣bis suis literis potestatem tractandi inter te & ipsum concordiam super discordiam inter vos suscitatam, quam etiam tibi & tuo Reg∣no pensatis diligenter omnibus conditionibus tuis & alligatorum tu∣orum multipliciter expedire credentes amicitiae tuae persuademus te∣que  cum diligentia exhortamur ut ad hoc tuum assensum praebeas, quod te et ipsum revocare possumus ad concordiam, et inter vos vera pacis foedera ordinare. Ad quae libenti animo vacare volumus et impendere operosae prosecutionis labores in quo si consiliis nostris con∣sentire et acquiescere volueris ut speramus, placet tibi nobis tuis le∣teris dare potestatem praemissam tractandi concordiam et treugas ad annum vel biennium ordinandi. Nec te moveat amicitia inter nos et Philippum Regem Francorum praedictum, inita et contracta, nam ex quo tu treugas et certos terminos ad tractandum de concordia inter  te et praedictum Philippum Regem Francorum accepisti absque nostro scitu, voluntate, et assensu de consilio nostrorum Principum qui li∣gas pacta et uniones nostras, noverint quibus visum fuit quod hoc salvo honore nostro facere possemus, concordiam et amicitiam cum dicto Rege Franciae contraximus, et unionem inivimus, vicariatum∣que tibi per nos commissum ex causis revocavimus praevocatis, pro firmo sciturus quod in tractatibus nostris, sic tibi fraternè provide∣mus,  quod si in nostris consiliis acquiescere volueris, causa tua ad fi∣nem bonum, mediante nostro auxilio producetur. Super quibus tuam amicitiam de nostrâ intentione plenius informandam, religiosum vi∣rum Fratrem Eliarhardum lectorem ordinis fratrum heremitarum sancti Augustini, specialem nostrae Curiae Capellanum, tuae fraterni∣tati transmittimus quem petimus super praemissis cum celeri expedi∣tione remitti. Dat. Franchinforde xxv. die mensis Junii, Regni no∣stri anno xxiv. Imperii nostri.
N. 91. Ibm. p. 98. 2. SErenissimo Principi Domino Ludovico Dei gratiâ Romanorum Im∣peratori semper Augusto, Edwardus eadem gratiâ Rex Franciae et Angliae, et Dominus Hyberniae salutem, et votivis semper successionibus gratulari. Serenitatis vestrae literas reverenter recepimus in∣ter alia continentes quod praeclarus Philippus de Valesio ad tractandam inter nos et ipsum concordiam dedit vobis ad requisitionem vestram suis literis potestatem. Et si placeret nobis potestatem hujusmodi vobis dare, libenti vacaretis animo ad dictam concordiam reforman∣dum  et quod amicitia inter vos et ipsum Philippum inita minimè nos moveret. Nam ex quo sine scitu et assensu vestro treugas et certos terminos ad tractandum inter nos et dictum Philippum de pace accepi∣mus, dictam amicitiam cum eo de consilio Principum vestrorum quibus visum fuit quod hoc salvo honore vestro possetis facere, con∣traxistis, vicariatum nobis per vos commissum revocantes. Et qui∣dem zelum quem habetis ad faciendam dictam concordiam pluri∣mum commendamus, volentes vestrae patere notitiae quod nos pa∣cem  resonabilem habere cum dicto Philippo semper optavimus, quam in quantum decuit sumus cum justitia prosecuti. Et revera votivum nobis foret admodum & acceptum si posset fieri per tanti mediatoris instantiam pax optata. Sed quia scimus jus nostrum in Regno Franciae sa∣tis clarum, illud arbitrio dubio non proponimus ducere alicui per literas nostras committendum. Verum dum attentâ meditatione pensamus qualiter vestra consideratio circumspecta videns patentem nostram justitiam & dicti Philippi duritiem obstinatam & injuriam nobiscum,  contra dictum Philippum vestra gratia ligam fecit in specialem adop∣tionis filium, de dilectionis exuberantia nos admittentes, ut cum pace vestrâ loquamur, mirari non sufficimus quod praepotens vestra sublimitas quae ad laudem bonorum & vindictam malorum est divi∣nitus instituta contra nos dicto Philippo injuriatori nostro notorio se ligavit. Et id quod dicitur nos sine scitu & assensu vestro cum prae∣dicto Philippo treugas & tractatum pacis iniisse, non debuit con∣sideratis facti circumstantiis rationabiliter vos movisse, quia dum ob∣sidebamus  civitatem Tornaceam, oportuit nos eorum sequi consilia, qui nobis comitivam & auxilium tunc fecerunt, & hyemis subita vici∣nitas ac locorum distantia vestram super hoc consulere celsitudinem minimè permiserunt, immo nobis alias si recolitis concessistis quod cum opportunitas arrideret tractare possemus de pace, vobis incon∣sultis, ita tamen quod sine consensu vestro pacem finalem cum dicto Philippo nullatenus faceremus, quam nunquam facere proponebamus priusquam super hoc vestrum habuissemus providum consilium &  assensum. Sed semper in votis gessimus vobis in omnibus facere quod debuimus juxta vires, sperantes quod fraternae vestrae plenitu∣do benevolentiae nos ad tempus benignius supportasset: videtur etiam aliquibus quod revocatio dicta vicariatus facta fuerat prematurè cum juxta sponsionem super hoc per imperiales apices nobis factam, non debuisset fieri quousque regnum Franciae vel majorem partem ejus∣dem pacificè fuissemus adepti. Premissa quaesumus velit vestra nobili∣tas debite ponderare, & ulterius facere quod debebit, quia per Dei  gratiam vobis & vestris semper juxta mensuram impensae nobis bene∣volentiae gratam faciemus pro viribus repensivam. Celsitudini ve∣strae donet Altissimus votivae felicitatis augmenta. Dat'. London. xviii die mensis Julii. Anno regni nostri Franciae ii. regni vero nostri Angliae xv.
N. 92. E veteroi Ro∣tula hujusce Temporis pe∣nes meipsum. REtinentia Regis Edwardi tertii in exercitu suo, in partibus Normaniae, Franciae, & coram Cales. Anno regni sui vicesimo. Ad 20 s. per diem. Dominus Princeps.   Ad 6 s. & 8 d. per diem. Episcopus Dunolmensis.   Ad 6 s & 8 d. per diem. Comites. 15. Ad 4 s. per diem. Barones, & Baneretti. 44. Ad 2 s. per diem. Milites. 1046. Ad 1 s. per diem. Scutiferi, Constabularii, Centenarii, & Ductores. 4022. Ad 6 d. per diem. Vintenarii & Sagittarii equites. 5104. Ad 6 d. per diem. Pauncenarii. 355. Ad 6 d. per diem. Hobelarii 500. Ad 3 d. Per diem. Sagittarii, pedites. 15480. Aliqui ad 12 d. 10 d. 6 d. 3 d. per diem. Cementarii, Carpentarii, Fa∣bri, Ingeniatores, Pavilona∣rii, Minarii, Armatores, Gun∣natores & Artillarii. 314. Unde ducenti Vintenarii 4 d. residui ad 2 d. per diem. Wallenses pedites. 4474.   Magistri Constabularii, Marinarii  & Pagetti 700.   Navium, bargea∣rum, balingearum, & vitellariarum. 16000.   Summa totalis hominum pre∣dictorum praeter Dominos. 31294. Summa totalis vadiorum guerrae cum vadiis Marinariorum a 4to. die Junii. Anno 20mo. dicti Regis Edwardi 3tii. usque 12m. diem  Octobris. Anno 21mo. ejusdem Regis per unum Annum et 131. dies. Ut patet in libro de particulis Computi, Walteri Wetewange tunc Thesaurarii Hospitii. Titulo totale va∣diorum guerrae in partibus Normaniae, Fran∣ciae, et coram Cales. l. 127201-- s. 02-- d. 9-- 06. And that at Present we may know how the King in these Times was served in his Wars by his Noble Men, and others, I have tran∣scribed  the following Instances. Domino Edwardo Principi Walliae existenti in obsequio Dom Regis in partibus Normanniae, Franciae, et coram Cales, cum reten∣tione suâ pro vadiis guerre ad 20 s. undecem Baneretti quolibet capi∣ente per diem 4 s 102 milites quolibet ad 2 s. 264 Scutiferi, quo∣libet ad 12 d. 384 Sagittarii equites quolibet ad 6 d. 69 Sagittarii pedites quolibet ad 3 d. 513 Wallenses quorum unus Capellanus ad 6 d. unus medicus unus Proclamator, 5 Standardarii et 25 Vintenarii  quolibet ad 4 d. et 480 pedites quolibet ad 2 d. per diem. Domino Henrico Comiti Lancastriae, existente coram Cales in ob∣sequio Regis cum retentione suâ pro vadiis suis guerrae et unius Co∣mitis utroque ad 6 s. 8 d. 11. Baneretti quolibet ad 4 s. 193. milites quolibet ad 2 s. 512. Scutiferi quolibet ad 12 d. 46 homines ad arma equites & 612 sagittarii equites quolibet ad 6 d. per diem.
Domino Wilhelmo de Bohonn Comiti Northampt. existenti in obsequio Regis in partibus Normanniae, Franciae & coram Ca¦les. 2 Baneretti. 46 Milites. 112 Scutiferi. 141 Sagittarii equites ad vadia ut supra. Domino Thomae de Hatfeld Episcopo Dunolmensi ad 6 s. 8 d. per diem. 3 Baneretti. 48 Milites. 164 Scutiferi. 81 Sagittarii equites quolibet capiente ut supra. Domino Radulpho Baroni de Stafford existenti in obsequio  Barones cum eorum reten∣tione. Regis in partibus praedictis cum 2 Banerettis. 20 Militibus. 92. Scutiferis. 90 Sagittarii Equites quolibet capiente ut supra. Domino Wilhelmo de Wareyne Militi & aliis. 95 Milites.Milites cum e∣orum reten∣tione. 313 Scutiferi. 394 Sagittarii, Hobelarii, Pauncenarii, Equites, & 46 Sagittarii pedites. de eorum retinentia quolibet capiente ut supra. The Retinue of King Edward the third in his Army  in Normandy, France, and before Calais in the 20th Year of his Reign The Prince by the Day. 20 s. The Bishop of Durham. 6 s. 8 d. Thirteen Earls each by the Day. 6 s. 8 d. Fourty four Barons and Baneretts Each by the Day 4 s. One Thousand fourty six Knights Each by the Day. 2 s. Esquires, *Constables, Captains and† Constables were Officers and Comman∣ders. Leaders. 4022. each by the Day. 1 s. Vintenars that had the command of 20 Men or as our Serjeants, and Archers on horseback 5104. each by the Day. 6 d. Pauncenars, they were most strangers, but what  otherwise I know not, 355. by the Day each. 6 d. Hobelars 500. by the Day each. 6 d. Archers on foot 15480. by the Day each. 3 d. Masons, Carpenters, Smiths, Engineers, Tent-makers, Miners, The English had five peices of Cannon at the Battel of Cressy. Meze∣ray. f. 369. Gunners armed, and those that had the Care of the Artillery. 314. some at a Shilling others at 10 d. 6 d. and 3 d. by the Day. Welshmen, foot 4474. whereof 200 Vintenars each by the  Day 4 d. the Residue each by the Day. 2 d. The whole Number of the Men of the Army was besides the Lords 31294. Masters, Captains, Mariners and Boys for 700 Ships, Barges, Balingers and Victuallers 16000. The Summ Total of the War, with the Wages of the Mari∣ners from the 4th of June in the 20th Year of Edward the third, to the 12th of October in the 21st Year of his Reign,  one Year and a Hundred 31 Days. 127101 l. 2 s. 9 d. ob. as it ap∣pears in the Book of particulars of the Account of Walter We∣tewange, then Treasurer of the Houshold. Under the Title of the Total of the Wages of the War in Normandy, France, and before Calais.
The following Instances makes this Service more plain To Edward Prince of Wales being in the Kings service in Nor∣mandy,In eodem Ro∣tulo. France and before Calais, with his Retinue for his Wa∣ges of War 20 s. a Day. Eleven Banerets, every one taking 4 s. a Day. 102 Knights each 2 s. a Day. 264 Escuires, each 12 d. a day. 384 Archers on horseback each 6 d. a Day.  69 foot Archers each 3 d. a Day. 513 Welshmen, whereof one Chaplain at 6 d. a Day. One Physician, one Herald or Cryer. 5 Ensignes, 25 Serjeants or Officers over 20 Men each 4 d. a Day. 480 footmen each 2 d. a Day. To Henry Earle of Lancaster, being in the Kings service be∣foreEarls and their Retinue. Calais with his Retinue, for his wages of War, and one o∣ther Earle each 6. s. 8. d. a Day. Eleven Banerets each 4. s. a Day. 193 Knights each 2. s. a Day. 512 Escuires each 12 d.  a Day. 46 Men at Armes, and 612 Archers on Horseback each 6 d. a Day. To William Bohun Earle of Northampton being in the Kings ser∣vice in Normandy, France, and before Calais. 2 Banerets. 46 Knights. 112 Escuires. 141 Archers on Horseback. For their Wa∣ges as above. To Thomas Hatfield Bishop of Durham 6 s. 8 d. a Day. 3 Ba∣nerets.The Bishop of Durham and his Retinue. 48 Knights. 164 Escuires. 81 Archers on Horseback, eve∣ry one taking as above. To Ralph Baron of Stafford, being in the Kings service in theBarons with their Retinue. places aforesaid, with 2 Banerets. 20 Knights. 92 Escuires. 90 Archers on Horseback. Every one taking as above. To William de Wareyne Knight, and other 95 Knights, 313Knights with their Retinue. Escuires. 394 Archers, Hobelars, or Light-horsemen, Pauncenars on horseback. and 46 foot Archers of their Retinue, every one tak∣ing as above. The Chiefs of the Forreigners, and Strangers that were in the Kings service, were commonly paid in Grosse. So many Thou∣sand or Hundred Pounds, for their own Wages and their Mens: Pro vadiis suis & hominum eorum, According to their own Quality, and the Numbers and Quality of those they brought with them. N. 93.Look for this Number and Number 94 95. and 96. in the History, and a Para∣graph or two before this Number, and there are Di∣rections where to find the ori∣ginals. Litera super correctione Articulorum. UNiversis praesentes Literas inspecturis Frater Androynus mi∣seratione Divinâ humilis Abbas Cluniacen' Apostolicae sedis Nuncius Salutem in Eo qui est omnium vera salus. Noveritis quod Illustrissimus Princeps & Dominus, Dominus Jo∣hannes Dei Gratiâ Francorum Rex in Pace finali inter ipsum & Excellentissimum Principem & Dominum, Dominum Regem Angliae noviter reformatâ, Literas suas eidem Regi Angliae Nobis praesen∣tibus  concessit & tradi fecit sub hac Forma. JEhan par la grace de Dieu Roy de France scavoir faisons a tous presens & avenir, Que nous avons veu le Traicte d' Accort fait naguires par certains Traicteurs & Procureurs entre nous & nôtre treschier Frere le Roy d' Angleterre contenue la fourme qui s'ensuit.
Charles ainsne fitz du Roy de France Regent le Royaume Duc de Normandie & Dalphin de Vienn. A Tous ceuls qui ces presen∣tes Lettres verrent, Salut. Nous vous faisons scavoir que de tous les Debas & Descors quelconques menez & demenez entre Monsieur le Roy de France & nous pour lui & pour nous & pour touz ceuls a quil appartient d' une part, Et le Roy d' Angleterre et touz ceuls a quil puit tou∣chier de sa Partie d' autre. Pour Bien de Paix est accordes le viii.  Jour de May, l' An Mil trois cens soixante a Bretigny de les Chartres en la maniere qui ensuit. 1. Premierement que le Roy d' Angleterre avec ce quil tient in Guienne & in Gascoigne aura pour lui & pour ses Hoires per∣petuelment a touz jours touts les Choses qui sensuivent a tenir par la maniere que le Roy de France & son Filz ou aucune de ces Ancestres Roys de France les tindrent. Cest ascavoir ce que en demain en demain & que en fie en fie & par le temps & maniere dessus esclarciz la Cite le Chastel la Conte de Poictiers & tout la Terre & le Pais de Poitou, ensamble le fie de Tovars, & la Terre de Belleville, la Cite & le Chastel de Xainctes, et tout la Terre et le Pais de Xaintonge, par de ca et par de la, la Charente et la Cite et le Chastel d' Agen, et la Ter∣re et le Pais d' Agen et la Terre et le Pais d' Agenois, la Cite le Chastel et tout la Conte de Pierregort, et la Terre et le Pais de  Pierreguis, la Cite et le Chastel de Limoges, et la Terre et le Pais de Limosin, la Cite et le Chastel de Caours, et la terre et le Pais de Caourcin, la Cite le Chastel et le Pais de Tarbe, et la Terre et le Pais et la Conte de Bigorre, la Conte la Terre le Pais de Gaure, la Cite le Chastel d' Angolesme, et la Conte et la Terre et le Pais d' Angoulemois, la Cite & le Chastel de Rodes, la Terre & le Pais de Rovargne & si il y a aucunes Seigneurs comme le Conte de Fois, le Conte d' Armagnac, le Conte de Lisle, le Count de Pierregort, le Vi∣conte  de Limoges, ou autres qui tiennent aucunes Terres ou Lieux dedans les Metes dez diz Lieux, il feront Homage au Roy d' Angle∣terre, & touz autres Services et Devoirs deus a cause de leurs Ter∣res & Lieux en la maniere quil ont fait, ou temps passe. 2. Item aura le Roy d' Angleterre tout ce que le Roy d' An∣gleterre ou aucunes des Roys d' Angleterre anciennement tindrent  en la Ville de Monstereul sur la Mer et les Appartenances. 3. Item aura le Roy d'Angleterre tout la Conte de Pontieu tout entierment sauf et excepte que se aucunes choses ont este alienees par les Roys d' Angleterre qui ont este par le temps de la dicte Con∣te et appartenances et a autres Personnes que aus Roys de France le Roy de France ne sera pas tenuz de les rendre au Roy d' Angleterre, et se les dictes alienations ont este faits aus Roys de France qui ont este par le temps sans aucune moyen et le Roy de France les ti∣egne  a present en sa main il les leissera au Roy d' Angleterre enti∣erment, Excepte que se les Roys de France les ont eu par eschange, et autres Terres le Roy d' Angleterre delivrera au Roy de France ce que ou a eu par eschange, ou il li laissera les choses ainsi alie∣neres. Mais se les Roys de Angleterre qui ont este par le temps en
avoient aliene ou transporte aucunes choses en autres Personnes que aus Roys de France et depuis soient venues es mains du Roy de France eu aussi par partagi le Roy de France ne sera pas tenuz de les rendre aussi se les choses dessus dictes devoient Hommage le Roy les baillera a autres qui en feront Hommage au Roy d' An∣gleterre, et si ils ne devoyent hommage le Roy de France bail∣lera un tenent quil y en fera le devoir dedanz un an prochain, apres ce quil sera partiz de Calays. 4. Item le Roy d' Angleterre aura le Chastel & la Ville de Ca∣lais, le Chastel et la Ville et la Seignorie de Merk, les Villes, Cha∣steax et Seignories de Sangale, Conloigne, Hames, Wale, et Oye, avec Terres, Bois, Mares, Rivieres, Rents, Seignories, advoysons d' Eglises et toutes autres appartenances et Lieux entregisans de∣dans les Mettes ou Bonnes qui sensuit. Cest ascavoir des Calais jusques au Fil de la riviere par de∣vant  Gravelingues et ausi per mesme le fil de mesme la riviere tout entour l' Angle et aussi par la riviere qui va par dela Poil et aussi per mesme la riviere qui chiet en grant Laq de Gui∣nes et jusques a fretun et dilec par la Valee, entour la Monta∣igne de Kalkuli, encleant mesme la Montaigne et aussi jusques a la mer avec Sangale et toutes les Appartenances. 5. Item le dit Roy d' Angleterre aura le Chastel & la Ville  & tout entierement la Conte de Guines avec toutes les Terres, Villes, Chasteaux, Forteresces, Lieux, Hommes, Hommages, Se∣ignories, Bois, Fores, Droitures, dicelles aussi entierement, com∣me le Conte de Guines derrer' mort les tint au temps de sa mort, & obeiront les Eglises & les bonnes Gens, estans dedans les Limitations du dit Conte de Guines, de Calais & de Merk & des autres Lieux dessus diz au Roy d' Angleterre ainsi comme il  obeissoient au Roy de France & au Conte de Guines, qui fur par le temps toutes les quelles choses de Merk, & de Calais con∣tenues en ce present Article, & en l' Article prochain precedent le Roy d' Angleterre, tendra en demaine, Excepte les Heritages des Eglises, qui demourront aus dittes Eglises entierement quel∣que part quil soient assis, & aussi exceptez les Heritages des au∣tres Gens des Pais de Merk & de Calais assis hors de la Ville de Calais, jusques a la Valeur de cent Livrees de Terre par An de  la monnoye courrant au Pais & au desouz les quiels Heritages leur demourront jusques a la Value dessus ditte & au dessouz mais les Habitations & Heritages assis en la ditte Ville de Calais avec leurs Appartenances demourront en demaine au Roy d' Angleterre pour en ordener a sa Volente, & aussi demourrent aus Habitans en la Conte, Ville, et Terres de Guines, tous leurs Demaines entierement & yrevendront plenement sauf ce que dit est des Confrontations, Mettes, & Bonnes en l' Article prochain  precedent. 6. Item est accorde que le Roy d' Angleterre & ces Hoires au∣ront et tendront toutes les Isles adjacens aus Terres, Pais et Li∣eux avant nomes ensamble avecques toutes les autres Isles les quelles le dit Roy d' Angleterre tient a present.
7. Item accorde est que le dit Roy de France & son ainsnez Fitz le Regent pour eulx et pour touz leurs Hoires et Successeurs au plus tost que lon pourra sanz fraude et sans mal engin et a plus tard dedans la feste saint Michiel prochain venant en un An rendront, bailleront, & delivreront au dit Roy d' Angleterre & a ouzes Hoires & Successeurs, & transporteront en eulx tou∣tes les Honneurs, Obediences, Homages, Ligeances, Vasseauls,  Fiez, Services, Recognoissances, Droitures, mere & mixte Impere & toutes manieres de Jurisdictions hautes & basses, Sauves-gardes, advoysons et patronages d' Eglises et tout le droit quil avoient, et pouvoient avoir, appartenoient, appartienent ou pouent appar∣tenir pour quelque cause, titre ou coleur de droit a euls aus Roys et a la Coronne de France pour cause des Cites, Contes, Cha∣steals, Villes, Terres, Pais, Isles et Lieux avant nommes, et de touts leurs Appartenances et Appendances quelque Part quil soient  et chascune dicelles aussi manderont lez diz Roy et son ainsnez Filz par leurs Lettres patents a touz Arcevesques, Evesques et autres Prelas de Saincte Eglise et aussi aux Contes, Vicontes, Barons, Nobles, Citoiens, et autres quelconques des Cites, Contes, Ter∣res, Pais, Isles, Lieux avant nommez quil obeissent au Roy d' Angleterre, et a ses Hoires et a leur certain commandement en la maniere quil ont obei aus Roys et a la Coronne de France et par mesmes les lettres lez quitteront et absoudront au mieulx  quil se pourra faire de touz Homages; Fois, Seremens, Obliga∣tions, Subjections, et Promesses faiz par aucun deuls au Roy et a la Coronne de France. 8. Item est accorde que le Roy d' Angleterre aura les Contes, Cites, Chasteaux, Terres, Pais, Isles & Lieux avant nomes avec toutes les Appartenances & les Appendances quelque part quil soient a tenir a lui & a tous ses Hoirs et Successeurs heredita∣blement  & parpetuelment en demaine ce que le Roy de France y avoit en demaine & aussi en fie & service ce que les Roys de France y avoient pr telle maniere, sauf tout que dit est par des∣sus en l' Article de Calais & de Merk & ses des Cites, Contes, Chasteaux, Terres, Pais, Isles, & Lieux avant nomes, Drois mere & mixte Impere & Jurisdictions, & proufiz quelconques, que te∣noit aucun Roy d' Angleterre illecques ou en leurs Appartenan∣ces & Appendances quelconques aucunes Alienations, donnations,  Obligations, ou charges ont este faits par aucun des Roys de France qui ont este par le temps puis lxx Ans, en ca pour quel∣que cause ou forme que ce soit, toutes telles Donnations, Alie∣tions, Obligations & Charges, sont desores & seront du tout ra∣pelees, cassees & adnullees et toutes choses ainsi donnees, allienees, ou chargiez seront realment & de fait rendues & baillees au dit Roy d' Angleterre, ou a ses Deputes especialment en mesme l' entirete comme il furent aus Roys d' Angleterre depuis lxx. Ans  en ca au plus tost que lon pourra sanz mal engin, & au plus tard dedans la Sainte Michiel prochain venant en un An a tenir au dit Roy d' Angleterre & a touz ses Hoirs & Successeurs par∣petuelment & hereditablement par maniere que dessus est dit, Excepte ce qui est dit par dessus en l' Article de Pontieu, qui de∣mourra en sa force, & sauf & excepte toutes les choses donnees
& allienees aus Eglises qui leur demourrant paisiblement en touz les Pais & Lieux ci dessus et dessous nommes, si que les Personnes des dittes Eglises prient diligement pour les diz Roys comme par leurs fondeurs sur quoy leurs consciences en seront chargiez. 9. Item est accorde que le Roy d' Angleterre toutes les Ci∣tes, Contes, Chasteaux et Pais dessus nomez qui anciennement n'ont este des Roys d' Angleterre, aura et tendra comme le Roy  de France ou ses Filz les tiennent a present. 10. Item est accorde que se dedans les mettes des diz Pais qui furent anciennement des Roys d' Angleterre auroient aucu∣nes choses qui autrefois n' eussent est des Roys d' Angleterre dont le Roy de France estoit en possession le jour de la battaille de Poitiers qui fu le xix. Jour de Septembre l' An Mil. ccc. lvi. Elles seront demourront au Roy d' Angleterre & a ses Hoirs par  la maniere que dessus est dit. 11. Item accorde est que le Roy de France & son ainsnez Filz le Regent pour eulx & pour touz leurs Hoirs & pour touz les Roys de France & leurs Successeurs a touz jours au plus tost que se pourra faire sanz mal Engin & au plus tard dedans la Saint Michiel prochain venant & un An, rendront & bailleront au dit Roy d' Angleterre & a touz ses Hoirs & Successeurs &  transporteront en eulx touz les Honneurs, Obediances, Homma∣ges, Ligeances, Vasseauls, Fiez, Services, Recognoissances, Sere∣mens, Droitures, mere & mixte Impere, & toutes manieres de Jurisdictions hautes et basses sauves-gardes, et Seignories, qui ap∣partenoient et appartiennent ou pourroient en aucune maniere appartenir au Roy et a la Coronne de France ou a aucune autre Personne a cause du Roy et de la Coronne de France en quel∣que temps, es Cites, Contes, Chasteaux, Terres, Pais, Isles et  Lieux avant nommes, ou en aucune deuls ou leur Appartenances et Appendences quelconque ou es Personnes, Vassaulz et Subgiez quelconques diceuls. The twelfth Article was entirely left out of the Treaty of Peace, Corrected at Calais when the two Kings met there. 13. Item est accorde a in que ce present Craictie puisse estre  plus briefment acompliz que le Roy d' Angleterre fera amener le Roy de France a Calais dedans trois sepmaines apres la Nati∣vite saint Jehan Baptiste prochain venant, cessant tout juste em∣peschement aus despens du Roy d' Angleterre hors les frais de l' Ostel du dit Roy de France. 14. Item accorde est que le Roy de France paiera au Roy d' Angleterre trois Milions d' Escuz d' Or, dont les deux valent un  Noble de la Monnoye d' Angleterre & en seront paies au dit Roy d' Angleterre ou a ses Deputez six Cens Mil escuz a Calais de∣dans quatre Mois acompter depuis que le Roy de France sera venuz a Calais et dedans l' An des lors prochain ensuit en seront paiez quatre Cens Mil Escuz tels comme dessus en la Cite de Londres en Angleterre, & deors chascun An prochain ensuit iiii.
Mil Escuz tels comme devant en la ditte Cite jusques a tant que les diz trois Milions seront parpaies. 15. Item est accorde que pour paiant les diz vi. Mil Escuz a Calais & pour baillant les Hostages ci dessous nommes & deli∣vront au Roy d' Angleterre dedans les quatre Mois, acompter de∣puis que le Roy de France sera venuz a Calais, comme dit est, la Ville le Chastel & les Forteresces de la Rochelle, & les Chaste∣aux,  Forteresces, & Villes de la Conte de Guines avec toutes les Appartenances et Appendances, la Personne du dit Roy sera tout delivre de Prison & pourra partir franchement, mais il ne pour∣ra armer ne ses Gens contre le Roy d' Angleterre jusques a tant quil ait accompli ce qui est tenuz de faire par ce present Trai∣ctie et sont Hostages tant Prisoniers pris en la Battaille de Poiti∣ers comme autres qui demourront par le Roy de France ceuls qui sensuit. Cest ascavoir Monsieur Loys Conte d' Anou, Monsire Jehan- Conte de Poitiers Filz au Roy de France le Duc d' Orleans Frere du dit Roy, le Duc de Bourbon, le Conte de Blois, ou son Frere, le Conte d' Alancon ou Monsire Pierre d' Alencon son Fre∣re, le Conte de Saint Pol, le Conte de Harcourt, le Conte de Portien, le Conte de Valentmois, le Conte de Breine, le Conte de Vaudemont, le Conte de Foreis, le Viconte de Beauont,  le Sire de Coucy, le Sire de Fienne, le Sire de Preaux, le Sire de Saint Venant, le Sire de Garencieres, le Dalphin d' Auvergne▪ le Sire de Hangest, le Sire de Montmorency, Monsire Guillaume de Craon, Monsire Loys de Harcourt, Monsire Jehan de Ligny. Les noms des diz Prisonieres sont tiels, Monsire Philip de France, le Conte d' Eu, le Conte de Longueville, le Conte de Pontieu, le Conte de Tancarville, le Conte de Jogny, le Conte de San∣cerre, le Conte de Danmartin, le Conte de Vantadour, le Con∣te  de Sailebruche, le Conte de Auxerre, le Conte de Vendosme, le Sire de Craon, le Sire de Rual, le Mareschant d' Andeneham, le Sire d' Aubigny. 16. Item est accorde que les dessus diz Prisonnes qui veuront demourer en Hostage par le Roy de France comme dit est seront par mi ce delivres de leurs Prisons sanz paier aucun Raencon par Couvenances faits par avant le tiers jour de May dernier∣ment  passe, & se aucun d' euls est hors d' Angleterre & il ne se∣ront a Calais en Hostage dedans le premier mois apres les dit∣tes trois Sepmaines de Saint Jehan cessant juste empeschement il ne sera pas quittez de sa Prisonne mais sera contrains par le Roy de France a retourner en Angleterre comme Prisonier ou a paier la peine par lui promise, & encorrue par defaut de son Retour. 17. Item est accorde que en Lieu des diz Hostages qui ne  vendront a Calais ou qui mouront ou se departiront sanz conge hors du povoir du Roy d' Angleterre, le Roy de France sera tenuz d' en baillier d' autres de samble estat au plus pres qu'il pourra estre fait dedans quatre Mois prochain apres que le Bail∣lif d' Amiens ou le Maire de Sainct Omer en sera sur ce par Let∣tres du dit Roy d' Angleterre certifiez. Et porra le Roy de
France a son departure de Calais en mener en sa Compaignie dix des Hostages tels come les deus Roys accorderont & souffira que du nombre de Quarante dessus dit en demeure jusques au Nombre de Trente. 18. Item accorde est que le Roy de France dedans trois Mois apres ce quil sera partis de Calais rendra a Calais en Hostage quatre Personnez de la Ville de Paris, & deux Personnes de  chascun des Villes don les noms sensuivent. C' estascaveir de Saint Omer, Arras, Amiens, Beauvais, Lisle, Douay, Tournay, Reins, Chaalons, Troyes, Chartres, Tholouse, Lionz, Orleans, Compiegne, Roan, Caen, Tours, Bourges, les plus souffisans des dittes Villes pour l' accomplisement de ce present Traictie. 19. Item est accorde que le Roy de France sera amenez d' Angleterre a Calais & demourra a Calais par quatie Mois apres  sa venue, mais il ne paiera riens du premier Mois pour cause de sa garde & pour chascun des autres Mois ensuivant quil demour∣ra a Calais par defaut de luy ou de ses Gens il paiera pour ses gardes dix Mil Royauls telz comme il courrnt a present en France avant son departir de Calais & aussi au future du temps qu' il y demourra. 20. Item est accorde que au plus tost que faire se pourra de∣dans  l' An prochain apres ce que le Roy de France sera partiz de Calais, Monsire Jehan Conte de Montfort aura la Conte de Montfort, avec toutes ses Appartenances en faisant Homage, Lige, au Roy de France, & devoir & service en touz cas comme bon & loyal Vassaul Lige doit faire a son Seigneur Lige a cause la ditte Conte & aussi li seront renduz ses autres Heritages qui ne sont mie de la Duchie de Bretaigne en faisant Homage ou au∣tre Devoir, qui il appartendra, & se il veult aucune chose de∣mander  en aucuns des Heritages qui sont de la ditte Duchie hors du Pais de Bretaigne bonne & brieve Raison li sera faite par la Cour de France. 21. Item sur la Questionne du demaine de la Duchie de Bre∣taigne que est entre le dit Monsire Jehan de Montfort d' une partie, & Monsire Charles de Bloys d' autre partie, accorde est que les deux Roys appelez par devant euls ou leurs Deputes es∣pecials  les parties principals de Bloys & de Montfort s'enformeront du droit des Parties, & s'enforceront de mettre les Parties a Ac∣cord sur tout ce que est en debat, entre eulx, au plus tost que il pourront, Et en cas que les diz Roys par euls ne par leurs Deputes ne les pourront accorder dedans un An prochaine apres que le Roy de France sera arrivez a Calais, les Amis d' une par∣tie & d' autre s'enformeront diligement du droit des Parties, & par maniere que dessus est dit & s'enforceront de metre les dit∣tes  Parties a Accord au mieux que faire se pourra au plus tost qu'il pourront, & se il ne les peuent mettre a Accord dedans de∣mi An adonc prochaine ensuit, il raporteront aus diz deux Roys ou a leur Deputes tout ce qu'il auront trouve sur la droite des dittes Parties & sur quoy le Debat demourra entre les dittes Parties & adonques les diz Roys par eulx ou par leurs Deputes
especial au plus tost qu'il pourront mettront les dittes Parties a Accord en diront leur final avis sur le droit de l' une partie & de l' autre & ce sera exequte par les deux Roys, & en cas qu'il ne pourront faire dedans demi An des lors prochain ensuit, adonc les deux Parties principals de Bloys et de Montfort feront ce qui mi∣eux leur amblera, & les amis d' une Partie & d' autre aideront quelque partie qu'il leur plaira sanz empeschement des diz Roys, & sanz avoir en aucun temps domage, blasme, ne reproche par  aucun des diz Roys par la cause dessus ditte, & se ainsi estoit que l' une des dittes Parties ne vousist comparoir souffisament de∣vant les diz Roys ou leurs diz Deputez, ou temps qui li sera esta∣bli, & aussi en cas que les diz Roys ou leurs Deputez auroient ordene & declare que les dittes Parties feussent a Accord ou qu'il auroient dit leurs avis pour le droit d' une Partie, & aucune des dittes Parties ne se voudroit accorder a ce, ne obeir a la ditte, Declaration adonc les diz Roys seront encontre luy de tout leur  povoir & en ayde a l' autre qui se voudroit accorder & obeir. Mais en nul cas les deux Roys par leur propres Personnes, ne par au∣tre ne pourront faire ne entreprendre Guerre l' une a l' autre pour la cause devant ditte, & touz jours demourra la Souverainete & Homage de la ditte Duchie au Roy de France. 22. Item que toutes les Terres, Pais, Villes, Chasteaux & autres Lieux baillies au diz Roys seront en telles Libertez &  Franchises comme il sont a present & seront confermees par les diz Seigneurs Roys ou par leur Successeurs ou par chascun deulx toutes les fois qu'il en seront sur ce deuement Requis se contraire n' estoient a ce present Accord. 23. Item le dit Roy de France rendra & fera rendre & resta∣blir de fait a Monsire Philippe de Navarre & a toux ses adhe∣rens en apres au plus tost que l' on pourra sanz mal engin & au  plus tard dedans un An prochain apres que le Roy de France sera partiz de Calais, toutes les Villes, Forteresces, Chasteaux, Seignories, Drois, Rents, Profis, Jurisdictions, & Lieux quelcon∣ques que le did Monsire Philippe tant pour cause de luy que pour cause de sa Femme ou ses diz adherens tindrent ou devoient tenir au Royalme de France & ne leur fera jamais le dit Roy Repro∣che, domage ne empeschement pour aucun chose faite avant ses heures & leur pardonra toutes Offences & mesprises du temps  passe pour cause de la Guerre, & sur ce auront ses Lettres bonnes & souffisans, si que le dit Messire Philippe & ses diz adherens retournent en son Hommage & luy facent les devoirs & li soient bons & loiauls Vassaulx. 24. Item est accorde que le Roy d' Angleterre pourra donner cest fois tant seulement a qui qui li plaira en heritage toutes les Terres & Heritages qui furent de fie Monsire Godefroy de Hare∣court  a tenir du Duc de Normandie au d' autres Seigneurs de qui elles doivent estre tenues par raison parmi les Hommages & Services anciennement accostumez. 25. Item est accorde que nul homme ne Pais qui ayt este en l' obeisance de l' une partie & vendra par c' est Accord a l' obei∣sance
de l' autre Partie ne soit empeschiez par chose faite ou temps passe. 26. Item est accorde que les Terres des Bannis & adherens de l'une Partie et de l'autre et aussi les Eglises de l'une Roy∣aume et de l'autre, et que touz ceulx qui sont desheritez ou Ostes de leurs Terres ou Heritages ou chargiez d'aucune Pension, Taille, ou Redevance ou autrement grevez en quelque maniere  que ce soit pour cause de cest Guerre, soient restituez entierment en mesme le droit et Possession qu'il eurent avant la Guerre com∣mencee, & que toutes Manieres de forfaitures, trespas & mespri∣sons faiz par eulx ou aucune d'eulx en moyen temps soient du tout pardonnees, & ces choses soient faites au plus tost que l'on pourra bonnement et au plus tard dedans un An apres que le Roy sera partiz de Calais. Excepte ce que est dit en l'Article de Calais, de Merk, et des autres Lieux nommez au dit Article.  Excepte aussi la Viconte de Fronsac, et Monsire Jehan de Ga∣lart les quielx ne seront point compris en cest Article, mais de∣mourront les biens et Heritages en l'estat qu'il estoient par avant ce present Traictie. 27. Item est accorde que le Roy de France delivrera au Roy de An∣gleterre au plus tost qu'il pourra bonnement, et donra et au plus  tard dedans un An prochain apres son departir de Calais toutes les Cites, Villes, Pais et autres Lieux dessuz nommez qui par ce present Traictie doivent estre baillees au Roy d'Angleterre. 28. Item est accorde que en baillant au Roy d'Angleterre ou a au∣tre par lui par especial Deputez, les villes et Forteresces et toute la Conte de Montfort, les villes et Forteresces et toute la Conte de Ponthieu, la Cite et le Chastel de Xainctes, les Chasteaux, Villes, et  Forteresces et tout ce que le Roy tient en demaine au Pais de Xain∣tonge, de ca et de la la Charente, le Chastel et la Cite d'Angolesme, et les Chasteaux, Forteresces, et Villes que le Roy de France tient en demaine au Pais d'Angolesmois, avec Lettres et Mandemens des de∣laissemens des foy et hommages, le Roy d'Angleterre a ses propres couz et frais delivrera toutes les Forteresces prises et occupees par lui et par ses subgiez, adherens, et allies es Pais de France, de Tou∣rainne, d'Anjou, du Maine, de Berri, d'Auvergne, de Bourgoigne,  et de Champaigne, de Picardie et de Normandie, et de toutes les au∣tres partiez, Terres et Lieux, du Royaume de France. Excepte cel∣les du Duchie du Bretaigny et de Païs et Terres qui par ce present Traictie doivent appartenir et demourer au Roy d'Angleterre. 29. Item est accorde que le Roy de France fera baillier et delivrer au Roy d'Angleterre ou a ses Hoirs ou Deputez toutes les Villes,  Chasteaux, Forteresces, et autres Terres, Pais et Lieux avant nom∣mez avec leurs Appartenances aus propres Couz et fraiz du dit Roy de France & aussi s'il y avoit aucuns Rebelles ou Desobeissans de ren∣dre, baillier, ou restituir au dit Roy d'Angleterre aucunes Cites, Villes, Chasteaux, Paix, Lieux, ou Forteresces qui par ce present Traictie li doivent appartenir, le Roy de France sera tenuz de les faire delivrer au Roy d'Angleterre a ses despens, & semblablement le Roy d'Angleterre fera delivrer a ses despens les Forteresces qui par ce pre∣sent
Traictie doyvent appartenir au Roy de France: & seront tenuz les diz Roys & leurs Gens a euls entre ayder quant a ce requis en se∣ront aus gages de la Partie que le requerra, qui seront d'un Florin de Florence par Jour par Chevalier & demy Florin par Escuyer & pour les autres au fuer & du surplus des doubles gages: & est accorde que si les gages sont trop petiz en regard au merchie des vivres en pais, il en sera a l'ordenance de quatre Chevaliers pour c'es leus c'est ascavoir deux d'une Partie & deux d'autre. 30. Item est accorde que les Arcevesques, Evesques, & autres Prelas & Gens de Saincte Eglise a cause de leur temporalite seront subgiez de celui des deux Roys soubs qu'il tendront leur temporalite, & s'il ont temporalite soubs touz les deux Roys il seront subgiez de chascun des deux Roys par leur temporalite qu'il tendront soubz chascun diceulx. 31. Item est accorde que bonnes, alliances, amitiez, & Confede∣rations  soient faites entre les deux Roys de France & d'Angleterre & leurs Royaumes en gardent la Conscience & l'honneur de l'un Roy, & de l'autre, non obstant quelconque Confederation qu'il aient de ca & de la avec quelconques Personnes, soient d'Escoce, de Flandres, ou d'autre Pais quelconques. 32. Item accorde est que le dit Roi de France & son ainsnez Filz  le Regent pour eulx et pour leurs Hoires Roys de France, si avant comme il pourra estre fait, se declayront et departiront du tout les Aliances qu'il ont avec les Escoz et prometteront se avant comme faire se pourra que jamais euls ne leurs Hoirs ne les Roys de France qui par le temps seront ne donneront ne feront au Roy ne au Royaume d'Escoce ne aus Subgiez dicelli present et ave∣nir, confort, aide ne faveur contre le dit Roy d'Angleterre, ne contre ses Hoirs et Successeurs, ne contre son Royaume, ne con∣tre  ses Subgiez en quelque maniere, et qu'ils ne feront autres Alliances avec les diz Escoz en aucune temps avenir, contre les diz Roys et Royaume d'Angleterre. Et semblablement si avant comme faire se pourra le Roy d'Angleterre et son ainsnez Filz se declayront et departiront du tout des Alliances qu'il ont avec les Flamens et promettront que euls ne leurs Hoirs ne les Roys d'Angleterre qui par le temps seront, ne donneront ne feront aus Flamens presens et avenir aide, confort ne faveur contre le Roy  de France ses Hoirs et Successeurs ne contre son Royaume, ne contre ses Subgiez en quelque maniere, et qu'il ne feront autre Alliances avec les diz Flamens en aucune temps avenir contre les Roys et Royaume de France. 33. Item accorde est que les Collations & Provisions faites d'une partie et d'autre des benefices vacans tant comme la Guerre adure tiennent et soient valables, et que les frais issues, et reve∣nues  receuz et levez de quelconque Benefice ou autres choses temporels quelconques es diz Royaume de France et de Angle∣terre par l'une Partie et par l'autre durant les dittes guerres soient quittes d'une Partie et d'autre.
34. Item que le Roys dessus diz soient tenuz de faire confer∣mer toutes les choses dessus dittes par nôtre saint Pere le Pape et seront valles par seremens, sentences, censures de Court de Rome et touz autres Lieux en la plus fort maniere que faire se pourra et seront empitrees dispensations et absolutions et Lettres de la ditte Cour de Rome touchant la perfection et accomplisse∣ment de ce present Traictie et seront bailles aus parties au  plus tard dedans les trois Sepmaines apres ce que le Roy sera arrivez a Calais. 35. Item que touz les Subgiez des diz Royaumes qui vou∣dront estudier es estudes & Universites des Royaumes de France & d'Angleterre joyront des Privileges & Libertes des dittes estudes & Universites tout aussi comme il povoient faire avant des pre∣sentes guerres & comme il font a present. 36. Item a fin que les choses dessus dittes Craictees & Par∣lees soient plus fermes, estables & valables seront faites & don∣nees les fermetes qui sensuivent. C'est ascavoir Lettres Seelees de Seauls des diz Roy & des Ainsnez Filz diceuls les meilleurs qu'il pourront faire & ordener  par les Conseils des diz Roys, & jureront les diz Roys & leurs Enfans Ainsnez & aussi les autres des Linages des dis Seigneurs & autres Grans des diz Royaumes jusques au nombre de vingt de chascune partie qu'il tendront & aideront a tenir pour tant comme a chascun deuls touche les dittes choses traicties & ac∣cordees & acompliront sanz jamais venir au contraire sanz fraude et sanz mal Engin, et sanz faire nul empeschement, et se il y  avoit aucun du dit Royaume de France ou du Royaume d'An∣gleterre qui feussent rebelles, ou ne vousissent accorder les choses dessus dittes, les deux Roys feront tout leur povoir de corps de biens et damis de mettre les diz Rebelles a vraye obeissance se∣lon la fourme et teneur du dit Traictie et avec ce se soubzmet∣tront les diz Roys et leurs Hoirs et Royaumes a la cohercion de nôtre saint Pere le Pape a fin puisse contraindre par Sentences, censures d'Eglise et autres voyes deuez celui qui sera Rebelles selon ce qu'il sera de Raison. Et parmi les Seurtes et Fermetes  dessus dittes renunceront les diz Roys et leurs Hoirs par foy et par serement a toutes guerres ct a touz proces de fait se par desobeis∣sance, rebellion ou puissance d'aucun Subgiez du Royaume de France ou autre juste cause le Roy de France ou ses Hoirs ne po∣voient acomplir toutes les choses dessus dittes le Roy d'Angleterre, ses Hoirs ou aucun pour eulx ne feront ou deuront faire guerre contre le dit Roy de France ses Hoirs ne son Royaume, mais tous  ensamble s'efforceront de mettre les diz Rebelles en vraye obeis∣sance & d'acomplir les choses devant dittes. Et aussi si aucuns du Royaume & obeissance du Roy d'Angleterre ne vouloient ren∣dre les Chasteaux, Villes, ou Forteresces qu'il tiennent au Roy∣aume de France & obeir au Traictie dessus ditte, ou, par juste c use ne povoient acomplir ce qu'ils doivent faire par ce pre∣sent Traictie, le Roi de France ne ses Hoirs ou aucun par eulx ne feront point de Guerre au Roy d'Angleterre ne a son Roy∣aume,
mais touz deux ensamble feront leur povoir de recourer les Chasteaux, Villes & Forteresces dessus dittes, & que toute obeisance & accomplissement soient fais es Traicties dessus dittes & seront aussi faites & donnees d'une Partie & d'autre selon la nature du fait toutes manieres de fermetes & seurtes que l'on pourra & scaura ou pourra diviser tant par le Pape le College de la Court de Rome, comme autrement pour tenir & garder perpetuelment la Paix & toutes les choses par dessus accordees. 37. Item est accorde que par ce present Traictie et Accord, tous autres accors, Traictes, ou Prolocutions se aucun en y a faiz ou pour parlez au temps passe sont nulz et de nulle valeur, et du tout mis au neant et ne senpourront jamais aidier les par∣ties ne faire aucun reproche l'un contre l'autre pour cause di∣ceulx traictiez ou Accors, se aucun en y avoit comme dit est. 38. Item que ce present Traictie sera approue, jure, & con∣ferme par les deux Roys a Calais quant il y seront en leurs per∣sonnes, et depuis que le Roy de France sera partiz de Calais et sera en son povoir, dedans un mois prochain ensuivant le dit de∣partement le dit Roy de France en fera Lettres confirmatoires et autres necessaires ouvertes, et les envoyra et delivrera a Calais au dit Roy d'Angleterre ou a sees Deputez au dit Lieu, & aussi le dit Roy d'Angleterre en prenant les dittes Lettres confirmatoires  en baillera Lettres confirmatoires pareilles a celles du dit Roy de France. 39. Item est accorde que nul des Roys avant diz ne procurera ne fera procurer par lui ne par autre que aucunes noveletes ou grefs se facent par l'Eglise de Rome ou par autre de Saincte Eg∣lise quelconques qu'il soient contre ce present Traictie sur aucun  des diz Roys, leurs coadjuteurs, adherens, ou alliez quelconques qu'il soient, ne sur leur terres, ne de leurs Subgiez pour a choi∣son de la guerre, ou pour autre chose, ne pour services que les diz coadjuteurs ou alliez aient fait au diz Roys ou a aucune di∣ceulx. Et se nostre dit saint Pere ou autre, le vouloient fair les deux Roys le destorberont selon ce qu'il pourront bonne∣ment sanz mal engin. 40. Item des Ostages qui seront bailliez au Roy d'Angleterre  a Calais de la maniere & du temps de leur departement les deux Roys en ordeneront a Calais. Et nous Roy de France dessus dit veu & considere le dit Traictie pour bien de Paix fait en nôtre nom & pour nous entant comme a nous touche a notre partie aians ferme & agreable ycelui & toutes les choses dessus escriptes, volons loons, ratiffions & approvons & de nostre auctorite Roy∣al par deliberation conseil & consentement de pluseurs Prelas &  Gens de Saincte Eglise Dux & Contes tant de nôtre Linage que autres, & de pluseurs tant Pers de France que autres Grans, Barons, Nobles, Bourgois et autres Sages de nôtre Royaume con∣sentons, et confermons le dit Traictie et toutes les choses dessus dittes contenues en ycelui, et jurons sur le corps Jehu Christ et en parole de Roy pour nous et pour noz Hoirs iceli tenir gar∣der
et accomplir sanz jamais venir en contre par nous ou par au∣tre, et pour les choses dessus dittes et chascun dicelles tenir fer∣mement a perpetuete, obligeons nous noz biens presens et avenir, noz Hoirs et Successeurs et leurs biens, et souzmettons quant a toutes ces choses nous et noz Hoirs et Successeurs a la Jurisdi∣tion et Cohertion d'Eglise de Rome, et volons et consentons que nôtre Saint Pere le Pape conferme toutes ces choses en donnant monitions, mandemens generals, sur l'acomplissement dicelles con∣tre  nous noz Hoirs et Successeurs, et contre touz noz Subgiez, soient Communes, Colleges, Universities, ou Persons secullers quelconques et en donnant Sentences generals descommuniement, de suspension, et de entredit, pour estre encoruz pour nous et par eulx par celi fait, si tost que nous en eulx ferons ou attempte∣rons en occupant Forteresce, Ville, ou Chastel ou autre quelcon∣que chose, faisant, ratiffiant, ou agreant ou donnant Conseil, con∣fort, faveur ou aide secretment ou en appert contre la ditte Pais,  des quelles Sentences il ne puissent estre absoubz jusques a ce qu'ils aient fait pleniere satisfaction a tous ceulx qui par celui fait auroient soustenu ou soustendroient domages. Et avec ce voulons et consentons que nôtre Saint Pere le Pape pour ce que plus fermement soit tenue et gardee la ditte Paix a perpetuete toutes Pactions, confederations, aliances et couvenances comme que elles puissent estre nommees qui pourroient estre prejudici∣ables ou obvier par quelconque voye a la ditte Paix au temps  present ou avenir, suppose qu'elles feussent fermes ou vallees par peines ou par seremens et confermees de l'auctorite nôtre saint Pere le Pape ou d'autre soient cassees, irritees, & mises au neant, comme contraires a bien commun & au bien de Païs commune, & profitable a tout Chrestiente & deplaisans a Dieu, e touz sere∣mens faiz en tel cas soient relachiez & soit decerne par le dit nôtre saint Pere que nul soit tenuz a tels seremens aliances ou couvenances tenir ou garder & defendre que au temps avenir ne  soient faites telles ou samblables, et si de fait aucun attemptoit ou faisoit le contraire que desmaintenant les casse & irrite & rende nulz & de nulle vertu. Et neantmoins nous les punirons comme violateurs de Paix par peine de corps & de biens, si comme les cas le requerra & que raison voudra et se nous fai∣sions procurions ou souffrions estre fait le contraire que Dieu ne vueille nous volons estre tenuz et repute pour desloiaul et parjure et volons encourir tel blasme et deffame come Roy sacre doit  encourir en tel cas, et les choses dessus dittes ferons jurer a te∣nir et garder par les Prelas quant il feront les seremens de feaulte et Chiefs de Eglises de notre Royaume, par noz Enfans, par nô∣tre Frere le Duc d'Orleans, par noz cousins et autres Prochains de nôtre sangue, par les Pers de France, par les Dux, Contes, Barons et Grant Terriers, par les Maires, Jures, Eschevins et Con∣suls et Universities ou Communes de notre Royaume et par noz Officers en la Creation de leurs Offices, et qu'il ne feront ne  moveront ou soustendront ou norriont guerre, quelconque haine ou discorde entre nous Roys et noz Royaumes dessus diz et les Subgiez diceuls et le dit serement serons renoveler de cinq Ans en cinq Ans pour en estre plus freche memoire et jamais ne fe∣rons Alliances en quelque Personne, Cite, Ville, ou Universite
contre nôtre dit Frere, ne contre ses Enfans ou leurs Terres ou leurs Subgiez ne autrement qu'il n'ensoient expressement exceptes. Et nous avons fait samblement Jurer toutes les choses devant dittes par noz Enfans le Duc d'Anjou et de Maine, le Duc de Berri et d'Auvergne, le Duc de Tourainne, le Duc d'Orleans nô∣tre Frere, et noz Cousins le Duc de Bourbon, Jaque de Bourbon, Jehan d'Arteis, Pierre d'Alencon, Jehan d'Escampes, Guy de Bloys, le Conte de saint Pol, le Conte de Harecourt, le Conte de Tan∣carville,  le Cont de saint Cerre, le Conte de Joigny, le Conte de Sairebruche, le Conte de Briene, le Sire de Coucy, le Sire de Craon, le Sire de Frieules, le Daulphin d'Auvergne, le Sire de Montmorency, Guillaume de Craon, le Sire de saint Venant. Et facons aussi Jurer samblablement et au plus tost que faire pour∣rons bonnement la plus grant Partie des Prelas, Pers, Dux, Contes, Barons, et autres Nobles de nôtre Royaume. En tesmoing de la quelle chose nous avons fait mettre nôtre  Seel a ces Lettres. Donnees a Calais le xxiiii. Jour d'Octobre l'An de Grace, mil trois cens Soixante. In quorum omnium Testimonium Sigillum nostrum praesen∣tibus Litteris duximus apponendum. Datum apud Calesium Morinen' Dioc. Die xxv. Mensis Octobris Anno Praedicto Mil∣lesimo ccc. N. 94. See the Origi∣nal in the Mar∣gin at the be∣ginning of N. 93. Serment que le Roy fist le xxiiii jour d'Octobre, A Calais sur les Articles ci contenus, confirmant la Traitie. This Oath was taken again in the very same Words and Articles at Bologne, 26th of October without any alteration, as they here  follow. With his Son Charles his Confirmation. JOhan par le Grace de Dieu, Roy de France a tous ceuls qui ces lettres verront salut. Scavoir faisons que par la paix fait & reformee entre nous & nostre treschier Frere le Roy d'Angle∣terre la quelle nous desirons estre fermement & perpetuelment gardee, nos avons fait certains Sermens sur le corps Jesu Christ sacre touchees les saints Evangiles de Dieu, c'est assavoir, que  nous confermons & approuuons la paix & tout le Traictie & ac∣cord fait a Bretigny par la maniere que il est escript & depuis corrige a Calais & ycellui en touz ses poins & Articles pour tant come il nous touche Accomplirons et enterinerons et ne vendrons encontre. Item que nous ferons les Renunciations cessions et Transpors qui sont a faire de nostre partie, et accordees par nostre Con∣seil  et ycelles envoyerons et delivrerons au Roy d'Angleterre ou a ses Deputez au jour et lieu contenuz en les accordees des Parties.
Item que nous surserrons de user des soverainetez et Ressors quant aus choses que tient le Roy d'Angleterre et qui li serront baillees et le quelles li doivent demourer par vertu du dit accord et Traitie par la form et maniere et jusques au temps exprimes et contenuz es Lettres sur ce faites par les Consaux de Parties. Item que nous deliverons au Roy d'Angleterre les Chasteauls,  Villes & Terres qui li doivent estre baillees pour faire voider les Forteresces occupees au Royaume de France par le Roy d'An∣gleterre, ses alliez, aydans, & adherens, par la forme & maniere & selonc la Moderation continue es lettres sur ce faites & ac∣cordees par les Consauls des Parties. Item que nous deliverons & ferons delivrer au Roy d'An∣gleterre  ou a ces Deputez, toutes les Terres, Villes, & Pais que nous le devons bailler & delivrer par le dit accord, par le temps, forme, & maniere accordes, par les Consauls des Parties, & li baillerons ou ferons bailler les lettres que bailler & delivrer li devons pour la Delivrance des dictes Terres, & que nous paie∣rons toutes les sommes d'or que nous sommes tenuz de paier au Roy d'Angleterre per le temps & maniere accordez per les Con∣sauls des Parties. Item que nous Renoncons a toute Guerre & proces de fait contre le Roy d'Angleterre & ses hoirs selon la forme des lettres sur ce accordees. Item avons Jure comme dit est les Alliances faites au Roy d'Angleterre per la maniere que accordees sont avec le Modifi∣cation que est faite des Escoz et de Bretaigne. Item que nous ferons et accomplirons par la maniere accordee tout ce que nous devons et sommes tenuz de faire, des Ostages qui bailler devons au Roy d'Engleterre. Item que nous lairons et deliverons aus Eglises tout ce qui a este occupe du leur, pour occasion de la Guerre, et a touz autres Allies ou adherens au dit Roy d'Angleterre, et leur par∣donneons  toutes offensees par la maniere que accorde est. Item que les Sermens qui sont a faire par noz Enfans ou au∣tres de nostre partie par la dit accord, nous les ferons faire au plus tost que nous pourrons bonnement et devrons par le dit Record. Item que toutes les lettres que nous devons envoier ou bailler  au Roy d'Engleterre avant ou apres la Delivrance de nostre Per∣sonne, nous baillerons et envoierons par la forme, temps, et maniere accordee, entre les Parties: et ferons et accomplirons tout ce que faire devons par le dit accord et par le maniere contenue en ycelui, et es lettres accordees par les Consauls des Parties. En Tesmoin de la quele chose nous avons fait mettre
nostre seel a ses presentes lettres donne a Bouloigne le xxvi. Jour d'Octobre l'an de Grace Mil C. C. C. Soixante. Par le Roy Under the great Seal hanging at it with Silk twisted strings. J. Math. There is also the Confirmation of this Oath verbatim (it being recited in it) by Charles his eldest Son, this being the last  Clause. ET nous volons de tout nostre povoir entermer tout ce que nostre dit Seigneur et Pere a promis et covenancie promet∣tons lojaument et en bonne foy et avons jure, et jurons sur le Corps Jesu Christ sacre tenir, garder, et accomplir pourtant co∣me il nous touche et pourra touchir tout et chascun les choses contenues es Lettres a dessus Transcripts et par le forme et mane∣re  que compris y est, senz venir ne faire venir pour le temps avenir en aucune manere a l'encontre. En tesmoing de ce nous avons fait mettre nostre seel a ces presentes lettres. Donne a Bou∣loigne le xxvi. Jour d'Octobre l'an de Grace Mil C. C. C. Soi∣xante. Par Monsieur le Duc Noevenes With his Seal hanging to it with yellow and green silk strings  twisted. ANdroginus the Pope's Nuntio's Certificate Dated at St. Omers 8th of November 1360. That in his presence John King of France on the 24th of October 1360. at Calais grant∣ed and delivered these very Letters or Articles of his Oath reci∣ted in his Certificat or Testification to Edward King of En∣gland. N. 95 See for the O∣riginal in the Margin at the beginning of Number 93. La Grant Lettre de toutes les Terres. The great Letter of Renunciation of John King of France &c. at Bologn 26 October 1360. the 7th. 11th. and 8th Articles included, the 12th omitted. JEhan par la Grace de Dieu Roy de France, a touz ceuls qui  ces Lettres verront, Salut. Scavoir faisons que nous avons promis & promettons bailler ou faire bailler & delivrer realment & defait au Roy d'Engleterre nôtre Frere ou a ses Deputez en celle Partie aus Freres Augustins dedenz la Ville de Bruges au jour de la Feste de saint Andrieu prochain venont en un An Lettres Seelees de nôtre grant seel en l'az de Soye & en cire vert en cas que nôtre dit Frere aura faites les Renunciations que il doit fai∣re de sa Partie & nôtre treschier Neveu son Filz ainsne & y celles  baillees a noz Genz ou Deputez au dit lieu & Terme par la maniere que obligiez y sont des quelles Lettres la Teneur de mot a mot sensuit.
JEhan par la Grace de Dieu Roy de France a noz bien Amez les Arcevesques, Evesques, Abbez▪ & autres Prelas, les Dol∣ens, Prevos, Chpitres, & Convenz & autres Personnes d'Egli∣ses, tant Cathedraux & Collegiauls que Conventuauls, & autres Regulieres & Seculieres: Et a noz Amez & Feauls les Dx, Con∣tes, Vicontes, Barons, Chivalers & autres Nobles, les Maies, Es∣chivins, Jurez, Consuls, Universites & Communautes & autres  Personnes tant Nobles que non Nobles noz Subgiez en tempora∣lite & Tenans de nous ou souz nous temporalite de la Cite, Cha∣stel & Conte de Poitiers, & de toute la Terre & Pais de Poitou des Fiez de Thovarz & de la Terre de B'lleville de la Cite & Chastel de Xaincts, & de toute la Terre & Pais de Xainctonge par de ca et par de la la Charente, de la Cite et Chastel d'Agen et de la Terre et Païs d'Agenois, de la Cite Chastel et de toute la Conte de Pierregort, et de la Terre et Païs de Pierreguis, de la  Cite et Chastel de Limoges, et de la Terre et Païs de Limosin, et de la Cite et Chastel de Caours et de la Terre et Pais de Caourcin, de la Cite, Chastel et Païs de Tarbe, de la Terre Pais et Conte de Bigorre, de la Conte, Terre et Pais de Gaure, de la Cite et Chastel d'Engoulesme, et de la Conte Terre, et Païs d'Engolesmois, de la Cite et Chastel de Rodeis, et de la Terre et Pais de Rovergne, Salut et Dilection. LES Guerres qui ont longuement dure entre notre treschier Seigneur et Pere jadis Roy de France lui vivant et apres son Deces entre nous de une Part et le Roy d'Engleterre notre Fre∣re, le quel reclamoit soy avoir droit au dit Royalme d'autre part, ont porte mult grans damages non pas seulement a nous & a vous, mais a tout le Peuple de notre Royaume & des Royaulmes voisins et a toute Christiante si comme vous meismes le savez bien, car par les dittes Guerres son maintesfoiz avenues Bata∣illes  morteles, occisions de Gens, Pillemens d'Eglises, destructions de corps & peril de ammes, defloracons de pucelles & de virges, dehonestation de Femmes mariees & autres, Arsures de Villes de Manoirs & Ediffices, Roberies & oppressions, Guietemms de vois et de chemins, Justice en est faille et la foy Christianne Resroidie, et Marchandise perie, et tant d'autres malx et horri∣bles faiz sensont ensuiz qu'il ne pourroient estre dis, nombrez ne escrips; Par les quels non pas seulement les deux Royalmes mais  les autres Royaulmes par Christiante ont souffert mult d'afflictions et dommages irreparable. Pour quoy nous consideranz et pen∣sanz les mauls deslus diz, et que vraisemblable chose estoit que plus grans senpooient ensuivre en temps a venir, et que le monde souffroit tant d'engoisses et de doleurs par les dittes Guerres; Et aians pitie et compassion de nôtre bon et loial Peuple qui si fer¦mement et si loyaument s'est tenu si longuement en vraie con∣stance et obeissance envers nous en exposant leurs corps et leurs  biens a tous perilz et sanz eschiver despens et mises dont nous devons bien avoir parpetuel memoire a nous pour ce pieca sou∣stenu paroles et traictie de Paix. PRemierement par le moien de honorables Peres en Dieu plu∣sieurs Cardinauls et Messagers de par nostre Saint Pere le
Pape qui a grant diligence et instance y traveillerent pour lors, Et depuis ce y ait en plusieurs traictiez parlez, et plusieurs voies touchees entre nous et le dit Roy d'Engleterre nôtre Frere. FInablement en mois de May darrein passe vindrent en France messages de par nôtre Saint Pere le Pape noz chiers et fe∣auls amis L'abbe de Clugny, Frere Simon de Lengres, Maistre en Durante, Maistre de Lorder des Freres prescheurs, & Hu∣gue  de Geneve, Seigneur d'Auton Chivaler, ou estoit lors le dit Roy d'Engleterre et son ost, Et tant alerent et vindrent les diz Messages devers Charles nôtre treschier ainsne Filz et devers le dit Roy d'Engleterre nôtre Frere que en plusieurs Lieux s'assem∣blerent traicteurs d'une part & d'autre pour parler & traictier de Paix entre nous qui lors estions en Engleterre, & le dit Roy d'Engleterre et les Royaumes de l'une & de l'autre, Et au dar∣rein s'assemblerent les Traicteurs & Procureurs de nous & de par nôtre dit Filz aians povoir & auctorite souffiser de nous et de  nôtre dit Filz. Et les Procureurs et Traicteurs de nôtre Neveu le Prince de Gales Filz ainsne du dit Roy d'Angleterre nôtre Frere aiant povoir et auctorite de son dit pere en ceste partie a Bretig¦ny pres Chartres ou quel Lieu fu parlee, traictie et accorde final Paix et concorde des Traicteurs et Procureurs de l'une et de l'au∣tre Partie tous les decors, dissentions et guerres que nous et le dit Roy d'Engleterre nôtre Frere avions l'une contre l'autre,  le quel traictie et paix les procureurs de nous et de nôtre dit Filz pour nous et pour lui par souffiser povoir donne a euls sur¦ce et les procureurs du dit nôtre Neveu le Prince de Gales pour le dit Roy d'Angleterre notre Frere et pour lui, jurerent aus sains Euvangiles tenir et garder et apres ce le jurerent solenne∣ment nôtre dit Filz pour nous et pour lui et le dit nôtre Neveu le Prince de Gales, aiant a ce povoir pour son dit Pere nôtre Frere et pour lui et nous apres ces choses ainsi faites et a nous raportees et exposees considere que le dit Roy d'Angleterre s'¦accordoit  et consentoit au dit Traictie et vouloit ycelui et la paix tenir et acomplir de sa partie yceuls traictie et paix du Conseil et consentement de de pluseurs de nôtre Sanc et linage et Pre∣laz et sainte Eglise, Dux et Contes tant Pers de France que au∣tres de et Gens d'Eglise de Barons, Chivalers et autres Nobles, Bourgois et autres Sages de nôtre Royaume pour apai∣sier les Guerres et les mauls et douleurs dessus diz dont le peuple  estoit si malmene comme dessus est dit, plus que pour la deli∣vrance de nôtre Personne a l'onneur et a la gloire du Roy des Rois et de la virge Marie, et pour reverence de Saincte Eglise de nôtre saint Pere le Pape et de ses Messages a nous consenti, & consentons, ratiffions, greons & approvons. Et com∣me par le dit Traictie & Paix le dit Roy d'Angleterre nôtre Frere pour lui, pour ses Hoirs et Successeurs ait Renuncie expres∣sement a la Succession & eschoite de nôtre dit Royaume qu'il  demandoit au nom & a la Couronne dicelui & a tout le droit qu'il reclamoit & povoit reclamer & demander en quelque mani∣ere a tous jours & a toutes les choses qui par le dit traictie ne∣li doivent estre baillies & a toutes autres demandes & actions qu'¦il nous povoit faire & en celle meismes maniere y ait Renuncie le dit Prince de Gales son Filz ainsne notre Neveu & expresse∣ment
on Renoncie a plusieurs Terres, Duches, Contes, Homma∣ges, et Souverainetez de notre dit Royaume que le dit Roy de Angleterre notre Frere demandoit a avoir et es quelles il e di∣soit avoir droit. Et parmi ce nous li aions octroie et promis a baillier, delivrer, et delaissier pour lui et pour ses Hoirs▪ et Suc∣cesseurs a tous jours certaines Terres, Cites, Chasteauls, Villes, Contes, & Seigneuries en nôtre dit Royaume si comme plus a plain est contenu en dit Traictie & Accord entre les quelles Ter∣res,  Cites, Contes & Seigneuries sont celle qui se apres sont Escripts. 1. PRemierement que le Roy d' Angleterre avec ce qu'il tient en Guienne & en Gascoigne aura pour lui & pour ses Hoirs parpetuelment a tous jours toutes les choses qui s' en∣suivent a tenir par la maniere que le Roy de France et son Filz ou aucun de ses Ancestres Roys de France les tindrent,  C'est ascavoir ce que en Souverainete en Souverainete ce que en demaine en demaine & par le temps & manieres au dessouz de claires, la Cite & le Chastel & la Conte de Poitiers & tout la Terre & le Païs de Poitou, ensemble les fiez de Thovars & la Terre de Belleville, la Cite & le Chastel de Xainctes & toute la Terre et le Païs de Xainctonge par de ca & par de la la Charen∣te, la Cite & le Chastel d' Agen, & la Terre et le Païs d' Agenois, la Cite et le Chastel & toute la Conte de Pierregort, & la Ter∣re  & le Paīs de Pierreguis, la Cite & le Chastel de Limoges & la Terre & le Païs de Limosin, la Cite & le Chastel de Caours et la Terre et le Pais de Caourcin; la Cite et le Chastel et le Païs de Tarbe, et la Terre, Païs▪ et Conte de Bigorre, la Conte, la Terre et le Païs de Gaure, la Cite et le Chastel d' Engoules∣me, la Conte la Terre et le Païs d' Engoulesmois, la Cite et le Chastel de Rodeis, et la Terre et le Païs de Rovergue. Et se il y a aucuns Seigneurs comme le Conte de Foix, le Conte d' Ar∣mignac,  le Conte de Lylle, et le Conte de Pierregot, le Vicon∣te de Limoge ou autres qui tiennent aucun Terres ou Lieux de∣dens les metes des diz Lieux, il feront Hommage au Roy d' Engleterre et touz autres services et Devoirs deuz a cause de leurs Terres ou Lieux en la maniere qu'il ont fait ou temps passe. 2. ITem aura le Roy d' Angleterre tout ce que le Roy de An¦gleterre ou aucuns des Rois d' Angleterre anciennement  tindrent en la Ville de Monstereul sur la mer et es appartenances. 7. ITem il est accorde que le Roy de France et son ainsne Filz le Regent par euls et pour tous leurs Hoires et Successeurs au plus tost que I' en pourra senz fraude et senz mal engin et au plus tart dedenz la Feste de Saint Michael prochein venir en un an, rendront, bailleront et delivreront au dit Roy d' Angle∣terre & touz ses Hoirs & Successeurs & transporteront en euls  toutes les honneurs, obediences, hommages, legeances, Vassauls, fiez, Services, Recognoissances, drotures, mere & mixte Impere, et toutes manieres de Jurisdictions hautes et basses, Resorts et Sauves-gardes, advoaisons et patronages d' Egli es et toutes ma∣nieres de Seigneuries et soverainetez et tout le droit qu'il avoi∣ent & povoient avoir, appartenoient & peuent appartenir
pour quelque cause, tiltre ou couleur de droit a eux aus Rois ne a la Couronne de France, pour cause des Cites, Contes, Chaste∣auls, Villes, Terres, Païs, Ylles et Lieux avant nommez et de toutes leurs appartenances et appendences quelque part qu'il soi∣ent et chascun dicelles senz y iens retenir a eulx a leurs Hoirs ne Successeurs aus Rois ne a la Couronne de France, & aussi manderont les diz Roy & son ainsne Filz par leurs Lettres pa∣tentes a touz Arcevesques, Evesques, & autres Prelaz de Saint  Eglise & aussi aus Contes, Vicontes, Barons, Nobles, Citoiens & autres quelconques des Citez, Contez, Terres, Païs, Ylles, & Lieux avant nommez qu'il obeissent au Roy d'Engleterre & a ses Hoirs, & a leur certain commandement en la maniere qu'il ont obei aus Rois & a la Couronne de France, & par meismes les Lettres leur quitteront & absoldront aus mieuls qu'il se pourra faire, de touz hommages, foiz, seremens, obligations, subjections, & promesses fais par aucun deuls au Roy et a la Couronne de  France par quelconque maniere. 8. ITem accorde est que le Roy d'Engleterre aura les Cites, Contes, Chasteauls, Terres, Païs, Ylles, et Lieux avant nommez avec toutes les Appartenances et Appendences quelque part qu'il soient a tenir a lui et a touz ses Hoirs et Successeurs heritablement et parpetuelment en demaine ce que le Roy de France y avoit en demaine et aussi en fie, service, souverainete ou Res∣sort  ce que les Rois de France y avoient par tel maniere, sauf¦tant comme dit est par dessus en l'Article de Calais et de Merk, Et se des Cites, Contes, Chasteaux, Terres, Païs, Ylles et Lieux avant nommez, souverainetez, drois, mere et mixte Impere, Jurisdictions et proffis quelconques que tenoit aucuns Rois d'En∣gleterre ylleques et en leurs appartenances et appendences quel∣conques aucuns alienations, donations, Obligations ou charges ont este faites par aucuns des Rois de France qui ont este pour  le temps puis Soixante dix Ans en ca par quelque fourme que ce soit, toutes telles donations, alienations, obligations, & charges sont deshors et seront du tout rapellees, cassees & anullees & toutes choses ainsi donnees, alienees ou chargees seront realment & de fait rendues & baillees au dit Roy d'Engleterre ou a ses Deputez especiaulz a mesme l'entierete comme il furent aus Rois d'Engleterre depuis sexante dix Ans en ca au plus tost que l'en pourra senz mal engin, & au plus tart dedens la Saint Michiel  prochain venant en un An, a tenir au dit Roy d'Engleterre & a touz ses Hoirs et Successeurs parpetuelment & heritablement par maniere que dessus est dit, Excepte ce qui est dit par dessous en l'Article de Pontieu qui demourra en sa force: Et sauf & excep∣te toutes les choses donnees et alienees aus Eglises qui leur de∣mourront paisiblement en touz les Païs & Lieux ci dessus & dessouz nommez si que les personnes des dittes Eglises prient diligemment pour les diz Rois comme pour leurs fondeurs sur  quoy leur Consciences en seront chargees. 9. ITem est accorde que le Roy d'Engleterre toutes les Cites, Villes, Chasteauls & Païs dessus nommez qui ancienne∣ment n'ont este des Rois d'Engleterre aura et tendra en l'estat & aussi comme le Roy de France ou ses Filz tiennent a present.
10. ITem est accorde que se dedans les metes des diz Païs qui furent anciennement des Rois d'Engleterre avoit aucuns choses qui autrefoiz n'eussent este des Rois de Engleterre dont le Roy de France estoit en possession le Jour de la battaille de Poitiers qui fu le xix. jour de Septembre l'An Mil C. C. C. cin∣quante six, Elles seront et demourront au Roy d'Engleterre & a ses Hoirs en la maniere que dessus est dit. 11. ITem accorde est que le Roy de France et son ainsne Filz le Regent pour euls & pour leurs Hoirs et pour touz les Rois de France & pour leurs Successeurs a touz Jours au plus ost que se pourra faire senz mal engin et au plus tart dedenz la Saint Michiel prochain venant en un an, rendront et bailleront au dit Roy d'Engleterre et a touz ses Hoirs et Successeurs et transporteront Successeurs et transporteront en euls toutes les honneurs, legalitez, obediences,  hommages, ligeances, vassauls, fiez, Services, Recognoissances, seremens, droitures, mere et mixte Impere, toutes manieres de Jurisdictions hautes et basses, Ressors, Sauvegardes, Seigneuries, et Souverainetez, qui appartenoient ou pourroient en aucune ma∣niere appartenir au Rois et a la Couronne de France ou a aucu∣ne personne a cause du Roy et de la Couronne de France en quelque temps, es Citez, Contez, Chasteauls, Terres, Païs, Ylles, et Lieux avant nommez ou en ancuns deuls et a leurs  appartenances et appendances quelconques, ou es Personnes, Vas∣sauls, ou Subgiez quelconques diceuls soient Princes, Dux, Con∣tes, Vicontes, Arcevesques, Evesques et autres Prelaz d'Eglises, Barons, Nobles et autres quelconques senz riens a euls leur Hoirs et Successeurs la Couronne de France ou autre que ce soit rete∣nir ne reserver en yceuls. Pourquoy il, ne leurs Hoirs et Suc∣cesseurs ou autres Rois de France ou autre que ce soit a cause du Roy ou de la Couronne de France aucune chose ne pourront  chalngier ou demander au temps avenir sur le Roy d'Engleterre ses Hoirs et Successeurs ou sur aucuns des Vassauls et Subgiez avant diz pour cause des Païs et Lieux avant nommez aussi que tous les avant nommes personnes et leurs Hoirs et Successe∣urs parpetuelment seront hommes liges, & Subgiez du Roy d' Engleterre et a touz ses Hoirs et Successeurs et que le dit Roy d' Engleterre, ses Hoirs et Successeurs toutes les Personnes, Cites, Contes, Terres, Païs, Ylles, Chasteauls et Lieux avant nommez  et toutes les Appartenances et Appendences tendront et auront et a euls demourront plainement, parpetuelment, et franchement en leurs Seigneurie, Souverainete, et obeissance, ligeance et subje∣ction comme les Rois de France les avoient et tenoient en au∣cun temps passe. Et que le dit Roy d'Engleterre ses Hoirs et Successeurs auront et tendront parpetuelment touz les païs avant nommez avecques leurs Appartenances et Appendences et les au∣tres choses avant nommees en toute franchise et liberte parpeu∣elle  comme Seigneur, Souverain et lige, et comme voisins au Roy et au Royaume de France sanz y regnoistre Souverainete ou faire aucune obedience, hommage, Ressort, subjection, et senz faire en aucun temps avenir aucun service ou Recognoissance aus Rois ne a la Couronne de France, des Cites, Contes, Cha∣steauls, Terres, Païs, Ylles, Lieux et Personnes avant nommees ou par aucun dicelles.
NOus voulans le Traictie accord et Paix dessus diz tenir, gar∣der et acomplir sur tous les Articles ci dessus escrips et chascun diceulx touz les Païs, Cites, Terres, Contes et choses dessus nommees es diz Articles et toutes les Appartenances et Appendences quelque part que il soient baillons, rendons, deli∣vrons et delaissons pour nous noz Hoirs et Successeurs Rois de France au dit Roy d'Engleterre par ces presentes Lettres pour lui et pour ses Hoirs et Successeurs et les transportons en lui  avecques toutes les honneurs, Regalitez, obediences, hommages, ligeances, Vassaux, fiez, Services, Recognoissances, seremens, droitures, mere et mixte Impere, & toutes manieres de Jurisdi∣ctions, hautes, moyennes et basses, Ressors, Sauvegardes, Seigneu∣ries & Souverainetez qui appartenoient, appartiennent, ou pour∣roient en aucune maniere appartenir aus Rois et a la Couronne de France, ou a aucune autre personne a cause de nous & de la Couronne de France en quelque temps es Cites, Contez, Cha∣steauls,  Terres, Païs, Ylles, et Lieux avant nommez, ou en au∣cun deuls & a leurs Appartenances & Appendences quelconques, ou es Personnes, Vassauls, ou Subgiez quelconque diceulx soient Princes, Dux, Contes, Arcevesques, Evesques, & autres Prelaz de Eglises, Barons, Nobles, et autres quelconques senz riens a Nous nz Hoirs & Successeurs la Couronne de France ou autre que ce soit Retenir ne Resever en yceuls. POurquoy nous, ne noz Hoirs et Successeurs ou autres Rois de France ou autre que ce soit a cause de nous ou de la Couronne de France aucune chose ne pourrons chalengier ou de∣mander ou temps avenir sur le dit Roy d'Engleterre ses Hoirs et Successeurs ou sur aucun des Vassauls et Subgiez avant diz pour comme des Païs & Lieux avant nommez, ainsi que tous les a∣vant nommees Personnes et leurs Hoirs et Successeurs parpetuel∣ment seront Hommes Liges et Soubgiez du Roy d'Angleterre &  a tous ses Hoirs & Successeurs: Et que le dit Roy d'Engleterre, ses Hoirs & Successeurs toutes les Personnes, Cites, Terres, Con∣tes, Païs, Ylles, Chasteauls & Lieux avant nommez & toutes les Appartenances et Appendences auront et tendront a euls de∣mourront plainement, parpetuellement & franchement en leurs Seig∣neuries Souverainete, et obeissance, ligeance, et subjection com∣me les Roys de France les avoient et tenoient en aucun temps passe: Et que le dit Roy d'Engleterre ses Hoirs et Successeurs  auront et tendront parpetuelment touz les Païs avant nommez avec leurs Appartenances et Appendences & les autres choses a∣vant nommees, en toute franchise & liberte parpetuelle comme Seigneur, Souverain, & Lige & comme voisins au Roy et au Royaume de France, senz y recognoistre Souverainete ou faire au∣cun obeissance, hommage, Ressort, Subjection, et senz faire en aucun temps evenir aucune service ou Recognoissance aus Roys ne a la Couronne de France des Cites, Contes, Chasteauls, Ter∣res,  Païs, Ylles, & Lieux et Personnes avant nommees ou pour aucun dicelles. Et se des Cites, Contes, Chasteaux, Terres, Païs, Ylles, & Lieux avant nommez, Souverainetez, drois, mere et mixte Impere, Jurisdictions et prouffis quelconques que tenoit aucuns Rois d'Engleterre illecques et en leurs appartenances et appendences quelconque aucuns alienations, donations, obliga∣tions,
ou charges ont este faites par aucun des Roys de France qui ont este pour le temps puis Sexante dix Ans en ca par quel∣conque fourme ou cause que ce soit. TOutes telles donations, alienations, obligations, et charges Nous des ores rappelons, cassons & anullons du tout et toutes choses ainsi donnees, alienees, ou chargees, rendrons et baille∣rons realment et de fait au dit Roy d'Engleterre ou a ses Depu∣tez especiaulx a mesme l'entierete qu'il furent es Roys d'Engle∣terre  depuis Sexante dix Ans en ca au plus tost que l'en pourra senz mal engin et au plus tart dedens la Feste de Toussains pro∣chain venir en un an, a tenir au dit Roy d'Engleterre et a touz ses Hoirs et Successeurs parpetuelment et heritablement, par maniere que dessus est dit. Et toutes les Cites, Contes, Chaste∣auls et Païs dessus nommees qui anciennement n'ont este des Roys d'Engleterre aura et tendra en l'estat et aussi comme nous ou noz Filz les tiennent a present. Et se dedens les metes des  diz Païs qui furent anciennement des Roys d'Engleterre avoit aucunes choses qui autres foiz n'eussent este des Rois d'Engleter∣re dont nos fussiens en possession le Jour de la bataille de Poi∣tiers qui fu le xix Jour de Septembre l'An Mil C. C. C. cin∣quante six, Nous les baillons, delivrons et delaissons a tous Jours au dit Roy d'Engleterre pour lui et pour ses Hoirs en la mani∣ere que dessus est dit, Exceptees toutes les choses donnees & ali∣enees es Eglises qui leur demourront paisiblement en tous le Païs  & Lieux dessus nommez. Si que Personnes des dictes Eglises prient diligemment pour nous & nôtre dit Frere comme pour leurs fondeurs, Et seront Subgiez les Arcevesques, Evesques & autres Prelaz de sainte Eglise a celui des deux Roys souz qu'il tendront leur temporalite. Et se il ont temporalite souz touz les deux Roys, il seront subgiez de chascun des deux Roys pour leur temporalite qu'il tient souz chascun des deux Roys. Et toutes les Cites, Villes, Chasteaux, Lieux, & Païs dessus diz,  & les Eglises, Prelaz, Chapitres, & toutes les Communes & U∣niversites et singulieres personnes dicelles auront toutes leurs li∣bertes, franchises et privileges qu'il avoient au temps du dit Traictie et Paix et enjoiront paisiblement et leur seront confir∣mees par le dit Roy d'Engleterre se il en est requis se contraires ne sont aus choses dessus dittes. Et mandons et estroitement commandons et avec ce se mestier est commettons par ces pre∣sentes Lettres a touz noz Seneschaulx et Juges, Baillis, et Prevos,  Capitaines, Castellains, gardes des Païs, Villes, et Lieux dessus diz & a chascun d'euls ou a leurs Lieuxtenants que chascun en la Se∣igneurie ou Jugerie, Capitaine, Chastellerie et Garde ou il sont establis et es Ressors sur la foy et obeissance qu'il nous doivent, et sur paine d'encourir nôtre indignation et d'estre prives de noz Offices contraignent reidement touz les contredisanz, desobeissans, et Rebelles par toutes les voies que en estre sera et que a faire sera a obeir paisiblement, fermement et entierement aus choses  dessus escripts et a chascun dicelles selon la Teneur de ces pre∣sentes et contraignent les desobeissanz et Rebelles en telle mani∣ere qu'il ny comveigne autrement pourteoir sur toutes les quelles choses et chascun dicelles et es deppendences et appendences. Nous voulons et commandons que touz nos feauls et Subgiez, Capitaines, Chastellaines, et Gardes obeissent et entendenta noz
diz Seneschaulx, Baillis, Juges & Prevoz & a leur Deputez & a chascun deuls & Jurons que jamais ne ferons ne soufferons estre fait par nous ne par autre en prive ne en appert aucune chose contraire es choses devant dittes & aucunes dicelles. En Tesmoing de la quelle chose nous avons fait mettre nôtre Seel a ces presentes Lettres. Donn a Bouloigne le xxvi Jour d'Octo∣bre l'An de Grace Mil. CCC. Sexante. Et pour ce que les dittes choses & chascun dicelles soient de point en point & par la maniere & fourme dessus dittes tenues & acomplies nous obligeons nous & noz Hoirs & touz les biens de nous & de noz Hoirs de nôtre dit Frere le Roy d'Engleterre & a ses Hoirs, & Jurons aus sainz Euvangiles de par nous cor∣porelement touchees que nous par ferons attendrons & acom∣plirons en cas dessus dit toutes les devant dittes choses par nous  promises & accordees comme devant est dit, et voulons ou cas que notre dit Frere et notre dit Neveu auroient faites les dittes Renunciations & envoiees & baillees, comme dit est, & les dittes Lettres ne fussent bailles a nôtre dit Frere, au lieu & terme & par la fourme et maniere que dessus est dit, des∣lors au cas dessus est dit nos presentes Lettres et quanque est compris dedenz aient tant de vigueur, effeit et fermete comme auroient nos autres Lettres par nous promises a baillier, comme  dessus est dit. Sauf toutevoies et Reserve pour nous noz Hoirs et Successeurs que les dittes Lettres dessus incorporees n'aient au∣cun effeit et ne nous puissent porter aucune prejudice ou dom∣mage jusques a ce que nôtre dit Frere et nôtre dit Neveu auront faites envoies et baillies les dittes Renunciations par la maniere dessus ditte et qu'il ne sen puissent aidier contre nous noz Hoirs et Successeurs en aucune maniere se non en cas dessus dit. En Tesmoign de la quele chose nous avons fait mettre nôtre Seel a ces presentes Lettres. Donne a Bouloigne le xxvi. Jour d'Octobre l'An de Grace Mil. CCC. Soixante. Par le Roy. J. Math. N. 96. See here for the Original in the Margin at the begin∣ning of N. 93. Les Amistees & Alliances d'entre les Roys d'Angleterre & de France. CHarles Ainsne Filz du Roy de France, Duc de Normandie & Dalphin de Vienne. Scavoir faisons a touz presens & avenir que nous avons veu & diligement avise les Lettres de nostre treschier Seigneur & Pere contenens la Fourme qui sensuit. Jehan par le Grace de Dieu Roy de France a tous ceux qui ces presentes Lettres verront, Salut. Scavoir faissons que Nous pensanz & consideranz que les Roys & les Princes Chrestiens qui veulent bien governer le peuple qui leur est subjet, doivent suyr & eschiver guerres, dissensions & discordes donc Dieu est offendu
& querre & avier pour eulx & pour leurs Subgez Paix, unite & concorde par la quelle l'amour du Soverain Roy des Roys doit estre acquise, les Subgez sont gouvernez en tranquilite & aux pe∣rilz des guerres est obvie: Et Recordans les grans maulx, do∣mages, & afflictions que nôtre Royaume & noz Subgez ont su∣stenu par long temps pour cause & occasion des guerres & dis∣cordes qui ont dure longuement entre nous & nôtre treschier Frere le Roy d'Angleterre & les Royaumes, Subgez, Amis, ay∣denz  & alliez d'une partie & d'autre, sur les quelles entre nous & nôtre dit Frere finablement est fait bon Accort & bonne Paix reformee. Et desiranz ycelle tenir & garder & perseverer en vraye amour perpetuelment par bonnes & fermes Aliances en∣tre nous & nôtre dit Frere noz Hoirs & les Royames & subgez de l'une, & de l'autre par les quelles pourroit la ditte Paix ac∣cordee & bonne amour estre plus fermement & plus entiere∣ment en concorde, garde, Justice, mieux estre exercee les droiz  & Seignories de l'une & de l'autre mieulx deffenduz les Rebelles, Malfaicteurs, et desobeissans a l'une et a l'autre estre plus aisel∣ment contrains a obeir et cesser des Rebellions et exces, toute Christiente estre maintenue en plus paisible estat et la Terre Saincte en pourroit mieux estre secorue et aidee, et toutes ces causes et autres attendens et considerans que notre Saint Pere le Pape ait dispense par grant deliberation avec nous et nôtre dit Frere. C'est ascavoir avec nous et touz noz Subgez tant Genz d'Eg∣lise comme Seculeurs sur toutes les confederations, aliances, Con∣ventions, obligations, Lettres et Seremenz qui estoient entre nous, nôtre Royaume et nos subgiez d'une Partie, et nôtre tres∣chier Cousin le Roy d'Escoce son Royaume et ses Subgez d'autre partie comme le bien et l'effeit de la ditte Paiz entre nous et  nôtre dit Frere d'Angleterre les Royaumes et Subgez de l'une et de l'autre, peust estre empeschee par icelles. Et pour ce les ait le dit nôtre saint Pere cassees, ostees, anullees et irritees du tout si comme en ses Lettres & es proces sur ce faiz est plus plene∣ment contenu pour consideration des causes & choses dessus dittes: Et aussi voulens acomplir en tant comme toucher nous peut le dit Accort fait sur les dittes Alliances si comme ottroie l'avons comme dit est. Eue sur ce tresgrant & meure delibera∣tion  avons fait & par ces presentes faisons pour nouz, noz En∣fans, noz Hoirs, & noz Successeurs, notre Royaume & noz Terres quelconques & noz Subgiez d'une parte avec nôtre dit Frere ses Enfans, ses Hoirs & Successeurs, son Royaume, ses Terres & ses Subgez d'autre partie parpetueles Aliances, confe∣derations, amitiez, pactions & convenances qui apres s'ensuiont. C'est ascavoir que nous, noz Enfanz, noz Hoirs & Successeurs nôtre Royaume, noz Terres & noz Subgez quelconques pre∣sens & avenir nez & a naistre serons a tous Jours mais a nôtre dit Frere, ses Enfans, ses Hoirs & Successeurs, son Royaume, ses Terres, & Subgez quelconques bons, vrays & loyaux Amis & alliez & leur garderons de tout nôtre povoir leurs honours & leurs droiz ou nous les saurons leur dishoneur leur vitupere & leur dommage empescherons loyaument de tout nôtre povoir a
aucuns de leurs Ennemiz presens & avenir nez ou a naistre, quelque il soient, aucun Conseil, confort ou aide encontre eulx ou aucun d'eulx pour quelconques cause ou occasion que ce soit ou puist estre par nous ou en appert nous ne donnerons ne fe∣rons, ne yceulx Enemis, au domage ou prejudice de nôtre dit Frere, ses Hoirs ou son Royaume scieument recepterons, rece∣vrons, ne recepter ne recevoir ferons ou souffrerons en aucune  maniere en notre Royaume ou autres noz Terres ou Seignories, ne par iceux Royaume & Terres, ou aucun d'eulx en prejudice ou domage de notre dit Frere, ses Hoirs, Successeurs, son Roy∣aume, ses Subgez & ses Terres leurs diz Ennemiz paffer ne de∣morer scieument souffrerons ne autrement y ceux Ennemis par nous ou par autres en appert ou en repost sous quelconque tiltre ou coleur que ce soit, contre nôtre dit Frere, ses Hoirs & Sub∣gez & son Royaume & autres Terres ne porterons ne soustendrons  noz Amis & noz Alliez a leur amour & alliance, s'il nous en re∣quierent de nôtre povoir, & enduirons, et ne souffrerons aucuns de noz Subgez ne autres quelconques aler, entrer en Royaume ou autres Terres de nôtre dit Frere ses Enfanz, Hoirs, ou Suc∣cesseurs pour y faire guerre, domage ne offense aucune a gaiges ou service d'autrui ou autrement par quelque maniere & cause que ce soit, aincois les empescherons et destourberons de tout notre povoir. Et se aucuns de noz Subgez faisoient le contraire  ou aucune guerre, villenie ou dommage a nôtre dit Frere, a son Royaume, par terre ou par mer ne a ses Enfanz, Hoirs, Suc∣cesseurs ou Subgez, nous les en punirons et ferons punir si grande∣ment qu'il sera example a touz autres. Et de tout nôtre po∣voir ferons adrecier & reparer touz les domages attemptaz ou emprises faictes contre ces presentes Alliances se nous en sommes requis, & toutefois que nôtre dit Frere, ses Hoirs ou Successeurs auront mestier de nôtre ayde & il nous en requerront ou fer∣ront requerir, nous encontre toute personne qui puisse vivre &  morir leur aiderons & dourons tout le bon Conseil, conforte & ayde a leurs propres fraiz & despens que nous ferions & pour∣rions faire pour nôtre propre fait & besoigne & sanz fraude & mal engin. Non contrestant quelconques autres Alliances, Ami∣tiez, ou Confederations que nous ou noz Predecesseurs aions eues en temps passe a quelconques autres personnes aux quelles toutes & chascun dicelles nous renoncerons de tout pour nous noz Suc∣cesseurs,  Royaumes, Terres & Subgiez a tous jours, mais par ces presentes reserve toute fois & excepte le Pape & le saint Siege de Rome, & l'Empereur de Rome, qui ores est les quiex nous ne voulons estre compris en ces presentes Alliances en aucune maniere. Et pour ce que les Alliances, Confederations, conve∣nances, pactions & autres choses dessus dittes et chascun dicelles soient plus fermement tenues, gardees, & acomplies, nous avons jure sur le Saint Corps Jehu Christ & encores jurons & pro∣mettons  par la foy de nôtre Corps, & en parole de Roy les cho∣ses dessus dittes & chascune dicelles tenir fermement & acom∣plir a touz jours sanz enfraindre en tout ou en partie en aucune maniere par quelconque cause ou occasion que ce soit. Et se nous faisions, procurions, ou souffrirons scieument le contraire estre fait, ce que Dieu ne vuille, nous voulons estre tenu & re∣pute en touz Lieux & en toutes places & en touz Pais pour
faux, mauvais, & desloial parjur, & encourir tel blasme & dif∣fame eomme Roy sacre doit encourir en tel cas. Et par ces pre∣sentes Alliances nous n'entendons ne voulons que aucune preju∣dice se face a nous a noz Hoirs & Subgez. Pourquoy nous et eux pourrions et pourront recepter, porter, et tenir touz les Banniz et Fuitifs hors du Royaume d'Angleterre presens et ave∣nir nez et a naistre par quelconques cause ou occasion que ce soit, par maniere que a este fait et acoûtume de faire en temps  passe. Et souz mettons quant a toutes ces choses nous et noz Hoirs et Successeurs a la Jurisdition et cohertion de l'Eglise de Rome. Et volons et consentons que nôtre saint Pere le Pape conferme toutes ces choses en donnant monitions et mandemens generaux sur l'acomplissement dicelles contre nous noz Hoirs et Successeurs et contre touz noz Subgez soient Communes, Colle∣ges, Universitez ou Personnes singulieres quelconques. Et en donnant Sentences generaux d'escommeniement de Suspension &  de intredit pour estre encoruz par nous et par eulx pour cellui fait si tost que nous ou eulx ferons ou attempterons en occu∣pant Forteresce, Ville, ou Chastel ou autre quelconque chose fai∣sant, ratifiant ou agreant ou donnant Conseil, confort, faveur, ou aide celeement ou en appert contre la ditte Paix et ces presentes Alliances. Et avons fait semblablement Jurer toutes les devant dittes choses par noz Treschers Enfans le Duc de Anjou et du Manie, le Duc de Berry et d'Auvergne, le Duc de Thouranie  le Duc d'Orliens, nôtre Frere et noz Cousins le Duc de Bour∣bon, Monsieur Jaque de Bourbon, Jehan d'Artois, Monsieur Pere d'Alencon, Monsieur Jehan d'Estampes, Guy de Bloys, le Conte de saint Pol, le Conte de Harecourt, le Conte d'Auxerre, le Conte de Tancarville, le Conte de Sancerre, le Conte de Joigny, le Conte de Salebruche le Conte de Brienne, le Sire de Coucy, le Sire de Craon, le Sire de Fiennes, le Dauphin d'Auvergne, le Sire de Montmorency, Guillaume de Craon, le Sire de saint Ve∣nant.  Et ferons aussi Jurer semblablement et au plus tost que faire pourrons bonnement la plus grant partie des Prelaz, Pers, Dux, Contes, Barons, et autres Nobles de notre Royaume. En Tesmoing des quelles choses nous avons fait mettre nôtre Seel a ces presentes Lettres. Donne a Bouloigne le xxvi. Jour d'Octo∣bre l'An de Grace Mil. CCC. Sexante. Et nous Charles dessus dit voulons de tout nôtre povoir en∣teriner  et acomplir Tout ce que-nôtre dit Seigneur et Pere a promis et convenancie, Promettons loyalment et en bon foy, et avons Jure, et Jurons sur le corps Jehu▪ Christ sacre, tenir, garder, et acomplir pour tant comme il nous touche et pourra toucher, Toutes et chascun les choses contenues es Lettres ci dessus transcripts et par la fourme et maniere que compris y est sanz venir ne faire venir en aucune maniere alencontre. En Tes∣moing de ce Nous avons fait mettre nôtre Seel a ces presentes  Lettres. Donne a Bouloigne le xxvi Jour d'Octobre l'An de Grace Mil. CCC. Sexante. Par Monsieur le Duc N. de Venes.
N. 97. Rot. Romae 4. Ed. 3. n. 2. John 22d then Pope. PApae Rex &c. Dum in recto considerationis examine, Nos ex debito suscepti regni nostri gubernaculi ad defensionem jurium et prerogativarum regalium conspicimus obligatos, dignum immo verius debitum reputamus, dicta jura deprimere conan∣tibus, viis licitis obviare. Sane licet donatio dignitatum, Preben∣darum et aliorum beneficiorum ecclesiasticorum quorumcumque ubi∣cumque  vacaverint, que sede plena ad collationem, presentatio∣nem, seu dispositionem aliam Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, et ali∣orum Prelatorum Ecclesiarum Cathedralium et Monasteriorum reg∣ni nostri, quorum temporalia de nobis tenentur in capite perti∣nerent ipsis Ecclesiis vel Monasteriis vacantibus et ipsarum tem∣poralibus in manu nostrâ existentibus, ad nos et non ad alium de nobili prerogativa et jure Corone nostre notorie pertineat et eti∣am pertinuit ab antiquo, fueruntque progenitores nostri Reges An∣glie  a tempore cujus contrarii memoria non existit, et nos totis no∣stris temporibus in plena & pacifica possessione vel quasi juris & pre∣rogative predictorum, Scientibus & tollerantibus sanctis Patribus summis Pontificibus qui vos in eminentia celsitudinis apostolice precesserunt. Vacantibus tamen dudum una vice tam Ecclesia Cathedrali Eborum per mortem bone memorie Domini J. Ro∣mayn dudum Eborum Archiepiscopi, quam Thesauraria dicte Ebo∣rum Ecclesie per privationem Domini Johannis de Columpna feli∣cis  recordationis, Dominus Bonifacius Papa octavus predecessor vester, ipsam Thesaurariam de facto tantum, cum de jure non po∣tuit, contulit Domino Francisco Gaytam, sed Avus noster Domi∣nus Edwardus tunc Angliae Rex illustris ipsam Thesaurariam Clerico suo Domino Waltero de Bedewynd donavit, prout ad ip∣sum ratione vacationis Archiepiscopatus predicti pertinuit illa vice, pro qua donatione regia, servato processu legitimo qui requiri∣tur in hac parte judicium redditum & diffinitiva fuit lata sen∣tentia  in Curia regia, in qua duntaxat jura & prerogative Regis hujusmodi debent, & non alibi pertractari. Virtute cujus Judicii idem Walterus rite secundum jura regni nostri in dictam Thesau∣rariam inductus & prefatus Franciscus amotus extitit ab eadem. Nuper vero quodam colore quesito de jure dicti Francisci Capel∣lani vestri in dicta Thesauraria, licet nullum jus in ea vel ad eam habuit, ut prefertur, Vestra Sanctitas in hoc, ut convincimur, circumventa, dictam Thesaurariam tanquam per dimissionem dicti  Capellani vestri de jure vacantem reverendo in Christo patri Do∣mino Petro Dei gratia titulo sancti Stephani in Celio Monte Pres∣bitero Cardinali de facto contulit & sibi providit de eadem, qui di∣lectum Clericum nostrum Magistrum Willielmum de la Mare possessi∣oni dicte Thesaurarie ex causa permutationis cum Domino Walte∣ro supradicto ut dicitur rite facte incumbentem, & in jus dicti Walteri succedentem, occasione dicte provisionis vestre fatigat mul∣tipliciter & molestat in enervationem judicii predicti, depressionem  juris Corone nostre & regni nostri dampnum inestimabile, si novita∣tibus & usurpationibus hujusmodi minime resistatur, quibus nu∣per in Parliamento nostro apud Westm. ostensis apercius & detectis, ac super hiis deliberatione prehabita diligenti, proceribus & peri∣tis ac toti regni nostri videbatur consilio tunc ibidem, quod pre∣dictum incumbentem pro conservatione juris nostri defendere de∣beamus. Quocirca vestre beatitudini votivis precibus supplica∣mus,
quatenus premissis clementer attentis & aequo libratis exa∣mine, predictam provisionem de dicta Thesauraria ut predicitur in juris nostri prejudicium per vos factam, dignemini cautius re∣vocare, dicto Domino Cardinali super hoc silentium imponentes, ut cessantibus lituum amfractibus & aliis periculis majoribus que ex novitatibus et usurpationibus hujusmodi possint verisimiliter provenire, cum nimium nos turbaret, si quod absit, corona regia nostris temporibus suorum jurium pateretur eclipsum, in sinu so∣lite  dilectionis apostolice domus nostra regia fiducialiter conqui∣escat, que semper vota sedis apostolice cum fervente devotionis & obedientie promptitudine pro ceteris est hactenus prosecuta, quod quesimus dignetur advertere summe vestre presidentie san∣ctitudo quam ad salubre gregis sui regimine conservet altissimus per tempora diuturna. Dat. apud Westm. quartodecimo die Decembr. N. 98. Rot. Romae 10. Ed. 3. M. 3. PApe Rex &c. beatorum. Inter solicitudines varias que nos  distrarunt hiis diebus, id prae ceteris insidet cordi nostro, ut jura corone nostre que progenitorum nostrorum digne recolenda nobilitas magnifice defensavit, sub nostro regimine salva vigeant et illesa; sane dicti progenitores nostri qui dudum Anglicanam fundarunt et dotarunt Ecclesiam, singulas Cathedrales Ecclesias no∣stri regni vacantes, olim libere contulerunt regio jure suo. Et postmodum ad supplicationem Cleri, et reverentiam ac rogatum domini summi Pontificis qui tunc universali presidebat Ecclesie, con∣cessit  Dominus Rex Anglie, qui tunc erat Capitalis Ecclesiarum Cathe∣dralium dicti regni, cum Ecclesie dicte vacarent potestatem futu∣rum Episcopum eligendi, salva sibi et successoribus suis hac pre∣rogativa quod cedente vel decedente loci Pontifice, Capitulum ipsius Ecclesie significare debet Regi qui foret, pro tempore, va∣cationem Ecclesie, et ab eo petere et habere licentiam futurum Episcopum eligendi, et cum sic per licentiam Regis elegerit, te∣neretur presentare Regi personam electam, et petere ac habere  assensum Regium electioni hujusmodi et electo, priusquam electi∣onis sue negotium prosequeretur electus. Et cum esset postmo∣dum confirmatus peteret et reciperet a Rege temporalia ad Epis∣copatum pertinentia et sibi fidelitatem faceret pro eisdem. Et si quid contra dictam formam forsitan actum esset, foret irritum et inane, et licet dicta forma seu prerogativa sit per sedem A∣postolicam et especialiter per felicis recordationis Innocentium Papam tertium predecessorem vestrum ex certa scientia confirma∣ta,  et a dicte concessionis tempore inviolabiliter observata, Va∣cante tamen nuper Norwicen. Ecclesia regni nostri per mortem bone memorie W. ipsius Episcopi, Prior et Capitulum ejusdem ecclesie petita modo quo premittitur et optenta a nobis eligendi licentia, subsequenterque presentata nobis electi persona, et petito ut regium preberemus assensum, cum tam de electione predicta quam ipsius electi persona aliqua nobis fide digna relatione sug∣gesta fuissent, super quibus ante assensum nostrum hujusmodi  debuimus plenius informari, ex deliberato peritorum consilio cer∣tum diem ipsi electo assignavimus satis brevem ad recipiendum responsum congruum in hac parte, sed idem electus nostrum re∣sponsum vel dictum terminum non expectans, preter assensum nostrum dedignanter recessit et ad prosequendum electionis sue
negotium ad Sanctitatis vestre Curiam, ut dicitur se divertit, in nostri contumeliam & contemptum juris nostri Regii, prerogative nostre predicte depressionem et exheredationis nostre periculum manifestum, de quo non mediocriter conturbamur. Quam ob rem solidam Apostolice clementie justitiam quam in conservatione jurium nostrorum Regalium invenire confidimus cum grato fa∣vore propitiam humiliter imploramus, quatenus premissis in de∣bite considerationis examine revolutis, electo prefato, si sit contra  jura nostra Regalia supradicta que adeo sunt notoria quod nulla tergiversatione celari poterunt, erga vos pro confirmatione electi∣onis sue prosequi voluerit audientiam denegare velitis quousque assensum nostrum in forma predicta meruerit optinere, quem si peteret ut est moris sine difficultate prestabimus, nisi subsit causa rationabilis propter quam id facere minime debeamus, hoc autem quesimus facere dignetur optentu justitiae pro conservatione juris nostri Regii, vestra benignitas gratiosa. Nam nimium nos tede∣ret  si tam notoria jura nostra Regia tantam paterentur nostris temporibus lesionem, quam etsi sic conniventibus oculis pertransire vellemus, fideles nostri minime tollerarent. Conservet &c. Dat. &c. N. 99. Claus. 18. Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 20. Dors. De pro∣clamatione fa∣cienda de provisionibus. REX Vicecomitibus London. Salutem. Cum nuper in Par∣liamento celebris memorie Domini Edwardi quondam Re∣gis Angliae, Avi nostri, Anno regni sui tricessimo quinto apud Carlisle, tempore Domini Clementis divina providentia sacro∣sancte  ac universalis Ecclesie tunc Summi Pontificis auditâ peti∣tione coram ipso Avo nostro & consilio suo, ibidem per Comuni∣tatem regni sui exhibitâ, continente quod cum sacra Ecclesia in statu Prelacie in regno Anglie per ipsum Avum nostrum, & pro∣genitores suos, Comites, Barones, & eorum Antecessores fuisset fun∣data, pro Catholice fidei informatione, sibi & populo faciendum, & orationibus, elemosinis, & hospitalitatibus in locis ubi Eccle∣sie fundate fuerint, pro ipsorum fundatorum, & eorum heredum  & omnium fidelium defunctorum animabus faciendum; Quod∣que certe possessiones tam in feodo & terris quam advoca∣tionibus que ad maximum valorem attingunt per dictos funda∣tores prelatis dicti Regni pro oneribus illis sustinendis fuissent as∣signate, & de possessionibus maxime Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus & aliis Domibus religiosis, per ipsum Avum nostrum & Progenitores suos, Comites, Barones, & alios Proceres dicti Regni assignat, iidem Avus noster, Comites, Barones, cete∣rique  proceres dicti Regni, tanquam Domini & Advocati tempore vacationum, habuissent et habere debuissent hujusmodi va∣cationum custodias, Prebendarum, Ecclesiarum, & aliarum digni∣tatum quarumcunque de advocatione Prelatorum predictorum ex∣istentium presentationes & collationes. Ac dictus Avus noster & dicti Progenitores sui semper hactenus maximam partem Consilii sui de dictis Prelatis ac ceteris indigenis ad hujusmodi beneficia promotis, quod sibi pro Salvatione Regni predicti, fore conveni∣ens  videbatur habere consueverint; predictus summus Pontifex donationem hujusmodi possessionum, & beneficiorum sibi appro∣priando, per provisiones suas hujusmodi dignitates, prebendas, & Ecclesias, alienigenis qui nunquam in dicto regno morabantur ac etiam Cardinalibus qui in eodem Regno morare non potue∣runt, & aliis tam alienigenis quam indigenis, ac si ipse Patronus &
Advocatus fuisset, cum de jure non extitisset, dederit, concesserit & presentaverit, per que si tollerarentur, vix aliquod beneficium infra modici temporis sptium remaneret, quin omnia beneficia ad donationem hujusmodi Prelatorum spectantia, per provisiones hujufmodi in manibus essent alienigenarum & indigenarum contra piam voluntatem fundatorum eorundem, sique electiones Archi∣episcoporum, Episcoporum, & aliorum religiosorum hujusmodi deessent; orationes, hospitalitates, & elemosine que in locis pre∣dictis  fieri deberent subtraherentur, iidemque Avus noster & alii laici patroni hujusmodi vacationum temporibus, presentationes & collationes suas amitterent, dictumque Consilium deperiret, bonaque innumera extra dictum regnum asportarentur, in Sacre Ecclesie Anglicane status adnullationem, necnon dicti Avi nostri & Corone sue, ac aliorum procerum dicti Regni exheredationem, & in offensionem & destructionem Legum & Jurium Regni ejusdem, & predicti populi maximum dampnum & depressionem, & status  totius Regni predicti subversionem, ac contra piorum fundato∣rum voluntatem & dispositionem, de assensu Comitum, Baronum, Procerum & dicte Communitatis, premistis erroribus & dispendiis intime consideratis in pleno Parliament predicto, provisum, or∣dinatum, concordatum, decretum, & consideratum fuisset, quod premissa gravamina, oppressiones, & cetera dispendia supradicta in dicto Regno, extunc fieri non permitterentur quovis modo. Et super hoc omnibus quorum tunc interfuit, ex parte dicti  Avi nostri per brevia sua prohibitum fuisset, ne quicquam quod in ipsius Regiae dignitatis lesionem, seu Procerum et populi sui pre∣judicium cedere possit attemptarent, seu facerent aliqualiter attem∣ptari: et insuper singulis vicecomitibus dicti Regni per hujusmo∣di brevia extitit demandatum, quod si quos per inquisitiones inde faciend. contrarium ▪ fecisse inveniri contingeret, tunc eos per eorum corpora caperent et salvo et secure coram ipso Avo nostro ad certum diem tam dicto Avo nostro quam aliis versus eos con∣queri  volentibus ducerentur responsuros, facturosque et receptu∣ros quod Curia sua consideraret in premissis. Ac jam in Ultimo Parliamento nostro apud Westmonasterium in Quindena Pasche proxi∣mo preterito tento, ad prosecutionem Communitatis dicti Regni per petitionem suam coram nobis et consilio nostro exhibitam nobis suggrntis errores, dispendia, et gravamina, in scandalum, dedecus, et depressionem totius Ecclesie Anglicane predicte, ac ex∣heredationem nostri & Corone nostre, & aliorum Procerum dicti Reg∣ni,  & ssensonem & destructionem Legum & Jurium regni ejusdem, & ppu nostri dampnum gravissimum, et status totius Regni pre∣dicti subversionem, ac contra Dei voluntatem, et ipsorum bene∣ficiorum▪ fundatorum piam dispositionem, accontra ordinationem, concordiam, decretum et considerationem predicta, & provisiones et reservationes beneficiorum hujusmodi per sedem Apostolicam factas multotiens evenisse, et nobis supplicantis ut eidem Ecclesie Anglicane ac nostre Comitum, Baronum, ac aliorum Procerum et  Communitatis dicti regni nostri indempnitati, et exheredationi propicere vellemus in hac parte per nos, Comites, Barones, Pro∣ceres, et dictam Communitatem provisum, ordinatum, concor∣datum, decretum, et consideratum, et tam infra libertatem quinque Portuum nostrorum quam alibi per Costeras Maris to∣tius Regni nostri Anglie et alios Comitatus Regni predicti pub∣lice
proclamatum, et ex parte nostrâ firmiter inhibitum fuisset, ne quis cujuscumque statûs seu conditionis esset, sive fuerit Ali∣enigena sive indigena literas, bullas, processus, reservationes, hu∣jusmodi beneficiorum instrumenta, seu aliqua alia nobis seu Po∣pulo nostro prejudicialia infra idem Regnum nostrum Angliae sub gravi forisfactura nostra deferret Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abba∣tibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus seu aliquibus aliis infra idem regnum nostrum liberanda. Et quod nullus sub forisfactura no∣stra  predicta ea recipere presumeret, nec quicquam aliud quod in nostri seu dicti Populi nostri prejudicium vel jurium Corone nostre aut provisionum, ordinationum, Concordiarum, Decreto∣rum, & considerationum predictorum lesionem cedere posset fa∣cerent, aut fieri procurarent quoquo modo. Et quod insuper diligens Scrutinium in locis (ubi necesse esset) infra idem Regnum nostrum super omnes & singulos infra dictum Regnum nostrum Anglie venientes fieret. Et omnes illos quos contra proclamatio∣nem,  et inhibitionem, predictas literas, bullas, processus, reservati∣ones seu instrumenta aliqua vel aliud quodcunque quod in nostri, seu dicti Populi nostri prejudicium deferentes contingeret inve∣niri, statim per eorum corpora attachiarentur & in prisonis no∣stris salvo custodirentur donec aliud inde precepissemus. Et Litere, bulle, processus, reservationes, & instrumenta predicta ab ipsis caperentur et in Cancellariam nostram de tempore in tempus mit∣terentur. Et nos de nominibus illorum sic arrestandorum et ali∣orum  quos contrarium in premissis constare posset fecisse, in di∣ctam Cancellariam nostram similiter de tempore in tempus red∣deremur certiores. Quidam tamen Provisores tam Alienigene quam indigene et eorum Procuratores et Nuncii dictas provisiones, ordinationes, concordias, Decreta, Considerationes, proclamationes et inhibitiones non considerantes, nec penas in eis contentas timentes, Literas, Bullas, Processus, reservationes et instrumenta, et alia hu∣jusmodi Nobis in dicto Populo nostro sic prejudicialia infra idem  Regnum nostrum detulerunt. Et ea Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ab∣batibus, Prioribus, et aliis tam indigenis quam Alienigenis infra dictum Regnum nostrum Anglie, post et contra proclamationem et inhibitionem supradictas liberarunt exequenda, ipsique Archi∣episcopi, Epicopi, et alii predicti Literas, Bullas, processus et in∣strumenta hujusmodi receperunt, et quamplures Provisores et Pro∣curatores Provisorum ad hujusmodi beneficia virtute dictarum Li∣terarum, Bullarum, Processuum, reservationum, et instrumentorum  admiserunt & eos in beneficiis illis induxerunt. Et sic dicti Provi∣sores et Procuratores dicta beneficia detinent occupata, in nostri et Corone nostre ac dicti populi exheredationem et intollerabile pre∣judicium et contra formam provisionum, Ordinationum, Con∣cordiarum, Decretorum, Considerationum, Proclamationum et inhibitionum predictorum, et vos quicquam contra hujusmodi proclamationem et inhibitionem attemptantes, hactenus juxta tenorem mandati nostri vobis inde directi facere non curastis, unde  quamplurimum conturbamur. Nos dicte Anglicane Ecclesie ac nostre et Corone nostre et dicti Populi nostri jura prout vinculo juramenti sumus astricti manutenere et defendere, has etiam pro∣visiones, ordinationes, concordias, decreta et considerationes pre∣dicta illesa volentes observare, et impugnatores eorundem debite cohercere, vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod factis et
iteratis proclamatione, et inhibitione infra Civitatem predictam in locis ubi decet, quod nullus cujuscunque statûs seu conditionis fuerit, sive fuerit indigena sive Alienigena, hujusmodi Literas, Bullas, processus, reservationes, instrumenta, seu aliqua alia Nobis seu dicto populo nostro prejudicialia, infra idem Regnum nostrum deferat sub gravi forisfactura nostra, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ab∣batibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, nec aliquibus aliis infra idem Regnum nostrum liberanda. Et quod nullus sub  forisfactura nostra predicta ea recipere presumat, et omnes illos quos hujusmodi Literas, Bullas, Processus, reservationes, instrumenta seu alia quecunque nobis et populo nostro sic prejudicialia postmodum infra dictum Regnum nostrum deferre, Et ea alicui infra idem Reg∣num liberare, seu ea ab eis admittere et virtute eorundem benefi∣cia aliqua recipere, seu aliquos in hujusmodi beneficiis occasione pre∣dicta inducere contigerit invenire. ac etiam illos qui hujusmodi Li∣teras, Bullas, processus, reservationes, instrumenta, seu aliqua alia  nobis seu dicto Populo nostro prejudicialia post dictum Parliamen∣tum nostrum, et contra proclamationem, inhibitionem, provisiones, or∣dinationes, Concordias, Decreta et considerationes predicta infra di∣ctum regnum nostrum detulerunt, et virtute eorundem beneficia ali∣qua admiserant, seu in hujusmodi beneficiis aliquarum hujusmodi provisionum virtute se posuerunt, seu ad eadem admissi fuerunt, ac etiam illos quos virtute Bullarum, Literarum, reservationum et provisionum hujusmodi appellationes, citationes, vel processus aliquos  versus Patronos seu eorum Patronorum presentatos vel alios quos∣cunque in quibuscunque Curiis facere vel prosequi vel fieri, aut procurari, seu aliud quodcunque quod in nostri seu dictorum Co∣mitum, Baronum, Procerum, Patronorum, vel dicte Communitatis aut provisionum, concordiarum, Ordinationum, Decretorum, vel conside∣rationum predictorum lesionem cedere possit facere praesumpserit, facto in hac parte diligenti scrutinio, habitaque inde viis et mo∣dis  quibus poteritis quotiens necesse fuerit informatione pleniori, ubicunque eos inveniri contigerit infra Civitatem predictam, per eorum corpora capi et arrestari faciatis, et eos una cum Literis, Bullis, processibus, reservationibus, et instrumentis secum vel alibi infra Civitatem predictam inventis coram nobis et consilio nostro statim cum eos capi et arrestari contigerit salvo et secure de tem∣pore in tempus duci faciatis, justitiam super hoc ibidem recepturi. Taliter vos habentes in executione presentis Mandati nostri, ne  materiam habeamus ad vos tanquam nostrorum et Regni nostri inimicorum fautores graviter capiendi. Teste Rege apud West∣monasterium tricessimo die Januarii, Anno Regni sui Anglie de∣cimo octavo, et Francie Quinto. Per ipsum Regem et totum Consilium. Eodem modo Mandatum est singulis Vicecomitibus per Angli∣am  sub eadem data, quod promissa faciant in Ballivis suis tam infra libertates quam extra. Eodem modo Mandatum est Bartholomeo de Burghersh Con∣stabular. Castri Dovorr. et Custodi quinque Portuum vel ejus locum tenenti.
N. 100. Rot parl. 50. Ed. 3. n. 94. Bille encontre le Pape et le Cardinaux. A Nôtre Seigneur le Roy et son Conseil praont Chevaleers des Countees, Citizeins des Citees, & Burgeys des Burghs, que sont venuz a ceste Parlement pur la Communalte de Royalme et suppliont de par la dite Communalte que lui pleise avoir bone consideracion as choses dessous escripts et a les defauts que sen∣suent et ordeigner covenable remedie dicelx que serra la plus ple∣sance chose a Dieu, & a seinte Eglise plus graciouse, & plus profi∣table pur luy et pur son roialme que unques fuit fait. Et cy est  ceo nostre seinte soy et nôtre ferme esperaunce que ceux que font plesance chose a Dieu et seint Eglise auront grace de bone esploit en quanque ils auront affaire. Primes que lui pleise penser & repenser comment ses Proge∣nitors nobles Roys d'Engieterre & autres grands de mesme la terre avec l'aide & la devocion de people cristien en auncien temps fesoient les Eglises en Angleterre puis pur grand devocion par deverses foitz & proces de temps donerent as ditz Eglises riches,  rents, terres & grands possessions oue diverses franchises & toutes les temporaiteez que eles ont, quelles choses ovesque ceo que no∣stre Seigneur le Roy mesmes ad done & graunte a eux si amon∣tent a pluis que la tierce partie de son roialme: Et penser com∣ment toutes cestes choses sont donez pro tiele devocion & tiele entent que les profitz ent sourdantz deussent estre despenduz sur mesmes les lieux as queux ils sont donez al'honure de Dieu, come en maintenance des Eglises & places appurtenantz en Hospitalitez,  en Almoignez & diverses oueres de charitee & del service de Dieu, & de seint Eglise, come en Chappelanes▪ Clercs & poueres que pri∣erent nuyt & jour pur nôtre seint Pier le Pape & pur l'estat de seint Eglise, pur nostre Seigneur le Roy, & pur l'estat de son roialme, & pur la Pees, pur lour Foundours, Patrons, & pur touz ceux que ont donez les biens as ditz lieux especialement et pur lour almes que la sont entres & touz Cristiens. Et pensez coment les Roys & autre grands pur lour grande devocion & les  grandes douns qu'ils avoient issint donez a seint Eglise feurent en peisible possession de doner les Eglises & les benefices de seint Eglise, come feist le Roy seint Edward que dona Levesche de Wyr∣cestre a seint Wulston, & puis par devocion de Roys fuit grante & par la Court de Rome conferme que les Cathedralz Eglises ave∣roient frank election de leur Prelatz selonc la ley Dieu & de seint Eglise ent ordeigne parpetuelment adurer. Et si soloient les E∣veschees et verray election et les autres benefices de seint Eg∣lise  per seint consideration & par charite sanz scruple de covetise ou de symonie estre done as gentz plus dignes de Clergie de nette vye, et de seint conversation que pont estre trovez que vo∣loient demurrer sur lour benefices precher, visiter, et confesser, lour Parochiens et despendre les biens de seint Eglise, al'honure de Dieu, en tieux overez de charite, come dessus est dit, et se∣lonc la devocion a la entente des donours. Et si longement come celles bones custumes feurent usez le Royalme fuit pleine de  toutes prosperites come des bones gentz et bone loialie des Clerks et de Clergie, des Chivaleers et des Chivalreez sont deux choses que touz jours regnant ensemble de pees et de quiete, de tresour, bledz et de bestail et d'autres richesse assetz. Et puis les bones custumes feurent pervertiez empesche de covetise et de Symonye, le Roialme adeste plein des diverses adversitez, come
des guerres et pestilences, feym, moreyns des bestes et de au∣tres grevances par quoi le roialme est si empovery et destruit qu'il ny ad mye la tierce partie des gentz, ne des autres cho∣ses susditz, come soloit estre par la cause susdite, et par enche∣sons desouz escriptz. ITem fait a penser quil ny ad nul homme de mounde queIbm. n. 95. eyme Dieu et de seint Eglise, le Roy et le Royalme d'En∣gleterre  que nad grant matier de penser de tristesse et delermer de ceo que la Court de Rome, que deust estre fontaigne, racyne, et source de seintete, et destruction de covetise, de symonie et des autres pecches ad si sotilment de poi en poi et de plus en plus par proces du temps par soeffrance et par Abbet des mal∣veys ore altrement a demesure que unques fuit devant attret a lui les collations des Archeveschies et Eveschies, dignitez proven∣dres et des autres benefices de seint Eglise en Engleterre des queux  le taxe amount a plus que cynk foitz le taxe des touz les pro∣fitz que appartenent au Roy per An de tout son roialme. Et de chescun Evesche et des touz autres benefices que le Pape donne il voet avoir la taxe. Et si Levesque devie devant ceo quil ad paye le tax le Pape le fait lever ensemblement oue une novel taxe de son Successour et pur plusiours taxes aver le Pape fait d'une voidance deux ou trois par voye des translations et tantz des taxes il voet aver et quant un Evesque ad ses bulles,  et serra tant endette vers la Court de Rome pur le tax et au∣tres paymentz et costages qui lui coment vendre les Boys de son Evesche a prompter de ces amys avoir eyde de ses poures tenantz subside de sa Clergie, et tout va en destruction de seint Eglise et de roialme d'Engleterre, et tout ensi voet le Pape avoir le taxe de chescune dignite et benefice qu'il donne. ITem fait a penser quil y sont plusours que quont ils averont purchace un benefice de la Court de Rome et paye le tax etIbm. n. 96. as brocours des benefices demorantz en la pecchereuse Cite Davenon lour sont ils mettent lour benefices a ferme quele ferme serra▪ mande as ditz brocours pur ent purchaser plusours benefices et greindres et greindres. Et tout einsy par voie de Simonye et de bracage un cheitif que nul bien soiet et riens ne vant serra avance as Eglises et provandres a la value de mill marcez par la un do∣cture  de decre, et un meistre de Divinite serra lee dever un pe∣tit benefice de xx. marcez et issint perdent Clerks esperance d'e∣stre avance per lour Clergie et talen dapprendre. Et par mesme la cause gentz lassent de mettre lour enfantz a l'escole et aensi va Clergie quest la substance de seint Eglise, et de notre seint foy et declin et anient. ITem fait a penser coment alienes enemys a ceste terre, et au∣tres demurrantz outre meer ont benefices, riches, reintes deIbm. n. 97. seint Eglise en Engleterre que unques virent ne jammes ne ver∣ront lour parochiens que ne font autre chose de lour benefice fors∣que southreient le service Dieu & de Seint Eglise et touts oeveres de charite que soloient estre faits illoeques et les places descheier parochiens propier en corps et alme et attreent a eux hors de roi∣alme
touz les profitz de ceux benefices en la bone de ceste terre qu'est grande empouerissement et destruction a seint Eglise et a ceste terre, et si est seint Eglise plus destruyt par tielx malvies Cristiens que par touz les Jewes & Saracyns de monde. ITem fait a penser que la leye de seint Eglise est tiele que be∣neficeIbm. N. 98. de seint Eglise doit estre done gracieusement par pure  charite sauns pris et saunz prier, et nul homme doit doner, or n'argent ne nul autre chose de monde pur benefice de seint Eglise. ITem fait a penser come loy et reson et bone foy volent que ceo quest done a seint Eglise pur devotion soit despendu al honure de Dieu solonc la devotion et l'entent de donour et non pas hors de roialme sur nos enemys. ITem fait a penser que dieux ad comys ses oweles a nôtre seintIbm. N. 99. Pere le Pape a pasturer et non pas a tounder. ITem fait a penser coment les lais patrons de seint Eglise veantz tant de covetise & Symonie regner vers gentz de seint Eg∣lise prenent ensample deaux & vendent les Eglises, dont ils sont Patrones, as gentz que la destruent come une beste, & comme Dieu fuit vendu a les Jewes, qui lui mistrent a la mort. ITem fait a penser quil ny ad null si riche Roy en toute laIbm. N. 100. Cristiantee quad la quart partie tant de tresore come a de le hors de la roialme d'Engleterre pur benefices de seint Eglise peccherousement par la maniere susdite en empoverissement & destruction de roialme & de seint Eglise par soeffrance & de∣faute du Conseil. ITem fait a penser & grandement a douter que depuis que seint Eglise nostre seint Miere en Dieu de qui nous per nous nostre baptisme quest la porte de tiel espouse Jehu Christ par laquelle nous esperions estre sauvez si peccherousement de mesme & touz les malx de monde venent de pecche, que si null pecche y fuist, null male avenist. ET tout temps ad este & touz jours serra que la ou reigne  grande iniquite grande y avera adversite que Dieu veant tant iniquite regner entre nous nous envoit tant dadversite, come nous avons des guerres, pestilences, feym, mortalitez des gentz grandes & petites, moryne de bestail, & autres grevances par meer & par terre accordant a nostre desert pur noz pecchez, & noement pur les pecchez susditz. PAR quoi pleise a nostre Seigneur le Roy penser coment ilIbm. N. 101. est ore l'an cyngantisme de son roialme quest appele l'an  Jubile, c'est assavoir l'an du grace & de joie, & que serra la greindre grace & joie que unques avoient a son Roialme, & la plus plesance chose a Dieu & seint Eglise & as touz ceux que eimient Dieu et seint Eglise que unques fuit fait, d'ordeigner
covenable remedie des choses susditz que si destruent le Roialme & seint Eglise & daver la besoigne a coer. ET par une lettre dessouth son seal en latyn & par une autreIbm. N. 102. dessouth les sealx des Grands de Royalme en Franceys come autre foitz fuit ordeigne en parlement comprenant ceste matiere prier a nôtre seint Pere le Pape que pleise a la seintetee aver bone consideration as choses susditz & nomement a ceo que la  ley de seinte Eglise par la quele toute la Christiente doit estre reule est tiel come dessus est dit que benefice de seint Eglise dount estre done graciousement par pure charite sanz rien doner pur y ceo. Et auxi aver regarde ceo que ley, reson, & bone foy volent que ceo quest done a seint Eglise soit despendu al honure Dieu & de mesme l'Eglise solonc la devotion & l'entent del donor. Et que pleise a sa Seintetee soeffrer les Cathedralx Eg∣lises avoir franks election de lour Prelatz solonc la dit ley de seint  Eglise & solonc la grant & confermement de la Court de Rome susdite, & des autres choses que sont cy nusantz & displesantz faire tiele ordinance quil soit al honure Dieu & de seint Eglise, & al'encrese de la devotion del people Cristien, & par issent que le people puisse avoir devotion de meyntenir ceo qu'est done a seint Eglise, par voie dencres & non pas de toler ceo qu'est done que Dieu defent par les causes susditz & pur defaute de correcti∣on dycelx, & que seint Eglise poet estre reulee & gouvernees  come ele fuit en temps seint Gregorye & des autres seints que donerent bonez ensamples de bien faire. Et pleise a nostre Seigneur le Roy ordeigner & commander sur peine de forfaiture & d'emprisonement que nul homme soit sy hardye de faire aport ne d'envoier outre meer riens de la bone monie de ceste terre pri∣vement,Ibm. N. 103. n'appertement per lettre de Lumbard n'en null autre ma∣nere. Et que null Lumbard n'autre face tielx lettres sur mesme la peyne & sur ceo soit bone enquerre par Justices de la pees &  d'assises en chescun cession. Et que null homme sur peyne de forfaiture de quanque il ad procure ne face destourbance a cest besoigne. LE Roy ad fait ordeigner de remedie suffisant devant cesteIbm. Rom. heure par estatuz & autrement & est en pursuant devers le seint Pier le Pape pur mesmes les besoignes & est en perfit vo∣lontee de faire de temps en temps tantque al final esploit dicel∣les  sibien cestassavoir de celles besoignes comprises en cest groos bille proschein precedente come de celles que sont comprises en le roule proschein ensuant come de celles quelles comprenont tout a poy une mesme matire. N. 101. In the Regi∣sters Office of the Archbi∣shop in Drs. Commons, Re∣gistrum Rey∣nolds fol. 241.a. JOhannes Episcopus servus servorum Dei, ad futuram rei me∣moriam. Cum sicut intelleximus Ecclesia Roffensis per obitum bonae memoriae Thomae ipsius Ecclesiae Episcopi vacare noscitur ad  praesens. Nos ad bonum statum ipsius Ecclesiae intendentes provi∣sionem ejusdem Ecclesiae hâc vice certis de causis quae ad id animum nostrum induxerunt, Ordinationi & Dispositioni se∣dis Apostolicae auctoritate praesentium plenarie reservamus. Decer∣nentes ex nunc irritum & inane si secus contra hujusmodi nostrae reservationis tenorem per quoscunque scienter vel ignoranter quo∣vis
modo contigerit attemptari. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae Reservationis & Constitutionis infrin∣gere vel ei ausu temerario contraire, Si quis autem hoc attem∣ptare praesumserit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei, ac beatorum Petri & Pauli Apostolorum ejus, se noverit incursurum. Dat. Avinion 14 Kal. Aprilis Pontificatûs nostri primo. John 22d▪ who was chosen Pope A. D. 1316  This 14 of the Kalends of April was 9. Edw. 2d 1316. and the same year he was chosen. Et memorandum quod 3 Kalend. Maii Publicatio facta fuit apud Arcus London. Et secundo Kalend. Maii subsequente Publicata fuerat apud Roffam coram Monachis. See the History of this Provision in Historia sa∣cra,  parte prima. f. 357. in the Historia Rof∣fensis, by William de Dene. N. 102. Rot. parl. 2. Ric. 2. parte 2. n. 13. apud Westmonaste∣rium. ITem les Seigneurs & Communes du Roialme Dengleterre esteantz a ceste Parlement granterent pur cux & pur tout la Commu∣nalte Dengleterre le subsidie des Leynes, quirs, & peaulx lanutz, & un autre Subsidie a prendre des biens des certeins persones per∣my le Roialme, soubz certeins fourme & manere comprisez en  un Cedule ent faite & baille avant en Parlement dont le tenour sensuit de mot a mot. LES Seigneurs & Communes du Roialme Dengleterre considerantz les grandes necessitees du dit Roialme, & la malice des E∣nemys de France, & aillours entendantz grant recoverer au dit Roialme & destruction des ditz Enemys que poent avenir per le grace de Dieu si suffisantie des Gentz d'armes & des Archiers en  brief soit envoie entre la Meer sur les ditz Enemys pur eux gre∣ver & lour malice aresteer solonc la sage discretion nostre tresre∣doute Seigneur le Roy et les Seigneurs esteantz a cest present Parlement en lieu ou leur semblera a pluis necessaire et profita∣ble en esploit de nostre Seigneur le Roy et de son dit Roialme grantent que si la Marc du Saak des Leynes & les sys deniers de la Livre que furent grantez au darrein Parlement tenuz a Gloucestr' soient pardonez & adnullez a present la Subside des Leynes adurer  per un An entier apres la Feste de seinte Michel proschein avenir, cestassavoir de chescun Saak tant come estoit grantez devant le dit Parlement de Gloucestre & un somme d'argent a Lever des diver∣ses persones du Roialme en manere come ensuit sibien dedeins Franchises realx come dehors, cestassavoir. Le Duc de Lancastre et le Duc de Bretaigne chescun a. x. Marcz.Ib. N. 14. Item chescun Counte d'Engleterre. iiii l. Item chescun des Countesses veoues en Engle∣terre a tant come les Countz. iiii l.
Item chescun Baron et Baneret ou Chivaler que poet a tant dispendre. xl s. The Duke of Lancaster and the Duke of Bre∣taigne each. x. marks. Also every Earl of England. iiii l. Also every Countess that is a Widow in Eng∣land, as much as the Earls. iiii l. Also every Baron and Baneret, or Knight of as good an Estate as a Baron or Baneret. xl. s. And so on in the English exactly Translated from the French.   Also every Baroness, that is a Widow, shall pay as a Baron, and Baneress as a Banerett. xl s. Also every Batchelour, and every Esquire, who by Statue ought to be made a Knight. xx s. Also every Widow that was the Wife of a Bat∣chelor, or Esquire. xx s. Also every Esquire of less Estate. vi s. viii d. Also every Woman, Widow of such an Esquire, or sufficient Merchant. vi. s. viiid. Item chescun Esq; nient possessionez des terres, rent, ne Chateux qu'est en service, ou ad este armez. iii s. iiii d. Also every Esquire without Possessions, Lands,  Rents, or Goods, that is in Service, or bears Arms. iii s. iiii d. Also the chief Prior of the Hospital of Saint John, as a Baron. xl s. Also every Commander of the same Order of England, as a Batchelour. xx s. Also every other Brother, Knight of the same Or∣der. xiii s. iiii. d Also all other Brothers of the same Order, as an Esquire without Possessions. iii s. iiii d. Also every Justice, as well of the one Bench, as of the other, and the chief Baron of the Exchequer, each, c s. Also every Serjeant and great Apprentice of the Law. xl s.
Also other Apprentices which follow the Law. xx s. Also all other Apprentices of less Estate, and Attourneys, each. vi s. viii d. Also the Major of London shall pay as an Earl. iiii . Also the Aldermen of London, each as a Baron. xl s. Also all other Majors of great Towns in Eng∣land, each as a Baron. xl s. Also other Majors of smaller Towns, according to the value of their Estate. xx. s. x s. or vi s. viii d. And all Jurates of good Towns, and great Merchants of the Realm, shall pay as Batche∣lours,  each. xx s. Also other sufficient Merchants, xiii s. iiii d. Also all lesser Merchants, and Arti∣ficers, Husbandmen, or who live upon Tillage according to the va∣lue of their Estate. vi. s. viii d. iii s. iiii. d. ii s. xii d. or vi d. Also every Serjeant and Freeman of the Country according to their Estate. vi s. viii d. or xl. d. Also the Farmers of Mannors, Perso∣nages, and Granges, Merchants of Beasts, and other Buyers and Sel∣lors, according to their Estate. vi s. viii d. xl d. ii s. or xii d. Also all Advocates, Notarys, and Proctors who are Married, shall pay as Serjeants of the Law, Ap∣prentices of the Law, and At∣tourneys, each according to their Estate. xl s. xx s. or vi s. viii. Also all Apparitors that are Married, according to their Estate. iii s. iiii d. ii. s. or xii d. Also all Inn-keepers that have not the Estate of a Merchant, shall pay according to his Estate. xl d. ii s. or xii d. Also every Married Man, for himself  and his Wife, that have not the Estates above-named, and above the age of sixteen, except very Beggars. iiii d.
And every Man and Woman un∣married, of such an Estate, and above the Age aforesaid. iiii. d. Also every strange Merchant of what Condition soever, shall pay ac∣cording to his Ability, as other Denizens. N. 103. Walsinghami Historia fol. 254. n. 10. RIchardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae & Franciae, & Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus ballivis & fidelibus suis ad quos prae∣sentes literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali, manumisimus universos ligeos & singulos subditos nostros, & alios comitatus Hertfordiae, & ipsos & eorum quemlibet ab omni bondagio exuimus & quietos facimus per praesentes, ac eti∣am  pardonamus eisdem ligeis ac subditis nostris omnimodas felo∣nias, proditiones, transgressiones & extortiones, per ipsos vel ali∣quem illorum qualitercunque factas, sive perpetratas, ac etiam ut∣legariam vel utlegarias si qua vel quae in ipsos vel aliquem ipso∣rum fuerint vel fuerit his occasionibus promulgata, vel promulgatae, & summam pacem nostram iis & eorum cuilibet inde concedimus. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. N. 104. Ibm. fol. 268. n. 10. 20. 30. Teste meipso apud London. 15. die Junii, anno regni nostri quarto. RIchardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae & Franciae & Dominus Hiberniae, universis & singulis Vicecomitibus, Majoribus & Ballivis, & aliis fidelibus nostris comitatus N. Salutem. Quia datum est nobis intellgi, quod diversi subditi nostri qui contra pacem nostram & in turbationem populi in diversis Comitatibus  regni nostri Angliae se levarunt, & in diversis conventiculis & con∣gregationibus se posuerunt, & damna plurima fidelibus nostris perpetrando populo nostro Comitatuum praedictorum, dant intel∣ligi & affirmant se dictas congregationes & levationes ex nostris vo∣luntate & auctoritate fecisse & facere ac damna prepetrare. Vobis innotescimus per praesentes, quod hujusmodi levationes, congregati∣ones, & damna ex nostrâ voluntate seu autoritate minime processe∣runt, prout-nec procedere aut fieri debet, sed inde quantum plus  potest, nobis displieet in immensum, & ea in nostri maximum vituperium & coronae praejudicium & totius regni nostri damnum, & turbationem redundare sentimus. Et ideo vobis & cuilibet vestrum injungimus & mandamus quod hoc in locis, ubi meli∣us & celerius pro pace nostra in hâc parte conservandâ vobis vi∣debitur faciendum, publice proclamari, & pro resistentia quorum∣cunque contra pacem nostram (ut predictum est) levantium manu forti, pro toto posse vestro, si necesse fuerit, taliter ordinari fa∣ciatis,  quod pro defectu hujusmodi proclamationis & resistentiae, damna vel mala aliqua in Comitatibus praedictis per hujusmodi Congregationes seu levationes, vel alio modo, minime fiant seu perpetrentur, & sub sorisfactura omnium, quae nobis forisfacere poteritis, nullatenus omittatis. Praecipientes universis & singulis ligeis & subditis nostris, quod ab hujusmodi congregationibus &
levationibus, & damnis penitus desistentes, ad propria se trahant, & ibidem in pace morentur, sub forisfactura vitae et membrorum et omnium aliorum quae nobis forisfacere poterunt. N. 105. Walsinghami Historia fol. 295. n. 10. Teste Rege apud Londonias 17. die Junii Anno regni nostri quarto. AUthoritate Apostolicâ mihi in hac parte commissâ, te▪A. B. ab omnibus peccatis tuis ore confessis, & corde contritis,  & de quibus confiteri velles, si tuae occurrerint memoriae, absol∣vimus, & plenariam peccatorum tuorum remissionem indulge∣mus, & retributionem justorum ac Salutis aeternae pollicemur augmentum, & tot privilegia quae in terrae sanctae subsidium proficiscentibus conceduntur, tibi concedimus, ac Ecclesiae universalis synodi, & Ecclesiae sanctae catholicae orationum & beneficiorum suffragia tibi impartimur. N. 106. Rot. parl. 11. Ric. 2. n. 13. VOus Jurrez que vous garderez & ferrez garder la bone Pees, Quiete & Tranquillite du Royalme, & si auscuns veulle fair encontre cela vous luy contresterres, & destourberrez a tout vôtre poair, Et si aucuns Gentz veulent Riens fair encontre les Corps des persons des cink Seigneurs, cestasavoir, Thomas Duc de Gloucestre, Henry Count de Derby, Richard Count d' Arundel & de Surrey, Thomas Count de Warwick, & Thomas Count Mareschal, ou auscun de eux, vous esterres ove les dit cynk Seigneurs jusques  al'entier fin de cest present Parlement & eux mainteindrez & su∣stendrez a tout vôtre poair a vivre & morir ove eux encontre touz, nul persone, n'autre chose except en manere avantdite. Savant tout foits vôtre ligeance envers nôtre Seigneur le Roy & la Prerogative de sa Corone & les loyes & bones Customes du Royalme. N. 107. Rot. parl. 11. Ric. 2. n. 48. VOus Jurrez que vous ne assenterez ne ne seoffrez en quan∣que en vous est que aucun Juggement, Estatute ou Ordenance  fait ou renduz en cest present Parlement soit aucunement annullez, reversez, ou Repellez en ascun temps avenir. Et encontre que vous sustendrez les bones Loies & usages du Royalme avant ces heurs faits & usez & fermement Garderez & ferrer Garder la bone pees, Quiete & Tranquillite en le Roialme sanz destourber en aucune manere a vôtre poair, si Dieu vous eid & les Seints. N. 108. Rot. parl. 11. Ric. 2. n. 9. IN nomine Dei amen. Cum de jure et consuetudine Regni An∣gliae ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem qui pro tempore fuerit, necnon ceteros suos suffraganeos, confratres, & Coepiscopos, Ab∣bates, Priores, aliosque Prelatos quoscumque per Baroniam de Do∣mino Rege tenentes pertineat in Parliamentis Regiis quibuscum∣que ut Pares regni nostri predicti personaliter interesse ibidem{que} de regni negotiis et aliis ibi tractari consuetis, cum ceteris dicti regni paribus et aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibus consulere et tractare, ordinare, statuere, et diffinire, ac cetera facere que  Parliamenti tempore imminent facienda, in quibus omnibus et singulis nos Wilhelmus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus totius Anglie Primas, et Apostolice sedis Legatus pro nobis nostrisque suffraganeis, Coepiscopis et confratribus, necnon Abbatibus, Prioribus, ac Prela∣tis omnibus supradictis, protestamur, et eorum quilibet protestatur qui per se vel Procuratorem hic fuerit, modo presens publice et
expresse quod intendimus et intendit, volumus ac vult eorum quilibet, in hoc presenti Parliamento et aliis, ut Pares regni pre∣dicti more solito interesse, consulere, tractare, ordinare, statuere, et diffinire ac cetera exercere cum ceteris jus interessendi haben∣tibus in eisdem statu et ordine nostris et eorum cujuslibet in omnibus semper salvis. Verum quia in presenti Parliamento agi∣tur de nonnullis materiis in quibus non licet nobis aut alicui eo∣rum juxta sacrorum Canonum inftituta quomodolibet personaliter  interesse, Ea propter pro nobis et eorum quolibet prote∣stamur, et eorum quilibet hic presens etiam protestatur, quod non intendimus, nec volumus sicuti de jure non possumus, nec debemus, intendit nec vult aliquis eorundem in presenti Par∣liamento, dum de hujusmodi materiis agitur vel agetur quomo∣dolibet interesse, set nos et eorum quemlibet in ea parte penitus absentare. Jure Paritatis nostre et cujuslibet eorum interessendi in dicto Parliamento quoad omnia et singula inibi exercenda no∣stris  et eorum cuilibet statui et ordini congruentia, in omnibus semper salvo. Ad hec insuper protestamur et eorum quilibet protestatur quod propter hujusmodi absentiam non intendimus nec volumus, nec eorum aliquis intendit vel vult quod proces∣sus habiti et habendi in presenti Parliamento super materiis an∣tedictis in quibus non possumus, nec debemus ut praemittitur interesse, quantum ad nos et eorum quemlibet attinet futuris temporibus quomodolibet, impugnentur, infirmentur, seu etiam  revocentur. Quelle protestacion lieu en plein parlement al' in∣stance et priere du dit Ercevesque et les autres Prelatz susdits est enroullez ycy en roulle du Parlement per comaundement du Roy et assent des Seigneurs temporels et communes. Semblable protestation firent les Evesques de Duresme & Kardoyl, mutatis mutandis. N. 109. Rot. parl. 21. Ric. 2. n. 38. VOus Jurrez que bien & Loyalment tendrez, sustendrez, & e∣sterres sanz fraud ou mal Engyn ove touz les estatutz, establis∣sementz, ordenances, & Judgments faitz ou renduz en cest present Parlement, sans jamais aler ou fair, a lencontre de null dicell ou dependantz ou parcel dicell, ne que james vous les repellerez, revo∣kerez, casserez, irriteres, reverseres, ne adnullerez, ne james soeffe∣rez repeller, revoker, casser, irriter, reverser ne adnuller a vivre &  murrir savant au Roy sa Regalie & libertie & la Droit de sa Corone. N. 110. Ibm. n. 40. VOus Jurrez que jamais en temps avenir, vous ne soeffrez nully vivant aler ne fair a lencontre de nul des estatutz, establisse∣mentz, Ordenances, & Juggements, faitz ou renduz a cest present Parlement ne a nul Dependances ou percell dicell. Et si nully le face & de ceo soit duement convict vous ferrez vôtre entier poair & Diligence sanz fraud ou mal Engyn, Et persuerez devers nôtre Seigneur le  Roy & ses heires Roys Dengleterre de luy faire avoir execution come haut et faux Traitour a Roy & au Roialme, sauvant au Roy sa Regalie & Libertee, & le droit de sa Corone. N. 111. Placit. Co∣ronae in Par∣liamento 21. Ric. 2. RIcardus Dei Gratia Rex Anglie & Francie, & Dominus Hi∣bernie carissimo consanguineo suo Thome Comiti Marescallo Capitaneo ville nostre Cales & ejus locum tenenti, Salutem. Cum ca∣rissimus frater Edwardus Comes Rutland, dilectus confanguineus
noster, Thomas Comes Kancie, carissimus frater noster, Johannes Comes Huntingdon, dilecti consanguinei nostri Thomas Comes Noting∣ham, Johannes Comes Somers, Johannes Comes Sarum, & Thomas Domi∣nus Despenser & dilectus & fidelis noster Willielmus Lescrop, Camerarius noster, coram nobis in presenti Parliamento nostro inter alios appella∣verunt Thomam Ducem Gloucestr. in prisona nostra sub custodia vestra de mandato nostro existentem de diversis Prodicionibus per ipsum & alios, contra nos, statum, Coronam, & Dignitatem nostram  factis & perpetratis, ipsique appellantes appellum suum predictum se optulerunt in Parliamento nostro predicto, secundum legem & Con∣suetudinem in Regno nostro Anglie hactenus usitatam prosecuturos, nobis humiliter supplicando, quatenus ipsum Ducem ad responden∣dum sibi super appello suo predicto coram nobis in eodem Parliamen∣to nostro corporaliter venire jubere volumus, nos supplicationi pre∣dictae annuentes, Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes quod prefatum Ducem coram nobis & consilio nostro in Parliamento nostro  predicto cum omni festinatione qua poteritis salvo & secure venire faciatis ad respondendum prefatis appellantibus, super apello suo pre∣dicto, secundum legem & consuetudinem predictas, & ad faciendum ulterius & recipiendum quod per nos et dictum consilium nostrum in eodem Parliamento nostro, de eo tunc contigerit ordinari. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis, et habeatis ibi hoc breve. Teste meipso apud Westmon. xxi die Septembris. Anno regni nostri xxi. Per ipsum Regem & Consilium  in Parliamento. Billingford. Responsum Thome Comitis Marescalli infra nominati. THomam Ducem Gloucestr. infra nominatum coram Vobis et Consilio vestro in presenti Parliamento venire facere non pos¦sum ad faciendum prout istud breve exigit et requirit, pro eo quod idem Dux mortuus est, et quem quidem Ducem ex precepto excel∣lentissimi Domini Regis habui in custodia mea in prisona Domini Regis Ville Cales et ibidem in eadem moriebatur. N. 112. Ibm. RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Anglie et Francie et Dominus Hiber∣nie  dilecto et fideli suo Willielmo Rykhill Salutem. Sciatis quod quibusdam certis de causis assignavimus vos ad vos versus Vil∣lam nostram Cales divertendos & colloquium cum Thomâ Duce Glou∣cestr. ibidem existente habendos, ipsumque de omnibus et singulis que vobis dicere sive exponere voluerit audiendos, et nobis inde ac de toto facto vestro in hac parte in propria persona nostra ubicunque nos fore contigerit, sub sigillo vestro distincte et aperte certificandos,  una cum hoc brevi. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod circa premissa diligenter intendatis, et ea faciatis & exequamini in forma pre∣dicta. Damus autem Capitaneo nostro Ville predicte necnon univer∣sis et singulis fidelibus et subditis nostris tenore presentium firmiter in mandatis quod vobis in executione premissorum sint prout decet. In cujus rei Testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes.
Teste meipso apud Wodstock xvii die Augusti, Anno Regni nostri xxi. N. 113. Rot. parl. 21. Ric. 2. n. 89. AS queux Juggements, Ordenances, et Establissements ensi faitz or∣donez et assentuz le dit Marsdi le xviii jour du Marce et toutz les estatutz, establissements, Ordenances et Juggements faitz et renduz en dit Parlement, ou a Coventre ou aillours per vertute et Authorite mesme le Parlement fermement tenir et garder si bien les Seigneurs Es∣pirituels  come Temporels et certain Chevaliers pur Countes par auctorite de Parlement y esteants, mesme le Marsdi furent Jurrez en presence du Roy sur la Croice de Cantarbirs, de les tenir & sustenir et de esteer ove ycelles sanz fraud ou mal engyne solonc la form & effet de les ser∣ments par eux faitz par devant come contenuz est en Rolle de Parle∣ment. Des queux Seigneurs et Chevaliers les nous cy ensuant, Cestassavoir. Lercevesque de Cantirbir. Lercevesque de Everwyk. Levesque de Londres. Levesque de Wincestre. Levesque de Ely. Levesque de Norwic. Levesque de Excestre Chancellor. Levesque de Roff. Levesque de Hereford. Levesque de Sarum. Levesque de Nicholle. Levesque de St. Asaph. Levesque de St. David. Levesque de Cestre. Levesque de Cicestre. Levesque de Landaffe. Labbee de Westminstre. Labbee de St. Esmon. Le Duc d'Everwyk. Le Duc d'Albemarle. Le Duc d'Excestre. Le Markys de Dorset. Le Count de Staff. Le Count de Sarum. Le Count de Northumberland. Le Count de Gloucestre. Le Count de Westmerland. Le Count de Wircestre. Le Count de Wilts Tresorer. Le Count de Suff. Le Sire de Grey de Ruthin. Le Sire Ferrers de Groby. Le Sire de Lovell. Le Sire de Camoys. Monsieur John Bussy. Monsieur Henr. Grene. Monsieur John Russell. Robert Teye. ET apres cestes serements ensi faitz le Chanceller par Comande∣ment du Roy comanda overment que touz ceaux que furent Jurrez & vorroient tenir cestes Juggements, Serements & Orde∣nances addresseroient en haut lour maynes Dextres. Quele chose  seust fait & assentuz par tout le People Dengleterre esteant en pre∣sence du Roy. N. 115. Rot. parl. 1. Hen. 4. n. 73. JOefdy le xxiii jour d'Octobre Lercevesque de Canterbirs chargea de par le Roy toutz les Seigneurs Espirituelx & Temporelx & toutz autres y esteantz sur leur ligeance que ceo que lors serroit monstrez ou parlez illoques serroit tenuz conseil & quil ne serroit ascunement discoverez a null vivant. Et puis apres demandez fuist  par le Cont de Northumb. par le Suertie du Roy & de toutz estatz du Royalme coment leur semble que serroit ordeignez de Richard nadgaires Roy pur luy mettre en saufe Garde sauvant sa vie, que le Roy voet que luy soit sauvez en toutes maneres, sur quoi respon∣duz fuest par toutz les Seigneurs Espirituelx & Temporelx ent se∣veralment examinez dont les noms si ensuent que lour semble quil
serroit mys en saufe garde & secre garde & en tiel lieu ou nul con∣cours des Gentz y ad, & quil soit gardez par seures & sufficientz persones, & que null quad est familiar du dit nadgaires Roy soit ascunement entour sa persone & que ceo soit fait en la plus se∣cret manere que fire se purra. Les Noms des Seigneurs demandez & assentuz sur la Question suis∣dit cy ensuant, Cest assavoir, Lerceves{que} de Canterbirs. Lerceves{que} Deverwick. Leves{que} Londres. Leves{que} Dely. Leves{que} de Nichol. Leves{que} de Norwiz. Leves{que} de Rouchestre. Leves{que} de Sarum. Leves{que} d'Excestre. Leves{que} de Cicestre. Leves{que} de S. Asaph. Leves{que} de Cestre. Leves{que} de St. David. Leves{que} de Landaff. Leves{que} de Durham. Labbe de Westminstre. Labbe de St. Alban. Labbe de St. Austin. Labbe de Bury. Labbe de St. Mary Deverwick. Labbe de Gloucestre. Labbe de Battaile. Le Prince. Le Duc Deverwick. Le Count de Arundell. Le Count de Warrwick. Le Count de Stafford. Le Count de Northumberland. Le Count de Suff. Le Count de Worcestre. Le Sire de Roos. Le Sire de Grey de Ruthyn. Le Sire de Cherlton. Le Sir de Bardolf Le Sir de Willoyby. Le Sir de Furnivall. Le Sir de Ferrers. Le Sir de Beamont. Le Sir de Berkely. Le Sir fitz Wauter. Le Sir de Mauley. Le Sir de Scales. Le Sir de Morley. Le Sir de Burnell. Le Sir de Lovell. Le Sir de Camoys. Le Sir de Seymore. Le Sir de Crombwell. Le Sir de Cobham. Monsieur Henry Percy. Monsieur Richard Scrop. Le Sir fitz Hugh. Le Sir de Bergaveny. Le Sir de Lomley. Le Baron de Graystock. Le Baron de Hilton. Monsieur Thomas Erpingham Chamberlain. Monsieur Matthew Gurnay. N. 116. Registrum A∣rundel parte ima f. 550. b. HEnricus Dei Gratiâ Venerabili in Christo patri Thome eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati Salutem. Satis informati estis qualiter inimici nostri Franciae & alii sibi adhaerentes facinora sua erga nos & ligeos nostros licet indirecte de Die in Diem circumquaque ostendentes cum magna Classe na∣vium cum maxima multitudine armatorum & Bellicorum supra mare congregati diversas villas super Costeris Regni nostri An∣gliae invadere, ac nos & Regnum nostrum praedictum nec non po∣pulum nostrum per terram et per mare destruere, & Ecclesiam Angli∣canam  subvertere, cum omnibus viribus intendunt & proponunt, per quod volentes salvationi Dicti Regni & populorum nostro∣rum ac Ecclesiae sanctae contra malitiam ipsorum inimicorum opi∣tulante Altissimo, providere, per diversas Commissiones assign vimus certos fideles nostros in singulis Comitatibus regni nostri praedicti ad arraiandos & armari faciendos omnes homines defensi∣biles,
videlicet, quemlibet eorum juxta statum & facultates suas, & eos arraiatos, armatos, & munitos in Arraiatione hujusmodi teneri faciendos, sicque semper prompti sint & parati ad proficis∣cendum in Defensionem Regni nostri praedicti, ubi, & quoties et quando ex hostium incursibus periculum immineat, aut necesse fuerit aliquale. Advertentes quodque vos & ceteri praelati ac totus Clerus dicti Regni, una cum aliis fidelibus nostris ad resisten∣dum dictis inimicis pro salvatione sanctae Ecclesiae et ejusdem Reg∣ni  manus tenemini apponere adjutrices, vobis in fide quibus no∣bis tenemini firmiter injungimus et mandamus, quatenus consi∣deratis gravibus Damnis et periculis imminentibus per aggressus inimicorum nostrorum praedictorum omnes Abbates, Priores, Reli∣giosos, et alias personas Ecclesiasticas quascunque vestrae Dioceseos, quacunque dilatione postposita, armari, arraiari, et armis compe∣tentibus, videlicet quemlibet eorum juxta statum, possessiones, et facultates suas muniri. Et eos in Millenis, Centenis, & Vintenis  poni faciatis. Ita quod prompti sint & parati ad proficiscendum ad mandatum vestrum una cum aliis fidelibus nostris contra dictos inimicos nostros infra dictum Regnum nostrum ad ipsos cum Dei adjutorio debellandos, expugnandos, et destruendos, et ad eorum malitiam et proterviam propulsandam, et conte∣rendam, et hoc sicut nos, et honorem nostrum ac vestrum et salvationem sanctae Ecclesiae et Regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Teste meipso apud Westmonast. 17. Die Januarii, Anno Regni nostri primo. N. 117. in the Chapter House at West∣minster. Confirmatio Treugarum inter Richardum Angliae & Carolum Franciae Reges. CHarles par la Grace de Dieu Roy de France, A tous ceulx qui ces presentes lettres verront, Salut. Comme l'an de grace Mil CCC. xx / iiii et xvi vivant lors feust nostre tres chere et tres amez filz Richart nagueres Roy d'Engleterre que Dieu absoile, certaines Treves Generales eussent estre prinses sur certaine forme entre nous d'une parte et nostre ditz filz d'autre, les queles Treves feurent solennelment Jureez et promises a tenir  d'une part et d'autre. Si comme es lettres sur ce faites est plus a plain contenue, Savoir faisons que nous qui en ce fait a tous autres voulons proceder de bonne foy n'entendismes oncques, ne entendons venir aucunement contre ce qui en ceste matiere avons promis & jure. Mais voulons tenir & faire tenir de nô∣tre part sans enfraindre les dittes Trieves leur Temps durant ainsi comme promis & jure l'avons. En Tesmoing de ce nous avons fait mettre a ces lettres nostre Seel. Donne a Paris le  xxix jour de Janver. l'an de Grace Mil. CCC. xx / iiii xix. Et le xx. de nôtre Regne. Par le Roy en son Conseil. J. de Sanctis.
N. 118. Rot. parl. 16. Ric. 2. n. 20. WIlliam Eves{que} de Cantirbirs baille avant une schedule en plein parlement contenant ces responses a certaines Ar∣ticles de luy demandez & en la forme & paroles qu'ensuent. A nôtre Tresdout Seigneur le Roy en cest present Parle∣ment son humble Chappelein William Ercevesque de Cantirbirs  a la petition baillez en le dit Parlement par les Communes de Roialme en la quelle Petition sont contenuz certeines Ar∣ticles. Cestassavoir, Primerement par la ou nôtre Seigneur le Roy, & toutz ses Lieges de vient du droit & soleient de tout temps pursuer en la Court mesme nostre Seigneur le Roy, pur recoverir leur presentmentz as Eglises, Provendres & autres Benefices de  seint Eglise as queux ils ont droit a presenter, la connisance de plee de quele pursuite appartient soulement a Court mesme nostre Seigneur le Roy d'ancien droit de sa Corone, use & approve en temps de toutz ses progenitours Roys Dengleterre, & quant Jugge ment soit rendu en mesme sa Court sur tiel plee & pursuite les Erce∣vesque, Evesques, & autres parsones espiritueles quont instituti∣on de tiel benefice deinz leur Jurisdiction sont tenuz & ount fait execution des tieux Juggements par mandement des Rois  de tout le temps avantdit sanz interruption quar autre Lay persone ne poet tiel execution faire, & auxint sont tenuz de droit de faire execution de plusours autres mandementz nostre Seigneur le Roy, du quell droit la Corone Dengleterre ad este peisible∣ment seisi si bien en temps nôtre dit Seigneur le Roy come en temps de touz ses Progenitours tanque en cea mes, ore tard di∣verses processes sont faitz par le seint pier le Pape & censures discomengementz sur certeins Evesques Dengleterre pur ceo  quils ont fait execution des tieux mandementz en overte dishe∣ritance de la dit Corone & destruction de la Regalie nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, say ley & tout son Roialme, si Remedie ne soit mys. A ceste Article le dit Ercevesque fesant protestation qu'il n'est pas sa entention de dire ne affermer que nostre seint piere le Pape ne poet excomenger Evesque solonc la Ley de seint Eglise, respoigne & dit, si ascuns Executions de processes soient faitz par ascune & censures d'escomengementz encontre  ascunes Evesques d'Engleterre, ou ascun autre Lige de Roy pur ceo quils ont fait execution de tieux mandementz il tient que ceo est contre le Roy, si come est tenuz en mesme la Petition, & pur tant il voet esteer ove nostre dit Seigneur le Roy & ove sa Corone en la cause avantdit a son poair, & auxint par la ou dit est & contenue en la dite petition que come clamour y ad que le dit seint pier le Pape ad ordeine & purpos de translater  ascuns prelates du mesme le Royalme, ascuns hors du Royalme & ascuns d'une Eveschee a autre deinz mesme fanz assent & conisanz nostre Seigneur le Roy, & sanz assent du Prelat que serroit ensi translate, queux prelatz sont molt profitables & ne∣cessaires a nostre Seigneur le Roy & tout son Royalme par que translations sils feussent suffertez les Estatutz du Royalme ser∣ront
defaitz & angutez & ses sages Lieges de son Conseil sanz on assent & encontre sa volunte sustretz & esloynez hors de son Royalme & la voir & tresor du mesme le Royalme, serroit en porte et ensi mesme le Royalme destitut, sibien du conseil come de∣voir au finall destruction de mesme le Royalme, & ensi la Corone d'Engleterre qui est si frank de toutz temp, quele nad ceu nule terene Soverein mes immediat susgit a Dieu en toutes choses touchantes Regalie de mesme la Corone, & a nule autre serroit sub∣mis  a Pape & les Leyes & Estatutz du Royalme par luy defaitz et anientiz a sa volunte en perpetuell destruction de la Sovereintie nostre Seigneur le Roy, sa Corone et sa Regalie et tout son Royalme que Dieu defend, le dit Ercevesque fesant protestation quil nest sa entention de dire ne affermer que nôtre dit seint Pere ne poet faire translations des prelatz solonc la ley de seint Esglise, respoigne et dit qui si ascuns Executions de tielx trans∣lations soient faitz d'aucuns prelatz de mesme le Royalme queux  Prelatz sont meulx profitables et necessaires a nostre dit Seig∣neur le Roy et a son Royalme suisdit ou que ses Sages Liges de son Conseil sanz son assent et encontre sa volunte soient sus∣tretz et esloignez hors du Royalme et le avoir et le tresor pur∣roit estre destruitz, le dit Ercevesque tient que ceo serroit contre le Roy et sa Corone, et pur tant il voet estre ove le Roy en tel cas layalment et sustenance de sa Corone et en toutz autres cas touchantz sa Corone come il est tenuz par sa Ligeance et pria  au Roy que la dite Cedule soit entre de Record en Roll de par∣lement, et le Roy lottroia. N. 118. Rendred in English. Rot. parl. 16. Ric. 2. n. 20. WIlliam Archbishop of Canterbury brought a Schedule into a full Parliament containing his Answers demanded to certain Articles, in the Form and Words following. TO our most redoubted Lord the King in this present Par∣liament his humble Chappellan William Archbishop of Canturbury, to the petition brought into Parliament by the Com∣mons of the Kingdom, in which are contained certain Articles, that is to say, first, whereas our Lord the King, and all his Lieges ought of Right, and were wont in all times to proceed in the King's Court, to recover their Presentations to Churches, Prebendaries, and other Benefices of holy Church, to which they had right to present, the Cognisance of which Plea only be∣longed  to that Court, by ancient Right of the Crown, used and approved in the Times of all the King's Progenitors, Kings of England, and when Judgment was given in that Court upon such Plea the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Persons Spiritual, who had Institution of such Benefices within their Jurisdiction were bound, and had made Execution of such Judgments by Command of the Kings for all the times aforesaid without in∣terruption; for a lay Person could not make such Execution,  and also are bound to make Execution of many other Commands of the King, of which Right the Crown of England had been in peaceable Possession, as well in this King's Time, as the Times f all his Progunitors, until this time. But of late diverse Pro∣cesses have been made by the holy Father the Pope, and Cen∣sures and Excommunications published against certain English
Bishops, for that they have made Execution of such Com∣mands in open Disheritance of the Crown, and Destruction of the King's Regalie, his Law, and his whole Realme, if Remedy be not had. To this Article the Archbishop making Protestation, that it was not his Intention to say or affirm, that our Holy Father, the Pope, could not Excommunicate a Bishop according to the  Law of holy Church, answereth, and saith, that if any Execu∣tion or Processes, Censures, and Excommunications should be made by any Person against any Bishop of England, or any other of the Kings Lieges, because they made Execution of such Com∣mands, he holds this is against the King, as it is holden or af∣firmed in the Petition, and therefore he will stand with the King, and with his Crown in the Case aforesaid, to his Power. And also whereas it is said and contained in the same Peti∣tion, that Clamour hath been made, that the holy Father the Pope, had ordained and purposed to Translate some Bishops of the Kingdom, some out of the Kingdom, and some from one Church to another within, without the Assent and Knowledge of the King, and without the Assent of the Prelate, which was  to be Translated, which Prelates were much profitable to the King, and his whole Kingdom, by which Translations if they be suffered, the Statutes of the Kingdom would be defeated and straightened, and the wise Lieges of his Council without their Assent, and against their Wills withdrawn and removed out of his Kingdom, and the Riches and Treasure thereof exported, whereby the Kingdom will be destitute of Counsel, and Wealth, to the final Destruction of the Kingdom, and also of the Crown  of England, which was so free in all times, that it had no earthly Soveraign, but immediately subject to God, in all things touching the Regalie thereof, and to no other: Should it be submitted to the Pope, and the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom by him be Defeated and Annulled at his Pleasure, it would be to the per∣petual Destruction of the Kings Soveraignty, his Crown and Regalie, and of his whole Kingdom, which God forbid. The said Archbishop making Protestation, that it is not his  Intention to say or affirm, that our holy Father cannot make Translations of Prelates according to the Law of holy Church, answereth, and saith, That if any Executions of such Transla∣tions of any Prelates of the Kingdom were made, who were very profitable and necessary to the King and his Realm, or that the Sage Lieges of his Council, without his Assent, and against his Will, should be withdrawn or removed out of the  Kingdom, whereby the Wealth and Treasure thereof might be destroyed; The said Archbishop holds this would be against the King, and his Crown, and therefore he will be with the King Loyally in this Case, and in Sustenance of his Crown, as he is bound by his Ligeance, and prayed the King this Cedule
might be entered on Record in the Parliament Role, which the King granted. N. 119. Pat. 6. Ric. 2. Part. 1. m. 32. REX Cancellario & Procuratoribus Universitatis Oxonii, qui nunc sunt, vel qui pro tempore fuerint, Salutem. Zelo fidei Christiane cujus sumus & semper esse volumus Desensores, moti salubriter & inducti volentes summo desiderio impugnatores  dicte fidei, qui suas pravas & perversas doctrinas infra regnum nostrum Angliae seminare, & dampnatas conclusiones eidem fidei notorie obviantes tenere & predicare jam noviter pessime presumpserunt & conantur in perversionem Populi nostri, ut accepimus, antequam ulterius in suis procedant erroribus & maliciis, vel alios inficiant reprimere & condignâ castigatione cohercere. Assignavimus vos ad inquisicionem generalem as∣sistentibus vobis omnibus theologis Universitatis predicte regen∣tibus  faciendam, ab omnibus & singulis graduatis Theologis & Jurisconsultis Universitatis ejusdem, si quos de jurisdictione U∣niversitatis illius agnovêrunt qui sint eis probabiliter suspecti de favore, credentia vel defensione alicujus heresis vel erro∣ris & maxime quarundam conclusionum, per venerabilem pa∣trem Wilhelmum Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem de consilio sui Cleri publice dampnatarum, vel etiam alicujus conclusionis alicui earundem consimilis in sententia vel in verbis, & si ali∣quos  de cetero inveneritis qui quicquam predictorum heresium vel errorum vel quemcumque consimilem crediderint, foverint, seu defenderint, vel qui Magistros Johannem Wyclyf, Nicola∣um Herford, Philippum Reppingdon, vel Johannem Aston, vel aliquem alium de aliquo predictorum heresium vel errorum seu alio simili, in verbis vel sententia probabili suspicione no∣tatum, in domos & hospicia ausi fuerint receptare seu cum eo∣rum aliquo communicare vel sibi defensionem aut favorem pre∣bere  presumpserint aliqualem ad hujusmodi fautores, recepta∣tores, communicantes & Defenfores infra septem dies, post∣quam premissa vobis constituerit ab Universitate & Villa Oxo∣nii banniendos & expellendos donec coram Archiepiscopo Can∣tuariensi pro tempore existente suam innocentiam manifestâ purgatione monstraverint. Ita tamen ut se purgare cogantur, ipsos tales esse nobis & eidem Archiepiscopo de tempore in tem∣pus infra mensem sub Sigillis vestris certificetis. Mandantes  insuper quod per Universas Aulas Universitatis predicte dili∣genter inquiri & scrutari faciatis indilate si quis aliquem li∣brum sive tractatum de editione vel compilatione predictorum Magistrorum, Johannis Wyclyf vel Nicolai habuerint, & quod librum illum, sive tractatum ubicunque contigerit inveniri, are∣stari, capi, & prefato Archiepiscopo infra mensem absque cor∣rectione, corruptione, seu mutatione quacunque quo ad ejus sententiam vel verba presentari faciatis. Et ideo vobis in fide  & ligeantia quibus nobis tenemini, & sub forisfacturâ omnium singulorum, libertatum & privilegiorum Universitatis predicte, & omnium aliorum que nobis forisfacere poteritis, injungimus & mandamus quod circa premissa bene & fideliter exequen∣da diligenter intendatis & ea faciatis et exequamini in forma
predictâ et quod prefato Archiepiscopo et ejus mandatis licitis et honestis vobis in hac parte dirigendis pareatis prout decet. Damus autem Vicecomiti et Majori Oxoniensi pro tempore ex∣istentibus ac universis et singulis Vicecomitibus, Majoribus, Bal∣livis, Ministris, et aliis fidelibus et subditis nostris tenore pre∣sentium in mandatis quod vobis in executione premissorum auxilientur, pareant et intendant. In cujus, &c. Teste Rege apud Westmonasterium tercio-decimo die Julii. Per Consilium. FINIS.
