B4233 12774867 93747
A SERMON Preached in the Cathedrall Church of YORK: Before hi Excellence the Earle of NEWCASTLE, AND Many of the Prime Nobility and Gentry of the Northerne COVNTIES. At the Publique Thanksgiving to Almigh∣ty God for the late great Victory upon Fryday, Iune 30. 1643, And the Reducement of the West Parts of Yorkeshire to Obedience. Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1643. By speciall Command.
To His Excellence, WILLIAM Earle of NEWCASTLE, Viscount Mansfield, Lord Ogle, Baron of Bol∣sover, Bothall, and Hepple, Governonr of the Towne and County of Newcastle, Generall of all His Majesties Forces in the North Parts of this King∣dome, and in the Counties of Nottingham, Lincoln, Rutland, Derby, Stafford, Leicester, Warwick, Northampton, Huntington, Cambridge, Norfolke, Suffolke, Essex, and Hertford, One of His Majesties most Honourable Privie Councell. Sir, THis Sermon is Yours in right of the Author, being first Preached, then Pub∣lished by Your speciall Command. Therefore it flyes thither most justly for Protection, from whence it had a being. But You have yet a nearer Interest in it from the Subject, (a great Victory gotten with as great hazard of Your own Person.) We are not so Sacrilegious to robbe God of His Glory, Neither are we so stupid or fanaticall, as to separate the
Sword of the Lord and Gideon. So long as an English Chronicle shall be extant, this Northerne Good Fryday will be remembred, to the perpetu∣all Honour of Your Noble Family. In managing Your great trust (conformably to Your Soverai ne) You have rather expressed His temper, who would suffer no Man to depart away from him discon∣tented, then the disposition of Vitellius, who thought no Smell in the World so Sweet.  at of a slain Enemy. God grant that  to the bad may not prove accidentally cruelty to the good, Nor Christian pitty to spare effusion of blood, give the ulcer space to turne to a Gangrene, so to make the Cure both more costly, and more dangerous to the bo∣dy Politiqe. He is blinde that doth not see how God hath blessed His Majesties Armies beyond probability, and how all His Forces have almost ever proved Victorious in the Field; Witnesse for this County. Seecroft, Tankersley, Yarum, Ather∣ton, &c. Those losses which we have susteined have been upon surprises, and especially by the negli∣gence of Scouts. The cold of the Feet strikes quickly up to the Head, And the carelessenesse of the meanest Officer may indanger the Life of the Greatest. But it is as superfluous as uncomely for me, like another Phormio, to discourse to Your Excellence of these
things, which are out of mine Element. Accept, I beseech you, this Mite, as a poore expression of my obedience and gratitude (two forgotten virtues in this Age) for Your singular favours to my selfe, And to the Churches of this Province, which owe to your Protection their present Liberty to serve God ac∣cording to their Duty, and the Laws and rites esta∣blshed, and to these Northerne Counties, which by Your endeavours are totall in a manner freed from the fury of Sedition, which lies now gasping within the Walls of Hull. God Almighty prosper Your Excellencies Arms, for the happy reducement of the rest of your great charge to Obedience and Peace, To the glory of God, the Service of His Ma∣jesty, Your own lasting Honour, the tranquility of this distracted Kingdom, and the unmas king of all Poli∣ticall and Ecclesiasticall juglers; which is the con∣stant expectation, and shall be the dayly Prayer of Yarl, Iuly, 18. 1643. Your Excellencies Most Assured And Obliged Servant, JOH: DERENSIS.
Psal. 44. Ver. 7. and 8. 7. For I will not Trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword that shall Help me. 8. But it is Thou that Savest us from our Ene∣mies, and puttest them to confusion that hate us. WE are not met together here to scanne curious Questions, but to Sacrifice unto God with the Voice of Thanks∣giving. Therefore I passe by those doubts in silence, which concerne ei∣ther the Author of this Psalme, or the occasion where∣upon it was Indited. Saint Paul applying the 22 verse (For Thy sake are we killed all the Day long,Rom. 8. 35. and accoun∣ted ss Sheep for the slaughter,) to the sufferings of the Primitive Christians, is an authenticke Witnesse that it may be aptly used by us in the like cases. We have heard with our Eares,Ver. 1. O God, our Fathers have told us, Fathers are Domesticall Preachers to their Fa∣milies. How thou hast driven out the Heathen with thy head, how Thou hast destroyed the Nations and cast them out,Ver. 2. God will have nothing stable in this World but himselfe. The highest Floods have the lowest Ebbes:
All Nations have their Suns and their Nights: King∣doms and Cities have their diseases and deaths, as well as Men: When God is angry, Momento sit cinis diu sil∣va, A Wood that hath been many ages in growing, is turned to Ashes in an instant.Ver. 3. 4. For they got not the Land in possession through their own Sword, neither was it their own Arme that helped them, but Thy right hand, and thine Arme, and the light of thy countenance: Thy Power, and thy Wisedome, and thy goodnesse. Hath not the Potter power over his Clay? Or the Mint-master over his Bullion? They that have great Orchards doe cut up some Trees, and plant and transplant oers, and all for order and profit: Shall no God have the same power in the spacious field of this World? Then if Go be the Soveraigne Monarch and disposer of Kingdoms, to whom shall we repaire but to Him in all our extre∣mities? Thou art my King,Ver. 5. O God, send help unto Icob. Thou art my King, That Jehovh is the great King both of Heaven and Earth, doth no more prejudice the rights of Earthly Princes, then it derogates from the Power of a naturall Parent, that his Child should prv, Our Fa∣ther which art in Heaven, Mitte salutes, or Manda salu∣tes, Send help, or command help; dictum factum, saying and doing with God is all one, help and health and victo∣ry are His Embassages. Then followes.Ver. 6. Through Thee will we overthrowe our Enemies, and in Thy name will we tread them down that rise up agaist us. Through Thee, I can doe all things (saith Saint Paul) through Christ that strengtheneth me. But without Him we can doe nothing, especially nothing that is good. No man can say, That Jesus is the Christ, but by the Holy Ghost. In him we live, we move, and have
our being. Will we overthrow, we will push them down, or we will tosse them to and fro, it is a Metaphor ta∣ken from horned Beasts. Every defeat is not an over∣throw, but we will turne them upside down: yea, and trample them under our feet, so as they shall not be able to rise again: And tread them down, It implies an utter overthrow; as Elisha said to King Joash, Thou shouldest have sitte them five or six times till thou hadst consumed Syra. And tread them downe that rise up against us, as dreggs are elevated out of the boone of a Vessell, (a proper Phrase for Schismaticks and seditious Persons.) Of your selves shall men arise speaking perverse things: And,Act 20. 30. in these dayes rose up Theudas.Act. 5. But all this must b in the name of the Lord, And in thy name we will tread them down, That is not in an hypocriticall pretense of thy name, a frequent way of deceit, which give occa∣sion to that common saving, In nomia Domini incipit omne malum, All evill begins with the name of the Lord. But thy name, that is, thy power, and thy blessing, and thy protection, as Saint Peter said, we have laoured all night and catched nothing, yet in thy name I will let down the Net. Nor in the name of our followers or confederates, for vaine is the help of man. Not in the name of our Friends, Friends are like Frogs, which seldome appeare but in a warme Season. No in our owne name like those builder of Babell, which reped con usion for their labour: but In thy name, we will tread them down that rise an against us. Therefore he addes, For I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword that shall help me. He doth not say. I will break my Bw and throw away my Sword, but I will not trust in my Bow. It is not the having of Arm; nor the
using of Arms, but the relying upon our Arms, and pla∣cing our confidence in our Arms, which is forbidden. As our Saviour saith of Riches, How hardly shall a rich Man enter into the Kingdome of Heaven? that is one that trusts in his Riches, We may not Deify our Bow, nor make an Idoll of our Sword. The Sword and the Bow were anciently the Princes of offensive Weapons, the Sword at hand, the Bow a farre off, as Iacob said to Ioseph,Gen. 48. 22. I will give the one portion above thy Brethren; which I tooke out of the hand of the Amorite, with my Sword and with my Bow. Among the Aegyptians a ben∣ded Bow was the Hieroglyphicke of Wrre, and a Bow broken or unbent did signify a Cessation of Arms: So we read that the very night that King Attila dyed, Martianus the Emperour did see Attila's Bow broken, which did betoken that the Warres were now at an end. God himselfe is contented sometimes to borrow a Me∣taphor from the Bow, to expresse his own power, He hath bent his Bow and made ready his Arrowes. Who hath not heard of Asters Bow and his Arrow, which he sent to King Phillip, with this inscription, After Philippo? a shrewd Message which cost Philip his Eye. The Parthian Bowes were more feared of the Romane Legions, then all Archimedes Mathematicall Instru∣ments. And ou English gray Goose Wing, hath been as terrible in former times to our Neighbour Nations. Next for the Sword. Among the Scythians their grea∣test Oath was by their Sword,Am. Mar. as the Turkish Sultans used to sweare by their Cimiters. The Alani had not a Church, nor a Chappell, nor so much as a Cottage but it had a Sword fastered in the ground, with barba∣rous and superstitious Ceremonyes, as their Tutelary
God. When God had expelled Adam out of Para∣dise, it is said that he placed a slaming Sword at the en∣terance thereof, to keep the way of the Tree of Life. And our Saviour saith of himselfe, that he came not to send Peace but a Sword. So then the Bow and the Sword do signify all kind of Arms and Ammu∣nition, and Military preparations, which serve either at hand ora farre off, as Powder, shot, Gunnes, (which are the successors of Bows,) Pikes, yea, even shippes and Fortes. For I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword that shall helpe me. How, not helpe me? No, not of themselves: as the King of Israel answered the Wo∣man when she cryed out helpe my Lord O King,2 King. 6. 26. so may our Boves and our Swords say unto us, If the Lord doe not helpe thee, how shall I helpe thee? All secunday, subordinate adjuments how eminent soever, lose their virtue and efficacy, if God suspend the influence of hi Favour. When the first and great Ring is fast, the lesser linkes do draw in vaine: as if a foolish Marriner should think by the strength of his arm, and of his small cord to draw the maine Rocke or Staith to his little boate. It is even as ridiculous, to thinke to subject the Power and Providence of God to humane Preparati∣ons. No, no, not so. But it is thou savest us from Our Enemies. Thou, not our own right hands, we dare not sacrifice to our own Netts. Thou, no Heathenish Tutelary God, nor Romish Tutelary Saint, all which are cast downe flat to the ground with this one word, But it is thou. Belus could not save Nineveh, not Iuno Carthage, nor Mi∣nerva Athens. Let others choose to themselves what protectors they please, from among the Societies of
mortall Men, or Companyes of Caelestiall Spirits, as St. Iames, St. Dennis, St. Marke. But be Thou evermore the Patton and Protector of our City, of Our King∣dome, Be Thou evermore the Generall of our Army, If Thou be with us who can be against us? Deo javante nil obest livor malus, Et non juvante nil prodest labor gravis. If thou give a blessing, envy cannot hurt us, if thou deny a blessing Labour cannot profit us. But it is thou that savest us, Thou only savest us, thou alwayes savest us, thou savest us from all dangers both of Body and Soule, Thou art the Fountaine, Salvation is the stream, thou art the Sun, Salvation is the Beame, thou art the Tree, Salvation is the Fruit. It is thou that savest us from our Enemies, It was Neroes vaine Com∣plaint, that he had neither Friend nor Enemy, where∣as in truth he had none but Enemies, Woe is me my Mo∣ther (saith Jeremy,)Jer. 15. 10. that thou hast borne me a Man of cotention, I have neither lent nor taken upon usury, yet every one doth curse me. If innocence it selfe should as∣sume the shpe of a Man, and dwell upo Earth, it would Enemies, rather then a Man want Enemies, his bosome Friend shall become his Enemy, Inimici homi∣nis Domestici ej, they of a Mans Houshold prove of∣ten hi Enemye, e, a M own selfe often proves his own greatest Enemy. To rise yet one degree high∣er, as it  the greatest Crosse to want all Crosses, so to  Eemies is the greatest Enmity. Enemies are the am nrs that naile us closer to our God, Enemyes are the bruhs that weare away themselves to smite off
the dust from us, enemies are the snuffers that soile them∣selves to make us burne more brightly. This is a tri∣ple Salvation, when God doth not only preserve us from our Enemyes, but also converts their Enmity to our good; and lastly, makes their opposition to us, to be a meanes of their own confusion. That's the last step in my Text, And puttest them to consusion that hate us, First to shame and confusion of Face, this is that in part which the Scripture calls heaping Coales of Fire upon an Enemies Head, to make his Cheeks glow with shame, and to scorch him inwardly with the testimony of s own Conscience. But if the Enmity be growne higher to harted, that is, to habituated malicious Enmi∣ty, so as there is no more hope of his Conversion or re∣covery, periisse puto cui pudor periit, past shame past grace, then followes likewise an higher degree of Con∣fuon, that is utter Ruine and Destruction, And puts them to consusion that hate us. Now you have the sense of my Text, I will not shred it any more into little parcells, Take five Observations which are as pertinent to the time and occasion, as they flow naturally from the Text. 1. That the People of God shall never want Ene∣mies, and such as hate them in this World. 2. That therefore it is Wisedome to have in readinesse Bows and Swords, that is, all manner of Mi∣litary preparations. 3. That when we have store of warlike Provision, yet we must not place our confidence in our Arms, not make them as Idols: For I will not trust in my Bow. 4. That our only defence from danger is the name
of the Lord, our onely dependence ought to be upon our God. But it is Thou. 5. That in lieu of his Protection and our preser∣vation, God expects Vitulos labiorum, the Calves of our Lippes, (as the Prophet Hosea calls them) that is, a thankfull acknowledgement of his favours. This brings my Text home to the present occasion, For I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword that shall help me. But it is Thou that savest us from our Enemies, and put∣test them to confusion that hate us. Of these in Order. First of the first, That the People of God shall ne∣ver want Enemies in this World.Cant. . . As a Ltlly among the Thores, so is my Love among the Daughters, not onely sure to be pricked, but in danger to be choaked with Enemes. Taulerus Writes of a devout Matron that had long affected to see her Saviour, At las he was pre∣sented to her Eyes like a little Childe wrapped in a bundle of Thornes, so as shee could not touch him with∣out boody hands, We must passe through many Ene∣mies to the fruition of Christ. Moses saw a Bush bur∣ning, but was not consumed with the fire, Exod. 3. A right Embem of the Church, which flourishes in a fiery travall, in the middest of Enemies. Behold (saith our Siour) I send you as Sheep into the middest of wolves.. 10. 16. Novum & inauditum ellandi genus, A new and strange kind of Warrefaire, (saith Saint Chrysostome) between a few nnarmed sheep, and a great number of ravenous Wolves. Into the middest of Wolves, as if one should cast an handfull of dry reeds or flax into the midst of an ot fire to extinguish it. But this is the Wisdome of God, rather to magnify hi power in the protection of his Servants from their Enemies, then in the preservation
of them without Enemies. Sanguine fundata est . sia, sanguine crevit, The Church was planted in blood, it was watered with blood. What need I reckon up the Persecutions of David, the blowes of Micheas, the Sa of Isay, the bonds of Iohn Baptist, the stones of Steven, the Crosse of Peter, the Sword of Paul, the fire of Laurence, the Exile of Athanasius? Purpurata est ter∣ra, &c. the Earth was purpled with the Blood of the Martyrs, Heaven flourisheth with the Crons of the Martyrs, Churches are adorned to the memory of the Martyrs, the Times are distinguished by the Birth∣dayes of the Martyrs, saith Saint Austine. And Saint Jerome in an Epistle to Chromatius witnesseth, that in his time there did not occurre that day in the year, where∣in five thousand Martyrs had not sealed the truth of their Religion with their blood, except the Calends of Jaary, when their malitiou▪ Enemies were so intent upon their Heathenish Soemnities, that they negle∣cted the slaughter of the poore Christians, and their hate gave place to their marth. The Jewes were their Enemies, the Heathens were their Enemies, Hereticks and Schismaticks were, and still are their Enemies. The Persecution of the Jews lasted but forty yeares, that of the Heathens but three hundred yeares, this last of He∣reticks above a thousand yeares. The Jews sought but one field, the Heathens ten set Battles, the Hereticks have renewed their Forces above two hundred times. This was the way whereby Christians of old did disperse the Armies of their Enemyes, even by the effusion of their own blood, This was the way which God ever blessed, The Blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church: But now our Enemies the Incendiaries of
the World have found out a cheaper way to plant their own dreames, which they guild over with the nme of truth, a way which Christ never taught, a way which the Church never knew, even in the blood of Iunocents, by Dagges and Daggers, by Poyson and Powder, by Murders and Massacres, by Tu∣mults and Treasons, by sheathing the Magistrates sword in his own Bowells. When the Discples did aske our Saviour if they should call for fire from Heaven to destroy those Cities that would not receive them, He answered,Luke. 9. 55. Yee know not what Spirit yee are of. But our Brethren in iniquiry whose zeale is as hot, and yet as darke as Hell it selfe, can be contented to deface so ma∣ny living Images of God, untill they make every Vil∣lage in their Native Country a shambles of Christians, to introduce their fanaticall conceirs. And our very Anabaprists whose beginning was like Neroes, made up of Charity and Meekenesse, in so much as Trajant said, the best Princes came farre short of the first five yeares of Neroes Government, who when he was but to signe the condemnation of a Malefactor, cryed our, O utinam &c, I would to God I had never known a Let∣ter; yet afterward he proved a very Monster of Cruel∣ty: So they at first were all mercy and Goodnesse, could not indure a Magistrate from the King to the Con∣stable, nor a Sword; held all Warres, all Cap∣tall Punishments, all effusion of blood to be ulaw∣full, yet are now grown more bloudy then Nero him∣selfe, and have died their Garments as deepe a Scarlet as Anti-Christ. What shall a Man thinke of such a Religion, but as a Schoole of Rebellion, a Nursery of Traytors,Gen. 49. 6. a Mother of all abhominations. O my
Soule come not thou into their secrets. The second Consideration is, That since we are sure of Enemies, it is wisdome to make prparation against them, Bowes and Swords, that is, ll Military Provisi∣on: as a skilfull Piloe when the Weather is calmest, doth prepare for a Tempest.2  12. Be of good Courage (said Ioab to his Souldier) let pay the Menfor our Peo∣ple, and for the Cities of our God, and then let the Lord doe that which seemeth good in his Eyes. His meaning was not that they should goe to it with their Fists, that was to play the Boyes, not the Men. The small and peaceable Company of Christs Disciples, armed with Innocence and Poverty,Luke 22. 38. yet had two Swords for their defence. What King (saith our Saviour) going to make warre against another King,Luke 14. 31. sitteth not downe and cousul∣teth, whether he he abe with ten thousand to meet him that commeth against him with tweny thousand? Observe first that he saith, what King? and against another King: Without the consent, or at least the implcir appro∣bation of the Sover igne Magistrate, no Mn can just∣ly take up publicke Arms. Our Saviour charged Pe∣ter to put o his sword,Mat. 26. 52. for all they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword. Why put up his sword? because he was a private Mn, and They that take the sword, that is, without the Auority of the supreame Magistrate, shall perish by the sword,Rom. 13. 4. for He beareth not the sword in vaine. But if pivate Persons have power to raise Arms, he bea∣reth the Sword altogether invain. Those places in ho∣ly Scripure which prohibit Christians to resist evill, or to render evill for evill, are by all Interpreters restrei∣ed to private Persons. Why did David inquire so often what reward should be given to him that killed
the Philistine, yet after his Victory never made De∣mand of it? But only by this meanes to gaine a Com∣mission from Saul. This was the cause why Caesar be∣fore his march to Rome did rejoyce so much, when An∣thony and some of the Tribunes of the People came into his Army; that being no Monarchy but a Popular State. By all which we may easily judge what is the condition of our present Rebells. Secondly, we may observe from these words of our Saviour, that even they who have the Power of Arms invested in them, ought carefully to proportion their preprations to their necessary oc∣casions. Saint Paul did thankeully accept of 200 Soul∣diers, 200 Spearemen and 70 Horse to convoy him to Caesarea,Act. 23. 23. safe from the insurrection of the Jewes. When a Trojan Priest offered to Alexander to shew him Pa∣ris his Harpe, he desired him rather to shew him A∣chilles his Speare, the more honorable Iustrument. The Phnicians pictured their Gods like Merchants with great bags and purses, to represent the power of mony: But the Graecians like Souldiers compleatly armed, to shew that all things are obedient to Arms. The Ro∣mans had the Temple of Ianu for their publicke Ar∣mory: and all provident States ever had their Arce∣nalls or Store-houses of Ammunition. A Travailers Sword though he be a Coward, yet it is a discouragement to a Theese. He that is best provided for defence, shall be sure to be least assaulted by his Enemies. It was an impertinent question of Socrates, when he see the strong Gates and Bulwarkes of Corinth, whether they were all Women that inhabited there. So soone as the Israe∣lites were come into the Land of Canaan Manna ceased, they were then to till the ground for their lively hood: It is no better then a plaine tempting of God, to depend
upon Divine assistence, and neglect ordinary meanes. It was the error of those frantick Anabaptists, who instead of sighting, were gaping up towards Heaven for a Mi∣racle to fall into their mouths, and thought themselves able to catch all the bullets into their Coatelaps. Indeed the King is forbidden to multiply Horses to himselfe, King. 11. 10. Deut. 17. 16: yet we know that King David provided speares and shields, and Solomon his Sonne provided not only Arms, but Ships, and Chariots, and Horsemen, without reproofe. The Text saith, that he had a thousand and four hundred Chariots, and twelve thousand Horsemen, which he disposed among the Cities of udah, 1 King. 10. 26. The religious King Asa in a time of Peace builded fencd Cities with walls, & Towers, & Gates & Barres, and God prospered him in it. He provided shields and Bowes and Targets and Speares for 580000. men, and accordingly God blessed him against the Aethiopi∣an his huge Host of a thousand thousand, 2 Chron. 14. 8. It i not then sply a sinne in a King to multiply his Warlike preparations, but accidentally to place his chiefe confidence in them, or by reason of them to lift up his heart above his Brethren. He that provideth not for his own, and especially for those of his own House, he hth deayed the Faith, and is worse then an Infidell, I T. 5. 8. The Commonwealth is the Kings Family, He is the Father of it: Christian Religion is so farre from disobliging him, that it binds him under the pain of grtevous Sinne and the high displeasure of his maker, to provide not only for the sustentation, but also for the protection of his Subjects. Indeed the Scripure saith she weapons of our warefare are spirituall, that is, our Christian Warefare with Sinne and Sathan, but we
have another capacity as we are men, and a Politicall Warfare, also which requires corporeall Weapons. And Saint Paul saith, We wrestle not with Elesh and Blood, That is not only, not principally with Flesh and Blood, we have greater Adversaries to cope withall, even Sinne and Sathan. Courage then, a Bible and a Bow are ot opposite: a man may be a good Swordman, and yet a good Christian. How often doth the Scripture call them the Warres of the Lord, the Battells of the Lord? How often doth it prescribe Military Rules and Pre∣cepts? God stiles himselfe the Captaine of the Lords Hoast, having his drawn sword in his hand. Iosh. 5. 14. Thou teachest my hands to warre and my fingers to fight, said David; I hope the Lord takes no Apprenti∣ss to teach them a wicked Trade. There is a time for Warre, and a time for Peace, Saith Solomon, but there is no time for that which is in it selfe unlawfull. Iohn Bap∣tist bids the Souldiers do violence to no man, accuse no man falsely, be content with their wages, he doth not bid them give over their Profession. Christ commends the Centurion, that He had not found so great Faith in Is∣rael. Saint Peter saith of Cornelius a Ciptein, that his Prayers and Almes were had in remembrance in the sight of God. And by Faith the Saints subdued Kingdoms, waxed valiant in Fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the Alients. Heb. 11. 33. Religion doth not make a Coward, Warre is the Exercise, Victory the Reward of Faith. To conclude this point, a Man may with a good Conscience meet his God with his Arms in his hand, nd safely lay down his Life in a just Warre. To dye for a Mans Religion, for his King, for his Country, is a degree of Marryrdome. Dulce & decorum est pr
Patria . Only there are some Rocks to be avoi∣ded, whereof this is one of the most principall, That a Christian Souldier doe not place his confidence in his Arms, which brings me to my third Observation. For I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword that shall help me. The Creatures are Gods Souldiers, and cannot move till he give them the Word. Let him but suspend his influence, and the most powerfull Creatures in the World become weak. The Lyons are not able to open their mouthes against Daniel, nor the fire to sindge one haire of the three Children. Ye have sown much and bring in little, ye eat but ye have not enough, ye drink but ye are not filled with drink, ye cloath you but there is no warmth, and he that earneth wages puts it into a bag with holes, a bottomelesse purse, Haggai 1. 6. Thus Seed, Meat, Drink, Cloathes, Money, Armes, all Creatures have so much power, and no more, then God infuseth in∣to them. Whats the reason of all this  Reade the ninth Verse, I did blow upon it. It it more easie for God to empty and exinanite all the Creatures in the World of power, then for a Man to blow away a Feather. Be∣sides Bread there is the nurritive faculty of Bread, which the Scripture calls the staffe of Bread, without which our Bread is like a lame Creeple without his staffe, who cannot move himselfe. Psal. 33. 15 A King is not sa∣ved by the Multitude of a Host, neither is a mighty Man (a Giant) deliveed by much strength, a Horse is but a vaine thing to save a Man. He doth not say a King cannot protect others, but lesse, He is not saved himselfe. There is no Creature more conducible to safety then an Horse, either for Victory or Flight, in utrumque pa∣ratus, yet without Gods concurrence an Horse is but a
vaine thing, or mendacium est equus, An Horse is but a Lie, as Saint Paul saith, an Idoll is nothing; an Idoll is something, either Gold, or Silver, or Brasse, or Wood, or Stone, So an Horse also hath a true subsistence of flesh and blood and bone: But an Idoll is nothing in efficacy, it is nothing in respect of that which the Idolater doth imagine, So an Horse if God withdraw his power is a Lie, without efficacy, not answerable to the confidence and expectation of his Rider. What Marveile? when One can chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, that want this influence. Deut. 32. 30. So without Gods bles∣sing, an horse is a Lie, an Army is a Lie, a walled City is a Lie. The Walls of Ecbatane were thirty Foot thick, and seventy Foot high, The Walls of Babilon were 50 foot thick and an 100. high, Ierusalem had a triple Wall about it: yet all these were ovethrowne, and if the Devotion of Pilgrims had not kept a little Life in Jerusalem they had all become long since deserts for Owles to, scriech in, and Satyrs to dance in. The like Fortune did Tyre run that was deemed invincible, The Walls of Jerischo fell down with the sound of Trumpets. And Capernaum which touched the Clouds with its losty Turrets, was cast down to Hell. When Nice∣phourus Phocas was building a strong Wall about his Pallace, he heard a voice in the night, O King though thou build thy Wall as high as Heaven, yet the sinne that is within will easily destroy it. The confusion of Babell, may teach us what is the united strengths and attempts of a World of Men without the Lord. Obad. 4. Though thou exalt thy selfe as the Eagle, and set thy nest among the Starres, thence will I bring thee downe, saith the Lord. Then let not the Bow-man trust in his Bow, nor
the Swordman in his Sword. Where Presumption leads the Van, Destruction commonly followes in the Reere. Where Pride is on Horsebacke, Shame alwayes sits upon the Crooper. Qui de se presumit ante proster∣nitur quam pugnat, said Saint Austine, He that trusts in himself is fallen already before he fight. Goliath threat∣ned David to give his flesh to the Fowles of the Ayre, and the Beasts of the Field, but a little stone taught him what it was to reckon without his Host. Neb chadnezzar vaunted of his Power, Is not this great Babilon which I have builded, hy my might, for the Honour of my Majesty? But a voice from Heaven whispered in his eare, Thy King∣dome is departed from thee, thou must dwell among the Beasts. Julian the Apostate threatned after his return from the Persian War, to root out the Sect of the Galileans, but a drt, (God knows from what hand, whether from Heaven or from Man,) learned him another lesson, Vicisti Galilaee, vicisti, Thou hast overcome thou Jesus of Galilee, thou hast overcome. Feed this man with bread of affliction and water of affliction, said Achab of Micheah, vntill I returne again in Peace; Good, what was the end of this presump∣tion? Notwithstanding all his disguising himselfe in the day of Battell, the Arrow found him out, and the Joynts of his harnesse. There is no Wisedome, nor Vnderstanding, nor Counsell against the Lord, Prov. 21. 30. It is better therefore to trust in the Lord, then to put any confidence in Man. That leades me to my fowerth Observation. But it is thou that savest us from our Enemies, Prov. 18. 10. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, te Righteous runneth unto it and is safe. And Prov. 21. 31. The Horse is prepared against the day ef Battell, but safety (or Victory) is of the Lord. Paul may Plant, and Apollo may Water, ut
it is thou that givest the increase. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. It was a brave answer of David to Goliah, Thou commest to me with a Sword, and with a Speare, and with a shield, but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, 1 Sam. 17. 45. When an Army of Syrians had begirt Elysha's City round, his servant cryed out, Alas my Master what shall we doe? Feare not (said Elisha) there are more with us, then with them: And praying God to open the young mans eyes, he see all the Mountains full of Horses and Charrets of fire round about Elisha, 2. King. 6. 17. So the Angells pitch their Tents about Gods Children. The godly never want heavenly suc∣cour, though they cannot be discerned with bodily eyes. The Lord himself is a wall of fire about them, 2 Zechar. 5. What virtue was there in Moses his Rod to break the hard Rocks, to divide the red Sea, to change whole Rivers into blood? Or in Shamgars Good, (an Instrument not made for War,) to slay 600? Or in Sampsons Jw boe of an Asse, to mke such heapes upon heapes of caikasses? Or in Eli∣sha's Salt to sweeten the bitter waters? Or i Cly and Spittle to open the eyes of the blind? Or in Peters shad∣dow to drive away diseases? But it was Thou; It was God that used these contempible means for the manifestation of his own power, It was God that added weight to Da∣vids little stone, to make it pierce into the Forehead of Goliah, It was God that added strength to a weak womans arme to destroy Ahimelech, It was God that cast Siserah into such a profound sleep, to give Jahell opportunity for her Hammer and her Naile. But it is Thou; It was God that made Jeremiah a defenced City, an Iron Pillar, a wall of Brasse agaist the whole Land, Jer. 1. 18. It is all one with him to save by many or by few. Though ye had
smitten the Army of the Chaldeans (saith God) so that there remained none but wounded men, yet they shall arise up every man in his Tent, and burne this City with fire, Jer. 37. 10. God can infuse such strength and vigour into men halfe dead, that all the power of their Enemies is not able to resist. What shall we say then? When we have both Bows and Swords let us nor presume; When we want Bwes and Swords, let us neither dispre, nor yet rashly hazard our selves: The one argues want of Faith, the other is a tempting of God. Whether we have them, or want them, yet let us say, Some put their trust in Char∣rets, and some in Horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God, Psal. 20. 7. When it was told Leonides that the Persian Arrowes did obscure the Sun, It is well, said he, then we shall fight in the shadow. But well and well againe is he, that fights under the shadow of the Al∣mighty, and under the covering of his Wings: Life or Death or whatsoever happens, shall work together for his good. But we are apt to impute all occurrences to se∣cundary causes; If a sicknesse seise upon us, we ascribe it to some cold or distemper, we scarce think of God: We trust him more easily with our Soules, then with our bodies, or our Estates. And if we doe confide in God, it is as an Usurer trusts a Bankerupt upon a pawne; So long as we have Men and Mony and Armes and Am∣munition we trust in God, but we cannot with the Wo∣man of Canaan pick comfort out of the name of a Dog, nor say with holy Job, Though the Lord should kill me yet will I trust in him. What is the result of all this? If we affect prosprou successe, we must place our confidence in God, not in our Bow, or in our Sword, 2 Chron. 13. 18. Judah prevailed against Israel, Because they relyed upon
the Lord God of their Fathers. The Israelites had grea∣ter numbers, a better cause, all manner of advantages a∣gainst the Benjamites, yet they lost two great Battells, and prevailed not till they sought for Victory with tears, and humiliation at the hands of God, Judges 20. Whilst Moses lifted up his hands in Prayer Israel prevayled a∣gainst Amalech. Bellum tibi imminet O Balach, saith a Father, O Balach thou Sonne of Zipor, Warre is in thy gates, six hundred thousand armed Israelites are entered into thy confines, And doest tou prepare curses in stead of dart, and Words for Wepons? Doubtlesse Balach had heard that Israel moved not a hand against Pharaoh, but the Lord fought for them, as an Hbrew Rabbine did expound this Text unto Origen, Numb. 22. 4, Now shall this Company licke up all that is round about it, as the Oxe licketh up the Grasse of the Field; The Oxe licketh up the grasse with his Mouth, and cuts it with his Tongue, as with a sickle, So this People fight with their Lips, and overcome with their Prayers, When thou buildest a Fort, lay the foundation in Prayer, When thou purrest on thine armour, buckle it to thee with Prayer. But God heareth not sinners, as one said to a company of Pirates in their devotions, pray lower, least God heare that yee are passing this way. He tht will pray aright for Victory over his Enemies, must first endeavour to conquer his own corruptions, He must doe his Duty, and referre the successe to God, as. Ioah said, Let us be valiant, and ply the Men, and let God doe what seemeth good in his Eyes, He must not swerve from the streight line of Justice for any advantage, He must not limit God to any meanes. There is a story of an Hermit, That prayed to God sometimes for Raine, sometimes for Faire Wea∣ther
and God still granted his request, yet his Garden did not prosper: So going to another Hermits Cell, he found all his Herbes faire and flourishing; And when he admired at it, the other Hermit soone resolved the doubt, O Foole, didst thou think thy selfe to be wiser then God? Such another fellow was Naaman, 2 King. 5. 11. I thought he will come out to me, and call on the name of the Lord, and strike his hand over the place. If God doe not help us just when we please our selves, and by such meanes as we approve, we thinke God hath forgotten us. Let us therefore pray with due submission, and when God hath granted our request, let us give all the glory to Him. But it is Thou, &c. This is my fift and last Observation that in lieu of Gods Protection he expcts a thankefull acknowledge∣ment from us, It is thou that savest us from our Enemies, and pu test them to confusion that hate us. Why was Go∣liaths sword laid up in the Temple? Though it was lp∣ped up in an Ephod, yet I doe not dobt but that at so∣lemne times it was to be sheed to the People, to ex∣cite them to  more cheerfull Thankesgiving, for Gods gracious deliverance of them from the Army of the Phi∣listins. Therefore God caused a potfull of Mann to be preserved, that Posterity might see with what food he had fed their Predecessors. And the Rod of Aaron was so carefully kept to be a memoriall of Gods great deliver∣ances. How devoutly did the Idolaters give thankes to their Gods of Gold and of Silver, being but supposed Be∣nefactors? much more we to the God of Heaven and Earth. What thanks did Christ the Sonne of the living God give unto his Father, for a dinner of Barly Bread and of broiled Fish? If any of us be invited forth to a Meale,
we hold it uncivility not to return thanks, much more to God who dayly spreadeth our Table, and filleth our cups, yea, who hath preserved to us the Tables and the Cups themselves, and not these only but our Lands, our Houses, our Goods, our Wives, our Children, our Lives, our Liber∣ties, our Religion, O sing prayses sing prayses unto our God, sing prayses sing prayses unto our King, who saveth us from our Enemies, and putteth them to confusion that hate us. The skirts of Aarons Garments were compassed with Bells and Pomegrannets. Pomegrannets are an excellent Fruit and signify Gods blessings; the sound of the Bells is our thankesgiving. When his Pomegrannets do abound, it is meet our Bells should sound. After the Lord had taken his rod off from Zachary, and restored him to the use of his tongue, the first thing that he did was to sing thankes to his Deliverer, Blessed be the Lord God of Is∣rael, which hath visited and redeemed his People. If God did require the first fruits of the Earth, much more the first Fruits of the Heart, and of the Soule. This is the end of this Assembly to return our thanks to the Lord of Hosts for a late victory obteined in the West parts of this Coun∣ty, by His Majesties Army under the Conduct of his Ex∣cellence the Earle of Newcastle, against the Lord Fairfax, and the Northern Rebells. A great victory indeed, whether we looke upon so many loyall Subjects that were redee∣med by it, and restored to their Friends, as Isaac was to Abraham, even from Death to Life: Or whether we look upon the great number of the Rebels that were slain, (the more the pitty) either in the Act, or in the intention of murther, (I cannot give, I conceive that no man that under∣stands himselfe can give a better terme to these Arms which are raised without the approbation of Soveraigne
Authority,) and so without Gods extraordinary mercy perished both Bodyes and Soules: Or whether we looke upon the great number of Prisoners, the vast propor∣tion of Ordinance, Arms, and Ammunition which were taken. A great Victory if we respect the place where it was, in the midst of all their strength, or the time when it was, in the very height of all their Power, or the Fruits and consequents thereof, the reducing of a great part of this County of Yorke to Obedience, and the set∣tling and securing in a manner of all the North Parts of England. A great Victory if we consider the manner of it, upon all the disadvantages in the World, of ground, and wind, and preparation, as if God should say from Heaven, I aloe will have the glory of this day to my selfe. Lastly, a grat Victory, if we looke upon the spee∣dinesse of it: as Caesar sometimes writ to the Senate, veni, vidi, vici, I came, I saw, I overcame, So here what a number of strengths were deserted and recovered in one day? If the Lord had not been on our side when Men rose up against us, Or if that Day had succeeded ill, God knowes what had become of all us here present, for our Estates we had been reduced to Beggery, for our Bodyes and Posterityes to slavery, for our Soules to He∣ey, Brownisme, Anabaptisme, or Familisme, or some oter more newly upstart vanity. Therefore once more Sing prayses sing prayses unto our God, sing prayses sing prayses unto our King. Who hath saved us from our Enemies and put them to confusion that hate us. When we enjoyed Peace and Plenty and Prosperi∣ty, we were not sensible of it, but apt to murmur, We see nothing but this Manna, ready to say militia est potior, Warre is better: and it is probable that our fore-pssed
unthankefulnesse, is the true cause of our present Suf∣ferings. Now then when the Crosse hath opened our eyes, when we find the excellency and the sweetnesse of those blessing, by wanting them, which we could not find by injoying them, though we were ungratefull for our former health, yet let us blesse God who hath put us into so faire a way of recovery from a desperate sick∣nesse. And now let us talke no more of supposed De∣layes, when we see how God hath disposed of all things to the greater manifestation of hi on poer, and the more speedy expediting of that very Work which we desire. And what knowest thou O Mn, whether God did order all things thus for this very end? Yet give me leave to say there is lesse danger in sound deliberte delay, then rash precipitation. The Graecians ordei∣ned no punishment for him that lost his Sword, but for him that lost his Buckler. Aut hoc, aut super hoc, said the Spartan Mother to her Sonne. The Romans had two gallant Capteins at one time, Marcellus full of Courage, Life, and Activity, and Fabius Maximus, slow, but sure, who did all things with leisure and de∣liberation, undoing Hanniball by inches, The former they called the Sword, the latter the Buckler of Rome. And that Politicke Nation upon just grounds did pre∣fere their Buckler before their Sword. Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem, Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem. But to returne. Thankesgiving is the Worke of this Day, let us doe it. Ingratitude dries up the Fountain of Gods Love, the Rivers of his Grace, the Dew of his
Mercy. As we looke to have more Victories, and the light of Gods countenance to shine still upon us, let us doe it. It becommeth well the just to be thankefull. In Heaven there is no Preaching, no Praying, no Sa∣craments. but Thankesgivings and Alleluiahs. Let us doe it with intention and devotion, not like Children which give thankes looking another way with their Fa∣ces; nor like Marriners which pray hard in a storme, but so soon as they are gotten into the Harbour, drown the remembrance  all their former vows in full cups. O take heed of Forgetfulnesse, there is nothing that growes old sooner then a good turne. As the Sea is the Foun∣tain of all Rivers, so they run into the Sea again by which meanes the flux and reflux is made perpetuall: All good and perfect gifts proceed from God the Father of Lights, and must be returned again to him by Thankes∣giving, that the entercourse of his Blessings and our thanks may be reciprocall and perpetuall. We have not wanted Enemies and such as hate us, Enemies to our Church, Enemies to our State: But we wanted Arms, we wanted our Bow and our Sword, The Enemies had seized upon His Majesties Magazine, his Ships and his Arms, and left us naked both for Defence and Offence. Yet the goodnesse of Almighty God, and the Provi∣dence of our gracious Queen, which ought ever to be thankefully acknowledged by this Nation, hath suppli∣ed this defect, and furnished us again with a Bow and a Sword, Arms and Ammunition, and with these we have obteined the Victory; with these, not by these, It was not our Bow, it was not our Sword that did helpe us, but it was thou O God who diddest save us from our Ene∣myes and put them to confusion that hate us. O Lord we
render unto thee all possible Thankes. Doe thou set∣tle our wandring imaginations, doe thou elevate our drowsie spirits, doe thou helps our dulnesse, That we may be yet more and more thankfull, with our hearts, with our tongues, with our Lifes, That so we may day∣ly heare of more and more Victoryes, which thou gi∣vest unto thine Anointed, untill the hopes of his Tray∣terous Enemies be like Winter Ice melted away to no∣thing, and his Crown be restored to it's ancient lustre, That under his Protection we may freely meet in this thy hol Temple, to laud and magnify thy glorious Name, O Eternall God, Father, Sonne, and Holy Gost, who art above all, and through all, and in all, To thee be Glory, and Dominion, and Thankesgiving, for ever and ever. Amen. FINIS
