B5361 12242483 56826
A true Copy of three Judgments given forth by a Party of Men, called Quakers at Philadelphia, against George Keith and his Friends. With two Answers to the said Judgments. The First Judgment. AT a Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, the 26th of 11 Mon. 1691. Thomas Fitzwater charged George Keith for denying the sufficiency of the Light, which G. Keith denying, T. Fitzwater insisted that he could prove the same, & being examined concerning his Proof thereof, several Friends present stood up, and said, They heard the said George Keith say, That he did not believe the Light was sufficient without something else, namely, Thomas Prichard, William Harwood, Benjamin Chambers, William Southbe, and several others. And after the matter in Debate had been throughly heard, the aforesaid Credible Evidences giving their Testimonies as above-said, the Meeting saw no reason to give Judgment against Tho. Fitzwater in this particular above-mentioned; but h said Thomas very readily left the matter to this Meeting and condemned the rash Spirit that he spoke those words in, although the Charge in it self was true. This is a Copy of what passed at a Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, the 26 of 3 Month. 1692. A. M. The Second Judment. VVE being prevented in our Meetings of late, to proceed order∣ly in business, by reason of a Turbulent & unsubdued Spirit, which has much disquieted us, but having respite at this time, have considered seriously and duely of a Charge exhibited several Months past by George Keith against William Stockdale, many if not most of
being present at several Meetings, where the Allegations of each side were heard; and as the Friends then present concluded on a Judgment in this matter, but were prevented of publishing the same, by reason of George Keith's unruly behaviour, & extream Passion, which abruptly broke up the said Meeting, we declare our concurrent sence as follow∣eth, That whereas Proof was made by two Witnesses, That William Stockdale should say, that Gen. Keith's preaching Christ without, and Christ within was preaching two Christs, which W. Stockdale denyed the words so spoken; and alleged that Geo. Keith called him an Ignorant Heathen, and gave him several villifying Expressions. Our Judgment is, That William Stockdale is reproveable, and blame-worthy or uttering the said words, they being an Offence to many sound and tender Friends, and that he condemn the same. And as for G. Keith's manner of proceeding against him, we cannot own the same to be pursuant to Gospel Order, the said G. Keith having not alone dealt with him in private before he had further prosecuted his Complaint; neither can we hold him ex∣cuseable for his undecent expressions to W. Stockdale, he being elder in Truth and in Years. Given forth by the Meeting of Publick Friends, at Philadelphia, the 4th of 4th Month, 1692. A True Copy, by Samuell Jenings. The Third Judgment, and Condemnation, against G. K. To the several Monethly and Quarterly Meetings in Pennsilvania, East and West-Jarsey, and else-where, as there may be occasion. BEloved Friends, In tender Love, and with Spirits bowed down before the Lord, is this our Salutation unto you, earnestly deing your growth and daily preservation in the antient , and in the simplicity of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; and or hope and breathings are, that no insinuations or wiles of the Enemy shall prevail to turn you aside from, our stedfastness, or to cause you so esteem lightly of the rock and way of Gods Salvation unto you, but that you be kept in the light and life, which was & is the jt mans path, to the end of on days, Amen. Now, dear Friends, it is with sorrow of Spirits and grief of Souls, that we signifie unto you the tedious Exercise & vexatious Perplexity
we have met with in our late Friend George Keith, for several Months past; With mourning & lamentation do we say, How is this Mighty Man fallen! how is his Shield vilely cast away, as though he had not known the Oyl of the holy Oyntment! How shall it be told in G & published in the Streets of Akelon? Will not the daughters of the Philestians rejoyce? Will not the daughters of the Uncircumcised Tri∣umph, when they hear that he is fallen upon the soaring Mountains, and from the high Places of Israel! Oh! how are we distressed for thee, thou as a man slain in thy high places! Whilst thou walked in the Counsel of God, & wert little in thine own Eyes, thy Bow did abide in strength, thy Sword returned not empty; from the sat of the Enemies of God thy Bow turned not back; His Enemies were then vile unto thee, and his Followers honourable in thy esteem. Oh! how lovely wert thou in that day, when his Beauty was upon thee, and when his Comliness covered thee! Why should his Ornaments exalt thee, which were given to humble thee before him! and how thou art fallen from thy first Love, and are become Treacherous to the Spouse of thy Youth! Consider where thou art fallen, and Repent, and do thy first Works. But so it hath happend Friends, lest any Flesh should glory, but be∣come Silent before the Lord, that this once Eminent Man and Instru∣ment of Renown in the Hand of the Lord, whilst he kept his first Habi∣tation, and knew the Government of Truth over his own Spirit, and witnessed the same to be a Bridle to his Tongue, was then serviceable both in Pen and Speech to the Churches of Christ; But now, and of late, it is too obvious and apparent, that being degenerated from the lowly meek and peaceable Spirit of Christ Jesus, and grown cool in Charity and love towards his Brethren, that he is Gone into a Spirit of Enmity, Wrath, Self-Exaltation, Contention & Janglings; and as a Person without the fear of God before his Eyes, and without regard to his Christian Brethren, and letting loose the Reins to an Extravagant Tongue, he hath broken out into many Ʋngodly Speeches, Railing Accusations and Pas∣sionate Threatnings towards many of his Brethren and Elders, and that upon slender Occasions; and when some in Christian Duty have laid before him his unsavoury words and unchristian-frame, he hath treated them with such vile words and abusive language, such as a Person of common civility would loath. It hath been too frequent with him, & that in a transport of Heat and Passion, to call some of his Brethren in the Ministry, and other Elders, and that upon small Provocations, if
any, Fools, Ignorant Heathens, Infidels, Silly Souls, Lyars, Hereticks, Rotten Ranters, Muggletonians, & other Names of that  famous strain, thereby to our grief oaming out his own Shame. And further, his Anger and Envy, being Cruel against us, and not contenting himself with his Harshness against Persons, but he proceeded in bitterness of Spirit to charge our Meeting with being come together to cloak Heresie and Deceit, and publishing openly several times, That there were more Doctrines of Devils and Damnable Heresies among the Quakers, than among any Profes∣sion among the Protestants. He hath long objected against our Disci∣pline, even soon after his coming among us, and having prepared a Draught of his own, and the same not finding the expected Reception, he seem'd disgusted since: He hath often quarrell'd with us about Con∣fessions, declaring, That he knew none given forth by the body of Friends to his Satisfaction; and often charg'd most of us of being unsound in the Faith. We have offered in several Meetings for his satisfaction, and to prevent strife among us, & for preserving the Peace of the Church to deliver a Confession of our Christian Faith in the words of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the Author of the Christian Faith, and in the word of the Apostles & Disciples, his faithful Followers; or we would declare our belief in Testimonies of our antient Friends and faithful Brethren, who were generally received by us; or we would concur & agree upon a Confession, and have it transmitted to the Approbation of the Yearly Meeting here, or the Yearly Meeting at London; ya, it was offered unto him at the same time, that a Confession concerning the  matter in Controversi should e given out of a Book of his own, but al wa slighted a insufficient: The Lord knows the trouble which we have ad with this  Member, and the openness of our hearts and well wishes towards him, notwithstanding his rage and violence against , and of the endeavours of many in this place to have gain'd upon him by a friendly converse, and by other means not inconsiderable to a otherly freedom; but one labour hither to seems to be a water spil upon the ground: And  Meeting having Tenderly and Orderly dealt wit  for his abusive Language and sorderly Behaviour, he hath  slighted  Applications of giing him to a sence of his ill Treatment a Miscarriages, but in  mner said to the Friends appointed by the Meeting to admonish him  Judgment of the meeting under his ; and hath of late set up a seperate Meeting , where he hath, like an open Opposer, not only
reviled several Friends, by exposing heir Religions Reputations in mix Auditories of some hundreds, endeavouring to render them & Friends here, by the Press and otherways, a scorn to the Prophane, & the Song of the Drunkards, but he hath traduced & villified our worthy travel∣ing Friends J D. and T. W. in their Powerful and savoury Ministry, whose service is not only here, but in most Meetings in England, Scotland and Ireland well known to have a seal in the hearts of many thousands of the Israel of God: he hath hath also within a few weeks appeared in opposition as it were, to the Body of Friends, by putting on his Hat when our well received and recommended Friend J. Dickenson was at Prayer, & that in a Meeting of near a thousand Friends & others, & so going out of the Meeting, to the great disquiet thereof, & to the draw∣ing some scores into the same Opposition with him, by his ill Example; and he thus persisting in his repeated oppositions, hard speeches and continued seperation, & labouring, like an unwearied Adversary, to widen the Breach made by him, & so abusing some of the neighbouring Meetings by being as yet under that cover of being owned by us, We are hereby brought under a Religious constraint, and to prevent other Meetings of being further injur'd by him, to give forth this Testimony, strained as it were from us by his many & violent Provocations, viz. That we cannot own him in such ungodly Speeches and disorderly Be∣haviour, or in his seperate Meetings, and that we disown the same, as proceeding from a wrong Spirit, which brings into Disorder inwardly and led into distraction and confusion outwardly, and until he con∣demn and decline the same, we cannot receive him in his publick Mi∣nistry, and would have him cease to offer his Gift, as such, among us, or else-where among Friends, till he be reconciled to his offended Bre∣thren,. And as to those few of our Brethren in the Gift of the Ministry who ae gone out with G. Keith, into his uncharitable & dividing Spi∣rit, the miserable effects whereof many of u have sufficiently known in Old England, and other parts) our Judgment is, That whilst they con∣tinue such, they become unqualified to the Work of the Gospel, as degenerating thereby from the Guidance of Gods blessed & peaceable Spirit in their hearts (from whence proceeds the effectual New Testament Ministry) and being turn∣ed rom the peaceable Fruits thereof, are gone to Ʋncharity and Contention. And now, all you who have walked in fellowship and communion with us, and are drawn aside through inconsideration, o otherwise, into this  of Seperation and Prejudice against our Meetings orderly established,
and wherein we have been often and mutually refresh't together, we cannot but in the fear of God, and in love to your Souls, admonish you also of the Insecurity of your present estate, and that therein we cannot have Ʋnity with you, and unless you return from under that Spirit, Dryness and Barrenness from the Lord wil be your Reward. And so ear Friends, we exhort you all to behave your selves in the Spirit of meekness & peaceble Truth, upon all occasions, but more especially upon any discourse or conference with any of them who are discontented among you, or started aside fom you; and avoid all Heats & Contentions in matters of Faith and Worship; and let not the Salt of the Covenant be wanting in your words and actions, for thereby the Savour o your Conversation will reach the Witness of God in them. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen. Given forth by the Meeting of Publick Friends in Philadelphia, the 20th of the 4th Month, 1692. Samuell Jenings, John Delavall, William Yardly, Joseph Kerckbridge, Walter Faucet, Hugh Roberts, Robert Owen, William Walker, John Lynam, George Gray, John Symcock, Griffith Owen, John Bown, Henry Wilis, Paul Saunders, John Blunston, William Cooper, Thomas Thakray, William Byles, Thomas Lloyd, John Williford, Nicholas VValln, VVilliam VVatson, George Maris, Thomas Ducket, Joshua Fearne, Evan Morris, Richard VValter. Here follows Two Answers to the said Judgments. To all faithful Friends in Pennsilvania, East and West-Jarsey, and to all every where else in all parts of the VVorld, to whose hands this may come, The Salutation of Love. WE in behalf of our selves, and many Brethren, who are falsly called the Seperate Meeting at Philadelphia, having taken into our serious and weighty Consideration, three several Papers given forth by them of the opposite side, who have opposd us, and continue to oppose us in our present Testimony to the Truth of
Christ, and his blessed Gospel & Doctrine, viz. The first given forth by the Monthly Meeting of the opposite side, the 20 of 3d Month, 192▪ wherein they clear T. Fitzwater of his falsly accusing G. K. for denying the sufficiency of the Light, saying expresly in their said Paper, That for credible VVitnesses giving their Testimony, that they heard G. K. say, he did not believe the Light was sufficient without some-what else; the meeting saw no reason to give Judgment against T. Fitzwater in tis particular, the said Thomas condemning the rash spirit that he spoke these words in, though the Charge in it self was true. And G. K. having both at a Quarterly and Monthly Meeting proceeding, sufficiently proved, & which was confes∣sed by T. Lloyd, as the Mouth of these Meetings, that by that some-what else, G. K. had frequently declared he did not mean humane Learning, nor the Scriptures, nor outward preaching (altho' the Scriptures, and outward  ar Instrumental, in Gods ordinary way of working, together with  inward operation of the spirit to mens salvation) as absolutely necessary, but the Man Christ Jesus, and what he did and suffered for us on Earth, and what he now doth for  in Heaven, & the fullness that dwelleth in him. By which it plainly appeareth, the said Monthly Meeting hath excluded the Man Christ Jesus, our blessed Mediator & Saviour, from having any  concern in our Salvation, and therefore we do unanimously, & with one heart judge & condemn their false Judgment, in claming Tho Fitzwater, that hath this tendency, not only to condemn G. K. for his  Christian Doctrine,  is a plain denyal of the Man Christ Jesus, & the great Merits, & Vas &  of his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection,  Asseon, and his Mediation for us in Heaven; a which are some∣what else thn the People called Quakers commonly understand by the ght, to wit, the Light in every mans Conscience. And by this rash ad inconsiderate Act of their Monthly Meeting, proceeding from great Ignorance, Error and Ʋnbelief in them, they have sufficiently declared themselves to be no true Believers in the Man Christ Jesus, and therefore  Christians; & for this cause we cannot own them to be our Christian , nor joyn with them in any Religious VVorship, until the con∣demn themselves for the said Act, and give us some evidence of their un∣ Repentanos and sincere Faith, by their open Confession and Decla∣ra of the Truth of Christ, which now they have denyed. The second Paper is given forth by a Meeting of these called Friends of the Ministry, signed by Sam. Jenings, as  lk of the said Meeing, wherein they give too partial and defective Judgment against VVilliam
Stockdale, not blaming him for any Offence to God, or Christ, nor con∣victing him for his sin of Blasphemy, whereof he was guilty, in charging G.K. for preaching Two Christs, because he preach'd Faith in Christ with∣in, and in Christ without us, wherein he plainly denyed Faith in Christ without us, that we judge Blasphemy against the Son of Man. Also, the said Meeting hath falsly judged and blamed G. K. for calling W. S. An Ignorant Heathen; for seeing he denyed Faith in Christ without us, we judge it was his proper Name, and he was not worthy to be accounted in the Truth, having discovered his so great Ignorance and Unbelief in one of the great Fundamentals of the Christian Faith. Also, they falsly accuse G. K. for not giving W. S. Gospel Order, whereas upon due ex∣amination, we find, that he had given him sufficient Gospel Order. The third Paper is signed by Samuell Jenings, John Simcock, Thomas Lloyd, and others, in Number 28, all pretended Preachers, wherein they have passed a most false Judgment against G. K. for his sound Christian Doctrine, and Godly Zeal, in sharply reproving gross Anti-Christian Errors, that he had detected them guilty of, partly by the Open Confession of some, and partly by the Coiace of others, and seeking to cloak and cover and defend the Guilty; and the said three Papers, and the matter contained in them being sufficiently answered in a late Book, called, The Plea of the Innocent, &c. which we having read and well considered, do approve of, and allow to be given forth by our una∣nimous Consent and Approbation, the particular things, in matter of Fact, therein contained, being all known to some of us, and the most principal to most of us: And we of this Meeting deliver it as our una∣nimous Judgment, that all these who have given judgment in the said three Papers above-mentioned, have given a false judgment in them against the Truth, and against G. K. and his Friends joyned with him in this Testimony. And we do declare against their false Judgment, and say, That G. K. and other Friends of the Ministry joyned with him in this Testimony, ought not to forbear the Exercise o their Ministerial Gift that God hath given them, notwithstanding the le Judgment of false Bre∣thren, that have joyned together in a Faction against him, and his faithful Brethren, but that he and his faithful Brethren of the Ministry ought to be encouraged and received by all faithful Friends every where, in the use and exercise of their Ministerial Gifts, which we are perswaded they still have, and the use and exercise thereof will tend to the Glory of God, the Prosperity of Truth, and Salvation of Souls. And we also deliver it as
our unanimous Judgment, that all these 28 Persons that have signed that false Judgment against G.K. & his Friends, ought not to be owned nor countenanced in their preaching or praying, but denyed, and all others that justifie them, until they condemn themselves for their said false and rash Judgment against G. K. and his Brethren; and until they give some publick and open Confession and Declaration that they are sound in the Faith of Christ, they having given sufficient cause to us, to conclude, That at present they have not the sound Faith of Christ. And tho' we have just cause to blame them for condemning us without all Hearing and Trial, yet they have no cause to blame us, because we have oft ought and requested a Meeting with them to have things of Difference fairly debated and tried, but could never obtain it; and they having new made publick their false Judgment against us, in three several Papers, we are concerned, for the Defence of Truth, and our Reptation, both as Men and Christians, to give forth this publick Te∣stimony against them, and to recommend it to all faithu Friends to consider and examine by the Spirit of Truth; and let both their pub∣lick Papers and ours be impartially weighed in the Ballance of Truth, in order to which we are willing that all their papers be printed as well as ours, that have been published on both sides, that so the impartial Readers may have a fair Opportunity to judge of both. Given forth at our Meeting at the House of Phillip James in Philadel∣phia the 3 o 5th month, 1692. in behalf of many of our Bre∣thren both in Town and Country, who are one with us in this Testimony, though not now present. Richard Dngworth, Joan Wells, Phillip James, Henry Furnis, James Sattick, James Choper, sen. William Davis, Robert Wallis, James Poulter, Nicholas Fierce, Thomas Budd, Jon Barclay, William Bradford, James Cper, jun. John Potus, John M' C, James Chick, John Bartram, Abel Noble, Joseph VValker, Thomus Paschall, Richard Hliard, William Watte, Anthony Stges, Ralph VVard, Thomas Pt, Jon Ga, Peter Chamberlain,
An Expostulation with Samuell Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and the rest of the twenty eight Unjust Judges and Signers of the Paper of Condemnation against G. K. & his Friends. And Complain for a Pub∣lick Hearing and Tryal before all Impar∣tial People. WHereas Samuell Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and others being in Number 28 have published a Paper a∣gainst G. K. the rest of his Brethren wh are joyned with him in this Testimony for the Lord Jesus, against whom they prophecy, That Dryness and Barrenness from the Lord, will be their Reward. We having read and considered the said Judgment, do testifie against it, as an unjust and unrigh∣teous Act; but that which aggravates the Crime against them is, that they say, This Meeting having tenderly and orderly dealt with him, &c. when they know in their Consciences, they dealt 10. with G. K. nr never sent for him to their said Meeting, but tryed and judged him altogether in his absence, wherein they have done worse than the Baptists did in the case of Tho. Hicks; for when Friends appealed to the People call'd Baptists oice against T. Hicks, they took their time & appointed a Meeting, and 3 or 4 days before the said Meeting sent Let∣ters to G. W. and W. P's Houses to give them notice to be at the Meeting, but they being so far from home that the could not have timely notice, it was reckon'd great Injustice for them o proceed and try Friends and T. Hcks in their absence; and
upon Complaint they give another Meeting: But T. Lloyd, S. Jenings, and the rest are so far short of the Justice of the Baptists, that they never so much as acquainted G. K. of their Meeting or intent to proceed against him, nor never sent for him that we can understand, only W Byles came to G.K's house and asked for him, his Wife told, he was from home, and she expected him the next Morning, but they told nothing of their business with him, but in all haste proceeded to judge him in his absence before he came home. Is this your orderly dealing with him? Is this your Justice? Is this your Christ an tender∣ness? your Charity, & your bearing with him in a Christian Spirit? for shame cease thus proceeding, or you will e a stink in the Nostrils of the Nations where it shall be told▪ What! pretend to Christianity, & fall short of Heathen Justice! John 7.50, 51 Acts 25.16, 17 Did the Baptists do unfair in procee∣ding to try Friends in their absence? Then much more you: for they gave some Notice before of their intending to Try Tho. Hicks, but you never so much as told G. K. of your so Meeting: Wherefore allow us so much Justice as the Baptists did to have another Meeting publickly to try G. K. where all People may be present, that are willing to come, and whereof G. K. may have timely notice, and liberty to plead his own Cause, and let all Impartial People judge; & through Gods Assistance we shall make it appear, that your said Judgment is unjust, & G. K. not worthy of Condemnation. Was there ever such an Act done in any Christian Society before, to con∣demn a man without ever hearing of him, or suffering him to speak for himself? Surely its far short of any worldly Court, where the party shall have timely notice to prepare for his his Trya nd liberty to plead his own cause in the face of the Country, and where his Accusers are not allowed to sit and give Judgment against him: But so it is, that these Unjust & Unrighteous Judges have proceeded to try, judge, and publish their Judgment against G. K. without ever hearing of him,
when its well known the most of them were his great Oppo∣sers: They might be sure this way to condemn him, when only a Faction of them get togeher, and accuse him, and he nor any for him be present to speak for him. But that which still hightens the Crime of Tho. Lloyd, Sam Jenings, and the rest of the 28 Unjust Judges, is, that they of the Ministry should give such a false Judgment, and then impose it on all the Meetings in these 3 Provinces, when most of the Friends thereof are great strangers to the Matter in Controversie, not knowing which Party is in the Right, but they must take said Judgment upon Trust from them, without enquiring into the Cause and Verity thereof; and where they think their said Judgment will not readily be swallowed down, they will fol∣low it from Meeting to Meeting, cloathed with their Magi∣stratical Robes, and if any Friends show their dislike of having it imposed on them without their own consent, and considera∣tion of the matter, presently threaten to bind them to the good Behaviour, and to the Peace, and call out for a Constable, thereby endeavouring to trample us down by their Magistra∣tical Power & Authority, as Samuell Jenings, Sam. Richardson, Thomas Lloyd, John Delavall and Anthony Morris did lately at a Monthly Meeting near Frankford, as is well known to many. Oh!  whither do you think these things will run? will it not give People just cause to say, he Quaers are turned Persecu∣tors? But our Trust and Confidence is in the Lord alone, who hitherto has pleaded the Cause of the Innocent, and carried his People through all the Powers & Oppositions that have hither∣to  up against them in all Ages, and we doubt not but he will do the same for us, as we keep faithful to him, and to the Guidance of his holy Spirit, Light and Life in our hearts. But are these your Proceedings Christian, or Protestant-like? or do they not raer relish of Rank Ppery, for the erg o them o the Ministry to impose their  the People without  enquiring  the matter? Is  Obedience?
Is not this believing as the Church believes, in order to bring in Ignorance the Mother of Devotian? Oh! who but ignorants and blind men, but can see these things? And yet now will ye stand in them, O ye Ʋnjust Judges! will ye not be willing to answer our just Complaint for a Hearing? Will you come short of the Justice of the Baptists, who admitted of another Meeting for a Hearing? But perhaps you will say, The Act of that Meeting was Infallible, being made up of such a Body of the Ministry, (as Arthur Cook said lately in the House of G. . That a Yearly Meeting could not Err) But we desire to hope, that som of you will better consider of it, & answer our just Complaint, and no lurk in holes and corners, but come openly and defend your selves, and repent of the Error and false Doctrine you have run into, and let a time and place be appointed & agreed on by both Parties for a Publick Hearing: If you have Truth and Justice on your side, come forth and let it appear before the World, and say not that such and such things are false, but prove them to be so; and bring things to the Light, and let not Christs words be fullfilled on you, viz. You hate the Light because your deeds are Evil, &c. Say not, that we are bold and daring thus to Challenge you; for its not wrt in a presump∣tuous Spirit as relying on our own Strength or Parts, but on the Lord alone, on whom is our Dependance, and who knows the Innocency of our Cause, and therefore we are not afraid to bring it to the Test, but willing to appear openly, as hither∣to we have done in Print, and not as your Practice is to report false things secretly abroad, which we know not whom to fasten upon; but what we publish in Print remains to be the Authors, whether true or false; if false, why don't you refute it, the Press is free and open for you, a for any? But the matter in  Printed Books is true, and stands over your Heads, and which you will never be able to Rte. But next, let us enquire, what have you condemned G. K.  some of you say, Partly for matter of Doctrine, and partly
for hard Words; But as for Doctrine you have not mentioned what it is; and as for the hard Names you mention, it is made appear in The Plea of the Innocent, &c. that they were justly given by G. K. to them that deserved the same: But have his Opposers given no hard Names, no unjust and false Reflections? yea, many. But why only then must G. K. be condemned, and not they also who have given hard words and false Names to G. K.? When G. K. complained against them for not giving Judgment against W. Stockdale's Blasphemy Samuell Jenings could excuse it, by bringing the Example and Practice of worldly Courts, saying, George, thou hast reviled thy Brethren, and in Courts we allow of Discount. So that according to S. Jenings, W. Stockdale's Blasphemy must be discounted against G. K's Reviling his Brethren, as they account it, but can never prove. But if Discount be allowable in this case, why are not G. K's hard words discounted against those that have been given to him, so far as they will reach? And that it may appear what hard Names have been given, we think fit here to mention, viz. They say G. K. has called them, 1. Fools, 2. Ignorant Heathens, 3. Infidells, 4. Silly Souls, 5. Lyars, 6. Hereticks, 7. Rotten Ranters, 8. Muggletonians. They of the other side have called G. K. 1. Brat of Babylon, 2. Accuser of the Brethren, 3. Apostate, 4. Worse than Prophane, 5. A Troubler of the Church, 6. A Person that no one could have Difference with, but he was in danger of the Life of his Soul, 7. A Preacher of two Christs, 8. A Teller of an Old St Andrews Story. 9. Pope, 10. Father Confessor, 11. Lyar, 12. Devil, 13 Muggletonian, 14. Com∣pared him to a Wolf Tyger, &c. 15 One that alwayes endea∣voured to keep down the Power of Truth. 16. A more vexatious Adversary than Hicks, Faldo, Scanderet, or the worst of Enemies.
17. One that is fallen upon the soaring Mountains, &c. 18.  a man slain. 19. Become Treacherous to the Spouse of his Youth. 20. Fallen  his first Love. 21. Gone into a Spirit of Enmity, Wrath, Self-Exaltation, Contention, &c. 22. Foam∣ing out his own Shame. 23. A Person without the Fear of God before his Eyes. 24. Leting loose the Reins to an Extravagant Tongue 25. Broken out into many Ʋngodly Speeches, Ratling Accusations, Paonate Threatenings, being Cruel, &c. like an Ʋnwearied Adversary. With many more that can be proved. Now let the Impartial Reader judge, which have exceeded in hard Words? and whether they are not very partial to pass by all that hath been said against G. K. and condemn him for what he hath spoke in is right-place, as is made appear in the Book called, The Plea of the Innocent. And yet when G. K. was the Complainer for many Months, for Justice to be done to Truth, they could plead for Discount, and put Blasphemy against Christ Jesus, in the Ballance against Reflections upon themselves, and yet now will not disount for hard words. And aso they have judged a whole Meeting without ever admo∣nishing of them. If this be not Partiality, Injustice and Un∣righteous Judgment, tell us what is. And clear your selves of these things, if you can. Signed by us, in behalf of the rest of our Friends by order of our Meeting, the 18th of the 5 Month, 1692. Thomas Budd, Richard Hilliard, John Hat, Thomas Paschall, William Bradford, James Cooper, Elizabeth Keith. THE END.
Books to be Sold by William Bradford in Philadelphia. 1692. The Christian Faith of the People called Quakers in Rhode-Island. 4 d. A Catechism for Children and Youth, and such others as need to be instructed in the first Principles of the Christian Religion. By G. K. Pr. 6 d. A Testimony concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, Day of Judgment, and Christs last Coming & Appearing without u. By G. K. 3 d. Truth and Innocency defended, against Calumny & Defamation, in a late Report concerning the Revolution of Humane Souls, &c. G. K. 5 d. Some Causes and Reasons of the late Seperation that hath come to pass here at Philadelphia. Shewing, That G. K's Opposers were the Cause of the said Breach and Seperation, and most properly are the seperate Meeting. To∣gether with an account of the sincere Christian Faith of G. K. and his Friends. Price 9 d. The Plea of the Innocent, against the False Judgment of the Guilty, being a Vindication of G Keith & his Friends, from the false Judgment, Calumnies and Defamations of S. Jenings, J. Simcock, T. Lloyd and others, being in Number Twenty Eight. Price 6 d. A Vision concerning Seperation among Friends in Old England. By G. F. A faithful Warning and Exhortation to Friends to beware of seducing Spirits. By S. Crisp. 6 d. A Appeal from the Twenty Eight Judges, to the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment in all faithfull Friends, called Quakers. A true Coppy of three Judgments given forth by a Party of men, called Quakers at Philadelphia, against G. Keith, &c. With two Answers to the same. New Husbandry to New-England, or an Experienced way to raise Quick Hedges and Clover Grass; and the way to make Syder. Note, That in some of Printed Copies of the Appeal from the twenty eight Judges, &c. there happen'd an Error in the Postscript, which pray amend, viz. line 1. for Anthony Morris read Sam. Richardson. And whereas it is reported, That the Printer being a favourer of G. K. he will not print for any other, which is the reason that the other Party appear not in Print as well as G K. These are to signifie, that the Printer hath not yet refused to print any thing for either Party; and also signifies that he doth not refuse, but is Willing and ready to print any thing for the future that G. K's Opposers shall bring to him.
