B5920 12683151 65702
SOME LETTERS, Containing An Account of what seemed most Remarkable in Travelling through SWITZERLAND, ITALY, Some parts of GERMANY, &c. In the Years 1685. and 1686. Written by G. Burnet, D. D. to the Hoble R. B. The Third Edition, Corrected, and Altered in some places by the Author. To which is added, an Appendix, containing some Re∣marks on Switzerland and Italy, writ by a Person of Quality, and communicated to the Author. Together with a Table of the Contents of each Letter. AMSTERDAM Printed for the Widow Swart, Bookseller in the Beurs Stege, 1688.
A TABLE Of the Contents of all the LETTERS. The First LETTER. From Zurich. THE Desolation that is to be seen all the way from Paris to Lions, occa∣sion'd by the oppression, which the People lye under, p. 1, 2. A short Ac∣count of some of the Rarities, and Inscriptions t Lions. The Authors opinion concerning an usual and obscure Inscription, p. 2, 3. A ssage in Vegetius de Re Militari, misprinted in ll the publick Editions, corrected from a  at Grenoble, p. 3. Of Geneva. Their amber of the Corn. The moderation of the Government in the price they ell it at, compared with the exorbitant Rates imposed by the Pope in all his Territories upon Grain, the buying and vending whereof he monopolizeth to him∣self, p. 4, 5. How the profit arising from Corn, with the other Revenues of the State, are applyed to the benefit of the Publick, and not to the Enriching particular men, ibid. The Learning and Knowledge of the Citizens, beyond what is found commonly elsewhere. Their publick Ju∣stice,
personal Vertue and Sobriety, and Severity to open lewdness. Their way of selling Estates; and the Security of Titles there, above what is in other places. The Constitution of their Govern∣ment, with the Method of Electing Members into their several Councils, and of Chusing their Sindics, and by whom, p. 5, to 8. A Description of Lausanne, with some account of the Lake, tha lyes between it and Geneva, p. 9, 10. The perpen∣dicular height of the Hill Maudit, p. 10. Of th Canton of Bern; Its Extent, Government, an Manner of Electing Persons into the several De∣grees of Magistracy; with the Advantages ac∣cruing to those chosen into Bailiages. Th Wealth of their peasants how attained. Th Tmper and Constitution of the People in gene∣ral. The application of their Women to dome∣stick Affaits, and Disposition of their Men fo War, p. 10, to 15. Their Military Lists, and wha number they can bring into the Field, Arm'd an Disciplined, upon a sudden Emergency, and ge∣neral Summons. The oversight of the Govrn∣ment, in suffering the French to possess them¦selves of the Franche Comt, after they were Ma¦sters of Alsace; and how they were partly brib' into it, and partly wheedled, p. 16, 17. Of th War between the Canton of Bern, and the Can¦ton of Schwits 1656. being occasioned by a La made by the Popish Cantons, rendring it capit to any to change their Religion, & making the
goods confiscable, p. 19, 20. A Description of the Town of Bern. The Great Church. The Domi∣nicans Chappel, with the famous Hole that went to an Image in the Church, from one of the Cells of the Dominicans, p. 21, 22. The Difference be∣twixt the Dominicans and Franciscans, about the maculate or inmaculate Conception of the Vir∣gin. The Story of Ietzer, with a large account of the horrid Cheat and imposture of the Domi∣nicans, for which several of them were executed at Bern 1509. p. 22, to 30. That Switzerland is better peopled than France or Italy, tho Coun∣tries incomparably more rich, and better scitua∣ted. Which proceeds from the Gentleness of the Government in the First, and intolerable and op∣pressive Severity of it in the two latter, p. 30, 31. Of Soloturn and Friburg, two of the chiefest Po∣pish Cantons; The strange Bigottry of the people there, and their gross and sottish Idolatry and Su∣perstition. How the Iesuites multiply in those Places, and from the number of ten, to which they were limited at Soloturn, and one thousand Livres a year allowed for their Maintenance, they are not only grown numerous, but become so rich, that they are raising a Colledg and Church, which will cost 400000 Livres, p. 31, 32. Of the Wealth of some other Religious Houses in Soloturn, and of the Fortification they are rasing about the Town, p. 33. Of the Government of that Canton, and of the ill Administration of Justice there,
beyond what is in the Protestant Cantons, ibid. Of aden, which tho the Seat of the general Diet of the Cantons, yet is not one of them, but a Batliage belonging to eight of the ancient Cantons, p. 33, 34. Of the Canton of Zurich. Its Wealth. The number of disciplined Men, which it can bring into the Field, upon 24. hours warning. The Nature of its Magistracy, and the Regulation of their allowances. Their Trade by means of a large Lake. Their Manufactory of Crape, and its good∣ness, p. 34. The scituation of the Town of Zurich. The Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants, and their Freedom from Luxury and Vanity. The Magistracy of the City. The division of the whole Canton. Its honour, in not being debauched by French Money, to alter the ancient Capitula∣tions with that Crown. Their Justice and Vertue in applying the ancient Revenues of the Church to pious uses. Their prudence in keeping the Edi∣fices of their Hospitals mean, and expending their Charity upon maintaining the poor that ar in them, p. 35. Of the Salary of their Ecclesiasticks, and the great Labour they are obliged unto, p. 36. Several Letters, written by the most Eminent of the English Reformers to Bullinger, preserved among the Archives of the Dean and Chapter in which they lament the retaining the Popish Vest∣ments, and the aversion they found in the Parlia∣ment, to all the Propositions that were made for the Reformation of Abuses. And Iewel having
declared in one, how the Queen refused to be called Head of the Church, adds, that it could not be ascribed to any Mortal, being only due to Christ, p. 36, 37, 38. Of the disagreement of an∣cient Manuscripts concerning that passage of St. Iohns Epistle, There are thre that bear Witness in Heaven, &c. To which are subjoyned many things worthy of observation, p. 38. to 41. A new Regulation at Bern, for the better Electing per∣sons into Bailiages, p 41. The generous protec∣tion and unexemplified Charity, which the Pro∣testant Cantons have expressed to the French Re∣fugies, p. 41, 42. A Reflexion of the Author on the Censure past by the Divines in Switzerland, against the Opinions of Amirald, concerning the Divine Decrees, and the Extent of the Death of Christ, &c. p. 42, 43. Of a Tax under which the Switzers lye when Estates are sold, and how it serves to prevent ill Husbandry, p. 44. A further account of those Cantons, where both the Re∣formed and Popish Religion are tolerated; and how from the diminution of the Papists in Glaris, some endeavoured to raise a War betwixt the Protestant and Popish Cantons; and in the inte∣im, while things seem'd to tend to a rupture, how the French begun their Fortification at Hunningen, p. 44, 45.
The Second LETTER. From Milan. OF the Bridge upon the Lake at Ripperswood, p. 46. Of Coire, the chief Town of the Gri∣sons. Of the Chappel pretended to be St. Lucius's, and what the Author said to the Bishop of Coire, to convince hat all related of King Lucius in that Matter, and of his writing to Pope Eleutherius, was a Fable. Of a difference between the Bishop and his Chapter about Exemptions, and the Au∣thors opinion in reference to that pretended Pri∣viledge, p. 46, 47, 48. The temper of the pre∣sent Bishop. The yearly Revenue belonging to him, and to the several Prebendaries. The Na∣ture of the Country, with the Wealth of the People, and how it ariseth. The Constitution of the Government. The Division of the Coun∣trey into Leagues. Whence, and upon what occasion it came to be inhabited. Of whom the General Diet consists, and of a late contest a∣mong themselves, and with the Emperor, p. 48. to 51. How they shook off the Austrian Jurisdi∣ction, and their zeal and Courage in vindicating and defending their Liberty, p. 51. The Distribu∣tion of the several Leagues into so many Commu∣nities; and in which Communities the Popish Re∣ligion is received, and in which the Protestant. The absolute Authority that each hath within it¦self,
p. 52. The manner of keeping their Diets, and the Customs therein observed, ibid. Of the Valteline, Chavennes, and Bormio, Territories which the three Leagues possess in Italy: and how they obtained them; With an account of the Fertility of the Soil in the Valteline, p. 54, 55. Of the Ease and Liberty that those Districts enjoy under the Leagues; and of a Constitution among them, by which the Peasants may demand a Chamber of Iustice, when they judge themselves oppressed, or aggrieved. Of the Massacre in the Valteline anno 1618. and the War that ensued upon it; with the issue of it, through the Wis∣dom and Conduct of the Duke of Rohan, p. 55, to 60. Of the Laws by which they are governed; with some of the Civil and Religious Customs that prevail among them, p. 62, 63. A remarkable Story of about 2000. that fled anno 1685. out of a Valley of Tirol, for fear of being destroyed upon the score of their Religion, and who seem by the Articles of their Faith, and the simplicity of their Worship, to be a remnant of the old Waldenses, p. 64, 65. Of the way from Coire to Chavennes, with an account of the most obser∣vable Villages upon the Road, p. 65, 66. Of Cha∣vennes; Its scituation. The fertility of the Soil, Easiness of the Government, Plentifulness as to all sort of Provisions, with an account of the Na∣ture of their Wine, and the manner how they both make and preserve it, p. 66, to 69. A Kind of
Stone here, and in the Valteline, which they use instead of Mettle for making pots, p. 69. The de∣plorable Fate of the Town Pleurs, which was bu∣ried, together with its Inhabitants, by the fall of a Mountain, anno 1618. p. 70, 71. Of the Lakes of Chavennes and Como, p. 71, 72. Of Codelago and Lugane, with other small Provinces here belon∣ging to the Switzers; where as the people live at ease, so the Country, tho extreamly barrn, is abundantly peopled, p. 73. Of Lago Maggiore, and of the Borromean Islands, which as to loveli∣ness and fertility nothing equals, p. 73, 74. Of Lombardy. Its Extent, pleasantness, goodness of Soil. The Inhabitants inconceivably poor, by reason of the severity of the Government, p. 75. The Lake cut by Francis the First from the Ri∣ver Tesine to Millan, ibid. Of the City Millan. The Dimensions of the Dutchy. Its Wealth. The Extent of the Town. The Nobleness of the Stru∣ctures. The Grandure and Beauty of the Dome, where the Body of S. Carlo Borromeo lies. A short Character of that Prelate, and what marks of his Wealth and Beneficence are to be seen in the Town, p. 76, 77, 78. Of other Churches and Convents. The Hospital, with the Lazarette ad∣joyning to it, p. 78, 79. Of the Ambrosian Office used here, and its distinction from the Roman, p. 79, 80. A remarkable passage in the Books of the Sacraments ascribed to S. Ambrose, where the Hosty is said to be the Figure of the Body and
Blood of Christ, p, 81, 82. Of Ancient Offices, and why none to be seen in the Vatican. A Manuscript Translation of Iosephus by Ruffinus, in the Am∣brosian Library, p. 82. No Glass Windows in Millan, not yet in Florence. The people deplora∣bly poor, while the Churches and Convents are so extravagantly rich. The Decay of their Wealth, occasioned in part through a faileur in the expor∣tation of their Silks, p. 83. An account of a Gentle∣women at Geneva, who besides her being greatly accomplished in Languages & Sciences, writes le∣gibly, tho blind since she was a year old, p. 83, to 86. The Third LETTER. From Florence. THe Frontier Towns of the Spaniards and Ve∣netians in Italy, ill fortified, as appears by Lodi the last Garrison belonging to the Spaniards in Millan, and Crema, the first Garrison apper∣taining to the Venetians. Of the Civil and Mili∣tary Officers, which the Venetians send into their several Territories and Provinces. The Cheese that goes by the name of Parmesan, is made chiefly at Lodi, p. 86. Of Brescia, where the best Barrils for Pistols and Muskets are made. A famous Nun∣nery there fallen into disgrace occasioned by the Priests conversing with the Nuns through a pri∣vate Vault, p. 87. Of the Lake of Guarda, ad the difference between the Miles in Lombardy and Naples, p. 88. Of Veona. Its poverty. The
baseness of the Coyn. The Remains of an old Ro∣man Amphitheatre. The Museum Calceolarium furnished with many Antiquities and Rarities, p. 88, 89. The Wine called Vino Santo, that grows near the Lake Guarda. Of the Colour of the Cattel and Hoggs in Italy, p. 89. Of Vincen∣za. The riches of the Palaces and Churches. A modern Theatre. Count Valerano's Gardens. The Courseness of the Images, and their gross Idolatry, p. 90. Of Padua. The Vniversity much decay'd, and by what means. The Quarrels among the Paduan Nobility, and what Advantages the Venetians make of them, p. 90, 91. Their Chur∣ches, and the Devotion payd to S. Anthony, who in one of the little Vows that hang without the holy Chappel, is said to hear those whom God him∣self doth not hear, p. 92. Why the Venetians im∣ploy not their own Subjects in their Wars, p. 93. The Palaces from Padua to Venice, on both ides the River Brent, ibid. Of the Lagunes, and that they grow dayly more shallow. Of the City of Venice. The Buildings, Palaces, Churches, Brid∣ges, Arsenal, Convents; Their Beauty and Wealth; with the meanness of the Library of S. Mark, p. 93. to 97. Of the small Consideration they have for Father Paul, and of the Memo∣rials out of which  collected his History, p. 97. The Attesttions produced by Mr. Arnaud, for the agreement of the Greek Church with the La∣tin, in the matter of Transubstantiation, where
penned, and how obtained: With an account of the ignorance and corruption of the Greek Priests, p. 97, 98. A famous Venetian Lady, that spake Greek and Latin well, besides three other Languages, and who commenced Dr. of Physick. Of the Ancient Noble Families of Venice. To whom, and upon what occasion the honor of being Noble Venetian is imparted, p. 98, 99, 100. The limited Power of the Duke, and that that Di∣gnity is not worth a wise Mans Courting. The reason of Sagrdo's being put by from being Duke; his retiring thereupon from the City; and the Books he wrote during his retirement, p. 102, 103. Why married Men are not now chosen to that honour, and of Titles forbidden, and allowed, p. 103. The Authority of the Senate over the Ecclesiasticks; and the limited power of their Bi∣shop; and that the very Clergy have little depen∣dence upon him. Of the Election of their Curat's by the Inhabitants of every Parish, and the Liber∣ty which the Candidates take to defame and ex∣pose one another, p. 103, 104. Ignorance and Vice the chief Characters of all Priests, especially at Ve∣nice. The licence assumed by many of their Nuns, particularly by those that call themselves Noble Venetians. All Ecclesiasticks precluded from a share in the Government; and in case any be pro∣moted to the Hat, their Friends and Reltions become uncapable (during their lives both of Imployments, and of sitting in the Great Council,
p. 104, 105. The Inquisition at Venice, through being subject to the Senate, does little hurt. Many Protestants there, whom the Senate gives no trou∣ble to. The Hosty not carried openly in proces∣sion. The Venetians generally unconcerned as well as ignorant in matters of Religion, p. 105, 106. Most of the young Nobility corrupted in their Morals; and wholly decline all Military Im∣ployments: So that their Officers as well as Soul∣diers are strangers. The reason of the degeneracy of the Italians, and in particular of the Venetian Nobility, p. 106, 107, 108. The pleasures which they pursue, are all bruitish: but the noble and innocent pleasures of Friendship and Marriage, &c. they understand not. Their Houses state∣ly, but not convenient. Neither their Bread, Wine, not the Cookery of their Flesh good. Their Coaches uneasy, and the Carriages through all Lombardy inconvenient, p. 108. to 111. Of the late created Nobility; the Sum they obtined it for; their number; and the prejudices arising hereby both to the Republick and the ancient No∣bility, p. 111, 112, 113. By whom Crimes, com∣mitted by any of the Nobility against the Stat are judged, and by whom the Offences of other Subjects are tryed, p. 114, 115. Of the Inquisi∣tors of State. The extent of their Authority. The Quality and Merit of their persons; and the use∣fulness of that Tribunal, p. 115. to 118. Of Mr. de la Hay, French Ambassador at Venice; His
Character, p. 118. The Road from venice to Fer∣rara. The Town as well as Country of Ferrara, forsaken of their Inhabitans, through the rave∣nousness of the Priests, and the oppressiveness of the Government. However the Churches and Con∣vents are vastly rich, and that from the Vanity of the people, more than from their Superstition, p. 119, 120. Of Bologna, which having delive∣red it self to the Pope upon a Capitulation, hath thereby preserved many of its Priviledges, and so continues Wealthy and well peopled, p. 121. Its Palaces, Churches and Convents, in one of which (namely that of the Canons Regular of St. Salva∣tor) there is a Scrowl of the Hebrew Bible, pre∣tended to be written by Ezra's own hand, but falsely. The Meridional Line, which Cassini laid along the pavement of St. Petrones's Church, p. 122. Of Pope Ioan's Statute there, and the Au∣thors unbelief as to such a person's having been Pope. Of the Monastery of St. Mchael on the Hill above Bologna, and of a Madona of St. Lukes, four miles from the Town, p. 123. Of the Appenine Hills, and of Pretolino, one of the Great Duke's Palaces, which stands on the last of them; with some account of the Gardens in Italy, p. 124, 125. Of Florence. The Great Dukes Pa∣lace. The Dome, with its Cupolo, and Bapti∣stery. Of the Chappel of St. Laurence, where the Bodies of the great Dukes lye deposited. The Statues in it, particularly that of the Virgin by Mich. Angelo. The Library belonging to
it, well replenished with Manuscripts, p. 125, 126, 127. Florence much decayed, and Siena and Pisa shrunk into nothing, and that more from the se∣verity of the Government, than the Decay of their silk Trade, p. 127, 128. A comparison be∣tween the Territories of the Venetians, Genoa's and Switzrs in Italy, which are well peopled, and the Inhabitants rich; and the Territories of the Great Duke, the Pope, and the King of Spain, where there are few people, those miserably poor. However the Churches are rich, which helpt also to sink their Trade, p. 128, 129. The Inns, when one hath past the Appenines, wretchedly accom∣modated. p. 130. The Fourth LETTER. From Rome. THe great desolation that appears in all the Popes Territories, through the rigour of the Government. For a Prince to be Elective, and yet Absolute, a great solecism in Government. The Pope the most Absolute Prince in Europe in Temporals, allowing the Cardinals no share with him in that, tho he admit them to share with him over the Affairs of the Church. The incongruity both of the one and the other, p. 131, 132, 133. A brief account and Character of the present, and the three preceding Popes. The scandal arising to Christian Religion through the neglect of Justice
and Mercy by him that stiles himself Christs Vi∣car. A handsome Reflection made to the Author by a Roman Prince, upon the folly of Oppressions, p. 134, 135, 136. The present Vice-Roy of Na∣ples the Marquis of Carpi, commended for Wis∣dom, Moderation and Justice. His suppressing the insolency of the Spaniards over the Natives. His maintaining the Souldiers in Discipline, and paying them exactly. His Reforming the Courts of Judicature. His extirpating the Banditi, and by what means. The design he is upon of brin∣ging the Money to its true value, p. 136, 137, 138. The Iesuites being the Proprietors of near the half of Apulia, treat their Tenants with that ri∣gour, that the Country is much desolated, and many die of hunger. The Sloth and Lasiness of the Neapolitans, hinders their making those advantages of the produce of the Country which they might. The provision here for Travellers bad, and the accommodation worse. Four parts of Five of all the Wealth of the Kingdom of Na∣ples in Church-mens hands, p. 139, 140. Of the Churches and Convents in Naples, particularly of the Hospital, stiled the Annunciata. The Ie∣suites great Merchants, especially in Wine, where∣in the Minims also deal, but more scandalously, in selling it by retail, p. 140, 141. A priviledge which the Convents have as to buying Houses in the Town. And that the Wealth of the Clergy is so great, that they are in a fair way of making them∣selves
Masters of the Kingdom. The contempt that Secular persons have for them. More Lear∣ning at Naples, than in all other places of Italy. D. Ioseph Valetta's Library, and of the learned Men that assemble at his House; of which num∣ber there are none of the Clergy, save one Rinaldi. The Imputations which the Church-men cast upon persons that have any tast of learning or good sense. The Temptation which men of wit are lyable unto, of disbelieving the Christian Religion, from the Idea which what they see among Priests and people give them of it. The preaching of the Monks silly and ridiculous. All the learning among the Clergy at Naples among a Few Secular Priests, p. 141, 142, 143. Of Molinos. His new Method. How much it prevails. Opposed by the Iesuites; and why▪ The Pope hath a favorable opinion of him, and yet through the complaint of some Car∣dinals, and the influence of a great King, hath caused throw him into the Inquisition. A pleasant saying of Pasquin's thereupon, p. 143, 144, 145. Of the City of Naples. Its Bigness, Beauty, and Supply as to provisions. Of the Vice-Roy's Palace, with the Pictures and Statues in it, p. 145. The Catacomb's here and at Rome described. The use they ancienlty served for. An account of some Inscriptions to be found among those at Naples. That they were not the Reposi∣tories of the Relicks of the ancient Christians▪
But the common Burying places of the Heathen. This demontrated, p. 146. to 152. When Bu∣rying began among the Romans, discoursed at large, and cleared by Testimonies out of old Roman Authors, p. 152. to 155. The Bones sent from hence, as the Relicks of primitive Chri∣stians and Martyr's, nothing but the Bones of Heathens, and for the most part of those of the meanest and most infamous Rank, p. 155. Of Mont Vesuvio. The Earthquakes occasioned about Naples, by the Convulsions of that Hill. The operation which its heat hath, to make the Soil bout fruitful, and the Air pure, p. 156. Of the Cave that pierceth the Pausalippe, with the Hot Bath near unto it, with the Grots that send out poysonous steams, ibid. Of the Bay of Puzzoli. The Rarities which occur there, particularly of the Sulfatara; and of the Cave, where the Sybil is said to have given out her Inspirations, p. 157, 158. Of the Rests of Caligula's Bridge. The depth of the Water where the Pillars were built, that supported the Arches. The Extent of the Bridge. The whole, a Monument of Caligu∣la's extravagancy and profuseness; as the great Fish-pond and the Centum Camera hewn out of the Rock, were of Nero's. The Baths of Puzzoli. The Via Appia. The Isle of Caprea, p. 158, to 162. Of Rome. The Via Flamminia on the Tuscan side. Of St. Peter's Church, and of the Palace adjoyning, with the
Defects in that, and in other Roman Palaces. Of the Villa Borghese, and Villa Pamphilia, and how the Palaces in Rome are furnished, p. 162, 163, 164. Of the vatican Library, and what the Au∣thor observed in the Manuscripts relating to the Council of Constance; and of the difference be∣tween Mr. Schelstrat and Mr. Maimbourg, con∣cerning that Council; with the Authors opinion as to that difference, p. 165.166, 167. Of the lear∣ned Men at Rome, such as Bellori, Fabri, and Na∣zar, with a Character of Cardinal d' Estré, and Cardinal Howard; and what small account the present Pope makes of learned Men, p. 168, 169. The contempt that the Romans have for the pre∣sent Pontificate, with an impartial Character of the Pope himself, p. 169, 170. A Nation may not only be dispeopled, by driving people out of it, but by weakning the natural Fertility of the Sub∣jects. Two Stories of the Fruitfulness of persons▪ at Geneva, whereas a strange Barrenness reigns over all Italy, p. 170. Of the Fountains and Aqua∣ducts at Rome. Of the Civility of the People▪ and that their Conversation is generally upon News. A Character of the Queen of Sweden, with a saying she had to the Author of her self. The jealousy that the Romans have of their Wives, and why: with an account of the vertuous deportment of the Dutchess of Bracciano amidst all the inno∣cent Freedoms of Conversation, p. 171, 172, 173▪ Of the Capitol, the Tarpeian Rock, Severus'
Triumpal Arch, and other ancient Rarities and Monuments, ibid. and p. 174. Of the Chur∣ches, and in particular of the Rotunda, St. Mary Magiore, and St. Iohn in the Lateran. Of the many ancient Monuments, Pillars, Statues, &c. at Rome, p. 174, 175, 176. Of the Modern Pala∣ces, and the Statues, Paintings, Heads in the Far∣nesian Palace. Of the Minerva, where the Inqui∣sition sitteth; and of the little hazard persons are in at Rome, whatsoever their Religion be, if they conduct themselves with any Discretion. Old-corn't Picture (who was convicted of the Gunpow∣der Treason) among the Martyrs in the Gallery of the English Iesuites. Of the Authors seeing the Emblematical Prophecies relating to En∣gland, which those Iesuites have. Of St. Grego∣ry's Chappel, and the Worship payd to his Statue, p. 176, 177, 178. A Character of the young Prince Borghese, ibid. A strange alteration of Sex in two Nuns. A youg Gentlewoman at Gene∣va, that contracted a Deafness from a Viciouness in the Nurses Milk; and who, tho being deaf, un∣derstands what is spoken to her, by observing the motion of their Mouthes that speak, p. 179, 180, 181. How all the World mistrusts the Iesuites, and yet trusts them. A pleasant Story of a Catho∣lick Gentleman's chusing the most ignorant Priest he could find for his Confessor, and why, p. 181, 182.
The Fifth LETTER. From Nimmegen. OF Marseilles. The Conveniency of the Harbour. The Wealth of the Town, through the Freedoms that it enjoyes, p. 184. Of the present Persecution in France, and how approved and commended by the Clergy; Re∣presented at Rome, by the Spanish Faction, as a reproach to the Catholick Religion; but applau∣ded by the Pope, p. 185, 186. The fault not so much in the King, as in his Religion▪ which obligeth him to extirpate Hereticks, and not to keep his Faith to them. The Forcing poor Peo∣ple by extremities to abjure their Religion, a greater cruelty, than if he should put them to Death for it, p. 186, 187. The Liberty the Author obtained at Geneva, of preaching to  Congregation in English, and of administring the Sacrament according to the way of the Churc of England, p. 187, 188. A Character of Mr▪ Turretin, and Mr. Tronchin, two of their Pro∣fessors, p. 188, 189. Some Monuments, which the Author saw at Avanche. The Chappel nea Morat silled with Bones of the Burgundians with an Inscription, that Charles Duke of Bur∣gundy, having besieged Morat, hoc sui Monu∣mentum reliquit, p. 189, 190. Of Basil. Th Town described. How it comes to be so ill peo∣pled,
and in what manner Governed. A re∣markable Piece of painting in the State-House. Several Pieces of Holben's there, and in other places of the Town. A new sort of Wind-Guns made by one in Basil. Of the publick Library, and how furnished with Books, Manuscripts, Medalls; and of a private Library belonging to the Family of Fesch. Of the Councils of the Town, and of the several Bailiages under their Jurisdiction. The proportion of Armed Men they can raise. The number of their Professors p. 190, to 195. Of Hunningen. The Large∣ness, Figure and Quality of that Fortification, p. 195, 196. Of Brisac, and the Fortification belonging to it, with its Figure, greatness, and strengh, p. 196, 197. Of Strasburg. The Town, with its old and new Fortifications described. The Animosity of the Lutherans against the Calvi∣nists, as well as against the Papists. Tho they have Pictures in their Churches, yet they Wor∣ship them not, p. 197, 198. By what means the City fell into the hands of the French. The Decay it already suffers in Trade, with an account of the Treatment of Mr. Dietrick by the French, contrary to the Terms of the Capitulation, p. 199 Of Philipsburg; its Natural Scituation, and Ar∣tificial strength, and how recovered from the French, p 200, 201. Of Spire, which as it is an ill Fortified, so it is a poor Town, and subsisteth chiefly by the Imperial Chamber that sitteth in it. A late Dispute between
the Town and Chamber concerning Priviledges. The Government of the Town is wholly Luthe∣ran, only the Cathedral is in the hands of the Bishop and Chapter. The meanness of the Tombs of the Emperors, that lye buried there. A Fable concerning St. Bernard, with some marks rela∣ting to it, on the pavement of the Church, and an account of some Figures in the Cloister, p. 201, 202. Of the Lower Palatinate, and of Heidel∣berg. Of the Scituation of the Town. The Wine-Cellar, with the Celebrated Tun that is in it. The Wisdom and Conduct of the late Prince Charles, in peopling and setling this State. The nature and proportion of the Taxes he laid upon the Sub∣jects, and their contentment under them. The People of Germany only bound to their particular Prince, tho the Prince himself be under some Ties to the Emperor. Pareus's Commentary on the 13. of the Romans, vindicated upon this Founda∣tion by Fabritius. A Character of Him, and Dr. Miek, p. 203, 204. Of Manheim. The care Prince Charles Lewes took to fortify it. His granting Liberty, not only to Christians of all parties, but also to the Iews, and thereby peopling his Coun∣trey, which had been strangely desolated. His Cha∣racter, p. 204. Of the present Prince. His Probity, Vertues and Stedfastness to the promises he made his Subjects, with relation to their Religion, p. 205. The Beauty and Fertility of the Country, from Heidelberg to Frankfort. The latter described. The three Religions tolerated there. The Origi∣nal
of the Bulla Aurea preserved among the Ar∣chives of that City. Lewd Women condemned here to the Pistrina or hand-mill. The Iews per∣mitted to dwell there, and to have Synagogues. An account of the Fortification of the Town, and its Wealth, p. 206, 207. Of Hockam, that yields the celebrated Wine. A famous Picture over one of the Popish Altars at Worms, as the Author was told, but did not see either it, or the Town, by reason of having taken another road, p. 287, 288. Of Mentz; Its Scituation, Compass, Cittadel, and Fortification of the Town. The Elector an abso∣lute Prince. The Demeasne of the Electorat, and what Taxes he imposeth on his Subjects, with the number of Armed men he can bring into the Field. How He and his Chapter chuse the Pre∣bends by turns, and in whom the right of chu∣sing the Elector resides, p. 209. Of Bacha∣rach, and of the Tower, where the Rats are said to have eaten up an Elector. A Labourer at Geneva stung to death by Wasps, ibid. Of Co∣blentz; its Scituation, Strength, and Fort stiled Hermanstan, p. 209, 210, 211. Of Bonne, where the Elector of Collen resides. A Character of the present Elector. A Story about the Forgery of Medalls, and to what value there were found of them at the last siege of Bonne. Of some Rarities belonging to the Prince, p. 211, 212. Of Collen; tho a City of great extent, yet ill built, and worse peopled. The Iews are allowed here to live; and in what place the Protestants are permitted the
exercise of their Religion. The Churches and Convents, with an account of the Fable of the three Kings, and 11000 Vrsulins. Of the late Rebllion there, and how occasioned, with the ex∣cesses that attended it, p. 213, 214. Of Dussel∣dorp. The Palace; The Iesuites Colledge; The Protestant Religion tolerated there, and by whose procurement, p. 214. Of Keiserswart, and how fortified. Of Wesel; A fair Town, meanly fortified, but populous and rich, p. 214, 215. Of Cleve, ibid. Of Nimmegen. A Character of Sr. William Temple, whose Picture hangs in the Stadthouse, with an ample commendation of his Book of the Low Countries, p. 215. A large and just Character of the present Prince of Orange, and of the glorious service he perfor∣med, in rescuing his Country from the French p. 216. An Appendix, containing Remarks of an Ita∣lian Gentleman, upon Switzerland, the Grison Country, the Bailiage of Lugane, the Lakes the Dutchey of Ferrara, the Estate of Bolognia the Country of the Great Duke of Tuscany, the temporal Government of the Pope, and the Re∣duction of the Interest due by the Montes a Rome, and of the Avarice of the Iesuits and Priests p. 222, &c.
SOME LETTERS, Containing An account of what seemed most re∣markable in Switzerland, Italy, &c. Zurich, the first of September, 1685. SIR, IT is so common to write Travels, that for one, who has seen so little, and as it were in haste, it may look like a presumptuous af∣fection to be reckoned among Voyagers, if he attempts to say any thing upon so short a amble, and concerning Places so much visited, and by consequence so well known: yet having had opportuni∣ies that do not offer themselves to all that travel, and having joyned to those, a curiosity almost equal to the advantages I enjoyed, I fancy it will not be an ungrateful entertainment, if I give you some account of those things hat pleased me most in the places through which I have passed: But I will avoid saying such things as occur in ordi∣nary Books, for which I refer you to the Prints; for as you know, that I have no great inclination to copy what others have said, so a traveller has not leisure, nor hu∣mour enough, for so dull an employment. As I came all the way from Paris to Lions, I was ama∣sed to see so much misery as appeared, not only in Villa∣ges, but even in big Towns, where all the marks of an
extream poverty showed themselves both in the Buildings, the Cloaths, and almost in the looks of the Inhabitants. And a general dispeopling in all the Towns, was a very visible effect of the hardships under which they lay. I need tell you nothing of the irregular, and yet magni∣ficent situation of Lions; of the noble Rivers that meet there; of the Rock Cut from so vast a height for a prison, of the Carthusians Gardens, of the Town-house, of the Iesuites Colledge, and Library of the famous Nunnery of S. Peter, of the Churches, particularly S. Irenees, of the remnants of the Aqueducts, of the Colums and the old Mosaick in the Abbey Dene. In short, Mr. Spon has given such an account of the Curiosities there, that it were a very presumptious attempt to offer to come after him. The speech of Claudius ingraven on a Plate of Brass, and set in the end of the low walk in the Town-hsuse, is one of the noblest Antiquities in the World, by which we see the way of writing and pointing in that age very copiou∣sly. The shield of silver of 22 pound weight, in which some remains of gilding do yet appear, and that seems to represent that generous action of Scipio's, of restoring a fair captive to a Celtiberian Prince, is certainly the no∣blest piece of Plate that is now extant; the embossing of it is so fine, and so entire, that it is indeed ivaluable: and if there were an inscription upon it to put us beyond conjecture, it were yet much more inestimable. A great many Inscriptions are to be seen of the late and Barbarous ages, as Bonum Memorium, and Epitaphium hunc: there are 23. Inscriptions in the Garden of the Fathers of mercy, but so placed, as it shews how little those who possess them do either understand or value them. I shall only give you one, because I made a little reflection on it, tho it is not perhaps too well grounded, because none of the Criticks have thought on it. The Inscription is this, D. M. Et Memoriae Aeter∣nae Sutiae Athidis. Quae vixit Annis XXV. M. X. DV. Quae dum Nimia pia fuit, facta est Imia: & Att Probatiolo, Cealius Calistio Conjux & Pater, & si∣vivo
ponendum curavit & sub ascia dedicavit. This must be towards the barbarous Age, as appears by the false Latin in Nimia: But the Inscription seems so extravagant, that a man dedicating a Burial-stone for this Wife and Son, and under which himself was to be laid, with cere∣monies of Religion, should tax his Wife of impiety, and give so extraordinary an Account of her becoming so thro an excess of piety, that it deserves some con∣sideration. It seems the impiety was publick, otherwise a Husband would not have recorded it in such a manner; and it is plain that he thought it rose from an excess of piety. I need not examin the conjectures of others: but will chuse rather to give you my own, and submit it to your censure. It seems to me, that this Sutia Anthis was a Christian▪ for the Christians, because they would not worship the Gods of the Heathens, nor participate with them in their sacred rites, were accused both of Aheism and Impiety. This is so often objected, and the Fathers in their Apologies have answered it so often, that it were lost labour to prove it: so this Wife of Cecalius Calistio ha∣ving turned Christian, it seems he thought he was bound to take some notice of it in the inscription: But by it the gives a honourable character of the Christian Doctrine at the fame time that he seems to accuse it; that through an excess of piety, his Wife was carried to it: since a mind seriously possessed with a true sense of piety, could no avoid the falling under a distaste of Paganism, and the be∣coming Christian. At Grenoble there is not much to be seen, the learned Mr. Chorier has some Manuscripts of considerable anti∣quity. In one of Vietius de re Militari, there is a clear correction of a passage that in all the printed Editions is not sense. In the Chapter of the sise of the Souldiers he be∣gins, Scio semper mensuram a Mario Consule exactam: A is in no M S. and Mario Consule is a mistake for trium Cubi∣torum; for III. which are for trium, have been read M. and
C. which stands for Cubitorum, as appears by all that fol∣lows, was by a mistake read Consule; so the true reading of that passage is: Scio mensuram trium Cubitorum fuisse semper exactam. He shewed me another M. S. of about 5 r 6. hundred years old, in which S. Iohn's Revelation is contained, all exemplified in Figures, and after that comes Esops Fables likewise, all designed in Figures; from which he inferred, that those who designed those two Books, valued both equally, and so put them together. I will not describe the Valley of Dauphine, all to Cham∣bery, nor entertain you with a Landskip of the Coun∣trey, which deserves a better pencil than mine, and in which the heighth and rudeness of the Mountains, that al∣most shut upon it, together with the beauty, the even∣ness and fruitfulness of the Valley, that is all along well wa∣tered with the River of Liserre, make such an agreeable mixture, that this vast diversity of objects, that do at once fill the Eye, gives it a very entertaining prospect. Chambery has nothing in it that deserves a long descrip∣tion; and Geneva is too well known to be much insisted on. It is a little State, but it has so many good Constitu∣tions in it, that the greatest may justly learn at it. The Chamber of the Corn has always two years provision for the City in store, and forces none but the Bakers to buy of it at a taxed price; and so it is both necessary for any extremi∣ties, under which the State may fall, and is likewise of great advantage; for it gives a good yearly income, that has helpt the State to pay near a Million of debt, contracted during the Wars; and the Citizens are not oppressed by it, for every Inhabitant may buy his own Corn as he pleases, only publick Houses must buy from the Chamber. And if one will compare the Faith of Rome and Geneva togethe by this particular, he will be forced to prefer the latter; for if good Works are a strong presumption, if not a sure in∣dication of a good Faith, then Iustice, being a good Wor of the first form, Geneva will certainly carry it. At Rome the Pope buys in all the Corn of the Patrimony; for none of the Landlords can sell it either to Merchants o
Bakers. He buyes it at five Crowns their measure, and even that is slowly and ill payed, so that there was 800000. Crowns owing upon that score, when I was at Rome. In selling this out, the measure is lessened a fifth part, and the price of the whole is doubled, so that what was bought at five Crowns is sold out at twelve: and if the Bakers, who are obliged to take a determined quantity of Corn from the Chamber, cannot retail out all that is imposed upon them, but are forced to return some part of it back, the Chamber discounts to them only the first price of five Crowns: whereas in Geneva the measure by which they buy and sell is the same, and the gain is so inconside∣rable, that it is very little beyond the common maket price; so that upon the whole matter, the Chambr of the Corn is but the Merchant to the State. But if the publik makes a moderate gain by the Corn, that, and all the other revenues of this small Commonwealth are so well im∣ployed, that there is no cause of complaint given in the administration of the publick purse: which with the ad∣vantages that arise out of the Chamber of the Corn, is about 100000 Crowns revenue. But there is much to go out of this; 300. Souldiers are payed; an Arsénal is main∣tained, that in propotion to the State is the greatest in the World; for it contains Arms for more Men than are in the State: thére is a great number of Ministers and Profssrs, in all 24. payed out of it, besides all the publick charges and Offices of the Government. Every one of the les∣ser Council of 25. having a 100. Crowns, and every Syndic having 200. Crowns pension: and after all this come the accidental Charges of the Deputies, that they are obli∣ged to send often to Paris, to Savoy and to Switzerland; so that it is very apparent no man can enrich himself at the cost of the Publick. And the appointments of the little Council are a very small recompence for the great attendance that they are obliged to give the Publick, which is commonly 4. or 5. hours a day. The Salary for the Professors and Ministers is indeed small, not above 200. Crowns; but to ballance this (which was a more com∣petent
provision when it was first set off 150. years ago▪ the price of all things, and the way of living being now much heightned) those imployments are here held in their due reputation, and the richest Citizens in the Town, breed up their Children so, as to qualifie them for those places. And a Minister that is suteable to his character, is thought so good a match, that generally they have such Estates either by succession, or marriage, as support them suteably to the rank they hold. And in Geneva there is so great a regulation upon expences of all sorts, that a small sum goes a great way. It is a surprising thing to fee so much learning as one finds in Geneva, not only among those whose profession obliges them to study, but among the Magistrates and Citizens; an if there are not many men of the first form of learning among them, yet every body almost here has a good tincture of a learned education, in so much, that they are masters of the Latin, they know the Controversies of Religion, and History, and they are generally men of good sense. There is an universal Civility, not only towards Stran∣gers, but towards one another, that reigns all the Town over, and leans to an excess: so that in them one sees a mixture of a French openness, and an Italian exactness: there is indeed a little too much of the last. The publick Iustie of the City is quick and good, and is more commended than the private Iustice of those that deal in trade: a want of sincerity is much lamented by those that know the Town well. There is no publik leudness tolerated, and the disorders of that sort are ma∣naged with great address. And notwithstanding their neighbourhood to the Switzers, drinking is very little known among them. One of the best parts of their La is the way of selling Estates, which is likewise practised in Switzerland, and is called Subhastation, from the Ro∣man custum of selling Sub hasta. A man that is to buy an Estate, agrees with the owner, and then intimates it to the Goverment; who order three several proclama∣tions to be made six Weeks one after another of the inten∣ded
sale, that is to be on such a day: when the day comes, the Creditors of thé seller, if they apprehend that the Estate is sold at an under value, may out-bid the Buyer; but if they do not interpose, the Buyer delivers the money to the State, which upon that, gives him his tile to the Estate, which can never be so much as brought under a debate in Law; and the price is payed into the State, and is by them given either to the Creditors of the Seller, if he owes money, or to the seller himself. This Custom prevails likewise in Swisse, where also twelve years possession gives a prescription; so that in no place of the World are the titles to Estates so secure as here. The constitution of the Government is the same both in Geneva, and in most of he Cantons. The So∣veraignty lies in the Council of 200▪ and this Council chu∣ses out of irs number 25. who are the lesser Counil; and the censure of the 25. belong to the great Counil, they are chosen by a sort of Ballt, so that it is not known for whom they give their votes, which is an affectual method to suppress sactions and resentments; since in a competi∣ton, no man can know who voted for him or against him: yet the Election is not so carried, but that the whole Town is in an intrigue concerning it: for since the being of the little Council leads one to the Sindicat, which is the Chief honour of the State; this dignity is courted here, with as active and solicitous an ambition, as appears else∣where for greater matters. The 200. are chosen and censured by the 25. so that these two Councils, which are both for life, are checks one upon another. The Magistracy is in the one, and the Soveraignty in the other. The number of 25. is never exceeded in the lesser Cun∣cil; but for the greater, tho' it passes by the name of the Council of 200. yet there are commonly 8 or 10. more, so that notwithstanding the absence or sickness of some of the number, they may still be able to call together near the full number. There is another Council besides these two, composed of 60. consisting of those of the 200. that have born Offics, such as Auditors, Attorny-Gene∣rals,
or those that have been in other imployments, which are given for a determinate number of years: this Court has no Authority, but is called together by the 25, when any extraordinary occasion makes it advisa∣ble for them to call for a more general concurrence, in the Resolutions that they are about to form. And this Council is of the nature of a Council of State, that only gives advice, but has no power in it self to enforce its advice. The whole body of the Burgesses chuse the Syndics the first Sunday of the year; and there are some other Ele∣ctions that do likewise belong to them. The difference between the Burgesses and Citizens is, that the former degree may be bought, or given to Strangers, and they are capable to be of the 200; but none is a Citizen but he that is the Son of a Burgess, and that is born within the Town. I need say no more of the Constitution of this little Republick, its chief support is in the firm Alliance that has stood now so long between it, and the Cantons of Bern and Zurich; and it is so visibly the interest of all Switzer∣land, to preserve it, as the Key, by which it may be all laid open, that if the Cantons had not forgotten their In∣terest so palpably, in suffering the French to become Ma∣sters of the Franche Counte, one would think that they would not be capable of suffering Geneva to be toucht: For all that can be done in fortifying the Town, can signi∣fie no more, but to put it in case to resist a surprise, or scalade: since if a Royal Army comes against it, to be∣siege it in form, it is certain, that unless the Switzers come down with a force able to raise the siege, those within will be able to make a very short resistance. From Geneva I went through the Countrey of Vaud, or the Valley, and Lausanne its Chief Town, in my way to Bern. The Town of Lausanne is situated on three Hills, so that the whole Town is ascent and descent, and that very steep, chiefly on the side on which the Church stands, which is a very noble Fabrique. The South-wall of the Cross was so split by an Earthquake, about 30. years ago, that there
was a rent made from top to bottom above a foot wide▪ which was so closed ten years after by another Earthquake, that now one only sees where the breach was. This ex∣travagant situation of the Town was occasioned by a Legend of some miracles wrought near the Church: which prevailed so much on the credulity of that age, that by it the Churh, and so in consequence the Buil∣dings near it were added to the old Town, which stood on the other Hill, where there was a Town made on the high∣way from the Lake into Switzerland, to which the chief priviledges of the Twn, particularly the judicature of life and death, do still belong. Between Gneva and this, lies the Lake which at the one end is called the Lake of Geneva, and at the other the Lake of Lausanne. I need not men∣tion the dimensions of it, which are so well known, only in some places the depth has never been found; for it is more than 500 Fathom; the Banks of the Lake are the beau∣tifullest plots of ground that can be imagined; for they look as if they hath been laid by art; the sloping is so easie and so equal, and the grounds are so well cultivated and peo∣pled, that a more delighting prospect cannot be seen any where: the Lake is well stockt with excellent Fish, but their numbers do sensibly decrease, and one sort is quite lost; it is not only to be ascribed to the ravenousness of the Pikes that abound in it, but to another sot of Fish that they call Moutails, which were never taken in the Lake till within these six years last past; they are in the Lake of Neuf-Chastel, and some of the other Lakes of Switzerland; and it is likely that by some conveyance under ground they may have come into Channels that fall into this Lake: the Water of the Lake is all clear and fresh. It is not only a great pond made by the Rhosne, that runs into it, but does not pass through it unmixt, as some Travellers have fondly imagined, because sometimes a sot gale makes a curling of the Waters in some places, which runs smooth in the places over which that soft breath of Wind does not pass, the gale varying its place often. But it is believed, that there are also many great Fountains all over the Lke.
These Springs do very probably flow from some vast ca∣vities that are in the neighbouring Mountains, which are as great Cisterns, that discharge themselves in the Valleys, which are covered over with Lakes. And on the two sides of the Alpes, both North and South, there is so great a number of those little Seas, that it may be easily guessed they must have vast sources that feed so constantly those huge ponds And when one considers the height of those Hills, the chain of so many of them together, & their extent both in length and breadth; if at first he thinks of the old Fables of laying one Hill upon the top o another, he will be afterwards apt to imagin, according to the ingenious conjecture of one that travelled over them oftner than once, that these cannot be the primary productions of the Author of Nature; but are the vast ruins of the first World, which at the Deluge broke here into so many inequalities. One Hill not far from Geneva, called Maudit or Cur∣sed, of which one third is alwayes covered with Snow, is two miles of perpendicular height, according to the obsrvation of that incomparable Mathematician and Philosopher, Nicolas Fatio Duilier, who at 22. years of age is already one of the greatest Men of his age, and seems to be bot to carry learning some sises beyond what it has yet attained. But now I will entertain you a little with the State of Bern; for that Canton alone is above a third part of all Switzerland. I will say nothing of its beginning nor Hi∣story, nor will I inlarge upon the Constitution, which are all well known. It has a Council of 200. that goes by that name, tho it consists almost of 300. and another of 25 as Geneva. The Chief Magistrates are two Advoyers, who are not annual, as the Sindics of Geneva, but are for life; and have an authority not unlike that of the Roman Conuls, each being his year by turns the Advoyer in office. After them, there are the four Bannerets, who answer to the Triunes as the People in Rome: then come the two Bursars or Treasurers, one for the ancient German Territory, the
other for the French Territory, or the Country of Vaud; and the two last chosen of the 25. are called the Secrets; for to them all secrets relating to the State are discovered: and they have an authority of calling the 200. together when they think fit, and of acusing those of the Magistracy, the Advoyers themselves not excepted, as they see cause: tho this falls out seldom. There are 72. Bailiages, into which the whole Canton of Bern is divided; and in every one of those there is a Bai∣lif named by the Council of 200. who must be a Citizen of Bern, and one of the 200. to which Council no man can be chosen till he is married: these Bailiages are imploy∣ments both of Honour and profit: for the Bailif is the Go∣vernour and Iudge in that Iurisdiction: since tho he has some Assessors, who are chosen out of the Bailiage, yet he may by his Authority carry matters which way he will, against all their opinions, and the Bailiff have all the Con∣fiscations and fines; so that drinking being so common in the Countrey, and that producing many quarrels, the Bailif makes his advantage of all those disorders: and in the 6 years of his Government, according to the quality of his Bailiage, he not only lives by it, but will carry per∣haps 20000. Crowns with him back to Bern: on which he lives till he can carry another Bailiage: for one is capable of being twice Bailif; but tho some have been thrie Bailifs, this is very extraordinary. The Exactions of the Bailifs are the only Impositions or charges to which the Inhabitants are subjected, and these falling only on the irregularities and disorders of the more debauched, makes that this gri∣vance, tho in some particular cases it preses hard, yet is not so universally felt: sor a sober and regular Man is in no danger. Many in this Canton are as in England Lords of Ca∣stles, or Mnnors, an have a Iurisdiction annexed to their Estates, and name their Magistrate, who is called the Ca∣stellan. In matters of small consequence there lies no appeal from him to the Bailif, but beyond the value of two Pi∣stols an appeal lies, and no sentence of death is execu∣ted, till it is confirmed at Bern. There lies also an Apeal
from the Bailif to the Council at Bern. There are many complaints of the injustice of the Bailifs: but their Law is short and clear, so that a suit is soon ended; two or three hearings is the most, that even an intricate suit amounts to, either in the first instance before the Bailif, or in the second Judgement at Bern. The Citizens of Bern consider these Bailiages as their Inheritance, and they are courted in this State perhaps with as much Intrigue, as was ever used among the Romans in the distribution of their Pro∣vinces: and so little signifie the best Regulations when there are Intrinsick diseases in a state, that tho there is all possible precaution used in the nomination of these Bai∣lifs, yet that has not preserved this state from falling un∣der so great a mischief by those little Provinces; that as it has already in a great measure corrupted their morals, so it may likely turn in conclusion to the ruin of this Repu∣blick. All the Electors give their voices by ballot, so that they are free from all after game in the nomination of the person: all the kindred of the pretenders, even to the remotest degrees, are excluded from voting, as are also all their creditors, so that none can vote but those who seem to have no interest in the issue of the competition; and yet there is so much intrigue, and so great a corruption in the distribution of these imployments, that the whole business in which all Bern is ever in motion, is the cat∣ching of the best Bailiages, on which a family will have its Eye for many years before they fall; for the Counsel∣lors of Bern give a very small share of their Estates to their Children when they marry them: all that they propose is, to make a Bailiage sure to them: for this, they feast and drink, and spare nothing by which they may make sure a sufficient number of votes; but it is the chamber of the Bannerets that admits the pretenders to the compe∣tition When the Bailif is chosen, he takes all possible methods to make the best of it he can, and lets few crimes pass, that carry either confiscations or fines after them; hs justice also is generally suspected. It is true, those of the Bailiage may complain to the Council at Bern, as the
oppressed Provines did anciently to the Senate of Rome; and there have been severe judgments against some very exorbitant Bailifs; yet as complaints are not made, except upon great occasions, which are not often given by the Bailifs, so it being the general interest of the Citi∣zens of Bern to make all possible advantages of those im∣ployments, the censure will be but gentle, except the complaint is crying. In Bern there is very little Trade, only what is necessary for the support of the Town. They maintain Professors in the Universities of Bern, and Lausanne; the one for the German Territory, which is the Ancient Canton; and the other for the new Conquest, which is the French: In the former there are about 300. Parishes; in the latter there are but about 150: But in the Benefices of the German side, the ancient Rights of the incumbents are generally preserved so, that some Benefices are worth a thousand Crowns: Whereas in the païs des Vaud, the provisions are set off as sallaries, and are generally from one hundred to two hundred Crowns: It is visible, that those of Bern trust more to the affections and fidelity of their subjects, thn to the strength of their Walls; For as they have never finished them, so what is built, cannot be brought to a regular fortification; and it is not preserved with any care, nor furnished with Canon; but if they have none on their Ramparts, they have good store in their Arsenal, in which they say there are Arms for forty thousand Men. The Peaants are generally rich, chiefly on the Ger∣man side, and are all well Armed; they pay no duties to the Publick▪ and the soil is capable of great cultivation, in which some succeed so well, that I was shewed some that were by accident at Bern, who, as I was told, had of Estat to the value of an hundred thousand Crowns, but that is not ordinary; yet ten thousand Crowns for a Pea∣sant, is no extraordinary matter. They live much on their Milk and Corn, which in some places, as about Payern, yields an encrease of 15. measures after one: they breed many Horses, which bring them in a great deal of mo∣ney.
The worst thing in the Countrey is, the moisture of the Air, which is not only occasioned by the many Lakes that are in it, and the Neighbouring Mountains that are covered with Snow, some all the summer long, and the rest till Mid-Summer; but by the vast quantity of Woods of Fir-teees, which seem to fill very near the half of their soil; and if these were for the most part rooted out, as they would have much more soil, so their Air would be much purer; yet till they find either Coal or Turf for their fewel, this cannot be done. I was told, that they had found Coal in some places: If the Coal is conve∣niently situated, so that by their Lakes and Rivers i can be easily carried over the Country, it may save them a great extent of ground; that as it is covered with Wood, so the Air becomes thereby the more unwhol∣some. They have some Fountains of Salt-water, but the ma∣king Salt consumes so much Wood, that hitherto it ha not turn'd to any account. The Men are generally sincere, but heavy; they think it necessary to correct the moisture of the Air with liberal entertainments; and they are well furnished with all ne∣cessary ingredients; for as their soil produces good Cattle, so their Lakes abound in Fish, and their Woods in Fowl, the Wine is also light and good. The Women are generally imployed in their domesick Affairs: and the Wives even of the chief Magistrates of Bern, look into all the con∣cerns of the House and Kitchin, as much as the Wives of the meanest Peasants. Men and Women do not converse promiscuously together, and the Women are so much amused with the management at home, and enter so little into intrigues, that among them, as an eminent Physitian there told me, they know not what Vapours are, which he imputed to the idleness and the intrigues that abound elsewhere; whereas▪ h said, among them the Blood was cleansed by their labour, and as that made them sleep well, so they did not amuse themselves with much thinking, nor did they know what Amours were:
The third Adultery is punished with death, which is also the punishment of the fifth act of Fornication; of which I saw an instance while I was in Bern: For a Woman, who confessed her self guilty of many Woredoms, and designed to be revenged on some Men, that did not fur∣nish her liberally with money, was upon that condemned and executed; the manner was solemn; for the Advoye comes into an open Bench in the midle of the Street, and for the satisfaction of the people, the whole Process was read, and Sentence was pronounced in the hearing of all: the Councellors both of the great and lesser Coun∣cil standing about the Advoyer, who after Sentence took the Criminal very gently by the hand, and prayed for he Soul; and after Execution, there was a Sermon for th instruction of the people. The whole State is disposed for War; for every ma that can bear Arms is listed; and knows his Post and Arms; and there are Beacons so laid over the Country▪ that the signal can run over the whole Canion in a night: And their Military Lists are so laid, that every man knows whether he is to come out upon the first or second, or not till the general summons. They assu∣red me at Bern, that upon a General Summons they could bring above 80000 Men together. The Men are robust and strong, and capable of great hardship, and of good Discipline, and have generally an extream sense of Liberty, and a great love to their Country; but they labour under a want of Officers. And tho the subjects of the State are Rich, yet the publick is poor; they can well resist a sudden Invasion of their Countrey; but they would soon grow weary of a long War; and the soil requires so much cultivation, that they could not spare from their labour the Men that would be necessary to preserve their Countrey: they were indeed as happy as a people could be, when the Empe∣rour had Alsace on the one hand, and the Spaniards had the Franche Comté on the other, they had no rea∣son to fear their Neighbours; but now that both those
Provinces are in the hands of the French, the case is quite altered; for as Basil is every moment in danger from the Garrison of Hunningen, that is but a Cannon sho distant from it, so all the Païs de Vaud lies open to the Franche Comtè, and has neither Fortified Places, nor good Passes to secure it; so that their errour in suffering this to fall into the hands of the French was so gross, that I took some pains to be informed concerning it; and will here given you this account, that I had from one who was then in a very Eminent Post, so that as he certainly knew the Secret, he seemed to speak sincerely to me. He told me, that the Duke of Lorraine had often moved in the Councils of War, that the Invasion of France ought to be made on that side, in which Franc lay open, and was very ill fortified; this he repeated often, and it was known in France: so that the King resolved to possess himself of the Comté, but used that precaution, that fearing to provoke the Switzers, he offered a neutrality on that side: but the Spaniards, who judged right, that it was as much the interest of the Cantons, as it was theirs, to preserve the Comtè in their hands, refused to consent to it; but they took no care to defend it, and seemed to leave that to the Switzers. In the mean while, the Frenh Money went about very liberally at Bern, and after those that were most likely to make opposition were gained, the French Minister proposed to them the necessity in which his Master found himself engaged to secure himself on that side; but that still he would grant a neutrality on their account, if the Spaniards would agree to it; and with this all the Assurances that could be given in Words were offered to them, that they should ne∣ver find the least Prejudice from the Neighbouhood of the French, but on the contrary, all possible Protection. There was just Cause given by the Spaniards to consider them very little in their Deliberation: for they would neither accept of the Neutrality, nor send a considerable force to preserve the Country,
so that it seemed almost inevitable to give way to the French Proposition; but one proposed that which an unbyassed Assembly would certainly have accepted, that they should go themselves and take the Country; and by so doing, they would secure the Neutrality, which was all that the French pretended to desire; and they might easily satisfy the Spaniards, and reimburse themselves of the Expence of the Invasion, by restoring the Country to them, when a General Peace should be made. He laid out the misery to which their Coun∣trey must be reduced by so powersul a Neighbour; but all was lost labour; so he went out in a rage, and published through the Town, that the State was sold, and all was lost. They now see their error too late, and would repair it, if it were possible; but the truth is, many of the particular Member of this State, do so prey upon the publick, that unless they do with one consent reform those abuses, they will never be in a condition to do much: for in many of their Bailiages, of which some are Abbeys, the Bailifs not only feed on the Subjcts, but likewise on the State, and pretend they are so far super-expended, that they discount a great deal of the publick revenue, of which they are the Receivers, for their Reimbursement: which made Mr. d' Erlack once say, when one of those Ac∣counts was presented, That it was very strange if the Abbey could not feed the Monks. It is true, the power of their Bannerets is so great, that one would think they might redress many Abuses. The City of Bern is divided into four Bodies, not unlike our Companies of London, which are the Bakers, the Butchers, the Tan∣ners, and the Black-smiths; and every Citizen of Bern does incorporate himself into one of these Societies, which they call Abbeys; for it is likely they were antient∣ly a sort of a Religious Fraternity: every one of these chuses two Bannerets, who bear office by turns from four years to four years, and every one of them has a Bailiage annexed to his Office, which he holds for
life. They carry their name from the Banners of the several Abbeys, as the Gonfaloniers of Italy: and the Advoyers carry still their name from the ancient title Ecdicus, or Advocate, that was he title of the Chief Magistrates of the Towns in the times of the Roma Emperours. The Chamber of the Four Bannerets that bear Office, has a vast Power, they examine and pass all Accounts, and they admit all the Competitors to any offices, so that no man can be proposed to the Council of 200. without their Approbation; and this being now the Chief Intrigue of their State, they have so absolute an Authority in shutting men out from imployments, that their office, which is for life, is no less considerable than that of the Advoyer, tho they are inferiour to him in rank. They manage matters with great address, of which this instance was given me in a competition for the Advoyership not long ago; there was one whose tem∣per was violent, that had made it so sure among those who were qualified to vote in it, as being neither of his kindred, nor Alliance, that they believed he would carry it from the other competitor, whom they favored, so they set up a third competitor, whose kindred were the persons that were made sure o him, whose advancement they opposed, and by this means they were all shut out from voting, so that the Electio went according to the design of the Bannerets. The chief man now in Bern, who was he reigning Advoyer when I was there, is Mr. d' Erlack, Nephew to that Mr. d' Er∣lack, who was Governour of Brsack, and had a breve to be a Marischal of France; this is one of the noblest Fa∣milies in Bern, that acted a great part in shaking off the Austrian Tyranny, and they have been ever since very much distinguished there from all the rest of their Nobi∣lity. The present Head of it is a very extraordinary Man, he has a great Authority in his Canton, not only as he is Advoyer, but by the particular esteem which is payed him. For he is thought the wisest and worthiest Man of the State, tho it is somewhat strange how he
should bear such a sway in such a Government; for he neither feasts, nor drinks with the rest. He is a Man of great Sobriety and Gravity, very reserved, and behaves himself liker a Minister of State in a Mo∣narchy, than a Magistrate in a Ppular Gvernment; For one sees in him none of those Arts, that seem ne∣cessary in suh a Government. He has a great Estate, and no Children; so he has no Projects for his Family; and does what he can to correct the Abuses of the State, tho the disease is inveterate, and seems past cure. He had a Misfortune in a War that was thirty years ago, in the yar 1656. between the Popish and the Protestnt Cantons: the occasion of which will engage me in a short digression. The peace of Switzerland is chiefly preserved by a Law agreed on among all the Cantons, that every Canton may make what Regulations con∣cerning Religion they think fit, without prejudice to the General League. Now the Popish Cantons have made Laws, that it shall be capital to any to change their Reli∣gion, and on a set day every year they go all to Mass, and the Masters of Families swear to continue true to the State, and firm in their Religion to their lives end; and so they pretend they punish their falling into Heresie with death and Confiscation of Goods, because it is a violation of the Faith, which is so solemnly sworn. But on the other hand, in the Protestant Cantons, such as turn are only obliged to go and live out of the Canton; but for their Estates, they still preserve them, and are permitted to sell them. One cannot but observe more of the merciful Spirit of the Gospel, in the one▪ than in the other. In two Cantons, Appenzel, and Gla∣rs, both Religions are tollerated, and are capable of equal Priviledges, and in some Bailiages that were conquered in common by the Cantons of Bern and Fri∣burg, in the Wars with Savoy, the two Cantons name the Bailifs by turns, and both Religions are so equally tolerated, that in the same Church they have both Mass and Sermon, so equally, that on one Sunday, the Mass
begins, and the Sermon follows, and the next Sunday, the Sermon begins, and the Mass comes next, without the least disorder or murmuring. But in the year 1656. some of the Cantons of Schwitz changing their Religion, and retiring to Zurich, their Estates were confiscated; and some others, that had also changed, but had not left the Canton, were taken and beheaded. Zurich demanded the Estates of the refugies, but instead of grating this, the Canton of Schwitz de∣manded hack their subjects, that they might proceed against them as delinquents; and they founded this on  Law, by which the Cantons are obliged to deliver up the Criminals of another Canton, when they come among them, if they are demanded by the Canton to which they belong; but those of Zurich and Bern thought this was both inhuman and unchristian; tho the Deputy of Bas was of another mind, and thought that they ought to be delivered up, which extreamly disgusted those of Zurich. Those of Schwitz committed some insolences upon the subjects of Zurich, and refused to give satisfaction. Upon all which a War followed between the Protestant and Po∣pish Cantons. The Cantons of Bern and Zurich raised an Army of 25000 Men, which was commanded by Mr. d' Er∣lak, but was dispersed in several Bodies; and the Papists had not above 6000; yet they surprised Mr. d' Erlack with a body not much superiour to theirs; both sides after a short engagement run; the Canon of the Canton of Ber was left in the Field a whole day; at last those of Lucer seeing that none stayed to defend the Canon, carried them off; this loss raised such a tumult in Bern, that they seemed resolved to sacrifice Mr. d' Erlack: but he came with such a presence of mind, and gave so satisfying an account of the Mifortune, that the Tumult ceased, and soon after the War ended. Upon this many thought, that tho the Papists acted cruelly, yet it wa according to their Laws, and that no other Canton could pretend to interpose or quarrel with those of Schwitz for what they did upon that occasion. Within these few years there were some quar∣rels
like to arise in the Canton of Glaris, where it was said, that the equal priviledges agreed on to both Religions were not preserved; but on this occasion the Popes Nuntio a∣cted a very different part from that which might have been expected from him; For whereas the Mnisters of that Court have been commonly the Incendiaries in all the dis∣putes that concern Religion, he acted rather the part of a Mediator; and whereas it was visible, that the injustice lay on the side of the Papists, he interposed so effectually with those of Lucern, which is the chief of the Popish Can∣tons, that the difference was composed. But to return to Bern; the buildings have neither great magnificence, nor many Appartments, but they are convenient, and suited to the way of living in the Country. The Streets not only of Bern and the bigger Towns, but even of the smallest Villages, are furnished with Foun∣tains that run continually; which as they are of great use, so they want not their beauty. The great Church of Bern is a very noble Fabrick; but being built on the top of the Hill on which the Town stands, it seems the ground began to fail, so to support it, they have raised a vast Fabrick, which has cost more than the Church it self; for there is a Platform made, which is a square, to which the Church is one side, and the further side is a vast Wall, fortified with buttresses about 150 foot high. They told me, that all the ground down to the bottom of the Hill was dug in∣to vaults; this plat-form is the chief walk of the Town, chiefly about Sun set; and the River underneath presents a very beautiful prospect▪ For there is a Cut taken off from it for the Mills, but all along as this Cut goes, the Water of Aar runs over a sloping bank of Stone, which they say, was made at a vast charge, and makes a noble and large Cascade. The second Church is the Dominicans Chappel, where I saw the famous hole that went to an Image in the Church, from one of the Cells of the Dominicans, which leads me to set down that Story at some length: For as it was one of the most signal cheats, that the World has
known; so it falling out about twenty years before the Reformation was received in Bern, it is very probable that it contributed not a little to the preparing of the spi∣rits of the people to that change. I am she more able to give a particular account of it, because I read the origin process in the Latin record, signed by the Notaries of the Court of the delegates that the Pope sent to try the matter. The record is above 130 sheets, writ close, and of all side, it being indeed a large volum; and I found the printed ac∣counts so defective, that I was at the pains of reading the whole process, of which I will give here a true abstract. The two famous Orders, that had possessed themselves of the esteem of those datk ages, were engaged in a mighty ri∣valry. The Dominicans were the more learned, they were the eminentest Preachers of those times, and had the con∣duct of the Courts of Inquisition, and the other chief officer in the Church in their hands. But on the other hand, the Franciscans had an outward appearance of more severity a ruder habit, stricter rules, and greater poverty: all whic gave them such advantages in the eyes of the simple multi∣tude, as were able to ballance the other honours of the Do∣minican Order. In short, the two Orders were engaged in a high rivalry, but the devotion towards the Virgin being the prevailing passion of those times, the Franciscans upon thi had great advantages. The Dominicans, thar are all engage in the defence of Thomas Aquinas's opinions, were there∣by obliged to assert, that she was born in Original Sin; th was proposed to the people by the Franciscans as no less than Blasphemy, and by this the Dominicans began to lose ground extreamly in the minds of the people, who were strongly prepossed in favour of the immaculate Conceptio▪ About the beginning of the 15th Century, a Francisc happened to preach in Francfort, and one Wigand a Domi∣nican coming into the Church, the Cordelier seeing him, broke out into exclamations, praising God that he was no of an Order that prophaned the Virgin, or that poysone Princes in the Sacrament, (for a Dominican had poysone the Emperor Henry the VII. with the Sacrament,) Wiga being extreamly provoked with this bloody reproach, gav
him the Lye, upon which a dispute arose, which ended in a tumult, that had almost cost the Dominican his life, yet he got away. The whole Order resolved to take their revenge, and in a Chapter, held at Vimpsen in the year 1504. they contrived a method for supporting the credit of their Or∣der, which was much sunk in the opinion of the people, and for bearing down the reputation of the Franciscans, four of the juncto undertook to manage the design; for they said, since the people were so much disposed to believe Dreams and Fables, they must dream of their side, and en∣deavour to cheat the people as well as the others had done. They resolved to make Bern the Seene in which the project should be put in execution; for they found the people of Bern, at that time apt to Swallow any thing, and not dispo∣sed to make severe Enquiries into extraordinary Matters. When they had formed their design, a fit Tool presented it self; for one Ietzer came to take their habit as a Lay-bro∣ther, who had all the dispositions that were necessary for the execution of their project: For he was extream simple, and was much inclined to Austerities, so having observed his temper well, they began to execute their project, the very Night after he took the Habit, which was, on Lady-day 1507. one of the Fryers conveyed himself secretly into his Cell, and appeared to him as if he had been in Purgatory, in a strange figure, and he had a Box near his mouth, upon which as he blew, fire seemed to come out of his mouth. He had also some Dogs about him, that appeared as his Tor∣mentors, in this posture he came near the Fryer, while he was a Bed, and took up a celebrated Story that they used to tell all their Fryers, to beget in them a great dread at the laying aside their habit, which was, that one of the Order, who was Superiour of their House at Soloturn, had gone to Paris, but laying aside his habit, was killed in his Lay-habit. The Fryer in the Vizar said, he was that person, and was condemned to Purgatory for that Crime; but he added, that he might be rescued out of it by his means, and he seconded this with most horrible Cries, expressing the Miseries which he suffered. The poor Fryer (Ietzer) was excessively frigh∣ted, but the other advanced, and required a Promise of him
that which he should desire of him, in order to the deli∣vering him out of his Torment. The frighted Fryer pro∣mised all that he asked of him; then the other said, he knew he was a great Saint, and that his prayers and mor∣tifications would prevail, but they must be very extraor∣dinary; The whole Monastery must for a week together discipline themselves with a Whip, and he must lie pro∣strate in the form of one on a Cross, in one of their Chap∣pels, while Mass was said in the sight of all that should come together to it; and he added, that if he did this, he should find the effects of the love that the B. Virgin did bear him, together with many other extraordinary things; and said, he would appear again accompanied with two other Spirits; and assured him, that all that he did suffer for his deliverance, should be most gloriously rewarded. Morning was no sooner come than the Frie gave an account of this Apparition to the rest of the Con∣vent, who seemed extreamly surprised at it; they all pres∣sed him to undergo the discipline that was enjoyned him, and every one undertook to bear his share; so the deluded Fryer performed it all exactly in one of the Chappels of their Church: This drew a vast number of Spectators to∣gether, who all considered the poor Fryer as a Saint, and in the mean while the four Fryers that managed the impo∣sture, magnified the Miracle of the Apparition to the skie in their Sermons. The Fryer's Confessor was upon the Secret, and by this means they knew all the little passages of the poor Fryers life, even to his thoughts, which help∣ed them not a little in the Conduct of the matter. The Confessor gave him an Hostie, with a piece of Wood, tha was, as he pretended, a true piece of the Cross, and by these he was to fortify himself, if any other Apparition should come to him, since evil Spirits would be certainly chained up by them. The Night after that, the former Ap∣parition was renewed, and the masqued Fryer brough two others with him in such Vizzards, that the Fry thought they were Devils indeed. The Fryer presented the Hostie to them, which gave them such a cheek, that he
was fully satisfied of the vertue of this preservative. The Fryer, that pretended he was suffering in Purga∣tory, said so many things to him relating to the Secres of his life, and Thoughts, which he had from the Confes∣sor, that the poor Fryer was fully possessed with the opi∣nion of the reallity of the Apparition. In two of these Apparitions, that were both managed in the same man∣ner, the Fryer in the Masque talked much of the Domini∣can Order, which he said was excessively dear to the B. Virgin, who knew her self to be conceived in Original sin, and that tbe Doctors who taught the contrary were in Purgatory: That the Story of S. Bernards appearing with a spot on him, for having opposed himself to the feast of the Conception, was a Forgery: but that it was true, that some hideous Flies had appeared on St Bona∣ventures Tomb, who taught the contrary. That the B. Vir∣gin abhorred the Cordeliers for making her equal to her Son; that Scotus was damned, whose Canonization the Cordeliers were then soliciting hard at Rome; and that the Town of Bern would be destroyed for harbouring such plagues within their walls. When the injoined discipline was fully performed, the Spirit appeared again, and said, he was now delivered out of Purgatory, but before he could be admitted to Heaven, he must receive the Sa∣crament, having died without it, and after that he would say Mass for those, who had by their great charities escued him out of his pains. The Fryr fancied the oice resem∣bled the Priors a little, but he was thn so far from sus∣pecting any thing, that he gave no great heed to this su∣spition. Some dayes after this, tbe same Fryer appeared as a Nun all in Glory, and told the poor Frier, that she was St. Barbary, for whom he had a particular devo∣tion; and added, that the B. Virgin was so much plea∣sed with his charity, that she intended to come and visit him: He immediately called the Convent together, and gave the rest of the Fryers an account of this Apparition, which was entertained by them all with great joy; and the Fryer languished in desires of the accomplishment
of the promise, that St. Barbara had made him. After some dayes, the longed for delusion appeared to him, clothed as the Virgin used to be on the great Feasts, and indeed in the same Habits: there were about her some Angels, which he afterwards found were the little Statues of Angels, which they set on the Altars on the great Holy Dayes. There was also a pulley fastned in the room over his head, and a cord tied to the Angels, that made them rise up in the Air, and flie about the Virgin, which increa∣sed the delusion. The Virgin, after some endearments to himself, extolling the merit of his charity and di∣scipline, told him, that she was conceived in Ori∣ginal Sin, and that Pope Iulius the Second, that then reigned, was to put an end to the Dispute, and was to abolish the Feast of her Conception, which Sixus the fourth had instituted, and that the Fryer was to be the Instrument of perswading the Pope of the truth in that matter: She gave him three drops of her Sons blood, which were three tears of blood that he had shed over Ierusalem, and this signified that she was three hours in Original Sin, after which she was, by his Mercy, delivered out of that State: For it seems the Dominicans were resolved so to compound the matter, that they should gain the main point of her Conception in Sin; yet they would comply so far with the reve∣rence for the Virgin, with which the World was possessed, that she should be believed to have re∣mained a very short while in that State. She gave him also five drops of Blood in the form of a Cross, which were Tears of Blood, that she had shed while her Son was on the Cross. And, to convince him more fully, she presented an Hostie to him, that appeared to as an ordinary Hostie, and of a sudden it appeared be of a deep ed colour. The cheat of those supposed vi∣sits was often repeated to the abused Fryer; at last the Vi∣gin old him, that she was to give him such maks of her Sons Love to him, that the matter should be past all doub.
She said, that the five wounds of St. Lucia, and S. Catha∣rine, were real wounds, and that she would also imprint them on him; so she bid him reach his hand; he had no great mind to receive a favour in which he was to suffer so much: but she forced his hand, and struck a nail thro it, the hole was as big as a grain of pease, and he saw the Candle clearly thro it; this threw him out of a supposed transport into a real Agony; but she seemed to touch his hand, and he thought he smelt an Oyntment, with which she anointed it, tho his Confessr perswaded him, that that was only an imagination, so the supposed Virgin lest him for that time. The next night the Apparition returned, and brought some linnen Clothes, which had some real or imagi∣nary vertue to allay his Torment: and the pretended Virgin said, they were some of the Linnings in which Christ was wrapped, and with that she gave him a soporiferous draught, and while he was fast asleep, the other four wounds were, inprinted on his body, in such a manner that he felt no pain. But in order to the doing of this, the Friers betook themselves to Charms, and the Subprir shewed the rest a book full of them; but he said, that before they could be effectual, they must renounce God▪ and he not only did this himself, but by a formal act put in writing signed with his Blood, he dedicated himself to the Deyl; it is true, he did not oblige the rest to this, but only to renounce God. The composition of the Draught was a mixture of some Fountain-water and Chrism, the Hairs of the Eyebrows of a Child, some Quiksilver, some grains of Incense, somewhat of an Easter Wax Can∣dle, some consecrated Salt, and the Blood of an unbap∣tised Child. This Composition was a secret, which the Subprior did not communicate to the other Friers. By this the poor Frier Ietzer was made almost quite insensible: when he was awake, and came out of this deep sleep, he felt this wonderful im∣pression on his body: and now he was ravished out
of measure, and came to fancy himself to be acting all the parts of our Saviours Passion: he was exposed to the peo∣ple on the great Altar, to the amasement of the whole Town, and to the no small mortification of the Francis∣cans. The Dominicans gave him some other draughts that threw him into convulsions, and when he came out of those, a voice was heard, which came thro that hole which yet remains, and runs from one of the Cells along a great part of the wall of the Church: for a Frier spoke thro a pipe, and at the End of the hole there was an Image of the Virgins, with a little Iesus in her arms, between whom and his mother the voice seemed to come; the Image also seemed to shed Tears, and a Painter had drawn those on her Face so lively, that the people where deceived by it. The little Jesus askt, why she wept? and she said, it was because his honour was given to her, since it was said, that she was born without sin; in Conclusion, the Fryers did so over act this matter, that at last even the poor deluded Fryer himself came to discover it, and resol∣ved to quit the order. It was in vain to delude him with more Apparitions; for he well nigh kill'd a Fryer that came to him personating the Virgin in another shape with a Crown on her head: he also over-heard the Fryers once talking amongst them∣selves, of the Contrivance and Success of the imposture, so plainly, that he discovered the whole Matter, and upon that, as may be easily imagined, he was filled with all the horror with which such a Discovery could inspire him. The Fryers fearing that an imposture, which was car∣ried on hitherto with so much success, should be quite spoiled, and be turned against them, thought the surest way was to own the whole Matter to him, and to engage him to carry on the Cheat. They told him in what esteem he would be, if he continued to support the reputation tha he had acquired, that he would become the chief person of the Order; and in the end they persuaded him to go on with the Imposture: but at last, they fearing lest he
should discover all, resolved to poyson him; of which he was so apprehensive, that once a Loaf being brought him that was prepared with some spices, he kept it for some time, and it growing green, he threw it to some young Wolves Whelps that were in the Monastery, who died immediately. His constitution was also so vigorous, that tho they gave him Poyson five several times, he was not destroyed by it; they also prest him earnestly to re∣nounce God, which they judged necessary, that so their Charms might have their effect on him; but he would ne∣ver consent to that: at last they forced him to take a poy∣soned Hostie, which yet he vomited up soon after he had swallowed it down; that failing, they used him so cruel∣ly, whipping him with an iron Chain, and girding him about so strait with it, that o avoid further Torment he swore to them, in a most imprecating stile, that he would never discover the secret, but would still carry it on; and so he deluded them till he sound an opportunity of gtting out of the Covent, and of throwing himself ino the hands of the Magistrtes, to whom he discovered all. The four Fryers were seised on, and put in prison, and an account of the whole Matter was sent, first to the Bishop of Lausanne, and then to Rome; and it may be easily imagined, that the Franciscans took all possible care to have it well examined; the Bishop of Lausane, and of Zyon, with the Provinial of the Dmiians, were▪ ap∣pointed to form the Process. The four Fryers first excep∣ted to Ietzers credit; but that was rejected: then being threatned with the Question, they put in a long plea a∣gainst that; but tho the Provincial would not consent to that, yet they were put to the question; some endured it long; but at last, they all confessed the whole progress of the Imposture. The Provincial appeared concerned; for tho Ietzer had opened the whole Matter to him, yet he would give no credit to him; on the contrary, he Char∣ged him to be obedient to them, and one of the Friers said plainly, that he was in the whole secret, and so he with∣drew; but he died some dayes after at Constance, having
poyson'd himself, as was believed. The Matter lay sleep some time, but a year after that, a Spanish Bi∣shop came, authorised with full power from Rome; and the whole Cheat being fully proved, the four Friers were solemnly degraded from their Priesthood, and Eight dayes after, it being the last of May 1509. they were Burnt in a Medow, on the other side of the River, over against the great Church; The place of their Exeution was shewed me, as well as the Hole in the Wall, thro which the Vice was Conveyed to the Image. It was certainly one of the blackest, and yet the best Carried on Cheat, that has been ever known; and no doubt had the poor Fryer died, be∣fore the discovery, it had pased down to posterity, as one of the greatest Miracles that ever was; and it gives a shrewd suspition, that many of the other Miracles, of that Church, were of the same nature, but more successfully finished. I shall not entertain you any further with the State of Bern, but shall only add one general remark: which was too visible not to be observed every where, and of too great importance not to deserve a particular re∣flection: it belongs in general to all the Cantons, but I give it here, because I had more occasion to make it in Bern, having seen it more, and stayed lon∣ger in it, than in the other Cantons. Switzerlad lies between France and Italy, that are both of them Countries incomparably more Rich, and better furnished with all the Pleasures and Conveniences of Life than it is; and yet Italy is almost quite dis peopled, and the people in it are reduced to a misery, that can scarce be imagined by those who have not seen it; and France is in a great measure dispeopled, and the inhabitans are reduced to a poverty that appears in all the maks in which it can shew it self, both in their houses, furniture, cloths and looks. On the Contrary, Switzerland is extream full of people, and in several places in the Villages, as well
as in their towns, one sees all the marks he can look for of Plenty and Wealth, their Houses and windows are in good case, the High Wayes are well maintained, all peo∣ple are well Clothed: and every one lives at his ease. This Observation surprised me yet more in the Countrey of the Grisons, who have almost no soil at all, being situated in Valleys, that are almost all washed away with the Torrents, that fall down from the Hills, and swell their brooks sometimes so violently, and so sud∣denly, that in many places the whole soil is washed a∣way, and yet those Valleys are well peopled, and every one lives happy and at ease, under a gentle Government, whilst other rich and plentiful Countries are reduced to such Misery, that as many of the inhabitants are for∣ced to change their seats, so those who stay behind, can scarce live and pay those grievous Impositions that are laid upon them; the rude people generally eason very simply when they enter into Speculations of Government, but they feel true, tho they argu false; so an easy Go∣vernment, tho joyned to an ill soil, and accompanied with great inconveniences, draws, or at least keeps peo∣ple in it; whereas a severe Government, tho in generall ideas it may appear reasonable, drives its subjects even out of the best and most desirable seats. In my way from Ber to this place I passed by So∣loturn, and I came thro Friourg in my way from Lausanne to Bern; these are two of the Chief of the Popish Catons, after Lucerne, and one sees in them a heat, and bigotry beyond what appears either in France or Italy: long before they come within the Church doors they kneel down in the Streets when Mass is a saying in it. The Imges are also extream gross. In the Chief Church of Soloturn there is an Image of God the Father, as an old man with a great black bead, having our Saviour on his knees, and a Pigeon over his head. Here also begins a devotion at the Ave-Mary∣bel, which is scarce known in Frace, but is practised all Italy over: At noon and at Sun set the Bell rings, and all say
the Ave-Mary, and a short prayer to the Virgin; bu whereas in Italy they content themselves with putting off their Hats, in Switzerland they do for the most par kneel down in the Streets; which I saw no where practi∣sed in Italy except at Venice, and there it is not commonly done. But notwithstanding this extream bigotry, all the Switzers see their common interest so well, that they live in a very good undestanding one with ano∣ther. This is indeed chiefly owing to the Canton of Lu∣cern, where there is a spirit in the Government very different from what is in most of the other Popish Can∣tons: the residence of the Spanish Ambassador, and of the Nuntio, in that Town, contributes also much to the preserving it in so good a temper, it being their in∣terest to unite Switzerland, and by this means the heat and indiscretion of the rest is often moderated. The Isuits begin to grow as powerful in Switzerland as they are elsewhere: they have a noble Colledge and Chap∣pel situated in the best place of Friburg. It is not long since they were received at Soloturn, where there was a revenue of 1000 Livres a year, set off for the maintenance of ten of them, with this provision, that they should never exceed that number; but where they are once settled, they find means to break through all Limi∣tations; and they are now become so rich there, that they are raising a Church and Colledge, which will cost before it is finished above 400000. Livres, to which the French King gives 10000 Livres for the frontis-piece: For this being the Cnton in which his Ambassador reside, he thought it suteable to his glory, to have a monument of his bounty raised by an order, that will never be wanting to flatter their bfactors, as long as they find their ac∣count in it. In the same Canton there is an Abbey that has 100000 Livres of revenue; there is also a ery rich House of Nuns, that wear the Capuchins Habit, that as I was told had 60000 Livres of revenu and but 60 Nuns in it, who having thus 1000 Livr apiece, may live in
all possible plenty in a Countrey where a very little mony goes a great way: But that which surprises one most at Soloturn, is, the great Fortification that they are building of a Wall about the Town, the noblest and soldest that is any where to be seen; the Stone with which it is faced, is a sort of course Marble, but of that bigness, that many Stones are 10 foot long, and two foot of breath and thickness: But tho this will be a wok of vast Expence and great Beauty, yet it would signifie little against a great Army that would attack it vigorously. The Wall is finished on the side of the River on which the Town stands, the Ditch is very broad, and the Counterscarp and Glasier are also finished, and they are working at a Fort on the other side of the River, which they intend to fortify in the same manner. This has cost them near two millions of Livres; and this vast expence has made them often repent the undertaking; and it is certain, that a fortifi∣cation that is ale to resist the rage of their Peasants in the case of a Rebellion, is all that is needful. This Canton has two Advoyers, as Bern; the little Council consists of 36, they have 12 Bailiages belonging to them, which are very profitable to those that can carry them, they have one Bursar, and but one Banneret. All the Cantons have their Bailiages; but if there are disorders at Bern in the choice of their Bailifs, there are far greater among the Popish Cantons, where all things are sold, as a forreign Minister that resides there told me, who tho he knew what my Religion was, did not stick to own franckly to me, that the Catholick Can∣tons were not near so well governed as the Protestant-Cantons. Justice is generally sold among them, and in their Treaties with forreign Princes, they have some∣times taken mony both from the Fenh and Spanish Am∣bassadors, and have signed contradictory Articles at the same time. Baden has nothing in it that is remarkable, except its convenient situation, which makrs it the seat of
the general Dyet of the Cantons, tho it is not one of them; but is a Bailiage that belongs in common to eiht of the ancient Cantons. At last I came to this place, which as it is the first and most honourable of all the Cantons, so with relation to us, it has a precedence of a higher nature, it being the first that received the Reformation. This Cantn is much less than Bern, yet the publick is much richer: they reckon that they can bring 50000. Men together upon 24. hours warning, their subjects live happy: for the Bailifs here have regulated appoint∣ments, and have only the hundred Penny of the fines, so that they are not tempted as those of Bern are, to whom the Fine belongs entirely, to strain matters against their Subjects: and whereas at Bern the constant intrigue of the whole Town is concerning their Bai∣liages; here on the contrary, it is a service to which the Citizens are bound to submit according to their Con∣stitution, but to which they do not aspire. The Govern∣ment is almost the same as at Bern, and the Magistrate that is called the Advoyer at Bern, is here called the Bourgomaster. The revenue of the State is here just∣ly accounted for, so that the publick Purse is much ri∣cher than at Bern; the Arsenal is much better furnished, and the Fortifications are more regular. There is a great trade stirring here; and as their Lake, that is 24. miles long, and about two or three Broad, supplies them well with provisions, so their River carries their Ma∣nufacture to the Rhine, from whence it is conveyed as they please. One of their Chief Manufacturies is Crape, which is in all respects the best I ever saw. I will not describe the situation of the Town, but shall content my self to tell you, that it is extream pleasant, the Countrey about it is Mounanous, and the Winters are hard; for the Lke freezes quite over, only in some places the Ice never lies, which is believed a mark that some Sprngs rise there, which cause that heat; so also in the Lake of Geneva, tho it is never quite frozen, yet great flakes of Ice lie in several parts; but these are never seen in some
parts of the Lake, which is supposed to flow from the same cause. But to return to Zurich; one sees here the true ancient Simplicity of the Switzers, not corrupted which Luxu∣ry or Vanity; their Women not only do not converse fa∣miliarly with men, except those of their near kindred, bt even on the Streets do not make any returns to the Civility of Strangers; for it is only Strangers that put off their Hats to Women; but they make no Courtisies: and here, as in all Switzerland, Women are not saluted, but the civility is expressed by taking them by the Hand. There is one thing singular in the constituion of Zu∣rich, that is, their little Council consists of 50 persons, but there sit in it only 25. at a time, and so the two halves of this Council, as each of them has his proper Bourgoma∣ster, have also the Government in their Hands by turns, and they shift every six months, at Mid-summer and at Christ-Mass. The whole Canton is divided into nine great Bailiages, and 21 Castellaneries; in the former the Bailif resides Constantly; but the Castellan, who is also one of the grat Council, has so little to do, that he lives at Zurich, and goes only at some set times of the year to do justice. The vertue of this Canton has appeared signally in their adhering firmly to the antient Capitulations with the Frenh; and not slackening in any Article, which has been done by all the other Cantons, where mony has a Soveraign influence: but here it has never pre∣vailed. They have converted he ancient Revenues of the Church more generally to pious Uses, than has been done any where else, that I know of. They have many Hospitals well entertained; in one, as I was told, there was 650 poor kept: but as they support the real Charities, which belong to such endowments, so they despise that vain Magnificence of Buildings, which is too generally affected elsewhere; for theirs are very plain; and one of the Government there said to me very sen∣sibly, That they thught it enough to maintain
their Poor as Poor; and did not judge it proper to lodge them as Prines. The Dean and Chapter are likewise still continued as a corporation, and enjoy the revenues which they had be∣fore the Reformation; but if they subsist plentifully, they labour hard; for they have generally two or three Ser∣mons a day, and at least one: the first begins at five a clock in the morning. At Geneva, and all Switserland over, there are daily Sermons, which were substituted upon the Reformation from the Mass. But the Sermons are generally too long, and the Preachers have departed from the first design of these Sermons, which were inten∣ded to be an explication of a whole Chapter, and an exhortation upon it; and if this were so contrived, that it were in all not above a quarter of an hour long, as it would be heard by the People with less Weariness and more profit, so it would be a vast Advantage to the Prea∣chers; For as it would oblige them to study the Scriptures much, so having once made themselves Masters of the practical parts of the Scripture, such short and simple Discourses would cost them less pains, than those more laboured Sermons do, which consume the greatest part of their time, and too often to very little purpose. Among the Archives of the Dean and Chapter, there is a vast Collection of Letters, written either to Bullinger, or by him; they are bound up, and make a great many Vlums in Folio, and out of these no doubt but one might discover a great many particulars relating to the History of the Rformatim: For as Bullinger lived long, so he was much esteemed. He procured a very kind reception to be given to some of our English Exiles in Queen Maries Reign, in particular to Sands, afterwards Arh-Bishop of York; to Horn, afterwards Bishops of Winhester; and to Iewel, Bishop of Salisbury. He gave them lodgings in the Close, and used them with all possible kindness; and as they presented some Silver-Cups to the Colledge, with n Inscription, acknowledging the kind Reception they had ound there, which I saw, so they continued to keep a
constant Correspondence with Bullinger, after the happy re-establishment of the Reformation under Queen Elisa∣beth: Of which I read almost a whole Volum while I was there: Most of them contain only the general news, but some were more important, and relate to the Disputes then on foot, concerning the Habits of the Clergy, which gave the first beginnings to our unhappy Divisions: and by the Letters, of which I read the Originals, it appears, that the Bishops preserved the ancient Habits rather in compliance with the Queens inclinations, than out of a∣ny liking they had to them; so far they were from liking them, that they plainly exprest their dislike of them. Ie∣wel, in a Letter bearing date the 8. of February 1566. wishes, that the Vestments, together with all the other Remnants of Popery, might be thrown both out of their Churches, and out of the minds of the People; and laments the Queens fixedness to them, so that she would suffer no change to be made. And, in Ianuary of the same year, Sands writes to the same purpose. Contenditur de vestibus Papistiis utendis vel non utendis, dabit Deus his quoque finem. Diputes are now on foot concerning the Popish Vest∣ments, whether they should be used or not; but God will put an end to those things. Horn, Bishop of Winhester, went further; For in a Letter, dated the 16th of Iuly, 1565. He writes of the Act concerning the Habits, with great regret, and expresses some hopes that it might be repealed next Session of Parliament, if the Popish Party did not hinder it; and he seems to stand in doubt, whether he should conform himself to it or not; upon which he de∣sires Bullingers Advice. And in many Letters writ on that subject, it is asserted, that both Cranmer and Ridley intended to procure an Act for abolishing the Habits, and that they only defended their Lawfulness, but not their Fitness; and therefore they blamed private Persons that refused to obey the Laws. Grindal in a Letter dated the 27th of August, 1566. writes, That all the Bishops, who had been beyond Sea, had at their return dealt wih the Queen to let the matter of the Habits fall: but she was
so prepossessed, that tho they had all endeavoured to di∣vert her from prosecuting that matter, she continued still inflexible. This had made them resolve to submit to the Laws, and to wait for a fit opportunity to revere them. He laments the ill effects of the opposition that some had made to them, which had extreamly irritated the Queens Spirit, so that She was now much more heated in those matters than formerly; he also thanks Bullinger for the Letter that he had writ, justifying the Lawful use of the Habits, which he says had done great service. Cx, Bishop of Ely, in one of his Letters, laments the aer∣sion that they found in the Parliament to all the Propsi∣tions that were made for the Reformation of Abuses. Ie∣wel, in a Letter dated the 22th of May 1559. writes, That the Queen refused to be called Head o the Church, and adds, That that Title could not be justly given to any mortal, it being due only to Christ; and that such Titles had been so much abused by Antichrist, that they ought not to be any longer continued. On all these Passa∣ges I will make no reflections here: For I set them down only to shew what was the sense of our Chief Church-men at that time concerning those matters, which have since engaged us into such warm and angry Disputes; and this may be no inconsiderable instruction to one, that intends to write the History of that time. The last particu∣lar, with which I intend to end this Letter, might seem a little too learned, if I were writing to a less knowing Man than your self. I have taken some pains in my travels to examin all the Antient Manusripts of the New Testament, concer∣ning that doubted pasage of St. Iohns Epistle, There are three that bear witness in Heaven; the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; and these three are one. Bullinger doub∣ted much of it, because he found it not in an antient La∣tin Manuscript at Zurich, which seems to be about 800. years old: For it is written in that hand that began to be used in Charles the Great's time. I turned the Manuscript, and found the passage was not there; but this was cer∣tainly
the errour or omission of the Coppier: For before the General Epistles in that Manuscript, the Preface of St. Ierome is to be found, in which he sayes, that he was the more exact in that Translation, that so he might discover the fraud of the Arrians, who had struck out that passage concerning the Trinity. This Preface is prin∣ted in Lira's Bible: but how it came to be left out by Erasmus in his Edition of that Father's works, it that of which I can give no account: For as on the one hand, Erasmus's sincerity ought not to be too rashly censured; so on the other hand, that Preface being in all the Manu∣scripts Antient or Modern of those Bibles that have the other Prefaces in them, that I ever yet saw, it is not easy to imagin what made Erasmus not to publish it; and it is in the Manuscript Bibles at Basil, where he printed his Edition of S. Ieromes Works. In the old Manuscript Bible of Geneva, that seems to be above 700. years old, both the Prefae and the Pssage are extant, but with this difference from the common Editions, that the common Editions et the Verse concerning the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, before that of the Water, the Blood, and the Spirit; which comes after it in this Copy: And that I may in this place end all the Readings I found of this passage in my Travels, there is a Manuscript in St. Mark's Library in Venice in three Languages, Greek, Latin, and Arabick, that seems not above 400. years old, in which this passage is not in the Greek, but it is in the Ltin set after the other three, with a sicut to joyn it to what goes before. And in a Manuscript Latin Bible in the Library of St. Laurence at Florence, both St. Iromes Preface and this Passage are extant: but this Passage comes after the other, and is pinned to it with a sicut, as is that of Venice: yet siut is not in the Geneva Manuscript. There are two Greek Manuscripts of the Epistles at Bsil, that seem to be about 500. years old, in neither of which this passage is to be found: they have also an Ancient Latin Bible, which is about 800. years old, in which tho St. Ierom's Prologue
is inserted, yet this Passage is wanting. At Strasrg I saw four very Ancient Manuscripts of the New Testa∣ment in Latin: three of these seemed to be about the time of Charles the Great, but the fourth seemed to be much antienter, and may belong to the seventh Century: in it neither the Prologue nor the Place is extant: but it is added at the foot of the page with another hand. In two of the other, the Prologue is extant, but the Place is no: only in one of them it is added on the Margin. In the fourth, as the Prologue is extant so is the Place likewise, but it comes after the verse of the other three, and is oyned to it thus, Sicut tres sunt in coelo. It seem'd strange to me, and it is almost incredible, that in the Vatican Library there are no Antient Latin Bibles, where above all other places they ought to be lookt for: but I saw none above 400. years old. There i indeed the famous Greek Manuscript of great value, which the Cha∣noine Shelstrat, that was Library keeper, asserted to be 1400. years old, and proved it by the great similitude of the Characters with those that are upon S. Hippolites Sta∣tue, which is so evident, that if his Statue was made about his time, the antiquity of this Manuscript is not to be disputed. If the Characters are not so fair, and have not all the marks of Antiquity that appears in the Kings Manuscript at S. Iames's, yet this has been much better preserved, and is much more entire. The Passage that has led me into this digression, is not to be found in the Vatian Manuscript, no more than it is in the Kings Manu∣script. And with this I will finish my account of Zurich. The publick Library is very noble: The Hall in which it is placed, is large and well contrived; there is a very hand∣some Cabinet of Medls, and so I will break off; but when I have gone so much farther that I have gathered Materials for another Letter of this Volum, you may look for a secn entertaiment, such as it is from. Your, &.
POSTSCRIPT. I told you, that in Bern the Balliages are given by a sort of a Ballot, which is so managed, that no mans Vote is known: but I must now add, that since I was fist there, they have made a considerable regulaion in the way of Voting, when Offices are to be given, which approaches much nearer the Ventian method, and which exposes the competitors more to chance, and by consequence may put an end to the Intrigues, that are so much in use for obtain∣ing those Imployments. There is a number of Balls put into a Box, equal to the number of those that have right to vote, and that are present; of these the third part is guilt, and two parts are only silvered, so every one takes out a ball; but none can vote except those who have the guilt balls; so that hereafter a man may have more than two thirds sure, and yet be cast in a competition. There is one thing for which the Switzers, in parti∣cular those of Bern, cannot be enough commended, they have ever since the Perseution began first in France, opened a Sanctuary to such as have retired thither, in so generous and so Christian a manner, that it deserves all the honourable Remembrances that can be made of it: such Ministers and others, that were at first condemned in France, for the affair of the Cevennes, have not only found a kind Reception here, but all he Support that could be expected, and indeed much more than could have been in reason expected. For they have assigned the French Ministers a penion of fve Crowns a month, if they were unmarried, and have increa∣sed it to such as had Wife and Children, so hat some had above ten Crowns a month pension. They dispersed them over all the Pais de Vaud: but the greatest number staid at Lausane and Vevay. In order to the supporting of this charge, the Charities of Zurih, and the other neigh∣bouring Protestant States, were brought hither. Not only the Protestan Cantons, but the Grisns, and some small States, that are under the protection of the Cn∣ton,
such as Neufchastel, S. Gall, and some others, hae sent in their Charities to Bern, who dispence them wit great disretion, and bear what further harge this Re∣lief brings upon them; and in this last total and deplo∣ble dispersion of those Churches, the whole Country h been animated with such a Spirit of Charity and Co∣passion, that every Mans house and purse has been ope∣ned to the Reuies, that have passed thither in suc numbers, that sometimes thee have been above 2000. i Lausanne alone, and of these there were at one ti near 200. Ministers, and they all met with a Kindness and Free-heartedness, that lookt more like some what o the primitive Age revived, than the Degeneracy of the A in which we live. I shall Conclude this Postscrips, which is already swelled to the bigness of a Letter, with a sad Instance o the Anger and heat that rises among Divines concerning Matters of very small consequence. The midle way that Amirald, Daiile, and some others in Frane took in the matters that were disputed i Holland, concerning the Divine Decrees, and the extent of the Death of Christ, as it came to be generally followed in France, so it had some Assertors both in G∣neva and Switzrland, who denied the Imputation of Adams sin, and asserted the Vniversality of Christ's death, together with a sufficient Grace given to all men, asserting with this a particular and free Decree of Election, with an efficacious Grace for those included in it: these cam to be called Universalists, and began to grow very con∣siderable in Geneva: two of the Professors o Diviniy there being known to favour hose Opinions, Upon this, those who adhered strictly to the opposit Doctrine, were inflamed, and the Contention grew to that height, that almost the whole Town came to be concerned, and all were divided into parties. If upon this, the Magistrte had enjoyned silence to both parties, they had certainly acted wisely: for these are speculations so little certain, and so little essential to Religion, that a Diversity of Opi∣nions
ought not to be made the occasion of Heat or Faction. But tho the party of the Vniversalists was con∣siderable in Gneva, it was very small in Switzerland, therefore some Divines there, that adhered to the old re∣ceived Doctrine, drew up some Articles, in which all these Doctrines were not only condemned, together with some Speculations, that were asserted concer∣ning Adams Immortality, and other qualities belon∣ging to the state of Innocency; but because Capl and some other Criticks had not only asserted the novelty of the points, but had taken the liberty to correct the reading of the Hebrew, supposing that some errors had been committed by the Coppiers of the Bible, both in the Vowels and Consonants, in opposition to this, they condemned all corrections of the Hebrew Bible, and asserted the Antiquity of the Points, or at least of the power and reading ac∣cording to them; by which, tho they did not engage all to be of Buxtors's opinion, as to the Antiquity of the points, yet they shut the door against all Cor∣rections of the present Punctuation: If this consent of Doctrine (for so they termed it) had been made only the Standard, against which no man might have taught, without incurring censures, tbe severity had been more tolerable: but they obliged all such as should be admitted either to the Ministry. or to a Professors Chair, to sign sic sentio, so  think; and this being so setled at Bern and Zurich, it was also carried by their authority at Geneva: but for those in office, the Mderator and Cerk signed it in all their names: and thus they were not contended to make only a Regulation in those Matters, but they would needs, according to a maxim that hath been so often fatal to the Church, enter into peoples Con∣siences, and either shut out Young Men from Imploy∣ments, or impose a Test upon them, which perhas some have signed not without Struglings in their Con∣science. Yet some that set on this Test or Consent▪ are men of such extraordinary Worth, that I am confi∣dent
they have acted in this matter out of a sincere zeal for that which they believe to be the Truth: only I wi they had larger and freer Souls. The only considerable Tax under which the Switze▪ lie, is, that when Estates are sold, the fifth part of the price belongs to the Publick, and all the Abatement th the Bilif can make, is to bring it to a sixth part; this the call the Lod, which is derived from Alodium: only ther are some Lands that are Frank alod, whih lie no under this Tax: but this falling only on the Sellers of Estats,  was thought a just Punishment, and a wise Restraint o ill Husbands of their Estates. I was the more confirmed in the account I have give you of the derivation of Advoyer, when I found that i some small Towns in the Canton of Bern, the chief Magi∣strate is still so called: as in Payerne, so that I make no doubt, but as the Antient Magistrates in the time of the Romans, that were to give an account of the Town, were called Advocates, and afterwards the Iudge i Civil Matters, that was named by the Bishops, was cal∣led at first Advocat, and afterwards Vidam or Viedom∣nus; so this was the Title thas was still continued in Bern, while they were under the Austrian and German yoke, and was preserved by them when they threw it off. I have perhaps toucht too slightly the last Difference that was in Switzerland, which related to the Canton o Glaris. In the Canton of Apenzell, as the two Religio are tolerated, so they are separated in different quarter▪ those of one Religion have the one half of the Canton, an those of the other Religion have the other half, so they live apart: but in Glaris they are mixt: and now the number of the Papists is become very low; one assured me, there were not above 200. Families of that Religion, and those are also so poor, that their necessities dispose some o them every day to change their Religion. The other P∣pish Cantons, seeing the danger of losing their interest en∣tirely in that Canton, and being set on by the intrigues o  Court, that has understood well the policy of imbroiling
ll other States, made great use of some complaints that were brought by the Papists of Glaris, as if the prevailing of the other Religion exposed them to much injustice and oppression; and upon that they proposed, that the Can∣on should be equally divided into two halves, as Appen∣zl was: this was extreamly unjust, since the Papists were not the tenth, or perhaps the twentieth part of the Can∣tn. It is true, it was so situated in the midst of the Popish Cantons, that the Protestant Cantons could not easily come to their assistance: but those of Glaris resolved to dye rather than suffer this injustice, and the Protstnt Cantons resolved to engage in a war with the Popish Can∣tons, if they imposed this matter on their Brethren of Gla∣ris: at last this temper was found, that in all suits of law between those of different Religions, two thirds of the Iudges should be alwayes of the Religion of the defendant; but while this Contest was on foot, those, who as is be∣lieved, fomented it, if they did not set it on, knew how to make their Advantage of the Conjuncture; for then was the Fortification of Hunningen at the Ports of Basil much advanced, of the importance of which, they are now very apprehensive when it is too late. There are six Noble Families in Bern, that have still this priviledge, that when any of them is chosen to be of the Council, they take place before all the Ancient Councellors, whereas all the rest take place according to the Order in which they were chosen to be of the Council.
THE SECOND LETTER. Millan, the first of October, 1685. AFTER a short stay at Zurich, we went dow the Lake, where we past under the Bridge a Ripperswood, which is a very noble Work for such a Countrey; the Lake is there about half a mile broad, the Bridge is about twelve foot broad, bu hath no Rails on either side, so that if the wind blow hard, which is no extraordinary thing there, a man is in great danger of being blown into the Lakes: and this same defect I found in almost all the Bridges of Lombardy, which seemed very strange; for since that Defence is made upon so small an Expence, it was amazing to see Bridges so naked: and that was more surprizing in some places, where the Bridges are both high and long: yet I never heard of any mischief that followed on this; but those are sober Countreys, where drinking is not much in use. After two dayes journey, we came to Coire, which is the chief Town of the Grisons, and where we found a general Diet of the three Leagues sitting, so that having staid ten dayes there, I came to be infor∣med of a great many particulars concerning those Leagues, which are not commonly known: The Ton is but little, and may contain between four and five thou∣sand Souls; it lies in a bottom, upon a small brook, that a little below the Town falls into the Rhine. It is environed with Mountains of all hands, so that they have a very short Summer; for the Snow is not mel∣ted till May or Iune; and it began to Snow in Septem∣ber
when I was there. On a rising ground at the East nd of the Town is the Cathedral, he Bishops Pallace, nd the Close, where the Dan nd six Preendaries ive; all within the Close are Papists, but all the Town re Protestants, and they live pretty neighbourly toge∣her. Above a quarter of a mile high in the Hill, one goes up by a steep ascent to Saint Lucius Chappel; My curiosy carried me thither: Tho I gave no faith to the le∣gend of King Lucius, and of his coming so far from home o be the Apostle of the Grisons. His Chappel is a litle Vault about ten foot square, where there is an Altar, and where Mass is said upon some great Festivals; it is si∣tuated under a natural Arh hat is in the Rock, which was thought proper o be given out to have been the Cell of a Hermit: rom it some drops of a small Foun∣tain fall down near the Chappel; the Bishop assured me it had a miraculous vertue for weak-eyes, and that it was Oily; but neither taste nor feeling could discover to me any Oilyness: I believe it may be very good for the Eyes, as all Rock-Water is; but when I offered to shew the good old Bishop, that the legend of Lucius was a Fable in all the parts of it, but most remarkably in that which related to the Gisons, and that we had no Kings in Britain at that time, but were a Province to the Romans, that no ancient Authors speak of it, Bede being the first that mentions it; and that the pretended Letter to Pope Eleutherius, together with his answer, has evident characters of Forgery in it, all this signified nothing to the Bishop, who assured me, that they had a Tradition of that in their Church; and it was inserted in their Breviary, which he firmly believed: he also told me the other legend of King Lucius's sister S. Emerita, who was burnt there, and of whose Veil there was yet a considerable remnant reserved among their Reliques: I confess, I never saw a Relique so ill disguised; for it is a piece o worn Linnen Cloath lately washt, and the burning did not seem to be a month old; and yet when they
took it out of the Case, to shew it me, there were some there that with great devotion rub'd their beads upon it. The Bishop had some contests with his Dean, and being  Prine of the Empire, he had proscribed him: the De had also behaved himself so insolently, that by an orde of the Diet, to which even the Bishop, as was believed, consented, he was put in Prison as he came out of the Cathedral. By the common consent both of the Popi and Protestant Communities, a Law was long ago made against Elesiastical Immunities: this attempt on he Dean was made four years ago; as soon as he was let o he went to Rome, and made great complaints o the Bi∣shop, and it was thought the Popish party intended to moe in the Diet while we were there or the repealing of th Law, but they did it not. The foundation of he Quar between the Bishop and Dean was the Exemptions to which the Dean and Chapter pretended, and upon which the Bshp made some Invasion: Upon which I took occa∣sion o shew him the novelty of those Exemptions, and that in the primitive Church it was believed, that the Bishop had the Authority over his Presbyters by a divine right; and if it was by a Divine Right, then the Pop could not exempt them from his obedience: but the Bi∣shop would not carry the matter so high, and contented himself with two maxims; the one was, That the Bi∣shop was Christ's Vicar in his Diocess; and the other was▪ That what the Pope was in the Catholick Church, the Bishop was the same in his Diocess. He was a good-natured Man, and did not make use o the great Authority that he has over the Papists there, to set them on to live uneasily with their neighbours of ano∣ther Religion. That Bishop was antiently a great Prince; and the greatest part of the League, that carries still the name of the House of God, belonged to him; tho I was assured that Pregallia, one of those Communities, was  ree State above six hundred years ago, and that they have Records yet extant that prove this: The other Communi∣ties of this League bought their liberties from several Bi∣hops
some considerable time before the Reformation, of which the Deeds are yet extant; so tht it is an impudent hing to say, as some have done, that they shook off his Yoke at that time. The Bishop hath yet reserved a Revenue of about one thousand pound Sterling a Year, and every one of the Pre∣bndaries hath near two hundred pound a Year. It is not easie to imagin out of what the Riches of this Country is raised; for one sees nothing but a tract of vast Mountains, that seem barren Rocks, and some litle Vallies among them not a mile broad, and the best part of these is washed away by the Rhine, and some Brooks that fall into it: but their wealth consists chiefly in their Hills, which afford much pasture; and in the hot months, in which all he Pasture of Italy is generally parched, the Cattle are driven into these Hills, which brings them in a Revenue of above two hundred thousand Crowns a Year. The Publick is indeed very poor, but particular persons are so rich, that I knew a great many there, who were believed to have Estates to the value of one hundred thousand Crowns. Mr. Schovestein, that is accounted the richest man in the Coun∣try, is believed to be worth a Million, I mean of Livres. The Government here is purely a Commonwealth; for in the choice of their Magistrates, every man that is above sixteen Years old hath his Voice, which is also the constitution of some of the small Cantons. The Three Leagues are, the League of the Grisons, that of the House of God, and that of the ten Iurisdictions. They believe, that upon the incursions of the Goths and Vandals, as some fled to the Venetian Islands, out of which arose that famous Common-wealth; so others came and sheltred themselves in those Valleys. They told me of an ancient inscription lately found, of a Stone where on the one side is graven, Omitto Rhetos Indomitos, and ne plus ultra is on the other; which they pretend was made by Iulius Caesar: the Stone on which this inscription is, is upon one of their Mountains; but I did not pass that way, so I can make no judgment concerning it. After the first
orming of this people, they were cast into little States, according to the different Valleys which they inhabi∣ted, and in which Justice was administred, and so they fell under the power of some little Princes, that became severe Masters; but when they saw the Example that the Switzers had set them, in shaking off the Austrian Yoke, above two hundred years ago, they likewise combined to shake off theirs; only some few of those small Prin∣ces used their authority better, and conurred wih the people in shaking off the Yoke, and so they are still parts of the Body; only Haldenstein is an absolute Sove∣raignty; it is about two miles from Coire to the West, of the other side of the Rhine; the whole Territory is about half a mile long at the foot of the Alps, whe there is scarce any breadth. The authority of these Baro was formerly more absolute that it is now; for the Subjects were their Slaves: but to keep together the lil Village, they have granted them a power of naming a list for their Magistrates, the person being to be named by the Baron; who hath also the Right of Pardoning, a Right of Coyning, and every thing also that belongs to a So¦veraign. I saw this little Prince in Coire, in an Equipage not suitable to his Quality; for he was in all poin like a very ordinary Gentleman. There are three other Baronies that are Members of the Diet, and subject to it; the chief belonged to the Arh-Duke o Inch-pruck; the other two belong to Mr. Schoven-stain and Mr. de Mont▪ they are the Heads of those Communities of which their Barnies are composed; they name the Magistrates out of the lists that are presented to them by their Subjects; & they have the right of pardoning & of coniscations: That belonging to the House of A∣stria is the biggest, it hath five voices in the Diet, and i can raise twelve hundred Men. One Travrs bought it o the Emperor in the year 1679. he entred upon the Righ of the ancient Barons, which were specified in an agree∣ment that past between him and his Peasats, and wa confirmed by the Emperour. Travers made many i∣croachments
upon the Priviledges of his Subjects, who upon that made their Complaints to the League; but Travers would have the Matter judged at Inchpruck, and the Emperor supported him in this Pretension, and sent an Agent to the Diet: I was present, when he had his Audience, in which there was nothing but General Complements: But the Diet stood firm to their Constitu∣tion, and asserted, that the Emperour had no Authority to judge in that Matter, which belonged only to them; so Travers was forced to let his Pretentions fall. All the other Parts of this State are purely Democrati∣cal; there are three different Bodies or Leagues, and every one of these are an intire Government; and the Assembly or Diet of the Three Leagues, in only a Confederacy, like the Vnited Provinces, or the Cantns: There are six∣ty-seven Vices in the General Diet, which are thus divi∣ded: The League of the Grisons hath twenty-eight Voices, that of the House of God hath twenty-four, and hat of the Iurisdictions hath fifteen. The Iurisdictions belonged anciently to the House of Austria: but they having shaken off that Authority, were incorpora∣ted into the Diet: but in the last Wars of Germany, the Austrians thought to have brought them again under their Yoke; yet they defended their Liberty with so much Vigour, that the Austrians it seems thought the conquest not worth the while, and that it would not quit the cost. They were affrighted by two extraordinary Actions; in one Village, which was quite abandoned by all the Men belonging to it, who left the Women in it, some hundreds, as I was told, there quartered, xnd were ap∣prehensive of no danger from their Hostesses; but the Women intended to let their Husbands see, that they were capable of contriving and executing a bold Action; tho it must be confest, it was a little too rough and Barbarous for the Sex: They entred into a Combination to cut the Throas of all the Souldiers at one time; the Woman that proposed this, had four lodged with her, and she with her own Hands dispatcht them all, and so did all the rest, not one
Souldier escaping o carry away the News of so unheard of a Rage. In another Place, a Body of the Austrians came into a Valley, that was quite abandoned; for the Men that had no Arms but their Clubs and Staves, had got up to the Mountains; but they took their Measures so well, and possessed themselves so of the Passes, that they came down upon the Souldiers with so much Fury, that they defeated them quite, so that very few escaped; and it is certain, that the Subduing them would have proved a very hard Work. It is true, they are not in a Condition to hold out long; the publick is too poor; so that tho particular Persons are extream rich; yet they have no publick Re∣venue, but every Man is concerned to preserve his Liber∣ty, which is more intire here, than it is even in Switzer∣land: but this swells often so much, and throws them in∣to great Convulsions. The League of the Grisons is the first and most ancient, and it is composed of eight an twenty Communities, of which there are eighteen Papists, and the rest are Protestants; the Communities of the two Religions live neighbourly together, yet they do not suffer those of another Religion to live among them, so that every Community is entirely of the same Religion; and if any one changes, he must go into another Community. Each Community is an intire State within it self, and all Perso must meet once a year to chuse the Iudge and his Assistants, whom they change, or continue from year to year, as they see cause: There is no difference made between Gentle∣man and Peasant, and the Tnant hath a Vote as well as his Landlord, nor dare his Landlord use him ill whn he vote contrary to his intentions; for the Peasants would look upon that as a common Quarrel. An appeal lies from the Iudge of the Community, to the Assembly of the League, where all matters end; for there lies no appeal to the ge∣neral Diet of the thre Leagues, except in matters that con∣cern the conquered Countries, which belong in common to all the three. There is one chosen by the Deputies for the Assembly of the League, who is called the Head of the League, that can call them together as he sees ause, and
can likewise bring a cause that hath been once judged to a second hearing. Ilants is the Chief Town of this League, where their Diet meets. The second League is that of the House of God, in which there are 24 Communiies; the Burgomaster of Coire is always the Head of this League: This League is almost wholly Protestant, and the two Val∣leys of the Vpper and Lower Enedin are pointed out by the Papists, as little less than Cannibals towards such Caho∣licks as come among them; but Frier Sfondrato, Nephew to Pope Gregory the fourteenth, whose Mother the Mar∣quess of Bergominiero, that was in England, hath married, found the contrary of all this to be true to his great regret. About eighteen years ago he was believed to have wrought Miracles, and he became so much in love with the Crown of Martyrdom, that he went through the Engedn, not doubting but he would find there that whih he desired. His Brother had come some time before into the Country to drink Mineral Waters, and was well known to the Gentry, so some of these hearing of the Fryr's coming, went and waited on him, and he was entertained by them in their Houses, and conveyed through the Countrey, tho he took all possible wayes to provoke them; for he was often railing at their Religion, but to all that they made no answer, only they continued their Civilities still, which did so inrage the warm Fryer, that he went to Bormio, and there (as was believed) he Dyed of Grief. An Accident fell out five years ago, that the People of the Country esteemed a sort of a Miracle. The Papists in their Processions go sometimes out of one Community into ano∣ther, and when they pass through Protestant Commnities, they lower the Cross, and give over singing till they are again upon Popish ground: but then they went on beaing up the Cross, and singing as they went; upon which the Protestats stopt them, and would not suffer them to go on in that manner: they finding hat they were not equal in number to the Protestants, sent to a Catholick Community, and desired them to come to their Assistance: Two thousand came, and by all appea∣rance
the Dispute would have had a bloody Issue: fo the Protestants were resolved to maintain the Right of their Community, and the others were no less resol∣ved to force their Way: but an extraordinary thick mist arose, and through it, the Papists fancied they saw  vast Body of Men, which was no other than a Wood: but terrified with the Appearance of such a number, they retired, and this saved a little battel, that probably would not only have ended in the shedding much blood, but might have very much disordered the whole Consti∣tution and Union of their Leagues. The Papists of qua∣lity endeavour much to keep their People in ordet▪ but they acknowledged to my self, that the Protestants were much peaceabler than the Catholicks. The Iurisdictions have fifteen Votes in the General Diet, yet they are generally called the ten Iurisdictions, and the greater part of them are likewise of the Reli∣gion; for upon the general Computation of the three Leagues, the Protestants are about two thirds. In their Diets there are three Tables, one in the middle, and two on either side; at every Table sits the Head of the League, and a Secretary near him; and from the Ta there goes down Benches on both Hands for the Deputi from the Communities of that League: They hold their Diets by turns in the Chief Towns of the several Leagues, and it hapned to be the turn of the House of God, when I was there; so they met at Coire. The three Leagues have a conquered Country in Italy, divided into three Districts, the Valteline, Chavennes and ormio. When Iohn Galeasse possessed himself of the Dutchy of Milan, and drove out Banabas, Mastinus one of Barnabas's Son, to whom his Father had given those three Branches of the Dutchy of Milan, retired to Coire, and being hospitably received and entertained by the Bishop, when he died, he gave his Right to those Territo∣ries to the Cathedral of Coire: but here was a Title with∣out a force able to make it good. But when the Wars of Italy were on Foot, the three Leagues be∣ing
much courted by both the Crowns, since they were Masters of the Passes, by which either the Switzers or Germans could come into Italy, they resolved to lay hold on that Opportunity: yet they had not Zeal enough for their Bishop, to ingage deep upon his Account, so they agreed with him to pay him such a Revenue, and he transferred his Title to them, and they were so considerable to the Spa∣niards, that without much ado, they yielded those Parcels of the Dthy of Milan to them, and by this means they are possessed of them. Those Accessions to this State are much better than the principal; for as certainly the Valteline, which is above forty Miles long, and two broad, is one of the riches Valleys in the World, in which there are three Harvests some years; so the Cha∣vennes and Bormio are much preferable to the best Valleys of the Grisons; yet the ingagement that people have to their native Homes appears signally here, since the Gri∣sons have not forsaken their Countrey, that they might scituate themselves so advantagiously: but they love their rugged Valleys, and think the safety they injoy n them beyond the pleasures of their acquired Domi∣nions; so they govern them by Bailifs and Podesta's, and other Officers whom they send among them; and all the advantages that they draw from them, is that the Magi∣strates whom they send to govern them, do inrich them∣selves, as the Bailifs in Switzerland do. All those Offices go round the several Communities, who have the right of nomination in their turn: But if there is none of the Community proper for the Imployment, any one of another Community may buy of them the Nomination for that turn, and the Community distribute among them the Money that he gives them. The publick draws nothing out of those parts, ex∣cept the Fines, which in some years amounts to no considerable sum; and ten or twelve thousand Crowns is thought a great deal to be raised out of them in a year; so that their Subjects live happy, and free
of all Taxes, which made their last Revolt appear the more extraordinaty; and it was indeed the effect of a very surprising Bigotry, when a people under the gentlest yoke in the World, who had no other Grievance, but tha now and then their Magistrates were of another Religion, and that the Protestant Religion was tolerated amongst them, would therefore throw off their Masters, cut the Throats of their Neighbours, and cast themselves into the hands of the Spaniards, who are the terriblest Masters in the World. But to give a more particular Relation of that matter, and to tell the Circumstances which seem a little to lesse that Rebellion and Massacre, I must give an Account of a part of this Constitution that is very Terrible, and which makes the greatest Men in it to tremble: The Peasants come sometimes in great Bodies, and demand a Chambr of Iustice from the general Diet, and they are bound to grant it alwayes when it is thus demanded, which come about generally once in twenty years; commonly this tu∣mult of the Peasants is set on by some of the Male-conten∣ted Gentry, and generally there are a great many Sacrifi∣ces made. This Court is composed of ten Iudges out of every League, and twenty Advocates, who manage such Accusations as are presented to them; this Court is para∣mount to Law, and Acts like a Court of Inquisition; they give the Question, and do every thing that they think ne∣cessary to discover the Truth of such Accusations as are presented to them; and the Decisions of this Court can never be brought under a second Review, tho there is an exception to this; for about a hundred years ago, one Court of Iustice reversed all that another had done; but that is a single instance. The Peasants are in as great a jealousie of the Spaniards, as the Switzers are of the French, and the good Men among them are extream sen∣sible of a great Dissolution of Morals that the Spanish ser∣vice brings among them: For there is a Grison Regiment kept still in pay by the Spaniards, there are in it twelve Cmpanies of fifty apiece, and the Captains have a thou∣sand
Crowns pay, tho they are not obliged to attend upon the service: This is upon the matter a Pension paid under a more decent name to the most considerable Men of the Countrey; and this is shared among them without any distinction of Protestant and Papist, and is believed to sway their Councils much. The Peasants are apt to take fire, and to belive they are betrayed by those Pensioners of Spain; and when Rumors are blown about among them, they come in great numbers to demand a Chamber of Iustice; the common Question that they give, which is also used all Switzerland over, and in Geneva, is, that they tye the Hands of the suspected person behind his back, and pull them up to his Head, and so draw them about, by which the arms and chiefly the Shoulder-blades are dis∣joynted; and when a person put to the Question confesses his Crime, and is upon that condemned to dye, he is obliged to renew his Confession upon Oath at the Place of Execution: and if he goes off from it then, and saith, That his Confession was extorted by the Violence of the Torture, he is put again to the Question: for this passes for a Maxim, That no man must dye unless he confsseth himself guilty: Generally when the fury of demanding this Chamber is spread among the people, the Gentry run away, and leave the whole matter in the power of the Peasants; for they know not where it will end; and so the Peasants being named to be Iudges, the Justice goes quick, till some Sacrifices appease the Rage. Two Year ago, upon the sale of a Common to the Bishop of Como, to which he had an ancient pretension, the Peasants having no more the liberty of the Common, were inraged at their Magi∣strates, and a Report was spread abroad, of which the first Author could never be discovered, that the Spaniards had sent a hunred thousand Crowns among them to corrupt all their Magistrates; upon this they were so set on fire, that it was generally thought there would have been many Sacrifices made to this fury: but the Gentry hapned to be then so much united, that there was none of them ingaged among the Peasants, or that managed their Rage:
a Chamber of Iustice was granted, but the matter was so ordered, that it did not appear that any one was guilty; yet some that had dealt in that transaction were fined, not so much for any fault of theirs, as to raise a fund to pay the Expences of the Chamber; and because they could not find colour enough to raise so much out of the Fines, there was a fine of five hundred Livres laid on every one of the Spanish Companies. I hope this digression will not appear tedious to you, and the rather because you will soon see that it was a little necessary to open the matter of the Rebellion and Massacre in the Valteline. In the Year 1618. there was a Report set about, That the Spaniards had a Treaty on foot o tear away the Valteline from the Leagues: this was supported by the Fort Fuentes, that the Governor of Milan was building upon the Lake of Como, near the Valteline. There was one Ganatz a Minister, but a bloody and Perfidious Man, that set on and managed the rage of the Peasats, and there was great reason to suspect some underhand dealing, tho he threw it which way he pleased. A Cham∣ber of Iustice was appointed to sit at Tossane, which is a considerable Town twelve miles from Coire, on the way to Italy, near Alta Rhetia, which is a high and small Hill, to which there is no access but on one side, where there are yet the Ruins of a Castle and a Church, and which they believe was the Pallace of Rhetus, the first Prince of the Countrey: There was severe Justice done in this Chamber, a Prist was put to the Question, and so ill use that he dyed in it, which is a crying thing among them. The chief suspicion lay upon one Pianta, who be∣ing of one of the best Families of the Grisons, was then one of the Captains in the Spanish Regiments; he with∣drew himself from the Storm, but the Peasants led on by Ganatz pursued him so, that at last they found him, and hewed him in pieces, Ganatz himself striking the first stroke with an Ax, which was taken ap and preserved by his Friends; and our and twenty years ater ifty or sixty of his Friends ell upon Ganatz in Coire,
and killed him with the same Ax, which they brought along with them, that they might execute their design by the same Tool with which their Friend was murthe∣red. Ganatz had during the Wars abandoned both his Rligion and Prfession, being indeed a disgrace to both, and had served first in the Venetian, and then in the Spanish Troops: After the peace was made, he became so considerable, being supported by the Spanish Faction, that he was chosen Governour of Chaven∣ns, and was come over to Coire to a Diet, he be∣ing then in so important a charge: but he was so much hated, that tho the muthering of a Magistrate in Office, and at a publick Assembly in so terrible a man∣ner, ought to have been severely punshed, yet no inquiry was made into the Crime, nor was any Man so much as questioned for it. In that Chamber many that were put to the Question, confessed enough to hang them; some indured the Question, and escaped with the loss of the use of their Arms. Those of the Valteline have made use of this severity, as that which gave the rise to the Massa∣cre; and it is very probable, this might have drawn in some, that would have been otherwise more mode∣rate, and that it did likewise precipitate that Barbarous Action: yet it was afterwards found out, that the Plot had been formed long before, so that the Industry and Rage of the Priests, managed by Spanish Emissaries, wok∣ing upon the bigotry of the People, was the Real Cause, and this was only made use of as a pretext to give some more plausible colours to the Massacre, which was executed some Months after this Chamber was dissol∣ved. It began while the Protestants were at Churh; there were some hundreds destroyed, the rest got all up to the Mountains, and so escaped into the Countrey of the Grisons, and those of Chavennes got likewise up to the Hills; for they are situated just at the bottom of them. I shall not prosecute the rest of that Har; the Frenh saw of what Advantage it was to them, not to let this Pass from Italy into Germany fall into the Hands of the
Spaniards; so Bassompiere was sent to Madrid, and ob∣tained a pomise, that all things should be put in the same state in which they were before the year 1618. but when that order was sent to the Governour of Milan, it was plain he had secret Orders to the contrary; for he refused to execute it: so a War followed, in which the Grisns found it was not easy for them to support the charge of it, without imploying the Assistance of the Frenh. But the Spaniards pretended to have no other Interest in the affairs of the Valteline, than the preservation of the Catholick Religion; and to sew their sincerity, they put the Countrey into the Popes Hands, knowing that he could not preserve it but by their Assistance, nor restore it without securing it from all change of Religion. The French willingly under∣took the cause of the Grisons, and because the Duke of Rohan was like to be the most favourable General, as being of the Religion, he was sent to command some for∣ces that marched thither: But he saw, that if the French once made themselves Masters of the Passes of the Coun∣trey, it would turn to their Ruin; and finding the Gri∣sons reposed an intire confidence in him, he thought it unbecoming him to be an Instrument in that which he saw must be fatal to them. The Spaniards seeing the Frenh ingage in the Quarrel, and fearing lest they should possess themselves of the Passes, offered to restore all the Territotry in Italy; for Chavennes and Bormio had likewise revolted, only the Protestants got away so quick upon the disorders in the Valteline, that they prevented the Rage of the Priests. The Spaniards ask'd these conditions, that an Amnesty should be granted for what was past; that there should be no Exercise of the Protestant Religion tolerated in the Countrey, and that even the Bailifs and other Magistrates of the Reli∣gion, that came to be sent into the Valteline, should have no Exercise of their Religion; and as for other per∣sons, that none of the Religioe might stay above six Weeks at a time in the Countrey. The Duke of Rohan
seeing that Condition of so much Advantage to the Leagues were offered to them, did underhand advise those of the Religion to accept of them, at the same time that he seemed openly to oppose the Treaty set on foot on those Tems; and that he might get out of this Im∣ployment with the less dishonour, he advised their clap∣ping him up in Prison till they had finished their Treaty with the Spaniards. So that they very gratefully to this day own, that they owe the Preservation of their Countrey to the wise Advices of that great Man. Many that were of the Religion returned to their Houses and Estates, but the greatest part fearing such another Massacree, have since changed their Religion, others have sold their Estates, and left the Country; some stay still, and go two or three hours journey to some of the Protestant Communities, where they have the Exercise of the Religion: And tho they may not stay in the Valteline above six weeks at a time; yet they avoid that by going for a day or two out of the Countrey once within that time; nor is that matter at present so severely examined: so that there is a calm among them as so those matters. But when it comes to the turn of the Protestant Communities to send one of the Religion to those imployments, he is often much embarassed by the Bishop of Como, to whose Diocess those Territories belong; for if the Bishop fancies, that they do any thing contrary to the Ekclesiastical immunities, he exommunicates them; and tho this may ap∣pear a ridiculous thing, since they are already in a worse state by being Hereticks, yet it produces a very sensible effect; for the people that are extreamly superstitious, will not after that come near such Magistrates▪ so that about three year ago a Bailif found himself obliged to desire to be recalled, tho his time was not out, since be∣ing excommunicated, he could no longer mainrain the Go∣vernmnt in his own person. Among the Grisons the Roman Law prevails, mo∣defied a little by their Customs: one that was a
little particular, was executed when I was there. A Mn that hath an Estate by his Wife, enjoyes it after her death, as long as he continues a Widower; but when he marris again, he is bound to divide it among the Children that he had by her. The Istice is short, and simple, but i is oft thought that bribes go here, tho but meanly in propor∣tion to their poverty, as well as in other places. The married Women here do scarce appear abroad, except at Church; but the young Women have more Liberty before they are mrried. There is such a plenty of all things, by reason of the Genlene's of the Government, and the Industry of the People, that in all the ten dayes, in which I stayed at Coire, I was but once askt an Alms in the Streets. There are two Churches in Coire; in the one there is an Organ, that joyns with their Voices in the singing of the Psalms▪ and there was for the Honour of the De, while we were there, an Anthem sung by a set of Musi∣cians very regularly. In all the Churches both of Swit∣zerland and the Grisons, except in this only, the Mi∣nister preaches covered; but here he is bare-headed. And I observed a particular devotion used here in saying of the Lords Prayer, that the Ministers who wear Caps, put them off when this was said. The Women here as in Bern, turn all to the East in time of prayer, and also in their private Devotions, before and after the publick Prayer; many also bow at the Name of Iesus: They Chri∣sten discovering the whole Head, and pouring the Water on the Hind-head, using a trine aspersion, which is also the practice of the Switzers. It was matter of much edification, to see the great numbers both here and all Switzerland over, that come every day to prayers mor∣ning and evening. They give here in the middle of the prayer a good interval of Silence for the private Devo∣tions of the Assembly. The Schools here go not above Latin, Geek and Logick; and for the rest, they send their Children to Zurich or Basil. The Clergy here are very meanly provided; for most part they have nothing but the Benevolence of their people: they complained much
to me of a great Coldness in their people in the matters of Religion, and of a great Corruption in their Morals: The Commons are extream insolent, and many Crimes go unpunished, if the persons that commit them have either great credit, or much money. The poor Mini∣sters here are under a terrible slavery s for the Grisors pretend, that in all times they had not only the Patr∣nage of their Churhes, but a power to dismiss ther Church-men as they saw cause. How it is among the Papists, I cannot tell; but the Dean of the Synd of the House of God old me, they had an ill custom of Ordai∣ning their Ministers without a Title, upon an examina∣tion of their Qualifications and Abilities, which took them up generally six or seven hours, and when this tryal was thus dispatched, if the person was found qua∣lified, they ordained him; and it was too ordinary for those that were thus Ordaind, to endeavour to under∣mine the Ministers already in imployment, if their people grew disgusted at them, or as they became disabled by Age; and often the Interest and Kindred of the Intruder carried the matter against the incumbent, without any colour or pretence; and in that case the Synod was bound to receive the Intruder In one half of the Country they preach in high Dutch, and in the other half in a corrupt Italian, which they call Romanish, that is, a mixture of French and Italian. In every League they have a Synod; and as the people chuse their Ministers, so in imitation of the Switzers, every Synod chuses their Antistes or Super∣intendant; he is called the Dean among the Grisons, and hath a sort of an Episcopal Power; but he is accoun∣table to the Synod: The Office is for life; but the Synod upon great cause given, may make a change. The people of this Countrey are much more lively than the Switzers, and they begin to have some tincture of the Italian temper. They are extream civil to Strangers; but it seems in all Commonwealths In-keepers think they have a right to exact upon Strangers, which one finds here, as well as in Holland, or in Switzerland.
I shall conclude what I have to say concerning the Gri∣sons with a very extraordinary Story, which I had both from the Ministers of Coire, and several other Gentlemen, that saw in April 1685. about five hundred Persons of different Sexes and ages, that past through the Town, who gave this account of themselves. They were the Inhabi∣tants of a Valley in Tirol, belonging for the greatest part to the Arch-Bishprick of Saltsburg, but some of them were in the Diocesses of Trent and Bresse; they seemed to be a remnant of the old Waldenses; they worshipped neither Images nor Saints; and they believed the Sacrament was only a Commemoration of the Death of Christ: and in many other Points they had their peculiar opinions, diffe∣rent from those of the Church of Rome; they knew nothing neither of Lutherans nor Calvinists; and the Grions, tho their Neighbours, had never heard of this Nearness of theirs to the Protestant Religion. They had Mass said a∣mong them; but some years since some of the Valley going over Germany to earn somewhat by their labour, hapned to go into the Palatinate, where they were better instructed in matters of Religion, and these brought back with them into the Valley the Heidelberg Catehism, to∣gether with some other German Books, which ran over the Valley, and they being before that in a good disposi∣tion, those Books had such an effect upon them, that they gave over going to Mass any more, and began to worship God in a way more suitable to the Rules set down in Scripture: some of their Priests eoncurred with them in this happy Change; but others, that adhered still to the Mass, went and gave the Arch-Bishhop of Saltsburg an account of it; upon which he sent some into the Coun∣trey to examin the Truth of the Matter, to exhort them to return to Mass; and to threaten them with all severity, if they continued obstinate: so they seeing a terrible Storm ready to break upon them, resolved to abandon their Houses, and all they had, rather than sin against their Consciences: And the whole Inhabitants of the Valley, old and young, Men and Women, to the number of
two thousand, divided themselves into several Bodies; some intended to go to Brandenburg, others to the Pala∣tinate, and about sive hundred took the way of Coire, intending to disperse themselves in Switzerland. The Mi∣nisters told me, they were much edified with their Sim∣plicity, and Modesty; for a Collection being made for them, they desired only a little bread to carry them on their way. From Coire we went to Tssane, and from that, through the way that is justly called Via Mala. It is through a bottom between two Rocks, through which the Rhine runs, but under ground for a great part of the way: The way is cut out in the middle of the Rock in some places, and in several places the steepness of the Rock being such, that a way could not be cut out, there are Beams driven into it, over which Boards and Earth are laid; this way holds an hour: After that, there is for two hours good way, and we past through two conside∣rable Villages; there is good lodging in both: from thence there is, for two hours Journey, terrible Way, almost as bad as the Via Mala; then an hours Journey good way to Splugen; which is a large Village of above two hundred Houses, that are well built, and the Inha∣bitants seem all to live at their ease, tho they have no sort of soil but a little Meadow ground about them; This is the last Protestant Church that was in our way; it was well indowed; for the provision of the Minister was near two hundred Crowns: Those of this Village are the Car∣riers between Italy and Germany, so they drive a great Trade; for there is here a perpetual Carriage going and coming; and we were told, that there pass generally a hundred Horses through this Town, one day with another; and there are above five undred Carriage Horse that be∣long to this Town. From this place we went mounting for three hours, till we got to the top of the Hills, where there is only one great Inn. After that the way was tolera∣bly good for two hours; and for two hours there is con∣stant descent, which for the most part is as steep as if we were all the while going down stairs: At the foo of this is a
little Village, called Campdolein, and here we found we were in Italy, both by the vast difference of the Climate; for whereas we were freezing on the other side, the heat of the Sun was uneasy here, and also by the number of the Beggar, tho it may seem the reverse of what one ought to expect, since the richest Countrey of Europe is full of Beggars; and the Grisons, that are one of the poores States, have no Beggars at all. One thing is also strange, that among the Grisons, the rich Wine of the Valteline, after it is carried three Dayes Journey, is sold cheaper than the Wine of other Countries, where it grows at the door: but there are no Taxes nor Impositions here. From Campdolein there is three Hours Journey to Chavenne, all in a Slow descent; and in some Places the Way is extream rugged and stony. Chaveunes is very pleasantly scituated at the very Foot of the Mountains; there run through the Town a pleasant little River: It is nobly built, and hath a great many rich Vineyards about it: and the Rebound of the Sun-Beams from the Mountains, doth so increase the heats here, that the Soil is as rich here, as in any Place of Italy. Here one begins to see a Noble Architecture in a great many Houses; in short, all te Marks of a rich Soil, and a free Government appear here. The Town stood a little more to the North, about five hundred years ago, but a Slice of the Alps came dow upon it, and buried it quite; and at the Upper-end of the Town there are some Rocks that look like Ruins, abou which there hath been a very extraordinary Expence, to divide them one from another, and to make the fit Places for Forts and Castles: the Marks of the Too appeared all over the Rock in one place. I measured the Breadh of the one from the other, which is twent Foot, the length is four hundred and fifty Foot, and a we could guess, the Rock was two hundred Foot high, cut down on both sides in a Line as even as a Wall; to∣wards the top of one, the name Salvius is cut i great Letters, a little Gothick. On the Tops of thos Roks, which are inaccessible except on the one sie,
and to that the Ascent is extream uneasy, they had Garrisons during the Wars of the Valteline: there were fifteen hundred in Garrison in that which is in the mid∣dle: There falls down frequently Slices from the Hills, that do extreamly fatten the Ground which they cover, so that it becomes fruitful beyond expression: and I saw a Lime Tree, that was planted eight and thirty years ago, in a piece of Ground, which had been so cove∣red, that was two Fathom and a half of Compass. On both sides of the River, the Town, and the Gardens belonging to it, cover the whole Bottom, that lie between the Hills, and at the Roots of the Moun∣tains they dig great Cellars, and Grottoes, and strike a hole about a foot Square, ten or twelve foot into the Hill, which all the Summer long blows a fresh Air into the Cellar; so that the Wine of those Cel∣lars drinks almost as cold as if it were in Ice; but this Wind-pipe did not blow when I was there, which was towards the end of September: For the Sun opening the Pores of the Earth, and rarifying the exterior Air, that which is compressed within the cavities that are in the Mountains, ushes out with a constant Wind; but when the operation of the Sun is weakned, this course of the Air is les sensible. Before or over those Vaults they build little pleasant rooms like Sommerhouses, and in them they go to collation generally at night in Summer. I never saw bigger Grapes than grow there; there is one sort bigger than the biggest Damas ene Plums that we have in Egland. There is a sort of Wine here and in the Valteline, which I never heard named any where else, that is called Aro∣matick-wine; and as the taste makes one think it must be a composition (for it tastes like a Strong-water drawn of Spies) so its strength being equal to a weak Brandy, disposes one to believe that it cannot be a natural Wine, and yet it is the pure juice of the Grape, without any mixture. The Liquor being singular, I informed my self par∣ticularly of the way of preparing it: the Grapes are red,
tho it drinks white; they let the Grapes hang on the Vnes till November, that they are extream ripe, then they carry them to their Garrets, and set them all upright on their ends by one another for two or three months, then they pick all the Grapes, and throw away those in which there is the least appearance of rottenness, so that they press none but sound Grapes: after they are pressed, they put the Liquor in an open Vessel, in which it throws up a scum, which they take off twice a day, and when no more scum comes up, which according to the difference of the season is sooner or later (for sometimes the scum comes no more after eight dayes, and at other times it continues a fortnight) then they put it in a close Vessel; for the first year it is extream sweet and luscious, but at the End of the year, they pierce it a little higher than the middle of the Vessel, almost two thirds from the Bot∣tom, and drink it off till it cometh so low, and then every year they fill it up anew: once a year in the Month of March it ferments, and cannot be drunk till that is over, which continues a Month, but their other Wi ferments not at that time. Madam Salis, a Lady of that Country, who entertained us three Dayes with a Magni∣ficence equal to what can be done in London or Paris, had Wine of this Composition, that was forty years old, and was so very strong, that one could hardly drink above a spoonful, and it tasted high of Spicery, tho she assu∣red me there was not one grain of Spice in it, nor of any other mixture whatsoever. Thus the heat that is in this Wine, becomes a fire, and distils it self, throwing up the more spirituous parts of it to the top of the Hog∣head. Both here, and in the Grisons, the meat is very juicy, the Fowl is excellent, their Roots and Herbs very tast∣ful; but the Fish of their Lakes is beyond any thing I ever saw. They live in a great Simplicity as to their Habit an Furniture, but they have plenty of all things, and are extream rich; the Family where we were so nobly enter∣tained, is believed to have about two hundred thousan
Crowns: here the Italian custom, of one only of a Family that marries, takes place generally. There is a sort of Pots of Stone that is used not only in all the Kitchins here, but almost all Lombardy over, called Lavge, the Stone feels oily and scaly, so that a Scale sticks to ones Finger that touches it, and is somewhat of the nature of a Slate; there are but three Mines of it known in these parts, one near Chavennes, another in the Valteline, and the third in the Grisons; but the first is much the best; they gene∣rally cut it in the Mine round, of about a Foot and a half Diameter, and about a Foot and a quarter thick, and they work it in a Mill, where the Chizzels that cut the Stone are driven about by a Wheel that is set a going by Water, and which is so ordered, that he who manages the Chizzel, very easily draws forward the Wheel out of the course of the Water; they turn off first the outward coat of this Stone, till it is exactly smooth, and then they separate one Pot after another by those small and hooked Chizzels, by which they make a Nest of Pots, all one within another, the outward and biggest being as big as an Ordinary Beef-pot, and the inward Pot being no bigger than a small Pipkin; these they arm with hooks and Circles of brass, and so they are served by them in their Kitchins. One of these Stone-pots takes heat and boils sooner than any Pot of Mettle; and whereas the Bottoms of Mettle-pots transmit the heat so intirely to the Liquor within, that they are not insufferably hot; the bottom of this Stone-pot, which is about twice so thick as a Pot of Mettle, burns extreamly; it never cracks, neither gives it any sort of taste to the Liquor that is boiled in it: but if it falls to the Ground, it is very brittle; yet this is repaired by patching it up; for they piece their broken Pots so close, tho without any cement, by sowing with Iron-wire the broken parcels together, that in the holes which they pierce with the wire; there is not the least breach made, except that which the wire both makes and fills. The passage to this Mine is very in∣convenient; for they must creep into it for near half a
mile through a Rock, that is so hard, that the passage i not above three foot high, and so those that draw out the Stones creep all along upon their belly, having a Candle fastned in their forehead, and the Stone laid on a fort of Cushion made for it upon their hips: The Stones are commonly two hundred weight. But having mentioned some falls of Mountains in those parts, I cannot pass by the extraordinary fate of the To of Pleurs, that was about a league from Chavennes to the North, in the same bottom, but on a ground that is a little more raised: The Town was half the bigness of Chavennes, the number of the Inhabitants was abou two and twenty hundred persons, but is was much more nobly built; for besides the great Palace of the Francke, that cost some millions, there were many other Palace that were built by several rich Factors both of Milan, and the other parts of Italy, who liked the scituation and air, as well as the freedom of the Government of this place, so they used to come hither during the Heats, and here they gave themselves all the indulgences that a va Wealth could furnish. By one of the Palaces, that was a little distant from the Town, which was not overwhelmed with it, one may judge of the rest: It was an out-house of the Family of the Francken, and yet is may compare with many Palaces in Italy; and certainly, House and Gar∣dens could not cost so little as one hundred thousand Crowns. The voluptuousness of this place became very crying, and Madam de Salis told me, that she heard her Mother often relate some passages of a Protestant Min∣sters Sermons, that preached in a little Charch, which those of the Religion had there, and warned them ofte of the tertible judgements of God which were hanging over their heads, and that he believed would suddenl break out upon them. On the 25th of August 1618. a Inhabitant came and told them to be gone; for he saw the Mountains cleaving; but he was laughed at for his pain▪ He had a Daughter, whom he perswaded to leave all and go with him; but when she was gone out of Town wit
him, she called to mind that she had not locked the Door of a Room in which she had some things of Value, and so she went back to do that, and was buried with the rest; for at the hour of Supper the Hill fell down, and buried the Town and all the Inhabitants, so that not one person escaped: The fall of the Mountains did so fill the Channel of the River, that the first news those of Chavennes had of it, was by the failing of their River; for three or four hours there came not a drop of Water; but the River wrought for it self a new course, and returned to them; I could hear no particular Character of the Man who escaped, so I must leave the secret Reason of so singular a Preservation to the great discovery at the last Day of those steps of Divine Providence, that are now so unaccounta∣ble. Some of the Family of the Francken got some Mi∣ners to work under ground, to find out the Wealth that was buried in their Palace; for besides their Plate and Fur∣niture, there was a great Cash and many Iewels in the House: the Miners pretended they could find nothing; but they went to their Country of Tirol, and built fine Houses, and a great Wealth appeared, of which no other visible account could be given but this, that they had found some of that Treasure. The Chief Factors of Italy have been Grisons; and they told me, that as the Trade of Banking began in Lombardy, so that all Europe over, a Lombard and a Bank signifyed the same thing; so the great Bankers of Lombardy were Grisons; and to this day the Grisons drive a great Trade in Money; for a Man there of a hundred thousand Crowns Estate, hath not per∣haps a third part of this within the Countrey, but puts it out in the neighbouring States, And the Liberty of the Countrey is such, that the Natives when they have made up Estates elsewhere, are glad to leave even Italy and the best parts of Germany, and to come and live among those Mountains, of which the very sight is enough to fill a Man with horror. From Chavennes we went for two hours through a plain to the Lake of Chavennes, which is almost round,
and is about two mile Diameter. This Lake falls into the Lake of Como, over against the Fort Fuentes; when we passed there, the Water was so low, that the Boat could not easily get over a Bank that lay between the two Lakes. The Lake of Como is about eight and forty miles long, and four broad; it runs between two ranges of Hills: I did nor stay long enough in Como to give any Description of it; for I thought to have returned that way from a little Tour that I made into the Bailiages that the Switzers have in Italy, of Lugane, Locarmo, and Bellinzona: but I took another Course, so I saw nothing in Como; the best thing in it is a fine Chappel, which the present Pope, who is a Native of Como, is building. From Como we went eight miles to Codelaggo, which belongs to the Switzers, and from thence to Lugane we had eight miles of Lake: This Lake doth not run in an even current, as the other Lakes, that rise under the Alps, but the scituation of the Hills about it, throws it into several courses. The Switzers have here several little Provinces, or Bailiages, of which during the Wars of Italy, betwee the Dukes of Milan and the two Crowns, in Francis th First, and Charles the Fifths time, they possessed them∣selves of as a Pledge for payment of their Arrears; and they were then such considerable Allies, that they made both the Competitors for the Dutchy of Milan court them by turns, and became the peaceable Prossessors of almost all that tract that lies between the Lake of Como to the Counttey of the Valessii, or the Valleys, The Inhabitans here are so well used, they live so free of all Impositions, and the Switzers Government is so gentle, that here I must tell you another Paradox, this is the Worst Countrey, the least Productive, the most exposed to Cold, and the least Capable of Trade of all Italy, and yet it is by far the best Peopled of any that I saw in all Italy: There belon to the Bailiage of Lugane alone, ninety nine Villages, of which a great many are very large, and all are full of People. The twelve Ancient Cantons have their turns of all the Bailiages and other Offices here: but when it come
to the turn of those of the Religion, their Bailifs must be contented with private Devotions in their own House, but can have no publick Exercises, nor so much as a Minister in their Houses. For here, as in the Valteline, when the Spaniards confirmed the Right of the Can∣tons to those Territories, they made an express Provi∣sion, that no Religion except the Popish should be tolera∣ted here; so that the Bailif, who is the Prince, ofen hath not the free Liberty of his Religion in these Parts. The Balifs here make their Advantages, as well as in the other Parts of Switzerland, but yet with more Caution; for they take great care not to give the Natives any distast, tho the Miseries, to which they see all their Neighbours expo∣sed, and the Abundance and Liberty in which they live, should by all appearance deliver their Masters from any great Apprehensions of a Revolt: A great many Mecha∣nicks of all sorts live in these parts, who go all Sum∣mer long over Italy, and come back hither with what they have gained, and live free of all Taxes. I was told, that some Nephews of Popes, in particular the Barberines, had treated with the Switzers, to buy this Countrey from them, and so to erect it into a Principality; and that they had resolved to offer twelve hundred thousand Crowns to the twelve Cantons: but they found it would certainly be rejected; so they made not the propositions to the Diet of the Cantons, as they once intended: and it is certain, whensoever this Countrey is brought under a Yoke, like that which the rest of Italy bears, it will be soon abando∣ned; for there is nothing that draws so many People to live in so ill a Soil, when they are in sight of the best Soil of Europe, but the easiness of the Govern∣ment. From Lugane I went to the Lago Maggiore, which is a great and noble Lake, it is fix and fifty Miles long, and in most places six Miles broad, and a hundred Fathom deep about the middle of it, it makes a great Bay to the Westward; and there lies here two Islands, called the Berromean Islands, that are certainly the loveliest spots of ground in the
World; there is nothing in all Italy, that can be compared to them; they have the full view of the Lake; and the ground rises so sweetly in them, that nothing can be imagined like the Terrasses here; they belong to two Counts of the Borromean Family. I was only in one of them, which belongs to the Head of the Family, who is Nephew to the famous Cardinal known by the name of S. Carlo: on the West∣end lies the Palac▪ which is one of the best of Italy; for the Lodgings within, tho the Architecture is but ordina∣ry, there is one noble Apartment above four and twenty foo high; and there is a vast Addition making to it; and here is a great Collection of noble Pictures, beyond any thing I saw out of Rome: The whole Island is a Garden, except a little corner to the South, set off for a Village o about forty little Houses; and because the figure of the Island was not more regular by nature, they have buil great Vaults and Portico's along the Rock, which are all made Grotesque, and so they have brought it to a regu∣lar form by laying Earth over those Vaults. There i first a Garden to the East, that rises up from the Lakes by five Rows of Terrasses, on the three sides of the Gar∣den that are watered by the Lake; the Stairs are noble; the Walls are all covered with Oranges and Citrons; and a more beautiful spot of a Garden cannot be seen: There are two Buildings in the two Corners of this Garden, the one is only a Mill for fetching up the Water, and the other is a noble Summer-house all wainscotted, if I may speak so, with Alabaster and Marble, of a fine colour, inclining to red; from this Garden one goes in a level to all the rest of the Alleys and Parterres, Herb-Gardens and Flower-Gardens; in all which there are variety of Fou∣tains and Arbors; but the great Parterre is a surprising thing; for as it is well furnished with Statues and Foun∣tains, and is of a vast extent, and justly scituated to the Palace, so at the Further-end of it, there is a great Mount, that face of it that looks to the Parterre is made like a Theater, all full of Fountains and Statues, the height
rising up in five several Rows, it being about fify foot high, and about fourscore foot in front; and round this Mount, answering to the five Rows into which the Theater is divided, there goes as many Terrasses of noble Walks; the Walls are all as close covered with Oranges and Citrons as any of our Walls in England are with Laurel: the Top of the Mount is seventy foot long and forty broad; and here is a vast Cistern, into which the Mill plays up the Water that must furnish all the Fountains: The Fountains were not quite finished when I was there; but when all is finished, this place will look like an Inhan∣ted Island. The Freshness of the Air, it being both in a Lake, and near the Mountains, the fragant Smell, the beautiful Prospect, and the delighting Variety that is here, makes it such a Habitation for Summer, that per∣haps the whole World hath nothing like it. From this I went to Sestio, a miserable Village at the end of the Lake▪ and her I began to feel a mighty change, being now in Lombardy, which is certainly the beautifullest Coun∣trey that can be imagined, the ground lies so even, it is so well watered, so sweetly divided by Rows of Trees, inclosing every piece of ground of an Acre or two Acres compass, that it cannot be denied, that here is a vast extent of Soil, above two hundred Miles long, and in many places a hundred Miles broad, where the whole Countrey is equal to the loveliest spots in all England or France; it hath all the Sweetness that Holland or Flanders have, but with a warmer Sun, and a better Air; the Neighbour-hood of the Mountains cau∣ses a freshness of Air here, that makes the Soil the most desirable place to live in that can be seen, if the Govern∣ment were not so excessively severe, that there is nothing but Poverty over all this rich Countrey. A Traveller in many places finds almost nothing, and is so ill furni∣shed, that if he doth not buy provisions in the great Towns, he will be obliged to a very severe Diet, in a Coun∣trey that he should think flowed with Milk and Hony: but I shall say more of this hereafter. The Lago Mag∣giore
discharges it self in the River Tesine, which runs with such a force, that we went thirty Miles in three hours, having but one Rower, and the Water was no way swelled. From this we went into the Canale, which Fanis is the First cut from this River to the Town of Milan; which is about thirty foot broad, and on both its Bank there are such provisions to discharge the Water when it rises to such a height, that it can never be fuller of Wa∣ter than is intended it should be; it lies also so even, that sometimes for six Miles together one sees the line so exact, that there is not the least crook: it is thirty Miles long, and is the best Advantage that the Town of Milan hath fo Water Carriage. I will not entertain you with a long description of this great City, which is one of the noblest in the World, to be an Inland Town, that hath no great Court, no Com∣merce, either by Sea, or any Navigable River, and that is now the Metropolis of a very small State; for that which is not Mountainous in this State, is not above six∣ty Miles square, and yet it produces a Wealth that is sur∣prising: It pays for an establishment of seven and forty thousand Men, and yet there are not sixteen thousand Souldiers effectively in it; so many are eat up by those in whose hands the Government is lodged: But the Vastness of the Town, the Nobleness of the Buildings, and above all, the surprising Riches of the Churches and Convents, are signs of great Wealth: The Dome hath nothing to com∣mend it of Architectre, it being built in the rude Gothick manner; but for the vastness and riches of the Building, it is equal to any in Italy, St. Peters it self not excepted. It is all Marble, both Pavement and Walls, both outside and Inside, and on the Top it is all flagg'd with Marble; and there is the vastest Number of Nihes for Status of Marble, both within and without that are any where to be seen. It is true, the Statues  some of the Niches are not proportioned to the Niches themselves; the Frontispiece is not yet made, it is to be all over covered with Statues and Bas-reliefs; and Pillars,
of which there are four Rows in the Body of the Church, have each of them eight Niches at the top, for so many Statues; and tho one would think this Church so full of Statues, that almost every Saint hath his Statue, yet I was assured, they wanted seven thousand to finish the design; but these mst chiefly belong to the Frontispie: The Church as I could measure it by walking over it in an equal pace, is five hundred foot long, and two hundred wide; the Quire is wainscotted and carved in so extraordinary a manner, that I never saw Passion so well expressed in Wood; it contains sixty Stalls, and they have almost all the Histories of the Gospel represented in them. Just under the Cupulo lies S. Carlo's Body, as I was told, in a great Case of Cristal of vast value; but I could not come near it; for we were there on two Hoy-dayes, and there was a perpetual crowd about it; and the Supersti∣tion of the People for his Body, is such, that on a Ho∣ly-day one runs a hazard that comes near it without do∣ing some Reverence. His Canonization cost the Ton a hundred thousand Crown; they pretend they have Miracles too for Cardinal Fredrigo Brromeo, but they will not set about his Canonisation, the price is so high. The Plate and other Presents made to S. Crlo are things of a prodigious value; some Services for the Altar are all of Gold; some very Massive, and set wih Iewels, others so finely wrought, that the fashion is thought equal to the value of the mettle; the Habits and all the other Ornaments for the Function of his Canoniation are all of an incredible Wealth. He was indeed a Prlate of great merit, and according to the Anwer that a Fryer made to Philip de Comines, when he asked him, how they came to qualifie one of the worst of their Princes with the Title of Saint in an inscription which he read, which was, that they gave that Title to all their Benefactors; never man deserved of a Town this Title so justly as Cardinal Borromeo did; for he laid out a prodigious Wealth in Milan, leaving nothing to his Family, but the honour of having produced so great a man, whih
is a real temporal inheritance to it; for as there have been since that time, two Cardinals of that Family, so it is esteemed a Casa Santa; and every time that it produces an Ecclesiastick of any considerable merit, he is sure, if he lives to it, to be raised to this Archbishoprick; for if there were one of the Family capable f it, and that did not carry it, that alone might dispose the State to a Rebel∣lion, and he were a bold man that would adventure on a Competition with one of tis Family. He laid out a great deal on the Dome, and consecrated it, tho the work wll not be quite finished yet for some Ages; that being one of the Crafts of the Italian Priests, never to finish a great design, that so by keeping it still in an unfinisht estate, they may be alwayes drawing great Donatives to it, from the Superstition of the People. He built the Arch Bishops Palace, which is very noble, and a Semi∣nry, a Colledge for the Switzers, several Parish Chur∣ches, an many Convents. In short, the wole Town is full of the marks of his Wealth The Riches of the Chur∣ches of Milan, strike one with amazement, the Buil∣ding, the Painting, the Altars, and the Plate, and eve∣rything in the Convents, except their Librairies, are all signs both of great Wealth and of a very powerful Super∣stition; but their Librairies not only here, but all Italy over, are scandalous things; the Room is often fine, and rich∣ly adotned, but the Books are few, ill bound, and worse chosen; and the ignorance of the Priests both secular and Regular is such, that no man, that hath not had oc∣casion to discover it, can easily believe it. The Convent of S. Victor, that is without the Town, is by much the rich∣est, it is composed of Canons Regular; called in Italy the Order of Mount Olive, or Olivetan; that of the Berna∣bites is extream rich; there is a Pulpit and a Confessional all inlaid with Agates, of different colours, finely spotted Marbles, and of Lapis Lzulis, that are thought almost inestimable. S. Laurene has a noble Cupulo, and a Pul∣pit of the fame sorm with that of the Bernabites. The Ie∣suits, the Theatins, the Dominicans, and S. Sebastians
are very rich. The Cittadl is too well known to need a de∣scription; it is very regularly built; and is a most effectu∣al restraint to keep the Town in order, but it could not stand outagainst a good Army three dayes; for it is so little, and so full of Buildings, that it could not resist a showr of Bombs. The Hospital is indeed a Royal Buil∣ding; I was told it had ninety thousand Crowns Reve∣nue: The old Court is large, and would look noble, if it were not for the new Court that is near it, which is two hundred and fifty foot square, and there are three rows of Corridors or Galleries all round the Court, one in every stage, according to the Italian manner, which makes the Lodgings very convenient, and gives a Gallery before every door: It is true, these take up a great deal of the Building, being ordinarily eight or ten foot broad; but then here is an open space, that is extream cool on that side where the Su doth not lye; for it is all open to the Air, the Wall being only supported by Pillars, at the distance of fifteen or twenty foot one from another. In this Hospital there are not only Galleries full of Beds on both sides, as is ordinary in all Hospitals; hut there are also a great many Chambers, in which per∣sons, whose condition was formerl distinguished, are treated with a particular Care. There is an out-house, which is called the Lazarette, that is without the Walls, which belongs to this Hospital, it is an extract quarter of a mile square, and there are three hundred and sixty Rooms in it, and a Gallery runs all along before the Chambers, so that as the service is convenient, the sick have a covered walk before their Doors. In the middle of this vast square there is an Octangular Chappel, so contrived, that the sick from all their Beds may see the elvation of the Hoste, and adore it: This House is for the Plague, or for infections Fea∣vers; and the Sick that want a freer Air, are also remo∣ved hither. As for the Devotions of this place, I saw here the Am∣brosian Office, which is distingusshed from the Roman; both in the Musick, which is much simpler, and some other
Rites: the Gospel is read in a hih Pulpit at the lower end of the Quire, that so it may be heard by all the people; tho this is needless, since it is read in a language that they do not understand: when they go to say high Mass, the Priest comes from the high Altar to the lower-end of the Quire, where the Offertory of the Bread and the Wine is made by some of the Laity; they were Nus that made it when I was there; I heard a Capucin Preach here; it was the first Sermon I heard in Italy, and I was much surprized at many Comical Expressions and Gestures, but most of all with the Conclusion; for there being in all the Pulpits of Italy a Crucifix on the side of the Pulpit towards the Altar; he, after a long ad∣dress to it, at last in a forced Transport, took it in his Ams, and hugged it, and kissed it: But I observed, that before he kiss'd it, he seeing some dust on it, blew it off very carefully; for I was just under the Pulpit: He en∣tertained it with a long and tender Caress, and held it out to the people, and would have forced Tears both from himself and them; yet I saw none shed. But if the Sermon in the morning surprized me, I wondred no less at two Discourses that I heard in one Church, at the same time, in the afternoon: for there were two Bodies of men set down in different places of the Church, all cove∣red, and two Laymen, in ordinary habits were enter∣taining them with Discourses of Religion in a Catehistical stile: These were Consrairies, and those were some of the more devout, that instructed the rest. This, as I never saw any where else, so I do not know whether it is peculiar to Milan, or not. My Conductor could not speak Latin, and the Italian there is so different from the true Tuscan, which I only knew, that I could not understand him when he was ingaged in a long dis∣course, so I was not clearly informed of this matter: but I am apt to think, it might have been some institution of Crdinal Borromeos. The Ambrosian Lirary, foun∣ded by Cardinal Frederick Borromeo, is a very noble Room, and wel furnished, only it is too full of School-men
and Canonists; which are the chief studies of Itly; an it hath too few Books of a more solid and useful learn∣ing. One part of the disposition of the Rom was pleasant; there is a great number of Chairs, placed all round it at a competent distance from one another; and to every Chair there belongs a Desk, with an Eritoire, that hath Pen, Ink, and Paper in it; so that every Man finds tools here for such extracts as he would make. There is a little Room of Manuscripts at the ed of the great Gallery, but the Library-keeper knows little of them; a great many of them relate to their Saint Charle. I saw some fragments of Latin Biles, but none seemed to be above six hundred Years old; there are also some fragments of Saint Amroses Wrks, and of Saint Ieroms Epistles, that are of the same antiquity. I was sorry not to find Saint Ambrose's Works intie, that I might have seen, whether the Books of the Sacra∣ments, are ascribed to him in ancient Cpies; for per∣haps they belong to a more modern Author. It is true, in these Books, the Doctrine of a sort of a corporal presence is asserred in very high expressions; but there is one thing mentioned in them, which is stronger against it, than all those Citations can be for it; for the Author gives us the formal Words of the Prayer of Consecration in his time, which he prefaces with some solemnity: will you know how the change is wrought, hear the Heavenly Words? For the Priest saith, &c. But whereas in the pre∣sent Canon of the Mass, the Prayer of consecration is for a good part of it very near in the same Words with those which he mentions, there is one essential difference; for in the Canon they now pray, that the Hosty may be to them the Body and Blood of Christ; (which by the way doth not agree too well with the notion of Transubstan∣tion, and approacheth more to the Doctrine of the Luhe∣rans:) whereas in the Prayer, cited by that Author, the Hosty is said to be The Figure of the Bdy and Blood of Christ: here is the language of the whole Church of that time, and in the most important part of the
Divine Office, which signifieh more to me, than a thou∣sand Quotations out of particular Writers, which are but▪ their Private Opinions: but this is the Voice of the whole Body in its Addresses to God: and it seems, the Church of Rome, when the new Doctrine of the Corporal Presence was received, saw that this Prayer of Consecra∣tion could not consist with it, which made her change such a main Part of the Office. This gave me a curiosity eve∣ry where to search for ancient Offices, but I found none in the Abbey of St. Germains, that seemed older than the times of Charles the Great; so I found none of any great Antiquity in all Italy: Those published by Cardi∣nal Bona, and since by P. Mabillon, that were brought from Heidelberg, are the most ancient that are in the Vatican; but these seem not to be above eight hun∣dred years old: There are none of the ancient Roman Offices now to be seen in the Vatican. I was amazed to find none of any great Antiquity; which made me con∣clude, that either they were destroyed, that so the difference between Ancient and Modern Rituals might not be turned against that Church, as an undeniable Evidence, to prove the Changes that she hath made in di∣vine Matters; or, that they were so well kept, that Hereticks were not to be suffered to look into them. But to return to the Ambrosian Library, there is in it a Manuscript of great Antiquity, tho not of such great consequence, which is Ruffinus's Translation of Iosephus, that is written in the old Roman hand, which is very hard to be read. But there is a deed in the curious Collection that Count Mascard hah made at Verona, which by the date appears to have been written in Theodosius's time, which is the same sort of witing with the Manuscript of Ruffinus, so that it may be reckoned to have been writ in Ruffinus his own time, and this is the most valuable, tho the least known Curio∣sity in the whole Library. I need not say any thing of the curious Works in Christal that are to be seen in Milan, the greatest quantities that are in Europe, are found in the Alps, and are wrought
here, but this is too well known to need any further in∣largement. It is certain, the Alps have much Wealth shut up in their Rocks, if the Inhabitants knew how to search for it: But I heard of no Mines tha were wrought, except Iron Mines; yet by the colourings, that in many pla∣ces the Fountains make, as they run along the Rocks, one sees cause to believe, that there are Mines and Minerls shut up within them. Gold has been often found in the River of Arve, that runs by Geneva. The last curiosity that I shall mention of the Town of Mi∣lan, is the Cabinet of the Chanoine Settala, which is now in his Brothers hands, where there are a great many very va∣luable things, both of Art and Nature: there is a lump of Ore, in which there is both Gold, and Silver, and Emeralds, and Diamonds, which was brought from Peru. There are many curious motions, where by an unseen Spring, a Ball, after it hath rowled down through many winding descents is hrown up, and so it seems to be a perpetual motion; this is done in several forms, and it is well enough disguised to deceive the vulgar. Many motions of little Animals, that run about by Springs, are also very pretty. There is a Load-stone of a vast force, that carries a great Chain: There is al∣so a moustrous Child, that was lately born in the Hospital, which is preserved in Spirit of Wine: it is double below, it hath one Breast and Neck two pair of Ears, a vast Head, and but one Face. As for the Buildings in Mlan, they are big and substantial; but they have not much regular, or beautiful Architecture: The Governor's Palace hath some noble Apartments in it: the chief Palace of the Town is that of the Homodei, which was built by a Bankier. There is one Inconvenience in Milan, which throws down all the Pleasure that one can find in it: They have no glass Win∣dows, so that one is either exposed to the Air, or shut up in a Dungeon: and his is so universal, that there is not one House of ten that hath Glass in their Windows: The same Dfect is in Florence, besides all the small Towns of Italy, which is an effect of their Poverty Fort what by the Oppression of the Government, wha by the no less squeezing Oppression of their Priests, who drain all the rest of their Wealh,
that is not eat up by the Prince, to inrich their Churches and Convents, the People here are reduced to a Poverty, that cannot be easily believed by one that sees the Wealth that is in their Churches: and this is going on so constantly in Milan, that it is scarce accountable from whence so vast a Treasure can be found; but Purgatory is a Fund not easily exhausted. The Wealth of the Milanese consists chiefly in their Silks, and that Trade falls so mightily by the vast Importations that the East India Companies bring into Europe, that all Italy feels this very sensibly, and languish extreamly by the great fall that is in the Silk-Trade. There is a great magnificence in Milan; the No∣bility affect to make a noble Appearance, both in their Cloaths, their Coaches, and their Attendants; and the Women go abroad with more Freedom here, than in any Town of Italy. And thus I have told you all that hitherto occurred to me, that I thought worth your knowledge. I am Yours. Postscript. In the Account that I gave you of Geneva, I forgot to Mention a very extraordinary Person that is there, Mstris Walkier; her Father is of Shaff-house, she lost her sight when she was but a year old, by being too near a Stove that was very hot: There rests in the upper part of her eye so much sight, that she distinguishes day from night: and when any person stands between her and the light, she will distinguish by the Head and its dress a Man from a Woman; but when she turns down her Eyes, she sees nothing: she hath a vast Memory; besides the French, that is her natural Language, she speaks both High-Dutch, Italian and Latn: she hath all the Psalms by heart, in French; and many of them in Dutch and Italian: she un∣derstands the Old Philosophy well; and is now studying the New: she hath studied the Body of Divinity well, and hath the Text of the Sriptures very ready: On all which mat∣ters I had long conversation with her; she not only sings well, but she playes rarely on the Organ; and I was told,
she played on the Violin, but her Violin was out of order. But that which is most of all, is, she writes legibly: in order to her learning to write, her Father, who is a worthy man, and hath such tenderness for her, that he furnisheth her with Masters of all sorts, ordered Letters to be carved in Wood, and she by feeling the Characters, formed such n Idea of them, that she writes with a Crayon so distinctly, that her writing can be well read, of which I have several Essayes. I saw her write; she doth it more nimbly than can be imagined; she hath a Machine hat holds the Paper, and keeps her alwayes in Line. But that which is above all the rest, she is a person of extraor∣dinary Devotion, great resignation to the Will of God, and a profound humility: The Preceptor, that her Father kept in the house with her, hath likewise a wonderful Faculty of acquiring Tongues. When he came first to Ge∣neva (for he is of Zurich) he spoke not a word of French, and within thirteen Months he preacht in French correctly, and with a good Accent: He also began to study Italian in the Month of November, and before the end of the fol∣lowing February he preacht in Italian; his accent was good, and his stile was floried, which was very extraor∣dinary; for the Italian Language is not spoken in Geneva, tho the race of the Italians do keep up still an Italian Church there.
THE THIRD LETTER. Florence, the 5th of November, 1685. I Have now another Month over my Hea, since I writ last to you, and so I know you expect an Ac∣count of the most considerable things that have occur∣red to me since my last from Milan. Twenty miles from Milan we past through Lodi, a miserable Garison, tho a Frontier Town; but indeed, the Frontiers, both of the Spaniards and the Venetians, as well as those of the other Prines of Italy, shew that they are not very appre∣hensive of one another; and when one passes through those places, whih are represented in History, as places of great strength, capable of resisting a long Siege, he must acknowledge, that the sight of them brings the Idea that he had conceived of them, a great many degrees lower. For Lombardy, which was so long the seat of War, could not stand out against a good Army now so many dayes, as it did then years. The Garrison of Crema, which is the first of the Venetian Territory, is no better than that of Lodi, only the People in the Venetian Domi∣nion live happier than under the Spaniard. The Senate sends Podesta's, much like the Bailifs of the Switzers, who order the Juice and the Civil Go∣vernment of the Iurisdiction assigned them: There is also a Captain-Genral, who hath the Military Authority in his hands; and these two are Checks upon one another; as the Bss's and the Cadi's are among the Turks. But here in Crema, the Town is so small, that both these are in one person. We were there in the time of the Fair; Linnen Cloath, and Cheese (which tho it goes by the name
of the Parmesan, is made chiefy in Lodi) are the main Commodities of the Fair. The magnificence of the Pode∣sta appeared very extraordinary; for he went through the Fair with a great Train of Coaches, all in his own Live∣ry; and the two Coaches, in which he and his Lady ride, were both extraordinary rich: his was a huge Bed-coach, all the out-side black Velvet, and a mighty rich Gold Fringe, lined with black Damask, flowered with Gold. From Crema it is thirty Miles to Bresia, which is a great Town, and full of Trade and Wealth; here they make the best Barrils for Pistols and Muskers of all Italy: there are great Iron Works near it; but the War with the Turk had occasioned an order, that none might be sold without a Permission from Venice: They are buil∣ding a Noble Dome at Brescia: I was shewed a Nunnery there, which is now under a great Disgrace; some years ago, a new Bishop coming thither, began with the Visi∣tation of that Nunnery; he discovered two Vauits, by one, Men came ordinarily into it; and by another, the Nuns that were big, went and lay in of Child-bed: when he was examining the Nuns severely concerning those Vaults, some of them told him, that his own Priests did much worse. He shut up the Nuns, so that those who are profef∣sed live still there, but none come to take the Vail: and by this means the House will soon come to an end. The Cit∣tadel lies over the Town on a Rock, and commands it ab∣solutely. Both here, and in Crema, the Towns have begun a Complement within these last ten or twelve years to their Podesta's, which is matter of great Ornament to their Palaces, but will grow to a vast charge; for they erect Sta∣tues to their Podesta's: and this being once bogun, must be carried on; otherwise those to whom the like honour is not done, will resent it as a high affront; and the Revenges of the Noble Venetians are dreadul things to their Subjects. This name of Podesta is very ancient; for in the Roman times, the chief Magistrates of the lesser Towns were call∣ed the Potestas▪ as appears by that of Iuvenal, Fidena∣rum Gabiorumve esse Potestas.
From Brescia, the beauty of Lombardy is a little inter∣rupted; for as all the way from Milan to Brescia is as one Garden, so here on the one side we come under the Mountains, and we pass by the Lake of Guarda, which is forty miles long, and where it is broadest, is twenty miles over: The Miles indeed, all Lombardy over, are extream short; for I walkt often four or five Miles in a walk, and I found a thousand paces made their common Mile; but in Tuscany and the Kingdom of Napels, the mile is fifteen hundred paces. We pass through a great Heath for seven or eight miles on this side of Verona, which begins to be cultivated. Verona is a vast Town, and much of it well built; there are many rich Churhes in it: but there is so little Trade stirring, and so little money going, that it is not easie here to change a Pistol, without taking their Coyn of base Alloy, which doth not pass out of the Veronese: for this seems a strange Maxim of the Venetians, to suffer those small States, to retain still a Coyn peculiar to them, which is extream inconvenient for Commerce. The known Antiquity of Verona is the Amphitheater, one of the least of all that the Romans built, but the best pre∣served; for tho most of the great Stones of the outside are pickt out; yet the great flopping Vault, on which the rows of the seats are laid, is intire; the rows of the seas are also intire, they are sour and forty Rows; every Row is a foot and half high, and as much in breadth, so that a Man sits conveniently in them under the feet of those of the higher Row: & allowing every Man a foot and a half, the whole Amphitheather can hold twenty three thousand Persons. In the Vaults, under the Rows of Seats, were the stalls of the Beasts that were presented to entertain the Company: the thikness of the Building, from the out∣ward Wall to the lowest Row of Seats, is ninty foot: But this Noble Remnant of Antiquity, is so often, and so co∣piously described, that I will say no more of it. The net thing of value is the famous Museum Calceolarium, now in the Hands of the Count Mascardo, where there is a whole Apartment of Rooms, all furnisht with Antiquities, and
Rarities. There are some old Inscriptions, made by two Towns in Africk, to the honour of M. Crassus: There is a great Collection of Medals and Medaillons, and of the Roman Weights, with their Instruments for theit Sa∣crifices; there are many Curiosities of Nature, and a great Collection of Picturs, of which many are of Palo Veronese's Hand. There is a noble Garden in Verona, that riseth up in Terrasses the whole height of a Hill, in which thete are many ancient Inscriptions, which belongs to Count Giusto. As we go from Verona to Vinenza, which is thirty miles, we return to the Beauty of Lmbardy; for there is all the way as it were a Succession of Gardens: the ground is better cultivated here, than I saw it in any other place of Italy: But the Wine is not good; for at the roots of all their Trees they plant a Vine; which grows up winding about the Tree, to which it joyns; but the Soil is too rich to produce a rich wine; for that requi∣reth a dry ground. There is near the Lake of Guarda a very extraordinary Wine, which they call Vino Santo, which drinks like the best sort of Canary, it is not made till Christmaes, and from thence it carries the Name of Holy Wine; and it is not to be drunk till Midsummer; for it is so long before it is quite wrought cleat; but I have not maked down how long it may be kept: we had it there for a Groat an English quart; I wondred that they did not trade with it. All the Cattel of Italy are gray or white, and all their Hogs are black, except in the Bolognse, and there they are red. I will not inquire into the reasons of these things: it is certain, Hogs-Flesh in Italy is much better than it is in France and England, whether the truffs on which they feed much in Winter, occasion this or not, I know not; the Husks of the pressed Gapes is also a mighty nourishment to them; but Cattel of that grayish colour, are certainly weaker: The Carriage of Italy is generally performed by them; and this is very hard work in Lombar∣dy, when it hath rained ever so little; for the ground being quite level, and there being no raised High-wayes or Cause-wayes, the Carts go deep, and are hardly drawn.
Vinenza hath still more of its ancient liberty reserved than any of thes Towns, as Padua hath less; for it deli∣vered it self to the Venetians; whereas the other dispu∣ted long with it, and broùght it often very low: one sees the marks of Liberty in Vincenza, in the Riches of their Palaces and Churches, of which many are newly built: they have a modern Theater, made in imitation of the ancient Roman Theaters. Cunt Velarano's Gar∣dens at the Port of Vern, is the finest thing of the Town; there is in it a very noble Alley of Oranges and Citrons, some as big as a Mans Body, but those are co∣vered all the Winter long; for in this appears the sensible difference of Lombardy rom those parts of Italy; that lie to the South of the Apenins, that here generally they keep their Oranges and Citrons in great Boxes, as we do in England, that so they may be lodged in Winter, and defended from the Breeses, that blow sometimes so sharp from the Alps, that otherwise they would kill those delicate Plants: whereas in Tuscany they grow as other Trees in their Gardens; and in the Kingdom o Naple, they grow wild, without any Care or Cultivation. We were at Vincenza upon a Holy day, and there I saw a preparation for a Procession that was to be in the after∣noon: I did not wonder at what a French Papist said to me, that he could hardly bear the Religion of Italy, the Idolatry in it was so gross. The Statue of the Virgi was of Wood, so finely painted, that I thought the head was Wax; it was richly clad, and had a Crown on its Head, and was set full of Flowers: how they did when it was carried about, I do not know; but in the morning all people ran to it, and said their prayers to it, and Kissed the Ground beore it, with all the appearances of Devotion. From Vincenza it is eighteen mles to Padua, all like a Garden: here one sees the decays of a vast City; which was once one of the biggest of all Italy; the compass is the same that is was, but there is much uninhabited ground in it, and Houses there go almost for nothing;
the Air is extream good, and there is so great a plenty of all things, except Money, that a little Money goes a great way. The Vniversity here, tho so much surported by the Venetians, that they pay fifty Proessors▪ yet sinks extreamly: there are no men of any great Fame now i it: and the quarrels among the Students have driven away most of the Strangers that used to come and study here; for it is not safe to stir abroad here after Sun set: The number of the Palaces here is incredible, and tho the No∣bility of Padua is almost quite ruined, yet the Beauty of their ancient Palaces shews what they once were. The Ve∣etians have been willing to let the ancient Quarrels that were in all those conquered Cities continue still among them; for while one kills another, and the Children of the other take their Revenges afterwards, both comes un∣der the Bando by this means, and the Confiscaion goes to the Senate. At some times of Grace, when the Senate wants Money, and offers a pardon to all that will com∣pound for it, the numbers of the guilty persons are incredi∣ble. In Vincenza, and the Country that belongs to it, I was assured by Monsieur Patin, that learned Autiquary, that hath been any years a Professor in Padua, that there were five and thirty thousand pardoned at the last Grace; this I could hardly believe, but he bid me write it down upon his word. The Nobility of Padua, and of he other Towns, seem not to see what a profit their Quarrels bring to the Venetians, and how they eat out their Families: for one Family in the same mans time, who was alive while I was there, was reduced from fourteen thousand Ducats Revenue, to less than three thousand, by its falling at several times under the Bando▪ But their Jealou∣sies and their Revenges are pursued by them with so much vigour, that when these are in their way, all other things are forgot by them. There is here the remnant of the Amphitheater, tho nothing but the outward Wall stands: There is here, as well as in Milan, an inward Town, called the City, and an outward, without that, called the Burgo; but tho
there is a Ditch about the City, the great Ditch and Wall goeth about all, and Padua is eight miles in compass; it lies almost round: The publick Hall is the Noblest of Italy: The Dome is an ancient and mean Building: But the Church of S. Anthony, especially the Holy Chappel in it, where the Saint lies, is one of the best pieces of modern Sculpture; for round the Chappel, the chief Miracles in the legend of that Saint are repesened in Mezzo Rilievo, in a very surprizing manner: The devotion that is paid to this Saint, all Lombardy over, is amazing: he is called by way of excellence il Santo, and the Beggars generally ask Alms for his sake: But among the little Vows that hang without the Holy Chappel, there is one that is the highet pitch of Blasphomy that can be imagined, Exaudt, speak∣ing of the Saint, quos non au it & ipse Dus; he hears those whom God himself doth not hear. St. Iustina is a Church so well ordered within, the Architecture is so beautiful, it is so well inlightned, and the Cupulo's are so advanta∣geously placed, that if the outside answered the inside, it would be one of the best Churches of Italy; but the Building is of Brick, and it hath no Frontispiece; there are many new Altars, made as fine as they are Idolatrous, all full of Statues of Marble. This Abby hath a hundred thousand Ducats of Revenue, and so by its Wealth one may con∣clude that it belongs to the Benedictine Order. Cardinal Barberigo is Bishp here; he seems to set St. Carlo before him as his pattern; he hath founded a Noble Seminary for the secular Priests; he lives in a constant discipline him∣self, and endeavours to reform hi Clergy all he can; but he is now in ill terms with his Canons, who are all Noble Venetians, and so allow themselves great liberties, of which they will not be willingly abridged: he is charitable to a high degree, an is i all respects a very extraordinary man. In the Venetian Trritory their subjects live easie and happy, if they could be so wise as to give over their Qar∣rels; but tho the Taxes ae not high, they oppress thei Tenants so everely▪ that the Peasants live most miserably,
yet on all hands round about them, the Oppressions being more intolerable, they know not whither to go for ease; whereas on the contrary, the miseries under which their Neighbours groan, chiefly those of the Ecclesiastical State, send in an increase of people among them, so that they are well stoekt with people; but the Venetians are so jealous of their Subjects understanding Military matters, which may dispose them to revolt, that they never make any Levies among them for their Wars; this jealousie is the true ground of that maxim, tho another is pretended, that is more plausible, which is, their Care of their own people, whom they study to preserve, and therefore they hire Strangers, rather than expose their Subjects. It is cer∣tain, a revolt here, were no hard matter to effectuate; for the Garrisons and Frtifications are so slight, that those great Towns could easily shake off their yoke, if it were not for the Factions that still reign among them, by which one party would chuse rather to expose the other to the rigor of the Inquisitors, than concur with them in asserting their Liberty; and the Inquisitors in such cases proceed so secret∣ly, and yet so effectually, that none dares trust another with a Secret of such consequence; and the oppressed No∣bility of those States, retain still so much of their old and unsubdued Insolence, and treat such as are under them so cruelly, that the Venetians are as secure in those Conquests, as if they had many strong Cittadels, and numerous Gar∣risons spread up and down among them. From Padua down to Venice, all along the River Brent, there are many Palaces of the Noble Venetians on both sides of the River, built with so great a variety of Architecture, that there is not one of them like another; there is also the like di∣versity in the laying out of their Gardens; and here they retire during the hot months; and some allow themselves all the excesses of dissolute Liberty that can possibly be imagined. From Lizza Fucina, which is at the mouth of the Brent, we pass for five or six miles on the Lagunes, or shallows, to Venice; these shallows sink of late so much, that the preserving Venice still an
Island, is like to become as great a charge to the Venetian▪ as the keeping out the Sea is to the Dutch; for they use all possible industry to cleanse the Channels of their Lagune, and to keep them full of Water: and yet many think, that the Water hath failed so much in this last age, that if it continues to abate at the same rate, within an age o two more, Venice may become a part of the Terra firm It is certainly the most surprizing sight in the whole World, to see so vast a City, scituated thus in the Sea, and such a number of Islands so united together by Brid∣ges, brought to such a regular figure, the Pilotty sup∣plying the want of earth to build on, and all so nob built, which is of all the things that one can see the mo amazing. And tho this Republick is much sunk from what is was, both by the great Losses they have suffered in their Wars with the Turks, and by the great decay of Trade, yet there is an incredible Wealth, and a va plenty of all things in this place. I will not offer to de∣scribe neither the Church nor the Palace of S. Mark, which are too well known to need a long digression to be made for them; the painting of the Walls, and the roofs of the Halls, and publick Rooms in the Palace, are of vast value; Here I saw that Story of Pope Alexander the III. treading on the neck of the Emperor Frederic Barbarossa. The Nobleness of the Stair-ases, the Ri∣ches of the Halls, and the Beauty of the whole Building▪ are much prejudiced by the Beastliness of those that wal along, and that leave their marks behind them, as if this were rather a common House of Office, than so Noble a Palace: And the great Hall, where the whole body of the Nobility meet, in the Great Council, hath nothing but the roof and walls that answers to such a Assembly; For the Seat are liker the benches of an Au∣ditory of Schollars, than of so glorious a Body. Whe the two sides of this Palace are built as the third, which is the most hid, it will be one of the gloriousest Palace that the World can shew. The two sides that are mo seen▪ the one facing the square of St. Mark, and the
other the great Canale, are only of Brick, the third being all of Marble, but the War of Candy put a stop to the Building. St. Mark's Church hath nothing to re∣commend it, but its great Antiquity, and the vast Ri∣ches of the Building, it is dark and low; but the pave∣ment is so rich a Mosaick, and the whole roof is also Mosaik, the outside and inside are of such excellent Marble, the Frontispice is adorned with so many Pillars of Porphiry and Iasper. and above all with the four Horses of Corinthian Brass, that Tiridates brought to Tiberius, which were carried afterwards to Constanti∣nople, and were brought from thence to Venice, and in which the gilding is still very bright, that when all this is considered, one doth no where see so much cost brought together. I did not see the Gospel of St. Mark, which is one of the valuablest things of the Treasure; but they do not now open it to Strangers; yet Doctor Grand, a famous Physitian there, told me▪ that by a particular order, he was suffered to open it; he told me▪ it was all writ in Capital Letters, but the Characters were so worn out, that tho he could disern the Ends of some Letters, he could not see enough to help him to distin∣guish them, or to know wheter the M.S. was in Greek or Latin. I will not say one Word of the Arfenal; for as I saw it in its worst State, the War that is now on foot having disfurnished a great deal of it, so it hath been oten described, and it is known to be the Noblest Maga∣zine▪ the best ordered, and of the greatest variety, that is in the whole World: its true, it is all that this Stat hath; so that if the Magazines of other Princes, which lie spread up and down in the different Places of their Dominions, were gathered together, they would make a much greater shew. The Noblest Convent of Venice is that of the Dominicans, called Saint Iohn and Saint Paul; the Church and Chappels are vastly rich: there is one of Saint Luke's Madona's here, as they pretend; the Dormitory is very great; the Room for the Library, and every thing in it, ex∣cept
the Books, is extream fine. But Saint George's, which is a Convent of the Benedictines; in an Isle intirely possessed by them, over against Saint Marks square, is much the richest: the Church is well contrived, and well adorned: and not only the whole Building is very Magnificent; but which is more extraordinary at Venice, they have a large Garden, and noble walks in it. The Redemptore and the Salute, are two Noble Churches, that are the effects of Vows that the Senate made whe they were afflicted with the Plague, the latter is much the finer, it is to the Virgin; and the other is only to our Saviour: so naturally doth the Devotion of that Churc carry it higher for the Mother than the Son. It is true, the Salute is later than the other, so no wonder if the Architecture and the riches exceed that which is more ancient. The School of Saint Roch, and the Chap∣pel, and Hall, are full of great pieces of Tintore: a Cena, of Paulo Veronese in the Refectory of St. George, and the Picture of St. Seter the Martyr of Titians, are the most celebrated pieces of Venice: Duke P∣saro's Tomb in the Friary is the Noblest I ever saw. B if the riches of all the Convents, and the Parish Chur∣ches of Venice amased me, the Fronts especially, many of which are of white Marble, beautified with several Statues; the meanness of the Library of S. Mar did no less surprize me. There are in the Antichamber to it, Statues of vast value, and the whole Roof of the Library is composed of several pieces of the greate Masters put in several Frames: but the Library hath no∣thing answerable to the Riches of the Case; for the Greek Manuscrips are all modern; I turned over a great many, and saw none above five hundred years old I was indeed told, that the last Library-keeper was acc∣sed for having conveyed away many of their Manuscrips, and that four years ago being clapt in prison for this by the Inquisitors; he, to prevent further Severities, poi∣soned himself. I went to the Convent of the Servi; bt I found Father Paul was not in such consideration there,
as he is elsewhere. I asked for his Tomb, but they made no account of him, and seemed not to know where it was; it is true, the person to whom I was recommen∣ded, was not in Venice, so perhaps they refined too much in this matter: I had great Discourse with some at Venice concerning the Memorials out of which F. Paul drew his History, which are no doubt all preserved with great care in their Archives; and since the Transactions of the Coun∣cil of Trent, as they are of great Importance, so they are become now much controverted, by the different Rela∣tions that F. Paul, and Cardinal Pallavicini have given the World of that matter; the only way to put an end to all Disputes in matter of Fact, is to print the Oriinals themselves. A Person of great Credit at Venice, promised to me, to do his utmost, to get that Proposition set on foot, tho the great Exactness that the Government there hath alwayes affected, as to the matter of their Archives, is held so sacred, that this made him apprehend, they would not give way to any such search. The Affinity of the matter brings into my mind a long Conversation that I had with a person of great Eminence at Venice, that as he was long at Constantinople, so he was learned far beyond what is to be met with in Italy; he told me, he was at Constantinople when the Inquiry into the Doctrine of the Greek Church was set on foot, occasioned by the famous Dispute between Mr. Arnaud and Mr. Claude he being a zealous Roman Catholick, was dealt with to assist in that business; but being a Man of great Honour and Sincerity, he excused himself, and said, he could not meddle in it: He hath a very low and bad Opinion of the Greeks; and he told me, That none of their Priests were more inveterate Enemies to the Church of Rome than those that were bred up at Rome; for they, to free them∣selves of the prejudices that their Countreymen are apt to conceive against them, because of their Education among the Latines, do affect to shew an Opposition to the La∣tin Church beyond any other Greeks. He told me, that he knew the Ignorance and Corruption of the Greeks was
such, that as they did not know the Doctrines of their own Church, so a very little Money, or the hope of Pro∣tection from any of the Ambassdors that came from the West, would prevail with them to sign any thing that could be desired of them. He added one thing, that tho he firmly believed Transustantiation himself, he did not think they believed it, let them say what they pleased themselves; he took his measures of the Doctrine of their Church, rather from what they did, than from what they said: For their Rites not being changed now for a great many ages, were the true Indications of the Do∣ctrines received among them; whereas they were both ignorant of the Tradition of their Doctrine, and very apt to prevericate when they saw Advantages or Protection set before them; therefore he concluded, that since they did not adore the Sacrament after the Consecration, that was an evident sign that they did not believe the Corporal Presence; and was of a force well able to balance all their Subscriptions: He told me, he was often scandalized to see them open the Bag, in which the Sacrament was preser∣ved, and shew it with no sort of respect, no more than when they shewed any Manuscript; and he looked on Adoration as such a necessary Consequent of Transustan∣tiation, that he could not imagine that the latter was re∣ceived in a Church that did not practise the former. To this I will add what an Eminent Catholick at Paris told me; he said, the Originals of those Attestations, were in too exact and too correct a stile, to have been formed in Greece; he assured me, they were penned at Paris, by one that was a Master of the Purity of the Greek Tongue, I do not name these Persons, because they are yet alive, and this might be a prejudice to them. One of the chief Ornaments of Veice was the famous young Wman that spake five Tongues well, of which the Latin and Greek wee two; she passed Doctor of Physick at Padua, accor∣ding to the ordinary Forms; but which was beyond all, she was a person of such extraordinary Vertue and Piety, that she is spoken of as a Saint; she died some Months
before I came to Venice: she was of the noble Family of the Cornaro's, tho not of the three chief Branches, which are Saint Maurice, Saint Paul, and Calle, who are de∣scended from the three Brothers of the renowned Queen of Cyprus, but the distinction of her Family was Pisco∣pia. Her extraordinary merit made all people unwil∣ling to remember the blemish of her descent of the one side; for tho the Cornaro's rekon themselves a size of Nobility beyond all the other Families of Vnice, yet her Father having entertained a Goudalier's Daughter so long, that he had some Children by her, at last for their sakes married the Mother, and payed a considerable Fine to save the forfeiture of Nobility, which his Children must have undergone, by reason of the meanness of the Mothers birth. The Cornaro's carry it so high, that many of the Daughters of that Family have made themselves Nuns, because they thought their own Name was so No∣ble, that they could not induce themselves to change it with any other; and when lately one of that Family mar∣ried the Heir of the Sagredro, which is also one of the an∣tientest Families, that was extream rich, and she had scarce any portion at all, (for the Crnaro's are now very low) some of their Friends came to wish them joy of so advanta∣gious a Match; but they very coldly rejected the Comple∣ment, and bid the others go and wish the Sagredo's joy, since they thought the Advantage was wholly of their side. There are of the truly Ancient Noble Families of Venie, four and twenty yet remaining, and even among these, there are twelve that are thought superior to the rest in rank: since the first Formation of their Senate, they have created many Senators. In their Wars with Genua they conferred that honour on thirty Families: several of their Generals have had that honour given them as a reward of their service: They have also offered this honour to some Royal Families; for both the Pamilies of Valos and Bourbon, were Nobles of Venice; and Henry the III. when he came through Venice from Poland, to take pos∣session of the Crown of France, went and sate among
them, and drew his Ballot as a Noble Venetian: many Popes have procured this honour for their Nephews. Only the Barberines would have the Venetians offer it to them without their asking it, and the Venetins would not give it without the others asked it, and so it stuck at this. But during the War of Candy, Cardinal Franis Barberie gave twelve thousand Crowns a year towards the War, and the temper found for making them Noble Veuetians was, that the Queen Mother of France moved the Senate to grant it. In all he Creations of Seators before the last War of Can∣dy, they were free; and the Considerations were, either great Services, or the great Dignity of those on whom they bestowed this Honour. Those new Families are di∣vided into those that are called Ducal Families; and those that were called simply New Families; the Reason of the former designation is not rightly understood; but one that knew all that related to that Constitution particularly well, gave me a good account of it. That which natu∣rally occurs as the Reason of it, is, that all those Fami∣lies, that are called Dual, have had the Dukedom in their House: But as all the old Families have had the same Honour, though they carry not that Title, so some of the nw Families have also had it, that yet are not cal∣led Ducal. Others say, that those Families that have had branches, who have been made Dukes, without their being first Procurators of S. Mark, or that have been cho∣sen to that Honour, without their pretending to it, are called Ducal: But the true Account of this is, that from the year 1450. to the year 1620. for a hundred and se∣venty years, there was a combination made among those new Families to preserve the Dukedom still among them: For the old Families carrying it high, and excluding the new Families from the chief Honours, nineteen of the new Families entred into mutual Ingagements to exclude the ancient Nobility: It is true, they made the Dukedom sometimes fall on some of the new Families that were not of this Association; but this was more indifferent to them, as long as the ancient Famillies were shut out, and that
it appeared, that they bore the chief sway in the Election, This Combination was a thing known to the very people, tho the Inquisitors did all they could to break it, or at least to hide it, so that I never met with it in any of their Authors. But this failed in the year 1620. when Memmio was chosen Dke, who was descended of one of the an∣cient Nobility, which was so great a mortification to the Case Ducale, that one of them (Veniero) hanged him∣self, by the Rage to which that Disgrace drove him, yet his man came into the room in time, before he was dead, and cut him down, and he lived long after that in a better mind. Since that time, one of the Bembo's, two of the Cornaro's, and one of the Cotarini's, and the present Prince, of the Iustniani, the first of that family that hath had that honour, have been Dukes, who are all of the ancient Families: So that this Faction is now so intirely buried, that it is not generally known (even in Venie it self) that it was ever amongst them; and thus time, and other Acidnts bring about happy Events, which no Care nr Industry could produce: For that which all the Endeavours of the Inquisitrs could not compass, was brought about of it self. It is true, the Factions in Venie, tho violent enough in the persons of those who manage them, yet are not derived by them, as an Inheritance to their Posterity, as it was among the Florentines; who tho they value themselves as a size of men much above the Venetians, whom they despise as a phlegmatick and dull race of people, yet shewed how little they understood with all their vivacity, to conduct their State; since by their domestick Heats they lost their Liberty, which the Venetians have had the wisdom still to preserve. This Faction of the Case Ducale was perhaps willing to let the matter fall; for they lost more than they got by it; for the Ancient Families in revenge set them∣selves against them, and excluded them from all the other advantagious Imployments of the State. For the others being only united in that single point relating to the Duke∣dom, the Ancient Families let them carry it; but in all
other Competitions they set up alwayes such Competitors against the Pretenders that were of the Ducal Families, that were much more esteemed than these were, so that they shut hem out of all the best Offices of the Republik. Such a Faction as this was, if it had been still kept up, might in Conclusion have proved fatal to their Liberty. It is indeed a Wonder to see, the Dignity of the Duke so much courted; for he is only a Prisoner of State, tyed up to such Rules, so severely restrained and shut up as it were in an Apartment of the Palace of S. Mark, that it is not strange to see some of the greatest Families, in parti∣cular the Cornaro's decline it. All the Family, if ever so numerous, must retire out of the Senate, when a Due is chosen out of it, only one that is next to him of kin. sits still, but without a Vote: And the only Real Pri∣viledge that the Duke hath, is, that he can of himself, without communicating with the Savii, propose mat∣ters, either to the Council of Ten, to the Snate, or to the Great Counil; whereas all other proposi∣tions must be first offered to the Savii, and examined by them, who have a sort of Tribunitian Power to reject what they dislike; and tho they cannot hinder the Duke to make a Proposition, yet they can mortifie him when he hath made it; they can hinder it to be voted; and after it is voted, they can suspend the execution of it till it is examined over again: And a Duke, that is of an active Spirit, must resolve to indure many of these Aflictions; and it is certain, that the Savii, do sometimes affect to shew the Greatness of their Authority, and exercise a sort of Tyranny in the rejecting of Propositions, when thy intend to humble those that make them: yet the greatest part of the best Families court this Honour f Dukedom extreamly. When Sagredo was upon the point of being chosen Duke, there was so violent an Out-cry against it over all Venie, because of the Digrare, that they thought would come on the Republik, if they had a Prince, whose Nose had micarried in some unfortunate Dis∣orders; the Senate complyed so far with this Aversion,
that the people testified, that tho the Inquisitors took care to hang or drown many of the chief of the Mutineers, yet they let the design for Sagredo fall: Upon which he was so much disgusted, that he retired to a house he had in the Terra firma, and never appeared more at Venice: During which time of his Retirement, he writ two Books, the one Memorie Ottomniche, which is Prin∣ted; and he is accounted the best of all their mordern Au∣thors. The other was Memoires of the Government and History of Venice, which hath never been Prin∣ted; and some say, it is too incere, and too particular, so that it is thought it will be reserved among their Archives. It hath been a sort of Maxim now for some time, not to chuse a married man to be Duke, for the Coronation of a Duhes goes high, and hath cost above a hundred thou∣sand Dats. Some of the ancient Families have affected the Title of Prince, and have called their bran∣ches, Princes of the Blood; and tho the Cornaro's have done this more than any other, yet ohers upon the ac∣count of some Principalities, that their Ancestors had in the Islands of the Archipelago, have also affected those vain Titles: But the Inquisitors have long ago obliged them, to lay aside all those high Titles; and such of them as boast too much of their blood, find the dislke which that brings on them very sensibly; for whensoe∣ver they pretend to any great Imployments, they find themselves alwayes exluded. When an Election of Am∣bassadors was proposed, or of any of the chief Oices, it was wont to be made in those terms, that the Counil must chuse one of its Principal Members for such an im∣ployment: But because this lookt like a term of Di∣stinction among the Nobility, they changed it five and twenty years ago; and instead of Principal, they use now the term Honourable, which comprehends the whole body of their Nobility, without any distinction. It is at Venice, in the Church, as well as in the State, that the Head of the Body hath a great Title; and particu∣lar Honours done him; whereas in the mean while this is a
meer Pageantry, and under these big words there is lod∣ged only a ligt shadow of Authority; for their Bishop has the glorious Title of Patriarch, as well as the Duke is cal∣ed their Prince, and his Serenity, and hath his name stampt upon their Coyn; so the Patriarch with all this high Title, hath really no Authority: For not only Saint Mark's Church is intirely exempted from his jurisdiction, and is immediately subject to the Duke, but his Authority is in all other things so subject to the Senate, and so regula∣ted by them, that he hath no more power, than they are pleased to allow him: So that the Senate is as really the supream Governour over all persons, and in all cau∣ses, as the Kings of England have pretended to be in their own Dominions since the Reformation: But besides all this, the Clergy of Venice have a very extraordinary sort of Exemption, and are a sort of a body like a Presbytery in∣dependent of the Bishop: The Curats are chosen by the Inhabitants of every Parish, and this makes that no Noble Venetian is suffered to pretend to any Curay; for they think it below that dignity, to suffer one of their body, to engage in a competition with one of a lower order, and to run the hazard of being rejected, I was told, the manner of those Elections was the most scandalous thing possible; for the several Candidates appear on the day of Election, and set out their own Merits, and de∣fame the other Pretenders in the sowlest Language, and in the most scurrilous manner imaginable; the secrets of all their Lives are publisht in most reproachful terms, and no∣thing is so abject and ridiculous, that is not put in practice on those occasions: There is a sort of an Association among the Crats for judging of their common concerns, and some of the Laity of the several Parishes assist in those Courts, so that here is a real Presbytery. The great Libertinage, that is so undecently practised by most sorts of people at Venice, extends it self to the Clergy to such a degree, that tho Ignorance and Vice, seem the only in∣delible Characters, that they carry generally over all Italy, yet those appear here in a much more conspicuous man∣ner
than elsewhere; and upon these popular elections all comes out. The Nuns of Venice have been under much scandal for a great while; there are some Nunnerys that are as famous for their strictness and exactness to their Rules, as others are for the Liberties they take: chiefly those of Saint Zachary and Saint Laurence, where none but Noble Venetians are admitted, and where it is not so much as pretended, that they have retired for Devotion; but it is owned to be done meerly, that they might not be too great a Charge to their Family: They are not vail∣ed, their neck and breast is bare, and they receive much company: but that which I saw, was in a publick Room, in which there were many Grills for several Parlors, so that the conversation is very confused; for there being a different company at every Grill, and the Italians spea∣king generally very loud, the noise of so many loud Talkers, is very disagreeable. The Nuns talk much, and very ungracefully, and allow themselves a liberty in Rallying, that other places could not bear. About four years ago the Patraiarch intended to bring in a Reform into those Houses; hut the Nuns of S. Laurence, with whom he began, told him plainly, they were Noble Ventians, who had chosen that way of life as more convenient for them, but they would not subject themselves to his Re∣gulations; yet he came and would shut up their house, so they went to set fire to it; upon which the Senate interposed, and ordered the Patriarch to desist. There is no Christian State in the World, that hath expressed a Jealousie of Church mens getting into the publick Coun∣cils so much as the Venetins: for as a Noble Venetian, that goes into Orders, loses thereby his right of going to vote in the great Council; so when any of them are pro∣moted to be Cardinals, the whole kinred and family must (during their lives) withdraw from the great Council, and are also incapable of all imployments: And by a clause, which they added when they received the Inqusi∣tion, which seemed of no great consequence, they have made it to become a Court absolutely subject to them;
for it being provided, that the Inquisitors should do nothing but in the presence of such as should be Deputed by the Senate, to be the Witnesses of their proceedings, those Deputies either will no come but when they think fit; or will not stay longer than they are pleased with their proceedings; so that either their absence, or their withdraw∣ing, dissolves the Court: for a Citation cannot be made, a Witness cannot be examined, nor the lea point of Form carried on, if the Deputies of the Senate a not present: and thus it is, that tho there is a Court of I∣quisition at Vnice, yet there is scarce any person brough into trouble by it; and there are many of the Protesta Religion that live there without any trouble: and tho there is a Congregation of them there, that hath their exercises of Religion very regularly, yet the Senate gives them no trouble. It is true, the Hosty's not being carried about in Procssion, but secretly by the Priest to the Sick, makes that this uneasy discrimination of Protesta and Papist, doth not offer it self here, as in other places; for the straitness of the streets, and the Channals through which one must go almost every foot, makes that this could not be done in Venice as it is elsewhere; and from Ve∣nie this Rule is carried over their whole Territory, tho the like Reason doth not hold in the Terra Firma. The Vene∣tians are generally ignorant of the matters of Religion to  scandal, and they ae as unconcerned in them, as they are Strangers to them; so that all that vast pomp in their Ceremonies, and wealth in their Churches, is affected ra∣ther as a point of Magnificence, or a matter of Emulation among Families, than that Superstition hath here such a power over the Spirits of the People, as it hath else∣where: for the Athesm that is received by many here, is the dullest, and cousest thing that can be imagined. The young Nobility are so generally corrupted in their Morals, and so given up to a most supine Ignorance o all sort of knowledge, that a man cannot easily imagi to what a height this is grown; and for Military Co∣rage,
there is scarce so much as the Ambition of being thought brave remaining among the greater part of them. It seemed to me a strange thing, to see the Bro∣lio, so full of graceful young Senators and Nobles, when there was so glorious a War on foot with the Turks; but instead of being heated in point of Honour to hazard tir lives, they rather think it an extravagant piece of Folly, for them to go and hazard it, when a little Money can hire Strangers, that do it on such easie term; and thus their Arms are in the hands of strangers, while they stay at home managing their Inrigues in the Broglio, and dissol∣ving their spirits among their Courtisans. And the Repu∣tation of their Service is of late years so muh sunk, that it is very strange to see so many come to a service so decryed, where there is so little care had of the Soul∣diers, and so little regard had to the Officers; the Arreas are so slowly pay'd, and the Rewards are so scantly distri∣buted, that if they do not change their Maxims, they may come to feel this very sensibly; for as their Subjects are not acquainted with Warlike matters, so their Nobi∣liy have no sort of Ambition that way, and strangers are extreamly disgusted. It is chiefly to the conjuncture of affairs hat hey owe their Safety; for the Feebleness of all their Neighbours, the Turk, the Emperour, the Kng of Spin, the Ppe, and the Duke o Mantua, pre∣serves them from the apprehension of an Invasion; and the Quarrels, and Degeneracy of their Subjects, save thm from the Fears of a Revolt; but a formidable Neighbour would put them hard to it. One great Ocasion of the Degneracy of the Italians, and in particular of the Venetian Nobility, is a Maxim that hath been taken up for some considerable time, that for the preservation of their Famili, it is fit tat only one of a Famil should marry; to which I will not add, that it is generally be∣lieved, that the Wife is in common to the whole Fami∣ly. By this means the younger Brothers, that have Ap∣pointments for ife, and that have no Families that come from them, are not stirred up by any Ambition to signaize
themselves, or to make Families, and so they give way to all the Laziness of Luxury, and are quite enervated by it. Whereas the best Services done in other State, flows from the Necessities as well as the Aspirings of youn∣ger Brothers, or their Families, whose blood qualifis them to pretend, as well as their Pride and Necessities push them on, to acquire first a Reputation, and the a Fortune: But all this is a Mystery to the Venetians, who apprehend so much from the active Spirits of a necessitou Nobility, that to lay those to sleep, they incourage them in all those things that may blunt and depress the Minds; and youth naturally hates Letters as much as it loves Pleasure, when it is so far from being restrained, that it is rather pushed on to all the Licentiousness of unli∣mitted Disorders. Yet I must add one thing, that tho Venice, is the place in the whole World, where pleasure is most studied, and where the youth have both the greatest Wealth, and the most leisure to pursue it; yet it is the place that I ever saw, where true and innocent Pleasure is the least under∣stood; in which I will make a little Digression, that perhaps will not be unpleasant. As for the Pleasure of Friendship, or Marriage, they are Strangers to them; for the horrible distrust, in which they all live, of one another, makes; that it is very rare to find a Friend in Italy; but most of all in Venice: and tho we have been told of several Stories of celebrated Friendships there, yet these are now very rare. As for their Wives, they are bred to so much ignorance, and they converse so little, that they know nothing but the dll Superstition on Holy∣dayes, in which they stay in the Churhes as long as they can, and so prolong the little Liberty they have of going abroad on those dayes, as Children do their Hours of play: They are not imployed in their Dome∣stick Affairs, and generally they understand no sort of Work; so that I was told, that they were the insipidest Creatures imaginable: They are perhaps as vitious as in other places, but it is among them downright Lewdnes;
for they are not drawn into it, by the intanglements of Amour, that inveigle and lead many persons much far∣ther than they imagined or intended at first; but in them, the first step, without any preamble or preparative, is downright beastliness. And an Italian that knew the World well, said upon this matter a very lively thing to me, he said, their jealousy made them restrain their Daughters, and their Wives so much, that they could have none of those Domestick Entertainmnts of Wit, Conversation, and Friendship, that the French or En∣glish have at home: It is true, those he said hazard a little the Honour of their Families by that Liberty; but the Italians, by their excessive Caution, made that they had none of the true Delights of a Married Stae; and not∣withstanding all their uneasy jealousy, they were still in danger of a contraband Nobility; therefore he thought they would do much better to hazard a little, when it would produce a certain satisfaction, than to watch so anxiously, and thereby have an insipid Companion, in∣sted of a lively Friend, tho she might perhaps have some ill moments. As for their houses, they have nothing con∣venient at Venice; for the Architecture is almost all the same▪ one Stair-case, a Hall that runs along the Body of the House, and Chambers on both hands; but there are no Apartments, no Closet or Backstairs; so that in houses that are of an excessive Wealth, they have yet no sort of convenience; Their Bedsteads are of Iron, because of the vermin that their moisture produces, the bottoms are of boards, upon which they lay so many Quilts, that it is a huge step to get up to them; their great Chairs are all up∣right, without a slope in the back, hard in the bottom, and the wood of the Arms is not covered: they mix Water with their Wine in their Hogsheads, so that for above half the year, the Wine is either dead or four: they do not lea∣ven their bread, so that it is extream heavy, and the Oven is too much heated, so that the Crum is as Dough, when the Crust is as hard as a Stone; in all Inns they boil meat first before it is roasted, and thus as indeed they
make it tender, so it is quite tastless, and insipid: And as for their Land-carriage, all Lombary over, it is extream inconvenient; for their Coches are fastned to the pearch, which makes them as uneasie as a Cart: It is true, they begin to have at Rome, and Napls, Coaches that are fastned to a sort of double Pearch, that runs along the bottom of the Coach of both sides, which are so th, that they ply to the motion of the Coach, and are ex∣tream easy, but those are not known in omardy▪ and besides this, their Caleshes are open, so that one is exposed to the Sun and Dust in Summer, and to e Weather in Wnter: But tho they are covered as ours are, on the oher side of the Appenins, yet I saw none that were covered in Lombardy: and thus by an enumeratio of many of the innocent pleasures, and Coneniences o Life, it appears, that the Venetins pursue so violentl Forbidden Pleasures, that they know not how to find out that which is allowable. Their constant practices i the Broglio is their chief business, where those that are ne∣cessitous, are suing for imployments of Advantage, and those that are sull of Wealth, take a sort of pleasure in cros∣sing their pretentions, and in imbroiling maters. The Wall in which the Nobility tread, is left to them: for no ohe dare walk among them; and they change the side of the square of Saint Mark as the Sun and the weather direct them. Perhaps a derivation that Mr. Patin gave me of Broglio from the Greek Perbolaon, a little corrupted, is not forced; and since they make all their paties, and manage all their intrigues in those Wolks, I am apt to think that Broils, Brovillons and Imbroilments are all deived from the Agitations that are managed in those Walks. As for the last created Nobility of Vnie, I came to know some particulars that I have not yet seen in any Books, which I suppose will not be unacceptable to you. It is certain, that if the Venetans could have foreseen a the beginning of the War of Candy, the vast Expence in whih he length of it ingaged them, they would have abandoned the Isle, rather than have wasted thei
Treasure, and debased their Nobility. This last was extream sensible to them; for as the Dignity of the rank they hold, is so much the more Eminent as it is restrained to a small number; so all the best Imployments and Ho∣nours of the State belonging to this Body, the admitting such a number into it, as must rise out of seventy eght Families, was in effect the sharing their Inheritance among so many adopted Brothers. This had been less infamous, if they had communicated that Honour only to the ancient Citizens of Venice, or to the Nobility of those States that they have subdued in the Terra Firm; for as there are many Citizens, who are as ancient as the Nobility, only their Ancestors not hapning to be of that Conil, that assumed the Governmet about our hundre years ago, they have not been raised to that Honour, so there had been no Infamy in creating some of them to be of the Nobility. It had been also brought under consultation long ago, upon the Reduction of those State in the Ter∣ra Firma, whether it was not advisable, according to the Maxims of the Ancient Romans, to communicate that Dignity to some of their chief Families, as being the surest Way to give some contentment to those States, it being also a real, as well as a cheap Secu∣rity, when the chief Families in those Cities, were admitted to a share in all the Honours of the Repu∣blick. It is true, some of the Nobility of those States thought they had Honour enough by their Birth, and so Zambara of Bresia refused to accept an Honour from those that had robbed his Countrey of its Liberty, yet his posterity are now of anoher mind; for hey came and bought in this last sale of Honour that which was freely offered to their Ancestor, and was rejected by him. When the Senate found it self extreamly pressed for Mo∣ney, during the War, it was at first proposed, that some Families, to the number of five, might be Eno∣bled; they offering sixty thousand Ducats if they were Venetians, and seventy thousand if they were Strangrs:
There was but one person that opposed this in the Snate, so it being passed there, was presented to the Great Coun∣cil; and there it was like to have passed without any di∣ficulty, but one person opposed it with so much vigor, that tho the Duke desired him to give over his Opposition, since the Necessities of the War required a great supply, yet he persisted still; and tho one of the Savii set forh with Tears the extremities to which the State was reduced, he still insisted, and fell upon one Conceit that turned the whole Counil; he said, they were not sure if five Per∣sons could be found, that would purchase that Honour at such a rate, and then it would be a vast Disgrace, to expose the offer of Nobility first to sale; and then to the Affront, of finding no Buyers when it was offered to be sold; and by this means he put by the Resolution for that time: But then another Method was taken, that was more honourable, and was of a more extended Conse∣quence. Labia was the first that presented a Petition to the Great Council, setting forth his Merits towards the Repu∣blik, and desiring that he might be thought worthy to offer a hundred thousand Duats toward the service of the State: this was understood to be the asking to be made Nobl at that price. Delfino said, he thought every man might be well judged worthy, to offer such an assistance to the Publick, and that such as brought that supply, might expect a suitable acknowledgement from the Sena∣te, who might afterwards of their own accord bestow that Honour on those that expressed so much Zeal for the Publick: and this would in some fort maintain that de∣gree, which would be too much debased▪ if it were thus bought and sold: but it seems the Purchasers had no mind to part with their Money, and to leave the Reward to the Gratitude of the Council, so the Petition was granted in plain terms: and the Nobility so acquired was not only to descend to the Children of him that was enobled; but to his Brothers, and the whole Family to such a degree. After Labia, a great many more came with the like Pe∣titions, and it was not unpleasant to see in what terms
Merchants, that came to buy this Honour set forth their Merits, which were, that they had taken care to furnish the Republick with suh things as were necessaty for its pre∣servation. There was a sort of a Triumirat ormed, of a Iew, a Greek, and an Italian, who were the Brokers, and found out the Merchants: and at last brought down the price from a hundred thousand, to sixty thousand Ducats; and no other qualifications were required, if they had money enough: For when Correge said to the Duke, that he was afraid to ask that Honour for want of Merit, the Duke asked him, if he had a hundred thousand Ducats? and when the other answered, the Sam was rea∣dy; the Duke told him, that was a great Mrit. At last seventy eight purhased this Honour, to the great regret of Laebia: who said, that if he had imagined, that so many would have followed him in that demand, he would have bid so high for it, that it should have been out of heir power to have done it. It is true, many of the Purchasers were Ancient and Noble Families; but many others were not only Merchants, but were of the lowest sort of them: who as they had inriched themselves by Trade, did then impoverish themselves by the acquisition of an Honour, that as it obliged them to give over their Trade, and put them in a higher Way of living, so it hath not brought them yet in any Advantage to ballance that Lofs: for they are so much despised, that they are generally excluded, when they compete with the ancient Nobility; tho this is done with that Discretion, that the old Families do not declare always against the new; for that would throw the new into a Faction against them, which might be a great prejudice to them; for the new, are much more nume∣rous than the old. Another great Prjudice that the R∣pblik feels by this great Promotion, is, that the Chief Families of the Citizens of Vnice, who had been log practised in the Affairs of State, and out of whom the Envoyes, the Secretaries of State, and the Chancellour, that is the Head of the Citizens, as well as the Duke is the Head of the Nobility, are to be chosen, having purcha∣sed
the Chief Honour of the State, there is not now a sufficient Number of capable Citizens left for serving the Stte in those Imployments; but this defect will be re∣dest with the help of a little time. But if this increase of the Nbility, hath leslened he dignity of the ancient Fa¦milies, thee is a Regulaion made in this age, that stl preserves a considerable distinction of Authority in their hands. Crimes against the State, when committed by any of the Nobility, were alwayes judged by the Inqui∣sitors, and the Council of Ten; but all other crimes were judged by the Council of Forty. But in the year 1624. one of the Nobles was accused of Peculat, committed in one of their Governments, and the Avogadore, in the plea∣ding▪ as he set forth his crime, called him a Rogue and a Robber: yet tho his Crimes were maniest, there being but six and twenty Iudges present, twelve only condem∣ned him, and fourteen acquitted him; this gave gre Ofence; for tho he was acquitted by his Judges, his Crimes were evident, so that his fame could not be resto∣red: for the Depositions of the Witnesses, and the Avo∣gadores (or the Attorney Generals) charge, were heard by the people; so it was proposed to make a Difference between the Nobility, and the other Subjects; and since all Tryals before the Forty were publick, and the Tryal before the Ten were in Secret, it seemed fit to remit the Nobility to be tryed by the Tn▪ Some foresaw, that this would tend to a Tyranny, and raise the Dignity of the an∣cient Families (of whom the Council of Ten is alwayes com∣posed) too high; therefore they opposed it upon this ground, that since the Counil of Forty sent out man Orders to the Governours, it would very muh lesse their Authority, if they were not to be the Judges of those, who were obliged to receive their Orders: but to qua∣lify this Opposition, a Proviso was made, that reserved to the Coucil of Forty a Power to judge of the Obedience that was given to their Orders; bu all other Accus∣tions of the Nobility were remitted to the Counil of Ten▪ and the Body of the Nobility were so pleased with this di∣stinction,
that was put between them and the other Sub∣jects, that they did not see, that this did really inslae them so muh the more, and brought them under more danger; since those who judge in secret have a freer scope to their Passions, than those whose proceedings are Pu∣blik, and so are in effect judged by the Publick, which is often a very effectual restraint uon the Judges hem∣selves. But the Council of Ten being gnerally in the hands of the great Families; whereas those of all sorts are of the Council of Frty, which was the chief Iudicatory of the State, and is much Ancienter than shat of Tn: it had been much more wisely done of them to have been still Judged by the Forty: And if they had thought it for their Honour, to have a diference made in the way of Judg∣ing the Nobiity, and the other Subjects, it had been more for their Security, to have brought their Tryals to this, that whereas the Forty judge all other Offenders with Open Doors, the Nobility should be judged the Doors being shut, which is a thing they very muh desire now, but without any hope of ever obtaining it. For this powr of Judging the Nbility, is now considered as the Right of the Ten; and if any man would go about to change it, the Inquisitors would be pehaps very quck wih him as a Mover of Sedition, and be, in tht case, both Judge and Party; Yet the Inquisitors being apprhensive of the distast, that this might breed in the Body of the Nobility, have made a sort of Regulation, tho it doth not amount to much; which is, that the Nobility shall be judged be∣fore the Council of Ten for attrocious Cases, such as Matters of State, the Robbing the Publick, and other enormous Crimes; but that for all other matters, they are to be judged by the Forty: yet the Counil of Ten draws all Cases before them, and none dare dispute wih them. But this leads me to say a litle to you of that part of hs Constitution, which is so muh censured by Stran∣gers; but is really both the greatest Glory, and the chief Security of this Republick, which is, the unimitted
Power of the Inquisitors, that extends not only to the Chief of the Nobility, but to the Duke himself, who is so subject to them, that they may not only give hi severe Reprimands, but search his Papers, make h Process, and in conclusion, put him to death, witho being bound to give an Account of their proceedings, except to the Council of Ten: This is the Dread not onl of all the Subjects, but of the whole Nobility, and o all that bear Office in the Republick; and makes the greatest among them tremble, and so obligeth them  an exact conduct. But tho it is not to be denied, tha upon some occasions, they may have been a little too sud∣den, particularly, in the known story of Focarini;  such unjustifiable Serverities have occured so seldom, that as the wisdom of this body in making, and preser∣ving such an Institution, canno be enough admired, so the dextrous conduct of those who manage this  Trut, so as not to force the body to take it out of the hands, is likewise highly to be wondered at. In short, the Insolence, the Factions, the Revenges, the Necessitie and Ambition, that must needs possess a great many Mem∣bers of so vast a body, as is the Nobility of Venice; mu have thrown them often into many fatal Convulsions,  it were not for the Dread in which they all stand of ths Court; which hath so many Spies abroad, chiefly among the Gondaliers, who cannot fail to discover all the secre Commerce of Venice: besides the secret Advices that a thrown in at so many of those Lons mouths, that are i several places of St. Mark's Palace, within which there are Boxes that are under the keys of the Inquisitors; so th it is scarce possible for a man to be long in any design ∣gainst the State, and not to be discovere by them▪ And when they find any in fault, they are so inexorable, and so quick, as well as severe in their Justice, that he very fear of this is so effectual a restraint, that perhap the long preservation of Venice, and of its Liberty, is owing to this single piece of their Constitution. A the Inquisitors are persons generally so distinguished fo
their Merit, who must be all of different Families, and their Authority lasts so short a while, that the Advan∣tages of this vast Authority, that is lodged with them, are constant and visible; whereas the unhappy instances of their being imposed on, and carrying their suspicions too far, are so few, that whenever the Nobility grows weary of this Yoke, and throws it off, one may rekon the Glory and Prosperity of Vnice at an end. It was terribly attackt not long ago by Cornaro, when Ierom Cornaro was put to death for his correspondonce with Spain; he was not near akin to the great Family of that name, yet the Family thought their Honour was so much toucht when one of its remotest branches wa condemned of Treason, that they offered a hun∣dred thousand Crowns to have saved him, and by consequence to have perserved the Family from that In∣famy; but tho this was not accepted; (for he suffered, s he well deserved) yet it was so visible, that none of the Family were concerned in his Crimes, that it did not at all turn to their Prejudice. But upon the first occaion that offered it self after that, to quarrel with the proceed∣ings of the Inquisitors, they laid hold on it, and aggra∣vated the matter extreamly, and moved for the limiting of their Authority; but the Great Council was wiser than to toucht so sacred a part of the Government, so they retain their Power very intire, but they manage it with all possible Caution. A Foreigner that hath been many years in their service, told me, that the Stories with which Strangers were frighted at the Arbitrary Power that was rested in those Inquisitors, were slight things, in com∣parison of the Advantages that they found from it: and alter eleven years spent in their service, he said, he ne∣ver was so much as once sent for to receive a Reprimand from them. And if the Nobelity, that have any Com∣merce with Strangers, confess it sincerely to the Inquisi∣tors, they are in no danger by it; but if they conceal it, or any main Circumstances of it, their Process will be soon dispatched. These are the most remarkable things
that I could pick up, during my stay at Venice.  have avoided to say any thing relating to their se∣veral Councils, Offiers, and Iudicatories, or to the other parts of their Government, which are to be found in all Books; and the Forms by which they give their Votes by Ballot are so well known, that it were an abusing of your time, to inlarge my se concerning them; nor was I suffiiently informed, concerning the particulars of the Sale of Nobilty that is now on foot, since this last War with the Turks, which hath made them willing to take up once again this easie way of raising of Mony: No could I give credit to that of which a person of  Eminence there assured me, that there was a Po∣soner General in Veice, that had a Salary, and  imployed by the Inpuisitors to dispatch those, again whom a publick proceeding would make too great  noise; this I could not believe, tho my Author pro∣tested, that the Brother of one that was solicited t accept of the imployment discovered it to him. Thee is no place in the World where Strangers live wit more freedom; and I was amazed to see so litt Exactness among the Searhers of the Customhouse for though we had a Mullets-load of Trunks, an Portmantles, yet none offered to ask us, either co∣ming or going, what we were, or what we ca∣ried with us. But the best and Noblest Entertainmen that Venie afforded while I was there, was the Company of Mr. de la Hay, the Frenh Ambass∣dor, who as he hath spent his whole life in public Embassies, so he hath acquired so great a Kno∣ledge of the World, with so true a Judgment, an so obliging a Civility, that he may well pass  a Pattern; an it is no wonder to see him  ingaged in a constant succession of publick Imploy∣ments; and his Lady is so wonderful a person, th I pay them both but a very small part of wh
I owe them, in this Acknowledgment, which I udge my self bound to make of their extraordinary Civilities to me: and indeed, without the Advan∣age of such a Rendezvous as I had there, a fort∣nights stay at Vnice had been a very teious mat∣er. From Venice we went again to Padu; From hence to Rovigo, which is but a small Town, and so to the Po, which divides the Territory of the Rpublick from the Ferrarese▪ which is now the Popes Country; and here one sees what a difference a good and a bad Government makes in a Coun∣ry; for tho the soil is the same on both sides of he River, and the Ferrarese was once one of the eautifullest spots of all Italy, as Ferrara was one o its best Tows, while they had Princes of their own, who for a course of some Ages were Prin∣es of such Eminent Vertue, and of so Heroical a Nobleness, that they were really the Fathers of heir Country; nothing can be imagined more changed than all this is now. The soil is abando∣ned, and uncultivated, nor were there hands enough so much as to mow their Grass, which we saw withering in their Meadows to our no small won∣der. We were amazed to see so rich a soil thu forsaken of its Inhabitants, and much more when we passed through tat vast Town, which by its extent shews what it was about an age ago, and is now so much deserted, that there are whole sides of Streets without Inhabitants; and the Poverty of the Place appears signally in the Churches, which are mean, and poorly adorned; for the supersti∣tion of Italy is so ravenous, and makes such a pro∣gress in this Age, that one may justly take the mea∣ures of the Wealth of any place from the Churches. The Superstition, or Vanity of this Age, is so much beyon that of the past (tho the contrary to this is commonly believed) that all the vast Buildings of great Chur∣ches
or rich Convents, and the surprising Wealth that appears in them on Festival dayes, are the Donatives of the present Age; so that it is a vulgar error that some have taken up, who fancy, that Superstition is at a stand, i not in a Decay; unless it be acknowledged, that the cra of the Priests hath opened to them a new method to sup∣port their riches, when the old ones of Purgatory, and Indulgences were become less effectual in an Age of more knowledge, and better inlightned; and that is, to ingage men to an Emulation and a Vanity in Enriching the Churches, as much as other Italians have in the enrichin their Palaces; so that as they have a Pleasure as well as  Vanity, in seeing so much dead wealth in their houses, they have translated the same humour to their Churche: and the vanity of the present Age, that believes little or nothing of those contrivances, of Purgatory, or the like, produceth the same, if not greater effects, in the building and enriching their Churches. and so carries it▪ in Expence and Prodigality, from the superstition of the former Ages, that believed every thing. But to return Ferrara, I could not but ask all I saw, how it came, that so rich was so strangely abandoned? some said, the Air was become so unhealthy, that those who sta in it were very short lived; but it is well known, th fourscore years ago it was well peopled▪ and the ill Air  occasioned by the want of Inhabitants; for there no being people to drain the ground, and to keep the Ditche clean, this makes that there is a great deal of water th lis on the ground and rots, which infects the Air in th same manner, as is observed in that vast and rich,  uninhabited Champaign of Rome; so that the ill Air is t effect, rather than the cause, of the dispeopling of t Popes Dominions. The true cause is the Severity of the ∣vernment, and the heavy Taxes, and frequent Confiso∣tions, by which the Nephews of several Popes, as the have devoured many of the Families of Ferrara, so the have driven away many more. And this appears mo visibly, by the different State as well as the Constitutio
of Bologna, which is full of people that abound in Wealth; and as the Soil is extream rich, so it is cultivated with all due care. For Bologna delivered it self to the Ppedom upon a Capitulation, by which there are many Priviledges reserved to it: Crimes there are only punished in the perfons of those who commit them; but there are no confiscations of Estates; and tho the Authori∣ty, in criminal matters, belongs to the Pope, and is managed by a Legate and his Officers; yet the Civil Go∣vernment, the Magistracy, and the power of Judicature in Civil matters, is intrely in the hands of the State: And by this Regulation it is, that as the Riches of Bologna amazes a Stranger, it neither being on a Navigable Ri∣ver, by which it is not capable of much Trade, nor being the Center of a Soveraignty, where a Court is kept; so the Taxes that the Popes fetch from thence are so considera∣ble, that he draws much more from this place of Liberty; than from those where his Authority is unlimited and absolute, but that are by those means almost quite aban∣doned: for the greatness of a Prince or State rising from the numbers of the Subjects, those Maxims that reain the Subjects, and that draw Strangers to come among them, are certainly the truest Maxims for advancing the greatness of the Master. And I could not but with much scorn observe the folly of some Frenchmen, who made use of this Argument to shew the Greatness of their Na∣tion, that one found many Frenchmen in all places to which one could come, whereas there were no English nor Dutch, no Switzers, and very few Germans; but his is just contrary to the right consequence that ought to be drawn from this observation. It is certain, that few leave their Country, and go to settle elsewhere, if they are not pressed with so much uneasiness at home, that they cannot well live among their Friends and Kindred; so that a mild Government drives out no swarms: whereas it is the sure mark of a severe Government that weakens it self, when many of the Subjects find it so hard to subsist at home, that they are forced to seek
that abroad, which they would much rather do in thei own Country, if Impositions and other Severities, di not force them to change their Habitations. But to return to the Wealth of Bologna, it appea in every Corner of the Town, and all ound it, tho i¦scituation is not very faourable; for it lyes at the foot of the Appenins, on the North-side, and is extream cold in Winter. The Houses are built as at Padua and Ber, so that one walks all the Town over, covered under Piz∣za's; but the walks here are both higher and larger than any were else, there are many Noble Palaes all over the Town, and the Churches and Convents are incre∣dibly rich: within the Town, the richest are the Domi∣nians, which is the chief House of the Order, where their Founders Body is laid in one of the best Chapp of Italy: and next to them are the Franciscans, the Servites, the Iesuites, and the Cannons Regular of St. Salvator. In this last there is a Scrowl of the Hebre Bible, which tho it is not the tenth part of the Bible, they fancy to be the whole Bible: and they were made believe by some Iew, that hath no doubt sold it at a high rate, that it was written by Ezra's own hand; and this hath past long for current: but the Manuscript is only a fine Copy, like those that the Iews use in their Synagogues, that may be perhaps three or four hundred Years old: that part of it on which I cast my eye, was the Book of Esther; so by the bulk of the Scrowl, I judged it to be the collection of those small books of the Old Te∣ment that the Iews set after the Law; but those of the House fancy they have a great treasure in it, and perhap such Iews as have seen it are willing to laugh at their igno∣rance, and so suffer them to go on in their Error. The chief Church in the Town is St. Petrone's, and there one sees the curious and exact Meridonal-line, which th rare Astronomer Cassini laid along a great part of the Pavement in a ras Circle: it marks the true point of miday from June to Ianuary, and is one of the best Per∣formances that perhaps the World ever saw. In the grea
square before the Church, on the one side of whih is the Legates Palace, among other Statues one surprized me much, it was Pope Ioans, which is so named by the peo∣ple of the Town; it is true, the learned men say▪ it is the Statue of Pope Nicolas the IV. who had indeed a youthly and womanish face. But as I looked at this Statue very attentively, through a little prospect that I carried with me, it appeared plainly to have the face of a young Woman, and was very unlike that of Pope Nicolas the IV. which is in St. Maria Maggiore at Rome: For the Statue of that Pope, tho it hath no beard, yet hath an age in it, that is very muh different from the Statue at Bologna. I do not build any thing on this Statue; for I do not believe that Story at all; and I my self saw in England a Manuscript of Martinus Polonus, who is one of the ancient Authors of this matter, which did not seem to be written long after the Authors time, in it this Story is not in the Text, but is added on the margin by another hand. On the Hill above Bologna stands the Monastery of St Michael in Bosco, which hath a most charming scituation and prospect, and is one of the best Monsteries in Italy; it hath many Courts, and one that is Cloistered, and is Octangular; whih is so nobly painted in Fresco, that it is great pity to see such work exposed to the Air: All ws retouhed by the famous Guido Reni, yet it is now again much decayed: The Dormitory is very Magnifient; the Chappel is little, but very fine; and the Stalls are richly carved. On the other side of Bologna, in the Bottom, the Carthusians have also a very rich Monastery: Four miles from Bo∣logna there is a Madona of Saint Lukes; and because many go thither in great Devotion, there is a Portio Build∣ing, which is already carried on almost half way; It is walled towards the North, but stands on Pillars to the South, and is about twelve foot broad, an fifteen foot high; it is carried on very vigorously; for in eigh or ten years the half is built, so that in a little time, the whole
will very probably be finished; and this may prove the be¦ginning of many such like Portico's in Ialy; for things of this kind want only a beginning, and when they are once set on foot, they do quickly spread themselves in a Cou∣try that is so intirely subdued by Superstition, and the Ar∣tifices of their Priests. In Bologna they reckon there are se∣venty thousand persons. I saw not one of the chief Glo∣ries of this place; for the famous Malphigius was out of Town while I was there. I saw a Play there, but the Ps was so bad, the Farces so rude, and all was so ill acted, that I was not a little amazed to see the Company expres so great a Satisfaction in that which would have been hiss'd off the stage either in England or Frane. Fom B∣logna we go eight miles in a Plain, and then we ingage into that range of Hills that carry the name of Appens, tho that is strictly given only to one that is the highest: All the way to Florence this track of Hills continues, th there are several bottoms, and some considerable little Towns in them, but all is up hill and down-hill, an Florence it self, is just at the bottom of the last Hill. The high-ways all along these Hills are kept in so very goo case, that in few of the best inhabited Countrys doth one find the High-wayes so well maintained, as in those for∣saken Mountains: but this is so great a Passage, that  that are concerned in it, find their account, in the expence they lay out upon it. On the last of these Hills, tho in a little bottom, in the midst of a Hill, stands Pratoli, one of the great Dukes Palaces, where the retreat  Summer must be very agreeable; for the Air of thos Mountains is extream thin and pure. The Gardens in Italy are made at a great cost; the Statues and Fountains a very rich and noble; the Grounds are well laid out; a the Walks are long and even: But as they have no G∣vel, to give them those firm and beautiful walks that we have in England, so the constant greenness of the  doth so much please them, that they, preferring the sigh to the smell, have their Gardens so high sented by  made with them, that there is no pleasure to walk
them; they also lay their walks so between Hedges, that one is much confined in them. I saw first in a Gar∣dn at Vinenza, that which I found afterwards in many Gardens in Italy, which was extream convenient, there wen a course of Water ound about the Walls, about a foot from the ground is a channel of stone, that went along the side of the Wall; and in this there were holes so made, that a pipe of white Iron or Wood put to them, conveyed the Water to such plants, as in dry seaon, needed watring, and a Cock set the Water a running in this course, so that without the trouble of carrying Wa∣ter, one person could easily manage the watring of a great Garden. Florene is a beautiful and noble Town, full of great Palaces, rich Churches, and stately Convents. The streets are paved in imitation of the old Roman High∣wayes, with great Sone, bigger than our common pave∣ment Stone, but much thicker, which are so hollow∣ed, in their joynings to one another, that horses find fastning enough to their feet: There are many Statues and Fountains in the streets, so that in every corner one meets with many agreeable Objects. I will not entertain you with a description of the great Dukes Palace and Gardens, or of the old Palace, and the Gllery that joyns to it, and of the vast Collection of Pictures, Statues, Cabinets, and other Curiosities, that must needs amaze every one that sees them: the Plate, and in particular, the Gold Plate, and the great Coach, are all such extraodinary things, that they would require a very copious description▪ if that had not been done so often, that it were to very little purpose to Copy what others have said: and these thigs are so exactly seen by every Traveller, that I can say nothing that is more particular of these subjects, han you will find in the common Itinerarys of all Travellers. The great Dome is a magnificent building, but the Fron∣tispiece to the great Gate is not yet made. The Cupulo, is after St. Peters, the greatest and highest that I saw in Italy; it is three hundred foot high, and of a vast com∣pass; and the whole Architecture of this Fabrick is very
singular, as well as regular. Only that which was in∣tended to ad to its Beauty, lessened it very much in my thoughts: for the Walls that are all of Marble, being of white and black Marble, laid in different figures and orders, looked too like a Livery, and had not that air of Nobleness which in my opinion becomes so glorious a Fabrk. The Baptistery, that stans before it, was a Noble Heathen Temple; is Gates of brass, are the best of ht sort that are in the World: There are so many Histo∣ry, so well represented in Bas Reliefs in them, with so much Exactness, the Wok is so natural, and yet so fine▪ that a curious man could find entertainement for many dayes, if he would examine the three Gates of this Tem∣ple with a critical exactness. The Annunciata, St. Marks, St. Croce, and St. Maria Novella, are Churches of great Beauty and vast Riches; but the Church and Chap∣pel of S. Laurence exceeds them all, as much in the Riches within, as it is inferiour to them in the outside, which is quite flea'd, (if I may so speak) but on design to give it a rich out-side of Marble. In a Chappel within this Church, the Bodies of the great Dukes lye deposited: till the famous Chappel is finished, But I was much scandalized to see Statues with Nudities here, which I do not remember to have seen any where else in Churches. I will not offer at a description of the Glorious Chappel, which as it is without doubt, the richest piece of build∣ing that perhaps the World ever saw, so it goes on so slowly, that tho there are alwayes many at work,  yet it doth not seem to advance proportionably to the num∣ber of the hands that are imployed in it. Among the Statues that are to be in it, there is one of the Virgin's, made by Michael Angelo, which represents her grief at the Passion of her Blessed Son, that hath the most life in it of all the Statues I ever saw. But the famous Lirary, that belongs to this Convent, took up more of my time than all the other Curiosities of Florence; for here is a col∣lection of many Manuscripts, most of them are Greek, that were gathered together by Pope Clement the VII and give
to his Country: there are very few Printed Books mixed with them; and those Books that are there, are so rare, that they are almost as curious as Manuscrips. I saw some of Virgls Pems in old Capitals. There is a Manu∣script, in which some parts both of Tacitus and Apuleius are written, and in one place, one in a different hand had writ, that he had compared those Manuscripts, and he adds a date to this in Olibrius's time, which is about twelve hundred Years ago. I found some dipthongs in it cast into one Letter, which surprized me; for I thought that way of writing them had not been so ancient: but that which pleased me most was, that the Library-keeper assured me, that one had lately found the famous Epistle of St. Chrysostome to Cesarius in Greek, in the end of a Volume full of other things, and not among the Manuscripts of that Fathers Books; of which they have a great many. He thought he remembred well the place where the Book stood; so we turned over all the Books that stood near it, but I found it not: he promised to look it out for me, if I came back that way: But I changing my design, and going back another way, could not see the bottom of this. It is true, the fa∣mous Magliabecchi, who is the Great Dukes Library-keeper, and is a person of most wonderful Civility, and full of Candor, as well as he is learned beyond imagi∣nation, assured me, that this could be no other than a mi∣stake of the Library-keepers; he said, such a discovery could not have been made, without making so much noise; that he must have heard of it. He added, there was not one man in Florence, that either understood Greek, or that examined Manuscripts; so that he assured me, I could not build on what an ignorant Library-keeper had told me: So I set down this matter as I found it, without building much on it. Florence is much sunk from what is was; for they do not reckon, that there are above fifty thousand ouls in it: and the other States, that were once great Republicks, such as Siena and Pisa, while they retained their Liberty, are now shrunk almost into nothing: It is certain, that all
three together, are now not so numerous, as any one of them was two hundred years ago. Legorn is full of peple; and all round Florence there are a great many Villages; but as one goes over Tuscany, it appears so dispeopled, that one cannot but wonder to find a Coun∣try, that hath been a Scene of so much Action, and so many Wars, now so forsaken, and so poor, and that in many places the Soil is quite neglected for want of hands to cultivate it; and in other places, where there are more people, they look so poor, and their Houses are such mise∣rable Ruins, that it is scarce accountable, how there should be so much Poverty in so rich a Country, which is all over full of Beggars: and here the stile of Begging was a li∣tle altered from what I found it in Lombardy; for where∣as there they begged for the sake of St. Anthony, here all begged for the Souls that were in Purgatory; and this was the stile in all the other parts of Italy, through which I passed. In short; the dispeopling of Tuscany, and most of the Principalities of Italy, but chiefly of the Popes Do∣minions, which are more abandoned than any other part of Italy, seemed to flow from nothing but the Severity of the Government; and the great Decay of Trade: For the greatest Trade of Italy being in Silk, the vast Impor∣tation of Silks that the East-India Companies bring into Europe, hath quite ruined all those that deal in this Manufacture: Yet this is not the chief Cause of the dis∣peopling of those rich Countrys; the Severity of the Tax▪ is the true Reason: notwithstanding all that Decay of Trade, the Taxes are still kept up. Beside this, the vast Wealth of the Convents, where the only people of Italy are to be found, that live not only at their Ease, but in great plenty and Luxury, makes many forsake all sort of Industry, and seek for a retreat in one of those Seats of Pleasure; so that the People do not increase fat enough to make a new race to come instead of those, whom a hard Government drives away. It must needs surprize an unattentive Traveller, to see not only the Venetian Territory, which is indeed a rich Country, but
the Bailiages of the Switzers, and the Coast of Ge∣noa so full of People, when Tuscany, the Patrimo∣ny, and the Kingdom of Naples, have so few Inha∣bitants. In the Coast of Genoa, there is for many miles as it were a constant tract of Towns and Vil∣lages, and all those are well peopled, tho they have scarce any Soil at all, lying under the Mountains, that are very barren, and that expose them to a most un∣easy Sun; and that they lie upon a boistrous Sea; that is almost alwayes in a Storm, and that affords very few fish: and yet the Gentleness of the Government draws such multitudes thither, and those are so full of Wealth, that Mony goes at two per cent. But on the other hand, to ballance this a little, so strange and wild a thing is the nature of Man, at least of Italians, that I was told, that the worst people of all Italy are the Genoeses, and the most generally corrupted in their Morals, as to all sorts of Vice; so that tho a severe Coernment and Slavery, are contrary to the nature of man, and to human Society, to Iu∣stice and Equity, and to that essential Equality that Nature hath made among men; yet on the other hand, all men cannot bear that Ease and Liberty that become the Human Nature. The superstition of Italy, and the great wast of Wealth that one sees in their Churhes, par∣ticularly those Prodigious Masses of Plate, with which their Altars are covered on Holydays, doth also sink their Trade extreamly; for Silver, being in Commerce, what blood is in the body, when so much of that is dead, and circulates no more; it is no wonder if such an extravasaion (if I may use so long and so hard a word) of Silver, occasions a great Deadness in Trade. I had almost forgot one remark, that I made in the last Hill of the Apenins, just above Florence, that I never saw such tall and big Cypresses any where as grew over all that Hill, which seemed a little strange, that Tree being apt to be starved by a cold Winter among us, and there the Winters are severe. All the
ways in Tuscany are very rugged, except on the side of the Arne. But the uneasiness of the Road is much qua∣lified by the great Care that is had of the Highways, which are all in very good case: The Inns are wretched; and ill furnished both for Lodging and Diet. This is the plague of all Italy, when once one hath passed the Appenns; for, except in the great Towns, one really suffers so much that way, that the Pleasure of Travelling is much abated by the Inconveniences that one meets in every Stage through which he passes. I am SIR, Yours.
THE FOURTH LETTER. From Rome, the 8th of December, 1685. I Am now in the last stage of my Voyage over Italy; for since my last from Florence, I have not only got hi∣ther, but have been in Naples; and have now satis∣fied my Curiosity so fully, that I intend to leave this place within a day or two, and go to Civita vecchia, and from thence by Sea to Marseilles; and so avoid an unplea∣sant Winters Journey over the Alps. It is true; I lose the sight of Turin, Genoa, and some other Courts: but tho I am told, these deserve well the pains of the Journey; yet when one rises from a great meal, no Delicacies, how much soever they might tempt him at another time, can provoke his appetite: So I confess freely, that the sight of Naples and Rome have so set my stomach that way, that the Curiosity of seeing new places is now very low with me; and indeed, these that I have of late seen are such, that places which at another time would please me much, would now make but a slight and cold Im∣pression. All the way from Florence, through the Great Dukes Country, looked so sad, that I concluded, it must be the most dispeopled of all Italy: but indeed, I changed my note when I came into the Popes Trritories, at Pont Centino, where there was a rich bottom, all unculti∣vated, and not so much as stocked with Cattle, But as I passed from M. Fiascone to Viterbo, this appeared yet more amazing; for a vast Champian Country lay almost
quite deserted. And that wide Town, which is of so great a compass, hath yet so few Inhabitants, and those look so poor and miserable, that the people in the ordinary Towns in Scotland, and in its worst Places, make a better appearance. When I was within a days Journey of Rome, I fancied that the Neighbourhood of so great a City must mend the matter; but I was much disappointed; for a Soil that was so rich, and lay so sweetly, that it far exceeded any thing I ever saw out of Italy, had neither Inhabitants in it, nor Cattel upon it, to the tenth part of what it could bear: The surprize that this gave me, increased upon me as I went out of Rome on its other side, chiefly all the way to Naples, and on the way to Civita Vecchia; for that vast and rich Champian Country, that runs all along to Terracina, which from Civita Vecchi is above a hundred miles long, and is in many places twelve or twenty miles broad, is abandoned to such a de∣gree, that as far as ones eye can carry one, there is often not so much as a house to be seen; but on the Hills, that are on the North-side of this Valley: and by this dispeop∣ling of the Country, the Air is now become so unwhol∣som, that it is not safe to be a night in it all the Summer long; for the Water, that lyes upon many places, not being drained, it rots; and in the Summer this produc so many noisom Steams, that it is felt even in Rome it¦self; and if it were not for the breeses that come from the Mountains, the Air would be intolerable: When one sees all this large, but wast Country, from the Hill of Marino, twelve miles beyond Rome, he cannot wonder enough at it. In a word, it is the rigour of the Governmet that hath driven away the Inhabitants; and their being driven away, hath now reduced it to such a pass; that it is hardly possible to repeople it: for such as would come to drain and cultivate it, must run a great hazard, and few can resolve on that, when they can hope for no other Reward of their Industry, but an Uneasy Government. It is the greatest Solicism in Govrnment for the Prince to be Elctive, and yet Absolute; for an Hereditary Prince i
induced to consider his Posterity, and to maintain his people, so that those that come after him may still support the rank which they hold in the World: But an Elective rine hath nothing of that in his eye, unless he hath a pitch of generosity, which is not ordinary among men, and least of all among Italians, who have a passion for their Families, which is not known in oher places: and thus a Pope, who comes in late to this Dignity, which by consequence he cannot hope to hold long, doh very na∣turally turn to those Councils, by which his Family may make all the Hay they can during this Sun-shine: And tho anciently the Cardinals were a check upon the Pope, and a sort of a Council, without whom he could do nothing even in Temporals; yet now they have quite lost that; and they have no other share in affairs, than that to which the Pope thinks fit to admit them; so that he is the most absolute Prince in Europe. It is true, as to Spirituals, they reain still a large share, so that in Censures and Defini∣tions the Pope can do nothing regularly without their concurrence; tho it is certain, that they have not so good a Title to pretend to that, as to a share in the Temporal Principality. For if the Pope derives any thing from Saint Peter, all that is singly in himself, and it is free to him to proceed by what method he thinks best, since the Infalli∣bility, according to their petensions, rests singly in him; yet because there was not so much to be got by acting Ar∣bitrary in those matters, and a Summary way of exerci∣sing this Authority, might have tempted the World to have enquired too much into the grounds on which it is built; therefore the Popes have let the Cardinals retain still a share in this Supremay over the Church, tho they have no claim to it, neither by any Divie nor Ecclesiasti∣cal Warrants: But as for the endowments of the See of Rome, to which they may justly lay claim, as being in a manner the Chapter of that See; there is so much to be got by this, that the Popes have ingrossed it wholly to themselves: and thus it is, that the Government of this Prinipality is very unsteady. Sometimes the Popes Fmily
are extreamly glorious, and magnificent; at others times, they think of nothing but of establishing their Houe Sometimes the Pope is a Man of sense himself; Sometimes he is quite sunk, and as the last Pope was, he becomes a Child again through old age: Sometimes he hath a parti∣cular Stiffness of Temper, with a great Slowness of Un∣derstanding and an insatiable desire of heaping up Wealth, which is the Character of him that now reigns. By this di∣versity, which appears eminently n every new Potifi∣cate, that commonly avoids those Excesses that made the former reign odious, the Councels of he Popedom are weak and disjoynted. But if this is sensible to all Europe, with relation to the general concer of that Body, it is much more visible in the Principality it self, that is subject to so variable a Head There hath been in this Age a succession of four ravenous reigns; and tho there was a short Inter∣ruption in the Reign of the Rospigliosi, that coming after the Barbrins, the Pamphili, and the Ghii's, did not inrich it self; and yet it disordered the Revenue, by the vast Magnificence in which he reigned, more in twenty nine Months time, than any other had done in so many years. The Altieri did, in a most scandalous manner, raise themselves in a very short and despised Reign, and built one of the Noblest Palaces in Rome. He that reig now, doth not indeed raise his Family avowedly, but he doth not ease the People of their Taxes: and as there is no Magnificence in his Court, nor any publick Buildings now catrying on at Rm; so the many vacant Caps, occasion many empty Palaces: and by this means, there is so little expence now made at Rome, that it is not possible for the People to live and pay the Taxes, which hat driven, as is believed, almost a fourth part of the Inhabi∣tants out of Rome, during this Pontificate. And as the preemption of the Corn makes, that there is no prof made by the Owners, out of the cultivation of the Soil, all that going wholly to the Pope, so there are no waye lest here of imploying ones Mony to any considerable Advantage: For the publick Banks, which are all in te
Popes hand, do not pay in effect three percent, tho they pretend to give four per cent of interest: The settlement is indeed four per cent, and this was thought so great an advantage, that Actions on the Popes Bank were bought at a hundred and sixteen the hunded. But this Pope broke through all this, and declared, he would give all Men their Mony again, unless they would pay him thirty per¦cent for the continuing of this Interest; and thus for a hundred Crows Principal, one not only payd at first one hundred and sixteen: but afterwards thirty: in all one hundred six and forty for the hundred, which is almost the half lost: For whensoever the Pope will pay them back their Mony, all the rest is lost: And while I am here, there is a report, that the Pope is treating with the Genoeses for Mony at two per cent; and if he gets t on those terms, then he will pay his Debts: and the Subjects, that have put in Mony in this Bank, will, by this means, lose six and forty per cent, which is almost the half of their Stock. A man of quality at Rome, and an eminent Church∣man, who took me likewise for one of their Clergy, be∣cause I wore the Habit of a Church-man, said, that it was a horrible Scandal to the whole Christian World, and made one doubt of the Truth of the Christian Religion, to see more Oppression and Cruelty in their Territory, than was to be found even in Turky; tho it being in the Hands of Christ's Vicar, one should expect to find there the pat∣tern of a mild and gentle Government: and how (said he) can a Man expect to find his Religion here, where the common Maxims of Justice and Mercy were not so much as known. And I can never forget the lively reflection that a Roman Prine made to me upon the folly of all those severe Oppressions, whih as they drive away the In∣habitants, so they reduce those that are left to such a degeneracy of Spirit by their Necessities, that the Spaniards, whose Dominions look so big in the Map, are now brought so low; and if they had kept still the possession they once had of the Vnited Netherlands, they would signifie no more towards their preservation,
than their other Provinces did; which, by their unskil∣ful conduct, they have both dispeopled and exhausted. Whereas by their losing those Seven Provines, those States hav fallen upon such wise Notions of Govern∣ment, and have drawn so much Walth, and such numbers of People together, that Spain it self was now preserved by them, and was saved in this Age by the loss it made of those Provinces in the last; and those States, that if they had remained subject to Spain, would have signified little to its support, did that now much more considerably, by being Alis, than they could have done, if they had not shaken off their Yoke. Indeed, if Spain had been so happy as to have such Viceroys, and Governors, as it has now in Naples, their affairs could not have declined so fast as they have done. The Marquis of Carpy, in his youth intended to have take so severe a Revenge of an Injury, that he thought the late King of Spain did him in an Amour, that he designed the blowing him up by Gun-powder, when he was in the Coun∣cil-Chamber; but that Crime was discored in time, and was not only forgiven him in consideration of the great∣ness of his Family, he being the Son of Don Lewis de Har, but after that he was made for several years Ambassador t Rome: He is now Viceroy o Naples, and is the only G∣vernour of all the Places though which I Passed, that is, without exception, beloved and esteemed by all sorts o People; for during the few years of his Ministry, he hath redressed such abuses that seemed past cure, and that required an Age to correct them: He hath re∣pressed the Insolence of the Spaniards so much at Na∣ples, that the Natives have no occasion to complain of the haughtiness of their Masters: sor he proceeds against the Spaniards with no less severity, when they give cause for it, than against the Neapolitans: He hath taken the Pay of the Souldiers so immediately into his own care, that they who before his coming, were hal naked, and robbed such as passed on the Streets of Naples
in day light, are now exactly payed, well disciplined, and so decently cloathed, that it is a pleasure to see them: He examins their Musters also so exactly, that he is sure not to be cheated by false lifts: He hath brought the Markets and Weights of Napls to a true Exactness: And whereas the Bread was generally too light, he has sent for Loave out of the several places of the Markets, and weighed them himself; and by some severe Punish∣ments on those that sold the Bread too light, he hath brought this matter to a just Regulation: He hath also brought the Courts of Iudicature, that were thought generally very corrupt, to Reputation again; and it is believed, he hath Spies to watch in case the trade of Bribes is sound to be still going on: He hath fortified the Pallae, which was before his time so much exposed, that it would have been no hard thing to have made a descent upon it, But the two things, that raise his reputation most, are his Extirpating of the Banditi, and the Regu∣lation of the Coin, which he hath taken in hand. It is well enough known, what a Plague the Banditi have been to the Kingdom; for they going in Troops, not only robbed the Country, but were able to resist an ordinary Body of Souldiers, if they had set on them: These travelled about seeking for spoil all the Summer long; but in Winter they were harboured by some of the Neapolitan Barrons, who gave them Quarter; and thereby did not only protect their own Lands, but had them as so many Instruments ready to execute their Revenges on their Enemies. This was well known at Naples, and there was a Council that had the Care of the reducing the Banditi committed to them, who as they catched some few, and hanged them, so they fined such Barons as gave them harbour; and it was believed, that those Fines, amounted to near a hundred and fifty thousand Crowns a year: And thus the disease went on; only now and then there was a little Blood let, which never went to the bottom of the Distemper. But when the present Vieroy entred upon the Governmnt,
he resolved to extirpate all the Banditi; and he first let all the Barons understand, that if they harboured them any more, a little Fine would not save them, but that he woul proceed against them with the utmost severity; and by this means the Banditi could find no Winter Quar∣ter: So they betook themselves to some fastnesses among the Hills, and resolved to make good the Passes, and to accommodate themselves the best they could amidst the Mountains. The Viceroy sent a great body against them, but they desended themselves for sometime vigorously, and in one sally they killed five hundred men: but at last, seeing that they were like to be hard prest, and that the Viceroy intended to come against them in Person, they accepted of the terms that he offered them, which was, a pardon for what was past, both as to life and Gallies, and six pence a day for their entertainment i Prison during life, or the Viceroys pleasure; and so they rendred themselves. They are kept in a large Prison, and now and then, as he sees cause for it, he sends some few of them up and down to serve in Garrisons. And thus, beyond all mens expectation, he finished this matter in a very few months; and the Kingdom of Naples, that hath been so long a scene of Pillage and Robbery, is now so much changed, that in no place of Europe do the Subjects injoy a more entire Security. As for the Coin, it, as all the other Spanish Mony, is so subject to Clipping, that the whole mony of Naples is now light, and far below the true value; so the Viceroy hath resolved to redress this: he considers, that the crying down of Mony, that passeth upon the publick Credit, is a robbing of those in whose hands the mony happens to be, when such Proclamations are put out; and therefore he takes a method that is more general, in which every one will bear his share, so that none will be crushed by it. He hath laid some Taxes on the whole King∣dom, and hath got a great many to bring in some Plate to be coyned: and when he hah thus prepared such a quan∣tity, s may seve for the circulation that is necessary, be
intends to call in all the old Mony, and to give out new Mony for it. Thus doth this Viceroy set such a pattern to the other Ministers of the Crown of Span, that if many would follow it, the State of their affairs would be soon altered. The Kingdom of Naples is the richest part of all Italy; for the very Mountins, that are near the half of the Soil, are fruitful, and produce either Wie or Oil in great abundance. Apulia is a great Corn Country, but it is exces∣sive hot, and in some years all i burnt up. The Iesuites are the Proprietors of near the half of Apulia; and they treat their Tenans with the same rigour that the Barons of this Kingdom do generally use towards their Farmers: for the Commons here are so miserably oppressed, that in many places they dye of hunger, even amidst the great plenty of their best years; for the Corn is exported to Spain: but neither the Spaniards nor the Neopolitans understand Trade so well as to be their own Merchants or Carriers, so that the English do generally carry away the profit of thi Trade. The Oil of this Kingdom is still a vast Trade, and the Manufacture of the Wool and Soap of England, consumes yearly some thousands of Tuns. The silk Trade is so low, that it only serves themselves, but the exportation is incon∣siderable: the Sloth and Laziness of this people renders them incapable of making those Advantages of so rich a soil, that a more industrious sort of people would find out: For it amazes a Stranger to see in their little Towns, the whole men of the town walking in the Market places in their torn Cloaks, and doing nothing; and tho in some big towns, such as Capua, there is but one Inn, yet even that is so miserable, that the best Room and Bed in it, is so bad, that our Footmen in England would make a grievous Outcry if they were no better lodged; nor is there any thing to be had in them: the Wine is intolerable, the Bread ill Baked, no Victuals, except Pidgeons, and the Oil is rotten. In short, except one carries his whole Provision from Rome or Naples; he must resolve to indure a good deal of Misery in the four days journey that is between those two places. And this is what a Tveller,
that sees the Riches of the soil, cannot comprehend: but as they have not hands enough for their soil, so those they have are generally so little imployed, that it is no won∣der to see their soil produce so little; that in the midst of all that abundance, that Nature hath set before them, they are one of the poorest Nations of Europe. But beside this which I have named, the vast and dead Wealth that is in the hands of the Churchme, is another evident cause of their misery. One that knew the State of this Kingdom well, assured me, that if it were divided into five parts, upon a strict survey, it would be found, that the Churh∣men had four parts of the five: which he made out thus, they have in Soil above the half of the whole, which is two and a half; and in Tythes, and Gifts, and Lega∣cies, they have one and a half more: for no man die without leaving a considerable Legacy to some Church o some Convent. The Wealth that one sees in the City of Naples alone, passeth imagination; there are four and twenty Houses of the Order of the Dominicans, of both Sexes, and two and twenty of the Franciscans, seven of the Isuites; besides the Convents, of the Olivitaes, the Theatines, the Carmelites, the Benedictines; and above all, for scituation and riches, the Carthusians, on the top of the Hill that lieth over the Town. The riches of the Annunciata are prodigious: It is the greatest Hospital in the World; the Revenue is said to be four hundred thousand Crowns a year: the number of the Sick is not so great as at Milan: Yet one convenience for their Sick observed in their Galleries, which was considerable, that every Bed stood as in an Alcove, and had a Wall on both sides, separating it from the Beds on both hands, and as much void space of both sides of the Bed, that the Bed it self took up but half the Room. The young Children that they maintain are so many, that one can hardly be∣lieve the numbers that they boast of; for they talk of many thousands that are not seen, but are at Nurse: a great part of the wealth of this House goeth to the inriching their Church, which will be all over within crusted with in∣layings
of lovely Marble, in a great variety and beauty of colours: The Plate that is in the Treasury here and in the Dome, (which is but a mean building, because it is ancient, but hath a Noble Chappel, and a vast Trea∣sure) and in a great many other Churches, are so prodi∣gious, that upon the modestest estimate, the Plate of he Churces of Naples amounts to eight millions of Crowns. The new Church of the Iesuites, that of the Apostles, and that of S. Paul, are surprizingly rich; the gilding an painting that is on the Roofs of those Churches have cost millions: And as there are about a hundred Cnvents in Naples, so every one of these, if it were in another place, would be thought well worth seeing, tho the riches of the greater Convents here, make many of them to be less visi∣ted. Every year there is a new Governour of the Annun in∣ta, who perhaps puts in his own Pocket twenty thousand Crowns; and to make some Compensation when he goeth out of Office, he giveth a vast piece of Plate to the House, a Statue for a Saint in Silver, or some Coloss of a Candle∣stick; for several of those pieces of plate are said to be worth ten thousand Crowns; and thus all the Silver of Na∣ples becomes dead and useless: The Jesuites are great Merchants here; their Wine-Cellar is a vast Vault, and holds above a thousand Hogsheads, and the best Wine of Naples is sold by them; yet they do no retail it out so scan∣dalously as the Minims do, who live on the great square before the Viceroys Palace, and sell out their Wine by re∣tal: they pay no Duty, and have extraordinary good Wine, and are in the best Place of the Town for this retail. It is true, the Neapolitans are no great Drinkers, so the Pro∣fs of this Tavern are not so great as they would be in col∣der Countries; for here men go only in for a draught in the mornings, or when they are athirst. Yet the House groweth extream rich, and hath one of the finest Chp∣pls that is in all Naples; but the Trade seems very unbe∣coming men of that Profession, and of so strict an Order. The Cnvents have a very particular priviledge in this Town; for they may buy all the Houses that ly on either
side, till the first street that discontinueth the Houses; and there being scarce a street in Naples in which there is not a Convnt, by this means they may come to buy in the whole Town: And the progress that the Wealth of the Cergy makes in this Kingdom is so visible, that if there is not some stop put to it, within an Age they will make themselves Masters of the whole Kingdom▪ It is an ama∣zing thing to see so profound an ignorance, as reign among the Clergy, prevail so effectually; for tho all the Secular persons here, speak of them with all possible scorn, yet they are the Masters of the Spirits of the Peo∣ple. The Women are infinitly Superstitious, and give their husbands no rest, but as they draw from them great presents to the Church. It is true, there are Societies of men at Naples of sreer thoughts than can be found in any other place of Italy: The Greek Learning begins to flou∣rish there, and the nw Philosophy is much studied; and there is an Assembly that is held in D. Ioseph Vallet's Library (where there is a vast Collection of well chosen Books) composed of Men that have a right tast of true Learning and good Sense: They are ill looked on by the Clergy, and represented as a set of Atheists, and as the Spawn of Pomponatius's School: But I found no suc thing among them; for I had the Honour to meet twice or thrice with a considerable number of them, during the short stay that I made among them: There is a lear∣ned Lawyer, Francisco Andria, that is considered as one of the most inquisitive Men of the Assembly: There is also a Grandchild of the Great Alciat, who is very c∣rious as well as learned. Few Churchmen come into this attempt for the reviving of Learning among them: O the contrary, it is plain, that they dread it above a¦things. Only one Eminent Preacher, Rinaldi, that  Archdeacon of Capua, associates himself with them: e was once of the Iesuits Order, but left it; and as that alo served to give a good Character of him to me, so upon  long conversation with him, I found a great many other tngs that possessed me with a high value or him. Some
Physicians in Naples are brought under the Scandal of Atheism; and it is certain, that in Italy, men of sear∣ching understandings, who have no other Idea of the Christian Religion, but that which they see received among them, are very naturally tempted to disbelieve it quite; for they believing it all alike in gross, without distin∣ction, and finding such notorious Cheats as appear in many parts of their Religion, are upon that induced to disbelieve the whole. The Preaching of the Monks in Naples are terrible things. I saw a Iesuit go in a sort of a Procession, with a great company about him, and cal∣ling upon all that he saw, to follow him to a place where a Mountebank was selling his Medicines, near whom he took his Room, and entertained the people with a sort of a Farce, till the Mountebank got him to give over; fearing lest his action should grow tedious, and disperse the com¦pany that was brought together. There are no famous Preachers, nor men of any reputation for learning among the Iesuites: I was told, they had not men capable to teach their Schools; and that they were forced to hire Strangers: The Order of the Oratory hath not that reputation in Italy, that it hath gained in France; and the little Learning that is among the Clergy in Naples, is among some few Secular Priests. The new Method of Molino's doth so much prevail in Naples, that it is believed, he hath above twenty thousand Followers in this City: And since this hath made some noise in the World, and yet is generally but little understood, I will give you some account of him: He is a Spanish Priest, that seems to be but an ordinary Divine, and is certainly a very ill Reasoner, when he undertakes to prove his Opi∣nions: He hath writ a Book, which is intituled, il Guida Spiritual, which is a short abstract of the Mystical Divinity; the Substance of the whole is reduced to this, That in our Prayers, and other Devotions, the best Methods are to retie the mind from all gross Images, and so to form an Act of Fith, d thereby to present our selves before God: and then to sink into a silenoe and cessation of new Acts, and to let God act upon
us, and so to follow his Conduct. This way he prefers to the multiplication of many new Acts, and different form of Devotion; and he makes small Account of corporal Austerities, and reduces all the Exercises of Religion to this simplicity of Mind: He thinks this is not only to be proposed to such as live in Religious Houses, but even to Secular persons, and by this he hath proposed a great Reformation of mens Minds and Manners; He hah many Priests in Italy, but chiefly in Naples, that dispose those who confess themselves to them, to follow his Method: The Iesuites have set themselves much against this con∣duct, as foreseeing, that it may much weaken the Emp that Superstition hath over the Minds of People, that  may make Religion become a more plain and simple thing and may also open a door to Enthusiasms: they also pre∣tend, that his conduct is Factious and Seditious; that thi may breed a Schism in the Churh. And because he saith, in some places of his Book, That the Mind may rise up  such a Simplicity in its Acts, that it may rise in some of its Devotions to God immediately, without contemplating t Humanity of Christ, they have accused him, as intending to lay aside the Doctrine of Christ's Humanity; tho it  plain, that he speaks only, of the purity of some sing Acts: Upon all those heads they have set themselve much against Molinos; and they have also pretended that some of his Disciples have infused into their Peniten That they may go and communicate as they find themselv disposed, without going first to Confession; which they thought weakned much the yoke, by which the Pri subdue the Consciences of the People to their Conduc Yet he was much supported both in the Kingdom of Nap and in Siily; he had also many Friends and Followers  Rome, So the Iesuites, as a Provinial of the Order a∣red me, finding they could not ruin him by their o force, got a great King, that is now extreamly in the I¦rests of their Order, to interpose, and to represent to the Pope the danger of such Innovations. It is certain,  Pope understands the matter very little, and that he is po∣sessed
with a great opinion of Molino's Sanctify; yet upon the Complaints of some Cardinals, that seconded the Zeal of that King, he and some of his Followers were pt in the Inquisition, where they have been now for some Months, but they are still well used, which is be∣lieved to flow from the good opinion that the Pope hath of im, who saith still, that tho he may have erred, yet e is certainly a good man: Upon this Inprisonment, Paquin said a pleasant thing; in one week, one man had been condemned to the Gallies for somewhat he hath said, ther hath been hanged for somewhat he had writ, and Malis was clapt in prison, whose Doctrine consisted efly in this, that mn ought to bring their minds to a state of inward quetness, from which the name of Quie∣ was given to all his followers: The Pasquinade upon all this, was, Si parliamo, in Galere, si scrivemmo Im∣icati, si stiamo inquiete all' Sant' Officio, e che bisog∣ for: If we speak, we are sent to the Gallies; if  write, we are hanged; if we stand quiet, we are clapt dapt in the Inquisition: what mus we do then? Yet his Fol∣lowers at Naples are not daunted, but they believe, he will come out of this Tryal victorious. The City of Naples, as it is the best scituated, and i the best Climate, so it is one of the Noblest Cities of rope; and if it is not above half as big as Paris or London, yet it hath much more beauty than either of them: The Streets are large and broad, the Pave∣ent is great and Noble, the Stones being generally above a foot square, and it is full of Palaces, and great Build∣ig: The Town is well supplied by daily Markets, so that Provisions are ever fresh, and in great plenty; the Wine is the best of Europe; and both he Fish and Flesh is extream good: it is scarce ever cold in Winter, and there is a fresh Air comes, both from the Sea and the Mountains in Summer. The Viceroy's Palace is no extra∣ordinary building, only the Stair-case is great: But it is now very richly furnished within, in Pictures and Statues: There are in it some Statues of the Egyptian Deities of
Touchstone, that are of great value: There are no great Antiquities here, only there is an Ancient Roman Porti, that is very Noble before Saint Pauls Churh. B without the City near the Church and Hopital of Si Gennaro, that is without the Gates, are the Noble Catacombs, which because they were beyond any thing I saw in Italy, and to which the Catacombs of Rome are not to be compared, and since I do not find any accoun of them, in all the Books that I have yet seen concerning Naples, I shall describe them more particularly. They are vast and long Galleries cut out of the Rock▪ there are three Stories of them one above another:  was in two of them, but the Rock is fallen in the lowest, so that one cannot go into it, but I saw the passage to t▪ These Galleries are generally about twenty foot broad, and about fifteen foot high: so that they are Noble and spacious places, and not little and narrow as the Cata∣combs at Rome, which are only three or four foot broad▪ and five or six foot high. I was made believe, that these Catacombs of Naples went into the Rock nine mile long; but for that I have i only by report: Yet if that be true, they may perhaps run towards Puz zolo, and so they may have been the burial places of the Towns on that Bay; but of this I have no certainty. I wal∣ked indeed a great way, and found Galleries going off on all hands without end, and whereas in the Rom Catacombs there are not above three or four rows of Niches, that are cut out in the Rock one over an∣other, into which the dead Bodies were laid; her there are generally six or seven rows of those Niches nd they are both larger and higher; some Niches are or Childrens Bodies; and in many places there are n the Floors, as it were great Chests hewn out of the Rock, to lay the bones of the dead as they dried, in them; but I could see no maks either of a cover for these holes, that looked like the bellys of Chests, or of a facing to shut up the Niches when a dead Body was laid in them; so that it seems they were
monstrous unwholesome and stinking places, where some thousands of Bodies lay rotting, without any thing to shut in so loathsome a sight, and so odious a smell: For the Niches shew plainly, that the Bo∣dies were laid in them only wrapt in the dead Cloaths, they being too low for Coffins. In some places of the Rock there is as it were a little Chappel hewen out in the Rock, that goes off from the common Gallery, and there are Niches all round about; but I saw no marks of any Wall, that shut in such places; tho I am apt to think, these might be burying places ap∣propriated to particular Families. There is in some places on the Walls and Arch, Old Mosaick Work, and some Painting, the Colours are fresh, and the Manner and Characters are Gothick; which made me conclude, that this might have been done by the Normans, about six hun∣dred years ago, after they drove out the Saracens: In some Places there are Palmtrees painted, and Vines in other places. The freshness of the Colours, shew these could ot have been done while this place was imployed for bury∣ing; for the Steams and Rottenness of the air, occasi∣oned by so much Corruption, must have dissolved both Plaister and Colours. In one place, there is a man pain∣ted with a little Beard, and Paulus is written by his head: there is another reaching him a Garland, and by his head Land is written: and this is repeated in another place right over against it. In another place I found a Cross painted, and about the upper part of it these Letters . C. X. O. and in the lower part NJKA. are pain∣ted: A learned Antiquar, that went with me, agreed with me, that the manner of the Painting and Charact did not seem to be above six hundred years old: but neith of us knew what to make of these Letters: The low seemed to relate to the last word of the Vision, which it is said that Constantine saw with the cross that appeared to him: But tho the first two Letters might be for Iesus, it being ordinary in old Coyns and Inscriptions to put a C. for an S. and X. stands for Christ, yet we knew not what
to make of the O, unless it were for the Greek Theta, and that the little line in the bosom of the Theta was worn out, and then it stands for Theos; and thus the whole Inscrip∣tion is, Iesus Christ God overcometh. Another Picture i the Wall had written over it Sta. Iohannes, which was a clear sign of a barbarous Age: In another place there is  Picture high in the Wall, and three Pictures under it, th at top, had no Inscription; those below it, had these Inscriptions, S Katharina, S. Agape, and S. Marga∣rita, these Letters are clearly modern; besides that, Margaret and Katherine are modern names: and the add∣tion of t a little above the S. were manifest evidences, th the highest Antiquity that can be ascribed to this Painting is six hundred years. I saw no more Painting, and I e∣gan to grow weary of the darkness, and the thick Ar f the place, so I stayed not above an hour in the Catacom. This made me reflect more particularly on the Catacom of Rome, than I had done; I could image no reason why so little mention is made of those of Naples, when there i so much said concerning those of Rome; and could give my self no other account of the matter, but that it being a maxim to keep up the reputation of the Roman Cata∣combs, as the Repositories of the Reliques of the primitive Christians, it would have much lessned their credit, if  had been thought, that there were Cataombs far beyond them in all respects, that yet cannot be supposed to have been the work of the primitive Christians; and indeed, nothing seems more evident, than that these were the common Burying Places of the ancient Heatbens. O enters into them without the Walls of the Towns, accor∣ding to the Laws of the twelve Tables, and such are the Cataombs of Rome that I saw, which were those of S. Agnes and S. Sebastian, the entry into them being without the Town; this answers the Law, tho in effect they run under it; for in those dayes, when they had not the use of the Needle, they could not know which way they carried on those works, when they were once so far ingaged under ground, as to lose themselves. It is a vain
magination to think, that the Christians, in the primi∣tive times, were able to carry on such a work; for as this prodigious digging into such Rocks, must have been a very visible thing by the Mountains of Rubbish that must have been brought out, and by the vast number of Hands that must have been imployed in it; so it is absurd to think, that they could hold their Assemblies amidst the annoyance of so much corruption. I found the Steams so strong, that tho I am as little subject to Vapours as most men, yet I had all the day long after I was in them, which was not near an hour, a Confusion, and as it were a boyling in my Head, that disordered me extreamly; and if there is now so much stagnating Air there, this must have been sensible in a more eminent and insufferable manner while there were vast numbers of bodies rotting in those Niches. But besides this improbability, that presents it self from the nature of the thing, I called to mind a passage of a Letter of Cornelius, that was Bishop of Rome, after the middle of the third Century, which is preserved by Euse∣bis in his sixth Book, Chapter 43. in which we have the State of the Church of Rome at that time set forth. There were forty six Presbyters, seven Deacons, as many Sub∣deacons, and ninety four of the Inferior Orders of the Cler∣gy among them: there were also fifteen hundred Widows, and other poor maintained out of the publick Charities. It may be reasonably supposed, that the numbers of the Christians were as great when this Epistle was writ, as they were at any time before Constantine's dayes; for as this was writ at the end of that long Peace, of which both S. Cyprian and Lactantius speak, that had continued above a hundred years; so after this time, there was such a succession of Persecutions, that came so thick one upon another, after short intervals of quiet, that we cannot think the number of the Christians increased much beyond what they were at this time. Now there are two particulars in this State of the Clergy, upon which one may make a probable estimate of the numbers of the Chri∣stians; the one is, their Poor, which were but fifteen
hundred: now upon an exact survey, it will be found, that where the poor are well looked to, their number rises generally to be the thirtieth or fortieth part of mankind; and this may be well believed to be the proportion of the Poor among the Christians of that Age: For as their Cha∣rity was vigorous and tender, so we find Celsus, Iulian, Lucian, Prophiry, and others, Object this to the Chri∣stians of that time, that their Charities to the Poor drew va numbers of the lower sort among them, who made them∣selves Christians that they might be supplied by their Bre∣thren: So that this being the State of the Christias then, we may reckon the Poor the thirtieth part, and so fifteen hundred multiplied by thirty, produce five and forty thousand: And I am the more inclined to think, that this rises up near to the full sum of their numbers, by the other Character of the numbers of the Clergy; for as there were forty six Presbyters, so there were ninety four of the inferior Orders, who were two more than double the number of the Priests: and this was in a time in which the Care of Souls was more exactly looked af∣ter, than it has been in the more corrupted Ages, the Cler∣gy having then really more work on their hands, the instru∣cting of their Catechumens, the visiting their Sick, and the supporting and comforting the Weak, being Tasks that required so much application, that in so vast a City, as Rome was in those dayes, in which it is probable the Chri∣stians were scattered over the City, and mixed in all the parts of it we make a conjecture that is not ill grounded, when we reckon, that every Presbyter had perhaps about a thousand Souls committed to his Care, so this ries to six and forty thousand: which comes very near the sum that may be gathered from the other hint, taken from the number of their Poor. So that about fifty thousand is the highest account to which we can reasonably raise the numbers of the Christians of Rome in that time: And of so many persons, the Old, the Young, and the Wo∣men, make more than three fourth pats; so that men that were in condition to work, were not above twelve thou∣sand:
and by consequence, they were in no condition to undertake and carry on so vast a Work. If Cornelius in in that Letter speaks of the numbers of the Christians in excessive terms, and if Tertullian in his Apology hath also set out the numbers of the Christians of his time, in a very high strain, that is only to be ascribed to a pom∣ous Eloquence, which disposeth people to magnifie their own Party, and we must allow a good deal to a hyperbole, that is very natural to all that set forth their Forces in general terms. It is true, it is not so clear when those vast Cavities were dug out of the Rocks. We know, that when the Laws of the twelve Tables were made, Sepulture was then in use: and Rome being then grown to a vast bigness, no doubt they had Repositries for their Dead: so that since none of the Roman Authors mention any such work, it may not be unreasonable to Imagine, that these Vaults had been wrought and cut out from the first beginnings of the City▪ and so the later Authors had no occasion o take notice of it. It is also certain, that tho Burning came to be in use among the Romans, yet they returned back to their first Custom of Burying Bodies long before Constantines time; so that is was not the Christian Religion that produced this change. All our modern Writers take it for granted, that the change was made in the times of the Antonius: yet there being no Law made concern∣ing it, and no mention being made in an Age full of writers, of any orders that were given for Burying-places, Vel∣seru' opinion seems more probable, that the Custom of Burning wore out by degrees; and since we are sure, that they once buried, it is more natural to think, that the Slaves and the meaner sort of people were still Buried, that being a less expenceful, and a more simple way of bestowing their Bodies, than Burning, which was both pompous and chargeable; and, if there were already Burying places pre∣pared, it is much easier to imagin how the Custom of Bu∣rying grew universal without any Law made concerning it. I could not for some time find out upon what grounds the Modern Criticks take it for granted, that Burying
began in the times of the Antonins, till I had the happi∣ness to talk of this mater with the learned Gronovius, who seems to be such a Master of all the Antient Learning,  if he had the Authors lying alwayes open before him: he told me, that it was certain, the change from Burnig to Burying, was not made by the Christian Emperours; for Marobius (lib. 7. chap. 7.) sayes, in plain terms, that the Custom of Burning the odies of the Dead, was quite worn out in that age: which is a clear Intimation, that it was not laid aside so late as by Constantine; and as there was no Law made by him on that head, so he and the succeeding Emperurs, gave such an entire toleration to Paganism, admitting those of that Religion to the greatest Imployments, that it is not to be imagined, that there was any order given against Burning; so that it is clear, the Heathns had changed it of their own accord: other∣wayes we should have found that among the Complains that they made of the Grievances under which they lay from the Christians. But it is more difficult to fix the time when this change was made. Gronovius shewed me a pas∣sage of Phlegons, that mentions the Bodies that were laid in the Ground; yet he did not build on that; for it may have relation to the customs of Burying that might be elsewhere. And so Petronius gives the account of the Bu∣rial of the Ephesian Matrons husband; but he made i appa∣rent to me, that Burying was commonly practised in Commodus's time; for Xiphilinus tells us, that in Perti∣nax's time, the Friends of those whom Commodus had ordered to be put to Death, had dug up their Bodies, some bringing out only some parts of them, and others raising their entire Bodies. The same Author also tells us, that Pertinax buried Commodus's body, and so saved it from the Rage of the People; and here is a positive Evidence, that Burying was the common practice of that time. The same learned person has since my first conversation with him upon this subject, suggested to me two passages of Festus Pompeius, that seem to determiné this whole mat∣ter; and that tell us, by what names those Catacombs
were known in the Roman time, where-abouts they were▪ and what sort of persons were laid in them; we have also the designation by which the Bearers were commonly known, and the time when they carried out the Dead Bodies: and it appears particularly by them▪ that in the Repositories, of which that author makes mention, there was no care taken to preserve the bodies that were laid in them from rotting. His words are. Puticulos antiquissi∣um genus sepulturae appellatos, quod ibi in puteis speli∣rter homenes: qualis fuerit locus quo nunc cadavera pro∣jici solent, extra portam Esquilinam: qua quod ibi putesc∣rnt, inde prius appellatos existimat puticulos Aelius Gal∣ls, qui ait antiqui moris fuisse, ut patres familias in lo∣m publicum extra oppidum mancipia vilia projicerent, at∣qu it a projecta, quod ibi a ptescerent, nomen esse factum puticuli. The other passage runs thus. Vespa & Vespillones dicuntur, qui funerandis corporibus officium gerunt, non  minutis illis volucribus, sed quia vespertino tempore cos effe∣runt, qui funebri pompa duci propter inopiam nequeunt. All this agrees so exactly to the thoughts, that a general view of those Repositories give a man, that it will not be hard to persuade him, that those Burying places, that are now graced with the pompous title of Catacombs, are no other than the Putecoli mentioned by Festus Pompeius, where the meanest sort of the Roman slaves were laid, and so without any further care about them were left to rot. It is true, it is very probable, that as we see some of the Roman Families continued to Bury their Dead, even when Burning was the more common Custom; so per∣haps others continued after this to hurn their dead, the thing being Indifferent, and no Law being made about it; and therefore it was particularly objected to the Chri∣stians after this time, that they abhorred the Custom of Burning the Bodies of the Dead, which is mentioned by Minutius Felix; but this or any other evidences, that may be brought from Medalls of Consecrations after this time, will only prove, that some were still Burnt, and that the Christians practised Burying Universally, as
expressing their belief of the Resurrection; whereas the Heathens held the thing Indifferent. It is also clear, from the many genuine Inscriptions that have been. found in the Catacombs, which bear the dates of the Consuls, that these were the common Burial-Places of all the Christians of the fourth and fifth Century; for I do not remember, that there is any one dae that is Antienter; and yet not one of the Writers of those Ages speak of them, as the Work of the Primitive Chri∣stians. They speak indeed of the Burial-Places of the Mar∣tyrs; but that will prove no more, but that he Christians might have had their Quarters, and their Walks in those common Burial-places, where they laid their Dead, and which might have been known among them, tho it is not likely, that they would in times of Perseoution make such Inscriptions as might have exposed the Bodies of their dead Friends to the Rage of their Enemies. And the Spurious Acts of some Saints and Martyrs, are of too little credit to give any support to the common Opinion. Damasus's Poetry s of no better Authority. And tho those Ages were inclined enough to give credit to Fables, yet it seems this of those Catacombs, having been the work of the Primitive Christians, was too gross a thing to have been so early Imposed on the World. And this silence in an Age, in which Superstition was going on at so great a rate, has much force in it; for so vast a Work, as those Catacombs are, must have been well known to all the Ro∣mans. It were easy to carry this much further, and to shew, that the Bas Reliefs, that have been found in some of those Catacombs, have nothing of the beauty of the Ancient Roman time. This is also more discernable in ma∣ny Inscriptions that are more Gothick than Roman; and there are so many Inscriptions relating to Fables, that it is plain, these were of later times; and we see by Saint Ierom, that the Monks began, even in his time, to drive a trade of Reliques; so it is no wonder, that to raise the credit of such a heap, as was never to be exhausted, they made some miserable Sculptures, and some In∣scriptions;
and perhaps shut up the entrys into them with much care and secresy, intending to open them upon some Dream or other Artifice, to give them the more Reputa∣tion; which was often practised in order to the drawing much Wealth and great Devotion, even to some single Relique; and a few being upon this Secret, either those might have dyed, or by the many Revolutions that hapned in Rome, they might have been dispersed before they made the discovery: And thus the knowledge of those pla∣ces was lost, and cae to be discovered by accident in the last Age; and hath ever since supplied them with an in∣exhaustible Magazin of Bones, which by all appearance are no other than the Bones of the Pagan Romans; which are now sent over the World to feed a Superstition, that is as blind as it proves expensive. And thus the Bones of the Roman Slaves, or at least, those of the mea sort, are now set in Silver and Gold, with a great deal of other costly Garniture, and entertain the Superstition of those who are willing to be deceived, as well as they serve the ends of those that seek to deceive the World. But because it can∣not be pretended, that there was such a number of Chri∣stian at Naples, as could have wrought such Catacombs, and if it had been once thought, that those were the co∣mon Burial-places of the ancient Heathens, that might have induced the World to think, that the Rman Cata∣combs were no other; therefore there hath been no care taken to examin these. I thought this deserved a large dis∣course, and therefore I have dwelt perhaps a little too long on this subject. I will not enter upon a long description of that which is so well known▪ as Mont Vesuvio, it had roared soloud about a month before I came to Naples, that at Naples they could hadly sleep in the Nights, and some old Houss were so shaken by the Earthquake, that was occasioned by this convulsion of the Hill, that they fell to the ground: And the great Convulsion above fifty yars ag, was so terrible, hat there was no small fear in Naples, tho it lyes at the distance of seven Mles from the Hill, yet the storm was choaked un∣der
ground; for tho it smoakt much more than ordinary, yet there was no eruption: It was indeed smoking not only in the mouth of the little Mount, that is formed within the great wast that the fire hath made, but also all along the bottom that is between the outward mouth of thi Mountain (which is four miles in compass) and that in∣ward Hill. When one sees the Mouth of this fire, and so great a part of the Hill which is covered some foot deep with ashes and stones of a metallick Composition, that the fire throws out, he cannot but stand amazed, and wonder what can be the Fuel of so lasting a Burning, that hath calcined so much matter, and spewed out such prodigious quantities. It is plain, there are vast Veins of Sulphur all along in this Soil, and it seem in this Mountain they run along through some Mines and Rocks; and as their slow consumption produ∣ceth a perpetual smoke, so when the Air within is so much ratified that it must open it self, it throw up those masses of Mettle and Rock that shut it in; but how this Fire draws in Air to nourish its Flame, is not so easily apprehended, unless there is either a con∣veyance of Air under ground, by some undiscovered vacuity, or a more insensible transmission of Air, through the pores of the Earth. The heat of this Hill ope∣rates so much upon the Soil, that lyes upon it towards the foot of it, that it produceth the richest Wine about Na∣ples; and it also purifieth the Air so much, that the Village at the bottom is thought the best Air of the Country, so that many come from Naples thither for their health. Ischia, that is an Island not far from Naples, doth also sometimes spew out fire. On the other side of Naples to the West, one passeth through the Cave that pierceth the Pausalippe, and is four hundred and forty paces long; for I walked it on foot to take its true measure; it is twenty foot broad, and at first forty foot high, but afterwards it is but twenty foot high; the Stone cut out here is good for building; so that as this opened the way from Puzzoli to Naples; t
was also a Quarry for the building of the Town: All along the way here, one discovers a strange boiling within the ground; for a little beyond this Grot of Pausalippe, as we ome near the Lake of Aniano, there is of the one Hand,  Bath, occasioned by a Steam that riseth so hot out of the ground, that as soon as one goeth a little into it, he finds himself all over in a sweat, which is very proper for some Dieases, especially that which carries its name from Na∣pls: And about twenty paces from thence, there is ano∣ther little Grot, that sends out a Poysonous Steam, that as  put out a Candle, as soon as it cometh near it, so it in∣fallibly killeth any living Creature within a minute of time; for in half that time a Dog upon which the Experiment is commonly try'd (the Grot being from thence called Grotto di Cane) fell into a convulsion. From that one goeth to see the poor Rests of Puzzoli, and of all that Bay, that was once all about a tract of Towns, it having been the retreat of the Romans, during the heats of the Summer. All the Rarities here, have been so often, and so copously descri∣bed, that I am sensible I can add nothing to what is so well known. I will say nothing of the Amphitheater, or of Ci∣cero and Virgils Houses, for which there is nothing but a dubious tradition; they are ancient brick buildings of the Roman way, and the vaults of Virgil's House are still intire: The Sulfatara is a surprizing thing; here is a bottom, out of which the force of the Fire, that breaks out still n many places, in a thick steaming smoke, that is full of Brimstone, did throw up about a hundred and fifty years ago, a vast quantity of Earth, which was carried above thre miles thence, and formed the Hill called Monte Novo, upon the Ruins of a Town, that was overwhelmed with this Eruption; which is of a very considerable height; they told me, that there was before that time a Channel, that went from the Bay into the Lake of Averno, of which one sees the beginnings in the Bay at some distance from the shore, it carrieth still the name of Iulio's Mole, and is believed to have been made by Iulius Caesar. But by the swel∣ling of the ground upon the Eruption of the Sulsata∣ra,
this passage is stopt, and the Averno is now fresh Wa∣ter; it is eighteen fathom deep On the side of it is that amazing Cave, where the Sybil is said to have given out her Inpirations: the hewing it out of the Rock, hath been a prodigious Work; for the Rock is one of the hardest Stones in the World, and the Cave goeth in seven hundred foot long, twenty foot broad, and as I could guess, eighteen foo high: and from the end of this great Gllery, there is a narrow passage of three foot broad, two hun∣dred foot long, and seven high, to a little apartment, to which we go in a constant sloping descent from the great Cav; here are three little rooms, in one of them there are some Rests of an Old Mosaick, with which the Walls and Roof were laid over; there is also a spring of Water, and a Bth, in which it is supposed the Sybil bathed her self; and from this Cave it is said, that there runs a Cave all along to Cuma, which is three long miles, but the passage is now choakt by the falling in of the Rock in seve∣ral places: This piece of Work amazed me; I did not much min the popular opinion that is easily received there▪ that all this was done by the Devil; the marks of the Chizzel in all the parts of the Rock sheweth, that this is not a work of Nature. Certainly they had both much leisure, and many hands at their command who set about it; and it seems to have been wrought out with no other design, but to subdue the People more intirely to the conduct of the Priests that managed this Imposture; so busie and indu∣strious hath the Ambition and Fraud of the Priests been in all Ages, and in all corrupt Religions. But of all the Senes of Noble Objects that present it self in the Bay of Puzzolo, the Rests of Caligula's Bridge are the most amazing; for there are yet standing eiht or ten of the Pillars that supported the Arches, and of some of the Arches, the half is yet intire. I had not a line with me to examine the deph of the Water where the urthest of those Pillars is built; but my Waterman assured me, it was fifty Cubits. I have since my being in Naples, in∣structed one that was going thither in this particular, and
have received this account from him; that he had taken care to plum the water at the furthest pillar of Caligula's bridge, on the Puzzolo side; and sound it was seven fa∣thom and a half deep: but he adds, that the Watermen assured him, that on the other side before Baia, the wa∣ter was twenty six fathom deep: but as he had not a plum∣met long enough to try that, so he believed a good deal ought to be abated; for the Watermen had assured him▪ that the Water was ten fathom deep on the Puzzoli side, tho upon tryal he found it was only seven and a half: and by this measure one may suppose that the water is twenty fathom deep on the other side: so that it is one of the most astonishing things that one can think of, that pillars of Brik could have been built in such a depth of water, and for the carrying off of the Sea, that seems yet more im∣possible. It is a Noble Monument of the profuse and extra∣vagant Expence of a Brutal Tyrant, who made one of the vastest Bridges that ever was attempted, over three or four Miles of Sea, meerly to sacrifice so great a Trea∣sure to his Vanity: As for Agripina's Tomb, it is no great matter, only the Bas Reliefs are yet entire. The marvellous Fish-Pond is a great Basin of Water, wrought like a huge Temple, standing upon eight and forty great Pillars, all hewed out of the Rock; and they are laid over with four crusts of the old Plaister, which is now as hard as stone; this is believed to be a work of Nero': and about a quarter of a mile from thence, there is another vast work, which goeth into a Rok; but at the entrance there is a noble Portico built of Pillars of Brick; and as one enters into the Rock, he finds a great many rooms regularly shaped, hewed out of the Rok, and all co∣vered over with Plaster, which is still intire, and so white that one can hardly think that it hath not been washed over since it was first made; there are a vast num∣ber of those Rooms, they are said to be a hundred; from whence this Cave carrieth the name of the Centum Came∣ra: This hath been as expensive a work as it is useless; it is intituled to Nero, and here they say he kept his Prisoners.
But there is nothing in all this Bay that is both so curio and so useful as the Baths, which seem to flow from the same reason that is the cause of these Eruptions in he Ve∣suvio and Sulfatara, and the Grottos formerly mentioned, that as this heat makes some Fountains there to be boiling hot, so it sends up a steam through the Rock, that doth not break through the pores of the Stone where it is hard▪ but where the Rock is soft and spungy, there the steam come through with so melting a heat, that a man is soon, as it were, dissolved in sweat; but if he stoops low in the passages that are cut in the Rock, he finds no heat, be∣cause there the Rock is hard. Those Steams, as they are all Hot, so they are impregnated with such Minerals as they find in their way through the Rock; and near this Bath there are Galleries hewed out the Rock, and faced with a building; in which there are, as it were, Bed∣steads made in the Walls, upon which, those that come thither, to sweat for their health, lay their Quilts and Bed-cloaths, and so come regularly out of their sweats. It is certain, that a man can no where pass a day of his life, both with so much pleasure, and with such advan∣tage, as he finds in this journey to Puzzoli, and all along the Bay: but tho aniently this was all so well built, so peopled, and so beautifully laid out, yet no where doth one see more visibly what a change Time brings upon all places: for Naples hath so intirely eat out this place, and drawn its Inhabitants to it, that as Puzzoli it self is but a small Village, so there is now no other in all this Bay, which was anciently built almost all round; for there were seven big Towns upon it. Having thus told you what I found most considerable in Naples, I cannot pass by that Noble remnant of the Via Apia, that runs along thirty miles of the Way between it and Rome, without making some mention of it: this Higb-way is twelve foot broad, all made of huge Stones, most of them blew, and they are generally a soot and half large of all sides: the strength of this Causeway appears in its long duration, for it hath lasted above eighteen hundred Years; and is in most pla∣ces
for several miles together, as intire as when it was first made: and the Botches that have been made for mending such places, that have been worn out by time, shews a very visible difference between the ancient and the mo∣dern way of paving. One thing seems strange, that the ay is level with the earth on both sides: whereas so much weight as those Stones carry, should have sunk the ground under them by its pressure: Besides, that the Earth, especially in low grounds, receives a constant increase, chiefly by the dust which the Winds or Brooks carry down from the Hills, both which Reasons should make a more sensible difference between those Wayes and the Sol on both sides: and this makes me apt to believe, that anciently those Wayes were a little raised above the level of the ground, and that a course of so many Ages hath now brought them to an equality: Those Wayes were chiefly made for such as go on foot: for as nothing is more pleasant, than to walk along them, so nothing is more inconvenient for Horses and all sorts of Carriage; and indeed Mulets are the only Beasts of burthen that can bold out long in this Road, which beats all Horses after they have gone it a little while. There are several Rests of Roman Aniiquities at the Mole of Cajeta; but the Isle of Caprea, now called Crapa, which is a little way into the Sea off from Naples, gave me a strange Idea of Tibe∣ius's Reign, since it is hard to tell, whether it was more extraordinary, to see a Prince abandon the best Seats and Palaces of Italy, and shut himself up in a little Island, in which I was told, there was a tradition of seven little Pa∣laces that he built in it; or to see so vast a body as the Ro∣man Empire so governed by such a Tyrannical Prin, at such a distance from the chief Seat, so that all might have been reversed long before that the News of it could have been brought to him. And as there is nothing more won∣derful in Story, than to see so vast a State, that had so great a sense of liberty, subdued by so brutal, and so voluptious a Man as Anthony, and so raw a Youth as Au∣stus; so the wonder is much improved, when we see a
Prince at a hundred and fifty Miles distance, shut up i an Island, carry the Reins of so great a Body in his hand, and turn it which way he pleased. But now I come to Rome, which as it was once the Empress of the World; in a succession of many Ages, so hath in it at present more urious things to entertain the attention of a Traveller, than any other place in Europe. On the side of Tuscany, the entry into Rome is very sur∣prizing to Srrangers; for one cometh along for a great many miles, upon the remains of the Via Flamminis, which is not indeed so entire as the Via Appia; yet there is enough left to raise a just Idea of the Roman Greatness, who laid such Causewayes all Italy over. And within the Gate of the Porta di Populo, there is a Noble Obelisk,  vast Fountan; two fine little Churches, like two twins, resembling one another, as well as placed near one ano∣ther, and on several hands one sees a long Vista of Streets. There is not a Town in these parts of the World, wher the Churches, Convents, and Palaces are so Noble, an wbere the other Buildings are so mean; which indee discovers very visibly the Misery under which the Rom groan. The Churches of Rome are so well known, tha  will not adventure on any description of them, and indee I had too transcient a view of them, to make it with th degree of exactness which the subject requires. S. Pet alone would make a big Book, not to say a long Lette▪ Its length, height, and breadth are all so exactly propo¦tioned, and the eye is so equally possessed with all these that the whole, upon the first view, doth not appear vast as it is found to be upon a more particular attentio and as the four Pillars, upon which the Cupulo rises are of such a prodigious bigness, that one would thi they were strong enough to bear any superstructure wha¦soever; so when one climbs up to the top of that  height, he wonders what Foundation can bear so hug a weight; for as the Church is of a vast height, so  Cupulo rises four hundred and fifteen big steps above  Rof of the Church. In the height of the Concave of
Cupulo, there is a representation, that tho it can hardly be seen from the floor below, unless one hath a good sight, and so it doth not perhaps give much scandal, yet it is a gross indication of the Idolatry of that Church; for the Divinity is there pictured as an antient man compassed about with Angels. I will say nothing of the great Altar, of the Chair of S. Peter; of the great Tombs, of which, the three chief are those for Paul the III. Vrban the VIII. and Alexander the VII. nor of the vast Vaults under this Church, and the Remains of Antiquity that are reserved in them: nor will I undertake a description of the adjoy-ning Palae, where the painting of the Corridori, and of many of the Rooms, by Raphael and Mihael Angelo are so rich, that one is sorty to see a wok of that value laid on Fresco, and which must by consequence wear out too soon, as in several places it is almost quite lost already. I could not but observe in the Sala Regia, that is before the famous Chappel of Sisto V. and that is all painted in Fresco, one corner that represents the Marther of the re∣nowned Admiral Chastilion▪ and that hath written under it those words, Rex Colinii necem probat: The vast length of the Gallery on one side, and of the Library on ano∣ther, do surprize one; the Gardens have many Statues of a most excessive value, and some good Fountains; but the Gardens are ill maintained both here, and in the Palace on the Quirinal. And indeed, in most of the Palaces of Rome, if there were but a small cost laid out to keep all in good case, that is brought together at so vast a charge, they would make another sort of shew, and be looked at with much more pleasure. In the Apart∣ments of Rome there are a great many things that offend the sight: The Doors are generally mean, and the Locks meaner, except in the Palace o Prince Bor∣ghese, where as there is the vastest collection of the best Piees, and of the hands of the greatest Masters that are in all Europr, so the Doos and Locks give not that istast to the eye, that one finds elsewhere. The looring of the Palaces is all of Brick, which is so
very mean, that one sees the disproportion that is be∣tween the Floors and the rest of the Room, not witho a sensible perception and dislike. It is true, they say, their Air is so cold and moist in Winter, that they cannot pave with Marbl; and the heat is sometimes so great in Summer, that Flooring of Wood would crack with heat, as well as be eat up by the vermin that would nestle in it. But if they kept in their great Palaces servant to wash their Floors, with that care that is used in Holland, where the Air is moister, and the Climae is more productive of Vermine, they would not find such effects from wooden floors, as they pretend. In  word, there are none that lay out so much Wealth all as once, as the Italians do, upon the building and finishin of their Palaces and Gardens, and that afterwards besto so little on the preserving of them: another thing I obser∣ved in their Palaces; there is indeed a great series of Noble Rooms one within another, of which their Apartmen are composed; but I did not find, at the end of the A∣partments, where the Bed-Chamber is, such a dispositio of rooms for Back-stairs, Dressing-rooms, Closets, Ser∣vants rooms, and other Conveniences as are necessary for accommodating the Apartment. It is true, this is not so necessary for an apartment of State, in which Magnifice is more considered than Convenience; but I found the fam want in those Apartment in which they lodged; so that notwithstanding all the Riches of their Palaces, it canno be said, that they are well lodged in them; and their G∣dens are yet less understood, and worse kept than th Palaces. It is true, the Villa Borghese ought to be excep∣ted, where, as there is a prodigious collection of Bas ∣liefs, with which the Walls are, as it were, covered al over, that are of a vast value; so the Statues within, of which some are of Porphiry, and others of Touhstone, ar amazing things: The whole ground of this Park, which is about three miles in compass, and in which there are  or seven Lodges, are laid out so sweetly, that I thoug I was in an English Park when I walked over it. The
Villa Pamphilia is better scituated, upon a higher ground▪ and hath more Waterworks, and twice the extent of the other in Soil, but neither doth the House nor Statues ap∣proach to the Riches of the other, nor are the grounds so well laid out and so well kept. But for the Furniture of the Palaces of Rome, the publick Apartments are all cove∣red over with Pictures; and for those Apartments in which they lodge, they are generally furnished either with red Velvet, or red Damask, with a broad gold Galloon at every breadth of the stuff, and a gold Fringe at top and bottom; but there is very little Tapistry in Italy. I have been carried into all this digression, from the eneral view, that I was giving you of the Popes Place. I amed one part of it, which will ingage me into a new di∣ession, as it well deserves one, and that is, the Library of e Vatican. The Case is great, but that which is lodged in i, is much greater; for here is a collection of Books that filleth a mans eye: There is first a great Hall, and at the end of it there runs out on both sides, two Galleries of so vast a length, that tho the half of them is already furnished with Books, yet one would hope that there is room left for more new Books than the World will ever produce. The Heidelberg Library stands by it self, and filleth the one de of the Gallery, as the Duke of Vrbis Library of uscripts filleth the other. But tho these last are very  & beautiful, yet they are not of such Antiquity as those of Heidelberg. When it appeared that I was come from gland, King Henry the VIII's Book of the Seven Sa∣raments, with an Inscription writ upon it with his own Hand to Pope Leo the X. was shewed me; together with a collection of some Letters that he writ to Ana Bolen, of which some are in English, and some in French. I, that ew his Hand well, saw clearly that they were no Forge∣ries. There are not many Latin Manuscripts of great Anti∣ty in this Library; some few of Virgils I saw writ in Ca∣pitals. But that which took up almost half of one day at I spent at one time in this place, related to the present pute that is on foot between Mr. Schlstrat the Library-keeper,
and Mr. Maimboug, concerning the Council of Constance. The two Points in debate are the Words of the Decree made in the fourth Session, and the Ppes Con∣firmation. In the forth Session, according to the Frec Manuscripts, a Decree was made, subjecting the Pope, and all other Persons whatsoever, to the Authority of th Council, and to the Decrees it was to make, and to the Reformation it intended to establish both in the Head and the Membrs; which as it implyes, that the Head was corrupted, and needed to be reformed, so it sets th Council so directly aove the Pope, that this Session being confirmed by the Pope, putteth those wbo assert the Pop Infallibility to no small straits: For i Pope Martin, that approved this Decree, was infallible, then this Decree  good still; and if he was not infallible, no other Pope wa infallible. To all this Schelstrat answers from his Man∣scripts, that the words of a Reformation in Head and Mem∣bers, are not in the Decree of that Sssion; and he did she me several Manuscripts, of which two were evidently writ during the sitting of the Council, and were not at all da∣shed, in which these words were not. I know the han and way of writting of that Age too well to be easily mi∣staken in my judgement, concerning those Manuscripts▪ but if those words are wanting, there are other words i them that seem to be much stronger for the superiority o the Counil above that Pope. For it is Decreed, that Popes▪ and all other persons, were bound to submit to the Deci∣sions of the Council, as to Faith: which words are not  the French Manuscripts: Upon this I told Mr. Schelstr that I thought the words in these Manuscripts were stro∣ger than the other, since the word Reformation, as  was used in the time of that Council, belonged chiefly  the Correcting of Abuses, it being often applied to t Reulations that were made in the Monastick Orders, whe they were brought to a more exact Observation of  Rules of their Order: So tho the Council had Decreed Reformation both of Head and Members, I do no see th this would import more, than that the Papacy had fall
ito some Disorders that needed a Reformation: and this  not denyed, even by those who assert the Popes Infali∣ility: but a submission to points of Faith, that is expressly asserted in the Roman Manuscripts, is a much more posi∣tie Evidence against the Popes Infallibility: and the word Faith is not capable of so large a sense as may be justly acribed to Reformation. But this difference, in so main a oint between Manuscripts concerning so late a trans∣tion, gave me an occasion to reflect on the vast uncer∣nty of Tradition, especially of matters that are at a eat distance from us; when those that were so lately ransacted, are so differently represented in Manuscripts, d in which, both those of Paris, and Rome, seem to arry all possible evidences of sincerity. As for the Popes firmation of that Deree, it is true, by a General Bull, pe Martin confirmed the Council of Constance to such period; but besides that, he made a particular Bull,  Schelstrat assured me, in which he enumerated all the Decrees that he confirmed, and among those, this De∣ree concerning the Superiority of the Council is not na∣ed; this seemed to be of much more importance, and therefore I desired to see the Oriinal of the Bull; for there seems to be just reasons to apprehend a forgery here: He promised to do his indeavours, tho he told me, that ould not be easy; for the Bulls were strictly kept; and he next day when I came, hoping to see it, I could not e admitted: but he assured me, that if that had not een the last day of my stay at Rome, he would have pro∣cred a Warant for my seeing the Original: so this is all I can say as to the authenticalness of that Bull: But sup∣osing it to be genuine, I could not agree to Mr. Schel∣t, that the General Bull of Confirmation, ought to e limited to the other, that enumerates the particular crees: but since that particular Bull was never dis∣overed till he hath found it out, it seems it was ecretly made, and did not pass according to the forms of the Consistory; and was a fraudulent thing, of which no noise was to be made in that Age, and
therefore in all the Dispute that followed in the Council of Basil, between the Pope and the Council, upon this very point, no mention was ever made of it by either side: and thus it can have no force, unless it be to discover the Arti∣fices and Fraud of that Court: That at the same time in which the Necessity of their affairs obliged the Pope to con∣firm the Decrees of the Council, he contrived a secret Bull, which in another Age might be made use of, to weake the Authority of the General Confirmation that he gave: and therefore a Bull, that doth not pass in due Form, and is not promulgated, is of no Auhority; and so this pre∣tended Bull cannot limit the other Bull. There were some other things, relating to this Debate, that were shewe me by Mr. Schelstrat; but these being the most important. I mention them only. I will not give you here a lage c∣count of the Learned Men at Rome, Bellori is deservedly famous for his knowledge of the Greek and Egyptian Ai∣quities, and for all that belongs to the Mythologies, an Superstitions of the Heathens; and hath a Closet richly fu∣nished with things relating to those matters. Fabretti i justly celebrated for his Understanding of the Old Roma Architecture and Fabricks. Padre Fabri is the chief Ho∣nour of the Iesuits Colledge, and is much above the com∣mon Rate both for Philosophy, Mathematicks, and Churc-History. And he to whom I was the most obliged,  Nazari, hath so general a view of the several parts o Learning, tho he hath chiefly applied himself to Philosop and Mathematicks, and is a man of so ingaging a Civility and used me in so particular a manner, that I owe him▪ as well as those others who I have mentioned, and who I hath the Honour to see, all the acknowledgments  Esteem and gratitude that I can possibly make them. One sees in Cardial d' Estrè all the advantages of a hi birth, great Parts, a generous Civility, and a meas of knowledge far above what can be expected from a per∣son of his rank; but as he gave a noble Protection to  of the most learned Men that this Age hath produced▪ Mr. Launnoy, who lived many years with him, so i ∣visible,
that he made a great progress by the conversation of so extraordinary a person; and as for Theogicol Lear∣ing▪ there is now none of the Colledge equal to him. Cardinal Howard is too well known in England to need any cracter from me: The elevation of his present condi∣tion hath not in the least changed him; he hath all the eetness and gentleness of temper that we saw in him in England; and he retains the unaffected Simplicity and Humility of a Fryer, amidst all the Dignity of the Purple: and as he sheweth all the generous care and concern for his Country-men that they can expect from him; so I met with so much of it, in so many obliging marks of his good∣ess for my self, that went far beyond a common civility, that I cannot enough acknowledge it. I was told, the Ppes Confessor was a ver extraordinary man for the Oriental earning, which is but little known in Rome: He is a Master of the Arabick Tongue, and hath writ, as Abbot Nazari told me, the learnedst Book against the Mahome∣tn Religion, that the World hath yet seen, but is not yet Printed: He is not so much esteemed in Rome as he would be elsewhere; for his Learning is not in vogue; and the School Divinity and Casuistical Learing, being that for which Divines are most esteemed there; he whose tudies lead him another way, is not so much valued as e ought to be; and perhaps the small account that the Pope makes of Learned Men, turns somewhat upon the Confessor; for it is certain, that this is a Reign in which Learning is very little incouraged. Upon the general Contempt that all the Romans have, for the present Pontificate, one made a pleasant reflection to me, he said▪ Those Popes, that intended to raise their Families, as they saw the censure that this brought on them, so they studied to lessen it by other things, that might soften the Spirits of the people. No man did ore for beautifying Rome, for finishing St. Peters and the Library, and for furnishing Rome with Water, than Pope Paul the V. tho at the same time he did not forget his Family; and tho the other Popes, that have raised great
Families, have not done this to so eminent a degree as he did, yet there are many remains of their Magnificence▪ whereas those Popes that have not raised Families, have i seems thought that alone was enough to maintain their Reputation, and so they have not done much, either to re∣commend their Government to their Sbjects, or their Rig to Posterity; and it is very plain, that the present Pope ta∣keth no great care of this. His life hath been certainly very innocent, and free of all those publik Scandals that make a noise in the World: and there is at present a regularity in Rome, that deserveth great commendation; for pu∣blick Vices are not to be seen there: His personal Sobriety is also singular. One assured me, that the Expence of his Table did not amount to a Crown a day; tho this is in∣deed short of Sisto V. who gave order to his Steward, ne∣ver to exceed five and twenty Bajokes, that is, eighteen pence a day, for his Diet. The Pope is very careful of his Health, and doth never expose it; for upon the least disorder, he shuts himself up in his Chamber, and often keepeth his Bed for the least indisposition many days; but his Gover∣ment is severe, and his Subjects are ruined. And here one thing cometh into my mind which per∣haps is not ill grounded, that the Poverty of a Nation, not only dispeoples it, by driving the People out of it, but by weakning the natural fertility of the Subjects; for a men and women well cloathed, and well fed, that are not exhausted with perpetual Labour, and with the tearing Anxieties that Want brings with it, must be much more lively, than those that are pressed with Want; so it is very likely, that the one must be much more disposed to propagate, than the other: and this appeared more evi∣dent to me, when I compared the Fruitfulness of Genev and Switzerland, which the Barrenness that reigns over all Italy. I saw two extraordinary instances of the copious pro∣ductions of Genva; Mr. Tronhin, that was Proess of Divinity, and Father to the Iudicious and worthy Proes∣sor of the same name; that is now there, dyed at the age of sevnty six Years, and had a hundred and fifteen Persons all
alive, that had ether descended from him, or by marri∣ge with those that descended from him, called him Father. And Mr. Calendrin, a pious and laborious Preacher of that Town, that is descended from the Family of the Calendrini, who receiving the Reformation about a hundred nnd fifty ars ago, left Lucea their Native City with the Turre∣, the Diodati, and the Bourlamacchi, and some others that came and setled at Geneva: He is now but seven and forty years old, and yet he hath a hundred and five Persons that are descended of his Brothers and Sisters, or arried to them; so that if he liveth but to Eghty, and the Family multiplieth as it hath done, he may see some hundreds that will be in the same relation to him; but such things as these are not to be found in Italy. There is nothing that delights a stranger more in Rome; than to see the great Fountains of Water, that are almost in all the corners of it: That old Aquaduct which Pl the V. restored, cometh from a collection of Srces, five and thirty Miles distant from Rome, that ns all the way upon an Aqueduct in a Cannel that is vaul∣ted, and is liker a River than a Fountain: it breaketh out in five several Fountains, of which some give water about a foot square. That of Sixtus the V. the great Fountain of Aqua Travi, that hath yet no decoration, but dischar∣geth a prodigious quantity of Water. The glorious Foun∣tan in the Piazza Navona, that hath an air of greatness in it that surprizeth one, the Fountain in the Piazza de Spagna, those before S. Peters, and the Palazzo Farn∣, with many others, furnish Rome so plentifully, that al∣most every private House hath a Fountain that runs conti∣ually. All these, I say, are noble Decorations, that carry an sefulness with them, that cannot be enough commended: and gives a much greater Idea of those who have taken ca∣re to supply this City, with one of the chief Pleasures and Conveniences of Life, than of others; who have laid out illions meerly to bring quantities of Water to give the eye  little diversion, which would have been laid out much ore nobly and usefully, and would have more effectu∣ally
enterniz their Fame, if they had been imployed  the Romans did their Treasures, in furnishing great To with Water. There is an universal Civility that reigns among  sorts of people at Rome, which in a great measure flo from their Government; for every man being capable of  the avancements of that State, since a simple Eccl∣siastick may become one of the Monsignori, and  of these may be a Cardinal, and one of these may b chosen Pope, this makes every man behave himself towar all other persons with an Exactness of Respect: for  man knows what any other may grow to. But this mak Professions of Esteem and Kindness go so promiscou to all sorts of persons, that one ought not to build to much on them, the conversation of Rome is generally upo News, for tho there is no news Printed there, yet in the se∣veral Antichambers of the Cardinals (where if they mak any considerable figure, there are Assemblys of those th make their Court to them) one is sure to hear all the  of Europe, together with many speculations upon what p∣seth. At the Queen of Swedens, all that relateth to Germany or the North is ever to be found; and that Princess, tha must ever reign among all that have a true tast either o Wit or Learning, hath still in her drawing Rooms the be Court of the Strangers; and her Civility, together with th vast variety with whih she furnisheth her conversation▪ maketh her to be the chief of all the living Rarities that on sees in Rome; I will not use her own words to my self▪ which was, That she now grew to be one of the Antiquiti of Rome. The Ambassadors of Crowns, who live here in another form than in any other Court, and the C∣dinals and Prelates of the several Nations, that do all m nd center here, make, that there is more news in Rome, than any where: For Priests, and the men of Religious O∣ders, write larger and more particular Letters, than any other sort of men. But such as apply themselves to mak their Court here, are comdemned to a loss of time, that  need be well recompenced; for it is very great. As for
hat Studies Antiquities, Pictures, Statues, or Musik, ere is more entertainment for him at Rome, than in all he rest of Europe; but if he hath not a tast of these things,  will soon be weary of a place where the Conversation is ways general, and where there is little Sincerity or Open∣ practised, and by consequence, where friendship is  understood. The Womn here begin to be a little more versable, tho a Nation naturally jealous, will hardly ow a great liberty in a City that is composed of Ecclesia∣icks; who being denyed the priviledge of Wives of their , are suspected of being sometimes too bold with e Wives of others: The Liberties that were taken in the Constable of Naples's palace, had indeed disgusted the Ro∣ns much at that Freedom, which had no bounds. t the Dutchess of Bracciano, that is a Frenh Woman, ath by the exactness of her deportment, amidst all the innocent Freedoms of a Noble Conversation, recovered in a great measure, the Credit of those Liberies, that La∣i beyond the Mountains practise, with all the strictness of Vertue: For she receiveth visits at publick hours, and in publick Rooms; and by the liveliness of her Conversa∣on, maketh that her Court is the pleasantest Assembly o Strangers, that is to be found in any of the Palaces of the Italians at Rome. I will not ingage in a description of Rome, either an∣cient or modern, this hath been done so oft, and with such actness, that nothing can be added to what hath been already published. It is certain, that when one is in the Ca∣tol, and ses those poor Rests of what once it was, he is srprized to see a building of so great a fame sunk so low, that one can scarce imagine that it was once a Castle, sci∣ated upon a Hill, able to hold out against a Siege of the Gls: The Tarpeian Rock is now of so small a fall, that a man would think it no great matter, for his diversion, to leap over it: and the shape of the ground hath not been so much altered on one side, as to make us think it is very uch changed on the other. For Severus's Triumphal rch, which is at the foot of the Hill on the other side, is
not now buried above two foot within the ground, as he vast Amphitheater of Titus▪ is not above three oot sunk un∣der the level of the ground. Within the Capitol one ee many Noble remnants of Antiquity; but none is more glorious, as well as more useful, than the Tables of  Consuls, which are upon the Walls: and the Inscription on the Columna Rostrate in the time of the first Punick War, is without doubt the most valuable Antiquity in Rome. From this all along the sacred way, one findeth such remnan of Old Rome in the Ruins of the Temples, in the Triumphl Arches, in the Portico's, and other Remains of that Glo∣rious Body, that as one cannot see these too often, so every time one sees them, they kindle in him vast idea's of that Republick, and make him reflect on that which he learned in his youth with great pleasure. From the height of the Convent of Araceli, a man hath a full vie of all the extent of Rome, but literally it is now seges ubi Roma suit; for the parts of the City, that were most inhabited anciently, are those that are now laid in gre Gardens, or, as they call them, Vineyards, of which some are half a mile in compass: The vastness of the Rom Magnificence and Luxury, is that which passeth imagina∣tion; the prodigious Amphitheter of Titus, that could con∣venienly receive eighty five thousand spectators; the great extent of the Circus Maximus; the vaults where the Wa∣ters were reserved that furnished Titus's Baths; and above all, Dioclesin's Bths, tho built when the Empire was in its decay, are so far above all Modern Buildings, that the∣re is not so much as room for a comparison. The extent of those Bahs is above half a mile in compass: the vastness of the Rooms in which the Bathers might swim, of which the Carthusians Church, that yet remains intire, is one, and the many great Pillars, all of one stone of Marble, beautifully spotted, are things of which these latter Ages are not capa∣ble. The beauty of their Temples, and of the Portico's before them, is amazing, chiefly that of the Rotunda where the Fa∣brick without, looketh as mean, being only brick, as the Architecture is bold, for it riseth up in a Vault, and yet at the
top there is an open left, of thirty foot in Diameter, which▪ as it is the only Window of the Church, so it filleth it with light; and is the hardiest piece of Architecture that ever was made. The Pillars of the Portico are also the noblest in Rome, they are the highest and biggest that one can see any where all of one Stone: and the numbers of those ncient Pillars, with which, not only many of the Curches are beautified, chiefly S. Mary Maggiore, and  Iohn in the Lateran▪ but with which even private hou∣ses are adorned, and of he Fragments, of which there are ch mulitudes in all the Streets of Rome, giveth a great idea of the Expencefulness of the old Romans in their buil∣ngs; for the hewing and fetching a few of those Pillars, ust have cost more than whole Palaces do now: since ost of them were brought from Greece: Many of these Pillars are of Porphiry, others of Iasp, others of grana∣ed Marble, but the greatest number is of white Marble: The two Columns, Trajans and Atonius, the two Horses that are in the Mount Cavallo, and the other two Horss in the Capitol, which have not indeed he postures and otion of the other: The brass Horse, that as is believed carrieth Marcus Aurelius; the remains of Nro's Colossus; the Tmple of Bahus near the Catacomb of S. Agnes, which is the intirest and the least altered of all the an∣cient Temples: The great Temple of Peace; those of he Sun and Moon: that of Romulus and Remus, (which I considered as the ancientest Fabrick that is now let; for it is little and simple, and standeth in such a place, that hen Rome grew so costly, it could not have been let alone unchanged, if it had not been that it was reveren∣ced for its Antiquity) the many o her Portico's, the Ar∣ces of Severus, of Titus, and Constantine, in the last of which one sees that the Sculpture of his Age▪ was much sunk from what it had been, only in the top there are some Bas Reliefs, that are clearly of a much ancienter time, and of a better manner. And that which exceedeth all the rest, the many great Aqueducts that come from all hands, and run over a vast distance, are things which a man cannot see
oft enough, if he would form in himself a just idea of the vastness of that Republick, or rather Empire: There are many Statues and Pillars, and other Antiquities of grea value, dug up in al the quarters of Rome, these last hun∣dred and fourscore years, since Pope Lo the tenth's time▪ who as he was the greatest Patron of Learning and Arts, that perhaps ever was, so was the generousest Prince that ever reigned; and it was he that first set on foot the inqui∣ring into the Riches of Old Rome, that lay, till his tim, for the most part, hid under ground; and indeed if e had been less scandalous in his Impiety and Atheism, of which neither he nor his Court were so much as ashamed, he had been one of the most celebrated persons of any Age. Soon after him Pope Paul the III. gave the ground of the Monte Palatino to his Family: But I was told, that hi large piece of ground, in which one should look for the greatest collection of the Antiquities of the highest value, since this is the Ruin of the Palace of the Romun Emperors, hath never been yet searched into with any exactness: So that when a curious Prince cometh, that is willing to imploy many hands in digging up and down this Hill, we may expect new Scenes of Roman Antiquities. But all this matter would require Volumes, and therefore I have only named these things, because I can add nothing to those copious Descriptions that have been so oft made of them. Nor will I say any thing of the modern Palaces, or the Ornaments of them, either in Pictures or Statues, which are things that carry one so far, that it is not easie to give bounds to the Descriptions ino which one findeth himself carried, when he once enters upon so fruitful a Subject. The number of the Palaces is great, and every one of them hath enough to fix the attention of a Travel∣ler, till a new one drives the former out of his thoughts: It is true, the Palestrina, the Borghese, and the Farnes have somewhat in them that leave an impression which no new Objects can wear out; and as the last hath a noble Square before it, with two great Fountains in it, so the Statue of Hercules and the Bull, that are below, and the
Gallery above stairs, are unvaluable; the Roof of the Gallery is one of the best pieces of Painting that is extant, being all of Carrachio's hand; and there are in that Gallery the greatest number of heads of the Greek Philosophers and Poets that I ever saw together: That of Homer and that of Socrates were the two that struck me most, chiefly the latter, which as it is, without dispute, a true Antick, so it carrieth in it all the Characters that Plato and Xnophon give us of Socrates; the flat Nose, the broad Face, the simplicity of Look, and the mean Appearance which that great Philosopher made, so that I could not return oft enough to look upon it, and was delighted with this more than with all the Wonders of the Bll, which is indeed a Rock of Marble, cut out into a whole Scene of Statues; but as the History of it is not well known, so there are such faults in the Sculpture, that tho it is all ex∣tream fine, yet one seeth it hath not the exactness of the best times. As for the Churches & Convents of Rome, as the num∣ber, the Vastness, the Riches both of Fabrick, Furniture▪ Painting and other Ornaments amaze one, so here again a Stranger is lost; and the Convent that one seeth last, is al∣ways the most admired: I confess, the Mieva, which is he Dominicans, where the Inquisition sitteth is that which maketh the most sensible impression upon one that passeth at Rome for an Heretick, tho except one committeth great follies▪ he is in no danger there; and the Poverty that reigns in that City maketh them find their interest so much in using Strangers well, whatsoever their Religion may be, that no man needs be affraid there: And I have more than ordinary reason to acknowledge this, who ha∣ving ventured to go thither, after all the liberty that I had taken to write my thoughts freely both of the Church and Se of Rme, and was known by all with whom I conver∣sed there, yet met with the highest Civilities possible among all sorts of people, and in paticular both among the Eng∣lish and Sottish Iesuits, tho they knew well enough that I was no friend to their Order. In the Gallery of the English Iesuits, among the Pctures
of their Martyrs, I did not meet with Garnet; for perhaps that name is so well known, that they would not expose a Picture, with such a name on it, to all strangers; yet Old-corn, being a name less known, is hung there among their Martyrs, tho he was as clearly convicted of the G-powder Treason, as the other was: and it seemed a little strange to me to see that at a time, in which, for other Rea∣sons the Writers of that Communion have not thought fit, to deny the truth of that Conspiracy, a Iesuit convicted of the blackest crime that ever was projected, should be reckoned among their Martyrs. I saw likewise there the Original of those Emblematical Prophecies, relating to England, that the Jesuits have had at Rome near sixty years, and of which I had some time ago procured a Copy; so I found my Copy was true. I hapned to be at Rom during St. Gregory's Fair and Feast, which lasted several dayes. In his Church the Hosty was exposed; and from that, all that came thither, went to the Chappel, that was once his House, in which his Statue, and the T∣ble, where he serd the poor, are preserved: I sa such vast numbers of people there, that one would have thought all Rome was got together. They all kneeled down to his Statue, and after a prayer said to it, they kissed his foot, and every one touched the Table with his Beads, as hoping to draw some vertue from it. I will add nothing of the several Oblisks nnd Pillars that are in Rom, of the celebrated Chappels that are in some of the gre Churches, in particular those of Sixtus the V. and Paul the V. in Santa Maria Maggiore, of the Water-works in the Quirinal, the Vatican, and in many of the Vineyards: Nor will I go out of Rome to describe Frescati, (For Tivoly I did not see) The young Prince Borghese, who is indeed one of the Glories of Rome, as well for his learning as for his vertue, did me the Honour to carry me thither with those two learned Abbots, Fabretti and Nazari, and entertained me with a magnificence that became him bet∣ter to give than me to receive. The Water-works in the Al∣dobrandin Palace have a Magnificence in them beyond all
that I ever saw in France, the mixture of Wind with the Water, and the Thunders and Storms that this maketh is noble: The Wter-works of the Ludovisio, and the Mon∣te Dragene, have likewise a greatness in them that is natural; and indeed, the Riches that one meets with in all places within doors in Italy, and the Pverty that one seeth every where abroad, are the most unsuitable things imaginable: but it is very likely, that a great part of their movable Wealth will be ere long carried into Fra; or as soon as any Picture or Statue of great value is offered to be sold, those that are imployed by the King of France, do presently buy it up, so that as that King hath already, the greatest collection of Pictures that is in Europe, he will very probably in a few years more, bring together the chief Treasures of Italy. I have now given you an account of all that appeared most remarkable to me in Rome. I shall to this add a very extraordinary piece of Natural History that fell out there within these two years, which I had first from those two learned Abbots, Fabretti and Nzari, and that was afterwards more authentically confirmed to me by Cardi∣al Howard, who was one of the Congregation of Cardi∣nals that examined and judged the matter. There were two Nuns near Rome, one as I remember was in the City; and the other not far from it, who, after they had been for some years in a Nunnery, perceived a very strange change in Nature, and that their Sex was altered, whih grew by some degrees to a total alteration in one; and tho the other was not so entire a change, yet it was visible she was more Man than Woman; upon this the matter was looked in∣to: That which naturally offereth it self here, is, that these two had been alwayes what they then appeared to be; but that they had gone into a Nunnery in a dis∣guise, to gratifie a brutal Apptite. But to this, whn I proposed it, answer was made, that as the Breasts of a Womn, that remained still, did in a great measure shake off that Objection, so the proofs were given so fully, of their having been real Females, that
there was no doubt left of that, nor had they given any sort of Scandal in the change of their Sex; And if there had been any room left to suspect a Cheat or Disguise, the proceedings would have been both more severe and more secret; and these persons would have been Burnt, or at least put to Death in some terrible manner. Some Physicians and Chirurgions were appointed to examin the matter, and at last, after a long and exact inquiry, they were judged to be absolved from their vows, and were dismissed from the Obligation of a Religious Life, and re∣quired to go in mens habit. One of them was a Valet  Chambre to a Roman Marquess, when I was there: I heard of this matter only two dayes before I left Rome, so that I had not time to inquire after it more particularly; but I judged it so extraordinary, that I thought it was worth communicating to so curious an Inquirer into Nature. And since I am upon the subject of the Changes that have been made in Nature, I shall add one of another fort, that I examined while I was at Geneva: There is a Minister of S. Gervais, Mr. Gody, who hath a Daughter, that is now sixteen Years old; Her Nurse had an extraordi∣nary thickness of hearing; at a year old, the Child spoke all those little words, that Children begin usually to learn at that age, but she made no progress; yet this was not observed, till it was too late; and as she grew to he two years old, they preceived then that she had lost her hea∣ring, and was so deaf, that ever since, tho she hears great noises, yet she hears nothing that one can speak to her. It seems, while the milk of her Nurse, was more abun∣dant, and that the Child suckt more moderately the first year, those humors in the Blood and Milk had not that effect on her, that appeared after she came to suck more violently, and that her Nurse's Milk being in less quanti∣ty, was thicker, and more charged with that vapour that occasioned the deafness. But this Child hath by obser∣ving the Motions of the Mouths and Lips of others, acqui∣red so many Words, that out of these she hath formed
ort of Iargon, in which she can hold conversation whole days with those that can speak her own language. I could understand some of her words, but could not compre∣hend a period; for it seemed to be a confused noise: She knows nothing that is said to her, unless she seeth the Mo∣tion of their Mouths that speak to her; so that in the Night, when it is necessary to speak to her, they must light a candle: Only one thing appeared the strangest part of the whole narration; She hath a Sister, with whom she has practised her language more than with any other; and in the Night, by laying her Hand on her Sister's Mouth, she an perceive by that, what she says, and so can discourse ith her in the night, It is true, her Mother told me, that this did not go far, and that she found out only some short period in this manner, but it did not hold out very long: thus this young Woman, without any pains taken on her, hath meerly by a natural sagacity, found out a method of holding discourse, that doth in a great measure lessen the Misery of her Deafness. I examined this matter critically, but only the Sister was not present, so that I could not see how the conversation past between them in the dark. But before I give over writing concerning Rome, I can∣ot hinder my self, from giving you an account of a con∣versation that I had with one of the most Celebrated per∣sons that lives in it; I was talking concerning the credit that the Order of the Iesuites had every where; It was said, that all the World mistrusted them, and yet by a range sort of Contradiction all the World trusted them; and tho it was well known that every Iesuite was truer to the Interests of his Order than he could be o the Interests of any Prince whatsoever, yet those Princes that would be very careful, not to suffer Spys to come into their Courts, or into their Counels, suffered those Spys to come into their Breasts and Consciences: and tho Prines were not generally very tender in those parts, yet as they had oft as much Gilt, so they had sometimes as much Far as other people, which a dextrous Spy knew well how to manage. Upon which, that Person, that pretended to
be a zealous Catholick, added, that for their part, they considered only the Character that the Church gave to a Priest; and if the Church qualified him to do the functions of a Priest, they thought it very needless to enquire after other personal Qualities, which were but common things, whereas the other was all divine. On the Con∣trary, they thought it was so much the better to have to do with a poor Ignorant Priest; for then they had to do only with the Church, and not with the Man. Pursuant to this, that persons Confessor was the greatest, and the most notorious Blokhead that could be ound; and when they were asked, why they made use of so weak a man; they answered; hecause they could no find a weaker: and when ever they found one better qualified that way, if it were a Groom, or a Footman that got into Prists Orders, they would certainly make use of him. For they would ask counsel of a Friend; but they knew no other use of a Confessor, but to confess to him, and to receive Absalu∣tion from him: and in so doing, they pretended they acted as became a true Catholik, that considered only the Po∣wer of the Church in the Priest, without regarding any thing else. So far have I entertained you with the short Ramble that I made, which was too short to deserve the name of Travelling, and therefore the Inquiries or Observations that I could make, must be received with the Abtement that ought to be made for so short a stay; and all will be of a piece, when the Remarks are as slight, as the Abode I made in the places through which I past was short. As I have avoided the troubling you with things that are com∣monly known, so if I have not entertained you with a long recital of ordinary matters; yet I have told you nothing but what I saw and knew to be true, or that I had from such hands, that I have very good reason to believe it: and I fancy, that the things which made the greatest impression on my self, will be acceptably received by you, to whom, as upon many accounts, I owe all the expressions of Esteem and Gratitude that I can ever pay; so I had a
more particular reason, that determined me to give you so full an account of all I saw and observed, for as you were pleased at parting to do me the Honour, to desire me to communicate to you such things as appeared most remakable to me, so I found such a vast advantage in many places, but more particularly at Venie, Rome and Naples, by the Happiness I have of being known to you, and of being so far considered by you, that I could give a copious account both of your Person and Studis, to those in whom your curious Discoveries had kindled that esteem for you, which all the World payeth both to you and to your immortal Inquires into Nature, which are among the peculiar Blessings of this Age; and that are read with no less care and pleasure in Italy than in England. This was so well received, that I found the great advantage of this Honour I did my self in assuming the glorious Title of one of your Friends; and I owe a great part of that di∣stinction which I met with, to this favourable Character that I gave my self; so that if I made any progress in the Inquiries that so short a stay could inable one to make, I owe it in so peculiar a manner to you, that this Return that I make, is but a very small part of that I owe you, and which I will be indeavouring to pay you to the last moment of my life.
THE FIFTH LETTER. From Nimmegen, the 20th of May, 1686. SIR, I Thought I had made so full a Point at the conclusio of my last Letter, that I should not have given you the trouble of reading any more Letters of the volum of the former: But new Scenes, and new matter of∣fering themselves to me, I fancy you will be very gentle to me, if I ingage you again to two or three Hours reading. From Cvita Vecchia I came to Marseilles, where  there were a Road as Safe, as the Harbour is Covered; and if the Harbour were as Large, as it is Convenient, it were certainly one of the most important places in the World: all is so well defended, that it is with respect ei∣ther to Storms or Enemies, the securest Port that can be seen any where. The Freedoms of this place, ho it is now at the mercy of the Cittadel, are such, and its Scitua∣tion draweth so much Trade to it; that there one seeth another appearance of Wealth, than I found in any Town of France; and there is a new Street lately built there, that for the Beauty of the Buildings, and the Largeness of the Street, is the Noblest I ever saw. There is in that Port a perpetual heat, and the Sun was as strong in the Christmas week, that I was often driven off the Key. I made a Tour from thence through Province, Lnguedo, and Dauphine. I will offer you no account of Nismes, nor of the Amphitheatre in it, or the Pont du Gar near it; which as they are stupendious things, so they are so copiously described by many, and are so generally known
to the English Nation, that if you have never gone that way your self, yet you must needs have received so particular a relation of them, from those that have seen them on their way to Montpelier, that I judge it needless to enlarge upon them: Nor will I say any thing of the Soil, the Towns, or any other remakable things that I found there▪ I have a much stronger inclination to say somewhat concerning the Persecution which I saw in its Rage and ut∣most Fury; and of which I could give you many In∣ances, that are so much beyond all the common mea∣sures of Barbarity and Cruelty, that I confess they ought not to be believed, unless I could give more positive proofs of them, than are fitting now to be brought forth; and the particulars that I could tell you are such, that if I should relate them with the necessary Cicumstances of Time, Place, and Persons, these might be so fatal to ma∣ny that are yet in the power of their Enemies, that my re∣gard to them restrains me. In short, I do not think that in y Age there ever was such a Violation of all that is Sacred, either with relation to God or Man: And what I saw and knew there, from the first hand, hath so confirmed all the Idea's that I had taken from Books, of the Cruelty of that Religion, that I hope the impreion that this hath made upon me, shall never end but wich my Life: The Applauses that the whole Clergy give to this way of proceeding, the many Panegyricks that are already writ upon it, of which, besides the more pompous ones that appear at Paris, there are numbers writ by smaller Authors in every Town of any note there; and the Ser∣mons that are all flights of flattery upon this subject, are such evident Demonstrations of their sense of this mat∣ter, that what is now on foo may be well termed, the Act of the whole Clergy of France, which yet hath been hitherto esteemed the most moderate part of the Roman Communion. If any are more moderate than others; and have not so far laid off the humane na∣ture, as to go in intirely into those bloody Practices, yet they dare not own it, but whisper it in secret, as if it
were hals Treason: but for the greater part, they do not only magnifie all that is done, bur they animate even the Dragoos to higher degrees of Rage: and there was such a Heat spread over all the Country, on this occasion, that one could not go into any Ordinary, or mix in any pro∣miscuous conversation, without fining such effects of it, that it was not easie for such as were toucht with he least degree o Compassion for the Miseries that the poor Protestants suffered, to be a witness to the Insulting that they must meet with in all places. Some herhaps ima∣gin, that this hath not been approved in Italy, and it is true, there were not any publick Rejoycings upon it at Rme; no Indulgenes nor Te Deums were heard of: And the Spanish Factin being so prevalent there, it is not strange if a course of proceedings, that is without a example, was set forth, by all that were o that Inte∣rest, in its proper colours; of which I met with some instances my self, and could no but smile, to see some of the Spanish Faction so far to forget their Courst of Inqui∣sition, as to argue against the Conversions by te Dra∣goons, as a reproach to the Catholick Religion. Yet the Pope was of another mind; for the Duke d'Estrées gave him an account of the Kings Proceedings in this matter very copiously; as he himself related it. Upon which the Pope approved all, and expressed a great Satisfactio in every thing that the King had done in that matter; and the Pope added, that he found some Cardinals (as I re∣member the Duke d'Estrées said two) were not pleased with it, and had taken the liberty to censure it; but the Pope said, they were too blame: The Duke d'Estrées did not nme the two Cardinals, tho he said, he believed he knew who they were; and it is very like that Cardinal Pio was one; for I was told, that he spoke freely enough of this matter. I must take the liberty to add one thing to you, that I do not see that the French King is to be so much blamed in thit matter as his Religion i, which, without question, obligeth him to extirpate Hereticks, and not to keep his Faith to them: so that
istead of censuring him, I must only lament his being bred up in a Reliion that doth certainly oblige him to ivest. himself of Humanity, and to violate his Faith, whensoever the cause of his Chrch and Religion requi∣eh it: Or if there is any thing in this conduct, that can∣ot be entirely justified from the Principls of that Rli∣gion▪ it is this  that be doch not put the Hereticks to Death  of hand, but that he forceth them, by all the Extremi∣es possible, to sign an Abjuation, that all the World must needs see, is done against their Consiences: And tis being the only End of their Miseries; those that would think any sort of Death a happy conclusion of their Suffe∣rngs, seeing no prospect of such a glorious issue out of their Trouble, are prevailed on by the many lingring Deaths▪ of which they see no end, to make Shipwrack of the Faith: This appearance of Mercy, in not putting men to Death, doth truly verifie the Character that Solo∣ giveth of the tender Mercies of the wicked, that they  cruel. But I will stop here, tho it is not easy to retire from so copious a subject, that as it affordeth so much matter▪ so upon many accounts, raiseth a heat of thought, that i not easily governed. I will now lead you to a Scene that giveth less passion. I past the Winter at Geneva, with more satisfaction than I had thought it was possible for me to have found ay where out of England: tho that received great allayes from the most lamentabl Stories that we had every day from France: But there is a Sorrow by which the Heart is made better. I ought to make the most publick aknowledg∣ments possible for the Extraordinary Civilities that I met with in my own particular: but that is too low a Subject  entertain you with it. That which pleased me most, was of a more publick nature; before I left Geneva, the umber of the English there was such, that I ound we could ake a small Congregation; for we were twelve or four∣een; so I addessed my self to the Council of 25. for Liberty to ve our own Worship in our own Language, according to
the English Liturgy. This was immediately granted in so obliging a manner, that as there was not one person that made any Exception to it, so they sent one of their Body to me, to let me know, that in case our number should grow to be so great, that it were fit for us to assemble in a Church, they would grant us one, which had been done in Queen Maries Reign: but till then▪ we might hold our Assemblys as we thought fit. So after that time, during the rest of my stay there, we had every Sunday our Devo∣tions according to the Common-Prayer Morning and Eve∣ning: and at the Evening Prayer, I preacht in a Room that was indeed too large for our small Company; but thete being a considerable number in Geneva that Under∣stand English, and in particular some of the Professrs and Ministers; we had a great many Strangers that met with us: and the last Sunday I gave the Sacrament according to the way of the Church of England; and upon this occa∣sion, I found a general joy in the Town, for this, that I had given them an Opportunity of expressing the respect they had for our Chrch; and as in their publick Prayer they alwayes prayed for the Churhes of Great rittain, as well as for the King, so in private Discourse they shew∣ed all possible esteem for our Constitutions; and they spoke of the unhappy Divisions among us, and of the Se∣paration that was made from us, upon the account of ou Government and Ceremonies, with great regret and dislike. I shall name to you only two of their Professours, that as they are Men of great Distinction, so they were the pe∣sons with whom I conversed the most. The one is Mr. T∣retin, a Man of great Learning, that by his Indefatgable Study and Labour has much worn out, and wasted hi strength; amidst all the affluence of a great plenty of For∣tune to which he was born, one discerns in him all  Modesty of a humble and mortified temper, and of a active and fervent Charity, proportioned to his Abu∣dance, or rather beyond it: And there is in him such  melting Zeal for Religion, as the present conjuncture  for, with all the seriousness of Piety and Devotion, whi
shews it felf both in private conversation and in his most edifying Sermons, by which he enters deep into the Con∣sciences of his Hearers. The other is Mr. Tronhin, a Man of a strong Head, and of a clear and correct Judgment; who has all his thoughts well digested; his Conversation has an engaging charm in it that cannot be resisted: He i a Man of Extraordinary vertue, and of a Readiness to oblige and serve all persons, that ha scarce any mea∣sures: His Sermons have a sublimity in them, that strikes the Hearer, as well as it edifyes him: His Thoughts are noble, and his Eloquence is Masculine and exact, and has all the Majesty of the Chair in it, tempered with all the Softness of Persuasion, so that he not only convinces is Hearers, but subdues them, and triumphs over them. In such Company it was no wonder, if time seemed to go off too fast, so that I left Geneva with a concern, that I could not have felt in leaving any place, out of the Isl of Brittain. From Geneva, I went a second time through Switzer∣land to Basil: at Avanche I saw the Noble Fragments of a great Roman Work, which seems to have been the Portico to some Temple: the Heads of the Pillars are about four Foot square, of the Ionick Order; the Temple hath been dedicated to Neptune, or some Sea-god▪ for on the Fragments of the Architrave, which are very beautiful, there are Dolphins and Sea-horses in Bas Reliefs; and the Neighbourhood of the place to the Lakes of Iverdn and Morat maketh this moré evident: there is also a Pillar standing up in its full height, or rather the Corner of a Building, in which one seeth the Rests of a regular Archi∣cture in two ranks of Pillars: If the ground near this were carefully searcht, no doubt it would discover more ests of that Fabrick. Not far from this is Morat; and a little on this side of it is a Chappel, full of the Bones of he Burgundians, that were killed by the Switzers, when this place was besieged by the famous Charles Duke of urgundy, who lost a great Army before it, that was ntirely cut off by the besieged; the Inscription is very
extraordinary, especially for that Age: for the bones being so piled up, that the Chappel is quite filled with them, the Inscription bears, that Charles Duke of Bur∣gundy's Army having besieged Morat, Hoc sui Monume∣tum reliquiet, had left that Monument behind it. It can∣not but seem strange to one that views Morat, to imagin how it was possible for a Town so scituated, and so slight∣ly fortified, to hold out against so powerful a Prince, and so great an Army, that brought Canon before it. I met with nothing remarkable between this and Basil, except that I staid sometime at Bern, and knew it better; and at this second time it was, that My Lord Advoyer d' Erlach gave Order to shew me the Original Records of the famous Process of the four Dominicans; upon which I have retoucht the Letter that I writ to you last year, so that I now send it to you with the Corrections and In∣largements, that this second stay at Bern gave me occasion to make. Basil is the Town of the greatest extent of all Switzer∣land, but it is not inhabited in proportion to its extent. The Rhine maketh a Crook before it; and the Town is scituated on a rising ground, which hath a noble effect on the Eye, when one is on the Bridge; for it looketh like a Theater. Little Basil on the other side of the Rhine, is almost a fourth part of the whole: the Town is surroun∣ded with a Wall and Ditch; but it is so exposed on so many sides, and hath now so dreadful a Neighbour within a quarter of a League of it, the Fort of Hunningen, that it hath nothing to trust to, humanely speaking, but its Vnion with the other Cantons. The Maxims of this Canton have hindred its being better peopled than it is; the Advantages of the Burgership are such, that the Citizens will not share them with Strangers, and by this mean they do not admit them. For I was told, that during the last War, that Alsatia was so often the Seat of both Armys, Basil having then a Neutrality, it might have been well filled, if it had not been for this Maxim. And i were a great Happiness to all the Cantons, if they could
have diffecent Degrees of Burgership, so that the lower Degrees might be given to Strangers for their Incourage∣ment to come and live among them: and the higher De∣grees, which qualifie Men for the advantagious Imploy∣ments of the State, might he reserved for the Ancient Fa∣ilies of the Natives. Basil is divided into sixeen Cmpa∣ies, and every one of these hath four Members in the little Council, so that it consisteth of sixy four: But of those our, two are chosen by the Company it self, who are called the Masters, and the other two are chosen by the Council out of the Company; and thus as there are two sorts of Cunellors, chosen in those different manners, there are also two chief Magistrates. There are two Bur∣ermasters, that Reign by turns, and two Zunft. Ma∣ters, that have also their turns, and all is for life; and he last are the Heads of the Cmpanies, like the Romans Tribunes of the People. The Fabrick of the State House is ancient; there is very good paintin in fresco upon the Walls; one piece hath given much offence to the Papists, ho they have no Reason to blame the Reformation for it, since it was done several years before it, in the year 1510. t is a Representation of the Day of Iudgement, and after Sentence given, the Devil is represented driving many efore him to Hell, and among these there is a Pope, and everal Eclesiasticks. But it is believed, that the Cun∣il, which sate so long in this place, acting so vigorously gainst the Pope, ingaged the Town into such a hatred of the Ppacy, thas this might give the rise to this Repre∣entation The more learned in the Town ascribe the be∣inning of the Custom in Basil of the Clocks anticipating he time a full Hour, to the sitting of the Council, and hey say, that in order to the Advancing of business, and he shortning heir Sssions, they ordered their Clocks to be set forward an Hour, which continueth to this day. The Cathedral is a great old Gothick Building; the Cham∣er where the Counil sate, is of no great reception, nd is a very ordinary Room: Erasmus's Tomb is only  plain Insription upon a great Brass Plate: There are
many of Holbens's Pictures here, who was a native of Ba∣sil, and was recommended by Erasmus to King Hnry the VIII. the two best are a Corpo or Christ Dead, which is certainly one of the best Pictures in the World: There is another Piece of his in the Stadt-House (for this is in the publick Library) of about three or four foot square, in which, in six several Cantons, the several parts of our Saviours Passion are represented with a life and beauty that cannot be enough admired; it is valued at ten thousand Crowns; it is on Wood, but hath that Freshness of colour still on it, that seems particular to Holbens's Pencil. There is also a Dance, that he painted on the Walls of an House where he used to drink, that is so worn out, that very little is now to be seen, except shapes and Postures: but these shew the exquisiteness of the Haud. There is another longer Dance, that runneth all along the side of the Con∣vent of the Augustinians, which is now the French Church, which is Deaths Dance; there are above threescore Fi∣gures in it at full length, of Persons of all ranks, from Popes, Emperors and Kings, down to the meanest sorts of Peopl, and of all Ages and Professions, to whom Death appea∣reth in an insolent and surprizing posture; and the seve∣ral Passions that they express, are so well set out, that this was certainly a great design. But the Fresco being exposed to the Air, this was so worn out some time ago, hat they ordered the best Painter they had to lay new Co∣lours on it; hut this is so ill done, that one had rather see the dead shadows of Holbens's Pencil, than this course work. There is in Basil a Gun-Smith, that maketh Wind-Guns, and he shewed me one, that as it received at once Air for ten shot, so it had this peculiar to it, which he pretends is his own Invention, that he can Discharge all the Air that can be parcelled out in ten shot at once, to give a home blow. I confess those are terrible Instruments, and it seems the interest of mankind to forbid them quite, since they can be imployed to Assassinate Pesons so dextrously, that neither Noise nor Fire will discover from what hand the Shot comes. The Library of Basil is b
much the best in all Switzerland, there is a fine collection of Medals in it, and a very handsome Library of Manu∣scripts; the Room is Noble, and disposed in a very good Method. Their Manuscripts are chiefly, the Latin Fa∣thers, or Latin Translations of the Greek Fathers, some good Bibles; they have the Gospel in Greek Capitals, but they are vitiously writ in many places; there is an infinite number of the Writers of the darker Ages, and there are Legends and Sermos without number. All the Books that were in the several Monasteries, at the time of the Refor∣ation, were carefully preserved; and they believe, that the Bishops who sate here in the Council, brought with them a great many Manuscripts whih they never carried away. Among their Manucripts, I saw four of Huss's Letters, that he writ to the Bohemians the day before his death, which are very devout, but excessively simple. The Manuscripts of this Library are far more numerous than those of Bern, which were gathered by Bongarsius, and left by him to the publick Library there: they are indeed very little considered there, and are the worst kept that ever I saw: But it is a Noble Colectin of all the ancient Latin Authors; they have some few of the best of the Roman times, writ in great Characters, and there are many that are seven or eight hundred Years old. There is in Basil one of the best collections of Medals that ever I saw in private hands; together with a Noble Library, in which there are Manusripts of good antiquity, that belongs to the Family of Fesch, and that goeth from one learned man of the Family to another; for this Inheri∣tane can only pass to a man of Learning, and when the Family produceth none, then it is to go to the publick In Basil, as the several Cempaies have been more or less strict, in admitting some to a Freedom in the Company, that have not been of the Trade, so they retain heir Privi∣ldges to his day. For in such Compaies, that have once received such a number that have not been of the Trade, s grew to be the majority, the Trade hath never been able o recove their Interest. But some Companies have been
more cautions, and have never admitted any but those that were of the Trade, so that they retain their Interes still in Government. Of these the Butchers were named for one, so that there are alwayes four Butcers in the Council▪ The great Council consisteth of two hundred and forty▪ but they have no power left them, and they are only assem∣bled upon some extraordinary occasions; when the little Council thinketh fit to communicate any impor∣tant matter to them. There are but six Bailiages that be∣long to Basil, which are not imployments of great advan∣tage; for the best of them doth afford to the Baili only a thousand Livres a Year: They rekon that there are in Basil three thousand Men that can bear Arms, an that they could raise four thousand more out of the Canton; so that the Town is almost the half of this State and the whole maketh thirty Parishes. There are eigh∣teen Professors in this University; and there is a Spirit of  more free and generous Learning stirring there, than I sa in all those parts. Thee is a great decency of Habit i Basil; and the Garb both of the Councellors, Minister and Professors, their stiff Rufs, and their long Beards▪ have an Air that is August: The appointments are but smal for Councellors; Ministers and Professors, have but  hundred Crowns a piece: It is true, many Minister are Professors, so this mendeth the matter a little: B perhaps it would go better with the State of Learnin there, if they had but half the number of Prossors▪ and if those were a little better incouraged. No wher is the rule of St. Paul [of Womens having on thei heads the Badge of the Authority under which they ar brought, which by a phrae that is not extraordinar he calleth Power] better observed than at Basil; fo all the Marrid Women go to Church with a Coi o their Heads, that is so olded, that as it cometh dow so far as to cover their Eyes, so another folding cove∣reth also their Muth and Chin, so that nothing  the Nose appears, and then all turns backward in a ol∣ing, that hangeth down to their midleg. This is alw
White; so that there is there such a sight of White Heads in their Churches, as cannot be found any where else: The Unmarried Women wear Hats, turned up in the brims before and behind; and the brims of the sides being about a foot broad, stand out far on both hands: This fashion is also at Strasburg, and is worn there also by the Married Women. I mentioned formerly the constant danger to which this Place is exposed, from the neighbourhood of Hun∣ingen; I was told, that at first it was pretended, that the French King intended to build only a small Fort there, and it was believed, that one of the Burgomasters of Basil, who was thought not only the wisest man of that Canton, but of all Switzerland, was gained to lay all men asleep, and to asure them, that the suffering this Fort to be built so near them, was of no importance to them; but now they see too late their fatal Error: For the place is great, and will hold a Garrison of three or four thousand Men; it is a Pentagone, only the side to the Rhine is so large, that if it went round on that side, I believe it must have been a Hexagone; the Ba∣stions have all Orillons, and in he middle of them there is a void space, not filled up with earth, where there is a Magazine built so thick in the Vault, that it is proof against Bombs: The Rmparts, are strongly faced; There is a large Ditch, and before the Cortine, in the middle of the Ditch, there runs all along a Horn work, which is but ten or twelve foot high; and from the bottom of the Ram∣part, there goeth a Vaul to this Horn-wrk, that is for conveying of men for its defence; before this Horn-work there is a half Moon, with this that is peculiar to those new Forifications, that there is a Dit that cuts the hal Moon in an Angle, and maketh one half Moon within another; beyond that there is a Counterscarp about twele foot high aboe the Water, with a co∣vered Way, and a Glay designed, tho not executed; thee is also a great Hrn-work besides all this, which runs out a huge way with its Out-works towards Bsil; there is al∣so
a Bridge laid over the Rhine, and there being an Islan in the River, where the Bridge is laid, there is a Horn-work that filleth and fortifieth it. The Buildings in ths For are beautiful, and the Square can hold above four thou∣sand Men; the Works are not yet quite finished, but when all is compleated, this will be one of the strongest place in Europe: There is a Cavelier on one or two of the Ba∣stions, and there are hal Moons before the Bastions, so that the Switzers see their danger now, when it is not easy to redress it. This place is scituated in a great Plain, so that it is commanded by no rising ground on any side o it. I made a little Tour into Alsace, as far as Mountbel∣liard; the Soil is extream rich, but it hath been so long a Frontier Country; and is, by consequence, so ill peo∣pled, that it is in many places over-grown with Wood▪ In one respec it is fit to be the seat of War, for it is full of Iron-works, which bring a great deal of Money into the Country. I saw nothing peculiar in the Iron-Works there (except that the sides of the great Bellows were not of Leather, but of Wood; which saves much mony) so I will not stand to describe them. The River of the Rhin, all from Basil to Spire, is so low, and is on both sides so covered with Woods, that one that cometh down in a Boa hath no sight of the Country: The River runneth some∣times with such a force, that nothing but such woods could preserve its Banks, and even these are not able to save them quite; for the Trees are often washed away by the very Roots, so that in many places those Trees ly along in the Channel of the River: It hath been also thought a sort of a Fortification, to both sides of the River, to have it thus faced with Woods, which maketh the passing of Mn dan∣gerous, when they must march for some time after their passage through a d filépunc; The fist night from Basil we ca∣me to Brisac, which is a poor and mierable Town, but it is a noble Fortificatin, and hath on the West-side of the River, over which a Bridge is laid, a regular Fort of four or five Bstions. The Town of Brisac riseth all on a Hill, which is a considerable height; there were near it
wo Hills, the one is taken within the Fortification, and the other is so well levelled with the ground, that one cannot so much as find out where it was; All the ground about for many Miles is plain, so that from the Hill, as rom a Cavalier one can see exactly well, especially with the help of a Prospect, all the motions of an Enemy in case of a Siege: The Fortification is of a huge compass, above a French League, indeed almost a German Leaue; the Ba∣stions are quite filled with Earth, they are faced with Brick, and have a huge broad Dith full of Water around them; the Counterscarp, the covered Way, which hath a Palisade, withn the Parapet, and the Glacy, are all well executed; there is a half Moon before every Cortine: the Bastions have no Orillons except one or two, and the Cortines are so disposed, that a good part of them defen∣deh the Bstion. The Garrison of this Place in time of War must needs be eight or ten thousand Men; there hath not been much done of late to this place, only the Dith is so adjusted, that it is all defended by the Flanks of the Bastions. But the noblest place on the Rhine▪ is Strasburg; it is a Town of a huge extent, and hath a double Wall and Ditch all round it: the inner Wall is old, and of no strength, nor is the outward Wall very good; it hath a Faussebraye, and is faced with Brick twelve or fifteen foot above the Ditch: the Counterscarp is in an ill condition, so that the Town was not in case to make any long resistance; but it is now strongly fortified. There is a Citadel built on that side that goeth towards the Rhine, that is much such a Fort as that of Hunningen, and on the side of the Cittadel towards the Bridge, there is a great Horn-work, that runs out a great way with Out-woks belonging to it; there are also small Forts at the two chief Gates that lead to Alsace; by which the City is so brid∣led, that these can cut off all its communication with the Country about in case of a Revolt: the Bridge is also well fortifyed; there are also Forts in some Islands in the Rhine, and some Redoubts: so that all round this place, there is one of the greatest Fortifications that is in Europe.
Hitherto the Capitulation, with relation to Religion, hath been well kept, and there is so small a number of new Converts, and these are for the greatest part so incon∣siderable, they not being in all above two hundred, as I was told, that if they do not imploy the new-fashioned Missionaries à la Dragonné, the old ones are not like to have so great a harvest there as they promised themselves, tho they are Iesuites. The Luherans for the greatest part retain their Animosities almost to an equal degree both against Papists and Calvinists. I was in their Church, where, if the Musick of their Palms pleased me much, the Irreverence in singing, it being free to keep on, or put off the Hat, did appear very strange to me: The Churches are full of Pictures, in which the hief passages of our Sa∣iour Life are represented; but there is no sort of religious respect pay'd them, they bow when they name the Holy Ghost, as well as at the Name of Iesus: but they have not the Ceremonies that the Lutherans of Saxony use, which Mr. Bebel, their Professor of Divinity, said was a great happiness; for a similitude in outward Rites might dispose the ignorant people to change too easily. I found several good people both of the Lutheran Ministers and others, ac∣knowledge, that there was such a Corruption of Morals spread over the whole City, that as they had justly drawn down on their heads the Plague of the loss of their Liberty, so this having toucht them so little, they had reason to look for severer strokes: One seeth, in the ruin of this City, what a miscievous thing the popular pride of a free City is: they fanied they were able to defend themselves, and so they refused to lt an Imperial Garrison come within their Town: for if they ha received only five hundred mn, as that small number would not have been able to have opprest their Liberties, so it would have so secured the Town, that the French could not have besieged it, without making War on the Empire: but the Town thought this was a Diminution of their Freedom; and so chose rather to pay a Garrison of three thousand Souldiers, which as it exausted their Revenue, and
brought them under great Taxes, so it proved too weak for their defence when the Frenh Army came before them. The Town begins to sink in its Trade, notwithstanding the great circulation of Mony that the expence of the Fortifications hath brought to it: but when that is at an en, it will sink more sensibly; for it is im∣possible fo a Place of Trade, that is to have alwayes eight or ten thousand Souldiers in it, to continue long in a Flou∣rishing State. There was a great Animosisy between two of the chief Fmilys of the Town, Dietrick and Obrcht; the former was the Burgomaster, and was once almost run down by a Faction that the other had raised against him: but he turned the tide, and got such an advantage against Obrecht, who had writ some what against the Conduct of their Affairs, that he was Condemned and Beheaded for writing libels against the Government. His Son is a lear∣ned man, and was Professor of the Civil Law: and he to have his turn of revenge against Dietrick, went to Paris last Summer, and that he might make hi Court the better, changed his Religion. Dietrick had been alwayes looked on as one of the chief of the Frenh Faction, tho he had been at first an Imperialist, so it was thought, that he should have been well rewarded; yet it was expe∣cted, that to make himself capable of that, he should have changed his Religion; but he was an ancient man, and would not purchase his Court at that rate: so without any reason given, and against the express words of the Ca∣pitulation, he was confined to one of the midland Provin∣ces of Frane, as I remember, it was Limosin, and thus he, that hath been thought the chief cause of this own's falling under the power of the French, is the first man that hath felt the effects of it. The Library here is consi∣derable; The Case is a great Room, very well conrived; for it is divided into Closets all over the body of the Room, which runs about these as a Gallery, and in these Clo∣sets all round there are the Books of the several Professions lodged apart: There is one for Manuscripts, in which there are some of considerable Antiquity. I need say nothing
to you of the vast height, and the Gothick Architecture of the Steeple and of the great Church, nor of the curious Clock, where there is so vast a variety of motions; for these are well known. The Bas Reliefs upon the Tops of the great Pillars of the Church are not so visible, but they are surprizing; for this being a Fabrik of three or four hundred years old, it is very strange to see such Represen∣tations as are there. There is a Procession represented, in whih a Hog carrieth the Pot with the Holy Water, and Asses and Hogs in Pristly Vestmets follow to make up the Processin; there is also an Ass standing before an Altar, as if he were going to Consecrate, and one carrieth a Cafe with Reliques, within which one seeth a Fox; and the Trains of all that go in this Procession, are carried up by Monkies. This seems to have been made in hatred of the Monks, whom the Secular Clergy abhorred at that time, because they had drawn the Wealth, and the following of the World after them, and they had exposed the Secu∣lar Clergy, so much for their ignorance, that it is proba∣ble after some Ages, the Monks falling under the same contempt, the Secular Clergy took their turn in exposing them in so lasting a Representation to the Scorn of the World. There is also in the Pulpit a Nun cut in Wood, lying along, and a Fryer lying near her with his Breviary open before him, and his hand under the Nuns habit, and the Nuns feet are shod with iron shoes. I confess, I did not look for these things; for I had not heard of them; but my Noble Friend Mr. Ablancourt viewed them with great exactness, while he was the French Kings Resident at Strasburg, in the company of one of the Magistrates that waited on him; and it is upon his credit, to which all that know his eminent sincerity, know how much is due, that I give you this particular. From Strasburg we went down the Rhine to Philips∣burg, which lyeth at a quarter of a Miles distance from the River; it is but a small place, the Bastions are but little: there is a Ravellin before almost all the Cortines, and there ly such Marishes all round it, that in these lyeth
the chief strength of the place. The Frenh had begun a great Crow-work on the side that lyeth to the Rhine, and had cast out a Hor-work beyond that; but by all that ap∣pears, it seems they intended to continue that Crown-work quite round the Town, and to make a second Wall and Ditch all round it; which would have inlarged the place vastly, and made a compass capable enough to lodge above ten thousand Men: and this would have been so terrible a Neighbour to the Palatinate, and all Franconia, that it was a Master-piece in Charles Lewis, the late Elector Palatine, to ingage the Empire into this Siege. He saw well, how much it concerned him to have it out of the hands of the Frech, so that he took great care to have the Dke of Lorrain's Cap so well supplied with all things necessary, during the Siee, that the Army lay not under the least uneasiness all the while. From thence in hree Hours time we came to Spire, which is so naked a Town, that if it were attacked, it could not make the least resistance. The Town is neither great nor rich, and subsisted chiefly by the Imperial Chamber that fitteth here, tho there is a constant dispute between the Town and the Chmber concerning Privilegs; for the Government of the Town, pretends, that the Iudges of the Chamber, as they are private men, and out of the Court of Iudiature, are subject to them; and so about a year ago they put one of the Iudges in Prison: on the other hand, the Iudges pretend, that their persons are sacred. It was the consideration of the Chamber that pro∣cured to the Town the Neutrality that they injoyed all the last War. I thought to have seen the forms of this Court, and the way of laying up, and preserving their Records, but the Court was not then sitting. The Building, the Halls and Chambers of this famous Court are mean beyond imagination, and look liker the Halls of some small Company, than of so great a body; and I could not see the places where they lay up their Archives; The Government of the City is all Lutheran; but not only the Cathedral is in the hands of the Bishops and Chapter, but
there are likewise several Convents of both Sexes; and the Isuites have also a Colledge there. There is little re∣markable in the Cathedral, which is a huge building in the Gothick manner, of the worst sort. The Tombs of many Emperors, that ly buried there, are remarkable for their meanness; they being only great Flagstones layed on some small Stne-ballisters of a foot and a half high: There are also the marks of a ridiculous Fable concerning St. Bernard, which is too foolish to be related, yet since they have taken such pains to preserve the remembrance of it, I shall venture to write it. There are from the Gate all along the Nf of the Church up to the Steps that go up to the Quire, four round Plates of Brass, above a foot Diameter, and at the distance of thirty foot one from another, laid in the pavement, on the first of these is ingraven, O Clemens; on the second, O Pia; on the third, O Felix, and on the fourth, Maria▪ The last is about thirty foot distant from a Statue of the Virgins: so they say that St. Bernard came up the whole length of the Church at Four Steps, and that those four Plates were laid where he stept: and that at every Step he pronounced the word that is ingraven on the Plate; and when he came to the last, the Image of the Virgin answered him, Salve Bernarde, upon which he answe∣red, Let a Woman keep silence in the Church; and that the Virgins Statue has kept silence ever since; This last part of the Story is certainly very credible. He was a Man of Learning that shewed me this; and he repeated it so gravely to me, that I saw he either believed it, or at least that he had á mind to make me believe it: and I asked him as gravely, if that was firmly believed there; he told me, that one had lately writ a Look to prove the truth of it, as I remember, it was a Iesit: He aknowledged, it was not an Article of Faith; so I was satisfied. There is in the Cloister an old Gothick Representation of our Saviours Agony in stone, with a great many Figures of his Apstles, and the Company that came to seize him, that is not ill Sulpture, for the
Age in which it was made, it being some Ages old. The Calvinists have a Church in this Town, but their num∣bers are not considerable. I was told there were some ancient Manuscripts in the Library, that belongeth to the Cathedral: but one of the Prebendaries, to whom I addressed my self, being, according to the German Custom, a Man of greater Quality than Learning, told me, he heard they had some ancient Manuscipts, but he knew nothing of it; and the Dean was absent, so I could not see them; for he kept one of the Keys. The lower Palatinate is certainly one of the sweetest Countryes of all Germany: It is a great Plain till one cometh to the Hills of Heidelberg: the Town is ill scituated, just in a bottom, between two ranges of Hills, yet the Air is much commended: I need say nothing of the Castle, nor the prodigious Wine-Cellar, in which, tho there is but one celebrated Tun, that is seventeen foot high, and twenty six foot long, and is built with a strength liker that of the ribs of a ship, than the Staves of a Tun; yet there are many other Tuns of such a prodigious bigness, that they would seem very extraordinary, if this vast one did not Eclipse them. The late Prince Charles Lewis she∣wed his capacity in the peopling and setling this State, that had been so intirely ruined, being for many Yars the Seat of War; for in four years time he brought it to a Flourishing condition: He raised the Taxes as high as was possible without dispeopling his Country, all mens Estates were valued, and they were taxed at five per cent of the value of their Estates; but their Estates were not valued to the rigour, but with such abatements as have been ordinary in Englad in the times of Subsidies; so that when his Son offered to bring the Taxes down to two per Cent of the real value, the Subjects all desired him rather to continue them as they were. There is no Prince in Germany that is more abote than the Elector Paltine; for he layeh on his Sbject what Taxes he pleaseth, with∣out being limited to any forms of Goernment. And here I saw that which I had alwayes believed to be true,
that the Subjects of Germany are only bound to their parti∣cular Prince; for they swear Allegeance singly to the Elector, without any reserve for the Emprour; and in their Prayers for him, they name him their Soveraign. It is true, the Prince is under some ties to the Emperour; but the Subjects are under none. And by this D Fabritius, a learned and judicious Professor there, explained those words of Pa∣reus's Commentary on the Romans, which had respect only to the Princes of the Empire: and were quite misun∣derstood by those who fancied that they favoured Rebellion▪ for there is no place in Europe where all rebellious Do∣ctrine is more born down than there. I found a great spirit of Moderation, with relation to those small Controversies, that have occasioned such heat in the Protestant Churches, reigning in the University there, which is in a great mea∣sure owing to the Prudence, the Learning, and the happy Temper of Mind of D. Fabritius, and D. Mick: who as they were long in England, so they have that ge∣nerous largness of Soul, which is the Noble Ornament of many of the English Divines; Prince Charls Lewis saw that Manheim was maked out by Nature to be the most important place of all his Territory, it being scitua∣ted in the point where the Neckar falleth into the Rhine; so that those two Rivers defending it on two sides; it was capable of a good Fortification: It is true, the Air is not thought wholsome, and the Water is not good, yet he made a fine Town there, and a Noble Cittadel, with a regular Fortification about it; and he designed a great Palace there, but he did not live to build it. He saw of what advantage Liberty of Concience was to the peopling of his Country; so as he suffered the Iews to come and settle there, he resolved also not only to suffer the three Re∣ligions, olerated by the Laws of the Empire, to be profes∣sed there, but he built a Church for them all three, which he called the Church of the Cncord, in which both Calvi∣nists Lutherans and Papists had, in the order in which I have set them down, the exercise of their Religion; and he maintained the peace of his Principality so intirely, that
there was not the least Disorder occasioned by this Tole∣ration: This indeed made him to be lookt on as a Prince that did not much consider Religion himself: He had a wonderful application to all affairs, and was not only his own chief Minister, but he alone did the work of many. But I were Injust if I should not say somewhat to you, of the Princely Vertues and the Celerated Probity of the present Pr. Elector, upon whom that Dignity is de∣volved by the extinction of so many Prnces; that in this Age composed the most numerous Fmily of any of that rank in Europe. This Prince, as he is in many respects an honour to the Religon that he professes, so is in no∣thing more to be commended by those who difer from him, than for his exact adhering to the Promises he made his Subjects with relation to their Religion, in which he has not (even in the smallest matters) broke in upon their establisht Laws; and tho an Order of Men, that have turned the world up-side down, have great credit with him, yet it is hitherto visible, that they cannot car∣ry it so far as to make him do any thing contrary to the established Religion; and to those acrd Promises that he made his Subjects. For he makes it appear to all the world, that he does not consider those, as so many words spoken at first to lay his people asleep, which he may now ex∣plain and observe as he thinks sit; but as so many Ties upon his Conscience and Honour, which he will Religiously ob∣serve. And as in the other parts of his Life, he has set a No∣ble Pattern to all the Princes of Europe, so his exactness to his Promises, is that which cannot be too much com∣mended: of which this extraordinary Instane has been communicated to me since I am come into this Country. The Elector had a Procssion in his Court last Corpus Chri∣st day, upon which one of the Ministers of Heidelberg preaht a very severe Sermon against Popery, and in particular taxed that Procession perhaps with greater plainness than discretion: Ths being brought to the Ele∣ctors Ears, he sent presently an Order to the Ecclesiastical Senate to suspend him. That Court is composed of some
Secular men and some Churchmen, and as the Princes Au∣thority is delegated to them, so they have a sort of an Epis∣copal jurisdiction over all the Clergy: This Ordr was a sur∣prise to them, as being a direct beach upon their Laws and the lierty of their Reliion: so they sent a Depuation to Court, to let the Elector know the reasons that hindred them from obeying his Oders, which were heard with so muh Justice and Gentleness, that the Price, instead of exressing any Displease against them, recalled the Order that he had sent them. The way from Heidelberg to Frakfort▪ is, for the first twelve or fifteen Miles, the beautifullest piece of ground that can be imagined; for we went under a ridge of little Hills that are all covered with Vines, and from them, as far as the eye can go, there is a beautiful Plain of Corn-fields and Meadows, all sweetly divided and inclosed with rows of Trees, so that I fancied I was in Lombardy again, but with this advantage, that here all was not of apiece, as it is in Lombardy; but the Hills, as they made a plea∣sant inequality in the prospect, so they made the Air purer, and produced a pleasant Wine: The way near Darmstat, and all forwards to Frankfort, becometh more wild and more sandy: There is a good Suburb on the South-side of the Main over against Frankfort, which hath a very considerable Fortification; there is a double Wall, and a double Dith, that goeth round it; and the outward Wall, as it is regularly fortified, so it is faced with Brick to a consierable height. The Town of Frankfort is of a great extent, and seemed to be but about a third part less than Srasburg: The three Reliions are also tolerated there; and tho the number of the Papists is very inconsiderable, yet they have the great Church, which is a huge rude building; they have also several other Churches, and some Covets there. There are several open Squares for Market places, and the Houses about them look very well without. Among their Archives they preserve the Original of the Blla Aurea; that which is shewed to Strangers, is only a great Parchment writ in High Dutch; but the Original is preserved with more Care,
and is in Latin: yet since I made a short stay there, I was not at the Pains of desiring to see it; for that is not obtai∣ned without difficulty. The Lutherans have here built a new Churh, called St. Katherines, in which there is as much paintig as eer I saw in any Popish Church; and over the high Altar there is an huge carved Cruifix, as there are painted ones in other places of their Church: The Pulpit is extream fine, of Marble of different coours, very well polished and joyned. I was here at Sermon, where I understood nothing; but I liked one thng that I saw both at Strasburg and here, that at the end of Prayers, there was a considerable interval of silence left, before the conclusion, for all peopls private Devotions. In the House of their publick Discipline, they retain still the old Roman Pistrina or Hnd-mill; at which lewd Women are con∣demned to grind, that is, to drive about the Wheel that maketh the Milstones go. There is a great number of Iews there, tho their two Synagogues are very little, and by consequence, the Numbers being great, they are very nasty. I was told, they were in all above twelve hundred. The Women had the most of a tawdry Imbroidery of Gold and Silver about them that ever I saw; for they had all Mantles of Crape, and both about the top and the bot∣tom, there was a border above a hand breadth of Imbroi∣dry. The Fortification o Frankfort is considerable; heir Ditch is very boad, and very full of Water; all the Ba∣ions have a Countermine, that runneth along by the brim of the Ditch; but the Counterscarp is not faced with Brick as the Walls are, and so in many places it is i an ill condition; the covered Way and Glacy are also in an ill case: The Town is rich, and driveth a great Trade, and is very pleasantly scituated. No far from hence is Hockam, that yieldeth the best Wine of those parts. Since I took Frankfort in my way from Heidelbrg to Mentz, I could not pass by Worms, for which I was sorry. I had a great mind to see that place where Luther made his first appea∣rance before the Empeour, and the Diet, and in that solemn Audience expressd an undaunted Zeal
for that Glorious Cause in which God made him such a blessed Instrument. I had another piece of Curiosity on me, which will perhaps appear to you somewhat ridi∣culous. I had a mind to see a Piture, that as I was told, is over one of the Popish Altar, there, which one would think was Invented by the Enemies of Transubstantiation, to make it appear ridiculous There is a Windmill, and the Virin throws Christ into the Hoppr, and he come out at the Eye of the Mn all in Waters, which some Priests take up to give to the People. This is so course an Emblem, that one would think it too gross even for Lap∣landrs; but a man that can swallow Transubstantiation it self, will digest this likewise Mentz is very nobly sci∣tuated, on a rising ground▪ a little below the conjunction of the two Rivers, the Rhine and the Man; it is of too great a compass, and too ill peopled o be capable of a great defence: there is a Cittadl upon the highest part of the Hill that commandeth the Town; it is compassed about with a dry Ditch, that is considerably deep. The Walls of the Town are faced with Brik, and regularly fortisied, but the Counterscarp is not faced with Brick, so all is in a sad condition; and the Fortification is weakest on that side where the Electrs Palace is. There is one side of a new Palace very nobly built in a regular Archtectre, only the Germans do still retain somewhat of the Gothick manner; It is of a great length, and the design is to build quite round the Cort, and then it will be a very magni∣ficent Palae, only the Stone is red: for all the Quarries that are upon the Rhie, from Bail down to Colentz, are of rd stone, which doth not look beautiful. The Ele∣cor of Mentz is an absolute Prince: his Subjects present Lists of their Magistrates to him, but he is not tied to them, and may name whom he will. The Ancient Demeasn of the Electorat is about orty thousand Crowns: but the Taxes rise to about three hundred thousand Crowns; so that the Subjects here are as heavily taxed as in the Palati∣nate: Thee is twelve thousand Crowns a yer given the Elector for his privy Purse, and the State bears the rest o
is whole expence: It can Arm ten thousand Men, and here is a Garrison of two thousand Men in Mentz: this Electr hath three Counils, one he is Chcllour of the Empire, consisting of three persons: The other two are for the Policy and Iustie of his Principality. He, and is Chapter have Months by turns for the Nomination of the Prebends. In the Month of Ianuary he names if any dyes, and they chuse in the Room of such as dye in Fe∣ruary, and so all the year round. The Preendaries or Dome-Heers have about three thousand Crowns a year a∣iece. When the Eector dieth, the Emperor sendeh one o see the Election made, and he recommendeth one, but he Canns may chuse whom they please; and the present Elector was not of the Emperrs Recommendation. Be∣ides the Palace at Mentz, the Electr hath anoher near  rankfrt, which is thought the best that is in those parts f Germany: The Cathedral is a huge Gothick Building; here is a great Cpul in the West-end, and there the Quire singeth Mass: I could not learn whether this was one only because the place here was of grater reception han at the East-end, or if any burying place and indow∣ment obliged them to the West-end. Near the Cathedral here is a huge Chappel of great Antiquity, and on the North Door there are two great Brass Gates with a long Inscription, which I had not time to write out, but I ound it was in the Emperor Lothariu's time. There are a vast number of Churches in this Town, but it is poor and ll inhabited. The Rhine here is almost half an English mile broad, and there is a Bridge of Boats lay'd over it. From Mentz all along to Baccharach (which seems to cary its name [Bacch Ar] from some famous Altar that the Ro∣mans probably erected by reason of the good Win that grows in the Neigbourhood.) There is a great number of very considerable Villages on both sides of the River: Here the Rats Tower is shewed, and the People of the Country do all firmly believe the Story of the Rats eating p an Elector, and that tho he fled to this Island, where e built a small Tower, they pursued him still▪ and
swimmed after him, and eat him up: and they told us, that there were some of his Bones to be seen still in the Towr. This extraordina death makes me call to mind a very particular and unlooked for sort of Death, that car∣ried off a poor Laouer of the ground a few dayes before I left Geeva The Foot of one of his Cattel, as he was ploughing, went into a Nest of asps, upon which the whole Swrm came out, an set upon him that held the Plow, and killed him in a very little time; and his Body was prodigiously swelled with the poison of so many Stings But to return to the Rhine; all the way from Bac∣charach down to Cblents, there is on both sides of the River hanging Gounds, or little Hils, so laid, as i many of them ha been laid by Art, whih produce the rich Rhenish Wine. They are indeed as well exposed to the Sun, and covered from Storms, as can be imagined: and the Ground of those Hills, which are in some place of a considerable height, is so cultivated, that there i not an inch lost that is capable of improvement, and thi bringeth so much Wealth into the Counry, that all along there is a great number of considerable Villages. Cohlent is the strongest place that I saw of all that belong to th Empire; the scituation is Nble, the Rhine running befor it, and the Moselle passing along the side of the Town; it is well fortified, the Ditch is large, the Counterscarp is high, and the covered Way is in a good Condition, both Wall and Counterscarp are faced with Brick, and there are Ra∣velines before the Cortines; but on the side of the Mosell it is very slightly fortified, and there is no Fort at the en of the Stone Bridge that is laid over Moselle, so that it lieth quite open on that side, which seemeth a strange defect in a place of that consequence. But tho the Frtifi¦ations of his place are very considerabl, yet its chief de∣ence lieth in the Frt of Hermnstan, which is built on the top of a very high Hill, that lyeth on the other side of the Rhine; and which commandeth this place so absolutely▪ that he who is Master of Hermanstan, is alwayes Master o Coblents. This belongeth to the Elector of Triers, whos
Palace lyeth on the East side of the Rhine, just at the Foot o the Hill of Hermanstan, and over against the point here the Mosee faleth into the Rhine, so tha nothing an be more pleasantly scituaed; only the ground begins o rise just at the bak of the House with so muh steeness, hat there is not Room for Gardens or Walks. The House keth a great shew upon the River, but we wre told, hat the Apartments within were not answerable to he oside. I say, we were told, for the Germn Princs eep such forms, that, without a great deal of ado, one annot come within their Courts, unless it be when they re abroad themselves; so that we neither got within the Palae at Mnz, nor this of Hermnstan. It is but a few Hours from this to Bonne, where the Elector of Collen kee∣eth his Court: The Place hath a regular Fortification; the Walls are faced with Brick; but tho the Ditch, which is ry, is pretty broad, the Countersarp is in so ill a condi∣ion that it is not able to make a great defence. This  is the Noblest born, and the best provided of all the erman Clergy; for he is Brother to the Great Maximilian Duke of Bavaria; and besides Collen, he hath Liege, Mun∣er, and Hildelshim, which are all great Bishoprick: He hath been also six and thirty years in the Electorate: His Palace is very mean, consisting but of one Court; the half of which is cast into a little Garden, and the Wood-yard i in the very Court; the lower part of the Court was a Sta∣ble: but he hath made an Apartment here, that is all fur∣ished with Pictures; where, as there are some of the hands of the greatest Maers, so there are a great many foils to set these off, that are scarce good enough for Signposts. The Elector has a great many Gold Medalls, which will give me occasion to tell you one of the Exravagantest pieces of Forgery that pehaps eer was; whih hapned to be found out at the last iege of Bonne: for while they were clearing the ground for lanting a attry▪ they dis∣covered a Vault, in whih there was an Iron chest that was ull of Medalls of Gold to the value of 100000 Crwns; and f which I was old the Elector bought to the value of 30000
Crowns. They are huge big, one weighed 800. Ducat and the Gold was of the fineness of Duat Gold: but tho the bore the Impressions of Roma Medalls, or rather Medailons, they were all Cunterfeit, and the imta∣tion was so coursely done, that one must be extream Ignorant in Medalls to be deceived by them. Some few that seemed true, were of the late Greek Emperors. Now it is very unaccountable, what could inuce a man to make a forgery upon such Mettle, and in so vast a quan∣tity, and then to bury all this under ground, especially in an Age in which so much Gold was ten times the value of what it is at present; for it is judged to have been done about four or five hundred years ago. The Prince went out a huning while we were there, with a very handsome Guard of about fourscore Horse, well mounted; so we saw the Palace; but were not suf∣fered to see the Apartment where he lodged: There is a great Silver Casolette gilt, all set with Emeralds and R∣bies, that tho they made a fine appearance, yet were a Composition of the Princes own making: His Oficer also shewed us a Bason and Ewer, which they sid were of Mercury fixed by the Prince himself▪ but they added, that now for many years he wrought no more in his Labua∣tory. I did not easily believe this, and as the weight of the Plate did not approach to that of Quick-Silver, so the Medicinal Vertues of fixed Mercury (if there is any such thing) are so extraordinary, that is seemed very strange to see twenty or thirty pound of it made up in two pieces of Plate. A quarter of a mile without the Town, the best Garden of those parts of Germany is to be seen, in which there is a great variety of Water-works, and very many Noble Ais in the French manner, and the whole is of a very considerable extent; but as it hath no Statues of any value to adorn it, so the House about which it lyeth, is in Ruins: and it is strange to see, that so rich and so great a Prince, during so long a Regency, hath done so little to inlarge or beautifie his Buildings. Bonne and Co∣blntz are both poor and small Towns. Collen is three
hours distant from Bonne, it is of a prodigious extent, but ill built and worse peopled in the remote parts of it: and as the Walls ae all in an ill case, so it is not possible to fortify so vast a compass as this Town maketh, as it ought to be, without a charge that would eat out the whole Wealth of this little State. The Iews live in a little Suburb on the other side of the Rivr, and may not come over, without leave obtained, for which they pay considerably. There is no Exercise of the Protestant Re∣ligion suffered within the Town, but those of the Reli∣gion are suffered to live there, and they have a Chrh at two miles distance. The Arsenal here, is suitable to the Fortificatons; very mean, and ill furnished. The Quire of the Great Church is as high in the oof, as any Church I ever saw; but it seemes the Wealth of this place could not finish the whole Fabrick, so as to answer the height of the Quire; for the Body of the Church is very low: Those that are disposed to believe Legends, have enough here to overset even a good de∣gree of Credulity, both in the Story of the Three Kings, whose Chappel is visited with great Devotion, and stan∣deth at the East nd of the Great Quire; and in that more copious Fale of the eleven thousand Vrsulins, whose Church is all over full of rough Tombs, and of a vast number of Bones, that are piled up in rows about the Walls of the Church: These Fables are so firmly believed by the Papists there, that the least sign whih one giveth of doubting of their truth, passeth for an infallble Mark of an Heretick. The Isuites have a great and Noble Colldge and Churh here. And for Thaulr's sake I went to the Dominicans House and Church, which is also very great. One grows extream weary of walking over this great Town, and doth not find enough of entertainment in it: The present Subject of their Disourse is alo ery melanholy: The late Re∣bellion that was there, is so generally known, that I need no say much concerning it. A report was set about th Town, by some Ieniarys, that the Magistrates
did eat up the publick Revenue, and were like to ruin the City; I could not learn what ground there was for these reports; for it is not ordinary to see reports of that kind fly, through a body of men, without some Foundation: It is certain, this came to be so generally believed, that there was a horrible disorder occasioned by it; The Ma∣gistrates were glad to save themselves from the storm, and abandoned the Town to the popular fury, some of them having been made sacrifices to it; and this rage held long: But within this last year, after near two years di∣sorder, those that were sent by the Emperor and Diet to judge the matter, having threatned to put the Town un∣der the Imperial Bann, if it had stood longer out, were received▪ and have put the Magistrates again in the pos∣session os rheir Authority, and all the chief Incendirys were clapt in Prison: many have already suffered, and a great many more are still in Prison: they told us, that some executions were to be made within a week when we were there. Dusseldorp is the first considerable Town be∣low Collen, it is the Seat of the Duke of Iuliers, who is Duke of Newburgh, eldest Son to the present Elector Pa∣latine. The Palace is old and Gothick enough: but the Iesuites have there a fine Colledge, and a noble Chappel, tho there are manifest faults in the Archiecture: the Pro∣testant Religion is tolerated, and they have a Church built here within these few years, tbat wat procured by the intercession of the Elector of Brandenburgh, who ob∣serving exactly the Liberty of Religion that was agreed to in Cleve, had reason to see the same as duly observed in his Neighbouhood, in favour of his own Religion. The For∣tification here is very ordinary, the Ramparts being faced but a few foo high with Brick. But Keiserswrt, some hours lower on the same side, which belongeth to the Elector o Collen, tho it is a muh worse Twn than Dusseldorp, yet is much better fortified: it hah a very broad Ditch, and a very regular Fortification: the Walls are considerably high, faced with Brick, and so i the Counterscarp, which is also in a very good Condition. The Fortification of Orsoy
now quite demolished. Rhineberg continueth as it was but the Fortificatin is very mean, only of Earth, so that it is not capable of making a great Resistance. And esel, tho it is a very fine Town, yet is a very poor Fortifica∣tion, nor can it ever be made good, except at a vast expence: for the ground all about it being sandy, nothing can be made there that will be durable, unless the Foun∣dation go very deep, or that it be laid upon Piloty. In all hese Towns one sees another air of Wealth and Abundance than in much richer Countrys, that are exhausted with Taxes. Rees and Emmerick are good Towns, but the Fortifications are quite ruined. So that here is a rich and a populous Country, that hath at present very little de∣sence, except what it hath from its scituaion. Cleve is a delicious Place, the scituation and prospect are char∣ming, and the Air is very pure; and from thence we came hither in three hours. I will not say one word of the Country into which I am now come; for as I know that is needless to you on many accounts, so a Picture that I see here in the Stadthouse, puts me in min of the perfectest Book of its kind that is perhaps in being; for Sir William Temple, whose Picture hangeth here at the upper end of the Plenipotentiary, that negotiated the famou Treaty of Nimmegen, hath indeed set a pattern to the World, which is done with such life, that it may justly make others blush to copy after it, since it must be acknowledged, that if we had as perfect an account of the other Places, as he hath given us of one of the least, but yet one of the Noblest parcels of the Vni∣verse, Travellig would become a needless thing, unless it were for diversion: since one findeth no further occasion for his curiosity in this Country, than what is fully fais∣syed by his rare performance; yet I cannot give over writing, without reflecting on the Resistance that this Place made, when so many other Places were so basely delivered up, tho one doh not see in the uins of the Fortificatin here, how it could make so long a resistance; yet it was that that stem'd the tide of a progres that made
all the World stand amazed; and it gave a little time to the Dutch to recover themselves out of the consternio▪ into which so many blows, that came so thik one  another, had struck them. But then the World saw a change, that tho t hath not had so much Incense given to it, as the happy conjun∣cture of another Prince hath drawn after it, with so much excess, that all the topicks of flattery seem exhausted by it, yet will appear to posterity one of the most surprizing Scenes in History, and that which may be well matched with the recovery of the Roman State after the Battel of Canne. When a young Prince, that had never before born Arms, or so much as seen a Campagne, who had little or no Council about him, but that which was suggested from his own thoughts, and that had no extraordinary ad∣vantage by his Education, either for Literature or Affirs, was of a sudden set at the Head of a State and Army, tht was sunk with so many losses, and that saw the best half of its Soil torn from it, and the powerfullest Enemy in the World, surrounded with a Victorious Army, that was commanded by the best Generals that the Age had produ∣ced, come within sight, and settle his Court in one of its best Towns, and had at the same time the greatest force both by Sea and Land, that hath been known, united together for its destruction. When the Inhabitants were forced, that they might save themselves from so formidable an Enemy, to let loose that which on all other occasions, is the most dreadful to them, and to drown so great a part of their Soil, for the preservation of the rest; and to complicate together all the Miseries that a Nation can dread, whn to the general consternation, with which so dismall a See possessed them, a distraction within doors seemed to threaten them with the last strokes; and while their Army was so ill disciplined, that they durst scar∣ce promise themselves any thing from such feeble Troops, after a Peace at Land of almost thirty Years continuance▪ and while their chief Ally, that was the most concerned in their preservation, was, like a great paralitick body,
iker to fall on those that it pretended to support, and tho crush them, than to give them any considerable assi∣stance: When, I say, a young Prince came at the Head of ll this, the very prospect of which would have quite dampt an ordinary Courage, he very quickly changed the Scene, he animated the Publick Councils with a generous vigour: he found them sinking into a feebleness of hearkning to Propositions for a Peace, that were as little safe as they were honourable; but he disposed them to resolve on hazarding all, rather than to submit to such Infamous Terms. His cre∣dit also among the Populace seemed to Inspire them with a new life; they easily persuaded themselves, that as one WILLIAM Prince of ORANGE had formed their State, so here another of the same name seemed marked out to recover and preferve it. It was this Spirit of Courage which he derived from his own Breast, and Infused into the whole People, as well as into the Magistracy, that preserved this Country. Something there was in all this that was Divine. The publick Councils were again setled, and the people were at quiet, when they saw him vested with a full Authority for that time with Relation to Peace and War, and concluded they were safe, because they were in his hands. It soon appeared how faithfully he pursued the In∣terest of his Countrey, and how little he regarded his own. He rejected all Propositions of Peace that were hurtful to his Country, without so much as considering the Ad∣vantages that were offered to himself, (in which you know that I write upon sure grounds.) He refused the offer of the Soveraignty of its Chief City, that was made to him by a solemn Deputation, being satisfied with that Authority which had been so long maintained by his Ancestors with so much glory, and being justly sensible, how much the breaking in upon established Laws and Li∣berties, is fatal even to those that seem to get by it. He thus began his publick appearance on the Stage, with all the disadvantages that a Spirit aspiring to true Glory could wish for; since it was Visible, that he had nothing to trust to, but a good Cause; a favourable Providence,
and his own Integrity and Courage nor was success want∣ing to such Noble Beginnings; for he in a short time, with a Conduct and Spirit beyond any thing that the World hath yet seen, recovered this Sate, out of so desperate a distemper, took some Places by main force, and obli∣ged the Enemy to abandon all that they had acquired in so feeble a manner. And if a raw Army had not always success, against more numerous and better-trained Troops, and if the want of Magazins and Stores in their Allys Country, which was the chief Scene of the War; made that he coud not Post his Army, and wait or favourable circumstances, so that he was sometimes, forced to run to Action, with a hast that his Necessitys im∣posed upon him; yet the forcing of the beginnings of a Vi∣ctory out of the hands of the greatest General of the Age, the facing a greeat Monarch with an Army much inferior to his, when the other was too cautious to hazard an ingagement; and in short, the forming the Dutch Army to such a pitch, that it became visibly Superior to the French, that seemed to have been sed with Con∣quests; and the continuing the War, till the Prince that had sacrificed the quiet of Eurpe to his Glry, was glad to come and treat for a Peae in the Enemies Counry, and in this very place, and to set all Engines on work to obtain that, by the Mediation of some, and the Jealousies of other Princes: all these are such Performances, that Posterity will be disposed to rank them rather among the Idea's of what an imaginary Hro could do, than with what could be really Transacted in so short a time, and in such a manner. And in conclusion, every place that belonged to these States, and to their Neighbours along the Rhine, to∣gether with a great many in Flanders, being restored, these Provinces do now see themselves under his happy Coduct, re established in their former Peace and Seurity. And tho some scars of such deep wounds do still remain, yet hey find themselves considered on all hands, as the Bul∣wark of Christndom, against the Fears of a new Monarchy, and as the Preservers of the Peace and Liberty of Europe.
Here is a Harvest, not for forced Rhetorick, or false Eloquence, but for a severe and sincere Historian, capa∣ble of affording a Work that will far exceed all those lus∣cious Panegyricks of mercenary Pens: but a small or a counterfeit Iewel must be set with all possible Advantages, when a true one of great value needs only to be shewed. I cannot end with a greater Subject; and I must acknow∣ledge my self to be so inflamed with this hint, that as I can∣not after this bring my pen down to lower matters, so I dare not trust my self too long, to the heat that so Noble an Object inspires, therefore I break off abruptly. YOURS.
An APPENDIX, Containing some Remarks, that have been sent to me by a Person of Quality. A Person of great Rank, that is of Italian extraction, and that by consequence knows the Countrey well, ha∣ving spent much of his time in it, had heard that I was giving the World an account of the Reflections that I had made on the present State of Italy, and upon that he writ the follow∣ing Paper to one of his Friends▪ to be communicated to me; for I have not the honour of any Commerce with himself: The Observations that he had made, agreed so exactly with my own, that I thought it would be no small Advantage towards the supporting the Credit of those that I had made, to find them confirmed by so extraordinary a Person, whose Character (as those who know him well have assured me) is so undispu∣ted, that if I durst name him, this alone would serve to esta∣blish the belief of the most critical parts of my Letters in the minds of all that that should read his Paper: but since I can∣not adventure on this, without obtaining his Leave, and since he is now at such a distance, that it is not easie to get his Friend to write to him, or to receive an Answer from him time enough, therefore I have added this Memorial. There are two Particulars in which He and I differ, and in so great a Variety of Observations, that are so Critical, and so much out of th Common road, it will not appear strange, if there should be some disagreement, when he mentions the Tax that the Po∣pe has laid on the Corn; he does not ad one thing which I men∣tion, and that is, that the Measure, by which the Pope ells, is by a fifth part less than that by which h buys: The oher is more considerable; for in the Account that he gives of the preent Pope's breaking in upon the settlement of the Bank, tho it is upon the matter very near the same with that which I give, yet there is a differene of some Importance
as to the manner of doing it; but as to that, all I can say, is▪ that the first Account I had of that Transaction, was the same that is in this Gentlemans Paper; but afterwards I had occasion to talk of this matter very Copiously with one, that has lived many years in the Popes Dominions, and that has dealt much in those Affairs; he has now a Character upon him, and so it is not expedient to name him: It was from him that I had the particular recital of this matter, and therefore I thought it surer to go upon the Information that I had from him, than upon the general Report that all Strangers may find at Rome. This Paper had been more copious, if the person that writ it, had not been restrained by some particular Considera∣tions from saying any thing relating to the Government of Venice.
REMARKS. Vpon SWITZERLAND. IT is very surprising when one comes out of France, (which is an Extraordinary good Country) into Switzerland, which is not near so fertil, and yet to see so great a difference between the People of hoe two Countries. The People in France, and especially the Peasants, are very poor, and most of them reduced to great Misery and Want. The People in Switzerland cannot be said to be very Rich; but yet there are very few, even amongst the Peasants themselves that are miserably poor; the most part of them have enough to live upon, from their Labour, and the Fruits of the Earth. Every where in France, even in the best Citys, there are Swarms of Beggars; and yet scarce any to be seen throughout all Switzeland. The Houses of the Peasants, or Country people in France are extreamly mean, and in them no other Furniture to be found besides poor nasty Beds, straw Chairs, and Plates and dishes of Wood and Earth: In Switzerland the Peasants have their Houses furnished with good Feather-Beds, good Chairs, and other Housholdstuff for their Convenience, as well as their Necessity; their Windows are all of glass, always kept mended and whole, and their Linnen very neat and white, and as well for their Beding as their Tables. Of the GRISONS Country. THe Grisons Country is much more Barren than Swit∣zerland; because 'tis wholy upon the Mountains, which produce nothing at all; yet notwithstanding (all Excess and Luxury being banished from amongst them, and the Inhabitants being extreamly Laborious) there are none to be seen there that are very poor and needy,
but they live at Ease and there are a great many; Gen∣try of good Estates. Their Government is altogether Popular; there are but three or four Royalties belon∣ging to Nobility in all the Country. All the rest of their Lands are in Demeane, which may yet well be cal∣led Royalties too, because exempt from all dues and pay∣ments whatsoever. There is nothing at all to be pay'd for bringing into the Country any sort of Goods or Merchan∣dises, or for exporting of them thence; every one there fully enjoys the Fruit of his own Labours, and the Reve∣nues of his Land; although the Wine they drink is brought upon Horses four or five days Journey, yet they have it cheaper there than in most parts of Itly or France, where it so plentifully grows. There are Villages upon the very tops of the Mountains, consisting of 150 and 200 Houses apiece; and altho' they have no Con or Grain that grows there, and but very little Grass, yet the Peasants keep three or four hundred Horses, which they imploy to carry Goods and Merchandises, which turns to so good account that they live very well, and want nothing either for the Necessity or Convenience of life. The Inns upon the Mountains are very good; and there is always to be had, besides good Bread and Wine, great quantity of Game and Venison, according to the Season of the Year, goo Trouts, very good Chambers, and Beds after the manner of the Country. When you leave the Grisons Country, and are ome into the Country of Chavenne, the People begin to speak broken Italian: altho' this latter is a more fertil Country, yet the Inhabitants and Pasants do not live so well as in the Grisons Country, for that the Natives are more slothful and lazy: and here again there are abun¦dance of poor People, as you will find in all parts of Italy Of the Bailiages of LUGANE. THere are on the other side of the Mountains four Bailiages, which were formerly part of the Dutchy of Milan; Lewis XII. when he lost that Dutchy, gave
these Bailiages to some of the Switz Cantons. These Bai∣liages are called, Lugane, Lucarno, Mendris, and Belinston. I shall only take notice of the Bailiage of Lugane, which contains ninety nine Villages; The Territories of this Baili∣age and of the others, are not near so good as that of Milan, to which it joyns; yet the Villages of this Bailiage are very populous; the Land is very fruitful, because it is well culti∣vated; and all the Inhabitants live contented and well; there are no Beggars amongst them, nor hardly any Object of Misery and Want: Their Houses are all good, well built, and kept in good repair. The Territory of Milan is certain∣ly one of the best in all Italy; it produceth Wine, Corn and Oyl in abundance, very great quantity of Silk, and (generally speaking) all sorts of Fruits; there is also excel∣lent Pasture for Cattle, and yet the Peasants there do not live so well by much as in the Bailiage of Lugane; for there is a great deal of Land that lyes unmanur'd, and the Coun∣try is not near so populous as in Lugane. There can be no other Reason given for this Difference, but that Milan is un∣der the Dominion of Spain: That the People are loaden with Imposts, Subsidies and Taxes, which makes them very poor; whereas the People of Lugane are under the Govern∣ment of Switzerland, who put no Taxes or subsidies upon them. Remarks upon the LAKES. I Do not know that in the Kingdom of France, as it was thirty years since, there were any Lakes, except perhaps in the Mountains of Dauphiné. From the Lake of Iour to the Lake of Garde, which is at Desenesan, between Bresse and Veronne, in the Territories of Venice, there are a great number of Lakes; one of the most considerable is that of Geneva; then there is the Lake of Newchattel, the Lake d'Yverdun, the Lake of Morat, the Lake of Bienne, the Lake of Quinti, the Lake of Lucerne, the Lake of Con∣stance, the Lake of Valestat, and many others in the Moun∣tains of Switzerland. There is on the other side the Moun∣tains a great and considerable Lake, called Come, also the
Lake of Lugane, the Lake Major, which is above 60 miles long, and likewise the Lake de Gard: All these Lakes are replenish'd with most excellent Fish, and particularly Trouts; but in the Lake de Garde there is found an admi∣rable Fish, called Carpion, which is far more delicate than either Trout or Salmon, but they are not so great; for those of the largest sise do not weigh above fifteen pounds. I do not think that in any part of Europe there are so many fine Lakes to be found in so narrow a Compass, as those which I have here mentioned. Concerning the Dutchy of FERRARA. THe Duke of Ferrara hath always been but a little Prince, because his Dminions are not very great; yet there have been several of the said Dukes for above 150 years ago, and since, that have made a handsome Figure, and held a considerable Rank amongst the Princes of Italy. The Country was formerly very populous, and the Lands being fertil, and well cultivated, the Revenue of the Prince were considerable, and he kept a good Court. But since that Dutchy i devolved upon the See of Rome, by the Death of the last Duke, who dyed without Issue Male, the Country is almost depopulated; the most part of the Lands are desolate; and for several Years last past the Dutchy is infected with Diseases, purely for want of Inhabitants. There wer formerly in the Time of the Dukes of Ferrara, more than one hundred thousand People, and at present there are not 15000. The Grass grows in the Streets and most of the Houses are void, Polesino is one of the best parts of Italy; and that part of it which is possessed by the Venetians, is very well culti∣vated and populous; and 'tis one of the best of their small Provinces. As soon as you pafs the great Arm of the River Po, which is called the Lagoscouro, which separates that part of the Polesino which belongs to the Venetians, from that which belongs to the Pope; although the Land and Country is the very same, yet the most part of those
Lands of the Polesino, which belongs to the Ecclesiasti∣cal State, are desolate and ast: The Grass lyes withered and rotten upon the ground, because there is no body takes care to mow it; and in passing through great Villages, you'l find all the Houses abandon'd, and not one Inhabitant to be found. It is not easily to be imagined how it is posible, that a Country so populous and flourihing, should in less than 80 years be so entirely ruined and dispeopled: by this it is very apparent, that no Subjects are so unhappy, as those that live under the Domination of the Clergy. Concerning the Estates of BOLOGNIA. IF the Popes had been able to have made themselves ma∣sters of Bolognia, as they have done of Ferrara, they would thereby have reduced it to the same miserable con∣dition; but Bolognia hath always preserved their Priviled∣ges and the Civil Government, by means of the Gonfalon∣niers, under whom they are governed; they have te right of sending Embassadors to the Pope, who injoy the same Prerogatives as do the Embassadors of the other free Princes and States: The Ppe cannot confiscate the Goods of any Subject of Blognia for any Crime whatsoever. The great Mischiefs which too frequently happen here, more than in other parts, are Assassinations and Murthers; those that commit them fly for shelter to some of the Churches, as to an inviolable Afylum, from whence the Legats themselves cannot bring them to be punished; or perhaps they retire into the Country, into some Strong hold, or into the Territories of a Neighbouring Prince, where they are certainly secure, and there remain until the Legation of the then Crdinal be finished, and afterwards make an agreement with the Successor, who for Money pardons them (having Power so to do) all the Crimes and Murthers they have committed: In other respects the People of Bo∣lognia are very happy, and live in great plenty, for that the Country is mighty fruitful; and they pay no Taxes to the Prince.
Remarks upon the Country of the Great Duke of TUSCANY. THere are in ths Great Dukedom three considerable Cities, Florence, Pisa, and Senna. All those who have read the Histry of Italy, do know, that Psa was for∣merly a very powerful Commonwealh, that it flourished in Trade and Commerce, and that there were a great many wealhy Citizens belonging to it; there needs no other proof of this, than what we read, that upon a certain occa∣sion a hundred of the Citizens equip'd each of them a Gally at their own Charges, whih they maintained during all the War. The great Actions are well known whih they have done in the Levant by their Flets, and how they a long time opposed the Duke of Florene, who at length sub∣dued them by the Assistance of the Spanish Arms. Pisa is one of the largest and most beautiful Cities of Ita∣ly; the Buildings are stately and fine; & so is one of their Churches, which with its Dependencies is one of the finest in all Italy The City is built upon the River of Arne, which divides it in the midst; it is navigable for Vessels of a great burthen  and at Ligorne, which is twelve Miles distance, it falls into the Sea. It is one of the best scituated Towns in all Italy for Trade, with which it flourished extreamly whils it was a Republick: at present not only the City, but he Country belonging to it, is wholly depopulated. Wri∣ters say, that there were formerly above one hundred and fifty thousand Inhabitants, whereas now there are not twelve thousand. The Grass grows in most of the Places & Streets of the City, and most of the Houses are deserted, and lye void. I was my self in a fair large Pallace which was let for six Pistoles per annum; the greatest part of their Lands lye wast, and the Air is very unhealthy in most parts, because of the small number of Inhabitants. The Duke of Florence thought there was no way to secure himself of this great City; but by depopulating of it, and ruining the Trade, which rendred it so potent, so that at present there is not any Trade there at all.
The City of Sienna was also formerly a very fine Com∣mon Wealth, and had in it many noble, rich, and power∣ful Families; but since that the Duke of Florence hath redu∣ced it to his Obedience, he hath ruined most of the No∣bility and Gentry, many of them retiring into France, and into the territories of some of the Princes of Italy. As to the City of Florence it self, it is extreamly decayed to what is was since it came under the Government of the House of Meicis. It is plain from the History of Machiavil, and other Italian Authors that lived in those times, that it was three times more populous when it was a Republick, than it is now. The Great Duke keeping his Court and re∣sidence there, one would think should make the City flou∣rish the more; yet it wants a great deal of that Luster and Splendor it had when it was a Commonwealth. Remarks upon the Temporal Government of the POPE. THere are certainly very few People so miserable, a those who live under the Dominion of the Pope: most of the States of Italy, and where there are the most Subsi∣dies and Impositions, have not put any tax upon Corn and Grain which make Bread, because there is no person, tho never so miserable, that can subsist without it; there is that humanity and regard had to the People, in not laying Taxes upon Bread, because 'tis the common Nourishment and absolutely necessary even for the most Indigent and Poor; tho Impositions are laid without scruple upon Wine and o∣ther Merchandises, because thy are not so necessary as Bread yet the Pope makes no scruple to lay very great Imposition upon Corn and Bread throughout all his Dominions, ex∣cept in those places that have yet preserved their Liberties. It was Donna Olimpia, that during the Pontificat of Innocent the X. began to put Taxes and Imposts upon Corn, and made such Laws which have ruined the most part of the great Nobility and Gentry, that live under the Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment, who had their revenues consisting in Corn. All the Popes who have reigned since Innocents time, have found
such a great Advantage to themselves by these Laws of Donna Olympia, that they have continued them ever since; and it is at present a very Considerable part of the Ecclesi∣astical Revenue. The substance of which said Law or Or∣dinance is this, That no person whatsoever is suffered to sell Corn to any Strangers; but all those that have any, are obliged to sell it at a price certain to the Ecclesiastical Chamber; which is not at the most above one moiety o the real Va∣lue; and then the Ecclesiastical Chamber sells it again at double the price In Italy there is no person, either in City or Country, in the Popes Dominions, who is permitted to make their own Bread, but evey one is obliged to buy it of the Bakers, who are appointed by the Chamber; in each Vil∣lage and Burrough there is but one Baker Established by the Chamber to make and sell Bread; the Baker is obliged to ta∣ke the Corn of the Chamber at a certain price, and to make the Bread of such a quality and weight, and to sell it at a price Certain. In the great Cities, as at Rome, there are Very many Bakers, who are all obliged to buy a certain quantity of Corn of the Ecclesiastical Chamber for a whole Year to come, which they pay for beforehand, and give ten Crowns the Salme or measure, when at the same time the Chamber bougt it of the particular persons for five Crowns, at the beginning of the year, all the Bakers are obliged to take the same Quantity of Corn for the Year ensuing, altho sometimes they have a great deal of the last years Corn upon their hands, which they must deliver to the Cham∣ber for five Crowns the Salme or measure, and then the very same Corn is sold them again for ten Crowns. I do not belie∣ve that there is any Country in the World, that draws more profit from their Subjects for Corn, an the Pope doth in his Dominions, which hath been partly the Cause of the ruin of the Ecclesiastical Estate, since the Establishment of the said Law, which was about thirty years since: the Country is unpeopled, and great part of the Lands lie void and un∣cultivated, because it is not worth while to manure them, when the greatest advantage and profit, arising thereby, goes to the Pope. In travelling through the Ecclesiastical
Territories in Romania, and between Rome and Naples, there are vast quantites of Land unmanured. A Traveller passing through the Estate of a Roman Prince, told the Prince upon his return to Nples, he would if he pleased send him Husbandmn that should manure his Land; thinking that it had been for want of Labourers that the Lands lay yoid and wast. The Prince told him, that he did not want people to Cul∣tivate his Lans; but because they were obliged to sell all their Corn and Grain to the Chamber at a Very Low Price, it would not quit Cost to Manure and Cultivate it. Touching the Reduction of the Interest of mony Due by the MONTES at Rome from 4 to 3 per Cent. EVery body almost knows what 't is which in Italy, & especially at Rome, they call the Montes; it it is much like the Rents upon the Town house at Paris. The Popes having occasion of money, borrow great sums of particular Persons at 4 per Cent Interest; This they call at Rome the Establishment of the Monte, that is, the Creation of cer∣tain Officers, and the assignment of several Rents for the payment of those who have lent Mony to the Pope. The present Pope, finding the Chamber engaged to the annual payments of I know not how many Millions of Roman Crowns Interest, to those that had ient Money upon the Monte, resolved in part to reduce and lessen the great Sum of Money which the Interest amounted to, and having for this purpose raised several Millions of Roman Crowns, he ac∣quainted those that had money upon the Monte, that they should come and receive their principal money, unless they would take 3 per cent Interest for the 4 per cent which they formerly received; wereupon, there being really no Trade in all the Ecclesiastical Territories, and the Lands worth nothing, and that the Estates of the Nobility were all sold to a penny, all Persons who had Money upon the Monte, not knowing how to Imploy it to advantage elsewhere, let it there remain, contenting themselves with three per cen instead of four per cent, which they had before; So that by this means every one concerned lost a fourth part of
their yearly Income, and the Chamber got I know not how many Millions of Crowns yearly by this Retrenchment of one per cent. It is almost incredible the Immence Sums the Pope hath raised by retrenching of many superfuous Expences, and extinguishing several Offices to which great Salleries were payd by the Ecclesiastical Chamber, and b divers other means. Those who are well informed in thee matters, do for certain affirm, that all the Subsidies which the Pope hath remitted to the Emperor and King of Poland, to carry on the War against the Turks, are not the thirtieth part of the Money which he hath treasured up; altho likewise he hath pay'd many Debts of the Chamber, which were not chargeable upon the Montes. I ought not here to omit relating, that the Inns, espe∣cially in Tuscany, in Romania, and between Rome and Na∣ples, are very sordid and incommodious, one may give a pretty good guess at the prodigious Wealth belonging to the Clergy in the Kingdom of Naples by the great quantity of plate, Vessels and Statues of Silver in the Churches; and by the riches and magnificent Furniture of their Habita∣tions, and Vestments of the Priests. One may upon the whole matter make this Important Reflection, that if the King of Spain doth not think of some expedient, to hinder the Clergy from Increasing their Estates in Lands, which they do daily, they will in a very little time become Masters of the greatest part of the Kingdom of Naples; for they are already possessed of more than the half of the Lands of that Kingdom, besides the other vast profits they make continu∣ally under pretence of Service to the Church, for their Mas∣ses, Buildings, Burials, Marriages, Confessions, and by their Indulgences, and the Legacies left them by Will. Tho these are Remarks made in hast▪ yet they may be of use to the Author. I know several very pleasant Stories of the Iesuits at Naples. The Prince of Salerme gave them the moiety of a great House which he had at Naples, and thereupon an Inscription was engaven in Capital Letters upon the Fron∣tispice
of the House, of the Donation thereof given to the Iesuits by the said Prince; within these few years the Iesuites have turn'd the Heires of the Prince of Salrme out of possession of the other Moiety of the said House, and have defaced the Inscription upon the House: and all this they have done by Colour of Law and Justice. Upon the first Establishment of the Society of Iesuits, the Carthu∣sians of Naples, who are very rich, voluntarily assigned them a yearly Pension of several thousand Ducats; but the Carthusians perceiving that of late years several of the Ie∣suits were grown mighty rich, resolved to withdraw the said Pension; the Iesuites hereupon went to Law with them, and obtained Sentence, that the said Pension should be con∣tinued. The Iesuits have got a very considerable part of the Lands of the Nobility in the Kingdom of Naples. All the Re∣ligious, of what Order soever they be, who have Houses at Naples, have the Priviledge of purchasing all Houses that are contiguous to them on the one side or the other to the very end of the Street, in order to make their Houses entire and to stand alone like an Island; and for this purpose they have no more to do, than only pay the Proprietor for his House, not according to the present Value, but as it was last sold, perhaps 50, 60, or 100 years ago, and so hath de∣scended from Father to Son successively to the person then in possession. Many other very considerable Remarks might be made of the divers Triks and Methods the Clergy of this Kingdom make use of to wheede and trapan the Laity out of thei Estates. FINIS
