c1940 99827090 31503
THE Chaplains Petition TO THE HONOURABLE HOUSE For Redress of Grievances. By one of the Camp Chaplains. 1. SInce the Ladies 'gainst Men Have to Paper put Pen By way of Most humble Petition, In hope your good pleasure Will once be at leisure To mend their now Scurvy Condition. 2. And since you allow That impertinent Crew, Your Patience to weary and vex, With a thing of no moment, That has small weight, or none in't, But's as Idle and Light as their Sex. 3. We, humble Famelicks, Divinity's Reliques, In plain English, Chaplains Domestick; To make known our grievance For you to relieve once, On your Door do our earnest Request stick.
4. Viz. Be it Enacted, That as we've contracted, Our Salaries may be Paid us: That when we're dismist ill We may not go whistle, As an ord'nary Footman or Maid do's. 5. For as to the Land all, It will be a Scandal To see Sons of Levi go Thread-bare; Even so to be sure, If the Pastor is poor, His Flock will ne're greet him with Head bare. 6 Next, when we've said Grace, Let's at Table have place, And not sculk among the Waiters: Or come in with the Fruit To give thanks, and sneak out, To Dine upon half empty Platters. 7. But besides store of Dishes (One part of our Wishes) To fortifie Maw Sacerdotal: Elemosinary Funk, And leave to be Drunk, We humbly desire you to Vote all. 8. Item, Pray make us able To command Steed in Stable, When we are dispos'd ad ridendum: And if we want Boots, Whips, Spurs, or Sartoots, Oblige surly Groom straight to lend them. 9. Nor let our great Patrons, Or their ruling Matrons, Read the Butlers a Juniper Lecture, If sometimes they pass To our hands a stoln glass, Or some little Orts of Confecture.
10. When long we have serv'd, And Preferment deserv'd, Let's not miss of our just Expectations; By every Fopp's Letter For his Friend, that's no better, Or our Patron's more Block-head Relations. 11. For 'tis cause of grieving To see a good Living Which our Thoughts had long been fixt on, Be giv'n to a Wigeon With no more Religion, And Learning much less than his Sexton. 12. Nor yet let Matrimony, The worst sort of Simony, Be the Price of our Presentations: Nor to wed a cast Mistress When she's in great distress, Our requisite Qualification. 13. And if't be our chance To serve against France, At Sea, on the Rhine, or in Flanders; We earnestly sue t' ye, That exempt from all duty We may Dine with our Pious Commanders. 14. Then Brandy good store, With several things more, Which we Sons o'th' Church have a right in: But chiefly w' intreat, You'll never forget To excuse us from Preaching and Fighting. 15. Let not a Commission So change the condition Of him that just carried a Halbert; That a Dunce of no Letters Should Hector his Betters, For truly we cannot at all bear 't.
16. Nor when the War's done, Let's be broke ev'ry one, To languish in Rags and lye idle; Nor be so ill serv'd, To be left to be starv'd, And kept by a Bear, and a Fiddle. 17. May it therefore you Please, For your own and our Ease To relieve us without hesitation: For the Grievances told, Are as frequent and old As any besides in the Nation. 18. Then on us take Pity, And chuse a Committee, Let no other Business prevent ye; Our request do not spurn, Nor Vote it to Burn With a Nemine Contradicente. 19. To this if you yield, Our Mouths shall be fill'd With Encomiums of your Piety; Whose excellent Fame We will loudly Proclaim And worship next that of the Deity. 20. When thus you remove What we disapprove, We all, down to Z from the Letter A; By Night and by Day, Will fervently Pray, As in Duty bound, &c a. LONDON, Printed for the use of the Petitioners; and sold by Tho. Ranew in Fleet-Street near Temple Barr. 1693.
