c2012 13274795 98710
THE CHARACTER OF AN Irish-Man: OR, A DEAR-JOY Painted to the Life. SINCE the Arrival of the Teague-Land Troops, in this Protestant Kingdom, who can admire at the surprize and consternation of our English Nation, when they look upon it to be as bad as a New Massacre, and much more Formidable than a DƲTCH-Invasion?
But, if this be the Effect of our Fears, Where's our Forti∣tude? Where's our True English Courage? Where's our Ancient Grandeur? Can it be consistent with the Temper of a true English-Man, whose Name has been a Terror to all Nations, to fear a Neighbouring Subject? Is it not a Diminution of that Ancient Glory that once kept all the Universe in awe? England fear'd no Incursions then, but made them. Our War-like Kings, like Julius Caesar, came and saw, and whereso-e're they came did Overcome: And shall we stand in dread of such a Morsel, as would hardly serve the Bull-and-Mouth for a Break-fast, before a long-winded Meeting? If they be Strangers, we ought to treat them with Civility: If they be Fellow-Subjects, we ought to Embrace them: If they come to our Assistance, we ought to Encourage them. But you'll Reply, They are a pack of Irish-Wolves, Tories, Cut-Throats, Papists, what not, come over to De∣vour us. I Answer, If they be Wolves, you have Doggs enough to Worry them, at a cheaper Rate than Cromwel did those in Ireland. If they be Tories, we have yet Whiggs enough remaining of the old Stamp to match their Cocks. For Cut-Throats, (thank the Fates) some can Sleep quietly all Night, and when they Wake, find their Throats Cut in the Morning, without the help of an Irish-Skein. And for Papists, you have a Thousand to One. Where then is the cause of our Fears and Jealousies? It is a groundless Suspition; and I will undertake to prove, by Invincible Arguments, that an Irish-Man, and Subject of the King of England, is no such Monster as you would render Him.
First, They are Christians as well as We, the same Hopes, the same Fears, and same Apprehensions of a Future Being. If we differ in Principles, they have yet as much Honor and Honesty, Allegiance and Loyalty, Religion and Conscience, perhaps more than those that suspect their Fidelity. They are Subjects of the same Prince; subject to the same Laws and Punishments; Ought we not then to Love our Fellow-Subjects? What tho' we Arrogate to our selves the upper-hand in Fellowship? Must we therefore utterly despise these Gentlemen? 'Tis unnatural to take the Sword in the Right Hand to cut off the Left: We are all Members of the same Head. They are Civiliz'd as much as We; a Nation of as much Humanity, Temperance, and Sobriety: But you will say, They want Sense, They want Courage; It is a Mercy, if they want them not more themselves, who tax Them with the want of Either: For their Courage, shew me a Hector of Holbourn, that can Bully them; and for their want of Wit, (for all your Bog-Witticisms, wherewith you upbraid them) produce the Sharper that can ite them. If Diamond only can cut Diamond, 'tis odds but the Irish-Man has the better of the Lay: And for their Behaviour, instance so many? Men of any Nation, under the same Circumstance, that e're carry'd themselves with more Decorum, Obligingness, and Respect than they have done, in their Quarters or else∣where, since their Arrival: Their Officers being generally. Gentlemen of Education, Conduct, and Experience. I will not deny, but amongst so many Thousands, there may be some Extravagancies committed; but shall we lay it as a Crime to a whole Nation? It is a small Corporation, that has neither Rogue nor Thief within it; and that Lon∣don has both, you need go no further than the Old-Baily,
to be convinc'd: It is uncharitable to condemn a whole Nation, for the particular Offences of a few. Nor will you find the least cause of any such danger from the Irish; there being amongst them several English Gentle∣men Officers, which are Protestants, yet live amicably with their Superior Commanders, and the Soldiers quietly under them: Besides, the English which are this day in Ireland, (where the Natives are more numerous) enjoy their Estates and Possessions, without the least disturbance or molestation. How unreasonable is it then, to suspect an Irish-Invasion in England, by a few Regiments, when our vast Armies in Ireland cou'd hardly reduce them in so many Centuries? Let us then no more fear them as Enemies, but embrace them as Friends; and since they are only come over for the Defence of the King and Country, upbraid them no more with the Opprobrious Titles of Rogues, Tories, and Rebels; but call them (what they more properly deserve) The Guar∣dian Angels of the Court, The Life-Guard of the City, The Safe-guard of the Nation. FINIS. Printed in the Year 1689.
