C3270 12275856 58442
CR DIEV·ET MON·DROIT HONI · SOIT · QVI · MAL · Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION Concerning the President and Council of Wales, and Marches of the same. CHARLES R. WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice of His Privy Council, for many weighty Considerations hath beén graciously pleased to establish and continue His Honorable Council in the Dominion and Principality of Wales, and Marches of the same, in the same manner and form as His Royal Progenitors, Kings and Queens of this Realm have heretofore used for the good Government, ease, and benefit of the In∣habitants of those parts. His Majesty therefore by the Advice of His said Privy Council, doth hereby publish and declare, That His Majesties Pre∣sident and Council established in the said Dominion and Principality of Wales, and Marches of the same, have full power and authority to hear and determine all such Causes and Complaints as are comprehended in His Majesties Instructions, delivered unto His Majesties President of that Council: As also, that His Majesties Loving Subjects within the Dominion and Principality of Wales, and Marches thereof, as heretofore used and accustomed, may fréely repair unto the said President and Council for Relief and Iustice in their lawful and necessary Suits. And His Majesties further will and pleasure is, That
the Authority and Proceédings of His said President and Council, be duly and fully acknowledged and obeyed: To which purpose, His Majesty doth hereby streightly charge and command all Majors, Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Serjeants, and all other inferior Officers and Ministers of Iustice, within the Iurisdiction of the said Court, to serve, execute, and obey all Precepts, Process, and Letters of Iustice of His said President and Council, and in all points and places within the said Principality and Marches thereof, to be attendant to them. And furthermore, That all His Loving Subjects within the said Dominion and Principality of Wales, and Marches thereof, as heretofore used and accustomed, do yield their obedience, and submit themselves unto the Orders, Precepts, Commands, and Decreés of the said President and Council accordingly, as they will answer the con∣trary at their utmost peril. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty eighth day of September, 1661. in the Thir∣teenth Year of Our Reign. God save the KING. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, 1661. At the KING'S Printing-House in Black-Fryars.
