C4062 19737387 109418
ARTICLES OF VISITATION & ENQƲIRY Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL, Exhibited to the Ministers, Church-Wardens, and Side-men, Of every Parish within the Diocess of LINCOLN, At the Primary Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in GOD, THOMAS, Lord Bishop of that Diocess. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.
The Tenor of the Oath to be Admi∣nistred to the Church-wardens and Sides-men of every Parish. YOU shall swear in Truth, Judgement, and Righteousness, faithfully to execute the Office of a Church-Warden within your Parish; and according to the best of your Sll and Know∣ledge, Present such Things and Persons, as by these Articles, and the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, you know to be Presentable. So help you GOD.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION & ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESS of LINCOLN. TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chappels, with the Ornaments and Furniture thereunto belonging. IS your Church or Chappel kept in good and sufficient re∣pair, and all things so decently ordered and kept clean, as becometh the House of God? II. Is there in the Church (or Chappel) a Font of Stone standing in the usual, ancient place, with a Cover to it, for the Administration of Baptism? Is there also a convenient Communion-Table, covered with a fair Carpet of Silk, or other decent Stuff, in time of Divine Service; and with a fair Linnen Cloath at the time of Administring the Sacrament? What Cup, Chalice, Paten, or Flagons, have you belonging to that Service? III. Have you in your Church (or Chappel) a convenient Seat for your Minister to read Divine Service in, and a Pul∣pit with a decent Cloth or Cussion for the same? Have any Pews or Seats been erected by any private person of his own authority without leave from the Ordinary? IV. Have you a large Folio Bible of the last Translation, with two Books of Common Prayer well bound, one for the Minister, the other for the Clerk? Have you the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority, the Book of Canons, and the Table of Degrees allowed and prohibited in Marriage?
V. Have you a Register Book of Parchment for all who are Christned, Married, and Buried in the Parish, in which are set down the Names of the Parties, with the Day, Month and Year of each Christning, Marriage, and Burial? Is the Transcript thereof every year, within one month after the 25 of March, carried into the Bishops Registry? VI. Have you a Paper Book in which the Names of Stran∣gers who Preach or Officiate in the Church (or Chappel) are set down? And another Book for the Church-Wardens Ac∣counts? VII. Have you a fair Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his publick Ministration provided at the charge of the Parish? VIII. Have you a Chest for Alms, with three Locks and Keys, and another Chest to keep the Books and Ornaments of the Church? Have you a Bier with a black Herse-cloth for the Burial of the dead? IX. Is the Church-yard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Pales, or Rails, and decently kept from all annoyance or Incroach∣ments? Are the Trees therein preserved? X. Is the Mansion House of your Minister, with all other Houses thereto belonging kept in good repair? Have any of them been pulled down or defaced? Hath any incroached upon the Land thereto belonging, or felled the Trees thereon growing? XI. Have you a perfect Terrier of all Glebe-lands, Gar∣dens, Orchards, and Tenements belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage; also a particular Lift of such Pensions, Tithes, or other yearly profits (either within or without the Parish), as belong thereunto? Are any of them with-held from your Minister, as you know, or have heard, and by whom? XII. Have any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage been taken away, or alienated by Sale or Exchange, without Licence from the Ordinary, and free consent of the Incumbent? TIT. II. Concerning Ministers. I. IS your Minister Episcopally ordained Deacon or Priest, according to the Laws of the Realm of England? Is he
defamed or suspected to have obtained his Orders or Bene∣fice by any Simoniacal compact? Hath he been legally Insti∣tuted and Inducted into his Benefice? and did he within two Months after his Induction, publickly read in the Church, in the time of Divine Service, the 39 Articles of Religion, esta∣blished in the Church of England? And did he then and there declare his assent thereunto? II. Hath your Minister been Licenced to Preach by the Arch∣bishop, Bishop of this Diocess, or either of the two Univer∣sities? Doth he diligently read Divine Service, and Preach every Lords Day in the Church, unless hindred by Sick∣ness, or reasonable absence? And in such cases, doth he pro∣cure some lawful Minister to read Prayers, to Preach, and perform other Ministerial Duties? III. Hath your Minister (or any other who Preached in your Church) published in his Sermons any Doctrine which is new, strange, and disagreeing from the Word of God, and the Articles of the Christian Faith, or any thing against the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England, as they are now established? IV. Doth your Minister in the Morning and Evening Ser∣vice, in the Administration of the Sacraments, and in per∣forming other Religious Offices appointed by the Church of England, use the respective Forms in the Book of Common Prayer, which are enjoyned in this Church? And doth he make use of the Surplice when he reads Divine Service, or Administers the Sacraments? V. Doth your Minister diligently Catechize the Youth of his Parish every Sunday and Holyday before Evening Service? Doth he prepare and procure them (as occasion is offered) to come and be confirmed by the Bishop? And doth he endeavour to re∣claim all Popish Recusants, and all Sectaries in your Parish, to the true Religion? VI. Is your Minister a Man of sober, unblamable, and ex∣emplary life? Is he grave, modest and regular in his outward demeanor and Apparel, according to the Constitutions of the Church? Or is his carriage, conversation, or company, in
any kind whatsoever, disorderly, or scandalous, and unbeseem∣ing his Calling and Charge? VII. Is your Minister ready to visit the Sick, and to Baptize Infants in danger of death, being so desired? Is any Infant, or more aged Person in the Parish yet unbaptized by his default? Have those Children which have been Baptized in private Houses by the Minister of the Parish, afterward been brought into the Church? and did the Minister there certifie the Con∣gregation, That the true Form of Baptism was by him pri∣vately before used? Or if any Children in the Parish have been Baptized privately by any other lawful Minister, have those Children been brought to your Church? And hath the Minister of the Parish there examined, whether such Children were lawfully Baptized, or not? Doth your Minister refuse to give the Sacrament to any in the Parish, and for what cause? Or doth he give it to such as are scandalous, or notorious sin∣ners, or to any Excommunicate persons? Doth he duly Ad∣minister the Blessed Sacrament three times every year at the least, whereof Easter to be one? VIII. Doth your Minister Marry any Persons in Private Houses, or such as are under age, not having the content of their Parents and Guardians? Doth he Marry any without Banes first published three Sundays or Holydays in the Church? or at prohibited times or hours, without Licence so to do? Or with the Licence of any other than the Archbishop, Bishop of this Diocess, or his Chancellor? IX. Doth your Minister duly bid and observe Holy-days, and Fasting-days, as is appointed? And doth he then use the Forms of Prayer prescribed by the Church? Hath he taken upon him to appoint any private Fasts, or Religious Ex∣ercises, without Lawful Authority? Doth he, or any other (Minister or Lay person) in your Parish, hold any Conventi∣cles, or Religious meetings for people of several Families to resort unto, contrary to the Laws in that case provided? X. Is your Minister constantly resident among you, and how many weeks in the year hath he been absent from his Benefice? Hath he a Curate to assist him in his absence or presence? Is that Curate in Holy Orders, and hath he a Licence from the Bishop, to serve the said Cure? Doth he carry himself in all things as an able and discreet Minister, and
conformable to the Church of England? Doth he serve any more Cures beside that of your Parish, and at what distance? And doth any Lay-man, not being in Holy Orders, presume to read Publick Prayers in the Church? XI. Is there in your Parish any Lecturer? Is he in Orders, and duly Licenced? Doth he read Divine Service before his Lecture? And is he conformable to the Discipline of the Church of England? XII. Doth your Minister every six months publickly de∣nounce all such as persevere in the Sentence of Excommunica∣tion, not seeking to be Absolved? Have any Excommunicate Persons been received into the Church, without a Certificate from the Ordinary of their Absolution? Or any so dying, buried with Christian Burial? TIT. III. Concerning Parishioners. I. ARE there any in your Parish who are reputed Here∣ticks or Schismaticks, refusing Communion with the Church of England? Any Impugners of the Religion esta∣blished, of his Majesties Supremacy, or of any of the Laws, Rites, and Ceremonies Ecclesiastical? Have any spoken or declared any thing in derogation, or to the depraving of the Form of Gods Worship in the Church of England, and Ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, as it is now Established by Law? Are there any convicted Papists, known Anabaptists, or Quakers, in the Parish? II. Are there any in your Parish who lie under a common fame, or vehement suspition of Adultery, Fornication, or In∣cest? Are there any common Drankards, Swearers, or Blas∣phemers of Gods Holy Name and Word? Are there any Ex∣communicate persons, or any who countenance, or keep com∣pany with them? What punishment for any such offences have been commuted and exchanged into a Pecuniary Mulct or Sum of Money by any Ecclesiastical Judge, exercising Jurisdiction within this Diocess, by virtue of any Grant or Commission? What was the Sum of Money by them, or any of them so re∣ceived and taken, and to what uses was the same bestowed?
III. Do any of your Parish prophane the Lords Day by neg∣lecting of publick holy Duties, or by doing the works of their ordinary Calling, or using unlawful, Recreations, or permitting their Children and Servants so to do? Do they duly observe other Holidays, Festivals and Fasts appointed by Authority? IV. Do all those who inhabit in your Parish, duly resort to your Church (or Chappel) and continue there during Divine Service, Sermon, and other Holy Duties, with that reverence, order and decency, as befits devout Christians? Or have any occasioned riot, clamour, or fighting in the Church at any time? Is there any Recusant, Papists, or Sectaries in your Parish? Do they, or any of them keep any, School-master in their House, which cometh not to Church to hear Divine Service, and receive the Holy Communion? V. Are there any in your Parish who refuse to have their Infant-children Baptized by your Minister? or do they keep them unbaptized longer than the Church allows? and what Infants, or more aged persons, are there in your Parish un∣baptized? VI. Do all your Housholders duly send their Children, Ap∣prentions, and Servants to be Catechized? And do they take care (when occasion is offered) they should be Confirmed by the Bishop? VII. Is there any person in your Parish so confirmed and in∣structed, and, being sixteen years of age, who refuseth to re∣ceive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times every year, whereof Easter to be one? And do all receive this Sacred Mystery with that outward gesture of humility and reverence as becomes them, meekly kneeling upon their knees, according to the order and custom of the Church? VIII. Are there any in your Parish who are known or sus∣pected to be unlawfully Married, contrary to the Laws of God and this Church? Are there any, who being lawfully Married, (and never Divorced) do yet live asunder? Or any, who being lawfully Divorced, do live together again? Or being separa∣ted for Adultery, have afterwards enter married with any other during the life of their first Consort? IX. Are there any married Women in your Parish, who after their safe delivery from Childbirth, refuse to make their hum∣ble and publick Thanksgivings to God, according to the ap∣pointment of the Church.
X. Are there any of your Church, who refuse to pay their Easter Offerings, and other Duties to your Minister? Or to pay the Rates assessed on them, for the repair and provisions of the Church? XI. Do you know, or have you heard of any Patron or other person in your Parish, who having the Gift of an Eccle∣siastical Benefice, hath made gain, thereby upon any Bargain, either for Money, Pension, Lease, Reserve of Tithes, or Glee, or other Simoniacal Compact whatsoever? XII. Do any among you refuse to bury their Dead, accor∣ding to the Rites of the Church of England? Are there any Wills of deceased persons unproved, or Goods not admini∣stred? Do you know of any Legacies given to your Church, on the Cathedral Curch of St. Paul in London, or to the Poor, or to other charitable uses, not yet received by you, or detain∣ed from you, or not applied to the charitable uses appointed? TIT. IV. Concerning the Officers belonging to the Church. I. ARe the Church-Wardens of your Parish yearly chosen according to Law? And are there Sidemen appointed to assist them, for the due ordering of the Church? II. Have the former and last Church Wardens given up their Accounts to those that succeed them, together with all Moneys, and other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? III. Have you a Parish Clark, aged twenty years at least▪ who is of sober Life and good report? Is he chosen by your Minister, and approved by the Parish? And is he able for Reading, Writing, and Singing, as a Clerk? And his Wages duly paid him? IV. Doth he or your Sexton take care of your Church, to keep it lockt and clean, to open the doors, and ring the Bells in due time, to call the Living to the Worship of God; also to admonish them by Tolling of a Passing-Bell for any that are dying, thereby to meditate of their own death, and to com∣mend the others weak condition to the mercy of God?
TIT. V. Concerning Alms-houses, Schools, and School-Masters, Physicians, Chyrurgions, and Midwifes. I IS there any Hospital, Alms-house, or Free-School, Founded in your Parish? Are they so governed and or∣dered in the use and revenue as the Founders appointed, ac∣cording to the Ordinances and Statutes which have been made concerning the same? II. Doth any man keep a publick or private School in your Parish? Is he or they licenced and allowed thereunto by the Bishop or his Chancellor? Doth he instruct his Scholars in the Catechism and Religion of the Church of England? Is there any Woman that taketh upon her to instruct and edu∣cate any young Maidens? Doth she resort duly, and bring with her to Divine Service, upon the Lords Day and Holidays, all such young Maidens as are committed to her care? III. Do any in your Parish practice Physick, Chyrurgery, or Midwifery, without Licence from the Ordinary? TIT. VI. Touching Ecclesiastical Officers. I. ARE there any Ecclesiastical Officers that exercise Ec∣clesiastical Jurisdiction within this Diocess, that take, and receive any extraordinary Fees for any Cause? Have abuses or offences been presented by Church-wardens and Quest-men? And are such offences, being presented, sup∣pressed or left unpunished? II. Have any Apparitors taken any reward for the concoal∣ing of any offence, or the avoiding of the punishment of the Offenders? And do they summon any without a Citation first had? IF you know of any other Default or Crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, you are to present the same.
Advertisements. I. EVery Parson and Vicar, and (in their lawful absence) the Curate of any Parish, may join in Presentments with the Church-wardens and Side-men; and if they will not Present, then the Ministers themselves (being the Persons that have the chief care of suppressing Sin and Impiety in their Parishes) may Present such Crimes as are against the Ecclesiasti∣cal Laws, and want due Reformation. Can. 113. II. THe Ministers are to take notice, that the Bi∣shop at his Visitation, will be ready to Con∣firm the Youth who shall be fitted and brought be∣fore him; and therefore they are desired, by diligent Catechizing in the Grounds of Religion, to prepare those under their charge, and bring them at the time appointed, to the Bishop: For as (de Jure) he can∣not, so (de Facto) he will not Confirm any, save such who have been duly Catechiz'd, and (by their Pa∣stors Testimony) have attain'd such a measure of Knowledge of the Principles of Christian Religion, as may render them capable of Confirmation. T. LINCOLN.
