C41 18832087 108399
A Fairing for Young-men, OR The careless Lover. Who is resolv'd in his mind, upon a merry straine, To Love, but not long, unlesse his Love, loves him againe; He wishes all Batchelors to be rul'd by this Song, And then their Sweet-hearts should not foole them so long. To the tune of, He that hath most Money, he is the best Man. LIst you brave youngsters that live in the Citty and likewis you Countrey Lads hearken a whil Here are some Uerses, I hope they will fitt ye; which when you have heard may caus you to smil I loved a Maid once but she did deceive me, and for the losse of her Ile not complaine, No beauties of Fréedom shall ever bereave me, For I cannot love if not loved againe. My Love for beauty I néeds must commend her, and for her carriage it séem'd very faire But such a politick Wit did attend her that I had like to be caught in fooles snare, For by experience be sure I can tell thée, false love will puzzell, and trouble thy braine, Then let not fond smiles, and glances compell thée To love and not be beloved again. She in my company often consented, for to be merry, and passe time away, And for a while I rested contented, though in her carriage she séem'd very coy But when I perceived her suttle delusion, her humours no longer I then would maintaine For t'is a madness and breeds a confusion. To love and not to be beloved again. The more you séeke to a Maid, she will slight you strive for to please her as well as you can The more you intreate her, the less she'l requite you such fooles some maidens do make of a Man: Then thy'l fly from you, thinking to prove you, but for their absence never complaine, The more then you slight them, ye better they'l love you For J le never love if not loved again.
The second part, to the same tune SOme like the wind wil be alway changing, and yet with fancies wil lead you along: When that their minds on others are ranging, thinking to charm you with their fals tonng, They'l kisse you, they'l clip you, they'l tel you a sto∣ry when al your time wil prove labour in vain, At last they will leave you, and take in, t a glory: But jl'e never love if not loved again. Batchelors all that heare this my Ditty, take my advise and be ruled by me, Slight your coy Lasses in Countrey and Citty: then to your humours they'l quickly agrée, The more you créep to them, ye sooner they'l leav you kéepe a whil from them, you'l hear them complain Tell them you'l leav them, if once they deceiv you Then if you'l love them they'l love you again. Lasses there be to that will fawn upon you, and make you believe they do love you so deare, When tis to try what they can get on you, to feast their chops with Wine and good Chéere, On shall be namelesse did serve them all finely, for to a Tavern he led them away, Cal'd for good Chéere and welcom'd them kindly, And left these Lasses the reckoning to pay. Have a care, have a rare Young men be carefull, Maids are too cunning for you now a dayes, Some wil be sullen, and some wil be chéerefull, some are too nimble, and some have delayes, Some Maids are wanton, and some Maids are civil but jl'e chuse a Maid that means honest and plain For som are to cunning I think for the Devil, But jl'e love that Maid that will love me again. She that loves truly be sure will nere leav théee but faithfull and constant will alwayes remaine, And of thy Estate she'l never deceive thée, but give thée good counsel the same to maintain; Shée'l nere put you off with so many denyals, as some their be that delights in that straine, To wast your means and your time upon trialls; But if you love her she'l love you againe. You Young-men al I have sent you a Fairing they that are honest hearts heare it away, And for to give it your loves be not sparing, for tis good counsell and truth I dare say, Young-men be carefull but be not deceitfull, let not your swéet-hearts have cause to complain If they prove constant then prove not ungrateful, But if they love you then love them again. C.. FINIS. London, Printed for Francis Greve dwelling on Snow-hill.
