C5040 11751088 48582
Severall PROPOSALS HUMBLY TENDERED To the CONSIDERATION Of those that are in Authority, For the Ease, Security, & Prosperity of this Common-wealth. By WILLIAM COLE, a Constant Asserter of the Rights and Priviledges of the People, and Opposer of the late Tyranny and Apostacy. Nehemiah ch. 5. vers. 14, 15. &c. I and my Brethren have not eaten the bread of the Governour.But the former Governours that had been before me, were chargeable un∣to the People, and had taken of them bread and wine, besides fourty shekels of silver: Yea, even their Servants bare rule over the people: but so did not I, because of the fear of God, &c. LONDON: Printed MDCLIX.
Several Proposals humbly tendred to the Consideration of those that are in Authority. 1. THat it would be very much for the Security of the Nation, and Satisfaction of the honest party, to have a review of all the Officers in the Commonwealth; That so all those that have been put in Imployments chiefly to serve the Lusts and Ends of the late Single Person, and in their respective places to be Informers, Pimps, and Tra∣pans, both to entrap, and ensnare, those that were Assertors of the Native Rights, may be expunged; And that the Fawnings and Flatteries of Time-ser∣ving men (who are Terrae Filii, sons of the Earth, and will serve the worst of Tyrants in the worst of wick∣edness, to satisfie their Covetous and Ambitious spi∣rits) may not be Credited. 2. That men may be imployed not on Principles of favour, but from principles of Ability and Integrity; And that plurality of Offices, either Civil or Milita∣ry, may be laid aside: That so those men that are brought lowe, either by sufferings for their Constan∣cy, or by losse of Trade in these sad Times, may find
in some measure, a way open, to procure a livelihood for their Families. 3. That in Collection of Customes and Excise, it is con∣venient, that men of Ability, and Affability, may be imployed, who may also be able to inform the Mer∣chants and others, Why this present Parliament is yet inforced to continue these great burthens? and who was the occasion thereof; which will much cool and qualifie the heat, that at present hath much exaspera∣ted the people of this Nation against it, by the impe∣rious carriage of insulting Spirits; especially if they may have assurance, that the Excise (which is the bane of all Trade and Commerce) may in short time cease. 4. That in regard of the Poverty of the Nation, there may be care taken, to collect all publique Monyes at as cheap a rate as may be, and that whereas some men have vast sums given for Sallaries heretofore, it was more from a principle of Designe than Necessity, that so their Mercenary spirits might be obliged to destroy their Countries rights, and keep a strict hand and eye over the constant honest party: If there be care taken in this businesse, there will be many thou∣sand pounds yearly added to the publique Trea∣sury. 5. That some men of ability and activity may be imployed, Superintendents or Over-seers of the Na∣vies stores in Chattam, Porsmouth, and Plymouth, who may: If they are able and honest, save the State above 40000 l. per annum, it being a practice in most of the
Officers to comply and connive at one anothers Of∣fences; whereby Tymber, Cables, Sayls, Powder, Cordage, Provisions, &c. are usually sold by Officers in great quantities. 6. That the Number of Officers, especially of the Custome and Excise, and value of their Salaries may be regulated and lessened; For that in many places the Salaries of the Custome-Officers exceeds the Receipts. 7. That the Farming of the Custome and Excise may forthwith cease; which is so cruelly executed, that there is a general Out-cry against it throughout the three Nations, which much endangereth the Peace of the Common-Wealth. 8. That there are 150 Sayl of English Ships em∣ployed the less yearly by the means of Martin Noel's Farming the Custome of Coals, which very much lesseneth the Number of Shipping, and prejudiceth the increase of Mariners, which is of a very ill Con∣sequence; For that the Shipping are England's Walls; and Saylors, the Garrison to defend them. 9. That it is of Considerable Importance, to em∣ploy an able publique-spirited Person to be Gover∣nour of the Isle of Barbadoes, which at present is, and so like to be, a Trade of great advantage for the ex∣pence of the Manufactures of this Common-wealth, if the said Governour shall wisely und uprightly, accor∣ding to the Act of Trade made by this present Parlia∣ment, prevent the Importation of the Manufactures of Holland and other Countries, at which there hath
been of late (as is generally reported) a great conni∣vance either through Bribery, or Neglect. 10. That it will be of very great Consequence to the encrease of Shipping and Navigation, (in some speedy time) to make some free Ports in England, whereby we shall be able to Equal and Match the Dutch in the Trade of the Zound and Baltique-Seas, and Equal them with Magazines of Goods to furnish all Parts at as cheap a rate, as the aforesaid Dutch or Hamburgers shall be able to do. 11. That there may be a Survey of all the penal Statute Laws of the Land, and a brief Collection of them that are profitable and necessary, for the well and peaceable Government of this Commonwealth, owned by this supreame Authory, and all those that are grounded on principles of Tyrranny and Oppres∣sion; & repugnant to the Laws of God and reason, and unnecessary or vexatious may be exploded: And that they that are owned may be Printed in one Volume, that so the people may know what is their duty, and not be punished by Trapps and Snares of absolete Laws, through the malice or Subtilty of corrupt Judges or Justices, it being a desperate and cruel principle for the Rulers to require obedience to Laws that the People are not capable to understand, and a known Maxime that a Multitude of Laws are a multitude of Fetters to inslave the Ignorant, and de∣stroy the Simple hearted. 12. That seeing the whole Commonwealth is in a Lamentable condition of poverty, Trade almost ut∣terly
lost, and Thousands of Poor ready to starve, Let Piety, Pity, and desire of true renown perswade those that have Thousands and Hundreds yearly means, to forbear Sallaryes for some years, that so the People may have food, and the Commonwealth by their examples be encouraged and invited to Cha∣rity and Pity. This noble and true Christian pra∣ctise and example was acted by Nehemiah, whose pattern I earnestly beseech our present Law-makers to imitate, in freeing this Commonwealth from Bondage, Slavery, and Tyranny; God forbid they should follow Jehu, who destroyed Ahab's House, onely to seat himself and his posterity in the Throne. FINIS.
