C5577 R37267 16292579 105266
THE COMMON-WEALTHS GREAT SHIP Commonly called the SOVERAIGNE of the SEAS, built in the yeare, 1637. With a true and exact Dimension of her Bulk and Bur∣den, and those Decorements which beautifie and adorne her, with the Carving work, Figures, and Mottoes upon them. Shee is besides her Tunnage 1637. Tuns in burden: Shee beareth five Lamhorns, the biggest of which will hold ten persons to stand upright, with∣out shouldring or pressing one another. With the names of all the Ropes, Masts, Sailes, and Cordage that helong unto a SHIP. As also the names of all our Commanders at Sea, the number of Men and Gunnes which every Ship carrieth both in their Admirall, Vice-Admirall, and Reare-Admirall. With all the Fights wee have had with the Hollander, since the En∣gagement of Lieutenant-Admirall Trompe neere DOVER, against the English Fleet under the Command of Generall Blake, at the same time that three of their Embassadours were here treating of PEACE. With a perfect rehearsall of an Act for encrease of Shipping, and En∣couragement of the Navigation of this Nation, which so much displeaseth the HOLLANDER. Goe not forth hastily to strive, least thou know not what to doe in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, for Tho: Jenner, and are to be sold at the South Entrance of the Royall Exchange, 1653.
numbered diagram of a ship or galleon with rigging, flying the flag or ensign of Cromwell's commonwealth THE SOVERAIGNE OF THE SEAS BVILTE IN THE YEARE 1637
The Common-wealths Ship, common∣ly called the Soveraign of the Seas, with her bulke, and burden. BEFORE I come to give you a true and exact Dimension of her bulke, burden, &c. it is ne∣cessary that I make some satisfaction to the world concerning those Decorements which beautifie and adorne her, and to render a faire account of mine owne invention concerning the carving worke, the Figures, and Mottoes upon them, which some perhaps have too liberally taxed: Thus therefore to any who have formerly either doubted of their propriety, or are at this present desirous to understand their imagined obscurity, I thus freely deliver my selfe. Upon the Beak-head sitteth royall King Edgar on horse∣backe, trampling upon seven Kings. Concerning those Kings whom you may perceive to lye prostrate under his Horses hoofes, they were Kynadus, King of the Scots, Malcolme, King of Cumberland; and of the pet∣ty Kings of Wales, Dufnall, Grifith, Huvall, Jacob, Judithil. He moreover surprized by Sea a Prince of the Romans, whose name was Maxentius, who had done many out-rages upon the Ocean, and was the greatest Arch-pirate that those times afforded. He also compelled Ludwallus, prime Prince and King of Cambria, which is Wales, (because he would have all the ravenous & dammageous Beasts to be destroyed through the Land) to pay unto him yearly by way of Tribute, three
hundred Wolves skins: by reason whereof, within the space of forty yeares after, in England, or Wales, both which (but especially Wales) who before were miserably infested with that kind of beast, there was scarcely to be fouud one Wolfe alive: and so much for the Princes over which he had sole dominion. His Navy Royall consisted of three thousand and sixe hundred Ships, (such as they used in those dayes) yet not any of them but serviceable either for Fight, or bearing Victuall, and munition, to furnish the Navy, which he divided into three parts, appointing to every of them a severall squadron: and this hee did to secure Navi∣gators from Enemies, and Sea-Rovers, as also from all other neighbour Princes, who might challenge any interest in these our foure Seas. And therefore every Spring and Summer, he in per∣son sayled with those in the East parts, to them that lay hovering in the West. And sending them backe againe with their Charge, would with the West squadrant, saile into the North, and after with the Northern Fleet compasse into the East, by which the Maine Ocean rounding those Islands, of which he was sole Prince and Monarch, being at his onely charge, both quieted and secured, he did (as justly he might) write himselfe Lord of the foure Seas. I began at the Beak-head, where I desire you to take no∣tice, that upon the stemme-head there is Cupid, or a Child resembling him, bestriding and bridling a Lyon, which im∣porteth, That sufferance may curbe Insolence, and Innocence re∣straine violence. On the Bulk-head right forward, stand six severall Statues in sundry postures, their Figures representing Consilium, that is, Counsell: Cura, that is, Care: Conamen, that is, Industry, and unanimous indeavour in one compartment: Counsell holding in her hand a closed or folded Scrole; Care, a Sea-com∣passe; Conamen, or Industry, a Lint stock fixed. Upon the o∣ther, to correspond with the former, Vis, which implyeth force, or strength; handing a Sword. Virtus, or Vertue, a sphearicall Globe: and Victoria, or Victory, a wreath of Law∣rell. The Morall is, that in all high Enterprizes there ought to be first Counsell, to undertake; then Care, to manage; and
Industry, to performe; and in the next place, where there is ability and strength to oppose, and Vertue to direct, Victory consequently is alwayes at hand, ready to crowne the un∣dertaking. Upon the Hances of the waste are foure Figures, with their severall properties: Jupiter riding upon his Eagle, with his Trisulke (from which he darteth Thunder) in his hand: Mars with his Sword and Target, a Foxe being his Embleme: Nep∣tune with his Sea-horse, Dolphin, and Trident: and lastly, Aeo∣lus upon a Camelion (a Beast that liveth only by the Ayre) with the foure Windes, his Ministers or Agents, the East, cal'd Eurus, Subsolanus, and Apeliotes: the North-winde, Septentrio, Aquilo, or Boreas: the West, Zephyrus, Favonius, Lybs, and Africus: the South, Auster, or Notus. I come now to the Stearn, where you may perceive upon the upright of the upper Counter, standeth Victory in the middle of a Frontispiece, with this generall motto, Validis incumbite remus: It is so plain, that I shall not need to give it an English interpretation: Her wings are equally displayed; on one Arme she weareth a Crowne, on the other a Lawrel, which imply Riches and Honour: in her two hands she holdeth two Mottoes; her right hand, which pointeth to Jason, bears this Inscription, Nava. Jason being figured with his Oare in his hand, as being the prime Argonant, and say Nava, or more plainly, Operam nava; for in those Emblematicall Mottoes, quod subintelligitur, non deest. She pointeth to Hercules on the finister side, with his Club in his hand, with this motto, O Hercules, be thou as valiant with thy Club upon the Land, as Jason is industrious with his Oare upon the Water. Hercules again poin∣ting to Aeolus, the god of Windes, saith Flato: who answereth him againe, Flo: Jason pointing to Neptune, the god of the Seas (riding upon a Sea horse) saith Favelo; to whom Nep∣tune answereth, No; These words Flo, and No, were also much excepted at, as if there had been no such Latine words, till some better examining their Gramar Rules, found out Flo, flas, flavi, proper to Aeolus, and No, nas, navi, to Neptune, &c.
In the lower Counter of the Sterne, on either side of the Helme is this Inscription, He who Seas, Windes, and Navies doth protect, The Soveraign, the great Ship in her course direct. There are other things in this Vessell worthy remarkable, at least, if not admiration; namely, that one Tree, or Oake, made foure of the principall beames of this great Ship, which was 44. foote of strong and serviceable Timber in length, three foote Diametre at the top, and ten foote Diametre at the stubb or bottome. Another (as worthy of especiall observation is) that one piece of Timber which made the Kel-son, was so great and weighty, that 28. Oxen, and foure Horses, with much difficulty drew it from the place where it grew, and from whence it was cut downe, unto the water-side. There is one thing above all these for the world to take e∣speciall notice of, that shee is, besides her Tunnage, just so many Tuns in burden, as there have been years since our Bles∣sed Saviours Incarnation, namely, 1637. and not one under, or over: A most happy Omen, which though it was not at the first projected or intended, is now by true computation found so to happen. It would be too tedious to insist upon every Ornament belonging to this incomparable Vessell, yet thus much con∣cerning Her outward appearance; She hath two Galleries of a side, and all of most curious carved Worke, and all the sides of the shipp are carved also with Trophies of Artyllerie and Types of honour, as well belonging to Land as Sea, with Symboles, Emblemes, and Impresses appertaining to the Art of Navigation: and thus much in a succinct way. I have deli∣vered unto you concerning her inward and outward De∣corements; I come now to describe her in her exect Dimen∣sion. Her length by the Keele is 128. foote, or thereabout, with∣in some few inches. Her mayne breadth or widenesse from side to side 48. foote. Her utmost length from the fore-end of the Beake-head, unto the after end of the Sterne, a prora ad pup∣pim,
232. foote; Shee is in height from the bottome of her Keele to the top of her Lanthorne, seventy sixe foot, she bea∣reth five Lanthorns, the biggest of which will hold ten per∣sons to stand upright, and without shouldring or pressing one the other. Shee hath three flush Deckes, and a Fore-Castle, an halfe Decke, a quarter Deck, and a round-house. Her lower Tyre hath thirty ports, which are to be furnished with Demy-Conon and whole Canon throughout, being able to beare them. Her middle Tyre hath also thirty ports for Demi-Culverin, and whole Culverin. Her third Tyre hath 26. ports for other Ordnance; her Fore-Castle hath twelve ports, and her halfe Decke hath fourteen ports; Shee hath thirteene or fourteene ports more within board for murder∣ing peeces, besides a great many Loop holes out of the Ca∣bins for Musket-shot. She carrieth moreover tenne peeces of chase Ordnance in her, right forward, and ten right off, that is according to Land-service in the front and the reare. She carrieth eleven Anchors, one of them weighing foure thou∣sand foure hundred, &c. and according to these are her Ca∣bles, Masts, Sayles, and Cordage. I come now to give you a particular Denomination of the prime Work-men employed in this inimitable Fabrick; as first Captaine Phines Pett, Over-seer of the Work, and one of the Principall Officers; of whose knowledge, experience, and judgment, I cannot render a merited Character. The Master Builder is young Mr. Peter Pett, the most inge∣nuous sonne of so much improved a Father, who before he was full 25. yeares of age, made the Modell, and since hath perfected the worke, which hath won not only the approbati∣on, but admiration of all men, of whom I may truly say, as Horace did of Argus, that famous Ship-master, (Who built the great Argo in which the Grecian Princels Rowed through the Helle spont to fetch the goleen Fleece from Colchos. Pallas her self flew into his bosome, and not only enjoyn'd him to the undertaking, but inspired him in the managing of so exquisite anabsolute an Architecture.
The names of all the Roapes, Masts, Sails, and Cordage that belong unto a Ship. 1. ANchor. Anchor∣stocke. An Awning. Axell-tree. Ballast. 3. The Beak or Beak∣head. Beame. Bedds. 4 A Bend. A Berth. 5 Blocks. 6 A Boalt roape. 7 Bolt sprit. 8 A Bonnet. A Boome. 9 The Bowe. A Bower. Brackets. 10 Brases. 11 Brayles. Breech & breech∣ing. Brest-Roapes. A Buoy. 12 A Buttocke, A Cabell. Caburne. 13 The Cap. The Cap-staine. Cap stainebars. Carlings. A Carriage. Carnels. A Case. Caskets. Catharpings. 14 Catt. 15 Cat-holes or houcks. Cheekes. Cheteres. Clamps. A Cleate. Clew. 16 Clew-garnet. 17 Clew-line. A Clincher. Cockes. 18 The Collar. The Combe. Cooke-Room. Cordage. 19 Counter. A Crabb. A Cradle. Cringles. 20 Cros-Jack. 21 Cros-tree. 22 Crow-feet. Cubbridg head. The Davit. 23 Deadmen-eys. 24 Deck. Deep-see-lead. Deep-see-line. Dock. A Drabler. Draggs. A Drift-saile. Duck up. 25 Earing. Entring-ladder. Entring-roape. Eyes. Eylet-holes. 26 A Facke. 27 The Farthell. Fartheling lines. Fidd. Fammer. The Fish. 26 Flaggs.
27 The Flook. The Flowr. Flush. The Flye. 28 Fore-mast. 29 Fore-sail. 30 Fore-top-mast. 31 Fore-top-yard. 32 Fore-yard. Futtocks. The Garboord. 33 The Garnet. Girt. Goose-wing. Grapnell. A Gripe. Gromets. A Guge. Hallyards. 34 The Hawses. A Hawses. Head-lines. 35 Head sailes. Head-sea. The Helme. Honey-Comb. The Hookes. A Horse. A Hullock. The Jeere. The Jeere-Cap∣staine. A Juncke. A Jury-mast. A Kedger. The Keele. The Keel-Roap. Keeleson. The Knave-line. Knees. Kneetles. The Knights. Knots. Ladder. 36. A land-Turne. A Langrell. Lasking. Latchets. Ledges. The lec-fauge. The Leetch. Leetch-lines. 36 Legges. Lines pins. Lockers. A Logg-line. The Loofe. A loofe-hooke. A Lust. The Manger. Marling. Marling-speeke. Martnets. Masts. 37 The misen. 38 The misen-mast. 37 The misen-saile 39 The missen-top∣mast. 40 The missen-yard Munck-seame. The Needle. Nettings. Netting-sailes. Nippers. Out Licker. Oze, or Ozie. A Pantch. A Bardude. Parrells. The Partners. A Passaredo. The Paule. A Peeke. 41 Pendants. The Pillow. A Pintell. 42 The Poope. A Port. Powches. The Prowe. Priming. Puddings. Pullies. Pumps. The Pumb-break. The Pump-Can. The Pump Dale. 43 Puttocks. 44 Quarter-Deck. A Quoyle. Quoyns. Ram-head.
Ranges. Ribbs. To Ride. Riders. Rigging. Ring-bolts. The Risings. Rising-timbers. A Road. A Roader. 45 Roaps. Roap-yarnes. Robbins. Roofe-trees. 46 The Round-house The Rowle. 47 The Rudder. The rudder-roap. Rudder-irons. The Run. Rung-heads. The Rungs. The Runner. 48 Sailes. A Sacrfe. A Scuttle. A Seele. Shackles. The Shancke. Shanck-painter. Shearing. 49 Sheats. Shoars. Shoar. Shot. Showle. 50 Shrowds. The Sillinder. Sinnet. The Skeg. The Skiff. Skupper, or skup∣per-holes. Skupper-leathers. Skupper-nailes. A Selatch. Sleepers. Slings. A smitting-line. A snatch-block. Sockets. Sounding-line. A spindle. Spit. 51 Sprit-saile. 52 Sprit-saile-top∣saile. 53 Sprit-saile-top∣mast. 54 Sprit-saile-yard. Spung-yarn. 55 Stayes, & back∣stayes. 56 The stern. Stern-shevts. The steeridg. 57 The stem. A stepp. Stoaked. A stake. A strap. A stream-anchor. Stream Cable. A stretch. Studding-sailes. A sturrop. Swisters. 58 Tackes. To tack a ship. 59 Tackles. Talle. Tamkin. Tapering. Thight. Thwart-ships. Ties. Top-armors. Top-Gallants. Top-Mast. Top-Roaps. To Tow. The Tuck. A Violl. A Warp. Wast-Board. Wast cloaths. Whoodings. A Worme. Wormings. A Yard. A Yawe. A Yoake. 60 A Jacke.
A Narrative of the late Engagement between the English Fleet under the Command of Ge∣nerall Blake, and the Holland Fleet under the Command of Lieuteiant Admiral Trump neer Dover. portrait of Maartin Tromp, probably by Wenceslaus Hollar (per the National Portrait Gallery, London) Martin Tromp, Admirall of Holland & West-friesland. VPON Tuesday the 18. of May, 1652. in the morn∣ing, General Blake being gone to the West-ward, as far as Rye Bay eight dayes before, with twelve or thirteen Ships, leaving Major Bourn in the Downs with eight Ships only, there appeared upon the back side of the Goodwin, a Holland Fleet of Men of War, consisting of two and forty Ships, one whereof had a Flagg on the main-top-Mast head, the rest Jacks and Ancients; and being come unto the South-sands head, two of them bore up towards the En∣glish Ships in the Downs, whereupon Major Bourn sent out the
Greyhound to examine them, and to know the reason of their so near approach; who answering, That they had a Message to the Commander in Chief in the Downes, were permitted to come in; and having saluted the Flag, the two Captains, named Tyson and Aldred came aboard the sayd Major Bourn, and acquanted him that they were sent by Van Trump, to let him know that he had been Riding about Dunkirke with His Fleet, where by reason of foule Weather they had lost many of their Cables and Anchors, and the wind being Northerly, were driven more to the Southward then they intended, which Van Trump thought fit to signifie, to prevent any mis-appre∣hensions or Jealousies. And having said this, and received for answer, That the Reality of what they said would best appear by their speedy drawing off from this Coast, they de∣parted to their Fleet; and immediately upon their arrivall with them, the whole Fleet stood up to Dover, and came to an Anchor within little more then shot of the Castle the same day in the afternoon. Upon their coming before Dover Ca∣stle, and Riding there with Flag in the Main-top, without saluting the Castle, the Castle made three shot at them; not∣withstanding which, the Dutch Admirall kept up his Flagg, and rode there at Anchor until the next day noon, and exer∣cised his Musquetiers, by discharging volleys of small shot many houres together. Upon Wednesday about twelve a clock the Dutch Fleet weighed Anchor, and stood off towards Calice some four Leagues into the South-east; about the same time the English Fleet under General Blake coming from the West towards the Downes, discovered them, and supposed by their course they had been going back; Major Bourn likewise was in sight, coming from the Downs to joyn with Generall Blake. About an hour or two after, the Holland Fleet altered their course, came back again, made all the Saile they could, and bore directly with Generall Blake, Van Trump the head∣most with his Flag in the Main-top; and being come within shot, the Generall shot a Gun at his Main-top, and then two single shot more: whereupon Trump shot a single shot through the Generals Flag, and then immediately gave the first Broad side, and took in his Pendants, and hung out his Red Flagg
under the Holland Colours, which was the Signal on their part for their whole Fleet to engage, and so the Fight began, which happened between four and five a clock in the after∣noon, and continued until nine of the clock. In the Fight the English took two of the Holland Fleet, one whereof having six foot water in the Hold they left, taking the Captain and Officers aboard, the other being a Ship of thirty Guns. Ge∣nerall Blake lay all night where the Fight began, or neere thereabouts, and the Holland Fleet was espyed about foure Leagues distant towards the Coast of France next morning. The truth of this Relation appears in the Letters of Gene∣rall Blake, Major Bourn, and others in the Action, by the Examinations of the Dutch Captains, and other Officers ta∣ken in the Fight: And whereas Van Trump in the accompt he gives of this A∣ction, makes the occasion of his coming back upon the Engl∣ish Fleet, the guarding of some Merchant men richly laden from the Streights, which had been in fight with some of our Frigots: That action is set down in a letter written by Cap∣tain Young, whereby the occasion, beginning and ending thereof is declared: And besides, these very ships which hee pretends to come to protect or rescue, upon Saturday be∣fore had passed by General Blake, and were gone to the East∣ward. Generall Blake's Letter. Right Honourable, I Have dispatched away this Express to your Honours, to give you an account of what past yesterday between us and the Dutch Fleet being in Rye Bay; I received Intelligence from Major Bourne, that Van Trump with forty Saile was off the South-sand head, whereupon I made all possible speed to ply up towards them, & yesterday in the morning we saw them at Anchor in and near Dover-Road; being come within three leagues of them, they weighed and stood away by a winde to
the Eastward: We supposing their intention was to leave us to avoid the dispute of the Flag; about two hours after they al∣tered their course, and bore directly with us, Van Trump the headmost, whereupon wee lay by, and put our selves into a fighting posture, judging they had a resolution to ingage be∣ing come within Musket shot, I gave order to fire at his flag, which was done thrice, after the third shot he let flie a Broad side at us; Major Bourn, with those Ships that came from the Downs, being eight, was then makingtowards us, we conti∣nued fighting till night, then our Ship being unable to saile, by reason that all our Rigging and Sailes were extreamely shattered, our Mizen-Mast shot off, we came with advice of the Captains to an Anchor about 3. or 4. Leagues of the Ness to refit our Ship, at which we laboured all the night; this morning we espyed the Dutch Fleet about foure Leagues di∣stance from ours towards the Coast of France, and by advice of a Councel of War, it was resolved to ply to windward to keep the weather gage, and we are now ready to let fall our Anchor this Tide; what course the Dutch Fleet steers wee doe not wel know, nor can we tel what harm we have done them, but we suppose one of them to be sunk, and another of 30. Guns we have taken, with the Captains of both, his Main-Mast of the first being shot by the Board, and much water in the Hold, made Captain Lawsons men to forsake her. We have six men of ours slain, and nine or ten desperately wounded, and 25. more not without danger, amongst them our Master and one of his Mates, and other Officers. We have received a∣bout 70. great Shot in our Hull and Masts, in our Sails and Rigging without number, being engaged with the whole Bo∣dy of the Fleet for the space of four hours: And the mark at which they aimed, we must needs acknowledge a great Mercy that we had no more harm, and our hope the righteous God will continue the same unto us, if there do arise a Warre be∣tween us; they being first in the Breach, and seeking an Occa∣sion to Quarrel, and watching as it seems, an Advantage to brave us upon our own Coast, &c. Your most humble Servant, Robert Blake.
The severall Fights and Victories obtained (by GODS blessing) over the Dutch, by the Fleet of the Common-wealth of England, since the late Engagement of the Admirall Trump near Dover (contrary to the Law of Nature, and custom of Nati∣ons) at the same time that three of their Embassadors were here treating of Peace. IƲNE 30. 1652. Sir George Aseue had advice 1 Victory after the Hollanders breach of Peace. of thirty or forty Dutchmen, home-wards bound, with foure men of Warre for their Convoy, hearing they were very neere the narrow, he presently weighed Anchor with nine Sayle, and stood over the Coast of France; some of his headmost ships came up with the Dutch Fleet, twenty six of them ranne directly ashore upon Callis sands, five we took, two more we got off from the sands, and burnt three. This Fleet of the Dutch came from Tardadoes in Portugall, most of them laden with Salt and Oyle. The Names of the Dutch men of Warre, taken by Generall Blake 2 Victory. in the North, being the Guard of the Fishing Busses. Ball of Rotterdam, 24. Guns. Waterhound, Vice-admiral, 29. Guns. 3 Victory. Sampson of Anchiusens, 28. Guns. Armes of Holland, 30. Guns. Noah's arke, 24. Guns. Swan of Amsterdam, 28. Guns. Adam & Eve, 24. Guns. John Baptist, 22. Guns. Land of Promise, 24. Guns. Sampson, 24. Guns. Two of which were sunk. Sept. 25. 1652. The Holland Fleet appeared on the back∣side of the Goodwin, but were that night driven backe by a storm; the twenty sixt day they appeared, and were forc't a∣way by another storm, twenty seven were forc't away the third time that General Blake got under Sail, and discovered the Dutch, they had two Admirals, De Wit, and Ruiter, with
about 54. sail of men of War, and some small Vessels; our number was pretty equall with them. The event of the fight. Reer Admirall of the Dutch, 36. Guns sanke, a great Vessell of thirty Guns taken, their Reer-Admirall himselfe taken Prisoner, and one Captain more, 300. Prisoners taken, one great Frigot of the Hollanders seen to sink; two Dutch vessels sunk in the night after the fight. One hundred and odde of the Dutch slain and drowned in the Reer-Admirall; all the Dutch Fleet generally much torne and shattered, one of their Masts, and three of their ships being shot off by the great Ship called the Common-wealth. A Letter from Lieutenant Admirall Trump, to the High & mighty Lords, the States Generall of the Ʋnited Provinces, written in the Ship Brederode, before Calais, March 4. 1653. High and Mighty Lords, THe fights begun the last of February, and did end the 2. of 4 Victory. March, after Sun-set, about the length of Portland, we be∣ing above 70. Ships of Warre, and about 150. Merchantmen, Commander Ruiter, and those that were with him, did fight the Enemy in the Rear; the Rear Admiral Peter Florize fought in the Front of the Enemie, where Admiral Blake with the best ships was, and the Vice-Admiral Jan Everse in the midst. In the afternoon we went away from the Enemie, we tooke Counsel, what hereafter we should do to fight with the Ene∣my again, and leave the Merchantmen; and that we should not discharge any Ordnance in vain, because our ammuniti∣on begun to be wanting; We did see a great way by the East of us, only with his great sail floating, the ship called the Vo∣golstruis, I did send ihe Commander Wilde with three ships af∣ter him to help him, and if unserviceable, to hale him if pos∣sible: After which, we did gather our Body together, as well our Men of War, as Merchantmen, and went our way. March 1. in the morning we saw the ship, the Ʋrgelstrugs a∣mong the English Fleet, then began the Enemy very furiously to assault us, five or sixe of his best sailed Frigots keeping at each side of our Fleet. This day were cut off from our Fleet Cap. Jan la Sage of Zealand, and Bruyin van Seelst of Amsterdam, and some few Merchantmen, divers ships came to us, com∣plaining
they had little or no Powder nor Bullets left at all, every one did mend as much as they could of what was shot in pieces. March 2. the Enemie began again to assault us with a great fury; about two hours in the afternoon, Blake being joyned with the most part of his body, made a signe to fall on again. The Vice-admirall Jan Everse, and others came to speak with me, & called, they had neither powder nor shot, being dark, we put our Lights up, Blake did likewise put his Lights up, being by the wind of us, and after midnight we lost the Ene∣mies Lights. The third Ditto in the morning at breaking of the day wee saw Calice S. W. from us two miles. Taken by the English from Van Trump 47. ships in this Con∣flict. Gentlemen, YEsterday morning being at Anchor some ten miles without the South-head of the Gober, early in the morning we discryed the 5 Victory. Dutch Fleet about two Leagues to the Leeward. We made sail to∣wards them, and between 11. & 12. at Noon we were engaged, and for three hours the dispute was very sharp on both sides, which con∣tinued from 3. till 6. in the evening; at which time the Enemie bore away right before the wind, and little more was done, onely the Fri∣gots gave chase so long as there was any light to distinguish one from another. One of the Dutch Admirals was blown up, and 3. or 4. sunke. We cannot hear that any of our own ships was lost in this En∣gagement, blessed be the Lord. We are at this time very fair again by them, and shall still endeavour our utmost to engage them as soone as we can. It hath pleased the Lord to take away General Dean in the fight, an honest and faithfull servant of the Common-wealth. He was slain by a great shot. In this Engagement we have spent the grea∣test part of our powder and shot; and therefore I earnestly desire you will take care that a considerable proportion may be suddenly provided us and sent, with such Victuals and Waterships as are yet behind. What ships are making ready in the River, may as soone as can be sent. This is the best account can be given at present. Your most affectionate friend and servant, GEO: MONKE. From aboard the Resolution, 14 Leagues from the North-foreland bearing west of us, June 3. 1653. at 6 in the morning.
Another Letter from the Fleet subscribed by Gen. Blake, and Ceneral Monke, directed to the Lord Ceneral Cromwel, as followeth. May it please your Excellency, Your Lordships of the second instant, with the enclosed Intelli∣gence, we this day received, and according to your Excellencies apprehensions thereon, wee have engaged with the Dutch Fleet, a briefe accompt of the first dayes action we have already sent unto your Lordship. The next day being the third instant, wee did what wee could to reingage them, and having the Wind (which was but little) about Noone we came within shot. After four hours dispute with them, or thereabouts, they endeavoured what they could to get away from us; but having then a pretty fresh gale of winde, we pressed so hard upon them, that we sunke and tooke many of them, as appeares by the enclosed List, and do suppose we should have destroyed most of them but that it grew darke, and being off of Ostend among the sands, we durst not be too bold, especially with the great ships, so that it was thought fit we should Anchor all night, which we accordingly did a∣bout tenne of the Clock. This morning some of our ships descried the Enemie again afar off, steering toward the Weillings, so far as with safety we might, and to range along the Coast till wee came to the Texel (the better to improve the present Victory God hath given un∣to us) unlesse we see cause to divert our course. We shall not further trouble your Lordship, but subscribe our selves Your Excellencies most humble Servants, Robert Blake. George Monk. A List of the Dutch ships taken and sunk, with the number of Prisoners, likewise the number of men slain and wounded on our part, viz. On Thursday, 5. Dutch ships sunck. 2 blown up, 7. Taken. On Friday, Dutch Prisoners 1350. whereof sixe Captains. 11. ships taken. 6 sunk. 2 Water-hoyes taken. 2 ships blown up amongst their owne Fleet. Sunke by that disaster, one. Slain in our Fleet 126. whereof one Captaine. Wounded 236. Not one ship lost on our part.
full-length profile portrait of General Richard Deane holding a sword, set in a view outward from inside a ship or galleon, bearing many flags, blazons and penants; beyond this two other ships or galleons surrounded by smoke General Deane , as he was flourishing his Sword at the head of the Ship, June 3. 1653. Aetatio suae 42.
A Letter from Generall Monke. Right Honourable, SInce mine to you yesterday (wherein I gave you an acc∣ount 6 Victory. of the goodnes of God towards us, & appearance for us in the Engagement with our Enemie the day before, and that we were then in the pursuit of them) there hath little more been done, night drawing on, and the Dutch making directly to the Texel with what sail they could, so that it was not fit to be bold on that shoar, not knowing how the wind may take us, many of our ships being much disa∣bled, but gave order to a small vessell or two to keep sight of them till the morning, and observe what course they steered, who returning, gave an account that the Enemy steered the same night into the Texel Harbor, & had Boats with lights to guide them in; whereupon yesterday at a Councel of War it was resolved that the whole Fleet should presently set Sail for Southold Bay, there to dispose of such ships as are disa∣bled, and to send away our wounded men and Prisoners, of which a certain account cannot be given at present, but hope to do it very shortly. But I do present your Lordships here enclosed with a generall account, referring the condition of the wives and families of those who are slaine, to your Ho∣nours tender care, wherein I doubt not but you will have re∣spect to their necessities. I remain Your Lordships most humble servant, George Monke. The names of the Officers that were slain & wounded on our side. In the Andrew, Cap. Tho: Graves. Golden Cocke, Cap. Ed∣mund Chapman. William, Cap. John Taylor. May Flower, Cap. Will: Newman. Prosperous, Cap. Crisp. Phoenix, Cap. Owen Cox. Wounded. In the Triumph, Cap. Peacock. The Lawrel, Cap. John Stokes. Dragon, Cap. John Seaman. Port∣land, Cap. William Rous. Assurance, Cap. P. Holland. Tulip, Captain Joseph Cubit. A list of the Dutch Captains taken Presoners Admirall Trump slain by a Musket shot on his left breast.
1. Cor. John Evertson, Vice-Admiral of Zealand, Captain of the Eyon. 2. Claus Johnson Zanger. 3. Andrew Ferteene, Captain of the Concord. 4. Gebron Scotter, Captaiu of the Golden-fleece. 5. Frederick Shellingworth. 6. John de Hea, Cap. of the Garland, the ship burnt. 7. Captain Gotherick of the Joy of Flushing. An Act for encrease of Shipping, and encouragement of Navigation, and Fisherie of this Nation, by catching of God, Ling, Herring, Pilchard, and that after the first day of February, 1653. no fish shall be imported or exported in any other ships or Vessels, save on∣ly in such as doe truly and properly appertain unto the people of this Common-wealth. depiction of two boats or fishing-boats at sea; one in the distance has a man pulling a rope tied to the topmast; one has three men pulling on a rope or line from which hang several large fish FOR the Increase Shipping, and the Encouragement of the Navigation of this Nation, which under the good
Providence of God, is so great a meanes of the Welfare and Safety of this Common-wealth; Be it Enacted, That from and after the first day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty and one, & from thence forwards, No Goods or Com∣modities whatsoever, of the Growth, Production, or Manu∣facture of Asia, Africa, or America, or of any part thereof; or of any Islands belonging to them, or any of them, or which are described or laid downe in the usuall Maps or Cards of those places, as well of the English Plantations, as others, shall be Imported or brought into this Common-wealth of England, or into Ireland, or any other Lands, Islands, Planta∣tions or Territories to this Common-wealth belonging, or in their Possession, in any other Ship or Ships, Vessell or Vessels whatsoever, but only in such as do truly and without fraud belong only to the People of this Common-wealth, or the Plantations therof, as the Proprietors or right Owners thereof: And whereof the Master and Marriners are also for the most part of them, of the People of this Common-wealth under the penalty of the forfeiture and losse of all the Goods that shall be Imported contrary to this Act; as also of the Ship (with all her Tackle, Guns and Apparel) in which the said Goods or Commodities shall be so brought in and Im∣ported, The one moiety to the use of the Common-wealth, and the other moiety to the use and behoof of any person or persons who shall seize the said Goods or Commodities, and shall prosecute the same in any Court of Record within this Common-wealth, and in no other, except only such For∣reign Ships and Vessels as doe truly and properly belong to people of that Countrey or place, of which the said Goods are the Growth, Production, or Manufacture: or to such Ports where the said Goods can only be, or most usually are first shipped for Transportation. That no sort of Cod fish, Ling, Herring, Pilchard, or any other kind of salted Fish, u∣sually fished for, and caught by the people of this Nation; nor any Oyle made, or that shall be made of any kind of fish, whatsoever, nor any Whole fins, or Whale bones, shal from hence forth be imported in to this Common-wealth, or into Ireland, or any other Lands, Islands, Plantations, or Terri∣tories
thereto belonging, or in their possession, but only such as shall be caught in Vessels that do, or shall truly and pro∣perly belong to the people of this Nation, as Proprietors and Right Owners thereof: And the said Fish to be cured, and the Oyle aforesaid made by the people of this said Common∣wealth, That no sort of Cod, Ling, Herring, Pilchard, or a∣ny other kind of salted Fish whatsoever, which shal be caught & cured by the people of this Common-wealth, shall be from and after the first day of Feb. one thousand sixe hundred fifty three, Exported from any place or places belonging to this Common-wealth, in any other Ship or Ships, Vessell or Vessels, save only in such as do truly and properly appertain to the people of this Common-wealth, That this Act extend not to restrain the Importation of any of the Commodities of the Streights or Levant Seas, loaden in the Shipping of this Nation, though the said Commodities be not of the very Growth of the said places, nor be meant to restraine the Im∣porting of any East-India Commodities loaden in the Shipp∣ing of this Nation, at the usual Port or places for Lading of them heretofore in any part of those Seas, to the South-ward & Eastward of Cabo Bona Esperanza, although the said Ports be not the very places of their Growth. That this extend not to Bullion, nor yet to any Goods taken, or that shal be taken by way of Reprizall by any Ship or Ships, having Commis∣sion from this Common-wealth. Provided, that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend, nor be con∣strued to extend to any Silke or Silke-wares which shall be brought by Land from any parts of Italy, and there bought with the proceed of English Commodities, sold either for Money, or in Barter; but that it shall and may be lawfull for any of the people of this Common-wealth, to ship the same in English Vessels from Ostend, Newport, Roterdam, Mid∣dleburgh, Amsterdam, or any Ports thereabouts; The Owners and Proprietors first making Oath by themselves, or other credible Witness, before the Commissioners of the Customes for the time being, or their Deputies, or one of the Barons of the Exchequer, that the Goods aforesaid were so bought for his or their own proper accompt in Italy.
A true Relation of a most bloody, treacherous, cruell Designe of the Dutch in the New-Netherlands in America, in supplying the Indians with Arms and Am∣munition, to burn and slay the English on a Sabbath day when they were at meeting. depiction of four male figures emerging in a line from a doorway; one carries several muskets or guns; one carries several staffs or pikes; one carries a basket; on the ground are barrels, helmets and armour THE Colonies of New-England consisting of severall Governments, have the Dutch setled to the South∣west of them, at the Manatha's or New-Netherlands, and the French to the North-East, alongst the Grand River of Canada; between which Nations there hath ever been (till now of late) a friendly correspon∣dence, and a mutuall assistance against the common Enemie, the barbarous Indians. About six years since, the Dutch being reduced to a great exigence and strait by the Indians, implored the English ayde and assistance, which immediately was sent them, under the command of Captain Ʋnderhill, a Gentleman of spirit, expe∣rience, and conduct, who prizing Christian blood beyond
Indian Wealth and Treasure (being proffered a hogshead of their Wampampege to with-draw the English Forces) fell on these Heathens in vindication of the Dutch, and in one night cut off fourteen hundred of them, and so gallantly, with the hazard and some losse of English Blood (through the assistance of the Omnipotent) resetled the Hollandar in peace and safety, But Ingratitude over-clouding those Heroick Actions, and Amboyna's treacherous cruelty extending it self from the East to the West Indies, running in its proper channell of Dutch blood, quickly sought their Neighbors, their Friends their Noble Defenders, the English, Destruction; and by their unworthy inequality of retribution, have chronicled themselves Ungratefull, Perfidious, Bloody, and Cruell. For about March last, 1653. with gifts and large promi∣ses they instigated and hired foure of the Grand Princes of those Territories, some of them most fierce, barbarous, and bloody people, fit Instruments for so horrid a designe, on a Sabbath day, when all Families were at Meeting, unexpe∣ctedly to fall on the English, and to burne and slay what possibly they could: and for the better perfecting of this Di∣abolicall plot, they supplyed the Indians with Armes and Ammunition, which were dispersed in all their Habitati∣ons, they having a Ship sent them on purpose from Holland, the Fountain of Treacheries, with all necessary tools for the acting of a second Amboyna Tragedy. But the Omnipotent God (who hath ever beene a most mercifull protector of the English in those parts, as in the Pe∣quet War, &c.) did through his infinite goodnesse, most timely before the bloody day of acting, cause an Indian, that should have been an Executioner, to be a revealing Deliverer of our Nation, who informed the Magistrates of Boston of the Dutch and Indians bloody intentions; whereupon they requested severall Merchants of that Town with all expedi∣tion to march forth towards the Indian Habitations, to see what they could discover. At whose desire, Mr. Gardner, Mr. Hutchinson, Mr. Hooper, and Mr. Seavern rid forth, and the first Wigwambs, or Indian houses they came to searching,
they found them full of Armes and Ammunition, (which have been ever prohibited the Indians by the English) all their Musquets were charged with powder and ball, which they brought with them to Boston: the Countrey was immediate∣ly put in a posture of Defence, and two Gentlemen sent from Boston, viz. Captain John Leveret, and Mr. Davis, to the New Netherlands with some Indians that confessed, that they were hired by the Dutch for to be instruments in this unheard of and unparalleld Inhumanity. Some Letters affirme, that the French are confederate with the Dutch and Indians, so that the English are invironed with their Enemies But that out of the hands of all their Enemies the Lord may deliver them, Let all good Christians im∣plore a blssing from the Almighty, that is most powerful to save, that he may crown their Enterprizes with successefull Victories. Amen. If any desire to be better informed of what here is inserted, let them repair to any Merchant that holds correspondence with New-England, whose Letters can evidence the certainty hereof. Wonderful and strange presages both in the Heavens, and by the wa∣ter, and on on the earth in Holland, fresh yet in memory, before any acts of hostility betwixt them and the English, 1652. depiction of four men standing at the sea-shore, gesturing toward four other men in a small boat or fishing-boat, pulling a rope or line from which hang several large fish Shippes and Nauall fights with the English collers and Belgike Lion seene at the mouth of the Mase by the fisher∣men at noone-day and affermed upon oath 1655
Amsterdam, 1652. VVEe have many judicious men who have observed the signes of Heaven against us, and the Prodigies on earth, and signs in the Aire, and are afraid of them. They re∣member a prophesie, that when the State-house of Amsterdam shall be built, the glory of that Citie shal be pulled downe; they say the beleagering of that Citie by the Prince of Orange, shewed the ruine of their liberty by that Family; that the i∣nundation of waters upon that Citie, a little after Oranges death presaged a deluge of miseries breaking in upon them. The dreadfull apparition at the mouth of the Mase, of Ships and Navall fights, in which were English colours, and the Dutch, with the belgick Lyon, and this seene by the Fisher∣men of Mazeland at noon-day, and affirmed by oath was that draught in the ayre, of the tragedy which is now acting up∣on the water; the burning of the old Statehouse at Amsterdam, in which was great losse of papers and money. The narrow escape of our fire ships by burning of the Lubeck ship, and the burning up of our Magazens at Dorte, and the mutinous ca∣riage of our Schuterdy. The pest. in our ships, & Trumps co∣ming to the Downs with above 100. saile, and not able to touch Sir George Ascue, who then had but 15. Ships with him, though came up close, and endeavouring it, because the wind in our Fleets teeth, as was in 88. The Spanish begin to im∣prove and fortifie his Frontiers upon us, & are jealous of the Spanish nation at this time, knowing he spares no oyle to cast into this flame. A letter from France of the rising of 13000. Protestans against the Papists. depiction of the inside of a church, in which four men are setting fire to the pulpit, benches or seats, etc.; at the four corners of this image are small sketches of armies, military companies or groups of soldiers with flags or ensigns and weapons The Papistes at Vals in France burned the pul∣pit and benches turned out the Minister upon which the No∣bilitie and Gen∣trey arose in a bodey about 10000
Honored Sir, COunt de Rieux, and Madam de Ornana, and others, rose upon the Protestants at Vals, when they were at Church, turned out the Minister, abused divers, and burnt the Pulpit, and Bench∣es: Ʋpon which the Protestant Nobility and Gentry all about Lan guedock are risen in armes for their defence, and in a short time got together above ten thousand men in a body, which so frighted the Papists in Niesms, and other places thereabouts, that they are with∣drawn as fast as they can for feare of them. Newes hereof comming to the Court, the Kings Councell have passed a Declaration for the Protestants to enjoy the benefit formerly granted at Nants, and of o∣ther Edicts in their behalfe, and that Count de Rieux and his Con∣federates shall repaire all the damages the said Protestants have su∣stained, and that the Protestants do lay downe their Armes; & Count De Rieux is sent for to Paris, to answer a Charge exhibited against him. Monsieur De Ville France of the Protestant family of Man∣thurst, is come out of the Daulphin to Niesms with 3000. men to send with the Protestants. From Paris, Septemb. 14. Stilo novo. THings are here statu quo, as in my last, the Protestants being up in the Province of Languedock grow very numerous, and appear to be in very good earnest, having set out a publique Manifesto, wherein they do declare the ground of their taking Arms; and they have chosen themselves a General, not of the ranke of Nobility, be∣cause they are so apt upon all occasions to close with the Court; but a a Gentleman, one Monsieur Cassagne an old Souldier, and an able follower of that famous Prince, an able Politician, and a gallant Sword-man to the Quondam Duke of Rhoane: So that the Court here are in extream agonies about it, and offer all the lenatives in the world to allay their resolution, but by all signes and tokens there will as yet be no accommodation.
October 26, 1653. A Tumultuous rising of a company of Seamen at the Prize Office. depiction of a crowd, many holding pikes, and of a man on a horse; also two gallows, from one of which hangs a body or corpse; a man supported by a ladder at the other gollows is having a rope or noose put around his neck THis day there was a Tumultuous rising of a company of Sea-men, who demanding at the Prize-Office their shares in some Prizes that had been taken, were so rude in their de∣mands, that the Commissioners were forced to send for som Souldiers to appease the Tumult, which was not don with∣out the losse of some blood, one being slain on the place, and divers hurt and wounded on both sides. Afterward, the Seamen repaired to VVhitehall, and being more civil in their Demands there, were promised to have what in reason was just: And some of the chief of them being made sensible of the sad effects that would follow such unadvised and despe∣rate proceedings, they were content for that time to depart in peace October 27. The Seamen in a Tumultuous manner, in greater numbers than before, rose again, many of them be∣ing armed with Swords and Pistols, and other weapons: And coming down towards VVhitehall, they were met with∣all by the Lord Generals Life-guard at Charing-crosse, and soon dispersed, some cut and wounded. By the Councel of State appointed by Authority of Parliament. WHereas for the encouragement of Seamen, a conside∣rable augmentation hath been made of their Wages, and seasonable provision for such of them as have been sick or wounded, and due consideration had of the wives, Chil∣dren, and impotent Parents of all Officers and Seamen that
have been slain in the present Service, as also their Months Gratuity and wages fully paid them upon coming in of the said respective Ships, in which they have served; Notwith∣standing all which, and the extraordinary care that hath been taken by the State from time to time for their encou∣ragement, divers Seamen and others did on the 26 and 27 dayes of this instant October, in a mutinous and seditious manner, assemble themselves together in numerous compa∣nies, with Pistols, Swords, and other weapons, on the Tower hill, at Charing-crosse, and other places in and about the Ci∣ties of London and VVestminster, to the disturbance of the pub∣lick Peace: Now to the end that such practices for the fu∣ture may be prevented, which we have too much cause to believe have been animated and fomented by discontented and il-affected persons; and that others in time to come may not be seduced to their own ruine, we do hereby De∣clare that exemplary Justice shall be inflicted upon the chief Actors or Ringleaders of this Mutiny and Sedition, some of which are now under custody: And do streitly charge and command, That no Mariner, Seaman, or other persons whatsoever, upon pain of death, do presume to assemble to∣gether in a mutinous or seditious mannner, or any wayes countenance or abet such Mutiny or Sedition. And we do further Declare, That a speedy course shall be taken for the adjusting and payment of the money due to the Seamen for their shares of Prizes; and that all due encouragement (wch shall hereafter be particularly expressed) shall be given to such as shall voluntarily engage themselves in this present Service. Dated at Whitehall, this 27 day of Octob. 1653. An Additionall Article to the Lawes of War, and Ordi∣nances of the Sea. THat all Mariners and others employed, or which have been employed in the service of this Common-welath in their Fleets, or otherwise at Sea, shall after the time of their respective discharges, demean themselves with all duty and respect to the publick Peace: And if any person who hath been, is or shall be so employed, hath committed or abetted, or shall commit or abet any Mutinous or Seditious act,
whereby the Peace of this Common-wealth may be, or hath been endangered; Every such person shall be proceeded a∣gainst, and suffer pains of death, or otherwise, in the same sort and manner, as by the Lawes of war and Ordinances of the Sea already established, he might have been proceeded a∣gainst for any act of that nature, in case of being in actuall Service. Provided, That every person comprized within this Arti∣cle, be proceeded against within three Moneths after the Of∣fence committed, and not otherwise. Nov: 4. 1653. A Souldier hang'd at Tower-hill. Oct: 31. One of the chief mutinous Sea-men was hang'd, he having stirred up the rest by making proclamation, &c. And another was whipt under the Gallows. Sixteen Men of VVarre were swept away, and 2000 Men drowned, with 500 peece of Ordnance. The Sea broke in through their Banks in above dozen places, into the Merchants Cellars and Warehouses, having been beaten on through the extream violence of the wind. depiction of five ships or galleons on a stormy sea Amsterdam, Novemb: 14. 1653. DEwitte being come home with his Merchant men from Denmarke, they began to grow high with a design upon England, the Merchant-men being got in, Orders were sent that they should by all means keep at Sea, fearing if the Fleet of war had come in, they should not gather them together again, and determined to supply them with Victuals, and o∣ther necessaries at a distance, that so they might convey their last Vintage from France, through the Channel, and then brave it upon the English Coasts, and endeavour to block up
the Thames. In the interim, it pleased God, that by a violent storm of a weeks continuance, no lesse then sixteen men of war of De witts Fleet, were swept away, 2000 men drownd, and 500 piece of Ordnance, whereof a good number Brasse, and great store of provision in a particular Vessel. The new Frigots lost their masts, but sav'd themselves with much ado. As a further addition to their miseries, the Sea brake into the Cellars and Ware-houses, to the exceeding losse of their Merchants, by making severall breaches in their Banks in a∣bove a dozen places; and generally over all the Low Coun∣treys, the Sea having been beaten on the Coasts, through the extream violence of winds and weather. And the Duke of Lorraine is come once again on their Borders, to add to their troubles. Harlem in Holland, Decemb. 30. 1653. On Tuesday last there rose a very great storm, which continued all night, there being between fifty and six∣ty Merchants riding at Anchor at the Texel, many of them are sunk and cast away, but 17 saved between 30 and 40 are at best spoiled, sunk. and run a ground, and of them no lost, amongst the rest there was one East India ship called the Lilly lost, that was going out, and the Marigold is much hurt and shatter'd. One tore and sunk another Divers of them have been driven ashore and some upon Shelves and Rocks, and many are lost in severall parts. What the particular losses have been cannot yet be collected. But the East India Fleet at Sea, being 150 ships, are much feared. At Amster∣dam also some hurt was done by this storm, for without the gate of the Ci∣ty, by the  Bole. a Malt-Mill of Stephen Paters, fell on fire with the violence of the motion, whereby not onely the Mill but four Houses that stood by it were burnt, to the great losse of Stephen Pater, who had much Malt lay there. Also within the City, the iron Crosse (that is about 20 foot long, and weighed 14 or 1600 l.) that stood upon the West Church lately built, the Weathercock above it, and the great Copper gilded Bowle under it, which held near a Hogstead of Beer, were all blown down through the body of the Church, falling on the Grave stones brake them, and tore the dead bodies in their Graves. But the greatest losse I hear of was at Rype in North Holland, where an Oyl-Mill by the storm, in a violent motion by its own heat set fire, and that burning set divers Houses on fire, some 5 or 6 hundred Houses were destroyed, and many persons burnt alive, and a∣bundance of Goods, many being taken in their Beds, and others burnt be∣fore they could get out of doors. And not onely the private Houses, but the two Churches, Town-house, and the Way house also as is said, are all laid in ashes. And the fire staid not in this Town, but flew over the River sixty foot broad, that goes about the Bemster, and upon the inside of the bank of the Bemster, burnt divers Houses also; and burnt the very ships (though small ones) and Boats that lay in the Haven; besides what harm it hath done in other parts not herein mentioned.
A LIST of the Common-wealth of Englands Navie at Sea, in their Expedition in May, 1653. Under the Command of the Right Honourable Col: Richard Deane, and Col: George Monke, Esquires, Generals and Admirals. Together with the Names of all the Commanders of the said Fleet, and the number of Men and Guns which every Ship carried, at that memorable Fight on the 2 and 3 of June, 1653. in which through Gods blessing on the said Fleet, they took and destroyed between 20 and 30 Dutch Ships of War, and also took 1350 Priso∣ners, with very little losse on our part; and pursued the Dutch to their own Harbours. Also a distinction of part of those Ships (by the letter P in the Margent) which have been taken Prizes, and are now in the Service of the Common-wealth. THE FIRST SQUADRON. The Red Standard and Flagge, under the Squadronall Command of the Generalls above expressed. Ships Names. Commanders. Men. Guns. The Resolution The Generals 550 88 Worcester Frigot George Dakins, Capt. 220 50 Advise Frigot Jer: Smith, Capt. 180 42 Diamond Frigot William Hill 180 42 Saphire Frigot Nicholas Heaton. 140 38 Marmaduke Edward Blagg 460 42 Pelican Peter Motham 180 40 Mearmaid John King 100 26 P Goulden Fleece Nic: Foster 180 44 Loyalty John Limbry 150 34 Society Nic: Lucas 140 44 Malaga Marchant Henry Collins 140 36 Martin John Vessy 90 14 P Fireships Fox —Cornelius 30 10 P Fireships Fortune Humphry Morris 30 10 P Fireships Renowne. James Salmon 30 10 The Vice-Admirals Division of the Generals Squadron. Triumph James Pecock, Vice Adm: 350 62 Lawrell Frigot John Stoake, Capt. 200 48 Adventure Frigot Robert Nickson 160 40 Providence Frigot John Pearce 140 33 P Beare Francis Kerby 200 46 P Hearts ease Thomas Weight 150 36 P Hound Jonah Hide 120 36 P Anne and Joyce William Pile 119 34 London Arthur Browne 200 40 P Hanniball William Hadduck 180 44 P Mary Prize Henry Maddison 120 37 Thomas and Wil: John Jefferson 140 36 The Rear-Admirals Division of the Generals Squadron. Speaker Frigot Samuel Hewet, Rear Adm. 300 56 Suffex Frigot Roger Cuttaine, Capt. 180 46 Guiney Frigot Edmond Curtice 150 34 Tyger Gabriel Sanders 170 40 Violet Henry Southwood 180 40 P Sophia Robert Kerby 160 38 Falmouth Frigot John Jeffreys 100 26 P 4 Sisters Robert Becke 120 30 Hambr: Merchant William Jessell 110 34 Phanix Henry Eaden 120 34 The Generals Squadron consisting of 38 Ships. Mannaged by 6169 Men. Mounted with 1440 Guns. THE SECOND SQUADRON. The English Colours, and White Flaggs, committed to the Conduct of William Penn, Esq; Vice-Admirall of England, and Admirall of the White Flagg. Ships. Commanders. Men Guns. James William Pen, Esq; Admi: 360 66 Lion John Lambert, Capt. 220 50 Ruby Frigot Robert Sanders 180 42 Assistance Frigot William Crispin 180 40 Foresight Frigot Richard Stayner 180 42 Portsmouth Frig: Robert Doenford 170 38 P Anne Piercy Thomas Hare 120 33 P Peter John Littleton 100 32 Exchange Henry Tidman 100 30 P Merlin George Crapnell 090 12 Rich: and Martha Evestace Smith 180 46 Sara Francis Steward 140 34 Lixa Merchant Simon Baily 160 38 P Fireship, Falcion   030 10 The Vice-Amirals Division of the Vice-Admirals Squadron. Victory Lionell Lane, Vice Adm: 300 60 Centurion Frigot Walter Vood, Capt. 200 42 Expedition Frigot Tho: Vodis 140 32 P Gilt flower John Hayward 120 32 P Middle borow Tho: Wishing 120 32 P Raven Robert Taylor 140 38 Exchange Jeafrey Dare 120 32 Giobe Robert Coleman 110 30 Prudent Mary John Taylor 100 28 Tho: and Lucie Andrew Rand 125 34 The Reare-Admirals Division of the Vice-Admirals Squadron. Andrew Tho: Graves, Rear Adm: 360 56 Assurance Frigot Phillip Holland, Capt. 160 36 P Crowne —Thomson, Capt. 140 36 P Dutches Richard Seafeild 090 24 P Princes Maria Saite Hanly 170 38 P Waterhound Gyles Shelly 120 30 P Pearle James Cadman 100 26 Reformation Anthony Erning 160 40 Industry Ben: Salmon 100 30 The Vice-Admirals Squadron consisting of 33 Ships. Mannaged by 5085 Men. Mounted with 1189 Guns. THE THIRD SQUADRON. The Blew Flaggs, Commanded by John Lawson, Esq; Rear-Admirall of England, and Admirall of the Blew Flagge. Ships. Commanders. Men. Guns. George John Lawson, Esq; Adm. 350 58 Kentish Frigot Jac: Renolds, Capt. 180 50 Great President Francis Park 180 40 Nonesuch Frigot Tho: Penrose 170 40 Successe William Kendall 150 38 Welcome Tho: Harman 200 40 P Oake John Edwin 120 32 Brazill Friggot Tho: Heath 120 30 Eastl: Merchant John Woulters 110 32 Adventure Edward Greene 160 38 Samaritan Shadrach Blake 120 30 P Hunter, Fireship,   30 10 The Vice-Admirals Division of the Rear-Admirals Squadron. Vant Guard Joseph Jorden, Vice Ad. 390 56 Entrance Richard Nubery, Capt. 200 43 Dragon John Seaman 260 38 P Convert Phillip Githings 120 32 P Paul Anthony Spatchurt 120 38 P Gift Tho: Salmon 130 34 Cressent Frigot Tho: Thorowood 115 30 Samuel Taboat Joseph Ames 110 30 Benjamin Robert Sparks 120 32 P King Fardinando Richard Paine 140 36 P Roebuck Henry Fenn 100 30 The Rear-Admirals Division of the Rear-Admirals Squadron. Rainbow William Godson, Rear Ad. 300 58 Convertine Frigot Anthony Joyne, Capt. 210 44 Amity Frigot Henry Pack 150 36 Dolphin Robert Davis 120 30 P Armes of Holland Francis Mardrig 120 34 P Tulip Joseph Cubbit 120 32 Jonathan Robert Graves 110 30 P Dragoneare Edward Smith 110 32 William and John Nath: Jesson 120 36 Nichodemus Frig. William Ledgant 40 12 P Blossome Nath: Cock 110 30 The Rear-Admirals Squadron consisting of 34 Ships. Mannaged by 5015 Men. Mounted with 1189 Guns. The Totall of Ships in the Fleet 105 The Totall of Men 16269 The Totall of Guns 3840 Besides these, there have come to the Fleet, and with Generall Blake, and other Ships, above twenty, since the draft of this Lift, whose names, and number of Guns and Men, cannot be given at present. Licensed and Entred according to Order. LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sould at his house in Aldersgate-street, and by Tho: Jenner at the South-entrance of the Royall EXCHANGE. 1653.
