c5750 10264624 44760
THE CONFESSION and EXECUTION OF THE Nine PRISONERS That Suffered at TYBƲRN, On Wednesday the 28th of April, 1680. VIZ. Ralph Cook for Coyning, William Harding for a Rape, Henry Weller for stealing a Mare, Dorothy Soams for stealing a Silver Tankard, Anne White, For several-Burglaries. Joseph Rumney, For several-Burglaries. Matth. Smith, For several-Burglaries. John Ralfs, For several-Burglaries. and Clement Snell, For several-Burglaries. With their Behaviour in Prison, &c. THough in every Moneth there be made such numerous Examples, and so many justly Executed; yet so hardned are Offenders grown, that they will take no warning, either by the Justice inflicted on others, or the Mercy formerly vouchsafed to themselves, but run on in the same course of Impiety; and those that were crowding Spectators at one Ex∣ecution, come themselves to Suffer at the nex. Which is credibly reported to have been several of these miserable, Wretches Case, some of them being after last Sessions observed to be very diligent to get places, to see the Prisoners go to Suffer, and others in the mean time no less busie in Picking of Pockets amongst the Crowd. Yet we must do the present Sufferers that right, as to say, That after Condemnation they generally behaved themselves very peni∣tently, and with a sober Deportment lamenting their ill-spent Lives, aggra∣vating and crying out of the multitude and heinousness of their Sins, and imploring the Mercy and Pardon of Almighty God through Jesus Christ. Some of them ripp'd up and declared the series and tracks of wickedness, which they had followed from their Youth, discovering such variety of parti∣cular Offences, that one would have thought it almost impossible, that persons of their Age could have been such vast Proficients in Wickedness. Several of them had been under Sentence of Death before, and now too late they remembred those solemn Vows which they then made to Heaven, to forsake their lewd Courses, if God and the King would but have Mercy upon them, and save their Lives at that time: But when their Prayers were heard, no sooner were they abroad, but they were far more wicked than ever before. These dreadful Aggravations now lay heavy upon their Spirits, and they did desire all that came to see them, to beware of the like horrible Impiety, that they would not abuse Mercy, nor neglect their Vows made in the time of Distress; for God will not be mocked.
On Sunday the twenty fifth instant, the Ordinary both forenoon and after∣noon, took great pains with these Condemned Malefactors, in two excellent Sermons, to bring them to a sense of their sins; and it was observed, that the greatest part of them gave their attention with much more seriousness, than some others in their Circumstances heretofore were wont to do. There were a great number of Clippers and Coyners Arraigned at this Sessi∣ons, whereof several were Convicted, others Acquitted: of the former sort were Mrs Richardson and her Son, a brisk bold young fellow, and pretending himself a Dancing-master; another woman was Indicted with them, but Ac∣quitted. Mrs. Richardson had brought a Trunk lockt to this other womans house, and set it obscurely under the Cellar-stairs; in this Trunk there were found the Tools for Clipping; likewise at home when she was taken, there were some Clippings discovered, and she cryed out of a window, and said, she was undone; and the Son endeavoured to fly for it, so that they were found guilty. One Ʋnderwood, and Elizabeth Cook a Wench he kept company with (a ve∣ry courteous Lady, for at the Bar she boasted, she never had been unkind to any man in her life) were likewise Convicted of High-Treason for the like offence, much clipt Money and Clippings, and, the necessary Implements be∣ing found upon them. Both these and two former lived near Pickadilly, and 'tis supposed, were all of a gang, or had conversation together; they were first discovered by means of an old Companion, to whom this Ʋnderwoods Mistress boasted, that she could get a Guinney a day by this Mystery; and told him some∣mething of the way. The Woman being supposed  the chief Inticer to this villany, was sentenced to be Burnt. Another person who drove the same Trade alone by himself, was also found guilty: the matter was proved so plainly on him, that there could be no doubt or difficulty made of it. But His Majesty, who is wholly composed of Grace and Clemency, was pleased to Reprieve several of these Offenders. A person living in or near Grubstreet, and his Wife, were likewise charged with the same Offence: The Evidence for the King made out several presump∣tions against them, but there was a multitude of their Neighbours and others that came in to testifie as to their Credit, &c. And the Prisoners alledged, the prosecution was upon an old grudge, and endeavoured to recriminate upon one of the chief Evidence; it did appear that four years ago, their House had been searched on suspition of this Crime of Clipping, and then nothing found that could render them obnoxious to the Law, so that after a full and fair Try∣al they were acquitted. Several persons, as is usual every Sessions, were Convicted for stealing of silver Tankards, and divers for Shop-lifting, the particulars too tedious to relate. One Daniel Mackarty, an Irish-man, was Tryed and Convicted of Treason, as being a Popish Priest: the manner of his Apprehension was thus. A woman in Charles-street being very sick, this Father officiated with her, said Mass, and Administred the Sacrament to her, of which the Nurse gave notice to some honest Neighbours, who took out a Warrant and seized him in the said sick womans Chamber, who much interceded and begged that they would not take him away, and furiously Crying out, O will ye rob me of my Salvation;
but they advised her to send for a Protestant Divine, and take instructions from him, and not to trust such blind Popish guides, with their Idolatrous Masses, and foolish Ceremonies of Extream Unction and groundless Absolutions, where there is neither true Faith or Repentance. The Nurse testified that she had heard the Prisoner say Mass, and exercise other parts of the Priestly Function. Dr. Oates likewise was a Witness against him, that he confessed to him that he was a Priest when he was brought to his Chamber. In his Pocket when he was taken, there was found a Petition to the Venetian Ambassa∣dor, expressed by the name of Daniel Mackarty Priest, setting forth his being in want, and desiring relief; as likewise a Letter in French directed to him, and signifying likewise, that he was a Priest; which Papers were read in Court. He had little to say for himself, but behaved himself impudently, calling the Witnesses scurrilous names, &c. Nothing could be made more plain than his Priesthood, which in truth he scarce denyed, and so was found guilty, which he seemed not at all to regard, being a person (as most of them are) of a won∣derful confidence. The Petition before-mentioned was in French, and therein it was specifi∣ed what Order he was of; likewise there was another Paper in the same Lan∣guage, purporting to be directions how (if he were taken) he should behave himself, what excuses and pretences he should make, what he should say if con∣fronted by Doctor Oates, or any other of the Kings Evidence; whereby we may see they have Lessons set them in every case. He thought to have baffled the woman that gave Evidence against him, by asking her what cloaths he had on when she heard him officiate; who answered, the same he had now; whence he would infer that it could not be, because in saying Mass, they use such and such Vestments; but this was quickly contradicted, for though he had not all his Formalities, which they cannot conveniently always, nor safely now especially, carry aboith them, yet to supply that defect, there was found about him, and now shewed in Court, a thing called in their holy Gib∣berish, A Stole, being a piece of Sattin or Taffata, of near two yards long, and three or four Inches broad, of a kind of deep blew, or almost purple colour, which they use to fling over their shoulders, and that alone serves instead of all the rest of their gear. The woman mentioning her hearing him say Mass, was askt how many were present, she answered, she could not certainly tell, but was sure there was above threescore; and being demanded if she knew any of them, replyed, yes, there were enough of them now about the Court, or in the yard, or words to that effect. There was a young Gentleman of good note, took a Tryal on the Friday touching a Rape charg'd to be committed on the Daughter of one Mrs. a Girl about ten years of age. He was ordered by a Relation to demand Mo∣ney of this Childs Parents, who kept an Ale-house, and they contriv'd, as may be thought, this Stratagem not onely to satisfie that Debt, but screw more Money out of him. The Girl told the story that he meddled with her in the Chamber at her Mothers; and her Sister a wench about sixteen years of age confirm'd it, by saying she came up and saw it, and that he gave her two shil∣lings to hold her tongue; and Midwives swore the Child had had some A∣buse. But the Gentleman proved by a Servant-maid, that the eldest Daugh∣ter went abroad, pickt up a man, brought him home, who went to bed with both her and her Sister, and began with the least first, so that then she cry'd out and might receive the prejudice. Twas also prov'd, that they would fain have made a Composition for one hundred and sixty pound, and then they would put it up, &c. So that upon the whole matter, the Gentleman was fairly Ac∣quitted.
But as to the rest of the 24 persons condemned this Sessions, they were all (except the 9 named here before in the Title-page) Reprieved. The Behaviour of most of those in the prison after Sentence, was, as we said, very penitent; especially Henry Weller, condemned for stealing a Mare, and formerly Transported, was remarkable, spending his whole time in Reading, Prayers, and Exhortations to his fellow prisoners. Early in the morning before he suffered, he prayed with them above an hour very heartily, and with expres∣sions suitable to their condition: wherein they seemed affectionately to joyn, and to receive much comfort thereby; they all immediately after singing praises to God with a Psalm. William Harding, for that detestable Violence and Rape committed on a poor childe, appear'd the most hardned and refractory person amongst them all. No perswasions or intreaties of Ministers or others that came to visit him, could bring him to relent; but as he lived like a Brute, so to outward appearance he seemed not so sensible of his condition and approaching end, as might have been hoped for from the means that were used with him. The women, White and Soams, were old offenders, had many times been in New-gate, and often received Mercy: they now lamentably bewailed their con∣dition, and expressed much sorrow for their sins. Ralph Cook was convicted of Treason, for counterfeiting the Kings Coyn, making Mill'd Half-Crowns out of Pewter-plate; part of which Pewter, and seven of the Half Crowns, with divers Tools for the purpose, were found in his Lodging. He was first discovered by means of his wife, who gave some inti∣mation thereof to his Landlord. He confessed that he was drawn into this fa∣tal practice by a certain person in Stafford-shire, who 'tis said is some time since dead. He behaved himself soberly after Sentence, except onely when transpor∣ted with passion at his wife, whom yet in words he did forgive, and prayed seve∣ral times that God would forgive him his sins, and put his heart into a frame of charity towards her and all others. At the place of Execution none of them made any set Speech, but in gene∣ral confessed their sins, and warn'd all the Spectators to take example by them, to avoid Ill company, Drunkenness, Swearing, profanation of the Sabbath, &c. Discourses common on such occasions, but 'tis a thousand pities they are no more regarded: for if they were, we should not see so many daily come to such an Ignominious End. FINIS.
