C6108 11771359 48867
POEMS, SONGS AND Love-Verses, Upon several Subjects. By Matthew Coppinger Gent. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel street, in Covent-Garden, 1682.
TO HER GRACE THE DUTCHESS OF Portsmouth. MAdam, it is but just, since you receive All the Delights our Soveraign can give, That we; in gratitude unto our King, Shou'd to your Highness bring an Offering. For we by Duty are oblig'd to Prize Those that are Gracious in our Princes Eyes, As well as hate his greatest Enemies. Accept this also, Madam, sent to you, Both as Your Merit, and Your Beauties due;
Which to You not the least of Glory brings, Having by it subdu'd the best of Kings. And now Your Country may Precedence claim, Since You have gave it such a lasting Fame; Greece, Helen; England, Rosamond did boast, But France You henceforth will Glory most; For by Your conqu'ring Eyes You have made known The Monarchy of Beauty is Your own. You are the Darling of my King, His Pleasure, His Indies of incomparable Treasure; That precious Gem, who from your Country came, Too narrow for the Limits of Your Fame, Into the Bosom of a King who knows What 'tis for to deserve, and to dispose. But stay, my Muse, no Sacrilegious Eye Shou'd dare be so Prophane, as once to pry In Princes Actions; they like Gods appear, And never move in any common Sphere: We shou'd from their Concerns our selves retire, And what we understand not well, admire. Your Pardon, Madam, if my zealous Passion Has err'd beyond the Rules of Dedication; And if so high and rare a Contemplation Shou'd fly beyond all bounds of Limitation, And on Dedalian Wings shou'd dare to pry Too near the Beams of Sacred Majesty; Since my Ambition for your Service may Make me speak more than others dare to say. Then prostrate at your Feet I now lay down This Infant Book, which may deserve your Frown;
But hopes a better Fate, since the intent Was good, and only for your Service meant. Which if you view but with a pleasing Eye, It will presage such a Felicity, That all the Frowns of Fortune, and the rage Of time shall want a Power to engage. Your Highnesses Most humble and devoted Servant, Matthew Coppinger.
TO THE READER. TILL this minute I was in doubt whether or no I should afford you an Epistle, being as indif∣ferent whether you take the pains to read it, as you are to go to the cost to buy my Book. It was design'd for my own Pleasure, (being the rellicts of some Idle hours) wherein though I have borrowed the name of Clelia, I wou'd not have you think I do it as your Epigram∣mists do, only to sill up my Verse, or to in∣voke an unknown Deity; but that I veil'd my Ambition under it, not daring to name a Person whose Quallity and Merit did so far exceed all my pretentions, that it had been a sin as great as my Ambition, to have once but mentioned her name, and
to have expos'd it to the publick view. And as for what else you find contain'd in this slender Vollumn, if you think it worth your time to give it the perusal, you will find I took more care to please my self, than you. Your Friend, M. C.
POEMS. On Clelia's Garden. O Garden, unto me more blest Than the Elizian Fields, possest By happy Lovers; and more Fair Than the Hesper'an Orchards are, Which all in Golden Metal shine, With Boughs, and Leaves, and Fruit Divine; Such Paradise it self might be, In its first virent Purity; On which the Heavens did then dispence An incorrupted Influence. Here grow no Dodan Oaks, nor Pines, Nor Elm-inamour'd clasping Vines, No Paphian Myrtle, nor the Bays, Nor Lawrel binding Phoebus Rays: No Cedar, nor the pleasant Palm, No Poplar dropping precious Balm. Such Ornaments are far too mean In Clelia's Garden to be seen
Within these Walks are neither set The Couslip, or the Violet. No Dary, nor Narcissus grows, No Tulip, nor the fragrant Rose, No Marigold, nor running Vine, Of the embracing Cullumbine. Here is no Alabaster Font, With Sea-green Tryton carved on't, Nor yet Arion, to bestride The sporting Dolphins watery side; Nor Neptune riding on the main, Whose Hand a Trident does sustain. No Silver Stream here glides along, Bearing the Goose, or Princely Swan; Nor yet through pleasant Shades displays Its murm'ring Streams a hundred ways. Here's no Colossus to bestride The fronting Walks from side to side: Nor any Statues that surpass, Of sollid Marble, or of Brass. These and the like may such delight, VVhose Eyes can't bare a better sight. The Airy Nation sing not here, But gladly lend a list'ning Ear. The chattering Pye (if here) grows dumb, And prating Parrats Note is done. Domestick Robin nought can say, Not does its chat avail the pay. The Goldsinch, Linnet, and the Thrush, Confine themselves unto their Bush;
And for their silence you may swear, They mute Pythagoreans are; And Philomel is here affraid Tereus with Incest to upbraid. Now some, perchance, may ask me where My Gardens excellencies are, To which no other may compare? I answer thus; The shady Trees, Whose spreading branches some may please, My Clelia's presence doth supply, Who may with Art and Nature vie. For when she please for to unfold Her braided Tresses, to behold, You'd guess it for a Grove of Gold; But that her Eyes such Lustre make, That any one may well mistake, And think it Paradise, and she The Guardian Angel of the Tree. Upon her Princely Forehead, there The the azure Veins so clear appear, In such a rich composure set, As far exceed the Violet. But when she please for to disclose. Her blushing Cheeks, the new blown Rose For shame into its bud doth close, Not once presuming for to vie, With such a pure Vermillion Dye. Her Skin so rare a White does show, As may lend Beauty to the Snow.
The paler Lillies close do stand, To steal some whiteness from her Hand. Her clasping Arms (O Charms Divine!) Do far excel the Cullumbine; VVithin whose close embraces are Two Virgn Fonts, so lovely fair, That every drop which flows from thence, Such Sov'raign Vertue will dispence, As might (if such a thing could be) Cloath us with Immortality. But when she please to touch her Lyre, Or with her Voice our Souls Inspire, The gen'ral Choire of Birds will be Ravisht with such a Harmony. The Angels too, that turn the Spheres, VVou'd to her Anthems lend their Ears. This is the Eden of my Pleasure, The Indies of my choicest Treasure; The Venus of my Love and State, And the Sole Ruler of my Fate. The Inquest. WHere's absent Clelia? VVhere are those Eyes, That steal away My Heart in Play, And over it so strangely Tyrannize?
I thought I had been free; But looking round, Alas for me! I nought cou'd see, Yet found my self in Fetters closely bound. I laid me down to rest; And yet my mind Was still opprest, And in my Breast I did a hundred thousand torments find. I walk'd the City round, In search of ease; But nothing found On which to ground A hope of Remedy for my Disease. Into the Countrey streight I made repair, To mittigate My cruel Fate, But I found nothing there, but sad Despair. I view'd the Arched Skie, And foaming Sea, The first too high For me to flye, And t'other deep, as is my Misery.
I cou'd not tell what course Or way to Steer; Or by what force To gain Remorse, And ease my Heart of this my cruel fear. At last my Clelia came, O blest Reprieve! And ceas'd to blame My ardent Flame; And for her sake commanded me to live. What happiness was this, To one as lost? O who cou'd wish So great a Bliss, Half starv'd at Sea, to gain so blest a Coast? To the King's Majesty. IF that this Book, without Command, May chance (Great Sir) to kiss your Hand, Vouchsafe one smile, my bashful Muse Will then grow bold, no more refuse To bear Loves Standard, and desie All force, but from a Female Eye. The vigorous God of Love dares say, That Mighty Kings his Power obey;
And that his force is felt by all, The Rich, the Poor, the Great, the Small, None are exempt, he conquers all. The Gods themselves his Vassals be; Apollo's Love became his Tree. Iove was a Bull, although Divine; And Pluto's Love was Proserpine. And you (Dread Sir,) more Great, we know Have felt the power of Cupid's Bow. And may you always in the Night, Be sill'd with Venus's delight; And in the day have choice of Pleasure, Which may in sum out-vie your Treasure; Which grant, O Heaven, so great may be, That one small Bag may come to me. A Song. COY Clelia, veil those Charming Eyes, From whose surprize there's none can part; For he that gazes, surely dyes, Or leaves behind a conquered Heart. I durst not once presume to look, Or cast my wary Eyes aside: But as a Boy that Cons his Book, Close sitting by his Masters side,
Dares not presume to look awry, On Toys that catch the wand'ring sense; So if I gaze, I surely die: Against those Charms there's no defence. Thus Heathens at the Suns up-rise, Unto the Ground did bow their Head, Not able with their feeble Eyes To view their God they worshipped. Sent to Clelia. GO tell her that I love; Yet have a special care Lest thou despair, Whilst thou dost strive to move, A Love whose happiness does fly so high, 'Tis the next Mansion to Divinity. If she but ask thee where Thy Master lives or lies, Look on her sparkling Eyes, And boldly tell her there; And that thy duty made thee come to find Him that by gazing left himself behind. If she desire to know Where first I saw her face; Tell her the happy place To which my life I owe,
Was in her Garden; there I heard her sing, And with her Fingers touch the quav'ring String. Nor had thy Thracian Lyre, Orpheus, when thou didst play, More Power the Beasts to stay, Or Trees or Stones Inspire. Thy Auditors were sensless ones, but here Angels came list'ning from their Heavenly Sphere. If she in anger say, How durst he come so nigh, T' invade my privacy, When I my self retir'd away? Tell her the Queen of Love brought me to see The full perfections of her Deity. Epig. 43. lib. 5. Martial. THe crafty Thief may rob thee of thy store, And greedy Flames thy Houshold Gods devour; Thy Debtor Principal and Use deny; In barren Fields, thy Corn that's sown, may dye. Thy Steward, by his crafty Mistress spoil'd; And laden Ships be in the Ocean foil'd: But what thou giv'st the Poor with liberal Hand, This Fortune can alone thy Power withstand.
Omnia mutantur. MY Genius hurried by that haste Which brought the Universe to waste, And all things by its Power defac't, Compels me to reflect upon Past Ages, others coming on, By a swift Revolution. For by the eating Teeth of Time, There's nought so noble, or sublime, But shall be turned into slime. The four great Monarchies that were So vast, as kept the World in fear, Their Exits past, and disappear. Cities so vast, that one may say, The Sun scarce view'd them in a day, Are nothing now, but heaps of Clay. Wonders, of which the World did boast, For their Magnificence and Cost, Are now in their own Ruins lost. All things are subject unto change, And into several orders range: Natures events are often strange.
Yet Man, whose Glory's but a shade, Oft-times his fancy does perswade That nothing can his Power invade. And yet their Honours quickly rust, And all their glorious Titles must Be mingled with the common dust. Their Pageant Pomp does fade away, And greatest Trophies soon decay, And Death the Victor turns to clay. Riches remain but for a Night, And e're the Morning take their flight, And leave the miserable Wight. Beauty decays much like a Flower, Which buds and spreads, and in an hour Th' Impartial Scythe doth it devour. That Beauty which e're-while might seem Enough to grace the Cyprian Queen, Is counted now of no esteem. When in her Glass fair Hellen spy'd Her Face, by Time so mortifi'd, Which was e're-while her chiefest pride, She weeping said unto her Glass, Is this the Beauty did surpass? Tell me why I twice ravisht was.
O Time, whose greedy Teeth devours The prime and glory of our Powers, And leav'st us what was none of ours; VVho lay'st thy rav'nous hands on all, The Rich, the Poor, the great, the small; None are secure untill they fall. VVhen will thy wanton lust have end? Or till what date dost thou pretend These outrages thus to defend? Thou need'st not answer; for I know Thy furious course shall forward go, Till Heaven does Ne plus ultra show. Tempus edax rerum tu{que} invidiosa omnia distruitis, &c. An Epitaph on A. P. IF that Extortion, Fraud, and Strage, Lust, Envy, Rapine, in this Age May claim your Tears, I justly may Claim all the Tears that you can pay. For though the pious Hand of Death Has nimbly snatcht away my Breath, It had prevented him before, And Sin had made my Age fourscore.
Say then, who-e're shall name my loss, Here lies extinct Misanthrópos. Senex Tempus Mors & Chorus. Sen. HAil ancient Brother, what is in thy mind, To count the Sand, and mow the whistling VVind? Has age depriv'd thee of thy sense, to be The perfect Emblem of Foolery? Come leave this madness, do as I have done, Cast thy old skin, and be agen as young As is Aurora at her first up-rise, Youthful by virtue of her Lovers Eyes. I am all Air, there's not a part in me But has shook off it's dull Mortality; Prithee go run and fetch me Charles his VVain, To hurry me o're the Celestial Plain. O Love, Love, Love, thy strong Medean Charms Has gave new strength and motion to my Arms. My Legs and Thighs are able to support The mighty Fabrick of Heavens starry Court. Temp. Are you in Love? Sen. I am. Temp. With whom; Sen. There stay; One that wou'd make thee throw thy Scyth away, And break thy Glass, if thou shouldst chance to spie One of the smallest Cupids in her Eye:
How then couldst thou resist united Charms, Which conquer Men and Gods with their Alarms? But let that pass, sure I have seen before Thy Picture painted on a Usurers Door; They call'd it Time. Temp. 'Tis true, and I am he Until this day regarded not by thee, And something slightly now. Seest thou this Glass? Thy Life and Sand in the same moment pass. Sen. Thou ly'st, base Slave, though Sixty years are run, Double their Number are as yet to come; My active Blood runs quick, and every part Performs it's Duty round about my Heart: My strength at Thirty never was more great, Nor does one part fail of it's usual heat; All pains and groans have now forsook the Stage, And like the Phoenix I've renew'd my Age. Temp. Fond Man, thy present State is but a Breath, And lightsomness doth but foretel thy Death Just as a Lamp, when all the Oyl is spent, Gives the last farewel to it's nourishment. Mor. Here ends thy Labour, thy last Thred is spun, Embrace me silently now I am come. You seem to wonder, doating Age, I am Death, Come to demand this moment of thy Breath. How soon he's gone? how silently he lyes? When I once come, in vain are all Replies;
No Charms can stay m'inexorable Hand, All Sexes bow the head when I command; If I once strike, no Wards against my Blow, Youth, Beauty, Strength, and what are priz'd below, Are menial things, and here may please the Eye, But Vassals-like, desert their Lords, when I Do once appear; in vain are Prayers or Tears, No sound of Mercy ever pierc't my Ears. Chor. Then happy he who leads a life so blest, That when thou com'st, thou only shalt devest Of Earthly dross, whose better part shall flye, A welcom present to the Deity; There shall be lasting Pleasures to be found, That he shall thank the Hand that gave the wound. An Elegie on Mr. W. L. MEek, Kind, and Good, could I relate Our loss, and thy too sudden fate, I'd force the World to lend their Eyes As Conducts to thy Obsequies. But since thy loss too great appears To be the Subject of our Tears, We will contemplate on thy Worth, Too great for any to set forth; And only saying, Thou art dead, Will be as much as can be sed. Quid de te jactor? fama & tua gloria major.
A Song. I Will not tell her that she's fair, For that she knows as well as I, And that her Virtues equal are Unto the Glorys of her Eye. And that I love her well, she knows, For who can view that Heavenly Face, Not paying that Respect he owes To Beauty, bearing such a Grace? But this I'le tell, and tell her true, She takes upon her too much State; For, by the Gods, it would undo A King to Love at such a rate. Let Common Beauties boast the Power Of some uncommon Excellence, And thank Dame Nature for the Dower Of that decoying Charming Sense; Adorn themselves with Pearls and Gold, In Rubies and Rich Di'monds shine, In choicest Silks that may be sold, And all to make such Ladies Fine.
These are like some Rich Monument, Rais'd all of carv'd and costly Stones, Painted and Gilt for Ornament; But full within of dead Mens Bones. Such common ways my Clelia scorns, Her lovely Soul is too sublime, She's not compleat that Cloaths adorn, Or does in ought but Nature shine. To Clelia. FAir, and yet Cruel, sure it cannot be, Nature denies such Catastrophe; The spangled Orbs serenely do display Not in a Cloudy Night the Milkie way; The misty Shades do swiftly disappear, When Sol's Bright rays do Crown the Hemesphere; But Love is subject to the Chains of Fate, And more unhappy proves than fortunate. How often have my Vows to Clelia paid My Constant Zeal? How often have I made The same consession of my Love to thee, As mortals pay unto Divinity? Yet the requital of my Love's Disdain, And Cruelty the Med'cine for my Pain; A Viper which doth seed upon my Heart, And plays the Tyrant upon every Part;
Forcing a Lethargy through all my Soul, Which does my vital Spirits so controul, That though you'd strive for to prevent my fate, My Doom's confirm'd and pitty comes too late. Thus the faint Pilgrim with Devotion bows Unto the Sacred Shrine, and pays his Vows; Beging a Blessing on his feeble knee, Supported by his Faith and Piety; His daily Orisons do beg Direction From that great Pow'r that is his sole Protection; But when at last his fatal Glass is run, And time casts Mists before his glimmering Sun, In some old ruin'd Monastry or Cave, Shunning the World, he seeks a quiet Grave. A Song. I Have drank too much Lethe of late, I've forgot that I e're was in Love, I am Crown'd with a nobler Fate; 'Tis a passion that's too much above That pittiful State Which sometimes moves pitty, but oftener hate. The sad looks of a Lover in pain, When my fancy descends to his Breast, Makes me Smile when I think how in vain He does so much disquiet his rest, In thinking her best Who in mocking his Love does think her self blest.
Such Whiners as these, at their leasure, With an ang'ry glance from their Eye, They quickly deject at their pleasure, Who during their anger do dye; Such is the measure These predicant Fools do get from their Treasure. To Clelia. THink not, fair Madam, that your high dis∣dain, Which wounds my Heart, shall cause me to sustain The pond'rous bulk of all your Tyranny, And the Insulting Conquest of your Eye. Against your scorns I'le arme my panting Heart, Secure from wound, and safe in every Part; Biding defiance to your Conq'ring Eyes, I'l give you no more leave to Tyrannise. Yet if at last no Remedy I find To ease the troubles of my tortur'd Mind, And with despair must yield to Fate, my Breath Shall censure you the Agent of my Death: Then you that are the cause of this my fate▪ Shall mourn and grieve like one that's desolate, And on my Hearse engrave my Tragedy, With Tears proceeding from your doleful Eye. Yet have a care, for if a Tear should steal And touch my Corps, I instantly should feel
The Fire of Love to kindle in my Breast, 'Twou'd wake my drowsie Senses from their rest. Me tamen urit amor, quis enim modus adsit amori. To Clelia. MIrrour of Beauty, from whose conquering Eyes All Power of Love and Glory does arise; Resistless Charms does Crown your Heavenly Brow, You Hellen-like no Second can allow. Here Nature strove to shew her greatest Art, Each part of you does captivate a Heart, Your wounding Beauty spreads through every Part. Pardon me then if that I soar above, The Merits of undeserving Love. I needs must love, for 'tis my cruel Fate, Let not my kindness then deserve your hate; Since to your Beauty I have Prisoner been, Divinest Creature, think it not a Sin: The Torrent of my Grief oreslow'd my Heart, And Love conceal'd still swell'd in every Part. All my Ambition only is to gain Your love, but (Cruelty) I strive in vain: One Smile from you has power enough to save A drooping Corps that's catching at a Grave.
One Frown wou'd make a Miser, 'midst his store, Forsake his Wealth, his Fate for to deplore: The Gods bewail their Case, and mourn to see Mortals so blest, more than Immortals be. Iuno till now from her Olympick Throne Nere saw a Beauty greater then her own. Since then all Beauty is in you alone, You are that Goddess I'le adore, or none. Scribe aliquid magnum. I Thank you, worthy Sir, your good advice Is like the Recepes of a Doctor's Bill, Where an Ingredient's dear, to save the price, You'l leave it out, though it the Patient kill. You'd have me take some Noble Theam, and make Verses that might be worthy of the Press, Which if I were so mad to undertake, You'd see a Gyant in a Pigmies dress. I am no Mole, nor can I feed on Earth, Nor yet Camelion, to browse on Air; I always have sed well, e're since my Birth; And now to starve my self I do not care. Wou'd you but be Mecenas, then I'd try To what my bold Invention cou'd aspire, And strive for to excel in Poetry Great Maro, and the Rhodopean Lyre.
No barren fancy shou'd possess my Brain, Each Verse shou'd flow as from Apollo's Quill, In such a lofty and Heroick strain The Universe I'd with my Numbers fill. I'd frame such raptures in Immortal Verse, As shou'd the brightest Stars from Heaven con∣vey, And every Cloud the Muses shou'd disperse; And with my Feet I'd tread the Milkie way. Otia da nobis: sed qualia fecerat olim Mecenas Flacco, Virgilio{que} suo. Condere victuras tentem per secula chartas Et nomen flammis eripuisse meum. De Pompeo & Filiis, e Martial. THe Sons of Pompey yielded up their Breath In divers quarters of the spacious Earth. Europe within her Bowels does contain One of the Sons of Noble Pompey slain. In Asia's Confines doth the other lye, And he himself in Africa did dye. What makes the World as Thunder-struck ap∣pear, That such a Slaughter shou'd be every where? So great a Ruine cou'd not likely be Contained in One place, nay scarce in Three.
De Sacerdote qui Caniculum in Coeme∣terio Sepelivit. A Wealthy Thuscan Priest, of no mean note, One that cou'd say his Decalogue by rote, And Pater-noster too, and, if such need, Cou'd make a Repetion of his Creed, Had a small Dog he did so much regard, That dead, he Buried him in the Church-yard; The Bishop glad that he had got a Claw Whereby to get the Priest into his Paw, Summons him to a strict Examination Of his so irreligious Violation Of Holy ground. The Priest, who knew his mind, How much he was to Avarice inclin'd, Appears, and with him brings full Fifty Pound, Which he knew well wou'd make the matter sound. The Bishop urg'd the Crime, and so far went, That he, poor Man, must be to Prison sent; To whom the Priest, My Father, did you know How much you to that loving Creature owe, And how in Wisdom he did antecede All that I ever knew was of the breed, I am sure you wou'd not blame my action then, Since he deserv'd a Burial among Men.
For whilst he liv'd, and did enjoy his Breath, He was as wise as Men, but more in Death. The Bishop ask't him how. The Priest reply'd, He wisely made his Will before he dy'd; And knowing that it was a Pious deed, He left you Fifty Pounds to help your need; With that produc'd the money. Sure reply'd The bishop, never Dog more fairely dy'd; And God forbid I shou'd at all detract From this your Zeal in such a Pious Act. If you have more, let there be set apart, A place to bury Dogs of such Desert. On Suadela. THey say Ulisses by his Art Had power to hear the Sirens Sing, And from their Charming Notes depart, Tasting the sweets without a Sting. I wonder not, since free from harms I have left Suadela and her Charms. Nobis placeant ante omnia Sylvae. HAil Sacred Woods, and all the rural Gods, Who in these Coverts make your blest a∣bodes; Ye Fauns and Satyrs that do here reside, And Watery Nymphs that neer these springs abide;
And ye, ye pretty mourning Turtle Doves, The living emblem of chastest Loves; May no devouring Hawk e're fly this way, Of so much Innocence to make a prey: Let all be happy, chirp sweet Birds, and sing, And with your Melody these Woods shall ring. For here I first beheld that Angels Face, Which to these Coverts gave the greatest Grace. And thou, old Oak, beneath whose spreading shade That Heavenly Object did my sight invade, May no rough Wind e're rend thy aged top, Or thankless hand thy Beauties glory crop; Or shivering Winter, which the Woods bereaves, E're rob thee of thy green and shady Leaves; But may each year new Strength and Verdure grant. 'Till thou grow young, as when thou wert a Plant; And may'st thou flourish many Ages more, And still more green than e're thou wast before. But when thou must decay, for eating Time Will not permit thee always thus to shine, From thy old Trunk may thousand young ones Flower, Weaving their tender Boughs into a Bower. And thou great Paphian Goddess, ever bless This goodly Bower with so much happiness, That whosoe're shall come within it's shade, Shall to thy Mystick power be Captive made;
Each Lover then this Covert shall invite To taste the happiness of Loves delight; Thus shall thy fall be greater then thy rise, And of a Tree become a Paradise. An Epitaph. JUst as I liv'd, just so I dy'd, Contemning God and Man, With Earthly dross nere satisfi'd; Now satiated am. Desire not to know my Name, Which justly is accurst, For making Gold my chiefest aim, Even with Tantalian thirst. A Dialogue. Lover. REnder your Heart, or else give mine agen. Virgin. What, change with Men? Lov. Justice commands you to do one or t'other. Vir. Yes, to a Lover. Lov. Then I am he, sweet Saint, that owns that Flame. Vir. You are much to blame. Lov. For loving you? I must until I dye. Vir. Pray tell me why.
Lov. Most mighty Love no reason can indure. Vir. Is your Love pure? Lov. As pure from spot as Elemental fire. Vir. N'ere to expire? Lov. No, not when Time it self shall cease to be. Vir. You have conquer'd me. Lov. Blest voice, that very word new life does give. Vir. With thee I'le live. Lov. Our mutual Joy shall with our Loves com∣bine. Vir. I am only thine. Lov. Triumphant Love, what never lose the field? Vir. Love makes me yield. Lov. Then let's enjoy each other without fear. Vir. Agreed, my Dear. A Pastoral Courtship. COme, my Dear Love, into this Grove, This Paradise shall cover The secret Pleasures of our Love, Which we will here discover. See how the Trees do bend their Boughs, And silent murmuring make, Whilst the inviting Shade allows A place to recreate.
The pleasant Birds do sit and sing, No cause of sorrow's here, Here nothing lurks will terror bring To Hare or timerous Deer. The pretty cooing Turtles take This place for their delight, And an inviting moaning make, Nor fear the ravenous Kite. And all stand wond'ring and admire That we delay so long, The gentle Choire of Birds conspire To please us with a Song. But why so coy? thou needst not fear, No danger's in this Grove, Venus her self did here enjoy The Pleasures of her love. Come let me kiss those Lips, those Eyes That Captivate my Heart, And are to me a Paradise Beyond the power of Art. O let me touch those milk-white Breasts, Which like the Alps appear, Which never yet fond Love hath prest To make his Vintage there.
Come let that Belly, which might well A Stoick's courage move, Which does so far, dear Love, excel, Receive the stamp of Love. So, do not blush, the buding Rose That hangs upon the Tree, Retains his glory, though the Nose Has ravisht its Virginity. Come do not grieve, thou needst not fear, This place will all conceal, There's none can know what we did here, Our Pleasures to reveal. Nor does thy Angels Beauty seem Less lovely than before, For then thy Face but here and there A little Cupid bore. But now ten thousand Cupids crown That heavenly Face of thine Angellick Essence flowing down Has made thee quite Divine.
Therefore each day we'll try the Power What charms of Love can do, And create Pleasures for each Hour, Until the Gods shall sue, My Joy, my Paradise, to Worship you. Ite triumphales circum mea tempora lauri Vicimus, in nostro est ecce Corinna sinu. An Epitaph. ALas, poor Infant! Death was too severe, O're such small Bones to raise a Trophy here. Merciless Tyrant, thus for to bereave Thee of thy life, scarce giving time to Breath. Thou wert a Gem, as quickly lost as found, Thy Life and Death was in one Volumn bound. If Prayers and Tears cou'd have preserv'd thy Breath, Thou yet hadst liv'd triumphant over Death. But thou wert snatch'd away, thy rising Sun Finish'd its Course e're it had scarce begun; And we in darkness mourn, yet we can see The Hand that cuts the Twig may fell the Tree. Sweet Fruits soon drop, but those that longer last Always do relish with a sower taste. Optima prima fere manibus rapiuntur avaris Implentur numeris deteriora suis.
The Syrens Song. YE Powers above, and ye Celestial ones, We Sirens sing a doleful Lullaby To those who by our false inchanting Tones, We draw to hear our pleasant Harmony. No Ulyssean stratagem nor skill Can save poor Mariners that coast our way, But with Inchanting Notes we please and kill Who on our Road to hear our voice do stray. And Women-like, our Tongue can play its part; Whilst like to Deities wee seem to be, At the same instant we can by our Art, Read to poor Mariners their Destiny.
An Elegie on the Death of that No∣ble and Renowned Gentleman, Collonel Simon Lambert, of the Island of the Barbadoes. Dignum laude virum musa vetat mori. BEfore some Famine, Pestilence, or War, Or Monarchs Death, Heaven sends a blazing Star, To let us know not what to hope, but fear, When such Portents his Messengers appear. And can great Lambert dye, and Nature show No sign, so great a ruine to forego? Had I beheld th' Illustrious Prince of Light Resign his glorious Rays to sable Night, And some bright Constellation fall from thence, I instantly shou'd have inferr'd from hence Our certain loss, and boldly wou'd have said, The Heavens declare that vertuous Lambert's dead. But none of these presented to our view, Yet that he's dead, we know to be too true. Let us consider then what loss we have, And what great Vertue's buried in his Grave: For we lament no shrub that was but small, But grieve to see this stately Cedar's fall.
Beneath whose spreading Branches, whilest it stood, Whilst it did flourish like a verdant Wood, We did enjoy all that was just and good. Great Ionathan, a Witness thou may'st be, He liv'd to serve his Sovereign and thee. He was no gilded Image, that did show A Glorious outside, and did nothing know: But he in every part was so compleat, As shew'd that he was wise, as well as great. Among the Best, he Noblest was, and where The Noblest were, there he did Best appear. Mercy and Justice both did in him dwell, And each did strive which shou'd in him excell. He, like another Atlas, did sustain This Islands burthen, with Minerva's Brain; And in each Exigent he did advise, As if that he had seen with Argus Eyes. In sum, Each action has deserv'd Renown, For which he shall receive a Heavenly Crown, And sing with Angels in that Heavenly Choire, To which his Righteous Soul did still aspire. To Madam Lambert. NOW, Madam, since you have sustain'd a loss, Which all the pleasures of your Life may cross;
And such a loss as doth all loss exceed, Whose very name may make your heart to bleed; Yet comfort take, since he is gone before, To wait your coming at the Heavenly Door; Where you shall enter an Immortal Bride, With Saints and Angels to be glorify'd. Nor let it be a grief that you have none To pattern your dead Lord, I mean, a Son: His Vertues have immortaliz'd his name, And still he lives in a perennal Fame. The Epitaph. An Acrostick. Strong Monuments of Wood, Marble, or Brass, In time time decay and into Ruines pass; Making a mock of all that Pomp and Pride, On which the hopes of Fame has still rely'd. Note here a President did know full well, Life justly led all Monuments excel. A Person of such great Desert and Fame, Might all the highest worths of Honour Claim; By which he to himself has been so kind, Eternal Monuments to leave behind. Reader, who-e're thou art, believe thus much, This Island scarce can find another such.
On my Ladies Lap-Dog. LElaps, my Ladys Dog, must sit at Meat, And be her Taster, e're my Lady'l eat: The choicest bits the Table can afford, My Lady cuts, and gives them to her— And many a lick his Curship gives my Lady, Who cries, Poor Creature, he's as kind as may be▪ And when 'tis Night, e're she can take her rest, My Lady calls for that which she loves best. Her pretty Dog is all my Lady's care; I smell a Rat, Madam, you'd best beware. All Night she folds him in her Arms, the Cur, Perchance, may fare the worse for loving her. He's slick and sporting, who can chuse but doat On that which lies under a Ladis Coat? But why a Dog? Cannot my Lady find Some spruce young Gallant that will please her mind? Is Earth so barren, can it not afford Something will better personate a Lord? Yet 'tis the mode, I grant it, so you keep Your Dogs to watch, whilst, Madam, you do sleep. However, we'd suppose this done for fashion, Did not your actions shew too much of Passion: For't gives suspition unto every Guest, To see a Christian serv'd after a Beast.
Her Plea is Innocence; yes, in this sense, A kind of dogged brutish Innocence, And Pretty: May be so, Nature, thou'rt wise, In giving Ladies such perspicuous Eyes. When first I saw him lying on her Bed, I could have left him shorter by his Head, For all his Beauty; nor yet cou'd I find One part more rare in him than all his Kind. And yet she doats upon this ugly Cur; He and my Lady 'tis keeps all the stir. Many do think the Dog is too obscene, Or what the Devil shou'd my Lady mean? De Leone & Lepore, e Martial. WHat makes the trembling Hare the Lyon fly Thy death agrees not with his Majesty. A nobler Object doth his rage possess, And thou by flying makes his Glory less: His Hunger is asswag'd by blood of Bears, And mighty Bulls he in his anger tears. The choicest Stag the Coverts can afford, Is made a Dish to serve the Forests Lord Dogs prey on Hares. Let not the Irish Boy Fear mighty Charles will his base Youth destroy
To the Worshipful Jonathan At∣kins, Knight, Governour of the Island of the Barbadoes. WHat ails the Poet? What a new desire Inflames his Heart, and doth his Soul inspire, With emulous Notes to touch Apollo's Lyre? 'Tis you, dear Sir, as great by Birth as Fame, Whom Merit and true Honour gives a Name; Who Heaven (Great Soul) did send for to revive This drooping Island, and to keep alive Those who Oppression did before enslave, And Cruelty deject unto the Grave. You are the Subject of my Verse, to you All the Encomiums of our Praise is due. Astroea now appears with Heavenly Grace, And banish'd Justice re-assumes her place. The course of things are chang'd, and we are now No more deceiv'd by Ianus double brow. Blest Halcyon days, and you that made them so! Unto what Land soever I shall go, Your Memory I'll strive for to display, Whilst Phoebus with his Beams adorns the day. But yet methinks I hear some say, Where's he Dares contradict us in our Seigniory, And tax our actions? Come, and you shall see One fam'd for Justice, Mercy, Piety;
VVhose Eye no diff'rence knows between the poor, And him whose laden Ships can hold no more; VVhose actions Justice guides, for in each Hand The Sword and Balance equally do stand. Here's no Perversion; here's the Motto too, Give God and Caesar equally their due. O glorious Sun-shine of this Western Isle, VVhat noble Appellation, or what Stile Befits thy Praise? Or how can we express Our Joy, your Bounty, and our Happiness? VVhose liberal hand bestows, e're we can think, Whole Bowls of Blessings, fill'd up to the brink, Beyond our hopes: Yet thus the Powers we serve Are wont for to reward, e're we deserve. O thou great Author of all earthly things, Whose hand deposes Princes, throws down Kings▪ Who view'st from thy Olympick Throne the State, And actions of each mighty Potentate; VVho rules the worlds vast Frame, O Crown the days Of our blest Ionathan with living Bays; And that his Progeny may ever live, Propitious Heavens, grant, as I believe. First shall the liquid VVaters cease to flow, The Earth to cause both Plants and Trees to grow▪ Heavens radiant Monarch shall deny his light, The Machine of the VVorld involv'd in Night;
The Lamb shall slay the Lyon, and the Hare Of the swift Hound no more shall stand in fear; The Eagle court the Dove, and all things be In Sympathie with their Antipathie: 'Tis then, and not till then, my Pen shall stay, And strive no more your Glory to display; Which like the Sun in his Meridian height, Cheers the whole World with his illustrious Light. Ante leves ergo pascentur in oethere cervi, &c. Quam nostro illius labatur pectore vultus. The Lovers Greeting. WHen bald-pate Winter, with his hoary head, By the Springs kind aspect was vanquished; When sturdy Boreas Storms were over past, And milder Zeph'rus breath'd his gentle blast; In pleasant May, when Flora did invest The Fields with green, and shady Coverts blest; When ev'ry where the bright refulgent beams Of glorious Titan shin'd upon the streams Of gliding Crystal Floods, whose waving pace Seem'd as it were to emulate with Grace The various Clouds, and gladly to invite Faint-hearted Lovers to their dear delight. It was my chance to meet my dearest Love, Who, Gods you know, I do esteem above
All earthly Treasures, and to me what-e're Under both Polls can be accounted fair. I came (and with a modest pace) and bent My tim'rous body, full of discontent, And at her feet (who the great Gods above Can testifie, I do sincerely love) I prostrate fell, thinking thereby to gain One loving smile, but it was all in vain. For, O my cruel Fate, at the first view Her smiling Countenance my Love withdrew, And with an ireful look she cast her Eye, Bending her brows, now full of Tyranny. So have I seen when Phoebus in his might, Shoots forth his glorious Raies, whose shining light Doth dazle all Mens Eyes; yet by and by An envious Cloud doth hide him from our Eye. But all this time I stood amaz'd, nor knew To bear those sudden storms of frowns she threw▪ Just as when Iove doth thunder in the Sky, The amaz'd beholder, ready for to dye, Trembles and shakes, not knowing how to free Himself from danger that he's forc'd to see. Yet at the last, when I cou'd nought perceive That might at all my tim'rous heart relieve, Like a bold Soldier, mad, with desp'rate Fate, Resolv'd my cruel Fortune to abate, And give the Onset with a Heart that's free From Fear, or any such base ignomy. I tried a thousand ways, but all in vain▪ Still what I did, did more increase my Flame.
Ah cruel Nymph, abate your high disdain, And grant me Love to mitigate my pain; Which if you do deny, for my relief, 'Tis Death shall ease the burthen of my grief. Sui minus est animus nobis effundere vitam In me crudelis non potes esse diu. Farewell to Pleasure and to fond Delight, Farewel those thoughts which an unconstant mind Is still perplext with, pond'ring in the Night, For what his wearied Lust can never find; His Rage is blind, And he far more unconstant than the Wind. When I but think how my disorder'd Heart Has by the motion of one flatt'ring look, By that detested, vile and cursed Art, Venus, I mean thy subtle tempting Hook, Been tamely took; Thus tempting Toys make Children leave their Book. O then those Charms that did my Heart controll, Burst in a Fury from my swelter'd Brest, And the disorder'd passions of my Soul Their damn'd and treach'rous ways does so detest, That over-prest, My weary'd mind is robb'd of all its rest.
On Clelia's Sore Eyes. WHat makes the Frontiers of the sable night Display their Mists, and thus expel the light? Dire Queen of Shades, what power, as yet un∣known, Hast thou assum'd, that's stronger than thy own? These sable Mists are worse than those that fell On impious Pharaoh for an Israel: For but a time those dismal Clouds did stay, Which gave a greater welcom to the day. But now the Gods, the angry Gods, I find, All human kind has at one stroke struck blind, And rob'd the World of Glory in its height, Having eclipst its main and greatest light: And now, alas! muffl'd in Clouds, it lies Groping in darkness, robb'd of both its Eyes: Nor can we hope our Fate for to reverse, But are like mourners drooping o're a Hearse, Till in your Eyes, your Eyes, we may behold Beauty enthron'd, more bright than burnisht Gold, Which now is hid, and doth obscurely lye, As pearls i'th' Oceans vast profundity. But sure the mighty Pow'rs had some design, And our neglect of you they thought a Crime; And took from us, what we as slightly prize As Indians Gold, and precious Treasuries; And now think sit, lest by those Stars we fall, And so receive a gen'ral Funeral,
For to restore us by degrees those Eyes, Which else would make mankind a sacrifice; As Men not quite recover'd of their sight, Do lose the same by the excess of light. A Dream. TEll me, thou pale-fac'd Empress of the Night, What horrid terror did my mind affright. I saw, and in a Dream a Damsel stood Before me trembling, all besmear'd with Blood. In her right Hand a wither'd Branch she had, And with a sable Veil her Brows were clad; And to her self she mourning seem'd to say, 'Twas love, alas! fond Girl, did thee betray. And so she vanish'd. Then I heard a cry. Of a lost Damsel, at the point to die. Her latest Breath did on Narcissus call, Cruel Narcissus, cruel in my fall. For thee I did honour and life forsake, And gave thee Love, which thou refus'd to take; For thee I did Philanders Love despise, Who now may glory at my injuries. Her other words she did in Tears confound, Abruptly mangled in a dying sound. With that I shrunk, and sudain terror prest My melting Heart in my molested Breast; I ponder'd in my mind, at length I knew The voice was Phillis, that her self had slew;
And art thou dead, said I, false unto me? His hate's a just reward of Perjury. But O that yet my life cou'd thine redeem, My Soul shou'd vanish as of no esteem: O cruelty! what made thee so unkind, To kill the Joy, and Darling of Mankind? And since thy Death by Pen can't be exprest, I'le write thy Elegie upon my Breast. But snatching at my Sword, a Hand was sent, My suden Execution to prevent; And Phillis, who before I thought was dead, Appear'd, and with a Garland Crown'd my Head, And told me death had not the power to sever Two Hands, two Hearts, that must be joyn'd for ever. Then waking suddenly, I knew the Theam Was my molested fancy in a Dream. Even when I wake or sleep thou'rt in my mind, Unconstant Phillis, cruel, and unkind. Omnia qua sensu volvuntur vota diurno, Tempore nocturno reddit amica quies.
An Elegie on the Death of his ve∣ry good Friend Mr. Edward Lynch, Buried in Salisbury Cathedral. ASist my Muse, thou gravest of the Nine, Melpomine, assist, and let Line Proceed from thy more solemn state, which shall Attend the Rites of this sad Funeral. Shall then Eternal sleep rich minds repress, And leave them only to enjoy their bliss? And must their Names no more be thought upon, Buried in silent Oblivion? And with their Bodies must their Names be thrust Into the Earth, and Buried in the Dust? No, no, their Fame swift Time shall ne're devast, But flourish still, so long as Time shall last. Why then doth Death involve my Friend, who sleeps, And in the Dust a silent Requiem keeps? But that thy Name henceforth may never die, I'l write in Verse thy mournful Elegie. Yet Ink's too black a Colour to infold Thy vertuous Name, that shou'd be writ in Gold. That honor'd Marble that does bear thy Name, Henceforth shall be Immortal by the same. Nor Time nor eating Age shall e're devour What bears th' Impression of so fair a Flower.
When first my steps unto thy Grave drew nigh, To pay my duty to thy memory, The pious Marble thaw'd into a Tear, As silently expressing thou wert there. The Marble Statues, Bishops, Prebends, Lords, And many other that the place affords, Through stony Mantles wept their sufferings, And seem'd to me like Arethusa's Springs. And may they ever weep, for Piety Is seldom found among them till they dye. Who e're shall hear thy Name, and shall not spend One Tear for thee, unpitty'd be his end, And may his Ghost do pennance at thy Grave, Honor'd (though restless) such a Doom to have. Methinks I cou'd grow ang'ry with my Muse, That shou'd at such a time her aid refuse; But that she told me that her Lungs were weak, And far unfit thy Praises for to speak; And that whilst she thy Fame did strive t' express, Her halting Numbers only made it less. We knew thy worth e're we discern'd thy Age, And budding Glory gave a true presage Of what thou did'st, and what thou would'st have done, Had not thy rising▪ prov'd thy setting Sun. O cou'd I speak thy praise, I would disperse Thy living Fame throughout the Universe: To tell thy worth, how vert'ous and how wise, In this I know none can Hyperbolise. Each of thy actions strove for to excell, As rolling Waves which in the Ocean swell.
My Muse, in contemplation now of thee, Has struck the Poet in an Ecstasie. Love Triumphant. TWas at the time when Phoebus with his Rayes The Universe with equal Beams serveys; When Flocks and Heards to the cool Shades re∣pair, T' enjoy the Breezes of a cooler Air. I laid me down upon the Grass to rest, Whilst Loves fierce God inflam'd my tender Breast. Millions of thoughts I interweav'd with fears, And my blest Saints Idea wash'd in Tears. Ah, cruel Nymph, said I, what God unkind Hath with such Cruelty incens'd thy mind? Lay by Ioves Flames, Salmonean terrors fear, Least you his Thunder and his Lightning bear. For that great God that rules the arched Skie, Can ne're be pleas'd with acts of cruelty. But if you needs will take a Goddess form, Which can your native Beauty nought adorn, Take her whose milder form Mankind did move To honour and adore as Queen of Love. Thus shall you gain that honour that's your due, And we take you for her, or her for you. Thus whilst my mind passion toss'd too and fro, As Waves by Winds which on the Ocean blow, Behold my Clelia came, and forward prest, Whilst the light Wind her lower Parts undrest;
Rich in Attire, in Beauty richer far: Thus Venus us'd to court the God of War; And thus themselves who in the Woods retire, The Naides, and Draydes attire. I silent lay, as if with sleep opprest, Whilst her right Arm surrounds my willing Breast. I made return, and often Clelia cry'd, She who you seek is here, she then reply'd; With that I gave a start, to let her know How great a passion in my Breast did slow; She smil'd, as something pleas'd to see me start, And by my actions seem'd to know my Heart. Then, as if newly risen from a trance, Or death-like sleep, I did my Head advance, And mildly speak her thus, Goddess most fair, If you are come to comfort my despair, You have nob'ly done, taking that shape whereby You may at once deceive and please my Eye. But if you come for to deride my fear, And make me think my absent Clelia here, You have lost your aim, for to my grief I know My Clelia ne're did so much kindness show. However I'm content, be what you will, Nothing that bears that form can e're be ill. Much more I wou'd have said, but she, too kind To bear my passion with a steady mind, With loving words my sorrow did asswage, Commanding me no farther to engage My self in sadness, since before my Eyes No flying shade did stand to Tantalize;
But real Substance, which did passion move, And her who I so oft had vow'd to love. I gave attention unto what she said, And millions more of Protestations made To keep my faith inviolate, whilst she, Poor Soul, did both believe and pitty me. I often kissing wring'd her by the Hand, And by dumb signs gave her to understand My head-strong Passion wou'd no more obey, Since she her self had took the curb away. But she, too Innocent, ne're understood The swelling Tides of Passion in my Blood: Yet from her Eyes some pitty did distil, Like Pearls thrust out, though shrewd against their will; Unwilling for to leave that happy place, Where sorrow cou'd not chuse but have a grace. Thus temper'd Steel is sometimes clad in rust, And grains of Gold are mingled with the Dust. But I, who in the Wars of Love had been A Voluntier, thought now or ne're to win The honour of the day, and in some sort To gain the conquest of the Virgin Fort; Which I assaulted with so free a force, (Not with Battallions of Foot and Horse; But smooth and courtly Complements) as might Have mov'd the chaste Diana to delight, And made the cold Lucretia to desire To wanton in the Flames of Venus fire.
Then Clelia surrender'd, all her Treasure Was solely at the Conquerours will and Pleasure; Which was so great, that nothing can augment My Joy, or add unto my blest Content. Divinest Creature, to whose heavenly Brow Our yielding Hearts do with submission bow; Rare Master piece of Nature, here I lye Conquer'd by Beauty, and by Beauty dye. To you my Ghost shall in the Night appear, And though I die, I'll never leave you here. Yet you are cruel, and will not afford My dying Corps but one poor parting Word. O that your Beauty had less mortal been, Or that to love had not been held a sin! I boldly to the World wou'd have made known Thy Beauty claims Desert, and thine alone. But stay, methinks there's something in thy Eye That tells me that thy Lover must not die. And since that thou hast gave this blest Reprieve, I for thy sake will be content to live, And by some signal Service henceforth try For to requite your generosity. AS you are fair, can you be loving too, And make me happy in adoring you? Not all the Wealth that India can give, Without your love, can make me wish to live. As in the Ocean, on a Summers day, You may behold the Fish keep Holy day,
Are all o're-joy'd, and smile as 'twere, to see Fair weather gild the rough and angry Sea. Can so my Fortune more auspicious prove? You having smil'd upon my hopeless Love, Be as you are so kind, so truly fair, Loving of me, who now cast off despair; Too soon a flame will else my Heart control, And leave my drooping Corps without a Soul. Make me but sure that you will ever love Me, who no other joys cou'd ever move; Happy that day, thrice happy, wherein I In you beheld my chief felicity. Adoring you, I feel a scorching fire; You, you alone, can make that flame retire. Not that the Ardor can e're quite retreat, All you can do is to allay the Heat; The scorching Fervor never will give o're, Wealth cannot do't, nor a whole Nations store. That you are good, we know, Vertuous, and Wise: India's bright Sun took luster from your Eyes. Can else his Beams so dazle all Mens sight? Give me but leave, I'll say, He robb'd his Light. Without your Beauty, he eclips'd must lye; Your Presence comprehends a Deity. Love heads his Golden Arrows, and from you Can take such Charms as may the World subdue,
Make all things yeild, even the great Gods above: Me thinks I hear them cry, Great Queen of Love; Wish ing to fall by your more pleasing Fate, To you they come, and for their Sentence wait; Live, Queen of Love, with most Imperial State. On a Sigh. GO, mournful Sigh, haste to my Fair, And to her what thou know'st declare; Tell her, that thou wert so opprest Within the Prison of my breast, That having broak the Gaol, thou fled'st to her for rest. But if unkindly she deny, Then shall thy wretched Gaoler die; And by this means thou shalt be free From thy Confinement, she from thee, And I from all my grief and wretched misery. But yet, poor mournful Breath, beware Thou dost not draw from her a Tear. For if thou dost, I will confine Thee to this hollow Breast of mine, And give thee no more leave or time to wander there.
For who can tell, but she may be So loving as to pitty thee, And on thy sorrow notice take, And entertain thee for my sake, In Paradice of Joy and full felicity. Mount Ida. IN times of old, when Kings did not disdain The sweet Employment of the silly Swain; When to the Gods the rural Altar fumes With Sacred Incense and with sweet Perfumes, Were daily blest, and all things seem'd to be A Paradise for Mans felicity. Then no insulting Tyrant did molest, Hind'ring the quiet of his Subjects rest: But then Simplicity did crown the day, And Innocence did every Scepter sway. Within the Confines of vast Asia's Womb Once was a stately City, now a Tomb; Imperial Troy, whose stately Structures Pride Did Egypts lofty Pyramids deride. Rich in a King, their glory to augment, No Stranger, but by lineal descent; And blest with Children of such high Renown, Which did augment the honour of his Crown; But that this Sentence might have its Probatum, Nihil est ab omni parte beatum.
Whilst Paris, Priam's Son, with care did keep, In flowry Meads, his Fathers Flocks of Sheep, Lo, Three triumphant Goddesses, of Birth Celestial, guide their steps unto the Earth, VValking to view the Fields, whose Fragrant smell The richest Indian Odours did excel. Discordia griev'd (as 'twas her course) to see Three potent Goddesses so well agree, Throwing a Golden Ball before them, says, Let her take this, whose Beauty wins the Bays. All plead their Titles in the slowry Field, And each unto her Rival scorns to yeild. Till walking forward, they did soon espy The sprightly Son of Priam, who did lye Under a lofty Tree, whose spreading shade Sols Radiant Beames did all in vain invade. Between them then, to end this fatal grudge, They all consent to make brave Paris Judge: But when the youngster saw the glorious sight, His Heart was straight way ravisht, and the sight Inflam'd his generous Soul, he prostrate lyes, He worships and adores the Deities. Nor can he longer gaze, so great a light Cou'd not be bore by any mortal sight. VVhich when they see, and think upon the Prize, They add new force and vigor to his Eyes. To whom Queen Iuno mildly did begin, Both with applause, and promise for to win.
Juno's Speech. Thou who of Priams Court the glory art, More beautifi'd by Nature than by Art; Give me the Ball, let not thy Hand refrain, But give it me, and I'le give thee again Glory and Honour, and what e're can be Than this more happy, that I'le give to thee. I'le set a Crown of Gold upon thy Head, These words thereon shall be Intituled, THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. Riches and State, Honour and Fame shall ever propagate. The Worlds vast Confines shall a tribute yield To thee alone, the Caesar of the Field; The breath of Fame shall all thy state declare, And all the world shall term thee Fortunes Heir; And if there's ought thy mind can covet more, Command Queen Iuno, scorn for to implore. The youngster stands amaz'd, his Hearts on fire, A thirst of Honour does his Soul inspire; His eager heart had soon a Captive been, Had not brave Pallas soon prevented him, VVhose Princely presence does his mind control, And adds new force unto his vigorous Soul.
Pallas Speech. To whom the Goddess mildly thus, Brave Prince, Does Iuno's powerful promise so convince Thy easie fancy to dispose the Prize? Art thou become a Captive to her Eyes? Can VVealth and Honour make thee to contemn The certain gift of VVisdoms Diadem? VVisdom gains Riches; Honour's but a slave, A Lambent fire; our fancy more does crave. I scorn to court thee for the Ball, yet know, If thou on Pallas do the same bestow, Thy VVisdom through the spacious Earth shall ring And Forraign Nations shall their Presents bring Thy Foes shall yield unto thy conquering Hand Nor shalt thou fear any invading Band, Or Forraign Force, for thou alone shalt Reign From East to West, and o're the floating Main. And ending thus, Venus drew near, whose smiles The youngster of his Senses quite beguiles; She robs him of his Heart, and therewithal Obtains the long'd for prize, the Golden Ball. For when the Prince had with a pleasing Eye Beheld the glory of the Deity,
A sudden Joy through every Member steals, And by his blushes he his Love reveals. To whom the Queen of Souls, Goddess of Loves, More sweet and gentle than her Team of Doves, Makes her address with words so courtly mild, As might the watchful Dragon have beguild, Or charm'd the Brazen-footed Bulls, and made The Sons of Tellus cease for to invade Each others life; such was her charming Tongue, As without Magick might make Aeson young, And bring th' Hesperian Fruit into her lap, Force Argus hundred Eyes to take a nap. Here Majesty and Love did well agree, And both concur, great Queen, to favour thee. Such charms her looks did bear, such her aspect, When she to Parris did this Speech direct. Venus Speech. Brave Prince, to whom the Goddesses have been Both suppliants, endeavouring to win The Prize, which only does belong to me, The Fates themselves grant the Priority. They promise Conquest, Wisdom, and a Throne, All this is nought but what's before thy own. But yet suppose it so, cou'dst thou delight In cruel Wars, where blood doth blood excite? Is this the way to gain thee honour? No. Kingdoms thou mayst possess, and perish so.
Who gains by Blood and Death, shall, at the price, Have the reward of blood and avarice. Or rather, wouldst thou chuse on Beds of Down, In Cupids Fields to gain the sweet renown, Spending thy youthful days in merriment, Such as pale War did never yet invent, With Grecian Dames, whose Beauty may not be Exprest by Tongue, or Pens Indignity? If this can please, give me the Prize, I sue Both as my merit, and my Beauties due; And thou shalt gain a Lady, such another Titans Majestick Raies did ne're discover; Whose Beauties form there's none can Parallel, Her Skin for Whiteness does as far excel The driven Snow, as does the Suns bright Raies A glittering Star: shou'd I disclose her praise, How red unto the sight her Cheeks do seem, That you wou'd term her to be Beauties Queen; Indulgent Nature out of all her store, Has not enough to make one Beauty more. Now Paris burns with Love, his warm desire At length is turn'd into a Flame of Fire; He knows no medium now, Love sways each Part, And reigns as Monarch o're his very Heart; And, with a willing Hand, he gives the Ball To Venus, most deserving it of all. Iuno, and Pallas, with an ireful Eye, Ascend into the Turrets of the Skie,
There mindful of their wrongs, deliberate The Ruine of the mighty Trojan State. —Manet altâ mente repôstum Iudicium Paridis spretae{que} injuria formae. On Clelia's Picture. DO'st not thou see this Picture set, Round with the Rose and Violet, Crown'd with the Garlands of the Spring, And Looks that might entice a King? And can thy Eye find any place To gaze upon, but on this Face? Do'st not thou see that sparkling Eye Inflam'd with Love and Majesty; Those tempting Lips, than which to kiss, I cou'd not hope a greater bliss; Those lovely Cheeks, nay, every Part Not able to be prais'd by Art; And ask me whom it represents? My Life, my Soul, my blest Contents. 'Tis Clelia's Shaddow, which her Eye Reflected here as she past by. To which, as 'tis her due, I pay A thousand Offerings a Day. And now, methinks, I cease to blame The Ethnicks, who did Idols frame, If that among their Number they Had any one like Clelia.
MY Friend Iohn Clement t'other day, Was very Sick and like to dye, And, as 'twas thought, did only stay To bare Tom Flavel company. He made his Will, and all his Lands By Testament were mine to spend, And soon had come into my Hands, If death, like him, had been my Friend. But, curse upon it, unawares That Wicked Rogue Tom Flavel dy'd, At which my Friend Iohn Clement swears The Rascal did it out of Pride. With that he bid 'em sill his Grave, And (truly) swore he would not dye, Since the unlucky peevish Slave Had slighted thus his Company. So I, who half an hour ago Built lofty Castles in the Air, Did to my sorrow quickly know, I was an Heir, not worth a Hair. Heredem scripsit me Numa convaluit.
A Song. REstore my wounded Heart, Dear Love, And let thy conquering Eyes Thy hard'ned Heart with pitty move Towards a sacrifice, Who prostrate lyes, Your shade with reverence to Idolatrize. Let not those powerful Siren Charms Which do my Heart delay, Take me and Lull me in their Arms With an intent to slay, Or only to betray, That you by this the Prize may bear away. But if the cruel Fates decree That Love must end in Death, I'le scorn, my cruel Destiny, And will resign my Breath, Grasping the clammy Earth, Cursing my Fate, my Fortune, and my Birth. To Venus. VEnus, I oft have heard thy Name, Ador'd thy God-head, felt thy Flame;
And oft invok'd thy Power, to find Some mercy in a Female mind. And Cupid, I to thee did pay My faithful Orisons each day; And thou so well perform'dst thy Part, I reign'd o're many a Virgins Heart. But now I've other work to do, Faith thou must Court thy Mother too. Nay, many such a trick is done, A Mother cheated by her Son. And thou, my pritty courtly Lad, Of me shall find a loving Dad. No clam'rous Mars shall make thee fear, Nor Vulcans Horns become a jear, Nor yet his Net, which did proclaim To all the Gods thy Mothers shame; Tell her I'm active, young, and free, And that, I'm sure, thou know'st I be; A Lover too, thou oft did'st prove The mighty force I had in Love. Nor can my Parts, so well inclin'd, Fail for to please thy Mothers mind; Nor will this Match be a disgrace, Since I supply Anchises place, Or young Adonis, who did move Thy Beauteous Mother once to love; Nor can'st thou this my passion blame, That art the Author of my Flame. Consider then the wound you gave, Whose Power alone has strength to save;
And let thy never-erring Dart Reign Monarch of thy Mothers Heart; Least from my Arms her self she shroud, And I embrace Ixion's Cloud, And courting of the Substance, may With empty Shaddows only play, Which ne're can quench my ardent Flame, That's as Immortal as her Name. To Vesper. SWeet Vesper bring the Night, Why dost thou thus delay, To rob me of delight,? Too long has been thy stay, Make hast away, And check the lasie Dawning of the day. And Phoebus tell from me, That he his Raies lay by, Nor so discourteous be As once to mount the Skie, Or once came nigh With one small Beam, to wake my Love and I.
Shou'd he scorn my desire, I'd send his Bastard Son To set the Heavens on fire, And he agen shou'd run Without the Sun, And grieve for what his folly shall have done. How soon the Sun makes hast Unto his Thetis Bed, Longing to be embrac'd, And coole his radiant Head, Which now looks red: Such longing hopes hath Lovers ever fed. How soon my Prayer is heard, Cynthia's bright Horns appear: No, 'tis my Love prepar'd Her Lover for to cheer; In all her Sphere Her borrow'd Luster never shines so clear. E Libro quarto Horatii Carmin. Ode 7. THe Snow's dissolv'd, the grassie Fields grow green, And bald-pate Trees with dangling Locks are seen.
Earths course is chang'd, and Rivers by the Sun Exhal'd, with pregnant Floods their Banks o're-run. The Graces and the Nymphs their Steps advance, And, being disrob'd, do lead a Country Dance. Times Mutability doth make appear, That nought is permanent beneath the Sphere. Mild Zeph'rus chides the Cold, the Heat doth blast The slowry Spring, and then posts on as fast. Next fruitful Autumn comes upon the Stage; Then lazy Winter, like decrepid Age. And yet the Moon, which shady Night adorns, With waxing Light repairs his waining Horns. But when we to the lower Shades repair, Where Aeneas, Tullus, and Ancus are, We instantly to Dust and Ashes turn, No more return, but rest, us in our Urn. Who knows whether the Gods above will cast One day, to add to what's already past? Nor shall thy greedy Heir for ever find What thou bestowest with a lib'ral mind. When thou art dead, and Minos shall of thee Give Judgment, according to equity, Torquatus, not thy Stock nor Eloquence, Nor yet thy Piety, shall fetch thee thence: For, neither from the streams of Cocytus Cou'd Dian bring her Chast Hyppolitus, Nor yet the friendly Theseus e're retake Perithous from the Lethean Lake.
A Song. FAir Clelia, didst thou know How great a sorrow in my Breast does flow, Thou couldst not be Cruel to me, Nor think it any gain To mock my Sorrow, and deride my Pain. Far be it yet from me To hope for Life that is disdain'd by thee; For if I thought There might be ought In me, that thou dost hate, I'd Court my Ruin, and I'd hug my Fate. But if thou dost desire T' augment my grief, and so increase my Fire, Let me but know Thy pleasure's so; For I am so much thine, As ne're to speak, exclaim, or once repine.
An Abcdary. A sure Foundation makes a Building stand, But he's a Fool that builds upon the Sand. Consider Vertue in her glorious form, Doth Youth in all her Ornaments adorn. Extol her Beauty, Court her Princely Eye, For with her Wings she'll raise thee to the Sky. Get but a place within her Breast, and know How mean thy thoughts were when thou wert below. If thou dost once observe the Path she treads, Keep close, tho' over Rocks and Hills she leads: Let not the error of the way deceive, Mark well her course, and thou'lt some tract per∣ceive. Nothing so hard but Industry will gain, Obtain her once, thou'lt find her worth thy rain. Perchance thou'lt say, Vice leads a smoother way. Question not so, lest thou thy self betray. Rewards are virtues due, but pains confound, Such vagrant Fools, with a ne're dying wound. Turn then, and take that path that's so severe, Unto Eternal Joy that Course will steer; When those who court a smoother path, may go X times more quick, yet to their overthrow. Youth, Beauty, Strength, do often ill advise, Zeal only with a Crown adorns the Wise.
A Deserted Lover. AH, lovely Fair! can you so cruel be, To scorn my Vows, yet never pity me? Can you prove false, who once I did adore? Pity a Youth that never lov'd before. How wav'ring like the Wind? What subtle dart Had you at first to penetrate my Heart, Obdure as Steel, which ne're no torture found, Or ever knew for to receive a Wound; Till in your Eyes, the little twinkling Boy Taught me at first how to begin to toy? He taught me Love, whose active Fire first grew, And more increast, the more I look'd on you: Yet you more Cruel than the Tygers Rage, Relying on your Beauty, Wealth and Age, Disdain what you before did seem to prize, And blast my Lawrel with your lightning Eyes. Thus to the World your Cruelty is known, And after Ages shall repeat my moan. Persidious Maid, your hatred makes me bow, And Curse the rashness of my idle Vow. And since it is alone for you I dye, 'Twill change your Honour into Infamy.
A Song. VEnus of Souls, Whose Hand controls The greatest Monarchs breast; Under whose Shade All Beauty's laid, Where every one would rest: Were I to chuse, I'd not refuse, But in thy very Heart My mind should rest, And in thy breast I'd Reign by Love, not Art; VVhere I would be For ever free, Till I could satisfie My curious mind, That's so confin'd, And in that Instant dye.
To one that disswaded him from the Love of Clelia. GO, dull Mechanick! whose Invective Pride Dares the Epitome of love deride; Go to black Acheron, there tell thy deeds To the dull VVinds, which on the Vallies feeds; And let thy poys'nous Breath extol the Fame Of some old VVitch, or Hagg, or canting Dame. Croak Carrols to the Toad or hissing Snake, And breathe thy Venom o're the Stygean Lake. And for to please thy fancy, may'st thou be Inchanted with thy VVises deformity. O Divine Clelia! can the Gods connive At Blasphemy, and let the Slave survive? If you thus deal with such unequal odds, I'll scorn to worship such Plebeian Gods. There's not an Air, a Whisper, or a Breath Proceeds from her, but triumphs over Death. The blushing Sky grows pale, if she but frowns, And the shrill Orbs leave their harmonious sounds. Prometheus from her Beauty stole that Fire, With which he did his new form'd Man inspire. Her Breath the Zeph'rus is that chears the Earth, Those sweet Perfumes that give the Phoenix birth.
Her Eyes, Mouth, Nose, and Cheeks, Waste, Thighs and Feet, Are quite beyond Comparison compleat. Go then, grim Cur, repent what thou hast done, And leave to bark at such a glorious Sun. My Clelia is so fair, and free from harms, Such Innocence in her all-conquering Charms, That shou'd the admiring World but chance to pry Into those hidden Glories of her Eye, They'd ne're adore another Deity. To Clelia. Shall still my suit prove void, then bid me die, I onely hope in vain, tell me, shall I Enjoy that very word torments my Soul; Your Eyes do promise what you will Control. Beauty 's too great to be a Tyrant there, I harbour nothing now but sad despair, Adore ing you, my hopes are nought but Air. Epigr. 72. lib. 6. Martial. CIlex, a Thief, much noted for his Crime, Did on a time, into a Garden Climb: But in that spacious Garden looking round, Nought but the God Priapus could be found;
Unwilling then empty to go, or stay, He took Priapus up, and went away. Rare Guardian Gods! Rome cou'd not chuse but fall, When such base Gods did keep her Capitol. Romans their Gods, not Gods did Rome defend, Their Empire else had sooner had an end: For who relies on such Egyptian Bands, Shall find, like Reeds, they'l run into their Hands. A Song. SO strange a Distemper I ne're yet did know, 'Tis too strong to be call'd an Impotent Foe; 'Tis too weak to surprise and conquer my Breast, Yet with sundry Alarms it oft does infest; It roars and it rages, and makes such a do, That though 'tis a Slave, 'twou'd be Conquerour too. With a Courage more stout than Achilles slew Hector, I swore, that no Passion shou'd be my Director; Disdaining those Bonds that the Predicants wear, My Soul is a Monarch as free as the Air. When such puling Passions my Fancy discovers, Like Physitians, I gain by the Sickness of others.
If Nature would shew me a Creature Divine, I'd smile in her Face, and I'd swear she was mine: I'd urge her with Pleasures, my glory shou'd move Ten Millions of Cupids to inforce her to love. I'd spare not one Kiss for the wealth of a Mine; 'Tis death for a Lord, if he touch but her Shrine. Such Affection I bear to the Creature I love: But if she were Heiress to thundering Iove, And full of disdain, I defie all her Charms, As Heat repels Heat, and Arms repels Arms. And rather then bear their scorn and their flight, I'le worship the Owl, the Queen of the Night. Eurialus, Hersilia, Dares. Eur. BEautious Hersilia, those that rule above, In you have plac'd so much Divinity, That I am compell'd to tell you that I love, And in those scorching Flames, alas! I fry. O do not frown, nor yet divert your Eyes, But let one loving glance prolong my end. What Glory is it for you to defie Your Slave, that you are bound for to defend?
Hers. If Heaven in me had plac'd ought wor∣thy love, I shou'd have lik'd this Honour done by you; But since 'tis only Fancy that does move, 'Twere base in me, to take what's not my due. Or if I wou'd, I cannot ease you now; Your fond desires you never can attain: Think you a Votress will reject her Vow? One of the Quiver-bearing Goddess Train? Besides you may as well go Court a Saint To leave her Heaven, and visit Earth agen, As ever hope to move me by your 'plaint, To taste the sorrows that attend on Men. Dar. Here comes the mighty Daros, Madam, chuse The solid Oak, or else this slender Reed, Which if I touch, I instantly shou'd bruise; Yet such an Act would make my Honour bleed. I love, and will enjoy; nay, be not Coy; Were mighty Turnus, or Aeneas here, I'd not defer one moment to enjoy. A noble courage scorns to stoop to fear. Thou art mine by Heaven, and were the Gods unkind, As not to aid me, if I should desire; I'd search their Palaces, and there I'd find A subtler Flame than was Prometheus Fire.
With this I'd gain thy Love, or else compel Thy stubborn Fancy to obey my will; Nay, more, I'd ransack the abiss of Hell; The Stygian Prince shou'd my Commands full∣fil. Hers. Though you're so proud to menace, know that I Do neither fear, nor yet respect your force; My Virgin honour's able to desie The furious Current of your mighty Course. If Heaven and Earth were all at thy Command, And I alone thy Bondage did deny, My Chastity is able to withstand The Rage of thy audacious Tyranny. Besides, the Gods, (who thy malicious Tongue Has glory'd in upbraiding thus) Would with a Thunder-bolt prevent the wrong, And send thee headlong into Erebus. Chorus. So have I seen a lofty Cedar stand Amidst a Cops of Shrubs and ragged Trees: Her lofty Top did wave, when gently fann'd And Courted by Favonius milder breeze. But when in Storms the angry North did frown, Threat'ning the ruin of her losty Pride, She scorn'd to veil unto the angry Clown, Her sollid strength did all her force deride.
An Acrostick on Madam Ann Tirrell. Admir'd Beauty, whose victorious Eyes Ne're wants a Heavenly Vertue to surprise. Nature in you alone may boast what-e're To Grecian Hellen was accounted fair. I you, as Persians do adore the Sun, Revived Phoenix, that art still but one. Roses and Lillies are too mean a Grace, Etherial Beauty Crowns your Heavenly Face; Lasting as Fame, still may your Honour be, Like verdant Lawrel, still from Envy free. Admit my Fancy be too high, or low, Regent of Hearts, know you have made it so. On Clelia's severe Command. TO thee, O Wood, I make my moan, And sing the Accents of my groan, Which else I durst intrust to none. For since that she who I adore Has gave Command, that I no more Shou'd blaze her Fame, as heretofore,
Silence it self shall louder be Than any voice which comes from me, Where any Auditor shall be. Yet every whist'ling Wind shall bear My sad Complaint unto her Ear, That her Commands were too severe. And on each Tree I'll carve her Fame, Which still shall flourish by the same. Th' Immortal Grove shall be its Name. In which each chirping Bird shall raise Encomiums on my Clelia's praise, Whilst I in sorrow spend my Days. I'l search the Aetnean Caverns, where The fiery Sallamanders are, To me those Flames cannot compare. Though Mulciber does there display His slaming Ensignes Night and Day; In time those Flames may yet decay. But mine's Eternal, and will stay, The substance ne're consumes away, The more it burns, the more it may. They are no Lovers that can tell What caus'd, how strong they love, how well; Love does ad Infinitum dwell.
I live on air of endless love, And as a shadow only move, By that which does the substance prove. I'le search where the Chamelions are, And unto them I will declare, That Love's as bad a Food as Air. Nay, worse, for though their Food's but Breath, Air is their Life, Love is my Death, Hunger more Comfort wou'd bequeath. But now I nearer come, I see There can but little difference be, I am a Shadow, so is he. I'le dig the Earth, that I may know What Nature has deny'd to show, To Moles that in her Bowels grow. And there I'le whisper Clelia's Name, That Mines and Stones may hear the same, And tell from whence their knowledge came. But now I nearer come, I find That Moles and I are nigh of Kind; For they as well as Love are blind. For what they dig they do not know, And labouring pain do undergo; I love, my case is even so.
Their pain is pleasure, so is mine; But here we differ, mine's Divine; Their aim is Earth, mine too sublime. I'le dive into the Watery-deep, And see the Bodies that do sleep, For whom the Waves themselves do weep. And there together with the throng Of num'rous Fish I'll swim along, Who are like me depriv'd of Tongue. Yet cou'd I like Arion play, I'd make those Mutes stand at a bay, Whilst I my Clelia's praise display. That so, when ever I shou'd dye, Each Element might then supply The praises of her memory. A Song. THE Fetters of Love are far stronger than hate, Fast binding the Captive, by that they call Fate, Inslaving the Senses, and dulling the Brain, For a thing of no moment, scarce worth a name, A delight that does cloy, as soon as enjoy'd, And a Fancy obtain'd we after avoid. The pleasures are past soon as ever they come, And gallop away as the Deel upon Dun.
A Complaint against Cupid, for causing a distastful Love. FArewell, my scornfull Female Saint, In vain you boast your conq'ring Eyes, Whilst your deportment does depaint A Tygress o're a Sacrifice. Desist, for by the Powers above, And by the Oath they use to swear, My anger's greater than my Love, And your disdain I scorn to bear. For your base pride you hold so high, Will at the last your self anoy, Like to the Cockatrices Eye, Whose self-reflection doth destroy. Know then, that I am no such Fool, To doat on your Complexion; My Passion is become too cool For such a weak Infection. Those am'rous glances which I paid To those disdainful looks of thine, Are now asham'd that e're they made An Idol to adorn thy Shrine.
Cupid, henceforth I vow despite Against thy Quiver and thy Bow, Did I plead Nonage in thy sight, Fond Boy, that thou shouldst use me so? I was not born of Stygian race, Against the Gods I ne're made War, Nor did thy Temples e're deface, Or blemish'd Venus with a Scar. It was not I that took the pains Her secret Love for to discover, And bound her in Cyclopean Chains, Caressing her Licentious Lover. How came it then that thou should'st make So strange a love my Heart to seize, And give new vigor to the Snake Which was before content to freeze? Didst thou at random shoot a Dart, Directed by no certain slight, To see if thou couldst hit a Heart Which did thy Childish Godhead slight? Or art thou like some Idle Lad, Whom no delight can e're content, But in a humour raging mad, Throws stones into the Element?
If so, a Rod is fitter far For to correct thy Childish will, And thousand petty Gods there are Can draw thy Bow, yet never kill. But I Blaspheme, great God of Hearts, Thou did'st this thing, that thou mightst try With what a strength thy powerful Darts Force Love against Antipathy. On his viewing a Fragment of the Old James. THis piece of Wood, which now doth lye Neglected by each passer by, Not for so base a use design'd, Did once despise the Waves and Wind. This was a Member of that Frame That once did bear great Iames's his Name; Within whose bulk there did embark More Souls than Creatures in the Ark; And unto cruel Death did drive Far more than Noah sav'd alive. His wide-mouth'd Cannon oft did make The Watery Region to quake; And frighted Neptune from his Seat, Whilst his shrill Tryton blew Retreat. The quondam rageing Waves did sly, And left the Neighbouring Ocean dry.
His Warlike sides with fire and smoke Did oft the drunken Dutch provoke; And made the modish French to find The difference 'twixt Smoak and Wind. Yet now, in midst of all his State, His Glory he resigns to Fate; Like Hercules, (though Iove his Sire) Yields to consuming Flames of Fire. This makes the English Proverb sound, Who's born to hang, shall ne're be drown'd. For whom the Waves cou'd never tire, Lies here at last, consum'd by Fire. An Anagram on His Highness Jame's Duke of York and Albany. JAMES STUART. Anagram. A JUST MASTER. Epigram. I'LL boldly on, not fearing a disaster, If Life or Death can serve so Iust a Master:
Susana Witherell. Anagram. U are all Whitness. Epigram. SUch great Perfection reigns through all your Soul, You are all Whiteness, not one part is soul. Another. You are all Whiteness, rare perfection; hence Your very Name creates a Quintessence. An Acrostick. So Sweet, so Good, so Vertuous, and so Fair! United Forces still most pow'rful are. Such conqu'ring Charms do in your Eyes appear, As gives new Luster to the Hemesphere; Nature in you perform'd her utmost skill, Allowing priviledge to save or kill; Who can resist the Dictates of your will?
Interiour motions from your Beauty rise, Teaching me love, which you alone despise; How can you be so cruel for to slay Each minute, that which doth your will obey? Reprieve's in vain, when Death hath seal'd the Fate, Ever be cruel, pity'll come to late. Like Niobe I'le mourn, and my last breath, Like Swans, shall sing the Omen of my Death. A Song to Lucifer. WHy dost thou thus delay, O Lucifer, to usher in the day? Sluggard, I know thy fear; Thou know'st my Clelia will then appear, Whose blest and heavenly sight VVill doom thy Light unto Eternal Night. Nor shall we need the Sun, Bid him unto the lower VVorld return, And with his Beams of light Expel from the Abyss the Queen of Night; For from my Clelias Eyes Proceed such Rayes as doth all Light surprize.
Nor shall we need the Powers Of Moon, or Stars, or Hail, or Snow, or Showers; For whilst on Earth she stays, With her more glorious and refulgent Rayes, Proceeding from her Eyes, Gives Birth to all, and Natures course supplies. But when she please to sly From Earth to Heaven, and be enthron'd on high, And there look down on Men, The Golden Age shall Visit Earth agen; And all the World shall be Blest with its Primitive Fecundity. To the King's most Excellent Majesty. OF mighty Iove I lately ask't a Boon, Which, like a God, he granted me as soon As I cou'd ask; and gave me this Command, Go, and receive it at thy Princes Hand, Great Charles, to whom the World shall Homage pay, The Dutch, the French, the Spaniards all obey; Whose mighty Fleets shall from the Indies bring Spice, Pearls, and Gold, as Presents to the King. Thou need'st not doubt, thy wants he'll soon supply, From his so unexhausted Treasury.
No more he said, the God I straight ador'd, With Hecatombs of Thanks his Altar stor'd; And big with expectation to receive The promis'd Gift, I thought my King wou'd give. Some Days, some Weeks, some Months I spent in vain, Each moment full of hopes of promis'd gain; And still my want increas'd. I therefore then Swore ne're to trust a Heathen God agen, But to my Soveraign my wants declare, Whose Clemency shall suit unto my Prayer. Thus shall th' admiring World perceive the odds Between our Christian Kings, and Heathen Gods. A Song. FRom Salamis when Teucer fled, And left his Country, then With Poplar Boughs he Crown'd his Head, And all his Warlike Men; And with a Bowl of fragrant Wine With Bachus did caress, Drowning their Souls in Muscadine, Joy'd with such happiness.
So let us like Immortal Souls Our life in pleasure spend, Quassing our time in lusty Bowls, Which never shall have end. Thus shall we make the Powers above To envy our delight, And Cupid, Prince and God of Love, To Revel all the Night. Thus shall we make the Gods despise The sweet and pleasant taste Of Nectar, which they once did prize, Drank by Immortal Race. Thus each of us shall be a Star, And with the Gods combine In their Divinity to share, As they shall in our Wine. Frange oros, Pete vina, rosas cape, tingere nardo. Dido's Expostulation. THey say, that Souls departed, first must run To Styx, and so unto Elizium. They tell me wonders, and they likewise show Th' Immortal Pleasures of the Shades below.
I dare not trust loud Fame, but, if I might, My wandring Soul should pass to Styx this Night. Fond Heart, ne're fear, undoubtedly 'tis so, Be resolute, for thou mayst safely go. Well, I'm resolv'd, and if that Fame doth lie, Let Fortune do her worst, I can but dye. And now this Sword shall pass into my veins And ease my Heart of all my cruel pains; My vital Spirits saint, I come, I come, To my sweet rest, even to Elizium. Dido and Charon. Did. A Boat, a Boat. Ch. Who calls? Did. Charon, 'tis I, A Soul drove by Immense extremity To leave the furious Earth, and now am come To thee, to row me to Elizium. Ch. What is thy Name? Did. Dido, who just now sway'd Thy Scepter, Carthage, who great Kings obey'd. Ch. What brought thee hither? freely now re∣late The real cause of this thy sudden Fate. Did. Make no delay, sweet Charon, pitty me, Involv'd by Fate in this Calamity. Ch. Thou canst not pass, 'tis vain for thee to strive, The Gods command, and I cannot connive. Did. O Cruelty! then must I tell the cause? I have transgress'd the great Commands and Laws
Of the just Gods, thus to anticipate The desperate force of my too rigid Fate. Ch. What was the motive? Did. Love. Ch. The Gods forbid. Wou'd such a thing from Mortal Race were hid? O 'twas not Love, but Glory and Revenge, And had not Fate commanded such to range A hundred years on this side Styx, my Boat Ere now had been as tatter'd as my Coat. Did. Charon. Ch. I cannot stay, but must be gone, And leave thee here most sadly to bemoan Thy desp'rate folly, with those Shades that fly Like num'rous Troops of Atoms in the Skie. Did. But where is then Sicheus? Ch. Pish, he's free From all those troubles that attend on thee; He's in Elizium. Did. What can he rest, When I with sorrow am so much opprest? Let not the burden of my grief exceed. Ch. This is enough to make the Rocks to bleed, And Gods relent. Did. My very Soul doth swell, My Heart doth burn worse than the Flames of Hell; My Princely Power is gone, where's Honours now, Those regal Titles that did crown my Brow? Ch. Honour! there's no such thing, the meanest Slave Is equal to a Queen when in the Grave. Here's no distinction, Kings and Princes all Must bear that equal Sentence that shall fall
Upon them, for their bad or good intent, Firmly enacted by Heavens Parliament. Sub tua purpurei venient vestigia Reges Deposito luxu: turba{que} cum paupere mixti Omnia mors equat, &c. AN envious, angry, sluggish, drunken Lover, His Passion, and his Vice at once discover; A vicious Passion quickly will discover An envious, angry, sluggish, drunken Lover; A sluggish drunken Lover in a trice Discovers both his Passion and his Vice; His anger and his envy quickly be Disclos'd by Wine, In Wine is Verity. Desire of sloath, and lust of Wine may prove An Antidote against the power of Love; Anger and Envy, in one Breast confin'd, Love ne're will stumble at, though Love is blind. Who e're to Wrath or Envy will give place, May he ne're meet with any chast Embrace. Those that to Sloath and Wine addicted be, May live with Epicurus, not with me. The Confidence of a Iust Man. NO Salvage Tyranny, no desp'rate War, No cruel Fortune, nor unlucky Jar,
No trembling Earthquake, nor the Potent Hand Of thund'ring Iupiter, whose high command Doth claim obedience, no, not if the frame Of Nature were involved in the same, And the whole Fabrick by disorder brought, Shou'd be converted suddenly to nought; Like hopeless Wretches, it cou'd never fright My Heart, and make me tremble at the sight; Nor cou'd it shake the Castle of my Soul, That's fortifi'd beyond such weak control. My Valiant Heart ne're sears the scorching Sun, Nor the strange Operations of the Moon; No Comet hath the power to make me fear, Not though his Beard portend a Famine neer, Or Pestilence, or Sword, or what is worse, All Heavenly Influence turn'd into a Curse. For what are these, but secondary things, And in the Hands of the great King of Kings, VVho can dispose of us, and all of these, Not as we wou'd, but as himself does please? Si fractus illabatur orbis Impavidum ferient ruinae.
On the Death of Mr. William Goffe, late Gallant to the La∣dy Willoughby Yeomans, kill'd by Richard Love. HOw, Goffe forsook her! 'tis as true as may be, He has took distast, and so has left my Lady. This should not be, for Ladys have such Art, VVhen they have got possession of a Heart, They know their forces, and with cunning sway, No Heart can mutiny or disobey. Some say he's dead. This then will end the strife, Death robb'd my Lady, as she robb'd his VVife. By what rude Hand was it that he did fall? By Love. O mighty Love, thou conquer'st all! Hast thou again mistook? has Death and thee Been conversant and chang'd Artillery? Reclaim thy Errour, see what thou hast done, Give Death his Arrows, and take thou thy own. Ah Madam, now where were those powerful Charms That should have kept your Lover in your Arms? Come tell me, Venus, is not Love your Son, The same with Cupid? Then what has he done? O he has slain thy Mars, and Arms put on VVould fright Achilles and his Myrmodons;
But yet methinks your Lover should not dye, Death sure cannot resist a Ladies Eye. Go touch his liveless Corps, and when that's done, The Tyrant needs must give you what's your own But that Dame Mr. Gosss Wife. Baucis will put in a Plea, E'ne take him Death, for he belongs to me: Unless to share him, you have got the Art, Half for my Lady, Death take Baucis part; As the Twin Stars by turn shine in the Skie, One day he shall survive, the next day dye. But we have found a better way then this, Madam, my Lady, or what else you please, Shall put on all her Ornaments and Geer, Step down to Hell, and find her Lover there; There intercede with Proserpine the Queen, And if she can but him from thence redeem, She shall in partnership no longer be, But by this means gain the Monopoly. Now Orpheus for a Women once did so, She for a Man, will make it quid for quo. But here perchance you'l say, 'tis basely done, Thus to insult upon a Ladies wrong. Which I'le deny, for many in your sight, Do think far worse than I intend to Write; And though they do not speak, their thoughts are free: A secret's worse than open Enemy: But I am neither. Deaths severer Brow, Presents his Image, that I write of now,
And to my thoughts most sadly does discover The grief that you conceive for such a Lover. But this does most of all my passion move, That he who liv'd by Love, shou'd dye by Love. But I have done, lest this shou'd give offence, My Ne plus ultra makes a recompence. A Lovers Complaint. AH fainting Breath, there's nought can yield relief Unto a wounded Soul, whose murm'ring grief Loves no delay, but like the rising Sun, Still perseveres until his course is done. What shall I speak? or what can I devise? I'le rather dye, than once Apostatize. Nor shall my panting Breath your shade defame, I'll honour you, and Idolize your Name; And though at last you scorn me till I dye, I needs must love you to Eternity. Love in Ambiguity. WHy shou'd I urge my Love, since that I know Her Merit's great, and my Desert's as low? My thought's as high as his who did aspire To climb the Charriot of Etherial Fire;
And rashly perish'd, such has my fault been, His was the King of Light, and mine the Queen. I fondly thought, Prometheus-like, to steal The heavenly Flame her Beauty does conceal; And for my Error feel the raging smart, Which Vulture-like does seed upon my Heart. Pardon my rashness, mighty Queen of Hearts, And thou great God of Love, whose peircing darts No Medium knows, but either help or kill, Must I the Number of thy victims sill? O play not with my Heart, as Children do With some poor Bird, which while they love, they shew. One over-weening grasp of life bereaves, And in a moment all the joy deceives. But why do I thus deprecate in vain, Hoping for what I never can obtain? Alas! unworthy Wrecth, too great a sire Has on a sudden kindled thy desire Beyond thy Fortune; as some Country Wight, Who never knew the Wars, or how to fight, Talks Big or Stoutly, and resolves to try His ne're prov'd Courage on the Enemy; But when he sees the adverse Host draw nigh, And now or never all his Manhood try, He throws his Arms away, resolves to yield, And like a Vassal quits the ne're sought Field; Just so did I, my actions, thoughts, and all, Let all objections in a moment fall;
Untill your Heavenly Beauty I did see, Alas! too strong an Enemy for me. At the first sight I yielded Heart and Will, Lady, to be at you Devotionr still. Among the many Trophies then that wait Upon your Beauty, let it be my Fate, Or rather Fortune, since it cannot be Counted a Bondage, where the Body's free, But why the Body? Body, Heart, and Mind, Unto your Beauty are alike confin'd, Are either fix'd, or move by your direction; Yet proud, in being Vassals to Perfection. Eccho to the Painter, out of Ausonius. ALas! fond Painter, why dost strive to grace An unknown Goddess with a fancy'd Face? I am the Daughter of the Tongue, and Wind, An empty Mother, Voice without a Mind. I dying sounds fetch back with living tone, And others mock with Words that are my own. I in thy Ears my Habitation found, And if thou mean'st to paint me, paint a Sound.
A Dialogue between an Aethiopi∣an, and a White Virgin. Vir. AFfright me not, you urge your suit in vain; More Fear than Love your Hellish looks have bred. Eternal terror seize you for your pain; Think you I'll take a Devil to my Bed? Go Court the Darkness, Wed thy self to Night; Fry in your Sands, and search for grains of Gold; O Sun, how canst thou thus behold a sight That will thy glorious beams in darkness fold! Sure thou art Pluto, ugly infernal Prince, Be gone, I say, be gone to the Divine And Beautious Creature thou didst ravish hence, The lovely, Fair, and Charming Proserpine. Eth. Whitest of Whites, more lovely than the day, Which from the East in radiant beams appears, More lovely to my sight than Cynthia, Which twice six times a year her Beauty clears,
Despise me not because that I am black; The Sun you speak of lyes so neer our Land, We have him in our Face, you on your Back; Nay, sometimes with him we walk Hand in Hand. Since then that he who the whole World surveys, Doth deal his Blessings with partiality, You he does warm, us scorcheth with his Rays; Your Beauty works the like effect on me. Vir. My Beauty, Slave! stop that presumptious word; Shall such a Harpy ever speak my Name? Does Earth another Cacus yet afford? What was I born to be a sport to Fame? Thou art that brand the fatal Sisters threw Into the Fire at Meleager's Birth, Which half consum'd, in hast Althaea drew Out of the Flame; be gone, thou Son of Earth▪ Eth. Alas! too cruel Nymph, despise me not; A Slave I am, but unto none but you. Whiteness in you none counteth as a spot; And in our Black lies our chief glory too.
The Day is pleasant unto every sight, And all men praise the glory of the Sun; Yet when 'tis gone, how soon they hug the Night, And sleeping, in its sable Bosom run. 'Tis only Fancy moves the Sphere of Love; No Colour wards, where Cupid shoots his dart; Thou God, who all things with thy power dost move, With one small touch O wound this Virgins Heart; That she who doth thy Power so much despise, May quickly by experience learn to know, Thou only giv'st those leave to Tyrannize That pay submission to thy Conquering Bow. Observe the Rain-bow, view the Colours there, Looks it not pleasant unto every Eye? Diversity of Colours makes it fair: Discord in Musick makes an Harmony. Since then that I am Black, and you are Fair, What a sweet Babe may come from such a pair? An Epitaph. UPon this Marble Stone forbear to tread, Or to deface the Relicks of the Dead;
Yet Read, and so let fall a Tear in Verse, To pay Devotions to his mourning Herse. Here's Vertue laid, and Piety lies slain, Who the three Graces shall revive again: Those Powers Immortal, who in Heaven do shine That Trinity, although One God Divine, Shall raise his Body glorious from the Dust, Who in his Maker did repose that trust. The Lovers Iubile. 'TWas Evening when the Suns departure made The open grounds a comfortable shade; When walking forth to view the fragrant Fields, The sweet variety that Flora yields, Near to a Myrtle Grove a Cave I spy'd, By which a pleasant Stream did gently glide: Amidst the Grove an ancient Altar stands, Almost defac'd by irreligious hands. This I repair'd, and said, O Goddess, now, Who e're thou art, receive my sacred Vow, And grant my Suit, and let some pity move In Clelia's Heart a more propitious Love. Off'rings by me shall ever be repaid Upon this Altar, though by time decay'd, And Mans ingratitude. Then looking round, I spy'd an Iv'ry Image on the ground.
Hail Power, said I, what impious hand hath done So vile an Act? who wou'd such honour shun? I washt it in the Stream, and to it said, Ah beautious Image, fair Pigmaleon Maid: Then gazing on it, where a Fillet ty'd The Ivory Hair, this Motto I espy'd; In Honour of the mighty Cyprean Goddess. O thou Illustrious Queen of Love, said I, What Hand cou'd do this great Impiety? What Impious Creature was it durst prophane Thy sacred Shrine? O Sin without a Name! Against a Myrtle by the Altar stood The Goddess Seat, Arch'd round with Carved Wood, There I the Image set, and having laid My Hand upon the Altar, thus I pray'd. Great Paphian Goddess, Cytherean Shrine, Whose presence, I acknowledge, is Divine. If to this Grove or Altar I have done Ought Meritor'ous, or have favour won, Let Love to all more mild and gentle be, And cease to punish Mans Impiety. A thousand Lovers shall this Grove frequent, And offer Odours of the purest scent. The Shepherds that possess the Vales shall bring Their Sheep-hooks crown'd to thee an Offering. The Altar shook, the Myrtles seem'd to move, Resounding murmuring Notes of happy Love. Celestial Musick did salute my Ears, VVhen lo, the God of Love to me appears,
And says, Young Man, this Bow my hand doth hold, Lets sly no Arrow, but the Head is Gold. Thy Prayer is heard, the Goddess is appeas'd, And every Lover of his pain is eas'd. No Jealousie or Fears shall now torment A Lovers Joy, or ravish his Content. The fairest Nymphs, whose Beauty wins the Bays, Shall sing Encomiums of her Lovers praise. The fairest Shepherdess (for Love hath Charms) Shall fold a naked Shepherd in her Arms; Fair Daphne playing on a rural Quill, Both Hills and Dales with Corydon shall fill, And Corydon shall VVoods and Springs possess VVith praises of his Loving Shepherdess. Loves mutual Sympathy shall Crown the Year, And thou whose Heart doth Loves Idea bear, Shalt in thy Clelia find a quick return, VVho, in thy absence, flames of Love do burn: And e're the Sun the Horizon decline, Her beautious Body shall be joyn'd to thine. This said, he lightly from the Altar Springs, And Fans the sounding Grove with tow'ring wings. Then on a sudden, through my swelling Veins Loves passion glides, and all my Bones inflames; And having gain'd the Conquest of my Breast, Reigns Monarch there, and scorns to be supprest, The Goddess then adoring, I a way Espy'd, which 'twixt the Shrine and Altar lay:
This path I follow'd, Fortune was my guide, And led me all along the River side, VVhere Multitude of Lovers did resort, Filling the Fields with all delightful sport. Some in the stream their tender Limbs unite, Like Salamacis and Hermaphrodite; Others upon the ground so closely lye, You'd take them for the Zodiack Geminy. One's plaiting Garlands, 'tother's twisting Boughs, Commixt with Flowers, to bind her Lovers brows. One's braiding of the Hair, another tries VVith pleasant Songs to close her Lovers Eyes. This seeming coy, a thousand pretty ways Her eager Lover to her Arms betrays. That skill'd in nothing, but pure Innocence, Thinks to delay her Lover's an offence. O happy place! said I, and down I lay Upon a rising ground that did survey The posture of each Lover, when from far A Lady came, just as a rising Star. The lighter Vestments that her parts infold, VVere Azure Silk, and interweav'd with Gold; Her Hair was braided, drest with Ribbons; so Iris appears, drest in her mantling Bow. A Silver Veil her beauteous Face did shade, So fine, you'd say 'twas by Arachne made. The emulous Winds her swelling Garments kiss, VVhich to my view betray'd a Lovers Bliss. I gaz'd, not able to revert my Eyes From Loves great Charms, and sacred Novelties:
Thy Fate, Acte on, then I did bemone, And fear'd it instantly might be my own; But as she nearer came unto my view, My doubts were clear'd, and I my Clelia knew; I ran to meet her, when her eager steps Prevents my speed, and in my Arms she leaps; Clasping I laid me gently on the ground, Millions of kisses their successors found. I ruffled up her Silks which kept the way Unto the Paradise where Cupid lay; She made resistance, such as might be said, Thou shalt enjoy, and yet I'le dye a Maid. Her Eyes declar'd her Pleasure and Content, And what she did was out of Complement. What thought can know the Pleasures I enjoy'd? Immortal Pleasures, never to be cloy'd. But till in modest terms I can express My full fruition, you have leave to guess. VVe bound our Brows with Myrtle, and teturn'd Unto the Grove, and sweetest Odours burn'd; VVe deck'd the Shrine with Garlands, and this day For ever we our Annual Rites will pay; And unto every Lover this shall be (Great Paphian Queen) a joyful Jubile. On Love. LOves Charms all humane force do sway, And Monarchs do his Power obey.
Nor is there any can resist, He makes them Love, and when he list, No place prescrib'd, now here, now there, The surest place is any where. A Song. COme, let's to the Tavern be gone, The day does begin to decline, All the time we do lose VVe basely abuse The longing desire of VVine. Boy, call up your Ladies of Pleasure, No Stoick with us shall tarry, VVe'll drink all the Night And take our delight, Let Sectary Dreamers marry. Come, fill the Glass full to the Brim, Though Iove our Pleasure opposes, Our Pallates 'twill please And expel all Disease, And inflame our frollick Reposes. VVe laugh at the madness of those VVho heap up a Mass of Treasure, VVe hate a base Miser, But we will be wiser, And confound all our Riches in Pleasure.
Thus, like Gods, we'll have pleasure in store, And our Wine shall roar in like the Waves, And in spight of pale Death, That destroyer of Breath, We'll keep Revellings yet in our Graves. The Surrender. I Yield, dear Enemy, nor now Can I resist so sweet a Brow; For who would not a slave remain, On whom thou please to lay thy Chain? For with such love thy Yoak I take, As Martyrs that embrace a Stake. Now since I own this great defeat, Command thy Forces to retreat, And vail those charming looks, from whence My Ruine comes, by Innocence: And since I yield my self your Slave, Let Beauty, which the conquest gave, Not triumph in the vanquisht foil, Or glory in your Captives spoil. The noble Lyon in his rage Disdains his Forces to engage Against a prostrate Worm, from whence His vallour can have no pretence: Such honours always did pursue The Roman Valour as their due:
And since that you have now put on The Courage of an Amazon, An Angels Beauty, such a form May glorified Saints adorn; May all their Vertues take a place To grace thy Heart as well as Face, And in thy Breast some pitty plant, The only Good that thou dost want: Thus shall my Chain more gentle prove, Supported by the Wings of Love. I love a Lass that will not wed, Yet vallues not her Maiden-head; That is not peevish, proud, nor poor, That scorns the Title of a Whore; That can both Dance, and Sing, and Quass, And, in what ever humour, Laugh; Who swears by Fate, she'll not abuse What Nature gives her leave to use; Yet to a Friend will not be coy, But give him leave for to enjoy What he desires, so he'll conceal Those hidden Pleasures which they steal. She is not such as stand without, And call to every rabble Rout, Crying, Turn in, thou honest Fellow, Until their—is grown so mellow, That even the Pox would scorn to dwell In such a loathsom nasty Cell. A vengance take such Whores as these, are far worse than the Disease;
I cannot guess but their descent Was from some nasty Excrement; Else cou'd they ne're infect the Earth With Plagues, but from so base a Birth. A Dream. WHen Titan hasted from his heavenly Sphere, And Thetis modest Blushes did appear; Grown weary with the fervor of the day, Upon the Banks of a cool Brook I lay; The shallow Stream soft murmuring did yield, A whistling Zeph'rus cool'd the heated field; The Birds in Trees with their mellodious Throats Prattled the discord of divided Notes. The Hills the sound repell'd, the Virgin Voice To every accent lent a parting Noise. The Grashopper (whose shriller voice repairs The smalness of his kind) with pleasant Airs Made all the Fields to ring, such harmony Proceeded from th' Innumerable Fry. I fancy'd this to be th' Elizean Groves, The happy Paradise of all chast Loves; And wisht my Clelia here, when happily A silent slumber clos'd my twinkling Eye. Behold, the God of Dreams before me stood, And with his Leaden Wand he smooth'd the flood,
And brusht the whistling Winds, which forthwith lay Upon the ground as Dews that fall in May. A gen'ral silence cover'd all the place, And on my Head he laid his drowsie Mace; Earth seem to vanish, Heaven for to descend, A hundred Thrones one Goddess did attend, VVho in a Rain-bow Robe, commixt with Rays, Such as Sol wears when he the VVorld surveys, Enters the Pallace; from her sparkling Eye; Proceeded Love, and awful Majesty. A Throne there was, Twelve Lyons did uphold, Set round with Amethysts in beaten Gold. The steps were Crowns, Scepters, and Diadems, Rubies, and Saphirs, and commixed Gems. The Goddess this ascends, whose heavenly Face Did quite eclipse the luster of the place; Millions of Cupids, in their Liveries, Attend the motion of her sparkling Eyes. A Herauld then the Goddess will proclaims, And summons all who burn with Love's fierce Flames T' appear before the Throne. VVithout delay, Innumerable Troops her will obey. And here 'twas worthy of ones observation, To see each Mimick fool it in his station. One in an antick posture leads a Dance, And swears each step is Alamode de France; 'Tother more solid, walks a State-Corant, And Pedigreed Antiquity doth vaunt.
The next a puling Lover, foreward steers, His Eyes deject, distill abundant Tears, Complaining of his cruel Fate, to move In some base Punk a more auspicious love; A braging, roaring Russian next appears, Who talks of desolation, racks and fears; Affrights his Love, who he doth strive to gain, And thinks Bellona one of Venus train. Some aged Fools I saw among the rest, Who time of every Sense did quite divest; Shaking their hoary Heads, in their esteem, As Complaisant as when they were Sixteen; Protesting Love, in such a doleful strain, As Ghosts are wont who Visit Earth again. But that which mov'd me most, was for to see My Brother Poets sensless foolery. Loaden with Anagrams, Acrosticks, time Was never spent in cobling of such Rhime: Some weep in Elegie, and Epitaph, Whose Nonsense well might cause the dead to laugh; Others more Jocund, Songs and Catches make, And sure they are, that every Clause will take. And in a word, though all was but delusion, It was the perfect Map of meer confusion. The Goddess smil'd, (as well she might) to see The true adorers of her Deity So much deluded by each Idle Passion, Which was by custom grown into a fashion;
And gave Command, for 'twas her will and Plea∣sure, Which rashly broke, they might repent at leasure, That none shou'd Court in any other sort Then what was us'd when Mars and she did sport; Think you, said she, that Peleus e're had sped So happily in Thetis pregnant Bed, Who oft by varying forms she did delude, If not by force he had her charms subdu'd? Did not th' Infernal Prince ascend from Hell, To Lights abode, where Gods and Men do dwell, And took thy Daughter, Ceres, to Command The utmost limits of th' Infernal Land? Yes, Proserpine was fair, a Goddess too, What cannot Love, that mighty Monarch, do? Think you that Iove, Father of Gods and Men, Had e're enjoy'd Agenor's lovely Gem, If not by Pollicy made his escape, And then confirm'd his Passion with a Rape? And thousands more were won after this fashion, Not courted with an Idle whining passion. Fortune assists the bold, who Courts by Letter Is counted modest, yet thought ne're the better; For Women love those that are brisk and free, And hate the lasie Lovers Pedantry. If they slight you, do you but then slight them, The Women soon will learn to Court the Men: Did not the Beautious Eccho Court in vain The self admiring Boy, who with disdain
Her love repaid, did not Medea wo The Emonean Prince with love and Magick too? And Sylla too, by Impious love misled, Her Father slew, to gain just Minos Bed; And both her self and Purple Hair did bring Pledges of love, unto the Cretan King. And Dido, whilst her love she did pursue, The Trojan Prince to her embraces drew. 'Tis only Custom makes them claim as due The Adoration that belongs to you; Your servile Yoak of passion quickly break, And put in practice what you hear me speak. They all assent, and wisely did approve The wholsom Counsel of the Queen of Love, And so departed: when a pretty Lass, Which in the dark might for my Lady pass, Gave me a kiss, and to me smiling sed, She thought the Grass as good as any Bed; I hugg'd a wholsom Girl in my esteem; So wak'd, and vext, I found it but a Dream. To the Honourable Jonathan At∣kins, Governour of the Bar∣badoes. WIth joy like ours the mighty Roman State Their Capitolean Triumphs celebrate.
Sing Io Peans for their Victory, And Trophies bring, great God of VVar, to thee. Yet we to you Great Sir, will Trophies bring Of Peace, a more delightful Offering. Our VVoods shall ring, whilst we bring Myrtle Boughs, Commixt with Bays, to crown your sacred Brows. And thou Daphnean Lawrel too shall joyn Thy verdant Leaves, which shall his Temples twine. Ceres, Pomona, Flora, all shall bring The Glorys of the Summer, Autumn, Spring. The great Survey or of the East, and West Shall fire the Spices of the Phoenix Nest; And Iove's great Bird shall in her Tallons bring The living Phoenix as an Offering; Iris to both the Poles her Bow shall tye, VVhose party-colour'd Robes adorn the Skie. The spangled Orbs their glory shall dispence Upon this Isle, with sacred Influence. All things shall strive to add some glory to This Fertil Isle, that's Governed by you, Even senseless things: And shall I silent sit, And slear at all, for to be thought a VVit, Like many Foppish Gallants now adays? No, I'le present you with this sprig of Bays. Inspire my Muse, thou sacred God of Verse, VVhilst in Heroick Numbers I rehearse The glory, safety, and the blest content, Depends, Great Sir, upon your Government.
The Rich, the Poor, the Strong, the Impotent, Each in his Station reaps a blest content. The Rich his Land and Cattle doth obtain, The Poor Man reaps the fruit of all his pain, The strong Mans strength is curb'd from Ty∣ranny; The weak ne're fears his angry Enemy. Here no Man falls by cruel hand of VVar, Nor raging Tumults terrifie from far; But here in safety every man does lye, Reaping the joys of such Tranquillity. Vive le Roy. Great Charles, thou didst foresee This Countrys good, and Long'd for Liberty. Great Ionathan our David well did know, On whom his Love and Honour to bestow; Else had this Isle ne're seen this happy time, More Fertil by your presence, than the Clime. O happy Island! O Thrice happy Land, VVhose Regiment is given to your Hand▪ Rule as you please, those Pow'rs that reign above Inspire your Soul with a paternal Love; Infusing in our Hearts Obedience still, Governing all our Actions by your VVill. O mibi tam longe maneat pars ultima vitae Spiritus, & quantum sat erit sua dicere facta Non me carminibus vincet nec Thracius Orpheus, Nec Linus.
On the Nine Muses, out of Auso∣nius. CLio relates things done, and gives the time; Melpomene delights in Tragick Rhyme; Thalia sports it in lascivious Verses, Euterpe sweet and pleasant things reherses; Terpsicore with Harps the mind inspires; Erato dancing most of all desires; Calliope brave Deeds to Books commits; Urania to Astronomy submits; Polhymnia describes with hand and gesture In midst of these, Apollo most Divine VVith his diffusive Spirit cheers the Nine. To Clelia. HEiress of love, and glory of the Time, Angelick Beauty shining in your Prime; Thus Gods in ancient times did terrifie Poor Mortals by approaching Deity, As when you show the luster of your Eye; Whose high Majestick grace, when lookt upon, Doth cause an awful adoration. Never did Egypt Apis worship more, Offering their lives, then we do you adore; The Sun-burnt African, of sable hue, VVorships the Moon, and thinks it may be you.
The Persian, the Sun, and thinks he spies The glory only propper to your Eyes. But we enlightned by that glorious light Wou'd make a Sun-shine in the darkest Night, Do really adore that high persection Which they enjoy but only by reslexion. Fair Clelia, then give me but leave to say, I shall no more delight to see the day, Than see you happy, which shall ever be The greatest happiness can come to me. On the undaunted Courage of a Shipwrackt Captain. HArk how the roaring Winds, (great God of Thunder,) Exalt the briny Floods, to tear a sunder Our well rig'd Vessel riding on the Main, Whose lofty threatned Pendant does disdain Proud Neptunes angry Power, and awful wrath, Dashing the boldest of his Waves to Froth. Which when the King of Floods with anger saw, His awful Trident scorning to withdraw, He summon'd all the Waves, and did implore The Eolean aid, which made the Winds to roar. Now like to Mountains rise the Waves on high, Tossing the nimble Vessel to the Skie; Then by a great descent she falls again Into the gaping Bowels of the Main.
No voice is heard, in vain they spend their Breath, Two Elements at once conspire their Death. The Mariners are stupisi'd with fear, The skilful Pilot knows not how to steer. The Ocean boils, and, to augment the rage, The Winds from ev'ry Point the Floods engage. Heavens face is cover'd with a Veil of Night, The Thunder bearing Clouds ejected Light From all Parts flies, and in this wretched state, Presents to all an unavoided Fate. Which when the Captain saw, he gaz'd a while, To see their manly Courage thus recoil; And with more Pow'r than Neptune, which doth sway His wat'ry Trident, which the Waves obey, His loud Imperial voice commands a peace, Whose Eccho stops the Waves, and makes them cease. Or like fierce Mars, with an undaunted minde, As if their God the wat'ry Realm did bind, He cuts the smiling Ocean, and does stand As the Supream that Governs Sea and Land. Now by this time a frighted Wave appears At Neplune's Court, relating all their fears; Telling, some mighty God usurp'd his Seat, And all the Waves lay prostrate at his Feet. The Sea-green God all in a rage appears, And the shrill Trytons Visage anger bears; The Mermaids skip and dance about the Boat, Which Seamen say does dreadful Storms denote,
And so it was. The Misty Shades of Night All on a sudden robb'd 'em of the Light. The Heavens began to roare, the Waves arise, Dashing their briny Floods against the Skies. The Captain strives in vain the Ship to save, While on each side appears a threatning Grave. There's no cessation, VVaves the VVaves out∣vies, And threaten Heaven with their batteries. VVhat shou'd they do, poor men? their Courage fails, And all their hopes are shatter'd as their Sails. They all stand stupifi'd, like senseless stocks, VVhilst the craz'd Vessel's dash'd against the Rocks. The Captain then, with a Couragious motion, 'Leaps in the raging Bowels of the Ocean, And with his threatning Sword he cuts the Waves, The raging Floods with Valour he outbraves; And swimming to the Shoar, his Sword he shakes, Whereat the roaring Sea retires and quakes. But all his men, alas! like silly Sheep, Sink to the bottom of the swelling Deep. Yet he's ne're daunted, his firm Soul stands fast Upon its Basis, stedfast to the last. What Noble Hero ever cou'd do more Than be o're Land and Sea a Conquerour?
To his Verses. Go tell my fair, that I Must let her know I love, or dye. Nor can the knowledge be Enough, O no, she too must pitty me. Alas! What did I say? Is pitty all that she must pay? No, she must yet do more, Love me as much as I adore, And joyn in One these Three, Know, Love, and Pitty me. On Parson Andrew's, Parazitical Sermon to Mr. Evans, Mayor of Shaston. WHere is this Boanerges, that dares batter The Churches Faith, and in a Pulpit slatter? VVho fears not both in Sermon and in Prayer▪ For to delude Our Worshipful the Mayor, And make the People think, if he were able, That he in all things is Infallible? Let him do what he will, it does appear, He must be one of Gods Vicegerents here.
Believe him but in this, and next you then Must both believe in Mayor and Aldermen, And add it to your Creed; and then you may Say Mass, and to the Fur-gown'd Idol Pray; And thus he puts a slur upon the Nation, And brings it off, This Ancient Corporation. This ancient Corporation's not so blind, But see the VVallet of his faults behind; And hold it for a true and Christian Canon, The Parson cannot serve his God and Mammon: But Andrew's sham-Apostle thought in Meter Something to say in praise of Simon Peter. Nor will his Plea excuse him, though he say, 'Tis Oratoria licentia. On a Wife. OUt, or I burst! VVhat damn'd confounded spell Made Orpheus run to fetch a VVife from Hell? VVhat was it mov'd that madness in his Breast? He by a Legion surely was possest Of master-Devils. Had he lov'd the Pox, And all the Plagues were in Pandora's Box, Embrac'd all Vice, though loathsom and impure, Heaven might in pitty yet afford a Cure. But when they come to that licentious life, To fawn, and hug, and doat upon a VVife,
There's no Salvation for such cursed Elves, They may, like Iudas, go and hang themselves. Had Adam ne're seen Eve for to entice, He doubtless yet had liv'd in Paradise. That curs'd Satanick Engin, not content To damn her self to endless punishment, Intic'd our Father Adam for to eat The fruit of Life, and Death inflicting meat. And ever since each cursed Iezabel Has led her Husband the right way to Hell. O rare advice to Iob! why dost retain Thy foolish Righteousness so long in vain! Lo, the reward of all thy Piety! Take thy Wife's Counsel, curse thy God and dye. Counsel so good, who coud not chuse but take, Though not for Hells, yet for his poor Wifes sake? Damn'd Monster, cou'dst thou find no other way Than this, thy righteous Husband to betray? Can e're a Man expect a moments rest, That hugs so curst a Viper in his Breast. Woman brings VVo, 'tis true, her very Name An adjunct is of Sorrow unto man; Let her be fair or foul, airy or dull, Peevish or pleasant, kind or unnatural; She's but the Devils bait for to trepan Poor, fond, uxorious, and silly Man.
Naides, Draides, Hymen, Orpheus, Euridice. Naides. O Hymen, come away, Frame no excuses for a longer stay; For hand in hand The Lovers stand, And think each hour a year Until thy tedious Godhead does appear. Dra. Great God of Nuptual Rites, Orpheus and his Euridice invites Thee to their Feast, Wich shall be blest With mutual Joy, if thou appear, And cause a general Mirth throughout the year. Hym. Shame on your uglie hast, That thus disturbs and calls away so fast, In Stygian damp They have dipt my Lamp, Yet may the Omen be Far from my Orpheus and Euridice.
Chorus. Far be the Omen, we Do hope from him, and his Euridice. Ye Gods that hear What we prepare, Our Sacrifice and Song, Where Beasts and Trees shall caper in a throng. Orph. What over tedious stay, My fair Euridice does thus betray? The slying hours, Whose mutual powers, Lest they too slow appear, Take Cupids Wings, and hasten from their Sphere. Eurid. The time I think mispent That robs my Orpheus of the least content. A Lovers fear Is always neer; Yet shall thy Beauteous praise Appear more blest, cause thou didst Tantalize. A Song by Orpheus. Poor Tantalus, I pitty thee, Who Court'st the Wave, and Woo'st the Tree; The water slides just as he sips, And so avoids his amorous Lips; The Golden Fruit his lust intice, VVhich he wou'd tast at any price:
But Fare resists his strong desires, For whilst he gapes, the Fruit retires; VVhat fault, alas! cou'd this deserve, In midst of plenty thus to starve? Thou art like a Miser▪ cloath'd in Rags, VVhilst he sits brooding o're his Bags. And dares not touch ought of his store, But is in midst of plenty Poor. Hym. Hail to the lovely pair, For whose sweet sake I hither made repair, Firmly to lie In Amity, Beauty and Love, which be Compris'd in Orpheu's and Euridice. Orph. VVelcomer than the day, Hymen, what was the cause of this delay? Cou'dst thou find out A cause of doubt, Or thought that there might be In either of us Mutability? Hym. Brave Prince of Poets, no; By this delay I strove to let you know Some cruel Fate Does on you wait, VVhich all your Pleasure banes, Fast bound by Fate in Adamantine Chains.
Orph. The Gods with ease afflict Poor Mortals, who their power can't contradict; And we adore That power the more, And herein surely trust, If we but once are good, that they are just. Eurid. None but the Guilty fear, And what they fear, 'tis Justice they shou'd bear: Let nothing cause A farther pause, But in this Temple joyn Two Hands, Two Hearts, which Fate cannot untwine. Hym. Goddess of Hearts, Before whose Throne VVith equal parts Two and yet One Themselves present, To the intent That thou mayst ever be Propitious to their Love and Amity. Grant their Requests, Let lasting Peace In mutual Breasts Ever increase; And may they prove True as the Dove, And may they also be Inrich'd with a most numerous Progenie.
For by this Light, And Altars fume, Which in thy sight We here consume, Thou ne're didst bless With happiness Two Lovers that will prove More great in Merit, or more true to Love. Chorus. Let pleasing smiles And mutual Joy The time beguile, And never cloy. Let pleasant Theams, In gentle Dreams, Increase their generous fire, And kindle Flames that never shall expire. Hymen. The Goddess frowns, and with dejected Eyes Seems slightly to regard our Sacrifice. One of the Turtles which the Offering were, Dy'd on the Altar, e're I made my Prayer. The Tapers shone but with a heavy light, One sputtering Blue, resign'd his Flame to Night. Orpheus. The Gods deep wills are seldom known, 'Till put in Execution;
And 'twere a folly to lament A certain doom none can prevent; Then why shou'd we capitulate With what recorded is by Fate? Euridice. The power of Fate cannot our love control, And fear's too base for any generous Soul; The Gods, who in a higher Orb do move, May take our lives, but never wrong our Love. Let's then like Turtles sitting on a Tree, Wait for the Hawk wou'd catch us if we flee. FINIS.
THE TABLE. A. A Wealthy Thuscan Priest, of no mean note. Page. 23. Alas poor Infant, Death was too severe. Page. 30. Assist my Muse, thou gravest of the Nine. Page. 45. As in the Ocean on a Summers day. Page. 50. A sure Foundation makes a Building stand. Page. 67. Ah lovely fair, can you so cruel be. Page. 68. Admired Beauty, whose victorious Eyes. Page. 76. An Anagram and Epigram on James D. of York. Page. 83. An Anagram, Epigram, and Acrostick on Su. W. Page. 84. A Boat, a Boat. Page. 89. An envious, angry, sluggish, drunken Lover. Page. 91. Ah fainting Breath, there's nought can yield relief. Page. 95. Alas, fond Painter, why dost strive to grace. Page. 97. Affright me not, you urge your suit in vain. Page. 98.
B. Before some Famine, Pestilence, or War. Page. 32. Beautious Hersilia, those that rule above. Page. 73. C. Coy Clelia, veil those Charming Eyes. Page. 7. Come my dear Love into this Grove. Page. 27. Cilex, a Theif, much noted for his crime. Page. 71. Come lets to the Tavern away. Page. 106. Clio relates things done, and gives the time. Page. 116. D. Divinest Creature, to whose heavenly brow. Page. 50. Dost thou not see this Picture set. Page. 59. F. Fair and yet cruel! sure it cannot be. Page. 17. Farewel to pleasure and to fond delight. Page. 41. Fair Clelia, didst thou know. Page. 66. Farewel my scornful Female Saint. Page. 80. From Salamis when Tucer fled. Page. 87.
G. Go, tell her that I love. Page. 8. Go mournful sigh, haste to my fair. Page. 52. Go dull Mechanick, whose infective pride. Page. 70. Go tell my fair that I. Page. 102. H. Hail ancient Brother, what is in thy mind. Page. 13. Hail sacred Woods, and all ye rural Gods. Page. 24. How, Gosse forsook her! 'tis as true as may be. Page. 93. Heiress of Love, and glory of the time. Page. 106. Heark how the raging Winds (Great God of Thun∣der.) ibid. I. If that this Book without command. Page. 6. If that extortion, fraud and strage. Page. 12. I will not tell her that she's fair. Page. 16. I have drank too much Lethe of late. Page. 18. I thank you, worthy Sir, your good advice. Page. 21. Iust as I liv'd, just so I dy'd. Page. 26. In times of old, when Kings did not disdain. Page. 53. I yield, dear Enemy, nor now. Page. 107. I love a Lass that will not wed. Page. 108.
L. Lelaps my Ladys Dog, must sit at meat. Page. 35. Loves Charms all humane force doth sway. Page. 105. M. My Genius hurried by that haste. Page. 10. Meek, kind, and good, cou'd I relate. Page. 15. Mirrour of Beauty, from whose conqu'ring Eyes. Page. 20. My Friend John Clement 'tother day. Page. 60. N. No Salvage Tyranny, no desperate War. Page. 91. O. O Garden, unto me more blest. Page. 1. Of mighty Jove I lately askt a Boon. Page. 86. Out or I burst, what damn'd confounded spell. Page. 121. O Hymen come away. Page. 123. R. Render your heart, or give mine agen. Page. 26. Restore my wounded heart, dear Love. Page. 61.
S. Shall still my suite prove vain? then bid me dye. 71. Sweet Vesper being the Night. 63. So strange a distemper I ne're yet did know. 72. T. The crafty Thief may rob thee of thy store. 9. Think not, fair Madam, that your high disdain. 19. The Sons of Pompey yielded up their breath. 22. They say Ulisses by his art. 24. Tell me, thou pale-fac'd Empress of the Night. 43. 'Twas at the time when Phoebus with his rays. 47. The Snow's dissolv'd the grassy Fields grown green. 64. To thee, O Wood, I make my moan. 76. The Fetters of love are far stronger than hate. 79. This piece of Wood which now doth lye. 82. They say that Souls departed first must run. 88. 'Twas Evening when the Suns departure made. 101. U. Venus, I oft have heard thy Name. 61. Venus of Souls, whose hand controls. 69. Upon this Marble stone forbear to tread. 100.
W. Where's absent Clelia. 4. What makes the Frontiers of the sable Night. 42. What ails the Poet, what a new desire. 37. When bald-pate Winter with his hoary head. 39. What makes the trembling Hare the Lyon fly. 36. Why dost thou thus delay. 85. Why shou'd I urge my love, since that I know. 95. When Titan hasted from his heavenly Sphere. 109. With joy like ours the mighty Roman State▪ 113. Where is this Boanerges, that dares batter. 102. Y. Te powers above, and ye Celestial ones. 31▪ FINIS.
