D1324 8712971 41634
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Simeon and Levi. Upon this TOPICK, WHETHER Flying from Suffering, in a Day of Persecution; Or, Complying with the Terms of the Persecuting Party, for a little Ease, be the more Honourable. With Allowance. Levi, WEll met, Brother Simeon, after so great a Storm. The Blasts of Boreas have blown fierce upon us. The Elements have been black over, us; and nothing but the hideous noise of Thunder-Claps have been heard among us. But now, through the Clemency of our Gratious So∣veraign,
there is a great allay. The Clouds are scatte∣red, the fury of the Wind is over; the Air is calm and serene, and we being so happily met under a shadowing Tree, in this pleasant bright day, pray let us sit down and talk a little. Simeon, With all my heart. Levi, Then, how has it been with you all this time? how have you secured your self from the terrible suffer∣ings that have been every where? I see you look pritty brisk and bonny, which makes me conjecture you have not felt much of it. Sim. Why, truly, no Brother; I have not; for in its first appearance (which was so gastly, it made me tremble) I finding my strength to decay, betook me to the Country; where I lived, private, and in quiet, from the noise and clamours of all such things. Levi, But had you not a Pastoral charge of a Flock? Sim. I had so. Levi, How then could you leave them? Sim. I wisely fore-saw, the rage of the Storm growing so great, that every one would be forced to shift for himself; and I was willing to save one betimes. Levi, Methinks you have not acted like a good, but bad Shepherd, whose proper Charector is, when he sees the Wolf coming, to fly away, and leave his Sheep to be devoured. Sim. I confess that looks a little awry upon me; but I have a plain Text to bear me out in what I have done. Levi, Pray tell it me. Sim. Why, if they Persecute you in this City, flee into another. Levi, Without the help of Joseph's Cup, I divined
what your Scripture would be. But you cannot surely think this any warrant at all for your practice: For be∣side that, this was spoken to Apostles, who had no care of any particular people: So it is meant of a flying only from suffering (which may be innocent) but not from work, which is your case; you (Jonah like) fled from your Pastoral Employment, to live Solitary in the Woods, to keep your skin whole. Sim. Well, I will not stand in it, but I have done amiss; but of two Evils, I thought t'was prudent to chose the lesser; if I had stayed, I might have gone to Prison and dyed (oh! terrible) as some other did, and so have been of no use now: Whereas I was ready, upon the first news of his Majesties Indulgence (and as soon as I heard the Coast was clear of Informers) to pack up my Auls, and away to London, with as much speed as ever I tripped from it, (which was such, as I assure you secured me from the fate of Lot's Wife) and to reparing my wasted Synagogue I went; raised up the Galle∣ries, jumbled together the Pews, and sold them too, as fast as I could tole in Customers; (for I had a pannick fit of Zeal fresh come upon me to do my Masters work) and am now as hard at it as ever, and thump it about, as in the days of yore, and mean to continue so till—But pray, now you have examined me; give me leave to demand, where you have sanctuaried your self; for you look as though you had born as little of the brunt as I? Levi, Why, truly when I first saw the Clouds a ga∣thering, I buckled on my Helmet, advanced my Voice, and standing is the high Place of the Tabernacle, I so∣lemnly warned my People, with stretched forth Lungs, to prepare for the approaching Storm, and to be sure to stand to their Tackling, and not basely desert the Cause,
as they would avoid another day the forever odious name of Renogadoes; and this I continued with much vio∣lence to do, till I was unhappily seized, and cast into Bondage. Sim. Oh! sad (Horrisco audiens) Levi, But I tell you (for the encouragement of all that dare try it a little while: for I am not for long Im∣prisonment) I had a great deal of comfort, and refresh∣ment in the time of my Captivity. Sim. As how I pray? Levi, Many sweet doses of glittering Guineys for a Cor∣dial in a morning; sundry pretty Angels ministring to my necessities on high noon, when Colon began to grum∣ble; and several Noble treatments attended my accep∣tance at night. Sim. If I had known this, I would not have fled so fast from a Prison. Levi, Ay, But Brother, you must know there was an ebbing tide in those Enjoyments (as there is in all created Comforts) the Springs of Consolation too soon (Ah, I tell you, too soon) abated of their Exuberancy; and then (ah then, my Strength fainted, and my Spirit no longer able to bear up) failed within me; then every thing in a Prison seemed dissatisfactory to me, and then it was I began to groan for Liberty; 'tis true, I had Friends in aoundance came to visit me, but they were dry (therefore miserable) Comforters, Words flowed with a mighty torrent from their Mouthes, but there was no dropping at their Fingers ends, from whence I always derived the most Satisfaction and Encouragement: I tell you Brother, one good well-mannag'd Pocket-Argument ever had more prevalency with me to persevere, then
an hundred airy Throat ones; for whilst I was boye up by the former, I stoutly affirmed (with no want o Confidence) the Ceremonies of the Church of England to be Abominable, the Frame of her Constitution wholly dis-agreeing to Gospel Light and Truth; but when those Supports shrunk from me, I soon alter'd my Opinion, I got a new pair of Spectacles, and read over the Comon-Prayer; and truly I could find nothing but good and sound matter in it; and so without further consideration, I resolved (rebus sic stantibus) to yeild a profound Con∣formity to it, which I forthwith promised, and then with winged Celerity, I bid my Prison, my Keeper, my People, my Integrity an entire farewel. Sim. Had you not better have gone into the Country as I did? Levi, No, I thank you, I made a better Market of my short Imprisonment; I might have followed the Plough∣tail long enough, before I should have met with those feeling Contentments I did there. Sim. Which of us was the honester Man? Levi, Nay, I can't tell that, but I think we have neither of us much to spare of that Commodity. Sim. Which of us took the more honourable Way? Levi, That must be left to the Judgment of some Learned Brethren, who are not altogether unacquainted with either of our ways. Sim. What will the Men of the World say of us? Levi, I know what they say of you. Sim. What? Levi, A Man may take a great deal of pains for God, in a fine cool day, when 'tis neither too hot, nor too cold; He may lay about him much, even to a mighty thumping
the innocent Pulpit, making the Feathers lead a wearied life for want of a little rest; He may be very Industrious and Laborious; He may Preach much, Pray much, Ca∣techize much, and yet when it comes to the pinch, and there be most need of his work Doe-Little. Sim. Say you so Brother; Ay, but do you know how the Carnal sort speak of you? Levi, Deliver me out of pain, inform me quickly. Sim. Why, they (that is, the Sons and Daughters of Men) say very peremptorily, A Man may Bluster and Thunder, lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, Roar like a Wide∣mouth'd Bull of Bashan, lay about him like a Tbrasher, Whine and Cry, Baul and Yaul, Press and Perswade his Auditors to stand their Ground, and not comply in the least with sinful Traditions; and yet, when it comes to his own particular Case, to Buckle or Suffer, even such a one may shew himself, (to his never to be forgotten shame) Non Vincens sed Victus. Levi, We can't help it, I wish they have nothing more to say. Sim. Do you think they will be tattling any thing else? Levi, Yes, Yes, no doubt they will draw some out∣ward Inferences from both our Practices: As 1st. True Zeal to God can't be measured by Mens keeping a noise, when they have nothing to oppose them, till they come to the tryal of a suffering Testimony. 2dly. They will be apt to conclude, that unless Jesus Christ hath some faithfuller Workmen, then you or I have appeared to be, his Work will certainly be left undone, when there is the most need of doing it. 3dly. I am afraid they will infer, that as our Saviour chose to ride upon a simple Ass, rather then a trapped Horse; so (according to the truth
of the Mystery) he calls out poor low Men (that are little esteemed by the World) to bear the burthen of his Service, in the day when he has most service to do. Lastly, 'Tis ten to one but those, who are not Followers of us, will be surmising, our present hot-spur re-assumed Zeal, proceeds rather from a love to our dearly beloved selves, and our own Interest, then any true desire of advancing Christs mediatory Kingdom. Sim. These are base Inferences, and yet too natural. But Pray, let us meet suddenly again to discourse of our Friends of the Congregational way, to remark how they have carri∣ed it in the time of Persecution, whether like us or no? Levi, I fear (upon examining the matter) we shall find a vast difference. Sold at the Three Kyes in Nags-Head-Court in Grace-Church-Street, over-against the Conduit, 1688.
