D1854 08713170 41641
A PICK-TOOTH FOR SWEARERS, OR A LOOKING-GLASS FOR Atheists and Prophane PERSONS. WHEREIN The Greatness of the Party Offended, the Solemn giv∣ing of the Law, Together with the Strickness and Pu∣rity thereof; The Unquestionable Verity of the Ho∣ly Scriptures, and what fearfull Sentence the Wicked may expect in the Great Day, are briefly touched. EDINBURGH, Printed by JOHN REID, at his Printing-House in Bells-Wynd, ANNO DOM: 1698.
Unto the Right Honourable SIR ARCHIBALD MURE of Thorntown, Lord Provost, Bailies. WILLIAM MEINZIES ARCHIBALD RULE JAMES NAIRN GEORGE MITCHEL PATRICK HALIBURTON Dean of Guild. SAMUEL M'CLELLAN Theasurer. And the Remanent Council of the Ancient and Honourable CITY EDINBURGH, Right Honourable, THe Great Disposer of all Things in His Provi∣dence, hath committed the Oversight and Care of a great many Persons, unto your Charge; And GOD be thanked at present, this Ho∣nourable and Ancient City, the Metropolis of Scotland, is provided with Magistrates and Counsellors, who tes∣tifie their Dislike of Prophanity, and Immorality, and give a Copy to those under their Charge, to study Pie∣ty and Vertue; Notwithstanding of all which, more of these Vices abound in this Place than can be easily
Suppressed, Even tho the Government hath lately E∣mitted a Proclamation, for putting the Ancient Laws a∣gainst such Transgressours, more punctually in Excuti∣on. I am fully convinced every one according to their Capacity's and Stations, ought to contribute their Endeavours for suppressing vice, and I have Essayed to Compose a few Verses, whereby the reprehend∣ing thereof is in some measure aim'd at, How meanly soever the Subject be handled, 'tis all the Mite I can throw in, towards the prosecution of such a Lau∣dable Design. Your Lordship and Honours are the only Persons, I judge these few Lines can most fitly be ad∣dressed unto. Wherefore I with all Humility offer Them to Your Consideration, and if they may Contribute any wayes towards the discouraging of Prophanity and Looseness, it shall yeild great Satisfaction to Your LORDSHIP and HONOURS most Humble Servant, Ja: Donaldson.
A PICK-TOOTH for SWEARERS, &c. GReat Master of the Muses, Mighty THOU, Before whoseRom: 14, 11, Face all Knees shal trembling bow, Thou, who commands Thy Sacred Name to be WithPsalm: 9, 7. Reverence mention'd, and Humility; And holds him guilty of Attrocious sin, That needlesly doth take't his lips within. Thou who doth makeMath: 12, 22. the Dumb distinctly Talk, And Blind to See,Math: 11, 5. and Lame with eveness Walk. AndPsalm: , . maketh Babes to give Thee perfect Praise Inspire my Pen and my Affections Raise. Afford me Matter, so Assist my Quill, That I may Write according to Thy Will: Then shall my joy and happiness be more, Then these whose Cups with Wine and Oyl run O're. TheExo 3, 14, Great I AM who onlyIsa: 44, 6, Psalm 11 4, IS Alone, And in the Heav'ns establish'd hath-his Throne. HE whoJob: 37, 18. spread forth the Azure Skies above, And in their Spheres makes all the Planets move.Job; 9, 7, &c. He that theJob 3, 4, Pro: 8, 29, Earth's Foundations strong did lay, And made theseGen: 1 16, Lights which separat Night from Day, He who theIsa: 48. 13. Heav'ns doth Measure at one Span, And of the Dust Created MortalGen: 2. Man. He that doth fill the1 King, 27, Heav'ns, Earth, Sea and Air, Without Dimensions present every where; WhoJob: 26 13, 9. Fram'd the Crooked Serpent, Bounds the Waves, And Fashon'd all theIsa:  33 Subterraneous Caves.
He who thePsam: 14, 7. Stares doth number all by Name, At whose CommandGen 1, 1, Psalm: 36 8 all things from Nothing Came. He who doth weigh thesa: 40 12. Mountains in a Scale, And Lay'th in Balance every Hill and Dale: In whose great Sight15, all Nations seem to be, As Crawling Worms, yea les than Gnat or Flee. Great HE put on a Rob of Majestie, And on the Wing of Subtile Air did Flie. Before his Face the; 18 9 Stable Heav'ns did Bow, Then in a Cloud HE Visits Earth Below. In Thickest Darkness Wrap'dExod: 14. 16, his Hallowed Light, Least Mortals had been Struck dead at the Sight. ThePslm: 68, 9. Earths Foundations mov'd Heavn's Pillers Shook, All Creatures Trimbled while this Great HE Spoke. The Hills114. 4. did Leap like Timerous Kids or Lams, The Mountains trembled as their helples Dames: When Bear or Woulf Comes on their young to Prey, Ev'n so the whole Creation Quak'd that Day. Mount Sinai Smoak'd, Lightnings Abroad did Flie, By voice of Thunder than His Majestie Expres'd his Greatness in a solemn Way, The Trembling Camp thought Heav'n and Earth that Day. To their first Nought should be Reduc'd anone, And Instantly his Judgement Seat, or Throne Erect'd should be, while the great Troump did sound Some Fled, and some Fell flate upon the Ground. The Trumpet still sounds Louder till at last, Th' Eternal HE was pleas'd to stop the Blast.d: 19. 18. Than by a distinct voice to Israel said, These words which after in the Ark were laid; Ingraven on two Tables, made of Stone: Wrot by the Finger of the Great THREE-ONE.
And must Imprinted be on every Heart, That would not in Eternal Torments Smart▪ Thus Spoke Great HE, I Am Thy Lord and King, Exod: 2 Who doth Alone from Bound Slavery bring. No other Gods have thou at all but ME. And to no Image Bow, or Bend thy Knee. My Sacred Name take not at all in Vain. Nor any of MyM: 2, 2, Attributes Prophane. Such as Transgress shall no ways Guiltless be: But holdenExod: 2 Guilty in a high Degree. Men may esteem the Trespass small, but I Will after suchM: 2, 2, Offenders strictly try: My Hand shall find them out,Exod 20, 7, I will not Spare That vile presumptuous Wratch who's bold to darr, Psal: 9 17. In his vile Mouth to take My Hallowed Name, Without due Reverence, and a Praying Frame. I'll Smite him Through with Darts of fiercest Wrath And Sharpest Vengeance; yea Eternall, Death, And hightned Fury on his Soul shall Seize, Without the least hoursRom: 14, 10, Respite, Sift, or Ease His Tongue shall Fry in hotest Pot of Hell, That thus Offends; yea and his Soul shall Dwell In most exquisit Torments, in thatExod. 2. 19. Cave, Which for the Devils I Prepared have. First to the Eye is represented there Most dreadfull Spectres, Round them every where. Hobgoblings dancing in prodigious Shapes, Like Lyons, Tigers, Dragons, Bears, and Apes, With Horns of Steel, and Iron-Teeth like Darts,
And forked Claws for tearing Sinners Hearts. Thou no glad Musick in that place shall hear, Nor other Noise shall touch thy Cursed Ear, But Ruefull Shrikes, and Knocks of Ratling Chains; And mutual Curses of Dire Ghosts in Pains, Who One Another tempted have to Sin, Plagueing the Day their, 'quantance did begin. No Sweet Refreshing Smell shall ther be found, But noxious Savour Eevery Where abound, Of all vile Filth, and stinking Sulphurous Smoak, Least Smell of which all Mortal Flesh would Choak, Were it not now so strongly Verg'd about, With thickest Earth that none thereof gets Out. No softer touch is there than Scorpions Stings And Byting Asps: yea all Termenting Things, Do there Combine, and all their Force Unite To Plague the Body▪ and Torment the Sp'rit▪ TheMrk 9, , Worm of Conscience Gnawing thee Within, When thou Reflects upon thy By-pass-Sin, Its gentlest Byts much Sharper are by Far, Than Dragons, Claws or red Hot Pincers were, Thy Heart and Bowels plucking out At Once; Or Rav'nous Birds thy Flesh tear from thy Bones. Hot Burning Coals of Juniper shall be Thy Bed of Down, and then to Cover thee A Quilt of Boyling Brimstone thou must take, And Wrap thee in, till thou full Payment make, To Divine Justice for thy great Offence, In that thou hast without due Reverence, My Hallowed Name Prophan'd, and tane in Vain. Thou surely shall endure Eternal Pain, Because thy Sufferings no Proportion have,
To that Infinite Offence which thou gave. The Head, the Hand, the Nose, the Ear, the Eye; Yea, every Member shall tormented be Apart, and such exquisite Tortures fill Each Joint, as would great Leviathan kill. Yet thy frail Body I'le make to subsist Under such Torments, while I do exist. No Wine, or Beer, is there to quench thy Drowth, Nor liquidLuke 16. 24. Drop, at all to cool thy Mouth. But bitter Dreggs of that greatPsalm  5. 8. Cup of Wine Of Indignation in my Hand Divine; Which without Mixture every Soul shall Take, And drink and Vomit, in that Burning Lake. My holy Sabbath see thy self thou keep, And every Soul within thy Gates that Sleep. Thy Parents Honour, and thy Days Prolong: And Kill thou not, nor do thy Neighbour Wrong. Form all Unchastness keep thy Body pure: And do not Wealth by wrongful Means Procure. Bear not False Witness; Neither Covet thou Thy Neighbour's Wife, his Servant, Ox or Cow. WHILE Israel stood, and all these Words did hear, Their Hearts did Fail, Almost i distract'd by Fear,Exod. 2. 19. To Moses came, and trembling they Beseech, Th' Almighty ONE may please no more to Preach, In such a Dreadfull most Confounding way, Least by his Presence Mortal Flesh should dye: But rather by his Prophets speak and They His holy Laws will willingly Obey. Their Sute is Granted, and th' Almighty ONE
Approves theDeut: 5. 24. 25. Motion, as they've said 'tis Done: He sends them Prophets of their Bretheren, Men Of such like Passions with Themselves, that when They speak his Word, their Presence may not Make Their Hearers tremble, not their Joints to shake. But such is Man's perverse Corrupted Will, That out of Good he had Engendereth Still. To have the Message of th' Almighty King, Brought by frail Men like us in every Thing; To whom with freedom we Recourse may have, To solved be of Doubts, and Counsel Crave. To have the Bread of Life, brought down from Heav'n In Earthen Pots, and to Mens Children Giv'n, If Right Consider'd special Mercies Are, And so by Israel they esteemed Were, In that dread Day when the Almighty GOD, From top of Sinai Thundred Mighty Lowd; No Man nor Beast the Hallowedxod: 19.13. Mount might Touch, Nor to the Borders thereof durst Approach, Save Moses self: But now it is not so, All Men may freely to the Altar go, And Offerings Glad of Joy and Praise present, And back Receive Heav'ns Liberal Complement,John: 4. 2. And by the Prophets be instructed Still, In every Thing that's the Almighty's Will: Yea, all the Prophets from that very Day, Do early Rise and to the People say, Repent,Mark: 1, 15, do Justice, o Mercy love, and see, Ye with your GOD all Humble Walkers be.Mic: 6. 8. But froward perverse Man replys, I hate, To Curb my Lusts, or at the Narrow Gate, Once strive to Enter, since along I May Not take my Darling Sins in Company.
Tush, what is said by yonder Man we're Sure, The Mickle Devil himself cannot indure, What? tell us live like Hermits, Pray and Whin, Abstain from pleasure, Falsly Nick-nam'd Sin. These Babling Preists may Superstitious Wives Charm by their Doctrine to reform their Lives, Or make some timerous simple Fools amuz'd But gallant Sp'rits will not be so abus'd. We plainly see Priest-Craft is but a Trade, And don't believe one Word of what is said, Further then Interest or Self-gain doth go, In every Land and Countrey is't not so? Do not all Sects, and Parties stiffly plead Their way is only Right, what further need Of Proof to show, that all Religion's Vain; By Priests invented meerly for Self-gain, The Turks, the Pagans, Papists, and what not; Of Thousands more, would all be thought Devote; Yet Black and White are more alike then they, Therefore in short, ther's nothing Truth they Say. But grant there be a GOD, as they Give out; He is so very good we do not doubt, He'l Spare and will not Torture, nor Afflict Poor Mortal Flesh, yea, sure he's not so Strict, Severe and Rigid, as those Bablers tell, And fright the Simple with a Scarcrow-Hell. If Hell there be at all, 'tis only This, A bare exclusion from Coelestial Bless; Which to speak plainly we almost wou'd Chuse, And all the Toilsom joys of Saints Refuse, Since constantly they must give Praise Divine, A work to which we do not much incline.
O Wretched Athiest! doth thou think indeed, These Scriptures which thou frequently may Read, Are forg'd by Art, or Subtile Mans Ingine? And are not Marked with a Stamp Divine? The dreadfull Plagues madeExod. 9. 14. knowen on Egypt Land, Redeeming Isra'l with a Mighty hand.Exod, 13. 8. Thexod. 13. 21▪ Sea dividedExod. 3: 16. Jordans Streams back turn'd; And Law emitted while theDeut. 4. 8. Mountain Burn'd Are these Romances, Lies or Forged Tales? Were not Divine Unquestion'd useful Seals? Fixt to the Law, Commencing from the Day These Acts were Done; Pray there fore show what Way? Could Isra'l be Impos'd on, or Deceiv'd When all the Laws and Statutes they Receiv'd? Enforced were from what their Eyes had Seen; And to their Sense Demonstrated had Been. These very words which all the Camp heard Spoke From midst the Cloud; the Fire, and dreadfull Smoak; Ingraven are on Tables made of Stone, And short time after to theExod, 34: 29. People showen, And Copies thereof all Requir'd to take, And on theirDeut. 6, 9. Wals and Door-Posts fast them make; And both the Tables in the Ark uplaid. In time to come to shew what GOD had said. 'Tis more then Plain, had not the thing been true When Moses first expos'd unto their view, These Sacred Tables, and Commanded All To mind, so said the GOD of Israel From top of Sinai, which your selves did Hear; Their Answer had been thus, 'tis more then Clear, We never Heard such words, nor Saw such things As by this Doctrine to our Ears thou brings.
We never heard this Law from Sinai Giv'n, Nor saw the Fire which almost rached Heav'n: We never saw these Plagues on Land of Ham, Nor through the Sea on dry Land ever Came. We never saw proud Jordans Channel dry Nor there Stons Fix'd for furture Memory. Therefore these Laws we'll not Receive at all; Nor to our Offspring e're commit them shall. Since none of these wrought in our Sight have been, Nor any Shadow thereof have we seen. But so it was that on the self same Day The Angel did all * Egypt's first born Slay;Exod. 12, 21, The Israelits first Solemniz'd the Feast, And every Year they kill'd that hallowed Beast The Pasca-lamb; in memory of this Thing, And other Mercies to Rememberance Bring.Jo, 5. 8. The Law of b Circumcision they likeway With punctual strictness constantly Obey. In Testimony of the Cov'nant made With Abraham, and all his Numerous Seed, Whereby they their Pollution did confess, And to be cleang'd evince their willingness: The Table, Stones, and Aarons budding Rod. For Monuments are keep'd, to shew what GOD Had for them Done, and at their hands doth Crave; And several other symbols they Receive: And did Retain till that Great Prophet came. Who was e're Moses, and is still the Same; From whose Bless'd Lips vain Word did never Fall; Bnt Good and Gracious were his Speaches all. He Taught, Explain'd, Confirm'd, and did Fullfill The Holly Law, and Shew'd the Fathers Will. He taught with Meekness, and with Power Divine,
In him the Fathers Image bright did Shine. More Pure and Heavenly was his Doctrine far, Then Speech ofJoh. 7. 46, all that e're before Him were; More sweet and pure was every VVord he Spoke Than precious Honey droping from the Rock More Fragrant than the sweetest Myrrh or Rose Spicknard, pure Incense, Aloes; yea all those, Dull Methophores are in the least to Show, What Sacred Language from his Lips did Flow. He did not with the Scribes place Holiness, In washing off External Filthiness; Nor bare avoiding Scandelous Offence, He taught the Law in a quite other Sense. Thus was his Doctrine. You haveMat: 9. 21. &c. heard of old, And doubtless by your Fathers have been told, Thou shalt not Kill, who ever kills shall Be To Judgement brought, and he himself shall Die. But now, I Say, not only such as Kill, And Cruelly his Neighbours Blood doth Spill, Shall die the Death, but such as Angry are VVithout Just cause the Judgement too may Fear; Yea such as shall his Brother but Nick-name, VVithout all doubt's in danger of the Same: But such as call him Fool, Hell's fire may Dread, Therefore Forgive and lay aside all fead Then to the Temple thou may freely go, And Pray and look to be Forgiv'n also. Adultery too you also have heard tell, Deserves GODS VVrath, and Punishment in Hell. That's true Indeed, but also tell I must, Such is his Guilt, that giveth way to Lust.
And doth not bound the Passions of his Mind, When they run loose on vile Thoughts of that kind. Downright For-swearing, and Blasphemie too, You have heard tell procures GOD's VVrath also. Such gross atrocious Sins, the Scribs I know Without reprooff do not oft times let go. The Law requireth more I tell thee plain, Thou ought not Speak, nor move thy Lips in vain: Far less to Swear by Heav'n in any Case, Because it is GOD's Hallow'd Dwelling-place: Nor by the City of the Mighty King, Nor by his Foot-Stool, Earth, nor any Thing That being hath; No, not a Hair or Threed; Or least excression of thy Beard or Head: But let your Common talk be Yea and Nay, What e're is more, proceeds of ill I say. Thus he the Law taught in its Geninue sense, And Heav'nly-food did to mens Sons dispense, By Miracles of Mercy, also he His Doctrine prov'd to be of verity The Sick are Heal'd,Mat. 11. , the Blind their Sight receive, Dumb, Deaf, and all what e're Disease they have, Are straightway cur'd, when he but spake the Word, Yea, Spirits foul, must needs Confess him LORD Of Heaven and Earth,Luk. 4 41. and by them very Soon (Against their VVills.) what He Commands is done He in Compassion withLuk: 5, 36 &c. a little Bread, Mirac'lously great Multitudes did Feed. These great Things were not in a Corner wrought, But openly, and he no Credite sought. Further than what his Adversaries might See publickly Performed in their sight,
Then certainly his Doctrine must be True, Since what he taught was not before a Few By Miracles confirm'dJohn 1. 20. But even before. Great Multitudes who did him not Adore, Nor Love his Person, 'cause they would not See The Radient Beams of his Divinity, Through his Sweet, Humble Humane-Vestment shine, They could not think his Person was Divine. 'Cause he came not with Earthly Pompe and Power, Few him Imploy'd their Sin Sick-Souls to Cure. The blest Disciples who his great Acts Saw, And heard him Preach, and thus explain the Law, Beleiv'd his Word, in token thereof They Themselves give up his Statutes to Obey: With Watter Clean soon then they Sprinkled are, By which they their polluted State declare, The Cleansing Virtue, and Excelling Worth Of that Rich Blood which from his Side sprung forth. And least that they that Covenant forget, To which the Seal of Baptism is set, Just at that Instant they their Names receive, That afterward they may Remembrance have Of this blest Bargain when their Names they hear But Mentioned, and to their Children Dear Transmited have this Ordinance, so we It to this Minute Handed Down may see. These Scriptures, Atheists! are of Verity, As ev'n the Devils themselves dar not deny; As has been prov'd, how comes it then that thou Doth not unto the Great MESSIAH bow? And Homage pay to the Almighty King, At whose Command All Things from Nought did spring?
Art thou in Terms His great Pow'r to Resist? The Universe who holdeth in his Fist; Who in a moment can all Creatures kill, And turn to Nothing, if it were his Will. Did he not cause one of his Angels slay, And on the Ground near g tenscore thousand Lay Of Sirian Corpses,2 King. 19, 35. in a single Night? What Mortal dare with such a Champion fight? Yet manyRev: 5. 11. Legions of such Angels stand, And wait to flee at this great King's Command, To execute his Will where he doth send, 'Gainst such a partie, how darst thou Offend? How dar thou Baffle his Great Hallowed Name, At whose Dread Presence in1 Pet: 3. 10. a Burning Flame The Eliments shall all disolved be, Thes: 5, 2. Before h his Face; the Heav'ns and Earth shall flee: Yea from the presence of this Angry Iudge *All Isles and Lands shall seek to find Refuge. In that dread Day the Sun shallRev: 6, 12. &c. lose his Light, And Black as coal the Moon turn in his sight: Togither heIsa: 34. 4. the Firmament shall Roll As when a Scrib folds up a Parchment Scrol. As thick as Hail-stones, Stares then drop down shall, Or as the leaves in Autumn frost, do fall By a strong Wind, that blows down Tree and all. Then shallRev: 20, 11. Erected be his great white Throne In Flaming Fire the Judge shall sit thereon, And distribute Pure Iustice to each one. Then Stoutest Champions to Deaf Rocks shall cry, To hide them from his Penitrating Eye! Yet all in vain, Rev: 6, 1. for Earth, Sea, Death and Hell, Shall yeild up all the Guests that in them dwell.
To the prophain Curst Swearer, Athist Wretch, The Judge shall on this ways derect his Speech▪ The ARAIGNMENT of the WICKED WHat? daring VVretch have I now found thee out That at my Threatnings hitherto durst Flout, And mock my Envoys, that my Message bore, And frequently stood knoking at thy Door, With precious Offers of a Crown of Ioy, And freedom from all things that do Anoy, But these rich Jewels, Pearls, and Dimonds thou Did trample on, and like a Hog or Sow, Delight did take, to puddle in the Mire, Than Sensual Pleasures knowing nothing higher. Did not my Preaching Prophets tell thee plain? Thou ought not take my Hallowed Name in vain? Nor swear at all by Conscience, Faith, nor Truth, Nor Curse thy Neighbour with thy Lips or Mouth; Yet even these very Lips, and Mouth which I Created have, my Name to Magnifie, Thou hast imploy'd as Instruments of Sin, And wickedly hast tane my Name therein In calling me thy VVrath to execute On Innocents; therefore now I will shoot Hot Thunder Bolts of vengeance through thy Soul, And make thee still in Utter-Darkness howl. Thy Cruel Curses on thy self I'll turn, And make thee in Eternal Fire to burn. Oft call'd thou Fiends thy Neighbours Souls to take, Now shall they cast thee in the Burning Lake.
As heretofore thou Mercy still did hate, So shall thou not one Drhant of Mercy get. Of all the VVretches that this day stand here, None are so guilty as thou who durst Swear. By my Blest Name,Psalm: 40. 6. my VVounds, and Precious Blood, Which from my side did Spring forth as a Flood To quench that fury which nought else could Please,Micc 6, 6, No, not all Creatures in one Sacrifice. All other VVights, but thou have some Excuse, Of Gain or Pleasure that did them Induce To break my Law; but thou hath none at all. Yea, Turks and Pegans 'gainst thee witness shall: Their Idols names they never Baffled so, As thou has mine▪ Pack hence, and from me go. Come Mastive Dev'ls them neck and heell, ty fast, And in hot Boiling Brimstone-Pots them cast. FINIS. Reader, PErhaps some may be surprized to see any thing of this kind come forth under my Name, and others, seeing this acknowledged by me, may be ready to Conclude, I haue also Composed several other Papers latly exposed to the Publick, especially those signed J. D. I love not to Rob any Man of his due▪ none of these are mine; This being the first thing in Rhyme ever possed the Press, whereunto my Name is Affixed directly, or indirectly. These Notes I have subjoined for An∣swering an Objection that may Ocurr, and explain any thing, that may not be so easily understood by those of weakest Capacities; not that the same Matter, contained in the Notes may not he expressed in Rhime, as well as the rest, but to degress in explaining every thing that may seem difficult would much marr the Grace and Harmony of the Poem, This method is used by the best English Poets, (I mean those that write in English) that I have seen, and I judge it very convenient; 'Tis im∣possible to please every one, or to solve all objections and doubts that may be made about or against this, if I get the Approbation of the sober and discreet 'tis enough: However I am resolved to take my hazard fo ee, whatever sensure I meet with.
TO invocate the Muse or some supposed Diety hath been an Ancient custom among Poets in the entry of their works, & so far imitated by our Modern Rhimers, that not only follow they the same Method; But also invocat the same supposed Dietys, The first propably were Serious in their Invocations, believing these Dietys could assist them; but I do not think it approveable in the Letter, for neither in Jest or Eat; nest is it Lawfull to invocat any other Object but the True and Living GOD, for things not in the power of any Creature to bestow. 2 Perhaps some may carp at the word Stabl, because we are informed by Holy write, The Heavens shall Depart as a Scrol when it is Rolled together. This I hope none will think I deny, especially seing I mention the same in the 19 Page; but that which I use this Expression for, is to show there is nothing so great, spacious, firm, or Perminable, But it giveth way to, and payeth Homage at the presence of this Infinit and Incompre∣hensible Being. If I had Room here I might tell you the Opinion of some Divines on this point; That tho it be Acknowledged the Firmament or Vi∣sible Heavens shall suffer by the Universal Confragration for their Pur∣gation, because they are polluted and made subject to Vainity, yet the Blessed Mansions of the Elect Souls (called Coelum Empyreum) are not incident to any such Change, not needing to be purged, not Unclean thing ever having entered there. see Mr. Durham on Rev. 21, 1 3 I have seen an Abridgements of the Commands in Rhime much after this sort; but I have endeavoured to express the same matter in other words than what was in these Verses, and so far as I remember have not repeated any of them Verbatim. 4 It may be thought strange that I should aleadge one part of the Tor∣ments of Hell Consisteth in beholding fearfull Objects, seing the Scripture informs us 'tis always dark there, yea, 'tis freqently called Vtter Darkness: Yet seeing there is nothing wanting in that place to Compleat the Horrour and Torments of the Damned; And the Be∣holding of dreadfull Objects, being that which doth Creat Horrour al∣most as much as any one thing, I do not think it absurd to believe that that may be one part of their Torment. Tho with corporal eyes in the state we not are it be impossible to behold any Object without
light: Yet 'tis not unlike some such Dreadful objects may be Repre¦sented to the Apprehension of the Damned 5 Something both of the Place and Quality of Hell may seem here to be asserted, that cannot be well agreed unto by every one. First as to its quality, I beleive most People do grant there shall be nothing want∣ing that may compleat the Misery of such as are there; and seing the Damned shall after the great Day▪ be Corporally in Hell, I do not think it Absurd to believe they shall be Tormented even by matteriall Fire, and that all the Sulpherous, Betumnious, and Vile matter now Dispers∣sed through the Universe shall be gathered to that Place, this seems to be the opinion of Aquinas and several School-men Qoted by Durham Rev: 21 I which that Reverand Author doth not oppose, but rather Homologat: For when the Eliments are refined and purged by the great Confragration, all the impure matter in them must either be Annihi∣lated, or placed some where or other, I see no need of its Anicholation, neither can I think of any other place more proper to Lodge it in. As to the place of the Dam∣ned, the Scriptures seem to determine, in speaking of it alwayes as a place below the surface of this Terrestrial Glob, and in the Instance of Core Daban and Abiram, 'tis expresly said they went down alive to the sides of the pit, such as will have all Scripture expressions on this point Metha∣phorical, I shall not dispute with: But let them know 'tis no good place be where it will▪ 6 This may seem very gross and absurd, but Nevertheless beside the inu∣merable Multitudes who by their Practise say no less I have even heard some Verbaly express as much, and plead almost in the same words. 7 The Quakers abuse this Scripture when they make use of it against Swearing in Judgement, when Necessarly called thereto, To fear the LORD, and swear by His Name, is no part of the Cerimonal Law, as some of them Foolishly Plead: Neither is Swearing altogether Discharged as doth appear by the 37 Verse, where 'tis laid. But let your Communica∣tion be yea, yea, and nay, nay, what ever's more; (to wit in Common Dis∣course) cometh of evil. And Paul writing to the Galatians Chap. 1, Ver. 20. useth a more solemn Attestation, in taking GOD to witness the truth
of what he wrote; And I hope no Quaker will aledge there is anie evill in this Expression. 'Tis Probable Sweating by the Temple, Altar, and Jerusolem have been the Common Oaths of those times; Wherefore our Saviour Particularly mentioneth them, thereby giving a Coppy to his Apostles and Ministers, to insist in Reproving the predomining sin of the times wherein they Live. I confess the Quakers run in the safest exeem; 'tis much better to Decline sweating in Judgement, than Rapp out such Dreadful and Execrable Oaths, so frequently as many do; But all Extreams being bad, none of them are approveable. 8 'Tis observable all the Miracles wrought by our Blessed Saviour, were of Mercy and Compassion. He could have made Wine of VVater at any time, but He did it not till there was need for it; And the People that invited Him to the VVedding like to be affronted for want thereof. He could have created Bread at any time, but he did it not till there was need thereof, to Refresh great multitudes in desart places, when Food could not easily be otherwise had; And so forth of all the Rest. 9 There's one thing renders the Miracles pretended to be wrought by the Church of Rome greatly suspicious (much contrar to the example of our Saviour and his Apostles) they work their Miracles always before such as doubt nothing of the Truth of their Doctrine; VVhereas the other only before Great Multitudes of unbelievers did work Miracles, of purpose they might believe. I confess I have heard some times the Papists have Endeavoured to put a cheat on others not of their own pro∣fession, impretending to Cure some Persons that they have Suborned to faign themselves Impotent, as that Boy at Aberdeen mentioned in Kno Historie. One at Dublin within this seven years. And a VVo∣man in the North of Ireland, that through their Perswasion faigned her self Dumb, whom a Gentleman that law her Carried about by some Priests or Friers, showing her to the People, & Offering to restore her to her speech, told me that he was in Company Where a Gentleman Jealous of the deceit Threatened her, and when she would not speak for a long time, he Lashed her soundly with a Whip, til she Cry'd out, and Confes'd the deceit; Some such wonderful Miracles, I believe may be wrought by these Gentlemen: But I Resolve to suspend my Faith of their Doctrine: (I mean their Traditions and Tenets Repugnant to Holy Write) till I see
them Confirmed by some Miracle where there is no ground of Suspition. I do not doubt but the Gentle-men who Endeavour to put such Hocus Tricks upon the simple, may also deny the matter of Fact of these Instances I have given, & no wonder since one of that gang with whom I Discoursed within these few year, had the Impudence to deny their was any such thing as a Masacker of the Protestants by the Popists in Ire∣land within these forty or fifty years, tho' the Fact be so Natour, & many Thousand yet Alive that saw it with their eye. He affirmed the Pro∣testants had a Designe to cut off of all the Papists, and they in their own Defence only, were obliged to use some Hostilities, &c. 10 Just while this was at the Press, a Pamphlet Intitulat An Easie way with the Diests, came to the Publick, which solveth this Point Pretty well; wherefore I referr you to it. Only by the by, I would say to the Quakers, if the Church had Contemned, & neglected the Sacraments, as they do; we would have wanted one good Proof for confirming the Truth of the Holy Scripures; For not only do these Ordinances Exhibit, and hold forth to our Senses the Efficacie and Virtue of Christs Blood and Sufferings; and help us to a more distink uptaking of spiritual things: But also are a most pregnant Evidence of the Verity of the Scriptures, seing they Commence from the very Day these Publick and Nottour Mira∣cles were wrought, on Purpose to Convince the Beholders of the Truth of what is therein Revealed. FINIS. Advertisement. Husbandry Anatomized, or several Rules, and Measures for the better Improvement of the Ground, particularly calculat for Scot∣land; wherein 'tis shewed much more Increase may be had, than in following the Common way; and yet much of the present Labour and Expence Saved. To which there is now added a postscript, furder Clearing & applying the same. Edinburgh sold at the aigh Coffee house on the North side of the Street near the Cross, price 14 sh: Scots with a Reasonable Abatement to such as Buy them in Gross or Unbound.
