E2935 R27351 9818645 44173
ENGLAND Must Pay the Piper. BEING A SEASONABLE DISCOURSE ABOUT Raising of Money this SESSION. In a Letter to a Member of the Honourable House of Commons. SIR, ACcording to your commands I waited upon Sir R. W. at his return from the Country, and discoursed him concerning the matter you gave me in charge about raising of mony this Session of Parliament, and found him so prepared to give me satisfaction therein, that he had Writ a small Tract on that Subject, which he was so Obliging to lend to me to Tran∣scribe, which I here send you without any Alteration; he having designed it for a member of Parliament; and it is as followeth. Sir, I Think it past Dispute, that there is not one man of an hundred who would in any manner have contributed to this Revolution, if they could have foreseen, that thereby we should have been engaged in so durable, expensive, and destructive a War, in Defence of the Dutch, and other Confederates; not on∣ly to the eternal Scandal of our Loyalty, Religion, Honesty, Justice, Honour, and Morality; but to the Waste and Consumption of our Stores of Arms and Ammunition, the Loss of our Ships and Men, the Inundation of Foreign Force, to the very enslaving the Nation to their Interest, Councils, and Conduct, and the utter beggering of our selves, by the Decay of Traffick and insupportable Taxes.
Yet all this might have been more pa∣tiently born, if we had found a sincere and cordial Prosecution of the glorious Ends which were pretended, of a full Enjoyment of our Christian and Civil Li∣berties and Properties, as true, free-born Englishmen, which were suggest∣ed (as things invaded in the late Reign,) to be taken special care of. How far we have been disappointed in these particulars, may be the subject of another Discourse; resolving at present to confine my self onely to the Question about raising of Money. Since my going into the Countrey I have sadly experienced to what Indi∣gences the Farmers and Tenants are re∣duced, by the Decay of Trade, the Low∣ness of the Markets in Corn, Cattel, and Wool; the Squeezing of their Purses to the utmost Mite, by successive and re∣doubled Polls and Taxes; the Haraffing the whole Militia of the Kingdom, to the Expence of more than two Poll-bills more, when the Council knew full well that the French Fleet had no Land-men on board to make a descent; to which may be added, the universal Pressing of Labourers and Servants, whereby neces∣sary Hands were wanting for Tillage and Harvest. From hence it is that we can neither get our Rents, nor the Countrey men Money for their necessary subsist∣ence. In this their deplorable Condition they are almost sunk into despair, at the In∣telligence given them of a Debt of four or five Millions yet remaining, after the six Millions paid by them, or raised out of the Revenue; and that this must ne∣cessarily be advanced this Session, be∣sides a Fund of three Millions more the next Spring, for the ensuing Campaign. You very well know, that it was the expectation of the Commonalty of the Kingdom, that at the last Meeting of the Parliament they would have perfec∣ted the Bill of Commission of Enquiry for the Money already given, how it had been expended. Your Fellow Commo∣ners challenge at your hands a satis∣faction in this particular, before you give a farther Supply; and this with the strictest Examination. And since we are so inclinable to pur∣sue Dutch Councils, and espouse their Interest; it is but reasonable we should likewise imitate their Constitution; especially in this particular of Raising Money, not to determine it before the Commons (as their States do in the Af∣fairs of greatest Moment) consult, and obtain the Approbation of all the Coun∣ties, Cities, and Burroughs; which, if ever, at this Juncture is most requisite, and would be the greatest Instance of the People's true Liberty, that ever had been granted by any of our Kings, in confirmations of our Magna Charta. This they judge the more reasonable and just, because it is every where brui∣ted, that the Officers both at Sea and Land, especially the English, are nine or eleven Months in Arrears of Pay. I have it from a Captain, who served in Ireland under all the Hardships of Duke Schomberg's Campaign, that when they arrived at Dublin, they had but three Months Pay of thirteen then owing to them, with a Complement, that they should stay there to spend it. Besides this, we are told of the vast Summs owing for Money taken up at Bankrupts Interest, and for Provisions also of Ammunition, taken up on Cre∣dit at excessive Rates; and farther, I am told, that if we had not seized the Swe∣dish Ships, laden with Masts, Pitch, Tar, and Materials for Cordage, we could not out of our exhausted Stores, have rigged out our Fleet at this Season, when it was well known, how infinite∣ly provided it was two years since. Farthermore, the Common Soldiers make a general Complaint, that they scarcely have had subsistence Money, whereby they have been necessitated, ei∣ther to take free quarter, or rob and pil∣fer, or over-awe their Hosts to take what they would please to give them, though some are so good natured as to pawn their Coats and Hats for Bread and
Drink: All which conduceth to the far∣ther impoverishing of the Countrey. It must indeed be owned, that it may be thro' a politic Design, the Officers are thus treated, whereby they may be kept in a stricter dependence on the Govern∣ment, for fear, lest if they should quit the Service, they might lose their Ar∣rears; and many dying, by Sickness or Battel, will save the publick so much as is owing to them; for I believe you can find few Instances, that any Heirs or Ex∣ecutors, Widows or Orphans, were bet∣ter for the Legacies of Arrears, either left by Officers, or Common Soldiers, or Seamen. Upon the whole, I find that many inquisitive and judicious Persons, calculating the Income of the Exche∣quer, and the Expence, are of opinion, that there is no reason for such Arrears, but think it demonstrable that either there is some secret Agreement, which must be concealed from the Nation, to furnish the Confederates with Summs of Money from hence, or that the foreign Troops are better paid than the English, or that by Combination Treasures are hoarded up by our Ministers of State for a comfortable Subsistence against a Storm. It hath ever been the care, as it is the Duty of the House of Commons, to sup∣ply the publick Wants of the Govern∣ment with Money proportionable to the necessities of Affairs: But withall they have been carefull in all Kings Reigns, to see that the Money so given was tru∣ly expended, for those ends for which it was given. And they have stifly denied Supplies, till they were satisfied in the necessity, and with the publick Emolu∣ment which was like to accrew to the Common-wealth by such Expence, and have been allways carefull to avoid fo∣reign Councils and Forces, from having Influence over the Government. And when upon weighty Considerations they have thought it expedient to give Money, they have taken special care to intrust the Managery thereof in safe Hands, as may be found, upon all such occasions, in the Journals of the House; otherwise they deserved not to be the People's Representatives and Trustees. You know full well you have been singled out, upon special confidence in you, to prepare and consent, on their behalf, to such Laws as are for publick benefit; yet it is well known, that in the respective Countries you leave be∣hind you a much greater number of Persons of Quality, no ways inferiour to your selves in Estates, Interest, and love of their Countrey's Prosperity; so that in common prudence, you ought to have regard how you oppress them, their Relations, Friends and Depen∣dents. Wherefore in the matter of Money, you ought, in respect to them as well as your own Posterities, to suspend your giving of Money till you be able to give them sufficient satisfaction, that what hath been given is truly expended, and that the raising of more is for the pub∣lick Good of the Commonwealth of the Kingdom. I presume the Inducement which will sway you most in this matter, will be that Ireland may be subdued, and that France may be brought to so low a con∣dition, that the King thereof may be compelled to yield to the Emperour, the King of Spain, and other the Con∣federates, what ever he hath by his Arms dispossessed them of. If therefore I make it appear, that it hath not been the aim of such as have influenced our Affairs, to reduce Ire∣land, but rather, as it appears by the consequence of things, the Design hath been, under that Pretext, to raise Mo∣ney to distribute amongst the Confede∣rates, according to some secret Articles not communicated to the Houses, and to purchase at any rate foreign Forces, to the great hazard of the enslaving us to them. And if I make it appear that without the Confederates will bear a considerable part of our Charge, we shall not be able to keep in conjuncti∣on with them; or can, though we
should pawn our Estates to raise Mo∣ney, be able to bring France to terms, as affairs are managed abroad. If, I say, I clear these two Points to your sa∣tisfaction, I hope you will then con∣clude, that the giving more Money will be but powring Oyl into the Fire, which will finally consume us. I shall begin with Ireland. It is well known that when the P. of O. took upon him the Administration of the Government, before the Conven∣tion had conferred upon him the Regal Title, the Protestant Interest in Ireland was little inferiour to that of the Ro∣man Catholicks, and a small Supply from hence would have cast the Scales. There are Noblemen who can tell, if they please, that even then an Overture was made, that upon distributing 30000 li. among certain Officers in Ireland, they would have undertaken that the Army there should have sub∣mitted. And it is as well known to those Noble Persons who it was that would not allow above 20000 li. to be expended on that account, and so the Project fell: But we have reason to believe, that to support the Confede∣rate Interest, twenty times as much hath been disbursed to Germanes, Danes, and Dutch, to the Swiss-Cantons, the Duke of Savoy, and other Allies. It is worth a serious Enquiry, whence it happened, that Collonel Lundy, who was accused for having treacherously deserted the Defence of London-Derry, and Col. Richards, and Cunningham, who were charged with Cowardise, in not adventuring to conduct the Forces under their Command to the Relief of the same, were onely imprisoned and cashiered, but were never brought to any Tryall. Or why M. G. Kirk lay six Weeks in Lough Foyle, without attemp∣ting to relieve the Town, till 5000 of the Soldiers and Townsmen were dead by Famine and Sickness; yet when it was reduced to the last Extremity, he found it no difficult work to send in Supplies. When D. Schomberg went to Ireland, he carried with him an Army sufficient to have vanquished a much greater force than King James then had, considering they were neither disciplin'd, arm'd, nor provided with Artillery or Ammu∣nition in any Plenty at that time; so that he might with much facility have then marched to Dublin, the Soldiers being exceeding earnest for that pur∣pose. But, it seems, it was not then thought seasonable to effect so necessa∣ry a Work; but that great General, very advisedly, suffered two parts of his Army to perish in the most misera∣ble manner that ever English-men did in their own Camp. Let us now reflect upon what hath been done since the Success at the Boyne. When K. James was fled, and, as our publick Intelligences informed us, there were not 2000 Irish left in a Body; Was this Victory pursued? Or the af∣frighted Irish closely followed? No, they had time given them to rally a∣gain, about Athlone, Limmerick, and Galloway. To this may be added, that Duke Schomberg declined the arming of the Irish Protestants, till absolute Necessi∣ty compelled him to it, for the Recruit of his Army, and the like was denied after advancing beyond Dublin; till the News came of the Defeat the French had given us at Sea: Whereas those Men, both for their Zeal to the Cause, and their Experience in the Countrey, as well as unaptness to the Diseases of the Climate, might have been of grea∣test use, if a speedy reducing of that Kingdom had been designed. It must be owned that there were some, who truly desiring Dispatch, mo∣ved that a Proclamation might be pub∣lished, whereby such Terms might be afforded, as the Irish, during their Con∣sternation, might be the likeliest to comply with; and thereupon yield up their Arms, and Strong Holds: For which purpose it was proposed, that such as so submitted, might be par∣doned
Life, and enjoy their Estates ac∣cording to the Settlement in K. Charles the 2d's time; imposing some pecunia∣ry Mulcts on some few of the most ob∣stinate, and that an Indempnity should be granted to the common sort, upon yielding their Arms, and obliging them∣selves to Obedience. But this was opposed, and it is known by whom, upon a Reason well worthy Observation, viz. That a Promise had been made to the Counts and Officers, Germanes, Danes, and Dutch, that they should have Lands distributed among them, after the Conquest of the Countrey: Which Promise could not be perfor∣med, if any of the Irish who had been in Arms, were permitted to enjoy their Estates. From hence we may learn the true reason why the Dutch and Danes brought over so many hundreds of Women and Children, who went over to Ireland with the Army, no doubt on Promise of sharing that Kingdom, and planting Dutch and Danish Colonies, as a Re∣ward of their Service. Upon those Reasons that sort of De∣claration was laid aside, and the other published, which onely pardoned the submitting Commoners their Lives, but left all of the better sort to the Rage of the Soldiers, and the Penalty of forfei∣ted Rebels. Upon the Publication of this, all the Gentlemen, and Landed Men, finding what they were to relie upon, combin'd with great Resolution to defend them∣selves, and their Countrey, by a vigo∣rous Resistence: So that we are like to lose many thousand of Lives, e'er they be reduced to the condition they were in, in July last, besides the Expence of some Millions of Treasure. Surely, if the putting an end to the Wars in that Kingdom had been sin∣cerely intended, it had been no difficult matter to have penned a Declaration in such Terms as might have effected it: We have seen modern as well as old Pre∣sidents of Declarations, which have ef∣fected great Designs, when they were no whit observed, after Possession of what the Prince aimed at. But, as if it had not been sufficient to debar the better sort of all hopes of subsistence, an after Declaration was a∣greed upon, at once to impoverish the whole Body of the Commoners, more than if they had paid twelve Subsidies, and that was by debasing the Brass and Copper Coine. In the time of K. James this Money was made currant, and the Soldiers were paid in it, and once in a Month, or so, the Pay-Masters took in the Brass-money from Suttlers, or others who re∣ceived it from the Soldiers, if they de∣sired an Exchange, and they received Gold or Silver for it. But this Procla∣mation sinking this Brass Money to the intrinsick Value, whereby every 20 s. was scarce worth 2 d. it was such a sud∣den impoverishing of the Common Peo∣ple, and Tradesmen, as was unsupporta∣ble: So that this so wisely contrived Pro∣clamation, by little and little, by com∣mon Consent is little observed; for I am informed, by one lately come from Dublin, that a Crown of that Coine of K. James's now passeth for 4 s. I think very few will judge these two Proclamations to have contributed any thing to the Reduction of that King∣dom, but rather to the exasperating the whole Body of the Nation, even to the Rapparies; and I am well assured, that one whose Pen was used in the draught of these, is so sensible of the mischievous Effects of them, that he wisheth he had lost the fore Finger of his Hand, when he was ordered to write them. But these have not been the onely Re∣moras of annexing that Kingdom to this Crown, but the fatal Council of laying Siege to Limmerick, hath impeded it more than any thing hitherto. If the Army had marched to Cork and Kingsale, those two important Places might have been reduced in six hours, without the Treasure that has been since expended in order to reduce them; and then we
had sooner been Masters of all the Ports towards England, and the famous Road of Kingsale might have been a secure Harbour for our Fleet, and by a Block∣ade Limerick might have been kept from doing mischief, and a Siege laid to it at a more seasonable opportunity. From all these instances I think it may rationally be concluded, that some Peoples designs have been to keep up the Trade of War. I cannot condemn Foreigners, or Souldiers of Fortune; by such arts they are enriched, without much hazard: but I think the wisdom or integrity of our Countreymen, who are consulted in such matters, deserves no great commendation from any who love Settlement and Peace rather than War and Confusion. But surely it behoves all Members of the Commons House, who are chosen as the Tutelars of their Countrey, to make a strict enquiry into these particu∣lars, and be well satisfied in the dispo∣sal of the late Moneys, by which a great many are known to have mightily en∣creased their Fortunes, while so many Countrey Farmers, Housekeepers and Tradesmen are reduced to Alms, and so many true Protestants plundered and abused by our outragious Foreigners and profligate English Souldiers, as the Eminent Mr. Hill of Hilsbury can wit∣ness, where they cut in pieces the very Hangings and Curtains to make Bree∣ches thereof; neither did the Lady An∣trim, the Lady Arglass, or that ancient Gentleman Sir Butler, notwith∣standing the near relation he hath to the D. of Ormond, and his Protection granted, escape any better. But to finish the matter of Ireland: It is true, new Supplies under the E. of Marlborough are sent, but that is done for another end, that the Dutch may be transported back hither, as Persons more to be confided in here, and to be taken more care of, it being more con∣formable to the grand design, that En∣glish, Irish and Scots may destroy one another, provided that the Pretorian Band of Foreigners be preserved. I now come to the second Head; wherein I shall endeavour to prove, that notwithstanding our giving of Money, as liberally as desired, we cannot expect to give any great stop to the French K's Conquests, as Matters now stand. I intend no Panegyrick on that great King, though, if he were not our Ene∣my, he might deserve it above any of his Predecessors. I think it cannot be pa∣ralleled in History, that he singly, with∣out the Conjunction of any other Prince, should maintain a War in his Enemies Country, against the whole Empire, the Crown of Spain, the Low Countries, Us, and Savoy: So that he is entirely sur∣rounded with the potentest Enemies that any Country was ever begirt with; and yet notwithganding, no one of them have been able to make an Impression upon him, but he hath defended himself, and annoy'd his Adversaries with a Suc∣cess beyond the expectation of Mankind. The D. of Savoy, sollicited by the Em∣perour and Spain, and incourag'd by our Mony, hath been the latest who entred into Confederacy against him, and is like so be the first who will repent it, having very nigh lost his Dukedom, as it was, before, to K. Henry, Grandfather to this present French King. The States cannot be able to subsist long. A most intelligent Gentleman, who attended our Army in their Service this Spring, told me, That one of their considerablest Magistrates told him, that they would use their utmost Effort this Summer to maintain the War; but if they had not some extraordinary Success, they must make the best Terms they could; for they were no longer able to sustain the Charge of it, considering the loss of their Trade. What shall we therefore judge they can do, seing they never suffered so great a Loss since they were a free State, as they have done this Year at Fleury, and at Sea, except when this very King over∣run almost all their Countrey, Holland it self scarce excepted; the preventing of which destruction was ascribed to the interposing of K. Charles II. As to their excessive Taxes I shall give but Two Instances,
The first I had related from a Trades∣man here, who received it from his Correspondent there, That a Gentleman having the Tuition of two Orphans, paid the whole annual Income of their Estate, which was 1500 Pounds a Year, and this Year being assessed 500 Guilders more than the last, was forced to yield up his Tuition to the Magistrates. The other is what the first mention∣ed Gentleman told me, That while he was there very many gave over their Hou∣ses and Trades, by reason of excessive Taxes. He knew some Coffee Houses, who paid 50 Pounds for Licence for one Year, be∣sides the Tax according to the Rent of their Houses, upon their Trades, and personal Estates, with the general Excise. These, I hear, are Presidents inten∣ded to be follow'd in Raising of Mony here, together with a new Imposition on Chimnys, to be purchas'd at ten years value, and the Sale of such confiscated Estates in Ireland, as are not receiv'd for the Uses before specifi'd. But I think these two last will find few Adventurers. How the States, or at least the Dutch Seamen, will resent the Lord Torring∣ton's suffering them to sustain the Loss on our Coast, without affording them Relief, we shall not know, till there be some Joint Engagement against the French Fleet, especially since after such, upon the whole, I do not wonder that we have such Rumours of the Dutch Endeavours to make a separate Peace, as they did once, when they were in League with the Emperour and King of Spain, leaving them in the lurch. And it is to be suspected, that if the States indeavour it not speedily, the Rable will compell them to it; for it is well known that there still remains a Party there, who never loved the P. of O. and are no better inclin'd to him as King. As to the Emperour, this Years Suc∣cesses of the Turks in Hungary and Tran∣silvania, must necessitate him to con∣sent to a Peace, either in Christendom, or with the Port. The latter he cannot effect, as Matters now stand, upon ho∣nourable Terms: And the Venetians be∣ing animated by the taking of the im∣portant Place, Napoli di Malvasia, will be very sollicitous to pursue their good Success with all Vigour imaginable on their Side; and we may be assured that the Pope, being so deeply interested in the advancing the Prosperity of that Re∣publick, will leave nothing unattempted to induce the Emperour to prosecute the War against the Infidels, rather than here. And the Germane Princes, suffici∣ently harassed by the War with France, wherein they have suffer'd so much Bur∣ning and Devastation, even to the pay∣ing of Contributions beyond the Rhine, will gladly embrace the Overtures of Peace with that Crown, especially fin∣ding that this Year, hitherto, they have not been able to perform one Action, the Benefit whereof may countervail the Charge of one Brigade of their Army. Farthermore, it is to be consider'd, how disadvantagiously the Confederates make War against France: The several Princes are necessitated in their several Districts, to obtain the consent of their respective States to raise Mony; after which there must be an adjusting of all Things by Plenipotentiaries. or Confe∣rence of those absolute Princes, by which means they are generally so late in the Field, that the French King ef∣fects a great part of his Designs, e'er they come from their Winter Quarters. And when they are advanc'd, the Princes have almost as many independant Gene∣rals, as they have Armies; and it is well known with what Difficulty the Ger∣mane Princes, especially the Emperour, raiseth Mony to maintain so expensive a War. Wheras 'tis certain, the French King hath made a secure Fund for nine Years beforehand, to defray all the sta∣ted and contingent Charges of the War, and can with the same facility renew it at the Expiration of that Term, by a singular Way he hath above all other Princes, that even in times of Peace the whole Revenue of his Kingdom comes into his Exchequer every 4 or 5 Years.
He ordereth his Armies by his own single Command, without any other co∣ordinate Power, or dependence on the Suffrages of others, whereby all his Af∣fairs are managed with secrecy and stea∣diness. From whence we must conclude, that he is likelier to weary out the Con∣federates, even upon the Defensive part at their Charges, than they are to gain any Advantage upon him, even though we were able to provide our Quota of the Expence, and supply fresh Armies in conjunction, and according to the Ex∣igence of the Confederates. But what can we hope to doe, when the Sheaf of Arrows is unloosed, and any of the Confederates shall make a sepa∣rate Peace? Can it be conceiv'd that we can be able to cope with the French K. when the Circumvallation is broken, and he shall be at Liberty to turn an un∣interrupted Force upon us; when we are exhausted by Taxes, and so divided among our selves upon account of the Interest of King James, and the ill un∣derstanding betwixt the Ch. of England and the Dissenters, the Monarchical and Common-wealth Men? The Case being thus, I think we ought seriously to consider for whose Cause we began the War: It was first proclaimed here; and it was one of the great Eye∣sores, both to the French, and Confede∣rates, that King James would join with neither Party; but that he designed to have stood neuter. But the States and Confederates found a means to make him flie for Refuge to that Prince who solely was not an Enemy to his Person, and was likeliest to protect him, though he had declined to join in a League with him; which, as matters fell out, had been his onely Security. So that upon the whole we may con∣clude, that the Revolution here was the Contrivance of the Confederates, but principally of Spain and the States, to make a powerfull Diversion against France, and engage us in their Quarrel; and to add the whole Force of England to their Defence. Since therefore the War was begun, and is continued for the Advantage of the States, and those Princes, and hath been so destructive to our selves, that, as it is managed, besides the inestimable Losses we have sustained, we are forced to contribute so great a share of our own Money to support them. It cannot but be thought most advi∣sable, before you consent to raise Money, to send Commissioners to the States, to know whether they be able and willing to continue the War, and such onely to be sent, who may discover the Secrets of their Councils, and their Strength; and if they find them in both agreeable to our Wishes, then to know what share they will bear of the Expences; for it is but reasonable, that as we sustain all this Misery and Damage for their sakes, and in subservience to their single Interest, they, and not we, should bear the Bur∣then. For to tell us at this time of the day, that we have put K. William upon the War, is a cold Consolation, and an ill Requital for our Easiness to subject: our selves to Dutch Stratagems. If therefore the States and Confede∣rates will pay the Debt of four Millions, be it more or less, I think our Country Men will be content to submit to the raising a Fund of two Millions more for the next Compaign, and upon no other Terms, I think, it can be advisable to grant any Money at all, nor then, with∣out a just Account of what is expended. There was something more added, but it was onely Assurance of Friendship, and that it was from an earnest Desire to serve his Countrey that he had composed it: Such therefore as it is I send you, and judge you will think I have fully obey'd your Com∣mands, who am, Yours assuredly.
