F2010 R28022 10329767 44874
THE Testimony of GOD To those Rulers, Teachers and People of this present Age, where the Headship of the Church is given to Man, and to such as strive to have it so, and to those that set themselves in the seat of God, by taking upon them that which properly belongs to God and Christ, who are one. Wherein Gods Controversie with them is plainly demonstrated. Opened and given by the Spirit of Truth, which is made ma∣nifest in that earthen vessel which is called George Fox the younger. HEarken O ye Kings, and Give ear ye Rulers, Teachers and Peo∣ple of all sorts (who are striving against the Spirit of God and its workings:) The Lords Controversie is great this day, and few there be that rightly understand it, therefore are ye confounded, broken and breaking one of another, and cannot be healed, until y return to, & receive & obey that which will shew you with what Gods con∣troversie is: therefore consider this, The inspiration of the Almighty giveth understanding, Job 32.8. Yea, the life of the Immortal word, which is the Right of men, John 1.4. giveth to understand the mind of the Eternal God; There∣fore to the Light which the word hath enlightned you withal, take heed, John 1.9. for that is the faithful witnesse for God, and to that in you all (who shall hear the Testimony which God hath given me to bear shall I be made manifest; for that shall answer to the words of the Most High, which I have to utter; Therefore let all flesh be silent, that Truth may take place, and that the words of the Holy One may be heard and received. Thus saith the Lord God, My Controversie hath not been, nor is not with man any further then as he is departed from me, and joyned to, and become one with the man of sin, that wicked one, the son of perdition, who is exalted in man above me the Eternal God, and opposeth me, and sitteth in my Temple,
shewing himself to be God, in taking upon him that which properly belon∣geth unto me, for he commands and leads them with whom my contro∣versie is, into whatsoever and whithersoever he pleaseth, and they are be∣come subjects unto his Kingdom, so that they will not that I should Reign over them: but they have taken councel of my Adversary, who hath taught them also to take (as it were) my Honour (which I will not give to another) unto themselves: and so they are become one with my Adversary: and by his power they also (in many things) have set themselves in my stead, in ta∣king upon them to do things which did properly belong unto me, and they in thus doing have sleighted and rejected the thing that I have done; and thus the Abomination which maketh desolate, standeth in the place where it ought not; For which cause I will visit saith the Lord God. And now You with whom Gods Controversie is, (who have given the head∣ship of the Church to man) that you may further see your errour. Mark and consider these things, It did properly belong to the mighty Eternal God, to Ordain a Head for his Church, and he unalterably Ordained one Head thereof, which is Christ, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the quickening Spirit: Yea, he gave him to be Head of the Body, which is the Church, the fulnesse of him that filleth all in all, that he in all things might have the prehe∣minence, in whom all fulness dwells, 1 Col. 18, 19. Ephes. 5.23. & 1.22, 23. And by the appointment of the Father, he giveth forth all the Lawes and Ordinances which his Church (that is the Congregation of the Righteous) are now to observe; and whosoever will not hear him in all things, and fol∣low his leadings, and obey his voice, are to be cut off; For all judgement is committed unto him, John 5.22.27. But many of you who (in several Nations) are called Christians (with whom the Lords controversie is great, unto the dishonour of God) You have taken upon you to Ordain others Heads of the Church then Christ, and that they shall give forth Laws & Ordinances for the Church to observe, and they that will not hear your Heads, & observe their Laws and Ordinances, you will cut them off, or persecute them; and in thus doing you have slighted and rejected the thing that God hath done, and ye have set your selves in his stead; And this is a great cause of Gods controversie with this Age, and until this abomination be removed and broken down, God will remove and break down all in whomsoever it doth reside, and all such as would uphold it, whatsoever their names be called; For whosoever will strive to uphold that Authority in themselves or others, which properly belongs to God and Christ (who are one) shall not be able to stand in this the day of Gods controversie; neither can the Nations be settled in true peace, un∣till that be given up to Christ, which properly unto him belongs, and is his Right, for though the Lord hath long born with great patience, yet now
the time hasteth, that the Heir must be possest of that which the Father hath given unto him, and they that will not freely give up to him his due, must be broken. And now, O England, to Thee I speak (mark) this did not serve to end the Controversie of God with Thee, when thou didst take the Head∣ship of the Church from the Pope, and gave it to the (outward) King; Neither did that end Gods Controversie with Thee, when thou didst take it from thy King again, and gave the Nature or Power of the Head-ship (though not the Name) unto an Assembly of Priests called the Synod, whom thou Authorizedst to give forth directions and Ordinances for the Church to observe, and if after thy long Changing of it thus, one from another, thou now give it to thy (outward) King again, (as many in thee strives to do) this will not end Gods Controversie with thee neither; For these things do not at all answer the intent of God, for the Lord will not own, that a King should be called the Supream Head of a Church, no more then he will own that a Pope should be so called; Neither will he own any to exercise the Office of Headship in his Church, but Christ only, Whom he hath given unalterably to be the Head thereof; Therefore whe∣ther it be Pope, King, Priests, or any others, that will not submit to Christ, and own Him alone to be the Head of the Church, must be slain by the Sword of his Justice; Therefore O England, take heed what thou dost, and provoke not the Lord yet further against thee in this particular, for, until the Head-ship be wholly given up to Christ, Gods Controversie cannot cease. And furthermore, it doth properly belong unto God and Christ (who are one) to make and Ordain whomsoever they Please to be Ministers, and those Ministers are to follow those orders and directions, and to declare those words unto the People (and not what they will themselves) which the most High gives unto them, and they are to go to such places as He sends them unto, to declare His will, and they are to receive that for their Labour which He alloweth them, and they are to abide in those places, observing those orders and directions which he gives unto them, and they are not to remove, but at His pleasure, and as He gives them free∣dom, or by His order, which they must observe. But in these things also, Man hath set himself in the stead of God; For men in these Nations have made, and some yet do make and ordain whomsoever they please to be Ministers, and those Ministers are to fol∣low those orders and directions, and to speak those words to the People which Man giveth unto them, (and also they may in some things speak more if they will) and they are to go to such places as man sends them un∣to, and there to declare that which man in his will hath prescribed and set down; And they are to receive for this their Labour that which man al∣loweth them (with what more they can get to satisfie their greedy minds)
and they are to abide in those places, observing those orders and directi∣ons which man gives unto them, and they are not to remove but at mans pleasure, by his order, or as he gives them freedom. And thus hath man, even the man of sin, set himself in the stead of God, and would force all to bow unto him, and so man in this state hath rejected the will of God, and his work; for such a one whom God makes a Mi∣nister, and sends unto places to declare his will (unto the People, as he hath received it from God) such a one is counted a Vagabond and a distur∣ber of the peace, and persecuted by such as are exalted in their fleshly minds, above the witnesse of God; And for this cause also is Gods Contro∣versie with Nations, and they cannot be established in true peace, until they give unto God and Christ that which to them belongs, (which they have held from God by usurpation) therefore whether it be Popes or Kings or Parliaments, or any other men that will assume this to themselves which alone belongs to God and Christ, they must and shall be broken, let their strength be never so great: For the Lord (who is mighty) will take to himself this his proper Right in making Ministers which shall observe his Will, and he will provide for them, and such as are made by man he will Con∣found; Therefore O Nations, take heed what you do, and run not your selves any more into these things, least you further increase Gods anger against you. And as Christ is the Anthor of the true Faith and not man, so he is the Defender of it, and not man; Therefore that Title must be given unto Him, and not unto man, or else Gods Controversie cannot cease. Again, it is Gods proper Right to give Laws unto man, Isa. 33.22. For their is one Law-giver, who is able to save and to destroy, Ia. 4.12. And the Law is not made for the Righteous, but for the unrighteous, 1 Tim. 1 9. And the Law is to go forth of Zion, Mica 4.2. Isa. 2.3. Now in this particular also, man hath set himself in the seat of God, and so hath dishonoured the one Law-giver, by setting up many law givers, who not being guided by the pure Spirit of the Lord, have made Laws contrary to the Will of God, whereby the Righteous have been Punished and oppressed. Now in this particular, man hath exceedingly corrupted his wayes, for which cause-Gods Controversie is exceeding great, and until man submit to the one Law-giver in this particular also, (who is able both to save and to destroy) Gods Controversie cannot cease; for the Law which God gives, is not against the Righteous, but against the unrighteous. But how are the Laws of these Nations like to be such, (let the witnesse of God in you all answer) seeing by man it is given into the hands of man in such a manner as it is to make Lawes, (Mark.) Have you not read in the Scriptures of Truth, that the Flock of Christ is a little Flock,
Luke 12.32. And that, though Israeh be as the sand of the Sea, yet but a rem∣nant shall be saved, Isa. 10 22. Rom. 9.27. And again, strait is the way, and narrow is the Gate that leadeth unto Life, and few there be that find it, (mark that) because broad is the way and wide is the Gate that leadeth to de∣struction, and many there be that go in thereat, Mat. 7.13, 14. Now mark and consider these things, seeing that the Righteous are fewer in number then the unrighteous, & that the Law makers are chosen by the most voices; (and that of the richest people out wardly) how are the Righteous like to be preserved in outward freedom by the lawes that are so made? Doth not the World love his own? John 15.19. And will it not provide for its own life and liberty? And is the life & liberty of the Righteous one with the world, (Read Wisdom, the 2 Chap.) Will not that which is for the freedom of the one, be for the bondage of the other; Oh! the Lord hath be∣held this abomination, and his Soul abhors it, and his controversie is with the Nations, because of the grieveous Oppression, Oathes, and Vio∣lence, which fills the Earth partly by this means; Oh! how do the rich oppresse the poor? and draw them before the Judgement seats, Ja. 2.6. And how do the haughty vaunt themselves over the meek? And how is Judgement turned backward? For he that departeth from ini∣quity maketh himself a prey to this Generation, Isa 59.14, 15. And though several overturnings have been, yet is iniquity stil at a great height, and increaseth exceedingly; And what will it advantage a Child to flee from a Bear and joyn to a Lyon? Verily the day is come, wherein there is no hiding place of safty for the Righteous, but purely in the Name of the Lord, and blessed are they that alone trust therein. For the help of the meek standeth in the Name of the Lord, (Psal. 124.8. Hos. 13.9.) And happy are they that abide in it, for the day will be terrible and dreadful unto all that have not a habitation in the Name of the Lord the King of Saints; For Violence and Oppression shall come to the full, and then shall the Lord Roar out of his Habitation, and he shall strike the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth with Astonishment, and Faintnesse, and Deadnesse of Spirit, shall ceaze upon the mighty men, and weaknesse and fear up∣on the strong and bold of the Earth, for the Lord will appear in his mighty Power to take the Kingdom, and to relieve the oppressed, and to help the needy, and they shall be strong in him. Be wise therefore Oy Kings, and learn Wisdom ye Judges and Rulers of the Earth, Return unto the Lord & serve him with fear, tremble before the Glory of his Presence, & kisse the Son, least he be angry and you perish by the way; For his wroth shall suddenly burn, and then, blessed are all they that trust in Him, (Read Vsal.) Therefore strive not with the Lord any longer, by withholding his Right from Him, but give unto him his due, and re∣sign
up to him and his Anoynted the things that he doth require, for the Lamb must get the victory, and he must have the Preheminence in all things, yea, he must be the Supream head in all Spiritual things, and the only Law-giver to his People; Yea, he with the higher Power must ordain and send forth Ministers, and Labourers into his Church, Vineyard, and Har∣vest, for he only can fit them for the work, and not man; And he will take care that they shall not lack any thing, (Luke 22.35.) For the Earth is the Lords & the fulnesse thereof, (Psal. 24.1.) And he will constrain people with his love (which is better then outward force) to give his Ministers food and Raiment when they have need thereof, and they will be contented there∣withall, 1 Tim. 6.8. Therefore medle not with these things any more, I warn and exhort you in the Love of God: For it belongs not unto you, but unto God and Christ who are one, and let Christ only be acknowledg∣ed to be the defender of the Faith, who is able to perform that office to the full which man is not. And let the one Law-giver be minded and owned in man, to give forth Lawes to punish transgressors, that so the Judgement may be the Lords and not mans, for so ought it to be, and he that ruleth over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God, (2 Sam. 23.3.) And they that fear the Lord and hate Coveteousnesse ought to be Judges and Rulers, (Exod. 18.21.) To see and take care that the Law of God be put in due ex∣ecution, Judging righteously, without respect to persons, (Prov. 24.23.) Doing to all men, as they would they should do unto them, keeping out of Bribes and gifts, that the eye may not be blinded, (Exod. 23.6, 7, 8.) And such Rulers as these, will the Lord set up and Honour, unto whom he will plainly shew his Righteous just Law, which he will have executed upon transgressors, and men shall be subject unto them for conscience sake, and they only shall be a terror to evil doers, and encouragers of them that do well, and they shall be gaurded with Righteousnesse, and the Lord shall blesse them with the dew of Heaven, and they shall send forth a good savour into the Earth, and then shall the Inhabitants of the Earth learn Righteousnesse; For Judgement shall run down as Water, and Righteousnesse as a mighty stream; for the Judgements of the Lord shall be rightly executed, and self-ends shall be denied; And then shall Praises, Dominion, Honour, and Obedience, and all that is the Lords, be yeild∣ed unto Him the King of Saints; And vntil this come to passe, Gods Controversie shall not Cease; But there will be Breaking, and Overturning, Oppressing, and spoiling and Insnaring one of another, and they that come uppermost, and will not give unto the Lord his due, but set themselves in his Seat, what∣soever words they professe, or let them appear never so strong in the arm of flesh, yet they shall be broken down with dishanour; And Plagues and Tor∣ments,
shall be the portion of the Hypocrite that bows to deceit; And Babylon must fall and perish, for strong is the Lord which judgeth her, (Rev. 18.8.) And in vain do men seek to establish themselves in that which the Lord is against, and wo will be unto them that are found in the State of Caperna∣um and Edom, (Read Obediah 3.4. Mat. 11..) And now ye Rulers, Teachers, and People, remember you are warned, and it is in true love to your Soules and Bodies, therefore Repent whilest you have time left you, that you may be saved, though it be so as by fire; And speedily resigne up to the Lord, that which properly belongeth unto him, for verily the day dawneth apace, which shall reveale that man of sin more and more, who hath set himself in the seat and stead of God, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and abolish and destroy with the Brightnesse of his coming, (2 Thes. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.) And the day of the Lord shall even so come as a thief in the night, and when the wicked shall say peace and safty, then shall come upon them sudain destruction, even as the travel of a woman with Child, which by no means can be escaped, 1 Thes. .2, 3.) Be still O ye Saints of the most High God, keep clear of Babylon, take heed of being insnared by her, cleave not to her flatteryes in any wise, but follow the Lamb, whithersoever he leadeth you, and hold fast the word of his patience in the true Integrity of your hearts, that so ye may stand and indure the tryal to the end, and whatsoever you suffer for the Testi∣mony of God, you shall have a full reward for it, if you faint not; This in the Word of the Lord, is unto you. Lambeth House, the 28th. 4th. Moneth. 1660. Post-Script. ANd if I could write no more, yet this is the Testimony of Truth, to the Ru∣lars, Teachers, and People of this present age (in what Nations soe∣ver this may come) mark, you must all come to the Light of the Lord Je∣sus Christ (the Lamb of God) who hath enlightened you, that with the Light you may come to see what is contrary to the mind and will of God, both in your Lawes, and Governments, and in the constitutions thereof, and in your Mini∣stry,
and Worship, and in the constitutions thereof, and in all your Conversati∣ons; And that which you see with the light, to be contrary to the mind and will of God, (in any of these things before mentioned you must deny, and give it up to be consumed by the Spirit of Judgement and burning, and you must give your full consent that the Lamb of God (the Light of the World, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the quickning Spirit who is one with the Eternal Father) may have the preheminence in all things; And that he may Rule in you all, over you all, and lead and guide you all in all things, before you can witnesse that Gods Controversie with you is fully come to an end; And all them of the Nations that are saved, must walk in the Light of the Lamb; Therefore let every particu∣lar in their several stations, come to a true honest search speedily, and cast off, and deny that which the light will let you see that God is against, that so happily God may stay the mighty Judgement (which otherwise must come) which is nigh at the door, which shall sweep away the ungodly. These are faithful and true sayings, and things which must shortly be fulfilled, therefore, blessed will every one be that will hear and obey the Counsel of the most High, for the day of the Lord draweth nigh. And now ye Rulers, if ye resolve to build up that which God hath thrown down by an out-stretched Arm, and if you strive to establish your selves in that which Gods Controversie hath been, and yet is against, you will undoe your selves for ever, for you will engage the Lord against you, who assuredly will be too strong for you, and break and confound you, as opposers of his mighty work; Therefore take heed what you doe, the Lords decree shall stand. G. F. THE END. LONDON. Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Signe of the Bull ar Mouth near Aldersgate. 1660.
