F553 R34435 14404061 102330
THE STRIFE OF BRETHREN; AND A TREATY FOR PEACE. Two Sermons. The one, Preached at the Morning Lecture in the Citie of LONDON: The other, More inlarged in ano∣ther Congregation. BY JOHN FATHERS, Master in Arts. Si filij dei sumus pacifici esse debemus nam pacificos esse oportet dei filios, corde mites, sermone simplices, affectione concor∣des, fideliter sibi unanimitatis nexibus cohaerentes. Cypr. de unita. Ecclesiae. LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, and are to be sold, by Christopher Meredith, at the Crane in Pauls Church-yard. 1648.
READER; RIght words are forcible, and a word fitly spoken like apples of gold in pi∣ctures of silver. These Sermons pre∣sent right words in season: they found good acceptance with those that heard them preached; at the intreaty of many of whom they are published by their reverend Au∣thour, and allowed to be printed by Thy servant in the Gospel, JA: CRANFORD. Aug. 26. 1648.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, Lord of Cameron, and Generall of all the PARLIAMENTS Forces. Strength of body and multiplication of Grace and Honour unto perfection. ILLUSTRIOUS SIR; YOur Excellency beaming down lately some favour on your worthless Orator, invites this reflection of an humble gratitude. I am not ignorant how little leasure your most important, and now incumbent af∣faires can allow you unto reading, and yet how much your zeal and piety enforces from them. This treatise is very little, the Title shews you the whole mind of it. It contains the strife of brethren, and a treaty for peace, it comes with confidence to kisse your hand, which the hand of the Allmighty hath made so notably instrumen∣tall for the publique peace. It was visible as the Sunne, how in every quarter of the Kingdome, the nets were spread for the godly, (how soe∣ver
characterd under most unhappy notions of division.) Had not the holy watchman of Israel quickned your vigi∣lancy and activity to breake those snares of death, from whence our soules are escaped. It is more then manifest to all that seek out the works of God [which all do that have pleasure therein] that the same arm, which cut Rahab and wounded the Dragon, hath not lesse wonderfully ap∣peared in your Armies, then in ages past, and by most re∣markable providences hath determined the unkindly dif∣ferences that are amongst us. And since the Highest hath so much honored you, it will be your happinesse, as your goodnesse, to study how to honour him. Amidst other opportunities, the Justice of your cause bespeaks the improvement of this, that your Excellency will be pleased to mediate unto the Par∣liament, to take care, that godly Ministers, whose hands lifted up in the Mount, have strengthned yours in the val∣ley, and the people, who have willingly offered them∣selves, & even undon themselves for the publique, be not a second time undon by those rigid taskmasters amongst whom they live; I mean such dis-affected Constables, O∣verseers, and other Officers, who in proportioning pub∣lique rates, impose the greatest burden upon the best-af∣fected, thereby endeavouring (if they might) to render your Armies, for whom the rates are collected, most de∣testable unto those, to whom they are a protection. Josephus and Terentius in their respective ages, having favour for any request from the Emperours, aspired no∣thing for themselves, but improved all their interests for God, and for the Saints; the one petitioning the safety of sacred truths, the other the liberty of holy Professors. And since I have assumed the boldnesse to beg, suffer me (most benigne Sir) to lie at your Excellencies feete with one suite more. In these labours which were expended on
the Citie of London, I have with all humility and intenti∣on of affection besought the Citie, to lay aside all discon∣tent and passion for a godly peace. And as Christians indeed, to bury all sense and suspition of injury in the grave of Christ. The same Petition I doe most humbly offer unto your Excellency: it is the glory of man to passe by offences. In great men it is greatest glory. It will be the choicest Diamond in the Diademe of your successes, to manage your power by a self-denying spirit of meek∣nesse and humility. Our English Chronicle hath a notable passage between the King of England and the King of Wales, who after an hot dispute of the sword, appointed a treaty of peace at the river Severne, some discourse inclining to a reconci∣liation, these competitors in soveraignty became corri∣valls in humility. The English King forced his horse into the river to offer the first imbraces unto his brother of Wales. The welsh-bloud being overcome with this ad∣mired condescension, lighted from his horse and swam the streame to salute his Corrivall, with these words; Vicit humanitas tua injustitiam meam, invictissime Rex, I need not bring it neerer, your wisdome can see a far off. But your Excellency hath as legible a Copie in your hand, as humane or sacred Story can afford. Abraham who was Uncle and foster-father unto Lot, in the strife between them was the first that sued for peace, and yeel∣ded so farre in his own right, as that, though the whole Land were his by as cleere and sure a title, as the Lord Paramount of all the earth could make, yet he offers Lot to take his portion where he pleased, and for a godly peace was contented with his Nephews leavings. Wee are now entring upon that great treaty of peace, by all that love Jerusalem most vigorously desired, al∣though by some never well affected to the publique, too
violently exacted, upon a designe; But the incompre∣hensible. Wisdome had a designe beyond theirs, season∣ably to appoint it, when his goodnesse had put a blessed advantage into your Excellencies hand to be helpfull un∣to it. There are three sister-graces, mentioned in this labour, which are inseparable from a well-grounded and lasting Peace. Truth, Justice, and Holinesse. Truth and peace, Justice and peace, Holinesse and peace, like Hippocrates twins, will live and die together. I trust, that Victorious Sword in your Excellencies hand, will readily appeare with that two-edged sword in Christs mouth for de∣fence of these.Simsons Ec∣clesiasticall History. It was a brave resolution of Joane Queen of Navarre, to prefer safety of Conscience before assu∣rance of honours, Religion before life; and never to lay down Armes which shee had taken up for the Protestant Cause, but with one of these three Conditions: an assu∣red peace, or an absolute victory, or an honest death. Wee trust the most holy Wisdome is now compassing the first of these, which, as it will be your vertue to pro∣mote, so your Crowne to subscribe. Mean time, wee continue our devout breathings for your Excellency in that divine elegancy of the Royall Prophet; Gird thy Sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty—ride prosperously; because of truth, meeknesse, and righ∣teousnesse, and the right hand of God teach thee terrible things. FAXIT DEUS. FOR, and, TO your Excellency a most humble Petitioner. JOHN FATHERS.
TO MY REVEREND BRETHREN, AND TRULY RELIGIOUS FRIENDS; Who desired the publishing of these ensuing Discourses. Mr ELIDAD BLACKVVELL, Preachers of the Gospel. Mr PETER WITTHAM, Preachers of the Gospel. Mr JOHN CRADICOTT, Preachers of the Gospel. WILLIAM BROVVNE, Esquire. Mr JOHN DETHICKE, Citizens of London. Mr HENRY WHITTINGHAM, Citizens of London. Mr RANDALL DOD, Citizens of London. Mr THOMAS IRONS, Citizens of London. Grace and Peace be multiplied. Right Worthy Sirs; THe words of a Minister must not onely be commoda, profitable to the Auditory, but accommoda, suitable to times and occasions. This necessity surprized these hasty thoughts, which your benignity conceiving to have some availe against the distempers of these times, and of this Citie, have importuned abroad.
As I have ever thought my labours unworthy the Presse, so my selfe have been ever unwilling to publish any thing, that may not finde a roome to stand up in the study, contrary to that Greek proverb,. A great book, a great evill; for if the subject be good, the bulke can be no burthen: I might have been so hap∣pie, to have left something unto posterity, had not the unhappie plunder of these times snatcht from me twenty yeares labours in the Ministery. Whilest nature shall yet fanne a little breath into my nostrills, I shall indeavour not to be found idle, nor un∣fruitfull in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Mean time, my deare friends, your respective importunities have prevailed for a let passe unto these unpolished notes, and if I cannot as yet compasse richer gifts, to cast into the Churches Treasury, the Lord, I know, disdaineth not mites. If I might be any way serviceable to God, or to his people in this weake in∣deavour, as it is the end of your desire, so it is the reward of his labour, who is a faithfull Zelot to the wellfare of Jerusalem. And Your most affectionate brother And servant in the Lord, JOHN FATHERS.
THE STRIFE OF BRETHREN, OR, ABRAHAM and LOT parting. THE FIRST SERMON. GEN. 13.8. And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my Heardsmen and thy Heardsmen; for we are bre∣thren. MY Text states the Times, the Condition of them, and the Desire of people in them. The Condition of them is very sad, and full of un∣naturall strife; and that is the subject of the Text. The Desire of the people is strenuous, if not too furious, for a treaty of peace, and that is the end of the Text; and that is the end of this endeavour likewise: But that our desires be regular, & the Treaty prove a bles∣sing, I shall labour to hold out some light unto you from this Treaty, or rather Intreaty of peace between Abram and Lot, wherein we have something supposed, and something proposed. That which is sup∣posed to be, or like to be, between Abram and Lot, is an unbrotherly strife, Let there be no strife; and the occasion thereof is more then ma∣nifest, an indiscreet falling out between their Heardsmen: Let there be no strife between me and thee, nor between my Heardsmen and thy Heards∣men. That which is proposed, is an effectuall endeavour for peace, and the Argument impelling it, is as powerfull as the endeavour proves effectuall: For we are brethren. There are onely two generall Observations, which I shall hold
forth unto you from the Hypothesis and the Prothesis of the words. The first is this, That there may be an unbrotherly strife betwen godly brethren. The second this, That where such unbrotherly strife is, all possible and speedy means must be used for reconciliation: Let there be no strife between me and thee, nor between my Heardsmen and thy Heardsmen; Fore we are brethren. First then,1. Generall Doctrine. That there may be on unbrotherly strife between godly bre∣thren. Doe you expect that I should prove this? I would the poynt were to prove; but it is past may be. It is too manifest, that there is an un∣brotherly strife between godly brethren. London, England, yea all England will give us in a teste to this truth. What County? What Citie? What Congregation? (yea the Lord be mercifull unto us) what Family scarce is there in the whole Kingdome, into which this Spirit of Division hath not breathed some malignant distemper? Here are two brethren in the Text, as neere as Nature, Society, and Religion could make them, whom neither native Countrey, nor te∣dious travell, nor pinching famine, nor threats of danger or distresse could separate; yet as you shall see in the sequell of this story, such an unhappy breach fell out between them, as that two such ancient and deere friends could not longer live together. Shall I shew you two others,Acts 15.39. who were brethren by Countrey, by Calling, and by Grace, united together in one joynt commission of Apostleship; and yet a very small matter occasioned such a sharp contention between them, as that those which had been very fast companions in love and labour, were provoked to part asunder. Between Abram and Lot the State peace was broken. Between Paul and Barnabas the Church peace was broken. But Englands testimony to the Doctrine premi∣sed, goes beyond both those: For between our unkind brethren, whom yet on both sides we cannot but beleeve, some to be truly god∣ly, both State peace, and Church peace, is not onely broken, but bro∣ken all in pieces; and so broken, as that it is even past the skill of man to find out a way to heale our breaches, unlesse a Divine Arme put in to doe it. Now for the Reasons of these unbrotherly differences, wee shall find enough in the Text, and need not look beyond it, nor indeed will time permit. The Message of this morning exercise be∣ing like that of the Prophets servant, so exceeding hasty, as that it
will not suffer us to salute any thing that lies besides the direct way of the Text. In the Text then we find three occasions or grounds. 1. In the persons between whom this unbrotherly strife is. 2. In their Heardsmen, amongst whom the strife began. 3. In the cause which provoked the falling out among the Heardsmen. 1. In the persons between whom this unbrotherly strife is: Grace there was without question, but there was Nature too, the second A∣dam had his image in them; but the image of the first was visible al∣so: they and we, and every supernaturall birth, have dividing prin∣ciples in us. We are not all Spirit, as the good Angels, that there should be no division; nor all Flesh, as the unregenerate,Rom. 7.25. that there should be no reconciliation; but we are partly Flesh, and partly Spi∣rit, that look how much the Flesh provokes unto division, so much should the Spirit incline unto reconciliation. Who among all the sonnes of Sion, doe not with Rebecca complain,Gen. 25.22. How is it thus with me? because of these Twins struggling in the wombs of their consciences: But though corruption should put out first, with Esau, and make the breach, yet let grace, as Jacob, take it by the heele, and get the blessing. But besides these dividing principles that are within, there are many occasions which doe irritate without; I doe not forget that I have confined my selfe to those in the Text: and in the opening of them, I shall give you out such observations as they offer to us, with some short applications, and then shall make them subservient to the generall Doctrine. The second cause then which provoked this strife between Abram and Lot, was the falling out amongst their Heardsmen.  And here I shall offer a double consideration of the Heardsmen.Pertiment ista ad cousas pro∣pter quas di∣vis sunt à se invicem Abram & Lot. Musc. in Locum. Inter famulos coeptum jurgium contagione facile ad ips us{que} capita serpit. Mercer in Locum. 1. In reference to their Relation, being Servants. 2. In reference to their Calling, being Shephards. 1. As they are Servants, observe,Observ. Contentious servants may and doe often cause unhappy broyles between their Governours, as here Abrams and Lots Heardsmen fell out about common of pasture. So in Gen. 26.14. Isaacs and Abimelechs servants strove about Wells of water. And that the quarrels of servants invade their Governours, Reasons may be, either 1. their too much connivance at their exorbitant courses. Private Families are the fountaines of Ministery and Magistracy, and
if the fountaines be corrupt, that there be neither instruction nor correction of youth there, what hope is there that the streames shall ever doe good upon them. Or 2ly, too much compliance with their corrupt opinions. We soon spy out such faults in our Families, as are against our own gain, but such errors as are against the Faith and Truth of Jesus Christ, we easily tollerate. Or 3ly, too much indul∣gence of their talings, and busie medlings. There is a disease of the eare in many Families, which itcheth after tales, and those that are troubled with it, shall hardly ever be free from trouble; its a pregnant signe that they are too invigilant over their own wayes and affaires, who are too busie in medling with others. Or 4ly, which is worst of all, when Governours doe too wickedly sport themselves in the proud contentions of their servants,, as Abner and Joab, who would have their young men play be fore them.2 Sam. 2.14.26. Bloody quarrels are but a pa∣stime to men of blood: but they bethought themselves, and saw, it would be bitternesse in the end. Behold how great a flame a little fire hath kindled in that famous Citie and Kingdome of Naples,  that destructive Sword that hath so lately eaten so much flesh, and drunke so much blood in that opulent State, was first drawn (as is reported) through the tumult of a few idle servants. But we need not goe so far either for time or place. Be∣hold how great a flame a little fire was like to have kindled here in London, but some few moneths past, by the tumultuous carriages of some Apprentises upon the Lords day,April 9. 1648. if divine mercy had not been propitious unto London, by a speedy providence to prevent the inva∣ding (and I feare intended) mischiefe. Your servants have gotten an unhappy principle amongst them, that they must have liberty of con∣science to attend on what Ordinance they please on the Lords day; and some under this pretence, take liberty for their lusts to attend on none. Where hath the Lord of Sabbaths discharged the account of masters of Families, not onely for him that serveth, but for him that sojourneth in the House? And; O my friends, how much was the Lord of Sabbaths and his Ordinances honored when our Tribes with their servants did march in good array unto the Temple of the Lord? A great complaint there is every where of bad servants, but let Go∣overnors of families lay their hands on their own hearts, and see if the sault be not mostly their own, who take no more care to make their servants good. I know well that all Governours have not ability alike to provoke their servants unto good; but all have authority alike to
keep them from evill: And if they be not as Eagles to carry them up∣on their wings to heaven, yet they should be as Sparrowes to lead them unto Gods House. Solomon did so order his Family, as that the Queen of Sheba did think them happy that lived under his roofe: you have the choycest youth of all the families in England intrusted with you in your City, if they should miscarry through your neglect, how publick, how great will that mischiefe be? But secondly, I would apply, and do heartily wish,  that holy care and resolution to be taken up by Governours, which the Kingly Pro∣phet for himselfe protested, Psal. 101.3, 4. To hate the work of them that turne aside, and to part with those that are of a froward heart; nay, if they be children as Simeon and Levi were, who by their unhappy brawles, doe make their parents to stinke amongst their neighbours, learne from the good old Patriarch, to disavow their combinations; and conclude with thine own foule as he did; O my soule come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly mine honour be not thou united, Gen. 49.6. At least as the Father of the faithfull did here: set thy grace and wis∣dome on work to the utmost, timely to take up contentions. Let there be no strife between mee and thee, neither between my servants, and thy ser∣vants; for wee are Brethren. That is now the first Consideration of the Herdsmen in their rela∣tion as servants. Their second Consideration is in their calling as Shepheards, and here as Abram and Lot were the representative of the Church, so spare me a little to look upon their Shepheards, as the re∣presentative of Church-Shepheards: and here is another cause of this unbrotherly strife. The note I give you is this; that The personall questions of some Pastours,Observ. doe become the reall quarrels of their favourites. Will not London bare me witnesse also to this truth, or otherwise let London travaile into the Citie of Corinth, and take a Map of their contentions there; or if Corinth be too far, the Word is neere you, if you please to turn to the first Chapter of S. Pauls first E∣pistle to his Corinthians, the 12. verse. And observe what the cry is there: I am for Paul, saith one, nay but Apollo is for my money, saith another, yea but Cephas is a man for mee saith the third; I care for none of your Ministers, saith a fourth; I can live immediately upon the revelations of Jesus Christ, and have no need of Ordinances. Now what is all this a doe, but the peoples affections, breaking out into factions; their severall sidings with their gifted Ministers, whose parts and opinions they did admire, and adhere unto. Or will you
vouchsafe to look into Jerusalem, and take notice there, of that divided multitude, before the High Priests Judgement-seate, where for the hope of Israel St Paul stood bound, Act. 23.6. It was an honest policy the A∣postle used to allay the storme of the people by discovering his judge∣ment in the point of the Resurrection; Hereupon there arose a dissention between the Pharisees and Sadduces, and presently saith the Text, the multitude was divided. See, the disputes of their Rabbies quickly en∣gaged the severall parties of their Proselytes, and the grounds are vi∣sible why it is so, either opinion is so headdy in the people, or affecta∣tion so blinde, or desire of victory so importunate, as that questions howsoever, or upon what pretence soever taken up, yet they are over∣hotly, & non sine felle, not without too much gall over-stifly main∣tained and pursued, not so much for Christ, for truth, or for Reli∣gion, as for selfe, for conquest, and for vaine-glory. Shall I apply,  or rather how shall I not apply? For Zions sake I dare not hold my peace. Amongst my Brethren, I could wish that Prophesie fulfilled in Esay 2.4. They shall beate their swords into Plough∣shares, and their speares into pruning-hookes. Questions engendring strife turned into matters of culture and edification. What caused the con∣fusion in the World after the Flood, but the division of tongues. The division of tongues is bad,Judg. 5.15. but the division of hearts is worse: For these di∣visions of Levi are great thoughts of heart. Of Levi did I say? it is read indeed, of Reuben. I would I were as much mistaken in the matter, as in the letter; Let them be the divisions of Reuben, who hath lost his dignitie, and the excellency of his power. Let them never be the divisions of Levi, whom the Lord claimeth for his portion. Let Massah and Me∣ribab, these waters of strife run still without the borders of the holy Land;Psal. 46.4. but let the soft and quiet streames of Shiloah refresh the Citie of God, and the Tabernacles of the ho place of the most High. Let Ephraim be against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, if so it must be, till they eate the flesh of their own arme: but let Levi and Levi, let Judah and Judah, let Levi and Judah keep close together in the bond of the holy Covenant. But now what was the cause of the falling out between Abrams and Lots Heardsmen? Not as some Rabbies suggest, that Abrams ser∣vants were good, and Lots evill, or that Abrams servants rebuked Lots for pasturing their cattle in other mens grounds, or that Lots servants were insolent against Abrams, and countenanced by their Master; but as the letter imports, vers. 6. that the strife fell out about common
of pastures through the enlargement of their flocks, there was not room enough for the one and for the other. And this is it indeed, the third or fourth cause of our Church-contentions, this common of pa∣stures and want of elbow-room amongst Pastors for the enlargement of their flocks. Whatsoever the suggestion may be, it is too certain, and it is fit it should be confessed, that Pride and ambition hath a maine streak in our Church-contentions.Observ. Will you please to look once more on those lowd contentions in the Church of Corinth, and take such an account of them, as Paul intimates in the 1 Corinth. 1. the 14. and 15. vers. I thank God, I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gajus, least any should say,Abutebantur hi mali praedica∣tores, quos mo∣do Paulus tax∣at sacramento Baptismi, eo sibi ipsis addicentes & obstringen∣tes cos quos baptisassent. Petr. Mart. in Locum. Notatur studi∣um eorum, qui per Baptismum sibi ipsis disci∣pulos obsigna∣bant. Musc. in Locum. that I had baptized in my own name. Why then its more then probable, that some there did baptize in their own name, to wit, those gifted Ministers, who boare amongst them the names of Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas; because they were esteemed to have their gifts; one elegant in speech, as Paul; another mighty in Scriptures, as Apollo; the third powerfull in argument, as Peter; and according to their severall gifts, they made their severall parties in the affections of the people, which occasioned the factions in the Citie. But what was now their baptizing in their own name, I cannot imagine that literal∣ly they did baptiz: their severall Congregations into those names they had taken up amongst them: as thus; I baptize thee in the name of Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, but rather as name signifies authoritie and power, so did they gather under their power and authoritie, and greaten as much as each of them could their severall Congrega∣tions, under the Signall of Baptisme by some peculiar manner of ad∣ministration. And here is Pauls , I thank God; not that he did not baptize, but that he did not baptize so many, as to occasion any such suspicion that he should aspire his own glory in greatning a Congregation to himselfe, and not to look after the glory of him that sent him. The very same iniquity which did obstruct the first Reformation of the Apostles, appeares still to hinder all the steps and progresses of it, to wit, the pride and ambition of some pretenders to Reformati∣on, who aspire to make their own names great, not Christ's glori∣ous; and some who think not their Congregations sure enough their own, unlesse by some peculiar manner of Baptising they are signed, and as it were assigned over unto them. Shall I lead you now from Corinth into the tumult at Ephesus, or
rather I would lead you out of it. The cry is lowd there for Religi∣on; Great is Diana of the Ephesians,Act. 19.28.32. and I could shew you too if time would permit my stay, what Englands Diands are: But that which I intend to shew you in Ephesus, is, that the project of the Craftsmasters was their Silver Shrines. And for the multitude the most part of them knew not wherefore they were gathered together. From hence my Beloved,  let me borrow time to-lay before you two notes of information. First, The primitive rise of Episcopacy or Prelacy. The office of Bishop and Elder is not differenced in Scripture; for those whom the Spirit calls , Over-seers or Bishops, Act. 20. ver. 28. In ver. 17. of the same Chapter, are called , Presbyters or Elders; and so compare Titus 1. ver. 5. and 7 But pride and ambition made the dif∣ference, the Bishop and Prelate by an usurpation of jurisdiction, and through the favour of Princes, accumulated titles of honour, and pre∣rogatives unto themselves above their brethren. This mystery of Ini∣quitie began in the Apostles time;2 Cor. 1.24. 1 Pet. 5 3. James 3.1. 1 Joh. 2.18. Paul hinteth at such as usurped do∣minion over Brethrens faith; Peter such as Lorded it over Gods heritage; James such as aspired Masteries; John, many Antichrists, who Diotre∣phes-like, loved preheminence, I feare, least some aspiring unto Cathe∣drals may have too much in them of the Cathedrall mans spirit, in this time of reformation I could heartily wish amongst reformers, the spirit of pride and envie to be laid aside. And let us all, my Brethren, in all humility and love bespeak one the other, as Abram did Lot; Let there be no strife between thee and mee, for wee are brethren. Secondly, The mischief see, of encreasing flocks, and greatning estates, Abrams and Lots Shepheards could well enough agree together so long as their flocks and means were small; but when they grew great, both their flocks and families and themselves must separate. How many of you in this Citie doe well know, how well the Pastor and Lecturer (I name no particulars) could in one Congregation hold common of pasture and peace together, so long as the ambition of Prelates kept theirs down; but since the Indulgence of these times hath given liberty for common of pasture in any Congregation, our peace is not onely broken, but our differences, though really very small, yet seemingly so wide, as that they cannot be stated, nor desires known to make way for a reconciliation. Eusebius in his 8. Booke 1. Chapter of his Ecclesiasticall History, gives us as lively a character of these times by those he liv'd in, as if he had lived in both. I have
not time to repeat his discourse, I shall desire you that are vers'd in History at your leasure to reade it. But I should here look a little more abroad unto State-contentions,Reader I have inser∣ted a tast of it. as well as Church-contentions. It is sad to see what unchristian, uncivill, unnaturall contentions,They which seemed our Shepheards, laying aside the rule of pietie, practised con∣tention and schisme among themselves, And whiles they aggravated these things, that is, contention, threatnings, mutuall hatred and enmitie; And every one proceeded in ambition, much like tyranny it selfe; then, I say, then the Lord according to the saying of Jeremy, made the daugh∣ter of Sion obscure, and o∣verthrew from above the glory of Israel, and remem∣bred not his footstoole in the day of his wrath, La∣ment. 2.1. this question of meum and tuum, mine and thine, doth be∣get amongst us. What is reported of the Gospel to pro∣duce by accident, that doth the world efficaciously work as an efficient: To set a man at variance against his Father, the daughter against her Mother, and the daughter in law a∣gainst her mother in law, and a mans foes to be those of his own houshold. Full purses are usually the bellowes, which pride and passion make use of to blow up strife amongst neerest friends, nor can wee see, nor will wee see our way to peace, till our purses be a little emptied. I have not time to stay longer on this; the generall Doctrine calls upon mee for a word of application. You have heard, that there may be unbrotherly strife between godly brethren, yea that it is past may be, you have seen antient & modern witnesses that it is so, with the evident grounds and causes thereof. Shall I then my Brethren, take up a reproofe, or rather a lamenta∣tion,  over those imbittered censures, which godly brethren let fall one against the other? Are wee brethren? Are wee godly? I am confident, that it may be safely concluded, that some on both sides, are brethren truely godly. Why then, why are wee so bitter one against the o∣ther? What means the gall and wormwood that is in our discourses and meetings? Ah my Brethren, my Brethren, did our Lord Christ wash his Apostles feete, and amongst them a Judas feete,John 13.12. and shall we throw dirt in one anothers faces? Is this Christ-like? doth this be∣come Christians?Eph. 2.13, 14. Did he powre out his precious bloud to purchase our peace, and shall wee draw out one anothers bloud in breaking our peace? Did he bequeath his peace unto his people,John 14.27. as his last and best Legacy he had to leave unto them, and shall wee like foolish children spend our portion in undoing one the other? But I will forbeare this ingratefull rebuke, being more willing, if time would permit, to travaile in the second generall, The treatie for Peace; But I may not forget my limits and your affaires; onely for close of this, I shall turn you unto two Counsels of the Apostle.
The first is given unto the brethren at Rome, Rom. 16. vers. 17. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences, contra∣ry to the doctrine which yee have learned, and avoyde them. And if you will mark farther, ver. 18. the Apostle doth there manifest such pecu∣liar marks whereby you may know them, and not be deceived. Which I had rather you should there reade your selves, then I repeat unto you, least they should be interpreted rather to be the words of mans spirit, then the words of the Spirit of God. The second is that which the Apostle with much tendernesse of bowells and affection pressed on his Corinthians, in his first Epistle, first Chapter, and tenth verse. Now I beseech you Brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that yee all speak the same things, and that there be no divisions among you, but that yee be perfectly joyned together in the same minde, and in the same judgement. And now I beseech you brethren, this is also my sute to you, and I cannot conjure you by a greater name, then that by which alone you must be saved. I have another sute likewise for you in the words of the same Apo∣stle, 2 Thes. 3.16. Now the God of peace himselfe give you peace alwayes, by all meanes. Our breaches are so wide, that if the Lord of peace him∣selfe doth not give us peace, it is beyond the understanding of man to compasse it. And our wastings are so great, as that Peace is by all meanes most desirable; yea and by all men most desired. Our second labour is to perswade and to direct unto this.
A TREATY FOR PEACE. OR, Abrahams parly with Lot. THE SECOND SERMON. GEN. 13.8. And Abraham said unto Lot, Let there be no strife I pray thee, between thee and me, neither between my Heardsmen and thy Heardsmen, for we are brethren. THE Text is a treaty of Peace between Abraham and Lot, wherein we have a Supposition and a Proposition; that which is supposed is this, That there may be an unbrotherly strife between godly brethren, there was so you see between Abraham and Lot. That which is proposed is that which should follow upon this, That where such unbrotherly strifeis all speedy and possible meanes must be used for a reconciliation. The first of these we have dispatcht in a morning Lecture elsewhere, and have spoken something to the second, which through the hast of that Exercise, was rather snatcht from me, then delivered by me: I there drew the face onely of Abrahams desire and example, now I shall give you the whole portraiture in a full Table: that which re∣mains is this, That where such unbrotherly strife is,2d Generall observation. all possible and speedy meanes must be used for reconciliation. I need not light a candle to this Sunne, both Nature and Nation, Civility and Morality, Profession and Religion, Truth and Christ bespeake this duty from us. There are no counsels so obvious in Gods word, as those which perswade to brotherly amity, to Christi∣an unity, to peace, a grace to peace, a blessing to peaceablenesse
and peace-making both in civil and in Ecclesiasticall differences, to a wise and speedy reconciliation of all offences. The Arguments are likewise manifest and manifold, which the Sword of the Spirit, or rather the Spirit of the Sword useth as a keen edge to cut off contentions, and to provoke unto love. How patheticall and full of affection are those Arguments of the A∣postle, Philip. 2. v. 1, 2, 3. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mer∣cies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory. Me thinks the Apostles soule and words flow out together, as he sayes else∣where, 1 Thess. 2.8. We are willing to impart not the Gospel onely, but our own soules, because you are deare unto us. What a heap of unities doth the Apostle pile up in Ephes. 4. v. 4, 5, 6. One Body, one Spirit, one hope of our Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, one God and Father of all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all. And now what is all this Onenesse but to make us One, to im∣pell Saints into the unitie of the Spirit, and bond of peace? If all be one, why should brethren be two? What mighty convictions doth the Apostle hold forth from Natures light in 1 Cor. 12. shewing how the united services of all the members in the body naturall, doe tutour the uniting of Christians, and of all their offices, parts and gifts for the service of the body my∣sticall. Variety of gifts are not bestowed on us to work contrariety of affection: It is a sublime notation of unity which the Apostle there gives, v. 12. calling the Head and the Body one Christ, plainly inti∣mating that such who wilfully rend themselues from the body, doe as much as in them lies to rend themselves also from the head. But what need I step beyond the Text for impulsives to inforce the duty of the Doctrine? Two I here find, one above the Text, the o∣ther at the foot of it, Let there be no strife between thee and me, neither between thy Heardsmen and my Heardsmen, saith Abram to Lot, and why? 1. Because the Cananite and the Perezite dwell in the land. 2. Because we are brethren. Let us now examine these reasons, and 1. Because of the Canaanite and Perezite which dwell in the Land,  as if Abram should have said, Why brother Lot, doe you not see that there is a generation of ungodly men dwelling amongst us, who would willingly take the advantage from our divisions to work us both out of this good land? I pray thee therefore brother, let there be no strife between us.
Why but some will say, Whom doe you mean by these Canaanites and Perezites? I'le shew you what Characters the Spirit of God doth hint unto us of them, The Canaanite is derived from that cursed seed, who did mock at his Fathers nakednesse, you have the story in Gen. 9.25. The Perezite from an Hebrew root which signifies to divide. Both of these mischievous enough to the power of godlinesse, and to the peace of the Gospel. The wilde Boare and the little Foxes doe ex∣ceeding great (though not equall) hurt unto the Spirituall Vine: the little Foxes spoyle her grapes; but the wild Boare would root it up. The Wolfes teeth and the Paers breath doe both kill, but the Pan∣ther with delight, the Wolfe with cruelty. But what doe you tell us of the Canaanites and the Perezites, are there any such dwelling in our land? My brethren, I accuse none here, but I am very certain you will all beare me witnesse that there is a generation of Canaanites in the land, which scoffe at Saints, at Ministers, at Profession, at Ordinances, and would scoffe at Jesus Christ himselfe, if he were alive, who doe not onely triumph in such nakednesses as they see, but with those in Mi∣cah, they pull off the beautifull garment from them that passe by them peace∣ably;Mica. 2.8. they study all the mischiefes they can, to render Religion, and the professors thereof odious. There is another generation of Perizzites in the land, who like Samsons Foxes have fire brands at their tailes, who make it their designe to divide, that they might rule. I mean not such, who through tendernesse of conscience, or upon misgiving grounds, doe separate, but I meane the politick Perizzite, who is set on work by Rome and Hell to retard the counsels of Reformation through the divisions of brethren. For is not the hand of Joah in all this? Hath not the Divell and the Jesuit made it their Master∣piece by most unhappy divisions to break the strength of that party by whom God hath broken theirs? yea and I am perswaded, that there are many truly godly, who are imployed by them as instru∣ments, that are altogether inscious of any designe: as Philip, King of Macedon imployed those honest Philosophers in those two famous Cities of Greece, to make several parties in them, that he might be invi∣ted in to make himselfe master of both.Qu. Curtius, lib. 1. And as the same Philip de∣cided the controversie of the Kingdome of Thessaly, between those two discording brethren who contended for it, which he fairly took from both.
Oh that we could undermine the gates of Rome and Hell this day, by our most happy uniting. Me thinkes there is no argument that can have more force in it then this, when we know that there are such generations of men amongst us, who doe wait for this ad∣vantage, to break in upon us through the lane of our divisions, and to raise their decayed fortunes on our miserable ruines. Tully in his Offices presents us with a very pat story to cautionate the unbrotherly discord of these times.Tull. de Offis. lib. 1. The Nolans and the Neopo∣litans having a controversie about a parcell of ground which lay be∣tween their severall Countries, Fabius Labeo being invited to deter∣mine the difference, gave unto them the exterior limits of the ground adjoyning to their respective Countries, and took unto the State of Rome all the land which lay in the midst between the confines. My brethren, let us be well advised, lest whilst we doe most unhappily contend about the confines of our priviledges and liberties, our good friends of Rome doe not come in and give us as much sensuall liberty as we desire, but take away from us those saving Gospel truths, and that purity and power of Ordinances which lie between us in medio, on both sides contended for. The second Argument that lies at the foot of the Text,  is the force of brotherhood: For wee are brethren, and wee are brethren many wayes: 1. We are brethren by Countrey, Nescio qua notale solum dulcedine cunctos Ducit— Should the Lord send us into a strange land to hang up our musical In∣struments by the waters of our captivity, and to weep over those Songs of Sion which here we might enjoy with peace and spirituall delight, and doe not, then this countrey brotherhood would have Argument e∣nough to cement us. Ah my brethren, doe we need such a rod to whip us into the sense of brotherly love? Surely the provocations of sonnes and daughters are greatest provocations, and our heavenly Father hath provocations enough to turn us all out of doores when we cannot live peaceably together in his house. But 2ly, brethren by blood, as some of us are, and brethren by grace, as Abram and Lot were, children of the same beauenly Father, partakers of the same Divine Nature, begotten of the same immortall seed, bred up in the same houshold of Faith, made to drink into one and the same Spirit, partakers of the same heavenly Calling, heires to the same immortall inheritance, and bound up together in the same bundle
of life, and bond of the Covenant of grace. O me thinkes flesh and bones should sooner separate in the body naturall, then such spirituall nerves and sine wes be broken in the body mysticall. Beloved, we should all love as brethren,1 Pet. 3.8. as genuinely and naturally as brethren, that's our Rule; but if we cannot hold proportion with the Rule, to love as brethren, yet let us keep correspondency with the object, to love the Brotherhood.1 Pet. 2.17. There is nothing sets the common adversary higher in the Scorners Chaire, then the discords of bre∣thren. The Devill hath prophesied, that the rents in Christs King∣dome should make roome for his. Shall I give you his plain language in some that wish well to his kingdome? The Presbyterians and the Independents will fall out, and then all will be ours again. Now my brethren, let not our divisions make the Devil a true Prophet. Let us honour God, and Religion, and our selves, and shame the Devill, let our blessed union discover him, as he is, a lyer from the begin∣ning. Shall I need now to make use of this point,  surely there was never more need then now that use should be made of it, and no point more usefull, more needfull then this. But I shall desire you to save me that labour, and to take it home with you, each of you, to make use of it upon your own hearts; and one unto the other, say as Abram unto Lot, Good neighbour, Deare friend, Let there be no strife between mee and thee, neither between my pastours and thy pastours; for wee are bre∣thren. Friends wee are now earnest for a Treaty of Peace, and the Spirit of God doth shew us, that if wee either love Jerusalem, or desire to pro∣sper in it, wee must pray for the peace of it; pray for the peace of Jerusalem,Psal. 122.6. they shall prosper that love thee; but if our practiles should give our pray∣ers the lye, it were an horrid mockery to God and to our selves: if wee should Petition God or man for a Treaty of Peace, and should not endeavour our selves to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace;Ephes. 4.3. Rom. 14.19. and, to follow after those things which make for peace, our treate would prove a mischiefe, and our peace a snare. Now I would encourage your endeavour, by directing it. Some di∣rections you have from the Copie wee have in hand; others wee shall adde, which though they be not in the Story, yet they belong unto the Text. The first is this; The higher any man is in place or parts above his brethren, the more is his duty to be first in seeking peace.Rule 1. Musculus in Loe. Erat Abra∣ham
& major natu & usu rerum prudentior. Abram was the elder and nobler of the two here, both in place and parts, and yet he is the first that sues for reconciliation: wee heare not in his mouth the language of these times; Sir, I am your elder, and your better, I look that you should stoop to mee; I wonder Sir, that you will suffer your servants to fall out with mine; why? have not I bred you up from a boy? have you not gotten all that you have under mee? and what common of pasture can your Shepheards challenge, but what they have at my courtesie? Nay, No such language you heare from Abram, he that saw Christs day,Joh. 8.56. Mat. 11.29. had received of Christs Spirit, to be meek and lowly in heart. He lays aside all thoughts of disparity, either in years or place, and the foster Uncle becomes an humble suitor unto his underling for an honorable peace. Wee are all bound to serve one another in love,Gal. 5.13. Rom. 9.12. and it is not incon∣gruous unto Gods way, that the elder should serve the younger. He that is most eminent in grace or place, to be most forward in seeking peace; this is most God-like, the most excellent Majestie that is offended, descends from his Throne of Glory to beseech proud sinners to be re∣conciled unto him.2 Cor. 5.20. O my Brethren, you that are more excellent then your neighbours,Prov. 12.26. that have parts, or gifts, or places above your bre∣thren, see how Religion directs you to improve them in the desires and endeavours for peace.Rule 2. Vide ut blande leviter, ac sua∣vibus verbis cum nepote a∣git, etiam juri suo cedens, quo inter ipsos ala∣tur concordia, licet to superior esset omnibus modis, optionē tamen dans e∣legendi quam velit terrae partem, se asse∣rens diversam accepturam. Gen. 13.15.17.8. The second Rule is this; Christians must be content to yeeld in their own right for a godly peace, whose right was ever clearer or su∣rer to the whole Land of Canaan, then Abrams was? he had it all made over to him and to his posterity from the Lord Paramount of the whole Earth, and yet when this strife fell out between Abrams and Lots Shepheards about common of pasture, he propounded unto Lot his choice of any part of the whole Land that was before him, and would content himselfe with Lots leavings. See, saith Abram, is not the whole Land before thee, separate thy selfe, I pray thee, from mee, (not that Abram was willing to part with Lot, but that they might pre∣serve that brotherly union at a distance, which they could not keep, by keeping together,) If thou wilt take the left hand (saith Abram to Lot,) then I will goe to the right, or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will goe to the left. Now Lots eye was so great upon the fat and pleasant vallies of So∣dom, as that forgetting his good manners to his Uncle, he made his choice, and Abram lost nothing by his condescention unto him;
for as soon as Lot was separated from him, the Lord appeares unto Abram,Vers. 15. and renews his promise of the whole Land to him and to his seed. See, my Brethren, God will not suffer us to be loosers in any thing, wherein for his sake, we deny our selves and our own right, in order to a religious peace. If our Brother Lot hath a minde to the fat and pleasant portion of Sodom, let him take it, surely if his designe be profit and not peace, the Lord will finde a time to fire him out of it againe; it matters not what we suffer in our own particular interests, so as God might have his glory in a godly peace. Were there more of Abrams condescenti∣on amongst us, how easily might our unhappie differences be taken up. The third Rule is;Rule 3. That in order to peace all expostulations and exprobrations of injuries be laid aside. Wee heare nothing from A∣bram of any unkindnesse, but onely a loving and humble intreatie; Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and mee. The repeating of an old wrong, is but as the rubbing upon an old sore, which doth but anger it, and make the cure the worse. It is an holy art of forgetfulnesse to be forgetfull of injuries. I would there were graves made, Domicilia silentij, houses of silence, between King and Parliament, between Parliament and Citie, be∣tween Cide and Army, between our diffenting brethren, and all those that upon sober and religious grounds, doe discent from them, to bury all passions and suspicions of injuries; and let these graves be Kibroth Hattaavab, graves of lust, I meane,Kibroth Hat∣taavah. Numb. 11.34. to bury all those corrup∣tions which have provoked these unkindnesses. My Brethren, you doe all professe your selves to be Abrams chil∣dren, inheritours of hose promises, which were made to him, remem∣ber that Christs argument doth as much concern the children by pro∣mise, as the children by flesh; if you are Abrams children,Joh. 8.39. you will then doe the works of Abraham: Amongst others forget not these which I have shewed you. There are two other Rules now, which though they be not in the Text, yet they doe belong unto the Doctrine. The first is this; There are three beautifull Sisters,  which are inse∣parable companions unto this happy heavenly off-spring, I meane a religious and well-grounded peace. The first is Truth, Love the truth and peace, Zach. 8.19. ver. Love peace, but truth with it, truth before it. If you let goe truth, peace will
not be worthy your love, you love peace, because it is the mother of plenty, but if you provide not for truth, to dwell with it, your peace will prove the daughter of vanity, your peace can be neither true nor lovely, that is separated from the love of the truth. The second is Righteousnesse. Mercy and truth are met together, righteousnesse and peace have kissed each other, Psal. 85.10. In that no∣table meeting of the divine attributes in Jesus Christ, these two righte∣ousnesse and peace are matcht together, no righteousnesse can procure our peace with God, but the righteousnesse of Jesus Christ, and no peace can stand with men, unlesse the influences of that righteousnesse be upon them. If unrighteousness be found in our Parliament, in our Com∣mittees, in our Courts of Judicature, in your Citie, and in your shops, the Land be not purged of bloud, and Justice be not done upon the Aebans, the troublers of our peace, our peace will be forced to depart againe as soone as it is procured. The third is Holinesse: Follow peace with all men and holinesse, with∣out which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace and holi∣nesse joyntly, but not equally. Peace for holinesse sake, and holinesse above peace; for this is implyed in the force of the reason: for with∣out holinesse no man shall see the Lord. Wee may see the Lord without ha∣ving peace with all men, but not without the having of holinesse. Let there be no strife between thee and mee, saith peace to truth, peace to righteousnesse, peace to holinesse; But let there be nothing but strife between me and thee, saith peace to error, peace to injustice, peace to pro∣phanenesse. And if any Minister should be so bold to separate those whom God hath joyned, or to joyn those whom God hath seperated, he should indeed preach sedition, but not against proud man, as is suggested, but against a holy and a jealous God. That true-righteous-holy-Peace, that blessed daughter of Heaven will certainly forbid all Con∣tracts that shall be published between error, injustice, prophanenesse, and her selfe, there is no peace to the wicked, saith my God, nor no peace with the wicked. Or if it were possible that Peace should own such Con∣tracts, Christ himselfe, who is the Prince of peace, would never own her for his daughter;Matth. 10.34. for in this case he saith, I came not to send peace on the earth, but the sword. In a word, let goe either of these sister-gra∣ces, and your peace, be it what it will, it will undoe you. This is now the first Rule in order to a godly peace. The second I have to lay before you is this, That if we will needs be striving, let Massah and Mcribah, those waters of strife run in their
right channels. The way to break a designe of warre, is many times to divert it; to break the strength of our unhappie contentions, I would fix them upon their true and proper objects. There are two which I shall propound unto you, 1. That which you should contend for.  2. That which you should contend against. First, That which you should contend for,  is that to which Jude exhorts you, Jude 2. that you should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints. There is faith a grace, and faith the object of that grace. Faith a grace is that whereby wee close with all divine revelations, not onely by a consent unto the truth of them in our understandings, but by a taste of the sweetnesse of them in our wills and affections; and those divine revelations are also called the faith of Saints: because they are those things which Saints by faith doe live upon: now Saints must contend for both; but that which Jude doth here intend, is the doctrine of faith; and for this wee must , contend, above all that strength wee contend with. The word is a compound, borrowed from those that did strive for masteries in the Olympick games, whose strife was vigorous as for life, yet heere wee must strive above that, and wee have a supernaturall strength given unto us to strive with; wee must put forth all that which Nature or Grace can minister unto us. Our lives must not be deare unto us, or any thing that is dearer then our lives, to preserve those saving truths which are the purchase of so many Martyrs bloud, yea of the precious bloud of the Sonne of God, our new Testament is the new Testament of his bloud. There are three energeticall arguments in this perswasive of Jude, inciting the duty he perswades unto. First, The transcendent excellency of that which wee contend for. Secondly, The mighty opposition which is against it. Thirdly, The irreparable losse of it being once gone. First, The transcendent excellency of that which wee contend for,  worth all the expence of all that labour, treasure, and bloud, which it hath cost this Kingdome. It is the Imperiall gift, the treasury, the inheritance of Saints. Naboth would rather part with his life, then with his inheritance, but an inheritance of a life immortall, how much is it to be preferred before a mortall life, or inheritance. It is storied of Troy, that in the Grecian siege it had an Oracle, that if it could keepe its Palladium, the image of their Goddesse of Wisdome, their Citie should not be lost. Beloved, this is our Palladium, loose it, and loose
all.Compare Ezek. 9.3. with 11.23. so 10.2. with 11.11. 1 Tim. 1.19, 20. The glory of God in Ezekiels Visions, did soone depart from the Ci∣tie, when it was once departed from the Sanctuary. If the Lord take coales from the Altar, to scatter over the Citie, the Judgement of it shall speed after with a vengeance. When Hymeneus and Alexander did make shipwrack of faith, they made shipwrack of a good Conscience with it. It was the great Comfort of Pauls Conscience upon his death-bed, that he had kept the Faith, and his keeping the faith was the main prop of his Confidence,2 Tim. 4.7, 8. that from thenceforth there was laid up for him a Crowne of righteousnesse. If you let goe faith, you loose your comfort, your confidence, your crowne: If therefore you will contend, contend as earnestly as you will for this. Contend for the Faith once given to the Saints. The second Argument to provoke unto this holy contention,  is the mighty opposition which Saints finde against the faith, therefore would the Apostle have us , contend earnestly; so wee translate It, but that is too low, you must more then contend; us Paul speaks in another sense,2 Cor. 8.3. not onely according to your power, but beyond your power: The doctrine of faith, as it never wanted some witnesses to defend it, so it ever had many adversaries to oppose it: The gates of bell, though they cannot prevaile against it, yet they will doe against it all the spite they can. Heresie is like that triple headed Serpent, if one head be cut off, three will arise in the place of it. And hereticks like those Romanes in their warres with Carthage, they will never be quiet, either Conque∣rours, or conquered; Surely, if ever the gates of Hell were set open in England, they are now set wide open, and the Locusts of the bottomlesse pit, even cover the face of the Land. It yeelds yet some comfortable hopes unto us, that the Lord hath a most beautifull work of refor∣mation upon the wheele in England, for that the Devill and the Je∣suite are so put to it to bestirre themselves. Never did heresie and blasphemy with that whorish impudence, oppose the fundamentall truths of Gospel grace, as now they doe, but blessed be God, who hath awakened the zeale of so many faithfull servants of the Lord Je∣sus in all parts of the Kingdome to give Testimony to his truth. My brethren, let us resolve not to spend our breath onely, but our blood in a good Confession, if God should call for it. Josephus hath a story worthy our observance: That when Pontius Pilate would have inforced the statue of Nero into the Temple of the Jewes, the zeale of the people inkindled against it, it being against the law of their holy Religion, Pilate purposing to inforce that by the Sword, which his
Rhetorick could not perswade, drew them into a place, where he had laid an Ambuscado of armed men, who upon his fignall, were to doe execution upon those who withstood his command. The Jewes be∣ing constant to their principle of Religion, espying their danger ap∣proaching, did all as one man open their naked breasts to the pointed swords of their executioners, resolving rather upon an honorable death with the safety of their Religion, then an ignominious life with the losse of it. The third Argument for this holy Contention,  is the irrecoverable losse of our Faith being once gone. It was once given unto the Saints, and but once: It was once given unto Rome, and once unto Macedo∣nia, and once unto the seven Churches of Asiaminor; and when once they had lost it, it was never as yet given to them again. Sol occidere & redire potest: If the Sunne in the firmament doth set, it will rise a∣gain; but if this Sun of righteousnesse once set upon a land, an irre∣coverable midnight of spirituall darknesse succeeds upon it. If we lose our estates, we may recover them again; if we lose our friends, God may raise us up some other; if we lose our lives we may exchange them for a better; but if we lose the Faith once given to the Saints, being once lost, it is lost for ever: and we lose with it our Soules, our Hea∣ven, our Christ, our God, and these irrevocably. Ah deare Christians, if ever ye will contend for any thing, contend for the faith once given unto the Saints. And that is now the first object of your holy Contention, that which you should contend for. The second is that which you should contend against: and here I shall propound two objects, first of persons, secondly of things. First for Persons, the Royall Prophet writes us a Copie, Psal. 139.21, 22. Doe not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and doe I not ear∣nessia contend with those that rise up against thee? yea I hate them with perfect hatred, I count them mine utter enemies. Certainly there is a generation in the Kingdom, and in this Citie (yea where is there not) whose hearts rise up against God, and against the power of godlinesse, Gods right band hath already found out many, and will certainly finde out more of those that hate him. Take heed good friends, how you con∣federate with those against whom the Lord is ingaged. Will you be tutor'd a little from that story of Judah in Ahaz time, in the seventh and eighth Chapters of Isaiah, when prophane Syria, and Apostate Israel combined together against honest Judah, their hearts did shake as Aspy leaves: the Lord sends a Prophet to assure them, that these
two smoaking fire-brands,1 sa. 7.2. which had more smoak then fire in them, should not hurt them;Verse 4. Judah, though with much a-doe beleeving, prospered, and the combined Armies are scattered. Discontented Is∣rael not humbled under Gods hand so visibly against them, resolve yet to recruit greater forces against Judah:Isa. 9.10. The Brickes are fallen, but we will build with bewen stones; the Siccamors are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars. Judah forgetting Gods former promise and deliverance,See 2 Chron. 28 16. sends to the Assyrian for aid: The Lord sends his Prophet to them again, and tels them, that because they had refused the soft run∣ning waters of Siloa,Isa 8.6.7. the mighty waters of Assyria should overflow them. Now what were those waters of Siloa? Siloa was a river that brake out at the foot of Mount Sion, and ran through the streets of Jerusa∣lem, to which the Church alludes, Psal. 46.4. There is a River, the streames thereof shall make glad the Citie of God. This river here is Jesus Christ,Psa. 36.8. the Fountain of Gods pleasures, the streames are his promises in which he makes out himselfe for the comfort of his people in saddest confusions. Now Judah had a speciall intimation of the Covenant of grace to assertain their former deliverance, as all temporary pro∣mises must have their strength and blessing out of that.Isaiah 7.14. But forget∣ting both their mercy and their duty, and seeking strength from an arm of flesh, which God had despised, they were not strengthened but di∣stressed by it, saith the story, 2 Chron. 28.20. Lo this is all the kind∣nesse we are like to receive from such confederates; the Lord therefore counsels the upright-hearted in Judab,Isaiah 8.12, 13 Say ye not a Confederacy to all them to whom this people shall say a Confederacy, neither feare ye their feare, nor be afraid, but sanctifie the Lord of Hosts himselfe, and let him be your Feare, and let him be your Dread, and he shall be for a Sanctuary unto you. But what got Apostate Israel by her prophane confederates? Why E∣say 9.11, 12. we shall find that they tasted the same bitter sauce with unbelieving Judah, they were with open mouth devoured by their good friends the Syrians, with whom they had before combined against Ju∣dah, Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula couum. I wish that Judah's and Israels sufferings may cautionate the godly in London how they confe∣derate with those that are ungodly. Surely they shall not strengthen, but distresse themselves by combining with those that are manifest ene∣mies to God and goodnesse. In Judges the second and the first, we read of an Angel of the Lord that came up from Gilgal to Bochim, to mind the Israel of God of their For∣getfulnesse of Gods great mercy in delivering them out of Aegypt, and of
their breach of covenant in making a league with those Conaanites whom the Lord had cursed. And he wrought so effectually upon their hearts, as that they wept abundantly. Certainly London shall know that they have had a Prophet amongst them: and they shall one day weep for their confederacy with wicked men; If the grace of God doth not now provoke their teares, the wrath of God will hereafter. The second object which we are to strive against, are our own lusts, striving against sin, saith the Apostle, Heb. 12.4.When the Scots Army was in the land. Some who willingly veile their eyes, doe make some question whom they shall esteeme as enemies in these mischievous broyls invading the bowels of the king∣dome. I am sure this is without all question, that Sin is our enemy, breaking our peace both with God & Man, and killing us as well with kisses as with blowes. God hath no enemy but this, or such whom this doth make to be his enemies. Now spend all your Arrowes, is long, as strong, as you can upon this enemy: here strive and spare not. If you spare any one, that one may undoe your soules as soon as a thou∣sand. There is more evill in one sinne then there is worth in all the good you doe, or can doe; yea more then the verue of the whole cre∣ation is able to expiate. One Acban is enough to disturb the peace of all Israel, and never let England think to have a firm peace, if Englands sins remain unreformed. Now strive as much against your Acbans as your Absoloms, your Dalilabs as your Thamars, your Rimmons as your Mammons, your Davids as your Gliahs, I mean your covert as your open sins, your loved as your loathed lusts; your heart abomi∣nations as your life-scandals, your babe-iniquities as your Giant pro∣vocations. May I say to you as that Prophet to the King of Israel,2 Kings 11.24 1 Kings 22.31 If thou let any escape (any that is liked by thee) thy life shall goe for his life; but if as the Syrian Sword did the King of Israel, you would single out some King-lusts, let me bring forth to justice these two onely. 1. Strive against that evill heart of unbeliefe,Heb. 3.12. which is in some de∣gree in the best of us. There is no sinne damnes but unbeliefe is in the company of it. When the Israelites were upon the borders of the holy land,Numb. 14.33. their unbeliefe did send them back to wander fourty yeares in the wildernesse, till all their carcases were wasted in it. We lately thought our selves even entring into our rest, into the possession of those glori∣ous promises which we have long waited for: but now we are in a wildernesse, we know not what to doe, we know not what to say, we know not what to think, and our great provocation is our unbe∣liefe.
If we had faith as a grain of mustard-seed,Mat. 17.20. we should remove mountains, we should cast our Devils. Every lust is a mountain that stands up a∣gainst the work of Reformation. And all unbeliefe is that dumb and deafe Devil that casts us so often into fire and water: now some moun∣tains, some Devils, are too hard for Ordinances for Apostles themselves if they were alive, onely Faith calls forth the fulnesse of God in Jesus Christ to overcome them. In Isaiah 41.14 and 15. verses, the Lord sets a worm on work to thresh the mountains. Alas, what proportion is there between a small worm, and a huge mountain? But feare not, I am with thee, (saith the Lord.) Here is a word for faith to live upon, and to call out an Om∣nipotent arm to its aid, whereas our unbeliefe doth not onely wea∣ken us, but even Omnipotency it selfe, as the Lord Christ saith, Hee could doe no great thing in Nazareth,Mark 6.5. because of their unbeliefe. Beloved, you are earnest now for a Treaty of Peace, and your seven-yeares wasting troubles do more then provoke you, but see that your faith doe call in God and his Christ unto the Treaty. See that your peace hath a word of faith to bottom upon, otherwise every storm will shake, if not overturne the sandy foundation of it.Isa. 40.6, 7. All flesh is grasse, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field. — The grasse wither∣eth, the flower fadeth, but the word of our God shall stand for ever. There is more in one word of God to establish a lasting peace for us, then in all the counsels of perishing creatures, who look beside it. Had wee Calebs spirit to follow God fully in the guidance and assurance of his Word,Numb. 14.24. what a great measure of self-deniall and Christian con∣descention might we obtaine to work towards a religious and a firme peace. Whatsoever therefore you strive against, strive especially against the unbeliefe of your own hearts. Secondly,  Against your pride, this is a proclaimed rebell against Heaven; God will have no peace with it. And little hope of a stable peace with men, if our pride stands up to wage warre with God. In the fourth of Daniel wee reade of a tree whose height reached unto Heaven, and an Angel sent from Heaven to cut it down, but the slump of it must remaine. This tree wee finde to be the pride of the Babylo∣nian Monarch, who gloried in the vanity of his Spirit. Is not this great Babel?Dan. 4.30.3.15. And, who is that God, that can deliver out of my hands? Such o∣vergrown trees there are too many in England. And God hath sent the Angel both of his word and rod, to cut them downe, yet some there are who stand up still against both. And those in whom this tree is
out downe, have the stump yet remaining; There is some strength of this corruption in the best. Though our estates be broken, yet our Spi∣rits are unbroken: Though the Kingdome be rent in pieces, yet our hearts are not; though our condition below, yet our carriage is as high as ever. And as in that great Tree in Nebuchadnezzars Vision,Dan. 4.12. The beasts of the field did dwell under the shadow of it, and the birds of the ayre did lodge in the branches of it; even so there are many other lusts and corruptions, which come under the shadow and spreading bran∣ches of this lust of Pride: as covetousnesse and ambition, on the one side, and passion and discontentment on the other. He that serves these lusts, will not spare any thing that may serve them, neither with Haman, the bloud of an whole Nation, nor with Absolom, the bloud of neerest relations, nor with Herodias, the bloud of most eminent Ministers, nor conscience, nor religion, nor Christ, nor God, nor any thing that will suire his designe. When Donatus was croft in the Bishoprick of Carthage, he turned heretique, and fired the whole Empire with his faction. I feare least ambition and discontent have made many Malignants in these dayes. Shall I say as he, Fight not against small nor great. No,1 King. 22.31. fight against all your lusts: But above all, against this King lust, this pride of your hearts, and against all those corruptions that strengthen themselves by it. O that I could in this prevaile with London this day, fortior est qui se quam qui for tissima vincit maenia, He is stronger that ruleth his spirit,Prov. 16.32. Colchester was then befieged. then be that winneth a Citie. Could you overcome these lusts of yours, you may not onely winne a Citie, but preserve and crowne your own. My brethren take heed, how you serve their ends who do serve their own lusts: How should they govern you that cannot govern their own passions? Fleshly corruption will ever lay before us specious pretences, in all those wayes into which our pride or passion doth prompt us; but grace will ever have a jealous eye over them. I ne∣ver suffered my passion to work, but I suffered by it, and so undoubt∣edly shall all they which give way unto it. I will only bring hither that passage of our Saviour in Luke 17. and the beginning of the chapter, where hee shewes the danger of those that give offences, and the duty of those that suffer offences. First, for those that give offences.  (And marke your danger you that doe it) It were better for him (saith Christ) that a Milstone were hanged about his necke, and be cast into the Sea, then that be should offend one of these little ones.
Secondly, for those that suffer offences, your duty is to forgive, and Christ well knowing how hard this duty is to corrupt nature, how apt we are to make Peters question,Matth. 18.21., How oft shall we forgive? pre∣occupates this objection, and tells us, that if every day our brother should offend us, and seven times in every day, and should as often declare himselfe to be sorry for his offence, it is our duty to forgive. Hereupon the Apostles startle, and cry out, O Lord increase our Faith, who hath saith strong enough to close with such a duty as this? Our faith can hardly work us to forgive our brother if he offends us but once; but if every day, and if seven times in every day bee doth of∣fend, where's the faith that can master passion so often to forgive? Now mark what Christ answers, If ye had faith as a grain of Mu∣stard seed, ye might say unto this Sycamine tree, Be thou plucked up by the roots, and be thou planted in the Sea, and it should obey you. Though Christ might point to a Sycamine tree there present, yes doubtlesse, that which he did chiefly aim at, was this root of bitternesse, that corruption which is naturally in every one of our hearts, indisposing us to recon∣ciliation; whereby the work is as hard to forgive offences, as to root up spreading trees. Now if a grain of Mustard seed will stock up this bitter root, & throw it into the Sea of forgetfulnesse, where it may ne∣ver grow nor appeare more; Oh where is Londons faith then! where is this grain of mustard-seed to bee found? If ever the publick good did provoke us to exercise faith in this duty of forgivenesse, now, even now it doth. If the glory of one man be great in passing by offences, how emi∣nent and exemplary will the glory of a City be? In short, deare Friends, keep your eyes, your ends, your aymes heaven-ward, Christ-ward, God-ward; and whatsoever is against Heaven, against Christ, or against God, be you against it: And what∣soever is for Heaven, for Christ, for God, be you for it. And if wee walke according to this Rule, peace shall be upon us, and upon the Israel of God.
THE CONTENT OF A WAYFARING MAN: AND THE ACCOMPT OF A MINISTERS REMOVALL. TWO SERMONS. The one preached at the Morning Lecture in the Citie of London; the other more enlarged in another Congregation. BY J. F. M. A. Nihil tibi aequè proficiet ad temperantiam omnium rerum, qàm frequens cogitatio brevis aevi & hujus incerti. Hieron. ad Heliod. . Chrysost. in 1 Tim. Hom. 17. LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1648.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, JOHN LORD ROBERTS, Baron of TRURO, All increase of lasting Honour and Felicity. Right Honorable, THis hasty undrest Birth, being forced out of doores by the importunity of divers godly Ministers and Friends, begges a covering from your Honours Name, whose merits are so well known unto the world in those publick imployments to which you have been ingaged, as, if I should attempt to adde any lustre, I should but light a Candle to the Sunne, and shadow that beauty which an abler pensill hath lately drawn.Master Samuel Bolton in his Epist. Dedic. to his Ar∣raignment of Errour. I had not adventured upon the Acumen of your wisdome and parts, for patronage of this in∣firm labour, had not your accustomed candor prompted me with afavourable excuse of this honest ambition, partly from that wel-known love your Honour bears to learning & piety, partly from the cōstant experience of your abundant favours, of which I desire in this smal monument to perpetuate the acknowledge∣ments, and partly from the subject of the first ensuing discourse, which may be not unsuitable to your affection of a cōtemplative retirednes and a contentive sweetnes in your self-injoyments:
your Honour not aspiring great things for your selfe in Ja∣cobs day of small things, most nobly disdaining to make your Morsels fat out of the publick wants, although your losses may be as great as some others. Heroick Sir, I trust neither of these Sermons will be un∣savoury to your goodnesse, though both unworthy your lear∣ning. The first Sermon presents you the felicity of an humble content and peaceable retirednesse, a Discourse not unseasona∣ble in times so full of trouble and uncertaintie as ours are. The second discovers the lawfull ends, and unkind provo∣cations of a Ministers removall, yeelding both an Apologie for the Minister, and an Alarm to the people whatsoever they are. Hope, which is the Mother of Boldnesse, and Mistresse of En∣deavour, hath brought them unto your hands, to do some service to the Church of God. and to your Honour, wherein if they shall be so happy, it will both Comfort and Crowne him who is servant to both In all Gospel duties intirely obliged, JOHN FATHERS.
THE CONTENT OF A WAY∣FARING MAN: OR, Jeremies Cottage in the Wildernesse. JEREM. 9.2. O that I had in the Wildernesse a lodging place of way∣faring men, that I might leave my people and goe from them. Or thus, Ob that I had the Cottage of a Wayfaring man in the Wildernesse. WE have here Jeremies Content, and Jeremies Account: His Content was moderate, He aspired no great things for himselfe, nor Bishops Lands, nor Deanes Houses. A Cottage was his Content, and his Content was sutable to his Condition. His Condition was a Wayfaring-man,Non lequitur de diversorii quae erant pagis & ur∣bus, sed de di∣versoriis de∣scrti quemad∣mdum videbimus ubi per sylvas longum est & molestum iter, tuguria quaedam componisi fortè depre bensus fuerit viator tenebris noctis ut possit latere sub tecto, scil. nè sub die cubet. Calv. in Loc. and the Cottage of a Wayfaring man was his Content, onely a hole to hide his head in a storm, and to afford him a nights lodging in his Way: And that in no stately Citie, where perhaps a small Cottage may be of more value then a large Farm in the Countrey.
But the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the wildernesse. And Wilder∣nesse, whether you take it literally, for a place smally inhabited; as that wildernesse wherein the Priests had 6 Cities; or for a place not at all inhabited, as that to which Jeremies wild Asse was used; or figura∣tively for a rude and untaught people, as Wildernesse doth often signifie in holy Scriptures. Either way it suits very well with Jeremies Con∣tent, who desired to enjoy himselfe in a peaceable retirednesse, which he could not in a tumultuous Citie; and probably as he had bet∣ter hopes of the safety of his person amongst wilde beasts, then wic∣ked men: so of the successe of his Ministery amongst a rude and igno∣rant people in the wildernesse, then amongst those whose knowledge did puffe them up in Jerusalem. For so we find Jeremies Account, why he desired the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the wildernesse, That I might leave my people, and goe from them. My people: His they were though they were so bad. Jeremy you will yeeld, was an able, painfull, faithfull, couragious Minister, who fea∣red not the frownes of Kings nor Princes, Fetters nor Dungeon, for the faithfull discharge of his Ministery; and yet so good as he was, he was unhappily matcht with a bad people, and so bad they were, as that he did desire to leave them, and yet not leave them without leave from God, or love to them. Not without leave from God;  for these words we must not con∣ceive to fall at randum from Jeremy, as if he were hurried away from his people by passion, or discontent, but as he sayes, Chap. 11. v. 20. Ʋnto thee, O Lord, have I revealed my cause. And Chap. 20.12. Vnto thee, O Lord, have I opened my cause. He seeks to God for a place of re∣move, and would remove as the Israelites in the wildernesse at Gods command. Not without love to them;  for though he did leave them, yet hee would not leave to pray for them, & to pray in teares, and teares in a∣bundance; and that abundance not sufficient to content his love, but that he wishes for more. O that my head were full of waters, and mine eyes a fountain of teares, that I might weep day and night for the captivity of the daughter of my people, verse 1. of this Chapter. For so you must joyn that verse to this, and you have then and there a double account of Jeremies option for a Cottage in the wildernesse. Seeing his preaching could doe no good in Jerusalem,  he was desi∣rous to retire himselfe to prayer, and to pray in teares, as Jeremy did, retirednesse is best.
Foreseeing their Captivity, he was unwilling to see it,  and there∣fore desired to enjoy himself in a peaceable retirednesse, rather then to live in Jerusalem with fire over his head. O that I had the Cottage of a Wayfaring man in the wildernesse, that I might leave my people and go from them. I have now given you the Analysis of the Text, and you see there is much in it, and I have little time, I shall endeavour as well as I can, to contract much into little, and shall confine my selfe to the two gene∣rall heads of the Text: Jeremiahs Content, and Jeremiahs Account. From the first, I observe; How moderate gracious desires should be in these earthly things. From the second; How good Ministers may upon warrantable grounds desire to remove from an unkind people. And first, I shall apply my selfe to the first, Jeremies Content: O that I had the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the wildernesse, that I might leave my people, and goe from them. Gracious desires should be moderate in these earthly things.1. Generall Doctrine. I doe not say, The desires of grace should be moderate. For that is our great corruption, that in those things wherein unsatiablenesse of desire is onely lawfull, our affections are too remisse; as in spirituall and hea∣venly things; and too intense in those things wherein unsatiablenesse of desire is most unlawfull: as in temporary and earthly things. And therefore I say, If our desires are gracious, they are and should be mo∣derate in earthly things. Will you please to look upon your example in the Text, Jeremiah was one of noble birth, of great parts, of eminent gifts, of admirable courage, of unparalleld fidelity in his Ministery: and yet neither his birth, nor place, nor parts nor gifts, did make him ambitious: A cot∣tage did content him who might deserve a palace. Will you take another instance to this? It is that of Agur,Prov. 30.8. Give me not riches lest I be too full, but feed me with food convenient for me. Give me not riches. Quis nisi mentis inops? You will scarce think him a reasonable man that should desire riches not to be given unto him? But stay a while, and heare his reason: Lest I bee too full. He would not have his food to become his disease. You well know the danger of surfeits, you know it, but feele it not whilest the sweet morsell is going down; but he that feares it, puts the knife unto his throat, and moderates his appe∣tite. Feed me with food convenient for me. 1. Victum, Food he doth desire:
So much of these outward things as may afford him a livelihood.  2. Dimensum, Food convenient, a portion sutable and competent to his place and calling. This is lawfull, and this is moderate. To these two instances will you please to take one Rule from him that is our Rule.ohn 14.6. Matth. 6.11. He that blesseth our prayers, taught us to pray for our daily bread.  1. For Bread, Panem indigentiae, so much as may supply our wants in our way: A Jacobs scrip to victuall us over Jordan.  2. Our daily Bread, sine solicitudine, without anxious thought for to morrow: for to morrow [saith the same divine O∣racle] will care for it selfe: Sufficient unto the day is the evill thereof. Nor did our blessed Lord and Saviour set this Boundary unto others, which he kept not himself: For he who had the fulnesse of Heaven and earth for his foot-stool, was yet content with his daily Admini∣strations. You have now the proofe of the Doctrine:Matth. 8.15. Mark 15.41. That gra∣cious dsires are and should be moderate. I might give you many Rea∣sons for further confirmation of it; but time confines me to those on∣ly which offer themselves in the Text. The first is this: That our Content should be suitable to our Condition.  Wayfaring-men wee are by our Mortall Condition, and our Spirituall Content should be the Cottage of a wayfaring-man, onely that which may suf∣fice us in our way. The life of Man is not unfitly compared to a way wherein persons of divers conditions travell,Matth. 5.22. Psalm 49.13. Psal. 24.6. and this is the brood of Travellers, we all meet in this one condition to be wayfaring-men. There are ma∣ny conditions of the wayfaring-man which suit with ours, should I travell them all, I should scarce part with the wayfaring-man, before this travell were ended. I will onely restrain my selfe unto two. 1. What we are in respect of our mortall Condition? Wayfaring-men. 2. What we ought to be in respect of our spirituall desires. Content with our cottage in this wildernesse of sin. This World is a through-fare either to Heaven or to Hell, and whether Judas goeth to his place, or Peter to his, we all are as a ship under saile, passing swiftly to our haven, and every moment of time doth hasten us to our last home. The travailes of men indeed are to divers ends: Some to be great, others to be rich; some for knowledge, others for wealth, [sew for grace.] And whilest for the increase of these, wee desire encrease of yeares, what doe wee desire, but that [which unto the carnall man is
so undesired] our hastning to our journeys end: the way in which wee all meet, the way of all flesh. It is not without a mystery, and this of our condition, that the worlds first entertainment of our Saviour was in an Inne,Luke 2.7. and his Mo∣ther fell in travell with him, whilest shee was in travell. How much doe they mistake their condition, that take their Inne for their home, and make their way their rest. I cannot blame worldlings to build them tabernacles here, and to wish they might ever dwell in them, being with Pharaohs Baker loath to go out of their earthly prisons, because they feare a worse condition out of them. But you my Beloved, that have good hopes of Heaven, ac∣count your selves strangers and pilgrimes here, and let your affections, your conversations be in Heaven, whilest yet your commoration is in your removing tabernacles. Should a wayfaring man be so taken up with the delights and pro∣fits of a forreigne Countrey, as to dislike the Lawes and Government of his own, and so to dislike it, as to take up armes against it: What doth he but make his travaile his exile, & may perhaps come short of a pardon, when he desires to returne home againe. Heaven is the Countrey, from whence our immortall soules did all set forth. Every finne is a warre against it, which if in disdaine of our home wee doe maintaine, wee are not travailers, but traytors and fugitives, and may be to seek of mercy, when our travaile is ended. My Brethren, minde your Condition, that's the first. Secondly, Let your content be suitable to your condition. When the Israelites travailed through the Moabites Countrey,Deut. 2.6. they would meddle with nothing, but necessaries in their way; and when they were journeying into the Land of Promise,Exod. 11.2. they left their brick and clay to the Aegyptians, and borrowed of them onely Jewels of gold and Jewels of silver; such things as were portable in their way to the holy Land. You that have a birth above the world, yee sonnes and daughters of the Highest, fowle not your fingers with this world. Let the Aegyp∣tians take their brick and clay unto themselves, and borrow you onely of this earthly Mammon so much as may be portable in your way to Heaven; or, by an holy exchange into heavenly treasures,Matth. 6.20. Luk. 16.9. may be tran∣sported thither before you. Our forefathers that lived six and eight hundred yeares, were con∣tent with removing tents, and wee whose lives are but of three dayes
to theirs, must provide houses so great, and inheritances so large, as if wee did forget that our condition is mortall, or that it is our duty, to suite our content unto our condition. Let worldlings beare with a chid∣ing from the Poet; O curve in terras animae & coelestium inanes: O yee crooked soules, bowed down unto the earth, and empty of all that is heavenly: why are yee so serious in trifles, and do so trifle in that which is most serious. Fond Earthworme, give me leave to reason with thee a little; thou hast provided for thy selfe a great and stately mansion, with ponds, and orchards, and vineyards, and all things that may delight and content thy flesh, but what hast thou laid up for thy precious soule, in those ,2 Cor. 5.1. buildings made without hands, eternall in the heavens. It will not be long, ere thy stately mansion will dis∣daine to lodge thee. Thy delicate wife, thy tender children, and thy dearest friends refuse to keepe thee, yea be glad to bury thee out of their sight: as Abram his beloved Sarah; and then think what will be∣come of thy poore and naked soule. Are thy comforts no surer then his which said, Quò iturus sum nescio? Whether I am going I know not. Hast thou taken so much care for a life so transitory, for which a cottage might have sufficed, and left an eternall felicity upon a per∣advanture? I tell thee, and be not angry with me, if I tell thee the truth; the basest vermin that crawleth upon the earth, is in a far bet∣ter condition then thou art. O that men heaping up earthly riches, according to the utmost measure of their will and power, would yet learne to measure their will and power, according to the frailty of their mortall condition; and whilest thy gaze so much on the golden bead of their Babylonian Idoll, in which they glory, they could yet looke down upon the feet of clay wherewith they travell. When I heare my fellow-travailer tell me of the danger of theeves and plunderers in my way; I begin to thinke of securing the money I have about me, and if I were to set forth, I would carry no more with mee then is needfull in my way. I need not Interpret, Breve iter mag∣no viatico non instruitur sed eneratur; Large provisions for a short jour∣ney are not an help but a burthen unto it, and if wee cannot unloade our selves, it is not from the impossibility of the duty, but from the perversnesse of our affections, and wretched creatures that wee are, who for a temporary security, can doe that which for an eternall feli∣citie wee reject as impossible to be don.
I have now don with the first reason, why gracious desires in these earthly things should be moderate; Because our spirituall content should be suted to our mortall condition. The second now that offers it selfe in the Text is this;  Because the peaceable retirednesse of a mean and low estate is much more desirea∣ble, then the trouble and danger of an high and great; and for this I conceive, was Jeremies desire to retire into a cottage in the wildernesse, that his soule might be free from the strifes and vexations that were in Jerusalem. And for this probably John Baptist might retire to exer∣cise his Ministry in the Wildernesse rather then in the Citie,Luk. 3.7. to the 18. because he saw so much disquiet and ungodlinesse in it, as appeares by the sharp reproofes of his Sermon to those that came out of it. And Moses doubtlesse saw some rich content in a peaceable retirednesse, that he was so unwilling to leave his private enjoyment for a publick imploy∣ment, his following his father in lawes sheep in Midian, to be the Lea∣der of the people of Israel, although the Lord answered all his foure doubts, and took off all his excuses in the third of Exodus. David likewise saw very much in this, who was so willing to have changed his Throne in Israel, for a porters office in the Lords house;Psal. 84.10. and reckoned one day there spent, to be better unto him, then a thousand in the tents of ungodlinesse. For his experience had taught him, that the tempter never gat so much advantage against him at his fathers sheepfold, as in his pallace at Jerusalem.2 Sam. 11.2. Great estates and high Imploy∣ments, are but the bellows of pride and passion; if there be not a great measure of wisdome and grace to keep the heart down. Solomon likewise was not unacquainted with the comfort and con∣tent of a peaceable retirednesse,Eccles. 2.8.11. who had tyred himselfe in searching out the vanity and vexation of high estates: Better (saith he) is a sallat of green hearbs where peace is, then a stalled oxe and contention therewith.Prov. 15.17. Surely, great estates carry with them great disquiets, and not lesse in mannaging, then in getting. How much better might a man enjoy him∣selfe in a mean and low estate? And how much better is it for a man to enjoy himselfe, then to enjoy an estate? He discovered a rich content in himselfe, that boare for his divise a Torteis in his shell, with this Motto: Mecum habito, I dwell with my selfe: and he also, that gave another word to it; Ʋbicun{que} sum, meus sum, Wheresoever I am, I am my selfe. Seneca that divine Philosopher, that was very studious in searching out beatitudes, discovered this amongst others: Beatus est, qui id se
esse putat: he is happie that can finde his happinesse within himselfe, and Bias-like doth carry his treasure and felicity with him. It is a poore and contemptible felicity, which one fit of an ague, stone, or gout, can deprive us of: and this is the top-excellency of all earthly comforts. It was an enigma no lesse elegant then acute of Heraclytus, who com∣pared earthly-minded-men (coveting so much to be rich and great) unto those that digged in silver-mines, who by all their hard toyle and care, got Parvum in magno, a little silver-oare in a great deale of dirty drosse: how much better is it to enjoy Magnum in parvo, a great and rich content in a mean and low estate. And as Cosmographers, who contract the whole world into a little Mappe, to enjoy all in a little; which he enjoyes, who in a little enjoyes God and himselfe, whose estate doth not possesse him, but he his estate: and whilest he is in the world, lives in Christ above it. The wise and holy God doth not unequally dispence his provi∣dences; Some have high places, and little comfort, great estates, and small content in them: others enjoy a rich and great content in a meane estate. Some with those Israelites fare daintily, and whilest the flesh is in their teeth, there is leannesse in their soules: Others with Daniel, doe eat their pulse with quiet consciences, and doe enjoy a richer content in God, and his Christ, then the whole creature can afford the worldling with∣out them. It was an hot dispute amongst ancient Philosophers, whether a pri∣vate enjoyment, or publique imployment were more desireable? How∣soever Seneca's writings approved the publique, yet his desires lead him unto the private: when being tyred with the temptations of Nero's Court, endeavoured if he might to have enjoyed himselfe in a solitary retirednesse; And though he placed not happinesse in Contemplation, as other Philosophers did, yet in Tranquillity: which he rarely en∣joys who aspires greatness, as he well shewed that laid down a Crown for the burthen of it. Our Ecclesiasticall History reports of Albertus Magnus, that he was so affected with a peaceable retirednesse, as that he left his Bishoprick of Ratisbone, to give himselfe to his private studies. I doe not undertake to determine the question, because to a wise man, saith the Philosopher both estates may be comfortable, much more comfortable to him that is gracious, without all dispute, good the more publique it is, the more good it is: and virtus in nobili plus
placet, quia plus claret, Vertue and grace the more eminent it is, the more beautifull it is, and beneficiall not onely in its imployment, but by its example: But, where grace and wisdome is wanting to keep down lust and pride, which are the usuall pedissequas of high im∣ployments and great estates, there that lazie and unthrifty adage is made good: Bene vixit qui bene latuit: It had been some kinde of good to such a man, that he had enjoyed lesse opportunities of doing good, wherein he did evill. I presume that many in these times doe wish with Jeremy, or the time may shortly come, (how soone they know not) that they might wish, they had lived in some obscure cottage in the Wildernesse, rather then to have been acquainted with those great temptations, in which their high places and imployments have en∣snared them. It is reported of the Hedge-hogge, which in our vulgar reproach is the character of a covetous man, that he goes to a pile of apples and gathers up as many as he can upon his prickles, and when he comes to his hole, he goes in with his prickles, but leaves his apples behinde him. How many are there that have wallowed themselves in the apples of their sweet contentments, which they have pursued with many pricks and gripes of conscience, who when they shall descend, as shortly they must, to their holes of darknesse, they must then leave all the sweet apples of their false delights behinde them, and can carry nothing with them, but the stings and stripes of a wounded consci∣ence. Will you heare what they say that have gon before them, what hath pride profited us? or what hath the pomp of riches brought us? All those things are passed away like a shadow, and as a poste that passeth by—but wee are consumed in our wickednesse. Is there now, that sayes if I were not Alexander, I could wish my selfe Diogenes, if I were not called to a publique place, I could desire a private retirednesse; surely, I could desire it likewise in thy behalfe, if the Lord hath not given thee grace, to make thy place serviceable to him and to his Saints. I have now done with the Doctrinall part of this portion of the Text, to wit, Jeremies Content, and I shall give you a very short ap∣plication of it. And first, whither shall I look? Shall I look off from my selfe,  or from any of you to carry home the reproof of this doctrine? Surely my brethren, there is scarce a mothers sonne in this Congregation, that lies not under the just rebuke of this truth: I mean for our im∣moderate
desires of these earthly things. Esaus hands we see every where hunting after the prey, & quoquo∣modo rem, all is good fish with the most, that comes to the net: but where doe we heare Jacobs voyce?Gen. 33.11. Phil. 4.11. The Lord hath had mercy on me, and I have enough. Or that of Paul, a Christian; I have learned in whatso∣ever estate I am, therewith to be content. Paul a Pharisee had never learned this lesson,Acts 9.4. com∣pared with Gal. 1.6. before he came to Christ, whose ambition hurried him to serve the lusts of the Coun∣cell at Jerusalem, in making havock of the Saints at Damascus. But when the heavenly vision had once struck downe his high thoughts, which lay with his body on the ground before the Lord Jesus; then, and not till then,Phil. 3.8. had he learned all to be losse unto him, and Christ onely his gain. Christians, we speak much of contentment, and it is usuall to say, I thank God I am content with what I have; but certainly, if thou art not brought over from the world unto Christ, and doest not en∣joy thy selfe in him, thou didst never yet know what contentment meaneth. The Prophet Habakkuk seeth the worldling loading himselfe with thick clay,Habak. 2.9. and calls unto him, Woe to him that coveteth an evill cove∣tousnesse. There is a covetousnesse which is good, to covet (as the Spi∣rit directs us) the best gifts,1 Cor. 12.31. and be you herein as covetous as your hearts can hold, and spare not. But there are other gifts which the Heathens call gifts of Fortune, because of their inconstancy: and of these is the evill covetousnesse, to covet to make the House great, and not the heart good.Habak. 2.10. The same Prophet calls to such and tells them in plain language, that they consult shame to their own house. But how is that, you will say? Without all question, the covetous man takes counsell within himselfe, with Edom, to build his Nest on high: hee consults nothing but glory to his House; but consulting not with God and his Word in his wayes, the wise and holy Providence turns his counsels into foolishnesse, and the glory of his House into shame. Little do many think how soon and how sad the Accounts may be to them and to their families, who have raised their houses by the undoing of their brethren. Some that have willingly emptied them∣selves to make them full, and others that have been drained by them to make their morsels fat, and their cups to over-flow. He hath swal∣lowed down riches,Job. 20.15. (saith Zephar in Job) and he shall vomit them up a∣gain; but when Judas would have vomited up his prize of blood, it
This is all I shall say more to this point, He onely is a poore man that is ever in wants, and he is ever in wants that covets to be rich: and, which is farre worse, a worse tyrant there cannot bee then a mans own lusts, nor a worse flave then he that serves it. And what doth he that covets to be rich having a sufficiency, but covet to serve his unsatisfied lust; at least as he that weares a thin silk cloake up∣on a thick fur'd gown, doth shew the wantonnesse of his spirit, not any usefull imployment he makes of it: even so when superfluity and not necessity doth excrutiate the soule with worldly cares, it argues the mind full of vanity, and the heart full of pride. But secondly, I would rather exhort you,  and O that I had argu∣ment strong enough to perswade the worldlings reason, that there is reason enough hee should be perswaded to moderation: If from nothing else, yet from the things themselves which he so much co∣vets. For first, Riches and great estates,  at their best cannot make the possessors thereof better: nay, he must be exceeding good, that is not made much the worse by them; for hee that travelleth in his abun∣dance, walketh upon snares,2 Tim. 6.9. and had need of much grace to keep his soule, that he be not entangled and undone by them. Secondly, look upon thy prosperity and glory at the highest,  it is but as thy shadow in the Sunne, the least cloud over-casts it at high noon; and that which in the morning is before thee, in the evening is behind thee: and all is but mane & vesper, of adayes continuance, so soon passeth it away, and we are gon. O that these reasons now, would make your reason to yeeld to Je∣remies Content: a Content suitable to your mortall Condition. O that I had the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the wildernesse. That was the first Generall of our Text, which I have now com∣passed, Jeremies Content: I had a desire to have given you his Ac∣count why he desired his Cottage in the wildernesse, That I might leave my people, and go from them. But I know the limits of your time in these morning Exercises, and I shall not exceed. Reader, here were some counsels added upon the second point which follow in the end of the second Sermon.
The second Sermon. THE ACCOMPT OF A MINISTERS REMOVE: OR JEREMY DEPARTING FROM HIERUSALEM. Caveat magistratus né stipendia a piis majoribus instituta diminu∣at, vel diminui & interverti patiatur, Deus enim vindex horum omnium, & famem ministrorum sequi solet fames verbi in in∣grata illa regione. Joh: Gerhard loc. com. de Ma∣gistrat. polit. sect. 185. Hebr. 13.17. Obey them that have the over-sight over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your soules, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with griefe, for that is unprofitable for you. LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1648.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFULL, FRANCIS BƲLLER, ESQUIRE, Member of the House of COMMONS; Abundance of Grace, and assurance of Glory. Noble Sir, THIS Account of a Ministers Remo∣vall, being pressed into publicke, doth hand unto me this publick acknowledge∣ment of what I owe unto your Family, for my first induction into a Pastoral charge; wherein, although it pleased God to make my Cup exceeding bitter by two that bore the marks of Gods manifest displeasure, theone killed by the Sword of his Comrade in an Alehouse; the other stigmati∣zed as Cain, a fugitive from Gods House, and from all Civill Societies, for eight or nine yeares together: yet it pleased God to make my comforts superabundantly sweet in some spirituall
seed there, the growth whereof I saw, especially in that Ordi∣nance of Catechising, wherein your Family blessed the Con∣gregation with a fruitfull example. It is our happinesse if we may be serviceable to God, and to his Church in our generations, and then is greatnesse both ho∣nourable and comfortable, when it is acted by grace. The good God of heaven encourage your power and parts to shine as a light upon an Hill, to all that are in the valley be∣neath you, and make you happy in the saving comforts of your Family. Which is the earnest prayer of Your Worships and your Families most humbly devoted, JOHN FATHERS.
THE ACCOUNT OF A MINISTER: OR, Jeremy departing from Jerusalem. THE SECOND SERMON. JEREM. 9.2. O that I had the Cottage of a wayfaring man in the wildernesse, that I might leave my people, and goe from them. WE have lately in another Exercise, and place, lodged Jeremy in his Cottage, and in him and it, have observed, how moderate gracious desires are, how suitable a mean Content is unto a mor∣tall Condition? and how much better a low and peaceable estate, then an high and trou∣blesome? We are now to look back unto Jeru∣salem, and to see how it stands between Jeremy and his people, that he is so prest to leave them, to examine the Account or reason of his former desire. From whence (not to lose time in ope∣ning particulars) some of you may remember, that I presented to you this generall Observation: That good Ministers may, upon warrantable grounds,2. Generall Doctrine. desire to remove from an unkind people. In pursuance of this Doctrine, we shall make out two Questions, which if we doe not bring into question, the people will for us.
1. How a good Minister can have a bad people,Qust. and the fault not his? 2. How a good Minister can leave his people,  be they never so bad? For the first,1. Quest. how a good Minister can have a bad people, and the fault not his, whose work it is to make bad people good. Surely, say some, the fault must neede be the Ministers that his people are so bad; for da Ambrosins & habebis Theodasios: Let the Minister be good, and the people will be easily wrought unto good by him: But either his life is amisse, or his labours too remisse; either he is too loose, or too precise in his conversation; or too profound, or too plain in his do∣ctrine; either he wants bountifulnesse, or peaceablenesse, humility or familiarity: Or perhaps the people may want themselves in all these. I deny not but the fault may be somtimes the Ministers, & good Mini∣sters may have their faults, and his discomfort sure it is, that his peo∣ple are no better,Heb. 13.17. and his discomfort is the peoples disprofit: Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may doe it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable unto you: unprofitable unto you (saith the Apostle) that you should make their lives grievous, who spend their lives to make yours good. But say my beloved, shew me the fault if you can, in Jeremies life, or labour, and yet his people so bad, as that he was not onely weary of them,erem. 20.15. but of his life too, because hee could make theirs no better. Perhaps you will say he was passionate; It is true, he was, but it was in compassion of the peoples good, and in zeale to Gods glory. You will say he was stout and stiffe,erem. 14.17, 9. erem. 15.19. and it was needfull he should be so: for the Lords charge unto him was, Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. The Ministery of the Word must not comply with the froward humours and wayes of men, but their untoward wayes and humours must yeeld unto the Ministery of the Word. Yea, but his Ministery was of heavie things: yea, and he would not abate one syllable of his message,erem. 36.32. though he saw the Kings wrath, the Nobles frowns, and the stinking Dungeon before him. But what say you then to Isaiah? He was a man for these times, he was stiled the Evangelicall Prophet,am. 19.2.27 and as David spake of Abimaaz, He is a good man, and bringeth good tidings. His prophesies were (for
the most part) Gospel; he did mysteriously and sweetly hold forth Jesus Christ, and yet if you will beleeve him, he had as little com∣fort amongst his people, as other Ministers might have amongst theirs. I have laboured in vaine (saith he) and spent my strength for nothing, Isai. 49.4. But what speak I of the servant? the Lord it is, of whom this prophesie speaks, as appeares by that which followes,Acts 13.47. verse 6. I will also give thee for a light of the Gentiles, and for salvation unto the ends of the earth. Which words the Apostle Paul in his Sermon at Antioch,1 Tim. 3.16. 1 Pet. 2.22. Matth. 22.16. Luke 20.21. bring∣eth home unto that admirable piece of that great mystery of Godlinesse, Christ preached unto the Gentiles. And now for Christ, the Sunne saw never any mans life more inoffensive then his. His Doctrine was with authority, he was a Teacher sent from God, and taught the word of God truly, his greatest opposites being his witnesses: and yet it is the succeslesnesse of his owne Ministery unto the circumcision, of which himself by the Prophet complaineth, I have laboured in vain, I spent my strength for nothing. Of him also the Divine Evangelist te∣stifieth, that He came unto his own, and his own received him not.John 1.11. It is more then manifest, he gave that blessing to the Ministery of the A∣postles, which he with-held from his owne: There were more con∣verted at one Sermon of Peter, then wee can read of by Christ in all his life time: such was our Lords condescention to honour his Ordi∣nances in his servants more then in himselfe. Now by two or three witnesses truths may be established; but if for further confirmation you desire reasons, why a good Minister may be ill matcht with a bad people, and the fault not his, may you please to consider these: 1. Mininisters may say as Jacob, Are we in Gods stead,  who hath with-held from us the fruit of our Ministery, whose prerogative a∣lone it is to make the sterill heart fruitfull, and to beget the new crea∣ture in the barren conscience: the labour is our work,Gen. 30.2. 1 Cor. 3.7. the blessing is his. 2. Our spirituall Seed is not alwayes visible,  some may lie under the clods. A remnant may return, though the generality be stark naught.Isaiah 10.22. 3.  What if the Lord be pleased to send his Ezekiels to a rebellious House, that will not heare them. Gods glory is never the lesse,Ez.  Isai. 15.11. Ezek. 2.5. though ours be under foot. His Word doth the work for which hee sends it; and if the people know no more, yet this they shall know, that the Lord hath sent a Prophet amongst them. He was not wan∣ting
to their good in outward means, if by not improving them, they had not been wanting unto their owne. Give me leave now to make some short application of this point, and I have two words to say, to People, to Minister. 1.  To the People; and let me beseech you good people, do not lay those burthens on your Ministers shoulders, which belong unto your own. It is one of the  stratagems of Hell to keep the peo∣ple from profitablenesse under the Ministery of the Word, by mis∣representing unto them the causes of their unprofitablenesse; and it is one of the mighty methods of Satan, to perswade them to charge the causes any where, then where they ought, upon their own hearts. Yet one word more, (good people) beare, and I pray beare with your Ministers complainings under your unprofitablenesse: for surely their discomforts are exceeding great, not as you give out, for their want of outward comforts: [For without all question, God will never leave a godly Minister unprovided for. If he straghten him in one place, he will make room for him in another.] But because Gods glory and your soules are dearer unto them then their lives. Moses for the glory of Gods name, was contented to have his owne blotted out of the book of life;Exod. 32.32. Rom. 9.3. and Paul for the salvation of many, was prest in zeale to have parted with his own. Nay, beloved, I will speak a bold word and a true, your soules are much dearer unto your Ministers, then they are unto your selves. For did you bestow but halfe those paines and cares about your own soules, which they bestow upon yours, how good, how much better would they be! How prodigall are many of the sonnes of Adam, to barter a∣way the pretious purchase of Christs blood for an Apple, their Birth-right for a messe of pottage, their soules upon every slight temptation, when it costs their Minister many a night watches, many a painfull swets, many a carefull thoughts, and heavy Ephialts, to recover the spoile out of the strong mans hands again. To my fellow-labourers in the Gospel,  such as doe see their seed and travell of their soule, whose lot is fallen unto them in a faire ground, and they have a good Congregation: Faelices nimium bona si sua norint, I would have them to blesse God much for this rich mer∣cy, who have cast their lot amongst a people reverently affected unto their Ministery. And I would perswade them with all tendernesse of
spirit and condescension to blow up every sparke of good, which they see amongst their people. A word more I have to my fellow-sufferers, who are discomforta∣bly matcht with an unkinde and untractable people, though their comfort be lesse then others, yet their reward may not: for our re∣ward is not according to our successe, but according to our labours. I have laboured in vaine, I have spent my strength for nothing; saith Christ, saith Esay: But my Judgement is with the Lord, and my work with the most High. Though Israel be not gathered; yet shall I be glorified. The clouds doe kindly serve divine providence in dropping down their fatnesse, though the earth be not fruitfull, and the Sunne in gi∣ving out his influences, though the clay be hardned; should wee cast our pearles before swine? Which doe not onely refuse our pearles, but rend our persons. Our pearles are not the lesse precious, nor our kindnesse the lesse acceptable unto Jesus Christ; for whose sake wee both labour and suffer. I remember a passage between Christ and Peter,Luke 5.4, 5. Christ coming in∣to Peters ship to preach, after he had don his Sermon, bad Peter to cast out his net into the Sea, for a draught of fish, why Sir, saith Pe∣ter, I have fisht all night, and have caught nothing; neverthelesse, at thy command, I will let down the net. And the holy Story saith, He enclosed a great multitude of fishes. You know what Christ intended in this, to shew Peter what he should expect when he should shortly be made a fisher of men. He might fish all night, and all day too, and catch nothing, if Christ be not with him: neverthelesse, having a word of command from Christ, he must doe his worke, and waite upon Christ for the word of his blessing. I have now dispatcht the first Question:2 Quest. How a good Minister may have a bad people, and the fault not his. The second comes on, How a good Minister may lawfully leave his people, be they never so bad: And here, I shall make out the Solution in soure particulars. 1. I shall shew what the interest and propriety is between the Mini∣ster and his people. 2. How farre that propriety and interest doth binde the Minister to stay with his people? 3. In what case he may remoove: and what Jeremies case was here. 4. What may be the warrantable ends and grounds of removall in such a case.
These sad and troublesome times have occasioned many remooves of Ministers, and their remooves many disputes among the people. A word to these will not be seasonable in these times. And first what the Interest and propriety is between Minister and people.1 Quest. O that I had the cottage of a wayfaring man in the Wildernesse, that I might leave my people. My people, saith Jeremy. But how so. The Prophets were not assigned unto peculiar charges, as the Priests were at Jerusalem, and the Levites unto their particular Cities; and yet Je∣remy's delegation wee shall finde to be chiefly to the head Citie, as ap∣peares by Chapter the first of this Prophecy, and ver. 18. Where his Commission is directed unto the Kings of Judah, and to the Princes and Priests that were in Jerusalem. In order whereunto wee shall reade Chapter 5 ver. 1. and 5. He went up and down the streets of Jerusa∣lem, to finde out one righteous and pious man. Upon this ground it is not improbable that he calls those of Jerusalem my people, to distinguish them from those in the Wildernesse of Judea, of Ziph, or of Maon; into some one of which he might desire to remoove: O that I had the cottage of a wayfaring man in the Wildernesse, that I might leave my peo∣ple. But whether wee confine Jeremy's Dioces unto Jerusalem, or en∣large it over all Judea, a propriety of relation he had, and every Mini∣ster hath in that people to whom the Lord doth send him. Ministers and people have mutuall interests one in the other.Observ. St Paul claimes as genuine and naturall right in his Corinthians and Galatians,1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19. as their father that did beget them, or their mother that did travaile in birth for them. Notwithstanding it was not Paul that did beget the Corinthians, but the Lord by him. Nor was it he that did bring forth the new creature in the Galatians, but the Spirit by him. Such is our good Lords condescension unto his worthlesse Ministers, as that he doth oft times in Scripture transferre over, as it were his right unto his Ministers, by ascribing that unto their power, which belongs unto his own, and allowing them to assume that right in his people, which none can truly challenge but himselfe; as he saith to Moses,Deut. 9.12. Thy people which thou hast brought out of Aegypt; when the people were neither of Moses constitution, nor of his bringing out of Aegypt, but the Lords. A word of use to this.  Surely the interest is very great between Minister and people, and the bond very strickt, both to enforce the Ministers care, and the peoples love, nor can indeed the Minister be carelesse, or the people unloving, if this propriety of relation be laid home.
The more I wonder at their unnaturall unkindnesse,  who doe not onely forsake, but disdaine, yea and reproach those Ministers, by whom if ever they were begotten in the Lord, they must confesse they were begotten through them. But now the second Question is,2 Quest. How farre this propriety and in∣terest between Minister and people, binds the Minister to stay with them? I conceive, they urge it by much too farre, that would have it as fixt and absolute, as between man and wife, To have and to hold, for richer, for poorer, for better, for worse, till death us depart. Be the Ministers condition or peoples carriage what it will, the Minister in their opinion can no more lawfully leave his people, then a man his wife. Would these likewise allow the wife, to have no right in what is hers, but what is her husbands? I trow they would not. I heare the Apostle say unto his Corinthians, I have espoused you un∣to one husband, which is Christ, but he doth not say,2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you unto one husband, which is my selfe. But grant the relation to be so fixed, as between man and wife, yet there are some cases in which man and wife may separate: And that is now our Third labour to finde out that case. Good people that are unwilling to leave their Pastour wee cannot blame to question, whether their Pastour might lawfully leave them.3 Quest. Et Ʋtinam, I would to God—But this is not the case between Je∣remy and his people. Leo hath a decree against those, who doe remove from small livings unto great: Si quis mediocritate sedis suae dispecta administrationem loci celebrioris ambiret, non solùm a Cathedra pellatur aliena sed carebit & pro∣pria. I need not interpret to those by whom I desire to be understood. Qui ad curas pervenerint tanquam sine cura victuri, honori totùm dati, sanitati nihil. Who as those Ecclesiasticks in Barnards time pursue their own preferment, not the peoples well fare. The Councell of Chalcedon hath another Canon, not much unlike the former, against removing from a Countrey to a Citie-charge; The caution in both is: Si quis ambiret, if authority draws the Mini∣ster; But Si majorum authoritate inductus: If authority calls the Mini∣ster, and (I will adde too) the love of the Congregation, the case is otherwise: But neither of these cases doth hitt ours; for Jeremy was contented to have changed his province in Jerusalem, for a cottage in the Wildernesse.
That clause then in the eighteenth Canon of the Councell of An∣tioch better fits us: Si non vitio suo, sed plebis contradictione pastor abie∣rit; If the removall of a Minister, be not occasioned by any mis∣carriage in the Minister, but provoked by the ill carriage of the peo∣ple: And so it was here: O that I had the cottage of a wayfaring-man in the Wildernesse, that I might leave my people, and goe from them. Doe you aske why? Jeremy will tell you in the words below my text, that his people were so bad, he could not tell how with any comfort to live longer with them. And how bad they were, I had rather you should there reade, then I report unto you. And now I come to the fourth and maine point of the Doctrine, to set forth unto you,4 Quest. what those warrantable ends and grounds are, upon which a Minister may leave his people: And here are two things which wee shall open unto you. 1.  The lawfull ends which must be in a Minister. 2.  The sinfull provocations that may be in a people. 1.  Wee will enquire what were Jeremy's ends, for which he desired his remoovall into the Wildernesse; And his ends I conceive, may be three. 1.  The successe of his Ministry. 2.  The safety of his person. 3.  The tranquillitie of his conscience. In reference to which, I shall reminde you of that threefold accep∣tion of this word Wildernesse in Scripture, which I mentioned in the opening of the Text. Suitable to Jeremy's threefold end of remo∣vall. 1.  It is taken metaphorically for a rude and untaught people, and Jeremy might hope for better successe of his Ministry in such a Wildernesse then in Jerusalem. 2.  It is taken literally, for a place not at all inhabited, and per∣haps Jeremy might expect more safety of his person amongst wilde beasts, then amongst wicked men. 3.  It is taken more stricktly for a place inhabited, but not sully peopled, and Jeremy's soule vexed with the sinnes of Jerusalem, he might desire the peace and comfort of it, in some safe and solitary retirednesse: O that I had the cottage of a wayfaring-man in the Wilder∣nesse, that I might leave my people, and goe from them. I shall now overlooke these againe; and hand you out some few observations from them, and then apply unto the generall Doctrine.
The first lawfull end in a Ministers removall,1 End. Vtinam liceat mihi agere in solitudine ut non cogar per vocationē me∣am servire isti impio popule. Pomeran. in Loc. is the hopefull suc∣cesse of his Ministry, and for this Jeremy might desire a cottage in the Wildernesse of Judea, of Ziph, or of Maon, expecting better suc∣cesse of his Ministry, in such a barren place, then in Jerusalem, which was fruitfull in wickednesse. Sancta rusticitas coelesti regno aptior, quam docta malitia, The poore and simple usually give that entertainment unto the Ministry of the Word, which the great and worldly wise do not neglect only, but despise: for world∣ly greatnesse thinks it selfe too great,Observ. & fleshly wisdome too wise to be ordered by that which they call, the foolishnesse of preaching.1 Cor. 1.27. Therefore hath the Lord chosen the weak and foolish things of the world, to confound the wise and mighty. And Wisdome will tell you,Prov. 9.4.26.12. that her preparations are for the simple, and shee hath reason for it: Because there is more hope of a foole, then of him that is wise in his own conceit. When John Baptist sent his Disciples to know of Christ, Whether he were the Messiah, or whether they should look for another; Christ told them of the Wonders which were done by him: The deafe heare, the blind receive their sight, the dead are raised to life, and amongst other wonders of his Kingdome, he brings in this with (if not above) the rest; The poore receive the Gospel: Our latter English reads it,Matth. 11.5. To the poore is the Gospel preached. But that is no wonder; for to poore and rich the Go∣spel is preached. But this is the wonder to the scornfull world, and indeed a great secret it is of Christs Kingdome, that the poore receive the Gospel better then the rich. It was no Paradox to him that said; The Devill hath more a doe to winne the simple, then the subtile, and the Minister lesse: Because the worldly wise are sooner enraged by the Ministry of the Word, then wonne by it: For that the Ministry of the Word crosses with the contentments of the world, and the wisdome of the Spirit bids open warre against the wisdome of the flesh; Whereas in the poore and ig∣norant temptations against the Word being lesse, the entertainment of it is easier. To apply a little. I would by the poore and ignorant,  provoke the rich and worldly-wise to an holy envie. I do not say, but some moun∣taines may be brought low, and some hills plowed as well as the val∣lies. Our net as Peters may sometime catch great fishes as well as small, and when great fishes come to our net, and break not through, the labour is not better answered, then the labourer comforted. But where wee labour all night and catch nothing, surely neither comfort nor Christ is there.
The labour of our Ministry is greater to lay the foundation,  then to make superstructures; But if the labour prove effectuall, the comfort is exceeding: for this wee need not travaile the Deserts of America. There are too many Wildernesses within the borders of our Israel. Congregations which with Zebulon and Nepthali yet sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death. Should my Brethren enforce themselves with Paul, to preach the Gospel where Christ is not named, they might possibly with Paul finde better entertainment amongst the Bar∣barians at Malta, then proselytes at Jerusalem. I meane amongst those that are humbly ignorant, sooner then those that are conceitedly knowing. And this is now the first end of Jeremy's desire of removall, the hopefull successe of his Ministry in the Wildernesse; O that I had the cottage of a Wayfaring-man in the Wildernesse, that I might leave my people, and goe from them. The second end of Jeremy's desired removall,2 End. was the safety of his person: and here wee take Wildernesse for a Desert of wilde beasts, and as Jeremy might hope for more comfort of his Ministry amongst a rude and untaught people; so more safety of his person, among wilde and savage beasts. You will take it as a very hard saying, but it is more hard and heavy that it should be true, yet too true it is, that The servants of God have found more security amongst wilde beasts, then amongst wicked men.Observ. That decree in Paradise of enmity between the Womans and the Serpents seede,Gen. 3.15. is both literally and mystically true. The naturall seede is not so envious to man, but the supernaturall is much more envious to the Christian man. The Woman in the twelfth of the Revelation fled for her security into the Wildernesse, and her blessed man-childe the Lord Christ was safe in the Wildernesse, who suffered in Jeru∣salem. Daniel found more mercy from the Lyons,Mat. 4. Dan. 6.22. then from the Ba∣bylonians. And the Ravens which of all birds are most envious to man,1 King. 17.6. were more pittifull to the Prophet then man was. Eusebius re∣ports of certain Christians of Tyre in Phoenicia, whose bodies were ex∣posed unto wilde beasts, and whilest the beasts by an instinct of reve∣rence abstained from them, they did not yet escape the cruelties of men, more rabid then the beasts. My Brethren,  Let us all take this home, and wonder what wee are by nature. The kingdome of Jesus Christ in the 11. of Isa. is set forth by wilde beasts changed from the rabidnesse of their natures, and the kingdomes of men in the 7. of Daniel by wilde beasts that doe continue
and exercise their native fiercenesse: the kingdomes of men will prove little better then the kingdomes of beasts, where the kingdome of Christ is opposed. Homo homini lupus: there is no beast more savage by nature then man is, unlesse the Kingdome of Christ doth either re∣generate or restrain him. There is much in that, & I desire it may be noted, the holy Scrip∣tures do often tutor the reasonable man by unreasonable beasts; because man being in honor little lower then the Angels, by his fall became worse than beasts: Beasts yeelding that obedience to God, and service to man, which men deny both to God and man. Basil of Seleucia not improperly observes, that the beasts before the flood were more tra∣ctable to the command of God, and to the ministery of Noah, then the men of the old world were; for they entred into the Ark and were saved, the other refused, and perished. Let us think how dreadfull the day will be,  when not onely the men of Nineveh, a Wildernesse of untaught people, but the Lions of Ba∣bylon, a Wildernesse of savage Beasts, shall rise up in judgement against the men of this generation, and condemne them; who doe most cru∣elly bite and devour one the other, whilest the beasts of the field are at peace with us. This is now the second end of Jeremy's desire of removall, the safe∣ty of his person, which he would rather venture in the wildernesse, then in Jerusalem. O that I had the Cottage of a Wayfaring-man in the Wildernesse, that I might leave my people, and goe from them. The third end of Jeremy's desired removall,End 3. Melius est ha∣bitare in extre∣ma solitudine, quā inter tāta. hominū scelera commorari. Hier. in loc. Psalm 120.5. was the tranquillity of his conscience, being grieved with the abominations that were in Jerusalem, he desired to retire into the wildernesse. How much better is an harmlesse and homely retirednesse, then the merry-madnesse of ungodly Societies? An Hermites life then a Ruffians? To be alwayes without company, then not to keep good? To dwell in the wildernesse, then in the tents of wickednesse? You know whose complaint it is, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Meshek, and to inhabit the tents of Kedar, my soule hath too long dwelt with them that are enemies to peace. And yet I heare him say elsewhere,Psalm. 16.6. The lines are fallen unto me in plea∣sant places, and I have a goodly heritage. Bona terra, mala gens. In re∣gard of the place, so it may be; but in regard of the people, woe is me. That holy resolution of good old Jacob in Gen. 49. and the sixth,  is that which I shall apply for caution against evill Societies, Into their
secret let not my soule come, my glory be not thou joyned with their Assembly. Or that prayer of David, Psalm 141. vers. 4. Lord let not my soule eat of their delicates. Lots eye was great upon the fat and pleasant vallies of Sodom,Gen. 13.10.19.12. but his righteous soule was vexed with the detestable wicked∣nesse of the people, and because he did not dislodge himself, the Lord did suddenly fire him out. Est aliquid mali, vicinum esse malo, it is bad to live by bad neighbours. If we feare not an house infected, we should dread an house on fire. The house infected is their finne, the house on fire is their judgement; and in as much as we are parta∣kers of their sinnes,Rev. 18.4. we shall be partakers of their judgements. Jeremy, to avoid both, desired to retire with safety into the wildernesse, rather then to live in Jerusalem with fire over his head: O that I had the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the wildernesse, that I might leave my people and goe from them. I have now done with the ends which might be lawfull in the Mi∣nister to desire his removall; I come to the provocations which are sinfull in the people to inforce his removall. And lawfull ends, and sinfull provocations joyned together,Observ. will certainly warrant a Ministers removall. There are foure great provocations wherewith Jeremy doth charge his people. 1.  Their intractablenesse to the ministery of the Word. 2.  Their unmercifulnesse, in with-holding maintenance. 3.  Their desperate Apostasie. 4.  Their bitter persecution. Now I charge none with these, but shall shew how lawfull the re∣movall is where these may be charged. The first provocation of the people is;1. Provoca∣tion. their generall inflexiblenesse unto good, and intractablenesse under the ministery of the Word. Of this our Prophet complains, Chap. 5. v. 12. That the men of Judah had belied the Lord their God, and accounted the words of his Prophets as wind. And Chap. 8. v. 9. They had rejected the word of the Lord, and there was no understanding left in them. Now this is a very sad provocation unto a Minister, which may not unjustly occasion his removall, as appeareth by that clause in the Mi∣nisters commission, Luke 10. v. 10, 11. Into whatsoever Citie you enter, and they receive you not, goe your wayes into the streets of the same, and say, even the very dust of the Citie which cleaveth on us, we doe wipe off against you.
And according to the tenor of this Commission, Paul and Barna∣bas shooke off the dust of their feet against the unbeleeving Jewes at Antioch, and told them, It was necessary that the word of God at first should have been spoken unto you: but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unwrothy of everlasting life; Lo, we turn to the Gentiles. Acts 13. v. 51. and 46. And in Acts 22. v. 18. The Lord charged the Doctor of the Gentiles to make hast, and to get him quickly out of Jerusalem, upon this ground, because, saith be, they will not receive thy testimony concerning me. And when Paul had a great desire to stay at Jerusalem, as appeares by his reasoning with the Lord, v. 19. and 20. No, saith Christ, do not plead for thy stay, but haste thee to be gone, for I have a purpose to remove thee farre hence to the Gentiles, vers. 21. What should God doe with such a people with whom his Word can doe no good? If they say to God, Depart from us, we will have no know∣ledge of thy wayes, it is time for God to say to his Ministers, Depart from them. Ex ore suo, out of their own mouth will I judge this peo∣ple, because they would not have the knowledge of my wayes, they shall not. And this is now their first provocation, their untractable∣nesse to the ministery of the Word. The second provocation in the people is,2. Provoca∣tion. Jer. 38.9. 1 Cor. 9.13. Their unmercifulnesse in with-holding maintenance from their Ministers. The Princes of Je∣rusalem would have starved Jeremy in the Dungeon, if an Aethyopian had not been more pittifull unto him then any Israelite was. Maintenance is allowed on all sides,V. 7.9. that he who waits at the Al∣tar, should live by the Altar. And the Apostle makes it out by divers arguments drawn from Natures laws, and if men would but measure the quotum by halfe that allowance which they give to one lust, they would be more reasonable in judging what were a competency. It is a great provocation when people with-draw their affections from their Ministers, and bestow them on those who with-draw their soules from the truth, as those Galatians gave their hearts to such as plucked out their spirituall eyes, who a little before would have spluc∣ked out their corporall eyes to have given Paul.Gal. 4.15. But when people also with-draw maintenance the bond of covenant between Minister and people is broken. For though the Covenant be not alwayes expressed, yet it is alwayes implied, that the people, plus multo, should bee as care∣full, and as certain unto the Minister in temporals, as the Minister unto them in spirituals, 1 Cor. 9. v. 11. The Civill law allowes the wife (and if it did not, the law of Na∣ture
doth) receiving not victum, livelihood from him to whom she is a helper, to seek alimentum, subsistence elsewhere. The third provocation in the people is Apostasie,3. Provoca∣tion. and this Jeremy charges double on Jerusalem, both in worship and in practice: In re∣ference to the one, in the words below my Text, he calls them Adul∣terers and Adulteresses: In reference to the other, an assembly of evill do∣ers. What adultery is to the Marriage-contract, that is Apostasie to the Gospel-covenant, and no adultery like to the adulterating of the truth and worship of God. Now Apostasie is a grievous provocation unto the Lord himself to depart from a people.Hos. 9.12. Woe unto them when I shall depart from them, (saith the Lord.) And when is that? When they depart from his truth and worship. And where the Lord goes, the servant goes after; If the Son of Peace abide not in the Citie,Luke 10.6, 10. the Embassadors of peace must depart, and their peace departs with them. In Heb. 10. v. 38. the Apostle brings in the Lord protesting against Apostates, If any man draw back, my soule shall have no pleasure in him. Draw back from what? The former words run thus, The just shall live by faith, and if any man draw back, that is, from faith, either from the doctrine of faith, or from the life of faith, from Gospel Princi∣ples, or Gospel Conversation, my soule shall have no pleasure in him: Non erit rectus in anima mea: He shall not stand right in my affection, I shall on no tearmes approve him: yea the words are a melosis, there is much more implied then is expressed, My soule shall loath and abo∣minate such a person, I will not endure the sight of him in the Con∣gregation. And if this be the case of the Congregation, the Minister may well say,Jerem. 8.5. Hosea. 11.7. Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace. But this must be understood of a people turned back by a perpetual rebellion and de industria, with an heart bent to back-sliding, not through infirmity, but by a designe. The fourth provocation is Persecution:4. Provoca∣tion. And Apostates soon turne persecuters, & solus Apostata persecuter; they usually become the grea∣test, because they are loath to have that way to bee credited, from which they are revolted. Julian that was the most notorious Apo∣state, became the most bitter Persecutor that ever lived in the Christian Church. There are two sorts of persecution, which the red Dragon stirres up against godly Ministers, Oris & plagae, Ishmaels and Esaus perse∣cution, Tongue-persecution, and Hand-persecution. When men do
not onely give out hard speeches, to reproach the Minister and his Do∣ctrine,Jude 15. but doe seek out all advantages to intrap his person. Now the Lord had discovered unto Jeremy the treachery of his peo∣ples hearts, though it were not come to blowes, chap. 11. v. 18.19. There is more danger of the wolf in the lambs skin, then in his own, and where danger is eminent, it is not onely safe, but necessary to a∣void it. If the people receive not our testimony,Acts 22.18. Matth. 10.23. Christ would have us to depart; but if they persecute us, Christ advises us to flye. And in personall persecutions all agree with Augustine that it is lawfull to re∣move, which in generall persecutions they question as unlaw∣full. Athanasius in his Apologie to the Emperour, on this ground justi∣fies his departure from Alexandria in the persecution of Constantius,1 Kings 18.4. and in the persecution of Jezabel, an hundred of the Lords Prophets were hid by Obadiah in a cave. You see now the provocations of the people, which may warrantize their Jeremies to depart from them, and to wish for retiring Cottages in the wildernesse. O that I had the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the wil∣dernesse, that I might leave my people, and goe from them. Two uses onely I shall make of this poynt:  the one of Examinati∣on, the other of Exhortation. I would desire our English Jerusalem to examine herselfe, whe∣ther she be not parallel to Jeremy's Jerusalem in all these provocations; As, 1.  Whether there be not a generall inflexiblenesse under the Mi∣nistery of the Word: yea, how doe the Ministers of London prophesie in Sackcloth, under a great contempt and scorn of their Ministery.Matth. 17.16. The Gospel tels us of a Devil that was too strong for the Apostles to cast one: Every ust is a Devil, and how many such Devils are there in the hearts of men, which are too strong for Ministers, too strong for Ordinances, too strong for the Apostles themselves, if they were alive. We may sooner destroy our own lives then some mens lusts. They will tell you how many Ministers they have out-lived, and their sinnes are as long lived as themselves. 2. What unmercifulnesse towards their Ministers? The Devill was somewhat mercifull unto Christ, he would not have had him to starve; he would have had him to turn stones into bread.Matth. 4.3. But some lesse charitable would have their Ministers to live upon stones in stead of bread.
It is storied of Calvin in Geneva, because he would not give the Sa∣crament unto the people in such a superstitious manner as they desi∣red, the people would give him no maintenance. For the very same cause would many Congregations in London either storm or starve their Ministers, or bring them unto Luthers pittance, an Herring a day; and for their aged Ministers, they deale with them, as men doe with their Horses when they are worn out, they turn them into bare Com∣mons. 3.  How is London turned back as the streames of Jordan by an horrible back-sliding? What a desperate revolt from the solemne Covenant? What an execrable deniall of the sacred Scriptures? Of the Faith of the Lord that bought them? How is the beautifull child of Reformation stifeled in the birth, and a monster of shamefull Defor∣mation brought forth in the room of it? O tempora! O mores! Time was when prayer and repentance were held up in the hands of faith, as pretious meanes to maintain Communion with Jesus Christ, and now men pray against their prayers, and repent of their repentings; because some lay too much weight on duties, others have laid them wholy aside. Time was when London-zeale enkindled against every bracelet & lace of the Scarlet Whore, and now as if the spirit of London were chan∣ged into her spirit of fornications, we plead for a tolleration of all her forceries. That which once entred as Iron into our soules, but to heare of, now it is accounted a sinne to speak against it. Time was when we did look on errors as the smoak of the bottom∣lesse pit, now they are admired as new lights dropt down from hea∣ven. And he is accounted no body in their Meetings that hath not something of them. Time was when the Lords day was a delight unto us: now it is questioned whether it be the Lords ordinance or mans. Time was when wee saw a beauty in their feet that brought the glad Tidings of Peace: Now Ministers are a burthen in their places. Time was when we fled as Doves unto the holes of the Windowes, and now the wayes of Sion complain for want of passengers. Time was, but time will faile me if I should goe on to shew what shamefull Apostasies are amongst us. 4.  How is Londons, how is Englands first love Apostatized into persecutions!
May it not be said of our times in England, as Bernard spake of his times, whose words are quoted by Hugo Cardinalis in his Postills on John; Good Jesus (saith he) it seemeth the whole Ʋniversitie of Christi∣an people have conspired against thee, and these are chiefe persecutors; even so the whole University of England seemes to conspire against Jesus Christ, and some which heretofore were great professors, are now be∣come bitter persecutors. 1. As for Ishmaels persecution,  I think never was more against faith∣full Ministers, then now is. Men bend their tongues for lies, and the scorners chaire is every where set up against Moses chaire; for the wholesome words they have from us, wee have bitter words from them. Luther was charged for preaching against the Popedome, to be tuba rebellionis, a Trumpet of rebellion. And wee for preaching against as great a mystery of iniquity, if not the same, to be Incendiaries of all the troubles that have been in England, and of this second warre: If any thing goe amisse with the people, Aaron must be stoned.Numb. 14.20. 2. As for Esaus persecution, rough hands wee finde every where.  And though they fall not down right to blowes, yet there is malice and treachery enough in their hearts to provoke them. New-England they say, is too good a condition for these roundheaded Ministers, and therefore they resolve, if they can get the day to cut their throats in Old-England: Behold, saith God to Jerusalem:Jerem. 3.5. Thou hast spoken and done as evill things as thou couldest. If thou couldst have spoken or done worse, thou wouldest. Wee need not (as Ezekiel in Jerusalem) digge through the wall of this Citie, to see the bitternesse of some mens spirits, the iniquitie of their heels doth sufficiently evidence the treachery of their hearts. They declare their sinne as Sodom, and publish it as Absolom in the face of all Israel, and in the sight of this Sunne. Too sadly hath the occasion presented you Jerusalems paralell in London, and yet spare me one word farther; for, it would be Londons happinesse if this day wee could be brought to give Glory to God in taking shame to our selves. And oh that London would take up righ∣teous thoughts before God in judging their own condition, the King∣dome you see, is all in bloud at this time, if wee would fetch bloud from our hearts, the Lord might be intreated to stop the issues of bloud that are running in the Land. Londons provocations are not onely paralel to Jerusalems, but as Jerusalem justified her younger sister
Samaria, so hath London her elder sister Jerusalem. There are six circumstances, wherein Judahs provocations exceed∣ed Israels. 1.  Because they were acted in a time of reformation. Israel sinned under bad Kings,Jerem. 1.1. Judah under good. 2.  Judah sinned against all the examples of Judgement which God had given them by Israel.Jere. 3.8. 3.  Judah rebelled against those speciall warnings, which God sent them by his Prophets.Hos. 4.15. Though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sinne. 4.  Judah made more profession, then backsliding Israel did, and the more wee appeare for God,Jere. 3.4, 5. the worse wee are, if wee be not that indeed, which wee appeare to be. 5.  Judah enjoyed more and better ordinances, then Israel did; and the more means of Grace wee sinne against,2 Chron. 13.10, 11. the more malice is in our sinne. 6.  Judah had made a solemne Covenant unto God, in Josias time, and sinnes against Covenants,2 Chron. 34.32. are not onely apostasies, but perjuries. Now see if all these aggravations be not found in Londons provoca∣tions. 1.  Have wee not such opportunities of reformation, as the Lord never betrusted England with the like, and will not our posterities even curse the losse of them, which our unnaturall divisions have snatcht from us. Our fathers had a prize put into their hands, and they re∣garded it not. 2.  Have not others Judgements heightned Londons security, I mean not Israels and Judahs in ages past, but Germanies and Irelands, Kents, and Colchesters present before us. When wee see an under-billet on fire, and the second smoaking, will not the top be consumed, if the fire be not quenched? 3.  Hath London wanted warnings, or Watchmen? Hath not the Lord Convened his faithfull Watchmen out of all the parts of Eng∣land, to warne London? Hath not the Lords voyce cryed unto the Ci∣tie; Heare yee the Rod, and who hath appointed it? Wee doe heare the Word,Mich. 6.9. and doe not feele it, therefore wee shall feele the rod, and shall not heare it. 4.  Whose meanes, whose mercies have been like unto Londons? Oh London, I am sorry for thy great accounts: may it not be said of thee, as of Capernaum;Luk. 10.15. And thou London which hast been lifted up to Heaven?
Certainly no Citie hath been so high in Gospel-priviledges as thou hast been. The Lord grant that thy Gospel-unkindnesses doe not in∣curre Capernaums curse, no misery so great as that which is provoked by the abuse of Gospel-mercy. Coales taken from between the Che∣rubims, are coales of Juniper, the fiercest discoveries of Gods fiery in∣dignation. 5. Hath not London been eminent in profession above all the parts of the Kingdome? Yea, are not Londons revolts even now vailed under profession? Is not truth almost banished under pretence of truth? And Religion disgraced under shew of Religion?Compare Ezek. 10.2. with 11.7. Zech. 13.6. Thus have I been wounded, saith Christ, in the house of my friends. Turkes and Infidels sinne singly, they professe themselves Christs enemies, and they are so, but this is, Duplex, multiplex iniquitas, a com∣plicated compound of iniquity. 1. To injure the Lord Jesus,  who seeks our eternall welfare. 2. To doe it under shew of friendship.  3. Against knowledge, and against some sense of love,  for both these must be in profession. 6. Did London, did England,  did two Nations ever enter into such solemne Covenants? as have been lately not onely published in our Cities, but hung up in our Churches as inviolable records of our in∣gagements, and as standing Witnesses against our revolts? And hath not London, hath not England? have not the two Nations sinned, not onely against, but with their Covenants? Serving our lusts, and not our God by them? The Greeke word, that signifies Oath or Covenant, includo unae,  septum vel ab  terminus. is derived from a word which signifies also an hedge or bound; and we have not one∣ly broken our hedge, our bound, but even laid it flat to the ground, whereby Gods wrath breaks in every where upon us, and he is in∣forced to unsheath his sword againe: The avenger of his Covenant. And now let London lay all these provocations and aggravations together, and see if there be not cause enough, for their Jeremies to wish for cottages in the wildernesse, that they might leave their people and goe from them? Yea, will London be entreated to see, how many faithfull Jeremy's have been provoked already to leave the Citie? who are now retired into their cottages to pray for those to whom their preaching could doe no good? And as Solon when Athens was taken by Pisistratus hung up his Speare and Target at the Citie-gates, with this Protestation; Oh Athens, I have ayded thee both in word and deed; so may those faithfull Ministers say that have left you; Oh London,
wee have done what wee could to warne thee of thy sinnes, and of those judgements which are like to follow them. Shall I have leave to tell you of above fortie Churches in this Citie, that are, or were lately empty, and many more from which godly, grave, and Orthodoxe Ministers have been forced to remove, through want of maintenance, or through other discouragements? I would lay before you, but one motive to quicken the bitter sense of this; Even the mischievous consequence of it. And I will give it you in a Scripture instance. You shall reade in the 2 of Chronicles the 28. ver. 24. That in Ahaz time in Jerusalem [which is Londons paralel] the doores of the Lords house were shut, and Altars set up in every corner of the Citie; And what followed? Why, grosse apostafie in the people, and shortly after utter desolation of the Citie. Surely there is no Omen so sad of Londons hastning misery, as their unkinde provocations of the departure of their godly Ministry. I need not tell you what followed Noahs entring into the Arke, or Lots departure out of Sodom, or what the Protestants in Queen Ma∣ry's dayes acknowledged, that those Marian-dayes were the just issues of their disdaine of godly Ministers in King Edwards dayes, but this remember, that the dust of your Ministers departure shall rise up as a testimony against you, and where Christs Ambassadours of peace are for∣ced to depart,Compare Ezek. 9.3. with 11.9. their peace departs with them. The glory of God did not long stay on the Citie, when once it was departed from the San∣ctuary: If the candles are put out, the shops are all shut up; Interpret what that means Isa. 9.19. If the Land be darkened, (and tis darkned with a witnesse when the Sun of righteousnesse withdraws his Gospel light) the people shall shortly be for fuell to the fire of Gods wrath. I have yet a word of Counsell to leave behinde mee,  before I goe unto my cottage. And first unto my brother Jeremy, who desires a cottage in the wil∣dernesse: I would desire him heedfully to write after his Copie here, to see that he hath lawfull ends, and warrantable grounds to leave his people. I need not repeat Jeremy's ends, or his peoples provocations againe. Two things onely I have in advice from Jeremy in Jerusalem, to Jere∣remy in England; which I noted in the analysis of the Text. 1.  That he leave not his people without leave from God. Nor 2.  Without love to them. 1.  Not without leave from God. Jeremy doth not let fall these
words at Randum, or in passion, but in dolour of his spirit, as else∣where he sayes, he commends his way unto God; Ʋnto thee, O Lord,Jerem. 20.12. have I opened my cause. If all mens wayes are in Gods dispose, his Mini∣sters are all wayes. Sometime Paul is ordered to stay at Corinth, when he is willing to remove. Sometime to remove from Jerusalem, when he is willing to stay, alwayes he waites upon the Lords call, to direct all his wayes. Non omnes possumus esse Caesares, wee cannot all be Assembly men. Some must be Country-men, all cannot live in the Cities; some must goe abroad into the Villages. All are not appointed to great places, some unto small; some have their pallaces, others their cottages; Wheresoever our lot shall fall, wee must see that we have a divine call to warrant our way, and then if wee have little, wee must be conten∣ted; because it is our portion: If wee have more, wee must be more thankfull, because it is above our deservings. Whether wee have more or lesse, we must be both contented and thankfull: Because it is Gods will. Let our lot fall unto us in a faire ground or a foule, wee must both contentedly and thankfully submit our way unto Gods dispose; onely for more peace and comfort, and for better successe of his Mini∣stry, is Jeremy's desire. O that I had the cottage of a wayfaring-man in the Wildernesse, that I might leave my people, and goe from them. 2. As Jeremy would not leave his people without leave from God,  so not without love to them, although he could receive no love from them; for though he did leave them, yet he will not leave to pray for them, and to pray in teares, and teares in abundance, and that abun∣dance not yet enough to expresse his love; but he wishes for more in the verse before my Text; O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of teares, that I might weep day & night for the slaine of the daugh∣ter of my people. Ministers may preach plausibly, but with Jeremy to mourn in secret is the tryall of their sincerity. And for such a people as Jeremy had is a tryall indeed. Paul spends and is spent (both in praying and in preaching) though the more he loves, the lesse he is beloved.2 Cor. 12.15 How of∣ten doe wee finde Moses on his face for the people of Israel, when they by murmuring and mutuning did spit in his face. Stephen wee see on his knees for his persecutors, pouring out his prayers and life toge∣ther. Can you drinke of the Cup that I shall drink of (saith our Saviour?) Wee can. But can you pray also for those that make you drink of it?
This wee hardly can, yet this wee must, if wee will be  Disciples indeed.John 8.31. Wee must pray for those that persecute us: Father forgive them, for they know not what they doe. Pray (you say) But how? Why 1.  With an intense retirednesse, setting your selves to prayer, mak∣ing it your businesse to pray withovt ceasing, as the Church for Peter, Act. 12. And as Samuel for Israel, God forbid that I should cease praying. 2.  With an intimate compassionatenesse, emptying your selves in prayer, through a quicke and active sense of the peoples dangers. My leannesse, my leannesse, woe is me. These two intimations wee have from those two holy advantages which Jeremy aymed at in his cottage in the wildernesse. The first was an holy retirednesse unto prayers and teares, for ver. 1. he wishes his eyes a fountain of teares;  and in the Text he wishes for some solitary place to powre them out in. It is not enough to pray, but we should pray in teares, and to pray in teares, we should retire our selves to it as to our worke. Could I here reach my brethren in their Cottages, I would be∣speake from them this holy improvement of their retirednesse, to pray for those whom they have left, those that are at ease in Sion, that drink their wine in bowles, and forget Joseph in the stocks. It is an happy leasure wherein wee are set on work for God, and a blessed se∣questration from the world, by which wee have more commerce with Heaven. 2.  Jeremy foreseeing Jerusalems misery, wishes himselfe in the wil∣dernesse that he might not see it; as good old Cato, hearing of Romes overthrow, being blinde and uncapable to see it, wished himselfe deafe too, that he might not have heard it. The miseries of unkinde people as they are better discerned, so they are more pittied by good Ministers, then by themselves. The Physi∣tian sees more into the danger of the patient, then the patient him∣selfe doth, and when the patient desires such things as would kill him, the Physitian studies all meanes to cure him. The watchmen on the walls, see further then those in the Citie, and though the people doe rest secure in their sinnes, yet they that watch for their soules will not suffer God to be at rest for them. Moses is contending with God for Israels safety, when Israel was dancing before their Idoll, senlesse both of their sinne and judgement approaching. My Brethren, I will onely say of Jeremy, as Paul of Abel, being dead
yet speaketh, and bespeaketh from you, your dearest affections, and tenderest bowels for the people of God. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountaine of teares, that I might weep day and night, for the slaine of the daughter of my people. And that I might set my selfe close to this worke, and might not see the calamity of my people which I doe foresee. O that I had the cottage of a wayfaring-man in the Wildernesse, that I might leave my people, and goe from them. 2. My counsels now to London, I shall dispatch;  And foure counsels I desire to leave with you. And O that the Lord God of Heaven, the omnipotent arme of divine grace would effectually set them home this day upon every one of your hearts, and for Christ his sake I beseech you, for your soules sake, for the safety of this famous Citie, of the whole Kingdome, yea of three bleeding dying Kingdomes, I beseech you, let my counsels be acceptable unto you, if yet the Lord may be entreated to continue the glory of his Ordinances among you, and to prevent those judgements which seeme to be threatned. 1. Keep close unto your holy Covenant, wherein you have most solemnly engaged your selves to the most high God,1 Counsell. for the encou∣ragement of pious Ministers, for the advancement of the power of godlinesse, and purity of worship, for the purging out of superstition, heresie, and prophanenesse, and that yee will all endeavour to goe one before the other in the example of a reall reformation. When our enemies were mighty, our dangers threatning, and our helpes small, how big were our promises? our protestations? our de∣clarations for God, and for his Christ? But as Elisha parlied with his servant concerning that good Shunamite; Shee hath been carefull for us,2 Kings 4.13, 14. but what have wee done for her? even so, should wee put the same que∣stion to our hearts concerning God [as it is very fit wee all should] what accounts could our souls give herein? That God hath been care∣full for us in the day of our distresse, will be, must be, confessed. But what have wee done for him, of all that wee have covenanted unto him? It is very sad to see how that solemne sacred thing is of late made like a picture with divers faces to look according to every mans hu∣mour and lust that looks upon it. And on both sides it is used, or ra∣ther abused as a stalking horse by those who under pretence of love unto it, doe practise the manifest violation of it.
Chrysostome was wont to say, that it was not onely the duty but the character of him that was, or would be godly, to be the same in the day of his health and prosperity, which he did promise to be in the day of his distresse and calamity. Surely our God is the same to us, our sinnes may change his providences, but our estates cannot change his love. He is to us a Covenant-keeping God, and exspects that wee should be to him, not onely a Covenant-making, but a Covenant-keeping people. My good friends, let us not befoole our selves, (for so wee doe said one of the wisest among the sonnes of men) if we think that God will accept promises without payments,Eccles. 5.4. Eccles. 5.4. The Preachers counsell is weighty in the 6. ver. of the same Chapter. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sinne, neither say thou before the Angel it was an error, Wherefore should God be angry at thy voyce? and destroy the workes of thy bands? There is no sinne that wee reade of in holy Writ, against which di∣vine anger hath more terribly threatned, or more severely executed, then against the sinne of Covenant-breaking. I could lay before you the three-yeares-wasting famine of Judea for Sauls breach of Cove∣nant with the Gibeonites, although but a civill Covenant, and made for many yeares before.2 Sam. 21. Josh. 9.15. Compare Jere. 52.3.13. Ezek. 17.13.19. As also the ruthfull desolations of Jerusalem for Zedekiahs treachery in breaking Covenant with the King of Baby∣lon. But I shall onely desire you to reade over and consider well that passage in Jere. 34. from the 15. ver. to the 21. In ver. the 15. the Lord commends the Princes, and the people, that they had entred into the Covenant: You have done that which was right in my sight (saith God) in making a Covenant with mee, in the house that is called by my Name. But ver. 16. he charges them with the dishonest breach of it, But yee have turned and polluted my holy Name. See, my Brethren, Covenant-breaking is a polluting of that sacred dreadfull Name, which is most solemnly invocated and attested in Covenant-making. But how had they broken Covenant? Why, they proclaimed liberty for Gods peo∣ple, and had done nothing towards it; therefore sayes God ver. 17. I will also proclaime a liberty for you, even a liberty to the sword, to the pesti∣lence, and to the famine, and I will make you to be removed into all the King∣domes of the earth: and ver. 20. I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and their dead be∣dies shall be for meat unto the fowles of the Heaven, and to the beasts of the earth. And that you may take speciall notice who they are, that are
the marks of this direfull wrath, the Spirit of God doth notably point them out unto you, ver. 18. They are the men that have transgressed my Covenant, which have not performed the words of the Covenant which they made before me, when they did cut the Calfe in twaine, and passed between the parts thereof. This was a ceremony used amongst the Jewes in ma∣ing Covenants, wherein they did tacitly imprecate the holy God, even so to cut them in pieces who did breake the Covenant, as they did cut the Calfe, and as they did passe between the divided pieces, so the Lord to cause his fiery indignation, to passe between them who di∣vided one from the other in the bond of the holy Covenant. And now my Brethren, if the most just God be so extreamly severe in breach of Covenants between man and man, how think you will he make his jealousie to smoake against those that break Covenant with himselfe in those things which doe most neerly concern his worship, and the glory of his Name. Methinks I could spend in this subject as much more time as I have already spent, and need indeed requires it, but that I must hasten.Mat. 24.18. I will onely bring hither those words which our Saviour in another sense useth; Let him which is in the field not turne backe to take up his cloaths; so say I to him that is in the Citie, if you were to loose your cloaths from your backs, doe not turne backe from the holy Cove∣nant. My second Counsell is this; Take heed of apostatizing from any knowne experimentall truths of Jesus Christ,2 Counsell. this enters as iron into the soules of your godly Ministers to see those whom they have look∣ed upon as their spirituall seed, and travaile of their soules, to recede from that forme of wholesome words they had received, to see them suck the bloud of Dragons, whom they had so carefully nursed up at the breasts of consolation, and to have their affections stolen away from them, and from Jesus Christ too, by those, who never spent a breath towards their spirituall birth. And as there cannot be a greater heart-breaking unto Ministers, so neither can Religion receive a deeper wound any way then by the A∣postasie of professors, wee are an hissing, not onely to Gath and Aske∣lon, to the proud scoffing world, but even to Judah and Ephraim, to all the reformed Churches of Christendome, to see how deeply, how suddenly London, England, have corrupted themselves. In the beginning of this Parliament wee admired to see how Eng∣land was turned Arminian, and how neere it was got of a sudden un∣to
Rome, wee have now more cause to wonder, how Rome is come into England, and how England is turned Libertine, Pelagian, Socinian, Antinomian, Antiscriptarian, Antitrinitarian; yea it hath had so ma∣ny turnings, as that turning unto Christ by repentance and humilia∣tion, is now turned out of doores, and throwne aside as an old dotage of legall servitude, wee know not whether the tyranny of Bishops, or treachery of seducers, have done London, England, most hurt: for the one kept from us the power of godlinesse, the other hath beguiled us even of the forme of it. Shall I tell you (and with reverence I would) that our apostasie from God, hath caused God even to apostatize from us. I speake in the same sense, as God speaks of himself that he repents and is sorry for what he hath done. God was in a very faire way to have refor∣med England, he had cast us in, as rich advantages, as ever any Na∣tion or age was betrusted with. He had awaked the zeale of all his faithfull ones in three Kingdomes; he had contributed the counsells of divers reformed Churches; he had broken the strength of all op∣posers, and because wee have apostatized from our former zeale, God hath also turned back from his; Divine Justice holds proportion with our sin, because we have said, the time of reformation is not yet come; God hath stept aside from us, and said, well, if you let goe this, you shall never have such a time more. Those that observe the Story of the Eastern Churches, doe alledge this as the great provocation of Gods wrath to bring upon them the blasphemous doctrine of Mahomet, because they rejected the whole∣some truths of the Gospel. When once we begin to nauseate at old truths, and (as flies about a Candle) to play about new lights, it is a thousand to one but wee singe our wings, if wee burne not our selves, before we get off. The least backsliding is in attendancy to totall and finall apostasie, and when wee once look back, wee have no more power to turne a∣bout againe, then Lots wife, who was instantly made a monument of her own revolt. I will close this with that of the Apostle,Hebr. 10.25. Heb. 3.12. Take heed bre∣thren, least there be in any of you an evill heart of unbeliefe, to depart from the living God: This evill heart reignes in some, dwells in the best, it is the mother of all finne, but apostafie is its primogenite, this begins in contempt of Ordinances; for such is the departing here, a farsaking of the holy Assemblies, as elsewhere the Apostle doth interpret himselfe,
and this he calls a departing from the living God, because God in every Ordinance might be enjoyed where there is faith to bring him home; now this God lives to take vengeance on all those that depart from him, therefore take heed how yee provoke this living God, by despi∣sing his Ordinances, and discouraging his Ministers, and so departing from him in the law of his Gospel-worship. This is the second Coun∣sell. My third Counsell is that of the 32. Canon of the Councell of Towers: Let all men study peace, but especially Christians.3 Counsell. Christians if there be any thing of Christs Spirit in you, lay aside that gall and wormwood, that bitternesse of spirit and heat of contentions that is in the midst of you. Whatsoever differences there are between you in things disputable, yet let unity be preserved in things fundamentall; nothing makes your Ministers lives more uncomfortable amongst you, or their Ministry more ineffectuall, nothing so much disgraces Reli∣gion, or obstructs the beautifull birth of reformation, then the unhap∣pie discords of those who are accounted godly in your Congrega∣tions. I doe not plead for Baal, that there should be any agreement with Rome in those superstitious Ceremonies or corrupt doctrines which are happily exploded our Assemblies. No; such compliance would prove Englands undoing: as our Ecclesiasticall History well observes, That, that Bulla consensus, agreement which the Greek Church made with the Church of Rome in their opinions, was an evill presage of the utter ruine of the Orientall Empire, and of that famous Citie of Con∣stantinople, which immediately followed thereupon: But as it is repor∣ted of Polycarpus and Amicetus, howsoever they differed in their opini∣ons about some things, and could not be reconciled, yet they kept fast the bond of Christian fellowship in the faith of Jesus. Even so (my Brethren) let us as many as love Jerusalems peace lay aside our diffe∣rences in smaller matters, and study how to preserve our unity in the maine; Follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edifie another. Rom. 14.19. Let us therefore follow faith the A∣postle; he had laid the foundation of his exhortation in two argu∣ments foregoing. 1. That sound Religion consists not in disputable Questions,  but in Gospel-fruits. 2. That the edifying and not the disputing Christian,  is he that is acceptable to God, and approved of men, ver. 17, 18.
It is said of Basil the great, that in those differences between Euse∣bius and him, he overcame him by courtefie, and humanitie. O that wee also could strive in love and humility, to goe one before the other, and to overcome our differences, not by bitter disputes, but by an humble condescension. Methinks wee should not own our selves to be Christs Disciples, and to have learned nothing of that prime lesson of his,Matth. 11.29. wherein he gives us both his counsell and example; Learne of me, for I am meeke and lowly in heart. As long as the professors of the true faith in Constantinople (how∣soever differing in points of Discipline) held love and fellowship toge∣ther in substantials of doctrine and worship, so long they became a fence unto their Citie against the publique enemy: But when once they brake asunder in unkindly divisions, and shortly after lost both truth and worship, both parties became a spoyle to those that hated them. The like unhappy Story wee finde of Jerusalem, when those two Christian Governours Guido and Raimundo, with their parties con∣tended amongst themselves, they gave occasion to the common adver∣sary to come in, and take from them both, not onely the Citie, but the Gospel to boote. I beleeve you doe not forget what lately I delivered unto you upon another subject, That there is a generation of Canaa∣nites and Perezites amongst us, that doe wait for the opportunity of Abrams and Lots divisions, to break in upon us, and to spoile us of all our Gospel-priviledges and liberties. Methinks if any thing would prevaile with us, nothing should more inforce us to agreement then this mischiefe which is like to follow our disagreement; we shall both sides become a prey to those that maligne us. I will here onely leave with you those three testamentall lessons which Bernard left at his death with those that were about him. 1.  That they should offend no man. 2.  That they should give lesse credit to their own opinion. 3.  That they should not be vindictive, nor desirous of revenge for wrongs done unto themselves. O that I had the penne of a Diamond to engrave these lessons upon your hearts. The necessitie of these times doth lowdly bespeake them of us. I have yet one Counsell more, and I have done. Love,4 Counsell. and cherish, and maintaine, your godly Ministers still, though they are Starres in Christs right hand, yet they are Lamps in yours, . If you disgrace
the Throne of Christs Glory in a way of loosenesse, Christ will disgrace it in a way of Justice. If you say in the pride of your hearts,Jerem. 14.21. as those wretched Citizens in the Gospel, Wee will not have this man to rule over us, take heed least the Lord Christ take you at your words,Luk. 19.14. as he did those Jewes, who cryed out, His bloud be upon us, and upon our children.Mat. 27.25. And his bloud is upon them, and upon their children to this day. If you say in scorne, Wee will not have that Government you call Christs, Christ may say in vengeance, Well, you shall not: my Mini∣sters shall no longer trouble you, mine Ordinances shall be no longer a burthen unto you, I will take care to remove my Kingdome from you, and to bestow it upon a people that may better prize it,Mat. 21.43. and im∣prove it. Cambden could not reach his conceit, who boare in his Shield a Sa∣vage of America, with his hand pointing to the Sunne, and this Motto; Mihi accessu, tibi recessu, In accesse to mee, in recesse to thee. I know not whether I may hit his conceit, but this I am sure, the Sunne of righteousnesse hath appeared unto those Savages of America, with heal∣ling in his wings, they are many of them brought unto civilitie, hope∣full to Christianitie. I pray God that Prophecy in Isa. 32. ver. 15. Be not fulfilled be∣tween them and us: The wildernesse shall become a fruitfull field, and the fruitfull field shall be counted as a forrest. It hath been once fulfilled be∣tween the Jewes and us that were Gentiles; may it never be againe ac∣complished between the Gentiles and us that are Christians, That their wildernesse should become a fruitfull field, and our fruitfull field should be counted as a forrest. I have done; England of all parts of the Christian world, and London of all parts of England, have been famous for their reverence and bounty unto their Ministers; Shall I say, How is the faithfull Ci∣tie,Isa. 1.21. the faithfull Kingdome, become an Harlot; rather I would say, and I have said all, Let England, let London remember their first love,Revel. 2.5. and doe their first works. FINIS.
