h1348a 99828562 32991
TO THE HONOVRABLE House of Commons assembled in Parliament at Westminster. The humble Petition of Robert Hebleth∣wait, sometimes preacher of the word by authority of Parliament at Great Snoring in Norfolke. As also a narrative of his grievances con∣cerning the uniust proceedings against him, of some malevolent spirits of the standing Commit∣tee at Norwich, occasioned by the false and malicious informations of Malignant persons in Snoring, and elsewhere. And the lesuiticall suggestions and complots of the idolatrous Delinquent, Edw. Dobbs, with his popish representative Charles Devill. Ecles, 3.16. And moreover I saw under the sun the place of iudg∣ment, that wickednesse was there, and the place of righteousnesse, that iniquity was there. Prov. 27.3.4. A stone is heavie, and the sand weighty, but a fooles wrath is heavier then both, wrath is cruell, and anger is outragious, but who is able to stand before envie? The words of David unto Jonathan when he consulted with him for his safety, 1 Sam. 20.8 Thou therefore shalt deale kindly with thy servant, for thou hast brought thy servant into a Covenant of the Lord with thee. Notwithstanding if there be iniquity in me (if there be misdemeanor in me) shay me thy self (judge me your self) for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father (why should you bring me, or leave me to the wrath of your enemies.) Prov. 31.8, 9. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed for destruction. Open thy mouth, iudge righte∣ously, and plead the cause of the poor and needy. Zach. 11.last. Woe be to the idol shepherd that leaveth the flock: the sword shall be upon his arme, and upon his right eye: his arme shall be cleane dryed up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkned. London, Printed in the Year, 1647.
To the honourable House of Commons assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of Robert Heblethwaite, sometimes Preacher of the Word at Great Snoring in Norfolke. Sheweth, THat your Pititioner being by the Order of the Right Ho∣nourable the Earl of Man∣chester, established in the possession and rights of the parsonage of the said Snoring, hath since (by the dislike and unjust pro∣ceedings of the Committee of that County, as also (in further reference to them) by the prosecution, subornation, and severall malicious practises of divers other Malignant Persons, by the space
of 4. yeares, and by their ioynt and severall plots, and contrivances (as may more fully appeare in a humble Narrative hereuto annexed) not only been eiected most frequently from his possession and officiating therein; but hath also (besides their customary seizure of his Tythes and profits to their own use, as much as in them lay) been scandalizd in his function, abused in his credit and reputation, ingaged in an unnecessary and to∣tall expence of his estate and fortune, and finally (as neare as they could by many uniust and vil∣lanous suggestions they have indeavoured the taking away of his verie life, to the eternall oblo∣quie and disgrace of Your Petitioner. The Premises considered, his humble supplication is, that this honourable House would be pleased to take into their grave and serious considerations, your Pe∣titioners sad and distressed condition, and to relieve him against his oppressors, as the iustice of his cause may truly require. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c.
The Narrative to the honourable House of Commons, &c. THat the necessirie, justice & conscience of the Par∣liaments Armes did ingage me with the first (acording to my interest & calling) both in pri∣vate and publique, to their abetment and vindi∣cation) is a thing to be manifested with a large and ampie cloud of witnesses, especially in Linne, during the Siedge whereof, my sufferings by the adverse party were heavie upon me. And however the malignity and vitious conditi∣on of my adversaries, hath indeavoured with all possible paines and subtilty, to traduce my credit, abuse my function, ingage me to the expence of that private meanes which God had blest me with, which was an annuity of 30. l. per an. in Linne and debarring me (as much as in them lay) from the injoying of that generall Salary, to which I was Lawfully appropriated, and into which I was legally inducted; yet I make no doubt so clearly to evidence my right and integrity, both in the acquisi∣tion and prosecution of my Title to the Parsonage; as it will not only produce an easie concession to the truth and justice of my desires; but will also returne both shame and infamy in their faces, who so violently endeavoured the procurement of my utter ruine and disgrace. To make this appeare, requires a look back to the very foun∣dation of my interest, which did thus commence. In Deeem. 1643. the right hononrable the Earle of Manchester (being sufficiently satisfied, not only in my abilities as to the Mi∣nistry, but also in
my assured and constant affection to the Parliament, by seve∣rall testimonies both of the well affected Clergie, and Gentry in Linne and thereabouts) did immediately issue an Order for my possession and settlement in the said Parsonage; which hath and will be fully testified by Col. Wanton (a Gentleman of undoub∣ted credit and repute) In which I had not long enjoyed my self, before the County Committee did summon me to shew cause, why I possessed my self of the said Sequestration, and officiated and took to my use the Parsonage House, and Barn of Corne. To which my only answer, was a presentation of them with the Order of the Conlonel; whereunto they said, that Or∣der was their security, and thereupon did not only keep it, but also made seisure of the Barne of Corn, yet did not prohibit me to officiate. In this beginning of trouble, my only & proper addresse was to Col. Wanton; (who after my recitall of severall passages with the Committee) was pleased to repossesse me of the Corne, in the threshing whereof I proceeded as before; but the Commit∣tee (being no wayes willing to leave their pretension of an in∣terest therein) after they had sent for me againe, desired to know, whether I would rely on them, or the Col. for my further establishment; to whom I relpyed: upon the Co. to which though they cryed God speed me, yet they seized the barne of Corne againe. Vpon this (my only relief being in the Col.) I repaired to him, who againe advanced me to a repossession of the Corne, and after a strong and tedious contest in the businesse betwixt him and the Committee, about June following, the matter was referred to the Earle of Manchester, who returned the Ar∣bitration of it totally to the Col. and he againe restor'd me to my former interest and possession; so that for the present the controversie was ended; but (in the interim by the misfortune and inconvenience of this contention) the vast fabrick of the Parsonage house submitted to downfall; and the lead thereof (to the proportion of 6. Tun) was taken away by Col. Wanton, to make into bullets, for the use and service of the State. Neverthelesse, in March. 1644. (when the Col. left this com∣mand in Linne (to my evident misfortune and disadvantage)
the Committee (being willing to revive their quarrell against the Col. and revenge it for present upon my felt) did againe command my appearance, to shew them cause, why (according to the Order of the said Earle) I had not paid a fifth part. To which when J came intentionally to resolve them, they waved their summons in lieu whereof they produc'd and read an in∣formation as related to me,See Order of 8. March, 1644. The particular Orders related to this narra∣tive are accor∣ding to the ci∣tation in the margent ex∣pressed at full in the end of the Papers. and signed (as they pretended) by twenty of mine own Parishioners; wherein they charged me with the seizure of a barne of Corne in 1643. And with the sale of about 7. Tuns of lead, belonging to the old & ruined Parsonage house, & whose downfal valued by them at 300. l they did not only lay to my charge, but did also demand security of me, for the rebuilding of the same. Wherin my innocency in the occasi∣on, became my justice in the refusall. And because I could not produce the Col. aforesaid Orders for my possession (by them as shamefully demanded as detained) in stead of relief, they com∣mitted my to the custody of a Trooper for a moneth, to my great charge and disgrace, nor would they suffer me to go home to visit my wife, distressed at the newes of their hard usage of me unlesse I would set my hand to an acknowledgement of a forfeiture of 300. l to the Speaker of the house, upon a non re∣turne within 5. dayes, which I did, and for ought I know, yet remains inforce against me; they seized my profits to the value of 80. l they turned me out of my Church, not only unjustly, but disgracefully; and suffered (if not countenanced) the entertain∣ment of notorious Malignants to officiate (in my vacancy and absence) in my proper cure. Vpon which commitment (the Earle of Manchesters power being then determin'd and expir'd) In August following (my injuries and indurance being above sufferance) I made my Ap∣peale to the Honourable Committee for Plunder'd Ministers at Westminster;See Order the 4. Aug. 1645. who having received both information and satis∣faction converning my title, they did nobly and iustly confirme me in it; and therewith ordered the County Committee to re∣turne a Narrative, why I stood committed, and from whence the severity used against me received occasion? which by them was not only neglected, but in stead thereof Articles of infamy and scandall promoted, under the politicall pretension whereof,
my repossession was delayed, and my profit detained untill June 1646 since when, (as also before) every slender and frivolous occasion administred plentifull matter to them, for my further vexation and imprisonment. For the proof whereof (amongst the variety of affronts, (es∣pecially in that intervaile from August 1644. See the war∣rant the 15. Iuly 1645. untill Iune 1646. Let this one (for brevity) be the evidence and conviction o their inveteracy. For presenting my self to officiate on the Lords day by vertue of the fore recited Order of the 4. of Au∣gust 1645, the strength of their spleen was so predominant, and they so remote from any sufferance of me therein, that rather then faile they revived an antiquated warrant of their own gained while I was in London, by the authority whereof I was arrested by one Iohn Flemming, and committed into the only and proper custody of one Nich. Smith an Ale-house keeper, whose Ale-house for his extravagant and notorious deboish∣ments I had formerly procured to be put down. Jn revenge whereof, the feare of my escape, as he pretended, ingag'd him to secure me with a strong guard in the next roome, but in the interim afforded me a visit, which brought this comfort only to me, to expect no more favour, then could be prepared in the Stocks or the Spitle-House. In order to which the very next morning, though they failed in the manner, they did not in the matter of their calumny; for I had a Convoy to the Commit∣tee, with staves and swords and such revilings, as might easily prompt me to the remembrance of a more primitive persecuti∣on, and consequently ingage me with much more patience, to be silent and yeelding to those reproaches, whose only end principally aimed at was a malicious exposure of my credit and fortune, into an utter disgrace and falling. Give me leave to al∣lude to that saying of David. Ps:35.15.23.25. In mine adversit they reioyced and gathered themselves together against me, yea the ab∣iects gathered, themselves together against me, they did tear me and ceased not. Stirre up thy self and awake to my indgement, ever unto my cause,See Order 4: Iune, 1646. my God and my Lord, Lee them not say in their heart ah. so we would have it, let them not say we have swallowed him up. But to leave this digression (as though they were resolved to deny obedience to all manner of Rule and orders) and though severall orders for repossession and confirmation did daily issue
and were as daily cotemned: In Iune 1646. (notwitstand∣ing their pretension of Articles.) Yet the honourable Commit∣tee for plunderd Ministers, did order mee possession with the Tythes in Arrears, as also a stay of prosecution, untill the ac∣complishment of that Order; wherein my Prosecutors were likewise sentenced to imprisonment.See Order 4. Iune 1646. But in that (as in the re∣mainder) their obedience was equall, and my self, as in the rest as totally defeated, of what was legally awarded me. Succeeding to this, was their severall indictments of me, at the Sessions at Norwich, their suits at law to exigents, their severall procuremēts of me under the custody of the Marshal at Norwich, and their neglect or rather waving of their Articles upon the validity of which they durst not depend; yet (rather then want an aggravation) they ingag'd one Devil in my prosecution, upon a presentation that had reference to the death of Mr. Dobbs the outed Delinquent; but the pretence of that was so visibly delu∣sive, that the Committee being convinced, & the said Devil not daring to appeare,See Order 13. Sept.; 1646. I had a dismission and confirmation there∣upon. Yet the practises of this Devill were rather altered then de∣termined. For his second summons cald me (coram) againe up∣on a presumption of a Lapse by the said Delinquents non resi∣dence, which comming to a hearing the 8. of May following, and Devill neglecting this as the former, it was deferred to the next 11. of Iune, and in the interimmy self was ordered to of∣ficiate and receive profits: which day being come, still Devill did play the least in sight; yet with a naturall and fraudulent subtilty, by the aduantage of my absence. he possessed himselfe by order from the Bishop of the Diocesse, and challenged the tythes of the Parishioners with great threatnings and (to keepe me the better from the hearing of my cause, or the ap∣pearing at my cure) the height of their malice, brake in upon me: for Nicolas Smith (the former recited prosecutor of mine) being made an instrument for the subornation of one Jo. Atkins of London, his main part and agency was layd in the prosecution of me upon an inditement at the Sessions in the old Bayly, for words pretended to be spoken against the King, two yeares be∣fore the prosecution, for which I was committed to Newgate
the 14. of Iuly last, fined a 100. l. and imprisoned during the Kings pleasure, and being once confined, there needed no insti∣gation for the reviving of their Dormant articles, in the strange and unheard of prosecution of which, it is observable that on the 16 of that instant Iuly while I was absent both in person and councell, was their day of hearing, against the justice of no∣tice or Summon'; that the Articles were not at all transmitted; that neither a defence or a cross-examination was at all put in; And that the Narrative (so long before Commanded) was not returned, which is course should have preceded all the former charges, by the recited Order of the 4 of August; by which unjust and indirect proceedings, a Sequestration (The only means to expose me to an utter impossibility of subsisting) (in a manner tacitly and surreptitiously) was gained against me. For the reversing of which, both common equity and my proper interest, became my civill instigation; in order to which (after 13. weeks imprisonment) upon my motion to the Com∣mittee for plundered Ministers my prosecutors were accor∣dingly summoned to make their appearance the 9. of November following,See Order. 23. October. to shew cause why the order of sequestration should not be reversed; wherin as they neither did not could depend up∣on other reason, then the Articles themselves, so the sequenstrati∣on was illegally procured, and therefore ought in all conscience and reason to be made null. And because upon the Hindg of this, the essence of my cause hath materiall motion; it cannot be amisse (as shortly as may be) to exhibit my Reasons for the fuller light, and inforcement thereof. First the Articles (their only plea) were notoriously false, the witnesses suborn'd, and once suppress'd; and therfore the seques∣tration procured upon them was by evident supprisall, and by the advantage of my imprisonment, as formerly I have noted. Secondly, admit the articles true; yet is it justice to reverse that Order, because it crosses, and is meerely antipode to the Custome, the Practise and Judgment of that honourable Committee. First, the custome, because their proceedings are in course,
and in course there was a Narrative to precede the Articles in order whereunto (when I made a punctuall complaint of my wrongs) and from the gratious consideration of them by that honourable Committee a narrative was not only commanded, but demanded from the Committee of the Country, they tho∣row Art or disability neglected the Narrative, and exhibited Articles; and so consequently not only perverted the foresaid custome, but by that and their former tedious preventions, per∣version, and anticipations, &. have unavoidably ingaged me into the expence of at least 500 l Secondly, the justice, because it is the constant practice of that honourable Committee, to retract and reverse all surreptiti∣ous and stolne Orders, upon a hearing of one side only; upon Councell on one side only; or in the absence of the Defendant. In all which three Particulars it is palpably visible, I was against my will a wanting;See Order the 29. Ian. 1645. by the working of their subtilty and confe∣deracy. Thirdly, the judgement, for when the profits, and the posses∣sion of the Parsonage were violently detained and kept from me; it was he judgement of that honourable Committee (in my proper right and regard) that notwithstanding the Arti∣cles were objected,See Order 4. Iune 1646. See Order the 8. May. 1646. yet present obedience should first be given to their former Orders, for possession and profits detained. Nor was it the controversie in hand, I being to shew cause only a∣gainst a title claimed by Mr. Devill, as by order of the 8. of May appeares. Finally, upon the 16. of Novemb. last, the cause arrived at a kind of hearing, wherein the Sequestrators (as in the totall progresse of the businesse) exalted their subtilty and industry in∣to all the vatious shapes and evasions, that could possibly be ex∣pected from the utmost cunning of such artificers: for they had not only made provision of some very strong and powerfull friends within the House for their further incouragement and countenance; but their other mysteries and inticracies did work in so hidden and obscure meanes, that (though the face of truth was palpably ore'clowded) it still supas'd all possible scrutiny of mice, to tender her beauty and vigor cleare, or otherwise to ex∣plicate their other Engines. For in stead of pertinencies to the
matter, they quaintly flew to the questioning of my title, so of∣ten resolved, not only by the recited, but also by many other orders; by a strange putting me upon the proof of Dobbs his Sequestration; by severall mysterious and questionable testimo∣nies of theirs; and by the utter over ballancing and suppressing of those more pregnant truths, which I both offer'd, and had ready for my vindication. Nay, which heightned my grief, and their Malignancy, the Delinquent Dobbs (though present there upon command) was not so much as questioned for his con∣tempts, meerly by favour of my adversaries procuring; a dan∣gerous discouragement to well affected and honest men, and too great a promotion to such pernitious, turbulent and Anti-Par∣liamentary spirits. And now oh the scornefull insults of an un∣godly and reprobate enemy! Give leave humbly to advise with Salomon, Prov. 22.10 Cast out the scorner, and contention shall goe out, yea strife and reproach shall cease. To conclud at length, by their only subtilty, I was constrain'd to joyn issue, to make defence & crosse examin; but in regard of the extremitie & sense of my poverty (having expended al my temporal Estate my spiritual being sequestred, & my Tythes in arrears in my adversaries hands, and more executions for tres∣passes, and another prosecution by indictment, for words a∣gainst the King (as I am credibly informed, and timely adverti∣sed) ready to be imposed upon me at my first arrivall into Nor∣folke, I am totally disabled for the present in, and shall be debar∣red for the future from any further prosecution. I confesse my rights are granted me by Orders from that ho∣nourable Committee for plundered Ministers,See order 23. Octo. 1647. but yet with so easie and mild a demand (viz, the Sequinstrators are required to pay) that my crafty adversaries (inurd to the gaine) will rather afford them their (come then obedience; nay, I am confident, that presuming upon their aid and protection, which they doe expect, and have not wanted from some in the House it will sooner move their laughter then their feare: having done so formerly, and told me to my face, they would not give obedi∣dience to the orders, but bad me in more uncivill language make them usefull for my back side. Notwithstanding all which injustice of their protectors, and
all their other recited pollicies, circumventions, contempts, opressions and unparaleld severe dealings with me, they cannot pull down my hope, though they have my fortune, nor shall they aftright me out of my principles, thogh they have bereav'd me of my estate. Which are to doe the law of my God, and the law of the Parliament of England even un∣to death, having already tasted of Banishmens, viz. Sequestiation, confis∣cation, viz. seizure of goods, and imprisonment. The law (I say) of the Parliament of England, smeane that law. 1. in oposition to the law and personall command of the King, in this distance and estrangement hoth of person and mind, from his great Councell in Parliament. 2. The law in distinction from the law of will and pleasure. And 3. The law in exposition by all the learned, radically, fundamentally, and su∣perlatively the law of the Realme or kingdome of England, viz. Mag∣na Charta, and the Petition of Right. Now for the present raising both of my hope and fortune & for that duty which I owe to truth and a good conscience, as I doubt not but to make manifest the particular charges of misdemeanors in this Nar∣rative, so I feare not by the serious consideration of them in the judg∣ment and prudence of this Honourable House, but to obtaine that justice from your hands, which will not only resolve my establishment in my rights, the consideration of my losses, and the reparation of my credit, but will likewise impose so iust a punishment upon my adver∣saries, and al their accomplices, as wil forever deter them for the fu∣ture from all attempts of any such nature or condition. Robert Heblethwait. Whereas there are severall instances in this Narrative, that have relati∣on in generall, to the Committee at Norwith, it is to be understood only of particular persons therein, to whom it properly refers, and whom the Autherfor beares to publish till further order. The severall Orders related to the Narrative are as follow. At the standing Committee at Norwith, March 8 1644. VVHereas the estate of Edw. Dobbs; of great. Snoring, Cler. par∣son of the said town, by order from the Sequestrators, bearing date the 22. of July, 1643. was seized and sequestred for the use of the State, and thereupon John Flemming and others had undertaken to pay and answer the State one hundred pounds per an, for the Tythes only of the said parsonage, which was really worth 120 l per an. and out of surplasage they were on satisfie themselves for the collecting thereof, and after wards one Robert Heb∣lethwait,
cler. (before the said Dobbs was ejected) upon or about the 7. day of Decemb. 1643 by the aid and assistance of a Troop of Horse, under the command of Cap. Liev. Coxon, by foroe seized all the goods, seized and tur∣ned out the wife & children of the said Dobs out of possession of the Parsonage & since his coming into possession, hath suffered or caused the trees that stood for defence of the parsonage house to be stubbed up, & about 7. Tun of lead that was for the covering of part of the parsonage house, to be taken of carried away, and the planchers of part of the House to be taken up, and hath since his comming made such a devastation, as (by the testimony of about 20. of the pa∣rish) 300. l will not make the parsonage in so good condition, at it was when he came thither, and since that time he hath preached very seldome, and being cal∣led before us, pretendeth no other title then his possession given as aforesaid, and his allowance thereof from Col. Wanton, but shewes nothing under the Col. hand to warrant the same. Whereupon, We doe order that Iohn Flemming, and Richard Newton, the formes Sequestrators shall secure all the profits of the said parsonage in the barne or elsewhere, and shall allow the wife of the said Dobbs for her and for her children, one fist part due to her, and out of the foure parts remaining, to pay all the duties due to the Parliament for the said foure parts, and provide an able man to serve the cure, and that untill the said Heblethwait shal give security to answer for the goods seized by him, belonging to the State, and to repaire the wasts made by him in the parsonage house, and pay the arrears due to the wife of Doobs for the fift part, he stands committed by order of this Committee. Signed by severall Committees. At the Committee for plundered Ministers, August 4. An. Do. 1645. VVHereas Robert Heblethwait was by the right honourable the Earle of Manchester nominated and appointed to the Church of Snoring, in the County of Norfolke, since when, as this Committee is informed be hath been imprisoned, and other severe courses have been taken with him. This Committee doe therefore desire the Committee of Parliament sitting at Norwich, to make a narriative of the case depending before them, concerning him, and what proceedings there have been against him, and for what. And in the meane time, this Committee think fit and accordingly order, that he shall continue in, and inioy the said living and Church, according to the order of the said Earle in that behalfe. Gilb. Millington. At the Committee for plunder'd Ministers, Junii 4. Ann. Dom. 1646. THe cause concerning the contempt of John Flemming, Rich Newton and Nich. Smith of great Snoring, to the Orders of this Committee complained of by Mr Heblethwait, Minister of great Snoring in the Coun∣ty
of Norfolke, comming into consideration in the presence of Councell on both sides, it appeareth that notwithstanding severall Orders of this Committee, the said Mr. Heblethwait is kept out of possession of the said Rectory, and the pro∣fits thereof detained from him,, in defence whereof, it is alleadged, that the said Mr. Heblethwait, hath no right to the said Rectory; and that there are Articles of misdemeanor depending against him, and a day is prayed for the hearing of the whole businesse on both sides, notwithstanding Which this Com. think fit, that obe∣dience be first given to the Orders of this Com. and doe therefore certifie the afore∣said contempt to the Com. of Examinations, to the end, that the said parties may be and stand committed till the possession of the said Rectory be given to the said Mr. Heblethwait, and satisfaction made for his said prosits detained, as afore said from him, for the better ascertaining whereof, this Com. doe referre it to Sir Antho. Jrby, Sir Will. Masham, and Col. Wauton, or any two of them, who are desired upon hearing of bath sides, to value and ascertaine the same, as to justice shall appertaine. Har. Grimstone. At the Committee for plunder'd Ministers, Ianuar. 29. An. Dom. 1645. VPon hearing of councell on both sides this day in the cause of M. Heblethwait Minister of Snoring, in the county of Norfolke, who was put in by the Earle of Manchester, It is ordered that the former order of this Com of the 6. of Ianuar. last, whereby the cause is referred to the examination of the Com. of Parliament sitting at Norwich for the said County, being obtained upon hea∣ring of one side only, and in the absence of the said Mr. Heblethwait be retracted & reversed, & wheras it is desired in the behalf of the parish, that this Com. would examine the cause, and the witnesses therin themselves, this Com. do think fit and order, that the same be referred to the Com. for the Association, sitting at Cam∣bridge, who are desired to heare and examine the parties and witnesses on all sides according to the former order of this Com. of the 27. of Decemb. last, and to certifie the same. And the said Mr. Heblethwait is in the meane time to inioy the said Rectory, and profits thereof, this Com. expecting all due obedience to bee given to the former orders of this Com. by the Com. of Sequestrations, and all other persons concerning the same, and that the profits taken by the said Com. of sequestration be by them upon sight hereof restored to the said Mr. Heblethwait. Gilbt. Millington. At the Com. for plundered Ministers, Octob. 23. Anno Dom. 1647. VPon consideration had of the Petition of Rob. Heblethwait, from whom the Rectory of great Snoring, in the county of Norfolk is sequestred, for that it appeareth to this Com. that the said Mr. Heblethwait was prisoner in Newgate upon the 16. of July last, when the said cause concerning him, was heard before this Com. and that he could not be himself present at the said hearing. It is ther∣fore ordered that Rich. Newton, Iohn Fleming, ana Nich. Smith, the seque∣strators
of the said Rectory shall have liberty to shew cause before this Com. on the 9. of Novemb. next, wherfore the said order should not be reversed. And its further ordered, that notwithstanding the said sequestration, the said Mr. Heb∣lethwait shall have a proportionable part of the last harvest prosits of the said Rectorie for such time as he served the cure of the said Church for that yeare, and that be shall have all other the tyths and profits of the said Rectorie, before then due fo the time that he officiated the said cure, which the said sequestrators are re∣quired so pay unto him, or to shew cause to the contrary on the said 9. of Novemb. And for that this Com. is informed, that Mr. Dobbs the former sequestred Minister is entertained into the said Church and Rectorie, since the said seque∣stration & officiateth the said cure in contempt of the sequestration of the said re∣ctorie from him, it is ordered that the said Mr. Dobbs do make his personall ap∣pearance before this Committee on the said ninth day of Novem. to answer his said contempt at his perill. William Purefoy. At the Committee for plundered Ministers September 22. 1646. Whereas it is averred before this Committee, that Mr. Dobbs from whom the Rectory of great Snoring in the County of Norfolk is sequestred is yet living, and that therefore the claime of Cha. Devil Cle. to the said rectory by vertue of a pre∣sentation ther of from the patron is delusory, upon pretence of the said M. Dobs his death, the said M Devil being called maketh no appearance according to order, although the day for hearing was appointed upon his petition, this Com. do there∣fore dismisse the said cause, and confirme the said Mr. Heblethwait in the said Rectorie, and the sequestration thereof. Gilbt. Millington. At The Com. for plunderd Minister. May 8. 1647. The cause coming to hearing between Mr. Devill and Mr. Heblethwait Mini∣sters of the Word, concerning the Rectory of Snoring in the County of Norfolk according to the order of the 23. of Mar. last, it is ordered, that the said hearing be deferred untill the eleaventh day of June next, on which day this Committee do a∣point to heare and determin the whole cause on both sides, and it is ordered, that the said Mr Heblethwait do continue and enjoy the quiet and peaceable possession of the said Rectory and the profits thereof in the meane time, and he is discharged from any further attendance upon the said order of the 23 of March last. Bt. Knightly. Whereas a warrant issued from the Committee rquiring Robert Heble∣thwait Clerk to appear before the standing Committee sitting at Norwich, & he hath refus'd to obey the said warrant, these are to wil & require you forthwith to apprehend the said Robert Heblethwait, and to bring him be∣fore the Committee sitting at Norwich, to answer for his said refusall and such other things as shall be objected against him. Iuly 15. 1645. To the chief Constables of North green how, and to the Constables of New Walsingham, and great Snoring, and to every of them. FINIS.
