J1016 12330982 59673
AN HISTORY OF THE Constancy of Nature. WHEREIN, By comparing the latter Age with the former, it is maintained tha the World doth not decay universally, in re∣spect of it Self, or the Heavens, Elements, Mixt Bodies, Meteors, Minerals, Plants, Animals, nor Man in his Age, Stature, Strength, or Faculties of his Minde, as relating to all Arts and Science By John Jonston of Poland. Printed for John Streater, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London, 1657.
TO THE Right Worshipfull and much Accomplished Gentleman George Pit, Esquire. Right Wor: I Have for a long time had an earnest am∣bition to offer something unto you that might be, in part at least, worthy of your self; and I hope you will make this pre∣sent to be so, by your gracious acceptance, suffering it to wear your livery: The Author of it was a very learned man, whose works can be no waies prejudiciall to any person of Honour. The subject of this Book is seri∣ous, and of great Importance, I fear no ob∣jection but that it may not be judged so suta∣ble for your younger thoughts. Yet I presume you wil not be offended with me, that I should conceive such ripenesse and maturity of judge∣ment in you beyond your yeers, as to tender a Book to your patronage, whose subject may deservedly imploy, and stumble too, the appre∣hensions of the greatest Sages, and learnedst Rabbies of our times: For my own part I ne∣ver much fancied Poeticall strains, and flashe of wit, that are commonly bare outsides and
make a crackling noise in the world, having no solid matter containd in them. Yet I know such empty vanities can hardly want Patrons; It were then great pity that such a rare piece as this should fail of a favourable Maecenas. The question here agitated is, Concerning Natures Constancy, (and not concerning the Inconstancy of vain mens Manners) which I wish idle brains would seriously reflect upon, viz. whether this age wherein we live, may not afford persons (for man is the chief thing here considerable as famous for their valour, for skill in all Arts and Sciences, and all other Noble qualities and endowments, as there were in former dayes. The Author who maintains the Affirmative, hath made it good, as I suppose, beyond all exceptions, and therein hath paralleld, and I may say, exceeded by force of Argument, any that have maintain∣ed the contrary; and that to the vindication of his own particular, in this excellent Book of Natures Constancy. True it is, that there were many men formerly of great Honour and Renown in severall Countreys, and men of our daies, are reputed generally to be as Pig∣mies, compared with those Giantlike Heroes that were before us; and in some particu∣lars, I think it cannot be defended, but they might surpasse us. Yet in regard we have the
benefit of their labours and our own endea∣vours, we, though dwarfs, standing on their shoulders may see farther than they could. For since the flood, commonly men lived no lon∣ger than we do now, and they wanted the help of many things that we enjoy; God hath been bountifull to every age in some notable disco∣veries never known before. For even in that very thing that learned Archimedes, is so much magnified for, his , our Age can justly say , that we have exceed∣ed him. Martial in his Epigrams complains of such who carped at those that were eminent for Parts, in the times they lived in, and would give them no commendation because they were not Antient. Tu solos laudas mortuos Poetas: Nolo ut tibi placeam, perire. And in another excellent Epigram he states it at large, taxing the malice and envy of de∣tractors, from the then present Age: Esse quid hoc dicam, vivis quod fama negatur, Et sua quod rarus tempora Lector amet? Haec sunt Invidiae nimirum, Regule, mores: Praeferat antiquos semper ut illa novis. Sic veterem ingrati Pompeii quaerimus umbram, Et laudant Catuli Julia templa senes Ennius est lectus salvo tibi, Roma, Marone. Et sua riserunt secula Maeonidem.
Rara Coronato plausêre theatra Menandro: Nôrat Nasonem sola Corinna suum. Vos tamen, ô nostri, ne festinate, libelli: Si post fata venit gloria, non propero. I confesse the noblenesse and admirable worth of Ancestours are as spurs to posterity to set them on upon some Honourable designes, that may make them worthy of their Progenitors; So Virgil hath it in his Heroick verses. Sis memor, & te animo reptentem exempla torū. Et pater Aeneas & avuncalus excitet Hector. Yet Ovid clears it, that what they did afore times, will not ennoble us, if we tread not in their steps of Honour and Vertue. Nam genus, & proavos, & quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix en nostra voco,— We may, nay we shall honour our Ancestours the more by endeavouring to go beyond them. For the men of Israel & Judah, had no under∣valuing thoughts of posterity; nor was King David displeased at it, when Solomon was made King, that the people prayed that God would make his Throne greater than the throne of his Father David. Paterculus a singular Historian, seemes to hold the Negative, but that is meant onely, as to the rising and falling of particular Genera∣tions, that like to mans life, have their childe∣hood, youth, vigour, and olde age. As Physi∣tians distribute the times of diseases, wherein
are to be observed, the beginning, augmenta∣tion, state, and declination of them. For even as a man being to go up a hill, first comes to the foot of it & so mounts higher by degrees til he come to the top, and then he must of ne∣cessity go down again, as being able to go no higher. So there is an  and top-point in all humane affaires, which being once gained, they fall back as far as the low rise they first had. We see this largely verified in seve∣rall ages, (I will not be tedious to rifle Histo∣ries to set them down here) wherein we read, that Learning and Military Arts, and purity of Religion have flourished wonderfully, yet by degrees they have all failed and worne away, and as grosse ignorance and pusillanimity; blindenesse and superstition have succeeded them, as can be imagined; like to the seven yeers of famine in Egypt, wherein the seven yeers of plenty were forgotten, as if they had never been. But that this is not so in the generall course of the world, that hath a conti∣nued revolution, and circular motion, is cleer∣ly seen in the very change of the yeer; For spring goes on to summer, summer to Autumn, Autum to Winter, and so comes about again: No spring so good, but, if not the next, yet some yeers following, may present us with the like or better, however the declining Au∣tum,
and cold hoary Winters have passed be∣tween. I am of opinion that the Author who maintained this Theorem, not as a paradox, but as a reall truth, hath obliged our Age to so∣lemnize his memorie, for giving us this hint to exasperate our endeavours, and for chalking out the way, whereby we may be able to do more than any Age before us. That they should not so much reflect on former times, as to for∣get that God had reserved somthing for them, if they would not be wanting to themselves. No Hercules Pillars are here set up, with a Non ultra engraved upon them; but we are to make use of Charles the Fifth his Motto, and go on couragiously with a Plus ultra, adding to what our forefathers shewed themselves ho∣nourable in. Give me leave for a cloze to make this application, that as your worthy Ancestours were highly honoured for their vertues, and for being good Patriots to their countrey, so you may have the happinesse to exceed them all, and to raise up Trophies of honor unto posterity, beyond your famous pre∣decessours, improving by your goodness those gifts that God hath bountifully bestowed on you. Which are the cordiall wishes of him who is, Your Worships in all Honou∣rable respects. John Rouland.
TO THE Most Illustrious and No∣ble Lords, D. ANDREAS. D. RAPHAEL. Earls of Lesum, Palatinat, Belzen: D. GEORGE de Konary Slupecky, Castel∣lanidae Lablinensi. My most gratious Lords, Health in all obedience. THough there be nothing almost, Most Illustrious Lords, that doth not de∣fend the Constancy of Nature, yet a∣mongst other arguments, your fa∣mily may stand in the first place. From the dayes of Dambrowca, that you have made Poland happy, unto this present time, there are as many Senatours of the Kingdom, of your house as you have had Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers in former ages, and all of them of so great vertues, that all vertues seem to be bred in your courts. That there were pios men amongst them, the founding of Monaste∣ries, and their large bounty to the Church can
testifie, that they were Magnanimous persons, appears by their laying aside the supreme ho∣nours, and undergoing meaner Offices, for the publike good. Your Ancestours far before the Lepidi, have out-run their yeers, by the cele∣rity of their wife actions, and were made Ho∣nourable Senatours, at that age that Scipio could not think of being Consul. And why do I speak of former dayes? Your Grandfather was for this very thing of most famous memory, who so raised Piety and Magnanimity to the height, that were his hereditary vertues, that he hath the name of the Patron of the True Religion, and seems to be an example of most prudent Oratory. To say no more, the most Illustrious Lord your Father lives, and I wish he might live alwaies, of whom so many & so great things may be said, that the slendernes of my wit cannot comprehend, nor my low style expresse. The Church calls him, her nursing Fa∣ther and Delight: The Senate their Eye, the Nobility, the light of the common wealth, the Muses their Patron; and to say what I would in brief; Men think that in his brest is bred, what∣ever vertue and prudence can be bred in any Noble person. But most Illustrious Lords, what shall I say of you and your two brothers? I look upon your Illustrious and most Noble Mother, descended from the Lesznii, and the
Dukes of Sanguscii, and you proceeding from n honourable Seminary of vertues, do shew forth some flowers in the spring of your youth or the good of the Church and the Common wealth, and there is no doubt but fruit will follow in the Autum of your yeers. Most Illu∣strious Lord Slupeck, I have no need to say much of you, and your most noble family. The Kingdom of Poland knows the worth of it, and posterity shall thankfully remember your most Honourable Father. And you whilst ll your designes are Honourable, and engraf∣ed into the Family of the Lesznii, what may be aid of that family you justly seem to partake of it. It is yet in your power to preserv a golden ge in the Church and State: and being so, most llustrious Lords, This work of the Constancy of Nature, doth of right belong unto you, and being I am come into the patronage of your Noble family, it is my duty to offer it un∣to you, whatever it is. Wherefore I lay it at your feet, and I beseech you to pardon any weaknesse in its mean dresse. No man was ever unblamed to be wiser than his mean con∣dition would suffer him; and no man lost his abour that offered, though it were a mean gift to the Gods. Farewell, most Illustrious Lords; and pro∣ceed and continue long to do good for God,
for your Country, and noble families; and to shew favour unto me, that am most addicted to your Honours. From Leiden in Holland, November: 1632. The most bounden to your most Illustrious Honours JOHN JONSTON. I am of the number of those that admire the Antients, yet I do not, as some do, despise our own dayes. For nature is not grown so barren as to bring forth nothing new, worth commenda∣tion. Pliny L. 6. Ep. 21. And as Tacitus saith. There is a kinde of Circle in all things, as the Ages for manners turn about; all things were not better in former times, but our Times have produced some things worthy to be commended, and arts worthy imitation for posterity, Annal.
The Table. The Prologue. IT is false that the world universally and perpetually doth grow worse. Page 1 Proposition. I. The world in respect of it self doth not alwaies run to worse. pag. 6. Proposition. II. The world in respect of Heaven doth not grow worse perpetually. pag. 10 Proposition. III. The world in respect of the Elements doth not grow to be worse. pag. 18 Article. I. The Elements in generally do not grow worse. pag. 18 Article. II. The Element of the Air is deficient in nothing. pag. 21 Article. III. The Element of Water is decayed in nothing. pag. 26 Article. IIII. The Elements of Earth hath said in nothing. pag. 28 Proposition. IV. The world, in respect of mixt bodies, both inanimate, nd animate creatures without reason, doth not grow worse. pag. 31 Article. I. From Meteors it cannot be proved that the world growes worse. pag. 32 Article. II. Mineralls have not failed. pag. 37 Article. III. Neither Plants nor Animals have decayed at all. pag. 39 Proposition. V. The World in respect of Man doth not grow worse. pag. 41 Article. I. The age of Man within these 3000 yeers hath not failed. pag. 42 Article. II. Mans stature and strength, within the eers, are not decayed. pag. 52
Article. III. Nothing is wanting to Faculties of th minde. pag. 6 The first branch. Memory and Judgement have not failed. pag. 6 Part. II. There is nothing decayed in the three Faculties, Divinity, Law, or Physick. pag. 7 Part. III. Nothing is wanting in speculative Phiosophy. pag. 8 Part. IV. Nothing is wanting in practicall Phiosophy and History. pag. 8 Part. V. Nothing wans in Tongues and Arts. pag. 9 Part. VI. Mechanick Arts and skill in Navigation have increased. pag. 10 Part. VII. Vices were as great formerly, as they ar now. pag. 17 Point. I. The Religion of the Antients was too sottish p. 11 Part. II. There were many wicked Lawes among th Antients. pag. 12 Part. III. The cruelty of the Roman people wa extream. pag. 12 Part. IV. The covetousnesse of the people Rome wa exceeding great. pag. 13 Part. V. Infinite was the Luxury of the Romans fo Venery and Drinking. pag. 14 Point. VI. The Gluttony of the Romams in mea was extrordinary. pag. 14 Point. VII. The Luxvry of the Romans in the Buildings was extream. pag. 15 Point. VIII. The Luxury of Romanes in their gar∣ments was extream. pag. 16 Point. IX. The Justice, Fortitude, and Prudence o the Romanes was nothing. pag. 16 Point. X. And the last, It is probable as some thin that the Church shall be in greater glory upon the earth yet, than ever it was before. pag. 17 FINIS.
John Johnstons CONSTANCY OF Nature: A Generall Thesis. It is false that the world universally and perpetually doth grow to be worse. The Prologue. REader, it is the common opinion, and is in every mans mouth, that this world, and all things therein contained, do run towards their end, by a universall and perpetuall declining to worse and worse; and that there is nothing now in being, or can fall out, that may, I say not be prefer'd, but be compared to the dayes of our Forefathers. That neither the uniformity of the Heavens, is the same as it was of elder times, nor the fruitfulnesse of the Earth, nor the same vigour is in Plants and Animals, nor is the statute or
age of man so strong. The excellencies of Arts,Scion. l. 8. c. 6. are, by reason of the worlds growing old, exhausted, and can do but little that is wonder∣full, and but in few things. Astraea is gone to the gods, & there is no man, in common society, that may be compared with Aristides or Socrates; in Policie with the Fabii, Scipio's, or Marcelli; in Houshold Government, with Aeneas, the wives of the Myniae, Manlius, or Juni∣us; in the Church, with Ambrose, Hierome, Au∣gustine: In the Schools, with Aristotle, Demosthe∣nes, Cicero, Galen. In brief, All things run down∣ward, and they come not back again. But how true these things are reported, I leave it to every cordial man to consider, in the fear of the Lord. As for my own part, and what concerns those that I follow, I see that hereby the Ma∣jesty of God is dishonoured, the commendable indeavours of Men are hindered. For if the supreme God will not have it, that his Name should be honoured with as much reverence, as it was formerly done, why then doth he re∣quire so much at our hand? And if he will, wherefore doth he not bestow on us as great gifts, as he did on our predecessours. It cannot stand with his Omnipotency, that the treasure of his power should be exhausted. As for mans Industry, this is certain, that a preconceived distrust, will be able to do as much, as Ima∣gination can in women great with childe, that sets marks upon Infants; or the conceits of Melancholy people, which being strongly printed in their minde, can torment them sometimes for many yeers, and sometimes bring them to their ends. This matter is confirmed not onely by the example of Franciscus, Mar∣quiss
of Saluzzium, who being bewitched by the predictions that were written in favor of Charles the fifth, degenerated from Francis the first, from whom he received his Marquisdom; but also, all those Learned Worthies (I say nothing of others who make such a pretence for their idlenesse, or ignorance) who think they can bring nothing into the Exchequer of Learning, because they think they can say nothing which hath not been already said.Quintil. Orat. 12. Wherefore Quin∣tilian speaks the truth; If men had thought thus, that no man could exceed him that was the best, they that are so, had never been the best. Lest therefore the truth should be in captivity, the Majesty of God dishonoured, and the in∣deavours of men, and from thence their com∣moditie, should be shut up in prison; I having borrowed matter, especially from a large Trea∣tise written in English, by that reverend man, D. George Hackwil, S S T. D. concerning this Thesis, yet preserving my own meaning, I thought fit to bring to publike view the princi∣pal things that are objected against it, and to communicate the same with the learned world. But while I deny that the world doth universally and perpetually run to worse and worse; I understand by the world, the whole compasse of the Heavens and the Earth, and I mean an universall ruine to worse and worse, in respect of all bodies therein contained; and I intend a perpetuall decaying, in respect of the duration from the beginning unto the end; So that the meaning will be this, That this Frame of Heaven and Earth with all bo∣dies therein comprehended, by succession of
time running along from the first to the last, doth not by nature slide and run to worse and worse. Yet I grant that the Elements are changed one into another, that mixt bodies are subject to alteration and diminution, that the earth hath lost something by the Fall, and the Flood; That the Manners of men and Arts do vary; That there is difference in the length of mens lives; And that sometimes some Arts are lost, But because. Seneca.All things but for time adjourn, And whats past, joyes to return, Nor is there made any thing, But the end and beginning, Touch each other in a ring. I think it can make nothing against the universall Ruine of the World.Philo de Mand. In∣corruptibil. There is a no∣table recompence in the Element's fourfould qualities, which they dispense with most equall and just rules, according to their turns. The Sea hath formerly taken away some Islands, and we read in Histories of some new ones come up in their rooms. God hath made Fruitfulnesse, or Barrennesse, neither in all places certain,In Icon. Anim. c. 2 nor yet perpetually. They are the words of Barclay, Those lands that were most fruitfull in former times, are now barren wildernesses, and dry sands; and those countries that were once ex∣tream cold and unfruitfull, are not now onely fit to bear corn, but abound with those things that are for delight. Formerly Ireland was a Mart for the Muses, now, unlesse it were adorned by that one usher, and some other Stars, we should
esteem it to be almost a Barbarous place. Greece was formerly the famous place for Wisdom, now it is despised for its idlenesse and igno∣rance. So all ages have their Genius, that directs the minds of mortall men to certain studies:Barclay l. c some ages are chiefly exercised in Wars, then again all things are peaceable; then peo∣ple are in love with Kingdoms, then with Common-Wealths; sometime they are all born as it were Barbarous, then again they grow more milde, and more easie of conditions; and then again after some ages they return to their first blockishnesse. So the world hath often been adorned with the refined manners of Men; and afterwards, Industry failing, vanish∣eth as it were in a cloud. Moreover, there are times in all Countreys, wherein men live either longer or shorter;Veridam in Hist. vitae & mortis. longer, most commonly when the times are Barbarous, and the Diet more plain, and more given to bodily exercise; short∣er, when they are more civill, and there is more Luxury and idlenesse; but these things have their turns, &c. And this is our opinion: But since the world is considered either in sprect of it self, or in respect of its parts in speciall, and these do contain more bodies under them, there must be many Propositions set down in clearing this Thesis; and these are the propositions that seem to me, to appertain thereunto. I. That the world in respect of the whole, doth not alwaies grow worse. II. Nor in regard of the Heavens. III. Nor in regard of the Elements.
IV. Nor in regard of mixt bodies both Inani∣mate, and Animate without reason. V. Nor in regard of Man. Wherefore our discourse shal be employed in the refutation of the contrary, and confirmation of these propo∣sitions; And thou, Christian Reader, read this without prejudice, and consider with judge∣ment. Proposition I. The world in respect of it self doth not alwaies run to worse. THis is most true. For the Wisdome of Solomon saith, that the Spirit of the Lord fills the whole world; That which the Platonists calls the Soul of the world, is nothing else but the power of God, that manifests it self no lesse in preserving the Frame of the Uni∣verse, than it did in creating it. Whence saith Justin Martyr, As that which is, had never been, unlesse he had commanded, Let it be made: So would it not continue, unlesse He had given order to those things that do not perish, that they should alwaies abide; and to those things that come and goe, that they should alwaies increase and multi∣ply. And Learned men in Schools, compare the dependance of things Created upon the Creatour, partly to Light, which is extinguish∣ed in the Ayre, by the Suns absence, partly to a Vessel that contains the water within it, partly to a Print made in Water. II. There are two principles that constitute naturall bodies;
Namely, matter and form. That, because it is not generated, it is not corrupted; for it is without any contrariety, and therefore cannot naturally be destroyed: but the nature of This, is, that when one departs an other succeeds in the same matter. — Nothing born can die, But all things successively, Are changed but formally. Nor can it be otherwise in Nature; For it in∣tends no annihilation, nor can she do that more than she can create; nor where there is any augmentation, can any diminution happen. III. But should we grant that some parts of the world do alwaies decrease; other parts thereupon will increase, or else diminution or annihilation must follow, and if this be granted, an incredible disproportion will fall out between them▪ and an infallible ruine must come upon that. And then for some thousands of yeers the Influence of the Heavens had faild, and trans∣mutation of Elements, and forces in mixt bo∣dies. But Solomon saith expresly,2 Pet▪ 3. 1 that there is a Circular motion in things, and as a Poet writes. Boetius.The Sun sets in the West, But he there takes no rest. To rise he doth his best. So we must judge of all other things. IV. Lastly,Mat. 24. 38. by the rule of proportion it were an easie matter to foretell the day and the hour when it shall end.1 Thes, 5. ▪ But that is false by the Testi∣mony
of Scripture, and of Christ himself: and divers men diversly define the Age of the world. Liboravius, makes it 1666. Rosnus, 1656. Cu∣sanus, 1700. or at least the space, that precedes the yeer 1734. Copernicus is of an other minde. Upon Napere, Baron of March, a Mathematitian, that was second to none, Owen makes this sport∣ing Epigram. Ninety two yeers, this world must last you say, It seems to set the bounds: you are full wise. For had you set them at a shorter day, You might have liv'd to shame, for forging lyes. But it is objected, that Esdras, the Apostle, and Cyprian a Martyr, did intimate the decaying of things, and confirme that Principle, Every thing the more it is removed from its beginning, the more it faints and fails. It is true, and in expresse words in Esdras.sdras l. 4. 5. v. 54. Consider also that you are of lesse stature than those that were before you, and those that shall come after you, will be lesse then you are, for that the Creatures now grow old, and are past the strength of their youth.m, 8: , 21. It is certain, that the Apostle writes, That the world is subject to va∣nity, and that it shall be freed from the bondage of corruption, into the liberty of the glory of the sons of God. We cannot deny but these are Cyprians words, You must know in the first place, that the world is now grown old, that it stands not so strong∣ly as it did stand, nor is it so vigorous as formerly it was, &c. In Winter, there is no such plenty of show∣ers to nourish the seed, nor in Summer is the Sun so beneficiall to ripen the corn; Nor are plants in the Spring so prosperous by reason of temperate weather;
nor are Trees so fruitful with fruit in Autumn. There are fewer Marble stones dug forth of the Mountains that are worn out; they afford lesse quantity of Silver and Gold; Metals are exhausted, and the slender Veines daily grow lesse and decrease. The Hus∣bandman failes in the Fields, Concord in friendship, skilfulnesse in Arts, Discipline in Manners, &c. All these things are true, yet this is most certain, that our Tenent is nothing weakned by this, nor is the contrary any whit confirmed. First of all that Book of Esdras hath nothing but a false Ti∣tle, and is most injurious. What we found in the sixth Chapter are mere Fables, concerning Behe∣moth and Leviathan; and that is false that is spoken of the consummation of the world. The Apostle onely ntimates the impuritie and defor∣mity that the Creature contracted by the fall of Man, and also the declining of Individuals, and the hastening of the species to a totall and finall dissolution by Fire; Lastly, the abuse of them, with the dishonour of the Creatour, joyned with the wrong done to his servants, which are the things he complains of. It is no wonder also that Cyprian writ such things.L. 3. Exor, Hist. e. 5. The times were then so bitter by reason of Wars, Famine and Pestilence, that the Christians of that age ex∣pected the end of the world to be at hand, & Gra∣serus writ that the opening of the second and third Seal hapned in that time. But a few yeers after, that lamentation was turned into joy. For not only under Galienus, otherwise a most cruel Persectour, was peace restored by an Edict sent forth to the Churches; but also under Constantine was that Woman in the Apocalyps brought back into the clear light, which Nero
had driven into the Desert, and which had lain hidden there for a Time, Times, and Half a time, or 245. yeers. But also unto this, may be opposed the Disciple of Saint Augustine, Orosius, whose words are these. Let them remember with me the times of their Ancestors, that were most unquiet by reason of Wars, most hainous for wickednes, most foul for dissentions, most miserable for a long continuance, which they may deservedly be afraid of, because they were, and they have need to beg that they may be no more; to beg that of God onely, who then suffered his secret Judgements to break forth, and now his Mercies are manifest by removing them. And that that Axiome is false, appears not only by the state of things, but also by the effusion of the grace of God by the Incarnation of Christ, in the yeer 3947. But that it must be understood of violent motion, is without all doubt. Proposition II. The world in respect of Heaven doth not grow worse perpetually. IF such a declining of things to worse should befall the Heavens, it should either befall the Substance of it, or the Motion, or the Light, or the Heat, or the Influence. But it falls upon none of these. Not the substance; For though it be granted, that the first matter of the Heavens, and of the Elements be the same, and that both in re∣spect of want of action in them both, and for the needlesse bringing in of two matters. Yet, that matter is joyned to such a form, that satisfieth the
whole desire thereof, nor hath it any contrary, whereby it may become subject to any corruption, and though it be subject to corruption, (which is the truth) as we finde it in the Psalme,Psal. 102. and thence Generation would follow, because that there ap∣peared new Stars, one in Cassiopea in the yeer 1572. which lasted two yeers: and again, another in the brest of the Hen, Anno▪ 1600. which is yet to be seen, and in 1604. one appeared in the Sphere of Saturn: Yet this would make no more against our opinion, than the corrupti∣on of mixt bodies made of Elements, can make. Not the Motion; For we see, if we were minded to follow the Common opinion, that not onely the Primum Mobile, by an Eternall decree goes about from East to West, but the Planets keep their courses as they are Calculated by our Ancestours, and when for certain yeers they have wandered in their Latitudes, they will without doubt passe in the same tarces as they went before. Boetius.The Sun that runs with Fire hot, The cold Moon's motion hindereth not▪ Nor doth the Pole Star ever drench Her flames within the Sea to quench, Though others do, and Vesper bright At certain times foreshwes darke Night, But Lucifer brings back the Light. Of Saturn the Planet we may say as truly now as Cicero writ of it formerly. The Star of Sa∣turne in its motion, effecting many things admi∣rable, both anteceding and retarding, and by ly∣ing hid in the Evening, and shewing it self again, in the Morning, yet this makes no change in the
large length of Time, but in the same time it wil do the same again. And should we maintain that the course of the Starres were changed, how then could Mathematicians foretell the yeer, day, hour, nay the very instant of Oppositions, and Conjunctions, and Ecclipses, so many yeers before. Lactantius concluded from thence that the Stars are no Gods, because they cannot alter or exceed their bounds or usuall Motions.Lactant. l. 2. Insti. c. 5, For were they Gods they might wander here and there at pleasure, without any necessity, as living Crea∣tures do upon the earth, who because their wlls are free, they go up and down where they please, and as their mindes lead them, thither they go. And Plutarch wondering at this uniformity, Such a great magnitude of things (saith he) such dispo∣sing of them, such a constancie in observing times and orders, could not either formerly be made without a Provident Artificer; or remain so many ages, without a Potent Inhabitant; or be governed for ever, without a Knowing and Skill∣full Ruler, as Reason it self declares it. And if we would hold that the Heaven's standing still, is agreeable to the Scriptures, and to the opini∣ons of the Antient Fathers, and should we assert that the Starres onely are mooved by their pro∣per Motions, and that they are in the heavens no otherwise than living Creatures are upon the Earth, Fishes in the Water, and birds in the Ayre; yet would the matter be the same. Not the light. For as at first the waters were dispersed over the Face of the Earth: So was the Light through the Firmament. And as the waters were gathered toge∣ther into one heap; so was the Light bound up in one body: & as that was called the Sea, so this was
called the Sun. As therefore the Sea loseth no∣thing, though it water the Earth with innume∣rable Rivers; so the Sun loseth nothing by com∣municating of his Light. And if it be true, that at Padua tow Pitchers were dug up, inclosed in one, which Olybius Maximus dedicated to Plato, for they were full of a liquor wherein a Light then burning, was preserved▪ for many ages. And if that be not false also, that is written of another Candle that was found burning in the Sepulchre of Tullia, what should we doubt of the Heavenly Light? Especially seeing that the Father, according the opinion of those who hold the Soul to be ex¦traduce, loseth nothing of his own Soul, when he communicateth a Soul to his Childe, but it is as Light borrowed from Light. As for the questi∣on concerning Heat, this doth of it self belong to the stars; yet God hath given this unto them, that they may be the cause of it, in things capable of heat. That they do it not by Motion, is confirm∣ed by the Suns standing still in Joshua's dayes, and the temper of the middle Region of the Ayre, that declines unto cold: but by their light, the beams whereof, if they fall Perpendicular, if they be reverberated, then is it stronger, and this is almost a certainty. For the Summer, and Winter Tempe∣rament of the Ayre, and the effects of the artifi∣ciall Glasses of Archimedes and of Proclus, seem to confirm as much. When therefore we shew that the Light is not diminished, every man may easily know, what to think of the Heat. We need not much troouble our selves concerning the Influence. For if the substance remains Entire, how can these Operations ceose, that flow from the forme? We may for maintaining of our
Theses otherwise, produce that which Langi hath written. I do not see, saith he, how any Ma can exactly calculate any Mans Nativity, seeing tha the Starres are hurried so violently about, day and night, so that the least moments of time will produc mighty changes, Which hardly any man can compre∣hend in his very thoughts.Budet. in Polo. Reginald Pool pleaseth me well, who answers thus to one, who promi∣sed him great Honours, from the Scheme of his Nativity. Whatsoever is pretended in me, by my naturall generation, is changed, and restrained by a supernaturall Generation made by the Blood of my Sa∣viour. But you will object to the contrary, that in former times the Torrid Zone was unhabitable, that the Sun is now neerer to the Earth, and not so far remote toward either Pole: and lastly, that the Pole Starre in the Tail of Ursa Minor, is neerer to the Pole; and therefore the Heavens are deficient. It is so; For there are ma∣ny that now live under the Torrid Zone, and there is Merchandise for multitudes of commodi∣ties,Bodinus. l. ult. Theatr. Natura. from hence thither; Bodinus reports out of Copernicus, Rainoldus, Stadius, and others, that the Sun is now more neer to the earth, by 136. Semidiameters, or 26600. miles, and Philippus Melancthon thought, that ought to be referred to the wasting condition of the earthly and heaven∣ly bodies. It is the common opinion of Astrono∣mers, that the Sun in Winter is not so far from us toward the South, as he was in the dayes of Pto∣lomie, and Hipparchus; and not so neer toward the North in summer. For Ptolomie about the yeer of Christ, 140. discovered the greatest decli∣nation of the Sun, from the Equinoctiall Line, to∣ward either of the Poles, to be 23, degrees, 51.
minutes, 20. seconds, and because he found that account to agree with the observations of Hippar∣chus who lived 130. yeers before Christ, and of Eratosthenes, who preceded him, he thence con∣cluded that the Suns greatest declination was im∣mutable. But in the yeer of Christ; one thousand four hundred and thirty, the most learned Astro∣nomers of the Arabians, found the same declina∣tion to be but 23. degrees 35. minuts. To whom Albategnius subscribed, who lived in the yeer, 880. But in the yeer 1070, Arzachel an Ethiopian born in Spain, took the greatest Declination, which he found to be 23 degrees, 33 minutes, 30 seconds; and that he might salve the differences of obser∣vations, he invented a new Hypothesis. Coperni∣cus afterward, following him, in the yeer 1520. concluded that the Suns greatest declination was mutable, yet never greater then 23 degrees, 52 minutes, nor lesse than 23 degrees, 28 mi∣nutes, and he taught us that in the space of 1 thou∣sand, seven hundred and seventy yeers, the Sun would passe from the former to the latter; and again, in so much space of time, the Sun would go back again, from the latter to the former. Therefore out of this Hypothesis of Copernicus, about 65 yeers before the birth of Christ, the greatest declination of the Sun was 23 degrees, 52 minutes, from which time, calculating backward, it hath ever grown lesse and lesse, untill about 1782. yeers before Christ, the greatest Declina∣tion but 23 degrees, 28 minutes, and from that, counting backward again as before, it in∣creased, untill in the yeer, 3499 before Christ, it grew to be 23 degrees, 52 Minutes. Lastly, Moli∣neus writes of the Pole Star, in the Tayle of Ursa
Minor, that in the Days of Hipparchus, it was 12 degrees distant from the Pole of the World, and now a dayes it is hardly four degrees from it, and he supposeth, that when it shall come to stand in the Poles place, (which may be within 500 or 600 yeers,) the period shall be, which God hath set to Nature. I willingly grant all these things, yet I see not what inconveniece will happen to our cause thereby. Since they, that are of a faction a∣gainst this, do defend a universall declining, they must also of necessity say, that the cold zones by the cold being increased, are become inhabitable, and that the forces of men are so worn, that they can by no means endure it. The suns neerernesse to us, is either founded upon false principles, or the Suns declination is uncertain and changea∣ble. For Ptolomie about the yeer of Christ, 140 placeth the distance of the Sun from the Earth, in 1210 Semidiameters of the Earth, but Albate∣gnius, about the yeer 880 found it to be 1146 Semidiameters. Copernicus about the yeer 1520 found it to be 1179. Tycho Brahe, about the yeer, 1600 calculated it to be 1182 Diameters. But Lasburgius, Keplerus, and others, suppose the Sun is distant from the Earth 3000 Semidiameters. Scaliger holds that opinion to be so absurd, that he breaks forth into these words. That which some have been bold to write,cal. exer∣t. 99. that the body of the Sun is not far more neer than it was written to be by our Ancestours, so that it may seem to have changed its place, in the body of the deferent Orb; their very writings ought to be wiped out with Spunges, or themselves whipt with rods. As for the Suns coming neerer to the South, or to the North, the most learned, Doctor Banbridge, Astromonie Rea∣der
in the famous university of Oxford, thinks that the Suns Declination is immutable, and that the difference of some minutes, between us and Ptolomie, might arise from some er∣rour amongst the Antients in their Observa∣tions, whence it will follow that the Sun is not farther removed toward the South, nor is he come neerer to the North. Yet however, if we should grant that there were a mutability, it would follow, that as the Sun was 65 yeers before Christ, farther off toward the South, than it is now; so in the yeers that went before those yeers it was not farther off. And when that the greatest Declination is at the highest, the Sun in winter wil be farther toward the South, and neerer in summer toward the North; But when it is at the lowest, it will be all contrary. Lastly, if any inconvenience may fall upon us thereby, that is recom∣pensed by the convenience, that befalls them that live toward the South, and so nothing can be collected thence, for to prove an uni∣versall falling of the World from worse to worse. The opinion of that Rare man is grounded on a weak foundation, for the Pole Star wil never remove to be in place of the Pole of the world, or be so straightned that it cannot proceed forward. I grant indeed that after 50 yeers are gone, it will be very neer to it, but it will go back again, and it will become more Northerly, as it is now Souther∣ly, and this seems to be most certain; and if the comming neer, or going farther off from the Pole, by other Stars, do not shew the end of
the world, what reason will perswade us that this Star should shew it? Proposition III. The world, in respect of the Elements, doth not grow to be worse. BEing that the Elements may be consider∣ed in generall, or in speciall; that this Article may be more exactly demonstra∣ted, four other Articles seem to belong un∣to it. I. That the world in respect of the Ele∣ments in general doth not grow worse. II. Not in respect of the Ayre. III. Not in respect of the Water. IV. Not in respect of the Earth. We shall therefore shew all these in their order. The First Article. The Elements in generall do not grow worse. FOr if the Elements considered in generall, should universally and perpetually grow worse, they should decay, either in respect of
Number, or Qualities, or Proportion, or Transmu∣tation. But it is not so in any of these. What concerns their number; The common opinion is, that there are four, but Three is the truth: for the Fire is but the supronie part of the purer Air, that is more subtile, hot, and free from exhalations. For since the Scripture doth no where speak of Fire, no not in Genesis where things created are described, why should we maintain it? And if that solid Element of Fire, should differ in subtility and thinnesse, from the Sky, or the uppermost part of the Air, a new refraction of the Stars must needs follow, by reason of the Fire, and we should be ignorant of their true places, which is false. Moreover, Nature in the chiefest things hath observed the number of Three. For to say no∣thing of the supernaturall Mystery of the Trinity; there is a Trinity in Mans Sex, the male, the Female, and the Hermaphrodite: there are three first principles of naturall things, as Matter, Form, and Privation: al∣so there are three sensible principles, Salt, Brimstone, and Mercury. There are three principall parts in Man, and three kind of spirits; the Animall, Vitall, and Naturall: as also they have three Channels, or Vessels, namely, the Nerves, Arteries, and Veins. There are three humours in the Blood, as there are in Milk. The Buttery part of Milk resembles the Air, and so doth the Cholerick part of the blood. The wheyish part of the Milk, and the serene part of the Blood, resembles the Wa∣ter. And the Crudly part of Milk resembles the Earth, as doth the grosser Choler of the
Blood, Every man knows that this number is found now adays; and in respect of the qualities, the Earth is now the driest Element, the coldest and the heaviest. The Air is the hottest moist∣est and lightest. The Water is cold and moist. Aristotle makes the proportion between the Elements to be Ten Degrees: but it is not so. For the Circumference of the Earth is 5400. miles,Barthol. de Element. c. 5. therefore the diameter is 1718, the Se∣midiameter is 859, or 860, which are chosen for to facilitate the account. Moreover there are many emptie places of the Earth that are without Water, and where Seas are, the Earth is under the Water,The same de aquis. l. 12. c. 5. so that the depth of the Sea, as is gathered by the observations of the most skilfull Mariners, in many places scarce amounts to 80, or a 100 pases, more seldome to two or 300 pases, and most seldom to 500 pases, but seldom or never to a 1000 pases, and that is but the fourth part of a Germane mile: and if this be compared with the Diame∣ter or depths of the Earth, it is as the height of a drop of sweat, compared with the whole body. Moreover, experience shews, that Air will be made of a few drops of water, that is by many degrees more than they. And who can deny, but that this proportion holds even at this day?Philo de∣mundi in∣corrupti∣bilitate, As for their transmutation: There is a notable compensation of the four fold forces in the Elements, dispensing their courses by equal rules, and bounds▪ For, as the Circle of the yeer is distinguished by four quarters, one quarter succeeding after an other, and by the same Circuit, untill the same time return again; in like manner the Elements of the world succeeding one the other in their courses, are changed, and you would say
it were incredible: When they seem to die, they are made immortall, running the same race again, and again, and passing daily up and down the same way. For from the earth begins a rising way, which melting is changed into water, then the wa∣ter evaporates into Air, the Air is rarefied til it he Fire, & another declining way tends downward from the top; the Fire being put out sinks down into Air, and the Air becomes thick, and turns to Wa∣ter, and the moysture of the Water becomes grosse till it be Earth. True it is they are not otherwise mingled, than as Islanders are with those that Traffick with them; yet this cannot be denied, but it is done for the great good of the Uni∣verse. For pure water were unfit to drink, the Earth would afford no moysture for Corn, and we could not breathe in the Air. Hence Saint Augustine.August. de Genesi ad liter. l. 7. c. 2. The Air on the top of Olympus, is re∣ported to be so thin, that it cannot nourish Birds, nor yet Men that happen to go up thither, can be nourished with the Spirit of a grosser Air, as they are wout to be, and is requisite for their nutri∣ment. Article. II. The Element of the Air is deficient in nothing. IF the Aire had failed in any thing, it had faild in its temper. But if we credit Hi∣storians, in former times the drinesse of the Air was greater, and the Infection of it more
Pestilentiall: Chronicles write, that in the yeer 1234, the Winter was so Cold, that in the Adriatick Sea, the Venetian Factours passed over the Ice, loaded with their Money. Zona∣us reports, that the like accident fell out in the Pontick sea, and the Sea adjoyning, under Constantinus Copronymus. In the dayes of Charles the great, there was a great and most bitter Frost, whereby the Pontick Sea for a hundred Miles Eastward was turned to Ice, and was from top to the bottom, 50 Cubits thick. In the yeer 1125, the Winter was so violent, that innumerable Eels in Brabant, by reason of the ice, went forth of the lake, which is strange, and got into Hay Ricks, and lay hid there, till by extream cold they rotted away, (Robertus De Monte). And the Trees at last scarce had any leaves put forth in May. But to speak of the drinesse,L. 4. Histo. I read in Livie, that in the yeer after Rome was built 322, that the rain from Heaven, not onely failed, but the Earth also wanted her inbred moysture, and had hardly enough to serve for the perpetuall Ri∣vers. And where Fountains and Rivers were dried up, and Water failed, the Cattell died for thirst.Meigerius. In the yeer 1153▪ the Wood took fire, by extreame heat of the weather, and the fat earth burned, and no rain could Extinguish it. The Germane Annals report, that in the yeer 1228, the Air was so hot, that the harvest was ended, (to use their own words) before the Feast of Saint John Baptist. In the yeer 1473, the Wood in Bohemia burnt 18 weeks, and the Danow was so dry, that in many places it was Fordable, and the same thing is written of the
River of the Thames in, the Reign of Henry the First. But in the yeer 1494 in the end of July, the Lakes and Waters were so bound up with Ice, that all the Fish died for want of water. You may adde to this, what Taci∣tus writes of Armenia,Tacit. An∣nal. l. 13. That the Winter fell out so cruell, that the ground was so covered with Jce, that without they dug, they could find no place for their Tents. Many mens Limbs were scorched with extremitie of cold, and some upon their Watch were found dead. And there was a Souldier observed, who carried a bundle of wood, whose hands were so frozen, that they clave fast to the wood, and fell off from his arms that were thus maymed. As concerning the Pesti∣lent infection of the air, it was once so great in Greece (as Thucydides observes) that Birds fell down with the infection, and birds of prey would not touch the carkases. In the government of Vibius Gallus and Voluti∣anus, as Pomponius Laetus, and Zonara testifie, the plague continued without intermission fifteen yeers,Lip. l. 2.  constant. c. 22. and at Alexandria no house was clear, and those that remained were not more than there were old men in former dayes. Lipsius saith, He never read of a greater plague, for continuance, in any part of the Earth. In Justini∣ans dayes, at Constantinople, sometimes, 10000 have died.Oros. l. 5 c. 8. In Numidia sometimes, as Orosius reports, 800000; In the time of Petrarch at Florence, between March and July, a hundred thousand died. And it was so violent in Italy, that of a thousand men, scarce ren remained, In the yeer 1348 the Plague destroyed so many at London in twelve Moneths, that in one Church yard 50000 were buried. Between Ja∣nuary
and July, there died 57374, What shall I say of the English Sweat, which thrice pas∣sed over the whole Island; the last was in the yeer 1551. Nor must we think that the Pox is now more violent than it was formerly, This very disease,L. 2. de mor. contag. saith Fracastorius, will dy and be extinct, and again it will revive in our Posterity, as it is credible it was seen by our Ancestours, of which there are no small tokens yet remaining. But as for the Scurvey, (which is nothing else than a Melancholique and Malignant Ca∣chexie of the body) and some suppose it to be proper to the inhabitants of the North, and the Sea Coast, It proceeds from obstruction of the Milt, by Melancholique dregs corrupted by some secret malignant quality, with weaknesse of the Attractive, and the expulsive faculties, and is not without some great hurt of the rest of the bowels of the belly: whence ariseth an itchy rednesse of the gums, flagging, corrupti∣on and stinking, falling out of the teeth, or weaknesse of the Legs, resolution, wannesse, and exceeding wearinesse, from a very small cause.Lang. Ep. 4. l. 2. That the Ancients were ignorant of this, is most false. For Hippocrates, as Langius writes, doth describe it under the name of the liac passion, or Volvulus Haematites, in lib. de intern.Galen. l. 3 de simp. caus. . 2. affssect and also under great milts, in the same book. And lib. 2. Prorrhetic, he confirms it. Galen in lib. Definit, describes the Scurvie: That it is a kinde of Palsie, that if men be affected with it, they cannot walk straight forward, but sometimes they reel from the right hand to the left, and they bring about their left foot against their right, and they are forced to knock their right foot against their left, and when they go forward
hey lift up their leg. Some again out of Galen would call it the Black Morphew; But true is, that a great Plague, this time ten yeers, spread in England, Italie, France, and other places: but what doth this make for a univer∣sall declining of Air to a worse condition? The violence of Fires underground seem to have respect to this, which were very raging in former times,Dion. Cass. in Histor. Plin. Jun. in Epist. ad Tacitum. as we know for certain. When Titus Vespasian, and Flavius Domitian, were Consuls, the Mountain Vesuvius in Campa∣nia burned, and first breaking up the top of it, it cast forth stones, after such vast flames, that it set two towns on fire, Herculaneum & Pom∣peys towns; and the smoke was so thick, that it obscured the Suns light. Lastly, it sent forth such abundance of Ashes, that they covered the neighbour countrey, as if they were snow, which by the force of the winds were said to be carried into Egypt, Africa, and Syria. The Ci∣ty Julianum,Tacit. l. 13. Annal. they are the words of the most prudent Historian, being joyned to us, was af∣flicted with an unexpected mischief. For fires breaking forth of the Earth, laid bold of Farms, Fields; Villages, in many places, and they flew to the very walls of Coln, newly built, nor could they be extinguished by the falling of rain, or by river waters, or any other moysture; untill for want of remedy, and for anger at the losse, some countrey men did cast stones on a far off, and as the flames gave way, they went neerer, and with strokes of clubs, and other things, they frighted them away as men do wilde beasts: Last of all, they took off their clothes from their bodies, and threw upon them; the worse they were and defiled
with wearing, the better they served to put out the Fire. That also was wonderfull that fell out in the Kingdom of Naples neer to Puteoli,Sandius in Itiner. in the yeer 1538, the 29 of September. The Sea retreated 200 paces, and a Mountain at two of the clock, at night, riss up, with a huge noise, and casting forth of burning stones, and with such a belching forth of ashes, that not onely almost all the houses were thrown down, but also the famous hot Baths at Tripergula. The mighty Fires of Aetna, and of some other Mountains in India, are to be seen in my Book of theLately printed in English. Wonders of Nature. Let every man consider whether the like hath hapned in latter times. Concerning that which is new∣ly written of the mountain of Coles in the Countrey of Misena, or of Modernus in Italy, that Agricola speaks of; or that which is writ∣ten of Hecla by Bleshaenius, or of S. Michaels Island, which is one of the Azores, seems not to be compared with them. Article III. The Element of water is decayed in nothing. WEe see at this day a threefold tide; a daily, monethly, and yeerly Tide, that Posidonius ascribes to the Sea. That it is Salt, as formerly, is discerned by the taste. It sends forth rivers from it, and receives them again upon their return. If waters are seen
now, where they never were before; on the contrary, waters do fail from the places where they formerly were.In vita Hilarion. It is manifest that in the yeer 1460, a Ship was found in the Alps, with Anchors, in a Mine where they digged Metals. And Hierome writes that after the death of Ju∣lian, Ships were brought to the Clifts of Moun∣tains, and hung there. And Though no Fountains last for aye But all rivulets still decay.Pontan. l. 48. Me∣tror. Yet the great Rivers, Indus, and Ganges, Da∣nubius, the Rhien, and Nilus have not at all changed their courses, as is to be seen in the Geographicall Descriptions. Especially the constant course of Nilus for so many Ages seems to be one of the wonders of the World. For it keeps its time so exactly,Prosper Alpinus. that if you take any of the earth about it, and neither moysten it, nor dry it, it will keep alwaies the same weight untill the 17 of June. From thence is the weight increased, as the river augments, and gives an infallible testimony of the ensu∣ing Flood. It is known that some Mineral Baths have perished, but it is no question, but others are risen in their rooms. Necham writes most truly of the Baths of England. For to releive old age decaid, ther's none Before our English Baths were ever known. If men he be bruis'd or broke, or fainting lie, Sick from a cold cause; her'es the remedy.
Concerning the English Spaws. See Ed∣mund Dean, Doctor of Physick at Yorke, his Spadocrene. Article. IIII. The Element of Earth hath faild in nothing. IF the Earth had faild in any thing, it must ei∣ther be in quantity or fruitfulness. For Aelian in his time, writes that Aetna, Parnassus, & Olym∣pus, did appear daily to grow lesse, as Sea-Men observed. But Palaestina though it were but a small Countrey, yet it was large enough, for Thirty Kings,1 Chron. 13. 3. that were Idolaters; and withall fed such multitudes of the Israelites, that in a war between Israel and Judah, 1200000 Men met; to say nothing of the Sa∣crifice made at the Dedication of the Temple,2 Chron. 7, 5. or of that other spoken of elsewhere in the Chronicles.2 Chron. 17. 14. Yet the Conclusion cannot by any means be granted. For what is spoken of Mountains,2 Chron. 1. 5. is not confirmed concerning the whole Earth, which hath the same Dimensi∣ons now, it formerly had. For, this falls out by reason of rain water and the Sea, and what de∣parts from the Mountains falls upon Valleys: whereupon Anaxagoras, being asked whether the Sea should ever overflow the Mountains of Lamsacum, he answered, Yes, when time should fail. For as nothing is lost by the Sea, when
the Rivers run from it, because they return again; so the earth loseth nothing by things that grow from it, and are fed by it, because all turn at last into earth, as Lucretius writes. Lucret. l. 2.Therefore the Earth hath gaind the Mothers Name. For all born of her, return to the same. That which is spoken of the Holy Land, it seems that we ought to ascribe that to the par∣ticular benediction of God; and also to the promise made for the supply of the Sabbatical yeer.Deu. 11. 12 But Bcardus writes thus of it before 300 yeers were past.Lev. 26. 3. The Corn growes and increaseth wonderfully upon the Earth,Lev. 20. 21 not manured with dung and soil;De terra sancta. p. c. 1. The Fields are like Gardens wherein there growes every where, Fennell, Sage, Rue, Rosen, and in brief,Whether the earth were for∣merly more fruitfull. there are found all the worlds goods; and the Land truly flows with Rivers of Milk and Honey. And though it be said, that it hath lost something of its wonted fruitfulnesse. Yet on the contrary, other countreys here & there, & other places, have received new forces, to be∣come fruitfull, & it is no doubt, but that did fal out by a singular curse from God, and for the wickednesse of the Inhabitants. We, saith Columella,Columella dere rusti∣ca. Plin. l. 18. c. 3. Aelian lib. 1. c. 33. assigne the businesse of Husbandry to the basest of our servants, as to a hangman for punishment, whereas the best and Noblest of our Ancestours used it themselves. The earth did heretofore enjoy a plow with a Garland and a tri∣umphant Plowman. We must do therefore as Mises
did, if we would have Pomegranates as great as he offred to Artaxerxes. Should I ad to these that there was greater famine amongst our Ancestours, and that the price of things were greater, I should not erre. In the yeer 1625 there was a mighty Famine: and in 1630, in Poland, which otherwise is held for the Gra∣nary almost of all Europe. For, four bushells of Corn, that were wont to be sold for three Franks, were prized at 18 Franks: But what is this to things past? In the time of Va∣lentine, Fathers, in a Famine, sold their chil∣dren, that they might avoid the hazard of death.Novel. tit. 11. apud codic. The∣odos. In the time of Honorius, they proclai∣med in the Market place, Set price to Mans flesh. Livy writes that many of the common people at Rome, that they might not pine away with lingering hunger,Jos. l. 6. annal. did cover their heads, and cast themselves into Tyber. The same thing, hapned in England,Beda. l. 4 c. 13. in the yeer of Christ 514, in the dayes of Cissa, King of the South Sax∣ons.Varro l. 3. c. 2. As for the price, Varro writes that L. Axius a Romane Knight, would not part with a pair of Pigeons, for lesse than 400 Denarii, and it may be now Sparrows are sold for lesse then a farthing.
Proposition IIII. The World, in respect of mixt bodies, both Inanimate, and Animate creatures without reason, doth not grow worse. A Mixt body is divided into Inanimate, and an Animate body: under that, Me∣teors and Minerals are contained; un∣der this, Plants, Animals, and Mankinde. Wherefore it seems very necessary, that for the more perfect handling of this question, these things should severally be demonstrated. But because there is a proper Article assigned for Man by himself, by reason that he affords such plenty of matter, we set down here one∣ly three Articles. I. It cannot be proved, by the Meteors, that the world runs to worse. II. Mineralls have not faild. III. Neither Plants nor Animals have de∣cayed at all.
Article. I. From Meteors it cannot be proved that the world growes worse. FOr neither have those things faild that serve for our profit; nor are things hurtful, lesse hurtfull now, thn they were formerly; nor are they lesse frequent; Rain and Snow do now as well make the earth fruitfull; Dew waters it; the Winde ventilates the Air, and the fiery exhalations purifie it. Do we not now see Rain-bows and other Meteors as well as formerly? As for things hurtfull; In the yeer N. C. 634, when the Jugurthine war began, it rained Milk three dayes, and in the third yeer that the wars proved successefull against Jugurtha, some write that it rained Milk twice.L. 3. Hist. See a rain of flesh in Livie. Albertus relates out of Avicennas, that a great masse of Iron, weighing a 100 pound fell out of the Air, and of that afterwards the best swords were made. When Hannibal with his Army broke into Italy, it rained fire-Stones. When Titus Annius Milo,Plutarch in Fab. Max∣imo. pleaded his cause at Rome, it raind burnt Brick; and it was recorded in the Acts of that yeer. Our age speaks no such things. It is true, the Clowds fell in Selesia, about Goldeberga: but, Was not a greater fall of them seen in Franconie, Anno. 1551? An
infinite multitude, saith, Bartholinus, of Men and beasts were drowned by a sudden tempest,Barthol. l. 2. de Me∣teor. c. 2. clowds falling unawares, and rain being powred forth in heaps; so that the strongest walls of many Cities, Vineyards, & gallant Buildings were destroyed utterly.In. L. prae∣dict. vener. What shall I speak of Earthquakes, comets, winds, and thunder. There appeared, as the Earl of North-Hampton writes, four Comets in four yeer: And Beda, and Paulus Aemilius say, that in fourteen days, in the time of Charles Martell, there were two seen, one at the Suns rising, the other at the Suns setting. There was such a great one,Senecá quaest. Nat. l. 2. c. 25. when Attalus Raigned, that it was as large as that place in the Heavens called Via lactea. And in the yeer 1556. there was one so great, that not onely all light exspirations and dry matter,Bodin. l. 2. Thea. Natur. no nor all Woods and groves, as many as are upon the face of the earth could serve for. Fuel for its two Moneths time wherein it shined. Was there any such thing in our dayes? Truly I know no example of it: and should I meet with any such; yet this would conclude nothing for the universall ruine of the world. For if when the exhalations are consumed, that trouble the Aire, the Aire grow clear; if the vapours that ascend, being framed of a more fruitfull fatty substance; can cause fruitfulnesse, when they are spread about the fields, and water them like dew; if all matter that burns do not leave behind it stinking smells, after that it is extinguish∣ed; a good temper of the Aire, fruitfulnesse
of the Earth, and plenty of provision may succeed after Comets; and the prediction of evil may be recompensed with this good successe. Concerning Earth-quakes, we have heard almost nothing in these days; if you except that which happened in Apulia,Cumanus. Anno. 1627, that devoured 17000 men. Also that was very strange that fell out in the yeer 1571, about the twelfth of the Calends of March in Herefordshire in England. For then at night about six of the clock, the Earth parted in the East quarter of that County, and a Mountain put forth with a Rock that was under it: (First with a mighty noyse and roaring, that all that lived neer those parts heard it) as if it had wakened out of some long sleep, and it riss to a higher place, leaving its deep den, and caried with it the trees that grew upon it, Folds and Flocks of Sheep: Some trees were swallowed up by the ground, others were carried along with the earth, and were by that means so united to it, as if they had rooted there at first. From the place it re∣mooved; it left a great empty cave, that was foury foot broad, and eighty ells long: the whole field was about twenty acres; In the way it overturned a Chappel. It removed a Yew-Tree that stood in the Church-yard, from West to East; and with the same vio∣lence it drove forward, the common wayes, Sheep Coats, and hedges with the trees planted in them. Thus when it had wan∣dred from Saturday night till Munday night,
it stood still. Yet formerly they were more frequent and greater. In the beginning of that yeer, when L. Cornelius, and L. Minu∣tius,Liv. l. 44. and 45. were Consuls, Livie writes that Earth-quakes were so frequent,Aristot l. 2. that men were weary,Metcor. c. 8 not onely of the thing it self, but,Plin. l. 2. c. 81. of the Festivals ordained for the remo∣ving of it: and he reports that an Earth-quake lasted 38. dayes. Others say, some have lasted two yeers, and come at severall times again. In Tiberius time, twelve Ci∣ties in Asia fell down. When Constantine reigned, as many were destroyed. Antio∣chia in the dayes of Trajan with the places about it,August. l. 2. de Mirac▪ S. S. was swallowed up. Augustine writes, that whilst he lived, a. hundred Cities in Africa fell down. Aeneas Silvius, writes thus, of an Earth quake to Frederick the Emperour. You shall understand by the bringer of these, what wonderfull and incredible damage hapned by an Earth-quake in the Kingdom of Apulia: For many towns were utterly overthrown, and others fell down in part; at Naples, almost all the Churches, and great Palaces fell; above 3000 are said to be killed in the ruines; all the people now dwell in Tents. The same may be spoken of Winds and Thunders. S. Paul in a Tempest saw neither Sun nor Stars, for many dayes. Virgil describes a fight of the winds Contrary, which now happens not. The East and West, and rainy South-west roar, Fighting, they drive huge Billowes to the sh.
What great Shipwarks have been in former times, the life of Solyman, and the approach of Charles the Fifth to Argiers, and his de∣parting thence, will manifest. He lost in a few howrs a 140 Ships (saith the History) 15 Gallions, besides Men and Horses, and other things that were destroyed. I saw, they they are the words of Bellarmine, and had I not seen it, I had nere beleeved it, a great quan∣tity of earth cast up by a most violent winde, and that was thrown upon a certain Village, so that a very deep pit was left, where the earth was thrown out, and the whole vil∣lage remained under ground almost buried, unto which that earth was brought. He that thinks this History to be of too late memory; let him think upon that winde that happened in the dayes of William Rufus, Anno 1096, at London, it threw down 600 howses; to say nothing of the cover of the Church, carried away with the Arches, and main beams: six of these that were each twenty seven foot long, fell with so great a force, that they made a hole twenty three foot deep in the ground.
Article II. Mineralls have not failed. OUr purpose was to speak of Mineralls in the second place. And these be∣fore any other things, if it were true, would discover the decay of the world. For the un∣satiable covetousnesse of men, seeks for Gold almost as low as Hell; and the cruel hunger they have after it, doth by an unrestrained sacriledge rob the Earth of her treasures that ly hid in the bowels of her. But it is so far from winning any thing to the side of those that are patrons of the opinion we oppose, that these very bodies, are a most strong ar∣gument against them. The Silesian Earth is come to be added to the earth of Arme∣nia, and Terra Lemnia, and it is also better. The inventor of it,Sennert scient. na∣tur. l. 5. c. 1. was one Johannes Mon∣tanus of Silesia, who hath put forth a Book of it, that it is Gold trasmuted, by the provi∣dence of God and of nature, prepared for an excellent remedy, and changed, being properly good against Venome, no lesse than Medica∣ments are, that are prepared with great cost of the Gold of Hungaria. There is also at this day Bole of Toccavia in Hungaria,Crato in Epistol. that is like Butter, and is good against Catarrhs, and is preferd before the
Bole of Armenia. Also there is a red earth found neer to Bergas in Norway, not unlike to Terra Sigillata; and it is a most present Antidote against the Scurvey.Petrejus dissert. harm, 38 Fallop. de therm. Cardan. l. 5, de subtilit. II. Also that Minerals have a power in them, to mul∣tiply themselves, is almost out of all doubt. A vein of Brimstone is repaired in four yeers. The earth Salt Peter is taken from, laid on a heap, will in five or six yeers yeeld Salt Peter again. In India there is a Mountain, called Oromenum, of naturall Salt, whereout Salt is cut, as quarries are, that growes again; as Caesalpinus relates: And the same may be said of Stones; and that is worth marking, that Garzias ab Horto writes of the Diamond.De Me∣tal. l. 1. Diamonds that in the deep bowels of the Earth should be perfected in many yeers,Cap. 6. are bred almost on the top of the ground,De simp. in India. nasc. l. 1. c. 47. and come to perfection in two or three yeers. For if this yeer you dig in in the Mine a cubit depth, you shall finde Dia∣monds; after two yeers, dig there again, and you shall finde Diamonds in the same place. Nor are Mettals out of this priviledge. For Gold at Corbachia in Westphalia groweth and increaseth in heaps every fourth yeer. Iron in Silesia, at the town Saganum, is dug up after ten yeers being bred anew. The same is spoken of Ilva an Island in the Tus∣cian Sea.L. 3. de Metallis Cap. 6. Caesalpinus reports, that the earth that is dug up with the Mine, though it have no metall in it, in processe of time will be changed into the same Mine. Lastly, it is most certain, that in some Countreys, even
now some rich Mines are found out. I will say nothing of the West Indies, the wealth whereof fills the Cantons of the Spaniards, English, and Dutch. Norway alone can shew the same, if Bar∣tholinus,De Cor. porib. perfectè mixtis inanim. c. 4. a man of credit, may be trusted. At this day, saith he, there is no place in the earth to fruitfull for Silver, as some Mountains are, that are discovered in the Kingdom of Norway, Anno. 1623, in the reign of Christian the fourth, King of Denmark and Norway, my most bountifull Lord, that if any man did formerly promise Golden Mountains, Norway doth not onely promise Silver Mountains, but performes them. For great lumps are dug up that are most pure and the best Silver, without any help of Fire. In other parts it is more unconcocted; but where scarce a fifth part was, now a third or fourth part is drosse. What shall I say of the Veins of Iron in Sussex, and of Tin in Cornwall? Article III. Neither Plants nor Animals have de∣cayed at all. I Shall not need speak much of these, for if the Earth have not failed, either in respect her fruitfulnesse, nor of other accidents, how then shall they fail? The Simples have now the same temperament, and the
same operations, and Animals are now de∣scribed as Aristotle described them. Aristotle saith, Horses lived but 18 yeers, and at the most but 50 yeers. Albertus saith, he saw a Souldier had a Horse 60 yeers old. Niphus saith, that in the Stalls of Ferdinand the First, there was a Horse 70 yeere old. Also Buteo, a man commended by many writers, going about to shew by Geometricall pro∣portion, that the Ark could hold so ma∣ny Cattell, and provision for a yeer, bor∣rowes the foundation of his Argument from the present Dimension of the bodies of beasts, and their sufficient nutriment. Go∣ropius Becanus, Pererius, Rawley and others subscribe to him. But what is spoken of an Elephant in the Book of the Maccabees,1. Mac. c. 37. Junius shews, that must be understood of the Indian Elephants, that are greater than the rest of Aethiopia. And they that have been in the Kingdom of the Great Mogull, maintain there are some greater than those we see here. The influence of Eclipses up∣on these inferiour bodies, and the greater frequency of them makes nothing to this matter. For first, since an Eclipse is nothing but the interposition either of the Moon, be∣tween us and the Sun, or of the shadow of the Earth between the Sun and Moon; we have no more need to fear any danger from an Eclipse, than we should by the interpo∣sition of some grosse Clowd.Seneca, l. 5. de benef. c. 6. This order will continue in all ages, that have such dayes, wherein the Sun by interposition of the Moon,
is afraid to send forth all his beames. Also it is false that Eclipses ate now more fre∣quent than formerly. For the Sun Moon and Earth have the same substance and ac∣cidents they had; and Light and shadowes have the same being, they had formerly, and the Moons way or Latitude, from the Eclipticke, is as it alwayes was. See Bartholinus concerning these points, Astrolog. Problem. Ultimo. Also it is false, that they are greater than they were. For in the yeer 1133,In Chron. regum, Mannor. L. Hist. novel. as Cambden writes, the Suns Ecclipse was so great, that day was changed to night. Anno. 1140. as Malmburiensis re∣lates, it was so great that men feared the old Chaos would return. Anno. 1415, on the seventh of June, it was so terrible that birds fell to the ground. We shall conclude therefore that there is nothing in mixt bo∣dies that can intimate unto us, that the world declines to worse universally and per∣petually. Proposition V. The World in respect of Man doth not grow worse. MAn is the Epitome of the whole world, a Marriage of Superiour and Inferiour bodies, a Microcosme of a Macrocosme.
But for as much as this consists not one∣ly in the body, but also in the rationall soul, that is united to it, it is requisite that in respect of all things, some of each should be enquired into. But here principally we are to consider his strength, age, and facul∣ties of his soul. And indeed our opposites maintain that in all these considerations, Man is decayed. Therefore under this pro∣position arise these Articles, I. The age of Man within these 3000. yeers hath not failed. II. His force and stature are not dimi∣nished. III. He wants nothing in the faculties of his soul. Article I. The age of Man within these 3000 yeers hath not failed. THat the age of Man hath not decaid since Moses time, may be cleered by many Arguments. For first, Moses himself speaks expresly.Psal. 90. 11. 10. Our yeers are 70, and if one so strong to come to 80 yeers, &c. And though he himself and Aaron his brother surpassed this age,Herodot in Thalia. but because, as a learned man said, he spake of the generall condition, it is per∣tinent to our subject. Hence also Herodotus
sets the longest bounds of Mans life to be but 80 yeers. Barzillay was said to be a ve∣ry old Man, and yet he was but fourscore: and David was full of dayes, yet but seventy yeers old. Solomon, as Divines conjecture, was not 60,2 Sam. 19. 32. yet it is said; When Solomon was old. In all the records of the Romane, Greek, French, and German Emperours, there are found onely four that lived to fourscore yeers. Amongst the Popes onely five, and they were immediately before our times. Namely, John the twen∣ty third, Gregory the twelfth and thir∣teenth, Paul the third and fourth; and that which is most notable, Elizabeth Queen of England out lived all her predecessours from William the Conquerour;De honest. disciplin. and she raigned as fortunately as Augustus, as long as David. Ptrus Criaitus, affirms that Egyptis by a sub∣tile conjecture, taken from the weight of the heart, found out within what bounds the life of Man was included, and he affirmed, that he could scarce live above a hundred yeers. For every yeer till fifty, it increa∣sed two Drachmes, and from thence to 100 yeers it decreased as much. Though this be rather curiositie than truth, yet it shewes what the Antiens thought of the last end of Man.L. 5. de lin∣gua latina. Varro also held the same opini∣on. They called the space of a hundred yeers, Seculum, from senex, an Old Man, because they thought that was the longest time for Men to live to be old: And Seneca saith, We see that thou art come to the very utmost stage of Mans life, thou art a hundred yeers old, I say no∣thing
of Trebellius Pollio, who in his book to Constantius ascribes to the longest age, but 120 yeers, by the opinion of Mathematici∣ans. Moreover, the Ancients well observed the secret stations and progresses of nature in Mans body, not onely in respect of increa∣sing in the Wombes of their Mothers, and in respect of their being born, but after their birth also. Hippocrates, ascribes to the time of being born, the seventh, ninth, tenth, the ele∣venth moneth also sometimes; and he rec∣kons the eighth Moneth to be dangerous. Some divide Mans age into three, others into four, five, six or seven parts, according to the consideration of the Planets. Philo produces Solons Elegiack verses of the se∣venth yeer,In opere de fab. mundi. causing changes in Mans body, Young children when seven yeers do go about, Renew their teeth that serve them to speak out. When seven more by Gods decree are run, Hair on their secret parts are first begun. And in thrice seven yeers, a soft hair down. With strength of yeers their beardlesse chin doth crown. Macrobius, clearly explains the changes of every seventh yeer in Mans age.L. 1. de Som. Scip. c. 6. That in the first, the teeth are shed; in the second, hair breaks forth on their secrets; in the third, their beard sprouts; in the fourth, Man ceaseth growing; in the fifth, strength is given; in
the sixth, consistence; in the seventh, decli∣ning. The Observations of the Learned say, the same is now done. And although as in health there are degrees of Latitude, so here: yet it is sufficient if it be infallible, for the greatest part, and uniformity hold; the other things being considered. At this time we hold the thirty fifth yeer to be the flower of Mans age, as being the Mean, between seventy; and the Age our Savior died at, unto which the Apostle in his Epistle to the Ephesians,Plutarch de Oracul. ce∣ssat. seems to allude. So it was in former ages. For Heraclitus, as Plutarch re∣lates, affirmed that thirty was the mean in mans Age. The same may be said of Climactericall yeers.Gell. l. 25. Whereof Gel∣lius writes thus:Noct. c. 7. It hath been observed for a long time, and it hath been approved in most Old men, that the 63d, yeer of their life was with some danger & hurt, either of their body, or with some great disease, or losse of their life, or grief of minde. See Baptista Codon chus, concer∣ning these things in a speciall Treaty, con∣cerning Climactericall yeers. To this may be added the Age of his Marriage and Genera∣tion, which is the same now, as it was for∣merly. The third Councill of Carthage, Chap. 9. Ordained that Readers in Church∣es, when they came to fourteen yeers, should be forced to Marry wives,Proem. l. . or to Vow Chasti∣ty. Quint. writes, that his wife dyed leaving two sons, being not full nineteen yeers old. Epictus saith, that women, so soon as they are fourteen yeers old,Enchirid. c. 55. men called them La∣dies.
The Civill Lawes approve of wo∣men to marry at twelve yeers old.Digest. l. 9. de spons. So doth the Jews Talmud, and the Canons of the Church.Buxtorf. Hesiodus 15. l. Under Tiberius, by the Papian Law,Synag. 3. it was forbidden men at 60 to marry.Lancel. l. 2. l. 11. Sanci∣nus 27. C. de Nuptiis. And women, of 50 yeers old, were likewise forbidden. But that law was repeal∣ed in Justinians Reign. Also the same may be proved by the Taking of Church Offi∣ces, or Military and Civill Offices: For anciently they were assoon admitted,In Antiq. Bran. and discharged assoon. Parker writes, He that must be promoted to be a Bishop, must not be under thirty. But now adays they are sel∣dom under fifty. Venerable Bede who lived about 800 yeers since, was made a Deacon at ninteen yeers old. Origen, saith Eusebius, was made a Catechist at eighteen yeers. The Levites were discharged after fifty.Num. 8. 23. As for Souldiers: The French at fourteen yeers, prepare their sons for War. n. Pompeius, at eighteen; Augustus at nineteen, endured war. The Romans at seventeen, made them take up Arms. Whence was the Law of Gracchus,Lib. 25. A Souldier must not be chosen under seventeen. Yet Livie writes, that when the second Punick War was, it was Decreed, that the Tribunes of the people should publish to them, that all that were under seven∣tene, that should take the Military Oath, should have their pay as well as if they were seven∣teen or more. The Athenian Law, dis∣charged men at fourty, and took them on, for Wars at eighteen. By the testimony of Po∣lyhistor, Cajeta, Pererius. Simeon and Levi,
were hardly twenty yeers old when they kil∣led the Sichemites: What shall I say of Alexander, C. Caesar, Julian, and others? As for Civill affaires, as Plutarch writes, Romulus reigned thirty eight yeers, and di∣ed at fifty, therefore he began to Reign at twelve. Cicero, as Cornelius Nepos writes, made his Oration pro Roscio at twenty three yeers old. Euripides, saith Gllius, at eight∣teen yeers old writ his Tragedies.Suetonius. Augustus at sixteen put on his Toga Virilis, and was made Consull at twenty. Josephus writes that when he was nineteen, he bare Office in the Common Wealth. Lastly, Tertulli∣an de Veland. Virgin. saith: Also the Heathen observe the seasons, that according to the Law of Nature, they may give lawes to severall ages. For they receive Women at twelve, and Men at fourteen, for Employments. But here are two principall Objections, especi∣ally against this. Namely, that the Pa∣triarchs before the Flood, lived very long: and that Men now marry sooner then they did formerly. I answer briefly to this. I grant the first; and say, that is most false that some maintain,Whence it was the Patriarchs lived so long. that their yeers contain∣ed onely thirty six dayes. For were that true, it would follow that Enoch and Cain begat children at six or seven yeers olde at the most. For the Scripture saith, This got chil∣dren at sixty five,Whether the yeers they lived were onely of 36 dayes. and the Other at seventy yeers. Nor had any of the Patriarchs lived to ninety seven yeers old, and many now live above a hundred: and that would be
false that the Scripture writes, that Abraham died ful of dayes, a good old Man. For ac∣cording to their account he should be but seventeen yeers old. And should we grant this to be most true, yet this would evince nothing for a generall decay of the world.Joseph l. 1. For it seems that was done formerly for Ver∣tues sake,Antiquit. c. 4. L. 1. and the glorious Profits they sought after,Chronol. that is, for Astrology, and Geometry, or for the encrease of Man kide. Hence Rabbi Levi as Genebrard quotes him, calls the long lives of the Patriarchs, a work of Providence and not of nature: or else by reason of their diet. Hence Roger Bacon writes, That as they had great wisdom, they found out all Regiment of health, and secret Medica∣ments, whereby their old age was retarded, and by which when it came, it might be mi∣tigated, and their children had this Regi∣ment, and Experiments against old age; For God gave them all wisdom, and so they might live long. Moreover we finde by constant observation almost in all times, that in some Countreys, there were some that lived longer than others, Epime∣nides of Crere lived a 150 yeers, Gorgias Si∣culus a Rhetorician a 108,Verulam. in Hist. vit. & mort. Hippocrates a 114. Terentia wife to Cicero, a 103. Clo∣dia daughter of Osilius, a 115 though when she was young she had borne fifteen chil∣dren. What shall I say of Luceia or Gale∣ria Copiola? She lived not a little more than a hundred yeers; For it is reported that for a hundred yeers, she played the
Jester upon the Stage; it may be at first she acted the maids part, and at last an old Wives. Isra, the Player and Dancer; was in her youthfull dayes brought upon the Stage: how old she was then, is not known, but after 99 yeers from that time, she was again brought upon the Theater, not to act her part, but to be shewed for a Miracle; when Pompey the Great dedicated the The∣atre. Also she was again shewed at the sports ordaind for to pray for the health of Divus Augustus. In Scripture, we read that Levi lived a hundred thirty seven yeers. Phi∣nhas, three hundred. Job after his restituti∣on, a hundred and fourty; yet he had sons and daughters marriageable before his fall. Anna the Prophetesse, lived a hundred and six yeers: John the Evangelist, as many. But the times of Vespasian the Emperour will best shew this, when the Muster Rowle was made. For then were there found in that part of Italy, which lyeth between Appeinus and the River Po, Men that were a hundred yeers old, and others above a hundred twenty four. Nor do the later times fail in this: for John of Times, that was Armour bearer to Charles the Great, lived 360 yeers. Versti∣gan writes that at Sgovia in Spain, it was repored that a woman lived a hundred and sixty yeers. Franciscus Alvarez, reports that he saw an Archbishop of Aethiopia, a hun∣dred and fifty yeers old. Buchanan, estifies that one Laurentius, of the Orcades, when he
was a hundred and fourty yeers old, went a fishing in his Boat in the coldest Winter commonly. A few yeers since in the County of Hereford,Verulam in Hist. vit. & mor. (they are the words of the Lord Verulam) for a May dance, there were eight men chosen, whose ages counted together, made eight hundred yeers compleat, so that what one wanted of a hundred, the other exceeded a hundred as much. Lastly, the Countesse of Desmond, lived in the yeer 1589, and after: she married in the dayes of Edward the fourth, Verulam saith, she thrice renewed her teeth, and lived a hundred and fourty yeers. To the cause taken from Nutriment may be added, our dainty Breeding now a∣dayes, too soon Marrying, and Luxury. Many dishes make many diseases. Seneca,Epist. 95. again, that great Physitian, and inventer of this Art, said, that women never shed their hair, nor did their feet ake: but now they want their hair, and their feet pain them, yet the nature of women is not changed, but their life. That which is spo∣ken of their marrying too soon is commonly false.Whether we marry soon∣er now than of old time time. For when Jacob descended into E∣gypt, Er and Onan are numbered amongst Judahs children, (they were dead) Sche∣clak; Phares, and Serak, and of Sharer, Hesron, and Hamul. And Judah was then at most but fourty yeers old, for Joseph was thirty nine. And he was born at the end of the fourteenth yeer, when Jacob lived in Mesopotamia, and the other in the eleventh yeer. In that time therefore, Judah had
sons that married wives, they were Er, and Onan, and by the same Thamar, he had Pharez, that bare two children. II. Benjamin in the same Chapter is said to be the Father of ten sons, and he was then but twenty three, or twenty four yeers old. He was born in the hundred and sixth yeer of his fathers age. Dinah, saith Polyhistor, was ravished at ten yeers old. Josias died at thirty yeers old, but his son Eliakim was 25. when he began to reign. Ahaz also lived but thirty six yeers,2 King. 22. and Hezekiah succeeded him at twenty five yeers, therefore he begat him at eleven yeers old: as for this example, Junius and Junc∣cius seem to think the contrary, but Hic∣rome in. Epistol. ad vitalem, hath recourse to Gods Omnipotence. For Nature can do nothing against the God of Na∣ture.
Article II. Mans stature and strength, within these three thousand yeers, are not decayed. WHat we said of Age, the same may we speak of Mans stature and force,Whether A∣dam were the greatest of all men? and that very well, For first, if the stature and strength of Man should universally and perpetually fail, it would follow that Adam was the greatest of all men. Yet that seems to be false. For what Johannes Lucidus speaks,L. 1. de E∣mend. temp. c. 4. he doth it from the vulgar Translation of that place, Hebron was afore time called Cariath Arbe. He saith, from thence it may be collected, Adam the great∣est among the Anakims was placed there.In. lib. de Paradiso. It smells of Fables of the Rabbins, who re∣port that the Sea divided Paradise, and that when Adam was driven forth, he was for∣ced to swim over. The place should be thus translated, He was the greatest man amongst the Anakims. Most also hold, that Adam was not buried in Hebron, but there where the new Adam was to suffer. Nephillim that were before the Flood, were men, as the Interlineary glosse expounds it, of huge bo∣dies and proud mindes, great strength, un∣ruly manners, yet is not the opinion of
Chrysostome against this, who saith that the Scripture calls, Noble strong and warlike Men, Gyants. II. Though we should grant that men before the flood were like Gyants, yet this concludes nothing against our Tenent, since there have been such in other ages; Nimrod is called a strong hunter before the Lord, The Names of Rephaim, Jumjummims, Jam∣jummims, Emims, and Anakims, signifie the same. The prophet Amos found one amongst the Amorites whose heigth he compares to Cedars, and his strength to a Yoke of Oxen. What think you of Og, King of Bashan, whose bed was nine Cubis long, four brad, not according to his own measure (as the Chaldees Pharaphrase and Complutensia would have it) for so the mesure were uncer∣tain, but reckoning according to the com∣mon measure of a Man, as Tremelius, Junius, and Arias Montanus interpret it. What shall we say of Samson, Goliath, and his brother? In the dayes of Augustus Caesar, there were Pusio and Secundilla, who were nine foot and a half long, and their bodies were pre∣served in the Sallustian Garden. In Claudius his dayes lived Gabbara an Arabian who was nine foot high: and in the dayes of Theodo∣sius one in Syria was five Cubits high. Sca∣liger at Millan saw a young man in an Hos∣pitall so tall, that he could not stand. Go∣ropius Becanus saith, he saw a Woman six∣teen foot high. Cassanian saith there was at Burdeaux one so tall,De Gygant. c. 6. that an ordinary
man might stand upright between his Legs. I saw at London the Kings Porter, who was seven foot high, and two fingers breadth. In China, some of the Kings guard are fifteen foot high; and the King is said to have five hundred such about him. In the Countrey of Paragonia they are com∣monly above thirteen foot high, and in Symmatra some are twelve foot high. III. Among the Ancients, a Cubit, a Foot, a Fingers breadth, a Hands breadth were constant and certain Measures; nor was it lawfull for every man to measure by his own measure. That appears by the Am∣phora of the Capitoll, and the Romane Congius▪ and other things. And those measures were taken from a Man of an or∣dinary stature. But because the bodies of Men are different, in severall Climates and Countreys; they began the measure from a certain principle, whence other measures were made, as from parts that were certain. Wherefore Geometricians make a Barley corn atwhart to be the least Measure that is, measuring the breadth of it. Hence, Guaric.A fingers breadth are sour grains. Four fingers a Hand breadth contains. A foot is four hand breadth, &c. Since therefore the earth, in respect of fruitfulnesse is not decayed, and we use Grains to weigh Gold as our Ancestours did, and the best Architects observe Vitru∣vius
his measures, there can be no excepti∣on. Wherefore the mean stature must be the same now as it was formerly. I con∣fesse the Jews had holy weights, or of the Sanctuary that exceeded the ordinary weights, and the Greeks had Royall Cubits; yet I affirm that their ordinary and com∣mon ones did not exceed ours. For if the Ark were measured by the common measure it amounted to 540 Cubits, and shewed that it was capacious enough. And Agrico∣la lib. de mensur. writes that Phya the wife Pysistratus was accounted so tall, that they honoured her as Minerva: yet was she not above four common Cubits high. Also Ar∣taches the chief Officer in Xerxes Army, was reported to be very tall, yet was he but four royall cubits high, abating four fingers breadth. As for the Romane measure, the same Agricola writes, that a Romane Foot was lesse than a French Foot, by two fingers; and it is to be seen yet at Rome, in the Mar∣ble Monuments, chiefly in the Gardens of Angelus Coloccus. But Goropius Becanus, found so me that were measured to be shorter by four hands breadth, & yet he was but a short man in respect of ordinary Men. Lastly, Nero, witnesse Suetonius, mustered a new Le∣gion of Italians that were sixe Cubits high:In Gyganto∣machia. he called that Alexanders Brigade. IV. The measure of diet, all things con∣sidered, was allowed for Men, according to the proportion of their bodies, and question∣lesse it was proportioned amongst the Anci∣ents, after the usuall custome, Homer sets
before Hercules, a man of mighty stature, an Ox for his dinner. Capitolinus and Cords allow Maximinus, every meal fourty, and sometimes sixty pounds of flesh. Athenaeus and Theodorus Hieropolitanus, assigne to Milo of Croton, twenty pound, and three gallons of Wine. In the dayes of Maximi∣lian the first, Emperour, there was a Man at Auspurg, who eat a whole Calf raw, as Surius writes. And the Ancients allowed as much food. For the Greeks as Suidas reports, allowed a Chaenix by the meal. Whence Clearchus calls Trophis in Homer. Herodotus, saith the same was observed in Xerxes his army, and as Polybius writes,In Polym∣nia. two thirds of a Medimnus of fine Wheat, amongst the Romanes were al∣lowed for every Foot Souldier by the Moneth, that is four bushels; for a Medim∣nus contained six. And this is the same with the former. For four Modii contained thirty two Chaenices. But that which Ra∣banus writes of the Israelites, that three Chaenices of Manna, were allowed every Man in the Wildernesse, that was Gods singular blessing, as Junius expounds it. Also a Horsman amongst the Romanes was allowed two Medimni, as the same Polybius writes,L. 6. but it was because he had a servant or two as Lipsius saith. V. Lastly, Weapons, Gates, Sepulchres, Beds,L. 5. de mil. &c. can shew as much, all which were anciently of the same dimensions.Rom. c. 6. Aristotle writes that Beds in his time were but six footMiscel. c. 4.
long. Magius who hath written a Tract for the contrary opinion, reports that the Tombs at Pisa in Italy are no longer than ours are, and he adds that at Pisaurum, in a Magazine for Armour, he saw the Helmets of the Duke of urbine dug up in the fields, neer Metaur∣um, where Asdrubal was conquered by the Romans; his words are these, They were no greater than our Souldiers more commonly. D. Hawkewill saw in the Church of the Abbey at Malmsbury, a Tomb that was said to be King Athelstanes, and it was not greater then ours. And in the place for dead bones in the Mo∣nastery at Glassenbury, there could no bone be found that represented any great stature. Sands in his Travels writes, that entring the Pyramids he met with such low and nar∣row entrances, that he was forced to stoop as he went. And he adds that in a spacious place built of Theban Marble, that he saw a Sepulchre seven foot long, and scarce four foot broad. It was reported to be the bo∣dy of the Founder, Charops. I saw at Ley∣den two dead bodies Embalmed, that were buried before Christ, one was of a small, the other of a bigger stature, but neither of them greater then ours. Those arms that are sometimes shewed of a vast Magnitude, as we saw in the Castle of the Earl of Fenton in Scotland, the Sword of King Robert, they were made to fright Men, or to vaunt with, as appears by that Alexander did in the Indies.Exod. 27. 1 Yet the Altar of the Tabernacle was said to be three cubits high. But if
those Cubits were then taken by the stature of the men then living, and men were then four Cubits high, the Priest was but one Cubit above the Altar, which was a cause of trouble, certainly, in his Administration. Solomons Altar was ten Cubits high,2 Chro. 4. 1 Exod. 20. 26. but it had steps from the ground. And though God may seem to have forbid men to go up by them, yet that was onely that their na∣kednesse might not be seen. Against what we now have said, five things are chiefly ob∣jected. I. That ofttimes, Sceletons of vast sta∣ture, and mighty great bones are common∣ly found. II. The Bible speaks much of Samson and others; and the Heathen speak of Diome∣des, Ajax, Hector, Hercules. III. Physicks were given in greater quan∣tities formerly, and blood drawn in greater abundance. IV. The duodenum gut is called so by Herophilus, formerly because it was twelve fingers broad in length; and now a dayes, it is hardly four. V. That impurity is contracted in the seed by propagation in successive generati∣ons; and, thence must necessarily follow di∣minution in magnitude and strength. Yet though these seem brave arguments, they are not so cosiderable,In vita Sertorii. that they can dis∣prove our opinion. As for the first, we grant it is so. For Plutarch out of Gabinius, which Strabo saith, is full of Fables, reports,
that in Africa the body of Antaeus, was found of sixty Cubits; Fazellus saith, seventy. In the fourteenth yeer of the Emperour Hen∣ry the Second,Malmes. l. 2. c. 17. de gestis Reg. Angl. the body of Pallas was found at Rome entire, to the wonder of all men, that it had lasted so many ages uncor∣rupted. The woud that Turnus gave him, was said to be four foot and a half. Herodo∣tus writes that the body of Orestes was seven Cubits, and for this Gellius calls him a fa∣bulous writer. Orion's body was fourty Cu∣bits, and Macrosyris a hundred. Bccace writes, that one of his teeth weighed a hun∣dred Ounces, and his staffe a thousand five hundred pound. I will say nothing of that Tooth S. Augustine saw, which were it divi∣ded into parts, would make ten of ours. Nor any thing of Christopher, whose tooth Ludovicus Vives, on that place of Au∣gustine saith,Aug. de ci∣vit. Dei l. 15. cap. 9. he saw, bigger than a Mans fist. I grant, it is so written. Nor do I speak as boldly as Becanus who writes; I beleeve not that in Pliny concerning Orion, though L. Flaccus, and Metellus, who said they went to see it, should swear it by their heads. We must so deal with our Ancestours, as we would have our posterity deal with us: But what doth all this make against us? I. It is apparent that Many things were not rightly understood: then, many things were added, that were Hyperbolically spo∣ken, when as the very antient writers did not beleeve what was reported. There might be some Money found in the Indies,
was presently added that Augustus his image was upon it. II. These monstrous Figures may be as∣cribed to Naturall or Artificiall causes, or to both joyntly. Also great Princes might make these things of ambition, or Skilfull Artificers of curiosity, or Infernall Devils of Malice and deceit. Truly that mad building neer Amsbury, which the Ancients call the Gyants dance, seems to proceed originally from thence. What strange bodies a thousand Artificers do often present us with,Delrius in l. 9. Mag. may be collected from the history of two Maids that were taken away, in whose places other bodies were layd. III. I know not whether it be wholly impossible for Nature to make such bodies in the very bowels of the Earth.Whether prodigious bodies like Men can be framed in the bowels of the Earth? For it is with∣out doubt, that many bodies have been found that represented the parts of Limbs, and others that were like entire living creatures. In the Dioces of Trevirs when caement was dug forth to repair buildings, they dug up black stones, like womens privi∣ties. Diphyes, represents the Genitals of both Sexes,Agricola. with a line to distinguish them, At Salfelda in Thuringia, a stone was dug up out of a Pit that was twenty fathom deep, that was like a firme brest, a foot a half long, three hands broad, on the fore part; where the ribs ended it was six fingers thick, and three where the whirlebands on the hinder part were pierced in the middle. The back bone was empty of that should represent the
marrow; Also Goropius Becanus, saw in England, a Stone cut out of the top of a Mountain, that was exactly like to a Perch, and not the least line wanted for its per∣fection. I will say nothing now of a Turnep neer Harlem that was dug up in the yeer 1583. It was like a Mans hand with nails, and all the distinctions of fingers, and the lineaments; I saw the picture of it at Lyons, with CL. D. Baudarcius my Patron. I will say nothing also of that of Agricola: we saw a small stature of a Man, that carried a Childe on his shouders, made of silver by nature. And if these things seem onely to be understood of the outward forms descri∣bed, and the matter to be wholly different, let I beseech you Fossill flesh answer that exception, which was reported to be found sometimes, and of which in the fifth Classis of our Thaumatographia, we spake some things out of Libavius. IV Lastly, D. Hawkwill thinks that such vast bodies may be ascribed to the Divels copulation with women. And truly, saith S. Augustine,De civit: Dei l. 15. c. 23. it is a most frequent report, and ma∣ny say they have tried it, or heard it of others, of undeniable credit,Whether women may conceive by the Devil? that the Sylvani and Fau∣ni, which they commonly call Incubi, have commonly committed wicked actions with Wo∣men, and have desired, and obtained to lie with them, and some Devils which the French call Dusii, do daily attempt and effect this unclean∣nesse; and many such men affirm it, that it were great impudence to deny it. Also Tosta∣tus,
writes that of such monstrous copulati∣ons,In c. 6. proceed the strongest and tallest Men. Valesius and Delrio agree with him.Gen. q. 6. It is no doubt,Vales. sac. but if any such things have hap∣ned,Phil. c. 8. it happened in the time of Heathen∣isme especially,Delrio in disq. when the Devil had most power, but not so after Christ was come. For that the Oracles ceased,Magic. and great Pan was dead, not onely Plutarch writes in a particular Book, but the History of Epitersis. shewes the Proclaiming of his death about Paxa. D. Hawkwell rests in this opinion, But to speak truth, and to confesse ingenu∣ously, I scarse dare agree with him. For though it were granted that the Divels should lye with Women, yet it followes not that they should conceive, and that for the unfitnesse of the prolifique matter. The Di∣vels are spirits and cannot have it of them∣selves. First therefore they must be Suc∣cubi, and steal it; and then Incubi and in∣ject it. And in the mean while the Seed is spoiled of its inward heat and spiritall, as being easily dispersed: whence it is, that some Witches say they felt it cold. Further, that seems to be a work of Imperfecti∣on. For if Gyants exceed so much, in magnitude, that it hinders any actions, they are to be called Monsters; And truly, Bar∣tholinus calls him a Monster, whose grind∣ing Tooth, Augustine saith he saw. In the interim every man may think what he plea∣ses.Phys. ge∣ner. 6. He that desires to know more exactly of the Divels copulation with Women, let
him read, Ambrose Pareus, and Caspar Bau∣hinus concerning Hermaphrodites. As for the second Objection, it is no more forcible then the former; for neither did the latter times yeeld to them, nor do our times fall short of them. Tribellius Pollio speaks the same of C. Marius, Capitolinus of Maxi∣minus, Vopiscus of Aurelianus, Barletus of Scanderbeg, and Fazellus of Galeotus Bardesi∣nus a Noble Man of Cathay; and others of Tamberlane and Ziska, &c. Georg. le Fuer writes, that Anno. 1569. there lived at Mis∣ni, Nicolaus Klunherus the President of the Cathedrall Church, who without any help lifted a Tun of Wine out of a Cellar.Canicul. colloq. 6. Ma∣jolus saith, that at Asta in the presence of the Marques of Pescaria, a man played with a pillar of three foot long, and one foot dia∣meter, as another would play with a ball. He reports also that one of Mantua, called Rodomant, of a mean stature, would break a rope as big as a Mans arm, like a thread. Ernaudus Burg, a Spaniard, Servant of the Earl Faux, as Frostardus relates, carried an Asse loaded with wood, up 24 staires into a Chamber, upon his back. Lobelius, a Po∣lander, writes in describing the things were done Anno. 1582, at the Circumcision of Mahomet, son to Amurat, that one man took up a piece of wood so great as twelve men could hardly carry it, and he laid upon his brest a stone that ten men could not bear.Camer. in Medit. Hi∣storicis. Forsbergius with his middle finger of his right hand could thrust any Man out of his
place. Pothowa Captain of the Cossakes, sath Leunclavius broak an iron Spurr, as a man would tear paper: Johannes Romanus in England could carry an Ox. Lastly, Anno. 1575, there was a Man kild of vast Magnitude by James Niazahilovius a Polander, Scythian. His forehead was twenty four fingers broad,Thuan. l. 6. ex Leon. Gerecio. and the rest of his body was so great, that his carcase lying on the ground, would reach as high as a Mans navell, when he stood. The third cannot be granted. For I. Goropius Becanus speaks expresly.Whether Physicks now a dayes may be given in as great a dose as for∣merly? Bodies will endure Heller now as well as they did formerly, in the same or greater quan∣lity, as I have tried in others. And Jacchmus is of the same minde. II. I remember, saith Galen, that blood was drawn to six pound weight in some men, and so the Fever was cured. But he took lesse from others. Where the forces are strong and age will allow it,C. 14. de Curat. per venae sect. . 9. c. 14. it is fit to draw blood till they faint. III. Pareus writes that in four dayes he drew seven pounds of blood from a Man, and D. Deodate affirms that from a Man of seventy six yeers, in three dayes, he took sixty Ounces of blood.In obser∣vat. Also Schenckius men∣tions strange bleedings at the nose, when sometimes eighteen, sometimes twenty, sometimes fourty pounds of blood have run forth. Lastly, Pasquier in Epistol. ad Turne∣rum observed, that blood was drawn, now more commonly than formerly; for of old, to open a vein was dangerous before fourteen
yeer old; and it is usual. What concerns the Gut, twelve fingers broad, It is true that Archangelus Picolominie concludes thence, that men were greater then, and lesser now; but how truely, let him see to it. I. It is certain that Pliny and Tertullian;L. 2. lect. Annot. mention Herophilus, yet it is uncertain what age he lived in. And should we suppose that he lived a thousand yeers since, it will follow that two third parts of men are lost in their statures;Whether the gut duode∣num be now shorter than of old? and if men be now five foot high, they were then fifteen. II. If that happen to us by reason of those times, then that hapned to them in respect of former times. And it is wonder, nor Galen, nor Hippocrates should speak any thing of them. III. Riolanus seems to decide this contro∣versie, when he writes, And take nothing from the Ancient Measure,L. 2. An∣trop. c. 12. unlesse you adde the more slender and narrow part of the Ventricle which reacheth forth from the bottom below, to the very beginning of the windings of the guts, which I have often seen to be twelve fin∣gers breadth long. Laurentius, and many others, think that the Antients took the Pylorus with the Duodenum. The last thing of the Impurity of Seed is false. For I. Wee see sometime that sickly Parents beget strong and healthy chil∣dren.L. 6. c. 13. Whether pro∣lifick seed be now more im∣pure than formerly? II. The same may be said of Animals: and doublesse Men had faild by this time, and there had been an end of the dispute.
III. There are many Examples, of wo∣men that have exceeded in bearing of Chil∣dren. Vives relates of a Countrey Man in Spain, whose progeny had fild a Village of a 100 houses whilst he yet lived. In the Temple of the Marschall in Essex, there is a Sepulchre sen of one Mary Waters, who when she died hd of her Legitimate posterity, three hundred sixty seven children, sixteen of her own, a hundred and fourteen of her childrens, two hundred twenty eight, in a third de∣gree; nine in a fourth. Also that is com∣mon. The Mother said to her Daughter; Daughter, say to your Daughter, that she must mourn for her Daughters Daughter. I let passe other examples. And I con∣clude, that strength and stature have not fai∣led for some thousands of yeers. Article III. Nothing is wanting to the Faculties of of the minde. THus much is spoken hitherto concer∣ning those things are principally to be considered in the body of Man: now fol∣lowes
the rationall Soul. Wherein we are to consider whether the faculties thereof have failed in generall or in speciall; That is principally known, both by the proceed∣ings of Arts, and manners; yet not omit∣ting those things that are requisite thereun∣to, as Memory, Judgement, Imagination, wherefore these parts are to be considered. I. That Memory and Judgement have not failed. II. Nor any thing in the three Facul∣ties. III. Thirdly, nor in Speculative Phi∣losophy. IV. Nor in practicall Philosophy and History. V. Nor in Languages and Arts. VI. Nor in Mchanicall Arts, and Navi∣gation. VII. Nor in Manners. The first Branch. Memory and Judgement have not failed. HOw have they failed, when as great∣er things have fallen out in the lat∣ter times, and in our own, than were the vast examples mentioned by the An∣tients?
Seneca the Rhetorician saith,In prooem. l. 1. con∣trovers. that he rehear∣sed two thousand words in the same order they were spoken; and that he repeated from the last to the first, all the verses that each man pro∣pounded, that came to hear his Master, and they were above two hundred persons.L. 3. var. lect. But Mar∣cus Antonius Muretus, reports of a certain young man of Corsica, who studied the Civil Law in the University of Padua, who could repeat thirty six thousand names without any staying, in the same order they were spoken. To which Muretus adds, I know not any of the Ancients I can oppose to this, un∣lesse it be Cyrus: of whom Pliny, Quintilian, and the Latine Writers relate, that he remem∣bred all the Souldiers names. Xenophor sayes, Onely of his Officers. But Aenaeas Sylvius testifies,In histor. Concil Ba∣sil. that Ludovicus Pontanus a Counsellour of Spalato, did not onely re∣peat all the Heads of the Laws, but the whole body of them; he died at thirty yeers old. Famianus Strada writes, that Francis Suarez,L. 1. Aca∣dem. prolus. that famous Jesuite, had so strong a Memory, that he recited Saint Augustines works in the same words they were written. We have often (saith he) seen him readily to teach and shew with his finger the very place & page, wherein he spake of such a thing. Grea∣ter, and more things may be spoken of Johu Raynolds, a Famous divine in Oxford Uni∣versity. For men say, he was so conversant in all Classicall Authors, that he might truly be called a Living Libray, or a third univer∣sity. Gentilis confessed, that he knew▪ the
Laws better than himself, yet he was pro∣fessour of them. To confirm the force of Judgement and the other Faculties,In 2. de C. D. c. 17. it shall suffice to Instance in Budaeus, Tostatus, & Sca∣liger. Ludovicus Vives saith, that France never brought forth any man that had a more sharp wit, strong jugdement, more exact diligence, or more learning; nor yet Italy in this Age▪ And indeed he had more knowledge of the La∣tine and Greek Tongues, than of his own. Wherefore what he writ in them was extem∣porary. If you read his Books, De Asse, you shall finde he had read all the Philosophers; and was imployed in publike Affaires both at home and abroad. But this is the great∣est wonder; which he found in him onely (they are the words of Vives) Both the Master and the Scholler, and the method and reason of teaching, and the tenth part of those things Men can hardly learn under other great Masters, that he learned wholly,Possev. in Appar. being his own Master, from himself. Tostatus in the 22, yeer of his age had the knowledge almost of all Arts and Sciences,Bell. de Ec∣cles. script. De Vivers. & doctis viris His∣pan. whence one writes of him, This the worlds wonder, knows all to be known. And Metamorus writes further of him. Had he lived in any age than in in that he did, we should never Envie at Augustine of Hippo, nor Hierome of Stridon, nor yet any of the Antients. By Scaliger, I mean Ioseph (though his father was a Man of so great learning, that Lipsius reckons him to be the fourth, with those three that he ad∣mires amongst the Antients) whose com∣mendation ounds in the mouthes of learn∣ed
men, (if you except Schoppius, who was the shame and spot of his Countrey.)In praesat opus Scalig. There is nothing (saith Casaubon) that any man would learn, that he could not teach; he had read nothing, (and what had he not read?) but he presently remembred it; there was nothing so obscure or difficult in any old Author, Greek, Latine, or Hebrew; but if he were asked, he would presently answer to it. He readily re∣membred the Histories of all Nations, all Ages, the successions of Empires, and the Estate of the Ancient Church. He held a re∣cord of all Animals, Plants, Metals, and of the properties of all naturall things, with their differences and names, were they new or old. He knew perfectly the situation of places, the bounds of Provinces, and the divers divi∣sions of them, at severall times. He left none of the more weighty Arts or Sciences, that he attempted not to learn; he had the knowledge of so many tongues, so exactly, that had he done nothing but this all his life time,L. 2. Hist. sui tempor. it would worthily be accounted a Miracle. The same is is witnessed of him by Julius Caesar Bullinge∣rus, a Sorbon Doctor, and Professour at Pisa, but in fewer words: for he writes thus. The yeer 1609 followeth, which was fatall by the death of Joseph Scaliger; than whom our age brought forth no man of a greater Genius, and Ingenuity for Learning; and it may be the Ages past, had hardly his equall for all kinds of Learning.Pasquir. l. 5. c. 38. To these I may adde, that young Man, who in the yeer 1445 was at Paris, who though he were but twenty
yeers old, yet was he very well versed in all Arts and Sciences, and therefore he was thought to be Antichrist, and born of the Divell. Castellanus who then lived, writes thus of him. A youth I did behold But twenty yeers old Who could all Arts unfold. And the Degrees uphold. He boasted that he knew What ever had been writ Had he but once the view; As a young Antichrist. But if we consider the whole matter ex∣actly and shall compare the condition of the later times with the former, we shall finde that we can do as much and more than they could. For we have many helps the Anti∣ents wanted. Amongst which the Art of Printing is the chief. For by this the prices of Books are eased, which were so high in former ages, that Plato paid three thou∣sand Florens for three Books, and the Books of the Antients are preserved for our use. Onely this is necessary, that we may employ lesse time in gaining languages, and that Controversies in Religion may be shortened, and that equall diligence may be used, and the like Patrons may be found. Aristole received from Alexander, eight hundred Talents to compose his na∣turall
History: Roscius the Comoedian had a daily sallary of three hundred flo∣rens. Aesop the Tragoedian, left to his son 1500000 Franks. How much hard Labour can do, wee may learn by the example of Joseph Scaliger. For he in twenty one dayes time, learned all Homer by heart, and in four moneths, he learned all contained in the Greek Poets besides. Hence, saith Vives, good wits grow in any place, if they may be adorn∣ed, it may be in some places more frequently, but every where some.Orat. 2. 5. And Quintilian writes. Nature hath not rejected us, that we should be slothfull, but we indulge more to our selves than we ought: so then, they did not so much exceed us in wit, as in resolution. In the mean while certain it is, that there is a circular motion also in habits; For first, the Egyptians floruished; Then the Greeks; At length, Learning forsook Athens, and passed into Italy, And now in the prin∣cipall parts of Europe, there are most learn∣ed Men.In praef. Schol. Mathem. And I dare say with Ramus, we have seen greater increase of learned men, and of their labours in one Age, than our Ance∣stours saw before in fourteen ages that are past.
Part. II. There is nothing decayed in the three Fa∣culties, Divinity, Law, or Physick. IT is almost clear concerning Divinity, that it is now in greater perfection. For I. The Gentiles were employed in vain disputes concerning the number and nature of their Gods; They became vain in their Imaginations. Now women understand better the most secret mysteries that are worth the knowing and needfull, than for∣merly the greatest Philosophers did. They were all alwaies eloquent in speaking a∣gainst their vices; we appear not in a habit, of wisdom,Minutius in Octavio. but in our mindes, we do not speak great matters, but we live so. II. The Church of the Jewes had the Oracles of God committed to them. But the Thalmudist, Cabalist, Phari∣sees and Essens, &c. did strongly wrest them. That they held a transmigration of souls, not onely appears by the opinion of Herod and of others concerning Christ,Math. 14. 2 as though he had received the soul of John Baptist or Elias,John 9. 2. But also the question of the twelve Apostles declares as much. And that they supposed a Temporall Kingdom of Christ, should be upon the earth, that question
shewes after Christs Resurrection, Concer∣ning the restoring of the Kingdom of Israel.Actor. 1. 6. III. The three former Centuries are commended for their piety and Martyrdom, the fourth for learning. For that age, if ever any, had most excellent and famous Doctours. Thence were Arnobius, Lactan∣tius, Eusebius, Athanasius, Hilarius, Basilius, Nazianzene, Ambrose, Epiphanius, Theophi∣lus, Hieronymus, Augustine, &c. Yet Tertul∣lian, Origen, Cyprian, are condemned for their enormous Errours; And then the principall Heresie concerning the Trinity and Christs Incarnation was so rife, that in those dayes, it was an ingenious matter to be a Christian.Erasmus. And at that time was the opinion of the Millenaries maintained: and that they were Angels that were called the Sons of God, in Genesis, Chap. 6. Whence, Peter∣nus on the place. I am ashamed to speak what I am about speak here, concerning the best writers. IV. About the ninth Century,Bell de R. l. L. 4. c. 12. men were so ignorant, that if any man studied Philo∣sophy, they commonly held him for a Con∣jurer.Chron. L. 4. Genebrard saith, This is called an un∣happy age, and drawn dry of men that were famous for wit and learning, wanting hoth Famous Princes and Bishops. V. So soon as Divinity was wrapt up with distinctions, there followed a great contempt of Gods Word. For Albertus M.
brought Aristotle into the inmost and secret places of the Church of God, whom former times had brought to the door. The men of former dayes, did onely equallize the sayings of the Fathers of the Church, with the Word of God: But he with his followers took away that small Reverence was left unto the Word of God, and com∣pared Aristotles writings with it, as if these were founded upon demonstrations, and that concluded onely by probable Arguments. Hence the most famous Graserus supposeth that the third Viol in the Apocalyps was then powred forth;L. 4. Isag. To this contempt was joyned a wonderful ignorance of Tongues;Exot. c. 14. To understand Greek was suspected; and He∣brew was almost Heresy. Remigius being ig∣norant of those Languages, in his Com∣ment upon those words, 1 Thes. 1. 8, From you sounded out the word, saith, that Paul spake something improperly, for he should have said divulged; being ignorant that S. Paul writ in Greek.3 Part de∣cret. de consec. dist. 4. In a part of Germay, as ap∣pears out of the Rescript of Pope Zacharie to Boniface Bishop of Germany, One Bapti∣zed in this maner. Ego baptizote in Nomine Pa∣tria & Filia & Spiritua Sancta. King Alfred in the Pastoral Preface prefixed to St. Gre∣gory, writes that in his dayes there was noe Priest in the Southpart of Humber, who un∣derstood the Sacred Office written in La∣tine,De corrup∣to Ecclesiae statu. or could interpret it. And Clemangus, They came not from their Studies or Schooles, but from the Plough tail, and ba∣ser
arts almost every where, to take charge of Parishes who understood little more Latine than Arabick, and they could not read, and (it is a shame to speak it,) they could scarce distinguish Alpha from Bets: and if they had a little learning, their manners were naught, forasmuch as they were bred without learning in idlenesse, and followed nothing but ribaldry, playes, eating and drinking, and vain controversies. I shall here set down the example of Du Prat, a Bishop and Chancellour of France, wh when he met with these words, in the Let∣ters of Henry the eighth, King of England, written to Francis the First, King of France, Mitto tibi duodecim Molossos, He thought he mnt Mules by Molossos; and afterward ob∣serving his mistake, he mended the matter well, taking Molossos for Muletis, and so doubled his ignorance. But all men will excuse themselves with that saying of Saint Gregory. The words of the Heavenly Oracle must not be subject to the Rules of Donatus. He that would know more herein, let him read Henricus Stephanus, in his Apologie on Herodotus. VII. Lastly, it is beyond all doubt, that no longer than about two hundred yeers did Greek and Hebrew begin to revive. And, as St. Augustine said, before Pelagius arose, the Fathers spake more carelesly; and that may be said also of the times that preceded Lu∣ther. I need not speak much of the know∣ledge of the Imperiall Lawes, He that shall
compare Baldus, Bartho. Jason, Accursius, with Cujacius, Alciat, Hotoman, Duarenus, French men, he shall see the phrase more po∣lite in these, and the method more ex∣act, and the sense of the Law more quick. For Cujacius said, as Thuan testifies, that Govianus, of all the Interpreters of Justinian his Law, as many as are or were, is the one∣ly Civilian, to whom the Garland, must be ascribed, if the question were made concerning the best. Yea Pithaeus, in his Epitaph made upon him, calls the same Man the first and last Interpreter of the Romane Lawes, from the first founders. Massonius writes thus of him: Jacob Cujacius, dug up the Romane Lawes by the Roots, and brought them to the light with so great care, that others before him may seem to be ignorant of them: he alone, after many men, seems to have sought them out more diligently, and more neerly to have discovered them. But if we en∣quire concerning the practick, from the decisions and judgements that now are at Rome, Naples, Florence, Genoa, Bononia, Mantua, at Perussium in Italy, Spires in Germany, at Paris, Burdeaux, Gratianapolis in France, we shal easily perceive, to whether the Goal must be delivered We acknowledge that Physick flourished in the dayes of Hip∣pocrates, and was renewed as it were by Ga∣len, but that it is now come to the top point, may be demonstrated by most firm Argu∣ments.
And I.Whether the Ancients understood Anatomy. Anatomy or artificiall Dissecti∣on of bodies was scarce known to the An∣tients. For the Aegyptians Dissected and Annoynted bodies to preserve them from corrupting; The Greeks burn'd them; witnesse, Herodotus and Thucidides. Plu∣tarch intimates that the custome was to burn one Womans body with ten Mens, as be∣ing fatter; and Hippocrates speaks nothing of these things. Democritus was found by him, dissecting many Animals, and when he as∣ked him the reason of it, he answered. I dissect these Animals you see, not that I hate Gods works, but to search out the nature of the Gall and of Choler. Amongst the Jewes, the custome was either to burn Malefactours, or to stone them: if they were hanged they were buried the same day: It was sin to touch the bodies of the dead. Amongst the Romanes also, bodies were burnt; The place where, was called, Puticulae, or Culina; and the vessels their ashes were put into,2 de Legi∣bus. Urnae. And though Cicero writes that Sylla was the first, who amongst the Senators of the Cor∣nelii,4 De Fast. would be burnt with fire; Yet Ovid, writes of Remus. The limbs must burn he did annoint. And Numa who was addicted to the Sect of Pythagoras, forbad men to burn his body. Tully himself saith,2 De Leg. that the Lawes of the twelve Tables forbad to bury a dead body in the City, or to burn it. And these were given
in the 300. V. C. yeer. Lastly, Vigne∣rius, shewes out of the eighth Book of Livie, that the body of the Son of Manlius the Consull was burned in the fields, and that was done in the yeer, V. C. CCCC. XII. Before Syllas death,Pliny pro∣oem. l. 28. CCLXX. It was not lawfull for them to behold the Entralls of man. This custome began to be anti∣quated after the Antonini. Macrobius saith, it began to fail in his dayes: Yet fifty yeers after, the bodies of Pertinax and Severus, were burnt, as Dion and Herodian testifie. Then lived Galen, who, as some write, did dissect many Apes and Monkeys, & no bodies of Men, unlesse perhaps he did One. Whilst Laurentius writes that he did that often: he saith onely, it is probable that he did so. As for the Primitive Church, Tertullian calls Herophilus a Butcher rather then a Physitian,Libro de Anima. who hated man, that he might know him. And Augustine, Though the diligence of some Physitians be cruelty,De civit. yet those men call'd Anatomists do butcher the bodies of the dead.Dei 22. c. 24 Boniface threatens those with Excommunication, who should take out mens bowels; Which is not onely (saith he) made very odious in the sight of the Majesty of God, but ought also, as being obvious to the eyes of men, to be exceedingly abhorred. Therefore, in our and our pre∣decessours dayes, that Science began to be adorned, and it was adorned by Vesalius, who was the restorer of it. Valerius, Sylvius, Fallopius, Columbus, Riolanus, Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aqua∣pedente,
Remmelinus, Spigelius, Casserius, and others. II. The knowledge of Plants, though it were first known to Theophrastus, after that to Pliny, and most of all to Dioscorides: yet in the Age newly past, this also is brought to greater perfection: And this is not onely apparent by the peregrinations of Ravilius, Lonardus, Fuchsius, Clusius, and Americus, by the Discovery of the New World, and by Navigations into both the Indies, which amongst the rest, have brought four most excellent Sudorificks unto us, Guaicum, China, Sassaphras, and Sarsaparillia: but also by the writings of Mathiolus, Thurnheuse∣rus, Lobelius, Clusius, Carrechterus, and Bau∣hinus, who was fourty yeers composing his Table of Plants. To these I adde the most Famous Man, Adolphus Vorstius, the Botanist at Leiden University in Holland, who was my Tutour, whose Skill I often wondred at, and that not without amazement. III. To this, Chymistrie may be joyned; which though it were somwhat known to the Antients:De Con∣sensu & diss. Chy & Galen. For Sennertus writes it is proba∣ble that Tubal Cai, was the first founder of it, and that it flourished in Egypt and chiefly in Arabia, as Geber, Avicenna, Rhasit, &c. do witnesse. Yet in these later Ages it was most adorned, by Lullius, Rogerius, Basilius, Valentinus; but above all by Paracelsus, and his followers; Suchtenus, Dornesus, Thurn∣heserus, Severinus and Crollius, and also by those Chymicall Physitians, Andernacus,
Quercetanus, Sennertus, Dodate, and is brought now to this height. From whence divers Medicaments have sprung, Tinctures, Spirits, Extracts, Salts, Magistrals, Praecipi∣tates, Glasses, Reguli, Flowrs, Milks, Sugars, Gills, &c. And though it must be confest that some of them are dangerous to give; yet this must not be denied, that it is onely when an unskilfull Physitian useth them, and they are prepared by an unskilfull Chy∣mist. Otherwise Extracts and Tinctures are stronger than Syrups, Decoctions, or In∣fusions.Senner. in Pharmaco∣paea. For when the profitable parts are parted from the unprofitable, strange, grosse and earthy parts, or as Schegkius saith, as it were from their excrements, and reffuse, as one may say, it cannot by any reason be denied, but they must be more effectuall, pleasing, and durable. To this belong Mag∣netick cures, transplanting of Diseases, Cures of such as are lame, &c. Of these the Antients speak very little, but Paracel∣sus, Crollius, Bargravius, Taliacotius, Petraeus, and others have spoke abundantly. Where∣fore Quercetanus seems to have said well. If Hippocrates, Aristotle or Galen, himself were now alive, he would be amused to see this art augmented and adorned with so many Ornaments, enriched with so many new Inventions, and confirmed with so many wonderfull operations.
Part. III. Nothing is wanting in speculative Philosophy. WHat we said of the three Faculties, we can boldly affirm of Philosophie. But Philosophie being either speculative, or practicall, and that we speak of in this part comprehends under it, Metaphysicks, Phy∣sickes, and Mathematickes; We must demon∣strate this of each of them in particular. As for Metaphysicks, after Averroes, both the old Scholiasts, and Thomas, Scotus, and the mo∣dern Spanish Philosophers, Sanchiez, Suarez, Fonseca, Masius, &c. have adorned it. And a∣mongst other Nations, very many are found, as Shieblerus, Timplerus, Cornelius, and Jaco∣bus Marnii, Scharfis, Lippius, Jacchaeus, Capsius, &c. Who partly have included it in an exact method, and in part have illustra∣ted it with most exquisite precepts, & in part have adorned it with most large Disputati∣ons. If Keckerman had finished his that he began, there could be nothing wanting, as many suppose, that were needfull to the per∣fection of a complete work, directed to its proper end. And I think that no man will deny but that Sagittarius hath been a great help on his Canals. A speciall part which
others call Pneumatica, is so illustrated and corrected out of the Scriptures, that it may well be written on the Altars of former ages, To the unknown God. The Doctrine of Angels, which many of the Antient Divines, thought to be Corpo∣reall, is admirably described. It is most cer∣tain that no writing of the Antients, can be compared to that of Delrius, de Disquisitioni∣bus Magicis, of Peucerus, and Julius Caesar, Bullinger de Divinatione. Naturall Philo∣sophie is far more excellent now, than for∣merly it was. For I. In Aristotle, innumerable spe∣culations, concerning Matter, the World, Heaven, and other things are false. We have them now corrected by Aslachus, Danae∣us, Campanella, Verulam, Bartholinus, Nollius, Buthardus and many others. I know not whether Drebbellius hath not exceeded the Antients in his Book of the Elements. III. Naturall History before Pliny his age began again to spring up, at length in his dayes it increased. Yet because the new world was not then open, nor so great search made, all could not be discovered by Pliny, that since that time hitherto is very exactly known by Aldrovandus, Gesner, Agricola, the Anatomists and others. Boetius most accurate∣ly searched out the nature of Stones. The wonder of the Loadstone were searched by Gilbertus and Cabaus; and Gesner found out more cleerly the nature of Coralls. III. No man will gainsay that the chief∣est
of operations is that whereunto the knowledge of things naturall must be di∣rected. He is the legitimate son of Naturall Philosophy, who knowes how to produce new Metals, can multiply and increase Windes, can make artificiall Baths of Vitri∣al, Bimstone, Allum; Can let fall Artificiall Snow, Rain, Hail, Frosts, &c. Can produce new Plants, and Animals: But the practick part of Philosophy was, till now, in the greatest darknesse; at last in our age the way to it was opened by famous Vernlam, Vi∣count of S. Albanes, Chancellour of England in his New Organum, his Sylva Silvarum, his Historie of Life and Death, and of Windes. And those that have afforded any thing notable therein, were either of the age newly past, or of our times. Histories are full, that Paracelsus, Kelleyus, Setonus, did Transmute Metals into Gold. Johannes Hun∣niades a Hungarian, the chief of all the Chymists in England, our friend, did Enli∣ven a Mettal that run. He shewed the same Art, concerning whom, Roger Bacon speaks thus;In sec. plan. terrest. re- It is more easie to make Gold, than it is to destroy it. Which Angelus de Sola, thought to be impossible reason of the fixednesse of the Mercury of Gold, the maturity, and the so straight Conjunction of it with the other substances of the same body, that it can ne∣ver go back. I think but a few are ignorant what a Polonian Physitian did for the r∣renewing of plants again. See more in Rho∣dologia Rosenbergeri.
Lastly, this Winter an English man is reported to have found out a new and easie way to make Salt of Sea-Water. As for the Mathematicks, there is no doubt▪ but our Ancestors came short of us in knowledge of Geography. For I. Strabo oftimes refutes Erastosthenes, Hipparchus, Polybius, and Posidonius: so doth Ptolomy, Marinus Tyrius; yet they also are imperfect, being compared with Mercator, Merula, Ortelius, Maginus, Cluverius, and Carpenter. II. In the time of Pope Clement the sixth, as Robert Avesburiensts testifies, when Lodo∣wick of Spain was chosen to be King of the Fortunate Islands, and raised an army in Italy and France, the English that were at Rome then with the Leger Embassadour, de∣parted, supposing him to be Elected Prince of England, as being one of the Fortunate Islands. III. One Ephorus an accurate Greek writer, supposed Spain which he called Iberia, to be some mighty City. Also the begin∣ning of Nilus was formerly unknown. But now adayes they are discovered. The origi∣nals of Nilus are neer the Mountains of the Moon, not far from the Promontory of Good-hope. IV. Of the Antipodes,Divin. In∣stit. l. c. 2. Lactantiu of old speaks thus. What doe they say that think the Antipodes to be Men, whose feet walk against ours, do they say any thing? Or is any Man so foolish to think there be men whose
feet are higher than their heads? or that their weights ly against the places ours do, turne the contrary way? That Corn and Trees grow downward, that Rain, Snow, Hail, fall up∣wards upon the earth? And Virgilius, Bishop of Salisbury was condemned for this of Heresie, by Pope Zachary. Yet now adayes, we are sure there are such, I can speak no otherwise of Astronomy. For I. The Ephemerides were not known to Ptolomy; Purbachius, was the first that brought them forth. II. Many Instruments within these few yeers have been found out by Tycho Brahe Galileus and ohers, whereby new Stars have been discovered, and Milkie wayes, which reason of Meteors was hid from Aristotle and the Antients. III. The Quadrature of the Circle was a thing to be known in Aristotle his days, bt it was not known.Nor is it yet known. Scaliger writes, that he first found it out. Yet Pancirollus saith, not above thirty yeers since was that art invented, which contains in it some wonderfull se∣cret.What things were lesse known in the Mathema∣ticks by the Antients? IV. Lastly, the most learned Brigs, late Professour of Geometry, in the Famous Uni∣versitie of Oxford, saith, that the Antients knew not these things so well. Copernicus Astronomy which teacheth us that the Earth is the Centre of the Globe of the Moon, and that the Sun is the Centre of all the other Planets: which may be discerned by our sight by help of an Op∣tick
Glasse, lately invented, in Venus and Mercury, when they are in the lower part of their Orbs. He sheweth also by the Diur∣nall Motion of the Earth, the Rising and Setting of all the Stars: and by the Annuall Motion of thesame in its great Orb, to finde out far more easily, the motions and distances of all the Planets, and their progresses in the Heavens, their Stations and Retrogradati∣ons, than we can by the Epicycles or other Hypetheses, of Ptolomy or of any of the An∣tients. The four Stars (which Galilaeus Galilaei the Florentine calles, Medicea, who first found them out by his tuba Optica) are al∣waies carried about the Star of Jupiter, and when they fall within the shadow of him they are Eclipsed, Jupiter intercepting the Sun beams, as the Earth doth when the Moon is Eclipsed. To find out the value of Algebraic Aequa∣tions of all things, if it be rationall: and if it be not, yet to expresse it next unto that in Numbers absolute: and that as accurate∣ly, as we can do any side of a surd num∣ber, or the length of any Irrationall Line. Any Subtendent Line being given in a Circle, to finde out the Subtendent of the third part of the Circumference given (whc. Theos in his comment upon Ptolomy thought to be impossible) and not onely of a third part, but of any part, be it even or odde. The very Subtendent line is found
of an odde part; but the very subtendent of an even part is not found at one operation, but onely the Square of Subtendent: and the greater the number of parts be, so much harder it will be to finde out the subten∣dent. The Canons of right lines, Tangents and Secants to the circle, were not known to any of the Antients. Erasmus Reinoldus first framed them; and the Canon of Sines, (that is far more commodious than the Ca∣non of Subtendents in Ptolomie) was first discovered by Johannes Regiomontanus, and afterwards was most accurately calculated by many men. The totall doctrine of Logarithms was first invented by John Napier Baron of Mer∣chiston, a Scotchman; whereof none of the Antients ever so much as dreamt of, whereby many Problems in Astronomy, Arithmetick and Geometry are resolved with very little bour, which otherwise were thought to be impossible, or else to be exceeding hard, and not to be unfolded but with much toil and losse of time. Thomas Hariottus a most skilful Geometrician was the first who taught men to find out the Arpha of a Sphaericall Trian∣gle, or the quantity of a Solid Angle; no man before him attained this. The igno∣rance of this proposition deceived Aristotle in his L. 3. de caelo C. 8. supposing that a solid place could be completed by a Pyramis. And Petrus Ramus, committed the same er∣rour, 16. & 4. lib. of his Geometrie, who
affims the same thing may be done also by an Octaedron. He teacheth also to finde out the propor∣tion of a Segment of a Circle, by that way which for Subtill and Accurate truth is equal to Archimedes way (prop. 31. and 33 lib. de Conoidib.) and for easinesse is far beyond it. Thus far Brigs, to these we might adde those things that the most Famous Guliel∣mus Avianus, Rector of the Colledge Tho∣man at Lipsia, my honoured friend, of his own invention hath inserted in his Univer∣sall Directory. Part. IIII. Nothing is wanting in practicall Phi∣losophy and History. PRacticall Philosophy without all doubt is in the same condition. For should we read the Books written upon this subject, by Lipsius, Guazzus, Althusus, Thomas, Hen∣ricus, Timpler, Keckerman, Donaldson, &c. who writ in Latine; or Verulam, Montanus, the most Reverend Hall, Robinson, Feltham, Gentius, Wright, who writ in French or Eng∣lish, and should adde thereunto what Veru∣lam hath written in his Augmentations of Learning, we shall finde that Seneca, Epicte∣tus,
Plutarch, and others of the Antients fell short of them many degrees. As for the Military art which is part of Politicks, the Romanes surpassed the Greeks therein,Histor. p. 1. 5. c. 9. l. Sect. 1. and Raughleigh is reported to have shewed that the Romanes were surpassed by the English in Edward the third, and Henry the fifth his dayes:Whether our times in Souldiery are short of Antiquiy? It is a question whether the Low-Coun∣tries fall short of Antiquity. Hunniades, Temincharius, Scanderbeg, Ziska, Polislaus of Poland, Henricus M. King of France. Fre∣derick or Nassau, &c. nay be compared with Julius Cesar. For he fought fourty seven battels with successe, and was never put to the worst, except in the Russian war, by the running away of one of the Palati∣nate. But of the other, compared to Alexan∣der the great, Pytheus, writes thus. Which of you two the Garland first should have; The warlike World long strove; at last it gave, The same to thee, Henry▪ by death thou wast. So made at once, the first Captain and last. Who of the Antiens better knew the Art of Fortification, than the Dutch and Ita∣lians do? Who used more Noble Strata∣gems than the Low Countries, in taking Breda and Zutphane? than the Spaniard did
in the interceptions of Amboina: and the English in the conquering of the thundring Navy. And as for Fights at Sea, not despising other Nations, the Dutch confe∣derates have the preeminence given to them, in many mens judgements▪ They would sail to Heaven with their ships, if men could sail thither. History is three fold, Naturall, Ecclesiasticall, and Civill: Of that we spake already. This in old Writers is full of Fables; Now we have the works of Baronius and Ezovis, the Centuries of the Magdeburgenses, revised lately by Luciu, Hospinians labours, concerning Temples, Feasts, Jesuites, Monks, the Sacramentary war, &c. Foxes Martyrology, that is about to be enlarged: and it is no doubt, but some man will be found, that will accurately per∣fect i. The Civill part was of old written by many particular men: Tacitus is most commended amongst them all. Yet Lipsius calls him, Forgetfull, and one that writes Contradictions; and Tertullian, A most bab∣ling Lyar. Nor doth Guicciardine, Comi∣naeus, Cambden, Thuan, and other, seem to fall short of him, who without anger or passion, writ the Histories of their own times, Melior Adamus excellently descri∣bed the lives of the Learned: to say nothing of others who writ in their Mother tongues. And if we speak of Universall History, Jo∣hannes Cluverius, professour of the University of Sora in Denmark, hath excellently drawn that forth. Yet C L▪ Conradus Graserus,
our Reverend Master, seems to outstrip him in some things. For to speak nothing of Chro∣nologie, deduction of Histories, and the Propheticall part of History, in the Exotick part, he hath bound together the acts of the four Monarchies, and of things concurrent, then from the destruction of Solomons Tem∣ple, unto the Reign of Ferdinand the first, by certain heads, according to lines drawn upon the Statue of Daniel, besides the Holy Writ, taken out of profane writers. Also he hath most accurately deduced Ecclesiasti∣call History according to the three sold pe∣riod of the Church by John the Divine in his Apocalyps, Revealed by Seven Seals, Trumpets and Viols. He that shall joyn together these two parts, like to Castor and Pollux, I dare promise to him security in the Ocean of History that otherwise is very un∣quiet. Commentaries now hot under our hands, doe promise, if God please, a larger deduction. Hitherto appertains Chronolo∣gie the Eye of History, which that it is now more augmented and more polished than it formerly was, is confimed by the writings of Scaliger, Pavellus, Helvicus, Calvisius, Al∣sted, and others. The Calculation of the yeer was along time uncertain amongst the Grecians, and though it were first invented by Meton, Calippus, and Hipparchus; yet it was after that mended by Julius Cesar, and Lilie is said to have mended his Computati∣on; Lastly for History, Keckerman, Alsted, and (whom I name by way of gratitude)
the famous Vossius have done excellently therein, who also hath set forth two incom∣parable volumes of Greek and Latine Histo∣rians. Part. V. Nothing wants in Tongues and Arts. I Need not say much of Languages. Eve∣ry one understands Latine▪ Greek in its own Climate is rude & barbarous, but in our world, it flourisheth in most places. Amongst the Fathers of the Primitive Church, but two, namely Hierome and Origen, under∣stood the Eastern Languages. But in these dayes innumerable are they that have great skill in them. Amongst whom I place the Buxtorsii, Amama, Hierome, Avianus, L' Empereur de Dicu, as the chifest Leaders. The Christians hardly ever saw an Hebrew Grammer before Caprio, scarce a Chalday one before Munster, or a Syriac one before Tremellius and Masius. But now they are not onelo Grammarians, but have set forth par∣ticular work themselves. And this will be demonstrated by Hutters Cube, which he set before his Bibl; Johnsons, That I saw hangd up in the Library at Leyden; Lubinus his Clavis of the Greeke Tongue, Mulfure∣tus
his of the Hebrew, The Horologium of Scikkardus, the circles of Stephanus Colerus; The Harmonia linguarum of Cruciger, The Lexicon of Francus disposed by proper Names. As much may be said of Arabick, for before Raphelengius, Baptista, and Erpeni∣us, no man set forth a Grammer of it. Now men are excellently skilled therein, as Golius Professour at Leyden, Brodardus with the Cadomenses, Schikkardus with the Tuingenses, and others. To Arts I refer Grammer, Logick, Rethorick, Poesy. I have now explained the condition of the former. I adde onely this, that it was an admirable Artifice that the Irish Fathers observed in their Janua Linguarum: but that is far be∣fore it, that Johannes Comenius, my friend, hath communicated in his. For he hath not onely in Sentences set down the Primi∣tive words, but he hath so disposed them, that it seems as it were a Synopsis of Philosophy. The Antients had notable skill in Logick, and the Scholiasts have writ many things concerning the precepts thereof very wittily, and subtilely; yet we are nothing behinde them. For since the vertue of an In∣strument consists in the use thereof, and Lo∣gick Rules are but as it were certain Mea∣sures of things, and such as are indivisible; there is lesse due to that age that was over∣much in disputes, and neglected the use, calling the Rules into question; More to that time, in which the rules are directed to their use, and the use is diligently and accu∣rately
inculcated. But Keckerman alone hath done this: His book of Logick is of so great Esteem, that in the University at Glas∣cow, it is expounded, and it is urged in the Evangelicall Schools in Hungary, is extol∣led by the Socinians themselves, and is in the hands of all their Students. To passe over the testimony of Johannes Valentinus Andreas,In Theatre Scholastico. his own scholler Alsted spake truly of him. I say of thee Rare Keckerman, That of three brests thou art a Man. Of Aristole, Ramus, and Melancthon. Melancthons brevity, Ramus Method, one; That surpassed Aristotle alone. To these we may adde the Logick of the Famous Burgersdicius, Philosopher in the University at Lyons, wherein he hath cor∣rected some errours of Keckerman. The Axi∣oms of Hunnius and Sagittarius, the Logicall Works of Alsted and Pareus; All these works are so written that they may shew the right use of Logick. Rhetorick and oratory, flou∣rished in Greece principally in Demosthenes his age; in Italy, when Tully and Salust, li∣ved, and some others: But now we must needs acknowledge that it flourisheth more, than it did formerly under Monks and Schollers. It is well known, what Lipsius writ truly of himself, though he did it blush∣ing: and there is no Man ignorant of the
Modern Oratours, Putean, Baudius, Heien∣sius, Vernuleius, Barclay, &c. Poetry ex∣celled in Homer amongst the Greeks, in Vir∣gil amongst the Latlne Poets.L. 3. Poet. p. 1. Virgil, saith Scaliger, brought up to the top of perfection by his choiser studies and judgement, that art that was but rude when he received it. And again, I think that he onely knew what it was not to trifle: he is the onely Poet amonst all the Poets, and compared single, he may stand for all. If we speak of Comae∣dians, Plautus is admired by most. Erasmus thinks there is more exact Judgement in one Comedy of Terence, than in all Plautus his works. But in the following ages, the Art of Poetry was hid as under Cimmerian dark∣nesse, and Verses were written which, brand the Age and the Authors with a mark of Infamy. King Ethelberd his Epitaph is this. Rex Ethelbertus his clauditur in Poliandro. Fana pians certus, Christo meat absque Me∣andro. And this was made on Gervasius Blessensis, Abbor of Westminster. De Regum genere pater hic Gervasius, Ecce, Est & defunctus; mors rapit omne ge∣nus. Venerable Bede▪ had this Epitaph.
Presbyter hc Beda requiescit carne se∣pultus. Dona Christe animam in coelo gaudere per aevum. Daque illi Sophiae d' ebriari fonte, cui jam Suspiravit ovans intentus semper amore. But we in the last age had two Poets, Ron∣sard and Buchanan (To say nothing of Bartus who writ excellently in French, or of Tor∣quatus Tassus in Italian, or of Spencer who writ in English, of Kochonovivs in Poles Language, of Opitius who is yet alive, who writ in the German tongue) who might be compared to Homer and Virgil. Of the for∣mer, Pasquire speaks thus. Wouldst thou Virgils verses make Or wanton Catullus take. Or delightfull Petrarch shew, Or Pindarus Modes renew. Ronsard Virgils verses can And wanton Catullus skan. And pleasant Petrach he doth With Pindarus grace set forth. He doth so well Pindar write, And as Petrarch doth endte. Catullus, Virgil, present, As if he to them had lent. Virgil gravely he doth sing, Like Catullus in no thing; Then wanton Catullus He, Far from Virgils Poetry.
Hee's Virgil and Catullus, And Petrarch with Pindarus. Yet is Ronsardus alone, Besides him there can be none. If Virgil and Catullus, And Petrarch with Pindarus, And all Poets were before Should live again or'e and or'e, All could not Ronsard aquall Yet he alone doth them all. Scaliger writes thus of Buchaan. Unto the highest Pinnacle was Poesie Come, but in thee it stands, can go no farther hence. Scotland the bounds of Romes Empire was formerly, Scotland the bounds shall be of Romes Eloquence. Yet we have now adays, some that you may reckon amongst the Laureate Poets. Amongst Comedians, Vernuleius and Frisch∣linus are not the least. As for Poeticall Invention, the Euphormio and Argenis of Barclay, Sidneys Arcadia, Montgomeries ura∣nia, Astraea, Gurmannus de Alfarache of Ale∣mannus, are as good as any written by the Antients. To conclude, I will adde something con∣cerning the Art of Teaching, which many men have adorned, principally in Languages▪ yet Petrus Glaumius seems to excell them all, who so taught the Italian Tongue in
half a yeers space in the University Giessena▪ that his Schollers would accurately contro∣vert their Theses, written of any matter in that language. The same did so instruct his Schollers at Halla in Saxony in the doctrine of Copy∣holds in two weeks space, they having learn∣ed nothing but the principles of Logick be∣fore, that they composed Theses of the same matter and would defend the same miracu∣ously, without any Helper. I was informed of this by that famous friend of mine, Master Sigismund Evens, who was as it were the Rector of the Colledge then, and directed all that businesse. Also he shewed me some examples of the Positions, with a Ta∣ble that Glaumius had set before it. Holstenius his Scholler hath professed in a Book he newly set forth, that he ca do as much.
Part. VI. Mechanick Arts, and Skill in Navigation, have increased. BUt, it may be, Manuall arts in these lat∣ter times have suffered some eclipse. For the art of Painting was excellent amongst the Romanes when their Empire was at the height. Whence Horace; Ep. 1. l. 2.Now are we come to'th top of Fotunes wheel, we Paint, Wrestle, and Sing full well, as nointed Greeks more quaint. Graving and Casting were of old in the greatest perfection, as may also appear by the Marmora Arundeliana at London, set up in the Garden of the illustrious Earle of Arun∣del, that were brought out of Italy and Greece. We saw, amongst many Inscripti∣ons Urnes and Statues, the Statue of C. Marius, VII. Consul, of Theseus, and of Her∣cules, when he was young: I saw also the Faces of Scipio, Ahricanus, Seneca, Socrates, Aesop, &c. carved and cast to the life. A∣mongst them all, the handsome proportion of the statue of Hercules, is most commended, and of a certain Feminine body; also the
head of a Macedonian King, cast in brasse, and it was found in a pit at Smyrna, by Petty who lived there five yeers for such purposes. The English carvers do as it were by rule direct their chiefest works thereunto. One of the most excellent workmen of them in the art of casting, by the judgement of all the rest, confessed he could not equall the Lineaments thereof. For that, though the the head were maimed, the Earle of Pem∣brok offered 300 pound, and it was refused, as D. Junius the son of Franciscus, a most courteous Gentleman reported, who shewed to me these and many more rarities. Lastly, for Architecture, Vitruvius is chiefly commended, nor are the Pyramids, & Obeliscks of the Antients things forgotten. Yet though these things be so: Nothing can be concluded that can any way prejudice our opinion. For the art of Painting declined afterwards,Epist. 119. whence Sylvius. I saw pictures of two hundred yeers standing, polished with no art. And again, If you look upon carved or painted works of two or three hundred yeers standing▪ you will perceive them not to lok like men, but like monsters, and strange crea∣tures. But in a few yeers after it grew up again, and Michael Angelus, and Raphael Ubinas were excellent in Italy, Durerus in Germa∣ny, whom Erasmus so highly extols, that he thinks, that if Apelles had then lived, as he was free and friendly, he would have yeeld∣ed the bucklers to Albertus, Carving and
Casting, if they do not exced in our times, yet they are scarce behinde the Antients, and in this is that Axiome verified, that there is a certain circle in humane affairs. It is true that in Architecture Vitruvius is commend∣ed. But that must be understood for his Rules in Architecture. Otherwise, Politian writes of Leo Baptista Alberti a Florentin, that he so searched out the footsteps of the Anti∣ents, that he both comprehended the antient manner of Architecture, and made it Exem∣plary. That others have done as much may be seen by magnificent structures, which are found about Castles, Monasteries, Churches and other buildings, whereof the Itinrant and Topographicall descriptions of Coun∣tries are full. The Pyramids and Obelisks were works made onely to vaunt by, and not for any profit. Yet the Obelisk set up by Sixtus V. Anno. 1586, is as good as any of them. It was 107 foot high, and 956148 pound weight. In the erecting of it from the begin∣ning of May till the end almost of Septem∣ber, 900 Men, and 70 Horses were Employ∣ed, and the charge came to 37975 Crowns, as saith Dominicus Pontanus. But though there were nothing that could shew that the former times in this point come short of ours; Yet some artificiall Works and Inven∣tions can shew this, that not very many yeers since were brought upon the stage of the World. The principall whereof, are suppo∣sed
to be the Art of Printing, Invention of Guns, the Mariners Compasse, and some sin∣gular Pieces. concerning the first Inventor of Printing.Who found out Print∣ing? Historians strive, yet cannot end this strife. Scriverius seems to demon∣strate by many Arguments, that Laurentius Johannis, surnamed Edituus, was the in∣ventor of it. And tis true that the Author of the Chronicle of Colen in their Native Tongue, set forth, Anno, 1499 saith that the first Prints were found in Hol∣land, and that the Inhabitants of Mentzs,Cap. 26. de papyro in Bibli∣otheca de communi∣catione linguar. c. de Typis. in Cosmogra∣phia. from Donatus that was Printed there in the yeer 1450, framed them to that forme we use them now adayes, But the words of Ma∣riangelus Accursius are these Donatus was first of all Printed here. Anno, 1450: In∣deed, Johannes Faust, a Citizen of Ments, who first invented this art in Copper prints, had his Instructions from Donatus printed before in Holland, in a print of Wood. But Palmeri∣us in Chronicis, Guilandinus, Vignerius, Bib∣liander,L. 2. c. 7. Munster, contend for Guttenbergius: If this contest can be decided, we may say, that at Harlem were the first grounds of it laid; and Guttenbergius, whom Polidor Vir∣gil makes the Author of it, did bring it to greater perfection. But Faustus was the first Man, that first used the art as we do now. Pe∣trus Ramus had Tullies Offices in print, with this Inscription. This present most famous work of Marcus Tully was happily ended by me, John Faust, a Citizen of Ments, not with Inke and Pen, or quills or brasse, but by a very
gallant Art, by the labour of my servant Peter de Gerneshem. It was finished, Anno. 1466. the fourth day of February. Yet what∣soever this may be, Germany will never endure to lose the praise of it. Bero∣adus. O Germany that dist finde, And art usefull for mankinde, To write in print a Mans minde. What is spoken of China, if it be true, yet every man must acknowledge, that all was worse,L. 3. de oc∣cult. natur. Miracul. c. 4. and more rude, not so neat and well trimmed, nor adorned with so comely vari∣ety of Leters, as Lemius saith. I doubt not but he would have said much more, had he seen the Prints of the Dutch, Italians and others now adayes. Every man may easily collect the great profit ariseth by this In∣vention. Polydore Virgil annexeth this to his Oration, de Bibliothec. Veterum. That was a very great blessing given to Man∣kind,De Invent. Rer. l. 2. c. 7. but it is no way comparable to that we have obtained now, since we found out a new way of Writing. For one man will print as much in one day as Many can hardly write in a whole yeer. All men know that Books are now made cheaer, more com∣mon and more correct, than they were in former times. For to let goe the price, I spake of in another place, I will speak this one thing truly and boldly, (they are Eras∣mus words,) I suppose that Hierom's Books
making, cost him lesse, than they do us in restoring them; And in the Preface to Au∣gustines Works. The rashnesse of idle peo∣ple hath scarce dealt so ill with any other, as with the Books of this Sacred Dr. At length Warlike Guns were invented,Whether Guns were known to the Anti∣nts? An. 1380 as Magius wil have it, or An. 1400 as Ramus saith, by one Bartholdus Swartz a Monk of Colen, or as Salmuth writes, by Constantine Anklitzen of Friburg. It is col∣lected from Platina in the Life of Vrban the fourth, that they were first used in the wars of the Venetians, against the Genoes▪ But that seems to be an untruth,Nova re∣pert. tit. 11. which some write that the Indians, or Salmoneus, or Archimedes were the Inventors of them. Virgil writes of Salmoneus thus. I saw Salmoneus cruelly tormented Because he oves Thundering Flames in∣vented.Aeneid. l. 5. Through Greece and Elis Sreets, in pompe he rode, Requiring to be honor'd as a God. In his Coach with four Horses be did fly, Shaking a burning Lamp to mock the Skie. Mad fool, to think that Clouds and Thun∣der can, Be made with Ayre and Horses by a Man.
But this seems to be nothing,L. 3. de regim. prin∣cip. p. 3. c. 18 but to make men afraid with the noise. And either Plutarch or Livie, or Aegidius Romanus, who in the Reign of Philip the fair writ of Warlike Instruments, Anno, 1285. would have spoken something of Archimedes. Nor would Mahomet have omitted this in his siege of Constantinople, who for the managing of one Instrument to beat down the walls, was constrained to employ fifty yoke of Ox∣en, and 2000 men, as Chalcondyla witnes∣seth. Yet we cannot deny but that in the Reign of Richard the Second King of Eng∣land, in the battering of the Castle at Out∣witch, the French had great Cannon, where∣by the walls and houses of the Castle were cloven and broken in many places. But whether those engines were such as we use now, is uncertain. The Marriners Compasse was not known of old time,Whether the Ancients knew the Marriners Compasse. as Blondus, Bodinus, Cardan, Bellonius, Acosta, Turnebus, Pancirolla testifie. Had it been found in Solmons dayes, he needed not to have consumed three yeers in going and coming, nor was he so wise as to know all things.In mercato∣re scena 3. The Compasse, by Plau∣tus called Versovia, alleadged by Lemnius, and called the Compasse, is supposed to be the Helm that turns the Ship, or a rope that turns the Sail,L▪ 20. Ad∣vers. c. 4. as Turnebus explains it. Flavius Melphitanus is thought to be the first Inventor of it, though Gilbertus saith that Paulus Venetus brought it from China;Gilbert. de Magnet. and Osorius saith, the Portingalls took it from
some Barbarian Pyrates neer the Cape of Good hope. Also that secret of the Lodastone, whereby friends may communicate their secret thoughts one to another at the great∣est distance, is reported to be an Invention of our times. But because Famianus Strada hath described it at large in the style and vein of Lucretius.L. 2. Pr∣lus. 6. I will for the Readers benefit, set it down in his own words. The Load-stone is a stone in Nature strong, For many needles toucht there with will change, And turn themselves to that Star full right, That next the Pole, above us doth give light. Conspiring in their motion, far asunder, All move one way at once, tis a wonder. For if at Rome one stir, the rest are guided, By the same course, nere so far divided. If then you would unto your friend endite Your minde, to whom you know not how to write. Make a plain Circle large enough, and set On the Circumference the Alphabet. Then let the needle in the middle play. Toucht with the Load-stone, that it easly may Point to the Letters; and to this again, Prepare another for a Counterpain;
The needle must be touched with the same Stone, as the former was to fit your frame. Your Friend that Travells must one Com∣passe take, And you must keep the other for his sake. But on the day and hour first consent, Whereon you mean to shew your close intent. This done, observe the time prefixed, and As one, so will the other move or stand. Move then your needle at that time when you, Would have your Friend to know the thing you do. And let the Needles point mark eah Letter Softly, that he may understand the better. The words they make, of this you may be sure; Your Needles motion will the same pro∣cure, In your friends needle: use your Instru∣ment Thus till you have disclos'd your full Intent. Tis a graeat wonder for your friend to see, His Needle travers o're the A. B. C. Guided by yours, that so wide doth lye Distant from his, and so to read thereby Each word you there make, and if then he please,
He may so send to you again with ease. When you have done, and when your style stands still. He can by's Needle write back what he will. I would this writing were once brought in use, Then should our Letters suffer no abuse, Thei'd need no Posts, nor need they stop or stay, They'd safely passe, and swiftly, no delay. From Theevs, nor Seas, nor Rivers need we fear; It were all one thing to be far or neere. Then Princes might their own dispatch∣es make, With their own hands, what ere they un∣dertake, We Scribes that swim in Inkes black Sea might then, Offer up to the Load-stone every pen. Thus for Srtada. Haseatefferus write,De utis affect. l. . cap. 3. that the like may be done by blood drawn forth of the veins of two friends. As for particular Inventions, many might be instanced in, that surpasse, Architas his Pigeon, Archimaedes his Globe of Glasse, Homers Iliads writ in parch∣ment and put into a Nutshell, the Ship and the Chariot of Myrmecidas; that was covered with the Wings of a little Bee, this with the wings of a Fly. Albertus M. made
a Statue that spake, he was thirty yeers in making it, and Thomas Aquinas brake it. Regiomontanus made an Eagle that at Nor∣imberg met Caesar Maximilian, and hung over his head directly, and bore him com∣pany into the City. He made also a Fly of Steel, that flew out of his hands, and flew back again into his hands, when it had first flew round about all the guests, at a banquet, and in a manner saluted them all. A gene∣rous Gentleman, Johannes Christophorus de Berg, affirms that he hath an Invention, that with one turn of a Wheel, made by a boy of 16 yeers old, he would rayse 800. weight 60 foot high. The Coach that saild with the Winde, that Stevinus invented is well known, of which Grotius writes thus. Typhis first made a Ship with sails, which Jove Did soon translate amongst the Stars above, But Stevins brought it on the Earth to sail. Typhis and Joves, may, Stevin's shall not fail. He affirms elsewhere that he could run-with it seventeen miles in two hours. I be∣leeve also that Cornelius Drebbils wonderfull Sphere is not unknown, wherein he did by vertue of a perpetuall Motion, represent the constant and most apparent Motions and Laws of the Heavens and the Stars, and the
Predestinations of Times, and Motions in them. But what shall we think of that Instru∣ment,Vranckhei∣mius in Epist. ad Burggra∣vium. by means whereof he changeth him∣self into divers forms of Trees, and living Creatures, and makes an appearance as if the Earth opened, and Spirits came forth of it;Hegenitius Iti. p. 73. First, in the form of a Cloud, and then changing themselves into another shape that he commands them, be it of Alexander the great, or of some other King or Prince. I will say nothing of his Ship that swam under the Waters, and an Optick Instru∣ment, wherewith in a Starlight night, he could read Letters a quarter of a mile from him. Jacobus Metius, brother to Adrian Metius invented a Perspective Glasse, whereby he could take the heighth of any Towre or bo∣dy that was distant from him three Holland Leagues, as exactly as if he stood close by it; and he could see cleerely into England from his own Shore. And he discovered o∣ther things concerning the Globe of the Moon, of the Milkie way, and of Stars, which Astronomers hitherto called Cloudy Stars, and of other Wandring Stars about Jupiter, an Invention now adayes which the Anci∣ents never knew of. Galilaeus Galileaei, hearing the fame of this Instrument, saith, he came to the Invention of such an other, by the help whereof he descried those Ob∣servations in the body of the Moon, and in∣numerable fixed Stars, the Milkie Circle,
Clowdy Stars, and the four Planets, and their periods about Jupiter. The same person mentioned before, proceded to search out with geat care and study an In∣strument of the like kinde, and he hoped to finde it, whereby out of our Horizon in the Opposite Hemisphere, beyond the bounder of the Hemispheres he might observe all the Stars there, as if they were apparent in that part of the world we live in. What shall we say of that Musicall In∣strument? that by the perpetuall, movea∣ble or moving vertue of the same (as the Artificer reported) in a clear day, the Sun shining forcibly, only by the Sun beams, that musicall Genius being, roused thereby, without touching the instrumentall parts with your hand; would make most Heavenly Musick. But who is able to rec∣ckon up all? If those things be true, that Mormius hath set forth in his Arcanis Rosi∣anis, lately at Leyden in Holland, (but beleeve them that will) his example were enough to oppose against all Anti∣quity. As for the art of Navigation,Whether the Antients were as well skil∣led in Na∣vigation as men are Nw. we need not prove it to be more perfect now, than former∣ly it was. I. The Antients writ on Hercules Pillars, Non ultra. And Lucan writes thus of the first Ships. First the white Willow whilst the Twigs were green.
Twisted into a Ship, and covered with a Hide, The bottome was on Waters to be seen, The Britans over Seas in this would ride▪ And the Venetians on the river Po. II. Fracostorius and Acosta confesse that we read no where in Antient Writers that men did ever sail into the Main Ocean. But the Phoenicians, Carthagenians, Tyri∣ans and Sidonians made choice of the shore. III. Lastly, in the times of our Fathers, the whole world hath been compassed round by Americus, Drake, Candish; and in our times, by Oliver Van Nort, Schoutenius, Spil∣bergen L'Heremite, and strange Voiages into the North parts have been undertaken by the English and Dutch. Moreover the pre∣cepts of the Art of Navigation are written by Petrus Medina, and Baptista Ramusius, and the publike Lectures appointed by Charles the fifth, are yet in use. But it cannot be granted to be true which Vatablus▪Whether O∣phir be Peru. and Arias Montanus say, with whom Alsed seems to agree, that Ophir, from whence Solomon fetched Gold and Elephants Teeth should be Peru, by transmutation of the Letters. For in the West Indies there are no Ele∣phants, and when under Franciscus Pizar∣rus, the Countries of Attabaliba were disco∣vered, and the Spanlards that understand not the language, described with their hands
water or any thing they would have, the In∣dian answered, Peru, that is water. So Ju∣caan, which Montanus thinks had the name from Joktan, is nothing else, but, What say you? What seek you? To rehearse the Opinion of Pineda, whereby he applies the name of Tartessi to Tartesso, in Spain, is enough to answer it. For there are no veins of Gold so plentifull, unlesse perhaps they were carried into the New World, and brought back again in their great Gallions. Since therefore it is so, it is most certain that Arts by Times succession have suffered no losse, but are come almost to the highest pitch; We may then say with Lactantius, God hath given every one wisdom in such a measure,L. 2. c. 8. that they may seek out things unheard of,Divin. In∣stitut. and consider of things they hear. Nor because they did precede us in time, did they also precede us in understand∣ing; which if it be given equally to all, it cannot be engrossed by those that went before us. It is pure as light, and the Sun beams; for as the Sun is the light of the Eyes, so is wisdom of the minde of man. Wherefore since it is naturall to all men to be wise, that is, to seek after wisdom, they deprive themselves of wisdome that ap∣prove the Inventions of their Ance∣stors without using their own judge∣ment and are led by others like bruit beasts. But this deceives them, that when they hear the name of Antiquity they think it not pos∣sible for them to understand more, because
they are called the younger, or that they could be mistaken who are called their An∣cestors. Part. VII. Vices were as great formerly, as they are now. HAving saild over the Straits of the Arts, we are now come into a large Sea of Manners. Whose chief hor∣rible waves and mighty storms drive for∣ward those that maintain the contrary opi∣nion. And though all things also at this day are full of vices, yet since in these last times almost the greatest part of the known World is converted to the Christian Religi∣on, there is no reason that we should hold this to be the worst of all, being compared with the Former. Lactantius himself breaks forth into these words.L. 5. Insti∣tut. c. 7. God as a most carefull Parent, when the last times drew on, sent an Embassadour, that should bring back again the former age, and banish∣ed Justice; lest mankinde should alwaies be driven on with the greatest and continuall Errours, wherefore the forme of that gol∣den age is returned. Yet it cannot be said that alwaies and in all places the Honesty of men increaseth, but we must grant, that all things
run in a kinde of Circle; and as times, so do manners change by course.Tacit. in Annal. There will be vices so long as there are Men, but these are neither continuall, and amends is made by the interposition of better things. Our An∣cestors, saith Seneca, complained so, and we complain as they did, and our posterity will do the like; saying, that manners are decayed, and wickednesse rules, that hu∣mane affaires grow worse, and fall in∣to all mischief; But these things stand at the same point, and they will stand, onely moving a little on this or that side, as waves that are brought in further by the tide, which going back leaves more room on the shore. Now Adul∣tery is the chief sin, and Chastity breaks the bridle; another time men are mad in rioting, and the kitchin proves the fatall ruine of Patrimonies; sometime Men take care for nothing but gay apparell, and to trim themselves fine, which shewes their minde to be ugly enough, &c. Vices do not wait all in one place, but they are moveable, and at ods one with another, they jar together, and are driven away one by another. But be∣cause the contrary part hath taken strong arguments from this matter, we shall han∣dle this question something more strictly and accurately. But since some vices are committed in Religion, others in Poli∣cie, and others in the common society of men, and, to compare all these severally with all Nations, would be too tedious for us
to undertake; We shall therefore make our comparison with the Romanes, whom Historians and other writers report to have been the most vertuous and prudent people of all Nations. Under this branch there∣fore these points are contained. I. That the Religion of the Antients was too sottish. II. That many of their Lawes in Policy were wicked. III. That the people of the Romanes were extreamly cruell. IV. That their covetousnesse was incre∣dible. V. That their Luxuriousnesse in venery and drinking was none the like ever heard of. VI. In Meats. VII. In Buildings. VIII. In costly clothes. IX. That the Justice of the Roman peo∣ple, prudence, and valour was not any thing. X. It is probable that the Church shall be in greater glory than ever it was before.
The I. Point. The Religion of the Antients was too sottish. IT may be easily understood that the Religion of the Antients, was vain, foo∣lish, wicked, by their Images, the num∣ber condition and adoration of their Gods. That is first cleerly demonstrated out of that place of Isaiah,Isay 44. vers. 8. to say nothing of Jeremiah, and the Wisdome of Solomon. For in the framing of an Idol the folly of man pro∣ceeds even so. The carpenter stretcheth forth his Line,Jer. 9. 3. and mark's it out with his square,Sapient. 11. v. 13. he fits the corners of it, or he de∣scribes it with his Compasse; at length he makes it of the fashion of a man, and decks it in mans rayment, that it may be in the house. He heweth down Cedars, and taketh the Cypresse and the Oke, which he strengthneth for himself, among the Trees of the Forrest; He planteth an Ash and the rain doth nourish it, then shall it be for a man, to be burnt, for he will take thereof and warm himself, yea he kindleth it, and baketh bread, yea, he maketh a god and worshippeth it; He maketh it a gra∣ven Image and falleth down thereto; He burneth part thereof in the fire, with part thereof he rosteth flesh, he eateth thereof and
is satisfied, yea he warmeth himself and saith, ah, ah, I am warm, I have seen the fire; and the residue thereof he maketh a God, even his Graven Image; he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me for thou art my God, &c. But what madnesse think you is this, or to make such things that they should afterwards be afraid of, or to fear what they themselves made. If Images could feel or move, men would voluntarily adore those they made. Therfore Seneca a heathen, speaks it, though it be in a scoffing way. They wor∣ship the Idols of the Gods, they kneel down and pray to them, they adore them; and when they stand in awe of these, they de∣spise the Workmaster that made them. The number of the gods was so numberlesse amongst the Heathen, that there were almost more gods than men. In Boccace they are almost without number. Crinitus hath num∣bred 30000 of them.Boccac. in geneal. De∣orum. Varro reckoneth Ju∣piters onely, to have been 300. For there were gods of the upper house, Tutelary gods,Crinitus de honest. disc. l. 3. c. 14. Village gods, Houshold and Closet Gods so many, that Pliny breaks into these words. The company of gods is thought to be more than there are men, when as every man makes what gods he pleaseth,Plin. l. 2. c. 7. and makes Junos, and good angels which they adopt for them selves. Of corn only, at divers times differ∣ing in the maner of it, there were Goddesses made, called, Segetia, Tutelina, Proser∣pina, Nodotus, Volutina, Patilena, Ho∣stelina, Flora, Lacturtia, Maluta, Ruricina,
I do not name them all, for it troubles me for that they were not ashamed of them. The condition of their Gods, may make every man laugh. Flora, when she had been a Whore a long time, and by prosttuting her body, had gained wealth, by making the Common Wealth of Rome her heir by her Testament, she gave the name to their Feasts called Floralia. Iuno was both sister and wife of Iupiter. Fortune, Fornax, Muta, Fear, Pale∣nesse, Feavers, Priapus and Cupid, are not names of things to be adored, but of the crimes of such as adored them. But what shall I say of the crackings of the belly, of the privy gods, dunghill gods? What of the Trojans that adored a Mouse? of the Egypti∣ans that worshipped Onions and Garlick? Mephitis was in great honour amongst the Heathens.Tacit. 3. For in the plundering of Cre∣mona,Hist. c. 6. all the Temples of the gods and god∣desses were rifled, but the Souldiers out of their superstition spared this onely. But this was the goddesse of stinks. The manner of Worshipping in many was very cruell, in others very beastly. They offered men in sacrifices to the dead, and they fed the fire with mans blood as with oyl. That was a cu∣stome amongst the Trojans and Grecians,Aenead 11. & 2. Silic. l. 4. as Virgil saith; amongst the Carthagenians as Silicus; amongst the French as Lucan; a∣mongst the Moabites, and Canaanites as the Scripture writes; amongst the Romanes, though when Cornelius Lentulus, and Luci∣nus Crassus were Consuls, they abrogated
this wicked custome. Lastly, amongst the Jews, as we read in the books of Kings,2 Reg. c. 16. it was a custome. Lactantius reports from Pescenius Festus, That the Car∣thagenians being overcome by Agathocles King of Sicily,L. 1. c. 21. fearing left the cause was because they had intermitted to adore Sa∣turne, they offered unto him two hundred Noble children for one Offering. Moloch's Statue amongst the Jews was in the Valley of Gehennon, or Tophet: Children that were Sacrificed were shut within the Idol, and the fire was kindled; and that they might not be heard to cry, they beat Drums, and Cymbals. Their beastlinesse Priapus and Berecinthia may shew. The Image of the first, was stark naked. Of their beastly Priests, it is said thus. Nos pudore pulso stamus sub Iove Coleis apertis. When the Sacrifice was ended they that were present fell to promiscuous venery. In brief;August. de civ. dei. l. 6 c. 8. This disease, that Crime, this dis∣grace was professed in their adoration, that will hardly be confessed by torments in the vitious lives of men. Before the Horse∣litter of Berecinthia,August. de civ. D. l. 2. c. 4. on a Solemn day, there were washings, and such songs were sung by the most wicked Players, that I do not say the mother of the Gods, but the mother of any Noble persons,L. 1. c. 21. or any honest men, nay the mothers of the very comedians ought to be ashamed to hear.
But the Men of Lyndus held those solem∣nities to be violated, if by chance at their times of performing these rites, any good word had dropt from any of their mouths. I will say nothing of their South-sayings, looking into Entralls and other kindes of Divinations, as also of the fooleries of the Thalmudists, and Cabalists. Cato and Cicero that were Heathens laught at them them∣selves:Cicero de divin. l. 3. Petrus Galatinus de Arcanis Catholicae veritatis, Buxtorfius in Synagoga Judaica, have described these. Since therefore the Sacred worship of the Antients was so sim∣ple,In frag∣ment. cruel, and obscene; It is no wonder that Seneca writ, If a man had leasure to see what they do and suffer superstitiously, he shall finde them so unseemly for honest persons, so unworthy of free Men, so unfit for discreet men, that no man would doubt but they were mad, if they were mad in fewer numbers, but now they are so many that they are defended by their numbers from being thought to be mad. He that would read more of their gods, let him read Gyraldus in Syntagmate, Dempster in Antiquitat. Roman. and Selden de Diis Syris.
Part. II. There were many wicked lawes among the Antients. AS we have shewed the Religion of the Antients to be daub'd with many vices: so, since a Law is a sacred Decree, command∣ing things honest, and forbidding the con∣trary, It will be very easie to shew the same things concerning their Lawes. And be∣cause Solon and Lycurgus are said to have founded most famous Common-Wealths; And Plato and Aristotle to have written the best platforms of them, if we can convince them of wickednesse and injustice, I think I shall give satisfaction in this point. In Solons Common-Wealth, two things are chiefly observed. First, Wherefore, for ease of the poor, he abolished all former contracts for debts? Secondly, By what Law he would make them infamous, that, when there was sediti∣on in the Common-Wealth, held with nei∣ther side. The first was unjust, because he did not enjoyne his friends to restore the great sums of money they had taken up before, upon trust, being forewarned by him what de∣signe he had in hand; and without Exami∣ning the reasons of particular debts, he at
once abolished them all. The other was so, because it takes away the means of re∣pressing sedition in the Common-Wealth. For it must needs be that reconciliation be made by those that are mediatours between them both. Lycurgus directed all his Laws to Valour, and to erect a Warlike Govern∣ment. He published that it was lawfull for Men to rob for victualls, and he would not have them punished though they were ta∣ken in the act. He decreed that Boyes and Girles should wrestle naked, in publike; and that it should be lawfull for old mens young wives, to make choice of what young man they pleased, and to lie with them for to have children by them; and as peace is not ordained for war, but the contrary way; so the Common-Wealth should be in∣structed for Peace, rather than for War. They that in their childhood are addicted to ill things, in their youth, having gained a custome, they will forbear none how great soever. That Law that draws men on to de∣ceive in some things, doth invite men to deceive in all, and as oft as we can: Nor can robberies be better put in practice than under the protection of a Law, that doth not punish a Man for theeving, but for not doing it with dexterity. Lastly, to prompt men to Lust, and to permit Adulte∣ries, what an impiety this is? Plato hath de∣served the same reward that Lycurgus did, by the Law he made for breeding up young men and Maids in Schools. And by that
law he made, To have all things common, He decreed that forme of Government that was contrary to nature. If marriages were taken away, and men might indifferently use what women they pleased, all natu∣rall love between parents and children would be lost; and upon quarrells, very brothers would murther one the other; and those things shold be honest and lawfull, that are wont to be adjudged hainous & fil∣thy. The propriety of things contains matter both of vertues and vices, but the communi∣ty of them contains nothing but a liberty of vices. Aristotle seems the most absurd of them all. For I. He bade to cast forth deformed chilren; But Nature cannot desire the pro∣duction of any thing, and not love that it produceth. Can any man expect that they should spare the blood of other men,Lactan. l. . c. 23. that do not spare their owne? They cannot be thought innocent who cast their own bowels to the Dogs for a prey, and as much as lies in them, they kill them more cruelly than if they had strangled them. II. He enjoyned Abortion. But, for that, at Malta a woman was condemned to die. For she was thought to have taken away a Citizen designed for the Common-Wealth. Lastly, he commanded those pictures of the Gods to be kept, in which custome allowed laciviousnesse, otherwise they were to be
rejected. But men sin more by imitation of the Gods. Lucian confesseth plainly, that when he heard of the rapes and adulteries of the Gods, he fell in love with the same. And Cherea in Terence saith, that when he saw the Picture of Jupiter descending into the Lap of Danae, in a Golden Showr, he was provoked thereby to do the like. But what God? saith he, He that shakes the Heavens with a Noise, and should not I a contemptible man do the like? Yea, I did that, and willingly; For men mark more what Jupiter did, than what Plato taught, or Cato decreed. To this purpose are the Saxon Lawes, that are altogether as ab∣surd. For in doubtfull causes, when there wanted manifest proofs to confirm the truth, sometimes they used Duels, sometimes to make men touch burning iron, or scalding water, sometimes they cast them into the bottom of a deep river, or Keel-Haled them. They that were killed in duels were guilty; the conquerour was disgraced, if he did not kill him that was worsted: they that escaped in the other punishments were ac∣quitted; they that were caried to the bottom, were held to be innocent, they that swam on the top were guilty, as if the water rejected them.
Part. III. The cruelty of the Roman people was extreame. BUt let us proceed to the wickednesse of the Romanes, and let us observe whe∣ther they did not equall, or exceed the wickednesses of our times, or of those that went but little before us. But whether this or that do appear to be manifest, it will be false to conjecture from thence, that there is a generall decay of manners. First, therefore I shal speak of their cruelty, which I shall shew by the Jewes, Christians, and other Nations, and from the Romanes themselves, amongst themselves, as being invincible Arguments.Lipsuis de Constant. They killed of the Jews in the siege of one only City, Jerusalem 1000000. and they took captives 97000. In the time of Trajan innumerable compa∣nies of them were slain, saith Eusebius, Iuli∣us Severus, being sent by Adrian the Empe∣rour into Judaea, did almost depopulate the whole Countrey. For he beat down fifty most strong Castles, burnt nine hundred eighty five Cities & Towns, and slew 50000 Jews. As for the Christians, it was their name only that was condemned, and not any fault
they committed. Whence at Lyons there was a Table carried before Attalus, The Martyr, This is Attalus the Christian. In Asia they cried out against Polycarpus; Poly∣carpus hath confessed himself to be a Christi∣an:De civit. Dei. l. 18. c. 52. And so great were the Persecutions, that Augustine compares them to the plagues of Egypt. Under Nero, they were burnt for lights in the night. Lactantius writes of Dioclesian; No man can write the cruelty of this Savage Beast,Tacit in Annal. l. 5. c. 11. so much as it deserves, which lying but in one place, yet did rage with Iron teeth, all the world over; and did not onely dissipate the limbs of men, but brake their bones, and was mad against their ashes, that there might be no place for their buriall. Hie∣rom saith,In Epist. ad Chrom. & Heliod. that there was no day wherein there were not 5000 men slayn, thirty Ro∣man Bishops were put to death from Peter to Sylvester, who dyed Martyrs. And to speak all, I will, in three words, The whole world almost was polluted with the Sacred blood of the Martyrs,Sulpit. l. 2. Sacra. Histor. and it was never spilt more in any warrs. And if we should rec∣kon up the kindes of torments we might boldly use these verses in Virgil. Had I a hundred Tongues,Aeneid. l. 6. and mouths likewise, A voice of Iron, I could ner'e com∣prise Their forms of pains, or names of Torments shew.
They were burnt in Furnaces, they were cast into hot Oyle, they had their eyes puld out, their tongues cut out, they were cast to Beasts, they were wrapt in husks and gi∣ven to the Hogs, they were rosted at an easy Fire, and they were basted with Salt, and Vineger, they were cast headlong from Rocks, they were torn by Trees bound down, and presently let loose, &c. To touch upon other Nations.Lips. l. 2. de const. c. 22. Onely the second Carthagenian war. In Italy Spain and Sicily alone, it con∣sumed above 1500000 in lesse than seven∣teen yeers. And what speak I of warrs that were either waged or led on with the good successe of Many? Onely one Caius Caesar (Oh plague and ruine of mankinde) confesseth, and boasts of it, that he had slain in Battails, 1192000 men. To him we may joyn Q. Fabius, who slew 1000000 French men; and C. Marius who destroyed 200000 Danes; and in this latter Age Aetius who in that notable sight in Catalaunia, slew 160000 Hungarians. What shall I now say of Octavianus Augustus, who at Perusia, sa∣crificed on Julius his Altar 300 Citizens? What of Caracalla, who at once almost destroyed all Alexandria a most populous City? What of Volesus Messala, who when he had beheaded 300 in one day,Seneca l. 2. de Ira. c. 5. he passed amongst the dead bodies, looking proudly, as if he had done some brave action to be no∣ted, he spake aloud in Greek, O Kingly action? You shall finde in Lipsius,Admir. l. 4. c. 6. the cruell fact of
Sulpitius Galba. By a most damned treach∣ery, he destroyed almost all Portugall in a certain Valley, by sending out his Souldiers three wayes. Nor were the bruit beasts free from the cruelty of the Romanes. For Polybius writes; It is frequently seen, that when the Romanes take Cities, they do not onely kill men, but dogs also, and mangle o∣ther creatures. I will shew the cruelty they used against themselves, onely in their Civil Wars, the Reigns of their Emperours, and in their playings at sharps on the Stage. For should I mention what is sufficient, my Enchiridion would become a tedious Volume. For Sene∣ca writes,De iral. 2. c. 8. That wickednesse was grown so common, and was so prevalent in every mans brest, that innocence was not to be thought, to be rare but not to be all. And Tacitus speaks of those times onely. We read that when Petus Thrasca was commended by Arulenus Rusticus, and Priscus Helvidius by Herennius Senecio, that it was a capitall crime, and rage was not onely exercised up∣on the Authors, but also upon their books, the Office being committed to the Trium∣viri, that the Monuments of the most fa∣mous wits should be burnt in publicke As∣semblies and Market place. For by that fire they hoped to abolish the voyce of the Ro∣man people, the Liberty of the Senate, and the conscience of Man kinde; In the mean time, they expelled all learned Professours, and banished every laudable art, that no∣thing
that was honest might remain. We shewed indeed a great proof of our patience: And, as the old Common-Wealth saw what was the height of Liberty; So we see what is the extremity of slavery, the very liberty of speaking and hearing, being taken from us by their Inquisitions, that we had lost our very Memories with our Voice, if we had as much power to forget, as we have to hold our peace.Valer. l. 9. c. 2. What concerns Civil Wars, Sylla most cruelly made the whole City, and all the parts of Italy to overflow with ri∣vers of Mens blood in Civil-wars. He record∣ed in the publike Tables, four thousand 700 that had their throats cut by an Edict of a cruell Proscription, that the Memory of so famous a businesse might not be for∣gotten. He would have the heads of mise∣rable men that were cut off, brought before him, whilst their countenance was yet fresh with spirits, that he might feed on them with his eyes because he might not eat them without great wickednesse. He would not kill M. Marius the Praetor, (who was drawn to the Sepulchre of the Family of Lutatia by the cry of the Common people) before he had miserably plucked out his eyes, and broken all the parts of his body. Also he presently butchered M. Plaetorius, because he swounded at the punishment of Marius; A new Tormenter of Mercy, for with him it was held wickednesse, to be unwilling to behold wickednesse. Moreover he commanded four Legions of the contrary part, that kept their
trust, to be slain in a publike place that was in Campus Martius, and they did not at all ask for mercy from his deceitfull hand. Those whose lamentable cryes were heard in the City, their bodies were cut with the sword and cast into Tyber, which was over∣burdned with the multitudes of them, and the waters ran like blood. And when the Senate was amazed at that cry; He added, Senatous, let us do this? A few sediti∣ous fellows are punished by command. This man was formerly a great Officer under C. Marius, though afterwards he proved to be his enemy, and caused Marius his ashes to be dug up, and scattered into the River Anio. The Triumviri did not leave to fol∣low his example, for they exposed to the like Proscription 300 Senators & 2000 Gen∣tlemen. It is no wonder therefore that Saint Augustine writes. That in that War between Marius & Sylla,De C. D l. 3 c. 27. besides those that fell in Asia abroad, that in the very City the Streets, Market places, Theatres, Temples were full of dead bodies; that it was hard to say, when the Conquerors killed most, either before to get the victory, or afterwards, because they had obtained it. And Lipsius useth these words: Oh the Wickednesse! Than which the Sun nor did,De Const. l. 2. c. 24. nor can can see any greater from East to West; Let me perish, if you will not say that manity it self was perished in that cruell and savage Age. It shall suffice for the Empe∣rours to mention Caligula onely. For all the common shores of cruelty seem to have met
in this Man.Sucton. in Calig. He condemned many of good rank, first being deformed and stigmati∣zed, to the Mines, or to the keeping of High Wayes, or to wilde beasts, or else he shut them up like four footed beasts in dens, or caused them to be sawn in sunder. Nor were all used thus for great offences, but such as thought amisse of his Government, or because they had never sworn by his Gnius; He compelled Parents to be present at the punishment of their Children, and one of them excusing himself, because he was sick, he sent him a Horseltter. Ano∣ther, so soon as he had seen the execution, he presently set to a banquet, and used all waies possible, to provoke him to rejoyce and be merry. He would not kill him that had the charge of his businesse, and hunting sports, till for some dayes together, he made him be beaten in his sight, as he was bound in chains, and that his brains being corrupt∣ed offended him with the stink of them. When he would have a Senatour to be ton in pieces, he suborned some that should run upon him suddenly, when he came into the Court, and call him Traitor, and should wound him with pen knives, and deliver him over to others to rend him n pieces; and he would never be satisfied till he saw his limbs and bowels and joynts drawn through the streets, and then piled up upon heaps. He seldom suffered any man to be punished, but with frequent and small wounds, giving alwaies this com∣mon
precept, That he should be so wounded that he might feel his death. Being offend∣ed with the people that favoured not his actions, he cryed out; Oh that all the Ro∣man people had but one neck! Oft times when he eat or drank, he would cause men to be tormented before him, to make them con∣fesse. A Souldier that was the Heads-man, cut off all mens heads that he pleased, that were imprisoned. At Puteoli, when the bridge was consecrated, after he had called many men to him from the shore, he sud∣denly caused them all to be cast down headlong. At a great Banquet he sudden∣ly fell into a great laughter, the Consuls that sate neer him, did ask him pleasantly what he laughed at; At what else, saith be, but that I can with one Nod cause you both to be strangled. As often as he kissed his Wives or concubines neck, he added. So fair a neck shall be taken off, if I say the word; And he also boasted withall, That he would search out by wracking from his Caesonia, wher∣fore he loved her so much. Wherefore Se∣neca speaks rightly of him, I knew long since, that under him Humane affairs would come to that condition,Praefat. ad 4. Natur. quaest. that to be killed would be an act of mercy.L. 1. c. 26. Concerning C. Piso: see the same Author, de Ira. Sword playes on the Theatre, were ordained to purge the spirits of great men, in which sports men fought naked, nor was their fighting so delightfull, as the various wounds they made. This kinde of celebra∣tion
passed afterwards from the honoring of dead men, to honour living men with; and at length, they used these sacrifices in memory of private men, that left Legacies for that end. At last they ascended to mul∣titudes. For Caesar when he was Aedilis, shewed 320 Duels. Gordianus sometimes 500. Trajan, in space of 123 dayes without Intermission, had 2000. Nero caused 400 Senatours, and 600 Roman Gentlemen, to fight it out with the sword. Commodus him∣self was amongst these Sword players. But at first onely Slaves were put to it.Serm. Sa∣turn 1. 12. Yet that is most true that Lipsius writes. That mat∣ter began not unfitly, from funeralls, which indeed was the funerall, and plague of the whole World. I beleeve, nay I know, that no War ever brought so great misery and desolation to mankinde, as these playes for pleasure did: think with your selves, of the number of the dayes, and the men I spake of: I am a Lyar, if one Moneth did not cost Europe 2000 or 3000 mens lives.Orat. pro Sextio. Yet Ci∣cero testifies, that that kinde of shew was made and celebrated with great multi∣tudes, and all sorts of men, and in that spectacle the multitude delighd most, They were often angry with the Fencers unlesse one of the two were suddenly slain,Lactant. l. 6. c. 20. and as if they thirsted after mans blood, they hated delays. This must not be understood onely of the people, but this cruelty was observed even in their Vestall Nuns.
,
Decisions, and by the great troubles they put them to, that were admitted by them. In the Mines of Gold at Ictimulum, there were 50000 to dig;L. 2. N. H. c. 63. L. 33. c. 4. and in those that were by new Carthage in Span there were 40000. How they were used, Pliny describes at large. Moreover it is known what Verres did in Sicilie, what C. Graccus comming Victor from Sardinia, said. Sylla out of the lesser Asia every yeer had 20000 Talents; Brutus, and Cassius within two yeers exacted the Tribute for ten yeers, and Antonius did extort it in one yeers time. The sum a∣mounts to 200000 Talents, Pleminius that was Scipio his Tribunus plundered the trea∣suryes of Proserpina, that were untouched in any age before.Sueton. in Galba. c. 12 Sulpitius Galba, when he had melted a Crown of Gold, taken out of the old Temple of Jupiter, and was given to him by the Tarraconenses, whose weight was fifteen pounds, because there wanted three ounces in the weight, he compelled them to make it good. Julius Caesar when he was first made Consul, rob'd the Capital of 3000 pounds weight of Gold, and he laid up so much guilded brasse in the Treasurie. He took from Ptolemy alone,Sueton. in Julio c. 54. in his own name, and Pompeys, 6000 Talents. Nor did Tiberi∣us want this vice;Sueton. in Tiberio c. 49. For it is clear enough that C. Lentulus the Augur, who was very rich, for fear and grief was made weary of his life by him, and that he must make no heir when he died, but him: But, what was the basest act, he compelled one by threats
that when he was sick he should name him for his Heir,Fulgosus. and when he recovered after∣wards he killed him with poyson. Lastly, he went sometimes by heapes of Gold and Silver, and sometimes he would tumble naked in them. But it may be objected that it is no wonder that Mon∣sters had such vices. 'Tis true, Yet Vespa∣sian who was counted a good Emperour, was sick of the same disease. For he openly did exercise negotiations that a privtae man would be ashamed of; by buying only some∣things, that he might sell them afterwards for more. Also it is beleeved that he was wont of purpose to promote the most gree∣dy Officers, that when they were grown rich he might condemn them; and he was said commonly to use those for Sponges, that when they were dry he might wet them, and when they were well wet, he might crush them out. I will Speak no∣thing of his Custome upon urine, which when his son Titus accused him for it as disgracefull, he put to his nose a piece of silver collected from thence, and asked whether it stank of Pisse at all: and he ad∣ded moreover. That the smell of gain, was good from any thing. But it should seem that they were all subject to that vice.Sueton in Vespas. c. 16. For when the Aricini and the Ardeates, had yeelded to make the Romanes umpires in a controversie concerning Land, they decreed the fields to be their own. Also they re∣ceiving
moneys from some Cities to enjoy their Liberties, they gave them not their monies back again, yet they exacted tribute from them Cicero thought that so foul a fault in Goverment, that he saith, It were better to trust Pirates than the Senate. Wherefore Salvian seems to speak trne. The unhumane∣nesse of Covetousnesse was the proper vice of the Romanes: and well may that of Claudian to Ruffinus be applied to them. A cruel man whose mind doth burn for Gain,L. 7. de Providen∣tia. Nor all the Golden sands of Tagus can suffice, Pactolus wealth, and Hemus in his eyes Are small; this drunk, he thirsts with greater pain. Part. V. Infinite was the Luxury of the Romanes for Venery and Drinking. I Passe from their covetousnesse to their Incontinence, which I suppose I shal shew sufficiently in their Venery, Drinking, Eat∣ing, Buildings, and Apparell. That mani∣fold and horrid Venery they used, I will not speak of, that I may not offend chast ears. Saint Paul hath plainly noted that in his
Epistle to the Romans. Their Feasts alone called Floralia, may well shew that, where∣in Whores Prostitutes under some ceremo∣nies and Rites, ran naked through the streets, using obscene words and gestures, and exposed themselves for all men to look upon them. Ovid speaks thus, Young Maids and Men and boyes are they that do Gaze on them, and great part of th' Se∣nate too. Tis not nough to hear them speak whats naught, But we must see whats worse, as we are taught. Their drunkennesse is evidently detected by their long continued drinking, their great draughts, the multitudes of Bibbers, and the love of them, and also by the measure of their Cups. For continued drinking, they imitated the Lawes of the Greeks in drinking: whereof one was, to drink till the Morning star rose. Another, to drink so many healths as the maids Names had Letters in it, hence Mar∣tiall. Let Navia six, Justina seven bc, Lycas five, Lyda four, and Ida three. The greatnesse of their draughts. Nivel∣lius Torquatus, before Tiberius drank three
Gallons at one draught, and thence he de∣served to be called, Three Gallons. M. Cice∣ro the younger, drank two Gallons at one tug.Philip 1. M. Antonius writ of his own drunken∣nesse, and Cicero writ of him. Thou with those awes, those sides, that strong Fencer-like force of thy body, drankst so much wine at the Marriage of Hippia, that thou wert forc't in the sight of the Roman people to vomit the next day.Serm. 2. What shall I say of Cleopatra who at one draught drankup 3124 crowns? What of Clodius the son of Aesop the Tragedian? Horace speaks thus of him. The son of Aesop from Metella's ear Took out a Pearl that she was wont to wear, Was worth ten Solids, and the same he drinks Dissolve'd in Vineger, what ere he thinks. To cast it down the River were lesse fault, Or to have thrown it in a stinking vault. Also Firmus drank two Buckets full of wine. Adrian the Emperour speaks thus of Bnosus: He was not born to live, but to drink, and it was a common jear upon him when he was hanged, That a great vessell hangeth there, and not a man. Maximinus as Capito∣linus writes, drank often in one day, a vessel of wine of the Capitol measure, which con∣taind eight Gallons. Phagon drank more than an Orca, that is, a vessell for wine greater than the Amphora was.
Lastly there is an Epitaph made of one thus. Drunken Offellius Buraetius is this;Camer. cent. 1. c. 34 Who ever whilst he liv'd did either drink or pisse. As for the number of drunkards, and their love; It is well known that Tiberius gave to Piso the Praetorship, for drinking three nights continually together: and to Pomponius Flaccus the Province of Syria, and in his Letters he called them the most plea∣sant friends he had for all times. He also did prefer a man that was unknown and sought for the Quaestors Office, before the most Noble Men, for pledging at a Ban∣quet, an Amp hora of wine, that he drank to him. And at that time when the Lex Fan∣nia was published, the matter was come so far, that many of the people of Rome would come drunk into the Senate house and so consult of the affaires of the Common∣wealth. Also Seneca writes thus of women. They do not watch lesse,Natural quaest. 4. c. 13. they doe not drink lesse, and with oyl and wine they entise men, and they cast it up again by their mouthes, what they have taken in their entrals, refusing it; and by Vomit they measure the wine they drank, and they eat snow as well as men do, to cool their hot stomacks. As for their Utensils, they used not onely great Cups, but, as Am∣mianus saith, very heavy handles, and they were adorned with most pretious Emblems.
two Cups of this kinde made by Mentor aare workmen, cost 100000 Sesterii. Also there were some made of perfect Jewels.L. 22. Plin. l. 33. Hence Pacatus in Latin, unlesse that Riot had bang∣ed the yeer, unlesse that winter Roses swam upon the cups, unlesse Muscadels had Broken the Summer Ice in their capacious Jewels. And Cicero, in Ver∣rem. De benef. l. c. 9. Also there was a wine vessell made of one Jewel made hollow like a great Mazer with a handle of gold. Also Seneca, I saw their Crystall vessels, whose Brittlenesse increased their price; For the pleasure of all things, amongst ignorant people proceeds from that danger should make a man avoid them. I have seen Murrine cups: for Luxury were small,L. 37. c. 2. should not men vomit, and drink to one the other in capacious Jewels. Lastly, Pliny, The Luxury of that matter increaseth day∣ly: a Murrine stone that cost 80 Sestertii, was made a cup holding about three Sexta∣ry. C. Petronius is said to have broken one of this kinde that cost 300000 Sestertii, that he might difinherit Neros Table. A Matron not very rich is reported to have bought another for 150000 Sestertii. What if I should say more? Juvenal writes. He drinks in a Priapus made of glasse. And Pliny. They delight to engrave their lust upon their cups, and to drink by obscene waies.
Point. VI. The Gluttony of the Romanes in meats was extraordinary. I Shew the Roman Luxury in their meats, by four Arguments chiefly, drawn from their Vessels, Servants, Meats, and the quantities they eat. Their vessels were of two sorts, their Tables and their Dishes. They had Silver Tables, & some of Gold, & yel∣low ones that were made of Earth dug out Africa.Plin. l. 13. c. 15. Tully had one cost 10000 Sestertii Asinius Gallus had one cost 11000. Also that wood was thought worth a Senatours Estate,Sutton. which was 12000 Sestertii; the dear∣er,Octav. 42. the more knots it had by the unhappy∣nesse of the Tree.Seneca dele benefic. l. 7. c. 9. And Seneca had 300 such, as Dion reports. The feet they stood upon, were of Ivory; and that was held so necessa∣ry as Juvenal writes. A Turbet or a Doe, is nothing worth, And Oyls and Roses stink that are set forth. Unlesse the Table stand on Ivory feet, And a tall Libard Yawning make them sweet. To passe to their dishes,Plin. l. 33. c. 11. Drusillanus Ro∣tundus had one, (he was Free Man of Clau∣dius
the Emperour, it was of Silver, and weighed 500 pound weight, he had 8 more that weighed fifteen pound weight. Whilst Vitellius was Emperour, he had one, that ac∣cording to Budaeus account, cost ten times H. S. and Hottoman saith, 200 Sestertii. It was so great that Vitellius called it Miner∣va's Buckler. Mucianus called Vitellius, The More of Dishes. As for the multitude of their servants,Epist. 93. Seneca cries out, Good God, how many men doth one belly imploy! For there were whole troops of unhappy boys, that af∣ter their banquets were ended, were for other disgracefull uses in their chambers. There were whole heards of those that were out of use, described by their Nations and Colours; so that they might be all of the same age, and the first down of their chins alike, the same kind of hair of their heads, that none that had smooth hayr, should be set amongst curled locks: and that I may speak fully to the point, they did carefully or∣dain silver,Seneca de vitae brevi∣tat. c. 12. and they diligently girded the Coats of their exolete boyes, that they should be very careful, to see how the Boare died when the cook killed him, how nimbly the smooth faced boyes, when the sign was given, ran after their businesse, with what Art the Sheep were cut into small peices, how curiously the unhappy boys did wipe away the spittle off those that were drunk. But that which is most wicked; Tiberius Caesar promised to sup with Sestius Gallus, a (voluptuous old man, full of Lechery and prodigality,
whom Augustus formerly had marked with ignominy, and not many dayes before, Tibe∣rius had checked him before the Senate up∣on condition that he should not change or abate any thing of his common custome, And that they might have naked wenches to attend upon them at supper.Sueton. in Tiber. c. 42. To this, belongs their Multitude of Cooks, who first of all were hired at the rate of a Horse, but at length they grew to that height, that hardly any Mortall man was of more valew,Seneca ad Helvid. c. 10. than he that best knew how to drownd his I. s. Estate. But Apicius was the most famous of all those who professed to know Kitchen affairs, Who when he had spent a thousand Sestertii in his Kitchin, & had wasted so many Princes donations, and a vast tribute of the Capitoll, at severall banquets, when he was deep in debt, and oppressed by his credi∣ditours, then he was first forced to look into his estate. And he found he should have, when he had paid his debts, a hundred thousand Sestertii remaining for himself, and fearing that he must suffer great hun∣ger if he should live with a hundred thou∣sand Sestertii, he poysoned himself and died. As for their meats they had variety, and very costly. For our world would be two narrow for their Throats. For they va∣lued their dainty meats not by the taste, but by the cost. They were content with no meats but those were brought from the far∣thest East,Petat in paeg. or from Colchis, that was out of
the bounds of the Roman Empire, or came from those Seas that were noted for Ship∣wracks; and the greater price was, the more they were pleased with them. The com∣mon number of their Messes of meat was seven.Lampridius But Heliogabalus, made such a Feast, that had 22 Courses of huge dainties. Also it is reported that at a supper of his Brother Vitellius, made to entertain him, there were 2000 of the choycest fishes, and 7000 birds set upon the Table. And he also exceeded this at the dedication of his great Dish.Sueton. in vitel. c. 12. For in this, there were the Livers of Giltheads, the brains of Pheasants and Peacocks, the tongues of crimson winged birds, the small guts of Lampries, brought as far as from Carpasium and the Spanish Seas, by Marriners and Gallies, and these he mingled together. I might adde to these one Clodius the son of Aesop the Tragaedian, a young man was mightily Luxurious;Valer. l. 9. c. 1. For it is certain, that he bought at vast rates, the best singing birds, and served them up at sup∣per for Gnatsappers: and he was wont to dissolve pearls of great valew in vineger, and drink them, desiring by this means, as fast as he could, to cast away a large patri∣mony as a sore burden. What shall I say now of Caligula, who in riotous expences ex∣ceeded the wits of all the prodigall persons that were, inventing most hideous kinds of meats and suppers, for he would sup up the dearest pearls dissolved in vineger, and would set bread and meats of gold before
his Guests, saying, that a man ought to be either very thrifty, or an Emperour. What shall I write of Asinius Celer, who bought one Barbel for 6000 Sestertii? of Lucullus, who at one sudden supper, that he enter∣tained Tully and Pompey at, who thrust themselves in to see what feasts he made, ex∣pended 50000 Drachmes, that is 5000 Crowns as Budeus makes the reckoning? Lastly,Seneca Epist. 95. what shall I say of Octavius who bought a very great Barbel for 5000 H. S. (wherefore should I not set down the weight of it,Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. c. 26. and provoke the gluttonous throats of others? They say it was four pound weight and a half.) And by a new ex∣ample, he bred Guiltheads in the sea, like corn upon the ground. In a word. These things are incredible if we compare them with our age. Yet the Roman Luxury was most wanton about Fishes and birds. For as for them, to say nothing of that of Ju∣venal. Whether that Oysters were neer Sandwitch bred. In Campania, or Apulia fed, They knew by tasting once, and more, They'd tell by sight which was Echinus shore. I will speak nothing also of that in Ammi∣anus Marcellius.Lib. 28. At their banquets they of∣ten called for scales to weigh the Fish and Birds were brought to the table, and Dor∣mice,
who were sometimes very great, which was tedious to those that were present, and formerly not used; but now it is continu∣ally commended, especially when as there were neer thirty Sciveners with their boxes and writing tables that assisted them. A Barbel seemd not fresh enough, unlesse he died in the hands of one of the guests. Wherefore the fishes swam in the Chamber, and were caeed under the Table, and are presently set upon the Table. An Elops in the banquets of Severus,Seneca Na∣tur. qust. l. 3. c. 17. was brought in by Servitors with Crowns on their heads, and a Trumpetter with them, as if it had not been a seast for delight but some tri∣umph of the Gods.Macrob. Satur. 3. 16. Also so great was their curiosity about their Fish-ponds, that it is hard to set it forth. In their Fish-ponds they had some Fish would come when Caesar was but named. Hitius sold his Manor house, that had many fishponds for 40000 Sster∣tia.Varro de re rustica c. 17. Cato the Tuto. of Lucullus sold the fish came out of his Fish ponds, for as many. And if that price of the Fish ponds Columella men∣tions,Lib. 8. c. 16. be to be granted, it was for 400000. though they were something lesse curious a∣bout birds;Gll. l. 13. c. 8. yet they were riotous enough. In the time of Favourinus the Governor. Victu∣allng houses and Luxury, held no supper to be costly, but where men eat freely; then that should be taken off, and better and more costly meat should be set on. Then that was accounted to be the principall part of the supper, amongst them, that made cost and
loathing of meats to serve for sports. Who denied that men ought to eat any bird ex∣cept Gnatsappes: as for other birds, and crambd fowls, they thought the banquet fordid and deficient, unlesse so much was set upon the Table that they might fill their bellies with the hanches of them on the lower parts; but those that eat the upper part of birds or crambd fouls, they thought they had no palate. They were most de∣lighted with Crimson coloured birds called Phaenicopteri, Peacocks, Thrushes and Pige∣ons. Hence it was that they sed whole companies of these, and they set a vast price upon them.L. 3. c. 6. For Peacocks, as Varro reports, Aufidius made above 60000 pieces of Money in a yeer. 5000 Thrushes were sold at three denarii, and that part of his farm yeelded 60000. As for Pidgeons, each pa of them in Varroes dayes was wont to be sold for a thousand sestertii, and in Columell his dayes there were some that sold two birds for 4000 pieces of Money.L. 3. c. 8. As for the quantities they did eat, Maximinus sometimes eat fourty pounds of flesh in a day:Capitolinus Cordus saith, sixty pounds. Claudius Albinus. eat so much as it is incredible. For he eat 500 did Figs, which the Greeks call Callistruthi; & 100 Peaches of Campania, and ten Melons of Osia, and 20 pounds of Grapes of Lece, and a 100 Gnatsappers, and fourty Oysters. Lastly,Vopsc in Aureli. no. Phago, of whom I spake before, eat at one dinner, a whole Boar, a hundred loases, a Wether and little a Hog. I will say no more. Though I might speak of their
bread and their sauces, but I should be too tedious. For a conclusion, it may be ob∣served that this force of Luxury grew strong as the Empire did. For in the time of the se∣cond Panick war, Cato complained, that a City could not stand, in which a fish was sold for more then Bes:Sueton in Tiber. c. 34. and Tiberius com∣plained that in his dayes three Barbels, were sold for 3000 pieces of money. Point. VII. The Luxury of the Romanes in their Build∣ings was extream. THeir riotousnes in their buildings is seen partly in their publike, & partly in their private houses. Amongst the Transient pub∣like houses, that offer themselves, in the first place, the excesse whereof would asto∣nish us, are the Theatre of Marcus Scaurus, and the bridge of Caligula. That was a tem∣parary work, and the use thereof was to be, scarce fr one moneth, yet it had three Floors,Plin. l. 36. c. 15. in which there were 360 Marble pillars. The Lowest part of the Theatre was all of Marble, the middle was of glasse, and the uppermost was guilded: The inferiour pillars were fourty foot long, and between them there were 3000 brazen Statues. The whole theatre was so capacious, that it would
contain 80000 Men. Caligula built a Bridge,Sueton. in in Caligula c. 19. all the space through between the hot Bathes, and the City Puteoli almost 3600 paces, procuring from all places, Merchants Ships, and fastening them with Ancres in a double row, and cast∣ing earth upon them, and making the forme of it like to Via Appia. He went up∣on this Bridge forward and backward, for two dayes together. The first day he rid up∣on a Horse with trappings, and Crowned with a Crown of Oke, and with an Ax, and a Target, and a sword, and with a horsemans coat, very richly made. The next day fol∣lowing, he rode in the habit of a Coach∣man, in a Coach with two gallant Horses, representing Darius, a Boy one of the hosta∣ges of the Parthians, the Praetorian Troop, accompanying him, and in Chariots were some bands of his friends. Wherefore that work seems to have been made for that end, that it might be destroyed. Caracalla also, wheresoever he did or purposed to stay in Winter, caused Am∣phitheaters, and playhowses to be builded, and suddenly they were to be demolished: amongst those that lasted, it shall suffice me to make mention onely of the Theater of Ti∣tus.Ammian. A man could hardly see to the top of it, and a whole river of wealth was spent in the building of it, wherefore Martial writes. Caesar's Amphitheater hath the Name. Let all give place, this doth deserve the fame.
And though such stately structures consum∣ed infinite wealth, yet if we regard the fur∣niture, and such things as were employed besides, we shall finde that the cost they were at, would have served for great Cities. And that the Magistrate did prodigally wast in Theatres, Playes, Wrestlers, Fencers, and such kindes of men all their patrimony, that they might win the peoples liking for an howers time. In a word; The workman∣ship was more than the matter. Nero, to shew his wealth to Thiridates King of Arme∣nia, covered all the Theatre with gold. & the very hangings that hung up, were of purple, and bossed with golden Stars, whence that was called a Golden day, and Lucretius all udes unto it. Yellow and Golden Hangings commonly, And murry coloured in the Theatres Hung, twinckling like to stars within the sky. Also Caligula when he set forth some principall Sports,Sueton. in Calig. c. 18 Vopiscus. in Probo. He commanded that the floore round about, should be made with Minium and Chrysocolla; Probus com∣manded to let loose at once 1000 Ostriches, 1000 Stags, as many Bears, 1000 Dogs, with wild Goats and many other beasts, and at these sports he gave them to the people by way of Magnificence▪ and it was free for eve∣ry one to kill as many as he could: And to add to this; The next day he caused to be
shewed openly a 100 he Lyons, a 100 Leo∣pards of Africa, as Many of Syria, a 100 she Lions, and 300 Bears. And Titus, who though he were called the delights of man∣kinde, did the like. All kindes of beasts,Martial. that on the Mountains be, Caesar, thy Theatre affords to thee: The Rocks did creep, the woods did run, Men guesse, Such was te Wood of the Hesperides. But Heliogabalus was the maddest man of them all:Lampridius For it is reported of him that he made at these sports, his Ships store in Channels that ran with Wine. And Cari∣nus was not far short of him. For Calphurni∣us writes thus of his playes. Not onely monsters that in woods are fed But also such as in the seas are bred. I saw sea Calves and Bears, and Horses fight, Ill shapen creatures, yet their names were right. I will say nothing of those Lageries that were cast amongst the people of all kinds of things,Sueton in Neron. c. 11. when Nero reigned, and this was done daily with some thousands of each. Multitudes of all kinds of birds, Tickets for Corn, Garments, Gold, Silver, Jewels, Pearls, Painted Tables, Slaves, Cattell, and wilde Beasts made tame, and lastly Ships, Islands, Fields. And if I shall add that private men
did such things,Vopiscus in Carino. that Milo spent three pa∣trimonies, in these vanities. Junius Messala gave his estate to stage playes, and not to his posterity; will not all men think that they were mad? Vopiscus speaks thus, I therefore writ this that those who should set forth stage plays, and sports hereafter, might be ashamed, and that they should not defraud their Heirs, & spend their estates on Players and vaia fellowes. What I said of Theatres, I may say the same of their Baths and Tem∣ples. For though they in Artimedorus his dayes, were nothing else but passages to their feasts, and so they were in other ages too; Yet was there an infinite number of them, and the ornaments were too super∣fluous. Agrippa when he was Aedilis, built a 170 of them.Lib. 36. Pliny writes, that in his dayes they were infinite. Cassiodorus saith, they were wonderful great.L. 16. Olimpiad in Excerp∣tis. Ammianus saith they were built in a Provinciall way. Dioclesian's con∣tained 1600 seats, all made of polished Mar∣ble. It appears by Seneca his Epistle, that their ornaments were superfluous.Epist. 86. For when he had described the bath of Scipio Africa∣nus, he breaks out into these words. But now who is there, that would be at the charge to be so washed; He seems to himself to be poor and base, unlesse the walls shine with great and pretious circles; unlesse Marbles of Alexandria be rough cast with Pargeting of Africa, unlesse it be painted over with a great deal of labour, and varied picture-like, unlesse the roof be covered with glasse;
unlesse the Thasian stone, that was former∣ly a rare fight in any Church, be layd round our fishponds; unlesse the water run forth by Silver Cocks; and yet I speak of onely common Conduit pipes. What shall I say when I come to the Baths of the Libertines? What multitudes of Statues were there? How many pillars that supported nothing, onely they were set for ornament, and for greater cause of expence? We are grown so dainty, that we scorn to tread on any thing but jewels.In Antiq▪ Rom. Rosinus adds further that their walls were annoynted with the most fragrant Balsoms, and sprinkled with the sweetest Oyls. There were at Rome 421 Temples. And they were all almost built of huge marble, shining with guilded roofs, wherein Jewels shined forth, & appeared like stars, set at severall distances. Augustus be∣stowed 16000 pounds weight of Gold upon the seat of Jupiter alone, set in the Capitol, and 500000 Sestertii,Dio 55. in Jewels. And Domiti∣an adorned the Capitol it self so richly that Martiall thought, If that the Heavens were for to be sold. And that the Gods should morgage all they hold. Yet could they not equall this largesse. He add's, Augusta thou art forc'd to stay. For Joves Cantore hath not wherewith to pay. And indeed in gilding thereof he spent above 12000 Talents; and the Gate was
covered over with plates of Gold, untill the Reign of Honorius. Nor did the Temple of Peace, erected by Vespasian come short much of this. For Herodian writes, that it was not onely the largest and the most beautifull of all works in the City, but it was the richest, adorned with orna∣ments of Gold and silver.L. 7. ex∣cidii. But Josephus saith, All things were conferred and disposed upon this Temple, to finde which, Men went before over all the world.L. 34. c. 8. Lastly, Pliny sait, Of all things, I have spoken of, the most fa∣mous of all in the City, are now dedicated by the Emperour Vespasian in the Temple of of Peace. And because they thought that Statues of brasse would make them conti∣nue for ever, they much affected them also, yet so that in them they discovered their Luxuriousnesse. For at last they exceeded so much in them, that there were almost as many of these statues in the City, as there were living men.Cassiod l. 7. They were not onely laid over with plates of Gold, but some were made of Silver, and some of pure Gold. Do∣mitian would let none be placed in the Capitol for him, unlesse they were of Gold or of silver and they must be of such a weight. And Commodus had his Image of a 1000 pounds weight.e. Statius seems to in∣timate that weight, when he writes. Give to the Capitol of lasting Gold, Faces of Hundred weights, we may behold.
Thus much for publike prodigality.Seneca de benef. 7. 10. Two things principally shew their Luxuriousnesse in private matters. Their houses, and housholdstuffe. These were larger than some Cities. They supposed their howses to be narrow,Valer. l. 4. c. 6. that were not larger than Cincina∣tus his fields. Some had Orchards on the tops of their houses, and others had woods that grew upon their roofs; from thence their roots sprung up,Seneca E∣pist 122. whence their aspiring tops would have but reached from the ground. Vast naturally varied pillars brought out from Egyptian sands, or from the desarts of Africa, supported the galle∣ries or large Parlours of some of the com∣mon people.Seneca E∣pist. 115. If you ask the number of them, Martial speaks boldly, Houses by hundred pillars are supported. If the price, Crassus durst write, that ten pillars cost 100000 pieces of money.Valerius The house that Gordianus built had 200 pillars for one walking place.Capitol in Gordia∣no. The beams were guilded, and the roofs layd over with plates of Gold, also their Chambers & Vessels were guilded. The vaults of their parlours were made to turn at pleasure,Seneca E∣pist. 50. that one might succeed another, and so they changed their roomes so often as they changed their mes∣ses.
I speak not of their Groves which in their chambers spring; Wherein with warling notes in's time each bird doth sing. Heliogabalus in his feasting-rooms,Lampridius loaded his Parasites with Violets and other How∣ers, so that some of them died by it, when as they could not be drawn forth presently. But above all the rest, Domitian, Nero, and Caligula were mad in their buildings. Plu∣tarch writes of him thus; If any man ad∣mire this magnificent furniture of the Capi∣tol, how, should he but behold one gal∣lery of Domitian, or a Palace, or a bath, or his room to sup in of so many inches, would he cry out with Epicarmus! He was not bountifull or liberall, But rather to be called prodigall. Suetonius, thus sets forth, Nero his Gol∣den house.C. 31. The entrance of it was, where a Colossus stood with his Image, a hundred and twenty foot high. It was so large that the gallery was three miles, and there was a Pool like to a Sea, set about with build∣ings like Cities. Also there was the Countrey diversfyed with Fields, Vine∣yards, Pasture grounds and Woods, with multitudes of all kinds of cattell and wilde beasts, in the other parts all things were daubed over with gold, adorned with Jew∣els, and with Cases of pearls. The vaulted
Parlours were set with Ivory Tables, that were made to turn, that Flowrs might be scattered; and they were made hollow that Unguents might be sprinkled upon them. The chief of their dining rooms were made round, and they were carried about day and night as the world is. When he had ended such a house, and consecrated it, he com∣mended it thus by saying, that now he be∣gan to dwell like a Man. The same speaks thus of Caligula, that he made Foists of Ce∣dar,Chap. 37 and their Castles were of Jewels, their Sails of divers colours, with large Baths, Galleries, and Parlours, and with great va∣riety of Vines, and apple Trees, and in these he would sit at meat, & passe over the shores of Campania in the day time, with danc∣ings and Musick. In the buildings of his Countrey Palaces, and Mannors, he set all reason aside, striving most to do that which men though impossible to be done, and therfore buildings were made in troublesome and deep Seas, Rocks of the hardest flint were cut up, and plain fields were raised as high Mountains,Plin. l. 33. c. 11. and tops of Mountains were levelled like plain fields, all done with wonderfull expedition, For if they delayd, it cost them their lives. As for hou∣sholdstuff,Lampridius it shall suffice to say that Caesar lay in a Bedsted of Gold. And that Helio∣gabalus had not onely a golden plough set with Jewels,Plin. l. 33. c. 3. but he made water in vessels of Myrrha Stones and of Onyx stones. Antoni∣us, in despite of Nature vilified Gold, a work
hee deserved to be condemned for, by proscription; and Bassa did his excrements in Gold. Moreover it is true, that candle∣sticks have been sold for 400000 peices of money. And there is no doubt but that Ho∣ratius had his Whores in a Chamber made of transparent Glasse.C. 43. Of Tiberius, Suetonius speaks thus. He adorned his chambers with Tables and Prints of lascivions Pictures and Images placed here and there. Point VIII. The Luxury of the Romanes in their gar∣ments was extreme. I Shall shew their Luxury in Clothing, by two Arguments, namely, the trim∣ming of their bodies, and the clothing of them.Natur. quest. 7. c. 31. The former was so curious, that Se∣neca writes, All that is left of good man∣ners we deface by our Levitie, and trimming of our bodies; we exceed Women in curiosi∣ty, we that are Men put on Whorish colours that civill Matrons ought not to weare, we stop as we go, by a tender, and soft man∣ner of going, and we do not so much go as creep. And Julius Caesar was not onely diligently shaved and barbed, but he was plucked also as some upbraded him;Sueton. c. 45. Nero was so shamelesse in his decking, and
trimming of himself, that his locks were alwayes layd in order: and in his voyage in∣to Greece, he let them hang down be∣hind the crown of his head.Sueton c. 51. Otto was wont to shave his face every day, and to smere it with wet bread, as the same Authour reports, and that he used from the first put∣ting forth of his downy hairs, that so he might never have a beard. What concerns their garments, Horten∣sius thought it a capital crime, because a plait was changed upon his should er, from the place it should be. Lucullus affirmed that he had 5000 short cloaks at home.Horat. It was their common custome to shift their clothes oftentimes in a day,Ep. 9. & Nero was ne∣ver seen twice in one garment. A cloke called Lacerna cost 10000 Sestertii. Nonnius had one Ring,Plin. l. 37. 16. Valued at 20000 Sestertii. The custom was for all of them to adorn their fingers with rings, and to have a Jew∣el on every joynt. Charinus wore six upon every finger, and he did not lay them by in the night. And Probus saith, that Luxury had found out Summer Rings, and winter rings. And this was used promiscuously amongst all.Seneca de Benef. 7. c. 9. Women had silk Garments, if they may be called Garments, that could neither defend their bodies or their chastiry. When they had put on these, a woman al∣most naked would swear she was not naked. The trimming and Garments of Lollia Pau∣lina, the Wife of Caligula, and that at or∣dinary banquets sometimes, was valued
at 400000 Sestertii. Hierome writes that one string of Pearls was worth many Man∣nours.In vita Pauli E∣remit. de habitu mu∣liebri. c. 9. Tertullian saith, that upon one Necklace 10000 Sestertii were strung, and that her tender neck wore upon it, whole Groves and Islands. Julius Cesar bought one Pearle, for 60000 Sestertil, that was bought for Servilia Brutus his Mother.Suoton. c. 59. And if you respect the Multitude; I see, saith Seneca, Pearls,De benef. 7. c. 9. not in every ear one (for now their ears are used to carry burdens) they are cou∣pled together, and others are placed over them, Womens madnesse cannot subdue their husbands sufficiently, unlesse they hang two or three Patrimonies at their ears on both sides.L. 2. c. 35. If you seek for the place. Ter∣tullian saith, They wear them upon their feet also, and that not only on the Latchets of their Pantofles, but all over their Startups. For it is not now suffi∣cient to wear Pearles, unlesse they may tread upon them, and walk upon them as they go. Lastly, if we regard their Looking-Glas∣ses, one cost sometimes more than the dow∣ry of the Antients was,Seneca. Natur. quest. l. 1. c. 17. that was publikely paid for the daughters of the poorer Em∣perours. Nor was that dowry sufficient for Free-mens daughters, to buy them a Glasse, which the people of Rome gave to Scipio his daughter. And that was 11000 pieces of Money. And further, the glasses of Servants cost somtimes 10, somtimes 20000 pieces of mony.
Not to make profit by, as Nicias the richest of the Graecians was wont to do, but only to keep company with,Athen. 6. when they went abroad. And thus much for the Luxury of the Romans, which C L. Meursius, and the Noble Kobi∣crzycus have sufficiently described. As much might be spoken of their Pride, Boast∣ing, Flattery, Ingratitude. For they cal∣led the City Rome, a Goddesse, and they placed their Emperours amongst the Gods; and they expelled those that deserved ex∣cellently well of the Common-wealth, Ca∣millus and Scipio. The five Cornelii are so many noted Examples of an unthankfull Countrey. But because Authors are full of examples of these vices, and our age wants not the like to oppose against them, I passe them over. Point. IX. The Justice, Fortitude, and Prudence of the Romanes was nothing. MAny suppose that the Romanes went before other nations for their Justice, Prudence and Valour; but they are decei∣ved. For if we regard these joyntly, all ver∣tues are linked together, by a certain band, so that he that hath one cannot want the rest.
But we have already shewed the many vices of the Romanes, and if we take them severally, neither of them can truly be at∣tributed to the Romanes;Lactant In∣stit. l. c. 10 Not Justice. For how should they abstain from blood, who adored bloody Gods, as Mars and Bllona? How shall they spare their own Parents that adore Jupiter that expelled his Father? or their own children, who worship Saturn, that devoured his own? How shall they keep chastity that adore a naked and an adulte∣rous Goddesse, and one that was a prostitute almost amongst the Gods? How should they abstain from rapine and deceit, who were acquainted with Mercury his theeving qualities, who taught them, It was no De∣ceit to deceive any man, but it was Wit? How should they refrain lust, who adored Jupiter, Hercules, Bacchus, Apollo, and the rest, whose Whoredoms and Adulteries, and Villanies towards Males and Females, are not only known to Schollers, but are also acted upon the Stages, and are sung up and down, that all men may be well acquainted with them? Can there be any just men amongst these things? Who though they should be naturally good, yet their Gods would teach them injustice? For to please that God you adore, you must use those things you know that he is pleased with, and so it falls out, that their Gods frame the mindes of those that adore them, to be as they are themselves: For the most religious worship is to imitate. As for their
Prudence, I dare say openly with the most Generous Gentleman Andreas de Rey.De consil. & Consul∣tatione. If the Counsels of the Romans, as they are in part described by Livy, and partly by Dion, and other very grave writers, should be com∣pared with those, which since a hundred yeers have been invented and undertaken in Spain, Italy, and Venice, in part since it was a Common-wealth; France, Germany, Eng∣land, Poland, whether they concerned peace or war, and are noted by Commineus, Guicciar∣dine, Sleiden, and also by some new wri∣ters of the French History, Mtaranus, and others in some parts we must confesse that this age for readinesse and Acutenesse of Inventi∣on, and exact dexterity of judgement, doth not onely equall but exceed Antiquity. And in∣deed I cannot conceive how they were wise men, who destroyed the Common Wealth of their choisest men, in sword playes upon the Stage, that powred forth vast treasures upon things of no valew, and exercised all manner of cruelty both upon their own peo∣ple and strangers. As for their Valour; As it is not the pu∣nishment that makes a Martyr; So, not fight∣ing, but the cause makes a valiant man. If Justice be set aside, Kingdoms are nothing but great Thefts. Wherefore Pirats being asked by Alexander, By what law they did it, they answered, By the same that he did.
And the Poet calls him, Earths fatall mischief, for that he did strike, Like unto Thunder all the world alike, Unluckie to the Nations— The same may be applied to the Ro∣manes. For to passe over Mithridates and Galgacus, Enemies to the Romans, of whom he speaks in his Epistle to Arsaces.Tacitus in vita Agri∣colae. The Romanes wage war with all, but they are more fierce against those where they hope to get the greatest booties, when they have conquered them. And Galgacus saith to his con∣federates, These Plunderers of the World, when they have plundered all they can on land, they Rove the Sas; if their Ene∣my be rich, they are covetous; if he be poor, they are ambitious; for neither East nor West can satisfie them. The war they first made against the Carthagenians was by reason of the Mamertini; it is certain almost that it was unjust. Nor can a heap of cutthroats, win the name of a civill Society, by their good successe, though they make a Cove∣nant. The same was don afterwards in Sardinia, when the Carthagenians had been com∣pelled to pay 1200 Talents. Moreover if if we be not called the lesse valiant because we manfully endure troubles and sharp mi∣series, our Martyrs may be preferred before
the Romans. For (to let men passe) chil∣dren and maids have silently conquered their Tormentors, and the fire it self could not make them grone. And Eusebius speaks of Dorotheus,L. 8. c. 6. Of all those that ever were amongst the Greeks, or Barbarians, famous for the greatnesse of their Mindes, and that are renowned in the mouths of Men, none can be compared with the divine and notable Martyrs of our age, Dorotheus and his fel∣lowes that were servants to the Emperours. If they object their defending of their Coun∣trey, we shall presently answer them with the examples of the men of Callis under Philip Valesius: and with the examples of the Dutch and others; who devoted themselves for their Countreys good. Again if we shall recollect the Acts of the Britains, French,L. 5. P. l. c. 5. 1. Germans, of Pyrrhus, and of the Carthagenians, against them, we shall finde these inferiour to them in very few things. He that desires to see an exact comparison between the Britains and the Romans, let him read Rawleghs History of the World. Moreover if unity be respected amongst ver∣tues. It is most certain that there was no ex∣ample of Amity amongst the Greekes or Romans that may be compared with the ex∣amples of Marcus Tarvisanus, and Nicolaus Barbadicus, Senatours of Venice. Alexander de Galtis, hath described it, prefixing before it an Historicall Argument.
Point. X. And the last, It is probable as some think that the Church shall be in greater glory upon the earth yet, than ever it was before. THough the matter be as I have shewed, yet many places of Scripture are ob∣jected, which seem clearly to speak the contrary of the last times.Matth. 24. 12. And in∣deed it is expresse in Saint Matthew, Because iniquity shall abound, the charity of many shall wax cold. When the Son of Man comes shall he finde faith in the Earth?Luc. 18. 8. In Saint Paul, The spirit speaks expresly that in the latter times some shall fall from the faith.1 Tim. 4. v. 1. vers. 17. Wicked men shall grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. In Saint Pe∣ter,2 Peter. 3. There shall come Scoffers in the last days, walking after their own lusts, &c. But all this cannot evince so much as to subvert our Opinion. And I may answer to those places, both in generall and in speciall. Generally, I. For though it were true that about the end of the world, Mens maners should grow worse, yet it follows
not, that therefore, there was an universall perpetuall decay. II. It cannot be understood how we shall expect a conversion of Jews and Gen∣tiles, and yet mens manners should grow worse. III. The last dayes seem not to mean those that are neerest to Christs coming, but for all that time that is between his first and second mming.Isa. 2. 2. So in Isaiah. And it shall be in the last dayes, when the Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be set in the top of the Mountains and lifted above the hills; that all Nations shall come unto it. Man is a little World, and as his age is divi∣ded into many parts, so is the age of the World divided into many periods. There∣fore as old age onely may equall all the other periods past; so may the last times also.Job 42. v. 12. 16. Nor may that seem strange, For the time from Jobs restitution untill his death, is called his last age, though it compre∣hends a 140 yeers. IV. The last dayes may be taken for the latest,C. 2. v. 28. whence as Joel speaks of Prophe∣sies,C. 2. v. 17. And it shall be after that, saith he. Peter in the Acts of the Apostles pronounceth the same by saying, that shall be in the last times. And that appears most clearly in the Prophecie of Jacob preceding his death. For he promiseth to certifie unto his sons,
what should happen in the last dayes. Yet he sets, between those times, the taking away of the Scepter from Judah, and the comming of Shiloh; Wherefore the last times seem not here onely to be meant, but also as a learned man explains it in his Comment upon the Epistle of Jude, the Kingdom of Christ; And thus much for the generall. In speciall, I. The Praediction of S. Paul, concer∣ning forbidding to marry, is fulfilled in Eustatius, the Tatiani, Marcionists, Manichees Catharists, and Montanists. The same reason serves for the other. For he doth not compare his age with ours, but rather teacheth us what shall be the con∣dition of the kindgom of Christ. Nor is that increase of wickednesse joyned with the suc∣cession of time, any thing to a universall and perpetuall ruine of nature. For as some fall off to wickednesse, others hold the faster to what is good. And S. Paul himself saith, But they shall proceed no further, but their folly shall be made manifest unto all. II. The Prophesie of Peter came to passe then in Judes times:vers. 9. for Jude useth almost the very same words, and the difference is no more but this, that one foretells it, and the other shews it fulfilled. III. The predictions of Christ are to
understood, concerning the Persecutions of the Christian Religion, and the subversion of the City of Jerusalem, and in this sense, Maldonat and Aretius alleadge Saint Pauls words, 2 Tim. 4. v. 6. Those words in Saint Luke signifie no∣thing else, than that from the time that Christ asscended into Heaven, untill his coming again, Men will be alwaies incredu∣lous. Divines interpret them, and Jansenius saith, They do not onely signifie Paucity, and want of faith in men, who shall be found alive in the last day, but also in men of all times. Some things also are alleadged for the co∣ming of Antichrist: but of this subject you may read Whitaker, Downam, and o∣thers. The most certain Argument; is the remo∣ving of that which hindereth, or the over∣throw of the Romane Empire, which the po∣pish party,In Memor. as Thomas, Lyra, Ribera, and Salmeron confess to be done already.Fran. l. 2. Histor. Who succeeded into his place, Pasquier, Matchi∣avel and Sigonius shew.Flor. l. 3. de regno. But the clearest of them all is Lipsius, whose most memorable words are these.Ital. l. 4. Wonderfull is Gods goodnesse to this City: When he took away the force of arms, he gave force to the Lawes: When he would not let the sword rule, he granted power to the Church; and so al∣so he made it to be the honour, the defence and the support of things. But they say that old Senate is not! Not that, but an
other, and behold in that Purple, select Judges, out of all our World, who are to be regarded for their Manners, Prudence, and Arms. Should the old Cynick live again, & should see this Assembly, he would make no question, to compare it with Kings or Noble∣men. What are the Tributes? Not so great but they are more innocent also, and more willingly paid. What are the Embassies, of Nations? Nor are they wanting, but they come from the known and unknown world, so wide doth this Majesty spread it self and hence they fetch Rights and Lawes of Sacred things. Kings and Princes come and how themselves, and submit their obedient heads to this one head. But as it is no doubt but that Antichrist is come, and is also re∣vealed to the world; so, many places of Scripture, according to some pious In∣terpreters, seem to intimate the neernesse of his Ruine, upon which they say, will fol∣low such a peace of the Church, as the like was never before. To this peace some adjoyne, a more full conversion of Jewes and Gentiles, to which the noble D. Ma∣kovius, the Light of his Countrey amongst strangers, addes their return into the land of Canaan; The restitution of all things by Elias, the ceasing of all Heresies, For∣rain persecutions, and of all Impiety. Some adde further to this, the Resurrection of the Martyrs, and a Reign with Christ upon the Earth for a thousand yeers. Of that opinion are, Carolus Gallus Profes∣sour
formerly of the University at Leyden, in his Clavis Prophetica nova Apocalypseos. In which work he confesseth that he la∣boured twenty five yeers, in reading, me∣ditating, searching, writing, and debating; And also George Hawkwell in his Apolo∣gia Providentiae Divinae, out of which we have taken a great part of this small Tract: as also Mathias Martinus, My Master, in his Epistle by way of answer to my letters, whererein I desired his opinion of this matter, Anno, a thousand six hundred twen∣ty eight. Alsted and Piscator are of this minde. But this man makes that kingdom to be in the Heavens; the other saith, it is not onely upon the Earth, but makes the thousand yeers to begin about the yeer, a thousand six hundred ninety four. Carolus Gallus seems to joyn with them.In Diatri∣ba & Chr∣nol. For in his eighth Observation, on the 20 Chapter of the Revelations, he writes thus. The Propheticall Spirit briefly doth pro∣phesie in this Revelation of S. John, of a singular, and wonderfull Resurrection of the Church, Renovation and restitution thereof, Namely, that in this last age it shall be conspicuous, consisting of Jewes and Gentiles, quick and dead, and it shall after a wonderfull maner Revive, be Re∣newed, Restored, and Flowrish again more Gloriously than ever it did formerly, and that from those that were dead the very first death.
If you enquire of their Arguments, they are partly taken from the certainty of the conversion of Jews and Gentiles, partly out of some places in the Scripture expresly promising peace, partly out of the prophecy of a thousand yeers, described in the twentieth Chapter of the Revelations, not yet fulfilled. And though that matter, as Enigmaticall, cannot be decided before the event; and if it might, it is beyond my abilityes, nor doth it concern this place: Yet,In stella Serpent. de∣legat. Evan∣gel ad In∣dos. I. It seems to be most true, that there shall be a more full conversion of Jewes and Gentiles, as Keckerman and Justus Heurnius, have demonstrated out of the Scripture. But after the Ru∣ine of Antichrist, not onely that which shall oppose Idolatry, but the matter it self doth shew it; to say nothing of the shut∣ting up of the Devill, which is written of, after the casting of the false Prophet and the Beast into the Lake. II. No Article of the Faith should be violated, though we should maintain the coming again of Elias, and the returning of the Jews again into the Land of Canaan. For that which is spoken of Elias by the Evangelist, to come again and restore all things, Christ did not ascribe to John the Baptist. Nor is that in Micha spoken of him, ascribed to this man. To say nothing
that the first coming of Christ was not terri∣ble, but joyful. The promise made to the Is∣raelites, Deuteronomie 30 is too glorious; and that it is not yet fulfilled, is apparent by the dispersion of the Jewes nor yet resto∣red. III. It is very probable that the notable ruine of Antichrist is hard at hand. For since it is evident that the History of the Reve∣lations describes unto us three periods of the Church, and each of them is bounded with seventy seven yeers, and from thence it certainly followes that the Denunciation of the Ruine of Babylon fel about the Reign of Charles the Fifth, and there is nothing more written of the restitution thereof, but that those late tumults in that battell, de∣scribed in the nineteenth of the Revelati∣ons, seem to be prefigured, and the successe on that side, sheweth nothing else, than what appeared in Carthage half destroyed. Name∣ly, that the bitings of beasts when they are rea∣dy to dy are most violent; It can hardly be thought that it can last long. Nor are all those Prodigies;What is to be thought of the mo∣dern Pre∣sages. Presages, and Predictions to be neglected, which are written to have fallen out both in former times, and in these last ten yeers. Indeed they are more obscure than that they may be easily looked into, and too seri∣ous to be rejected with scoffing prejudice. And though I finde that ambitious and ig∣norant
men challenge this to themselves; Yet Men of better mindes hold it better to wait on the event with hope and patience, than by rash Judgement to accuse the Scrip∣tures of falshood, and to make things false to be true, or to ascribe Divinity to Hu∣mane actions; or supernaturall Power to naturall things. I, though I had rather be silent, both concerning Divinity and the Truth, yet I professe that I have hard∣ly found any thing in Histories, I have read, that is not foretold either by Divine or Diabolick, or Humane, or Naturall predictions, or by them altogether. All the order of the four Monarchies lies couched in Daniels Images, the brief of all the Ec∣clesiasticall History is contained in the Apocalyptick writings. And out of these the Divell hath taken some things. The birth of Christ was fore shewed by the Sybils, Oracles, and Stars, besides the writings of the Holy Prophets. What Fi∣gures of mens Nativities, and what all the rest can do is taught by a work of Julius Caesar, Bullinger de Divinatione, and by the History of the Duke of Biron. Yet there is a mean to be used in these things; they must be made use of occasionally, and not fundamentally. IV. It is probable that the thousand yeers in the Revelations are not yet fufilld. For were they fulfilled, that must be, either
in the first, second or third period. Not in the first. For then the seven Seals had their event, nor did then any thing fall out besides, but what is written of the Womans driving a∣way, and the battell with the Dragon: also then there was an Infinite number of He∣reticks, and a mighty flood of persecu∣tion. Not in the second. For under that both Anti-Christianisme sprang up, and Mahumetisme. Not in the third. For then they say he was let loose. But then began the Church to rise again, with the two Witnesses that were slain in the for∣mer period; and Babylon began to decline. Of the same opinion is Dr. Mede, a Divine of Cambridge my Honourable friend,In libro de succesione. who is the Author of the Clavis Apocayptica, fetched out of the innate and imbred characters of the visions, and demonstrated from them. The most reverend Doctor usher Primate of Ireland saith that there is a two fold Mil∣lenary. But Martinius takes it for a long time by Synccdoche, and more rightly. But I will say no more of this matter than I have said; for I would shew onely what may be said thereof, and not what may be certainly said; if you except the first and second.
In the mean while I desire to be instruct∣ed of two things. Namely, Whether the Ruine of Antichrist shall be totall? And whether after that Satan is bound up so, there must needs follow a cessation of all Hereses,Dionis. Alexand. of all Impiety, and of all Persecu∣tions in the visible Church? Far be it from me any farther to favour the Millenaries, that were defended by Papia, Ireneus, Apollina∣rius, Tertullian and Lactantius, who dreamt of a glorious Jerusalem upon the earth for a thousand yeers, after the Resurrection, The blood of Sacrifices, Rest of the Sab∣bath, Circumcision, Marriages, Children, Education, Delightfull Banquets, the obe∣dience to them of all Nations, the Moon to shine as bright as the Sun, and that the Sun should shine seven fold cleerer than it doth. Let us rather pray that God would be pleased to look upon his afflicted Church with a Gracious Eye, and grant unto it what is for the good thereof. This is suf∣ficient, if it be not too much. But, Whether it be so or so, Thanks be given uuto thee, O Lord Jesus. FINIS.
Books Printed for John Streater, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London. THe Vale-Royall of England; or, The County Palatine of Chester, Illu∣strated. Wherein is contained a Geogra∣phical and Historical Description of that Famous County, with all its Hundreds, and Seats of the Nobility, Gentry, and Freeholders; Its Rivers, Towns, Castles, Buildings Ancient and Modern: Adorn∣ed with Maps and Prospects, and the Coats of Arms belonging to every indi∣viduall Family of the whole County. Unto which is added, An excellent Discourse of the Island of Man. The Refinement of Zion: Or, The old Orthodox Protestant Doctrine justified, and defended against several Excep∣tions of the Antinomians: methodically digested into Questions, wherein many weighty and important cases of consci∣ence are handled, concerning the nature of Faith and Repentance, or Conversion to God. By Anthony Warton.
De Morbis Foemineis: The Womans Counsellour; or, The Feminine Physi∣ian: Modestly treating of such occult▪ Accidents, and secret Diseases, as are incident to that Sex. Pharmacopaea: Or, Rhaenodaeus his Dispensatory. Treating of the whole Body of Physick: Performing the Office of an Herball, as well as an Apotheca∣rie's Shop. An History of the Wonderful things of Nature: set forth in ten several Classes. Wherein are contained, 1. The Wonders of the Heavens. 2. Of the Elements. 3. Of Meteors. 4. Of Mineralls. 5. Of Plants. 6. Of Birds. 7. Of four-footed Beasts. 8. Of Insects, and things wanting blood. 9. Of Fishes. 10. Of Man.
