J136 12392691 61025
KING IAMES HIS Iudgment by way of coun∣sell and advice to all His loving Sub∣jects, extracted out of His own Spee∣ches by Doctor Willet concerning Poli∣tique governement in England and Scotland. THese two Kingdomes of England and Scotland, having beene long at va∣riance, and exercised in time past with long and bloody Battells, were by him united in one▪ his Majesty was the Corner stone that conjoyned these two walles together. 2. By his Majesty King Iames of blessed memory, the faith of the Gospell was truely professed, and his Princly ookes proteted still maintained. 3. King Iames was a wise and judiciall King, whose writings doe give him the preheice before all his predecessors: Aother Salomon, a king, and yet an Ecclesiaste, a learned Writer, such an one as Gra∣ the Emperour was, of whom Ambrose saith, Scripsisti Epistol , ac ipsa apices fidem tuam pietatm{que}▪loquuit. Epist. 26. ad Grat. You have writ (not an Epistle onely) but whole bookes with your hand.
4. The doores of Protestant Churches were every where set wide open. 5. Christians went hand in hand▪ conferring freely, and edifying one another. 6. It was King Iames his godly Precept to his Princely Sonne; Tach your people by your example. P. 24. And such was his practice in his owne Royall Person, giving light by his Christian life to all his Subjects. 7. Whereas many feared an alteration of Religion, the Gospell set sure footing in the Church of England, which as by his Majesty while hee lived, so by his Royall Poste∣rity walking in his steppes, wee trust shall be continued to the end of the world, wherein his Highnesse also delive∣red his sound judgement, and constant resolution in his Med. on Revel. 20. p. 3. Art. 8.  the last estate (when the Church is delivered from the thraldome of Anti-christ) without any more generall motations, the world shall still remaine to the Consummtion, and end of the same. 8. By Gods mercy men planted Vine yards, and eate the fruites thereof, built houses, and dwell in them, and in∣creased in wealth. 9. It was admirable to consider the generall Resolution of all English people, and the conjunction of their hearts and affections, both of high and low towards their Royall Soveraigne. 10. Such was the  betweene England and Scotland, that not onely the externall arres  then like to cease for ever betweene these two Nations, but one uniforme Religion was also  to  them in perfect love and unity, that neither the Church of Scotland should be jealous of the English Church, as inclining in somethings to Popery, nor the English Subject the other as affecting a popular parity: but as loving sisters, and fellow Tribes should hold one Worship of God, and goe up to Ierusa∣lem together.
11. He caused Religion to be without mixture or tolle∣ration as his Majestie most godly professeth in his Medi∣tation upon the fifteenth of the first of Chronicles, in the ap∣plication. Is there not now (saith King Iames) a sincere profession of the Truth amongst us in this Isle ppugned by the Nations about, haters of the Holy Word, and doe we not also as Israel, professe one onely God ruled by his pure Word onely? on the other part, are they not as Phi∣listims, adorers of Legions of Gods, and ruled by the foo∣lish traditions of men? And againe in his Meditations up∣pon the twentieth of the Revelations 3. P, art. 1. hee saith: wee must feare to fall from the Truth revealed, and professed by us, that wee may be free from the like pu∣nishment, &c. 12. His zeale for Reformation of things amisse was great, who in the Preface to the Reader in his Princely Treatise, Queene Elizabeth then living thus writeth. I doubt nothing, yea (saith he.) in her name, I dare pro∣mise, by the by past experience of her happy Government, that no good Subject shall be more carefull to enforme her of any corruptions stollen into her State, than shee shall be zealous for the discharge of her conscience and honour, to see the same purged, and restored to the ancient integrity; and further during her time, becomes me least of any to meddle in it, &c. And that which his Majesty promised in behalfe of her, God directed his wisedome to performe by himselfe: the dealing wherein before, as it pleased his Princely modesty to call medling, so afterwards the whole managing thereof of right appertained to him. 13. The Church of England was not then forced to hang their Instruments of prayse upon the willowes, with the Is∣raelites in Babylon, and by the intermission of some chan∣ges onely to finde an occasion of thankesgiving unto God; but had indeed▪ as full, and as great cause, and as much l∣berty as ever to sound out prayses: England might then say with the Prophet David, then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with joy. Psal. 126▪ 2. 14. The Courts of Iustice were not interrupted, but the Laws, and  of Iudgement were open for every man, and to revive the hearts of his Subjects, he thus writeth to his noble son, p. 90. 91. presse to draw all your Lawes, and processes to be as short, and as plain as you can, &c. weary not to heare the complaints of the oppressed, aut ne Rex sis. 15. King Iames was no stranger, but of the Royall bloud of the Kings of this Land, a Prince of the same linage, of the same Island, of the same English bloud Royall; yea of the same Religion: who▪ as he was no forrainer▪ so gave he counsell to his Princely hire▪ p. 55. To heare ordinary Counsels, and Iustice seates in every Kingdome, of their own Countrymen. 16. Whereas the peace of this Church had beene hindred by the opposition of strange, and new Doctrines, he restored the peace of the Church, and brought it to one uniforme Doctrine, whose advice Princely is, Pag. 20. . 1. That if any do urge to embrace their own fantasies in the place of Gods Word, &c. acknowledg them for vaine men &c. and gravely and with authority redact them into order againe. 17▪ He had externall peace with other Nations, who to wound them with kindnesse, who was a Prince that used al other Princes Pag. 56. . As brethren, honestly, kind∣ly; and strove with every one of them in curtesie and thank∣fulnesse, and when any performed to offend this Nation, he was a couragious defendor, who revenged and freed his Subjects from all forraigne injuries done unto them, Pag. 55. 18. There was domestick Peace and plenty, for which we have cause to blesse God at this day, for thereby we ob∣tained godly education of our Parents, who were then children, whereas without it we might have beene distra∣cted from our parents, by the iniquity of unquiet times, which was then in danger to have befallen this Land. 19. He was a loving Prince; who as the naturall Father,
and kinde Master of his Kingdomes, thought his greatest contentment to stand in his Subjects prosperity, and his greatest surety in having their hearts, pa. 125. . 20. Such was his zeale to the house of God, that in his me∣ditaon in 1. Chron. 15 part 2. p. 43. hee holdeth that the chiefe vertue which should be in a Christian Prince; name∣ly fervency, and constant zeale, to promote the glory of God that hath honoured him, and concerning the Mini∣sters of the Church he saith, Pag, 20. love no man more than a good Pastor, reverence, and obey them as the He∣ralds of the most high God. Dr. Willets Observations on KING Iames his respect to the two Tables of the Law of GOD. THat Princely Ecclesiastes King Iames, declared . Pag. 89. that a King should be custas utriuiq tabula: The guardian of both the 2. Tables of the Law, which his Majesty testified in every particular, in his Christian, and judiciall treatises. 1. Concerning the first Commandement he professeth himselfe to be an enemy to all Atheisme. Basilic. p. 25. 2. Concerning the second Commandement, he condem∣neth adorers of legions of Gods, and such as are ruled by the foolish traditions of men. 3. Concerning the third Commandement, he saith, be∣ware to offend your conscience with swearing or lying, medit. in Chron. applicat. pag▪ 17.
4. Concerning the 4. Commandement: Hee saith always let the Sabboth be kept holy, and no unlawfull pastime u∣sed. Page 53. 5. Command: These be King Iames his own words, ho∣nour your parents for the lengthning of your own dayes, as God in his law promiseth, Page 96. 6. Command: There are some horrible crimes (saith His Majesty to his Princely heire) that you are bound in consci∣ence never to forgive (such as witchcraft, wilfull murther Page 31. 7. Command: He saith) God commanding by the mouth of Paul, 1 Corin. 6, 20, to abstaine from fornication, declareth that Fornicators shall not inherit the Kingdome of God▪ P. 74. 8. Command; His Majesty shewed his worthy resolution for the Reformation of the robberies, and oppression of the borderers, page 36. 9 Command: That Royall Ecclesiastes saith, beware to offend your conscience with use of swearing or lying, &c. lying commeth much of a vile use which banisheth shame▪ page, 17, 18. 10. Concerning the last Commandement: his Majesties Princely counsell is, abstaine from haunting before your marriage, the idle company of dames, which are nothing else, but irritamenta libidinis, page, 127.
Dr. Willets Observations on KING Iames his Counsell and advice to all his Subjects: according to their particu∣lar callings and Estates. THe Nobility may learne not to thrall by oppression the meaner sort, that do dwell by them, nor to maintain their servants, and dependants in wrong, pag: 45. 2. Merchants are taught not to buy the worst wares, and sell them at the dearest rates, pag; 50. 3. Iudges are admonished to take heed of bribery, advo∣cates to decline the longsomenesse of suites for the enrich∣ing of themselves, with the spoyle of the whole Countrey, Page 90. 4. Church governors to preserve Doctrine, and disci∣pline in purity according to Gods Word, Pag. 43. 5. Ministers and Preachers may receive information for their Calling. 1. not to vary from their Text. 2. not to meddle with Matters of State, Page 8 9. and 3. that their speech be not fairded with Artifice, &c. but to eschew all affected formes, Page 115. and 4. to use only Scripture for interpretation of Scripture if wee would bee sure, and ne∣ver from the analogie of Faith in expounding. The Poscript. THe Iewes returning from Captivitie did so wonder at their strange deliverances, that they seemed to be as men that
dreame. As strange a worke may it please God to worke for the Church of England if he please at this time; And though our divisions be not yet turned into peace, yet haue wee many yeares under our Gracious Soveraigne enjoyed both true Reli∣gion and Peace; and though there be now such great feares, and distempers in this Kingdome, under so godly, pious and Reli∣gious a Prince, who is even a pattern of true piety and love to all Princes of the World: yet let us not faint, oh let us pray▪ to God that as his Royall Majesty after his Royall Father King Iames, was setled in Peace; so this Kingdome may againe be reduced to that flourishing Peace, wherein under our gracious King it hath hitherto stood as before under his Royall Father the Lord grant that the glory of his own name may be advan∣ced, the Kings honour exalted, agreement between his Majestie and the Parliament concluded; the flourishing of the Church obtained; the peace of the Kingdome setled; and all divisions amongst us reconciled, Amen. Printed at London for Thomas Cooke, 1642. FINIS.
