L1073 12591178 63940
A LETTER From the SPEAKER OF The House of COMMONS, To the Gentry, Freeholders and Inhabitants of the County of YORKSHIRE, IN ANSWER To their Protestation. ORdered by the COMMONS in Parliament, That this be forthwith Printed and published: H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com SEPTEMBER 8. 1642. London, Printed by L. N. and I. F. for E. Husbands and I. Franck and are to be sold at their shops in the Middle-Temple, and next door to the Kings-head in Fleet-street.
A LETTER From the SPEAKER OF The House of Commons, TO THE Gentry, Freeholders, and Inha∣bitants of the County of YORKSHIRE, In Answer to their Protestation. MY Lords and Gentlemen, I am commanded by the House to let you know, that it is a very great satisfaction and contentment to this House, to finde the Affections and Resolu∣tions of your County, so worthily and seasonably
expressed, and with so much wisdom and cou∣rage, as they have observed in this your Protesta∣tion now presented unto them: Upon which, this House doth set a much higher rate and value in respect of the many subtile practices of the Malignant party in your County, both to dis∣quiet the peace of the whole Kingdom, and to oppose the just proceedings of this House, and to beget, if it had been possible, a contrary opi∣nion of you, from which you have now so fully vindicated your selves, and the most considerable part of that County. Nor can we but observe, that at this time, when the Protestant Religion, and Fundamentall Laws of the Kingdom, and Liberty of the Subjects, are so much invaded, as appeareth by that unheard of prevalencie of wicked Councell, which hath ar∣rived to that height, as to procure both Houses of Parliament to be proclaimed Traytours (a thing never before attempted, no not in the worst times) you do with so much zeal and courage of∣fer your selves to support your King, your Re∣ligion, and Liberty; all which will be preserved by your faithfull adherence to this Parlia∣ment. And besides all these, the House cannot but take notice of your wisdom and fidelity, in ex∣pressing
your detestation of those lawlesse Con∣sultations and Resolutions, at the last Assizes at York, where Propositions were made for the raising Forces both of Horse and Foot in that County, the levying of money for the mainte∣nance of them, together with the taking away the arms of the peaceable and best affected Subjects; all which was endeavoured to be strengthened by the bold, and Illegall attempts of the Grand-Jury, who at that time did lay aside all presidents of Love and Justice, in such presentments as were at that time by them made; which matter this House will in due time take into serious consideration. For your Resolution to withstand all these so Illegall proceedings, the House hath command∣ed me to return you their most hearty thanks, and to let you know, that this House doth esteem your Affections herein, as the most lively de∣monstrations of your loyalty to His most Sacred Majestie, and infallible symptomes of your fide∣lity to the Parliament, the onely means to pre∣serve the felicity of the English Nation. Lastly, this House hath commanded me to let you know, that they do assent to your desire of publishing this your Protestation in all Parish churches, Markets & Fairs within the county, the
same being as they conceive, a matter so much tending to the preservtion of the peace, not onely within your County, but likewise within the se∣verall parts of the whole Kingdom. And thus I bid you heartily farewell, and rest Your loving Friend, W. L. FINIS.
Ordered by the Com∣mons in Parliament, That this Letter bee forthwith Printed and Published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
