l1126 12935977 95758
A DEFENCE OF A BOOK INTITULED, The Snake in the Grass. IN REPLY To Several ANSWERS put out to it by George Whithead, Ioseph Wyeth, &c. London, Printed by M. Bonnet, for C. Brome at the Gun, W. Keblewhite at the Swan in St. Paul's Church-Yard. And Geo. Strahan at the Golden-Ball, over against the Royal-Exchange, in Cornhil. 1700.
CONTENTS OF THE First Part. The Preface Vindicated in an Advertisement. SECT. I. GEorge Whitehead's Pleasantry upon the Au∣thor of The Snake. Page 1. II. His Meek and Lamb-like Treatment of him. Page 2. III. His Cry of Persecution against him. Page 3. IV. His Address to his Work. Page 8. V. His Shuffle about their Answer to the Seven Quaeres given to their Yearly-Meeting. An. 1695. Wherein a short Scheme of the QƲA∣KERS Principles and the MONSTROƲS Foundation of their Faith. Page 9. VI. His Sober Caution consider'd, as to those Quakers who were Possest with the Devil. Wherein the Wonderful Story of John Gilpin. Page 25.
The Excuses which G. W. makes for this. 1. That this ought not to Reflect upon the Gene∣rality of the Quakers, or their Princi∣ples. ibid. 2. That Satan, in a Mad or Possest-Man, is not Transform'd into an Angel of Light. ibid. 3. That such Persons are fitter Objects of Pity than Raillery. Wherein of the Quaker-Eu∣thusiasm. Page 26. 4. That not more Quakers than others have run Mad. Wherein their Excuse for Gilpin, &c. is Considered. Page 30. Proofs of the Quakers being Mad. 1. In those who went Naked. Page 42. 2. In their strange Singularities. Page 48. 3. In thinking Themselves to be Free from Sin, and Equal to God. Page 50. 4. In Assuming to be Prophets. ibid. 5. In their Prater-Natural Quaking, &c. Page 54. 6. In their Silent-Meetings. Page 68. 7. In the New-Quakers of America. Page 69. 8. In their Vindicating of Mad-Men. Page 70. The Abuses and Mistakes which G. W. Alleges in The Snake. As to I. The Necessity of Preaching. Page 72. II. The Comparison of Fox and Muggleton. With G. W's: Malicious Innuendo as to the Act of Toleration. Page 73. III. Their Order against Carrying Guns in their Ships. Page 74.
IV. Their Principles Dangerous to Govern∣ment. Page 75. V. Their Opposition of Tythes. Page 77. VI. Their Treasons and Rebellion, in Abetting Oliver and the Rump. Page 83. VII. George Fox, his Assuming to be Equal with God. Page 87. VIII. Their Asserting the Sufficiency of their Light within to Salvation, without Christ. And As∣suming the Name of Christ to Themselves. Page 90. IX. Their turning the Death and Sufferings of Christ into an Allegorie and a Type. Page 105. X. 1. Their Spiritual Body of Christ, which they suppose He had from Eternity. And their Denial of His Now Human Body in Hea∣ven. Page 116. 2. Their Denyal that Christ had any Human or Created either Soul or Body, while He was upon Earth. Page 120. 3. Their BLASPHEMOƲS Contempt of Christ. Page 131. XI. Their Contempt of the H. Scriptures. Page 144. XII. Their Conforming and Transforming to e∣very Turn. Page 146. XIII. Their making no Confession of Sin, or Praying for Pardon. Page 149.
XIV. Three Matters of Fact relating to the QƲAKERS Contempt of the H. Scriptures. Which G. W. Denies after his Fashion. Page 160. XV. G. W's. Defence of Ed. Burrough for his Contempt of H. Scripture. Page 166. XVI. G. W's. Defence of himself for the same. Wherein is shewn, That the Quakers are Di∣rect Deists, and the Worst sort of them. Page 169. XVII. G. W's. Sincerity and Ingenuity in some Objections with which he Concludes the First Part of his Book. Wherein the Summ of the Quaker-Doctrine is laid open. viz. That they Deny the Humanity of Christ; and the Divinity of Jesus. Page 179.
CONTENTS OF THE Second Part. SECT. I. COncerning the Author. Page 1. II. The QƲAKERS Method in Answering of Books 1. Railing, Personal Reflections, and Nasti∣ness. Page 4. 2. Insolence and Threatnings against any who Oppose them. Page 32. 3. Bringing of Contrary-Testimonies. Page 51. 4. Double Meanings and Cross Purposes. Page 78. 5. Not to take an Answer. Page 82. 6. Pretending that the Quotations brought out of their Books are not True, because more than is Pertinent is not Quoted. Page 85. 7. Appealing from their own Printed Books to the Original Copies. Page 94.
8. Falsifying the Meaning of Others. For which by Will. Penn's Rule, they are Excluded from being Christians. Page 100. III. The Quakers Clear'd from Contradiction in those Seeming Contrary Testimonies, which are Produc'd in this Appendix, to Defend them from the Heresies Charg'd upon them. 1. As to Christ come in the Flesh. Page 112. 2. As to the Reality of His Death and Suffer∣ings. Page 123. 3. As to the Resurrection and Future Judg∣ment. Page 124. 4. Their Testimonies Allow'd to be Contra∣ry upon the Point of Government and Fight∣ing. And why. Wherein a Deep Secret of their Government is laid open. Page 127. IV. Their Wity Answer and Repartees upon the Point of their Denying Marriage, and Preach∣ing up of Fornication. Page 134. V. Their Re-Asserting of their own Infallibility, and Sinless Perfection. Wherein of their Ido∣latry. Page 148. VI. Their Defence of not taking off their Hats, or giving Civil Titles, consider'd. Page 162. And of the Pure Language (as they call it) of Thee and Thou. Page 185.
Both of which are shewn not to be mere Clow∣nishness or want of Manners: But that it Proceeds from a Design they have Form'd to Subvert all Government, that is not in their Own Hands. For that they think, none but Themselves have any Right to Govern. VII. The Absurdity and Blasphemy of the Quaker Notion of The Light within, shewn from Will. Penn's Defence of it, and others. viz. 1. That ther is no Natural Light or Reason in Man. But that all in him is Divine. Page 194. 2. That by this, they are not only Equal to God, in some sense; but that they are very God Him∣self. And that every Creature is God, Even the Devil. Page 206. 3. Some Texts of H. Scripture Rescu'd from the False Glosses which the Quakers put upon them, to favour the Universality of what they call The Light within. Page 224.
THE COLLECTION. Numb. I. THE Quaeres given to the Yearly-Meet∣ings of the Quakers at London the 17th. of May. 1695. With an Answer given to the same Quaeres by the General Meeting of the Reformed Quakers at Philadelphia in Pen∣silvania, the 18th. of Sept. 1695. Page 1. II. George Keith's Relation of Two Remarkable Meetings of the Quaker Preachers at Lon∣don. An. 1678. Concerning Three Great Fun∣damental Doctrins of the Christian Faith. Page 16. III. Some Passages taken out of a Ms. of Hum∣phry Norton's which is Mention'd in The Second Part. p. 99. 100. Page 39. IV. Some of the Omissions and Alterations, that the Quakers have made in the Re-Printing of the Works of their Deceased Prophets. Page 52. V. A Letter of John Feild and Will. Bingley to Sir Thom. Lane Lord Mayor of London. An. 1695. Page 78.
VI. A Paragraph which the Quakers put into The Post-Man. 14. Jan. 1699. Page 81. VII. A Declaration against Wigs, or Peri∣wigs. Page 83 VIII. The Excommunication of Will. Wilkins, for Marrying one who was not a Quaker: And And for being Marry'd by a Clergy-Man. Page 90. IX. Their Denyal of Burial to Thom. Bradly for the same. Page 92. I must trouble the Reader to Correct the Errata of the Press, as he finds them. For I am quite Tyr'd.
Advertisement. AT the end of the First Part there is mention made of a Preface. In which I have laid open the ways and means by which George Fox and the first Quakers came by all that Complication of the Ancient Heresies, with further Improvements, upon which they have set up. For it was none of their In∣vention. They had neither Parts nor Learn∣ing sufficient for such an Enterprise. But the Second Part Swelling so much, with the Collection, beyond the first Intended Bounds: And the Quakers last Answer to The Snake, which they call Anguis or Switch, having come out since: And it being thought necessary, That something shou'd be said to it par∣ticularly (because the Quakers make such Boasts of it) tho' in Effect it is Answer∣ed already in this Reply; I have, to Eease the Bulk of this, Reserv'd the Preface to my Reflections upon the Switch, which will be the shorter, because there will need little more than Applying their Answers in the Switch, to those Methods (set down in the Second Part) which they use in An∣swering
of Books that are wrote against them. And so that will serve as a Third Part to this; And be the Last I intend upon this Subject. Because I think to make it very Plain, that by their Answers in the Switch, they must be Satisfied and Know in their Hearts, that these Heresies, &c. are Justly Charg'd upon them; And that they have Taught them. Onely here let me take Notice of an An∣swer lately come out to the Preface of the Snake, concerning Mis. Bourignon, in an A∣pology wrote in Defence of her, and her Pri∣ciples. Wherein the Author shews, That he is not without Passion at what he calls Passion in others. But he vents it not in that Furious, Nasty Fashion as the Quakers. He calls that Zeal which is Exprest in the Preface against Bourignonism, Spiteful and Malici∣ous. But that Author cou'd have no Ma∣lice against her Person, whom he knew no otherwise than by her Writings. And if the Doctrins she Taught were such as he has there Represented them, believe it, there was Cause for all that Concern, and more than is there Exprest.
Now whether they are truly Represented in that Preface, will appear plain enough by the Answer to it. Which Denies not the Quotations, but by Contrary Testi∣monies, and some other of the Quaker-Methods here set down, wou'd Squeeze and Force the Words out of their Na∣tural Signification, which yet can not be done. The Apologist accuses the Author of that Preface of Prejudice and Un-chari∣tableness. Why? Because he do's not In∣sist upon and Recommend the Good things in Ms. Bourignons Writings, as well as Expose what he thought Dangerous and Destructive. But this was Blaming with∣out Cause. For it was Dangerous things only which ought to be Expos'd. And they were the more Dangerous, because they were Mixt with Good things, as Satan when Transformed into an Angel of Light. To Praise whose Light wou'd not be the way to Discover him. No. We must look for the Cloven-Foot.; And Pull off the Sheeps-Cloathing to find out the Wolf. The Apologist sets down his Belief, in most Orthodox and Moving terms. And
I do Believe him. And think him a Man of Piety and Sincere Intentions. And that he has been deluded by the seeming Devo∣tion, Self-Denyal, and Abstractedness from the World that Appears thro' the Writ∣ings of Ms. Bourignon. Therefore I do with Great Charity, and an Hearty Con∣cern, Beseech him and others who follow her Devotion, to consider, whether it cou'd come from God, and Cover such Terrible Doctrins, as overturn the very Founda∣tion of our Christian Faith? Such as CHRIST's Dying being only by Ac∣cident:—That He came not with a Design to Suffer:—That it was not Consistent with the Glory of God.; Nor needful as a Satisfaction for our Sins:—And other things mention'd in that Preface. I would Pro∣voke their Zeal to be more for the support of the True Christian Doctrin, than for the Flights of Ms. Bourignon or any o∣ther, which we do not Want. We have the Lives of the Holy Patriarchs, Pro∣phets, Apostles, and of Christ Himself for our Examples. There is no Addition to them in the Life of Ms. Bourig∣non.
As to the Rest of this Apology in Answer to Dr. Cockburn's Narratives concerning Ms. Bourignon, I meddle not with them. He is of Age, and can Answer for himself. My Province now is only The Snake in Grass, And so much of Bourignonism as is there Contain'd, for which I think this short Advertisement to be sufficient; And that her Pretensions to the Spirit of Prophe∣sie, or Miracles have no better Foundation than Fox or Muggleton had. And stand Chargeable with the same Enthusiasm and Blasphemy.
A DEFENCE Of the BOOK Intituled The Snake in the Grass. Against George Whitehead's Antidote, &c. George White∣heads Pleasantry upon the Author of the Snake.I. IN his Epistle to the Reader. P. 1. He tells that the Quakers did not Intend to write any Answer to The Snake in the Grass, that it was not worth an Answer, &c. It was slighted by Ʋs (says he) and laid aside—as scarce deserving any particular Answer. Till the Importunity of some People, he says, did Extort this Answer from them. And yet, p. 265. I must Advertise the Reader (says he) that this Officious Author shou'd have spar'd his other Discourse (against the Quakers) untill he had seen an Answer to his Snake in the Grass. This was very Cunning! Here He had that Author at a why not! For the Author, as others, did believe that the Quakers had no stomach to Answer that Book (which made them so long in doing it) because nothing is so hard to be Answer'd as Matter of Fact, of which that Book do's chiefly consist: And the Author was so Careful of his Quotations, that all G. Whitehead's
sagacity has not found out one False Quotation in the whole Book. This George knew, and therefore he was brought to this Answer, like a Bear to the Stake. But an Answer ther must be, because, as he confesses, People did call for it, and thought the Quaker-Cause Lost without it. And this Forc'd Answer, will sink it much Deeper in the Mire: for the Excuses are so slight, so Guilty, so Confessing, that every Discern∣ing Eye must see thro' these Fig-leaves, which they are not able so to Patch together as to Cover their Nakedness: His Meek and Lamb∣like Treat∣ment of him.II. This has Enrag'd them, out of All mea∣sure against the Author: And tho' in The Snake, Sect. xvii. one wou'd think ther were so much of the Venom and Bitterness of their Spirit set forth, as at least to Prevent their Falling, for some time, into the like again; yet they verifie the Character that Author has given of them (while they are Pretending to Clear themselves from it) and shew that Bitterness and Fury are so Ingrafted into their very Natures, that they cannot Refrain from it, even when they are Pleading not Guilty to the Charge; and call them∣selves, The Lambs of Christ, and The Meek of the Earth! Ther is hardly a Page in this Anti∣dote that is not be speckl'd with the Meek Froth of these Lambs. Such as calling the Author of The Snake,Ep. to Rea∣der. p. 2. Book. p. 3. and all that take his Part, The De∣vil and his Agents. Furious, Foul-mouth'd, Perse∣cuting Agents, Precipitated by the Devil and Ma∣lice— A Poor Dissembling Hypocrite, thro' whom the Devil and Malice do Invent,44.88.188.251.253.255.257.262.264. &c. Screwed up
by the Father of Lies to such a Height of Malice and Outrage.— Like some Mercenary Soldier of Fortune— A Persecuting, sculking Adversary— Persecuting Incendiaries— This Author's Great Malice, Cruelty, and Persecuting Spirit— Most Hideous and sordid Calumny— The sink of his Gross Calumnies and Malice— Such Dirty Kennels of Lies and Abuses, as the Books of the said Author. &c. This is enough for a Taste of such Delici∣ous Fare. I shou'd Transscribe Great Part of his Book, if I gave you a Collection of all of this sort that runs thro' it. And after all this Out-Cry, he has not shewn one False Charge, or Calumny cast upon the Quakers in All The Snake, as you will see in the Examining of those which he do's Allege. But this Bluster and Confidence (by way of Meekness!) he thought wou'd gain Credit with some, who wou'd take his word, rather than be at the Pains to Compare or Read Defences. His Cry of Persecuti∣on against him.III. And such wou'd think, by his Exclama∣tions, that some Grievous Persecution were stirr'd up against them; that the Author of The Snake had Incited the Civil Power, to Hang, Draw, and Quarter the Quakers, to Confiscate their Estates, Imprison, Banish, Torture, or some Terri∣ble Proceedings against them! But not a word of this, or any thing like it in The Snake, no, not as Alledg'd by G. W. himself; but, on the Contrary, ther is nothing else there Propos'd, but to Reason and Argue with them Fairly, and upon the Square; to Convince them out of their own Books and writings, and Undeniable Matters of Fact. Which if any man Quote
wrongfully against them; or Deduce Unjust Consequences from them, he Exposes himself, and gives them the Fairest opportunity can be to vindicate themselves. Indeed, if I shou'd Traduce and Defame in the General (as G. W. here serves the Author of The Snake) without Descending to Particu∣lars; and Producing my vouchers clearly and a∣bove board, whereby the Accused may have free scope to disprove the Charge, if False; this wou'd be a Persecution of the Tongue; and that is a Persecution, and a Severe one. But if I Quote Book and Page (as the Author of The Snake has done) and Recite fairly; and Argue from thence in the Common way of Reasoning, this cannot be call'd a Persecu∣tion. Or it is such a one to which the Quakers have al∣ways Invited, Encourag'd, and Provok'd us. Edw. Bur∣rough, in his Return to the Ministers of London. A. D. 1660. Page 657. and 658. of his Works. Reprinted A. D. 1672. says to them, Search the Scriptures, and that Religion and worship and Ministry, which is not according to the Scriptures — let that Religion, worship, Church, and Mini∣stry be utterly Condemned of The Lord, and all his People; and let such Ministers as cannot Prove their Call, their Maintenance, and Practices to be accor∣ding to Scriptures, let such Ministers be Confounded, and silenced for ever; And come to try this Mat∣ter when ye will. For whereas you cry out against us, as if we were Denyers of Scriptures, as if we were Enemies to Church, Deceivers, Hereticks, &c. But I say unto you, these things have you never yet justly Proved against us, but rather Accused us be∣hind
our Backs— And tho' for divers years to∣gether we have been Publick, yet when did ever any of your Ministers seek by Lawful means to Convert us, or shew us our Errors? If we were as you say of us, Oh, it had been your time to have sought our Con∣version!— If we be in an Evil way, as you say, let us hear your soundest Arguments, by the Spirit of God, and according to the Scriptures, to Prove those things which you say of us; Prove it by Evi∣dent Arguments, that we Deny Scriptures, that we are Hereticks— I challenge you All, in the Name of the Lord, even All you Ministers of London, Let us hear your sound Reasons openly— Come out you Ministers, we are willing to be Try'd ac∣cording to the Scriptures, and by the Spirit of God, in our Religion, and in Every Part of it; and if you be the same, then come forth— and let us have fair Dealing Openly, that Truth may be Manifest∣ed Publickly, and Error may be Discovered— And this wou'd be a Christian like way; we wou'd hear what you have to Charge against our Religion, by sound Arguments, that we may Answer it— and come out when you will in such away as this, and this wou'd Satisfie thousands— and this is the way to Exalt Religion: and we wou'd think it a Happiness, more than otherwise, to be joyned in so∣ber Debate and Dispute against you, that all may be satisfy'd who are Doubtful, and may hear your Principles and our Principles discussed, in the Pre∣sence of the People, who may Judge by the Light and witness in their own Consciences, for to that, in All, we do appeal; And in such a Proceeding, come forth when you will &c. But all this Daring was soon Quash'd when it came to the Tryal. How have they Ex∣claim'd,
of late, agaist George Keith for Provo∣king them to Dispute in Publick; and have Quit the Field, crying out, and that in Print, that they wou'd meet in no such way, lest it might Provoke the Government; tho' the Lord Mayor had given his leave for the Meeting in one of the Publick Halls of the City, and one of the Sherifes was himself Present, and his Officers attending, to see order kept: But all that was nothing, the Quakers said it was a Tur∣bulent way; And that the People were not Com∣petent Judges of such matters; as they Printed in the Reasons they put out, for their Decli∣ning to give G. Keith a Meeting, two years af∣ter one another in Turners-Hall, the first on the 11. June 1696. the other upon the 29. Apr. 1697. To take away both which Pretences, four Reverend Divines of the City of London were appointed by the Lord Bishop of London to meet at Turners-Hall the 21 of Apr. 1698. And there to Hear and Examin the Charges of False-Doctrin and Heresies, which G. Keith had Exhibited against the Quakers, and to Inspect the Quotati∣ons which he had brought out of their Printed Books. And Timely notice was sent to Will. Penn, G. Whitehead &c. of this meeting; and they, or what other Quakers pleas'd were In∣vited to come and vindicate their Doctrin and Principles: But they were still the same men, they wou'd not come (unless a few for Spys) but Reprinted their former Reasons, new vaump'd, against any such Meetings: And they cry'd out that Printing was the only method to Decide their Controversies, and they wou'd take no other.
But G. Whitehead is as much Displeas'd at that. And Appeals to his Reader. p. 2. and 3. whe∣ther The Snake be not as severe a Persecution, To Destroy and Murther our Reputations (says he) both as men and Christians. And I am told that they are Resolv'd to write no more Defences; for they have had as ill luck that way, as in Personal Disputes. It is a Grievous Persecution this, that men can neither Speak nor Write, but it is the worse for them! G. Whitehead their present Champion, seeks to Hide his Head be∣hind an Act of Parliament, and wou'd Gladly find shelter under the Plenitude of that Indul∣gence lately Granted to Dissenters, which he says (p. 2. to the Reader) these Malicious Peo∣ple (whom he calls The Devil and his Agents) do Envy them, because they will not give over writing against them. This Plea was put in, by Council Learned at the Law, for Mitigation of Damages, upon their Declining so many meetings for the Defence of their Cause at Turners Hall; And that they Fled for the same. But they sent in their Room A solemn Pro∣testation in behalf of the Act of Toleration; which they thought Reach'd even unto them; and that it was a sufficient Justification of their Principles. But the Reflections which were soon after Publish'd. 8. May, 1697. upon that Pro∣testation (and which they have not yet Attemp∣ted to Answer) has Disarm'd them of the Ad∣vantage they propos'd by that Act of Indulgence; and left them no other Choice, but to De∣fend their Cause, either by word or writing
(tho' that be a downright Persecution!) or by their future Silence, to let it Sink. His Ad∣dress to his Work.IV. Therefore, since it must be, George, let not your noble Courage be cast down, Cock your Hat, Look Bigg, and Enter the Lists with the Best Grace that you can. And he do's it, in the Rode he is most us'd to, the old Blasphe∣mous Rant, of putting all upon The Lord. I con∣fess then (says he p. V.) a holy Zeal the Lord raises, and has raised in my very Heart and Soul, against such Bitter Implacable, and Persecuting Spirits. And the Lor'ds Power I have felt, and do feel it to Aecompany and Inable me in Defence of His Blessed Truth and People. Now this Pow∣er which he calls the Lord's was nothing else but the Spirit of Rancor and Revenge; which soon Discovers it Self; for in the very next words, instead of Justifying or Defending his Cause, he falls upon Threatning his Unknown Adversary. 'Tis pitty (says he) but this Defaming Author shou'd be Publickly Exposed by Name for his Folly and Outrage—that he may not be suffer'd to sculk and Hide himself like a Snake under the Grass. That was witty! There he was Even with the Snake in the Grass! Here he had some body in his Eye, tho' he knows not whom, and some mischeif or other, which he thinks it a Pitty shou'd not be Inflicted upon him, by those in whose Power it is: whom he thus Instigates to do it. This was the Holy Zeal which was Rais'd in his very Heart and Soul! His Meek Heart that hates the thoughts of Persecution! If he had found such an Indication towards it in all the Sn. what Tragical Improvements cou'd
his way of Reasoning have made upon It! But, George, the Author gave some Reasons for Concealing of his Name, at the close of Sect XXIII. to which he thinks not fit to add any thing now, but only this, That if G. Whitehead and Will. Penn will set their Names, to all that they have Printed Incognito, he promises to put his Name, to the next Edition of the Sn. His Shuffle about their Answer to the seven Queres. With a short Scheme of the Qua∣kers Prin∣ciples and the Mon∣strous Foun∣dation of them.V. All that follows in G. W's Ep. to the Reader is concerning the 7 Queres which were sent to their yearly Meeting. 1695. the Provo∣cation that was given them to Answer two of them Directly, since they wou'd not the whole, as they Pretended, for their Length and Intricacy. And what G. W. says to this is consider'd in the Suplement to the Sn. N. VII. All to be added here is the Queres themselves, which was Promis'd in the Sup. and are Inserted in the Answer which the General Meeting of the Reformed Quakers at Philadelphia, in Pensilvania, Return'd to these Queres. Which I have Added in the Collection, at the End of this: to shew the Difference of those who Answer sincerely, and those who, when forc'd to it, Answer with Craft, and Dissimula∣tion: And that we may see the Honesty and sense of that Excuse given in the Answer of the London Quakers, That these Queres were not so Plain and Direct, as that a Plain Yea or Nay cou'd be given to Each Quere, as was Desir'd: And therefore, That they Give one General Answer; against which they were Caution'd. But wou'd not be Forbidden. For the same Reason given in the Conclusion of the Sn. and in the Sup. N. VII. Because they cou'd not otherwise Cover their
Frightful Heresies. Tho' this has not done it. To shew which Effectually, I will give a short Scheme of the Quakers Principles: And lay open the Monstrous Foundation of them: where∣by not only the Foul Fallacy of their Answer is Detected; but their Blasphemous Heresies made more Apparent. First then I will Grant that that Paragraph in their Answer to the Queres, We sincerely Believe in Jesus Christ, &c. is set down in most Ortho∣dox words, mostly in the Terms of the Creed. Why then shou'd we Quarrel with them? Why will we not let men tell their own Meaning? Why will we not Believe what they Profess? Wou'd this seem Equal Dealing with other Men? What more ought to be Expected from them, than to bring them to subscribe the very words of our Creed? What Better, or other words can we find as a Test for them? But it was told in the Conclusion of the Sn. That they cou'd Subscribe the whole Creed, and yet not mean one word of it, of a Personal Christ Existing now in Heaven, in His own true Human Nature, without all other men &c. Therefore they were Desir'd to give a plain Yea or Nay but to Two short Queres, upon that Head. Which they will not do. Now lest this shou'd seem an Unreasonable Imposition upon them: and to shew the Rea∣der, that ther was good Grounds, and even Necessity for all this Caution with them, I will set down in as Clear a Light as I can, the Bot∣tom and Foundation of this their Mystery of Ini∣quity; which indeed is wonderful: And without
Understanding of which Exactly, it is Impossi∣ble to Dive into their Hidden Meanings that they have, whenever they speak of Christ. 1. We must know then, That they do hold (with the Anthropomorphits and Muggletonians) that God has a Body, of Flesh, Blood, and Bones: And that Christ, as God, had such a Body from Eternity. And that this was an Human Body. And consequently, that God or Christ was a Man from Eternity. This Humanity of Christ they call Spiritual, Heavenly, Ʋncreated. And they Distinguish it from that Manhood which He took of our Na∣ture, in the Womb of the B. Virgin: which they call Earthly, Corruptible, Created, and Outward Manhood. 2. They say that He took upon Him this Outward Manhood, but not into His own Per∣son, so as to become Truly and Really His own Manhood, or Part of His Nature: But only as a Vail, Vessel, Garment, or Cloathing to His Heaven∣ly Manhood. As when Angels assum'd Bodies to Appear in, they took them not into their Na∣ture, but only as a Vail or Garment, for a time, and then laid them down again. Tho', while they Appear'd in them, they might be call'd Their Bodies, as being us'd or Possess'd by them. So, and no otherwise, the Quakers call the out∣ward Body of Christ, His Body. 3. The Heavenly Manhood of Christ, Flesh, Blood, and Bones, they say Dwells in them. This is what they call their Light within. 4. They Attribute the whole of our Redemp∣tion, of the Atonement, and Satisfaction made for our Sins, to the Madly suppos'd Sufferings,
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of the Hea∣venly Manhood, or their Light within: Which they say, is all Perform'd Within them. Of which, they say, the Outward Sufferings of Christ were a Type or Figure. 5. They Vilifie the outward Christ, and His Sufferings, as of no Efficacy towards our Salva∣tion, more than the Sufferings of other Good∣men, as an Example or Encouragement to us. For they say, That their Light within is sufficient to their Salvation, without, any thing else, i. e. without the outward Jesus, what He did or suf∣fer'd for us. And they Deny that He is now in Heaven, in the Outward Manhood of our Na∣ture, or that He will Come in That Manhood to Judge the World. In short, They Deny Jesus of Nazareth, or that Person who suffer'd upon the Cross, to be Properly the Son of God. 6. They are Perfect Deists in Every Re∣spect. 7. They are the most Monstrous sort of Deists that ever were in the World. For they hold with the Ranters (whence they sprung) That ther is no Difference or Distinction betwixt God, and Creatures: But that Every thing is God, even the Devil. The first of these Seven Particulars, I will shew in this Place. The 2.3.4. and 5. are shewn in Sect. vii. viii. ix. and x. The 6th. in Sect. xvi. And the 7th. in the 2d. Part, Sect. vii. N. 2. For the First then. That God, and Christ, as God, was a Man from Eternity &c. see Tho. Ellwood's Answer to G. Keith's Narrative. p. 96. 97. where he Delivers Will, Penn's true sense
and Meaning. The Plain Import of all his (W. P's) Arguments (says T. E.) is, That Christ, as Christ, was from the Beginning, before He took that outward Body of Flesh, in which He suffer'd at Jerusalem; which is so far from a Denyal of His being, Man, as well as God, that it is a fair Ac∣knowlegement of it; inasmuch as He wou'd not have been Christ, if He had not been Man, as well as God. As therefore He was Christ from the Be∣ginning, so was He also both God and Man; and that not only In his People, but out of, or with∣out them also. And if He was Truly Man Then, before He Appear'd in that outward Body, which was Nailed to the Cross, to be sure, He is not less Truly Man now; since that outward Manhood became (as I may say) a Cloathing to that Divine and Heavenly Manhood which He had before. Thus T. E. wrote lately, An. 1696. And shews what their Principles are Now. viz. That ther are Two Manhoods of Christ, the one outward; which serv'd only as a Cloathing to the Heaven∣ly Manhood. That Christ had not been Christ, if He had not been Man, as well as God; And therefore, That He was Man from the Be∣ginning, as well as God. And Consequently, That God, was Man, from Eternity: For Christ or the Eternal word, was no other than God. Now let Us go a little Back, and see the same Doctrine taught by the Quakers formerly. Isaac Penington in his Question to the Professors, &c. Printed An. 1667. p. 30. do's plainly Di∣stinguish these Two Manhoods of Christ. Thus he says.
He that knoweth the Substance, the Seed of the Kingdom, the Birth of the Spirit, knoweth the Flesh and Blood which is of the Seed. And this Flesh is Flesh indeed, this Blood is Blood indeed, even the Flesh and Blood of the Seeds Nature; But the other was but the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which He honoured in taking upon Him, in which He did the will, in which He offer'd up the Acceptable Sacrifice; but yet did not give the Honour from His own Flesh and Blood to It. For the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, was not His own Naturally, but only as He pleas'd to take it upon Him, and make it His. But that whereof He formeth Ʋs, and which He giveth us to Eat and Drink, is the Flesh and Blood of His own Na∣ture: And this was It wherein was the Virtue, and wherein is the Virtue, Life, and Power for Ever. Happy, O happy is he who is of It, who is taken out of and Formed of Him (as Eve was of Adam) and so becomes Flesh of His Flesh, and Bone of His Bone. &c. This was the Flesh and Bone of the Heavenly and Eternal Manhood, which he calls of the Seed's Nature, that is of Christ, not as He was of the Seed of Abraham, after the Flesh, but as He is the Seed or Light in our Hearts; for I. P. calls this the Seed's own Flesh and Blood, of His own Nature. And Distin∣guishes it from the Flesh and Blood which he took of our Nature. And says, that the Vertue and Life is not in that, but in the Flesh and Blood of His own Nature. Not the Flesh and Blood (says he p. 25.) of the outward Earthly Nature; but the Flesh and Blood of the Inward spiritual Na∣ture. Not the Flesh and Blood which Christ took of the first Adam's Nature; but the Flesh
and Blood of the Second Adam's Nature. This is of God, or Christ, as God. And p. 10 says, We are taught both by the Spirit, and by the Scrip∣tures, to Distinguish between Christs own Flesh; and that of ours, which He took up, and made His. Ther is much more to the same Pur∣pose in that Book of Penington's, with which I will not Detain the Reader. The last Authority I shall Produce is of the Great Fox Himself, in his Book call'd, Several Papers given forth for the Spreading of Truth &c. Printed, 1671. There p. 54. is a Chapter which bears this Title, Concerning Christ's Flesh which was Offered &c. And this Flesh he makes not to be That which He took of the B. Virgin, but That, which he had from the Beginning, and which he supposes was Crucify'd when Adam Fell: And in That Crucifixion to Consist the Atonement and Satisfaction made for Sin. And he takes that Text, The Lamb slain from the Foundation of the world, not as then Decreed and Purposed by God, but Literally, as then Actually Fulfill'd. Thus he Begins that Chapter. Christ, the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the world; when it began its Foundation, then the Lamb was slain— And Christ, according to the Flesh, Cruci∣fied, the Lamb slain, that Flesh of His, which is a Mysterie, when the first Adam's and Eve's Flesh was Defiled. This he calls a Mystery. And it is the true Mystery of Quakerism. It is upon this account, That the Quakers think all the Christian world to Lie in Darkness but Them∣selves. That other Christians know of no o∣ther Flesh and Blood of Christ, but that outward Flesh, which He took, in Time, of the B. Vir∣gin.
Hence it is common in their Discourse, and in their Books, to tell others, That the Flesh of Christ is a Mysterie; That they under∣stand nothing of it. As Solomon Eccles wrote, That the Pope,Sn. Sect. x. p. 138.the Episcopal, the Presbyterian, Independants, and Baptists, understand the Blood of Jesus Christ, no more than a Brute Beast. Therefore the Quaker's Confessing to the Blood of Christ in General Terms, can be no Justi∣fication of them, while they mean another Man∣hood, Flesh, Blood, and Bones, of Christ than any Christian ever Dreamt of. But it Argues their Deep Deceit and Hypocricy, to seem to Justifie themselves to the world, by their General Confessions; But Conceal their secret Meaning, whereby they know that they Differ most Wide∣ly from those, with whom they make this False Appearance of Agreeing Exactly. Therefore their Answer to the Queres is no Answer, while they Refuse to Renounce this Distinction that they have of Different Man∣hoods in Christ: or otherwise, to Explain them∣selves, and tell us, which of the Manhoods they mean. The words of their Answer to the Que∣res, upon this Head, are these, We sincerely believe in Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of the Living God, both as he is true God and Perfect Man. But what they mean by Man here, they do not Declare. Whether that Eternal or Heavenly Manhood before spoke of, or the Outward and Terrestrial Manhood, which he took of our Earth? But Tho. Ellwood (we thank him) has told us and Discover'd the secret, in his Answer to G. Keiths first. Narrative. p. 205. where he Recites a Quotation G. K. had brought out of G. Whiteheads Book The
Malice of the Independent Agent. p. 17. That Christ's Body now in Heaven is the same in sub∣stance He had on Earth, which wou'd seem a Fair Confession to the Humanity of Christ. But hold a little (crys T. E.) Did G. White∣head ever call or own Christ's Body now in Hea∣ven, or while it was on Earth, to be Terrestrial or of the Earth? Here we see how to Understand their words, and how to Interpret this their An∣swer to the Quaeres; not of the outward or Ter∣restrial Manhood, which Christ took of our Nature; but of their Secret and Heavenly Manhood, which they Madly Fancie, He had from Eternity. And thus G. Whitehead Explains himself, in his Part of The Christian Quaker. Printed. An. 1674. p. 140. where he says, That he was not at all against Jesus Christ being God and Man, take Man (says he) as Christ is the Hea∣venly, Spiritual, and Glorify'd Man. But he Con∣fesses, that he was against this. viz. That Jesus Christ consisteth of Human Flesh and Bone. Here he Distinguishes betwixt the Heavenly and the Human Manhood. The first he Ascribes to Christ, but Denies the Latter, that Christ has any Human Manhood. And the Reason he gives for it, is, Seeing Christ (says he) was from Ever∣lasting, which is the same we have heard before from Thom. Ellwood, where he takes upon him to Explain Will. Penn's sense in this Matter, viz. That Christ, as Christ, always had a Man∣hood; And seeing He had it from Everlasting, therefore it cou'd not be the Human but the Heavenly Manhood, Flesh, Blood and Bone. What then was that Flesh and Blood which he took of the B. Virgin, wherein He suffer'd and Rose again? And of which he said, Behold my Hands
and my Feet:Luk. xxiv. 39.Handle me and see, for a Spirit hath not Flesh and Bones, as ye see Me have. To this says G. W. (ibid. p. 139. 140.) yes, Christ Had such Flesh and Bones, but he did not Con∣sist of them. I distinguish between Consisting and Having. Says he. i. e. A man Hath anything that he Possesses or wears, I Have a Cloak, but I do not Consist of that Cloak, that is, It is no Part of my Nature; and I may Put it on, or Throw it off, without any Change of my Na∣ture. And no otherwise do the Quakers reckon of the Body and Blood which Jesus our B. Lord took, in Time, in the Womb of the Virgin. Not that He took it into His Person, so as to Con∣sist of it; as a Man do's Consist of Both Na∣tures, of his Body and Soul: But only, that He Had it, that is, Made Ʋse of it, and wore it, for a Time, as a Vail or Garment; which He has now laid aside; and subsists in Heaven, on∣ly in that Heavenly and Eternal Manhood, Flesh, Blood, and Bones, which He had, as Christ, from Eternity. And they make it a Contradiction to say That Christ do's Consist of any other Flesh and Bone, that is, of Human Flesh and Bone, they think this to be a Contradiction to Christ's be∣ing the Eternal Word; because they hold that He cou'd not be the Word or Christ, without Consisting of Flesh, Blood, and Bone: And there∣fore, That if He had None but the Flesh &c. of the Human Nature, which was Created in Time, it must follow, That He was not the Word or Christ from Everlasting. Thus says G. W. (ibid. p. 139.) Is there not a Plain Contra∣diction between Jesus Christ Consisting of Flesh and Bone, Human Nature; And that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Eternal word from Everlasting, &c.
Therefore you see it is Necessary for us, in order to Oblige these Quakers to Discover their Meaning, that we Insist upon the word Human, And that they will Answer, whether they Allow Christ to have Now in Heaven any Human Body? Or whether He do's Consist Now of that Bo∣dy; or did Consist of it, while He was upon Earth? But will the Word Human hold them? Have they no Dodge nor Shift whereby to use even that word Plainly, in a sense, in which they know that no body Understands it in this Case? What if we spell it Humane for Human, and take Humanity in the Moral and not Natural sense of the word; as when we say, that such an One is a Man of Great Hu∣manity, i. e. of Good Nature, Gentleness, Good∣ness, &c.? And Christ or The Word having Great Goodness in His Nature, consequently we will allow Him a Humane, tho not a Human Nature! I am Confident the Reader do's now think that I am Fooling with these Quakers; and Mean this only as a Banter: For that he must Conclude it Impossible for any Men to shew themselves such Knaves as well as Fools, to Dodge at such a silly and Impudent rate with Mankind; while they Pretend to the Greatest Plainess and Sincerity of any Men upon the Earth. Therefore let him Read a Quaker Book Intitul'd A Testimony for the true Christ and His Light in the Conscience, in Confutation of Robert Cobbit's Testimony against the Truth &c. Printed An. 1668. And said on the Title Page to be From some of them called Qua∣kers. But suppos'd to be Penn'd by G. White∣head. There p. 4. and 5. they say, As he (Rob.
Cobbit) speaks of Humane, with Relation to Na∣ture or Body, it hath Relation to the Earth, or Humus the Ground, of which Man was made; which the First Man is of, not the second (though He was Really Man too) but Humane or Huma∣nity in the other sence, with Relation to Gentleness, Mercifulness, and the like, this we know was, and is in the Image of God (in which Man was Made) and His Gentleness, Kindness, Mercifulness, &c. is Ma∣nifested in Christ—And the true and Real Humanity, as Oppos'd to that Cruelty, Envy, and In-Humanity, which is got up in Man since the Fall: so that Humani∣ty, und the Unreasonableness of Beasts are two things. Thus the Quakers. Here they Deny Christ the Second Man to have been Made of Humus the Earth, as the First Man was; And yet say they He (the second Man) was Really Man too. How was this? It cou'd not be in the same sense as the First Man, who was Made of Humus the Earth, if Christ did not take our Nature, or Humus upon Him. No, The Qua∣kers do not mean it in that sense, as if Christ had ever taken our Human Nature, so as to Consist of it, or let it be any Part of His Per∣son. And yet they say That He is Really Man too. By which they Mean only, That Eternal and Heavenly Manhood before Mentioned. And so Banter the World, with their Plain Confessi∣ons, in Double Meanings! Yet have they the Confidence, to Cry Whore first. And Boldly Challenge others with what Themselves are the most Notoriously Guilty, of any that Live upon the face of the Earth.
Sam. Fisher, one of the Chief Rabbies of the Quakers,Sam. Fish∣ers Works. p. 177. Charges the Priests against whom he Disputes, with Shameful shiftings from sense to sense, miserable marchings from Meaning to Mean∣ing; so that we can hardly know where or How to find them, nor what they mean. But we (says he) mostly or ever keep to the True, Honest, Ordinary, and Plain purport of the words, as they lie open and Clear to every Ordinary and Common Capa∣city. And G. Whitehead Intitul's one of his Books, The Quaker's Plainess, detecting Fallacie. Whereas their Books are such Un-intelligi∣ble Jargon, that one must serve a Prentiship be∣fore he can understand one word almost of what they wou'd be at. Nay they Glory, and often Boast that their Words, as well as Names, are Hidden from the World. And this not only in their Books, but I Appeal to all that Converse with them, whether the same Mysteriousness be not in all their Conversation, concerning Religion. When you ask them the meaning of their Light within, their Christ with∣in, their Life Read, &c. They Answer Com∣monly with a Grunt—of Disdain, or Pity, as they wou'd have you take it. And when they Vouchsafe to Speak, it is to this Purpose, These things are Hid from thee, and from the World. Read within, there thou wilt find them. But we know them, and have Sweetness and Life in them, &c. Their Language is as much a Cant, as the Gipsies. And this has Preserv'd them so long Ʋn-disco∣ver'd in the World. Yet they make up a Mouth, and Pretend to Plainess, beyond all others! But you shall never get them to Answer Di∣rectly,
or to the Purpose; To give a Plain Yea or Nay to any Question concerning their Heresies. If they say I wrong them, let this be the Test, That they will either Own or Disown this their Notion of an Heavenly and Eternal Manhood of Christ: And tell us, in Plain Terms, which of the Manhoods, that which is Created, or that which they say is Ʋn-created, they mean, when they Confess to the Manhood of Christ now in Heaven. And till they do this (which I Guess, will not be in Hast) let my Charge stand good against them: Which I may Reasonably pre∣sume from all Judicious Readers. But, ther is no stop in the Art of Heresie. This their Mad Notion of an Heavenly Body in God, or Christ, has brought them to Fancy, that they them∣selves have the same Heavenly Body. And thus they Understand our being Members of Christ, not as being Members of His Church, of which He is the Mystical Head: But as Members of this His Heavenly Flesh, Blood, and Bones: And therefore say, that Their own Bodies shall ne∣ver Dye. G. Fox, when one minded him, that he wou'd Dye,Will. Ro∣gers his Christian Quaker. IV. Part. p. 49. and turn to Dust, and there∣fore that he ought to be Humble; Answers, in his Letter, which is Printed, Thou sayest, when I am turned to Dust and Dead: Is this thy Doctrin? Are the Members of the Heavenly Body turned to Dust and Dead? This Doctrin proceeds from Darkness, and not from the Light of Christ. This is very Intelligible! And Easie to the Meanest Capacity! This is the Quakers Plainess! It was not said, that his Soul shou'd turn to Dust, this was spoke of his Body. And here he denies it of the Body. Why? Be∣cause
it was a Member of the Heavenly Body of God. And yet they do not doubt but their Bodies must Dye, in the True, Honest, Ordinary, and Plain purport of the Words, to which they Mostly or Ever keep! But this Mystery is Ʋn-Riddl'd in the Second Part. Sect. vii. n. 2. where it is shewn, That they hold their Bodies as well as Souls to be God. It is told in the Preface, how the Qua∣ker Heresies were Borrow'd from the Ancien∣ter Sectaries amongst us: And this their Answer to the Seven Queres, shews that they have In∣herited their Plainess and Sincerity in Repre∣senting their own Principles to the World. The Family of Love, who Prevaricated in every Article of the Creed, Printed a Confession of their Faith, in the very words of the Creed, An. 1656. But how they meant it, Mr. Knew∣stub has shewn us, which is Inserted in Heresi∣ography. p. 97. where, by Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord, they mean only Righteousness, which they call Christ; and Sin they call Anti-Christ; and the Seed of the Woman they make to be only a Principle or Quality in our Hearts, and not any Person; which are the very Words and Sense of Will. Penn, in his Part of The Chri∣stian Quaker. p. 97, 98. And in his Address to Protestants. p. 118, 119. What is Christ (says he) but Meekness, Justice, Mercy, &c. And thence Infers, that every Meek Man, must be a Chri∣stian. But the Familists go on, in the words of the Creed, Who was Conceiv'd of the H. Ghost: Born of the Virgin Mary; that is, in their Cant, as every one of them is Conceiv'd of the H.
Ghost, by the Renewing of the Spirit, in their Hearts, Born of the Virgin Mary; i. e. In their Virgin Hearts. Thus the Quakers understand it. See Will. Bayly's Works. p. 291, 292, 293. where this is, at Large, Insisted on. And the standard of the Lord. p. 17. says, in this same sense, That where Christ is Born, He is Born of a Virgin, that is, In them, as there Explain∣ed. Again, Suffer'd under Pontius Pilat. was Cru∣cify'd, Dead, and Buried; and Descended into Hell. i. e. That Jesus Christ, or The Light, is Crucify'd, &c. In Men; under Pontius Pilate, i. e. The Wicked one, or our Corruptions and Lusts. Et sic de Caeteris. And the same Author tells, p. 100. That, because of these Double Mean∣ings of the Famalists, ther was no way to Discover them, by any Words or Tests that cou'd be fram'd; But only by making them Renounce and Disown their Ring-Leader, one Henry Nicholas, and to Condemn his Doctrin; which they wou'd not do. And thus must we deal with their Spawn the Quakers; while they Refuse to Disown the Pernicious Doctrins of Fox, Whitehead, Penn, &c. we must Conclude, That they still do own them, notwithstand∣ing of all their Jesuitical and Janus-Confessions; which they have Copy'd after the Like Plain-Dealing Familists! Of whom, you may see more in the Authors I have Quoted. Who wrote before ther was a Quaker in the World, or the Name known. But this shews, who were the Fathers that Begot them. For they were the Sons of Many Fathers, All the Pestiferous Sects of Forty One. Whose Vomit they have
Lick'd up, and Render'd it ten times more Nauseous and Deform'd. And the Legions which Possess'd these Sons of Belial, are Enter'd, with Double Force and Ma∣lice, into this Herd of Swine: whom They have Captivated, both Souls and Bodies, in an Higher Degree than any of the Former; or than Any, perhaps, that have been known in any Age: Which I come next to shew; with G. White∣head's Defence of them. His Sober Caution consider'd, as to these Quakers who were Possest with the Devil. wherein, the wonder∣ful story of John Gil∣pin,VI. His Sober Caution (as he call's it) contains the first 12 pages of his Book. And it is all spent in warding off the several Instances, which cannot be Deny'd, of Quakers Possess'd with the Devil in most wonderful and Astonishing Manner. The Bulk of his Reasons is that such Instan∣ces can be no Reflection upon the People call'd Quakers, or upon their Principles, more than if they had happen'd among any others of other Communions. 1. But this is Answer'd in the Sn. Sect. xxi. p. 309. &c. where it is shewn that such En∣thusiastical Madness and Possession do's proceed from the Principles of the Quakers, and is caus'd chiefly by them. And besides it is a most No∣torious Mortification to their Pretence of Per∣fection and the Spirit of Discerning, beyond all o∣ther Men. 2. But G. W. adds some other Arguments here, as p. 3. he Asks, How Satan is trans∣form'd into an Angel of Light, when he appears like a Mad-man, a Witch, a Devil, a Blasphemer? Ans. Who says that he appears then like an Angel of Light? You must allow him sometimes
to take his own shape. But Secondly, The Pretence of Godliness and High Illuminations, which these Possess'd Quakers make such Great Boast of, that is the Sheeps Cloathing, and the Disguise of Light which Satan then puts on; and with which many are Deceiv'd. 3. G. W. adds next, that Men thus Mad or Pos∣sess'd are fitter Objects of Compassion than of that Wit and Raillery which the Author of the Sn. be∣stows upon the Quakers. Ans. That is true. And that Author bestows none of what G. W. call's Wit or Raillery upon them, unless G. W. reckons himself as one of them. The Author of the Sn. do's not esteem All the Quakers in that High Degree of Enthusiastical Madness as Gilpin, Toldervy &c. And therefore G. W. ought to take that little Familiarity us'd sometimes with him, as a Complement, as supposing him not in that Excess as others, as not yet Quite with∣out the Boundaries of Reason: out of which when he shoots sometimes, with Extravagance so Excessive as to Pass the Reach of Argument, then is he, in kindness, to be Reduc'd by shew∣ing him his Folly, in it's Plain Dress, which he call's Wit and Raillery. Nor is this without its Pity and Compassion, though Laughing, may be the Cure; as to Hypo∣condriacks, who cannot be Reason'd, yet sometimes are Jested out of their Delirous Imaginations. Which when any man comes to be Persuad∣ed are the Immediat Dictates of the Holy-Ghost, then is his Madness in Perfection. And the Quakers have never yet been able to give us any Mark or Rule or shew of Rea∣son, that they do not thus mistake All their
own Wild Imaginations for the Inspiration of God. We see (and G. W. cannot but own it) to what Excessive Heights this Enthusiastical Principle has driven some of the Quakers: therefore let the Rest beware, for they are up∣on the same Rode. They have lost their Compass, while they set their Light above the Scriptures: And have no other Assurance that they are in the Right, but their own Assurance that they are so. Which sort of Assurance not only Sometimes, but Always do's accompany every Error: For no Man can be in any Error, who do's not think himself to be in the Right: Else he were not in an Error; but in a Willful Obstinacy if he Per∣sisted in it, after he knew it it to be an Error. Now to Christians who believe the Divine Revelation of the H. Scriptures, these are a Rule, by which we measure our own Imagina∣tions; and if any thing comes into our Heads contrary to these, we are bound to Reject it: But to believe it a Divine Inspiration, and so not Controulable by Scripture, this is to be Mad, to be given up to all Delusion, to sur∣render our Hearts, as a Blank Table for the Devil to write what he pleases upon, and to pass it as the Ingravings of the Finger of God! And if ther be no Light, that is, no Ʋnderstanding in us, but what is Divine, we must think every thing Divine that is written there. And then we are Seal'd up in Error; from which ther can be no Returning while we keep in that Principle; the Scriptures can be no Reproof or Cheek to us, while we think
that what we call our Light with in is Superior to the Scriptures, and by which the Scriptures themselves were given forth. And Reason, which is Human, and, as these Men term it, Carnal, can never be admitted by them to Rectify what they think to be Divine. So that all Avenues are stopt to their Recovery. This is the most Dreadful condition that any Man can be suppos'd to be in. It is Despe∣rate to any thing but a Miracle. Therefore you see what Reason we have to Remove Men from this Principle. And this is the Heart of Quakerism. They Reckon themselves Se∣cure without Reason. They are sure, because they are sure. And this sort of Assurance proceeds from the Imagination; and therefore is strongest in Mad-Men: And the Maddest of the Quarkers, the most highly Enthusiastick, have the strongest Assurance of this kind. How different are these Men from those sort of Christians to whom St. Peter writes, and admo∣nishes them, To be Ready always to give an An∣swer to every Man that asked them a Reason of the Hope that was in them? 1 Pet. 3.15. But our Quakers give no Reason; they cry out upon Reason, as Carnal; and are against It, because It is against them. For no Reason can be given for any Hope or Inward Perswasion which is not Grounded upon Reason. Fancy and Rea∣son are two things. And no Reason can be given for Fancy. This is the Difference be∣twixt that Perswasion or Assurance which comes from the Sobriety of Religion, and that which comes from Enthusiasm. Enthusiasm is Imagination; and no Reason can be given for
what Assurance comes from thence. But the Assurance of Religion is a Sober and a Rational Persuasion, Grounded upon Reason, and there∣fore ther is always a Reason to be given for it. This do's not take away or lesson the Ne∣cessity of the Ordinarie Assistances and Inspira∣tions of the H. Spirit; which are, in a sound sense, call'd likewise Enthusiasm. This is Ex∣plain'd, and the difference of Enthusiasms clear∣ly laid down in the Sn. Sect. xxii. But I have said so much of it, in this place, that Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a Little and there a Little, I might, by any means, Instill this Difference of the Quaker from the Divine Enthusiasm into their Minds; and Guard them from this Fundamental Error, which carries in its Belly, all the others into which they are led: And of which they must first be Cur'd, before they can be Retriv'd from any other. And, to Repeat it again, that they may keep their Eye still upon this One Point; all I desire of them is, to let their Enthusiasm or Inspiration be Subject to the Scriptures, and not set up Above them. This was the Rule in all Holy Enthusiasms; they submitted to be Try'd and Ex∣amin'd by the Rule of the Scriptures. Then we have some Rule, some Compass to Steer by. But if we set our Enthusiasm Above the Scrip∣tures, this is the Wild, the Mad, the Diaboli∣cal Enthusiasm of which I have been speaking. And of which if the Quakers were once Cur'd, they wou'd, with the Blessing of God, soon Return to a Sober Mind.
4. G. W. is very Angry it shou'd be said that the Quaker Principles do make men more sus∣ceptible of the wild Impressions of Enthusiasm than other Men. And says against this, that as few of them have run Mad as of other Men. And p. 8. he Provokes his Adversary to produce his Catalogues of the Quaker — Mad-Men. Why truly, if Catalogues had been kept of them, I believe they wou'd be found to Exced any of such a Number of Men, by the Instances which we have seen of them. All of which G. W. wou'd throw off; by In∣stancing in a Few, whom, he says, they have Disowned. Thus says he p. 3. 4. His Instan∣ces of John Gilpin in 1653. James Milner, and John Toldervy, cannot affect the Quakers, since they have Long since testifi'd against the Madness of those Persons he Mentions. Ans. 1. Other Persons were Mention'd be∣sides these; And ther are Many More of the Like. Ans. 2. These Persons above Nam'd have not been Testify'd against as Mad-men by the Quakers. But, on the Contrary, James Milner is Justify'd for a True Prophet by G. Fox, after all the Madnesses he was Guilty of. Which is shewn in the 2d. Part. Sect. ii. N. 7. G. F. calls him a True Prophet of The Lord. And G. W. Now calls him a Mad-Man: which I know not how to Reconcile, but by owning of the Truth, That the Quaker-Prophets are Mad-Men. If G. W. can find any other way, let him shew his Parts!
In the next Place, as to Toldervy, he went Back and Forward, And the Quakers did Own or Dis-own him, as he went To or From them. But I know not that they have made a Mad-Man of him, before this time, now, in this An∣tidote. If they thought him Mad they spent their time well, in writing so Many Books against him, And Answering of his Books! But as for Gilpin, he left them Quite, after he had (by the great mercy of God,) Reco∣ver'd from his so Monstrous Possessions by the Devil while he was a Quaker. He had enough of them! Therefore they Laid Load upon Him. But what was it they Charg'd him with? It is Horrible to Repeat it! They Mistook the De∣vil for God! They Attributed the Possessions he was under to the H. Spirit; And said, That they were the Workings of The Light within, or Christ in his Heart; subduing the Devil, or his Corruptions; which Trembled in him: And that this was the Cause of his Dreadful Con∣vulsions. That his Charging them upon the Devil, was Blaspheming of God whose Work they were. That his seeking for Relief from them (which they call'd the Cross of Christ) And not being willing to Ly Under them, was his Deserting of God; And Returning under the Power of the Devil; being Weary of Bearing the Cross, &c. All this Appears by the Answers which the Quakers put out to this Relation which Gilpin gave of himself, call'd The Quakers Shaken. An 1653. One is in G. Fox's Gr. Myst. p. 297. Ther is an other call'd The Standard of the Lord, &c. by Atkinson, Burrough, Howgil, and 15 or 16
more whose Names are Subscrib'd, the same year. An. 1653. This Book I Forc'd my self to Read over, with Horror, and Reluctancy, be∣cause of the Diabolical Fury, Rage, and Blas∣phemy which fill every Page in it. There p. 23. They Answer Gilpin's saying, that that Trembling which seiz'd him, was of the Devil, thus, I manifestly witness against thee, that it was the Lord of Heaven and Earth that made thee Tremble. And p. 11. Concerning the Power that struck thee down from thy Chair, that I own to be of God. And that which spake to thee Bidding thee be Humble, and brought the Low down upon thy Knees; That I own to be of God, &c. Now what this was which Spoke to Gilpin, that Struck him from his Chair, and made him Tremble, &c. will be best known from his own Narrative, which, because it is but very briefly Touch'd in the Sn. Has been long out of Print; and so hard to be had: And that it is very Material, give me leave to Repeat but some Passages in it. viz. That this Gilpin was Perverted to Quakerism in May. 1653. By the Famous Christopher Atkinson, whose Name is up∣on the Title-page of the Answer to it above nam'd (tho others Subscribe to it) of whose Gifts see Sn. § vi. n. v. That the Burden of the Quaker Preaching was To Deny all Ministerial Teaching and Ordinances;p. .2together with all notio∣nal knowledge formerly gain'd by use of such means—That whatever any learn out of the Scriptures, by Hearing, Reading, Catechizing, &c was but Notional, Carnal, and Hanging upon the Tree of Knowledge: And so under the Curse▪  they Apply to this, Gal. iii. 13. Cursed is
every one that Hangeth on the Tree. i. e. on the Tree of Knowledge. so they understand that Text. That all our Duty was to hearken to a Voice within Ʋs; which was the only Rule. That he earnestly desir'd to have the Quak∣ing and Trembling-Fits (which was then very Frequent among them) thinking as they Taught him,p. 3. that this was the Manifestation of the Light within, and its Struglings to overcome our Corruptions. That at last they came upon him so Violently, that he cou'd not stand upon his Feet, but fell down, Trembling, Quaking, Howling and Crying in such a Terrible and Hi∣deous Manner, as Astonish'd all his Family. That he was Pleas'd with this, Thinking it, to be the Pangs of the New-Birth. The night follow∣ing, he was troubl'd with Terrible Dreams and Visions. And afterwards Lying Awake,p. 4.and thinking of them, I sensibly Perceiv'd (says he) something, as I Imagined, Lighting upon my Neck, giving me a Great Stroke, which caus'd much Pain to me; and after that Another, and so a Third and Fourth, each stroke being less than the former, and each stroke descending lower down, till it came to the middle of my Back: And then I thought that something enter'd into my Body; which I Perswaded my self, from Satan's Instigation, to be the Spirit of God descending upon me like a Dove and Entring into me. After this, he tells of strange Fits he had in his Garden, his Limbs being carry'd and shaken, without his Consent: And he Thrown down, Rais'd up, Turn'd upon his Back, then up∣on his Belly &c. Again, at a Meeting,p. 5 where C. Atkinson and John Audland (whose Blasphemous Letter to G.
Fox is Annex'd to the 3d. Edit. of the Sn.) Preach'd, In the time of his (J. Audlands) Speaking I was (says Gilpin) by the Power with∣in me, Drawn from the Chair on which I sat, and Thrown upon the Ground, in the Midd'st of the Company: Where I Lay all Night; All which time, My Body and all the Members of it were still in Motion; I being turned from my Back to my Belly, and so back again several times; and Ma∣king Crosses Continually with my Leggs one over the other; My Hands also were cary'd to and fro up∣on the Ground, by a Convulsive Power, as if I had been Writing upon the Ground. In all which Acti∣ons and Motions, I Acted not, in the Least Mea∣sure, by a Natural Power of Mine own; Neither did I Resist, or could I Resist that Power which Acted Me; but was altogether Passive. I was per∣swaded, That it was the Immediate Power of Christ; And heard, to my thinking, a Voice speaking to Me, and saying, That that writing with my hand upon the Ground, did signifie the wri∣ting of the Law within my Heart. Having lain all night upon the Ground, in the Manner a∣foresaid, The Power (as before in other Actions) moved my Hands to my Head, and laid them upon the Top thereof fast Closed together; whereupon I heard a Voice saying, Christ in God, and God in Christ, and Christ in Thee; which words I was Compelled to Sing forth before the Company, in a strange Manner, and with such a Voice, as was not Naturally Mine own: I sung also divers Phra∣ses of Scripture, which were given into Me. Af∣ter which I was Raised from the Ground, and set upon my Feet, by the power within me; which bad me be Humble, and brought me down again upon
my Knees, and with a whispering Voice said to me, Stoop Low, Low. And having stooped near the Ground with my Face, it said to me, Take up thy Cross and Follow Me. Whereupon Arising — I was suddenly Drawn down the street &c. viz. To the Fidlers House. whither William Dodding, and John Audland did Accompany him. And odd Freaks were Acted. I have Recited this Passage so Particularly, because, as before Quoted, the Quakers do Maintain, That the Power which struk Gilpin down from his Chair; and brought him Low down upon his Knees, bidding him be Humble &c. was of God; But that which Led him to the Fidlers, and Mov'd him to Play upon the Base Viol, and Dance, was of the Devil. (as in the Standard &c. p. 11.12.) whereas, it was the same Pow-that Acted him all along. And going to the Fidlers, was but a Part of the same Passage. But this shews how the Quakers hate Musick. As that Power said to Gilpin. p. 7. That it Hated Musick, which shews it to be the same Power that Acts the Quakers; A Sullen, Doged Spirit, Ʋn-Tun'd, and In-Harmonious! The An∣tipodes to Heaven! I suppose the Quakers thought, That it cou'd not be an Evil Spirit which bad Gilpin be Humble; that is, That the Devil can∣not. Transform himself into an Angel of Light, or a Wolf wear Sheeps Cloathing. They forgot that the Devil Quoted Scripture to our Saviour. And that they themselves have Quoted it upon occasions, tho' they have Declar'd War against it. But was it a Good Spirit which Tempted Gilpin to Despair, and to Cut his Throat?p. 8. as he tells that this Power did, which Possess'd him;
And Promis'd that he shou'd have Eternal Life, if he wou'd do it. At which when he star∣ted; and began to suspect that it must be an Evil Spirit which Tempted him to Self-Murder; Then the next Fit he had, the Spirit told him, That it was indeed an Evil Spirit which had Acted him all that time, under the Notion of the H. Spirit of God: But that Now the Holy Spirit had come upon him, and Chas'd away that Evil Spirit; wherefore now that he might be sure he was in the Right. And then again, upon other such like Occasion, the Voice wou'd tell him, That even that Spirit which pretended to be the Good Spirit, was still the Evil Spirit; and had told him a Ly, on Purpose to Deceive him: But that now the Holy Spirit was come in Good Earnest, and that he might De∣pend upon it. And thus for several times successively, as oft as he Entertain'd Suspitions of the Spirit that Acted him; And he was as oft Deceiv'd by it. Cou'd this then be a Good Spirit, which so oft call'd it self the Evil Spirit? For it is plain, by his Story, That it was the same Spirit which all along Possess'd him, till he was finally Deviver'd from it, by Returning to the outward Ordinances of the Church, which he had Forsaken. Was it a Good Spirit which Mov'd him, as he came from the Fidlers, to Proclaim through the streets as he went, I am the way the Truth and the Life? And Wil∣liam Dodding the Quaker in his Company: who did not Reprove this Blasphemy: for it was Common with the Quakers (See §. vii.) But said that he had no Power to Leave him. as he tells p. 7. This
was the Power Tormented Gilpin; which was surely no other than the Devil, who Tempted him thus to Blasphemy and Self-Murder. But this G. Fox will not allow; but says (Gr. Myst. p. 299.) That it was The Devil who was made to Tremble in Gilpin. Not that it was the De∣vil who made Gilpin to Tremble. No, They say that was God. And that it was the Devil, not who Tormented, but who was Tormented in Gil∣pin. I will not Detain the Reader with the Rest of Gilpin's story, which is indeed Prodigious: only make this Observation upon it, that, if it be True, ther can be no Doubt, of what many (Now a days) will not Believe, That ther are Diabolical Possessions. And that it is True, we have not only Gilpin's own Ac∣count, but it is Attested by the then Mayor of Ken∣dal (where Gilpin then Liv'd, And was so Possess'd) by the Minister, and several other Per∣sons of Credit, there Present. But now suppose it was not True, Is it not as Great a Degree of Possession, to make a Man Believe, That he had been so Possess'd, and Heard such Voices &c. if it had not been so? And the Transports he was in, were many of them such as Exceeded the Power of Nature; which any one will Acknowledge that Reads his Narrative. Nor can this be put upon the Common Effects of Madness; for no such Effects were ever seen in Gilpin Before, or after he Return'd from the Quakers. Or if it was Madness (of what ever sort) it was Visiby Caus'd by the Quaker Preachings,
and their Doctrine. And Cur'd by Returning from them. And no doubt, but Possessions of the Devil, when to a great Degree, will Transport Men, even unto Madness. Their is an Enthusiastical, as well as a Natural Mad∣ness. It is observ'd hereafter, that neither the Apostles, or any other Recorded in the H. Scriptures, were Converted to Christianity by such Violent and Monstrous sort of Convulsions of their Bodies. These are the Transports of Euries. But the Spirit of the Gospel is all Meek∣ness, Sobriety, and Gravity. But how will G. W. Reconcile his charging this of Gilpin's upon Madness; and G. F's say∣ing (Gr. Myst. p. 298.) That he came to be al∣most a Distracted Man: How will they Re∣concile this with what others of the Quakers, nay, and themselves, at other times, say, that these Extraordinary Quakings and Convulsions of Gil∣pin were the Workings of the H. Ghost in him? Do the B. Influences of God's H. Spirit bring Men to Distraction and Madness! G. Fox says (ibid) That the Lord smote Gilpin, that he came to be Almost a Distracted Man. That is true, it was the Lord who smote him; but how? by Delivering of him to Satan, for the Destruction, that is, the Punishment of his Flesh, that his Spirit might be Saved, in the Day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5.5. which Punishment God did usually Inflict, in the beginning of the Gospel, upon Excommunicated Persons, who Despis'd the Authority of His Church; for the Terror of others, as well as the Reclaiming of Themselves, And, in these later days, God
has Exerted His Power, in the same signal manner, upon many of those who have will∣fully Excommunicated Themselves, and Tram∣pled under their Feet that High Authority, with which Christ has Invested His Church! even the same that the Father gave unto Him. Of these Scorners, the Quakers are the most Outragious, and Blasphemous: And therefore this Judgment from God, has fallen most upon Them. And this is the greatest Part of their Judg∣ment, that they know it not to be such: But mistake the Strokes of God's Executioner, the Devil, for the Workings of the H. Spirit of God: And so Construe that as an Approbation of their Cursed state, which was sent to Re∣claim them from it. At least, to be a Warn∣ing to others, how they fall into their Snares; who are, by the Just Judgment of God, de∣liver'd up to the Devil, both Soul and Body, even in this Life! This is a most Material Point; Therefore I Insist so long upon it. And I desire the Quakers, and all others, to Consider, that, as this Gilpin was thus Deli∣ver'd over to Satan, upon his Forsaking of the Church, and Publick Ordinances of the Prayers, and Sacraments: So, upon his Return to these Holy Institutions, he was, by the Great Mercy of God, Rescu'd from the Power of the Devil, and Restor'd to his Former State. Which he Amply Acknowledges, and Desires the Chri∣stian Reader to joyn with him in Returning Prais∣es unto the Lord, for his Goodness towards him. p. 14. This Provok'd the Rage of that Cursed Spirit which Possesses the Quakers, to the ut∣most, which Return'd this Answer, p. 23. of
The Standard, &c. The Reader, if he be a Chri∣stian, will Return Plagues upon thee; thy Praise is Abomination. And as to the outward Or∣dinances, being Means of Grace, in the Consci∣entious use whereof God hath Promis'd to Reveal Himself to His People, and to give them Comfort, as Gilpin says, p. 13. That same Spirit which Tormented him, Return'd Answer, p. 22. of The Standard, I Deny that God ever did, or will ever Reveal Himself by any of those things. And says (ibid) of Gilpin's charging these Possessions of his upon the Devil, that all this was, On∣ly to Reproach the Living God, which the Saints Witnessed in them. This was their Light with∣in, which they say is God: Whose Workings they suppos'd those Possessions of Gilpin's to be: And therefore, that it was Blaspheming of God, to say, that these came from the Devil. To the same Purpose Answer'd G. Fox, in his Gr. Myst. p. 298. where he Repeats the words of Gilpin thus, He saith, he began to Consider, how he had offended God, by his neglect of the use of External means, Reading, Hearing, and Prayer, and Rejecting the Revealed will of God, in his Word; and Hearkning to the Voice of God, only within. And in Answer, falls, like the Rest, upon Running down all Exter∣nal Means of Reading, Praying, &c. for a whole Page together: And Directs Only to the Light within, as that which is Wholey, and Soley, and of it self sufficient. So when that Voice was neglect∣ed (says he) then was John Gilpin Confused, &c. whereas, as himself tells, and the thing shews it self, it was the Hearkning only to that Voice, which brought him into all his Confu∣fusion: And, in his Returning to the Exter∣nal
means, God did wonderfully Deliver him from that Confusion, which the Quakers call his Condemnation, his being Weary of the Cross, &c. However now G. W. calls him a Mad-Man; But do's not say, that these Possessions was his Madness. No, the Quakers think he was Mad, in seeking to be Deliver'd from them. And that when he grew Sober, then was he Mad! But G. W. says, that they have long since Testify'd against the Madness of these Persons. viz. Gilpin, &c. We have seen how they Testify'd against it! By Justifying it, as a Divine Inspiration! If G. W. can shew any other Testifying of theirs, let him. But when did they Testify against Gilpin? never till he Testify'd against Them. In all the time of his monstrous Possession, they stuck to him, and Accompany'd him, even John Andland himself, and William Dodding, who Declar'd he had no Power to leave him, for, he was Acted by the same Spirit. These and other Quakers went along with Gilpin to the Fidlers, and thro' the Streets, when he Blas∣phem'd, Proclaming himself, to be The way, the Truth, and the Life: And none of them Rebuk'd him, or then found any Fault at all with him: But on the Contrary, thought him a Chosen Vessel; and then Actuated by the H. Spirit of God. But when he Return'd to the Ordinances; and Declar'd that to be a Cursed Spirit by which he was Acted: Then! Then! and not till Then, they left him. Then they Accused him of Blaspheming Their God, that is, the Devil. Let them shew that ever they Testify'd against him, before that time. Yet now, they bring their Testifying against him, as an Ar∣gument (by Innuendo) not That, but As if they had
not own'd him in his Madness: And so were not Chargeable with it! Whereas they own'd him only in his Madness; But when he Return'd to a Sober mind, then they Disown'd him. He was no longer Fit Company for Them! So that he must (after all their Dodgings) stand still in the Catalogue, not of our, but of Their Mad Men. He was ours, only when he was Sober: And Theirs only while he was Mad; and no Longer. But now we will go to other Instan∣ces of Madness. 1. First then, Proofes of the Quakers being Mad. In those who went Naked. suppose you saw a Man go Naked thro' the streets, and Besmer'd all over with Excrements, and to come into a Publick Church, in that Condition (as Solomon Eccles, one of the Chief Quaker Preachers, did in the Church at Alderman-bury in London) when the People were there Assembl'd to Divine worship; wou'd not every body conclude such a Man to be Mad? for we know Madness only by the signs which men do shew of it. And if this be al∣low'd as a sign of Madness or a Disorder'd Mind, then we shall have a Large Catalogue among the Quakers; and that Cheifly of their Mini∣sters and Apostles: for this was Common with them, at their first Setting up. And to this Day, we have seen several of them Naked in our streets, denouncing Woes, Judgments &c. If it be said that these were Prophets, and that this was an Effect of their Prophetical Furie. This will make them Madder still, if it be not True. And whether it be True or not, I re∣fer to the Sn. Sect. vi. N. viii. where their Prophe∣tick Talent is Examined. And will the Madness of Solomon Eccles appear Less, because when
he came into the Church at Alderman-bury all Naked, cover'd only with vile Excrement, he did this as an Emblem of the Nakedness and Filth of the Minister, in Preaching out of the Bible (which G. Fox calls Conjuration, see Sn. p. 22.) and that he might as well come thi∣ther with that T—d in his hand, as the Mi∣nister with his Bible? A comparison full of Re∣verence to the Holy Scriptures! And George Whitehead, in his Light and Life of Christ with∣in &c. Printed 1668. p. 38. Vindicates this same Sol. Eccles for this his going Naked, as a Sign (Says G. W.) of the Nakedness of such Dark Professors and Priests as he S. E. witnessed against. And instead of being Asham'd of such a Beast, he there Blasphemously compares this Brutality of his to Isaiah's being Commanded to go Naked for a Sign to Egypt. Not knowing that the sackcloth or Garment of Hair which Isaiah was Commanded to Loose from his Loyns, it being worn Girt close about the Loyns, was a Rough sort of a Mantle or Ʋpper Garment Made of Hair, which the Prophets did usually wear, and by which they were known (See Zech. xiii. 4.2. K. 1.8. Matth. iii. 4. Rev. xi. 3.) Which being Ʋngirt, it was being Ʋndrest; and appearing so, is, in the Common way of speaking, call'd being Naked, as if a man came out all Ʋndrest into the streets, they wou'd say, why do you appear thus Naked? And to Cloath the Naked, is meant of their Poverty, not of their Shame. Or if a man shou'd Strip off his Cloaths, to Fight, Run, Work, or to do any thing upon which he was very Intent, as David when he Danced before the Ark, in a Linen Ephod, this was call'd being Naked, and that Shamelessly too
2. Sam. vi. 20. that is, for a King to be so Naked, or Ʋndrest. Thus it is to be Under∣stood, when it is said 1 Sam. xix. 24. that Saul Stript off his Cloaths, and Prophesied Naked before Samuel, that is, he lay'd by his Robes; It was a Mark besides of Respect to Samuel, as to the Doctor and Master there of that College of the Prophets. As with us, Scholars will not come in their Cloaks, to take their Lesson from their Master; nor do Men appear so muffl'd up where they intend to shew Respect. Yet not altoge∣ther naked, no nor Ʋndrest, Loose, or Slattering; that is a Greater Contempt, and Ʋndecency, and may be call'd being Naked. Thus it is said, that Peter was Naked. Joh. xxi. 7. and that he Girt his  his upper Garment, which was Loose before, when he knew that it was The Lord Jesus who appear'd unto them. But if the Ʋpper Garment were not only Ʋn∣girt, but quite laid aside, this wou'd be call'd a Going Naked, yet not such a Nakedness, void of Modesty, to Discover our Shame, as the Qua∣kers did. And Ignorantly and Impudently wou'd vouch the H. Prophets as a Precedent. To whom if any such Command, for Extraordinary Rea∣sons, had at any time, been given, it wou'd not have Excus'd the Immodesty, or the Blasphemy of any who shou'd Pretend the like Command from God. But this Mad-Freak was Common to their She-Prophets as well as the Men. The Wife of Edmund Adlington of Kendal, went Na∣ked thro' the Streets, the 21. Nov. 1653. As did Mary Collinson another Quaker in the same Town, who Rebuked those that cover'd her Nakedness, telling them, That they had hindered the work of the
Lord. If you ask my Authority for this, I have it out of a Book, Intituled A further Dis∣covery of that Generation of Men call'd Quakers. Printed 1654. subscrib'd by five of the then Ministers. p. 83.84.85. where you will find more Instances, as of Edmund Nuby's wife who went Naked through Kendal, and after in Dec. 1653. came in the same manner into the Church at Kendal. Another, in the Same Posture, about the beginning of January, into Hutton Chappel, at the time of Exercise (as they word it) Eli∣zab. Levens and Miles Newby (Here they go by Couples, Male and Female like the Beasts into the Ark) went Naked up the streets at Ken∣dal. This was attested by Mr. Walker Mini∣ster at Kendal, under his hand, by his Letters baring Date 31. January. 1653. Thom. Castel went as Naked, as he was Born thro' the streets at Kendal, the 10. January. 1653. On Monday. 28. Octob. 1653 one Thom. Holme of Kendal went as Naked thro' the Market-Place at Kirby Steven, upon the Market Day; and at his turning he said, It is not I but God that goeth Naked. And the week following, another Great Ring-Leader of the Quakers one Taylour came to that Town. And Denounced Woes against it, for Rejecting that Prophet of The Lord, whom He had sent to do signs and wonders in it. All these Instances were in one Year, with∣in the Compass of 4 Months, in and about Kendal, when Quakerism was but 3 years old. You may Imagin then how many more Exam∣ples might be Produc'd in other Places, throu∣out this and other Kingdoms and Nations where
they have spread themselves, in 48 years time now since they came into the World. But if you say, that these Testimonies are taken from Adversaries the 5 Ministers before Mentioned. I Answer, that in things of such Publick and Notorious Nature, it cannot be suppos'd that they wou'd Print a Lye, so soon, that is Pre∣sently after (as by the date of their Book) such things were done; when it wou'd have been in the Power of Every body in those Towns to Contradict and Expose them. And if these Instances had been False, it is not to be Imagin'd but that the Quakers in those times wou'd have Deny'd them. But further, we have both George Fox and James Naylor their Answer to this book of these 5 Ministers: And they Both do allow these In∣stances to be True; Boast of More of them; And Defend and Justifie the thing, as being Di∣vine and From God. G. Fox's Answer is in his Great Mystery. p. 233. where as to these Persons going Naked, he says, This hath been a Figure of your Naked∣ness, who are Egypt Spiritual and the Ethiopian Black — And speaking of the Holy Prophets ha∣ving been Signs to those in their Generations, he adds, such the Lord hath moved his Servants to give a True Sign amongst you, and not a Lying; who have their Cloathing, of the Spirit, which ye want; which ye shall witness the Truth of the Lord God in the Sign, if ever ye come into the True Cloathing of the Spirit of God. By this, no man can be sav'd who will not Allow and Receive
these Beastly Im-Modesties of the Quakers, as Divine and Heavenly Signs. James Nayler, in his Answer to this Book of the Five Ministers, which he Intituls A Dis∣covery of the Man of Sin. Printed 1655. com∣ing to that Point of their Going Naked, he says p. 48. God hath made as many Signs among you, as to go Naked in your Steeple-Houses, in your Markets, in your Streets, as Many in the Northern Parts, which is a Figure to you, of all your Na∣kedness. Here he owns many Instances of the like Nature in other Places, I cou'd Produce more by name, as of Daniel Smith Distiller of Malborrough in Wiltshire, who about Twenty years ago, went from Malborrough to Hull, on purpose to shew himself stark Naked in the Church there, which he did. And I suppose the Friends have not forgot (at least the Quaker that Marry'd her has not) that Precious Ser∣vant Maid at Putney, who came Quite naked into the Room where her Master had Company at Dinner: and when some wou'd have cover'd her shame, she thank'd them for their Love, but wou'd not admit of that sort of Kindness: But said that she was moved of the Lord to march quite round the Table, in that same Posture, which she did. But why shou'd I heap up Instances of this their Beastliness, see∣ing it is not Disputed, but Justify'd; And the Receiving such Obscene Bruts, as Signs sent from Heaven, made necessary to Salvation, as you have heard from Fox! But all sober Christians will rather look up∣on them as Signs of the Prodigious Delusions of the Devil; to make Men believe, even Women,
that Divesting themselves of all Natural Mo∣desty And Exposing themselves Naked, in Pub∣lick, Naked Men and Women together (as be∣fore is told) and out-doing the very Impudence of the Stews, is Consistent with that Shamefast∣ness and Sobriety which is so strongly Inculcat∣ed in the Gospel of Christ! But to think such Highly Englightned, beyond the ordinary Mea∣sure, and thereby to Commence Prophets, and Prophetesses sent from God, what is this but to have their Brains turn'd with this Enthusiasti∣cal-Madness; and, without straining the Mat∣ter, to be Literally out of their Wits, and Di∣stracted! What Greater Signs are shewn of it, even in Bedlam! And are not they as Mad, who Defend and Justify these in their Madness! Of which more hereafter. 2. But as those who thus Expos'd themselves Stark-Naked,In their Strange Singulari∣ties. are to be Computed no other∣wise than as Stark-Mad; so these who in lesser Degrees, act contrary to the Common Reason and Sense of Mankind, are to be suppos'd Mad∣dish; for ther are Degrees of Madness. Now if we see a man Abstract himself from all Human Conversation, to be always alone; to Grow surly and Morose; silent and sullen when Accosted; Exotick and Phantastical in his Dress, shunning what any body else do's wear; loving to Appear Singular in all his words and Gestures, who will neither Speak, Look, nor Go like other men; the Common observation of Mankind reckons of these as Growing to∣wards Madness.
But, if they say such a stress upon these; as to think it a Sin to use the Common Language, Habit, or Salutations, this is a Heightning of their Madness. To make it as G. Fox do's, a Sin for Women to have slit-Peaks on the Skirts of their Wastcoats, Short Black Aprons, or Vizard-Masks; or for Men to wear Skimming-Dish Hats (as he calls the little Hats) or Ʋnnecessary Buttons on their Coats or Cloaks. And to Pro∣nounce all this stuff as from the Immediat Spi∣rit of God! (see Sn. p. 299.) If this be not Madness, I think Olivers Porter had hard mea∣sure, to have his Preaching Confin'd to Bedlam when G. Fox. was suffer'd to go Loose, who said in his Journal. p. 24. When the Lord sent me forth into the World; He forbad me to put off my Hat to any — and I was Requir'd to Thee and Thou all Men and Women, they wou'd Down with all wordly Honour, as long as they had no share in it. Now in all the fore-mention'd Instances the Quakers have made themselves as Mad as any ever were in the World. And have been so esteem'd at Rome, and other Places where they had never been before; as they were at first when they Rose up amongst us: only the Com∣mon use of it now, has abated of the Strange∣ness, but nothing of the Irrationality and Mad∣ness, not to speak of the Breach of Justice or Reli∣gion; for Honour is as much Due to our Superiors, as either Fear, or Tribute, and Equally Com∣manded. Rom. xiii. 7. and to Deny it, is Im∣morality, and a Sin; besides the Singularity, and Proud-Humility, which Entitles it to a High
Degree of Madness. And in this, the whole Bo∣dy of the Quakers is Involv'd. In making Themselves free from Sin; and Equal with God.3. But thirdly, wou'd not that man be Coun∣ted Mad who shou'd Fancie himself Exempted from the Common Condition of other Mortals, to be as Bright and Glorious and Impassible as an Angel? And is it not as much to think our selves as Pure and Impeccable as they; even while we feel our own Frailty and Imperfections in Day∣ly and Frequent Instances! Yet still to Cry, that we are Pure, and without Sin! Nay, Per∣fect, even as God! And Equal to Him, and One with Him, in very Nature and Substance, and a Part of Him! Can any Madness be Imagin'd beyond or Equal to this! And G. W. p. 88. gives his Consent to secure such Persons in Bed∣lam, if we can find any such among them, that we can plainly Prove to hold the Same. Now whether this be not Plainly Prov'd in the Sn. Sect. ii. iii. and iv. I leave to the Reader. And G. W. do's neither Deny, nor Answer one of the Quotations there Produc'd: But stoutly Denies the whole Charge, without so much as Attempting to Invalidat any one Particle of the Evidence. Which I think I may Modestly say is very like the Answer of a Mad-Man. In Assuming to be Pro∣phets.4. But I will put the Case lower than that of Aspiring to be Equal with God: Suppose then that a Poor Country Lad shou'd come to London, and hapning upon a Rich Widdow, shou'd presently fancie himself to be some Duke or Great Prince; and, as such, shou'd Issue forth his Proclamations, Commissions &c. wou'd not G. W. give me leave to think this fellow a little Craz'd? But suppose he shou'd
set up for a Prophet sent Immediately from God, as Elijah was; And, as such, shou'd take upon him to Dictate to Kings and Emperors, and Com∣mand them, In the Name of the Lord to Give forth Prophesies, and affix to them, Thus saith the Lord &c. And suppose he Cou'd shew no Credentials at all for this High Commission, only bid Men take his own word for it; wou'd not this make him much more Extravagantly and Blasphemously Mad? Now how many Mad-Men of this sort have we had among the Qua∣kers? Even Fox their Original, and all the way down as many as have Wrote, or almost that have Preach'd or Spoke amongst them. This is a Talent without which whosoever speaks, is a Conjurer, as Fox has Determin'd in his Westmorland Petition. p. 5. in his Saul's Errand. p. 7. and els∣where, as shewn in the Sn. Ther is one particular Instance put in the Front of the Preface. p. xi. of the First Edit. of the Sn. (it is p. 281. of the Third Edit.) where a Prophetical Curse is set down of Con∣fusion against George Keith. And it is not a Hasty, Rash Curse, in Passion or so, as is usual among the Profane Cursers and Swearers of the World: But it is a Deliberat, Grave Curse, in Cold Blood, set down in Writing, and sent to George Keith; it bears Date the 17th. of the 4th. Month. 1695. And is subscrib'd George Whitehead. And begins in these words. Thus Saith the Lord. And it is written not in the Name of G. Whitehead, as any Thought or Prog∣nostick of his own, but every word in the Per∣son of God, as speaking to G. Keith, Because
thou hast poured Contempt upon My Servants, I will assuredly bring Confusion upon thee &c. Now for this George Whitehead thus to assume the Stile of the most Extraordinary Prophets of God, and to Fancie himself one of them, I think will be Judg'd a Greater Degree of Mad∣ness, than if he had Fancy'd himself to be a Duke, or a Prince: for a Prophet Immediatly sent from God, is certainly Cloath'd with a far Greater Honour than any that can be Bestow'd by the most Splendid of Worldly Titles. There∣fore this is no ordinary mistake, or such as cou'd befall any Man in his Wits. Nay farther (to shew the Excess of G. White∣head's Madness) Suppose he shou'd think that this Prophetical Curse of his against G. Keith, to be not only Equal to any Prophesie Recorded in Scripture, but of Greater Authority than any Chapter in the Bible: wou'd any body, in this case, Excuse him from the very Height of Mad∣ness! And for this, see his Truth defending the Quakers An. 1659. p. 7. where this Question was Demanded of him, Do you Esteem your Speak∣ings to be of as Great Authority as any Chapters in the Bible? And he sets down his own An∣swer in these words. That which is Spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as Great Autho∣rity as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and GREA∣TER. This he Repeats again in the same words, in his Serious Appology. An. 1671. p. 49. And Quotes his former Book, to shew that this was not spoke by Chance, but was a standing Principle among them. Now then, if G. W. will say, That the Curse which he sent to G. Keith was Spoken by the Spirit of Truth,
he owns, by his own words, that it is not on∣ly of As Great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, but of GREATER! And then I think we need no further Proof of his being Stark-Mad. But, on the other hand, if he will, to save himself from this Imputation, Acknow∣ledge that that Curse was not Spoken by the Spi∣rit of Truth, then must he own himself Guilty of a most Notorious Blasphemy, to Dictate thus in the Person of God, and make God to speak his Lies, and the Delusions of his Besotted Brain. And if this be not put upon the score of Mad∣ness, then ought G. Whitehead to suffer the Pun∣nishment of a Blasphemer. Therefore he shou'd Return his Thanks to those who are so Mer∣ciful as to Prove him only Non Compos (as of Felo de se) to save his Chattels and his Carcass too. But this is not only as to this Curse a∣gainst G. K. (that is but one Instance among many) nor only as to G. W. but it Reaches to All that the Quakers have Deliver'd, In the Name of the Lord, not only against Particular Persons, but the whole Church of England, the King, the Bishops and Priests, and the Lawyers too: they are Particularly mark'd out for De∣struction, if ever the Quakers do Prevail, they are the Midianites whom we must Vex, that is Destroy (see Sn. p. 230.) And if the many Thousands of their followers in England do be∣lieve (as they Profess) that what these their Leaders and Prophets have said is all from the Mouth of The Lord, the Consequence (besides the Blasphemy of it) must be very Dangerous: especially since they have already Publisht their Declaration wherein they Assert their Right and
Title to Possess the Ʋttermost parts of the Earth: and their Principle to Fight, even with the Car∣nal Sword, to Re-Gain it, whenever they see their time. vid. Sn. p. 212. Now if they will not let this be taken from them, upon the Account of Madness, believe it, it is time to Look after them. However it is Good to keep a Sword out of a Mad-Man's hand. See hereafter Sect. iv. p. 38. and we go on to yet Plainer and even Ocular Proofs. In their Preter-Na∣tural Qua∣king. &c.5. A fifth Instance of Madness, or rather of Diabolical Possession, is the Monstrous Quaking and Shaking, which for Ten years together after their first setting up, was strangely noted a∣mong them, and from which they had the Name of Quakers: It has much Abated since the Re∣stauration. 1660. Yet Remainders of it are still left amongst them. To this G. W. says p. 6. N. 6. How proves he that this proceeds from Delusion and Diabolical Possession p. 44. and not from the word and Power of God? But, George, How canst thee have the Confidence to ask such a Question, when thee knowest right well that this is Prov'd fully in the Sn. But thee Slidest over all the Proofs, and then Gravely Askest How Proves he? The Reader will see Proofs sufficient in the Sn. Sect. xxi. even the very Confessions of those who were so Possess'd. But G. W. Quotes a particular Page of the Sn. how proves he p. 44? this is of the First Edition. (it is p. 298. of the Third Edit.) He had hopes that no one wou'd look so much as into any one page which he Quoted, but take all upon his word. For in that ve∣ry Page, ther is a Proof, which G. W. Conceals
instead of Answering. G. Fox in his Westmorland Petition. p. 5. And in his Saul's Errand. p. 7. said that whoever spoke, and not from the Mouth of the Lord, were False-Prophets, Conjurers &c. These passages had been (with several others to the same purpose) Quoted before in the Sn. And in p. 44. which G. W. Names as having no Proof, these are again Referr'd to, and the In∣ferrence is made, that if all the vile stuff which the Quakers have Printed be not from the Mouth of the Lord then, by G. Fox's sentence, they are Conjurers: and another Instance of G. Fox's Senslesness is added In that same Place, which was not Quoted before, viz. his making it Heathenism and Idolatry to have any Creature in Heaven or Earth, as Sun, Moon, or Star, a Man, Beast, Fish, Fowl or Tree Painted upon a Sign-Post; but only something of Man's making, as a Fork, a Saw, a Bed-staff, or the like: Then his Pronouncing, as from the Mouth of God, against the slit-Peaks behind on the Skirts of Women's wastcoats, Mens Skimming-Dish-Hats, and such like Childish and Ridiculous stuff: And it is there Urg'd, that if All this was not from the Mouth of the Lord, then, G. Fox had Pro∣nounc'd himself to be a Conjurer, and so of the other Quakers. And if they were Conjurers, then those Monstrous Quakings and Shakings which Possess'd them were from the Devil, and no Divine Inspiration, as they Pretended. And G. W. answers not a word to any thing of this, but asks still what Proof is ther in p. 44. when this very Proof is in p. 44. And I Desire him now to Answer it. Was all that stuff which is there Quoted of G. Fox's from The Mouth of
the Lord? if G. W. will say Yea, I suppose I shall need no further Proof of his Madness, as well as of G. Fox's. If he says Nay, then I must ask him whether G. Fox said True, when he wrote, That whoever spoke and not from the Mouth of the Lord, was a Conjurer? If not True, George was a Lyar; and if True, he was a Conjurer: And if a Conjurer, his Quaking and Shaking was the Possession of the Devil, and did not Proceed from the word and Power of God, as G. W. wou'd turn it, And asks How Proves he? Do George, Ask that Question over again, and it will be as Good an Answer to this, as it was to the Sn. And you may Quote this Page too if you will, as well as p. 44. of the Sn, And tell the Reader that ther is not a word of the Matter neither Here nor There. But George is a Cunning Whipster, he had a farther Design in this than he was wil∣ling shou'd be seen. He put in his Plea for their Quaking, as Proceeding from the word and Power of God, by saying How Proves he? i. e. the Contrary. But George Knew well enough that this Plea wou'd never Hold, therfore he wou'd not assert it Positively, only by an Innuendo. And then in the same p. 6. N. 7. he puts in another Excuse (which he will as little stand by) as if this Quaking was only Fits of Convulsion, for thus says he, Ʋnless some have been taken therewith (i. e. with this Quaking) in some Convulsion Fits, which are Common to some Persons among Divers sorts of People:
As to this, I desire George to Consider, That this Plea Destroys the Former. For if their Quaking be only Fits of Convulsion, then is it no mark of the Extraordinary Workings of the Spirit in the Quakers, as they have Boa∣sted; and wrote in Defence of it; nay and call'd it an Holy Duty (Sn. p. 298.) and com∣par'd it to the Quaking of Moses and the Prophets. It will be very Profane to put all this upon Fits of Convulsion. But it will not do, in the Case of the Quakers. For it is very obvious, that these Quakings of the Quakers did not proceed from any Natural Cause. 1. These Quakings Possest them only, or most Generally, at their Meetings: And then wou'd Seize Many of them together. 2. They came Suddainly, and left them En∣tirely when they went away; And had not such Symptoms, or left such Marks behind them as Natural Diseases. 3. They were not Remov'd by Phisick or any Natural Means. 4. They who had them Pretended to Visi∣ons, even of Spirits Dancing about them, Spea∣king to them, and Directing them to do ma∣ny Extravagant things, to follow Flys, Burn their Leggs in the Fire, and some to Kill them∣selves, as in the Relations which Gilpin, Tordervy, and others have given of themselves. And were told by these Spirits, that these Qua∣kings were the workings of God's Spirit in them: And therefore bidden to Rejoyce in them: And when they came ont of these Fits, they Express'd the Great Joys they had in them, tho'
mix'd with Intolerable Pains. And therefore many Long'd for them. 5. They Exceeded any Convulsion or Natu∣ral Disease. See the account in the Sn. p. 301. Add to this another Instance given in the Further Discovery before Quoted, wrote by Five Ministers. p. 91. of a Quaker woman who came to Disturb one of their Congregations at Kel∣let in Lancashire, she fell into a Trance, her Belly puffed up, her sides Extended, her Back-bone thrust out, her whole Body as a Bladder when it is in Blowing &c. This is attested under the hand or Mr. Moore Minister at Kellt. But Instances are Endless. See the General Account of it in a Book Printed at that time. 1653. call'd A brief Relation of the Irreligion of the Northern Qua∣kers. Wrote by Francis Higgison p. 15. Those in their Assemblies that are taken with these Fits, fall suddenly down as it were in a Swoon, as tho' they were surpris'd with an Epilepsis or Apoplexy, and ly Groveling on the Earth, and strugling as it were for Life; and some∣times more Quietly, as tho' they were Depar∣ting. While the Agony of their Fits is upon them their Lips Quiver, their Flesh and Joints Tremble, their Bellies swell as tho' Blown with Wind, they Foam at the Mouth, and sometimes Purge as if they had taken Phisick. In this Fit they continue sometimes an Hour or two, sometimes Longer before they come to themselves again; And when it leaves them, they Roar out Horribly with a Voice Greater than the Voice of a Man; The Noise, those say that have heard it, is
a very Horrid Fearfull Noise, and Greater sometimes than any Bull can make. The Speaker, when any of them falls in this Fit, will say to the rest (that are some∣times Astonisht at this sight, especially if they be Incipients) let them alone, trouble them not, the Spirit is now strugling with the Flesh, if the Spirit overcome, they will Quickly come out of it again, though it be sorrow now, it will be Joy in the Morning &c. And when they have said a few words to this Effect, they go on with their Speaking. Sometimes they carry those wretched Pa∣tients to Beds, when they are near them, and let them Ly on them, till their Fit be over. These Quakings they Maintain Saul's Errand. p. 5. and in their Books and Papers call them the Marvelous works of the Lord, Battels of Shaking and Trembling before the Presence of the Lord: and call them that speak against them Ishmaelites, that scoff at the works of the Lord — They say also, those that speak against this Quaking shew themselves to be Blasphemers; and that it is Presumption and Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost to speak against it. Thus that Account. Take another two Years after this. Wrote by Mr. Edmund Skipp then Minister of Bodenham in Hereford-shire, but who (as himself tells us) had been before seduc'd by the fair Pretences of the Quakers, and was one of them; But, by the Great Mercy of God, having Discover'd
their Gross Deceits, he Return'd from them; and then Gave notice of them to the World in a Book, printed 1655. which he Intituled The Worlds wonder, or The Quakers Blazing-Star &c. there p. 22. he tells of these Mysterious Deceits of Anti-Christ. Which I gather (says he) from those strange and unheard of Passions and Agonies, those Great Burthens and Exercitations of Body, in so much that they are sometimes in Trances and Soundings; and if they are not brought into such a state of Deadness as it were, yet they suffer most Extreme Tortures of Body, that hath been Visible to me and several others many times, nay, so much Extremity that it maketh them Roar out for very Bitterness; And I do clearly Judge that if the Lord did not Li∣mit the Devil in their behalf, as he did for Job, saying, Thou shalt not touch his Life, it wou'd be Impossible for their Concaves to hold their Inwards, in those Violent Motions; for they are made under those Agonies to Tremble and Quake, as though their Flesh must part from their Bones and Ligatures, like unto Men in the strongest Fits of an Ague that ever you saw, as tho' they had seen Belshazzar's Vision. Dan. 10. that made his knees smite one against another. In those strange Passions they are Exercised with so much Heat (I know not of what sort) that it maketh them cry out for Drink, and ma∣keth them Sweat like men in most violent Feavers. Now they call these Agonies the Fiery-Trial. and say it is the Power of the
Holy Ghost burning up and Destroying their Corruptions, and Purifying them like Gold that is tried seven times in the Fire. And that which is very strange, when they are thus in the midst of these Extreme Shakings, Quakings, Trials, Roarings and Perplexities, that one wou'd think ther cou'd be no more Torment upon the Damn'd Spirits than is upon them at the Present, yet many times, when they begin to come to their Speech (for it falleth out often that they are not able to speak for a long time) they will speak how much Joy and Pleasure they have mix'd with that Torment, in such an Inseperable Manner, as they themselves Express, as Heat and Fire mix'd together, that they cou'd wish to be in it for Ever and Ever. This they call Drinking of the Cup, or the Undergo∣ing the Curse and wrath of God as Christ did, for here they speak (to my Under∣standing most Blasphemously) and say, they must be brought to suffer as Christ did, and to Undergo as Great a sense of Wrath as He did, when he Cried out, My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me? In a word, as far as ever I cou'd Understand their Ap∣prehensions by their Expressions in this last particular, I did Judge this to be their De∣lusion, that they must suffer Eternal Burnings, bearing the full weight of Divine Justice and wrath, as fully as though ther never had been any Christ Crucifi'd, or acceptation of His Sacrifice, untill, as they say, ther shou'd be no more left in them, but the Pure seed of God, in its own Perfect Likeness —
And they say that Condition or state which is call'd in Scripture Hell or Everlasting Tor∣ment—is but a Dispensation which shall End at such a time, as that Burning and Tor∣ment of the Soul and Conscience shall have Refin'd it, and brought it into its for∣mer Purity and Likeness of God. Thus far I have transcrib'd out of this Au∣thor, not only as to this of their Quaking, but because he do's withal open to us, the very Heart and Bottom of the Quaker Here∣sie. viz. That the Meritorious Cause of our Justification is not the Sufferings of Christ in His Body upon the Cross; but that the same sufferings must be wrought over again in us, that we must Bear our own Sins, in our own Bodies, and must be Healed by our own Stripes; which likewise they call the Suf∣ferings of Christ or the Light within them. And that what he suffers thus within every man, is the only Meritorious Cause of. his Justi∣fication, and Reconciliation to God. That what He suffer'd Outwardly upon the Cross is nothing to us, but an Example, a History, or Facilt Representation of the Greater Mystery of what He Suffers and Acts within us: Wherein only the Atonement and Satisfaction for Sin is Per∣form'd. And this they suppos'd to be done in these Monstrous Possessions of Quaking, &c. And therefore were greatly Desirous of them, as thinking their state not secure till they had gone thro' one of these Fits at least. As Mr. Skipp tells of himself, while he was a Quaker. p. 25. I thought it was my unhappiness (says he) that I was not, and it was great Cause of trouble
and unspeakable sorrow to me, and that which caus'd me to complain bitterly time after time, but they wou'd tell me that I must wait for it, and they said that they cou'd Believe for me, and they were Confident I shou'd be a very Glorious Piece, &c. Here their Spirit of Discerning fail'd them! But that which makes the long Quotation I have taken out of Mr. Skipp the more Valua∣ble, is, because G. Fox has wrote an Answer to it in his Great Mystery, where p. 314. he, after his usual fashion, Epitomizes and Falsifies Mr. Skipp's words above Quoted, thus, It is Blasphemy to say we must fill up the sufferings of Christ. Ther are no such words in Mr. Skipp, not so put together; but he referrs to that Part above Quoted, where Mr. Skipp calls it Blasphemy to say that they must suffer as Christ did, and are sav'd by Their own sufferings, and not by Christs. In which G. F. opposes Mr. Skipp, and says, in Answer, Thou hast not Drunk the Cup of the Wrath and Judgment of the Al∣mighty, and that you must Drink before you come to know the seed of God come from under all the Power of Wickedness in thee—And Christ who bore the Sin of the whole world, felt it, and was under it, and was offered, and over it all, and makes his Enemies his Foot-stool. This is all his Answer. And shews what he means, by con∣sidering what it is which he opposes; for without seeing the Books which he Pretends to Answer (of which few are now Extant) ther is no Understanding, by him, either what they said, for he seldom Quotes them True, or what himself says, who cou'd write nei∣ther Sense nor English. But here you see he
Denies nothing of Mr. Skipp's Charge against the Quakers, but rather Justify's and Defends it, in other words, that we must suffer as Christ did, till the Seed of God come from under the Power of Wickedness, which are almost Mr. Skipp's own words. And Fox do's not Deny, that they Place the Meritorious Cause of ther Justi∣fication in those Sufferings within themselves, and not in the outward Sufferings of Christ: And that when these Inward Sufferings in their Con∣sciences are over, and the Seed Purged, then that ther is an End of Hell, that these Sufferings of the Seed in them, is the only Hell, this Fox do's not Deny, tho positively Charg'd upon them: Which is a Plain Confessing; The Least one can do is to Deny (as G. W. here, in. this Answer of his) But when we Pretend to Answer, and dare not so much as Plead Not Guilty, it is a full and total yielding to the Charge. The truth is, the Light within is All things to the Quakers its Shining (as they think they are sure) within them, they call Heaven, its being obscur'd, that is Hell; And they Believe no other Hea∣ven or Hell, or God, or Christ but their Light within. And when they are Possest with their Quaking Fits, they call it the Fighting of their Light within against their Darkness within; which G. W. wou'd turn off here upon Convulsion Fits. For which I leave him to be Chastis'd by those Quakers who have wrote Apologies for their Quaking, as being the Effects of a Divine In∣spiration: And those who were much troubl'd, because that Extraordinary Quaking had now, in a Great measure, left them, as if thereby they had Lost that Measure of the Spirit which
their Fathers Possest, or which Possest their Fathers. To Comfort whom Pat. Levingston wrote a Book call'd Plain and down right Dealing, where∣in he told them that their first years were Purging years; but that when Phisick had Purg'd sufficiently, then the Patient was more Still and Quiet (See the Sn. p. 295.) yes, George, and after Convulsion-fits too when they are over! But, George, few Desire fits of Convulsion or any Na∣tural Disease, and Long for them, as the Qua∣kers for their Possessions: None Express Exta∣sies of Joy in Natural Diseases, as we have heard of this Quaker Sickness. And all this cou'd not be Counterfited: for None can Counterfit such violent Convulsions and Distortions as Exceed the Power of Nature. In the Next Place Young Children among the Qua∣kers were often feiz'd with these Quaking Fits, and these cou'd not Counterfit. And many Ear∣nestly Desir'd them, but cou'd not have them when they wou'd. And since they are neither Natural nor Coun∣terfit, they must be a Praeter Natural either Di∣vine or Diabolical Possession: And which of the two it is, ther are some Rules whereby to Guess, which are Mention'd in the Sn. Sect. xxi. which G. W. wou'd do well to Consider, and not Shuffle them off as he do's in this Answer. But he gives up the Cause, by Assigning such Contradictory Reasons: for, in the same breath, within the Compass of one Page he makes three supposes for these Quakings. First, The word and Power of God. Second, Convulsion-Fits. Third, Exorcism, or the Casting out of some Evil Spirit. If he had said the Entrance of the Evil Spirit,
and its taking of Possession, he had come nearer the Mark. But however, Why do's he make so many Guesses at the Causes of this Quaking? Did he not know whether it was Convulsion, or Inspiration, or Exorcism? or was he Asham'd to tell? Well, but as to our Present purpose, from whatever Cause these Quakings do Proceed, it is allow'd on all hands that the Possession is ve∣ry Strong; and carries with it the most visible Effects of Madness. And as the Old Proverb says, Once Mad, and Ever the worse, so they who have been once Possess'd with these Qua∣king Fits, seldom Ever after recover the state they were in before, but have Raz'd Looks, and something Frightful about them. But it is not all the Quakers whom God has Deliver'd so far into the Power of the Devil: And others have been Possess'd as well as the Quakers: But this was more Peculiar to the Quakers than to any others of any sort of People; otherwise they had not got the Name of Quakers from thence. And at the time when the Devil was most Busie, and these Qua∣kings were most Violent, and most Frequent, about the year 1653, Quakerism was then but very young, only three years old; and the Quakers did not then bear Proportion of One to a Thousand (speaking within Compass) to the Rest of England: so that we have had a Thou∣sand of these sort of Mad-Men among the Qua∣kers for One any where else. And if we Reckon those Mad, who Defend the Madness of others, then very Few of the Quakers will be left out of this Classis of Mad-Men. But I wou'd Desire
them, in their Lucid Intervals, to Consider that God was in the small still voice, not in the Furi∣ous Wind, Earth-Quake, or Fire. It was the Evil-Spirits who Tore those that they Possess'd,I Kings xix. and put them into Convulsions, Foaming, wallow∣ing, Roaring— It is said of those who heard the Apostles, that some Smote their Breasts and Re∣pented, others search'd the Scriptures dayly, to find whether these things, which they Preach'd, were so. But can the Quakers give one Sin∣gle Instance of any that was ever Converted to Christianity, at this Frightful Hideous Rate! Do not such Violent Transports look like the Spirit of Furie and Madness, more than of Meekness, Love, Humility, or any of the Christi∣an Graces! And then if we look into the wick∣ed Errors and Heresies which were Taught by this Quaker Spirit, it makes it a full Demon∣stration what sort of Spirit it was; and whence that Convulsive Birth of Quakerism did proceed: And that their Madness was not Caused by any Ordinary or Natural Distemper of Brain; but (which is much more Lamentable and Dismal) by the Possession of Evil Spirits. G. W's. putting this off with Convulsion-Fits, may be Compar'd to that of Mahomet's Fall∣ing-Sickness; who pretended that at those times the Angel Gabriel came with Revelations to him. But if Mahomet's Convulsions came from his Inspiration, his case and the Quakers are as near of Kin as their Doctrin: For Mahomet Pretended to Reverence the Scriptures both of the Old and New-Testament; only his Light within Guided him to Mis-understand them as to the Trinity and Incarnation: And his Alcoran
is nearer the Quaker and Socinian Comment upon the Text, than any other can be found in Christendom. It has been observ'd that the Beginnings of several Heresies and Sects have been Attend∣ed with these sort of Violent and Preternatural Transports, as in John of Leyden, Knipperdolling, and some later Enthusiasts among our selves, besides the Quakers. Such Punishments did in the Primitive Church often follow the sentence of Excommunication upon Notorious offenders. And God has, in our Later times, which have learn'd to Dispise those Spiritual Censures, Inflicted the like upon those who have Deli∣ver'd themselves unto Satan, by Excommunicat∣ing themselves, in Forsaking the Church, and and making Schisms against Her. Of these some notice may, perhaps, be taken hereafter. But this Instance of the Quakers is as Notorious as any, of the Power given to the Devil o∣ver Heresy-Archs. And I will not now take any others under consideration, my present business being only with the Quakers. In their Silent-Meetings.6. Ther is a Sixth Instance of Madness, which seems a Branch of Infection from the former; or rather a Lesser Degree of Possession, or of a more Sullen tho' less Furious Spirit than the other. Some are Possess'd with a Dumb Devil, who hang down their Heads, and will not Speak or Answer one word, say to them what you will. I have seen some of these in Bedlam. And these Generally love to be Alone, and Indulge their Melancholy. But if you shou'd see a company of these appoint Meetings to∣gether, not to Converse, but on purpose to be
All Silent: Wou'd you not think their Madness had. Exceeded the Common Bounds! Yet this might pass only for a Mad Freak. But sup∣pose, that they made a Case of Conscience of this, and urg'd the Obligation of it from Eze∣chiel's sitting Silent some time by the Captives at Babylon; and the like of Job's Friends, from Consideration of the Greatness of his Grief: And farther shou'd find out Spiritual Improve∣ment in this Silent Converse, by the Spirits fly∣ing from one to another, especially if they came to the Quaker-Gryp (like that of the Ma∣sons) when they Shake hands, this moves their Spirits much, and they Communicate by the Eyes, and by the Ears (for tho they do not Speak, they Grunt and Sigh hard, and sometimes Whis∣per or so) by the Pulse, by the Pores, by Sym∣pathy in every Part! Now all this is the Case of the Quaker Silent-Meetings, which some of them love better (for they are more Loving) than their Speaking ones. And the Arguments above mention'd have been made use of in Defence of them. These Meetings shou'd be in a Dark Room, which together with their Silence, might Contribute to their Cure. For what business they have there, needs no Outward Light, more than any Words to be made on't; especially if their Quaking-Fits happen'd at the same time; for such are Mon∣strous Sights, and best past over in Silence. In the New Qua∣kers of America.7. Ther is Another Range of Quakers, whom I suppose G. W. will give me one and All in∣to my Catalogue of Mad-Men, that is, those call'd Case's Crew or the New-Quakers in America (of whom a short Account is Given in the
Sn. p. 75. to 79.) who throw Dust in the Eyes and Mouths of the Old Quakers, giving them Serpents food. &c. These have Restor'd the Primitive Quakerism, with some Improvements, they bring Fidles into their Meetings, and Dance, Firsk, Vault there with wondrous Activity. They turn off their Wives, because the Children of the Resurrection neither Marry nor are given in Mar∣riage: And declare Marriage to be of the Devil, because the Children of this world, Marry: there∣fore they live in Common, and thro' off Ordi∣nances, of which Marriage is but one. And some of them keep up the Primitive order of going Naked; as Mary Ross who after her Appearing in that No-Dress in Publick, became Publick her self, and the Rulers of the World took offence at her Gifts, Imprison'd and Punish'd her out∣ward Man, or Woman. It was the same Spirit or Flesh that mov'd our England-Quakers, to the same Excess: And if they had been Scourg'd for such Beastly Immodesty's, as she was, it might have Cur'd their Itch. If that was not the Dis∣ease, it cou'd be nothing Short of Madness: which these American Quakers took from the Example of the European Quakers, who led the Naked-Dance as before is shewn. Vindica∣ting of Mad-men.8. I will now Close up this List of Mad-Men, with those who do Vindicat All or Any of the Madnesses before mention'd: since ther cannot be a Greater sign of a Mad-Man than to think Mad-Men to be Sober. But to mistake Rank Madness for Inspiration, and Prophesie, and the Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, is as High a Pitch of Madness as can be Nam'd. And this will Include all those Qua∣kers
who do not think the Rest to be Mad, who have Run into or Defended any of the Mad Freaks before Mention'd. Particularly All who will not think George Whitehead to be Mad, and some others I will not Name. If it be said, That many of these men, whom I have Charg'd with Madness (in their several Degrees) do, in Common Conversation, and in their Worldly business, talk like other Men, and shew no signs of Madness. I will Grant it. But so you will find it with many Mad-Men, till you come to hit upon the Point which Di∣sturbs them. Every Mad-Man is not Mad in Every thing. A Man may be Mad, Secundum Quid. Ther is a Remarkable story of a Great Don in Spain, who took a Fancie that he was The Holy Ghost: And therefore was shut up as a Mad-Man. But taking occasion one day to Discourse upon the Politicks with one of the King's Council, who came to see him, he Ar∣gu'd a Knotty Point which had Puzl'd the King and Council, with so Great Accurateness, that this Councellor Venting it next day at the Council receiv'd General Approbation: Upon which he took occasion to Interceed with the King for the Liberty of his Friend, owning that what he had said, was all borrow'd from him: and therefore did Conclude that it must be the Malice of some of his Enemies, which had Mis-Represented him, as a Mad-Man. The King bad his Friend Return to him again, and if he did not own that he was the Holy Ghost, he shou'd have his Liberty. But he stuck to his Point, and Remain'd a Mad-Man, notwithstanding of all his Politick Qualificati∣ons.
And now, upon the whole Matter, I Refer it to all the World whether ther can be Pro∣duc'd such a Catalogue of Mad-Men, in so many several Instances, as I have here shewn of the Quakers, among such a Number of any sort or Discrimination of Men upon the face of the Earth? G. W. has Extorted this from me. And one wou'd think that this were sufficient to Excuse me from Answering any more of his Book. But however I will Proceed to Examin those Mistakes and Abuses which he Alledges in the Sn. for wrong may be done, even to a Mad-man; and ther is an old saying which G. W. has us'd upon occasion, Give the Devil his Due. The Abu∣ses and Mistakes which G. W. Alle∣ges in the Snake.VII. The Catalogue of these Abuses begins at p. 13. of his Book; And he begins at p. 93. of the Sn. it seems he found None in all that went before this. And his Curse of Confusion upon G. Keith, before mention'd is in p. xi. But ther was no Abuse or Mistake in this, therefore he lets that Pass, without any Notice. As to the Necessity of Prea∣ching.I. The first he Instances is in p. 93, 94. (it is Sect. xxiii. N. iv. p. 328, 329. 3d. Edit.) where, from the Quaker-Principle of Reducing all to the Light within, and making that suffici∣ent, without any thing else, it is urg'd as In-conse∣quential to this, that the Quakers shou'd Preach outwardly &c. To which G. W. Answers, That this is a Condemning of the Apostles, and of the Church of England, who Preach outwardly, and yet do own the Inward Anointing, or the Light within, as well as the Quakers.
Ans. But not as do the Quakers. That is, to set it above the Scriptures (as has been spoke to) and to make it Sufficient to Salvation with∣out any thing else, as G. W. here owns again p. 28. i. e. without any Necessity of an out∣ward Christ, or Scriptures, or any thing else. And according to this sense of the Anointing or Light within, it is altogether Impertinent to have any outward either Preaching or Ordinan∣ces; for that must be Ʋnnecessary that is Added to what is Sufficient without it. But neither the Apostles nor the Church of Eng∣land having ever had any such notion of the Light within, but that it needed Helps; there∣fore their Preaching was most Rational. And that of the Quakers is Irrational, and Contradicto∣ry to their own Principles. The Com∣parison of Fox and Muggle∣ton. With G. W's. Malicious Innuendo, as to the Act of To∣leration.II. To what is said of the Comparison be∣twixt Fox and Muggleton in the Sn. he says. p. 14, 15. That it is a Gross Calumny against G. F. whose Divine Inspiration and sound Testimony, gi∣ven him of God, was Evident against Muggleton's Dark Spirit, Presumptuous and Blasphemious (thus the Quakers pronounce Blasphemous) Doctrin. And this is every word he says to the Matter. This is a Pretty Easie way of Answering! If you will not take his own word, ther is not a word like an Answer in his Book. He shou'd have Deny'd the whole Sn. at once: And sav'd himself and me this trouble. But p. 15. he wou'd charge the Reflection that is made upon the Toleration 1650, where∣in Fox and Muggleton appear'd, as if intended against the Present Toleration, and so to bring the Author under the Lash of the Government.
It is not worth any Answer, I only mention it to shew the Good Nature of the Man; who in the same Page cries out upon Persecution for Conscience Sake. As to the Oder of the Qua∣kers a gainst car∣rying Guns in their Ships.III. His next Skip is to p. 104. where he finds a Great Mistake; The Author was there shewing that since 1660 the Quakers have De∣cry'd the use of the Carnal weapon, and as a Proof of it (which they do not Deny) he said that by Order of their Yearly Meeting 1693 they were Commanded that none of them shou'd carry Guns in their Ships. This is Ʋntrue (says G. W. p. 15.) we know no such Commands — only a tender Caution to such that have acted contrary. Here are two Grievous Mistakes! First: not a Command, but a Tender Caution. i. e. their Command was worded in that Form. See Sn. p. 271.272. Secondly, not a Command for the Future, only a Caution or Reproof to those who had transgress'd before. And do's not this Imply a Command (Oh! I beg your Pardon) a Caution for the Future? And do's not this shew the Quakers pretended Principle, as much as in the words cited in the Snake? And were they Cited to any other End than to shew that Principle? I have not seen that Yearly Epistle, only took an Account of it from those that had Seen and Read it; And I find they have given me a True Account, tho' it were not Sillabical, as G. W. Objects: and none but he wou'd have made such an Objection, to no Purpose in the world but for Objection sake. This shews what little Room was left him in the Sn. for Objections, when he makes such work with this; and sets down Part of that Yearly Epistle, but not the whole, nor that Part
which Relates to the Guns, that we may see how it is worded. But he has Confest e∣nough. As to their Principles being Dan∣gerous to Govern∣ment.IV. He finds no more fault to p. 115. of the Sn. (it is p. 214. of the Third Edit.) which he Excepts against p. 16. 17. In that part of the Sn. it was shewn of what pernicious Consequence it was to Government for the Quakers to assume (as they do) a Prophetical Commission, Immedi∣ately from God, as the Prophets of old had: That this wou'd Inferr a Power for Deposing of Kings, and Alteration of Government, as some of the old Prophets did, by Command from God. That besides the Quakers had, by a Solemn Declara∣tion, asserted their Right to Possess the whole Earth, and to Fight for it, with the Carnal Sword. And the words of their said De∣claration are there set down, which was Penn'd by that Renown'd Quaker, Edward Burrough, and Subscrib'd by Fifteen of the Principal Leaders a∣mong the Quakers in the Name of All the Rest. Now G, W. do's not deny one word of all this. What then? How do's he Answer it? what is the Mistake, Abuse, or Calumny which he charges upon this Passage? He says, These are very Bitter, Invidious and Calumnious Suggesti∣ons, and Cruel Jealousies of a High Nature, as if this poor Libeller eagerly thirsted after our Blood. That Libeller (as you call him) I dare say had no Design upon your Blood, or the Blood of any body. But if you Preach up Bloody and Treasonable Doctrin, must no Man Detect this, without a Design upon your Blood! You Proclame Blood to the Ends of the Earth,
especially against the Priests of all Professions, Oh! Give the Priests Blood to Drink, for they are worthy — Slay Balaam, vex the Midianites, Blot out the Remembrance of Amaleck from un∣der Heaven, that is, the Clergy and the Lawyers &c. as the Quakers themselves Explain it (See Sn. p. 230. &c.) yet this must not be told you, but you Cry out, Here is a Design upon our Blood! But you Answer not a word of the Charge. Are any of your Authors falsly Quoted? Have they not said all these things? Will you then Disown these Authors, at least, as to these Bloody and Desperate Tenets? No. This cannot be done. For then their Infallibility will Crack: And your whole Foundation Sink. Then will it appear that the Spirit by which they have been Led, was not the Spirit of Truth, but of Murder, Treason, and the Vilest Errors. The Best Excuse that can be made for them, in this Case, is that which I have before In∣stanc'd viz. Madness. For if they are in Good Earnest, in all these Bloody Designs which they have Express'd, Considering their Power and Number now amongst Us, they are Dangerous indeed! And Every Government will be oblig'd to take a Care of them. And that in some other Manner than as John Parret, Charles Baly, and Jane Stoaks were Serv'd, who were so kindly dealt with at Rome to be sent to a Mad-House, and Phisick prescrib'd for them. The Matters thus Suggested (Says G. W. p. 17.) are so Gross, that we need say little to them. How! Say but Little to them! If they are so Gross, you need say the More to them. But what if
they are True, as well as Gross? And you offer not to Disprove one Tittle of the Truth of them. And the more Gross, one wou'd think you shou'd be the more Concern'd to Disprove them. And if the least of the Proofs which are brought against you, had been False, or any way Exceptionable, no doubt, we shou'd have heard of it (as from Rich. Scoryer, about a small Mistake alledg'd as to his School) George, you shou'd either have said nothing of this Matter, or have said more to it. But the Nation is oblig'd to you for this Discovery. You Repeat this Charge again. p. 18. where you Quote the Sn. p. 133. saying, Their Prin∣ciples Destructive to all Government, &c. And you answer. This is a General, very Gross &c. How a General? was ther only a General Charge given against you; and no Proof, no Particulars at all Mention'd? Yes, George, ther are abun∣dance of Quotations, and Particulars which are Insisted upon, and Prov'd at large. And Thou do'st not Answer to any one of them, Thou Dar'st not Deny one of them: yet here Thou woud'st Impose it upon the Reader, as if nothing but a General Charge had been Exhibited against you. This is Thy Sincerity and Quakers Plainness. Their Oppo∣sition of Tythes.V. From this place to p. 24. he spends a∣gainst what is said in behalf of Tythes. And p. 19. Quotes the Sn. saying that the Pope was the first Author of the Sacrilegious Impropriati∣ons; which is more largely Insisted upon in the Sn. yet he Charges the Author as a Popish A∣gent; and in his Contents calls this a Popish Plea for Tythes▪ But all the Reason he gives is, that some Papists were for the Divine Right of
Tythes. Then he names some of the Protestants which were not of this opinion. And this is all (Poor Man) that he knows of the Matter. He Answers none of the Arguments which are there brought for Tythes; nor do's he bring any Arguments against them. That is none of his Method! But as to Fr. Bugg's Impeachment against them for opposing and Annulling the Laws of the Land which enjoyn Tythes, he fairly Pleads Guilty, in Express Terms, while he thought he was Ac∣quiting the Quakers of that Charge: And he Re-Asserts their Seditious Principle. p. 18. a∣gainst The Secular Powers Imposing them, Tythes being Abolisht (says he) by Christ's Law. Which was all that Bugg Charg'd against them, as mak∣ing our Laws to be Anti-Christian. Upon this Head, I wou'd Recommend to their serious Consideration, a Principle they set down, in a Famous Martyrologie of theirs, call'd, The West Answering to the North. An. 1657. wrote by G. Fox, and several others of their Chiefs; suffering then some Chastisements, for their Blas∣phemie, &c. Contrary (as they thought) to the then Laws; by the Arbitrary Orders of some In∣ferior Magistrates. There p. 80. they say, That for Any Party of Men, under a Government, to Make Laws, being not Lawfully Authorized so to do, for the Binding of others; and thereunto to require obedience, is the setting up of Themselves above the Law, and Treading it under their Feet; And ren∣dring of them whom they do so Bind, their Slaves and Vassals; And so is Treason.
Now in the Sn. Sect. xix. Ther is mention'd a Declaration Sign'd by above Seven Thousand of the Quakers, Abolishing all the Laws, and Damning the Law-Makers, who Enact Tythes, the Payers of them, the Receivers, or any who but Countenance or Own them. This was in the year 1659. At which time the Quakers were very Busie with their Proposals to oppose the Restoration of the Church and the King. Rob. Rich,Hiden things &c. p. 29. a Quaker tells Us of two other Printed Papers of the Quakers, that same year, one subscrib'd by more than Ten Thousand, and the other by More than Fifteen Thousand. All presented to the then Parliament. To whom I am Credibly Inform'd, They offer'd to Raise Twenty Thousand Men, against the Com∣mon Enemy, so they Term'd the King, and Loyal Party. And they had then so much Fa∣vour, That, as the above Author Informs us (And cannot Deceive Us in that) by the Act of Parliament bearing Date the 28 June 1659 for Setling the Militia, the Quakers were made Commissioners, to Form Troops and Regiments, to Nominate the Officers, and to Assess Money for Buying Horse, Arms, &c. He Names Five by Name, whom he knew, who were of the Com∣mittee for the Militia of Westminster, and how many more, he says, he knew not. But that is not the Business now. We have sufficient Testimony of their Firmness to the King and Royal Interest, at that Time! That which I wou'd Reason with them now upon, is, Their Annulling of our Laws (as of Tythes) Not being Lawfully Authoriz'd so to do. Their setting up, Weekly, Monthly, Quarterly, Yearly Synods, or Parliaments; wherein they Issue Orders and Laws,
to All the Quakers. And Excommunicate those who Refuse to be Obedient. They Leavy Money, by Benevolence; which none of them Dare Re∣fuse, under Pain of being Dis-own'd (as they Phrase it) which to most of them, (who Trade Chiefly with one another) is to be Broke and Ʋn∣done. By these Voluntary Taxes, per Force, they have Fill'd and Maintain a Treasury, or Publick Stock; to Carry on their Common Cause: Among other things, to enable any Poor Friend, to support a Law-Suite against the Priests for Tythes. Of which several Instances can be given. That these Baals-Priests, may have no other Choice, but either to Loose the Tythes of the Quakers or Pay more for them, than they are worth. Especially the Poorer sort of the Clergy, who are Easily Tyr'd out at Law: Unless they had such a Fund as the Quakers have to support them. Let me Entertain the Reader with one In∣stance, upon this Head, which happen'd Lately: And has Conduc'd to open the Eyes of some Deluded Quakers, particularly of William Ma∣ther, who writes the Account himself, by his Letters, Dated from Bedford 12. July. 1698: And tells, That one Joseph Clark, a Quaker Prea∣cher, being sued for his Tythe by the Priest, John Feild, an Eminent London Quaker Preacher, and one of the Principal Directors of the Court of Second-Days-Meeting; which is the Helme of the whole Quaker Government; it is the Conclave, which Preseribes even to their General Council, the Yearly Meeting at London; and which is more, Commands their Bank or Publick Treasury; This John Field Encourag'd Joseph Clark to stand
out the Suite with the Priest; and Promis'd to secure his Goods from the Priest, if it came to the worst. But Jos. told W. Mather (to keep him Firm to the Cause) That it was The Lord, who Moved him, not to Pay his Tythes to the Priest. How∣ever so it fell out (whether thro' Multiplicity of Business in John, or want of Due Solicitation in Joseph, or from whatever Cause) That John did not Perform, as Joseph Expected; who ha∣ving waited till the Day before the Assizes at Bedford; and no Relief coming, was Forc'd to surrender: And sent to Agree with the Priest. And then told Will. Mather, That The Lord gave him Freedom to Pay Tythes, as well as other Taxes. Which, with other things, has much stumbl'd Mather, as to their Infallibilty, and even Sincerity, especially, Their Inscribing every thing they Do, or Think, to The Name of The Lord God! And that, both Backwards and For∣wards! But it is the Treason, and not the Blasphemy of their Practice herein that I am now upon. Which they have made Treason (as before Quo∣ted) in others. And therefore must come under their own Law, or Confess themselves to be Lyars and Deceivers. If they say, That their Testimonies against Tythes &c. are not Laws or Commands, only Ad∣vices and Recommendations, That is sufficiently Answer'd in the Sn. Sect. xix. where it is shewn, That they made it no less than Rebellion for any Quaker to Pay Tythe, upon any Account. And in their Rabshakeh, against Mr. Crisp. An. 1695. p. 90. They call his Marrying by a Priest, and Paying of Tythes, Transgressions; and such as
Cut him off from the Ʋnity of the Faithful. Now, where ther is no Law, ther is no Transgression. And it is no Mean Transgression that will Cut a Man off from the Ʋnity of the Faithful. That must be some Dreadful Damning Sin! And such they make our Laws. And Require Obedience (in opposition to them) to their own Laws; and thus Set Themselves above the Laws, and Tread them under their Feet; And render those whom they do so Bind, their Slaves and Vassals: And so (by their own Sentence) are Guilty of Treason. N. B. The above Mention'd John Field is he who wrote the Letter Printed in the Collecti∣on N. 5. to the Lord Mayor of London, where∣in he Endeavours to Prove, That the Setting up of Tythes is, in Effect, to say, That Christ is not become Man, or suffer'd Death for Man. &c. call's them Slanderous Covetousness; And threat∣ens the Government, both Lords and Commons, with God's Vengeance, who suffer Priests Charita∣bly. i. e. Who have any Charity or Favour for them. The Quakers had much more Charity for the Impropriators: And some Quakers allow'd them∣selves to Pay Tythes to them, which shews That their Rage against Tythes, Proceeded Chiefly from their Malice to the Clergy. Nay some of the Quakers themselves (as I am Inform'd) have been Impropriators, and Received their Tythes. They will tell us whether the Qua∣ker Squire Fettiplace in Gloucester-shire, was not of this Number? They wou'd not Refuse to Buy an Estate, because there were Impropriati∣ons Annex'd to it. Much less wou'd they Give
up the Impropriat-Tythes, after they had Bought them. VI.Their Treasons in Abetteng Oliver and the Rump.He comes next p. 24. to the Charge against them of their Treasons and Rebellion: And their Abetting of the Ʋsurpations under Oliver and the Rump. Which, according to Custom, he Denies; but offers not to Disprove one single Quo∣tation of those many which you will find Sect. xviii. of the Sn. This is Reply'd to in the Sup. N. 11. And I cou'd give many other Instances besides those in the Sn. Ther was a Book Printed by the Quakers. A. D. 1656. Intituled The Cry of Blood. Subscrib'd by these Eminent Quakers. Geo. Bishop. Thomas Goldney. Henry Roe. Edw. Pyott. Dennis Hollister. in name of all the Rest then about Bristol, where Complaining of their sufferings from the then Government, they say, in the Title Page, that it was contrary to The Righteous Ends of the War. i. e. of their Rebellion against the King. and p. 25. they say, For which (i. e. subverting the Fundamental Law) the Late King, Strafford, and Canterbury were Impeached Attainted and Executed as Traytors. And p. 31. they accuse some that Affronted them, whom they call'd Royeters, to be Cavaliers, and that Charles Stuart was Publickly mentioned by the Name of King. p. 69. They Plead as Merit in behalf of John Camm, and John Audland (See his Blasphemous Letter to G. Fox, Annex'd at the end of the Sn.) two of their Famous Prea∣chers, That they had been Six or Seven years in Arms for the Parliament, and had Fought and per∣formed Eminent Service in the Field. And. p. 90. That Thomas Robertson (another Preacher) was
Five or Six years in Armes for the Parlia¦ment, an Officer in Colonel Brigg's Regiment, was at Preston Fight, at the Engagement at the Bridge, in Scotland, and Carlise, living on his own Estate, and bearing his own Charges in the Wars, except a small Summ which he receiv'd after the Fight at Preston. That Josiah Coal was also a Soldi∣er in service of the Common-Wealth, and at Wor∣cester Fight. This was one of the Prime wor∣thies of the Quakers, a Preacher of Renown. See his Blasphemous Letter to G. Fox. in the Sn. p. 114. 115. Here the Treasons and Rebellion and Fighting of these Quaker-Leaders were Glory'd in (instead of being Condemn'd) by the rest of them, in the year 1656. But since 1660, they have got a New Light, they are now against all outward Fighting, Treason and Rebellion! Yet will not Censure any of their Ancient Traytors, Fighters, and Rebels: for such were their Chief Apostles; and led by the Infallible Light within! But they wou'd have that Forgotten, till a Day may come, when, as in 1656, they may again Plead these Glorious Merits of their Saints. And in the mean time, make a Mouth at us, while they wou'd Pame them upon us, as the only Lambs of Christ! But ther is one of these Lambs that I have not yet Nam'd under this Head of Treason, whom I must bring forth before G. W. to see what Character he will give us of him. This Quaker in the year 1659 had a Dispute with one Thomas Smith in the Mayor's House at Cambridge, soon after Sir George Booth had ta∣ken Armes for the King, and was Suppress'd
by the Rebels. It is told in the Sn. Sect. xviii. p. 228. How busy the Quakers were upon that occasion, against the King's Interest, and Boa∣sted in it as their merit, that they had given the first Intelligence to the Ʋsurpers against the Loyal Party; and gave their Advice or Command (and that In the Name of the Lord God!) to cut off all the Cavaliers whom they had taken Pri∣soners. They were Full of this their good ser∣vice, and very Vain of it. And this Quaker whom I am speaking of, taking his opponent Smith to be well Inclin'd towards the Royal Cause, and having him in the Mayor's House, he broke off from the Subject of Religion they were met about; and Demanded of him, whe∣ther he owned his Brethren the Priests, who had so much stirred up the Rebellion against the present Government? To which Insnaring Question, the Quaker says, Smith answer'd, That he did not own them. But that was (said the Quaker) because he saw they did not Prosper in their Designs. But when they did Prosper, as they did the year following, then the Quakers were the only Royal and Loyal Party! and said they had been so all along! And accus'd these same Professors (as they call'd the Presbyterians, Inde∣pendents &c.) that they had been the King's Ene∣mies, and therefore not fit to be Trusted by Him, or to be suffer'd to Teach the People. as shewn in the Sn. Sect. xviii. Now G. W. tell us Plainly, what do'st Thee think of this Quaker before mention'd? we wou'd have thy opinion of him. Was he then a Loyal Man, when he call'd it Rebellion to assert the King's Cause against the Ʋsurpa∣tion
that then obtain'd, and upbraided others with being Concern'd in it? If thou woud'st know his Name, not to keep thee longer in suspence, it is, George White∣head. And this thee wilt find p. 25. of a little pretty Treasonable, and very Blasphemous Book of his call'd Truth defending the Quakers &c. Printed that same year 1659. said, on the Ti∣tle Page to be written from the Spirit of Truth in George Whitehead, and George Fox the yonger. I wou'd have thee Read it George. It is as full of Heresies as a Dog is of Fleas, Larded thick with Nonsense, and Pride Prodigious. And prithee, George, lets have thy Censure of it, the next time thou sets Pen to Paper, if thou be'st not Tyr'd with that sport, as well thou May'st, considering thy Luck at it. It is now 49 years since that precious Piece escapt thy Fist. And if thee art not Grown Wiser, as thou'st Grown Older, thou'lt verefie the Proverb, no F—l to an Old F—l. It is told in the Sn. Sect. xviii. How G. Fox and the Quakers stood out against the Restau∣ration of King Charles II. to the very Last, even in the Beginning of the year 1660. And yet Immediately upon the Kings Coming Home, Run to him, with Addresses of their Love &c. I have one here to Add, which came Lately in my way. G. Bishop his Bitterness and Im∣placable Hatred to the King, and his Cause, is Particularly Insisted upon in the Sn. How he Preach'd and Commanded, In the Name of the Lord, That the Cavaliers, who were then Pri∣soners, shou'd be All put to Death. This is in his Book of Warnings Printed in the Beginning
of the year 1660 before the Restauration. And now I find another Book of (his) warnings. An. 1661. Directed to The King and Parliament to the Arch-Bishops, and Bishops &c. where p. 2. he Recommends the Innocent People (the Qua∣kers) to their Protection, as Those who suffer'd with you (says he) and by and under your Ene∣mies; who have Good will towards you &c. And not Content with this Gross Dissimulation in Themselves; he falls upon the poor Presbyte∣rians, for their Inconstancy, and Turning about; he upbraids them, p. 18. with their being Ʋpwards and Downwards; and Backwards and Forwards; Now here and now there; Reeling and Rouling; Pinching here sometimes, and Drawing as Contra∣ry at another. This needs no Application to the Quakers. G. Fox his Aspiring to be Equal with God.VII. In the Sn. ther is set down a Tryal at the Assises, and Depositions upon Oath that G. Fox and others of the Quakers did call them∣selves Equal with God &c. To this says G. W. p. 25. That we ought not to take the De∣positions of Adversaries against them. This is Pleasant! why, if any of the Quakers had De∣pos'd this, then they had been Apostats, Judases, &c. (as the Quakers have call'd their Late Sepe∣ratists) and so Adversaries with a witness. And all others are Adversaries of Course. And if none of their words must be taken, the Qua∣kers may Blaspheme, Rebel, Murder, Steal, or what they Please. For is not any one that wou'd Accuse them of any of these things, an Adver∣sary? And an Adversaries word must not be taken!
But let alone Adversaries. Has not G. Fox and others of the Quakers asserted the same in their Printed Books? And are they not Quo∣ted in the Sn. Sect. iii? And has G. W. An∣swer'd to one of these Quotations? No. Not to one of them. yet he Pretends this Book of his, to be an Answer to the Sn. And in the Contents he stiles the above Answer thus. A False Charge against G. Fox &c. Examin'd and Answer'd. Yet this is all the Answer he has given to it. In the same manner he passes off the Charge of their Assuming the Name of God and Christ to themselves; and their Pretence to Perfection Equal Even to God &c. He says to this. p. 26. That it is False; and Asserts the Contrary. But Answers none of the Proofs. See Sn. Sect. x. p. 132. and Sect. xiv. p. 175, 176. Let me add here one Proof more. I have before Quoted a Book wrote by Five Ministers call'd A fur∣ther Discovery &c. There p. 23, 24. is a Let∣ter of Will. Baldwinson, Dated 14. January 1653. and attested by Three others, where Will. Bald∣winson Declares that he, before a Company, where James Nayler and Richard Farnsworth were setting out this Doctrin of Perfection, De∣manded of them in these words, Friends, do you hold that a man may attain to that Height of Perfection in this Life to be as Perfect, as Pure, as Holy, and as Just as God Himself? And he asserts, that They Joyntly Reply'd, Yea, and they were so. After p. 62. of that Book, these Five Ministers say of the Quakers, But what dare not these men do, who Dare lift up themselves in their Blasphemous Pride, to be as Pure as God? G. Fox
Answers this Book in his Great Mystery and p. 232. Repeating these last words thus, But how Dare these men lift up themselves, in their Blasphemous Pride, to say they are pure as God? He do's not at all Deny the Charge, but Ju∣stifies and Defends it from being Blasphemy; and says, Doth not Christ say, Be ye Perfect as your Heavenly Father is Perfect? and As he is, so are we in this present World &c. These are the Texts they Commonly Abuse to this Blas∣phemous Purpose. John Harwood a Quaker, but who had fallen out with G. Fox, wrote a Letter to The Friends against him. An. 1663. which is Intitul'd To all People that Profess the Eternal Truth &c. where p. 3. he says, G. Fox hath call'd Himself The Son of God, and also said I am the Seed, which he might as well have said I am Christ, for we know that the Seed is Christ &c. To this G. Fox Printed an Answer the same year 1663, with this Title, The Spi∣rit of Envy, Lying, and Persecution, made Mani∣fest. Where, p. 2. He Answers the above Charge thus. And first thou saydst, G. F. calls himself, The Son of God &c. And this thou calls a Crime. This is all he says to it. Confessing the Charge: but Retorting upon Joh. Harwood, for his Igno∣rance (being a Quaker) to think it a Crime in G. Fox to call Himself, The Son of God, and Christ, and The Seed. Here now G. W. has a Plain Answer, and out of the Mouth of one, whom he will not call an Adversary. And we need no more witnesses against G. Fox, when we have it from his own Mouth.
Their Asser∣ting the Sufficien∣cy of their Light within to Salvation, without Christ. And Assu∣ming the Name of Christ to Them∣selves.VIII. He comes p. 27. to a material Point indeed. where it is objected against the Qua∣kers, That they hold the Light within Every Man that comes into the world, sufficient to Salvation, of it self, without Something else, that is, without the outward Christ, to suffer and Dye outwardly for Us. Which makes Christ's coming into the World of no Necessity at all to our Salvation; And Faith in Him to be but a sort of an Accomplishment, or Civility to∣wards Him, but no way Necessary: And puts the Heathen upon as good a Foundation as the Christian. Nay, I must say upon a Better; for if Faith in Christ be, by the Gospel, made Necessa∣ry to Salvation; and the Light within the Hea∣then be sufficient without this; Then is this not only Ʋnnecessary, but it puts us farther off from Heaven, by making more things Necessary to our getting thither than what is Requir'd from the Heathen: Then might Cornelius have an∣swered the Angel that commanded him to send for Peter, who shou'd tell him words, by which he and his House shou'd be saved,Act. xi. 14. that he had a Light within which was Sufficient, without any thing else. And that he had Duly follow'd this Light; for he had the Testimony of a Devout man,Act. x. 2.and one that feared God, with all his House. But this shews that ther was Something else Necessary, without which he and his House were not to be Saved. This was the Ground of the Quarrel which the Quakers took against G. Keith, because he Preach'd among them the Necessity of Faith in the outward Jesus; which they call'd Preaching
of Two Christs. i. e. one more besides their Light within, which they call The Christ. G. W. says, in answer to this, p. 28. That they were not offended at G. K's Preaching Christ, or his suffering and Dying without Ʋs, truly con∣sider'd. Truly Consider'd! what do's he mean by this? It is Impossible to catch these Qua∣kers speaking one word Plain, without a Men∣tal Reservation! By Truly Consider'd he means, That the Quakers do allow the History of Christ, of His Death and Sufferings. i. e. That ther was such a man, and that he Did and Suffered such things; and that the Light or Christ was in the man Jesus, whence he was called Christ, as others who have the same Light may, for the same Reason, be called by the same Name of Christ, which, as they say, belongs to Eve∣ry Member as well as to the Head. Is not the Substance, the Life, the Anointing called Christ, wherever it is found? Doth not the Name belong to the whole Body (and Every Member in the Bo∣dy) as well as to the Head? says Isaac Penington, in a Book which he calls A Question to the Pro∣fessors of Christianity. Printed 1667. p. 27. And in the same place says, That the Apostle gives them (the Members) the Name Christ together with Him, that is, together with Jesus who was called Christ, and he Quotes for this 1 Cor. xii. 12. in which Text ther is nothing like what he would be at. But it shews the Qua∣kers Notion; which he go's on to fortifie thus. The Body (says he) is the same with the Head; one and the same in Nature; and doth not the Na∣ture belong to the Nature in the whole? i. e. Be∣cause Christ has taken Our Nature, therefore
J. P. wou'd give us His Nature, which wou'd be to make Us God. As he words it. p. 7. We are as well of His Flesh and Blood, as He was of ours. By Christ's Flesh of which we Partake, he means the Heavenly Flesh which the Quakers say Christ had from Eternity, and that it is in them, that is, Christ's Divine Nature, of which J. P. makes us to Partake, as well as He of our Human Nature: which yet they say He took not Really, for J. P. do's not allow Jesus to be the Lamb of God, but that the Lamb (i. e. the Light) Dwelt in Him, as in a Vessel, in like manner as in us. By Feeling (says he ibid.) and knowing the Lamb in our Vessels, we know also what was the Lamb in His Vessel. So that by this, Jesus was not the Lamb or Christ, but only the Vessel in which the Lamb or Christ did, for a time, Reside. Which he further Explains, p. 33. in these words, Now the Scrip∣tures Do Expresly Distinguish between Christ, and the Garment which He wore; between Him that Came, and the Body in which He came; between the Substance which was Vailed, and the Vaile which Vailed it. Lo I come, a Body hast thou Prepared Me. There is Plainly He, and the Body in which He came. Ther was the outward Vessel, and the Inward Life. This we certainly know, and can never call the Bodily Garment, Christ, but that which Appeared and Dwelt in the Body. So that by this, Jesus was not the Christ, only the Prepared Body, Garment, or Vaile in which Christ Dwelt. The same Argument is Prosecuted by Will. Penn, in his Part of the Serious Apology. p. 146. and in the like words with Is. Penington, to shew the Unanimous Con∣sent
of the Quakers in this the Heart of their Christianity, These are his words. He that laid down his Life, and suffer'd his Body to be Cruci∣fy'd by the Jews, without the Gates of Jerusalem, is Christ, the only Son of the most High God: But that the outward Person which suffer'd was Proper∣ly the Son of God, we utterly Deny— A Body hast thou Prepared me, said the Son, then the Son was not the Body, tho' the Body was the Son's. i. e. The Body was the Son's, as a man's Gar∣ment or Vaile is his who owns and wears it; as the Body; of Will. Penn is the Son's who (he supposes) Dwells in it: But the Son was not the Body, that is, Jesus, in whose Body Christ Dwelt, was not the Son, not Properly the Son of God, but in a Large sense, as other men are call'd the Sons of God. And Christ Suffer'd His Garment or Vaile, the Body of Jesus, to be Crucifi'd: But that the outward Person which suffer'd, was Properly the Son of God, the Quakers do Ʋt∣terly Deny. And as that Person which Suffer'd was not Properly the Son of God, it follows as certainly that the Son of God was not Pro∣perly that Person, or was not Properly a Man. This was the Meaning of Will. Penn, in his Sandy Foundation. p. 20. calling Christ a Finit, Impotent Creature. He did not mean the Eter∣nal word. Or that this Word was Properly a Man in our Nature; for then, tho' the Manhood was a Creature, and Finit, yet the Man, or Person was not so. As a Man's Body is Corruptible, yet the Person Consisting of Body and Soul, is not so. Tho' the Properties of Each Nature, whereof a Person do's Consist, may be Attributed to the Person; as a Man is said to Dye, to Eat, Drink, Sleep &c. tho' these are Proper only to the Body:
And likewise he is said to Think, to Reason, to be Immortal, tho' these are Proper only to his Soul. Thus God is said to Dye, to shed His Blood &c. tho' this be Proper only to the Man∣hood, which the Word assum'd into His own Person: And Man is said to be God, Infinit, Almighty &c. tho' this be Proper only to the Di∣vine Nature of Christ, who is likewise Truly and Properly a Man. And none who had a True Notion of this, cou'd ever have brought himself, to call Christ, a Finit, Impotent Creature. Such a Blasphemous Contempt of our B. Lord and God, cou'd never have Dropt from the Pen of a Christian. But upon Will. Penn's Scheme, that the Word was not Properly a Man, it must follow, that the Person who Suffer'd was not Properly the Son of God: And Consequently that the Person who Suffer'd, which is the Christians Christ, was but a Finit Impotent Crea∣ture, and not Truly and Properly the Christ. J. Pennington asserts that the Name of Christ did not belong to the Person of Jesus, which he calls only the Vessel, or Vaile (as in his Quest. to Professors. p. 25.) but only to the Light or Christ which Dwelt in Jesus, as in the Quakers: So that the Name (Christ, says he) is not given to the Vessel, but to the Nature, to the Heavenly Treasure, to that which is of him In the Vessel. And he Contends That it was not the Flesh and Blood of the Vaile which was the Sacrifice that Cleanses. i. e. not the Flesh and Blood of Jesus, but The Flesh and Blood within the Vaile. i. e. the Spiritual Flesh and Blood of their Light within. Not the Flesh and Blood (says he) of the outward Earthly Nature; but the Flesh and Blood of the Inward
Spiritual Nature: Not the Flesh and Blood which Christ took of the first Adam's Nature; but the Flesh and Blood of the Second Adam's Nature. And What is the Laver of Regeneration (says he p. 24.) wherewith the Soul is washed? Is it the wa∣ter which ran out of the side of the Natural Body, when it was Pierced with a Spear? or the Water which floweth from the Spirit? And Can outward Blood Cleanse the Conscience? &c. Now G. W. is not against telling the History of the Life and Death of Jesus, that is, as he puts the Caveat, Truly Consider'd, i. e. so as not to lay the stress of our Salvation upon Faith in those outward Sufferings, or to make that Necessary to us: That Prerogative they Re∣serve only for the Sufferings, Blood-shedding &c. of Their Christ, the Light within. That only is sufficient without any thing else. And when you come to this (say they, in a Book Intituled The Doctrin of Perfection vindicated. Printed 1663. p. 19.) you will cease Remembring His Death at Jerusalem, and will come to see how He hath been Crucify'd In you &c. His outward Death is to be Forgotten; for the stress do's not Ly up∣on that! And, as Mr. Penn says in his Qua∣kerism a new nick-name &c. p. 12. Since they believe that appearance (of Christ in the Flesh at Jerusalem) they need not Preach what is not to be again. (See Satan Dis-Rob'd. p. 11.) Ther is an End of any more Preaching or Faith in that! Nay, it do's Hurt, as taking men off from Tru∣sting wholey and soley in the Light within as sufficient without it! Which is the very Heart and Soul of the Quaker-Faith. And therefore they think the Heathen in a Better Condition
than those Christians who lay so much stress upon the outward Christ, His Death and Suffe∣rings; for that the Heathen have not that En∣combrance to Divert them from Trusting wholly to their Light within, and to nothing else. And they think the Faith in the outward Christ so very Destructive, that G. Fox, Denounces them to be Reprobates, and Possest with the Devil, who Expect to be sav'd by Faith in the outward Jesus; and as wholly Ignorant of the Inward Pre∣sence of Christ in the Heart: For thus he Re∣plies upon Christopher Wade, who had, in a Book he wrote call'd Quakery Slain, asserted the Necessity of Faith in the outward Christ; but withall he is Full and Large upon as Great Necessity of the Inward Presence and Operation of the Spirit of Christ in our Hearts, In his In∣spections, Influences, and Operations — and by His Spirit Dwelling even in the Hearts and Societies of His People. as he words it. p. 4. And that by his Spiritual Influences, He is in all His Saints, p. 7. That He is Dwelling in the Believers Heart, by Faith of and in Him, p. 19. — And from thence the Saints are said to be the Habitation of God through the Spirit, p. 36. And much more to the same Purpose. But all this Faith is built upon the outward Christ, His Death and Suffe∣rings without Ʋs: And therefore G. Fox wrote an Answer to this Book, in his Great Mystery. p. 246. And Replies thus upon Wade. p. 250. And the Devil was in thee, and thou saith thou art saved by Christ without thee, and so hath Re∣corded thy self to be a Reprobate, and Ignorant of the Mystery of Christ within thee. So that, by this Doctrin, to believe in a Christ without, is
to be Possess'd with the Devil, to be a Reprobate, and Ignorant of Christ within. For they make to be these Two Christ's, as they objected against G. Keith, when he Preach'd to them of a Christ without. Which G. W. here allows, Truly Consider'd! that is, to Believe the History of Christ; but not to Trust in Him as an Object of our Faith; for that wou'd take away the Sufficiency of the Light within, without the outward Christ. And this G. W. do's plainly Confess, where he tells what it was for which they were Angry at G. Keith, not the Preaching Christ's outward Sufferings; But (says he) at his Ʋndervaluing the Light within, as not Sufficient to Salvation, or not Sufficient without something else. These are his words, p. 28. And this is as Plain a Con∣fession as can be in words. And G. W. go's on to Prove it, by saying that the Light with∣in is God and Christ &c. Which he Denies to our Jesus the Son of Mary, wou'd it be good Doctrin (says he) to say,Light and Life p. 54.that Mary and Simeon carry'd their Saviour on their Arms? — or that they carry'd God in their Arms — if that Child was God-Man, as he (Will. Burnet) terms him. And he Upbraids W. B. thus, your Boasting of your God and Christ at a Distance above the Clouds Stars and Firmament— And p. 55. whereas we are Accused (says he) with Denying that Blood let out, to be any way Meritorious to Salvation. I ask, whether any thing is of Eternal Merit and worth that is not Everlasting? This is to Exclude the Blood which Christ took, in Time, of our Nature, from being Any way Meritorious to Salvation: But placing all upon the shedding of His Spiritual Blood, which He had, as God,
from Eternity. Agreeably G. Fox attributes all the Merit towards Salvation, in that Flesh of Christ, which was Crucify'd, when Adam Fell, as before Quoted out of his Several Papers, for the Spreading of Truth. Where p. 57. he go's on thus, so Adam and Eves Flesh was Defiled, but the Flesh of Christ, the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the world, yet His Flesh never Cor∣rupted, which Flesh is the Offering — and in this Flesh is the Belief that takes away the sin, that ne∣ver Corrupted, that is the offering for Sin, and the Blood of this Flesh Cleanseth from Sin — so the seed Reigns, His Flesh the offering is Believed in, and Fed upon — And so this Pure Flesh this offe∣ring is set over all — so all Christendom hath talk'd long enough of Christ's Flesh and Blood.p. 58. p. 59 By this the Quakers think that Flesh of Christ of which we speak is of no longer use. At the Close of this Chapter G. F. go's about to Answer a very material Objection put against him viz. To what Purpose was Christ's coming in the outward Flesh, if all the Reconciliation was by His Heavenly Flesh? G. F. puts the Objection in these words. But if any should hold the Seed on∣ly within them, and that Christ is not come in the Flesh, and hath not Appear'd in the shape of a man — And truely G. Fox finds no harm in all this, Provided they stand out stiff against outward Offerings and Services. That is the Eye-sore of the Quakers. Take away the Merit of the out∣ward Sufferings of Christ, and the outward Ordi∣nances which He has Established in His Church. And All is well! G. F. gives no Advice to those who believe no Christ come in the Flesh, to learn any thing of that Doctrin; nor finds
any Fault with those who, Rejecting that, do hold the seed only within them; but bids them see if that they speak of (i. e. their seed or Light within) doth or hath brought them out of Adam in the Fall, and put down all Adam and Eves Sons and Daughters Inventions, which they have Invented in their Idol Minds, and other outward Offerings and Services; for (says he) they that own that Christ, that was offered, that was slain from the Foundation of the world, the Lamb, they own that, and their Belief stands in that which doth bring down the Inventions of the Sons of Adam, and Daughters in the Fall. So that here is a Belief in Christ, without a Believing that ever He came in our Flesh! viz. By Be∣lieving in His Inward and Heavenly Flesh, Blood, and Bones which were Crucify'd when Adam Fell; which the Quakers call the Seed or Light within; which they think Sufficient of it self, without any thing else. i. e. without any Faith in the outward Flesh which he took of our Nature, which they call Corruptible and Earthly; and therefore of no Virtue or Efficacy towards our Salvation, more than as a Good Example, like the Lives of other Vertuous men: And therefore that men may be Good enough Chri∣stians, without knowing any thing of that which is but a History to Us, that is, the Life Death, and Sufferings of Jesus of Nazareth: But that the Mystery and the Efficacy is only in what is wrought within Us; and that Faith in that, is the only true Christianity. This is the Center of Quakerism. And therefore I have Endeavoured to Render it very Plain and Ob∣vious,
as that upon which all the Rest of their vile Heresies are Founded. This that I have said, will obviate all the Quotations brought in the Appendix, Sect. 2. p. 12. &c. of the Quaker-Testimonies to Christ as come in the Flesh. For either They must A∣bandon this Distinction of the two sorts of Flesh, Blood, and Bones of Christ, or otherwise it is Impossible to Hold them, while they mean that of the one, which they seem to speak of the other. And, what Signifies their Acknowleging even Christ's outward Flesh and Humanity, as to the Historical part of it, while they Deny any Faith in it, as of Necessity to Salvation but place all the Efficacy, upon their Mad Supposition of His Inward and Eter∣nal Flesh, Blood, and Bones; Broken, Slain, Buri∣ed, Rising again, Ascending, and coming, to Judgment, within them; And thus Elude All the Articles of our Faith! G. Whitchead, in his Truth defending the Qua∣kers An. 1659. p. 67. plainly Denies, that we are Redeemed by the Human Blood of Christ. And says, That that Scripture 1 Pet. 1.19. is Perverted when taken in that sense, and averrs that the Apostle there, Doth not tell of Human Blood to Redeem them with; for (says he) Human is Earthly. What Blood is it then which Redeems Us? He go's on to tell in the next words, But Christ whose Blood is Spiritual is Lord from Heaven &c. And then he Asks, Was that Human Blood, which Christ saith, except a Man Drink, he hath no Life in him; and which Cleansed the Saints from all Sin, who were Flesh of Christ's Flesh, and Bone of His Bone? G. W.
means that this cou'd not be the outward-Flesh: But that it was the Eternal and Spiritual Flesh before spoke of; Which the Quakers suppose that they have within them; and this is it which they call their Light within. But I will Answer this Quere of G. Whitehead's because I believe he ask'd it thro' Ignorance, and that many Qua∣kers are Deluded by it. Therefore I say, That it was Human Blood of which Christ said Except a man drink of it &c. But the Figure lies in the word Drink, not that we were literally to Drink the very Material Blood of Christ; but to Feed upon it in our Hearts, by Faith. i. e. in the Satisfaction and Atonement thereby made to God for our Sins. But to put the Figure upon the Blood, as if that were only Figurative, and not True, Real, Material and Human Blood which Christ offer'd for us; but a Notional, Spiritual, which is not Real Blood, this is the Fandamental Error of the Quakers, and which overturns the whole Christian Faith. And now what do's it signifie to bring Quo∣tations out of the Quaker Books, which speak of the Blood of Christ, and bear witness to it, while they mean not Real or Human Blood, of our Nature, but only the Inward Spiritual Life of Christ in our Hearts; And do not Distinguish this at all from His Blood? As G. W. says, in the same Book before Quoted Truth defend∣ing &c. p. 63. Whose (Christ's) Blood is not differ∣ing from His Life, which Redeemeth from sin, as thou Imaginest, says he to his opponent, Christo∣pher Wade, who having said, as G. W. Quotes him, That our Blessed Saviour did Instruct men to lay fast hold of, and to abide in such a Faith which
Confideth in Himself, being Without Men. G. W. Replies p. 65. That's Contrary to the Apostles Doctrin— And the Saints Faith stood in the Power of God, which was In them. Again (ibid.) G. W. opposes this of C. Wade's, which he Quotes, That the true Christ doth by infallible Ar∣guments prove Himself not to be a Spirit. i. e. not a meer Spirit, as in the next page G. W. Quotes him. And G. W. gives the like An∣swer to this, which is (says he) Quite against the Apostles Doctrin, who Preach'd Christ In them, the Hope of Glory, and a Quickening Spirit. That Christ is a Spirit, and Ever was, no Christian Doubts: But that He has not likewise a Body, not from Eternity, as Quakers and Muggletonians madly Dream; but an Human Body, of our Na∣ture, which He took into His own Nature, in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin, and will for Ever Retain United in His Person, true God and Man; and therefore is not now a meer Spirit; as before His Incarnation, none can De∣ny, but the Grossest of Hereticks. And G. W. here Denies it, and says, That to affirm Christ not to be a meer Spirit is contrary to the Apo∣stles Doctrin, who Preach'd Christ In them. No Christian denies but that Christ, by His Blessed Spirit and Influence do's Dwell in the Hearts of Believers; But therefore to Deny the De∣monstration which Christ gave Luk. xxiv. 39. That He was not a Spirit, but had true Flesh and Bones, is such a Degree of sottish Infatua∣tion, as has Possest none amongst us but these Miserable Quakers. Why else did G. W. op∣pose C. Wade for urging this Scripture, in Proof that Christ was not a Spirit, but had a
True, Real, Human Body? G. Whitehead's mean∣ing was (as before shew'd p. 18.) that the Person who then Appear'd to the Apostles was not the Christ. No, but only a Vail or Garment of Bor∣row'd Flesh and Blood which He Wore: And by which the Quakers expect no Justification, but only by their own Works, wrought In them by the Spirit. Thus ibid. p. 62. G. Whitehead brings in C. Wade saying thus, That God doth totally exclude works, whether wrought by Men, or by any Spirit in man whatsoever, for Mens Justification. He do's not Exclude Works, as being a Neces∣sary Effect of Faith, and as Requir'd by God, and without which, when Possible, true Faith can∣not be; nor can men, otherwise, be made Par∣takers of the Benefit and Purchase made for Us by the Obedience and Death of Christ: But that our works, tho' wrought in us by the Ope∣ration of the Holy Spirit (as all our Good Works are) yet must not come in for any share of the Merit and Satisfaction for Sin, and our Justification thereby;Psal. xlix. 8.For it Cost more to Redeem our Souls, so that we must let that alone for Ever. Our Works, tho' necessary to Qualifie us, and make us Susceptible of that Justification which Christ hath Purchased for us by His Blood, yet are they Totally Excluded from being any Part of the Meritorious or Procuring Cause of our Justification. And to this G. Whitehead's An∣swer is, This is a Doctrin of the Devil. The same Answer, He and Will. Penn Repeated in their Serious Apologie. Printed An. 1671. (to shew they Alter not) p. 148. to those who objected to them, That they Deny'd Justification
by the Righteousness which Christ hath fulfilled in His own Person for us, wholly without us, and there∣fore Deny the Lord that bought us. To which their Answer is in these words. And indeed this we Deny, and Boldly affirm it, In the Name of the Lord, To be the Doctrin of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption, which do's now De∣luge the whole World. It makes ones Hair stand on End, to Hear such outragious Blasphemy a∣gainst the very Heart and Foundation of the Christian Religion! Against which the Cursed Spirit do's thus Gnash his Teeth, to see his Chief Principle Attackt of making men trust, for their Justification and Salvation, to what is wrought in their Hearts, by the Spirit of God, as they suppose, for which they oft mistake (as in the Present Case) the most Venemous Sug∣gestions of the Devil. Now if the Quaker method of Contrary Testi∣monies wou'd be allow'd,See 2d Part. Sect. ii. N. 3. they might Easily get off from all this, by what Will. Penn has wrote (in Point blank Contradiction to what is a∣bove Quoted) in his Primitive Christianity, Printed, 1696. p. 79. where he owns Justifica∣tion, only for the sake of the Death and Sufferings of Christ; And nothing we can do (says he) though by the Operation of the Holy Spirit, being able to Cancel old Debts, or wipe out old Scores. You see, he says, here, Though by the Operation of the Holy Spirit, so that, by this, All that is wrought in the Quakers, by their Light within, is De∣clar'd Insufficient to their Salvation, without something else, even the Death and Sufferings of the outward Christ. Unless Mr. Penn will say, That he Meant not this of the outward Christ but of the Death and Sufferings of
their Light within; which I suppose he will not venture upon, because it wou'd be so Gross a Sophistication as he wou'd be asham'd of; and Disparage any thing he cou'd say hereafter; for it wou'd be to Declare, that none must know his meaning. Therefore I will not sup∣pose any such thing, but that he Intends sin∣cerely as he speaks. But then, that Great Point of the Quakers is given up, upon which G. Keith was Pronounc'd an Heretick by a Publick Quaker Meeting at Philidelphia An. 1692.See Here∣sie and Hatred by G. K. giving an Account of this. And that by Authority of a Sentence out of a Book of Will. Penn's, call'd the Christian Quaker, where he said, that The Talent is in its self sufficient. i. e. as these Quakers Expounded it, That the Light within was sufficient (to Salvation) without any thing else. For that was the Dispute. And G. Keith was Accus'd for Heresie in Prea∣ching Two Christs, because he Preach'd the Ne∣cessity of Faith in a Christ without Us, now in Heaven, which they, who knew of no Christ but their Light within, thought a Preaching of Two Christs, and a Denying the sufficiency of their Light within, without Faith in an outward Christ. Their turn∣ing the Death and Sufferings of Christ into an Allegorie and a Type.IX. G. W. p. 29. Answers the Charge of their Allegorizing the Death and Sufferings of Christ, into an Inward shedding of Spiritual Blood &c. thus; he says, they do not turn the Death and Sufferings of Christ, into a meer Allegory, as if ther had been no such thing in Reality, both out∣wardly and Literally. No. It was never Charg'd upon them. But this is the Charge against them, That they Place the Merit and Satisfacti∣on not in the outward Sufferings of Christ, but in the Inward Sufferings &c. of their Light with∣in.
And to this they do not Answer. This is mere Dodging. And shews their Guilt. But he says Secondly, p. 30. That they do hold an Allegorical Meaning in Christ's outward Blood, and Passion. And there is His Spiritual Blood (says he) now if ther be an Allegorie in His outward Blood, then His outward Blood is an Allegorie: And the Inward Blood is the Sub∣stance or Principal; and the Merit and Satisfac∣tion lies in That. That is the Mysterie, of which Christ's outward Sufferings were but the History, or Facile Representations, as they Express it. See Sat. Dis. Sect. i. N. xii. p. 15, 16. And this, is, and has been our sincere Belief and Persuasion. says G. W. ibid. He Answers in the same page to the Objecti∣on of making their Light within the Archi-Type, of which the outward Christ was but the Type or Figure; He Denies none of the Proofs brought for it. See Sn. Sect. x. p. 129. &c. But he wou'd Play the Critick, he means by Archi-Type the Chief of Principal Type; and their not mak∣ing the Light within any Type at all, but the Substance, consequently, he thinks he has come off Cleverly, that they do not make it the Archi-Type. But his Skill has Fail'd him, for by Archi-Type is not meant any Type at all; but that thing to which all the Types do Refer, and which is Represented by them. Thus the Legal Sacrifices were Types, of Christ; and Christ the Archi-Type; not as G. W. wou'd have it, that He was the Chief-Type of Himself. And hence the Quakers making the outward-Christ a Type of their Light within, gives That the Prefe∣rence, and makes Christ Inferior to It. (See
Sat. Dis. Sect. 2. N. v. p. 34). Will he say the Light-within is an Allegorie? if not, then, in his sense of it, he plainly Prefers it to Christ: And makes Christ, His Sacrifice and outward Blood to Refer to It. He Confesses while he Denies! He wou'd avoid the Charge of making Christ's out∣ward Blood an Allegorie, and yet he Expresly calls it an Allegorie; i. e. that it has an Allego∣rical Meaning; for that is the only way that any thing can be call'd an Allegorie. But what the Quakers call the Spiritual Blood of Christ, they will not let that be an Allegorie, or have any thing else to Refer to, for then it wou'd not be the Chief and Principal. Now the Quakers, in this (as in other things) have lighted upon the Direct Contrary to the Truth; for whatever it may be which they Dream by Spiritual Blood, that can be only Alle∣gorical to the outward and Real Blood. For let me ask, whether the Blood of a Spirit, or the Blood of Light, i. e. of their Light within, be not an Allegorical Expression? But they will have the outward Blood of an Humane Body to pass for an Allegorie. For all that is spoken of the Blood of Christ in Scripture (says G. W. ibid.) is not to be taken only in a Literal Sense. Here is an only again, to put us off from knowing of his Meaning. Not only in a Literal Sense! (The Jesuits are but Dunces to these Quakers, for Plainness and Sincerity!) If the Efficacy and Merits of the Blood of Christ do Extend to any Spiritual Effects, by Faith in Him, His Death and the Satisfaction thereby Made for our Sins, then G. W. thinks to come off by his word only, that the Blood of Christ is not to be taken
only in a Literal Sense: And then it must be an Allegorie! And so he has gain'd his Point. But (George!) all this do's not make it an Alle∣gorie, nor hinder all that is spoken of the Blood of Christ in Scripture to be taken in a Literal Sense, and (notwithstanding of Thy only) I will say only in a Literal Sense: for outward Blood is only out∣ward Blood, and not Spiritual Blood: And its having Spiritual Effects, do's, in no ways, hin∣der its being only outward Blood: nor do's it make such Blood to be any Allegorie at all, un∣less, as the Blood of the Legal Sacrifices, it have Respect to another Blood more Worthy and Effica∣cious than it self: for Allegorie, in this Dispute, means the same as Type or Figure. Thus Gal. iv. 24, Isaac and Ishmael, Sarah and Hagar are call'd an Allegorie, because they were a Type or Figure of the Two Covenants. And thus it is that the Qua∣kers wou'd have the outward Christ to be an Alle∣gorie, Sc. of what they call the Inward Christ or Light within; which they make the Archi-Type, and so of more Worth and Dignity than the outward Christ, and consequently the Merit and Satisfaction by which we are sav'd to be Referr'd to That, and not to the outward Christ, who was but the Allegory, Type, or Figure of It. And this totally throws off the outward Christ from having any Share or Parcel in our Re∣demption, more than the Blood of those Bulls and Goats which were Sacrific'd under the Law; for the Quakers make the outward Blood of Christ to be but a Type, as these; tho a nearer Type than these: But All is to be Referr'd into the Archi-Type, which they make to be the Light within. When the Archi-Type comes, All Types of it do va∣nish, and become of no more Effect at all: Nay, it
is a Sin to use them any more, for that is an Implicit Denying of the Archi-Types being come: And hence it is, that the Quakers are so Enrag'd against laying any stress upon the outward Christ, His Death or Sufferings without us; which they say (as before Quoted) need not now be Preach'd, because they are not to be again. i. e. They are Past; but the Archi-Type, the Light within Re∣mains, which is Sufficient of it self, and without any thing else. i. e. without the outward Death of a Christ without Ʋs. For this Inward Christ, the Light within was always, before the Incar∣nation of the outward Christ; And before that (say the Quakers) did shed its Spiritual Blood &c. which was Sufficient to Save us: And that there∣fore ther was no need of the outward Christ's coming at all: as now the stress is not to be laid upon it, but upon the Light within, which is Sufficient without It. This is the true Qua∣ker Doctrin. But how the outward Christ cou'd be a Type of the Inward Christ or Light within, which was Before Him, the Quakers are left to Explain; for a Type must be Before that of which it is the Type, else it were not a Type, which is a Fore-runner of it. But Contradictions are no Novelties with them. G. W. falls again upon this Topick, p. 39. And takes a new way, thus says he, We know not what Author he has for this Charge, as if none of their Authors had been Quoted in the Sn. where Sect. x. the Reader will find Quotations sufficient, all of which G. W. passes over in this Confident manner, of which I have taken notice already. But, in this same place where he makes this Excuse, he do's himself Confess what is Charg'd upon them: for he says Expresly, That Christ's outward Blood and Water which flow'd out of
His Side, had an Allegorical Signification, even (says he) of the Spiritual Blood and Water of Life &c. Now (as before is said) having an Allegorical signification, is all that makes any thing to be an Allegorie. And making the out∣ward Body and Blood of Christ to be an Allegorie, that makes it but a Type or Figure; and Plain∣ly gives the Preference to whatever they Fancie by Inward Body and Blood. The Question being put to George Fox, in these words, Whether Christ in the Flesh be a Figure or not? He An∣swers in his Saul's Errand. p. 14. His Flesh is a Figure. And p. 8. It being objected against Richard Hubberthorn, that he had wrote, in these words, That Christ's coming in the Flesh, was But a Figure. G. Fox Defends that saying, thus, Christ, in his People, is the Substance of all Figures-but as He is held forth in the Scripture-Letter, with∣out them, and in the Flesh without them, He is their Example or Figure, which is both one, that the same things might be fullfill'd in Them, that was in Christ Jesus. Here he says that Example and Figure are both one. For he Understood not Words or the Sense of them; therefore you must take his Meaning, as he Expresses it, and by Example mean Figure. And here you see he makes a Di∣stinction betwixt Christ in His People, and as in the Flesh without them. The first is that Spiri∣tual Flesh before spoke of, or their Light within: the Second is the outward Christ Jesus. The first he makes the Substance and no Figure: but the Second he Expresly calls a Figure. And of what is it the Figure? He tells, of the same things to be fulfill'd in Them, that was in Christ Jesus. That is the Atonement and Satisfaction which Christ made for Sin was not the outward shed∣ding
of His Blood, but the shedding of the Spi∣ritual Blood Inwardly: And that this is Per∣form'd in Them, as it was in Christ; And that the Atonement and Satisfaction is made in Them, and The same in Them that was in Christ. This Inward Atonement they make the Great Mystery, of which Christ's outward Sufferings were but the History, as Mr. Penn expresses it, in his Rejoin∣der to John Faldo. p. 336. That these Transactions i. e. of Christ's outward Sufferings were as so ma∣ny Facile Representations of what is to be Ac∣complish'd In Man. (See Sat. Dis. Sect. i. N. xii. p. 15, 16.) Now, Reader, these Quotations out of G. Fox's Sauls Errand are Produc'd (a∣mong many others) in the Sn. yet G. Whitehead crys, We know not what Author he has for this Charge. Ther is another Little Author which G. W. has Forgot (it were well for him if he cou'd) who Answers to the same Objection that was put to G. Fox, six years after the Answer before Quoted given to it by G. F. in his Saul's Errand, which was Printed An. 1653. But G. Whitehead's Truth defending the Quakers was Printed An. 1659. where p. 20. he Answers to the same objection, which he sets down in these words, Did Richard Hubberthorn well in writing That Christ's Coming in the Flesh was but a Figure? And his Answer is Delicious! which therefore I will set down every word of it, and is as follows. Ans. Cou'd Christ have been said to have been Transfigured if his Coming in the Flesh had not been a Figure or Example till his Glory was Revealed? And hast thou not read that he was the Express Figure of his Fathers Sub∣stance?
instead of whih its translated Image &c. This &c. is not but here as if ther were any More in his Answer, of which this is every word, and ends with an &c. as I have set it down, lest G. W. might have a Secret-Reserve in that (who never writes without one) and Ac∣cuse me of False-Quotation, in leaving any thing out; after the Manner of his Appendix, as you will see hereafter in the Second Part. Sect. ii. N. 6. But now as to this Answer. Here G. W. do's not Deny that his Friend Hubberthorn had wrote thus. Or, that this was the Current Doctrin of the Quakers, and Justify'd by them. No, he owns all that, and go's on to Justify it, as Fox had done before him, and he had Six Years time after Fox had Answer'd, to have Consider'd of it. But the Quakers Doctrin is the same it was from the Beginning! for Truth is one and Changes not! But the Wit sometimes may. Of which G. W. here gives a noble Turn. He proves, That Christ was but a Figure, be∣cause He was Transfigured! This Punn looks as if it had been stolen out of Cambridge Jests. And I cou'd forgive George to Exert this Size of his Wit, were it not in Serious Matters. But to Pretend, That this was Written from the Spirit of Truth in George Whitehead and Geo. Fox the younger, as it is said on the Title-Page of this Book; And p. 7. That it is of as Great Authority as the Scriptures, and Greater, this puts it past a Jest, and ought to be Animadverted up∣on as a most Outragious Blasphemy. And shews moreover the Mad Delusion of these Quakers, that they are out of their Wits, and their Brains turn'd by an Enthusiastical Distraction. For, as
before has been shewn, the meaning of the word Figure in this Dispute, is a Type or Shadow, whether Christ was a Type or Figure of something else? i. e. of the Light within Ʋs. And to Prove this, by the Figure, that is, the Shape or outward Appearance of His Bo∣dy and Raiment being Chang'd in His Transfi∣guration upon the Mount, if these Men believe themselves, is such a Portion of Ignorance as sets them not out of the Rank of Children: But their thinking it to be Divine Inspira∣tion, makes them Mad-Men, and Blasphemously so. Then again, to make Figure, even in this sense that they wou'd take it, to be the same as an Example, which is Express'd in both the Answers of G. F. and G. W. this is not to know at all what they say, but to set down words at Random. For let Christs Transfigu∣ration be a Figure, in whatever sense, yet how is it an Example to Ʋs? Are we to be Transfigur'd, while upon Earth, as He was up∣on the Mount? And must the Cloaths we wear become White and Shining as His was then? Who wou'd have found fault with Hubber∣thorn for saying that Christ was to be an Ex∣ample to Us? Tho' the word But cou'd not have past even there. To say that Christs coming in the Flesh was But an Example, as if it had been Intended for nothing else! And nei∣ther G. F. nor G. W. find any fault with this But of Hubberthorn's, tho' it was objected; but Justify Hubberthorn in the whole. For it is the very Quaker Doctrin. viz. That the Birth, Sufferings, and Death of Christ, are but Types
or Examples of all those things to be Per∣form'd more Eminently within Ʋs; what Christ Did or Suffer'd Outwardly, they make but the History and even Facile Representations (as before has been said) of what was to be Accomplish'd in Man. Where the Atonement and Satisfaction for Sin is made, by the Birth, Sufferings, &c. of the Light within, and not by any thing which Christ suffer'd Outwardly for Us. For that we must Suffer the same our selves, even Eternal Burnings, and are Justify'd only by what We suffer, or the Light suffers In us; And not by the Sufferings of any Christ without Ʋs, as before shewn. p. 61. And this Rege∣neration wrought by the Light in our Hearts, they make to be a greater Mystery than the Incarnation of Christ, and His taking our Flesh up∣on Him in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin; who (according to them) was But a Type or Exam∣ple of their Virgin Hearts, where the True Christ is Born, &c. But G. W. has another Text for his Figure, it is Heb. i. 3. where Christ is said to be The Express Image of His (Fathers) Person. Which G. W. will have render'd thus, The Express Figure of his Fathers substance. He gives no Reason for the Fault he finds with our Tran∣slation. Yet, I suppose, he gave all he had. But however, what use can he make of it? That Christ was the Figure or Example of His Fathers Substance? what is the Example of a Substance? And was Christ an Example to His Father? Alas poor Quakers! Every thing goes wrong with them! But Pursue this Antidoie. G. W. says p. 39. That the Quakers do own that Christ's outward Blood is a Part of
His Sacrifice. But (George) what Part is it? this was put in but to Amuse. And by what is said above, if it be a Type, tho' the Chief Type, it can be no Part of the Sacrifice or Atonement: for, let me ask thee (George) Is not the Light within sufficient without some∣thing else? was ther no Atonement before Jesus suffer'd under Pontius Pilate? or was it the Vertue of that Death and Sacrifice of Jesus which did ope∣rate backward to those before Him, by Faith in Him who was to Come? or was ther then another Atonement before He came? if so, was not that Atonement Perfect? then the outward Blood was no Part of it. Or were ther Two Atonements? was that First, which the Quakers suppose made by the Heavenly Body, which, as G. Fox says, was Crucified when Adam fell, was that Per∣fect and Sufficient? If so, what needed Another? was the other which follow'd 4000 years after, any Part of it? And if not a Part then, how is it a Part now? But, George, thy Light and Life p. 55. has been before Quoted, p. 97. where thou opposes, the outward Blood of Christ, being Any way Meritorious to Salvation. Yet here thou allows it us as a Part of the Sacrifice, Great wits have short Memories. G. W. in the same p. 39. offers two migh∣ty Arguments, why the Quakers do not make Christ without but the History, and the Light within the Mystery or Substance. First Argument. The Quakers make him (Christ) no otherwise than the Father has Appointed and made Him to be. This was strong! And, in favour to George, I pass it without any Reply. Second Argument. He (Christ) as in Himself, is the Substance of all
Shadows, and the fulness of Light and Life. Who Doubts it George? But what Christ do'st thee mean? Thee say'st, As in Himself, did'st thee not mean by this, The Light within? yea ve∣rily! then thy meaning is, that the Light within is the Substance of all Shadows. And this is the very thing that is Charg'd upon thee and thy fellow Quakers. Why did'st thee not say that the outward Jesus of Nazareth who was Nail'd to the Cross was the Substance of all Shadows? That wou'd have been speaking Plain. But that was none of thy meaning. But by this Dodging way which thy Sincerity uses, we see thy meaning plain enough. 1. Their Spi∣ritual Bo∣dy of Christ which they Suppose He d from Eternity. And their Denial of his now Human Body in Heaven.X. Yet they have a Salvo even for this (tho' full of more Contradictions) for (as before shewn p. 13. &c.) they have a Notion of a Body which Christ had all along, before His Incarnation: And which sort of Body they now allow him to have in Heaven, but not that Body which He took of the B. Virgin, in which He Suffer'd, Dy'd, and Rose again. And by the help of this Private Notion of a Body, they Deceive many People, who know it not, in their Confession to the Body of Christ now in Heaven, as if they meant the same Body that we do; which they do not; but they mean it only of that Spiritual Body, of the Second Adam's Nature, as they Phrase it, which they say Christ or the Light had before the First Adam was Created. And they say, that this Body of Christ is within them, as well as His Spirit. Indeed they are here in a monstrous Confusion,
for by this Body, they mean the Spirit, and by a Spiritual Body they mean nothing but Spirit. However this serves them to Dodge and De∣cieve others. It was to meet with them in this, that the First and the Sixth Quaeres, of those given to their Yearly Meeting. 1695. were fram'd. viz. Do you believe in a Christ without you, Now in Heaven? And Quaer. 6. Is Christ now at this Day, and for Ever to come, Truly and Really a Man, in true and Proper Human Nature, without all other Men? But in their Pretended Answer to these Quaeres, they wave Answering Directly, and leave out the words without us, and without all other Men, and the word Human, upon which the Chief stress was laid, because they do believe that this Notional Body of Christ is within them, as well as His Spirit: Therefore they wou'd not Answer to this. And, tho' this was again Prest upon them, in the Conclusion of the Sn. and they were told of all this Dodging, and this was put upon them, as a Criterion to Clear themselves; and therefore they were Desir'd to begin their An∣swer to the Sn. with a Plain and Direct Ans. Yea, or Nay to these Two short Queres. Yet no Provocation can bring them to it. They will not yet Answer to it; for it Discovers the Heart of their Cause. It wou'd totally overthrow their Ancient Testimonies, wherein they Deny, That Christ hath now a Body of Flesh and Bones Circumscript or Limited in that Hea∣ven which is Above, and out of Every Man on Earth. These are the words of John Whitehead, in his Quakers Refuge Printed 1673. p. 40.
And p. 41. he says that they are in the Error who wou'd Limit it to a Particular Place, and out of every Man on Earth. for (says he) The Spirit and Body of Christ is not Divided; but wheresoever the Spirit and Life of Christ is, it is in the Body of Christ. This shews plainly what they mean. That the Bo∣dy of Christ is not Now a Body Circumscript or Limited to any Place (and consequently it is no Body at all, for that is Inseperable from a Body) but that it is wheresoever His Spirit is, and that it is within them, and not without all other Men. Thus Edward Burough being De∣manded, in these Positive Terms, Is that very man, with that very Body, within you, Yea, or Nay? And this he do's not at all Deny, but Answers in the Affirmative. p. 149. of his works. The very Christ of God is within us. You must take the meaning of these men by Con∣sidering that to which they Answer; and which they oppose: for in a Limited sense, Christ, by His Holy Spirit and Influences, is within us; and Christ is The very Christ; so that ther is a sense in which that Expression (tho' offensive in the wording of it) may be admit∣ted: But then when we consider that which they Oppose, or to which they Answer, the meaning appears Plain. for why wou'd they Oppose what they thought Orthodox? And this is the method by which we must understand G. Fox's Great Mystery, which is a Pretended Answer to 108 Books and Disputes against the Quakers. For G. Fox's own words are eldom either Sense or English; and he Miserably
Mis-Quotes and Mistakes their words whom he writes against; sometimes it appears to be on Purpose, and sometimes out of Pure want of Ʋnderstanding: Half Knave, and Half Fool! But by Reading those Books which he opposes, you may Discover what he wou'd be at. Instan∣ces of this, out of Number, can be given. Which, if any think it worth the while, are Ready to be Produc'd. But to the Subject we are upon. The first Book he Answers in his Great Mystery, is of one of the then Ministers Mr. Sam. Eaton, call'd The Quakers Confuted. Printed. A. D. 1654. where p. 12. Mr. Eaton makes as full a Confession as can be to the Inward Presense and Operation of Christ, by His Spirit in the Hearts of Believers. And therein (says he) they have Him: But they have not Christ in Flesh, or the Flesh of Christ dwelling in them; for that was taken up into Heaven, and will there be Con∣tain'd, till the Restitution of All things. This G. Fox opposes in his Great Mystery p. 3. And Quotes thus much of his words, with the Page. But the Saints have not Christ in the Flesh. p. 12. And opposes this, as Contrary to Christ and the Apostles Doctrin; who said they were of His Flesh and of his Bone — and they that have His Flesh, have it in them. This shews in what sense he Understood these Scrip∣tures; and what his Notion was of the Flesh of Christ. viz. That it was now at this time, in all Believers: and so not any Literal Flesh, but some Imagination or other that they have of Spi∣ritual Flesh; which they think that God Himself has, and Christ or the Light had from all Eternity;
so nothing of outward Human Flesh or Nature. Tho' if you take the word Human as it may be Deriv'd from Homo a Man, thus they will allow that Christ has a True Human Body, and Ever had from Eternity, that is, a True and Real Manhood. In this sense it is said be∣fore p. 11. l. 8. that they allow the Body which they say Christ had from Eternity to be an Human Body. For ther is no other word in Latin whereby to Express the Nature of Man, but Humanitas, whence we use the word Humanity to mean the same as Manhood. But if you Derive the word Human from Humus the Ground or Earth, of which Man was Made, in this sense the Quakers Deny that Christ had an Human Body from Eternity; or indeed while He was upon the Earth. For which I Refer you back to p. 19, 20. where you will find this Artfully Distinguish'd by the Quakers. But we will now go on to see the further Salvos that the Present Antidote affords in this Case. Their De∣nyal that Christ had any Human or Created richer Soul or Body, while upon Earth.2. G. W. Skips to p. 38. And takes up this Argument again, where he Pretends to An∣swer the objection of the Quakers making the Body of Jesus only a Vaile or Garment, wherein Christ or the word Dwelt; but that He took not that Body into His own Person, so as to be Hyposta∣tycally United to it. And to this, he says. p. 38. We are to seek herein, as not knowing where the Quakers say these things. Yet Answers not, or Names one of the many Proofs which are brought for this. (See Sn. Sect. x.) This wou'd be very Provoking, but that I am us'd to it; for it is his Con∣stant
Method. Yet in the Excuse he makes for it, he Confesses enough, to shew that the Quakers are Guilty herein. For, says he, Tho' His Flesh is call'd the Vail, yet it was that he own'd as His own Body, being also call'd the Body of Jesus, which was not a Fantastical but a Real Body. Here is putting in things they are not Accused of, that they may seem to vindicate themselves in something. They are not Accused for saying that the Body of Jesus was a Fantastical, or not a Real Body; but that it was not Truly, that is, Hypostatically the Body of Christ, only a Vail or Garment wherein He Dwelt: And, in that sense, it was His Body, as a Man's Cloak or Garment is his Garment; and so it was that (as G. W. says) which Christ owned as his own Body; being also (adds he) called the Body of Jesus. i. e. in some other sense than it was the Body of Christ. That is, It was the True, Proper, and Natural Body of the Man Jesus: But it was the Body of Christ, only as He Dwelt in it, in the Body of that man Jesus, as G. W. thinks He do's in the Body of George Whitehead. Otherwise it cou'd not be call'd the Body of Christ, and also (as G. W. here) the Body of Jesus. This must make Jesus and Christ to be Two Persons. For Example, if I shou'd say the Body of George, which is also the Body of Whitehead, this wou'd either be Non-sense; or else it must Divide George from Whitehead, and make the Body to belong to George in one sense, and to Whitehead in another.
It is told before p. 17, 18. How nicely G. W. do's Distinguish between Consisting and Having; and tho' he Allow'd that Christ once Had a Body, that is in His Possession, as a man Hath an House or a Cloak: yet G. W. positively De∣nies That Christ did Consist of Human Flesh and Blood. And if so, Then He was never Truly and Really a Man: only such in Appearance and False-shew. Which overthrows the whole Foundation of the Christian Faith. And is an Abominable Heresie long since Condemn'd by the Catholick Church, as I have elsewhere shewn: And that the Quakers have Lick'd it up, as they wou'd Pretend, by Inspiration; which if so, was most Certainly from the Devil the Father of Lies. But let us see more of them. Richard Hubberthorn in his works, Printed. 1663. a∣mong several Queres which he puts against Christ's being a Creature, or having any Created Nature in Him, do's Demand. p. 49. and 50. When was that Christ Created, which you say must as a Creature Judge the World? And if in Mary's time, who was Judge of the World till then? Was not the Person of Christ Jesus before the World was? And when had the Man Christ Jesus his Beginning, if you can Declare it? How is Christ the only be∣gotten Son of God, if He be a Creature, or how can God beget a Creature? And if the whole Person of Christ was not before the Earthly Adam, how was the Creation made by Him? Or how can He be of the Nature of fallen Adam, and not Earthly and Defiled? And is the Flesh of Christ Heavenly or Earthly? Or is He Christ without His Flesh? i. e. He had always an Heavenly Flesh, and that He has still: But never took Flesh of
Adam's Nature; for then they think He must have been Defil'd. As if He cou'd not take the Nature without the Defilement, which was but Accidental to it. George Fox in his Great Mystery. p. 99. sets down this Principle, of the Professors (as he calls them) That Christ hath a Humane Reasonable Soul. And he Disputes against it, and Battels it as a Gross Error. For (says he) Is not a Human Soul, Earthly? for you say that Christ had a Human Soul, and is not Human, Earthly? And hath a Human Body, and is not a Human Body, an Earthly Bo∣dy? was not the first man of the Earth, Earthly, and had an Human Body; the Second man, the Lord from Heaven? This is the Heavenly Body and Flesh which they suppose Christ had from Eternity. But here, and in many other Places, they Deny Christ to have either Human Body or Soul, or to be a Man, otherwise than, as they say, He was Man before the Creation. This being Urg'd against them by John Bun∣yan Minister of Bedford, who, in his Gospel-Truths Opened Sect. 18. takes pains to prove that the Christ who was Born of the Virgin was the true Saviour, and then Infers. p. 652 of his works in these words. How are they then Deceived who own Christ no otherwise than as He was before the world began— For in their owning of Him thus, and no otherwise, they do directly Deny Him to be come in the Flesh, and are of that Anti-Christian Party which John Speaks of. 1. Joh. iv. 3. Edw. Burrough Answers this Book of Bunyan's, and coming to this Passage, p. 142. of his works, he Repeats Bunyan's, words thus. How are they Deceived who own Christ no other∣wise,
than as He was before the world began &c. And instead of Clearing the Quakers from this Objection, or Disowning it to be a Principle of the Quakers, he stands by it, and pretends to give Reasons for it, as, Christ the same Yesterday, to Day, and for Ever. And that Christ was be∣fore Abraham &c. And falls upon Bunyan for his Grievous Ignorance, in not Apprehending this Quaker-Mystery, as he words it thus, To own Him (Christ) as He was before the world was, for Salvation. But that was not the Questi∣on. Bunyan's words, even as Repeated by Burrough, are not against owning Christ as He was before the World was (for that Bunyan and all Christians own) but against owning Him so, And No otherwise. i. e. Not as having taken Flesh, in time, of the B. Virgin, having Suffer'd, and Dy'd for us: for in that Respect, and not only as He was before the World was, Bunyan Contends that He was our Savi∣our. And Burrough opposing him in this, shews plainly what they mean viz. That Christ has now no other Flesh or Manhood than what He had before the World was; and that He is not our Saviour upon account of that Flesh of Jesus, which He Borrow'd as a Vail to shrowd Himself in for a time, or for what that Body suffer'd; but that He is our Saviour only as He was before the World was; and as they say that He is Inwardly now in their Hearts, in His Heavenly Flesh and Blood, which he had from Eternity. And the whole Merit and Atonement for Sin they place in the Inward Shedding of this Spiritual Blood in their Hearts; which they call the Sufferings of Christ, yes and
of His Manhood too, of His Body and His Flesh! thus Bantering Mankind, while they Mean nothing of this of that Visible Body, in which He Appear'd, in the Days of Pontius Pilat, and which was Nail'd to the Cross; but of the In∣visible Body, Flesh, Blood, and Bones of the God∣head. The Arch-Enemy having Taught them this Damnable Heresie, and thereby put the Grossest of Darkness for Light, and Defrauded them of whole Christianity, the Faith in the outward Jesus; and what He did and suffer'd outwardly for Us; tho' it be Inwardly Appre∣hended and Apply'd by Faith, which is the Gift of God. He of His Infinit Mercy Grant it at length to these Miserably Deluded Souls. For they yet stick fast in this Root of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity. As you may see in a Book lately Publish'd by one of themselves, but who has, with others, happily Discover'd the most Gross of their Heresies, this is one Daniel Leeds in America, his Book is Intitul'd News of a Trumpet Sounding in the Wilderness, Printed at New-York. An. 1697. And some Numbers of them are sent over hither. There, at the Conclusion of the Preface, he tells of the Doctrin which is, at Present, Preach'd among the Quakers in America. One Preach'd thus (says he) It is the work of the Devil to cause People that have Profest the Appearance of Christ in the Heart, to Respect the Person without them, Another Preached thus. I am Grieved that any, that have Profest the Light, shou'd now direct the Minds of People to Respect him, as he is now in Heaven above the Clouds. Truly Friends, it is Delusion▪ Another Preach'd thus. There is that wou'd
have Flesh added in the Creed, but let them take it that will. I believe the Lord will give them his Plagues and Torments with it. Of this, a Quaker there, one Abraham Hulings complain∣ed; and gave in a Paper, with the above cited Quotations, under his hand, to the Qua∣kers Church at Burlington, desiring them to cen∣sure this Doctrin. But they wou'd not. On the contrary they Exccommunicated, or Disown'd (as they Phrase it) this Hulings, for opposing this Doctrin. Moreover, says Dan. Leeds there is one John Humphrey, a Preacher near Phi∣lidelphia, that writes a Letter against G. Keith and his Friends, wherein he has this Expression, I am Grieved to hear some say, they ex∣pect to be Justify'd by that Blood that was shed at Jerusalem. In Justification of which Passage, he writes in another Letter thus. His (Christs) own words will clear me from your Aspersion. Joh. 6.63. It is the Spirit that Quickneth, the Flesh profiteth nothing. So He himself ascribes the work of Mans Salvation and Sanctification, not to the Flesh that Suf∣fer'd; but to the Spirit that Quickned: Not to the Blood that was shed at Jerusa∣lem, but unto that Flesh and Blood which was Spiritual, &c. of this False Doctrin G. K. complain'd to the Quarterly Meeting at Phila∣delphia, but no Answer cou'd he have, nor no Blame nor Condemnation must pass against their Brother John Humphrey for this False Do∣ctrin; tho' it's near Six years since these Let∣ters were Writ. Thus far Dan. Leeds. As to the Quakers mis-understanding of this, and o∣ther Texs in the 6th. of St. John, it is Recti∣fy'd
before p. 101. this Text. ver. 63. is an Explanation of ver. 53. viz. That it was Christ's Literal Flesh of which He spoke: but He cor∣rected the Gross Conception of Eating it Li∣terally; in which sense it wou'd not have Pro∣fited any who had Eat it: But the Spiritual-Eating of it, by Faith, is that which Quickneth. but the Quakers put the Figure and the Alle∣gorie upon the Flesh, as if it were not the Outward Flesh of Christ of which He spoke, but an Inward and Allegorical Flesh, by which they mean what they call their Light within: And so Enervat and Evacuat the Whole Foun∣dation of the Christian Faith. Dan. Leeds In∣forms Us, That in America the Quakers had heard, that their Brethren in England, particu∣larly at London, where most Notice has been taken of the Late Controversies with them, had begun, of Late, to Preach of an outward Christ, and of His Death and Sufferings. But this is only to Amuse. For, as has been said, they are not Charg'd with Denying the Mat∣ter of Fact, that Jesus of Nazareth did Suffer, as is Recorded of Him, in the H. Gospel: And which they now Preach, to make themselves Appear to be Christians: But who ever heard them Preach of Faith in Him, His outward Suffe∣rings and Death, as of any Necessity to Salva∣tion? This only is the Christian Faith. The other, of an Historical Belief that He did Suffer, is no more than what Jews and Mahometans do Confess; And which the very Devils do Believe, and Tremble. And no more have the Quakers yet Preached. But they think that a Great Deal; and are brought to
it, with mere Force. For, till of late, the outward Christ, or Jesus of Nazareth was sel∣dom or never so much as mention'd in any of their. Meetings, unless to Revile and cast Dirt upon Him. To give it as a Mark of False Ministers,Will. Smith's Primmer. p. 8. Gr. My∣stery. p. 250. to Preach Christ without, and bid People believe in Him, as He is in Heaven a∣bove. Nay as a Proof of their being Possest with the Devil, as G. Fox Blasphemes, The De∣vil was in thee (says he to a Christian) Thou say'st thou art Saved by Christ without thee, and so hast Recorded thy self to be a Reprobate. But tho' the Quaker Preachers in London, to stop the Cry against them, have of late, sub∣mitted to Mention the outward Christ, with some seeming Respect: Yet, in the Country, where they have less Politicks, and more Ho∣nesty, they cannot be brought even to that, as you may see in Sat. Dis. Glean. Sect. vi. N. 4. p. 94. And there are later Instances, which G. Keith met with in a Progress he made last Summer, by Invitation from some Qua∣kers, who begin to open their Eyes, in Hun∣tington-shire, and other Places thereabouts, where, tho' kindly Receiv'd, and the Doctrin he Preach'd of Faith in the Lord Jesus of Nazareth, and what He Did and Suffer'd for us, well En∣tertain'd and Listen'd to by several of the Sincere tho' Deluded among the Quakers: Yet it was a New Doctrin to them: And ther were others who violently oppos'd this Do∣ctrin, particularly of the Quaker both He and She-Preachers; one of which at St. Ives in Hun∣ington-shire, ask'd him what Christ he Preached? He said, The Man Jesus of Nazareth, who was
Born of the Virgin, Nail'd to the Cross, &c. She askt, what was become of him? G. K. said, That He was gone into Heaven. What (said she) that Heaven above our Heads? Pointing upwards. Which she Ridicul'd: And said she knew no Christ or Heaven but within her self. Thank'd God, That she had Bread in her own House, and Water in her own Cestern: And did not believe that ther was any thing without her cou'd do her any Good. And upbraided G. K. that he cou'd not be content with the Ancient Doctrin of Friends, of Faith in the Light within, as alone sufficient to Salvation; and ask'd him, if now he wou'd have any thing else? Or wou'd he make himself Wiser than all the Friends who had gone before? And to the like purpose. A He-Preacher at Charteres in the Isle of Ely, being askt by G. K. What he suppos'd was become of that Body which Christ took of our Nature? Answered, That He left it behind Him when He Rose from the Dead. And he Profess'd to Believe in no other Christ, but only his Light within. G. K. met with several the like Instances in that Journey: Which I will not here Repeat, because we may have them, per∣haps, in Reasonable time from himself. And these which I have mention'd are sufficient to shew, that however some at London wou'd Gloss it, the Quaker Faith is not Grounded upon our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, but upon their Light within, which they will sometimes so call, to Elude the world: And as they Be∣lieve not that Christ took our Nature Truly and Really into His own Person, while He was upon the Earth; but only as a Cloak or Vaile
to put about Him, for a time; so they think that He has now, ever since His Ascension, quite laid aside and thrown off that Vaile of our Nature; and that He has nothing at all of it now in Heaven: But that He subsists there only in that Heavenly Humanity, Flesh, Blood, and Bones which they suppose He had from Eternity. And this being their Faith, they must needs think the Common Christ of all Christians, as a True and Real Man, subsisting in our Na∣ture, now and for ever to come in Heaven, to be False and a Lye; and consequently to be an Idol, and our Worship of Him to be I∣dolatry: And as a necessary Consequence of this, they must Hate and Detest our Christ; they must Curse Him, and Renounce Him; as they have done, which I come next to shew. And yet, at the same time they Pretend to Worship the same Christ with us: And pro∣duce their Testimonies to Christ, thereby In∣tending to make us Believe as if they were true Christians, because they use the word Christ and Jesus, as we do, but not in the same Sense; which they know right well in their own Consciences: Yet, in their Quaker Plainess and Sincerity, they wou'd thus Put upon us! They Differ from us in the Object of our Faith, and not only in the Manner of our Worship, which Difference ther may be, and ther is a∣mong Christians; they Worship not the same Christ with us: For otherwise, if they only thought us Faulty in the Manner of our Wor∣ship, why woud they, for that, Curse and Damn
our Christ Himself, call Him an Imagined God, and Ʋtterly Deny Him? But to the Proof. Their Blas∣phemous Contempt of Christ.3. The Quakers having thus Transfer'd the whole Merit towards our Salvation, from the outward Christ, to their Light within. They have set up these Two, as Inconsistancies, as Ut∣ter Enemies to one another. Which they must be, upon the Quaker Notion. For Both can∣not be the Object of Faith: And since Both are made so, the one, by All Christians; the other, by the Quakers; one of them must be a False God, by the same Necessity, that the other is the True God. Therefore the Quakers, tho' in Gross Dissimulation with the World, they wou'd seem to speak Honourably of our Blessed Lord, yet they mean it not of Him, but of what they call their Light-within, as has been Sufficiently shewn. But, on the other hand, when they speak Plainly of Him, They Deny Him, they Renounce Him: Nay they Curse and Damn Him, as a False Christ, a False God. They send the whole Three Persons of the Holy and Ever B. Trinity into the Lake, and the Pit, as shewn in the Second Part, p. 38. &c. And Boldly and Blas∣phemously say, That the Lord Jesus whom we Profess is Accursed. ibid. p. Edward Burrough p. 101. of his works, calls that Christ to whom we Pray, an Idol God, and a Dead God. Josiah Coale, of High Renown among the Quakers, in his Works, Collected and Reprin∣ted An. 1671. opposing one John Newman, for saying If ther be no Personal being of Christ, then ther is no Christ to Exercise Faith in. Answers p. 336. By this kind of Arguments of
J. N. if Faith be Exercis'd in a Personal Being of Christ, it's Exercis'd upon Fancie and Ima∣gination, Which is very True; for a Personal Being of Christ is not Scripture. Here he makes a Per∣sonal Being of Christ to be nothing else but Fancie and Imagination, and consequently no Object of Faith. These works of Jos. Coale have Prefix'd High Testimonies and Elogiums from George Fox, G. Whithead, and from Will. Penn. Wherein ther are Multitudes of the like Blasphemies. Having thus made a Personal Being of Christ now in Heaven to be nothing else but an Ima∣gination of Christians, it follows, That the Qua∣kers do think Him to be an Imagined God, as they say Expresly, in The Sword of the Lord drawn. p. 5. And here (say they) Sottish Minds, your Imagined God beyond the Stars, and your Carnal Christ—is utterly Deny'd, and Testify'd against by the Light which comes from Christ. So that, by this, the Personal Christ of Christians in Heaven, is an Imagined God, and a Carnal Christ, who is Ʋtterly Deny'd and Testify'd against, by the Quakers Christ, I have before Quoted G. W. in his Light and Life. p. 54. Ridiculing of the Christians, for your Boasting (says he) of your God and Christ at a Distance above the Clouds, Stars, and Firmament. I Repeat it here, to shew the Harmony of the Quakers, in the same Stile and Sense. In the same page of The Sword before Quoted, the Quakers add, That this Christ the man of God, is God and Man in one Person, it is a Lye — And as for this Po∣sition, That Christ being the only God and Man in one Person, Remains for Ever a Distinct Per∣son from all Saints and Angels, notwithstanding their
Ʋnion and Communion with Him, the Quaker An∣swer is, your words are Ʋtterly Deny'd and De∣tested, and your Distinctions are Abominable. The Spiritual Ʋnion and Communion with Christ, was Allow'd to the Quakers: But that will not serve. They will have no such Person as Christ, but only the Light within, which is not a Person. And G. Fox, as before Quoted says, The Devil is in them, who Expect to be Saved by a Christ without them: tho' they Acknow∣ledge, That it cannot be without the Operation of His H. Spirit within them; as the Person fully own'd whom he oppos'd. But no Mat∣ter for that. They will have no outward Christ at all. And they make it a Mark of False Mi∣nisters to Preach of Faith in an outward Christ. Will. Penn Says (of which I have often Minded him) That the Person who suffer'd upon the Cross was Properly the Son of God, we Ʋtterly Deny. And in his Sandy Foundation. p. 20. he calls Him a Finit and Impotent Creature. Will. Bayly, in his works. p. 307. says, what was his (Christ's) Person, being mean and Con∣temptible, to them (His Diciples) more than ano∣ther Person? And p. 600. &c. He vehemently opposes the Outward and Visible Christ to be the Saviour. He says, The Apostles, did not Preach a Visible Christ with Flesh and Bones: And he asks, who was Enoch's Saviour and the Pro∣phets, who were before that Visible Flesh and Bones was? Then he Ridicules those, in the Quaker-Language before Mention'd, who Preach a Vi∣sible Man with Flesh and Bones, at a Great Di∣stance from all People, Above, where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are. And p. 24, 25. Whosoe∣ver
Preacheth, or causeth People to Believe their Saviour is without them, and that the Carnal Eye may behold His Glory, who is to be Revea∣led — I say, whosoever Preacheth to People of a Saviour without them — and of a Kingdom without them — I charge all such, in the Name of the most High God, To be Horrible Blasphemers, and Ministers and Messangers of the Devil. He adds, by way of Amusement, while the Light of Christ condemns them within, and while the Kingdom of God Suffereth violence within them. For even then, and then Chiefly, is the Faith in the outward Christ to be Preached to them, to Re∣claim and Convert them. O no, say the Qua∣kers, the outward Person of Christ is not the Mediator, or the Lamb of God, who takes away Sin: but only the Light in the Heart, for Christ is not any Person,See Sn. p. 140. and Sat. Dis. p. 3. &c. but only a Principle or Quality in the Heart. As Will. Penn says, What is Christ but Meekness, Justice, Mercy &c. who then can deny a Meek man to be a Christi∣an? And W. Bayly here p. 38. Humility and Meekness in the Heart of God's Child, is a Medi∣ator — it is the Lamb of God, that taketh away the Sin. And this the Quakers do worship, as Christ in them. G. Fox falls upon those. that are not worshiping Him (Christ) In them.Gr. Myst. p. 55. But for the outward Christ, and His Sufferings the Quakers Despise them to that Degree, That they Prefer their own Sufferings to them. They say, that Their Sufferings are Greater, and more Ʋnjust than the Sufferings of Christ.See Sn. p. 134.135. &c. That the Blood of Christ was no More than the Blood of another Saint. Nay they make it not so much as the Blood of a Quaker. For of Christ's
Blood they say, Can outward Blood Cleanse the Conscience? &c. as we have heard. But of the Quakers Blood they say,The Guil∣ty Cove∣red Cler∣gy. Man Ʋnvail'd. p. 17. An. 1657. That those who shed it cou'd not be Purg'd from that Guilt, but by The Same Blood (of the Quakers) which they so Cruelly shed. I desire any Quaker to shew such a Term of Respect to the Blood of Christ, which was shed upon the Cross, in all the writings of the Quakers. No. That cannot be done. But, on the Contrary, The outward Christ, and His Blood was that at which they Levell'd all their Venomous Darts. They set up the Doctrin of Perfection in themselves, say They are Free from Sin, and therefore, from Repentance. But they will not allow that Pre∣rogative to our B. Lord. It is told Sect. xiii. how R. Hubberthorn calls his opponent a Lyar and a Slanderer, for saying, That Christ Himself was not Capable of Repentance; and says, He was Capable of Repentance. Which cou'd not be, without being Capable of Sinning. For we are not to Repent of Good. But see how Differently some of them Treat James Naylor: They say of Him, That he Made himself of no Reputation,Hidden things brought to Light. p. 37. An. 1678.yea Sin, that Knew none. Yet I cannot think they will say, That Christ had Sin. But their Malice to Christ is, because the Christians do Worship Him; Which Transports the Evil Spirit that Possesses them, beyond all Rules of Sense or Reason. In a Paper of Queres of some Quakers about Cambridge An. 1655. Subscrib'd by Thomas Biddal, they say thus to the Chri∣stians there. The Great Delusion, Sorcery, and Bewitched Doctrin that you are under, of these Bewitching Simon Magus Sorcerers, which have
put you upon a Christ Crucify'd without you, not∣withstanding you and the Rest, are in your Filthi∣ness, and First Nature. This is there said to be Written from the Spirit of the Lord, and that The Lord Reveal'd this by His Spirit in them. These Queres are Printed by one Thom. Moore in his Antidote against the Spreading Infections of the Spirit of Anti-Christ. An. 1655. p. 68. &c. And pretended to be Answer'd by G. Fox in his Gr. Myst. p. 132. &c. but no notice is taken of this Passage. Which G. F. do's not Deny. As for that Softning stroke at the end of this Quotation, Notwithstanding you and the Rest, are in your Filthiness, it has been Answer'd al∣ready, to be no Reason against Preaching of the Crucifi'd Jesus; but rather on the Contrary, as the Best Remedy against Sin. But the Quakers sometimes Pretend, That by their Preaching against the outward Christ, they only mean to oppose those, who Totally Exclude, the Sanctifying Graces of His H. Spi∣rit within Ʋs. But this is a most Horrible False Pretence, against their own Consciences; for they know that ther were none such who Oppos'd them. And all those Books that I have seen, to which G. Fox Answers in his Gr. Myst. are Particularly Large and Full upon that Point. This Moore, p. 32. Says That Je∣sus, who is Personally Absent from the Believer, is Dwelling in the Believers Heart, by Faith of and in Him, and so the Father, in and through Christ. Which G. Fox Opposes. p. 135. And will have the very Person of Christ in Believers. Another, one Ra. Farmer wrote against the Quakers, in the same year 1655. a Book which
he Intitul'd Mysterie. Babylon the Great &c. where in his Preface, he Explains himself thus. Though God, and Christ, and Scriptures, and Or∣dinancies be; and be never so Glorious and Excellent, yet if they be not In thee, in their Life and Pow∣er and Efficaciously Reforming and Conforming Vir∣tue, they are to thee as if they were not at all, or Worse: But whenever they shall be in thee; let the Measures and Degrees be never so High, they will and must also be Without thee, and shall never be Indistinctly the Same with thee. This he Prosecutes further in his Book p. 26. and speaks against such a Notion of God and Christ within, as to make Void the Efficacy of His out∣ward Sufferings at Jerusalem. And this too G. Fox Opposes in his Gr. Myst. p. 173. I could give a Multitude of such Instances. I am the Larger upon this, because it is the only Fig-Leaf the Quakers have left to Cover their Hel∣lish Heresie, in their Contempt and Blasphemy which they Spue out against our B. Saviour, His Precious Death and Passion for our Redemp∣tion. Let me take this Place, to answer the Last Effort of the Quakers, upon this Head; and which being sufficiently Cleared, leaves their Cursed Heresie Naked and Expos'd to the Abhor∣rence of All Christians. The Quakers are told of this their Artifice, in Sat. Dis. Sect. 1. N. ix. p. 12. To. which G. W. Replies in this Antidote p. 210. 211. And Repeats the Charge against them thus. To my Adversaries confidently Asserting (says he) That J. Faldo, nor any other did ever oppose this, That they shou'd Preach Only the Incarnati∣on
and Sufferings of Christ at Jerusalem i. e. without Freaching likewise the Inward operations of His Spirit in our Hearts. And that if Will. Penn, or Thom. Elwood cannot Name one single Man, much less any of those Communions which he Disputes against, that ever thought Christ's out∣ward Appearance wou'd save them, without His Inward Appearance, in their Consciences, then a∣gainst whom have they Disputed? The Objection being thus stated (wherein I take no Notice of his misplacing some words, to hurt both the Sense and the English) he Answers thus. Yes I can Name one Single Man, whom he has Vindicated against Us. (in G. K's behalf) who has both thought and said as much as, That Christ's outward Appearance and Sufferings has saved them, without his Appearance or Work in them; And that is the said Rob. Gordon; And it's Char∣ged against him, among his many other Corrupt Doctrins, by G. Keith. in My and his Book, En∣tituled, The Nature of Christianity. p. 70. 71. Artic. 1. That Christ without Us upon the Cross, hath already subdued all things, finished Transgression, Made an end of Sin, abolish'd Condemnation and Death. Art. 8. That Redemption, Justification, were finished and Completed in the Cru∣cify'd Body of Christ for Us, not in our Per∣sons. Art. 12. That Redemption and all things are wrought, Purchas'd for Us, without the help of any thing to be wrought in Us.
So that here was one Man (i. e. R. G. and too many more) that laid the whole stress and work of Mans Salvation, Only upon Christ's outward Appearance and Suffering, without His Inward Appearance and Operations by His Spirit in Ʋs. I have given G. W's words at large, because upon this Depends the whole Cause of Qua∣kerism. Therefore I will Examin them Fully and Fairly. But first, let me take notice of the Mo∣desty of the Quaker-stile. In My and His Book says G. W. It founds Harsh in English, because, so Ʋnusual. But G. W. wou'd not Give Place to G. K. He Reserves His Dignity! And Comon Civility is an Heresie among the Quakers. But now to our Work. And first, I ob∣serve, That G. W. has left out, in the Arti∣cles he Quotes out of His and G. K's Book, the pages in R. Gordon's Book, call'd A Testi∣mony to the true Saviour, to which their Nature of Christianity is in Answer. For there the Pages of R. G's book are Quoted after Each Article. Which was wisely done of G. W. That none might know where to find the Quotations, unless they wou'd have Recourse to G. W's Nature of Christianity, which not one of a Thousand knows where to find. It was Printed An. 1671. and now hardly to be Got. And G. W. not only leaves out the Pages, but do's not so much as Name that Book of R. G's out of which they are taken, that his Reader might be left Sufficiently in the Dark. And that he had Good Reason so to do, will soon
Appear. To These Articles here Quoted, these pages of R. G's Testimony are added in The Nature of Christianity. viz. p. 3. 4. 5. 20. And whoever will Read these, will see R. G. fully Clear himself from this Imputation cast upon him; and that he had given no Ground at all for these Objections made against him. P. 4. and 5. he makes Two great Gospel Truths. The first, God manifest in the Flesh of Christ, whereby Christ became our H. Priest in the Flesh, therein to offer up himself, the one Perfect Sacri∣fice, Sufficient Atonement, the Compleat Peace-Offering, Once for Ever, not often, and in Eve∣ry Generation, and in Many Bodies (as the Qua∣kers say he Dayly offers Himself in their Bodies) but in One Body, by one Offering, not in our Per∣sons, or Within Ʋs (which is the Exact Qua∣ker Notion) but in His Crucifi'd Body without Ʋs, and before any Good wrought in Ʋs; whereby He hath already subdued all things, finished Trans∣gression, made an end of Sin, Abolished Condem∣nation and Death; and so hath for Ever, as our Head, in Himself compleated the work of our Redemption and Reconciliation with God for Ʋs; God thereby commending His Love towards Ʋs, that, while we were yet Sinners, Christ Dyed for Ʋs, when we were Enemies, we were Reconciled to God, by the Death of his Son, The other Truth is the Mystery of Christ, by His Spirit, Dwelling in His Saints, called in the H. Scripture, Christ within you; whereby God works In Us, through Faith in Christ, the Fruit
and Effect of the work already wrought by Christ, in His Crucifi'd Body, for Ʋs, without Ʋs. And then he tells that for which he Repre∣hends the Quakers, viz. That they Pretend so much zeal for this Mysterie of Christ within, the Operations and Actings of the Spirit of God in themselves, That they Deny the Mysterie of God in the Flesh of Christ, as a Matter of no Necessity to them, as to Redemption, Reconciliati∣on and Justification; Reckoning to Accomplish this, in their own Bodies, Each for himself, thro' Obe∣dience to the Law or Light in his Conscience: which Light they call Christ, Redeemer, and on∣ly Saviour; without Respect to the true Christ, and our only Saviour, Jesus Christ of Nazareth and Redemption already wrought and Accomplished for Ʋs, in His Crucifi'd Body. Thus Plainly do's R. G. Express himself, Giving full Testimony to Christ within, Dwelling in our Hearts by Faith: But Disputes only against that Quaker Heresie, of Placing the Sacrifice and Atonement for Sin, in the offering up of this Light within, Perform'd in their Hearts; and throwing off the Sacrifice and Atonement made by the offering which Christ made of Himself for Us, upon the Cross, as of no Efficacy to our Salvation. This is it, for which the Quakers so violent∣ly oppose him, and which G. W. here calls Corrupt Dectrin. And observe, That in the 12 Art. above Quoted, R. G's words are Recited Imperfect; for after the last words here put down. viz. without the help of any thing to be wrought in us, ther follows in R. G's words p. 20. so as to Atone with God for Ʋs. which Explains his
Meaning, and is most Orthodox viz. That no∣thing Perform'd In us, is the Atonement or Sa∣tisfaction for our Sins. But this, in no ways, Hinders, or Denies the Necessity of the Inward Presence, and Operations of his H. Spirit, to Sancti∣fie our Hearts; whereby only that Atonement Perform'd by Christ, in His own Body, with∣out Ʋs, is Apply'd, and Made Effectual to Us. Which R. G. over and over again, not only Asserts, but Zealously Contends for it. Now let the Reader Judge, whether G. W. has found an Instance in R. G. of one who Asserted, That Christ's outward Appearance and Sufferings, wou'd save any, without His Appearance and Work in them? The doing Right to R. G. is not the Matter. I shou'd not have Detain'd the Reader so long, meerly for that. But, by this it is very Evident, That the Quakers have all along oppos'd the Christian Doctrin, and Rejected all Faith, in our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, as to our Redemption or Salvation, by His Death and Sacrifice of our Sins upon the Cross. Why else did they Oppose (and that so Vehemently) those who Preached this Doctrin: and who also own'd the Inward Presence and operations of Christ, by His B. Spirit in our Hearts; not only as Beneficial, but Absolutely Necessary towards our Salvation; and without which, That the outward Sufferings of Christ, and all His Ordinances, wou'd be to us, as if they were not at all, or Worse, as before Quoted? Why did G. Fox, G. Whitehead, and all the Qua∣kers oppose this? They have Nothing left to say, But that those whom they Oppos'd did Deny the Inward opperations of Christ in the
Heart and that in this only they did oppose them, Which being most False; and they not being able to Produce one Single Person, who did Oppose them In this; shews what that was wherein they did Oppose them. Or if they cou'd find such a Single Person, why did they oppose Others, who had sufficiently Explain'd themselves In this, such as these before Nam'd? Why did they call These Devils, Anti-Christi∣ans, Sorcerers, for Preaching of Faith in Jesus of Nazareth? Why did they Belch out, in Fu∣ry, such Spitefull and Blasphemous Contempt, as before Quoted, against the Person of our B. Lord Jesus? Why did they call Him Accursed! Let them hear the Apostle, That no Man Spea∣king by the Spirit of God, calleth Jesus Accursed:1 Cor. xii.3.And that no Man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. Therefore till they come, not only to say, but to Believe this, they may be sure, That it is not the Spirit of Christ, but of Anti-Christ by which they are Acted. And they cannot Truly Believe this, without not only being willing, but in an High Degree Zealous, to Confess, Retract, and Condemn, the Above Quoted, and all other their vile Con∣tempts, and Outrages against our B. Lord and only Saviour Jesus Christ. I cou'd bring Multitudes of Quotations to the same Purpose of these before Produc'd, be sides what are offer'd in the Sn, to which G. W. has not answer'd: which we may easily suppose he wou'd have done, if he cou'd have found any thing tolerable to have said to them: And till he, or some other of the Quakers, shall think fit to Answer to these,
it is needless to Cloy the Reader with more; These being sufficient to let him see into the Depth of the Quaker Heresies, and Clear his way from their Little Subtleties with which they use to Hide and Cover them. G. W's. Immethodical way has carry'd me from p. 30. of his Antid. to p. 38. because both speak of the same thing, and I wou'd save Repetitions: for which Reason I must pass all he says from p. 30. to 35. which is a going over and over the same again and again; Denying the Charge, but not Answering of the Proofs. Their Contempt of the Ho∣ly Scrip∣tures.XI. He comes p. 35. to the Charge against them of Contemning the Holy Scriptures, call∣ing them Beastly-ware, Death, Dust, and Ser∣pents-meat, &c. He cou'd not, nor do's he De∣ny the Quotations where these names are gi∣ven to the Holy Scriptures, for the Quaker Books and Pages are Particularly set down. Yet he most Impudently Denies that they have call'd the Scriptures by such Names. Tho' per∣haps (says he p. 36.) making a Trade upon Scripture, or Preaching for Hire or Moncy, hath been so call'd by some or other. Here is a Per∣haps, and a some or other to throw us off a∣gain! And to make us believe, that such Names were never given to the Scriptures, but only to the making a Trade of them. For which I must Desire the Reader to look a∣gain into the Quotations in the Sn. and he will there see what a Guilty and utterly False Excuse and Put off this is. For these Names are given to the Holy Scriptures, to Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John. So that his Perhaps is most Certainly; and most Certainly G. W. knew it to be so, tho' he, with a Quaker Sincerity and Plainess, wou'd have it only pass for a Perhaps. And for his some or other, as if he knew not who it was that said any such thing, ther is mention made before of a Passage, and it is Quoted in the Sn. p. 342 of the First Edit. (it is p. 110. of the Third Edit.) of one George Whitehead, in his serious Apology. p 49. where he says, that what is spoken by the Spirit of Truth in any. (i. e. of the Quakers,) is of as Great Authority as the Scrip∣tures and Chapters are, and Greater. Mark that (George!) of Greater Authority than the Scrip∣tures! so that, by this, all Thy Preachments, and of others Thy Quakers, which you say are spoken by the Spirit of Truth, are not on∣ly of as Great, but (George!) of Greater Au∣thority than the Holy Scriptures. And what more Vile Contempt cou'd be put upon those Sacred Oracles than to compare them to the most Sensless and Blasphemous Ramblements that ever came out of the Mouths of Men! Nay, to Prefer these and all their Cursed and Furi∣ous Venome, and Beastly Nastiness (see Sn. Sect. xvii.) to the Holy Scriptures of God! Now (George) are The Scriptures, only the Preach∣ing for Hire! when you Question whether the First Pen-man of the Scripture was Moses or Hermes, whether ther are not many words con∣tained in the Scriptures, which were not spoken by Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, whether some words were not spoken by the Grand Impostor; some by False Prophets, and yet True; and some
by. True Prophets, and yet False, &c. And thy own Excuse for all this, that this was meant only against some Parts of the Scriptures, as in Sn. p. 86. Was all this only against Preaching for Hire? When G. Fox said in his Gr. Myste∣ry. p. 302. That the Scripture is not the ground of Faith. That the Scriptures being outward Writings, Paper and Ink is not Infallible, nor is not Divine. And p. 246. when he says of the H. Scriptures, that They are not the word of God. And in his News coming out of the North. p. 39. where he argues against those who Plead for the Scriptures, he says Hebrew, Greek, and Latin is your Original—you say that Mathew, Mark, Luke, and John is the Gospel, which is Carnal &c. was this only Preaching for Hire? Now (George) be Asham'd and Blush (if Thou Canst) and Confess and Retract (if Thou be'st a Christian) all your Horrid Contempt and Blasphemy against the H. Scriptures of God; and Preferring all your own Gross Delusions before Them, which are your Life. Deut. xxxii. 47. This is all that G. W. says to this Point. And yet in his Contents he Intituls this, The Quakers clear'd from Calumnies, in that Point. This is the Clearing! But some Read the Contents of Books, who Read not the Books: And such must think, that something Materi∣al is Perform'd, where so much is Promis'd. And such only can be Satisfi'd with this and o∣ther Quaker Answers and Defences. See more, upon this Head of the H. Scriptures, in Sect. xiv. xv. xvi. Their Con∣forming and Trans∣forming to Every Turn.XII. He comes, in the next place, p. 37. to answer their Conforming and Transforming to every Change and Turn of Government that
happen'd in their times: and brings a witty Distinction, he says they did not Change, In point of Worship, Principle, Faith or Discipline. This they borrow'd from the Church of Rome, which only, with the Quakers, pretend to Infalli∣bility: And when Press'd with their many Rebel∣lions and Treasons, which they have Rais'd and Fo∣mented; their Hypocrisies and Dissimulations, Breach of Faith, and other Immoralities of their Popes &c. then they come in with the Distinction, which G. W. here uses, That their Infallibility stands ne∣vertheless Firm and Sure, that is, as to Mat∣ters of Faith. Of the Difference betwixt the Pretensions of the Church of Rome and the Quakers to this Distinction it is spoke to in the Sn. Sect. vi. n. 1. And I shall have occa∣sion hereafter to speak further of their Infalli∣bility: only, for the Present, let us take No∣tice, That here G. W. owns all the Quaker-Treasons and Rebellions, their Trimming, Confor∣ming, Transforming &c. still as the Cards turn'd. Moreover their Cursing and Damning the King and all the Loyal Party: their Encouraging the Rebels and Ʋsurpers of England to shed more Blood, and carry Slaughter and Destruction into other Countries, throughout all Europe, and even to the Ends of the Earth. And all this, not only as their own Advice or Direction; But as the Immediate Command of God, and Given forth in His Name, and by His Authority. As is shewn at Large in the Sn. Sect. xviii. How∣ever what cares G. W. for all this! they are Safe as to Worship, Principle &c! But in the same Sect. it is shewn, That after the Restau∣ration. 1660. the Quakers did quite Alter and
Change their Principle, as to Fighting; or else they Ly'd. So that here is Changing of Prin∣ciples too (George) And many other Principles besides this, even quite thro' all or most of your points of Doctrin; which, of Late, you wou'd Chop and Change and Face about from your Ancient Testimonies, they being Discover'd past Defence. But never the less Infallible for all this! What signifies a Lying, Cursing, Dam∣ning, Blasphemous, Traiterous, and Nasty Infalli∣bility, so it be Infallible Still! so Worship, so Principles be sound! tho' this Infallibility is their Main Principle! But Infallibility is not the Article we are now upon. It is the Quakers Changeability, and Ʋnconstancy; and from hence, as G. W. quotes the Improvement made of it in the Sn. p. 285. (it is p. 227. of the Third Edit.) Judge whether these be sound Principl'd men, that can Turn, Conforme, and Transform to every Change according to the Times, whether these be fit men to Teach People? Now do's not the Reader think that these are the words of the Sn. spo∣ken of the Quakers? which I thought (because they are truly applicable to them) till I turn'd to the Place, and there I found, That they are the very words of a Declaration of the Quakers, after the King came home 1660 (only Recited in the Sn.) and they Pointed them against the Presbytcrians and other Dissenters who had been Trimmers under the several Ʋsurpations; and therefore urg'd against them that they were not sit to be Admitted as Tea∣chers of others, who had been so Ʋnconstant and Wavering themselves.
But to shew how Cursorily G. W. Read o∣ver the Sn. if ever he Read it All (he was soon weary of it) he thought that these words, which he Repeats out of the Sn, had been spoken against the Quakers: and therefore he crys out upon them (ut Supra. p. 37.) These are still Deceitful and Envious Suggestions. Thus handsomly giving himself a Box on th' Ear; for the Deceit and Envy are the Quakers, be∣ing their own words. Well! Really this George is Excellent Company! He cannot hear an Ill word said, but he must apply it to the Qua∣kers. Guilty Conscience! Like the man, who hearing some cry out a Whore in the street, ask'd how they came to abuse his Wife. But these are still Deceitful and Envyous Suggesti∣ons! Therefore (George) come along with me to the Next. Their ma∣king no Confession of Sin, or Praying for Pardon.XIII. In the Sn. p. 313. and 314. of the First Edit. (Sect. xxiii. N. vii. of the Third Edit.) it is told that the Quakers, out of their Conceit of Absolute and Senseless Perfection in themselves, do never Pray for Remission of Sin, as Supposing they have none to be Forgiven. And there is Publick Notice given in these words, If any can give Evidence, that ever he heard, at any Quaker Meeting, Remission of Sins Pray'd for, he is Desir'd, for the Vindication of the Truth, to Declare it. All this G. W. passes over. Nor do's he himself say that ever he heard the Quakers Pray for the Remission of their Sins. But he takes hold of a Charitable Prayer of the Author's for them, bemoaning the Des∣perateness of their Condition, who will not so
much as Ask, and therefore have no Promise to Receive Pardon for their Sin: Their way be∣ing Blockt up by a Proud and Blind Conceit of their own Perfection, from Seeking, or so much as Wishing to Return from their Sins! Therefore Prays that Author for them, The Lord help them, and hear our Prayers for them, since they will not Pray for themselves. Of these only words G. W. takes hold: And first he (after his Christian Manner) Returns him Re∣proaches for his Prayers, just Trans-versing our Saviour's Command, to Return Prayers for Re∣proaches. Thus have they learned Christ! But he says that the Author of the Sn. has here∣in Notoriously Belyed the Quakers, in saying that they do not Pray for themselves. Remember (George) that the Prayers which are spoke of in that Place of the Sn. are Prayers for the Remission of Sins, of these only was what above is Quo∣ted Spoken: and if Thee meanest any other, Thee Dodgest George, and Actest not Sincerely, tho' very like a Quaker! Therefore we will suppose (to save thy Reputation) that Thee do'st mean by the Quakers Praying for them∣selves, their Confessing of their Sins, and Pray∣ing for the Forgiveness of them. And now George, tell us, Did'st Thee ever hear such Prayers in any Quaker-Meeting? Did'st Thee e∣ver Pray after this fashion among the Friends? No. Thee canst not say it. How then are the Quakers Notoriously Bely'd, in saying they do not Pray for themselves, when in the same Place, it is over and over again plainly Express'd, that the Praying there spoke of is for the Re∣mission of Sins, and of no other sort of Prayers;
and the Reason given shews it, viz. That the Quakers think themselves to be Perfect, and without Sin; and therefore do not make any Confession of their Sins, or Begg Pardon for them. Now what has this to do with any other sort of Prayers? of which G. W. witting∣ly and willingly Means what he says here of the Quakers Praying for themselves, when he knew that it was meant quite otherwise in the Sn. which he pretends to Answer. This he must own, Unless he can Produce Vouchers for their making Publick Confession of their Sins, and Asking Pardon for them. But since he himself (the Eldest Preacher now among them) cannot Vouch it, I think we may De∣spair of any other. If ther needed further Vouchers, I cou'd Produce Many, even as Many of their Hearers as will speak the Truth. But I will give one Remarkable one which will shew that it is not Forgetfulness in them, but against their Principle. Mr. Thomas Crispe was of their Communion about 30 years, a Constant Hearer, and a Zealous Sufferer too among them. But he took offence at their never having any Confession of Sin, or Prayer for the Remission of it, in their Publick Meetings; and complain'd of it above 20 years ago. But no Rectification — No not at this Day, when they are putting a new Face upon all their Matters; But they will not be brought to this, to Confess themselves Sinners; for then they might be brought to Repentance; of which they Declare themselves Incapable. For this, among other vile Heresies, Mr. Crispe has seperated from them; of which he has given us a very Good
Account, in Several Treaties he has wrote a∣gainst the Quakers. They who were of them, must know them best. Let me give another Authority, of Daniel Leeds before mention'd, in his News of a Trumpet, Sounding in the wil∣derness. &c. p. 138, 139. he Charges them, in these words. You do never in your Meetings Pray for Pardon or Forgiveness of Sin (not that I have heard in Twenty years Due Attendance) for seeing it is Christ in you that Prays, ther is no need of it, He being without Sin. Secondly, You do not Pray to Christ, because it being Christ in you that Prays, it is Absur'd for Christ to Pray to Himself. Thus you see their Practice is Uniform, all the world over: yet not Consistent with it self. For Rich. Hubberthorn p. 20. of his works, Collected and Reprinted An. 1663. Repeating this Assertion of R. Sherlock his Opponent, viz. Christ Himself was not Capable of Faith and Re∣pentance. Answers, Here I Charge thee to be a Lyar and a Slanderer; for He was Capable of Faith and Repentance. Now, How Christ Himself was Capable of Repentance, who never did Sin: And yet the Quakers to be above Repentance, is left for them to Explain. Fran. Bugg, in his Picture of Quakerism. Printed. 1697. says p. 64. That he had been more than 25 years among the Quakers, and a Principal-Member, Yet never had heard any such thing among them. Moreover that he had Read the Chief of their Books (of which he there sets down a Catalogue) and tho' ther are some Prayers in them, yet nothing like Confession of Sin, or Begging for Pardon of Sin, is to be found in any of their Writings; and he Provokes them
to shew any Quotation of this sort, out of all their Books. He names p. 68. a Book of George Whitehead's. call'd Judgment Fixed, Prin∣ted. 1682 where ther is a Long Prayer of near 5 pages, beginning at p. 354. fill'd with nothing but Pharisaical Boast's of his own Perfections, and Appeals to God, with Imprecations and Re∣proches upon his Adversaries: But not one sy∣lable either of Confession of Sin, or Asking Mer∣cy for it. I wou'd not take Bugg's word (tho' I had no cause to doubt it) lest G. W. shou'd Reproach me with trusting to his Au∣thority: But I procur'd this Book of G. W's. and have it now before me, with his Long Appeal and Supplication, as he himself call's it; which contains Prayers —not so like Petitions, As Overtures and Propositions. And now, upon the whole Matter, after all the Wriggling, and Dodging that G. W. or any of the Quakers can use, it must be Known to all the World, and without Contradiction, what sort of Christians these Quakers are, viz. such as cannot make use of The Lord's Prayer; unless, as one of their Preachers C. H. who taking occasion to Repeat it in one of his own Prayers (perhaps on Purpose) left out the Pe∣tition for Forgiveness of our Trespasses, as Use∣less (forsooth!) to the Quakers. It was not made for them! Nor they for it! Unless they can have Liberty to Mend it, as they have done to the Creed, and the Decalogue; All of which Articles, and Commands they have Re∣duc'd
to One, viz. Hearken to your Light within. For this, with them, is the only Rule for all Matters both of Faith and Practice. But to see the Artifice and snare of the Devil, in which these men are Caught; They who are too Good for The Lord's Prayer, have Coppy'd exactly after the Prayer of the Pharisee Luk. xviii. 11. George Whitehead's seems to be taken word for word out of it; only En∣larges it, and far Exceeds that Pharisee in High Pride and valuing of His own Worthiness! The Pharisee only Thanked God, That he was not as other men are, Extortioners, Ʋnjust, Adul∣terers, that he Fasted, and Gave Tythes of All That he did Possess. These all were Duties In∣cumbent upon all; and the Neglect of which had been a Sin in any. But that is nothing to George Whitehead's Rant! Being Free from Sin, that is the Prerogative of every Quaker! That was a Poor Matter for the Top-Apostle! He tells God, in this Prayer, of his Extraordina∣ry Gifts, for which he is so Civil as to thank Him, for his Christian Spirit, his Faith, and not only Patience but Rejoycing under all his Sufferings, for his Righteous Judgment, and for his Ʋnderstanding too (he wou'd not thank God for Nothing) and for his Zeal, which was Most of All! And that Thou hast Raised me up (Says he to God) in Defence of thy Gospel, to vindicate thy Truth &c. Thou knowest (Says he) the Integrety of my Soul before Thee—and that I have not sought to Exalt my Self, nor any Populari∣ty, Party, or Interest to my Self, but only thy Glo∣ry, and the Good of Souls. Thou knowest that in the first Place my Soul hath sought for Peace—Thou know∣est that thou hast Endued me with a Christian Spi∣rit,
and with Faith, Patience &c. Thou hast also Endued me with the Spirit of Righteous Judgment, Ʋnderstanding &c. O my God! as I have Eyed Thee — so I Recommend to Thee, to Plead and Justifie My Cause &c. we say one Good turn Deserves another—Was ther ever such High Arrogance, and Setting forth his own Excel∣lencies in the Presence of God, And to His very Face! Before whom the Holy Job said,Job. xlii. 6.I Abhor my Self, and Repent in Dust and Ashes. But he was an Ʋnderling to George Whitehead, or the Meanest Quaker! They do not Abhor, but Vaunt themselves! they scorn to Repent, for they have nothing to Repent of! They are Clean and Pure as God! who Chargeth his Angels with folly:Job iv. 18. xv. 15. See be∣fore Sect. vii. p. 87.and the Heavens are not Clean in His Sight. But the Quakers Dare Reckon with Him, when He Pleases, and think they can stand the utmost Demand of His Extremest Justice; for that they owe Him Nothing! as Edw. Burrough says p. 32. of his works, That God doth not accept of any, where ther is any Failing, or who doth not Fulfil the Law, and doth not Answer every De∣mand of Justice. See how Literally these Qua∣kers are Describ'd, and their Fearful Condition, 1 Joh. 1.8, 9, 10. If we say that we have no Sin, we Deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us—If we say that we have not Sinned, we make Him a Lyar. But Solomon Eccles the Fd∣ler, and Quaker-Prophet, in his Musick-Lecture. p. 22. Returns the Lye upon St. John, if he Included himself amongst the Sinners, as he Evi∣dently do's, speaking in his own Person, as well as of others, If We say— But Crowde∣ro Answers with a Home Stroke, I do Affirm
(Says he) that if John had said he had been a Sinner, he had Lyed. Therefore, since all the Rest of Mankind do confess themselves to be Sinners, except the Quakers, it is not strange to sind this vile Scraper Determin thus Posi∣tively, in his Quakers Challenge. p. 3. That the Quakers are in the Truth, and None but They. Here they Exclude all the World. And All the World have Reason to Exclude them. He that Confesseth and Forsaketh his Sin shall have mercy. Prov. xxviii. 13. What Mercy then can these men have, who are so far from Forsaking this their Blasphemous Pride, that they will not so much as Confess it! Pride was the First Sin, and of all others, sets us farthest off from God: And of all Pride, the Proud—Humility is the Greatest. This Hypocrytical Hu∣mility is the widest Distance from the True v Christian Humility, Hates and Abhors it, and Falls upon it, wherever it meets it. See how the Quakers Insult and Triumph over Mr. Crisp for Confessing himself a Sinner, in their Rab∣shakeh Rebuked. Printed 1695. Which was wrote in Answer to two Papers that Mr. Crisp (be∣fore mention'd) had Publish'd against the Qua∣kers, in the first of which, call'd An Essay towards the Allaying of George Fox his Spirit. p. 1. he Expresses himself thus, in a Christian Humility, in Answer to their Abuses of him, They cannot Represent me a Greater Sinner than (I thank God) I think my self to be. Upon this they fall upon him. p. 5. of the Introduction. And first, to shew their Sense or Sincerity, they wou'd make Mr. Crisp to thank God for his being a Sinner; whereas any but a Malicious
Quaker, must have seen, at first view, that he thanks God for the Sense which He had gi∣ven him of his Sins. And it wou'd be a Matter of Great Thanks-giving to the Quakers, if the like Grace of Humility were Granted unto them. Pray God, of His Mercy, Give it them; else their Salvation is without All the Promi∣ses of the Gospel. But the Quakers from this Confession of Mr. Crisp's, Charge him Home, and say, that, by this, he owns all that they said against him, as to the Abusing of them and their Writings, nor is it Possible (says the Pen-man) for me to Wrong him; for let me Re∣present him how I will, I cannot Represent him a Greater Sinner than he thinks himself to be, and Thanks God for it too. And says that if they shou'd Represent him to be a Whoremonger, Prophane Swearer, Drunkard, or Idolater &c. this Confessi∣on of his Includes, not only all those, but all other Sins, of all sorts and kinds, how Gross soever. such Bitter Enemies are they to Confession! What sort of a Sinner wou'd they have Made St. Paul, at this Rate, from his Confession 1 Tim. 1.15. that he was the Chief of Sinners! And to Dispute against these Brutes, is a Mar∣tyrdom like that of his, who was Condemn'd to Fight with less Guilty Beasts at Ephesus. But I have Undergone it, for their Good; tho' I Receive the Thanks for it of him who wou'd Rouse a Sluggard out of his Sweet Slum∣ber. But some of them have been Rous'd, there∣fore I Cease not my Pains to Recover more of them; at least to Prevent others from falling into their Pit of Destruction.
I have Insisted longer upon this Point than was needful to overthrow the Poor Answer which G. W. gives to it; But I did it, be∣cause this is a Material Point, it is the very Bolt of the Door which shuts the Quakers up in their Darkness, by Perswading them ne∣ver to Consider any more, and be sure never to Repent. i. e. That they Repented once for all, when they first turn'd Quakers; But after that, they are Sinless and Perfect, and so need no more Repentance. G. Whitehead Denies, That ther is Continual need of Repentance; and Thomas Elwood Justifies him in this (See Sat. Dis. Sect. v. N. 2. p. 51.) As he do's likewise in G. W's Assertion, that the Righteousness in the Quakers is not Finit, but Infinit (ibid. Sect. 2. N. 7. p. 36.) And then indeed what need of Re∣pentance to the Quakers! They are Past Re∣pentance. But G. W. Changes his Tune, in his Christi∣an Epistle, to Friends. An. 1689. For there he Complains Grievously of their Great Corrupti∣ons; not only of a Few, but that Few of them, Nay very Few were what they ought to be. very Few (says he p. 9.) have their Minds Exer∣cis'd in frequent Prayer, or in Heavenly Meditati∣on &c. But too many have their Hearts taken up with these Fading Objects, and things Below, Minding Earthly things &c. And p. 10. he Charges them with Degenerating into Pride, and Height of Spirit and Apparel, as Too too Many do (Says he of the Friends) Contrary to Gravity, Modesty, Sobriety, Plainess, Simplicity, Innocency and Humility. And he goes on p. 11. Though some Formality, and something of the Form of
Truth they may have by outward Education (yet says he) 'Tis not by the work of Regeneration; for it is but Few, in Comparison, that Really Come in at That Door. &c. Here is a sad Account of the Quakers In∣fallibility! which was Granted, not only to some Eminent Quakers, but as Burrough says in his Preface to Fox's Gr. Mystery, p. 7. To Ʋs, Every one of Ʋs, in Particular. Yet now, it seems, Most of them are Gone off; And but very Few Left in the Truth! And have those that are Behind, any Greater Security than the others had! Is ther not now Continual need of Repentance! Is the Righteousness that is in Them, not Finit, but Infinit! Can Infinit Righ∣teousness Fail, or Fall away! Are not these Many and Grievous Sins, of which the Grea∣test Part of the Quakers are Guilty, Sufficient Matter for Publick Confession of Sin, and Re∣pentance among the Quakers? No. No. That must not be Admitted! They are Perfect and Sinless, for all this, As their Heavenly Father is Perfect; And, As He is, so are they in this World! Pursuant to this Principle, ther is no Petition for Repentance or Forgiveness in all G. W's Long Prayer before Mentioned. i. e. not for the Quakers, only for the worlds People, that they may turn to be Quakers. And therefore his saying, that the Quakers are Bely'd, in saying, That they will not Pray for Themselves, will not hold, notwithstanding of all their Prayers: For their Prayers are Panegyricks upon Themselves; and Commonly Invectives against others, and Curses instead of Prayers.
The Pharisee was Modest to George White∣head! he only Prefer'd himself to the Publican, and thank'd God that he was not like him. But G. W. not only Prefers himself be∣fore others, but upbraids them, in his Prayer, of Rancor, Fury, Hatred, Reviling, Slander &c. He Judges them as having Crucifi'd Christ to themselves; and Prays God to Judge them for these things. This is his way of Praying for them! He supposes some of them to have Sinn'd out their Day, and to be Judicially Har∣dened, and these he Excepts from his Good wishes of Opening their Eyes; and all that are Guilty of wilful Opposition and Hatred against the Quakers; from which Few of their Opposers will Escape (Let them name one, for an In∣stance) and All these are Excluded the Bene∣fit of the Quakers Prayers: so that when we come to compute the whole Account, we shall find that the Quakers neither Pray for Them∣selves, or any Body else. And what they call Prayers, are nothing Less; only Great Braggs of Themselves; and the Utmost Contempt, if not Cursing of others. And this is the Con∣sequence of their Super-Pharisaical Perfection! for which they may Read their Doom, And find their Remedy. Luk. xiv. ii. Three Matters of Fact Rela∣ting to the Quakers Contempt of the H. Scriptures, which G. W. Denys, after his Fashion.XIV. From p. 40. to 44. G. W. comes a∣gain upon the Subject of the Scriptures (which has been spoke to before Sect. xi.) saying they want Proof for their Contempt of them; That none value them more than they do; And that They are wholly Ignorant of any such thing, as their Despising of them, or setting up their
own writings as Equal to them, &c. And yet, Reader, he do's not so much as Name one of those Many Quotations, which you will find (for all these points which he Denies) in the Sn. Sect. vii. yet he Crys, Let's have plain Proof, for we are wholly Ignorant of any such thing. George, if thee had but the Honesty to have Nam'd the Proofs which were brought, thee woud'st have found them Plain enough: and that is the Reason thee wou'dst not name one of them. But by thy calling so Impudently for Proof, thee thought'st the Reader wou'd Suppose ther was none. And well he might (if he had ne∣ver Read the Sn.) for who cou'd Imagine that ther were so much Brass in any Humane face! I do not think ther is such another Instance to be Produc'd in the World! He certainly thought to have Provok'd me to have set down all the Quotations in the Sn. over again: and that this shou'd have Nauseated the Reader (as no doubt it wou'd) to see such tedious Repe∣titions; and so to look no more into such an Un-pleasant Controversy. And to avoid these Repetitions which this Im-methodical Answer for∣ces me to, I wou'd have said nothing to these pages of G. W. concerning the H. Scriptures (having spoke to it before) but for the Sake of 2 or 3 matters of Fact which G. W. Names and stoutly Denies. The first is p. 323. of the First Edit. of the Sn. (it is p. 105. of the Third Edit.) where it is told of a man being Rudely thrust down several steps of the Gallery in the Quaker Meeting house in Grace-Church-street, for Reading a verse out of the Bible there. To this says G. W. p. 41. We know no such Indignation or Action shown, by any of us, against the Bible, nor any
Person because thereof; neither do we Believe it; Let the Author Prove it, if he can. Do'st not Believe it George? why then do'st thee Confess it, in the very Next words, after thy Moody Simpering fashion? Possibly (say'st thee) some Publick Disturber might, by some or other present, be Gently turn'd out of Doors; not because of the Bible, but because of some Offensive Turbulent Be∣haviour. Here is Possibles, and Mights, and Some or Others, as if G. W. knew nothing of the Matter, or ever had Enquir'd into it; tho' the Year and Day, were particularly Set down, and Richard Smith vouch'd as then Present, and who did Attest it. But George, no doubt thee knew'st well enough, that the Person who came into your Meeting was Mr. John Pennyman, an Ancient, Grave Gentleman, and as In-offen∣sive as any man upon the face of the Earth; I do not think he cou'd Return an Injury, much less Offer one. And he offer'd none, at that time, or any thing like it, other than Reading a verse out of the 14th. of St. Luke. And the man who Rudely thrust him down stairs was William Mead: and let him, or let thee Name any other Disturbance or Offen∣sive Behavour that Mr. Pennyman was Guilty of, at that time; or else, George, this Excuse of thine, and putting the Author to Prove it, and saying Neither do we Believe it, will make thee look like just such a Sincere and Plain man as thou Art! The next story is told p. 330. &c. of the First Edit. of the Sn. (Sect. xxiii. n. viii. of the Third) of a Grave Council of the Quakers met upon these (to them) Abstruse Points. 1. whether the Body of Christ Arose out of the
Grave? 2, whether Christ was to be Pray'd to. 3. whether we must come to the Father, thro' Christ? For George Keith having asserted these 3 points, they were thought so strange of among the Quakers, that he was Accus'd for them, and a Council of their Chief-Priests and Elders met to Determin of these. Which they cou'd not do (so far as I can learn) but left them as they found them. But G. W. takes no Notice of all this, nor do's he Deny it at all, but takes hold of one Expression, which is Mention'd in the Debates, of a Quaker, who being Prest with the Authority of St. Paul, said That PAUL was Dark and Ignorant, and that they saw beyond him. This G. W. Denies, and calls again upon the Author to Produce his Proofs, who those were that so said, That Paul was Dark &c. or otherwise (says he) for ever be Asham'd of such odious Defamations. But the An∣nex'd Account under the hand of a much more Credible Witness than G. W. will shew this to be no Defamation: and Consequently the Odi∣ous which is Pinn'd to it, must Return from whence it came; as belonging to G. W. his Natural or Quaker Assurance, who was Himself Present, and bore a Principal Part in that Learned Quaker Council. The Account of which I have Annex'd, not only to Clear this Matter of Fact, but because ther are several other things in it, which are well worth our Notice. Ther is another Instance of the Quakers Respect to the Bible, which G. W. mentions p. 43. of a Quaker Servant-Maid who Burn'd the Bible Publickly against the Church (for greater Contempt!) in Bread-street. This is
told in the Sn. p. 343 of the First Edit. and p. 110. of the Third. And G. W. cannot get it Deny'd, but yields it very un-willing∣ly, Ʋpon a late Enquiry (says he) we under∣stand ther was such a Servant-Maid, who under some Discomposure and Temptation, Attempted such an Evil and Mad Action. How! George, was it only Attempted? Enquire again, and thou wilt find she did it. Thou know'st she did it, but woud'st Simper it off thus. And then sayst upon a Late Enquiry, as if thou hadst never heard of it before! O thy Mealy Modesty! such Glorious Actions of the Saints do not Pass so un-regarded; or are so soon forgotten! tho' now for Temporizing a little they must be Dissembl'd: For which Reason thou sayst she was under some Discomposure, and call'st it a Mad Action. Well! we have Mary Tucker too (that was her Name) ad∣ed to the Catalogue of Mad-Quakers. But, George, must we not have the Great Quaker-Prophet, Solomon Eccles in too, for the same reason? who coming Naked all over Besmear'd with T—d into the Church of Alderman-bury in London, and carrying his hands full of the same Filth, compar'd it to the Bible which the Minister carry'd in his hands up to the Pul∣pit, as is told before. And the Famous Jo∣siah Coal must in too, who Justify'd our Bi∣ble being call'd a Brazen-Fac'd-Book, Ʋnjust, Corrupt, and Perverse-Bible, as shewn. p. 9. of the Gleanings to Sat. Dis. And I think they are no whit behind any of these who call it Death, Dust, and Serpents-meat, Beastly-ware, &c. And then come in George Fox the Captain, and
the whole Rabble of Quaker-Prophets, Teach∣ers, Writers, and who not of them. And all these must to Bedlam, if Poor Mary Tucker go's. Even thee George Whitehead must bear her Company: for Burning of the Bible is not so Great a Contempt to it, as making all the Riff Raff of thine and thy Fellow Qua∣kers Blasphemous and Senseless Rattle to be of as Great Authority as It, and Greater! as I have shewn before from the words of G. White∣head. But George says that Mary Tucker was Se∣verely Rebuk'd and Testify'd against by our Friends, who came to Ʋnderstand that Attempt or Action (He knows not yet which it was) which we utterly Abhor. But, George, how do's this Ap∣pear? was she ever made to Sign an Instru∣ment of Condemnation against her self (accord∣ing to the Quaker Disciplin) and this Enter'd in your Register Book kept on purpose? was she oblig'd to Begg Pardon for this Fact Pub∣lickly, as the Fact was Publick, and of General Scandal? and as John Bringhurst the Quaker Printer was forc'd to do, only for Printing a Book of Will. Rogers (a then Seperat Quaker) without the License of the Second Day; Meet∣ing? was she Excommunicated as John Bant (a Quaker-Merchant) was for selling some of these Books of Will. Rogers? (see Gleanings of Sat. Dis. p. 8. was any Mark of Publick Dis∣pleasure put upon her? No. No. None of these things! All this is a sham, a meer sham, George, verily! Have you treated her as you have done G. Keith, or T. Crisp, or F. Bugg, only for tel∣ling you of your Errors? or as you have
done that most In-offensive old Gentlemans Mr. Pennyman, who will not so much as Dis∣pute with you? whom you call Devils Drudge, De∣vils Porter, Devil-Driven, Devil Incarnate, Judases, Apostats, Dogs, Serpents, and 1000 such like ventings of your Meekness and For∣bearance! But why do'st, George, name this of Mary Tucker among the Lyes and Calumnies which thou say'st are in the Sn. when thou Confesses every word that is said in the Sn. of it? But it serves for Clamour! We come next to Examin G. W.'s defence of Ed. Burrough and Himself for two Quota∣tions, which are brought against them in the Snake, shewing their Contempt of Scrip∣ture. XV. First, G W's. Defence of Ed. Bur∣rough for his Con∣tempt of Scripture. as to Burrough. You will find the Quotation out of him in the Sn. p. 109. (it is of the First Edit. which G. W. Quotes, p. 339.) and G. W. comes to it p. 42. and Ex∣cuses Burrough for this Assertion (speaking of the Commands which are given to us in the H. Scriptures) That is no Command from God to me, which He Commands to Another. Meaning that the Scriptures were Commands given long ago to other Men, and therefore did not oblige us now. To this says G. W. He in∣tends this of Special Commands that were to some, to BAPTIZE and PREACH the GOS∣PEL, as he Immediately Explains it, and not of General Commands of Duty Incombent upon All.
Ans. 1. It is well, George, that thou do'st admit the Commands to Preach and Baptize to be Special Commands given only to Some: How then came Thee and thy Quakers by that Authority? Think of this, George, for it Concerns thee. 2. How do's Ed. Burrough immediately Ex∣plain himself (as thee say'st) that he means this of Special Commands? It is true he do's name some Special Commands, as to Baptize and Preach: and some he says were sent to do both, To Baptism (as he Absurdly words it) and to Preach the Gospel: and Another was sent (says he) not to Baptize but to Preach the Gospel. He Re∣ferrs to 1 Cor. 1.17. (to which it is suffici∣ently Answer'd in the Discourse of Water-Bap∣tism Sect. vii.) and thinks that St. Paul had not the same Commission with the Rest of the Apostles. And if so, He was not an Apostle. This shews the Brutal Ignorance of these Enlightned and Infallible men, as they Desire to be Esteem'd! But were these Special Commands all the Contest betwixt Ed. Burrough and J. Turner, in answer to whom he said these words? No. not only not All the Contest: But they were no Part nor Particle of the Contest; and were very Impertinently brought in by E. B. ac∣cording to Custom. The objection put by J. Turner, as Recited by E. B. himself, was Charging this as a Quaker Principle, viz. That Saints were not to do Duties by or from a Com∣mand without, but from a Command within; and that the word Command in Scripture, was not a Command to them, till they had a word within them. And this E. B. Justifies, instead of De∣nying
it, and says, That is no Command from God to me, what He Commands to Another, and then J. Turner, or any other, who go's to Duty, as you call it, by Imitation from the Letter with∣out—This was wrote in the Year 1654. And we all know what they meant by that Phrase of Going to Duty, to Perform Family-Duty, &c. It was the Duty of Prayer, which was chief∣ly meant by these Expressions. And here E. B. means the same, for he speaks of Going to Duty, as you call it, says he; that is, in their sense, and what they meant by it. And in the same p. 47. upon the next Question, As to the time of going to Duties, he says, Expresly, All Duties, as she calls them, whatsoever. She Jane or Joan Turner against whom he Dis∣putes, did not Pretend to the Power of Preach∣ing, to Baptize, or any Special Command; but puts the Case, and the whole Dispute was con∣cerning the Obligation that lay upon us to Perform all our Duties to God or Man; And whe∣ther the Commands in Scripture did lay any Obligation upon us to observe them? And this the Quakers Positively Deny; or that ther Ari∣ses any Obligation to Duty, or that any Command is a Duty, except what is Enjoyn'd by their own Light Within: as W. Penn Expressly. See Sn. p. 92, 93. so that Burrough here spoke the Genuin sense of the Quakers: which G. W. knew well enough. But wou'd Turn and Shift it as you have seen. For this Principle do's indeed Out-Date the Scriptures, like an Old Al∣manack: And Resolves All and Every thing into their Light within, that is, what every man Pleases to make of it: and sets men at
Perfect Liberty from all Rules or Laws, whether Divine or Human. G. W's. Defence of Himself for the Same. Wherein is Shewn That the Qua∣kers are Direct De∣ists: And the worst Sort of them.XVI. But now in the next Place, let us hear G. W's. Defence of Himself, for a much more Gross Expression than that of Burrough's. Which stands Quoted in the Sn. next to that of Bur∣rough's. Sect. vii. p. 110. (it is p. 342. of the First Edit.) The Quotation is p. 49. of G. W's. Serious Apology where it was Demanded of him, Do you esteem your Speakings, to be of as Great Autho∣rity as any Chapter in the Bible? To which G. W. Answers in these words. That which is spo∣ken by the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as Great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and GREATER This has been Quoted and spoke to before. And he has Excus'd it in a won∣derful manner! He says p. 43. that what he meant was only this, To Prefer the Preaching with Divine Authority, according as Christ did, to the bare Reading of the Letter, as the Pharisees did; which was not (says he) at all to Lessen the Authority of Holy Scripture. But, George, it is to make the Quakers, and Thine own self Parti∣cularly, to Preach with Divine Authority, ac∣cording as Christ did! And then All your Wri∣tings and Preachments are as Good Scripture, as any He Spoke! Nay Greater when spoke by you, than His, when only Read: which was Plainly and Truly thy Meaning. Thou didst Grant (out of Modesty!) that His words and Thine, were of Equal Authority! But that the Diffe∣rence only lay in the Advantage that words have when spoken viva voce, more than the same words when written and only Read: And in this Sense, Thy Preaching is of Greater Au∣thority
and Power than the Scriptures; and of as Great as when they came out of the Mouth of Christ Himself! so that, George, thou art come off finely! The more Excuses thou make for a Bad Cause, they make it still worse and worse! The Longer you stand in a Mire, you sink the Deeper! Ther is nothing will do, George, but sincere Repentance, which cannot be without a Plain and Honest Confession of so Foul Blasphemy and Luciferian Pride, to the High Scandal of Christianity! Therefore Give Glory to God, and take Shame to your selves; and then God will Forgive you; and God and Man will Love you; and, with the Angels of Heaven, will Rejoyce at your Conversion. Why shou'd you think it so Grievous to own that you have been Mistaken and Deceiv'd? Who has not? It is Glorious and Praise-worthy to Confess and Return from an Error. And that Day that you shall Own and Acknowledge your Mistakes, they shall be no more Mention'd un∣to you. But till then, we must Expose them, because many others, Simple and Well-Meaning Souls are Caught in your Snares. O! at last, Lay your hand upon your Heart, and think what Mischief you do! what Good it is in your Power to do! The Lord give you a Heart to think of it; and open your Eyes to see your Errors, and the Truth. And be not so much Provok'd by the Opposition that is Given to you; as thereby Prompted to Consider and Reflect Seriously, whether these things are so? whe∣ther they are falsly Charg'd upon you? And what occasion you have given, in your Writings and Preachings, for all that Clamour that is Rais'd up against you; And by such as can∣not
Possibly have any other End or Design in it, but to Detect those Errors, so Pernicious to the True Christian Faith? Such Principles, as Prefer what you call the Immediat Teaching of the Spirit, IN MAN, to the H. Scriptures of God, as you Re-assert in the fore-cited. p. 43. Such Principles! as must make you think that Curse you sent to G. Keith (before spoke of) to be of Greater Authority than any Chapter in the Bible! as likewise the False-Prophesie of So∣lom. Eccles against John Story, and many others to be Nam'd. Such Principles! as make men Inscribe whatever comes into their Heads, to the H. Spirit of God; and to Give forth Cur∣ses, Blasphemies, and Treasons; Blood and De∣struction, and the most Beastly Nastiness, In the Name of the Lord God! and to think them of Greater Authority than any Precept in the Scripture! The Letter of the Scripture says Thou shalt not Kill. But Fox, Burrough, Bishop, and other Quakers, Quoted in the Sn. Sect. xviii. Command Oliver and the other Ʋsurpers, In the Name of the Lord God Almighty, not only to Destroy all the Cavaliers, and Priests in England, but to carry their Armes into France, Italy, Spain &c. and there to Kill and Slay Abundantly! The Letter of the Scripture says, Thou shall not Steal; but G. Fox, in his Great Mystery. p. 77. Justifies the Stealing of an Hour-Glass from the Priests. And as for any being moved of the Lord (says he) to take away your Glass from you, by the Eternal Power it is Owned. Now G. W. in this Place p. 43. Prefers the Teachings of the Spirit IN MAN to the Letter of Scripture. Now here is the Teachings of the Spirit in G. Fox &c. Opposite, in Terms, to the Letter of the Scripture. Or will he say,
That these were not the Teachings of the Holy Spirit in Fox &c? And then we may easi∣ly know whose Teachings they were! Will nothing Convince these men? To see G. Fox say of Stealing, By the Eternal Power it is Owned! And G. W. to Prefer this to the Letter of the Scripture! To the Plainest Commands, wrote by the Finger of God Himself! Here is the My∣stery of Quakerism, to throw off the Scriptures from being a Rule to them: And Giving them∣selves wholly up to be Guided by what they call their Light within; that is, whatever they are strongly Perswaded of: for they can give no other account of it: Nor any Rule to know that they do not mistake the strongest Delu∣sions of Satan, for the Light of Christ. As cer∣tainly they have done, in the Instances before us, and hundreds more (mention'd in the Sn.) their Inward Light Leading them Directly Counter to the very Letter of the Scripture. Now throwing off the Authority of Scrip∣ture, that is, of Outward Revelation, is Direct Deism. And the Quakers are Downright De∣ists, as shewn in Prim. Heres. p. 28. They Differ in Nothing, but in Expressing the same thing in Different Words. The Deists own a Light within, and that it is Divine. i. e. Planted in our Minds by God: and that it is a Ray, or Communication of the Divine Light. Wherein then do they Differ from the Quakers? only in this, That they call this Light within by the Name of Reason. Which word the Quakers do not like, because they Resolv'd to go out of the Rode of all Common speaking. But they Mean the Same thing. For they Deny a∣ny other Light in the Soul, but that which is
Divine. And this Light within, the Quakers and Deists make the Supreame Rule, not Con∣troulable by Scripture, or any thing else; but Sufficient of it self, Without any thing else. i. e. without Faith in the outward Jesus. For that God Requires no more of any man, but to Follow this Light within. And This is all the Christianity which the Quakers do own. This they say is To have Faith in Christ. Hence, they con∣clude All Moral Deists, whether Jews, or Heathens, to be Christians. G. Fox, in his Gr. Myst. p. 56. Sets down an Objection against the Quakers, viz. That they say, that any can have The Sight of the Godhead, without Faith in Christ. And he do's not Deny this to be their Prin∣ciple, but Justifies it. He Answers, Can any see the Godhead? have a sight of the Godhead? and not see Christ, and have Faith in Christ? By this, the Jews have Faith in Christ, for they Acknowledge the Godhead. And the Gentiles too. Because that which may be known of God is Ma∣nifest in them, for God hath shewed it unto them:Rom. 1.19, 20.For the Invisible things of Him, from the Creati∣on of the world are Clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even His Eternal Power and Godhead. In the same manner the succeeding Quakers do Chime in after G. Fox. T. Elwood, in his late Answer to G. Keith's Narrative. An. 1696. p. 75, 76, 77. do's Quote and Justifie Will. Penn his Address to Protestants. p. 118, 119. where he makes Christ not to be any Person, but only a Principle in men's Hearts, which is Common to All Men. For thus he Describes Christ. What is Christ, but Meekness, Justice,
Mercy &c. Can we then Deny a Meek man to be a Christian? And putting the objection against a Moral Heathen thus. Why! tho' this Person be a Sober Liver, yet he is but a General Believer; his Faith is at Large: 'Tis true, He believes in God; but I hear little of his Faith in Christ. Then, as T. E. says, W. P. Replies very well, Do's he not therefore believe in Christ? For, As he that believes in Christ, believes in God, so he that believes in God, believes in Christ. For an Answer to this Mighty Argument of the Quakers see Sat. Dis. Sect. 1. n. x. I am now only shewing, That the Quakers are Deists, and no more; Nay, I will say, not so much Christians, as any the Vilest and most Ab∣sur'd of any other Deists. Of whom, none that we know of, but the Quakers, will own that most sensless Blasphemy, of making Them∣selves to be God, by making their Souls to be Ʋn-Created, and without Beginning, and Infi∣nit, which is, to be God. As shewn. 2. Par. S. vii. n. 2. Quakery is a Scandal even to Deism. And as the Quakers out-shoot the other Deists vast∣ly in Non-sense, and Blasphemy: so they come not nearer to Christianity, in any thing that might Ballance. No, not as to the Acknow∣ledgment which they make to the H. Scriptures. For the Deists too, as the Quakers, will speak (sometimes) Honourably of the Scriptures, say they are Good Books, and many Good things in them. And Delight to Read them. But then, not to Trust to Every thing that is in them. Only so far as is Agreeable to their own Light within. And in this, they Endea∣vour
to support themselves, by the Various Readings, Copies, and Translations, of the H. Scriptures, to Render them Ʋncertain and Sus∣pected. And from them the Quakers have taken up the same Argument against the Authority of the H. Scriptures. Tho' they have the least skill in that Critical part of Learning, of any sort of Men upon the face of the Earth. Yet they Borrow Arrows out of Every Qui∣ver, against the H. Scriptures. as of the Pa∣pists against our Translation (as shewn in Sat. Dis. Glean. Sect. iii. n. 3. p. 79.) so, of the Deists against All. But All Translations do agree in what is Material, either as to Faith or Manners: And therefore these, and the various Readings of Copies Different both as to the Countries and Ages in which they were Transcrib'd, and Translated, instead of Militating against the Truth and Certainty of the H. Scriptures, are a Mighty Confirmation of Both; because this is a Demonstration that such Copies cou'd not have been wrote by Consert: And the Diffe∣rences between them is no more than what was Natural and Easie, and almost Unavoida∣ble to fall out, in the Common Mistakes of so many Several Amanuenses, and Translations. But all agreeing in the Full of the Faith there∣in Deliver'd, and Differing in nothing that can make any Alteration in that, Gives us the Greater, and an Undoubted Assurance of Trust∣ing to the Scriptures, so Agreeing in all their various Translations and Editions, as a Sure and Certain Rule both as to Faith and Manners.
But the Ignorant Quakers having got this Objection by the end, see what use they make of it, even to Render the Scriptures so Preca∣rious and Ʋncertain, as not at all to be any longer Trusted as a Rule to Us? And the Consequence is, That the Scriptures be now laid aside as now Ʋseless and Ʋnprofitable; nay more, as Dangerous and Hurtful to Us; be∣cause, if Corrupted, they may give us Poison for Meat, and so Help forward our Destruction. Thus that Renowned Quaker Samuel Fisher, in what he Blasphemously calls The Burden of the Message of the Lord it self. p. 3. and 5. (it is p. 19. and 21. of a Collection of such sort of his Messages. Printed. 1656.) comparing of the Light within and the Scriptures, says, That Prophet, whose voice soever hears not, and obeys not, even in all things whatsoever he saith to them, shall be cut off from his People, who, by a Mea∣sure of Light from himself, hath Enlight∣ned Every one of you, Whose voice is within, and not without to you, nor heard now without by a∣ny of you; for the Scripture is not his voice— for the Scriptures (not as written by the men that were Inspired, but as since then Mis-transcribed, even in the very Greek and Hebrew Copies, how much more as we have them Mis-translated in ma∣ny things, and in so many several Translations) these are in some things Fallible, and so not fit to be the Rule; as in the Dark, for want of the true Light yet shining, which now shineth forth, they have been suppos'd to be—but Christ himself, his Light and Spirit, which shew Good and Evil in the Heart, which are the only Guide, Law, and Rule — And this is Infallible — and there
is the only sure and safe walking, even in the Light, in Christ, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, which is Fallible, by false Interpretation and Translation. Here are all our Translations, and the Originals too both Hebrew and Greek that are Extant of the Holy Scriptures Damn'd at one Blow. That is to say, All the Bibles now in the world! They are no longer a Rule or Law to us! But all is Resolv'd into our own Light within, without Limit or Controul of Scripture, or any other Law or Rule whatsoe∣ver! And this is the New-Light which the Qua∣kers have brought into the world. viz. Before the Quakers came, that is In the Dark (as Fisher words it) for want of the true Light yet shining, the Scriptures were Suppos'd to be the Rule. That was Dark indeed! But now that the True Light (which the Quakers have brought) Shineth forth, the Scriptures are Discarded from being the Rule; and the Light within (i. e. what any man Fancies so to be) is the only Rule, Guide, Law &c. From this Ancient Quaker, his Son Will. Penn has Lick'd the Spittle, and thus Copies after him, and Improves upon him, I cannot but Observe (says W. Penn) after what a suspected Rate the SCRIPTƲRES have been first Collected— Are we sure that the Judgement of those who Collected them was sufficient to Determin what was Right,Rejoinder to John Faldo An, 1673. p. 38.and what not?— What Assurance have our An∣ti-Revelation Adversaries of their Doctors Choice? —How shall we be Assur'd that in above three hundred years, so many Copies as were doubtless ta∣ken, shou'd be Pure and Ʋn-Corrupted? — From hence we may Observe the Uncertainty of J. Faldo's
Word of God. See with what Contempt he calls the Holy Scriptures, John Faldo's Word of God! And makes them an Ʋn-Certainty! And calls those who Adhere to them, Anti-Revelation Ad∣versaries. Not that these Adversaries Oppos'd all Revelation: for the Holy Scriptures are a Re∣velation; But they are an Extraordinary Revela∣tion, far Exceeding the Discoveries, which are made by that Light or Reason, which is Com∣mon to all Mankind; and which the Deists and Quakers do Improperly call Revelation. And who will not own this as the only Certain and In∣fallible Rule of Faith and Practice, are those whom Will. Penn calls Anti-Revelation Adversaries. He says ibid. That we can never, by Authorities, prove the Scriptures to be given forth by Inspiration, nor that they are truly Collected. That is, That ther is no outward Evidence for them; but only what our Light within tells Us of them. And then they wou'd be Ʋn-Certain indeed! How many Men's Light within tells them nothing of the Holy Scriptures, of Moses, or of Christ, of the Law, or the Gospel? As for what Outward and Human Evidence ther is for these, I Referr the Quakers, to the Short Method with the Deists, wherein they are Equally Concern'd. But here see the Rea∣son why they not only Equal, but Preferr their own Writings and Speakings to the Holy Scrip∣tures; viz. Because, we have the Original of their Writings; and (as they say) but Corrupted Copies of the Scriptures. And that They have, The same De∣gree of the Spirit, the Prophets and Apostles had (Gr. Myst. p. 213.) therefore, that what they say Now; is of Greater Authority than the Scriptures, wrote so Long ago. Of which before.
G W's. Sincerity and Inge∣nuity, in some Ob∣jections, with which he Con∣cludes the First Part of his Book. Wherein the Summ of the Qua∣ker Do∣ctrin is laid Open. viz. That they Deny the Huma∣nity of Christ; Ard the Divinity of Jesus.XVII. We are now come to the End of the first Part of G. W's. Answer, which con∣cludes. p. 48. with a Notable smart Repartee upon the Author of the Sn. for calling the Title of a Book Holy. What was the Title of the Book? Gross Error and Hypocrisie De∣tected. And what do's G. W. make of this? He calls it Blasphemy. But how Blasphemy, George? Is not the Detection of Gross Error and Hypocrisie, a very Good work? And is it Blasphemy to call a Good work, an Holy work? Good and Holy (George) are very near of Kin. And thou did'st strain very hard against the Author, when thou found'st out this for Blasphemy. But it falls out further Unluckily in this Matter, for the Author never thought of any such Epithet as Holy to give to the Title of that Book, or any Epithet at all, but just to Name the Book. It was a mere Error of the Press. And it was put into the Errata to Dele that word Holy. And the page and line are nam'd in the Errata. p. 351. l. 9. but the Direction of Dele Holy, was left out. And ther is no other Error in that line which has but Six words in it; so that a little Skill, and as much Sincerity wou'd easily have found it out. At least wou'd have stopt such Ingenious Remarks upon it! It was corrected with a Pen in several of the Printed Books. And in the Second Edit. p. 350. the word Holy is left out. But however, this being the only Error which G. W. has found in the Sn. and shewing himself so Fond of it, it is a Pity to Deprive him of the Pleasure of it.
And now being Flusht with this First Victo∣ry, he Hews down G. Keith (for company) be∣cause in that Book of his, Gross Error and Hy∣pocrisie Detected (about the Title of which we have Quarrel'd) he brings Answers to the Seven Queres (Presented to the Yearly Meeting of the Quakers. 1695. and Sophistically Answer'd, by the Committee of Seven thereto appointed, of which G. W. was one) out of the Quaker-Books, since they wou'd not Answer Directly themselves. But G. W. is very smart upon him, and observes (with Great Acuteness!) that those Books being wrote before the Queres, were not Intended as Direct Answers to those Queres; for, says he, They cou'd be no Proper nor Direct Answers to those Queries, nor so Intend∣ed, nor by us Adapted to any such Queries; there∣fore the Greater Abuse in him to Collect and Place them for Answers thereto. This was a Great A∣buse indeed! To make you Answer more Di∣rectly than you had a Mind to! Your former Books spoke Plainly your Gross Heresies against the True Humanity of Christ &c. and you had no mind this shou'd be known; therefore you Contriv'd your Answers to bear a Double-Face, that you might have Room to Escape: And G. Keith (most Ʋnkindly, considering old Acquain∣tance!) wou'd stop your Passage, and shew out of your Printed Books, the Plain Truth of the Matter, and Detect your Gross both Errors and Hypocrisie. And all he has left you to say for your selves, is, That those Books were not In∣tended as an Answer to these Queries. But was ther never such a thing done before, to Introduce men as Answering to Queres, thereby
to make their meaning appear the more? The Name of George Whitehead is put to a Book Intituled The Light and Life of Christ within. Printed. 1668. where p. 51. he Intro∣duces a Baptist, put Quaeres to him, and makes Answers for him. And they are worthy to be Remembered, for the true Quakerism that is Express'd in them. viz. Denying Salvation by the Outward Jesus. For thus he Quaeries the Baptist, and makes him Answer. I ask (says G. W.) who is He that Satisfies and Appeas∣eth God, Dischargeth the Guilty, and Pays the Debt? Baptist. It is the Man Christ Jesus. Quest. Whence came he? Ans. God gave Him. Quest. And what is this Man Christ Jesus, who can Satisfie, Pacifie an Infinit God? Bapt. He is God-Man, Born of a Virgin, Then G. White∣head Replies upon him thus. How wou'd this Divide God, and set Him at a Distance from Himself? Is it Good Doctrin to say, that God Pacify'd God when He saw Himself Angry? For says the Baptist, It was God-Man that did it. Which is all one as to say, God Corrected Himself— and then He was Mediator to Himself, &c. And so G. W. Runs on Blaspheming, and (with the Socinians) Ridiculing the Doctrin of Satisfaction by the Death of Christ, or any Salvation by Jesus Christ, whom he Denies to be God-Man or the Saviour of the World. Wou'd it be Good Doctrin (says he p. 54.) to say that Ma∣ry and Simeon carry'd their Saviour in their Arms? that or they carry'd God in their Arms? if that Child was God-Man, as he (the Baptist) terms him—You Baptists were fain to Hide for all your Boasting of your God and Christ a
a Distance above the Clouds, Stars, and Firma∣ment. And Will. Penn was fain to Hide too, once upon a time, as others of you have done, for all your Boasting of your God and Christ at Hand, even Within you! In the same Dialect with G. W. says Christopher At∣kinson, in his Sword of the Lord drawn. p. 5. your Imagined God beyond the Stars, your Car∣nal Christ is utterly Deny'd—That Christ is God and Man in one Person, is a Lye. Which being objected in the Sn. G. W. answers here p. 145. We do not affect the Terms. And yet you will not Deny, but that they were Given forth, by the Spirit of the Eternal God! This is all that is Desir'd of you. And this we cannot bring you to. Blasphemous, and Contradictory WRETCH∣ES! But why, George, do you not Affect the Terms? What do they Differ from Thine own Terms? on∣ly what you Deny, he says is Ʋtterly Deny'd; and what you Ridicule and Laugh at, he says plainly, it is a Lye. Is it not the same Christ you both Oppose? Is it not the same whom you Reproachfully say to us is YOUR Christ? And what Christ is this? the Christians Christ. And what Christ have we? a Carnal Christ— your Carnal Christ is Ʋtterly-Deny'd. Now how do we own Christ to be Carnal? is it in the sense of Vice and Wickedness, as we say a Car∣nal-Man, meaning thereby, a Vicious, Sensual Man, given to the Lusts of the Flesh? No. I suppose the Quakers will not put that upon us, to say that we think Christ to be now Carnal, that is, Vicious in Heaven. But 2dly, do we think Christ to be Carnal, as if His Flesh were as Gross, and Infirm, i. e. Carnal as
ours is now, or as His own Flesh was while He Suffer'd in it upon the Earth? No. For we say, all Christians say, that He is now Glori∣fy'd. Ther is then no other sense' of the word Carnal, but that which has Flesh, in De∣stinction from a Spirit. And in this sense, we do say, and all Christians say, that Christ is Carnal. i. e. has Real Flesh, even the same Flesh which He took of the Blessed Virgin, in which He Suffer'd, Rose, &c. And this is the sense in which the Quakers do Oppose us, and Deny, nay Ridicule our Carnal Christ be∣yond the Stars. i. e. Any Christ who has True and Real Flesh, or an Human Body now in Heaven. This they say to Ʋs, is Our Imagined God beyond the Stars, as C. A. Our God and Christ, above the Clouds, as G. W. Implying that no such Christ is Theirs the Quakers God. And their Denying Christ to be Carnal, is plainly De∣nying of Him to be a Man. For Christ can be Carnal but Three ways. 1st. As Lyable to Sin. 2dly. To Infirmity. Or 3dly. As He has true Human Nature, or Flesh. Now it being only the Third way that we hold Christ to be Car∣nal; and the Quakers Denying Our Carnal Christ, consequently they Deny Christ to be now a Man. Your Carnal Christ (says C. A. in the place above Quoted) is utterly Deny'd and Testify'd against, by the Light which comes from Christ. So that here is the Quakers Light or Christ Testifying against the Outward Christ. And here they may see, that the Light in them is Darkness, for it Testifies against the Huma∣nity of Christ, and the Divinity of Jesus. The Quakers own Christ to be God, but they Deny
Him to be Truly and Properly a Man: They own Jesus to have been a Man, but not God, otherwise than as by Gods Dwelling in Him, but not Personally United to Him: and so as it may be said of other Men, in their several Degrees, that God do's Inspire or Dwell in them. But they call that Jesus whom All Christians do Worship, a Dead-God; because they think that the Man Jesus of Nazareth is still Dead: Tho' Christ, or the Light, cannot Dye, accor∣ding to Them, because they say It is God. Therefore they think, That We Worship a Dead Man, for God. And Consequently, That our Jesus is an Idol. For thus says Edw. Burrough, p. 101. of his works, to the Christian Professors, Some of you were Teachers for the King and Bi∣shops, and were Ordained by their Law; And your Prayers have been to your IDOL GOD— And you Pray to your DEAD GODS &c. By this, they can Mean None other but Christ. For whom Else did the King, or the Bishops, or any of their Teachers Worship as God! Therefore, we must make this Conclusion; And that Ne∣cessarily, from the Quakers Principles; That all Christians are Idolaters; And Christ a Dead Idol: Or otherwise, as the Truth is, That the Qua∣kers are no Christians; but Blasphemers of our Christ and God. And here I leave them. And the Remain∣ing Part of this Antidote, for the Present, in Expectation of their Melius Inquirendum; And for the other Reasons given in the Preface. And I Turn to a more Considerable Pen than that of George Whitehead; Tho' Shrowded un∣der the Humility of an Appendix to him.
THE APPENDIX TO G. Whitehead's Antidote, CONSIDERED; Which is Subscrib'd by Joseph Wyeth. And bears the Title of Primitive Christianity Continu'd &c. Part. II. SECT. I. Concerning the Author. AS Giants were attended by Dwarfs, and Knights had their Squires ready at hand, to save them sometimes at a Dead lift, so have our Quaker Heroes made a Cats-foot of poor Joseph Wyeth, to Blount their Enemies Swords; That if he shou'd Prevail, their Glory might appear the Greater, in Giving the Foil by a hand so Inconsiderable as the Journey-Man of Ben. Antrobus a Quaker Linnen-Draper. But if he was overthrown (which they knew full easie, unless from the weakness of his opponent) then their shift was,
that all the Disgrace shou'd fall upon him, who had no Honour to Lose, and They and their Cause be Guiltless, tho' All their strength was Exerted in what they put out under his Name. For the Reader must know that it is a stated Disciplin of the Quakers (notwithstanding of their Infallibility) to let none of their Friends Books (as they call them) be put to the Press, untill they have Undergone the Censure, and ob∣tain'd the Approbation of their Second-Days-Mee∣ting, which consists only of their Ministers or Preachers. Nor Dare any of their Printers Print any of their Books, without the Allowance of this Sanhedrin: so that they stand All Chargea∣ble for All of their Printed Books; at least for All of them, which they have not call'd in, and witnessed against, as they did against Wil∣liam Rogers his Christian Quaker (because it had more of Christianity in it than they cou'd Di∣gest) and Punish'd both Printer and Publishers, with the utmost severity that was in their Power. as you may see in Sat. Dis. Sect. iii. of the Gleanings. N. 1. and 2. But instead of shewing any such Displeasure against this Book that bears Wyeth's Name, the Chief of the Quakers do Recommend it, and Hand it about among Persons of all Qualities; which is owning of it, as much as if their Names had been set to it: Besides some Flou∣rishes in the Stile, which shew that some had a Finger in the Pye, tho' they wou'd not have their Crst Perking above the Lid, as an Index to whether Goose or Turkey hid Underneath. And if Joseph Improv'd himself or his Pupil
no more in his Travels, than to Undertake the Defence of his Patron, without his Directions, who was so much more Able to have Vindi∣cated himself, he has had as ill Luck in his second Trade of a Praeceptor, as in his First Journey-Man Preferment. In all of which, no Employment so servile was put upon him, as to set his Name to a Book, that gives him the Lye so Egregiously in that Character which he himself, Ʋn-brib'd and Ʋn-solicited, has bestow'd upon the Au∣thor of The Snake in the Grass, of being A man of Temper &c. Whereas this Book do's Represent him so far otherwise (as you will see hereafter Sect. ii.) that it is not possible to Reconcile such Contradictions, if they came Both from the same Person. Besides, in the Title-Page of this Book, it is said to Serve as an Appendix to George White∣head's Antidote against the Snake in the Grass. And sure George Whitehead wou'd not suffer an Appendix to be fix'd to his so Famous a Book, without his own Approbation; nor can it be Imagin'd that Joseph wou'd have offer'd at it. Therefore we must suppose that George White∣head is more Particularly Concern'd in this Ap∣pendix; And we must (for all the Reasons aforesaid) conclude, That this is the Joint and Concerted Apologie of the Quakers; otherwise it wou'd not be worth my while, nor the Pains of the Reader, to Labour a Point, which cou'd End in no more than a Confutation of Joseph Wyeth. And this, in Probability, was one Main Drift of the Quakers, to Stop a Reply; that
they might have the Last Word; which, with many, Passes for a Token of Victory. But the Charity that I have for their Souls, of those Many miserably Deluded by these their Leaders (tho' they put all the Misconstruction upon it that Malice and Envy can Invent) has Oblig'd me to Enter once more with them into the Lists: And I hope to make the De∣tection of their Gross Delusions so Plain by this, as to Stop any further need of my Labour herein; And to Satisfie all who are Desirous or Capable of Conviction. The Method I will take, in Replying to this Appendix, is, to Take a View of the Quakers Manner of Answering Books that are wrote against them. And Applying it to this Present Answer, will shew, That however in other things the Quakers are Chang'd, yet they still keep true to their Original and Ever Constant Furie, Falshood, and Dodging, either in Defending of Themselves, or Representing of their Adversa∣ries. SECT. II. The Method which the Quakers use in Answer∣ing of Books that are wrote against them. 1. WHEN Pride is Disappointed and o∣vercome, it Naturally Vents it self in Rage and Madness against those who have De∣tected it. These who have the Advantage in a Dispute, like those who Win, are seldom An∣grie:
It is the Losers who have leave to Talk, to Complain, and be Ʋneasie. And as ther is not so much Pride among any sort of People as the Quakers, they think∣ing themselves to be Above all the Rest of Mankind, and far beyond all Christians; to be Perfect and Sinless, Equal to Prophets, Apostles, to Angels, yea to God Himself, as Prov'd in the Six first Sect. of the Sn. so have None that ever were Born Vented their Rage and Mad∣ness against their Opponents with so much Ve∣nom, Nastiness, and Diabolical Furie as the Qua∣kers have done (see Sn. Sect. xvii.) Such words as they have found out of Spite and Inveterat Rancor, never came into the Heads of any either at Bedlam or Billings-Gate, or were never so put together, by any that I ever heard, and I have had the Curiosity to see Mother Damna∣ble, whose Rethorick was Honey to the Passion with which the Quaker Books are stuff'd. And which is more strange, it is not in their Power to Help it, or they will not. For they have been told of it, one wou'd think sufficiently, in the first Edition of the Sn. And in the Supplement to the Second Edition N. vi. G. Whitehead's Relapsing into it in his Answer to the Sn. is again laid before them; And they are Desir'd and Provok'd to try if they can Help it, if it be possible for them to write Temperately, and with Decency like other People: But that seems a Task too hard for them: for here again in this Appendix, they cannot leave that Common-Place of Reviling and Abusing, of shewing their Teeth and Malice in the most Venomous fashion, tho' nothing at all
Relating to the Cause in Dispute. Which is not any ways concern'd in the Character of the Author who writes against them; Unless he had Vouch'd something, in Prejudice to them, upon his own Credit, without other Authori∣ty, And, in that Case, Re-criminating is allow∣able, yet so far only as to the Truth of the Accuser, to take off the weight of his Evidence: For other Collateral Crimes (tho' true) are not, by the Rules of Charity, to be Objected, for that only serves our Spite, but not our Cause. Now the Author of the Sn. lets us Understand that he was almost a Perfect stranger to the Quakers, when he wrote that Book: And what he says of them from his own Knowledge, you will find in his Introduction. p. 2. where he lays his Charge not against the Generality of them, some of whom (he says) I know to be very Honest and well-meaning men, and Devout in their way: but against many of their Principal Leaders, as it is Express'd in the very Title-Page. And some of them he treats so Civily, that in this Appen∣dix p. 7. he is Accus'd for Fawning upon them. viz. upon W. Penn. And in his Conclusion, I do freely own (says he) that I have a real Kind∣ness and Good wishes for every one of the Quakers that I have hitherto been acquainted with; And I never receiv'd any sort of Dis-obligation from any of them, in my whole Life. This is what that Author speaks of them, as to his own Know∣ledge; And if they cou'd bring any thing to Disprove his Veracity, in this Favourable Cha∣racter which he gives to the Generality of the Quakers, they might have had free Leave; and, Perhaps, Greater Advantage against him than
as to any other Part of his Book. But the several Charges which he lays against their Lea∣ders, he Proves from their own Printed Books, and Quotes their Pages, so that let him be what sort of man he will, this makes nothing as to the Charge against the Quakers: All that is to be done in that Case, is, to Disprove his Quotations, either that he has Quoted False, or Impertinently, and not to the Purpose for which he has Produc'd them. But these are Armes which they have not Prov'd; And, in their stead, they have taken to their old Method of throwing Dirt, and Personal Reflections, as a Blind-man do's his Club, without either Fear or Wit; without Regard either to Truth or Pro∣bability. G. Whitehead in his Antidote had Ac∣cus'd the Author of the Sn. for being merce∣nary, as if he had been Hir'd or Brib'd to write against the Quakers. To this he Reply'd in a Supplement to the Second Edition N. vi. and shew'd the Sensless Malice of this Reflection, in that those whom G. W. supposes shou'd have Brib'd him, were the Poor Church of the Qua∣kers, who were not Capable, tho' willing of Giv∣ing such Hire; Besides that Author had Un∣dertaken that Task, and wrote Good Part of the Sn. before ever he Saw George Keith, or, as he Remembers, any one of the Quakers of his Part: being mov'd thereto meerly by Reading those Monstrous things which were Contain'd in some of the Quakers Books that came in his way, so far beyond what he Ex∣pected or Dream'd of them. But, on the other hand, he was acquainted, at that time, with some of the Rich Quaker Church, and his Byass,
as to Personal Kindness, lay wholly on their side; and they only were capable, and very Capa∣ble they were and are, to Hire or Give Pen∣sions. In short, I am very well Assur'd that the Author of the Sn. had not one single far∣thing of Contribution from any Person what∣soever towards Printing of that Book or the Writing of it. And the Controversie with the Quakers was such a Dead thing, that the Book∣seller wou'd hardly have ventur'd upon the first Edition, if he had known that it wou'd have swell'd, while in the Press, so much be∣yond the first intended Bounds. And whether, besides some Books which (as is Customary) the Author gave away to his Friends, he had any Guineas, or to the value of one, for that Impression, is easie to be known. Yet with∣out taking any notice of what was said by the Author in the Supplement before mention'd in Answer to this Malicious and False Accusation, the Quakers Trump it up again in this Appen∣dix, with fresh Venom and Assurance. The Pre∣face begins with it. The Ensuing Leaves (say they) contain our Vindication against the Black Attempts of a Necessitous and Malicious Priest — because he may find his Bread or Base Ends Sup∣ply'd by the Contest. And their Book Enters in the same Stile. p. 1. To the Disturbance of our Quiet (they go on) there hath of late appear'd an Expulsed Clergy-Man, Boasting himself to be some Great one, and indeed in all the Qualities of Venom Slander and Abuse he is so— his Scur∣rilous Pamphlets, which his Sculking Leisure and Malice furnishes him with opportunity to Multiply; for from being an Expulsed Priest, he makes a
Trade for Bread, and in part to Repair those Losses, which he Charges the present Establishment to have brought upon him. Now as it is nothing to the Quakers or their Cause, whether the Author of the Sn. was a Clergy-Man, or whether Expuls'd or not; so here they have shewn the Excess of their Malice by Endeavouring to Provoke the Government against some or other whom they had in their Eye: tho' thereby they Ex∣pose those who are Dearest to them. For what if this Clergy-Man (whoever it be whom they mean) had been Depriv'd, or Expuls'd (as they word it) because he had a Tenderness as to Swearing, the Objection comes Decently out of the mouth of a Quaker! Nay further, Suppose he had not only Sculk'd, but been in a Pro∣clamation; And underhand kept fair with the Government, at the same time, to save his Bacon on both Sides? What if he had taken the Oaths (in his way) while he put another face upon it, to those of his own Party: And Procur'd his Peace, by such Complyances as he had Blam'd in others? What if he had been the Greatest Traffacker in England for the Popish In∣terest, when it was in View: had wrote Apo∣logys for it, and Invectives against the Church of England for Opposing of it; but behind the Curtain, and not under his own Name? what if he had Traded in Declarations with Mr. B—nt upon a time? &c. what had all this have signify'd to the Present Cause of the Quakers, or their Heresies. When any Dare speak the least thing a∣gainst the Quakers, they Cry presently (as they did at the Meeting in Turners-Hall. 11.
June. 1696. to G. Keith) Prove it, or else thou art a Lyar. See G. Keith's Narrative. p. 46. I dare thee (said Hen. Goldney) to name their Names, or else thou art a Lyar, an Impostor, a Cheat — O thou Lyar, thou Contentious Creature! And Joseph Wyeth was Present as assistant to Gold∣ney. Now the Quakers cannot justly Refuse the same Measure which they have Meted to others; Therefore let them Produce their Witnesses, that ever heard the Author of the Sn. Boast himself to be some Great one; or is ther the least Semblance of that Quaker Vanity to be found in any thing that he has wrote? or of Charging the Present Establishment with his Losses? Let them Prove it, name their Names who heard him; or Confess themselves to be Lyars, Impostors, Cheats; Let them Prove their Repeated Calumny of his being Mercenary, and Brib'd to write against them; And taking his Charges against them from their Profest Adversaries, from whom in Part he Receives his Bread, as they Belch out again p. 11. of this Appendix. These Adversaries are George Keith, Francis Bugg, and others once of their Communion, who now Detect their vile Errors; and Whitehead in his Antidote had Charg'd this upon the Author of the Sn. That he took his Authorities from Bugg, which is fully Answer'd and Confuted in the Supplement to the Second Edition of the Sn. N. 2. Yet now, as if no such An∣swer had been made, it is Repeated over and over again. But the Reader will find the Char∣ges in the Sn. taken out of the most Appro∣ved Authors of the Quakers, and not from
the Credit of any of their Adversaries as they call them. And as for the Author of the Sn. Receiving his Bread from them, that has been spoke to already: But it is Cautiously added here [In Part] that he Receives his Bread, in Part, from them; so that if he ever Eat or Drunk with any of them, this is Receiving his Bread, in Part, from them. But he has Eat and Drunk, and been kindly Entertain'd by as many of Grace-Church-street Quakers, as of Turners-Hall; and therefore he is Brib'd by them too, to write against themselves! But Eating and Drinking are small things— In this Appendix p. 48. the Qua∣kers give the Author of the Sn. a Gentle Touch for his Taking of Snuff, they leave no stone Un-turn'd — these are Industrious men — And if they can find out that any one has Given him a Box of Snuff, that will be told in the next Book they Publish. Indeed if it were such a Snuff-Box as George Fox us'd to carry, like a Canister, which he kept perpetually at his nose, it might be of value, and must Pass for a Bribe to Persecute the Quakers! Whose Spite is so Implacable against the Author of the Sn. that they wou'd wound him, tho' thro' the sides of their Great Fox, or Greater Penn. See how they Exert their Christian Meekness p. 4. of this Ap∣pendix, where they call The Snake in the Grass, That Venemous Piece of Villany. And be∣cause the word Villain fitted their Good Breeding, and lest it shou'd slip the Reader's Attention, two lines before they have it again, and say that they are Villanously charged by him: whom p. 30. they call This Snake of Envy. And p. 34.
they bestow upon him the mild Epithets of Ma∣lice, Impertinancy, and Baseness. And p. 47. of Forgery, and Villany again. p. 49. they call him a Foul Vessel. p. 51. Violently Base. With abun∣dance of such Complements, with which I will not offend the Readers Ears: only thus much, to shew that Incorigable Spirit of Pride and Ma∣lice, which Possesses the Souls of these Quakers (Impatient of Contradiction) under the Guise of Humility and Meekness; That after being so often Expos'd for their Billings-Gate and want of Christian Temper, that one wou'd think their Whole Cause and Credit with the World did Depend upon their being Able, but once, to Counterfit a Moderation and Decency in their Lan∣guage, yet we find they are not Able; their Furie Boyls over the Thin Scum of their Sim∣pering Sanctity. It has been observ'd of a French∣man, that if you Ty'd his Hands, he cou'd not speak a word, being Depriv'd of that Action which always accompany'd it: so if you wou'd Restrain a Quaker from Rayling and Reviling you quite stop his Mouth, at least from ever An∣swering any Adversary. For this is a Topick never Forgot among them; which they use instead of Argument. If any can shew any Quaker Answer to any of their opponents with∣out this Ribaldry in it, they will Oblige the World with a Rarity, which I believe never yet was seen; I am sure it never came in my way; and I have been prety Conversant among them. If they Pretend that they are Provok'd to this Manner of Repartying upon their Adver∣saries, by their ill usage of them, particularly
the Author of the Sn. in Reviling and Abusing of them. First, If this were true, it ought not to Provoke them, who set up for Degrees of Ho∣liness, Self-Denyal, and Mortification beyond All other sort of men upon the face of the Earth; to be Meeker than Moses, Wiser than Solomon, more Patient than Job, &c. (See Sat. Dis. Sect. iv. N. v. p. 48.) And if they shew not this more than other men, how shall we know that they have it more than other men? But Secondly, at their first Appearing in the world, before any Provocation was Given to them, they fell upon All others with the same Violence and outrage, that they have since continu'd. They were the Aggressors and Gave the Provocation, instead of Receiving any. Thirdly, as to their Complaint of Provocation in the Sn. ther is none given them, but that of Detecting their Errors; And that in so soft a manner to the Chief of them, that (as before Mention'd) in this Appendix, it is term'd Fawning. It is hard to Please these men. If you be Civil to them, they construe it Fawn∣ing; and if you be Plain with them, they call it Vilifying and Reproaching of them. Indeed in the Sn. their Errors are Laid open very Plainly; and Hard-words are given to them. But How? When their Errors are such as have no Soft Names, we must Give them the Names by which all the World know them. How else shou'd we be Understood? If I Accuse a man of He∣resie or Idolatry, must I not call it Heresie and Idolatry? Or must I Invent New Names for Old Crimes? Indeed if I Fail in my Proof, I have done Injury to the Accused; and ought to make Satisfaction, when I am Fairly Convinc'd:
Yet if my Mistake was thro' Ignorance, it do's not come within the Denomination of Rayling, if the Dispute be Manag'd without Personal Reflections, which do not concern the Debate. A man may Reason with Great Sobriety and Good Manners, against Heathen, Turk, Jew, or Papist; and tho' the Charges be High of Here∣sie or Idolatry, yet this will not be Counted Rayling, if it meet with men of Sobriety and Good Temper. Nay, ther is no other way of being Convinc'd, on either side, but by Fairly and Calmly, yet Plainly and Thoroly Discussing of the Arguments on Both sides. Now if the Quakers can find any other Ill-Names Given to them in the Sn. than what was Necessary to the Charges laid against them, they have Read it more Carefully than I have done. Are they there call'd Raging Doggs, Green-Headed-Trumpe∣ters, Devils Incarnat, Devil-Driven-Dungy-Gods, Sodomits, and such Vile Names as they have Inven∣ted, and Bestow'd upon the Author of the Sn. and others who have Opposed Them? And can they not now Forbear it at last, after being so of∣ten told of it? This gives men a strange Idea of the Fierceness of the Quaker-Spirit, beyond what all their Adversaries cou'd say against them. Therefore I hope they will, in their After Answers, Practise that Self-Denial (if it be in their Power) to Abridge themselves of this their so Beloved a Topick of Rayling; at least, in that Blunt, Ʋnmannerly way, which Renders their Discourses, tho' they were otherwise valu∣able, most Nauseous to all men of Sense or Bree∣ding: For which Reason I have Insisted so long upon it in this, to Cure them, if Possible, of
what is so just a Prejudice against them; that we may get them to be a little Sociable and Tame; to Converse, like other men, tho' we Differ from them, without Flying in our Faces. But if they still continue to Bite, they must be Muzl'd. If they say that they never Snarle, but where they are Provok'd. It is Impossible to Begin with them, without Provoking of them; for if you oppose any of their Errors, then they Rave and Rage like Furies! Ther is no Pro∣vocation like it! And the Truth of it is, the Author of the Sn. did Begin with Them. And has got his Reward, for thrusting his Hand into this Nest of Hornets. But will they be more Moderate, where they Begin with others, Invite and Provoke them to the Dispute? No. It is all one. They are as Fierce upon the Attack, as in their Defence. Ther was one John Wigan an Annabaptist Preacher, who was Prisoner with George Fox and others of them in the Castle at Lancaster, in the Year 1664. And without his ever open∣ing his Mouth to one of them, only Passing thro' a Common Room where they were, they Attack'd him, and the first words were, Leave off thy Deceiving the People, Thou art a Deceiver. To which he return'd no more Provoking an Answer, than to Ask, wherein he was a Deceiver? and how they cou'd Prove him to be such? Then they Challeng'd him to a Dispute. To which he not being over Forward. They Drew up a Paper of 24 Queres against him, which they Fixt upon the Hall Door. This Forc'd him to Undertake a Publick Dispute with them in the Hall of the Castle. of which
has given a Particular Account in a Book Inti∣tuled Anti-Christ's strongest Hold overturned. Prin∣ted 1665. But this Debate not sufficing them, they fix'd up many other Papers upon the Door, and Gave him a Paper, wherein (as he tells. p. 52.) They Challenge All the Sons of Adam to Dis∣course with them of this their Fundamental Princi∣ple. viz. The Light within. Which was the subject of their Debate with Wigan, who held, That Christ doth not Lighten Every man that cometh into the world, with a saving Light. p. 10. This was all the Provocation he Gave them; Be∣sides Proving it so Effectually that they were not Able to Answer him. But, when their Ar∣guments were spent, they fell to their old Ar∣tillery of the most Bitter and Beastly Rayling, and Pronouncing Curses against Him, In the Name of the Lord. To All which he Return'd Answers truly Christian; and which shew'd that he Deserv'd that Character which Jos. Wyeth gave to the Author of the Sn. That he was a man of Temper. Yet all this notwithstanding, see how they Treated him, not only in the Heat of Dispute, when their Passions (who have none, but in Ab∣solute sway) might be put upon the Frett; But in Cold Blood, by Letters under their Hands. Some of which he has Added to his Book, by way of Appendix, from p. 56. Thomas Curwen (who was the Man first spoke to him, and call'd him a Deceiver, going thro' the Hall in the Ca∣stle at Lancaster, and Challeng'd him to the Dis∣pute) writes thus to him. John Wigane—Oh the Plagues of God will be thy Portion, and be Poured out upon thy Head—Thou filthy Deamer, who
Vomits up thy own shame—Thy Book will be thy overthrow: For it's no more to me than Chaff, and Dirt under my Feet. This was a Full Confuta∣tion! However it do's not Deny the Matters of Fact and Truth of Wigan's Relation of this Con∣ference; and therefore we may Depend upon this Book of Wigan's for so far True as it Con∣cerns the Quakers, that they are not thereby Mis-Represented. But what they found fault with, Curwin tells him in another Paper which he sent him. Thy ill-bred Behaviour (says he to Wigan) thy ill-bred saucy Tongue, un-nurtured and un-bred: And besides thy saucy Language. Thy Hypocrisie, and saucy Tongue, and unmanner∣lines, and ill-breeding. To see Quakers set up for Breeding! And Reprove Sauciness! But Wigan Pro∣vok'd them to Instance any the least Ill-Bread∣ing or Sauciness which he had shou'd towards them, and they cou'd not, for he carry'd it all along the Dispute with great Moderation: But it is all one for that, when the Quaker-Blood is up, it minds neither Right nor Wrong, Friend nor Foe, True nor False—G. Fox and Margaret Fell (whom he afterwards Marry'd) were Both Present at this Dispute, Chief Mana∣gers, and most Obstreperous, as Wigan words it in his Narrative p. 12. where he Describes George Fox Entring the Hall, after the Dispute was Be∣gun, and strutting like the Colosus at Rhodes, he clapt one foot upon a Seat, and the other up∣on the Table, about which the Rest were stand∣ing, And with his Ʋnwieldy Bulk, look'd as Big as Both the Giants in Yield-Hall. It was Pre∣sent Death to any Man that he Fell upon! And it shew'd the Courage of Litle Wigan who Durst
Dispute betwixt his Legs. But, George, was this Breeding! Did this look like Good Manners! No Matter. If it was not Civil, it was very GREAT! In this Posture, Fox propos'd some Scriptures in support of his Light; which when Wigan had Answer'd, without one word of Reflection or Abuse upon the Quakers, only giving a Fair and Calm Exposition of those Scriptures which the Quakers had Strained in Favour of their Notion of the Light within; Margaret Fell seeing her Huge sweaty Lover Re∣duc'd to his Principles, first Open'd in his Re∣scue, and Cry'd out to Wigan (having now the Giant at his Mercy) Thou art a Miserable Crea∣ture. This was seconded by James Brown (says Wigan. p. 20.) with great Fierceness, saying, Thou art an Enemy of God. Thomas Davenport put in his Thrust, and said Thou hast Deny'd Christ to Day. Richard Cubban wou'd not be behind, he said, Thou hast Deny'd the Lord that bought thee, and wou'd undertake to Prove that Wig∣an was one of those False Prophets mention'd 2 Pet. 2.1. This was struck home like Bru∣tus. But they had not Leasure in that Fray to his hear Proofs, and so the Knight escap'd for that time. But afterwards the Fox Giant hav∣ing Recover'd Breath and Courage, yet but Faint, Attack'd Wigan in these words, Thou art not a Rational Man. This was much below his or∣dinary Mettle. He was out of Breath. But he was Seconded to Purpose by a young Har∣dy Champion, John Berley, who Hewed him thus. The Eternal Judgments of God will fall upon thee, and Burn the up as Chaff: Thou art worse than a Drunkard. At which the Knight Fled—but
did not Escape so. For James Park Pursu'd him to his Chamber, and there gave him the Parting Blow, with great Vehemency (says Wi∣gan p. 21.) in these words. Thou art a Ly∣ar, and a Deceiver, and the Curse of God will be upon thee in thy Bed-Chamber, and Closet, and wherever thou goest, &c. Nor cou'd this satis∣fie. He sent to Wigan afterwards a long Pa∣per fill'd with Curses and Exclamations of Rage and Fury, which he sets down Verbatim. Where he calls him Monster, strange Birth of the Flesh, Dark, Hard, Blind, and such sort of the soft Breathings of the Quaker Spirit! No Water-Man or Oyster-Woman have their Artillery more Rea∣dy than the Quakers, when any Hard Ʋgly Question is ask'd at them: And their Answers are as Artificial Cross Purposes. Not a word to the Point. For Ill Words are Ill Words how∣ever they come in. And they save Answer∣ing to the Purpose, when it cannot be done. Thus Wigan tells p. 59. That he ask'd this Question at Margaret Fell. viz. What Parish Priest in England had got more Money with his Tongue than George Fox since he was Journeyman Shoo∣maker in Manchester? It was an Ʋnmannerly Question indeed, and Rubb'd upon a Sore place. For the Original of the Quakers was a Com∣pany of Poor, Ignorant, Nasty Country Boys and Sluts, Journeymen and Maidservants to Shooma∣kers, Taylors, Weavers, &c. who Breaking loose from their Masters and Mistresses, Run a Reli∣gion-Hunting, as an Easier Trade, like that of the Gipsies, and of more Prospect of Gain, from the Encouragement given them by that Blessed Act of Toleration, when the Church was suffi∣ciently
Humbled, in 1649, and 1650; then Fox first Ʋnkennel'd; and with his Cubbs hav∣ing Immediately Commenc'd Preachers, by Ver∣tue of an Act of State; But having no other Reverences settl'd upon them, than the Inhe∣ritance of the Jesuits, Rapite Capite, Catch who Catch can, their first Effort, like that of the Regulars in the Church of Rome, was to shake the Tythes and Maintenance of the Secular Cler∣gy, that, in the Scramble, some might come to Their share. And the Best Share they have got, tho' under the Name of Free-will offerings, and Elemonsinary Settlements. This made the Quakers first open their Mouths against the small Pittance which was then Allow'd to the Preachers Established; whom they term'd Hire∣lings and Greedy-Dogs for Receiving any thing from the People; Yet themselves soon Grew Rich and Thriving upon the Viis & Modis, the Ways and Means of this their new Preaching Trade. And are now Grown so Insolent and High-Crested as to Upbraid others who had something to Lose, as the Author of the Sn. for his Losses, and being now, as they call him, Necessitous; which makes Good the Old Pro∣verb, Set a Begger on Horseback, &c. Now George Fox having Grown up from his Leathern Britches, and Two-footed Pad, to Act the Gentleman, and Ride with his Man carring of his Cloak before him; and (having the full Command of the Thousands in the Quaker-Treasury) to Pretend to Mrs. Fell the Widow of a Judge, it cou'd not but be a Grating Question to her, to know how her Gallant, from a Journeymen Shooe-maker in Manchester, had Arriv'd to be
Primate of the Quakers; and had both their Persons and Purses more at his Command, than either of the Metropolitans of Canterbury or York cou'd pretend to over their Subjects? And whether any Parish Priest in England had got so much Money with his Tongue as G. Fox had done? Now hear her Answer, most Categorical, in these words. Thou art a Wicked, Ʋngodly, Impudent Lyar. Thou Lyar. A Proud Disdainful Spirit. A Heathenish Spirit which Torments thee, and many more such Night-Owls as Thou art. Thou wicked Lyar. The Devil the God of this World is thy God, and thou hast done what thou caust, in opposing the Quakers, to get Him Glory. Thou hast a great measure of the Spirit of Envy, Ma∣lice, and Cruelty, and Blood. And so he stood Corrected? And this is every word of her Answer to him. This is the Famous Marga∣ret Fell, Relict of Judge Fell, afterwards Mar∣ry'd to George Fox, and became the Mother of the Quaker-Church, from whom they Ex∣pected another Isaac, in her Old Age, to whom they Pray'd and Pay'd as Great Adoration as the Papists to the Virgin Mary. (See Sat. Dis. p. 90.) But she did not let Wigan get so out of her Clutches. She wrote three Letters to him. Part of which he has Printed in his foresaid Appendix. p. 58, 59. There she compares him to Korah, to Jannes and Jambres, for opposing their Light within, that is, their notion of it, in making it to be God and Christ. Therefore she tells him, Thou art without God in the World—a Minister of Darkness. Thy foul sinful Prayers are Abomi∣nable. Thy fleshly Performances are but Grass and Chaff. All thy Rotten Hypocritical Performances.
Thou hast Committed Sacrilege, and hast Blasphem∣ed against the Holy Spirit of God, which will never be forgiven thee in this World, nor in that which is to Come. Thou art under it, and it Remains upon thee for Ever—Thou art the Man—Thou art Accursed, and no other Por∣tion can thou have, and this is Scripture and Truth to thee. Here she has Damn'd him, past all Hopes of Repentance; Determin'd that he has Sinn'd the Sin against the Holy Ghost. And Vouches her words to be Scripture. See what before is said p. 52. of the First Part, of G. Whitehead's making what the Quakers speak or write of Greater Authority than the Scrip∣tures. And here Marg. Fell Chimes in with him, to shew this not to be a singular Opinion, but the current Doctrin of the Quakers. And now ther is no Medium left, but either we must believe these Quakers Guilty of the most Dreadful Blasphemy, in Fathering all their Vile and Horrid Delusions upon God Himself: Or otherwise that Every word of Margar. Fells, and all the Rest of their Writers are Scripture; and of Greater Authority than any Chapter or Verse in the Bible. Even all this that Marga∣ret here, like a Bitter Scold, spits againg Wi∣gan, calling him Thief—meer Sot and Ignora∣mus —night-Bird—Anti-Christ—Black Defil'd Heart—who Begins with a Lie, and Ends with the Devil, and a great deal more of the like Billings-Gate, for which a Ducking-stool had been the Properest Answer: Nay more, all the vile Nasty stuff in the other Letters sent to Wigan from others of these Quakers, of Vo∣miting, Spuing, Licking it up, &c. (See Sat. Dis.
Sect. v. of the Gleanings) all this must be of Divine Inspiration; and of Greater Authroity than the Holy Scriptures, or else these Quakers are the most Horrid sort of Mankind, who Vouch it to be so. These men Magisterially Bar others from Repentance; But if Repentance be hid from the Eyes of any, it may be said so of these Men. For after Wigan had wrote the aforesaid Appen∣dix, and it had come to the sight or Knowlege of these Quakers who had wrote these Letters to him, instead of being Asham'd of it (which wou'd have been Expected, had ther been any Shame in them) one of them, William Hilden, wrote to him a Long and more Scurrilous Let∣ter than any of the former, and Desir'd him to Insert it in his Appendix, which he has done. And there is such Beastly stuff as wou'd turn any ones Stomach to Read it, of Scal'd Heads, Gall'd Horse Backs, Spuing, Purging, Stinking and Wiping; which they apply all to Wigan, be∣sides, Grinning like a Dog, Teeth like a Lyon, a Paw like a Bear, and Mouth like a Dragon's Beast, &c. And besides this Ʋn-savory Language (says Wi∣gan p. 57.) They do their Ʋtmost to Render me Odious and Obnoxious to the Greatest Danger, and that by Dark and Dubious Insinuations, as, That it is known what I have been, and something else they have, which must not yet be Manifested &c. It seems Wigan was in Prison, as they were, for Non-Conformity; and tho' they were in the same Condemnation, yet (as Rats in a Trap will worry one another) this cou'd not Restrain the Rage of the Vermin: But they Endeavour'd to
Render him further Obnoxious to the Govern∣ment, tho' Themselves were more. As they have serv'd the Author of the Sn. to shew that they are no Changlings. But ther is one Complement, which the Qua∣ker Appendix I am now Answering, passes up∣on the Author of the Sn. p. 49. where, speak∣ing of G. Fox's Inspirations, he says such Inspi∣ration so Foul a Vessel (i. e. as that Author) must not Pretend to; which I wou'd Recommend to the Consideration of the Clean among the Quakers (if any such ther are to be found) For if we may Judge of the Foulness of a Vessel by what comes out of it, then certainly ther ne∣ver were such Sh—ten, Nasty, Scal'd, Gall'd, Filthy, Stinking Vessels, besides Blasphemous, Ve∣nomous, Furios, sensless Vessels as G. Fox and his Fell Dame, with the other Quakers their Assistants before-mention'd; whom, by their Language and Gust, one wou'd Guess at the Best, to be Gold-Finders, who Dane'd as Gossops at their Wedding about mid-night. And what sort of Inspirations such Foul Vessels are Capable of, let all Judge who are not as much Defil'd as Themselves. And if it be true what this Appendix tells us p. 6. That Truth Changes not, And therefore that the Quakers are still the same they ever were; then what Sh—ten Folks have we to Deal with? We must Encounter Them, as St. Dunstan did the Devil, with a Pair of Tongs. And what is said of the Jews, will be truer of the Quakers, that they may be known by the Smell. I confess, by their Phiz and Meen ther are none who Look so much as if something were amiss with them. But if this were the
worst of them, I wou'd not Foul my Fingers with them, but leave them to the Scavenger. That which I am Concern'd for, is the much Greater Filthiness of their Spirits, their Horrid Blasphemies, and Heresies, and that Implacable Furie that Reigns in them, which shews from whom their Inspirations came; For they are first not Pure, and then far from Peaceable, Gen∣tle, or Easie to be Intreated; Theirs is not the Meekness of Wisdom; they Answer more to the Description of Solomon's Fool,Prov. xiv. 16. who Rageth and is Confident. And the Advice of St. James is ve∣ry Applicable to Them. But if ye have Bitter Envying and strife in your hearts, Glory not, and Lie not against the Truth. This wisdom Descendeth not from Above, but is Earthly, Sensual, Devilish. And, If any among you seem to be Religious,c. i. 26.and Bridleth not his Tongue, this man's Religion is vain. I have shewn their Bitter and Nasty Treat∣ment of one who Gave them no Provocation, but was Provok'd by them. Let me give one more. Because it is of a man without any Gall, whom I verily think (and I have known him sometime) all the Abuses in the World, even Beating cou'd not Provoke to Return an Ill-word; for it is not in him. And besides he is a Grave Ancient Man, and of an Honorable Family, whose Gray-Hairs might Reconcile Respect from any not Destitute of Humanity. It is Mr. John Pennyman, whom the Gross Immora∣lities of the Quakers Drove from among them, after he had, in the meekest manner, Represen∣ted it to them; but met with no other Return than the most Bitter Reproaches, for his Good∣will,
and Christian Endeavours towards them. And they threw out their Venom against him not only in Discourse, in their Books and Letters, but they thrust out their Forked Tongues at him in their Sermons, at their Publick Meetings, when they were Assembl'd for the Worship of their God, which shews who it was that Inspir'd them, and Presided over their Devotions. Mr. Penny∣man has Printed some of them in a Post-script to a Sheet fill'd with their Contradictions placed in Two Columns; with the Time, Place, and Persons Names who in their Sermons, were In∣spir'd by their Numen, to Breath forth these Meek and Christian-like Expressions of Mr. Pen∣nyman, calling him, Grinning Dog. Whisting Cur. Barking Dog. The Devils Agent. The Devils Emissary. Thou Cursed Serpent, thou art Cursed for ever. I am moved of the Eternal God to Pronounce woes and Judgements against him. God's Power will Choak thee [This George Whitehead uttered at Grace-Church-street Meeting from the Preaching Place] Ʋnclean Nasty Spirit &c. All these were in their Sermons. And in their Books and Letters, when they had time to weigh and Consi∣der what they wrote (but they write too Extem∣pore) they call him The Devils Drudge. The Chief of the Devils. The Devils Porter, setting open the Gates of Hell. Vassal of Hell, and Bond∣slave of the Devil. Wolf. Dog. Betraying Judas. Devil-Incarnat. Devil-driven, Dungy-God. Ju∣das. Atheist. Runagad. Vagabond. Creeping Judas. Instigated by the Devil in the Spirit that wou'd Murther Christ. Craz'd, Crack-Brain'd, Distracted. This last is as true as where they call him Va∣gabond and Runagad who is a wealthy and Sub∣stantial
Citizen, whose Credit was never Blasted, and his Reputation stands firm to this Day. And as to his being Distracted, it has no bet∣ter Ground; all that are Acquainted with him know the Madness as well as Malice of this Accusation. Can they charge upon Him any one of the Eight Particulars before men∣tion'd, wherein They are Prov'd to be Mad, and Stark-Mad? Or that He was ever Guilty of any of them, even while he was a Quaker? For ther are Good and Sober men who have been Deluded into Quakerism, from their Pha∣risaical Pretences to Holiness, without (for some time) Discovering The Snake in the Grass, and the Devil Hid under the Angel of their Light: But yet who never Run with them into that Excess of spiritual Riot, which Intoxicated their Possess'd Leaders, and the Bewitched Herd that follow'd them: And therefore have Happily Rescu'd themselves, by the Good Grace of God, out of those Snares of the Devil. But the Quakers did not only Sharpen their Tongues a∣gainst this most In-offensive and Harmeless Old Gentleman, but they made use of their Hands; for as he there tells, at Ratcliff Meeting, after James Parks had Bitterly Inveg'd against him in his Sermon, calling him The Devil's Agent, the Devil's Emissary, &c. as above, Mr. Penny∣man stood up with intent to have spoken one verse of Scripture, that was all the Reproof he meant to Return to all his Railing; but before he had spoken six words, Henry Sutton, one of the Friends, pull'd him down with great Vio∣lence, and told the People, he was one of the Wickedest of Men, that he was a Limb of the
Devil, and Deserv'd to be Whipt at the Carts Ass, &c. To which Mr. Pennyman made no Reply. Another time in the year 1680, in one of their Meetings, at the Sign of the Bull and Mouth (A fit Emblem of their En∣dowments) Mr. Pennyman, giving no other Pro∣vocation than this, saying, He that Loveth not his Friend, cannot be said to Love his Enemy, one of their Preachers J. B. standing on their Preaching-Place, thrust his Stick with that Violence to Mr. Pennyman's side, that forc'd him off the step whereon he stood, and pre∣sently after struck him on the Face. Another of their Preachers, James Holliday, being altogether a stranger to Mr. Pennyman, told the People in his Sermon, that Mr. P. was a Companion of one W. B. who had been one of their Ministers; but, as he said, was turn'd a Common Cheat, and that he wou'd have Ravish'd a Woman. All which was Notorious∣ly False. And at their Great Tribunal the Yearly-Meeting at Grace-Church-street, James Hol∣liday being told of this his Abuse and false Accusation, and that it was Expected he shou'd Publickly Acknowledge the wrong done there∣in, he Reply'd, That Ʋnless the Lord Requir'd it of him, he wou'd not do it. Another time, the 24. Aug. 1681. Two other of the Friends, Thomas Ruddiard, and William Briggins, from the said Preaching-place, Affirm'd that Mr. Pennyman was Conversant and Intimate with one John Taylor a Ranter who, they said, had Hang'd himself, being Guil∣ry (as some of their Ministers Declar'd) of most Horrid wickedness, as Blasphemy, Whore∣dom
Drunkenness, and the like; whereas Mr. Pen∣nyman was never in Company with the said J. T. but was wholly a stranger to him, as he then Declar'd. But no Redress against the Precious ones, for Lying and Slandering of those who Durst see Faults in the Perfect! They will make no Acknowledgment or Repa∣ration for the most Apparant Injury, Ʋnless the Lord require them i. e. their own Light within, which they make their only Rule, and not the H. Scriptures, much less any Human Laws; so that ther is no Hold of these men. Because they have but one Principle, that is, To do what they Please. Nor is their Light within ty'd up by the Rules of Common Justice, Morality, or whatever is counted Sacred amongst Men. Here Holliday Refuses to make any Reperation for Apparent Lying and Slander. George Whitehead Refus'd to Restore what another Quaker (pro∣bably by his own Instigation) had Stoln from Mr. Pennyman, Unless, as he said, The Lord did Require him to Return it. And G. Fox justi∣fy'd Theft and Sacrilege, in Robbing of a Church, by the same Principle (See Sn. Sect. vii. p. 94.) Nay this is such a Foundation Principle with them, That even in this Appendix, where they are Smoothing over their old Errors, they Dare not Dally with this; but give several strokes, up and down, to shew that they will not own the Scriptures as Their Rule, and up∣braid those who make them a Rule, p. 11. The Holy Scriptures (say they) which in this Na∣tion is Commonly call'd the Rule of Faith. And p. 51. They say of the Light within, that it is The only True Guide of Men in matters Eternal,
and of Soul Concernment — And we have and do Continue to say, That whoever sets up any other Guide in opposition to this Truth and Light of Je∣sus Christ, or Prefers any other thing before it, they have not a Right Ground of Faith; but all that are Obedient to this Certain and Right Ground of Faith, according to the Degree Manifested unto them, we Really own. Here by the Truth and Light of Jesus Christ, they mean their own Light within, because they say, according to the Degree Mani∣fested unto them. that is, What they Think to be so Manifested unto them: And whoever sets up the H. Scriptures, or any other thing before this, i. e. before that Degree or Measure of Light which is within Themselves, they Pronounce them not to have a Right Ground of Faith. Which is a full Confession to the whole Charge that has been laid against them, upon this Head. so that no Rules either of Natural or Reveal'd Religion must Supersede, Direct, Amend, or Alter any thing of what their Light within do's Dictate to them; because they take it to be The Truth and Light of Jesus Christ. And whereas this Appendix do's Limit it to Matters Eternal, and of Soul Concernment; yet Will. Penn do's Extend it further, p. 36. of his Preface to G. Fox's Journal, where he says, For being Quickned by it in our Inward Man, we cou'd Easily Discern the Difference of things; And Feel what was Right and what was Wrong, and what was Fit, and what not, both in Reference to Religion, and Civil Concerns. And now what is it that is left out of the the Plenitude of this Power of their Light with∣in? The Holy Scriptures, as well as our Laws
must Bow to It: And the State, as well as the Church Fall down before It! Is ther no Danger to Church or State from this Princi∣ple? Is this a Principle to be Tolerated, to be Encouraged? And this Appendix do's tell us, in Plain Language, That as they have, so they still continue to stand by it. Sect. xvii. of the Sn: shews Apparently that their Principle is for Fighting, that they have Fought; and that Desperatly, if you will be∣lieve their Chieftan G. Fox, who, as there Quoted p. 210. says that their Character in Oliver's Army was, That they had rather have had one of them (Quakers) than seven men, and cou'd have turn'd one of them to seven men. For Enthusiasm is a Principle which will Hur∣ry men seven-fold more than Covetousness, Am∣bition, or whatever other motives Prompts men to Fight. And the Quakers being now so very Considerable both for Riches, Numbers, and Ʋ∣nited Disciplin, they are not to be Neglected, especially upon this Account, that (as shewn in the fore-Quoted Sect.) their Principle is a∣gainst all Government, but in their own Hands. In their Invectives they Commonly Joyn the Beast and the False-Prophet together to be De∣stroy'd. By the Beast they mean the Civil-Go∣vernment, and by the False-Prophet, the Church. Upon whom they Bestow as Ill-Names as any they have Bestow'd upon the Author of the Sn. And Devoted Them for Destruction as much as Him. Therefore He may take it the more Patiently. They have Freed Him from the Scandal, of having it said, What Evil has He done? That such Men shou'd speak Well of Him.
And if these Wasps have Stung Mr. Wigan, and Mr. Pennyman so severely, without any Provo∣cation, why shou'd he think to escape, who put his Hand into their Nest? I cou'd give ma∣ny more Instances of their like Treatment of others, but I am afraid of Cloying the Reader with such Nauseous stuff, and very willing to be Releas'd from the Drudgery my Self. I. Therfore I will turn to shew, that the worst Payers are the Hard est Cravers.2. The Qua∣kers Inso∣lence and Threat∣ning to any who Oppose them. That these Quakers who take so free Liberty with others, are the most Impatient to have any thing said to Themselves. They are Touchy upon the least Punctilio, and Improve any Re∣flection upon them to the utmost Strech. George Whitehead last year, Printed a Book which he Intituls, A sober Expostulation with some of the Clergy, &c. wherein he writes in a very Threatning stile to two of the Establish'd Cler∣gy, Mr. Smithies and Mr. Archer, for the suspi∣cion that lay upon them, of shewing some Countenance to Francis Bugg in his writing a∣gainst the Quakers. If thou (says he p. 11.) doth not put a stop to his mischievous Attempts, it will Affect thee—and the Cry will ascend Higher than to thy self. Here is an Innuendo against the whole Clergy. And p. 20. says he, Bugg's Abuses are in their own Nature Intolera∣ble— and we do not Intend to Lie under his Foul Calumnies. Pag. 106. If you will be mute in this matter (says he to these Clergy-men) and suffer him to Persist without your Publick Dislike, then may you be further Justly call'd in Question, and Expos'd thereupon for your neglect of Justice. This is Magisterial indeed! Here
Whitehead Acts the Metropolitan, and corrects these Clergy-Men with a Super-Episcopal Autho∣rity. What! must they be Accountable for Bugg's writing against the Quakers! And if they do but stand Mute in the Case! that is, if they do not take Part with the Quakers against Bugg, or any who shall hereafter come over (as he has done) from the Quakers to the Church of England, and Endea∣vour to Detect the Errors of the Quakers. What then? Here Whitehead threatens that they shall be call'd in Question for it, and Expos'd thereupon. He says that Bugg's Abuses are in their own Nature Intolerable. I am sure such Insolence as this is, in its own Nature, and according to the Na∣ture of all Government, or but the Shadow of a Church very Insufferable. To see a Sniveling Quaker thus Brave it, in the Face of the whole Church; and, in Print, to Threaten Her Cler∣gy for doing of their Duty! It is not Tolera∣tion will serve these mens turns. Ex Pede Herculem— We may know by a Little, what a Great Deal means. Their Principles are Calculated for Empire. Their Motto is, Do no Right, and take no Wrong. John Gilpin in his Nar∣rative, call'd The Quakers Shaken. before Men∣tioned, happen'd to call them a Faction, saying of a Pamphlet, That it was set forth by some of that Faction in York. To which they Answer in The Standard &c. Quoted before, p. 8. Thou full of Subtilty, is this thy Revenge, to Nick-Name the Truth, calling the Children of the Lord by the Name of a Faction? Which is Invented by the Devil, whose servant thou art. The Provocation was Greater, to which Will. Penn Replys, in his Scirmisher Defeated, p. 10. In answer to this, viz. That the womb of Iniquity
was in the Quakers writings, upon which W. P. Crys out; He has Invaded my Body and Soul, Religion and Life; for Lam, by my Doctrin, if the Priest may be believ'd, an Heretick, a Blasphemer, an Atheist &c. And what remains but that the Dogs or Lyons devour me, the Rabble or the Govern∣ment sacrifice me &c. And if Will. Pen may be Believ'd, what are our Priests as he calls them? That Cursed Bitter Stock of Hirelings— who have made Drunk the Nations—whilst they have Cut their Purses,Serious A∣pology. p. 156.and Pick'd their Pockets; Tophet's Propared for them, to Act their Eternal Tragedy upon, whose Scenes will be Renewed, Direful, Anguishing woes of an Eternal Irreconcilable Justice. The Idle Gormandizing Priests of England, run away with above 150000 l. a year,Guide mi∣staken, p. 18. Prin∣ted. 1668.under Protence of God's Ministers— No sort of People have been so Ʋniversally thro' Ages, the very Bane of Soul and Body of the Ʋniverse, as That Abominable Tribe, for whom the Theatre of God's most Dreadful Ven∣geance is Reserv'd to Act their Eternal Tragedy up∣on. &c. And for the Dissenters, he calls them An ill∣bred Pedantick Crew,Quakerism a new nick-name &c. p. 165.the Bane of Religion, and Pest of the world, the old Incendiaries to Mischief, And the best to be spared of Mankind, against whom the Boyling Vengeance of an Irritated God is ready to be Poured out. And now has not he (to use his own words) Invaded their Body and Soul, Religion and Life! for besides Damnation (which he never misses) he makes them Cut-Purses, and Pick-Pockets; and The best to be spared of Mankind. Do's not that look like throwing them to the Dogs or the Lions
or setting on the Rabble or Government to Sacrifice them? All this is made the Tragical Inference of Disputing against the Heresies and Blasphemies of the Quakers! And yet the above Language and Furie of Hell which is Belch'd out, with the Utmost Virulence, against the Church of Eng∣land, and the Clergy of all sorts, must be Ramm'd down their Throats: while the Quakers will Fly in any mans Face, and send him to the Devil, who Dares call Them but a Faction! And if any of our Clergy seem to Countenance the Conver∣sion of any from Quakerism; or but stand Neu∣ter; and not Hinder others from Writing a∣gainst them; he shall be Magisterially Threatn'd, as here by Whitehead, that is, by the Body of the Quakers, who own his, and the other Books Licens'd by their Second-Day's-Meeting, as has been told before. And I think they have here Given a very Good Handle, to Return their Complement upon Themselves; That if they stand Mute, and not Censure Will. Penn and the Rest of them, who have spu'd their Venom, in the like Furious and Standalous Manner, against the Church of Eng∣land, And Disown their Books, at least the Fore-Nam'd, and other such like Passages that are in them, then that the Cry shou'd Ascend Higher than to these Particular Authors, even to the Second-Day's-Meeting that owns them, if they will stand Mute, and not shew their Pub∣lick Dislike (as Whitehead here Requires from the Clergy-Men) then That they may be further Justly call'd in Question, and Expos'd thereupon; for their Neglect of Justice. Who will not do Justice, let Justice be done to them. Do's Bugg's Di∣sputing
against the Quakers, and Giving them less than their Due, seem Intolerable to Them? And do they tell us plainly That they do not Intend to Ly under his Foul Calumnies? And must the whole Church of England, and the State too Ly under the Thousand times Greater and more outragious Calumnies that the Quakers have over and over again Loaded upon their Backs! And they will not, to this Day, Retract one word or Letter: on the Contrary, they vouch it in several Places of this Appendix; And have Printed it in the Post-man (See Collection. N. 6.) That they are the same they were from the Beginning, and not Chang'd at all. Do's it then seem Tolerable to our Clergy and Magistrates, to Ly under the odious Names of Beast, False-Pro∣phet, Dogs, Witches, Anti-Christs, Devils Incarnate, &c! Did the Quakers, for their Vindication, In∣dict Bugg at the Sessions in London, and object to him their own Dayly Practice of Printing without License? Did they Complain against him to the Secretary of State, and upon a False Information, That his Papers were Seditious, and against the Government, Procur'd them to be Seiz'd, taken from the Book-sellers, and Deli∣ver'd into the Hands of the Quakers? Did they Imprison William Bradford a Printer in Pensilvania, seize his Letters or Types, and Forc'd him out of the Dominions of the Quakers, for Printing G. Keith's Defences against Them; and Prosecuted likewise the Publishers, and G. Keith himself for his Life, Improving his Di∣sputes against Them into a Design against the Government? Are they so Watchful so Indu∣strious so Impatient lest any Indignity shou'd be
Past upon Them: And must all orders of Men among us, Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military Bear their most Bitter Reproches, without any Sign of Repentance! And Court them and do them Favours for it! or suffer them to Usurp Favors that were never Intended them. It is Plain the Act of Toleration do's Except those who De∣ny in their Preaching or writing the Doctrin of the Blessed Trinity, as it is Declar'd in the Articles of Religion. That is, in our 39 Articles. These are the words of the Act. And it is as Plain that the Quakers have all along done it. G. Fox says, in his Great Mystery. p. 246. The Scriptures do not tell the People of a Trinity nor Three Per∣sons; but the Common-Prayer-Mass-Book speaks of Three Persons, brought in by the Father the Pope. Here it is Plain that the Quakers do not Ac∣knowledge that Trinity which is own'd in the Common-Prayer: And the Common-Prayer-Book, being every word an Act of Parliament, it is Plain what Trinity is Intended in the Act of Toleration: And the Opposers of That Trinity are the Persons Excepted out of the Act. To which the Quakers have no Pretence, Unless they will Disown G. Fox herein. They must likewise Disown Will. Penn, who wrote a Book in the year 1668. to which he Gave this Title. The Sandy Foundation shaken. Or, Those so Generally Believed and Applanded Doctrins, of one God Sub∣sisting in three Distinct and Separate Persons, of the Impossibility of God's Pardoning Sinners without a Plenary Satisfaction. Of the Justification of Im∣pure Persons by an Imputative Righteousness, are Refuted. And p. 12. The Title of that Section is, The Trinity of Distinct and seperate Persons in
the Ʋnity of Essence Refuted from Scripture. I know, for a Pinch, they will own the word Trinity, as the Sabellians and Socinians, meaning three Manifestations, or Operations, but not Three Persons. But that is not the Trinity In∣tended in the Act. But the Trinity which is Profess'd in the Creed of St. Athanasius, and more Briefly in our Litany. viz. The Holy Blessed and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons, and one God. This is that Trinity Intended in the Act of To∣leration; And which whoever opposes are Ex∣cluded from Claiming any Benefit by that Act. And this is that Trinity which the Quakers have, and still do Oppose; And therefore they are altogether Excluded from any Benefit of that Act. But their Opposing is not so Intolerable, as the Manner of it. Their Cursing and Damning (Hor∣resco Referens!) The Holy and ever Blessed Tri∣nity into the very Pit of Hell! And making it nothing but Conjuration! Ther is a Book wrote by George Whitehead, and three other Quakers viz. Christopher Atkin∣son, James Lancaster, and Thomas Symons (of whose Character see Sn. Sect. vi. n. v. p. 43. &c.) Intituled Ishmael and his Mother cast out &c. A∣gainst Mr. Townsend, a Minister in Norwich. Where p. 10. they tell him, And here is the three Persons thou Dreams of, which thou wouldst Divide out of One, like a Conjurer. And ibid. He (Mr. Townsend) is shut up with the three Persons in perpetual Darkness for the Lake and the Pit. This is thus Quoted, by Christoph. Wade, in his Quakery slain. p. 9. To which G. Fox Replies in his Gr. Myst. p. 246. who De∣nies
not the Quotation; but Re-Blasphemes a∣gainst the H. Trinity, in the words above-quo∣ted, and more which you will find in the same place. Christoph. Wade wrote an Answer to this Gr. Myst. which bears this Title, To all those cal∣led Quakers &c. To which G. Whitehead Replies, in his Truth defending the Quakers. An. 1659. And denies not the above Quotations out of his own Book Ishmael &c. But (as the Quakers use, when Pinch'd) he slips it over, and takes no notice of it. Not that he was Converted from his Heresie, for in several other Places of the same Book, he continues to Blaspheme, at his old Rate, against the H. Trinity. as in p. 40. 41. &c. But finding that the Matter was not thus Forgot, being Re-Objected against them about the year 1690, in An Epistle to the Friends &c. at their next General Meeting in London. Sub∣scrib'd N. N. Ther was Publish'd an Answer to this and two other Books wrote against the Quakers, by Some of Them. Intituled, The Christianity of the People commonly call'd Quakers Vindicated &c. Printed An. 1690. There p. 28. coming to this Objection, they go a New way to work, and lay the Fault Partly upon the Printer, And Looks on the words as wrong writ, or wrong Printed. Wrong Writ, and wrong Prin∣ted are two things. But they Jumble them here, that the Reader might mistake, and over∣look the Author, and so think it only an Error of the Press. But what was this Error? Why they say, That instead of [And the three Per∣sons] it shou'd have rather been [About the three Persons] which makes it non-sense, but not less
Blasphemy. But however, was this taken No∣tice of by the Quakers, in all that time from the writing of that Answer to Townsend (which the Quakers say in this last book ibid. was a∣bout the year 1654.) till this Book of theirs An. 1690, that is, for the space of 44 years? No. That is not Alledg'd. But they say (ibid.) that G. W. Corrected it long since, where he has met with that Answer. How do's this Appear? O you must take his own word for it: for is not He Infallible! But was not so Fatal a Slip of Infallibility fit to be Corrected in Print, to Remove that most Hideous and Blasphemous Scan∣dal? which cou'd not be done otherwise. For to what end was G. W's. Correcting it with a Pen upon a Book that came in his way? (if he did it) How shou'd this Un-deceive the World? Who had never heard of it, if he had not now told them. And it is at their Pleasure how far they will Believe him. This is like another Error of the Press, which they let slip 28 years together. (See Sat. Dis. Sect. ii. N. iii. p. 28.) And their Appealing from their Printed Books to the Original Copies. See hereafter N. 7. of this same Section. And how came it that none but G. W. Corrected this Monstrous Blasphemy? Were not the Rest of the Quakers likewise Concern'd? Well, if this will not do, they have another Excuse. They say (ibid.) That G. W. positively Disowns the words, and Affirms they are None of his, and that he writ not that Part of the Answer to Townsend— And G. W. was sorry his Name was to that Paper, without Distinction between what he writ, and what he did not write in it, wherein
those words are which gave the Occasion. Let this Advertisement Clear G. W. and Others; and suffice every Charitable Reader, as we hope it will. And G. W. sets his Approbation upon the Mar∣gin, in these words, To this I subscribe, George Whitehead. And now George thinks he is Lick'd Clean! No Spark of Dirt can Stick upon him! But how is it that G. W. let his Name stand to this Book for 44 years, without Vindica∣ting of himself? or cou'd not his Infallibility of Discerning Discover this Blasphemy all that time? Especially considering that Christoph. Wade wrote against this Book, and objects this very Blasphemy: And that both George Fox, and George Whitehead wrote severally Answers to Wade; And yet Neither of them found any Fault with the Writing or Printing of these Words. But if this shou'd Clear G. W. how will the Others get off, upon whom G. W. lays the Blame? The Quakers say, Let this Advertisement clear G. W. and Others. And upon the Title Page of their Book it is said to be Sincerely Tendered in behalf of the aforesaid People, and their Ancient Friends. Now these Ancient Friends whose Names are Affix'd to that Precious Book Ishmael, along with G. W.'s are here fairly Left in the Lurch, Disown'd and Abandon'd with all this Dreadful Blasphemy upon their Heads! And yet they will not Disown them! No. They Pretend to vindicate their Ancient Friends still, and that they have not Chang'd from the Beginning. As they tell not only in their Books, but in the Printed News-Papers, that All the World may take Notice of it. They are still Infallible,
Every one of them in Particular!See Sn. p. 34.284. And they are Conjurers, who speak, and not from the Mouth of The Lord. Now how came G. W. to write a Book jointly with Conjurers? And to set his Name to it along with theirs: And that with∣out Distinction between what he writ, and what he did not write in it? For which he says now that he is Sorry. But they who Jointly Sign a Book, or a Bond, are Answerable Jointly and Severally. Such a Poor Excuse as this cou'd not be taken from any Man of Common Animadvertence. For who wou'd set his Name with others as Joint Authors of a Book, if he had not weighed as well what the others had wrote, as what Him∣self wrote? Yet this is all the Defence that the Quaker Infallibility can make for it self! that is, That it did not Mind, but let things Slip at Peradventure! But then, to Inscribe their Heedless, Indigested Stuff as the Word of the Lord, which these Quakers do! This is Intolerable! And the Blas∣phemy not to be Endur'd! For this, they give such another Excuse, in the same place of The Christianity of the Quakers. p. 28. putting it again upon the Printer. They say that instead of [Which is the Word of the Lord] it shou'd have been [From the Word] How sensless is this! for that which is [From the Word of the Lord] is not that [The Word of the Lord?] But say they, We shall not stand by the said Title as 'tis worded without such Amend∣ment. Yet Charitably think it was worded Contrary to the Intent and Meaning of the Author. This is Pretty!
But how then came the Quakers, even the Great Fox himself, to say of their vile Scribles, as they almost do every where, This is the Word of God? See Instances, particularly of G. Fox in the Sn. p. 89, 90. Can we suppose that this was Contrary to the Intent and Meaning of the Author? How then shall we know what was their Meaning? They may Alter all their Books, and every word in them. Truly this wou'd be their Best way. They will never be Right, or their Books passable till this be done. And if we cou'd take them at their Word, they are in a fair way towards it. For here they say, That they will not stand by the said Blurrs in their Books, as 'tis worded, without such Amend∣ment. Among other of their Infallible Errata, I have spy'd two Letters in this same Page, which I suppose must go into the Basket, next time the Dust-Man comes about. They are two Letters, which are grown very offensive to the Quakers of late, viz. G. K. But they say here, We know no reason to Disown our Friends G. K. or R. B. for we have a True, Tender, and Christian esteem of Both. These were George Keith and Robert Barclay. And p. 26. say they, We have cause to Assure our selves, that both G. Keith, and R. B. wou'd Abominate this False-Brother's Attempt to make Divisions between them and their Ancient Brethren. Yet now G. Keith is the Great Incen∣diary, and Accuser of the Brethren! An Apostat! and as such, Excommunicated by the Sanhedrin of the Quarkers!
But what Cause they had to Assure them∣selves of this G. K. will fall foul upon their In∣fallible Spirit of Discerning; which they Insist upon Now, as strongly as ever (See hereafter Sect. v.) And say that none can be a Minister of Christ, who cannot Discern what Spirit is in any Man, whether a Good, or an Evil Spirit, at the first sight, without Speaking ever a word (See Sn. p. 33. &c.) of which a Pleasant Instance is hereafter given of G. Fox in Sect. v. But to Return; we have seen the Silly Ex∣cuses which the Quakers have made for that Most Horrible and Cursed Blasphemy before Quo∣ted, which they have Belched out against the H. Trinity, of Damning the three Persons into Hell. But they have another Put off, which tho' they have not Adventur'd upon in Print, that I know of, yet some of them make use of in Private Conversation, which is, That it is only the word Persons, which they Doom to the Lake and to the Pit, with those who use that Ʋn∣scriptural word, with Relation to God, or Christ: But then they must send Will. Penn thither too, who, in his Sandy Foundation. p. 15. speaking of the Son of God, the True Light, which Light∣neth every man &c. says, Who in Person Testify'd &c. Tho' G. Whitehead, in his Quakers Plainess. p. 24. says, That is not our Phrase, that I know of, or Remember. And That the Title (Person) is too Low and Ʋn-scriptural, to give to the Christ of God. Now then let him Remember, now let him Know, That his Friend Will. Penn has us'd it. And let them Reckon for thus Contradict∣ing and Thwarting one another. But however,
G. Whitehead, and the other Quakers, have sent to the Pit, all the Church of England, and all the Christian World, who do Profess Faith in the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity, And the Persons themselves, not only the Word, or Let∣ters: for these cannot be sent thither. And shall those, who not only Deny, but Blaspheme: Not only Blaspheme, but send to the Pit of Hell (O Horror to Repeat it!) the Persons of the Holy Trinity— Shall these be Shrouded under an Indulgence, which Expresly Spues out all such from Under its Protection, who Oppose or Deny the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity? Shall these be Included in this Tolera∣tion, who will not Disown G. Whitehead, for the Quotations above Cited; but still think him a Teacher sent from God? Let this Test be put upon the Quakers: And see whether they will Part with G. Whitehead, or the Toleration? If they stick by George, in this, it is a Demonstra∣tion that they like this Doctrin he has Deli∣ver'd. But they have given us a Full and Authorita∣tive Decision, in this matter, That they do still own and Adhere to not only these Doctrins before Quoted: But All and Every Part of what has been Deliver'd by their Doctors ever since their Beginning. In their Decretal Epistle, from their yearly Meeting at London (which is their Supreme, and most General Councel) for the year 1696. They do Re-Assert and Confirm All their Ancient Testimonies, And that, in All the Parts of it. For (say they) Truth is one, and Changes not: And what it Convinced us of to be Evil in the Beginning, it Reproves still. This is to keep up
their Infallibility. And in this, both Antidote and Appendix and in all their Late writings, they strenuously Assert, That they have not Changed at all, at least, in any Point of Doctrin: And still stand by, and Maintain All that they have Printed, or Preach'd, since they were Qua∣kers. And, as if this had not been Enough, they have Printed it in the Post-Man, that none might be Ignorant of it. I say not this, That I wou'd have any Per∣secution (as they call it) Renewed against them. I like not that Method. for ther are Honest, Well-Meaning Men among them; and the Sin∣cere, tho' Deluded, are most apt to put them∣selves into the way of Suffering; which often Hardens, seldom Converts them. And they are worthy of a Gentler Method. But the End for which I have mention'd this Act, is, first, To do that Right to the Government, as to Free them from the Scandal of Recognizing the Quakers as Protestants, who Deny the Holy Tri∣nity, the Satisfaction of Christ, and all outward both Sacraments and Priesthood; therefore the Protestant Religion is not Answerable or Reproach∣able for Them. Secondly I have Minded the Quakers of this, That if neither Religion nor Good Manners can Restrain their Furie, yet that out of Policie they wou'd learn a little more Decency towards the Clergy, especially the Bi∣shops, who have it in their Hands to put the Penal Laws in Execution against them, They not being Included within the Act of Tolera∣tion. And since they Enjoy their Present Li∣berty, meerly from the Grace, at least, the Good Nature of those, whom of all Mankind they
have Endeavour'd to Render most Abhorr'd; I think it is but a Reasonable and very Favou∣rable Composition, That they shou'd Retract the Above Mention'd and other such like Base and most Scandalous Reflections which they have Cast upon the Church of England, Her Priests and Bishops, as well as All the Rest of Her Com∣munity. For we say Leave is Light; And that Favour is ill Bestow'd, that is not worth Thanks, at least, Fair Ʋsage. Now the Reparatation ought to be as Publick as the Injury. Therfore the Easiest way I can Propose for the Quakers, is, That their Second-Days-Meeting, which do sit every week in Lon∣don, shou'd Publish Under their Hands a Con∣demnation of the said Scandals and Abuses ven∣ted by Will. Penn, G. Fox, and others of their Writers against the Church of England, Parti∣cularly These before Quoted, and Suffer it to be Printed. But most Especially what is above Quoted of most Hideous Blasphemy against the Holy and Tremendous Trinity of God. But if they Remain Mute in this Matter (as G. White∣head says to the Ministers) And Refuse to Right God, and His Church from these Abuses cast upon Them, which are in their own Nature Intolerable, then may she justly say in White∣head's words, We do not intend to Ly under their Foul Calumnies, Then Let The Cry Ascend High∣er, Then May they be further justly call'd in Question, and Expos'd thereupon, for their Neglect of Justice. Then may the Bishops (if they think fit) send to their Second-Days-Meeting, and Require such a Subscription and Submission from Them; or otherwise That they shou'd Acknow∣ledge
the Doctrin of the Holy Trinity, in the words of our Litany and Articles, to Qualify themselves for the Benefit of the Act of Tole∣ration. At least to Disown what G. Fox, G. Whitehead, W. Penn, and others of their Writers have said Blasphemously against it. But if they will still Adhere to their Former Doctrin here∣in, then have they totally Excluded themselves from the Act of Toleration. And then if the Bishops do not let them know, that it is in their Power to be Civil to them, they will be Good-Natur'd indeed! 2. But ther is nothing go's down so hardly with the Quakers as the Doctrin of Repentance, be∣cause it Ruins their Pretence to Infallibility and Perfection. And of all sort of Repentance they Hate that most, which Requires them to make Restitution or Satisfaction for the Injuries that they have done. Therefore they must stick to all the Calumnies and Outrage which they have vented against God and His Church, and all o∣thers; and to all their Beastly Nastiness and Loathsome stuff, which Run out of their Clean Vessels! They must, by their Principles, Return with the Dog to their own Vomit, and the Sow to her Wallowing in the Mire. This Notion of Perfection is such a sad Ingredient in the Princi∣ples of the Quakers, as Eternity is in the Tor∣ments of Hell; for it Confirms them in all their Sins, and Hinders them from ever Returning. G. Whitehead has Publish'd a little Book in De∣cember 1697, of which this is the Title A seasonable Account of the Christian Testimony and Heavenly Expressions of Tudor Brain upon his Death-Bed, being a young man Aged about 17 years.
Published for Instruction and Caution to the Youth among Friends call'd Quakers. where p. 2. you have this Passage, At several times being Ad∣vis'd to Prepare for his latter End, for if he Liv'd, it wou'd be well, and, if he Died, it wou'd be his Gain, his Answer was, He was not Conscious of any Action he had done, that he shou'd be fraid of Appearing before God Almighty. O Dreadful! To see a Miserable Creature go to Death, Har∣den'd against Repentance, by this Pernicious Doctrine of the Quakers! And to see this Re∣commended for the Instruction of other Quakers! As a Christian Testimony, and Heavenly Expressi∣on! And to shew what Solid Instruction he had Learn'd among the Quakers, it is told of him p. 5. and 6. That seeing some little Lyons of China upon the Chimney-piece, he said, Take away those Images, for they are to be Trodden under foot. And seeing another Piece of China, which had several Hands, he said, Take away that Piece that is Covered, for it hath Eyes and seeth not, and Ears and Heareth not. Then he took offence at a Pair of Guilded Tea-Pots; And said you may take away the other things that are Guilded, and wash it off. And after they were taken away (says the Relation) He was at ease. This is told to shew the Aversion of the Quakers to Idols, and how Tender this Young-Man was up∣on that Head! And this was Printed, for the Instruction of those that come after; To shew how Exactly this Precious Youth kept up to the Doctrin of their Great Master Fox, who in his Iconoclastes, makes it Heathenism and Idolatry, to have the Likeness of any Creature Painted upon a Sign (see Sn. Sect. xxi. p. 299.) And I sup∣pose
it is the same upon a Chimney-Piece. See with what Froth and Chaff these Poor Quakers are Fed! And Glory in at their Death! And yet do not Believe themselves! For if they did, they wou'd not have the Likeness of Creatures, Lyons, Bulls, &c. Painted upon their Signs, as is Common with them now in London. Yea and China Birds, Beasts, and Men upon their Chim∣ney-Pieces, Guilt Tea-Pots too! and moreover do Sell them, for Gain, and all the Rest, that offended this Tender Youth upon his Death-Bed; But not his Sins, for (Alas!) he had none; he was one of the Perfect ones! And his Exam∣ple is set out, to Encourage the Rest of the Qua∣kers to follow it. Now if you shou'd tell any Quaker, who had the Likeness of some Creature Painted upon his Sign, that he was an Idolater, He wou'd take it very Ill, and tell thee, Thou art a Lyar, a Satan &c. If you shou'd Ask him again, whether G. Fox was Acted by the Infallible Spirit, when he call'd this Idolatry? He wou'd Answer, That G. Fox was above thy Shallow and Dark Mind: That He was sent from God; And Endowed with Power from on High; And Taught the way of the Lord in Truth; That thou wert one of those who made a Man an offender for a word. He wou'd bid thee Read within, And Hearken to The small still voice; And such Ban∣ter nothing to the Purpose. And then think that he had sufficiently Answer'd thee. This is the Method they take to Reconcile Contradictions. And no other will you get from them.
This brings me to another Topick they use in Answering Objections made against them,3. Bringing of Contrary Testimonies which is, To bring Contrary Testimonies to those Ob∣jected, without offering to solve those that are Objected; not minding (or Hoping the Reader wou'd not) that this only Proves them Guilty of Contradictions; which is one of the Great Objections made against them. And indeed of this their Writings are so Fertile, that hardly a Page can escape you wherein you will not find some of them; For they are all Confusion and Contradictions. This is the Method thro' all this Appendix, which we are considering. They bring Contra∣ry Testimonies, or so seeming, to those which are Ob∣jected; and think (but they cannot so think) that this has done the work, and Clear'd their Cause. 1. Thus Sect. vi. In answer to their Con∣tempt of Magistracy and Government, their Mani∣fold Treasons and Rebellions, they bring Testimo∣nys from p. 41. to p. 45. of their Acknowlege∣ment to the Government. And I cou'd have fill'd ten Pages more with the same. for they made Submissions and Acknowledgments to all the Ʋsurpations and Governments that ever happen'd in their time; as Each had the Fortune to get Ʋppermost; And then they Be∣slav'd that which was Down, which they had Worship'd before. Of this Many Instances are given in the Sn. Sect. xviii. To which not one word of Answer, either in the Antidote, or this Appendix. But ther is an Answer which they have un∣der their Thumb to some of the Passages there Produc'd, which I must not Conceal (tho' it shou'd fore-stall their Market) because it will afford some Diversion to the Reader. These
Passages are in the Sect. above Quoted of the Sn. p. 222, 223. out of a Book wrote by G. Fox, which carries this Title, Several Papers gi∣ven forth by George Fox &c. The Book I never saw, yet will answer for the Quotations; which notwithstanding I take not upon trust of any ones Memory or my own. And can give them further Quotations, out of that Particular Book which G. Fox Mark'd with his own Pen or Aule (which he cou'd handle much better) for I have seen of his Hand (or Foot) writing, tho' not in that Book, and it look'd rather like the Ingra∣vings of a Sciver, or the Scratches of an Aule than the Draughts of a Pen. Besides his Deli∣cate Spelling, of which I can Present the Reader with a Sampler, out of that same Book. Which shews how much he was oblig'd either to his Amanuensis, or the Corrector of the Press, that we had one Line right Spelt in all his Works; tho' his Dictating has hardly afforded Us one Paragraph either of Sense or English. The Book I Quote is in the Possession of the Friends, where neither I nor any I can Employ can have Ac∣cess. I mention this as a Tryal for their Spi∣rit of Discerning; and will venture their Re∣proof for the Mis-Spelling but of a Word. The above-Mention'd Quotations out of that Book, are Bitter Invectives against the King (Char. 2.) to obstruct his Restoration, and against All Kings and Kingly-Government. It was Printed in the beginning of the year 1660, when things were coming on fast towards the Restauration. But soon after, when the King was Establish'd, then it was time (pursuant to their old wont) to turn about, and Tack with the wind. Then
G. Fox wrote Marginal-Notes upon one of these Books (the same that I have mention'd) to Re∣concile those Treasons and Rebellions which were in it, according to his Skill, that is, after the Manner of this Antidote and Appendix, by gi∣ving a Contrary Testimony, without Retracting the other. In p. 5. ther are these words, That the Christians were not to do any thing in the Name of an Earthly King. And again, The setting up of these Kings and Emperors and Protectors, and giving them the Names of Excellency and Majesty amongst the Christians hath been since the Days of the Apostles amongst the Apostats in the Apostacy from the true Wisdom and Life. Here he writes upon the Margin (I give it you in his own spelling) This was in the Days of Olefer Cromell who wou'd be King. G. F. And the like upon the Margin of p. 8. (where more of his Treasons were ex∣press'd) This was the time when the was so besy of making Olefer Cromell King. G. F. And the like is upon the Margin of several other Pages. Now, if this was not Intended for the Press, it was to give the Friends Ground to say, that they had seen this Exposition of his, and to make use of it, as they saw occasion. But if it was meant (as is most likely) to be made Pub∣lick, the Friends, upon second thoughts, found it cou'd not be done, without Re-Printing of the Book; which wou'd do them more Mis∣chief, than such a silly Excuse cou'd Heal. Therefore they took the safer Course, which was, by all the means they cou'd, to stifle the said Book. And I believe they thought they had Effected it. For having (by some Art) Re∣cover'd the Book aforesaid out of the hands of one of themselves, whom they suspected,
into whose Possession it had fallen, they have Condemn'd it to Perpetual Imprisonment, unless Rescu'd by such Discoveries as these. And if they put it not into the New Edition Design'd of G. Fox's Works, they see they will be De∣tected; nay more, if they Leave out or Alter any of his Marginal Annotations, they shall be told of it, let them secure that Book where they are, as well as they can. Of which a New Edi∣tion cou'd be given (if it were worth the while) without their Help. But now that I have mention'd G. Fox's A∣pologie, wrote upon the Margin of this Book of his, for the Treasons therein Contain'd, it is fit that I shou'd shew the Falshood and Appa∣rent Hypocrisie of this his Excuse viz. That what he wrote against Kings and Kingly Go∣vernment was only meant against his Olefer, when he Design'd to take upon him the Stile of King. In Answer to which consider 1. That his words are against All Kings and Emperors among Christians since the Days of the Apostles; and against All Kingly Government, whether in Olefer, or any body else. 2. He speaks p. 15. against Fighting for the Kings of the Earth. Now ther was no Fighting, or any Appearance of it, at that time when it was Under Consideration whether G. Fox's Olefer shou'd Assume the Name of a King: And he was then None of the Kings of the Earth. But wards the Restoration of King Charles er was Expectation of Fighting. And G. Bishop, and this G. Fox, and others of the Quakers, did violently Persuade to Fighting against his Restoration, and that In the Name of
the Lord (as abundantly shewn in the Sn. Sect. xviii.) It is true they were against Fighting For Kings; but they were as much for Fighting Against them. 3. This Book of G. Fox's was Printed in the beginning of the year 1660. And Olefer had been Dead two years before. And I suppose G. Fox was not afraid that they wou'd take him out of his Grave to make a King of him. But if it be said that tho' this Book was not Printed till the year 1660, yet it might have been wrote before in the year 1658 when Ole∣fer Dy'd; then it wou'd be ask'd, To what Purpose it was Printed two years after the oc∣casion for which it was wrote; And which cou'd never come again, if the Design had been only against Olefer? 4. But, to put the Matter out of Dispute, in the Book it self. p. 6. G. F. speaks of Ole∣fer, as then Dead. these are his words, So when the Kings that Deny'd the Pope took the Tenth of Tenths, the Popes wages that was Head of the Church, and when the Kings Dy'd, the Protector took Tenth of Tenths, and He was the Head &c. He Was — now He was Dead, G. F. falls up∣on Him, as upon all others when they were Gon. But let the world now Judge, let all the Qua∣kers, who Pretend to one Drachm of sincerity, Confess at last, what an Egregious Lyar and Hypocrite this G. Fox was, to give it under his hand, that this Book of his was wrote against Oliver! And we may hence see what stress is to be laid upon their Contrary Testimonies; and how they are to be taken as Vindications of
all the vile Heresies, Madness, Treasons &c. which they have Acted, wrote, Preach'd, and Printed. And All of them, both Parts of the Contra∣dictions, Dictated as spoken Immediately from the Mouth of the Lord Almighty! II. Thus (to give a few more Instances) if one shou'd Object the Implacable Rage, and Nastiness, of the Quaker-Spirit, and Produce what has been herein before Mention'd, what is Quoted in the Sn. Sect. xvii. and much more of the same Sort that can be Produc'd, they cou'd Answer All by Contrary Testimonies (of which they have many) where the Quakers do Abhor and Detest such manner of Proceeding, as Abominable and Anti-Christian: and set up Themselves for all the Meekness, and Christian Patience in the World. Thus in this Appen. p. 43. Sam. Fisher is Produc'd saying, That the Quakers are not for Reviling nor Threatning nor Cursing; but Committing our Cause (saith he) in Quietness, to Him that Judgeth Righteously. And G. Fox, in his Gr. Mystery p. 237. says That the work of the Ministers of the Gospel is not to Reflect upon Persons, — And so thou (says he to a Minister he Disputed against) that art Reflecting upon Persons, do'st shew a Mark of thy self to be a False-Prophet —and Reflecting upon Persons was never the way to Beget to God. And Will. Penn says in his Address to Protestants, p. 246. Second Edit. They that are Angrie for God, Passionate for Christ, that call names for Religion — may tell us they are Christians, if they will, but no body wou'd know them to be such, by their Fruits: To be sure, they are no Christians of Christ's making. He gave this Title to
another Book he wrote, viz. Reason against Railing, in Answer to Thom. Hicks. Whom he Accuses for Railing against the Quakers: And thence Proves him not to be a Christian. For, says he, p. 169. He that Rails, Reviles, calls Names &c. is no True Christian: But such is Thom. Hicks: There∣fore, no True Christian. And now, what wou'd you have more? Do's it not Plainly follow from hence, That neither Will. Penn, nor any of the Quakers, did ever Raile, Revile, or call Names? For then, by Will. Penn's sentence, here Twice Repeated, they are no True Christians. To be sure, they are no Chri∣stians of Christ's making! But a little before this, p. 163. W. Penn sets down an Objection of T. Hicks's, That the Great Quaker Ed. Burrough had Bestow'd upon Philip Bennet a Priest, who oppos'd him, by way of Answer, these Names following, Thou art a wicked Creature. Black∣ness of Darkness is Reserved for thee. Thou art a Serpent. And the Curse of God is Eternally upon thee. Thou Beast, to whom the Plagues of God are Due. Now these look very like Ill Names, and Railing, to be sure, they are Reviling. What says Will. Penn to this? He says, That this was the Fittest Return cou'd be made to the Questi∣ons which P. Bennet put to Ed. Burrough. Why? were they Rude or Reflecting Questions? No. for, W. P. confesses p. 164. 165. that they were Civil, no Railing or Reviling in them, but that he Queries smoothly. And therefore calls him a White Devil, and the more Serpentine for that. However a Civil Question, Deserves a Civil An∣swer. But Civil Questions Provoke the Quakers most; because it is hardest to Raile at them,
without which the Quakers cannot Answer. Therefore W. P. calls Bennet's Civil Questions Insnaring and Trapanning Questions. i. e. Ʋgly Hard Questions! they are to be seen in Bur∣rough's works. They are very Sober and Pertinent Questions, therefore were Troublesome to Answer. But Truth is not Easily Insnar'd, nor is Afraid of Questions. These Rather make Truth appear the more. And it looks like Guilt, to Return Railing and Reviling: And that is the Method, which Will. Penn Condemns here as Anti-Chri∣stian. Yet concerning the aforesaid Railing of Burrough against Bennet, W. Penn says, p. 164. I warrant it, from God, and by the sence of His Eternal Spirit do Declare, That it was the Portion, and only fit Answer to be given to those Trapan∣ning Questions. What! Better than a Sober Solution to such Questions, let them be never so Trapanning? Had not this been the best way to have Discover'd their Deceit; and Convinc'd, or else Confounded the Adversary, and left him without Excuse? No. Says Will. Penn (ibid) Had Ed. Burrough gone into a familiar opening to his (Bennet's) Vulturous, Ʋnclean, Serpentine Eye — what then? E. B. had brought the wrath of the Eternal God upon Himself, instead of the Priest. Thus W. Penn. So that, sometimes, for the Qua∣kers to Answer Soberly, without Railing, is to bring the wrath of God upon Themselves! and that is, when such Insnaring and Trapanning Questions are put to them, as will not Admit of a Plain and Direct Answer, without Disco∣vering their Mystery of Iniquity. But that is not the Point now. It is not, what Excuse they may have for their Railing, which none
afford so Liberally to their Opponents as the Qua∣kers: But is not Railing, Railing, be it in whom it will? was not this Reviling in W. P. not on∣ly to Justifie the Revilings of E. B. in such an Extraordinary manner, as above; but, as if that had not been Enough, to Fall Himself upon Bennet, and call him Vulturous, Ʋnclean, Serpentine? Tho', after all their Malice, they cou'd find nothing worse to say of Mr. Bennet than his Opposition to the Quakers, and Discovering of their Errors, by his Ʋnmerciful Insnaring Questions, tho' Confess'd to be Civil. And the worse for that! Against which, they have An∣swer'd with their Teeth, and Broke them. But was this no Raling, no Reviling in W. Penn? No. Have a care of that! wou'd he have Exceeded the Rules of Meekness, and Charity; tho' Hicks or Bennet did it against their Friends, and some of them, who were Dead too? No. He Protests to the Contrary (ibid. p. 166.) God is my Record (says he) this Day, I wou'd not, to Inherit more worlds than ther are Stars in the Firmament, have so Violated the Laws of Charity, against the most violent of our Deceased Opposers. Therefore, who can believe that such a Good man as this wou'd Raile, or Revile any Body! And he did justly Correct T. Hicks, for slandering of him, as if he had Abetted the Railings of James Naylor against the Clergy; and more over, that he had Father'd it upon the Holy Spirit: and that neither he nor I (says W. P. p. 174.) have words enough to signifie our venom and Malignity. And what was the Reason of this Heavy Charge? only (as W. P. himself there gives it us) Because I said of Iames Nay∣lor's
Book, That if he had Treated that Accursed stock of Hirelings (the Clergy) ten Thousand times more sharply, it had been but Enough. That was All! And to be Accus'd of Railing or Reviling for this! But he went further in his Serious Apology, p. 156. And I wou'd say not Enough (continues he) but that the Reverence I bear to the Holy Spirit wou'd oblige me to Acquiesce in whatever He shou'd utter thro' any Prophet or Servant of the Lord. Here is Ascribing all their Railing to the Holy Spirit! But W. P. go's on (as before partly Quoted p. 34.) we have nothing for them (the Clergy) but Woes and Plagues, who have made Drunk the Nations, &c. see before p. 34. And how they Damn the Clergy, not only of the Present Age, but Through Ages past, and that Ʋniversally, as you will see in the Quotati∣on brought p. 34. out of his Guide Mistaken. Here are the Dead as well as the Living: And not only the Priests of the Church of England, but Ʋniversally, of all the Churches in the World. Yet W. P. wou'd not, God is his Record, this Day, for more Worlds than ther are Stars in the Firmament so Violate the Law of Charity, as to Raile, or Revile the most violent of their Deceased opposers! Here are Contrary Testimonies with a witness! And is ther no Contradiction in all this? No. Far from it! For this is one of the Main Heads, upon which he Proves Thom. Hicks not to be a Christian. In the same Reason against Railing. p. 124. thus. He that Contradicts himself, is not led by God's Spirit, and Consequently, No Child of God, nor Certain Rule of their own Faith: but so doth T. Hicks: therefore no Christian Man. I
will not say, How Patly this might be Retort∣ed. But I wou'd Recommend to W. Penn's second Thoughts, the Inference he makes against T. Hicks for all this, p. 167. No man can be secure of him in Common Converse, who, to Com∣pass his End, upon such as oppose him, will self-Contradict, Pervert, Ly, Forge: beyond which, in this World, is nothing but direct Murder. And that's a Question, since, in some cases, it were less Irksome to Dy, than to be Defamed. Is this doing as Men wou'd be done to? &c. Apply this to W. Penn's usage of the Church of England, and others, in what is above Quoted, and much more of the same strain, that might be Pro∣duc'd out of his Writings. What can we say, to Reconcile these things, but that the Quakers think None but Them∣selves have a Right to Raile? or that it is not Railing, if it comes from Them, but Pure Zeal and Godliness? thus, The Saints may do the same things, by The Spirit, in Sincerity, Which other men are Tempted to, And at the Devil's Instance do. All Piety consists therein In them, in other men all Sin. But I have an Apology for Mr. Penn, Which I think Real. He tells us, in his Reason against Railing. p. 171. That he was then about 29 years of Age. This was Printed An 1673. And his Guide Mistaken before Quoted p. 34. was Printed An. 1668. When he was but 24 years of Age. He was then in the Heat of Youth,
and a New Convert to Quakerism; And it is usual with such, to Exceed in Zeal. But since, he has had time to Cool. And his Conver∣sation, of Late years, so much at Court, has softn'd his Temper, and let him see the Defor∣mity of Rudeness and Scurrility (which has be∣faln most of the Quakers, Principally from their want of Breeding) Insomuch that I am very Apt to Perswade my self, He is Inwardly A∣sham'd of these things; and wishes they had never been wrote. And this appears much in the Difference of his Stile in his Address to Protestants, and more, in his Excellent Reflecti∣ons and Maxims, from that vehemence, not to say Rashness that Runs thro' all his Former writings. If it be said, why if I think thus, I shou'd Press so hard upon Mr. Penn now? why, truely, to Rescue him even by Force, from among That Ill-bred Pedantick Crew. He will not take these words ill, for a Reason he knows (Sauce for a Goose, is Sause for a Gan∣der) But they have Chain'd him with Popula∣rity (fond to get a Man of Sense of their Party) and, Perhaps, with Hopes of Ʋniversal Heirship. But these, I suppose, are not so Considerable to him, as to stand by all his former writings, and come under the Censure (now Repeated) which he (for much less Reason) has Pass'd upon T. Hicks. But, which is Infinitly of more weight, I Conjure him to Consider, what Account he must Give, before the Great Judge, if, by his Example, or Silence, not Publickly to Retract his Errors, he Confirm so many poor Souls, that have given up their Judgments to him, in those Destructive Doctrins (which he cannot
but Know to be such) who might otherwise, by God's Grace, Retrieve themselves; and Return, with him, into the Bosome of the Church, and Favour of God. For this Reason, I have Insisted so long upon Mr. Penn's Contradictions, and Contrary Testimonies: and Repeated some Quotations of those above, which are in the Sn. in Sat. Dis. and others of that Author's Books, yet in none of the Answers that are come out to them, is the least Notice taken, or any Defence made for the above Hard Sayings of Mr. Penn. Which cou'd not be Forgetfulness, they being so often Press'd, and so much stress laid upon them, more than of 20 times as much from those of the Common Herd. Therefore, ther is Conviction in the Case. And since ther must be Confession, and Satisfaction, before ther be Forgiveness, we must, in Charity, still Press on, till we bring that to Pass; or otherwise some Reasonable Defence of these Railing Accusations, which Mr. Penn has brought against all sorts of Christians, par∣ticularly the Church of England: or else, he must Submit, by the rule he has set down, to be no longer Reputed as a Christian. And it must be some other sort of Defence than he makes in his Reason against Railing, p. 175. Let us not be Esteemed Railers, because we Rebuk Railing: Nor our Religious Censure of their Per∣versions &c. be Accounted Reviling. 'Tis trouble enough to us, to be thus Concern'd in Controver∣sie—'Tis not our Choice, but theirs. They Be∣gan. Who Began with the Quakers? Did any Begin with them, Before they were in the World? Did not they Begin, who came into Churches, and
Markets, and Houses, Challenging all People to Dis∣pute with them (tho', of Late, they like not that Method) Did the Church of England Begin with them? why then all that Rancorous Railing, and Reviling of the Church of England? And must this be taken only as Religious Censures? And have the Quakers, has Mr. Penn, Rail'd at nothing, but only against Railing? he Con∣fesses P. Bennet did not Raile, yet Justifies the Bitter Railing that was Return'd to him. But suppose he had Rail'd, yet such sort of Ve∣nemous Answers is not Reason against Rail∣ling, but Railing against Railing: And this Excuse wou'd serve at Billings-Gate. There∣fore Mr. Penn must find some other Defence; or else Confess the Delusion of that Spirit, which has thus Led him to Practices, that himself Confesses Inconsistant with Christianity. And which look so Abhorrent in his Eyes, when he Be∣holds them in other men. And let him see, by this, and Consider, That that Light within, which he and others have mistaken for the Good Spirit of God, has been the Spirit of Wrath and Furie, which has taken Possession of them: And that the Light in them is Darkness. This, Likely, may Grate. But I hope it will Prove a Happy Disobligation to Mr. Penn. And for which, he may own more Obligation to the Author, than to those Sorry Flatterers, who Lick up his Spittle, and call it Infallible. Which Pretence, as he do's not Believe, so must he Disown, or else Justifie all the above Railings and Revilings. Or Thirdly, be Silent, which, in this Case, I believe, all the world will take as a Full Proof of Guilt and Self Condemnati∣on.
However, what has been said, will give the Reader a view what stress is to be laid upon this Method of the Quakers, in Answering Ob∣jections made against them, by Producing of Contrary Testimonies. Of which (having done with Mr. Penn, at Present) I will give a few more Instances. One I Hinted before, which may Properly be Mention'd here, for they will not take notice of it. And that is, III. If you object G. Fox, in his Iconoclastes, making it Heathenism and Idolatry to Paint the Likeness of any Creature upon a Sign; they can Reconcile this by shewing the Contrary Testimo∣nies of the Quakers Practise at this Day, who have Signs of Lyons, Bulls, Bears, &c. like the People of the World; nay more, They can Pro∣duce a Contrary Testimony, even at that Time when this Iconoclastes was Printed, of—a Qua∣ker, who, at the meeting of Sufferings, where this matter was Debated being of a Contrary opi∣nion from G. Fox, ask'd one of Fox's Party for a Piece of Money: And shewing it, told them that they must, by this Rule, throw away all their Money, because ther were Images upon them, of Men, Lyons, Flowers, &c. But this (tho' an Unanswerable Argument to them) yet cou'd not Prevail. And notwithstanding of all this, they will not own that they are all of them Idolaters, who have Money, or Signs of Bulls, Bears &c. no nor that G. Fox was Mista∣ken; Because he Dictated this as from the Mouth of the Lord God! as he did All that he wrote; and set down this as a standing Rule, That whoever speak, and not from the Mouth of the Lord, are False Prophets, and Conjurers, in
his Saul's Errand. p. 7. And his Answer to the Westmorland Petition. p. 5. And the Consequence is Undeniable, that the Present Quakers are Heathens and Idolaters, or otherwise that G. Fox their Great Apostle and Founder was a False Pro∣phet and a Conjurer. This is the use all Men of Sense can make of their Contrary Testimo∣nies, which they Produce as their Vindicati∣on. IV. Thus, if we object their not taking off their Hats, and paying Civil Honour to Men: They can shew the Contrary Testimony of their Dayly Practise, in making their Apprentices and Servants stand Bare in their Presence. The Mystery is, They are against Paying of Honour, but not against Receiving it. Especially from the Wicked, it is most Due from Them to the Saints! Therefore tho' they Thee and Thou the Worlds People, yet they do not care to be Thou'd by them. They Love very well to be Master'd and Mistress'd by them. And will say to them sometimes, when they call the Quakers (after their own fashion) by their Bare (I had almost said Christen'd) Names, why do'st thee speak our Language, seeing thee do'st allow of giving Titles? Thee shoud'st speak in the Language thee do'st approve of. V. Again, if you object the Common Place which All the Quakers Insisted upon so much, at the Beginning, when they were Poor, That it was Anti-Christian for any Man to Sue ano∣ther at Law; And a Plain mark of the Repro∣bate, and People of the World: In the Describ∣ing of whom, G. Fox, in his News out of the North. p. 19. Among many other Wicked and
Abominable Practises (as he Reckon'd them) sets this down as a Main one, These wicked Folks Are such (says he) as Sue Men at the Law, which Christ forbade. Yet now that the Quakers are Grown Rich, and have something to Sue for, They Sue as fast as the World's People. Yet this is no Contradiction to their Principle! No. But only a Contrary Testimony, to Clear the other when Objected. VI. 1. If you object their not observing of Times, Set apart by the Church, as Festivals &c. They can shew the Contrary Principle of their General Councils, their Yearly Meetings in London, which they always Appoint to be Celebrated in Whitson-Week, that being the Great Festival ordained to be kept in Memory of the Miracu∣lous Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the A∣postles, at the Feast of Pentecost. If it be said, That this time is appointed only upon Ac∣count of the Season of the Year, because the Quakers come yearly to attend this their most Solemn Meeting from Foreign Countries, even from the West-Indies. That Excuse will not do, for this Feast is Movable, sometimes a Months dif∣ference; And if they Respected only the Sea∣son of the Year, they wou'd keep to some Con∣stant Month that all might know: But that they shou'd Always stumble just upon Whitsun-Week, will not pass merely upon Chance: But their Reason is plainly, because they Pretend to the Greatest Effusions of the Holy Ghost, which they have made Peculiar to Themselves: And therefore keep their General Meetings in Whit∣sun-Week, and at no other time; which is a most Solemn Observation of that Great Festival
of the Church. And yet they Exclaim most Bitterly against the Observation of Times, as being Carnal, and forsaking of the Truth &c. Nay G. Fox, in his News out of the North. p. 23. Names Whitsuntide, with Christmas and Easter, among the Holy-Days which he Runs down. So that here are Contrary and Re-Con∣trary Testimonies. 2. They now Generally observe The Lord's Day for their Publick Worship: But if any shou'd object this, as an Observation of Times, they have Ancient Testimonies to Produce, where the Quakers have Preach'd and Printed against the observation of That Day, as Superstitious, Car∣nal &c. And Solomon Eccles, and others of their Prophets, have got themselves into Churches, be∣fore the People Met, and carry'd with them, a Pair of Briches, Gloves, or something of their Trades, and set themselves in the Pulpit, or up∣on the Communion-Table, and there were found busie at work, when the People came to Church; and some of them have Opened their Shops on that Day, purposely as a Contempt of the Day, and to bear their Testimony against it. Which G. Whitehead Vindicates in his Truth Defending the Quakers. Printed 1659. p. 20. 21. where he Repeats this Question that was put to him. Did that Quaker Sin therein or not, who brought lately on the Lord's Day an old Dublet into Dr. Gell's Church in London; and sat upon the Com∣munion Table, mending it, while the Doctor was Preaching, the Parishioners forbidding him? And his Answer is in these words. What, wilt thou Continue a Papist, that thou Countest it such a Great Crime to Work upon the Communion Ta∣ble,
as if it were a more Holy Place than another? And, like a Papist, thou callest the Steeple-House the Church; which thou hast no Scripture for. And if any Quaker did as thou sayest, whether thinkest thou, was his working there, or a Priest's Preaching for Money and setting forth his ware to Sale there (as in the Market-house) the Greater offence? And where do'st thou Read in Scripture, that men must do no work on the First days of the week? Thus he. Yet now the Quakers Cease from Work on that Day: And set up for the Observation of it, as well as others. Tho' formerly, they us'd to make up their Accounts on that Day, to Pay and Receive Money &c. which I can Prove from those to whom they have come up∣on that Errand. But to save them on all sides, the Quaker Infallible Spirit can go both ways, For and Against the Observation of the Lord's-Day: And Both as Directed by the same Spirit. Thus G. Fox Determins in what he calls An Epistle to All the Christian Magistrates and Powers in the whole Christendom. London. Prin∣ted An. 1659. p. 12. So all Friends (says he) of the Lord God, that be Moved to set open your Shops, or to do any work on the First Day, which the false Christians call their Sabbath— Do not ye Judge all that do not as ye do, that be not moved to do the Service as ye are to do that Day; And all that doth not do that service on that Day as ye do, as are not moved by the Power of the Lord God, do not Judge them that doth such a Service on that Day. Here he makes them the False-Christians who call the First-Day their Day of Sabbath or Rest. And if the calling it so be such a Crime, sure the Observation of it,
as such, must be much Greater. Yet he Graci∣ously gives the Quakers leave to be such False-Christians, if their Light so Direct. The mean∣ing is, That their Light is Equally Infallible when it Commands Contradictions! But he casts the Ballance against the Obser∣vation of the Christian Sabbath: only wou'd not have those Precious ones to be Judged who do Observe it. I cannot Refrain from giving you his Reason against the Observation of it, which is Worthy of his Infallibility! You will find it in his Great Mystery. p. 101. viz. That it was not the Se∣venth but the Eighth Day. That is, It was the Eighth of the Seven Days! Unless the Quakers make more than Seven Days in a Week. And if it was the Eighth Day, why do the Quakers call it the First Day? But it is well enough, if the Light so Direct! Was this too from The Mouth of The Lord! Yea Verily! or else G. Fox has Decreed Himself to be a Conjurer. But the best of it is, No body will believe him, who ever knew him, or have Read his Books. VII. 1. Let me give Another Instance of the Contrary Testimonies of the Quakers. At their first setting up, when they were Poor and Beg∣garly, it was their Constant Theam to Rail at Fine Houses, and Costly Furniture, particularly against Coaches, which they Despis'd, as the Fox did the Grapes that were out of his Reach. They made these the Infallible Marks of Pride, and of The worlds People. No man Denies but that Pride is a Sin: And that Men may be Proud of these things. But the Quakers made the Hav∣ing of these things, or Ʋsing of them to be Pride. They Puplish'd a Book with this Magni∣ficent
Title, The Trumpet of the Lord, Blown &c. An. 1655. which Begins thus, Wo unto you that are called Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, in respect to your Persons— who are called of men, Master, and Sir, and Mistriss, and Madam— And you must have your Wine and Ale, and all your Dainty Dishes— And you have your Fine Attire, Silk, Velvet, and Purple, Gold and Silver; and you have your waiting-Men, and wait∣ing-Maids under you to waite upon you; and your Coaches to Ride in, and your High and Lofty Horses— And here you are Lords over your fellow Creatures, and they must Bow and Crouch to you— And you will be called Masters— upholding that which Christ in his Doctrin forbids, who saith, Be not ye called Masters— The Lord abhors all your Profession— Your Works are the Works of the Devil —in your Dainty Dishes— in your Lofty Horses, in your Curious Buildings, in your Earthly Honour, which is all the fruits of the Devil— You are too High, and Fine, and too Lofty to Enter in at the straight Gate &c. Yet now, None are more High and Fine grown than the Quakers! None have more Dainty Dishes, and Curious Buildings! None wear Finer Silk and Velvet! They have their Wine and Ale too! Their Lofty Horses, yea v∣rily, and their Coaches to boot! They have their Waiting-Men, and Waiting-Maids! And are Master'd and Mistress'd by them, without fear of that Command, Be not ye call'd Masters! For the Case is Alter'd quoth Plouden. They had then, poor Souls, None of these Tentations. G. Fox was known by the Name of The man with the Leathern Briches: which he tells full oft in his Journal. And his first Followers had, few of them, a Tatter to their Taile. Tho' they came
after to upbraid others by the Name of Thread∣bare Tatterdemallions (See Sn. p. 200.) They were their own waiting-Men and waiting-Maids! And Rode upon their own Hobby-Horses! None of them had been in the In-side of a Coach! That was an Exaltation far above their Thoughts! As were Fine Houses and Furniture, to those who Pigg'd in Barns or Stables, and un∣der Hedges! Therefore they Rail'd at all these Fine things, because they had None of them; or ever Hop'd to have. Silly, Dirty Draggle-Tayls! And Nasty Slovens! But now grown Fine and Rampant! Yet still Pretend to keep to their Ancient Testimonies! To be the same Poor in Spirit, and Self-Deny'd Lambs, they were at the Beginning! Tho' they Now stive to out-do their Neighbours both in Fine Houses and Furniture. They have got Coaches too! Ay marry! But you must not call them Coaches, for that Name they had vilify'd, and given it for a Mark of the Beast. But, as one of them said, when his Coach was objected to him, as Contrary to their Ancient Testimonies, he Re∣ply'd, That it was not a Coach, only a Leathern-Convenience. Like the Traveller who told that they had no Knives in France: And being ask'd How they cut their Meat? Said, with a certain thing they call a Couteau. I cou'd Enlarge upon Quotations out of the Ancient Testimonies of the Quaker Authors a∣gainst Fine Houses, Coaches &c. But I am afraid of tyring the Patience of the Reader. There∣fore shall Content my self with one more, for it is a Pleasant one. 2. Ther was nothing they Inveg'd against more severely than the use of Periwigs. G. Fox
had a Mind to be a Nazarite, like Samson, and wore Long streight Hair like Rats-Tayls, just as Muggleton did. But Will. Penn coming in a∣mong the Nasty Herd, cou'd not so easily forget his Genteel Education. He first Began with, Bor∣ders: at last came to plain Wiggs. And after his Example, it is now become a General Fashi∣on among the Quakers to wear Wiggs. G. White∣head himself is come into it. Therefore I must Mind them of their Ancient Testimonies against it. Of which I have Annex'd one in the Col∣lection. N. 7. Because it is short and very Ex∣traordinary for the Learning, Wit, and Quaker vein of Poetry. It will be an Entertainment for the Reader. But I wou'd not Force it upon him, therefore I have put it, where he may Read it, or Let it alone. There the Quakers make the wearing of a Wig to be downright Sin and Confusion. And bring several Texts of Scripture to Prove it. They Compare those that wear them to Hermophradites, and (for Rime) to Catamites. Nay they make them Calvinists, to shew their Wit: and that you might not lose the Jest, they put Calvus, Bald upon the Margin. So all that Shave their Heads are Calvinists. This too was from the Mouth of The Lord! They Abuse the Clergy for wearing Wiggs, ay and of a Light Colour too! That was Abomination! Especially if the Hair was Crisped or Curled! That they make a severe Aggravation! They shou'd have put in Clean too. For G. Fox his Heart-break∣ers were Long, Slank, and Greasie. It has been observ'd of Great Enthusiasts, that their Hair is Generally Slank, without any Curl: Which proceeds from a Moisture of Brain,
Inclines to Folly. It was thus with Fox and Muggleton. But the Quakers Wiggs now hinder us from the Observation. And Will. Penn, G. Whitehead &c. wear not only Fair, but Curl'd Wiggs. For none other are Made. They shou'd set up some Quaker Wigg-makers, to make them Wiggs of Downright Plain Hair, without the Prophane Curl of the Worlds People. It wou'd best fit the Quakers Plainess, and Down-right∣ness, or Right-downess. I Recommend to W. Penn, G. Whitehead, and the Rest of the Wigg∣ed Quaker Preachers, these sweet Lines of their Poet Laureat, out of his foresaid Declaration a∣gainst Wiggs. What wonder Women wear Gay Gold and Pearls, When Men Religious wear Gold Locks of Girls? Should Christian Guides affect a Whorish Guise? &c. Then they put the Question, whether Wiggs ought to be Permitted in Case of Health, when it may be Necessary to cut off ones Hair? And it is Rul'd in the Negative. That they must rather go Bald. This pretence for Pride (say they) is no better than what is for Drunkeness and Whore∣dom. And they Propose the Example of Elisha, who (as they have found it out) wore no Wigg, when the Children call'd him Bald-Head! And they do not beleve that Peter or Paul wore Wiggs! For if they had, then (say they very Smartly) The Women Christians might have Re∣torted upon them thus, Was that the Cause, Pe∣ter and Paul, that you bad Ʋs leave off our Locks, that you, and such like, might get them your Selves, to make Periwiggs of? Now may not the Inno∣cent
Lasses and Daughters of Sion make the same Repartee upon Will. Penn and G. Whitehead? Was it for this Cause, Good William and George &c. They Examin another Excuse for Wiggs. viz. Some say, shaving is to Prevent the Pox. To which they Answer, Small honour to wig∣wearers, to Incur such a suspicion of it. This suspici∣on comes Near some of the most Able Holders∣forth among the Quaking-Friends. See Sn. p. 4.7. I know not whether G. Archer, or if C. Atkin∣son wore a Wigg: But he might have had Oc∣casion for it, from what you will find in the Sn. p. 43. &c. And a Quaker said lately at the Conference in Norfolk, That he was at Last Hanged for a High-way-Man. (A pretty Life and Death for a Quaker Apostle!) And there∣fore that they did Disown him. It was full time! They will Quit any of their Friends at the Gallows. But they will not yet Disown his Books, which G. Fox, G. Whitehead &c. have Defended and owned. For then they must disown Fox, Whitehead, Howgil, and Burrough, &c. who wrote a Preface to one of his Books, call'd The Standard of the Lord: And with 15 or 16 more of the Eminent Quakers, Subscrib'd to it. And they never Disown'd any of Atkinson's Books, but Defended and Justify'd them, when the Professors brought Quotations out of them. But to Return. In that Precious Declaration against Wiggs, it is said, That the Apostles went with Sandabs, and a Single Coat, whose Examples the famousest Primitive Christians followed— yea, and Primitive Quakers too! who Generally went Bare-foot, because they had no Shoos: And few of them
were Worth Two Coats, or had one Good one. Which might have been one of the Causes, why they brought up the fashion of going Nak∣ed; And they Urg'd the Example too of the Prophets for that! They Boast (ibid.) how John Millner, a Friend about Northampton, a Wigg-maker, left off his Trade, and was made to Burn one in his Prenti∣ces sight, and Print against it. And that John Hall, a Gentleman of Northumberland, being Con∣vinced, sitting at a Meeting, was shaken by the Lords Power, Pluck'd off, and threw down his Wigg. &c. When shall we see such a Power in the Qua∣ker-Meetings now? To see their Wiggs fly about, or left for Mops to clean the House, and they come out all Elisha's! They must do this, or else Renounce their Ancient Friends, and their Precious Testimonies. Else that is not True, which they say in their yearly Epistle for the year 1696, That what their Light Convinced them of to be Evil in the Beginning, it Reproves still. For it Convinced them of these things, Fine-Houses, Coaches, Wiggs, &c, That they were very Evil! In The Trumpet of the Lord Blown, before Quoted, p. 2. They made All those to be mere Heathens who us'd these things, especially the Priests who Suffer'd them. Thus say they, And you say, he is a Minister of Christ, and he saith you are Christians, Whereas you are All Heathens, both Priest and People. And so sure were the Quakers then of the Truth of this, And of the Force of these their Doughty Arguments, That they say (ibid.
p. 5.) And if you will not believe this, you wou'd not believe Dives and he shou'd Rise from the Dead. Yet ther are not now more Dives's among any sort of People than the Quakers! They are Rich, and fare Sumptuously. And they Direct these their Dictates to Christ Himself; for thus say they (ibid.) To the Light in all your Consciences I speak. Now they make this Light to be Christ, and God Himself. And thus they take upon them to Instruct and Teach the Light! This Confounds All their Preaching and Teaching. For has the Light, has Christ need of being Taught by Them! But this belongs to another Head. And is spoke of in Prim. Heres. to which this Appendix is said to be an Answer. But says nothing to it. Therefore I Return, and go on with the Present Subject. VIII. Their Primitive Principle was, That none shou'd Preach or Pray but as the Spirit mov'd them. And they brought it as an Argument against all other Professions, that they did not Preach &c. by the Spirit, because they had set and stated Times for it, as if the Spirit were oblig'd to come at their Appointment. Yet now the Spirit moves Them just at such Times as they Appoint: And they have their Stated Days and Hours of Worship like other Peo∣ple. IX. They now Swear in the same Terms, which before they Declar'd to be a Direct Oath; and yet Pretend to stand still to their former Prin∣ciple against the Lawfulness of taking an Oath▪ See Sat. Dis. Sect v. N. vii. p. 54.
It wou'd be Endless to Pursue their Contra∣dictions, see a Catalogue that Mr. Peniman has Printed of them. This I hope will be sufficient to shew, that the Method taken in this Antidote and Ap∣pendix, of bringing Contrary Testimonies, is no Clearing of the Objections brought against the Quakers, while they Refuse to Disown those Heresies &c. which are plainly Prov'd upon them. It is as if a Man Accus'd of Treason shou'd bring Testimonies where he spoke Ho∣nourably of the King; but did not offer to Dis∣prove any Part of the Evidence brought a∣gainst him. Double meanings and Cross-purposes.4. Ther is another Method of Great service to the Quakers, in Answering their Adversaries, and Deceiving of them, which is The Double-Meanings they have in their words: whereby, tho' they speak the same Words that you do; and know your Meaning fully in them: yet they Mean them in a Quite Different Sense: And so, in Quakers Plainess, make their Escape! But ther being so much said of this, in the First Part §. v. p. 9. &c. I need Add no more here; tho' I cou'd Exemplify this their Arti∣fice in Many other Instances, were I not Ten∣der of the Reader's Labour, and Mine own. And that I think these are sufficient, at least, till Answer'd. Ther is Another Trick of the Quakers, may come in with this Head; And I cannot give it a Better Name, than Cross-Purposes, that is, They will not Answer Directly, but, as we say, About the Bush. But ther is always a Reason for it, when they so do. Thus if you Ask them,
whether they are Perfect, even as God? They will Answer, Be ye Perfect as your Heavenly Fa∣ther is Perfect. And, As He is, so are we in this World. If you Ask whether the very Body of Christ, Flesh, Blood and Bones, be in them? They will Answer, We are Bone of His Bone, and Flesh of His Flesh. If you ask, How they Understand these Scriptures? whether Strictly and in a Literal Sense? They will Answer, Let him that Readeth Ʋnderstand. And, He that hath Ears to Hear, let Him Hear. And no other satisfaction will you get from them. But the meaning is, They Dare not Assert their Blasphemies Broad-Fac'd: And wou'd thus Hide them. But this shews them Plain; And to what Sense they wrest the Scriptures, which they thus Quote. These are the sort of Answers you will Generally find in Fox's Gr. Mystery. But we know what they Hold, by what they Oppose. Of a Kin with this, is their never failing Allegories, by the Force of which they can Wrest any Text in Scripture, From or To what Mean∣ing they Fancy. Much has been said as to this Point, in their turning the Humanity of Christ, His Birth, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascen∣sion; the Resurrection of our Bodies, and Future Judgment; with the Sacraments of Baptism and The Lord's Supper, and other outward Ordinan∣ces, into an Inward and Allegorical Sense, to the Total overthrow of the Whole Christian Faith. I find some Pleasant Instances of this Kind, in William Haworth his Quaker Converted to Chri∣stianity. An. 1674. p. 7. 8. of his Prefatory Epistle to John Crook. Where the Quakers turn
this Text, He brought his Son out of Egypt, thus, out of the Egyptian Darkness of our Hearts. And this, The only Begotten Son, thus, Begotten in Ʋs. And speaking of those who were Beheaded for the Testimony of Jesus, they Explain it thus, That to part with Carnal Wisdom and Reasonings, that is Beheading. And thus we must Allow what they so much Boast in, viz. That they have Beheaded their Carnal Wisdom and Reason∣ing. And it is a very full Proof of it which Mr. Haworth tells us ibid. p. 3. I told (says he) Christopher Taylor (a Quaker who Disputed with him) What Will. Penn said to a Friend of mine. viz. That G. Fox was as Good a Prophet as Isaiah. And Taylor did not Deny it, but did Affirm it likewise. Nay the Quakers must think so, Mr. Penn must think so, if He or They believe the Half of what He and They have written of George Fox, particularly in the Preface to his Journal. Their Reason, Mr. Penn his Wisdom and Reasoning was Beheaded, Murder'd, Drawn and Quarter'd, when he cou'd believe thus of so Consummated a Brute as this Fox. And, which is more strange, he must, by the same Rule, think thus of Himself. See in the First Part. p. 32, 33. the Qua∣ker-Interpretation of Gal. iii. 13. Cursed is Eve∣ry one that Hangeth on a Tree. i. e. on the Tree of Knowlege, that is, what Knowlege is got by the outward Carnal means of Hearing, Reading, Ca∣techising &c. Tho' they cou'd bring Contrary Testimonies to this, of Their own Hearing, Read∣ing, Catechizing &c. But here is that Carnal thing of Knowlege, Wisdom, Reason (their Mor∣tal Foe) Hang'd and Crucify'd, as before they
had Beheaded it. Here is Their Plain, Easie, Natural way of Interpreting the Scripture! But why shou'd it be Natural? For the Natural Man knoweth not the things of God! And the Let∣ter Killeth! Therefore they will take Nothing according to the Letter. But they Mistake the Letter, or the Spelling sometimes. As one that I have seen, who late∣ly being Press'd with Christ being so often call'd The Son of Man in the Gospel: And that their Light within, cou'd in no Sense, according to their Notion of it, be call'd the Son of Man, seeing they believe it to be God and Christ from Everlasting: The Quaker Answered very Gravely, Ah Friend, ther is much in those words. Mind, mind them! then Pointing upwards to the Sun, said, The Sun of Man, that is, The Light of Man, or the Light in Man. And so the Mat∣ter was solv'd! Another of their Preachers, Holding forth in a Publick Meeting, (I can Produce witnesses) ob∣viating that Text 1 Thess. iv. 17. We shall be Caught up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, did thus Learnedly Expound, We must meet the Lord, in the Heir, that is, in the Light, which is Christ, who is the Heir of All things. Another speaking of the Resurrection of the Body; And ha∣ving heard some say, That we shall then have An∣gelical Bodies. Thence Prov'd that the same Body which Dies, do's not Rise again: Because our Bodies now are not made of Angelico; As it is said they will be then, being Angelical Bodies. This is like what is told in Sat. Dis. p. 42, 43. of Another of their Preachers mistaking that Text Joh. xiv. 2. In my Father's House are many Mansions, where instead of Mansions he cry'd
Manchets; And thence Improv'd what a Good House God kept, There was Plenty of Bread, many Manchets! And Another Applying that Text Matth. xi. 30. My yoke is Easie, and my Burden is Light, to the Light within. I cou'd Multiply upon such Fooleries of the Quaker-Infallibility. But you must Excuse such Blunders in their Learned Clerks: for many of them Learn by the Ear, and not by the Eye; They cannot Read, And so know not the Difference of words which sound alike, as Son and Sun, Air and Heir &c. This is one of the Reasons that they Play with Us at Cross-Purposes, and is one of their Glo∣rious Methods in Answering what is Wrote against them.Not to take an An∣swer. Upon which I will Insist here no Long∣er. But go to the Next. 5. Another Method they have in Answering, is, never to take an Answer. But to Insist up∣on the same thing over and over again, with∣out taking any Notice of the Answers that are Made to them, of which some Instances are given above. And then, on the other hand, if they Pub∣lish any thing which they call an Answer to such a Book; if any thing in that Book, tho' not touch'd at all in the Answer, shou'd after be objected, they Cry, that is Answer'd already, Confuted, overthrown &c. Thus in this Appendix p. 10. the Quakers say no more to all those several Charges which are laid against them in the Sn. And, to save Re∣petition, Referr'd to in Primitive Heresie, but, That these Charges are, near All of them, already Answered by George Whitehead in the Antidote.
This was spoke a little Guiltily. Near All of them. That confesses ther were Some not An∣swer'd. If you mean a Fair and Full Answer, then the truth is, not one of them is Answer'd. But ther are a Great Many, and not Near All that are not so much as once Mention'd, or the least Notice taken of them in that Antidote; and these of the Greatest Consequence, yet this must serve for an Answer to them All! And to afford this Appendix to say, in the same place, That His Abuses and Falsities are therein lay'd at his Door. Yet is ther not one Abuse or one Falsity in the Sn. made appear in either the Antidote or this Appendix. Thus that Author's Discourse concerning Baptism is serv'd. At the end of the Antidote ther are not two Leaves spent upon it, with this Title, Some Notice taken of the said Author's Discourse for Water Baptism. And it is Some No∣tice indeed, it is Nam'd and Rayl'd at, that is all. Not one of his Arguments Consider'd, or Objections Answer'd. Yet this passes among the Quakers as a Full Confutation. And when I have urg'd something out of this Book to some of them, they have said, O that is Answer'd, tho' not one word of it in this Some Notice of Whitehead's. And this Appendix p. 34. speak∣ing of it, says, In which Chapter, the Malice and Impertinency of that Discourse is somewhat shewn. Here is a Somewhat again, to save their Credit. But they tell not What! for that they cou'd not. Yet that Discourse is Answer'd, and there is an End of it! It is very Easie Answering Books, at this Rate. And shews the Quaker-Cause to be past a Defence, only something they must say, to Amuse their Implicit Followers, and
those who will not be at the pains to Read what they write, and Compare it with what is wrote against them. Will. Penn, at the End of his Primitive Chri∣stianity, spends Eight Sections to Enumerate their Exceptions against the Church of England. And, these being the Causes of their Seperation, are Particularly but Briefly Reply'd to, at the Close of Primitive Heresie. p. 30, 31. and 32. And one wou'd think this a very Material Point, for the Quakers to Justifie their Seperation. The Appendix concludes with a Reply to this. Which I will set down Every word, to save the Read∣er the Pains of going thither for it. Thus then it follows. He now Numbers up in Page 30, 31, 32. di∣vers things, wherein he wou'd fain have the Church and Ʋs agree, they not being sufficient (as he says) for Seperation. This Man is of a very Changeable Humor, in his Title, and for near all the Book, we are sad Hereticks, but now he wou'd have us Associ∣ates, which if we will not be, he gives us a Threat∣ning Advertisement, that he will Trump up more Heresies upon us. Well, in that let him do as God shall permit; But of two things he may be assured, that we shall have no Communion with his Lies, nor he true Peace in Persisting in them. Thus the Appendix ends. And ther is not one Syllable more in Defence of all the Alledg'd Causes of their Seperation. Yet this is call'd an Answer to Primitive Heresie; And it comes in but by the By as an Appendix to G. Whitehead's Anti∣dote. So now that Book Prim. Heres. is Answer'd too! And if you shou'd urge any of the Answers there given to the Causes which the Quakers Pretend to Justifie their Seperation and Schism
from the whole Catholick Church, They wou'd say, O that Book of Prim. Heres. is Answer'd. And so their Cause stands Good and Firm! Thus Easily do they Impose upon Themselves; and wou'd Deceive the World, if they cou'd. I might give many more Instances of this Kind, indeed thro' All their Answers. But I cannot stay. Their Pre∣tending tha the Quotati∣ons brought out of their Books are not Full; be∣cause more than what is Perti∣nent is not Quoted.6. I must come to another Egregious Trick which they use; when Quotations are brought out of their Books so Express and Full that no∣thing can be Answer'd to them, then they look and see if ther be nothing else spoke of in the Place Quoted, besides that which is brought a∣gainst them: of which they can seldom miss in their own Writings, which are all Confus'd and Huddl'd, a hundred things together with∣out Head or Tail. And then if the Objector brings only that which is Proper to the Sub∣ject he is upon, as he ought to do, to avoid Confusion, they Cry out that they are falsly Quoted. Why? because (forsooth) the whole is not Quoted, tho' All be Quoted that is Per∣tinent to the Subject; which is all that ought to be Quoted, and more wou'd be a Fault. Thus in Prim. Heres. p. 10. where the Sub∣ject was the Quakers Contempt of Baptism, a Quotation is brought out of Edw. Burrough's works p. 190, 191. where he Reckons up se∣veral things as Damnable Heresies, such as calling the Steeple-House a Church, saying that Singing David's Experiences in Metre, was singing to the Praise of God, and other like Perilous things! Among the Rest he Names Sprinkling of In∣fants (as they Contemptuously call Baptism) and not only Reckons this among the other Dam∣nable
Heresies, but says that to say Sprinkling In∣fants with Water— is Baptism into the Faith of Christ, this is the Doctrin of the Devil. And this is thus Quoted in Prim. Heres. Now what says the Appendix to this? Do's it Deny the Quotation, or any word of it? No. What then? it says p. 33. That ther are seve∣ral things left out. That is true. For they did not belong to the present Subject, which was Baptism. But is not all that is said of Baptism, in that Quotation? And is it not Nam'd there among the Damnable Heresies? And is it not said of Baptism particularly, i. e. the Sprinkling of Infants, and calling it a Baptism in∣to the Faith of Christ, that This is the Doctrin of the Devil? Yea. None of all this is Deny'd. What objection then can be made, that other things, which were not the Subject in hand, shou'd be left out; And which wou'd have Confus'd the Subject more, if they had been in? You shall see. Appendix says That as the words lie in the Charge, they are not like E. B's. words. Why, are they not his very Words? Yea. But they are not Like them! It says further, The Snake has here declar'd himself an Enemy to well-plac'd slops, and given us to Ʋnderstand, that he more Merits Advancement in Spain than in England. Why, what's the Matter now? Don't they Love Well-plac'd stops in Spain! As sure as can be, here was some Reflection meant a∣bout Popery! It is a Delicat Simile, if Bays knew how to Apply it. He was very Bigg with it, he cou'd not keep it till the time of its Birth, but threatens us with it two Pages before, he says, in the former Chapter p. 31. I shall anon
Prove him (this Snake) to be a Splitter of Sentences, an Enemy to Colons and Semi-Colons— This Appen. brought in to shew his Learning, and that he had lodg'd one night next Door to a Grammer School. Yet he looks a little Abash'd; 'Tis a Hopeful Lad—He says his Lesson delicatly—Come don't Cry, don't be Asham'd—Give me a Blow, and I will Beat 'em—What do they Laugh? Did they do it? Did they vex him? Come,The Direc∣tion of a Quakers Letter to one John Church, at the Sun, in Friday∣street near the Church yard. let us hear how your Master at Wansworth do's Dictate to your Pre∣cious youth. Sit down. Write Boys. For John Steeple-House, (Comma) in Sixth-Day Street; (Semi-colon) at the Sign of the Great Light: (Co∣lon) near the Grave-yard. There is the Punctum, the Full stop: Admirationis! Captus, Capta, Cap∣tum— O the Learning of Colons and Semi-Colons! O ye Splitters of Sentences! But Come, All Play will not do. We must to School again. How Towardly soever you have been at your Colons and Semi-Colons, you were put too soon to your Latin, or to soon Left it: And as Men are often Fondest of what they are worst at, you had not the wit to Conceal it! You had a Mind to have some Learning in your Book, that the Poor Quakers might hold up their Hands, and Bless themselves for that sight a∣mongst them! But what shift did you make? Did you make any Latin of your own? No. Hold there! That belong'd to the Form above you. What then? Did you Translate any thing into Latin? No, nor that neither. This is sad Teazing! But you took pains to Copy out a Latin Quotation out of Bishop Jewel's Apology. Was it any thing to the Purpose of your Dispute? It will not be Foreign to the
Present Case (says Appen.) what was that Case? it was, that Idolatry do's not Ʋn-Church, which he opposes. Is ther any thing of it, in the Quotations he brings out of Bishop Jewel? No, not a scrap. It was only shewing the Charg∣es of the Church of Rome against the Protestants. What use do the Quakers make of this? why, they say, that as the Protestants were wrong∣fully Charged, so are they. Do they offer to Prove this; or shew how their Cases were a∣like? No, not a word, only say (Appen. p. 4.) Hence we may have at least this Consolation, that we are not therefore Villanously Criminal, because Villanously Charged. They might have gather'd the same Consolation from the Tryal and Bar∣barous Regicide of King Charles I. wherein they Glory'd. (Sn. p. 220, 221.) But no mat∣ter for their Consolations, they can take them off a Broom-stick. We are now upon their Learning, wherein they Begin to Boast. One of the Quotations they make is p. 2, 3. of Appen. (they wou'd set it in the Front) And tho' they had nothing to do, but to Trans∣scribe out of Bishop Jewel's Book, yet, to shew how well they understood it, there are these Blunders in it. Bishop Jewell. Appen. Deo ipsi bellum face∣re— Deo ipse bellum face∣re— Laxare fraena—ad omne genus licentiae. Laxare fraenae ad omni genus— Nos ab Ecclesia Catholica defecisse— Nos ab Ecclesiae Catho∣licae defecisse.
Bishop Jewell. Appen. Ceremonias—meliori∣bus temporibus appro∣batas. Caeremonias—meliori∣bus temporis approba∣tus. For Oecumenici, Ocumenici, and such like we will forgive them, these are Hard things! But p. 8. of Appen. ther is another Quotation, in like manner Ignoramus'd. Bishop Jewell. Appen. Cum proximis istis Vi∣ginti annis— Cum proximis isti Vi∣ginti— Cumque res ipsa pro se loquatur— Cum; res ipso— Etiam postremo in Re∣gum jam Aulas & Palatia pervenerint. In Regnum jam Au∣las— Principes qui a sede Ro∣mana defecerunt. Principes quia a se∣de— Besides Impelente for Impellente; in Crementa for Incrementa, leaving out words, as for haec ipsa satis illis magna Indicia esse possunt, to say only satis magna esse possunt. And such like small matters! This is all the Latin in the Appen. except two words. p. 7. wherein they had as ill Luck, they had heard of Piae fraudes, and going to the Dictionary, to be sure, they found Piè, and Guessing that ther was some Mystery in that Dash over the è, and to shew their Ex∣actness and Nicety in Criticising, they put down in Italick Letters Piè fraudes: And in the same line Impiè fraudes.
But Hang this Human Learning! All our Fore-Fathers, the Poor, Silly, and, God help 'em, Ignorant Quakers, made it a Mark of the Beast; because they had none of it. Sour Plumbs! And we, to their Disgrace, must now run a Hanckering after it; set up our Schools, yea and hope for a College in time, to Learn that vain Philosophy! we Reform Backward! like a man in a Cock-boat Towing back a Ship under Sail; This Wicked World even Draws us after it, and we Learn its Fashions, instead of bring∣ing Them to Ours! They have not yet Learn∣ed the Pure Language of Theeing and Thouing, unless to Laugh at it: We are come to their Colons and Semi-Colons, and they Laugh at us too! We shew our Parts in Latin, and they Ridicule us! We wou'd be at their Fine Hard Modish words too, as Appen. p. 1. Opining, and Epoch. Nay even where we make Non∣sense of them to bring them in, as p. 6. I will tell him he is Dogmatically False. That's my Man! 'Twas Bravely said! Now Fillip—and Scipp as many Lengths of thy self as a Flea. This Monster's Excellent Company! But I must Leave him. So much for Fooling. Ther's no avoiding of it, in their Conversation. Next their Learning upon Colons, Semi-Co∣lons, and well plac'd stops to get Rid of a Troublesome Quotation, and Rescue a Hero at a Dead-lift (as Pallas came in shape of Rust) they I Deny your Quotation, if ever you Stop at all. And say, why did you not go on? Yes, that is, Transcribe a whole Book, if you Quote one word out of it. Thus in Prim. Heres. p. 10. G. W. is Quoted for his late
moderation towards the Sacraments, in his An∣tidote. p. 114. where he says, That they do not Censure or Condemn those who are Conscientiously Tender in the observation thereof, for Practising that which they believe is their Duty, either in Breaking of Bread, or Water Baptism. To this says Appen. p. 34. That G. W.'s words are Imperfectly Quoted, and neither Fully nor Tru∣ly given. Not Fully? Why? Appen. Sets down there half a Page more of what follows these words, which is a Running out upon their No∣tions of the Inward and Spiritual Baptism. And what is this to the business? That Author had a mind to shew only what Allowances the Qua∣kers Now make, on their behalf who Conscienti∣ously Partake of the Outward or Water-Baptism. And his Quotation was Full, as to that. But why was not this Quotation Truly given? Be∣cause not Fully, for the Reason above. Thus that Quotation is laid aside! And not without Great Vaunting of their having Discover'd the Certain knowledge of thy Baseness (say they to the Author) from thy Maiming of this Place. But they had Reason to be Concern'd at this Quotation, since they had not Sincerity enough to own the Truth. For their Great business at Present is to Persuade the world, That they have never Alter'd or Chang'd their Principles since they were first a People. Because they set up first upon the Infallible Guidance of the Holy Spirit; and that Every thing they spoke was the Immediate Dictate of the Holy Ghost; and they stand upon the same to this Day. Now Changing and Contradicting will not Fadge with
this. Therefore this Appen. Labours mainly to Prove that they never have Chang'd, as p. 6. Our Principles are now no other than what they were, when we were first a People, for Truth Changes not. And p. 53. I have before shewed, that our Princi∣ples are now no other than what they were when first a People. And Preface p. 3. What we now Profess, is no other than what we did. &c. This has been Dis-prov'd in a great Many Instances. But let us try one more in this Quotation, with which they are so Angry; and then you will see the Reason of their Displea∣sure. Is this Moderation which G. W. has now, at last, put on towards the Holy Sacraments, no other than what they Profess'd from the Beginning? How then came they to Excomunicate any for Receiving of Baptism? as for Instance, John Cox. And call'd it, a Drawing back to the Weak and Beggarly Elements. Come, Friends, speak out in Plainess, and tell Us, wou'd you own any for a True Quaker who shou'd Re∣ceive Baptism, and frequent the Holy Sacrament of The Lord's Supper? wou'd you neither Cen∣sure not Condemn them, if they made a Conscience of it, as their Duty? Wou'd you have Greater Tenderness towards these than for William Wil∣kins, whose Excommunication is put in the Col∣lection, at the End of this, for Marrying one that was not a Quaker, and for Marrying by a Priest? Was this a greater offence than the Receiving of the outward Baptism? But, in good Earnest, did you never Cen∣sure or Condemn Baptism? Is this new Modera∣tion of G. W.'s no other than what you always did Profess? In the Quotation before brought
of Edw. Burrough's, it is Rank'd amongst the Damnable Heresies, even to the Denying the Lord who bought Ʋs. And it is call'd, The Doctrin of the Devil. And p. 644. of his Works he says, That it is not Lawful for the Saints of God, to Join themselves to your Ordinances. Yet now G. W. will let them go, and neither Censure nor Condemn them. He has forgot a Book of his own, to which he gave this Title. The Autho∣rity of the true Ministry, in Baptizing with the Spirit; And the Idolatry of such men as are Doting about shadows and Carnal Ordinances, and their Ignorance of the Spirits Baptism (of which water-Baptism was but a Figure) Discover'd. And herein is shewed, that Water-Baptism is neither of Necessity to Salvation, nor yet is now Practised either by Authority from Heaven, or by any New-Testament Law that is in force upon Believers; seeing the Substance and the End of things Abolished is come and Enjoyed, wherein the Types Shadows and Figures are Ended. Yet George now will neither Censure nor Condemn them if they be Conscientiously Tender in the Observation of these Abolished Types and Shadows, tho' he calls it Ido∣latry, nay and Doting Idolatry! yet these men never Vary'd! they always said the same, since they were first a People, that they say now! Appen. p. 5. slighting all the Authorities brought for Baptism in Prim. Her. within the first 150 years after Christ (they care for no Antiquity or Fathers) says, Indeed if he can ab∣solutly Determin the Question by the Scriptures, the work is done. And yet in the Discourse of Bap∣tism, the Arguments are all Limited only to the Holy Scriptures; and (for any thing the
Quakers have said to the contrary) the Question is there Absolutely Determin'd. They Referr to a Book of one Dell against Baptism. This is their Great Assylum. Yet he was not a Qua∣ker, he was one of the Professors, whom they call Children of Darkness, and Damn them All to the Pit of Hell; And a Cambridge Schollar too! another Mark of Reprobation with them; and yet they fly to this Man, to Help their Light against the Divine Institutions of our Blessed Saviour. And they have Printed and Re-Printed this Book, as oft as they have been Attack'd upon this Point of Baptism. And out it has come since the Discourse of Baptism was Publish'd: This made me Curious to look into it. And there I found not one Objection but what is fully Answer'd in that Discourse. Tho' I am satisfy'd that Author had never seen it, before that Discourse was Printed. Yet still they Re∣ferr to that Book; which is only a Put-off, be∣cause they have nothing to say; and shews them to be Self-Condemn'd. Their Ap∣pealing from their own Prin∣ted Books, to the Ori∣ginal Co∣pies.7. They have yet another Contrivance (which is the Prettiest of all) to avoid the Quotations brought out of their Books. When none of the former ways will do, then they say, They have not the Book, as if they cou'd not come at their own Books! or otherwise they Appeal from the Print (tho' themselves have Publish'd it) to the Original Copy; which if Extant, none can have but Themselves. Yet they do not Produce the Copy, or tell how it is worded there, or that it is otherwise than in the Print.
Thus p. 9. of the Prim. Heres. ther is a Bloody Quotation out of a Book of G. Fox's call'd News out of the North. p. 14. where he makes it as unlawful to Return to Baptism, as to Circumcision; and calls the Lord's Supper, The Table of Devils, and Cup of Devils, which is in the Generation of Serpents, &c. and p. 39. where he Denies the Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John to be the Gospel, and calls them Carnal, &c. To this says Appen. p. 32. I cannot Exa∣min it, not having the Book by me; but I much Question the Truth of the Quotation. And this is all that is said to it. Now I can assure the Reader that this Quotation was taken out of the Book it self, and not from any second hand. And will he believe that this Book (which is Common enough, for I have seen more than one of them) cou'd not be Pro∣cur'd among the whole Quaker Sanhedrin? or that, if this Quotation were much Question'd, the Quakers are so Good Natur'd, or so very Remiss as not to be at the Pains to look in∣to that Book, if they thought to Catch that Author at one False Quotation, which they have not yet been able to do? or whether every sober Person will not rather Judge, that the Quakers do herein Plead Guilty? I leave it to their consideration. But hear another Pleasant Instance. G. W. being Press'd with a very untoward Quotation in Sat. Dis. Glean. Sect. iv. p. 82. out of the Works of Edw. Burrough. p. 273. where he Blasphemously makes the Sufferings of the Quakers, not only Greater, but more Ʋn∣just than the Sufferings of our Blessed Lord
Himself: He comes to give an account of this in his Antidote. p. 254. and he says, after the old Fashion, that E. B. is Cited Ʋnfairly and Partially in this Point. But he tells not where∣in. These are only words of Course, in all their Answers. Nay himself finds no Fault with the Quotation, that ther is a word Ad∣ded, or Diminished, or Alter'd. But says he, Whether it was so Verbally stated by E. B. him∣self, or by some mistake since, I shall not under∣take to Determin, unless I see his Original Copy. This Justifies the Quotation out of his Printed Book. And if ther was any Mistake, it was not in him who Quoted it. So that G. W. if he Reguarded Instice, ought to make Sa∣tisfaction for saying that this was Ʋnfairly or Partially Cited. But in the next place, this was Printed by E. B. in the year 1657. And Re-Printed in his Works. An. 1672. And these Works were Collected and Published by an Jun∣to of the Chief of the Quakers, whereof George Whitehead was one, and his Epistle particular∣ly (among others) Praesix'd, in High Commen∣dations of the Author and the Works. Yet now he wou'd turn it upon the Author of the Sn. to Justify these Works, and to pro∣duce the Original Copy! But may not that Author more Reasonably Ask him, how this Passage of E. B's. came to be Twice Printed without any Correction? And why it was ne∣ver taken notice of as any Mistake, these Forty years that it has been Printed, till just now? Suppose that Author had been taken Napping, at any False Quotation or Charge upon the Qua∣kers, and shou'd put it off from the Printed
Sn. and bid the Friends Produce the Original Copy; and accuse them of Quoting him Ʋn∣fairly and Partially, because they Quoted out of his Printed Book: I desire to know from the Quakers, particularly from G. W. Come, George, (I'll take thy word for once, but not to make a Custom of it) tell it now, in good sober sadness, woud'st thou have so Excused him? woud'st not thou have made an Hide∣ous Out-Cry, and Clapt thy Wings for Victory! But mark me, George, I do not mean only a bare Error of the Press, or what cou'd possi∣bly be so constru'd; but a whole Passage, such as this of E. B's. and not only saying such a thing, but going about to Prove it, as he there do's, That the Sufferings of the Quakers were more Ʋn-just than the Sufferings of Christ. Why? Because (says he) What was done to Christ, was Chiefly done by a Law, and in great part, by the Due Execution of a Law, &c. But that it was not so with the Quakers, which he there Indea∣vours to shew, most Horridly Blaspheming! As to his Arguments, I Referr to Sat. Dis. p. 82. But, as to our present business, G. W. is brought, at last, to say, in the same page (p. 254.) We will not stand by the Comparison. Well. This is something. This is the first Confession that ever we got from the Quakers. They will not stand by the Com∣parison of their Sufferings and Christ's. But what then will they do as to E. B. who made the Comparison? Will they say, that he was in an Error? No. Barr that! For he gave forth all he Wrote as the Immediate Word of The Lord God. And all his Editors G. W. &c.
have Attested this for him. And he stood the Highest among the Quakers, next to the Great Fox himself. Who has Determin'd (as before Quoted) That whoever speaks, and not from the Mouth of the Lord, is a False Prophet and a Conjurer. And if E. B. was a Conjurer, then G. W. may come in, and All of them. And then let the Quakers see how they have been Led! Let them Now see. Here G. W. says it, in the Name of the Rest, We will not stand by E. B's. Comparison (for indeed it is Blasphemous to the Highest Degree) And there∣by you are given to understand, That you are not hereafter to Trust any Quaker Books that are Printed, even tho' Publish'd and Recom∣mended by the Greatest amongst you. For such are E. B's. Works; And if now, after they have been put so many years into your hands, as the Words of The Lord; Part of them is Dis∣own'd, how can you be secure of other Parts of them, or any Part of them at all? How are you se∣cure of G. Fox's Writings, or of any others of your Prophets? Have you seen all their Origi∣nal Copies? You must either Disown G. W. in this Affront he has put upon E. B. or Down comes All whole Quakerism, at one Blow! Ther is but one Book amongst you (that I can hear, Except G. Fox's Marginal Notes of Oleser, &c. before mention'd) which will Escape, by this Rule, if that will. It is Humphry Nor∣ton's, for I have seen a very Ancient Manuscript of it, which, for ought I know, may be the Original. It was Printed at London, for so I sind it Quoted in a Book of Roger Williams's call'd, The Great Fox dugg out of his Burrows. p. 45. And this Precious Passage cited out of
him, where he is, after the Quaker-fashion, Ri∣diculing the Second Coming of Christ, in these words. Is not Christ God, and is not God a Spi∣rit? You look for a Christ without you. From what Coast or Country shall He come? What Country-Man is He? you stand Gazing up to the Clouds after a Man; but we stand by you in White, chi∣ding of you. Thus as he is there Quoted. How it is in the Print I know not, for I have not seen it, but in the Ms. it is p. 71. thus. Whence must this Christ come you wait for? And in what Generation? And of what Family? And out of what Country? And of whom must He be Born? That they may no longer be Deceiv'd by you; who have kept them Gazing after a False Christ. Well may it be call'd Gazing; but leave it, and mind those in White Apparel which Reproves you for it. Act. 1.10, 11. by which they mean, their own White Lights within! I suppose R. Williams might take it short. These are among several other Queres, of the like Nature, which Hum∣phrey put to the Professors. Ther is Abundance of such Blasphemous Hideous stuff in that Book, which shews Demonstratively what the Genuine Doctrine of the Quakers is concerning the Re∣surrection, Ascension, and Second Coming of our Lord Jesus, turning it only to the Rising, As∣cension, and Coming of the Light within them. The outward Christ H. Norton here calls a False-Christ. He was a Great Apostle of the Quakers, sent into Ireland, thence to the West-Indies; And most Highly Recommended by Edw. Burrough, and Francis Howgil (two Principal Pillars) to be Receiv'd by the Friends as a True Messenger of the Lord. But because this Book
is but in Few hands, and those of the Friends, who will not (now) let it be seen, I have in the Collection added a Trans-script out of the Ms. of some Passages in it, worth the Readers No∣tice; which Abundantly Confirm the Charges gi∣ven against the Quakers; and I thought this more Proper than to Thrust them in here, out of their Place, where we are Considering of the Quakers Manner of Defending themselves against these, and other such like objections. 8. The Last of their Cleanly and Clever Me∣thod▪Their falsi∣fing the Sense of what is Objected against them. For which, by W. Penn's Rule, they are Exclud∣ed from be∣ing Chri∣stians. of Answering which I shall Mention at Present, is, Their Ignorant or most Commonly Wilful Mistaking of what is objected against them: and so Answering Quite out of Purpose, That by starting of new Game, they may Di∣vert the Pursuer from the Cent of an Absurdity or Heresie in Distress. This they think a venial Politique in Them∣selves; But this Mote becomes a Beam in their Brothers Eye: And when they Charge it against others, then they can see Clearly into the Hei∣nousness and Utmost Deformity of this Sin. Then they Improve it into a Total Loss of the Character or Name of being a Christian. This is one of the Heads upon which W. Penn wou'd Prove Thom. Hicks, his opponent, not to be a Christian, in his Reason against Railing. p. 158. thus. He that gives that for a Man's An∣swer to any Question, that is not his Answer to that Question, is a Forger: But that T. Hicks hath, done: Therefore, a Forger, and Consequently no true Christian. He alledges, That T. Hicks did not Give Faithfully the Answers of a Quaker, in Dis∣pute with an Ana-Baptist. But all the Proof that W. P. brings for his Negative (who was not
Present) is, p. 160. We Charge it all with For∣gery, in the Name of God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth. And this being Proof In-Contestable! he thence Concludes T. Hicks, without Help, to be a Forger; who cou'd only support his Af∣firmative, by Human Testimony. But now, Reader, behold, the whole Herd of the Quakers (I know not if one can be Excep∣ted) of all that have wrote Answers to their Opponents, turn'd all out of the Pale of Chri∣stianity, by this Infallible Rule of W. Penn's! See in Sat. Dis. almost in Every Quotation which is there Canvass'd, how Grossy the Quakers have Mistaken (at least) the Answers of their Opponents: Charging them with what they never said, nay Quite Contrary to their own Words. But of this sort ther never was such another as George Fox. In his Gr. Mystery he Replies upon above 100 Opponents, of whose Books I have seen a good many; And, I cannot say that he has Quoted one Aright. Not only for Splitting of Sentences (with which Appen. keeps such a Racket) where the Sense is not Hurt; but taking Scraps out of several Chapters, upon Different Subjects, that sometimes you must Read over almost the whole Book he Answers, to find the Words which he Quotes: And then so Mangl'd, so Distorted, not one Sentence Intire, that the Author's sense can not be Gather'd from what he Quotes of him: Insomuch that without seeing those Books which he Answers, it is Impossible to know what they Truly said. Besides such Ridiculous Blunders, as cou'd not befall a Child that knew how to Spell and Put to∣gether. I before mention'd his Reading Exter∣nal for Eternal, a small mistake, if that had
been all. But to Ground a Charge upon this, and to Accuse Mr. Baxter of Ignorance and False Doctrin for setting up the Notion of an External Light in God, when Mr. Baxter's word is Plainly Eternal! This (and many more such like Instances, of which that Book is full) not only Ruins their Sensless Boasts of Infallible Guidance of the Spirit; But, by Will. Penn's Rule, Ex∣cludes them from being Christians. But if the Mistake of a Word may be Excus'd, upon the In-advertence of Infallibility; Ther are many more Instances, which shew, either want of Sense, or Wilful Perversion. Thus one Jona∣than Clapham, who wrote against the Quakers, says, Christ having Ʋndertaken the work of Man's Redemption, the Father hath Deliver'd up the whole Creation to Him— And therefore must Magistra∣cy belong to Him as Mediator. Now, cou'd any Man, in his Right mind, Understand this, as if Clapham had meant, that the Magistrate, and not Christ, was the Mediator? Yet thus G. Fox mistakes him, Gr. Mystery, p. 95. And Repeats his words thus, He saith, the Magistrate, in this Ex∣ternal Politick Kingdom, is a Mediator. And not only Fox, but one of the Chief of his Worthys. R. Hubberthorn, follows him in the same Per∣version. the Second p. 28. of his Works. (for ther are Double Pageings) Reprinted An. 1663. he says thus. The Honour which God will not Give to Another than Christ; hath he (J. Clap∣ham) Given to Another from Christ; And so Deny∣ed the work of the Son of God, as Mediator. And p. 44. Instancing in Sixteen Particulars of Clap∣ham's Ʋn-sound Doctrin (as he calls it) this is the First, That he says, That the Magistrate is an Offi∣cer of Jesus Christ as Mediator. And, upon the
whole, they Establish this as a standing Article of their Faith, that, To say the Magistrate is an Officer of Jesus Christ, as Mediator, is Blasphemy. And, say they to Clapham, What Priest besides thee Dare own any to be Join'd with Christ, as Me∣diator? Now, not only Dear George Fox, who Excelleth them all! but this Hubberthorn, and their Works are Highly Commended and Recommended by Will. Penn. By whose Rule of Mistaking or Mis-Representing the Answers of other Men, All of them must out of Christendom together. E∣specially George Fox, who Stumbles so often, that he hardly Goes one Right Step: I cou'd fill a Volume, with his Mistakes of this kind; but, for the Present, will Press your Patience, with two or three. Christopher Wade, in his Quakery Slain. p. 13. says, As the Devil of old Spake some Truths, to usher in his Manifold De∣ceits, even so he over-powers you Quakers— to De∣ny the Scriptures— God's Inspired writings, Ma∣nifested by his holy Apostles. And as he thereby Limits the Supreme Holy one, so he over-rules you, to acknowlege but one Dispensation of God's mind unto the Sons of Men. (viz. The Light within) To this George Fox Answers, in his Gr. Mystery. p. 247. And Repeats C. Wade's words thus, He saith (says G. F.) God li∣mits the Supream Holy one, by the Inspired Wri∣tings of the Apostles. And then he Pays C. W. for saying that The Holy one is Limited, by the words of the Apostles. But it is obvious to any one of Common Sense, that C. W. Meant, that it was the Devil, in the Quakers, who Limited the Holy one, by Denying the Dispensation of the Holy Scrip∣tures, and allowing but of that only Dispensation of the Light within. But, to take off all Excuse, C.
W. wrote an Answer to G. F. which he Directs, To all those call'd Quakers. An. 1659. Where he Instances in Twelve Lies and Forgeries, which G. F. had thus put upon him. Among which this is the Sixth (p. 5.) where he clears what he had said, by shewing the thred of the whole Discourse, and that it was the Devil, and not God, who he said did Limit the Holy one. To this G. Whitehead Replies, in his Truth defending the Quakers, Printed the same year, 1659. p. 61. And do's he either Confess G. Fox's Perverting the words of C. Wade, or Justify it? No. Nei∣ther. For Justify it he cou'd not, the Case was so Plain. And it is below a Quaker ever to Confess; for that supposes he cou'd Err! How then do's G. W. Answer? Why, he falls upon C. W. for saying that the Devil cou'd Limit the Supreme Holy One. But, first, here is the Cause given against G. Fox, that he had Per∣verted the words of C. W. And next, as to G. Whitehead's Mettl'd observation, how the Devil cou'd Limit the Holy one, let him Read Psal. Lxxviii. 41. Yea, they turned back, and Tempted God: And Limited the Holy one of Israel. Where Limiting is express'd as a Tempting. But says G. Whitehead, in the place above Quoted, This is as much as to say, the Devil is stronger than God— as this Deceiver hath Affirmed. Now here is another Manifest Perversion of the Meaning, as G. Fox's was of the Words of G. Wade. For did C. W. Affirm, That the Devil was Stronger than God; because the Devil is said to Limit Him? Then the Israelits were Stronger than God, for David says that they did Limit Him. But as C. W. said no such thing, do's G. W. think, that C. W. Believ'd the Devil to be
Stronger than God? No. he cou'd not think so; for who ever thought so? And then he said this against his own Conscience. Without doubt, he did! And for this, calls C. W. a Decei∣ver! Now here are some small Mistakes! First of G. Fox's, in taking God for the Devil. That was All! Next of G. Whitehead's, in say∣ing, that C. Wade did Affirm, That the Devil was Stronger than God. Now Recollect Will. Penn's Rule, before Mentioned, That he that gives that for a Man's Answer, that is not his Answer, is a Forger, and so no true Christian. The Application is Easie, and Unavoidable, That neither Fox, nor Whitehead are Christians, because they are Notorious Forgers, and Give that for a Man's Answer, which is not his Answer. Nay more, The very Objections which are put against them, they Retort, as being the Prin∣ciples of the Objectors. Thus five Ministers wrote a Book against the Quakers, call'd The Perfect Pharisee. An. 1654. And another, in Defence of it, the same year, Intituled, A further Disco∣very of that Generation of Men call'd Quakers, in Reply to an Answer the Quakers had put out to the Former. In both these, they Charge the Quakers with Seventeen Gross Positions, of which this is the Third, That the Soul is a Part of the Divine Essence. Thus plainly put down. p. 5. of the Further Discovery, Num. 3. of the Qua∣ker Positions, which are there first Rang'd in order: And then particularly Disprov'd, under their several Heads. And coming to this Head, p. 31. they call this Position (as truly it is) Blasphemy. G. Fox, Answers, to this, in his Gr. Myst. p. 227. and sets down this as the first of the Ministers Principles, That the Soul is
a Part of the Divine Essence. And thence Inferrs, p. 229. That in calling this Blasphemy, they had given Judgment against themselves. And so you five (says he) have Judged your selves to be Blasphemers, who said the Soul was Part of the Di∣vine Essence, and yet 'tis Blasphemy to say so. This is Giving that for a man's Answer, which is not, with a witness! And if Will. Penn can any Longer Defend G. Fox (even Dear George, who Excelleth All the Quakers) to be a Christian, by his own Rule, he will Exceed himself; and Out-do, all that he has Ever yet Done! At least, I hope he will Alter his Opinion, if he spoke it sincerely, That George Fox, was as Good a Pro∣as Asaiah, which has been Mention'd before. But not only Putting words upon a Man, which he did not say, nay Quite Contrary to what he says; but Leaving out the Material part of a Man's Answer, and giving that for his Answer, is Belying of a Man, and comes un∣der Will. Penn's Rule. Let me give one In∣stance of this (among many that I cou'd Pro∣duce) Matthew Caffyn, in his Damnable Heresies of the Quakers Discover'd. p. 29. gives his Charge thus. The Quaker saith, that Christ is already Come the second time: And George Fox Affirmed in Plain words, before many Witnesses, that he knew him come within him, and he looked for Him to come NO OTHERWISE: And James Parnal affirmeth— That by Preaching of a Christ in Heaven, the Devil gets his work done on Earth, as appears in his Book call'd Satan's Design disco∣ver'd. p. 19. 25.
This Fox Answers in his Gr. Myst. p. 141. And first, he leaves his Brother Parnel to shift for himself. He Denies not the Quotation. But says nothing to it. Then as to what is Charg'd upon Himself, he Quotes the Page in Caffyn, but Repeats his words thus. And George Fox said, that he knew Christ come in him. p. 29. Then he Crys, that Christ is in you, except ye be Repro∣bates. As if Caffyn had Deny'd the Inward Pre∣sence of Christ, by the Influence of His H. Spirit, in the Hearts of Believers, which no Christian e∣ver did Deny. But they Deny the Person of Christ, His Flesh, Blood, and Bones, in Men, as the Quakers Blaspheme. And Caffyn found no Fault with Fox's saying, that He knew Christ come within him. On the Contrary, he Justifies the In∣dwelling of Christ, by His Spirit. But he laid the stress upon G. Fox's saying, That he Looked upon Christ to come NO OTHERWISE, whith was put in Capital Letters, to shew that the stress lay upon that, as being a Denyal of Christ's Second Coming, to the Final Judgment. Of all which G. Fox took no Notice at all, but gives his words short, as above Quoted. Whereby it appears (which I have often observ'd before) That without looking into the Books which this Fox Answers, ther is no knowing of their Meaning, or what they object, by his False and often Absurd Chopping and Changing of their Words. Caffyn ibid. p. 35. Charges thus. The Quaker saith, that the offering of Christ's Body to be Bro∣ken, and His Blood shed, Avails not, so as, thro' Faith therein, to set free from Sin: But Blood in a Mystery, and a Body in a Mystery, which we know
not what it is, saith Lawson, in his Book p. 18. which was Typified, by the Fleshly Body of Christ, and His Blood. And says Caffyn. p. 36. Where∣fore he saith Boldly, but Blasphemously, That the Lord Jesus whom we Profess, is Accursed, pro∣fessing a Spirit within him, to be the only Christ. To this G. Fox Answers, Gr. Myst. p. 142. And Repeats the Charge only thus. They say, they own Christ that suffered, meaning the Spirit within. Page. 36. Here he Quotes the Page in Caffyn's Book, whereby we cannot mistake, to what it is that he Answers. And instead of Denying, he Justifies, in his Squinting way, this Hideous Blasphemy, by laying the whole upon the Light within: But Denies nothing of the other part of the same sentence, of calling that Jesus whom we Profess, Accursed &c. Blessed God, Defend Us! The Pen is like to Drop out of my Hand, while I am forc'd to set down this Greatest Outrage that Ever the Devil durst Presume to Belch out against our Blessed Lord and Saviour, thro' these the most Wretched of all his Instruments, the Quaker Tongues, which are set on Fire of Hell! I cannot stay longer upon this Subject. Ther is Infection in the ve∣ry Air. Let us Return, to their Moderate Sins of Lying, and Mis-representing the Answers of their Adversaries, and Rid Christianity of them, at the Back-Door which Will. Penn has Pointed: But not open the Mouth of the Gulph at once, of Blasphemies, not fit to be Heard upon Earth; lest the Stench, shou'd carry Plagues with it, thro' the World.
Christoph. Wade, in his Quakery Slain. p. 7, 8. tells of a Quaker Wizard, one James Milner, who Pretended that he must Suffer as Christ did, to save the Souls of two Women, Dorothy Barwick, and the Wife of Brian Fell of Ulverston, and in a Juggling, Inchanting Manner, with a Knife and a Bason he pretended his Blood was shed, and said, that he Gave up the Ghost, as Christ did. Thus C. Wade. And hence he Charges Milner with Luciferian Pride, to Save Souls as Christ did. To this G. Fox Answers in his Gr. Myst. p. 246. And Repeats no more of the Charge, but these words, He Crys (says Fox) Oh Luciferian Pride to save Souls! And thence falls upon Wade, as if he were an Enemy to the Saving of Souls; and asks him, What good (then) doth all your Preaching do? And Quotes the Apostles, who watched to save Souls, by turning People from their Sins. Now wou'd not any one have suppos'd, upon G. F.'s Quotation of C. W.'s words, That C. W. had been against all Methods or Means to Save Mens Souls: and that he had call'd it no less than a Luciferian Pride for any one to Attempt it, either to Preach or Pray or do any other Office of Religion! Who cou'd have Imagin'd, from this Quotation, as G. F. gives it, That C. W. only spoke of Attempting to Save Souls, as Christ did, that is, by Shedding of our Blood, and Giving up the Ghost, as an Atone∣ment or Propitiation for the Sins of others? I will spare my Pains to Exemplifie the Truth and Faithfulness of this Quotation! And when Will. Penn, can make a  of G. F. for this, by his own Rule, I will Promise Twenty and Twenty more of the ike, if need be, out of
that one Book, the Gr. Mystery. In which p. 298. And in his Saul's Errand p. 9. G. F. Justifies this Wretch, Milner; And notwithstanding that he cou'd not, nor did Deny this Matter of Fact, and much more of the Like Blasphemy, as Gi∣ving forth Twelve several Prophesies, in the Name of the Lord, all of which prov'd False; Pretending to Fast Forty Days, as Christ did, and other Madnesses of High Enthusiasm, yet G. Fox Justifies Milner, says, Ther was a Pure seed in Him; And that The Lord did open True Pro∣phesies and Mighty things to Him. And calls those Persecutors, and Wicked Men, who wou'd go tell the Nation (as he words it) of the Above mention'd, and such like Infirmities of that Pre∣cious Quaker Prophet! And now that I have given the Reader a Taste of Rich. Hubberthorn's, G. Whitehead's, and G. Fox's sincerity, in Reciting the Answers of other Men, out of the Fountain that is behind of the like Instances, in their Works, and those of the other Quakers; Approved, and Recom∣mended by W. Penn; And, by his standing Rule, before Mention'd, He himself, and all the Rest of that Herd, turn'd out of the Pale of Chri∣stianity together, to Graze in the Common, with Deists, Jews, and Pagans (Themselves the worst of the Company) Let me, for a Concluding stroke, upon this Head, Divert my self a little, with Witty Ap-Pen, from whom I have thus far Digress'd, to his more Considerable Bre∣thren. Now then, you shall see Ap-Pen shew his Parts, in behalf of Himself and Partners, at the End of the Preface, he gives their Au∣thority
for their so Frequent calling the Au∣thor of the Sn. a Serpent, a Viper, a Snake. (Will. Penn has lately Improv'd it to a Rattle-Snake) and they say it is A Title of his own Choosing. As I said before, it is not very Material what they call him. He is neither the Better, nor the Worse for that. They have call'd others by the same and worse Names where they had not the Pretence for such a witty Pun as this. But that which I take notice of this for, is, to shew them the Consequences which Themselves have laid down of Mistaking or Mis-Representing the words of other Men. Did the Author of the Sn. then mean that Title for Himself, or for the Qua∣kers? How you can Turn it upon him, is not the Point (free Leave you have) But to say, That you wou'd not Abridge him a Title of his own Choosing: and to give this as a Reason of your calling him so, is Expresly to Mistake (and that Wilfully) his words. And then, out of Christianity with you—according to Will. Penn. If you may call him a Snake, by this Argument, you may as well call Him the Devil, and say that too his A Title of his own Choosing, for another of is Books is Intitul'd Satan Dis-Rob'd. Therefore both Will. and Ap-Pen (cum Sociis) must either Renounce their Chri∣stianity (and then they will be— just where they were) or else Correct the above Mention'd Rule, which W. P. has (Infallibly) laid down, to Thrust others from thence. Thus Justly in the same Trap which they set for others, is their own Foot taken.
SECT. III. The Quakers Clear'd from Contradiction, in those Seeming Contrary Testimonies which are Pro∣duc'd in this Appendix, to Defend them from the Heresies Charg'd upon them. WHAT I have already said, may be thought sufficient in Answer to this Appen. wherein ther is nothing like an Argu∣ment but the Contrary Testimonies which are Pro∣duc'd against the Charges Exhibited. And these are Reply'd to (without Considering of them in Particular) in Sect. ii. N. 3.4. Whereby it appears First, That tho' these Testimonies pro∣duc'd, were Contrary to what is Charg'd from other Testimonies of the Quakers, yet that this is no Justification, but rather a further Argument of Contradictions against them. Secondly, That by the Contrary Meanings which they have, these Testimonies, tho' seemingly Contrary, yet are not so; and do not Contradict the Charges laid against the Quakers. To make the which more fully Appear, I will go over the Contrary Te∣stimonies Produc'd: And shew the Deep Deceit of these Quakers. 1. These Testimonies begin Appen. Sect. 2. p. 12. with this Title. Some Testimonies to Christ Jesus, as the Son of God, and Come in the Flesh. The first is of Rich. Farnsworth. An. 1651. in his Confession and Profession of Faith. where he Confesses to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. but he calls them not 3 Persons: so that this is
no Contrary Testimony to the Quaker-Heresie con∣cerning the Blessed Trinity; which makes them to be only three Manifestations or Operations of the same Person, as the Sabellians, Socinians &c. But then how is this a Testimony to the Son of God as Come in the Flesh, if the Son be not Di∣stinct from the Father? as G. Fox affirms, in so many words. Great Mystery. p. 142. and 293. &c. if so, then it was God the Father who took Flesh, as Muggleton said, Ay and Fox too. Gr. Myst. p. 246. where he falls upon Chr. Wade for offering to say, That not God the Father, but the Son (said Wade) took upon him Human Nature. This Fox opposes; and, brings, as an Argument against it, that Christ is call'd The Everlasting Father. Isa. ix. 6. The truth is, these Quakers make no Distinction at all betwixt God, and Christ, they mean the same thing, by Father, Son, Spirit, Christ, Light or Light within, which they make to be God. If otherwise, let them tell us how the Son took Flesh, and not the Fa∣ther? if the Son be only a Manifestation of the Father. A Manifestation can not take Flesh, be Born, Suffer, or Dye: then it must be the Father Him∣self, and none other, who was Born, Dy'd, &c. then it was the Father who sent Himself; and Return'd back to Himself; and was Received of Himself; who, upon the Cross, Pray'd to Himself, and Complain'd to Himself, that He had Forsaken Himself; And when He Dy'd, Re∣commended His Spirit into the Hands of Him∣self &c. This the Quakers are Desir'd to Answer, and it will soon Discover their sensless Sabelliamsm. And Farnsworth's Testimony says nothing at all against this.
2. They Leap now Ten years forward for the next Testimony p. 13. which is of Rich. Hodden An. 1661. in his Book call'd The one Good way of God. Where he tells of the Great Mystery of Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, which, he says, no Man can Understand by Hearing, Reading, Telling, or Talking of Him, or Concerning what He—Did, Said, or Suffer'd—How he is Form∣ed In his Servants—How they take up the Cross—or what that Cross is—How they are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones—What the Church is, or how his Body; or what it is to Eat his Flesh and Drink his Blood &c. This, as before told, is, the Body, Flesh and Bones of God, which they suppose He had from Eternity; and which now Dwells in the Quakers, not the Flesh of our Nature, which Jesus assum'd in the Womb of the Blessed Vir∣gin. That is not the Flesh which we Eat &c. And they that think so, he tells, know nothing of the Mystery of Christ, which, they say, can∣not be learn'd by Hearing (contrary to what the Apostle thought Rom. x. 17.) of what Christ Did, Said, or Suffer'd. Which shews that they meant not the outward Christ, but Their Christ, the Light within: otherwise how is it, that, as he says, none but the Quakers understand, what the Church is, how it is the Body of Christ, or what it is to Eat his Flesh, or what his Cross is &c? This shews plainly, That they have another Meaning for All these things than we have: And Consequently this is so far from being a Contrary Testimony to the Charges produc'd upon this Head, that it speaks the same; and might well have been put among
the Charges, instead of the Contrary Testimo∣nies. 3. The third Testimony is p. 14 from Geo. Bi∣shop, that Loyal good Subject! (See Sn. p. 227. to 232.) in his Vindication of the Principles and Practices of the People called Quakers. An. 1665. where he speaks too of Christ made Flesh &c. But then tells us what Christ he means, Christ In you, says he, that is, their Light within, which they call Christ. He says p. 15. as here Quot∣ed, That where this Christ is, there is not the Body that Suffer'd at Jerusalem, that was Flesh, that Proceeded from the Virgin Mary &c. that is, not within Men. No. who ever said it was, tho' Christ may be there by the Blessed Influences of His Holy Spirit. But then what Body of Christ is it, which the Quakers say is within them? For G. Fox will not allow Christ to be Absent from His Saints, as touching His Flesh. Gr. Mystery. p. 210. And Edw. Burrough p. 146. of his Works says in Answer to this Question, which he there puts, Is that very Man, with that very Body, within you, yea or Nay? And this he do's not Deny, but Answers in the Affir∣mative, The very Christ of God is within Ʋs, we Dare not Deny it. He do's not mean, as Bishop says well, the Body of our Nature, which Suffer'd at Jerusalem; for that is not so much as in any one, says Will Penn, in his Christian Quaker, p. 97. But they mean, as before has been shewn, The Heavenly Body of the Human Nature of God, which He had from Eternity. And this Vile and most Absurd Heresie is that Deep Know∣lege which the Quakers Boast they have in the things of God, beyond all other Men. This is
the Great Mystery of Quakerism. And this Testimony of G. Bishop's do's rather Confirm than Contradict it. 4. The fourth Testimony is p. 15. from Isaac Penington, Concerning the Sum or Substance &c. This is he who in his Question to the Professors before Quoted, in every Page almost, tramples under foot the outward Humanity of Christ, or that which He took of our Nature; And sets in opposition to it, as the Foundation of the Quaker-Faith, that which he calls Christ's own Humanity, or their Sensless Notion of the Humanity of the Heaven∣ly Nature. Now let Us hear what this Man will say to the Contrary. How much he Attri∣butes to the outward Humanity and Sufferings of Christ. First he puts the Objection, That the Quakers look not to be sav'd by the outward Christ, but by a Christ in us, says he. And to this he Answers, We do indeed Expect to be Saved (yea and not only so, but do already, in our several Measures, Witness Salvation) by the Revelation and Operation of the Life of Christ within Ʋs. So that their Salvation is from the Attonement &c. which is wrought Within them. And what Salvation do they mean? That of Heaven? No, not of any outward Heaven, but the Heaven within Themselves (See Sn. at the end of Sect. xii.) and consequently it is that Salvation which they have Attain'd Already, in their several Measures; for ther are Degrees of Glory even in Heaven. But now that All is given to the Inward Christ, what do's he ascribe to the Out∣ward? Truly as little as may be, only to take Notice of Him; he says, That the Salvation wrought by Christ within, is yet not withont Re∣lation
to what he did without us— and had its Place and Service in the will, and according to the Counsel of the Father. What Place and Ser∣vice was this? For that, he leaves you to Guess, he will come no Near. Every Good Action, nay every Good word, of any Good Man has its Place and Service! This is the Noble Te∣stimony of Isaac Penington, which is brought as a Vindication of the Quakers, from throwing the Least Slight upon the outward Humanity, Death and Passion of our Blessed Lord Jesus; and the Satisfaction and Full Propitiation there∣by Made for the Sins of the whole World: And to Clear them from Transferring of this to the Propitiation which they suppose made within them, by the Heavenly Flesh and Blood of their Light within! 5. The fifth Testimony is p. 16. from G. Keith's Immediate Revelation, where he do's sufficient∣ly Express what Manhood of Christ he meant, for he speaks of The Man Jesus, whom Simeon Imbraced with his Arms according to the Flesh. And the Quakers will not say, That it was the Light within which Simeon had in his Arms, or the Manhood of the Heavenly Nature, which cou'd not be Seen or Felt. And then as to the Inward Presence of Christ in the Soul, G. K. do's not speak of the Body of Christ there, as the other Quakers; but says that He is there According to the Spirit— by whom we Receive Light, Grace, and Truth, and through whom we have Access unto God. This is Orthodox, and plainly Exprest. Which shews that G. K. had too much Sense and Learning ever to be a Qua∣ker, tho' he thought himself one. And there∣fore
he cou'd not stay with them. He was Deceiv'd by them, and Catch'd by their Sheeps-Cloathing of outward Sanctity and Preciseness: But he still had Battling with them, about their Doctrines, as you may see in his Narrative here∣unto Annex'd. And by their Double and seem∣ing Fair Answers then, and at other times, he was Induc'd to Err on the Charitable side; And not think them so Monstrously Heretical as, upon a more serious Examination of their Books, he has since found them. I say not this, as if I did not think that he has been even Seduc'd in his Judgment into several Errors by their Conversation (it is hard to touch Pitch, and not to be Defil'd) for he has own'd it to the world; And as a Testimony of the Since∣rity of his Repentance, has, after the Example of St. Augustine, and other Holy Men, Pub∣lish'd a Book of his Retractations, the more to his Honour; And by that, shewn the other Qua∣kers the only way to Reconcile themselves with God and Man. But while they Persist to Cover, Palliate, and Excuse their Notorious He∣resies, which yet cannot be Hid: And that their Leaders, to save their own little Credit, wou'd Ruin so many Thousand poor Souls of their Ignorant Followers, by Keeping them in that Ditch, into which they have Led them; while they go on in this Wicked Course, they must be Expos'd more and more, till they come to be an Abhorring to all Flesh! And if they will Choose this, rather than to become the Joy of God, Angels, and Men, in their Conversion, let them Remember that Life and Death has been set before them.
6. The sixth Testimony is p. 17. out of G. Fox's Journal p. 358. which indeed seems Fair, and is put in the words of Scripture, and of our Creed, that Christ was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary &c. And if nothing had been said otherwise by G. Fox, or other of the Quakers, no Exceptions had been taken, whatever Secret Meaning they had had in their Minds. But when they have Ex∣press'd their Meaning in other places, and not Retracted it in these seeming Fair Confessions, we must, to make them Consistent with them∣selves, understand their words as themselves have Explain'd them. Now we do not Charge the Quakers, that they Deny that Christ took Flesh, and that in our Nature, in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin; it is own'd that they do hold all this, in Prim. Heres. Sect. 1. and Sn. Sect. x. But the Charge is this, That the Qua∣kers do hold, that Christ took or Borrow'd Flesh of our Nature, only as a Vail or Garment, wherein to shrow'd His own Flesh of the Heavenly Nature, for a time; as Angels when they Assume Bodies to Appear in upon an Occasi∣on; But that He did not take our Flesh into His own Nature, so as to become Part of His Person: without which, what is before quoted out of Will. Penn's part of the Serious Apology p. 146. must be true. viz. That tho' Christ Suffer'd that Body which He so took, to be Crucify'd, yet that the Person which Suffer'd was not Properly the Son of God. As if you Crucify'd the Body which an Angel assum'd, yet it were not Properly the Angel which wou'd be Cruci∣fy'd, more than a Man wou'd be Crucify'd if
you Crucify'd his Cloak. And if Christ was no otherwise Crucify'd, then was He not Crucify'd at all, only in Appearance and False shew. If that Person which Suffer'd was not Properly the Son of God, then Whose Son was He? Do ye Quakers believe, as some Socinians, That He was Begot by Joseph? Therefore will they Please to tell us, who they think was His Immediate Father? They have Deny'd it to be God. Else He wou'd be Properly the Son of God. Luk. i. 35. And G. Fox, in this Testimony, sets down only Gene∣ral Terms, that Christ took Flesh &c. But he has not Descended to say any thing in Opposition to their Sense of it; and therefore this is no Contrary Testimony to the Charge against the Quakers. And Will. Penn, in a Book very late∣ly Publish'd, the end of the year 1698. call'd A Defence of a Paper, Entitul'd, Gospel-Truth's, against the Exceptions of The Bishop of Cork'sTestimony. p. 31. Likes better of this Quaker Turn of the Text, Joh. 1.14. (which they Learn'd from the Socinians) that it shou'd ra∣ther be said, The Word Took Flesh, than as we Translate it, The Word was Made Flesh. Tho' the Greek cannot Bear their Sense, and is Li∣terally Render'd by Us, . i. e. Became or was Made, not Took Flesh. But we see the Reason why they wou'd have it Turn'd; because it might the more Favour their vile Heresie, That Christ did not Assume our Nature into His own Person, so as to become Really a Man: only, That He Took an Human Body, that is, of the Man Jesus, as a Cloak or Vail to shrow'd Himself in, for a Time. Which is the very Heresy of Cerinthus, against which St.
John wrote these Words. For Cerinthus said, That Christ did Descend upon Jesus, at his Bap∣tism. Thus Dividing Christ from Jesus; as say the Quakers, That Jesus was not the Lamb: Only the Lamb or Christ Dwelt in Jesus; as He do's in Their Vessels! G. Fox is before Quoted saying in his Several Papers for the spreading of Truth. p. 55. That Christ according to the Flesh was Crucify'd in the Days of Adam. And that in That Flesh of His was the Reconciliation. Then it was not in the Flesh, which He took 4000 years after of the Blessed Virgin. You see how Necessary it is for these Men to Explain themselves. And that Generals will not do. Now if any Testimony can be brought Contrary to this their Lurking Distinction of a Flesh of the Heavenly, and a Flesh of the Earthly Nature: or that places the Merit of our Salvation upon the Sufferings of the Earthly Nature, they will in∣deed be to the Purpose; And nothing can be so, that is short of that. For Exam∣ple. 7. The seventh Testimony. p. 18. is brought out of the Serious Apology just now Quoted, which Denies our Lord Jesus, who Suffer'd, to be Pro∣perly the Son of God. But let us hear them. This Testimony is taken out of p. 149. but three pages after what is above Recited. And it Confesses to One Lord Jesus Christ— who took upon him Flesh— to whose Holy Life, Power, Mediation, and Blood, we only ascribe our Sanctifica∣tion, Justification, Redemption, and Perfect Salvation. Now see what Hold can be taken of these Men, or what Trust is in their words! Here I Appeal to the Reader, whether this Quotation do's not
seem to say, That our Justification is ascrib'd to Christ? And to Him Only? Yet, but the very page before. p. 148. they fiercely oppose Justificati∣on by the Rightcousness which Christ hath fulfilled in His own Person for Ʋs, wholly without Ʋs. Not that the Effect is wholly without us, for it is ra∣ther wholly within us, that is, the Application of that Justification which Christ hath wrought for Us, when it is brought home to our Con∣sciences: But the Price, the Satisfaction for our Sins, which is our Justification, that is Wholly without Ʋs, we are no Part of the Meritorious, and Procuring Cause of our Justification, that is only Christ, His Blessed Death, Sufferings, and Perfect Rightcousness, Perform'd in His own Per∣son, wholly without us. But this is far from the Quaker meaning, tho' it seems to be the Import of their Words. And in the above Quotation where they ascribe their Sanctificati∣on, Justification &c. to our Lord Jesus Christ to Him Only, and to His Blood, they mean the Blood within, and Christ within. But as for Justifica∣tion by the outward Christ, as above, they Re∣turn this Prodigious Answer, which I have be∣fore Quoted, And indeed this we Deny, and Boldly Affirm it, In the Name of the Lord, To be the Doctrin of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption, which do's now Deluge the whole World. This is within less than the Compass of one Page to the above Quotation. And but two pages before this, they Deny that Person who Suffer'd, that is, our Lord Jesus Christ to be Properly the Son of God; whom, in this Quo∣tation they Seem to call His only Son. And this is not Contradicting themselves: For the My∣stery
lies here; they allow that Christ took Flesh; but not into His own Person; so that it was not His own Flesh, only as He Borrow'd and wore it for a while: And therefore that it was not His Person which Suffer'd, only the Person of that Man Jesus in which He Dwelt. The Person they Deny to be the Son of God, but the Light within that Per∣son they call the Christ, the only Son &c. And all this comes upon them, because they do not truly believe the Incarnation of Christ, or that He took our Nature into His own Person. Which is the Charge against them, and these are all the Testimonies which they have brought to Clear themselves. And these do, by no means, Clear them: But have Detected their Artifice much the more: And Render'd them Doubly Guilty. I have taken All the Quotations before-men∣tion'd upon Trust (except that out of the Se∣rious Apology which I had by me) for I wou'd not Causelesly suspect others of Deceit (tho' themselves do it) And because these Testimo∣nies here brought by Appen. are nothing to their Purpose, as has been shewn. Of the Rea∣lity of the Sufferings and Death of Christ. II. The next Sect. 3. in Appen. p. 19. &c. con∣tains Testimonies to the Truth and Reality of Christ's Death and Sufferings. But I may save the Reader and my self the Pains of Examining these. Because if Christ was not Truly In-Carnat, He cou'd not Truly Suffer: And tho' He be said to Suffer, Die, &c. yet that is not, cannot be meant Properly, by those who think that the Person which Suffer'd was not Proper∣ly the Son of God. But they call these the Sufferings of Christ, only because He permitted
that Body to be Crucify'd, which He assum'd as a Cloak or Vail, but did not take it into His own Person, by which Means only those Suffer∣ings cou'd be said to be His, Properly. There∣fore all they can say of the Death and Suffer∣ings of Christ will never Clear them, while they tell us, that they mean it not in a Plain and Proper Sense: But as our Sufferings may be call'd the Sufferings of Christ.Col 1.24. Which in a Large Sense. is True. But our Dispute proceeds of Christ's Sufferings, only in the Strict and Proper Sense. Not as the Quakers think their own Blood, to be the Blood of Christ; And that same Blood, by which we are sav'd. Thus they told some who, they said, had shed their Blood. You will by no means be thence Cleansed, but by the same Blood which you so Cruelly shed. This is in a Book Publish'd by them An. 1657. call'd The Guilty Clergy-Man Ʋnvail'd &c. p. 17. Many Quota∣tions of the like Nature can be Produc'd out of their Books. But I stay not here. Of the Re∣surrection, and Fu∣ture Judg∣ment.III. Appen. Sect. iv. p. 25. begins the Contra∣ry Testimonies concerning The Resurrection and Future Judgment. Where observe first their stating of the Case, ibid. p. 25. We are more Learned (say they) in the School of Christ, than to Deny, or be Ignorant of so Inestimable an Ad∣vantage, as is The Resurrection by Christ to Eter∣nal Glory; and of that Future Judgment by which the States of Men must be Determined. Now nothing at all of this is the Question. The Quakers have been told in the Sn. and Sat. Dis. of their Notion of an Inward Resurrection of Christ or the Light in their Hearts; and of a Judgment there likewise Past upon Sin. But
the Question is of the Resurrection of the Body, of the Same Body that Dy'd. And concerning this, ther is not one word of a Contrary Testimony among all those here Produc'd. The word Body is not so much as nam'd in all these Testimo∣nies, except one, which is a Testimony brought from Will. Penn. p. 29. where he says, as there Quoted, We own the Resurrection of the Body, ac∣cording to the Pleasure of God: And every Seed shall have its own Body. What Body they mean by this, is told in the Sn. Sect. xii. That by a Spiritual Body they mean no Body at all: but on∣ly the Soul freed from the Natural Body: which Natural Body they do not allow ever to be Raised again, or Joyn'd to the Soul. And there it is shewn at large, That Will. Penn allows no Resurrection of the Body that Dies; and Denies Positively, That that Description of the Re∣surrection 1 Cor. xv. Relates to the Resurrection of the Body at all; but to the two States of Man, in the Natural and Spiritual Birth. And this same Appen. instead of Contradicting, do's Re∣assert, and endeavours to Justifie the Testimonies of the Quakers against the Resurrection of the Body: And Repeats their old Argument against it. p. 31. thus. As for the Body, 1 Cor. xv. 37. Thou sowest not that Body that shall be. Thence they Inferr, That it is not the Same Body that Rises. This is fully Answer'd in the Sn. Sect. xii. of which no Notice at all is taken by Appen. But the old Objection still Insisted upon. And this, where they Pretend to bring Contrary Te∣stimonies to those Produc'd which Deny the Resurrection of the Body. Yet this hinders not their Constant Boast, which concludes Every of
their Arguments, of having fully Clear'd them∣selves, and totally Overthrown their Adversaries. Here (says Appen. p. 30.) I have brought Twelve Witnesses, to Testifie contrary to this Man's False Charge; which they do so Scripturally, and Truly, as Effectually to wipe it off, and leave no Room for this Snake of Envy to Hide himself &c. And this Appen. will make up the Baker's Dozen, who do All Justify the Charge of the Snake: And Effectually shew Themselves, not only to be Hereticks, in this Article of our Faith; but of the most Impudent and Shameless sort that ever yet Appear'd. In the Quotation brought from G. Fox. p. 28. of Appen. Reciting these words of the Apo∣stle's, We are Witnesses of all things which He did both in the Land of the Jews and in Jerusalem— And we did Eat and Drink with Him, after He Arose from the Dead, it is added, And to this do we Testifie, which are the People of God in Scorn call'd Quakers. See hereafter Sect. vii. N. 3. more Quotations, where they do, vouch Themselves to be Eye-Witnesses of the Resurrection of Christ: which shews what Resurrection they mean. They are Witnesses too of Their own Resurrection: And have Got (if you will believe them) their Resurrection-Bodies Already. That is, The Bo∣dies of Pure Souls. This is all they mean by it. If not, Let them tell us how our Resurrection-Bodies, if they be not the same Bodies that Died, are sown in Corruption, and Natural-Bodies! If the Soul gets a New Body, at the Resurrection, and that a Spiritual and Heavenly Body; How was it Sown, or When, a Natural Body, if it ne∣ver was Natural, or Corruptible! Or how was
it Sown, that is, Dead, if it never Died! And how is this then a Resurrection of the Dead! for the Soul never Died. What Dead then Rises, if not the Dead Body? Their Te∣stimonies Allow'd to be Contra∣ry upon the Point of Govern∣ment and Fighting. And Why. Wherein a Deep Se∣cret of their Go∣vernment is Laid o∣pen.IV. The next Contrary Testimonies (and they are all) that are Produc'd, are Sect. vi. begin∣ning at p. 40. of their Submission to Govern∣ment. And these I Grant to be Contrary Testi∣monies; and have told them, That I cou'd Pro∣duce ten times as many more for them: of their speaking Pro and Con, For and Against Every Government, as it was Ʋp or Down: of their Dis-owning all Fighting with the Carnal Wea∣pon; and yet setting it up, at other times, be∣yond All the Bully's in Alsatia. That one Quaker cou'd Cuff with Seven men, as G. Fox their General did Vapour. But I wou'd Desire a Contrary Testimony to a Declaration (told in the Sn. Sect. xviii. p. 212.) where the Captains and Colonels of the Quakers do give it under their Hands, in Name of their whole Army, That they have an Heirship to Possess The Ʋt∣termost Parts of the Earth; And a Right to Fight for it too! This Declaration was Drawn by Lieutenant General Edw. Burrough, and being sign'd by himself, and Fourteen or Fifteen of the Princi∣pal Officers, was Printed in the year 1659. And has never yet been Call'd in, Retracted, or Condemn'd, that I cou'd hear of. Now, Here, some Con∣trary Testimonies wou'd do well! your Trimming and Shamming every Turn of Government will not do, while this your Declaration of War, against the whole Earth, stands Ʋn-Repeal'd: your Magna Charta to take up Arms, whenever you see your Time; Till this be Cancell'd, and Ef∣fectually
Disown'd by you, we lie at your Mer∣cy; or else must Watch your Waters, to put it out of your Power. And the rather, because this very Declara∣tion is Particularly Insisted upon in Prim. He∣res. (to which this Appen. pretends to be an Answer) and Referrs to Quotations out of Sam. Fisher's works, which are in the same page, p. 15. and are there brought only as a further Attestation to Second this Declaration: And yet ther is not the least Notice taken of this Declaration in the Appen. or so much as Nam'd, as if no stress had been laid upon it, or that it did not Concern the Quakers at all! They wou'd fain keep this, as a Secret, they are loath it shou'd be known; and there∣fore wou'd not stirr the Coals, by Mentioning of it in the Least. But as to other Quotati∣ons, they Fight amain, and Vindicate, Tooth and Nail! as p. 47. where they Quote p. 16. and 17. of Prim. Heres. in which are some Passages out of the Works of Edw. Burrough, of Fighting, Killing, Slaying &c. And this Appen. wou'd have them only to Referr to the Spi∣ritual warfare; and says (but do's not Prove) That they have not Any Tendency to outward War. Of which the Reader shall be Judge. Among these Quotations ther are these. Give the Whore (that is Rome) double into her Bosom; as she hath loved Blood, so give her Blood, and Dash her Children against the stones. And to the English Army he says, Avenge the Blood of the Guiltless, thro' all the Dominions of the Pope, the Blood of the Just it crys thro' Italy and Spain —wherefore, How down the Tops, strike at the
Branches, make way, that the Ax may be laid to the Root of the Tree; That your Sword, and the Sword of the Lord may neither leave Root nor Branch of Idolatry &c. Now were they Spiritual Swords which the Parliament Red-Coats then wore? Were these the Proper Persons to be Employ'd in a Spiritual Warfare? Was ther no Tendency at all Here to any Outward War? Yet but for supposing such a thing, see how this Appen. do's handle the Author of Prim. Heres. By what hath been now said and shewn (says Appen. p. 47.) it may plainly appear, that his Charges are utterly False; and notwithstanding he Makes Quotations, Page 16.17. which he calls Edw. Burrough's (and Appen. do's not Deny it) to Countenance his villany herein; yet he is as far from Honesty in his Quotation, as he is from Truth in all those; for I shall shew that he hath Committed Forgery, to make this Mans writings Answer his Mind. This is an High Charge! But how do's the Forgery appear? Why in Splitting Sentences, in Colons, and Semi-Colons, as Before—Because he do's not Trans∣scribe whole Pages together, which are nothing to the Purpose. But not a word that he Quotes is Deny'd by Appen. or any thing Added to Burrough's words, yet Appen. calls this An Out∣rage, for which the Inquisition will hardly afford him President (they meant Precedent) We see, by this, what stress is to be laid upon the Out-Crys of the Quakers! And how to Construe their Villany, Forgery &c. when bestow'd by them upon any who Oppose them; that is, you may be sure then, They are in a Desperate Plunge, some Villanous Hard Proof — It wou'd not vex one to be Call'd a Knave or a Cheat, But
to have it Prov'd—Patience cannot Bear it — Besides, it is Ʋn-Mannerly. What! not to leave One small Starting-Hole— No Remedy, but Confess and Repent, which they have Abdi∣cated! Bid men Retract, who cannot Err! Ther is no such Outrage in the Inquisition! Yet these Quakers do not Cry, before they are Hurt, for they were touch'd here in a very Sore Place. And they have not told you all. In the same Sect. vi. of Prim. Heres. which Appen. is here Answering, Reference is made p. 14. to Sect. xviii. of Sn. for further Proofs of the Quakers Principle as to Fighting with the Car∣nal Sword. Where ther are Testimonies a Good Many, out of their most Approved Authors, from G. Fox and Downwards, and so Ʋndeny∣able, that Appen. says not one Syllable to them, nor owns that ever they heard of any such thing. In that Sect. p. 216. and 228. it is told how Active the Quakers were against the Restoration of K. Charles II. How they Boasted it, as their Merit, to the then Ʋsurpers, in the year 1659, that they had Given the first Intelligence a∣gainst Sir George Booth, and the Royal Party, who Rose in the West: And Advis'd to put him to Death, and All the Cavalliers whom they had taken Prisoners, to spare none of them, but Crush them, like a Cockatrice Egg. And besides to have Good Guards of Horse continually March∣ing about, to watch their Motions. And it is there ask'd, whether these were Spiritual Horse? To which Appen. gives no Answer. Yet see what a Rage they are in, because we will not believe, That all they say for War and Fighting is only meant of the Spiritual Warfare! or that
it has the least Tendency towards Outward War! In the said Sect of Sn. p. 208, 210, 211. you have G. Fox Commanding Oliver, thus, Let thy SOƲLDIERS go forth with a free and willing Heart, that thou may'st Rock Nations as a Cradle—to set up his STANDARD at ROME, then to fall upon the Turk &c. And telling how Bravely the Qua∣kers had Fought in his Army. When Thousands of Ʋs (says he) went in the Front of you, and were with you in the Greatest Heat. Then Complains, That they were turn'd off for being QƲAKERS, for saying THOƲ to a Particular, and for wearing their HATS. And such Tearing Fellows as they were! Valient Captains (says fox) Soldiers and Offi∣cers, of whom it hath been said among you, That they had rather have had one of Them, than Seven Men, and cou'd have turn'd one of Them to Seven Men. Now we must mean that Fox said this only of Disputing with Seven Men! That Oliver's Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, were Spiritual Horse and Foot; and that He only carry'd on a Spiritual War against the King: And that it was only in this Sort of War that the Quakers were! Valiant Captains &c. If you say a word to the Contrary, Appen. will Hew you Down, and Make a Greater Monster of you than any in the Inquisition! And Good Reason. For in Appen. p. 45.46. ther is set down at large The Quakers Vindica∣tion, Presented to the Members of Parliament in December 1693. Subscrib'd by 31 of them, In behalf of the said People. Of which the Fourth Article is in these words. That Magistracy or Civil Government is God's Ordinance, the Good Ends thereof being for the Punishment of Evil Doers, and Praise of them that do Well. And now is not
this a Full Vindication! What signifies All that can be said to the Contrary! Is not this a Contrary Testimony to all brought in the Sn. &c? No indeed, my Good Friends, Latet Anguis— This is no Contrary Testimony. It do's not Ʋn∣say one of the Treasons and Rebellions which are Charg'd against you. For it is not Charg'd against you, That you Deny all Magistracy: But all that is not in Your own Hands. You Pretend to have the only Right of Magistracy, over the whole Earth, by vertue of your Ʋni∣versal Heirship before mention'd. And this was not Forgot in Prim. Heres. in the very Begin∣ning of Sect. vi. p. 14. the same Place to which this part of Appen. now Quoted is in Answer: for there p. 94. of the Sn. is Quoted (it is p. 98. of the Third Edit.) where you Disown all Kings and Governments and Laws but Your Own. And Prophesie that the time will come (as soon as in your power) when England particularly shall be Cleans'd (as you call it) of all other. That you will have no King to Rule but JESUS, nor no Government of force, but the Government of the LAMB. That is, of your Light within, or of the Quakers who you think do Only Truly Follow it. And what says Appen. to all this? Not one word! only sets down the above Recited Vindication. Which Concludes thus. And we know of no other Do∣ctrin or Principle Preached, Maintain'd, or ever Received among (or by) Ʋs, since we were a Peo∣ple, contrary to these aforesaid. Now observe the Deep Hypocrisie of these men. They wou'd have the Present Government believe that they
do own Them, as God's Ordinance. This was the End of their Giving this Vindication to to the Members of Parliament: And why did they call it their Vindication, if it was not a Vindication to those to whom they Gave it? And yet, it is Plain that they own No Go∣vernment, as God's Ordinance, but Their own; nor do they, at all, Contradict that, in this seeming Vindication. The Whore, and the Beast are their Common Appellations for the Church and the State; in Fox's Journal. Passim. And thro' all their Writings. Yet they wou'd put a Face upon it, as if they bore Great Reverence to Both! Their above mention'd Declaration of Ʋni∣versal Hireship &c. and their Principle to Fight for it, has been over and over again laid in their Dish. In three Editions of the Sn. in Prim. Heres. again in Some seasonable Reflections upon the Quakers Solemn Protestation against G. Keith's Proceedings at Turners-Hall: 29. Apr. 1697. which Ends with this Declaration, and Desires, that this may be the Test of the Quakers. But they will not Touch! No Pro∣vocation can bring them so much as to speak of it, let it be Objected never so often. For they know it to be Their own Genuin Decla∣ration. And that no Excuse can solve it from the Mahometan Principle, of Propagating Re∣ligion with the Sword: and Conquering (when they Can) the whole Earth; to which they have Put in their Claim, in Time.
SECT IV. Their Witty Answer, and Repartees, upon the Point of their Denying MARRIAGE; And Preach∣ing up of FORNICATION. I Have now done with all their Contrary Testimonies, which is all that bears the face of an Answer, in this Appen. And the Reader Sees to what they have Amounted. First, To Prove the Quakers Guilty of Contradictions, and consequently, not to be Christians, according to Will. Penn's Rule, before Quoted. p. 100. &c. Se∣condly, That they have a Double-meaning in their Testimonies: and can Cant in Scripture-Phrases; which they Quote (like the Devil to our Saviour) most Opposite to their True-Meaning. They have other Answers, which tho' not so Knavish, yet are so Exceedingly Childish, that I am afraid to venture upon the Readers Pa∣tience to Name them. But Patience is Necessa∣ry for any that has to do with the Quakers. And that they may not Complain, that any of their Answers are Neglected: And because I hope it may open the Eyes of those who are Sincere among Themselves, I will undergo the Penance of Exposing them. Appen. p. 35. makes a Great Noise of wrong done the Quakers in Prim. Heres. Sect. v. by the Charge of their Forbidding to Marry, and Preaching up of Fornication. As if this were Laid out as a General Charge upon the whole Body of the Quakers. Tho' it is Expressly sai'd in the very Beginning of the Sect. p. 12. That they are not All Charg'd with it, nor Any of
them but only the New Quakers in America. And this Appen. do's confess too. And do's not pretend to Clear them from it. Where then was the Abuse in Placing of the Charge? O says Appen. its being against the whole Body of the Quakers, is Imply'd in the Title Page, and abundantly Charg'd in the Contents. For, says he, I cannot find one Marry'd or Single Quaker left out. First, for the Title-Page, ther is not one Syllable of it, or any thing like it. And the Contents saying, Their forbidding to Marry, is no more than the Hand of a Clock to Point where you may find the Hour. And the Page, being Nam'd, There you See who are, or are not Charg'd. O but says Appen, The first Charge runs over England, and all the Rest of the World, where ther are Quakers; the last is Limit∣ed only to America. Can any man make Sense of this? This Implys as if ther were Two Charges one for England, and one for Ame∣rica. But by the first Charge they only mean the Title and Contents, which they say Run over England and all the World of the Quakers. This is Non-sense as to the Contents, for they never go, but where the Book go's. Indeed Title-Pages are stuck up, or may be put into the Advertisements of News-Papers. But ther is not the least Hint towards this Charge of Marriage, in the Title-Page. So that all this Cry of the Quakers is no Wooll. Yet Appen. calls this Looseness in the Author, and at best, an Equivocal Lye. They must give some Ill∣words, or else they cannot Speak!
If it were worth the while to make Re∣prisals upon these Quakers, and Re-criminate up∣on them, I might go over as many Books I believe as they have wrote (for I can say it of as many as I have seen) and shew not only in their Contents, but Title-Pages, the most Ful∣som Boasts of what you will find nothing in the Book. I have, in the First Part given several Instances of it, as to the Contents of the Antidote; and cou'd give many more both in that, and this Appen. but that it is obvi∣ous to every one who will be at the Pains to Compare their Contents with their Perfor∣mance. I will here give the Reader one Instance, because it is a Pleasant one; and Discovers some other of their Principles. Ther is a Gentleman who was long of their Communi∣on, now one of their Seperatists, and a mem∣ber of Turners-Hall, Mr. Thom. Crisp: who, tho' a Quaker, and Zealous, even to Suffering with them, yet run not to all their Mad Extra∣vagancies: he allow'd himself to Pay Tythes, as a Just Debt, being Enacted by the Laws of the Land; for which he (with others such Mo∣derate Quakers) were severely Censur'd by them. He committed another Great Offence against their Orders and Constitutions, he was Marry'd in a Church, and by a Minister of the Church of England; which Rais'd their Indig∣nation Exceedingly. Therefore they Press'd him very hard, to make a Publick Confession of this Grievous Crime, and to sign an Instru∣ment of Condemnation against himself for it, Pursuant to their Disciplin. But not being a∣ble
to Prevail, they underhand and without his Knowledge, dealt with his Wife; who be∣ing Terrify'd with their Threatnings, all, In the Name of the Lord God Almighty! did sign such a Paper of Condemnation as they Re∣quir'd. But Mr. Crisp knew nothing of it, for several years after, till they themselves, up∣on his further Contests with them, Publish'd it in Print; without the Consent, and against the mind of Mrs. Crisp, who was not willing her Husband shou'd know it, lest he might be Displeas'd with her. But neither the sa∣credness of the Seal of Confession, nor the Ha∣zard of making Difference 'twixt Husband and Wife, was strong enough for their Resentment, when they thought they cou'd Reach a Blow at one who had Oppos'd them: or rather, who wou'd not be Intirely and Implicitly sub∣ject to their Popedoms: for no other Opposition had Mr. Crisp then given them, but only as to their Disciplin, in the Jurisdictions of their Womens Meetings, and other Institutions set up by George Fox, as Cardinal Primat; contrary to their Original Principle, of leaving every one to the Measure of the Light within Him∣self. Under which Pretence, they Drew many away from their obedience to the Church: But wou'd not Indure that Loose Plea (as W. Penn calls it) when urg'd by some among themselves,See Sn. Sect. vi. N. x. pa∣ragr. 12. p. 79, against that High Authority which their Leaders Assum'd, over all under their Do∣minion. This was all the Contest, at that time, betwixt: the Seperate and other Quakers, as appears in what was then wrote by John Story, Wilkinson, Rogers, Crisp, Bugg, and others
of the Seperats, wherein ther is nothing of those Errors in Doctrin, and Damnable Heresies, which they have since Discover'd: but were then Involv'd in, as Deep as the Rest. Yet for their Refusing to be subject to this Pleni∣tude of the Quaker-Church-Authority, they call'd them Judases, Apostats, Devils In-carnate &c. tho' Agreeing with them in Doctrin, and all the other Articles of the Quaker-Creed. It was this made them Discover Mrs. Crisp her Paper of Condemnation against her self, for being Mar∣ry'd by a Priest of the Church of England, in Revenge upon Mr. Crisp, who joyn'd with their Seperatists. But they were Disapointed of their Malice in thinking to make him Un-Easie as to his Wife: for he, as a wise Man, Consider'd their Importunity, and Terrible Denunciations of no less than Damnation, to all who wou'd not come under their Disciplin; which might work upon a Woman, that had given her self up to be Guided by them: And, as he ought, he plac'd the Abuse upon them, who had thus Impos'd upon the Credulity of a woman, whom they had Deluded to Believe them. Thus says he in the 5th Part of his Babels Builders. p. 9. Prin∣ted An. 1682. It is like She, as too many more have, gave too much Credit to what some of G. Fox's CHEATS said: And She is not the first that hath been Deceived by you; And perhaps some among you, that have Prated others out of their Money, might Prate her unto the writing and gi∣ving you that Paper you Pretend to. This is thus Quoted by G. Whitehead, in his Judgement Fixed. p. 290. And how do's he Answer it? Why
thus. O Thomas! be Asham'd of thus Abusing thy Wife. And in his Contents (which is the thing I am Coming to) he sets it down thus. (p. 162.) His (Thom. Crisp's) Abuse of his Wife. This made several of the Quakers (particular∣ly Ann Docwra) come to Mr. Crisp's house, think∣ing ther had been a misunderstanding betwixt Mr. Crisp and his Wife; to Endeavour a Re∣conciliation. For a Man's Abuse of his Wife, is a Comprehensive Charge. And standing thus Generally in the Contents of a Book, might Raise strange thoughts in the Reader, as we see it did; and Probably was the Design of the Wri∣ter. For what other Design cou'd he have? If ther was no Discontent (as ther was none in this Case) yet the Quakers did their Best to Raise one betwixt Man and Wife. At least, to Brand them to the world in the Contents of their Books; tho' when you come to the Proof, it is only putting the Abuse upon the Cheats the Quakers. To be Cheated is an Infirmity; but the Knavery is in the Cheaters. However this is call'd, Mr. Crisp's Abuse of his Wife! We see, by the way, what sort of Regard they have to the Church of England, when it is made so Heinous a Crime to Marry by any of her Priests. Ought not She to make it as Pe∣nal for any to Marry by the Priests of the Quakers? But that is not the Point now in hand. We are upon the Charges Exhibited in Contents. And how they are made Good in the Books. Particularly the Charge against the New-Qua∣kers in Prim. Heres.
Well, but the whole Body of the Quakers are brought in upon this Point, so far, as that the Principle upon which these New-Qua∣kers go, is the avowed Principle of the Body of the Quakers. viz. of taking the Resurrection in an Inward Sense, to Mean only the Rising up of the Light in their Hearts; and upon this Account, they Deny the Literal Resurrecti∣on of the Body, which has been sufficiently shewn. They say, that those who obey the Light have obtain'd the Resurrection already: And, in this Sense, They call themselves The Children of the Resurrection, in Opposition to The Children of this World, by which Name the Wicked, are Describ'd. Now the New-Quakers finding it Written, That the Children of this World do Marry: But that The Children of the Resurrecti∣on neither Marry nor are Given in Marriage; consequently they finding Marriage Inconsistant with the Resurrection-state: and thinking, by the Receiv'd Principle of the Quakers, that they were come to the Resurrection-state, it follow'd, of Course, That they must turn off their Wives. But then, finding likewise, That these their Spiritual and Resurrection-Bodys Retain'd still a strange Hankering after the Old way of the Flesh; And that Propagation was still to be kept up, they cou'd Fall no where else, but upon Fornication. For, The Children of this World MARRY! And indeed this is a Natu∣ral Consequence of the Quaker-Notion of the Resurrection; and were Enough to Cure them (any Sober man wou'd think) of this Mad and Heritical Extravagance. But they still stick to it. For Infallibility must never Repent or Amend! Upon this occasion, they are Ask'd
in Prim. Heres. p. 13. whether they are The Children of the Resurrection? If they Answer Yea, then, by this Text, in their Sense, they must not Marry. And if they say, Nay, then are they Reprobates, by their own Construction. And how do you think they get off from this Dilemma? By putting any other Sense upon the Text? or Denying this to be their Expo∣sition of it? or shewing, That this was not the Consequence of their Exposition? No. none of these ways. None of these wou'd do. How then? Appen. p. 36, and 37. trys (for the first time) what the Quakers can do at Wit and Raillery. But it is so Heavily Dull, as shews Them to be Children, in the Literal Sense, but neither of the Resurrection, nor of This world, for ther is neither Wit, nor Wis∣dom in their Poor Repartees. They say they will Turn the Tables (and most Ingeniously!) upon this Author, whom they call Charles. And thus they Begin. p. 37. Charles Art thou a Child of wrath? He must Answer Yea; or go against his own avowed Principles. Must he so? But what if he shou'd not? than BAYS's Suppose is spoyl'd. But if he shou'd not, then he must Go against his own Avowed Principles. What Principles are these? they Name none. They leave us to Guess. And I think I have found it out. It is said in our Catechism, That we are By Nature Born in Sin, and the Children of Wrath. There it is! And now they Twit us again with our Confessing our selves to be Sin∣ners: And Hugg themselves in their Perfection! But Hark ye, my Friends, you have Read but Half. For it is said, That being by Nature
Born in Sin, and the Children of Wrath, we are Hereby (that is, by coming, as we ought, to Christ's Holy Baptism) made the Children of Grace. So that, by our own Principles, we are Children of Grace; and you are The Children of Wrath, who Remain in your Natural Corrup∣tion; and Flout at, and Despise those Means of Grace, which Christ has Commanded. And therefore your Genteel Inference, upon your Forcing Charles to say Yea, whether he will or not, That it is very Hard, a Man shou'd send Himself thus to Hell, must be sent Home again to be Answer'd at The Second-Days Mee∣ting. And Charles has Escap'd for Once! But don't wonder (says Appen.) till we see what the next Question will do. Well, we won't if we can Help it. Now Charles, look to thy self! Let me ask again, Charles, art thou a Disobedi∣ent Son? He will say, NAY. That is, if he be not Cross! And because we know he is a Sinner, he may, perhaps, not Clear himself from all Breaches even of the Fifth Command. But he shall not put those Tricks upon Us. He shall Answer Nay, as you wou'd have him. And now what is your Inference? Be sure you hold him Fast. Why then, say you, It is written, Disobedience is as the Sin of Witch∣craft: therefore say all Good Men, Disobedience is a wicked thing, and consequently of the Devil. Verily those Good Men are very Ingenious men, who have found it out, That Sin and witch∣craft is a wicked thing! And more than that, That it is Consequently of the Devil! Well, what of all this? Now Reader (says Appen) see, Before he sent himself, and now he wou'd Hale
all the People thither. Whither? To the Devil! That's Hard indeed. But (Appen.) you have Forgot that you made him Answer Nay, to this Question of Disobedience. And then, How do's this Affect him? No matter for that. It affects others. For (says Appen.) he calls those Disobedient who are truly Obedient and Loyal: And so wou'd Hale All the People to the Devil. Do's he then call All the People Disobedient? Do's he Except None? This is a Terrible Fellow! we must look to him! But now Appen. suppose he shou'd call for Proof of this? Have you your Witnessess Ready? (For you must not Expect the Rogue will Con∣fess!) Otherwise may he call Thee and thy Friends, who thus Accuse him, as you have done to others, upon Less occasion, Lyars, Impostors, Cheats &c. He may bring you to as strict Account, as you did G. Keith at Turners-Hall (before men∣tioned) where you wou'd not Admit of Witness brought against you, unless Particularly Nam'd.Narrative of the Pro∣ceedings at Turner's-Hall. 11 June 1696 p. 39.46.You ought to Name his Name Particularly (said you to G. Keith) if thou do'st not, thou art an Impostor—I Dare thee to Name their Names, or else thou art a Lyar, an Impostor, a Cheat; I dare say it is a Cheat—O thou Lyar—You must not think to come off with such a Proof as you bring p. 6. of a Lying Boast you Charge upon the Author of the Sn. of his having Brought over a Great many from the Quakers, for which you say on∣ly I have heard it. For, whatever he has done, in that Case, I Dare say, you cannot Prove that ever he Boasted of it. Come Produce your Witnesses, Name them, Name them, or else
Thou art—But whoever has done it, it is Certainly known, that many of them of late, have left you, and Receiv'd Baptism, accord- to the Institution of the Church of England. Of which I cou'd name several. But that wou'd only Feed your Malice, to Rail against them: and if you cou'd not Find, to Make stories of them; as you have done against the Author of the Sn. and All that Oppose you. But now, as to your Charge upon Hear∣say, I desire you wou'd Read Tho. Elwood's Antidote against the Infection of Will. Rogers's Book. Printed 1682. p. 42. And see what Cen∣sure is there pass'd upon this manner of Pro∣ceeding, and take it Home to you. Thus you speak there to your Opponents, It seems you are such as can take up a Report, and Publish it to the Na∣tion, with a Comment upon it, as if it were True, tho' you do not know whether it be True or no. Is not this a Token of a Dark Spirit? I am sure you never Learn'd this of the Light, nor were led in∣to it by the Spirit, or Grace of God. It is a sign you wanted Matter, and abounded with Envy, else you wou'd not take up, or make, such Reports, to Employ your selves in Answering them—But the Lord will Rebuke that Spirit in you, and you to∣gether with it—If Report be true! But what if Report be not True? what have you done then? —you shoot your Bolts at Random, &c. I think now the Author of the Sn. is pretty Even with you, for Charging him upon Hear-say, not only of Boasting, as here, but of what might Reach his Life, as mention'd before.
But I have one Question to Ask here. You charge him with taking the Name of Loyalty to Himself: and fixing that of Dis-Loyalty up∣on All the People, and so Haling them All down-right to the Devil! The Chief Import of this Appen. is to Vindicate Will. Penn. But not under his own Name: he having more Wit than to Burn his own Fingers, where he found it too Hot for him: And now Good Ap-Pen or Ape-Pen (when one Plays with Children, they may use Childrens wit) whether is Will. Penn included (along with Sn.) in the Term Loyal; or must he go down the stream with the All? if the Former, then He is as Deep in the Mud, as Sn. in the Mire: And you have made a very Pretty Apology for Him! But if the Latter, was He always so? if not, then He has Chang'd his Mind: and is as Fal∣lible as other Mortals. Or, do's He only Act a Part now, as He did Before? what then be∣comes of his Boast in his Preface to Fox's Jour∣nal (before Quoted) That their Light within do's Guide and Direct them (and, by their Prin∣ciples, Infallibly) not only in matters of Reli∣gion, but also, as to Civil Concerns? will no Experience serve to make them Wise? or, at least, not stark Mad, to fix Infallibility thus upon Every thing that they do! what Pro∣vok'd Will. Penn to call his own Sins to Re∣membrance, by Handing about this his Dar∣ling Appen.? so much do's Zeal or Resentment sometimes over-shoot a mans Reason, tho' In∣fallible! And men are Fond of their own, tho' they be Brats!
Ap-Pen is very Angry at the General Charge in the Contents, before shewn, and says, That not one Marry'd or Single Qua∣ker is left out. Tho' in p. 12. which the Contents point to, they are All, both Marry'd and Single, not only Left out, but Expresly Discharg'd from that Accusation, except only the New Quakers in America. Now this calls to mind those sort of Accusations which the Quakers have given against All Sorts and Pro∣fessions of Christians, especially against the Church of England; whom Will. Penn their Orator Di∣stinguishes by the Delicious Epithets of Idle Gor∣mandizing Priests of England. That Abomina∣ble Tribe. The very Bane of Soul and Body, &c. as, before Quoted. And to Apply the words of Ap-Pen, This is General enough; for I can∣not find one single Priest of the Church of Eng∣land, or in All the World, left out. We are now very Justly Advertis'd, by this Quaker objection against General Charges, and without making very Particular Exceptions, whom they mean, in All the Venom and Billings-Gate they have spu'd out. For which we thank them. And, if it be not our Fault, will make the Due use of it. We have now done with the Witty Reper∣tee which Appen. throws at the Author of Prim. Heres. in answer to what he objected against the Quakers, as to the Inconsistency of their Marriage with their Notion of the Re∣surrection. But now (says Appen. ibid. p. 37.) I come more closely to Examin, &c. Now they have done with their Wit or Fooling, they come,
Closely to the Business. And First, they give a long Description of their Light within, and how, by it, they are made Partakers of the First Resurrection; and that Believing in the Light, is Solid Christianity, &c. Secondly, p. 39. They tell you of their manner of Marrying here in England, what Caution, &c. they use in it. But what is all this to the business? Do they tell how to Reconcile this with that Text, that the Children of the Resurrection do not Marry? No. Not a word! They Forgot that Text. Why was that objected to them? Had they any thing to do to Answer that Text? so one wou'd have thought! for this Text was the whole objection, as being that, which Persuaded the New Quakers to throw off Marriage. And they Answer it Closely (as they say) without so much as Naming of it, or taking the least notice, that ever it had been objected. This is their way! And thus they can Answer any Argument in the world, that is, by never Heeding it; but bringing in some long Discourse of other matters, till you For∣get it: And then, if you Remember it no more, it is Fully Answered!
SECT. V. Their Re-asserting of their own Infallibility, and Sinless-Perfection. Wherein of their Idolatry. THER is one thing They can never Forget, and it is not fit that We shou'd. Appen. brings it in Here again. That is, Their Infallibility, and Spirit of Discerning, Equally Infallible! In their Description of the Light within p. 38. say they. And it is Eternally true, That men by Believing in the Light (not∣withstanding his Idle scoff) may become Children of the Light: And it is of necessity, that them that are truly such, must be seperate from, and Dis∣cerners of the Children of this World. i. e. Dark∣ness. Thus Appen. And if what I have said before, be not sufficient to Prove these men to be stark Mad, sure this will be such a Con∣viction as that none can Desire a Greater. It has been Prov'd upon them over and over again, that not only most Vile and Scandalous Livers; but even Witches, and Persons visibly Possess'd with the Devil, have Preach'd Ʋn∣Discover'd amongst them, some for Twenty years together (see Sn. Sect. xxi.) as Winder's Witches, &c. Attested beyond all Contradiction. And their Books are full of Complaints of Judases among Themselves, so they call their Seperatists, who liv'd long among them, but were not truly of them; whom yet they cou'd not Discover. Did they Discover Chri∣stopher Atkinson and Thomas Symons's Maid, till they Discover'd it themselves? (Sn. Sect. vi.
N. v.) or George Archer (Sat. Dis. Glean. Sect. vi. N. 2. p. 92.) and many others, till their Whoring and Vileness Grew Notorious in the Countries where they liv'd? Who was it that Discover'd H. Winder's murderous Witches to the Quakers, who stuck by them, to the very Last? Yet still notwithstanding of all these Convictions, they stand firmly to it, That it is of necessity, that they must be seperate from, and Discerners of, the Children of Dark∣ness! Have they not had Instances enough, to shame them out of this Senseless and Blasphemous Pretence! They call for more, while they Re∣fuse to Repent. And (tho' it be needless) I will Gratify them, or the Reader, with one more that is Remarkable. The Great Quaker Apostle of Mary-Land, in America, was Thomas Thurston, who, while the Deputy Governor was absent a year or more in England, came with a Message from the Lord (as he Horridly pretended!) to his Wife, who was a Quaker, that he was sent to Propagate the Holy seed with her. And when her Husband Return'd, finding a Child more than he had left, she Confess'd the whole matter. Upon which he oblig'd her to go to the Quaker-Meeting, and there Publickly to Declare the whole Mon∣strous Truth, which she did. Nor cou'd Tho∣mas Deny it. Upon which he came to Eng∣land, and, till it was otherwise Discover'd, was Receiv'd by the Friends, and Preach'd a∣mong them, as Formerly. As he did in Ma∣ry-Land, for sometime after it was Publickly known there. And his Light within was thought so Infallible, that another Quaker-Preacher own'd
it to him (of Good Credit) who told it to me, That the Generality of the Quakers there, nay, said he, I my self Durst not Judge him, even in our minds, not to have had an In∣spiration from God for what he did. Yet it is of necessity, That they that are truly Quakers, must be seperate from, and Discerners of the Children of Darkness! And Rich. Hubberthorn. p. 212. of his works, says, That they can Discern the E∣lect from the World. And Denies those to be true Ministers of Christ, who cannot do it. This was the Argument by which G. Fox thought that he had Prov'd one Nathanael Stephens, who was Minister of Drayton, in the year 1655. not to be a True Minister of Christ. This you may see in a Book wrote by G. Fox and others of the Quakers, with this Title, The Spiritual Man Judgeth all things, or The Spiritual Man's True Judgment. And how by him the Hearts of others were and may be Judged by the Spirit of Truth; and also how things by the Spiritual Man were Judged of con∣cerning both Salvation and Dammation, &c. Print∣ed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Ea∣gle, at the West-end of Paul's. 1655. This Spiritual Man here mention'd was G. Fox: And the Judgment which he pas'd upon the Hearts of Others, and the Occasion of it, is told p. 3. of a Chapter which bears this Su∣perscription, This is to go abroad to stop Lies and Slanders, that Truth may be Cleared, &c. And it is subscrib'd George Fox. There he speaks of himself in the third Person, and says, GEORGE FOX coming to Drayton, to
his Fathers in the Flesh—Christopher Fox's House [This was to Imitate the Stile of our Blessed Lord. Rom. ix. 5.] upon the Sixth day of the week, being the Twelth day of the Ele∣venth Month— Thus Particularly he sets it down, with other Circumstances, as who were Present, &c. Because of the mighty Miracle he shewed that Day, in Judging the Heart of Nat. Stephens! which he go's on to Relate, and tells how he came into the Grave-yard (so he call'd the Church-yard) and met with N. Stephens the Priest (as he thought he Re∣proach'd him) and there before the Company, particularly Christopher Fox, his Father, Ac∣cording to the Flesh, being Present, Then George asked him (the Priest) what he did Believe, whether he (G. Fox) had such a Familier Spirit (as it seems (with very good Reason) had been objected against him) Yea, or Nay? The Priest Answered and said, He cou'd not tell. He might have a Good, and he might have a Bad. Then George told him, Here thou hast Mani∣fested thy self to be no Minister of God, but a False Minister. For the Ministers of Christ and the New Covenant of God, they cou'd Dis∣cern Spirits and Try them. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Joh. 4. And as you may Read in Isaiah, he Discern'd the Familier Spirit, and Judged it. Isa. 8. And the Apostle Discerned the Witch-Craft of the Witches that had Bewitched the Galatians, read Gal. 3. And here thou hast Manifested thy self to be a Blind Guide, who can put no Diffe∣rence between the Precious and the vile, who hast no Salt to savour withall, therefore thou art good for nothing but to be Cast out, and Troden under
Foot. Mat. 5. Then George told him that the Spiritual Man Judgeth All things. And Ste∣phens, and the other Priest Chester both Denyed it, and said the spiritual Man did not Judge All things. These are the words of G. Fox. And upon this occasion the Book wherein this is told was written. And bears the Title of The Spiritual Man Judgeth All things, &c. Through all which Book this Argument is carry'd on, That he can be no true Minister of Christ, who cannot Discern and Judge the Hearts of other men. And the Quakers here take to Themselves those Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Spirit which are mention'd. 1 Cor. xii. And equal Themselves to Isaiah, and the Holy Prophets and Apostles of our Lord. None of whom ever Pretended to that Prerogative of God Alone, to Know the Hearts of Men. Therefore it is said of Christ,Joh. ii. 24, 25. That He knew. All men: And needed not that any shou'd testify of man: for He knew what was in Man. But this was never said of any Prophet or Apo∣stle. They needed to be told of what was in Man. And sometimes God did tell them some things,2 Kin, vi. 12. by Particular Revelation; as to Elisha, what the King of Syria was doing in his Bed-Chamber. To Peter, the Deceit of A∣nanias and Sapphira,Act. v. &c. But they had no Ge∣neral Knowledge of Mens Hearts, which these Blasphemous Quakers do Pretend to! And they put this, as a Test, to Mr. Stephens, whether he knew G. Fox's Heart ? And from his not knowing it, concluded him to be a False Minister! And they make this to be a Gene∣ral Rule, so that none can be True Ministers
of Christ, who have not this Gift! By which All the Present Quakers are Ʋn-Minister'd, at least, the Chief of them, whom I have heard say, That they do not Pretend to this Gift. Yet will they not Disown this Blasphemous and Sensless FOX; But still count him as having been a True Minister of Christ: And that All he Wrote was from the Mouth of the Lord. Which if True, ther is not One True Mini∣ster of Christ among the Quakers at this Day. Even by their own Confession! Yet all this notwithstanding, They are Per∣fect and Sinless! They have not Chang'd, but are the same they were from the Beginning! They still Maintain the Doctrin and Holy Testi∣mony of their Ancient Friends! And that, In All the Parts of it! For Truth is One, and Chan∣ges not! Thus it is worded in the Yearly Epi∣stle for the year 1696. Given forth by their General Assembly at London. They have no Sins at all to Answer for, Poor Innocent Lambs! No. Not They! But did Christopher Atkinson, while carrying on his In∣trigue with Thom. Symmons's Maid: or Thom. Thurston, while Debauching the Deputy-Governor's Wife; and Father'd his Adultery upon the Imme∣diat Command of the H. Ghost! (O Dreadful!) or George Archer, Or any others of the Long &c. of the Quaker Harmless-ones, while they were Wal∣lowing in such Beastly Sins, did they, during that Time, and before they Repented, Conti∣nue in the Office of their Ministry? Yea Veri∣ly! They Preach'd and Pray'd, for all this, like Dragons! And did they, in all that time, Con∣fess their Sins in Publique? I mean not their
Private sins (for that they were not o∣blig'd to do in Publick, before they were Publickly known, to make Reparation for the Scandal) But did they Confess themselves to be Sinners in the General? Or Begg God to Pardon their Sins, or have Mercy upon them? Or own that they had, in the Least, Trans∣gressed Any of His Laws, since they were Qua∣kers? No! Thank you for that! What! Sinners and Quakers! That wou'd never do! That wou'd have Contradicted the Testimony of all their Ancient Friends, and the Founda∣tion of Sinless-Quakerism! As it has Quite o∣verthrown all their Pretence to the Spirit of Discerning and Knowing the Hearts of Men: And consequently, by G. Fox's Doctrin, Ren∣der'd them all False Ministers and Conjur∣ers! How Dreadfully Astonishing is this! To see these most Wretched and Desperate of Sinners, even while Reeking in the Foulest Sins, to set up the Pretence of Perfection: And Scorn to Own any Sin, or ask Mercy from God for it! Which, as before has been Observ'd, was ne∣ver yet Heard at any Quaker-Meeting. See more upon this subject, in the First Part, Sect. xiii. which begins at p. 149. There p. 155, 156. You will find a Noble Stroke of a Quaker Prophet and Fidler, who said of St. John, That if John had said, he had been a Sinner, he had Ly'd. This was to shew, that St. John did not Include himself, when he said (1 Joh. 1.8, 9, 10.) If we say, that we have not Sinned, we make Him (God) a Lyar, and His word is not in us. But the Quaker here
Returns the Lye upon the Apostle! He must Return it too upon the Prophet, who said, While I was Confessing MY Sin, and the Sin of my People. Dan. ix. 20. Here Daniel said My Sin. Did he not then Confess Himself to be a Sinner! Yet was he One of those Three, whom God Nam'd as the most Perfect of all the Earth. Ezek. xiv. 14. But the Quakers think Themselves more Perfect than all these! NOAH's Sin of Drunkenness, is Recorded. Gen. ix. 21. DANIEL here Owns His Sin. And JOB says, I Abhor my self, and Repent in Dust and Ashes. Chapt. xlii. 6. Wou'd he Repent for his Good Deeds? Or Abhor himself for them? But Will. Shewen, another Quaker Prophet, in his Treatise concerning Thoughts and Imaginations. Printed An. 1685. P. 25. tells us, that a QƲAKER is Meeker than MOSES, Stronger than SAMPSON, Wiser than SOLOMON, and more Patient than JOB. Nay, Harmless, and Innocent as CHRIST! But either St. John was, in Good Earnest, a Lyar, as Solomon Eccles (that was the Fidling Prophets Name) Civily calls him: Or otherwise, if he said Truth, then the Quakers make GOD to be a Lyar, and His Word is not in Them. They are Past all the ordinary Means of Grace, who have Excluded the very first step, of Asking, and consequently of Expecting any Mercy from God. For if they Expected it, they wou'd Ask it: And they Ask it not, because, they think, they have no Need of it. And this is Consequential to their notion of the Light within, which this Appen. instead of Excusing, do's Re-maintain, in Reducing all
Religion to Believing In their Light, which they make the Solid Christianity. If by the Light here they meant the outward Jesus of Nazareth, who was Born at Bechlehem, and Faith, in Him, ther wou'd be no Dis∣pute betwixt them and us. But when by the Light they mean not any outward Person, but something within themselves (as elsewhere fully shewn) whence they call it the Light within: And tell us of Faith In That; and that this Alone, without any thing else, is Sufficient for Salvation; which they make Common to all Heathens, to Everyman that cometh into the world, then I say, They are no Christians, But are Gross Idolaters, who Whorship something within Themselves; or some special Presence of God which they suppose to be There. For it is no less Idolatry to worship God In my Self, than In any Other; In the Sun, Moon, or any Creature; for ther is a Presence of God In them All. And this is the Excuse and Pre∣tence of all Idolatry. For the Idolatries of the Quakers, see Sn. Sect. viii. and Sat. Dis. Glean. Sect. ii. n. 4. p. 71. Let me here add one In∣stance more, which will Explain the Rest. It is in William Haworth his Book Intitul'd The Quaker Converted to Christianity. An. 1674. p. 4. of the Prefatory Epistle, where he tells, That he saw Jam. Naylor Suffer, for his Horrid Blas∣phemy, in taking Divine worship to Himself, and setting Himself up for the Messiah. And tho' Some of the Trimming and Time-serving of the Quakers made a Shew of Disowning this Naylor, after he was (as he justly Deserv'd) Whip't, Pillory'd, Bored thro' the Tongue, and Branded on the Forehead, for his Hideous Blasphemies:
Yet they did not Disown his Blasphemies (for they hold the Same) but they Meant only his Rashness, or Ill-Luck to Meet with His, and Their Due Deserts, or such like Mental-Reser∣vation. G. Fox wrote several Papers, in Justi∣fication of James Naylor, his Calling himself Christ and his being Hosanna'd as Christ was &c. which are Annex'd to the Tryal of James Nay∣lor, Printed by the Quakers, An. 1657. With Marginal Notes in Defence of All his Blasphe∣mies. Tho' this Vulpone, like Judas, after he saw that Naylor was Condemn'd, turn'd Tayle, and yet but Seemingly, Pretended to Disown him. But he Disown'd None of his Books, Principles, or Doctrin: On the Contrary, he as well as the Rest of the Quakers, did Justifie them, a∣gainst several Opposers, who Quoted them, as the true Quaker-Doctrin; which they did not Dis-own. And Will. Penn, in his Serious Apolo∣gy An. 1671. p. 156. Names James Naylor, and Vindicates him, as a Prophet, and Servant of the Lord, thro' whom the Holy Spirit did Ʋtter His Mind. Haworth, in the Place above Quoted, says, That John Bolton (who was a Quaker) told him, That he stood by, and saw three Women one after another, Fall down and Worship James Naylor, and one of them in her Bowings, had these words, viz. Thy Name is no more James but J AM. And James Naylor told John Bolton, That if he worshipped his Body, he shou'd Refuse it; But if that within, he wou'd Accept it. This is the same Answer which G. Whitehead, in his Innocen∣cy against Envy. p. 18. Gives to Fran. Bugg his Charge of the Idolatries, and Blasphemous Names and Titles given by the Quakers to G. Fox; G. W.
Replies, How Proves he they Gave and Intended those Names and Titles to the Person of George Fox, and not to the Life of Christ in him, whereof he was a Partaker? But how a Partaker? Was it of the Influences only or Inspirations of Christ's Blessed Spirit, that the Quakers Mean? No. No. That is but a small Dispensation, with them! They Mean, Partaking of Christ's very Nature and Essence, so as Themselves to be God! See hereafter Sect. vii. N. 2. And that the Light within Them, is not only a Ray or Communica∣tion of Christ, but is Christ Himself in Person. And therefore Appen. do's so often tell Us, not only of Believing, That ther is such a Light in Ʋs, But to Believe In That Light. viz. To make That the Object of our Faith. Tho' take it as they will, Adoration Paid to them, upon Account of that Light in Them, is Downright Idolatry. The Body of Christ, while upon Earth, was no otherwise Adorable, than upon Account of the Divinity Residing in it, And ther is no way by which the Quakers do Allow Adoration to Christ, but by the same, they take it to Them∣selves. I do not Doubt, but ther is an Influence and Inspiration sent from the Holy Spirit of God into the Hearts of all True Believers. This I Believe: But I do not Believe In it. That is, To make That In me, the Object of my Faith. Tho' He is the Object of my Faith, from whom It comes. Therefore to talk, as Appen, of Be∣lieving In this Light within, is no less than Ido∣latry; and shews the Quakers to be Destitute of whole Christianity. Hence they Reject the Holy Scriptures as the Rule of Faith, which this Appen. instead of Denying, do's again own, as shewn
before. And then Trusting only to what is within them, they are Given up to follow their own Imaginations; and take Every strong Im∣pression which comes into their Brain, tho' by the Illusion of the Devil (of which ther are many Instances In-disputable) for no less than the Im∣mediate Dictates of the Holy Ghost. And they are Equally sure of Every thing they Say or Do. And tho' it be, but upon Hear-say, yet they can Pawn their Infallibility for the Truth of it. As in this Appen. where before Quoted, p. 6. speaking of the Boast which they wou'd fix upon the Author of the Sn. of his having Con∣verted many Quakers, for which they give no other Proof than I have heard, yet, within five Lines, it says, Therefore, when this his Pre∣tended service is urg'd, as an Argument for his At∣tonement and Reconciliation, I can Assure them the Argument is False. May not the Quakers be here minded of what they say to this same Author, p. 49. of this Appen. where they Ac∣cuse him for saying, That G. Fox's Inspirations came from the Spirit of Pride. But (says Appen.) how Charles will Assure any man of that, which he is not Infallibly Assur'd of himself (an Inspirati∣on so Foul a Vessel must not Pretend to) cannot Readily be Guessed. It may very Easily be Guess'd (my sweet Appen.) for do's he say so, of his own Knowlege? or only by Hear-say? or do's he give any sort of Proof for it? If none at all. He was a very Naughty Fellow. But, upon what occasion do you bring this in? It is, speaking of your Stiffness, in not pulling off your Hats. As you word it. But you mis-Quote
Prim. Heres. This Charge is there Sect. vii. p. 17. And it is not worded Pulling, but only for not Taking off your Hats, (you have made Moun∣tains of less Mis-Quotations than this, this is beyond a Colon, or a Semi-Colon) for he wou'd not have you Pull or Lugg at your Hats (that is not Mannerly) but to Take them off Hand∣somly, and with a Boon meen. And did he call G. Fox, Proud, for not doing of this? Why tru∣ly Appen. the world do's call it a little Saucy not to Return a Civility, especially to ones Betters. But, Cry you Mercy, G. Fox thought no body Better, no, nor Half so Good as Himself! He call'd Himself, The Son of God, said His Kingdom was not of this world! He Trode upon Princes, like Mortar! Nay He made Himself Equal to God! (all which is shewn in the Sn.) why then shou'd He D'off His Bonnet to Mortal Man! And did that Scurvy Author of the Sn. say, That these Inspirations came from the Spirit of Pride? However here was something like to Proof, it was not meer Hear-say, but from G. Fox's own words, Printed in his Books. Tho' we know all this Proceeded from Pure spunk Humility! And you take no Pride at all, in keeping your Hats on, when men of Quality stand Bare before you! As did not that Friend who coming to K. Charles II. in Windsor-Park; and the King per∣mitting him to walk by him, with his Hat on, said to him, How like a Fool do'st thou look? See how Every body Stares at thee, for having thy Hat on? The Ingenious Quaker Reply'd. And Charles, if my Hat were off, no body wou'd look at me.
Well, but notwithstanding of all these Proofs, here is no Infallibility in the Case! And How can Charles Assure any man of that, which he is not Infallibly Assur'd of Himself? There Appen. has Clinch'd him! But will not both words and Actions amount to an Infallible Proof? No, not in Charles! Why? Because so Foul a Vessel must not Pretend to it. But from the Clean Vessel of a Quaker, an Hear-say is enough for an Infal∣lible Demonstration! And They can Pronounce I can Assure you of it, tho' in a Negative, as of his never having Converted any Quakers. Now if this shou'd Provoke him to Name Names in Print (which I am Morally assur'd he can) then ther wou'd be Boasting with a witness! But the Quakers are as Infallibly sure, That he either Has, or Intends to urge this as an Argument for his Attonement and Recon∣ciliation, tho' Appen. do's not tell with whom. But whoever they be, I can Assure them (says it) the Argument is False. Now, Suppose, that he never urg'd this as an Argument of his Recon∣ciliation with any Body, nor Ever had any such Intention, as all that know him do Believe, he do's not think it a Matter of that Merit. Well, but How can be Perswade others (if he had a mind to it) of what he is not Infallibly Assur'd Himself? What, not of his own Thoughts, and Actions? No. For, he is a Foul Vessel, that is, He is one of the World, and so a Child of Darkness, because not a Quaker! And such have no Right to know their own Thoughts: But the Quakers know their own, and all other mens too; And that Infallibly! or else they are the Greatest Lyars in the World; and their Fox was a Conjurer, by his own Confessi∣on. See Sn. p. 33. to 37. and p. 284.
SECT. VI. Their Defence of not taking off their Hats, or Giving Civil-Titles, Consider'd. And of their Plain Language (as they call it) in Theeing and Thouing. Both of which are shewn, not to be Merely want of Manners; But a Form'd Design to Subvert Government, when it is in Any other Hands but their Own. For that they think, None but Them∣selves have any Right to Govern. I Come now to Sect. vii. of Prim. Heres. And to Examin the Answers given to it by Appen. The subject is, The Quakers stiffness in not taking off their Hats, and Giving men their Civil Titles. Of which we just now spoke Obiter. But we will Examin their Answers more thoroly. They begin in Appen. p. 48. And first, this is call'd a Ridiculous Charge. And so indeed it is, in this Sense, as it is a Charge of a most Ridiculous Whim, if it were no worse: for it is not only a Proud and Sense∣less Singularity, but it is a Contempt of Govern∣ment, and Dissolution of Order, and the Diffe∣rence of Relations that men bare to one ano∣ther; which God Ordain'd, and without which the world cou'd not Subsist. And therefore it is brought in Prim. Heres. Next to Sect. vi. which treats of the Quakers Contempt of Ma∣gistracy and Government, as a Plain Instance of
it. To this says Appen. in their Courtly way, He Falsly and Foolishly Insinuates this (that is, taking off our Hats, and Giving men their Civil Titles) to have been Commanded by the Apostles &c. They mean, That ther is no Com∣mand in Scripture for taking off ones Hat. That is, Literally a Hat. They wou'd have the word Hat nam'd. And here they are Pret∣ty Secure, for ther were no Hats worn in those Days, nor many Ages after. But surely these Quakers are not so Dull, as not to know, That it is the Respect and Honour which is Due to our Superiors that is here Treated of, tho' the Manner of Expressing it may Differ, according to the Custom of Several Countrys. Thus Ʋn-covering of the Head is not us'd as a mark of Respect in Turkey. Therefore they do it not there, even in Presence of the Grand Segnior. There the Quakers may have this Liberty of Conscience. But if they wou'd observe the Scripture Literally (as they Pretend) they shou'd put off their Shoos, instead of their Hats. For that was then the Token of Respect; thus Moses was Com∣manded to put off his Shoos, when he Ap∣proch'd to the Bush, not to take off his Hat. Now, if the Quakers wou'd have Texts for shewing Respect to Superiors; they may have Abundance. Honour to whom Honour is Due. &c. And if Taking off ones Hat be us'd as a mark of Paying Honour or Respect, then it is Included in this Command. And the not do∣ing of it, is an Express Breach of this Com∣mand. And it is not in our Power to Ap∣point what shall be the Manner of Paying Honour: we must Submit, in that, to the Cu∣stom
of the Country where we Live. You find frequent Instances in Scripture of Falling Pro∣strate to Kings, and Worshiping of them with our Faces bent down to the Earth; and not only to Proud and wicked Kings, but to David, and the Best of them. None came into their Presence, without Paying of this Honour to them. And this was a Great Deal more, than Bare Taking off ones Hat. We never find, That either Christ Himself, or His Apostles Refus'd to Give all the Respect and Civil Ti∣tles that were Customarily Paid even to Hea∣then Magistrates. He acknowleg'd to Pilat, that his Power was from Above. St. Paul gave Felix the Title of Most Noble, Even when Fe∣lix call'd him Mad: and Ask'd Pardon for speaking Dis-Respectfully to the High Priest, tho' Judging him, Contrary to the Law. A Quaker wou'd have call'd him (if he Durst) a Chemarim, Baal's Priest, Serpent, Dog, Devil, as they have call'd our Bishops and Magistrates, when they were out of their fingers. And as Christ and His Apostles so those our H. Fathers in the Church, who succeeded them, did both Practice and Command, the same Honour to be Paid to all Magistrates and Superiors. Yet Ap∣pen. says That this is a Pretence so Idle, that he (the Author of Prim. Heres.) may as soon find in those Early times, the taking Snuff after his Manner to be Declar'd Heresie. This was by way of Wit, because he Supposes that Author takes Snuff! But I'll tell thee Appen. That if taking of Snuff, were, by the Custom of this Coun∣try, as Great a Dis-Respect to Superiors, as keeping on my Hat, I wou'd think that Author, or any other
who did it, Guilty of as much Ill-Manners, as a Quaker. But if they set up such Dis-Respect as a Principle, and made Themselves Distin∣guished by it; I shou'd Condemn it, even as a Heresie: for such I think it, to Dissolve the Good Order of the World, and set Mankind Loose from the Distance and Duty to Superi∣ors; and to Teach this, as a Doctrin of Christ. However, against the Quakers this holds good, by their own Principles, if it be any Sin (which has been fully Prov'd) to be not only Heresie, but even a Denying of the Lord who Bought them. For thus say they in Truth defen∣ding the Quakers, which is said in the Title Page, to be Written from the Spirit of Truth in George Whitehead and George Fox the Younger. p. 39. 40. All Hereticks are subverted and do sin, and in Sinning, they Deny the Lord that bought them; for Every Sin is a Transgression of the Law: And whatever sin they Commit against Christ, there∣in they Deny him. Here we see the Necessity of the Quakers Sinless Perfection! For they make Every Sin to be a Denying of the Lord that bought them. And consequently to be not only Heresie but Apostacy, and Renouncing of Christianity. Whereby they have, by their own Confession, Ʋn-Christian'd All of Themselves, in whom we can find the least Sin or Flaw. And that has been done, to Purpose, in many other Instances besides this of the Hat. But, besides the Heresie and Great Mischief of this, It is Gross Hypocrisie in you Quakers; for at the same time that you will not shew that Respect to other men as to take off
your Hats, because (Forsooth) you wou'd not be the Servants of Men (we Believe you) you Ex∣act that same Respect from your own Servants, and make them take off their Hats to You. Nay not only your Menial Servants, but your Apprentices, as seen every Day in London. Now, do you think these to be more Servants to you, and to owe you more Duty, than you owe to the King, or any Human Governor? Yes. You do think so; and (as Judas of Galilee, and his Galileans) that you ought not to be Sub∣ject to any King or Government, but your own Jesus; in whose Right, you think that you have the Heirship of the whole Earth: and Just Power to Fight for it too, as you have set forth in your Printed Declaration, which you have been so often told of, but will Give no Answer to it. This is the Secret of your Stiff∣ness in not taking off your Hats to any Gover∣nors who are Children of the World (as you call all but your selves) that is, the Children of Darkness (as Appen. do's Explain it) and yet Re∣quiring the same Respect to be Paid to your Selves, by your own Servants. I say not, That all the Simpletons among you, Understand this. Ther are many that Follow your Leaders as some did Absalom, in the Simplicity of their Hearts, not knowing any thing. It is not fit, that the Great Secret of your Empire (which you Hope for one Day) shou'd be Expos'd to Every Body. But, may be, you do not think that the taking off a Hat is any Token of Honour, on∣ly a Foolish Fancy some People have got, and you wou'd not Comply with the Folly of the World. But you wou'd not Deny any True Respect to Governors.
No, this will not do. You Refuse it, because it is a Token of Respect, and for no other Reason. As Francis Howgil (a Quaker Pillar) said to Mr. Burton a Magistrate, before whom he was brought; who told him, he did not value his taking off his Hat to him, but ther was a Respect due to Magistracy. Howgil Re∣ply'd, That God had not Commanded him to take off his Hat, and that he did not owe him that Re∣spect, nor wou'd he give it him. Whereupon one that stood by, took off his Hat, and laid it upon the Table by him. But Howgil took it up again, and put it on. Another took it off again, and laid it on the Fire, but within his Reach. Yet Howgil wou'd not stoop to take it off the Fire, for if it had been Burn'd, ther had been Persecution: and this Hat wou'd have been put into the Register of the Sufferings of Friends, with the Childrens Clouts, and Hundreds of Pins, &c. which are there carefully In∣serted! But Howgil had not that Pleasure; for some body took his Hat off the Fire, before any Harm came to it, and gave it him; which on he clapt again, and wou'd not be Controul'd. This, and other Passages, you will find in the Irreligion of the Northern Quakers Print∣ed 1653. p. 67.68. But Instances of this kind are so Frequent, that we need not make Quotations. But to shew further, how much they think the taking off of the Hat to be a Token of Respect, ther was a Civil-War among them, and several Books wrote upon it, of taking off the Hat at Prayer. Upon occasion of which, Will. Penn wrote his Judas and the Jews, against ano∣ther Quaker Book, call'd The Spirit of the Hat. They may say, that this is an Honour Pay'd to
God. True. But still it shews, what they think of taking off the Hat, that it is a Token of Respect. And this is the Reason why they will not Give it to any of the Worlds Magistrates. But says Appen. we Expected some Ancient Father to Condemn us, pursuant to the Title of Prim. Heres. And ther are none Nam'd in p. 17. But you were told p. 14. of the Repeat∣ed Exbortations in the Epistles, especially of St. Paul, of Obedience and Respect to Magistrates: And that the Occasion of this was the Prin∣ciple of the Gaulonits, followers of Judas: who (like You) threw off the Obedience and Respect due to their Magistrates, who were not of their Religion. And what needed this be Re∣peated over again in the next Leaf, while he was treating upon the same Subject? That is the manner of the Quaker Writers who Like so well what they do Themselves, that they are never weary of Licking their Bears; but never into Good shape. But how did the Title of Prim. Heres. Oblige the Author to bring any more of the Primitive Fathers, in this Point, besides the Apostles? were not they Fathers of the Church; and Primitive too? And what the Title Engages is, to shew that these Quaker-Heresics were Broach'd & Condemn'd, in the Days of the Apostles, & the first 150 years after Christ. These are the words of the Title. And is not this Answer'd, by shewing the Authority of the Apostles in the Case? But we see what it is to have to do with Angry Men; who are Resolv'd not to be Satisfy'd, and to find Exceptions, whether they can or not. It were Easie to Multiply Quotations out of the Fathers, upon this Head; But that wou'd be only to Over-Prove, and Tire the Reader.
Especially considering, what an Ample Testi∣mony Appen. has Produc'd p. 44. out of one of the Quaker-Worthys, Will. Gibson, in these words. And those Rulers Governors or Magistrates, who are a Terror to Evil Doers, and a Praise to them that do well, are worthy of Honour, yea, of Double Honour: and all such are duly Honour'd by us, with the Honour which belongs to them; and we Really and with Pleasure, Honour and Obey all such, not only for fear of wrath, but for Good Conscience-sake, as the Apostles, and Frimitive Fa∣thers did. Here are the Primitive Fathers Quo∣ted, and own'd by the Friends, in this Case. But Falsly, and to very Ill Purpose. For the Import of this Testimony of Gibson's, is to Li∣mit our Duty and Honour only to Good Gover∣nors: But so did not the Apostles and Primitive Fathers; for they both Pay'd and Preach'd, Obe∣dience and Honour to Wicked and Persecuting Go∣vernors. Now we know whom the Quakers think Good Governors. They shew it themselves; they have Given us here a Test. Those to whom they will take off their Hats and Pay them but that Single, instead of their Double Honour, these are they whom they Reckon Good Go∣vernors. And all those to whom they Refuse this, by their own Rules, are not Esteemed by them, as Good Governors. Now, they have Refus'd this to All the Governors that Ever yet were over them. Were none of them Good? Some (and not long since) have been very Kind to the Quakers. But that is not the Matter; They have not Got a Quaker-King yet. And they think, that none else have Right to Rule. All others are Ʋsurpers upon
their Ʋniversal Hiership. Therefore by Good here, they Mean Lawfull Governors; which they think none can be but Themselves. This has been touch'd before. And, if Truth were known, the Principal Cause of their High In∣dignation against the Author of the Sn. is be∣cause he has Search'd into this Secret, and laid it Open. They cou'd Fence with him Long enough about Heresies and Doctrins, no matter whether in or out of Purpose; they thought the World (as now) wou'd not Trouble them∣selves much about those Businesses: But when they Appear to be Downright Fifth-Monarchy Men, (as shewn in the Preface) and for Setting up Worldly Empire; for taking to the Carnal Sword: And have Swell'd to vast Numbers and Wealth: And now only watch an Opportunity—This strikes Deep—. And Swords ought to be kept out of the Hands of Mad-Men. Now their Submissions and Creeping to those in Power, will not Satis∣fie. This they have always done. And their Contrary Testimonies shew but their Deceit. Let them fairly Renounce their Declaration of War before Mention'd. Or see if they can Recon∣cile the Thousands and Ten Thousands of the Saints, whom their King may Command to Fight in his Cause, to mean Spiritual Battles, such as they are Now Fighting, with their Tongues and their Pens. That will go Hard. For, in the Same Declaration, p. 9. They tell, That they do not Yet believe, that their King will make use of Them, in That way: But that, for the Present, they are given up to Bear and Suffer &c. Therefore they Expect to be Em∣ploy'd
in some other sort of War than their Present Passive, only to Bear and Suffer. and when they Get such a King, they will Take off their Hats to Him: and leave their Sulleness; which they wou'd have Pass now, like David's Scrabling at Gath, only upon the Account of Madness, or at least Ill-Breeding. But ther is a Snake in the Grass—They have a further Meaning; which we shall know, whenever it is in their Power. Now, I wou'd Ask either Penn or Ap-Pen, whether if either of them were a King over the Quakers, he wou'd not expect as much Respect from his Subjects, as now he do's from his Servants, that is, to waite upon him, with their Hats off? If not, that he wou'd give us a Reason. But if so, then Another Reason, why the same Respect shou'd not be Paid to one of our Kings? And suppose him very Good to the Quakers, and Particularly to Will. Penn. Yet wou'd not this be Sufficient, to Give him the Respect of the Hat. Let them then find any Reason for it, but that he is not a Quaker. And why a Quaker King shou'd have more Respect than Another King, but be∣cause no other King can have the same Right to his Crown, as a Quaker: And the Reason of that, but Because none have a Right to Crowns, but Quakers. Jo Paean! And they give a Good Reason for it, in their Defence of the True Church of the Quakers. p. 19. for, say they, None knows aright how to Govern others, but them that are themselves Go∣vern'd by the Lord Jesus Christ; who are Anoin∣ted to Govern, as well as to Preach; for the Spirit
of Government is a Pure and Majestical Gift of God &c. This was wrote by the same hand that Penn'd their Declaration aforesaid, and serves as a Good Comment upon it. Now we know who they are whom the Qua∣kers do suppose are Govern'd by the Lord Jesus Christ. i. e. Those who Believe in and Worship the Light in their own Hearts; and that Only; Acknowleging no other, either God or Christ. In short, they mean by this, Themselves, and None other. See Sn. Sect. xvi. where they have Reprobated all others, of what Church, Sect. or Denomination whatsoever. Secondly, we find, That they think Themselves the Anointed, who have the Right to Govern. And Thirdly That this is a Majestical Gift. Therefore they are not a∣gainst Majesty, or Giving that Title, their Hat or Knee, to any who they thought had a Right to Govern: who were the Lawfull Higher Pow∣ers set over them by God. But who are these Higher Powers? what is that Higher Power to which Every Soul is Commanded to be Subject. Rom. xiii. 1.? This being urg'd to them, as an Argument for Obedience to Magistrates, it is Answer'd by Thom. Lawson, in his Lip of Truth. p. 48.49. The Power that Every Soul is to be Subject to, is but one just Power, which is Christ— That Power that Commands things Contrary to that in the Conscience, that is not the Power of God, that is not the Higher Power, but the Pow∣er that is from Below, and that is not it that the Soul is to be Subject to. Yet Christ own'd the Power of Pilat to be from Above. Job. xix. 11. Even when he was assing an Unjust sentence upon Himself.
And St. Paul apply'd that Text of obedience to Governours. Exod. xxii. 28. to a wicked High-Priest, who was Judging him contrary to the Law. Act. xxiii. 5 But I am not now Dis∣puting against this Destructive Error, only shewing you what is the Principle of the Qua∣kers concerning it. G. Fox tells us, in his Visitation to the Jews. An. 1656. p. 35. Such as Believe not in the Light, such was not to be obey'd, whose souls were not subject to the Higher Power. Here they let us see what they mean by the Higher Pow∣ers. Rom. xiii. 1. that is, their Light within: and so all the Commands for Obedience to Govern∣ment, is thus Transferr'd to obey the Light within. According to this Interpretation, Fox (ibid. p. 36.) says, Peter that was subject to the Higher Power, who was not subject to the Rulers. So here, Rulers are not the Higher Powers, but but Quite oppo∣sit: For they who are subject to the Higher Power (of the Light within) must not be sub∣ject to Rulers. That is, still to be suppos'd, except to Quaker Rulers, who only are sub∣ject to the Higher Power, the Light within, as Ed. Burrough says to them, in his Orders Di∣rected To the Camp of the Lord in England. Only among you is God know—you are God's Only Witnesses—you are the Royal seed— whom God hath Chosen to Place His Name in, and to take up his Habitation among, above all the Families of the Earth—All Nations shall call you Blessed—Oh thou North of England! out of thee did the Branch spring, and the Day-Star Arise, which gives Light unto all Regions round about—out of thee, Kings and Princes and Prophets did come forth, in the Name and Power
of the most High, &c. Now see what the Quakers are, and what they Pretend to! If God is known among them Only; and that they are His Only witnesses; then it plainly follows, from what is said above, that they think Themselves only have any Right to Go∣vern. They in Express words, have Abdicated all the Kings upon the Earth, as well as all Church∣es. And so now (says G. Fox) is all Professors,Great Mystery. p. 99. and Teachers upon the Earth; and Kings of the Earth Ravened inwardly from the Light, standing against the Light, and the Lamb, and the Saints— and are not to be Receiv'd into the Houses of the Saints, neither to bid them God speed. Now Paying of Reverence to them, by tak∣ing off the Hat, or Giving them their Civil Titles, is an Implicit owning of them, or Bid∣ding them God speed. Which is the Reason why the Quakers will not do it. And the Reason is as Plain, è Contra, That if they had a King who obey'd the Light, that is, a Quaker-King, they wou'd Bid him God speed, &c. They wou'd then Give him Hat and Knee, and Ti∣tles. Nay they have given it to some in Ex∣pectation. When Will. Penn was walking to∣wards the Stadt-House in Amsterdam, and his Son by his side, Attended with a Numerous Train of Quakers, one of them said, pointing to Will. Penn's Son, what a fine Prince wou'd that make? I can Name Vouchers for this, if Deny'd. Surely then they wou'd not Refuse him the Title of Prince, if he were in Pos∣session. Wou'd they think the Title of Prince
too much, who take to Themselves, all the Stiles of Christ, as Fox, Naylor, &c. have done, calling Themselves, and suffering others to call them, the Branch, the Star, the Son of God, the King of Saints, King of Israel, &c! And, as such, Receiving of Adoration from their People, falling down upon their Knees, or Prostrat before them! see Sn. Sect. viii. and Sat. Dis. Glean. Sect. ii. N. 4. p. 71. Wou'd G. Fox have thought any Honour too much for himself to Receive? who, when Jam. Naylor was brought upon his Knees be∣fore him, offer'd his Hand for Naylor to Kiss: But bethinking himself better, he pull'd it in again, and thrust out his Foot to Naylor, that he might Kiss it. As is told by a Quaker, in his Hidden things, brought to Light. Printed. 1678. p. 37. and 40. who tells, in the same place, that he himself saw a Woman at John Kilkam's House, in Balby, Fall down before G. Fox, near an Hours time, and that he did not at all Reprove her. So Greatly cou'd he keep his Port! And Act not only Regal, but a Papal state! Which the Quakers think to be Ʋsurped by all Others but Themselves. And Intend to Recover it wholly from them, as soon as they are Able. For as all Kings upon the Earth, are Ad∣judg'd by them, to have quite Ravened away from the Light: and consequently, by their Principles, have Forfeited their Right to their Crowns: so the Quakers do not Despair of coming into Possession, of all and every Post of Government, from King down to Consta∣ble. When they come in, none must have a
share! George Fox, in his News coming out of the North. p. 18. Directs a Challenge in these words. To the Heads of this Nation. And all the Dominions of the Earth. And to all who are under the Dominion of the Earthly Powers, Nations, and Kingdoms every where in all the World. To you all, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Ru∣lers, Judges, Justices, Third-Burrows, or Town-Clerks. Here he has them all together, from Top to Bottom. And now what has he to say to them? Terrible News indeed! he be∣gins, Tremble all before the Lord, O ye Earth∣ly Powers—you have caused the Prophets to be Stoned—you have caused them to be Imprison∣ed, you have caused them to be Banished in this Great City Sodom, and to suffer Beating and Scourging out of your Synagogues. Dreadful is the Lord and Powerful, who is com∣ing in His Power to Execute true Judgment upon all you Judges, and to change all your Laws, ye Kings—all you that have taken the Name of Justices, which are not in Justice, you must be Judged with the Just; and all you underling Of∣ficers, which have been as the Arms of this Great Tree—All your Branches must be cut down— And the Government shall be taken from you Pre∣tended Rulers,p. 20.Judges, and Justices, Lawyers, and Constables.p. 27. All this Tree must be Cut down; and Jesus Christ will Rule Alone—Hew down all the Powers of the Earth—slay Baal, Baa∣lam must be slain, all the Hirelings (the Clergy) must be turn'd out of the Kingdom—The sword of the Lord is Drawn against you all. You are Ruled by the Prince of the Air, and in the Power of Darkness ye stand—A Day of
slaughter is coming upon you, who have made war against the Lamb, and against the Saints (the Quakers) for Destruction you are, the Sword you cannot Escape. And it shall be upon you ere Long— Now Destruction is drawing nigh, sorrow is coming,p. 28.Sons and Daughters (of the Quakers) are going Abroad Joyfully in the Power and Strength of the Almighty—Howl, wo and Misery all ye Priests, ye Blind Priests— All Nations and Languages and Tongues and Kindreds and Peo∣ple, Tremble before the Lord's Host, and the Lord's Army.p 37. (these are the Quakers) The Corrupt Judge must not stand up, and the Corrupt Rulers must not Rule— And thou Beast (the Civil Go∣vernment) and False Prophet (the Church) must into the Fire:p. 38.the False Prophet is the Counsel∣lor to the Beast; and the Beast maintains the False Prophets—Both into the Pit, into the Lake, and Fire you must Both go. The Lord hath spoken it! But will they leave this to the Fire of the other World? No, no, they have a God that Answereth by Fire, even in this World▪ which we are told in a Terrible Book of the Quakers, call'd The Cry of Blood. Super-scrib'd (like Princes!) upon the Title-Page by Geor. Bishop, Thomas Goldney, Henry Roe, Edw. Fyott, and Dennis Hollister, Famous in the Congrega∣tion, all men of Renown, and Chiefs among the Worthies of Fox. There p. 61. They have De∣creed against us in these words, Ere long, yea and the Day is at hand, wherein your Baal must Plead for himself; And even those that Guard him (the Magistrates) and his Prophets (the Clergy poor Souls!) shast be Content to have their Tryal before the People, which is the God that answer∣eth
by Fire; and shall Deliver up the Prophets of Baal, to be cut off, by the People, whom they have Deceived. That is, when the People turn Qua∣kers, then they will Answer by Fire &c. And ther is no Doubt, but they will be as Good as their word. For are they not Infallible! Then slay Balaam! vex the Midianites Give the Priests Blood to Drink &c. This is no Jesting Matter. And tho' the business of their Hats (if ther were no more in it) were not worth a Button. Let them stick on their Heads, as upon Scarr-Crows: And they Bow after the same Fashion. Who wou'd speak Three words, to Purchace their Un∣gainly Conges, as Stiff and Grave as an Elephant's? or to see them thrust out a Limb, for a Sa∣lute, as if they were going to make a Pass at you— But ther is a Mystery at the Bottom, of Iniquity, and Rebellion. All that was Couch'd under the Parallel that is made to them of Judas, and his Gaulonites. And we may the Rather Believe this, because the Quakers, in this Appen. do, in plain Terms, Justifie Judas: for having Repeated his Princi∣ple, as given in Prim. Heres. out of Josephus, That he and his Followers wou'd Expose them∣selves to all Torments, rather than call any Mortal Man Lord or Master. Appen. Answers. p. 49. Now, Believe me, Friends, I cannot See the Here∣sie of this Doctrin. Here then the Charge is Confess'd; And the Parallel Acknowleg'd to be Just, betwixt Judas and the Quakers; who own, That they Maintain the same Principle, with Him. And who can Doubt, but that it is to the same End?
They Quarrel Prim. Heres. for bringing the Testimony of Josephus, as they wou'd make the Reader believe, instead of one of the Pri∣mitive Fathers, which Appen. p. 48. calls Cano∣nizing this Jew. Whereas Josephus is only Quo∣ted to shew the Principles and Sect of Judas Galilaeus, not for the Condemning of them. That is shewn from the Apostles. And what Cano∣nizing is hear of Josephus? Can the Reader bear with this Trifling! But these men will Complain, nay Boast, if they are not Answer'd. But whe∣ther is this so much a Canonizing of Josephus, as Appen. do's of Judas? who Justifies his wick∣ed Heresie: And Consequently must Rank his Sufferings for it, upon the score of Martyrdom; as of the Quakers, for the same Cause. And is Every Primitive Father that is Quoted, there∣fore Canoniz'd? But what Patience can hold out, to see these Quakers make objections, for want of Primi∣tive Fathers: And to Quote them too, as Gibson before, and others? Do they lay any stress upon the Primitive Fathers: or Pretend to Fol∣low Them? O, yes, by all means! They wou'd fain be in Good Company. And they call Qua∣kerism, now of Late, Primitive Christianity; in which Book, ther is not one Syllable of what the Primitive Fathers held; not one Quotation from one of them; nor any of them so much as Nam'd. How then do's their Christianity ap∣pear to be Primitive? No matter for that, Pri∣mitive is a Good word; especially to stand upon a Title-Page; which 100 Read, for one that Reads the Book. This shews, They wou'd be Primitive, or have the Reputation of it. And
so they have. As Primitive as Judas; whose Doctrine they Espouse; and the Apostles Op∣pos'd. But, if they are so much for Primi∣tive, what say they to those Quotations which are brought in Prim. Heres. out of the most Ancient and Ʋn-doubted of the Fathers; And which Confront their Tenets very Expresly? For them! They care not two pence for as many more of them! Appen. p. 10. 11. calls them Stale Tracts of Ʋncertain Persons. Do's he shew, how they are Ʋncertain? No, not he, Let them look to that! or have the Quakers any Better Editions, or other Works of those Fa∣thers, than those which are come to our Hands? No, no, no, They have None of them! they Hate and Abhor them! they were a Company of Bi∣shops, and Doctors! But ne'r a one among them like George Fox, or Edw. Burrough, or G. White∣head, or Little Appen. No, not one of them! Therefore says Appen. p. 10. We shall not need to be at all Afrighted, if we do find our selves to Differ, from what is to be found, under the speci∣ous Names of Ignatius, Polycarp &c. tho' Living within 150 years after Christ; nor under the Great Names of them call'd Fathers in the Succeeding Ages. And p. 5. It will not Avail tho' he bring many Clouds of such Witnesses— And not∣withstanding he calls this a Cavil, we learn'd from Elder Dissenters; we are not Afraid to stand by it; and therefore Pay little Reverence to those, nor any thing not Purely Apostolical. But Ignatius and Polycarp liv'd in the Apostles Days, and were Dis∣ciples to the Apostles. What is that to Us Quakers! It is no matter what they were, or where they were! We will have None of them! So set your
heart at Rest! We have Better at Home! We ne∣ver Lik'd G. Keith. since he was so Insolent to Com∣pare the Books of our Friends, to them call'd the Greek and Latin Fathers, as supposing Friends Books to have been written by no Better Guidance,See Sat. Dis. Sect. iv. n. v. p. 47.nor Clearer Light, than theirs, who Lived and wrote in those Dark times. For which Thom. Ellwood has Pay'd him to Purpose! And it is no won∣der that he has left Us. For when any once get Fathers and Councils and Antiquity and such stuff into their Heads, they can never Endure Us afterwards. Therefore we Hate all Schools and Colleges and Learning, and Human Reason! for all these things make against Us. And now that we are Setting up Schools &c. of our own, I'm afraid we shall not be Long-Liv'd. That by the bye. Therefore Appen. wisely throws off all your Fathers, and Primitives (which serve us only for Title-Pages) But says, p. 5. Indeed if he can Absolutely Determin the Question by the Scriptures, the work is done. Yet, in the Last Case, against Judas and the Qua∣kers, the Proof was brought from Scripture, and from nothing else. And yet the work is not done! For then you call'd for the Fathers, then he has not Perform'd his Promise of Giving us Quotations out of the Fathers; but puts Jo∣sephus upon us, and Canonizes him for a Father. But will the Scriptures do? Then in∣deed, the work wou'd soon be done. Will you let the Scriptures be the Rule? we will Ask no more. Appen. Denies it, as shewn be∣fore. Yet, they will stand to what the Scrip∣ture Commands, Provided the same thing be Requir'd by Their Own Spirit Anew (See
Sn. Sect. vii. p. 92, 93.) that is, if they Like it. They cannot Deny but that the Scripture Requires Honour to be Pay'd to Magistrates: Or that Taking off the Hat, is not a Paying of Honour (as Prov'd above) And therefore, Except the Reason I have Given (which they will not Give) I cannot Conjecture the shadow of a Reason, for their Refusing it. They say (as Howgil before) That God has not Commanded it. Not Particularly, as to the Hat. Neither has He Commanded to take off our Hats, at Prayer. Why then did they Contend so zea∣lously for that? They Render themselves Self-Condemn'd. They will (as Judas) call no man Lord or Master. Why then do they call any Man Father? for both are Forbidden in the same Place Matth. xxiii. 9. And in whatever Sense they take the one, they may take the other. But their Practice shews their meaning. They do call their Quaker Masters by the Name of Masters. And they do now use the word Lord, Speaking of or to Noble-Men, but they will not add the word My to it, or Say My Lord; that is, None but a Qua∣ker, must be Lord or Master to a Quaker. They must not be Servants to Men, that is, to the Men of the World. They! who Expect, as the Jews, to be Lords of the whole World! And the Quakers do Apply to Themselves all those Promises made to the Jews, which they Under∣stand of a Temporal Monarchy. They make the Jews a Type of the Quakers. Sam. Fisher in his Several Messages, which he said he had, By
Commission from God, p. 30. carries on the Parallel twixt the Jews and the Quakers; and Endeavours to shew, how the Promises to the Jews, were Fulfill'd, in the Quakers: and speaking, in the Person of God, Says, My Peo∣ple that were a Type of Them. i.e. of the Quakers. That is, the Jews, who where once God's Peo∣ple, were, in that, a Type of the Quakers, who think Themselves, now, to be the Only People of God, and Heirs to all those Promises that were made to the Jews! In the Testimonies to Francis Howgil, affix'd before his works (as is the Custom of the Quakers) Thomas Langham and Thom. Carelton give theirs in Verse (the Quakers are Special Good at Poetry!) and there Apply the Prophesies of Jeremiah and Ezekiel to Themselves, thus say they of Fr. Howgil. He was no Academian, as he said, But in our Northern Region he was Bred. Whereby this Observation may accrew, That Jeremiah Prophesied true; Because he said, out of the North shou'd come, A Nation that shall Ruin Babylon. And this my Friend, of whom I speak was one, Among many Worthies more that shot at Baby∣lon, Which out of the North arose &c. G. Fox, and the Original Quakers came out of the North of England (Omne Malum ab Aqui∣lone) thence they were very fond of the North; and apply'd to Themselves all the Prophesies where the North was Nam'd, or not Nam'd—
for they made the Branch and the Star of Righteousness arise out of the North of England! that is, G. Fox, whom they made the Christ. For Jesus of Nazareth did not come out of the North of England. But Fox their Messiah did. I say this, because some of them wou'd now pretend, as if this had not been spoke of Fox, but of Christ. G. Fox wrote a Book An. 1656. for the Conversion of the Jews to Quakerism, to which he gave this Title. A Visitation to the Jews, from Them whom the Lord hath visited from on High: Among whom, He hath Perform'd His Pro∣mise made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to his Seed, which Moses Saw, and the Prophets gave Testimony of, to which Seed the Apostles Wit∣nessed, Which Seed We are! Here is a Full Recog∣nition to Themselves, and Their Ʋniversal Heir∣ship. If They are that Seed to which Abraham, Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles did Witness, they are no other than Christ. For He was that Seed. Gal. iii. 16. However, in the Lowest Sense can be put upon it, they think Them∣selves the Heirs of all the Promises made to the Jews. Among which, that of Ʋniversal Mo∣narchy was certainly one; And Fulfill'd in the Person of Jesus of Nazareth. But the Quakers turn it to their Christ, the Light within: In whose Right, they think, That they have a Full, and In-defeasable Title to it. And then in∣deed, All the King's of the World ought to come with Cap in Hand to the Quakers! And State belongs to Them! of which they have al∣ready taken Possession, in Refusing to Pay Ho∣mage to any Powers upon the Earth, so much
as to move a Hat to the Best of them! or Treat them with Less Familiarity or other Ce∣remony than Plain Thee and Thou! Of which we come next to speak; and of the like Fig-Leaf Excuses they give for this, as for that of the Hat, Thereby to keep their Designs Un∣discover'd Concerning the Pure Language of Thee and Thou.Appen. brings in, by Head and Shoul∣ders, the business of their Singularity in Theeing and Thouing, for ther was nothing spok∣en of it in Prim. Heres. But this is a Great Point with the Quakers; and cost them both Money and Pains in setting out a Large Folio, upon this Subject, call'd The Battle-dore, under the Name of G. Fox, which go's thro? several Languages, of which G. F. knew not one Letter, tho he Impudently puts his Name, not only to the Book, but to the several Pages, where the Hebrew, Greek &c. is Set down, only to shew the use of the Singular Number to a Single Per∣son, which no body ever yet did Deny. Yet the Quakers gave Large money (one Jew had 60 pounds) for this Learned Collection, not worth one Half-Penny. And, that All might not be Lost, Appen. will have it Canvass'd here, And Demands, with Insulting, p. 49. That any Apo∣stle or Primitive Father shou'd be given, to Con∣demn the use of the singular Number, to a single Person (I never heard of any that did Condemn it) or to Authorize the use of the Plural, in the same Case. It was not a Case worth any of their Notice, to Enter into little poor Grammar niceties. Every Nation is Master of their own Language. And England now has, by Custom, made the word You both of a Singular and Plural Signification. And what has any man to say to
this? If you speak of the Propriety or Impropri∣ety of this, as to Criticising (at which the Qua∣kers are Able hands!) let them shew their Learn∣ing, and Compare all the Languages in the World. I wish they were no worse Employ'd. But to make a Case of Conscience of this: and set up this as their Discriminating Mark, upon a Re∣ligious Account, Exceeds Bedlam! What Scrip∣ture, what Authority have they for this? Except G. Fox's Blasphemous Journal, where he says p. 24. When the Lord sent me forth into the World, He forbade me to put off my Hat to any— and I was Required to Thee and Thou all Men and Wo∣men. It was the same Lord, that sent forth Judas, upon the same Errand of Levelling, to Destroy all Distinctions of Men; and so bring the World into Confusion. And lest our Out∣ward Carriage shou'd not be sufficient, here is Rudeness to Superiors brought into the Tongue, as well as Hands, Feet, or Head; That we shou'd call them by no Better Names than they call us: And so verify the Old Proverb, Familiarity breeds Contempt. But if G. Fox had this by Special Command from God, what needed he go to Grammar for it? Or did God give Extraordinary Revelations to the world, for no other End but to save Priscian's Head from being Broke, in English? Blasphemous Wretch! These are like the Silly Senseless Excuses they have about the Hat. But the Bottom of it is nothing but Pride, and Contempt of Superiors; because they think none Superior to Themselves. If they Suppose that Genders and Cases, Singular and Plural are such matters of Conscience, why not the Eight Parts of Speech, Syntaxis, Prosody, and Orthogra∣phy
too, Colons, Semi-Colons &c. Right Spelling, and Speaking strictly according to the Letter? Otherwise it is a sort of Be-Lying the word, and Deceiving of the simple Re-ader; which may, in time, tend much to the Damage of the Pe-ople. Ther is the same Reason for the one as the other. But ther is no Pride in this! No Contempt of Magistracy and Government! No Exalting of Themselves, and making Themselves Equal to Dignities and Powers! And their Pre∣tence for Conscience in this, is so very Ridicu∣lous, that no Hereticks, before the Quakers, e∣ver had so much want of Sense, as to fall upon any thing Like it: Ther is no Parellel to be found for it in all the Ancient Heresies; There∣fore it is not Mention'd in Prim. Heres. But Appen. wou'd have it in. And in he has it. Talking of the Singular and Plural Number were High things, Believe it, and Deep Learn∣ing to those Sorry Souls who first set up Qua∣kerism! (See the Account of their Original, as given by Themselves, in Sat. Dis. Glean. Sect. iv. N. 2. p. 85.) This was the Reason, they made, at first, such a filthy noise about the Singular and Plural, they were fine Hard words! And made the Quakers look Considerably, in a Country Town! It was such a Glorious Discovery, that G. Fox puts it among his Openings (See Sn. Sect. xxiii. p. 33. to 37.) And Pretends to have had it by In∣spiration. But now, after all, suppose the Quakers them∣selves (these Nice Criticks!) shou'd be found Guilty of the Heresie of False-Grammar, as well as the more Ʋn-Learned part of the world! It is common with them to use the Accusative for the Nominative Case, to say Thee for Thou. As,
how do'st Thee do? wilt Thee tell me, &c. And is it not as Great Heresy to put one Case for another, as one Number for ano∣ther? Tho', as I told you before, we do not put one Number for another, but the word You is with us, both Singular and Plural, as the word Sheep (to Descend to your understanding) or (to come nearer to you) Swine. Next Review of Heresies that you Pub∣lish, let this Vulgar Error be set in the High∣est Rank! and write your selves Sheepes, or Swines, which you like best, or to which you are most Like. But you say, if You be Singu∣lar, what use have we for the words Thee and Thou? O yes, for Variety! Two Strings to your Bow. As if I shou'd call Appen. a Sheep, or a Mutton; a Swine, or a Hog. Let some of these be your Name Hereafter—for you have no Name as yet, but that of Quakers, which you say your God-Fathers gave you, in Scorn. With your Christianity, you have Lost your Names too. For what Name have you for your Flock, now through the world? Is it that of Christians? That do's not Distinguish you from other Communities which bear the same Name. Is it, the Pe-ople of God? That others take to themselves too. You are the First Nameless Society that has yet appear'd. O, but I forgot, your Name is Hidden from the World! Wou'd your Heresies were so too. The time is Coming, when Both shall be For∣got, unless for Detestation. Appen. is very An∣gry p. 49. That G. Fox shou'd be Depriv'd of the Glory of being an Original, by shewing the semblance of his Wickedness in Judas: but herein Fox's Cubbs are an Original, that they
call themselves not by His Name, or by any other. Judas's Followers were call'd Gaulo∣nites or Galileans, but Fox's, nothing at all, in∣deed they were not fit to be Nam'd. But why was not Judas an Original to Fox, in the Point before mention'd, of Contempt of Magistracy? No, not in the Point of the Hat, because Judas wore no Hat! (No, nor likely, any Leathern Britches, and Fox had both) nor in Thee and Thou, because Judas did not speak English! And then (as says Appen.) G. Fox has (in his own Foolish and False words) The Glory of being an Original. Whose Foolish and False words? Certainly he means this for the Au∣thor of Prim. Heres. But they are not his words, he only Quotes them from Will. Penn, who Boasts thus of G. Fox, in his Preface to Fox's Journal. p. 31. That Fox was No Man's Copy, &c. so that Appen. must take Home a∣gain his Complement of False and Foolish, and Place the Saddle upon the Right Horse. Un∣less he thinks it was False and Foolish to Quote Will. Penn's Noble Character of his Beloved Fox; of whom he Exults thus, in the same Preface. Many have done Vertuously in this Day, But thou, Dear George Excellest them all! But, to make an End of this Head, Appen. says, p. 50. As for our Hats, we pull them not off in—Civility—yet we pay—Civility to all Men. You mean, some other way, but not in that. So say you (ibid.) we give Honour to whom Honour is Due. It has been told be∣fore, whom they are, to whom you think it Due. But if you think that any Honour at all
is Due to our Magistrates, then this Particular Honour of the Hat, and Civil Titles are Due, because they are Requir'd. Honour is as much Due to our Governors, as Tribute: And you may as well say we will Pay Tribute to whom Tribute is Due: but we will not Pay this Particular Tribute, which is Requir'd. We may as justly Cut and Carve for our selves what sort of Tribute, as what sort of Honour to Pay. We must Pay that which is Requir'd, or else we are Offenders. Unless we can shew some Po∣sitive Prohibition of God, against it. And there∣fore it Returns now upon the Quakers, since they Acknowlege some Honour to be Due, to shew where God has Forbidden that Particu∣lar Honour of the Hat, or other Address than Thee and Thou, else they are Transgressors as well against the Law of God, as of Man. If they say, that their Light forbids it (for they can shew nothing else) then may it not Forbid any other sort of Honour, as well as the Hat, or Titles? or any sort of Tribute, as it has done Tythes, Trophy-Money, &c. So that all our Laws, all Order and Government among Men, all things whatsoever, lie at the Mercy of the Quakers: while they Refuse to let Scripture, or any thing else, be a Rule to their Light; but set It up Paramount, as the Rule and Standart, to Confirm or to Annul all Laws, Customs, Constitutions, even the Holy Scriptures themselves. As Ample as the Commission gi∣ven to Jeremiah, over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to Root out, and to Pull down, and to Destroy, and to Throw down, to Build, and to Plant. If it be not so, and that the Quakers
will say, They are willing to take the Holy Scriptures for their Rule: Then let them shew any Scripture which Forbids that Particular Honour of the Hat, or of Civil-Titles: Other∣wise let them Confess, That the Light which has told them so is Darkness. But the truth is, They do not Acknow∣ledge the Holy Scriptures as their Rule, which is shewn before p. 29, 30. And Will. Penn has this Year 1699, Printed, tho' not Publish'd, except to the Friends (for their Book-Sellers Refuse to Sell them, unless they know to whom, they Refus'd it to some that I imploy'd) A Dis∣course of the General Rule of Faith and Practice, of which the whole Argument is, ex professo, to Prove, That the Scriptures cannot be that Rule. Wherein all the Popish Artillery is Muster'd up, against the Holy Scriptures being the Rule. It has Receiv'd a very Substantial Answer by G. Keith, therefore I say no more of it here. But to take Notice of the Deceit of the Qua∣kers, in their Quoting of Scripture. For to what Purpose do they Quote them, when they Own them not to be the Rule; And Conse∣quently, will not be Determin'd by them? This is only to Amuse, and to bear a Face, as if they Own'd the Scriptures. And to use them, ad hominem, against those who do Acknowledge them. Yet they have no Proof, but what they Pre∣tend from Scripture, for their Foundation-Princi∣ple, of The Light within (which they make the only Rule) being Christ and God. They can∣not say, that the Light within do's tell them this of its Self: For then it wou'd tell others
so, Seeing they make it Common to all Man∣kind: And: if it tells None so, but the Qua∣kers; or if it do's not tell all Others so, as well as the Quakers, then how is it the Gene∣ral Rule to All Men, as the Quakers wou'd have it? Therefore they have Recourse, for this, to Joh. i. 9. That was the true Light, which Lighteth every Man that Cometh into the World. And to other Scriptures, which they Wrest, to their own Destruction. And yet they will not Own the Scriptures for the Rule. But, when Pinch'd, they Fly back again to their Light-within. This is all they have for their Principle of the Hat; and their Sulleness, which they call Gravity. But I wou'd have them Distinguish betwixt the Gravity of an Angel, and a Devil. Both are Grave; But if an Angel Appear'd, we must Suppose with his Gravety, the Greatest Sweet∣ness, and Attraction that can be. On the o∣ther hand, if a Devil Appear'd, he wou'd be Grave too; but it wou'd be an Abhorrent and Frightfull Gravity, like that of a Lyon, when he was going to Devour, or of a Mastiff Dog, with Grin, and Snarle. Ther is nothing Exo∣tick, or Sour in the Gravity of Religion. It is all Decent, and Comely. It is the Beauty of Holiness. But in a Quaker-Meeting, Especially their Silent Ones, their Phiz and Meen, Hats pull'd over Eyes, their Habit, their Grunts and Dogged Demureness, the Deformity of Holiness is Drawn to the Life. No Stranger but wou'd think himself at a Bedlam, or a Funeral; or, as
indeed it is, among a Company of People Possess'd and Bewitch'd. But if he saw them fall to their Convulsions and Quaking-Fits, their Rolling and Roaring, Fomeing, Swelling, and Yelling, as, at first, was Common among them; I dare say, it wou'd never. bring into his Mind, the Exta∣sies and Tremblings of the Holy Prophets, thro' the Excess of the Revelations given unto them (which the Quakers urge as their Precedent) But rather that of Feinds in their Torments; For the Devils believe too, And Tremble, as the Quakers do. I have now gone over the Several Heads Mention'd in Prim. Heres. And Consider'd the Defences which Appen. has Produc'd for them. This brings him to his Conclusion. Wherein is Nothing but what has been Answer'd alrea∣dy; Only their Vapouring, How Bravely they have Acquit themselves! Which I leave them to Enjoy. And Hasten to the Last Section that I may have Done.
SECT. VII. The Asurdity and Blasphemy of the Quakers No∣tion of the Light Within. They hold, That ther is no Na∣tural Light, or Reason in Man: But that All in him is Di∣vine.1. I Now go on to Examin the Defence of Will. Pen, against the Friendly Expostula∣tion with him in Prim. Heres. This begins in Appen. p. 53. And it says, p. 55. That the Author of Prim. Heres. wou'd have Will Penn to suppose, That nothing but the Divine Light cou'd Reprove of Evil. But (Says Appen.) I have looked, and find no such Supposition; And there∣fore no further Notice need be taken of the Conse∣quences he draws as depending on that Supposition. This is Positive and Impudent to a Degree that cou'd befall none but a Quaker! He says he has Look'd— Therefore I beseech the Reader to Look too. The Charge is in Prim. Heres. p. 20. where the Pages of Will. Penn's Primi∣tive Christianity are Quoted. viz. p. 29, 30. and 31. And a short Account of them given, to wit, That the Scripture makes no Distinction between Natural and Spiritual Light. That Will. Penn Provokes any to give so much as one Text to that Purpose. That he makes it as Absur'd, as to talk of a Natural and Spiritual Darkness within. That he says, That ther are not Two Lights from God in Man, that Regard Religion. Not that Reproves or Condemns a man for Sin. These are the words in Prim. Heres. I must ask the Reader's Pardon for Trans-Scribing them. And also, for Setting down Will. Penn's
words more at Large, to satisfie the Importunate and Guilty Clamour of this his Appen. to Amuse those who have not Lookt into the Books. Will. Penn first supposes (what All Agree to) That ther is a Light in Man, which, as he words it, yields him the Knowledge of God: And likewise Reproves or Discovers that which offends Him. But whether this can be done by the Natural Light, or only by the Divine Light in Man? is the Question. Or, whether ther be any such Natural Light in Man, that can do Both or Either of these? Now take Will. Penn's own words, in Answer to this, p. 29. It is Granted (says he) that what we call Divine, and some, Mista∣kenly, call Natural Light, can do Both. Secondly, If this Light be Natural, Notwithstanding it doth Manifest our Duty, and Reprove our Disobedience to God, they wou'd do well to Assigne Ʋs some Cer∣tain Medium or Way, whereby we may truly Dis∣cern and Distinguish between the Manifestations and Reproofs of the Natural Light within, from those of the Divine Light within; since they Allow the Manifestation of God, and Reproof of Evil, as well to the one as the other. Let them give us but one Scripture that Distinguishes between a Natu∣ral and a Spiritual Light within. They may, with as much Reason, talk of a Natural and Spi∣ritual Darkness within. All this is in p. 29. and 30. and p. 31. he pursues the same Argu∣ment, Neither is there (says he) so much as one Scripture that affords Ʋs a Distinction between Light within and Light within; or that there are really Two Lights from God, in Man, that re∣gard Religion. And p. 32. Therefore there are not Two Distinct Lights within, but one and the
same Manifesting, Reproving, and Teaching Light within. And that this One, and but One Light within is not any Natural Light, he Particu∣larly Explains and Distinguishes with Exact∣ness, that none can (unless wilfully) mistake him, If by Natural (says he p. 14.) he meant a Created thing, as man is, or any thing that is Requisite to the Composition of a Man, I Deny it— For Man can no more be a Light to his Mind, than he is to his Body: he has the Capacity of seeing ob∣jects, when he has the help of Light, but cannot be a Light to himself by which to see them. Where∣fore as the Sun in the Firmament is the Light of the Body, and gives us Discerning in our Tempo∣ral affairs; so the Life of the Word is the Glo∣rious Light and Sun of the Soul &c. By which Logick, the Ʋnderstanding has no more Light in it self, than the Eye; only a Capacity to Re∣ceive Light, ab Extrà And consequently has no Natural Light, only a Natural Capacity to Receive it, when sent from another. And this is Quoted, and thus Urg'd in Prim. Heres. p. 21. Yet Appen. has Look'd, and cou'd not see it! By which he offers us an Experiment (if we cou'd Believe him) of the Natural Dulness of Human Ʋnderstanding. But ther is an Old saying, None so Blind, as they that Will not see. These men do their best, to Divest themselves of Reason; and they have gon very far towards it; And had done it, if Disowning of it, and Disputing Against it cou'd have done it. Rich. Hubberthorn was an Eminent Apostle of the Qua∣kers. His works were Collected and Re-Printed An. 1663. with Mighty Encomiums from G. Fox,
G. Whitehead &c. There, in a Treatise which he calls Truth and Innocency Clearing its self &c. p. 41. he Denies Reason to be the Common Prin∣ciple of Mankind; or that Men have any Natu∣ral Light, but only the Divine. Which he En∣deavours to Prove thus. Some (says he) are Ʋn∣reasonable Men, and so all have not Reason; and some are Idiots, and so have not Understanding: So then, all are not Enlightned with Reason and Ʋnderstanding. If being Ideots, or most Extra∣vagantly Ʋn-Reasonable cou'd Prove this, the Quakers have done it, to Demonstration! But it is that small Pittance of Reason, which they have Debauch'd, that Enables them to Dispute against Reason. Reason can never be Totally Extinguished, more than Life, while Man Remains. It Re∣mains, tho' Dreadfully Clouded, even in Bed∣lam. And therefore, it is an Ʋniversal Principle or Light, which is Essential to Mar, as Man. And the Quakers, whether they will, or not ('tis a sad Story!) must have it. Yes, and must be Confounded by it; or else Converted. They say, that All Men have not REASON. But were it not much more true to say, that All men have not GRACE, that is, the Divine and Saving Light? And that the Light in some men is Darkness. I hope they will not say the Divine Light (which they make to be God Himself) is Darkness. Therefore they must find out some Fallible Light in Man, that is Capable of being Darkned. At least, other men have found it, and see it Plainly in Them, tho' They cannot see it themselves, it is so Darkned; or will not Own it. But Christ (says Hubberthorn ibid.) calls it not
Reason nor Ʋnderstanding. But where were Hubb's Eyes? did he never Read Isai. 1.18. Come now, let us Reason together, saith the Lord. And Prov. iii. 5. Lean not unto thine own Ʋnderstanding. And 1 Cor xiv. 15. I will Pray with the Spirit, and I will Pray with the Understanding also. Then sure they were Two things. For ver. 14. it is said, My Spirit Prayeth, but my Understanding is Ʋnfruitful. Did Christ then never call the Light that is in Man by the Names of Rea∣son or Ʋnderstanding? or is ther no Light of Reason in Man, besides the Light of the Spirit? How then is the Light of the Spirit Distin∣guish'd from that of the Ʋnderstanding? If it be said, that Hubb Meant no more but that Christ did not call the Divine Light, Reason or Ʋnderstanding. That was a mighty saying! upon the Quaker Principle, that the Divine Light in Man, is God: And makes this Sense, That Christ did not call God, Reason or Ʋn∣derstanding. But what was it, which the Holy Scriptures call Reason or Ʋnderstanding in Man? If it is not God, it must be a Creature: And if it be Created in Man, and is Part of the Composition of a Man, then it is of his Na∣ture: And is Justly and Truly call'd a Na∣tural Light, or Natural Reason: And is Distin∣guish'd from the Divine Light, which is God. It was to this Natural Light or Ʋnderstand∣ing of our own, that we are Commanded not to Lean, that is, to Follow it, Absolutely, with∣out a Due Sense of its weakness, and there∣fore Acknowleging the over-Ruling Hand of God, to put our whole Trust in Him. The Foundation Principle of Quakerism, is, To Fol∣low
the Light within: But here is a Light with∣in, which God Commands Us not to Follow: Therefore this Light cannot be Himself: And therefore ther must be Another, and a Falli∣ble Light in Man, which it is Dangerous to Follow, without a Guard. And this is our Na∣tural Light or Reason. Which do's Manifest God to us, in a Great Measure, even His Eter∣nal Power and Godhead.Rom. 1.19.20. Which Renders all Sinners, even of the Gentiles, without Excuse, who do not Worship and Serve that God, In∣finit and Eternal, Sutably to those Discoveries, which, by their own Natural Reason, they can Make of Him.Rom. 2.14.15. And the Same Natural Con∣cience do's also bear Witness, and Accuse or Excuse, according as men follow that Law, written in their Hearts, by Nature, as the Apostle of the Gentiles did Admonish them. But Hubb says (ibid.) That that Light in Man, is not Natural. He do's not Square with Paul there! (as one of them said) unless (as W. P. says Extraordinarily! p. 15.) It is Natural to Man, to have a Super-Natural Light. For which he is Spar'd in Prim Heres. for if it be Natu∣ral, to have any thing that is Super-Natural, how is it Super-Natural? Or if it be Super-Na∣tural, how is it Natural? This looks very like a Figure they call a Bull. But to Proceed. W. P. says, in the same p. 15. of his Pri∣mitive Christianity, as before Quoted, That Man can no more be a Light to his Mind, than he is to his Body. To this says Appen. p. 54. That W. P. adds afterwards, About those things that more Immediatly concern our Better Inward and Eternal Man. He might have added too,
Or about any thing Else. For if ther be no Light in the Ʋnderstanding, it cannot see these, or any other things. Why did you not like∣wise say, That ther was no Light in the Eye; but that you meant only to see Dun Co∣lours. For if the Ʋnderstanding can see no more than the Eye, (as W. P. says) without an Adventitious (Natural Super Natural) Light, then it can see Nothing: for the Eye, with∣out Light, can neither see Dun, nor if it were Dipt in Yallow. And if ther be nothing in a mans Ʋaderstanding, more than in his Eye, to shew it Light, or, as W. P. words it, That Man can no more be a Light to his mind, than he is to his Body, then cannot the Natural Ʋn∣derstanding, of it Self, see any thing, not only of Spiritual, but of Natural Matters; more than the Eye, when ther is no Extraneous Light. That is, it is Actually Blind. But G. Fox's Blundering Spoyls, at every Turn, Will. Penn's Fine Schemes, for this Mar-all will have the Light not to be any thing sent into the Ʋnderstanding or Eye of the Soul,News out of the North. p. 19. but to be the Eye it Self. The God of the World (says he) doth blind your Eye, which is the Light. By which Argument, the Light it Self, which they say is Christ, is Blind. And the Eye, Christ, is put out by the Devil, who is the God of the World. And this Hideous Blas∣phemy must be the Consequence, upon the Qua∣ker Foundation, if ther be no Natural Light in the Ʋnderstanding. And more, if, accor∣ding to Fox, the Divine Light, that is Christ, be the Ʋnderstanding it Self. The Apostle says, The Eyes of your Ʋnderstanding being Enlight∣ned—Eph. 1.18.
Do's Christ Enlighten Himself? Is the Light a Light to its Self? so the Quakers think, who Preach to the Light, and Instruct Christ Himself.ibid. p. 42. 43.To that in Every one of your Conscien∣ces I speak (Says G. Fox) which is the Light— which Light is Christ. This was his, and the First Quakers common stile. But since it is much left off among them, for they have Dis∣cover'd the Nonsense and the Blasphemy, of Preaching to Christ, Instructing and Admonishing of Christ! Which yet they cannot get off, while they Allow no other Light in the Conscience. They cannot come off with this Distinction (which they bring in, to Amuse the World) of the Natural Light being only Un-Capable to see the Mysteries of Faith, by its own Na∣tive and Inherent Powers. For that has been Yielded to them. And they Oppos'd it, as it is Instanc'd in Prim. Heres. p. 20. It was Gran∣ted by an Opponent to the Quakers, in these words, That no man, by that Native Light, Inherent in him, had Power to Believe. This G. Fox Opposes, in his Gr. Mystery. p. 42. and says, The Light that doth Enlighten Every man, he calls it Native and Inherent. The names he gives of Native and Inherent, are his own, out of the Truth. And Appen. p. 54. do's Justifie this, by way of Excuse, he says, That G. Fox had Reason to Oppose this Tenet. Why? Because (he says) his Adversary did mean by Native and Inherent Light, that Light wherewith Every one that cometh into the World is Enlight∣ned withal. And what harm was ther in this? Has not every man, and must he not have what is Natural to Man? else he were not a Man.
O but Christ is call'd The Light that Lighteth Every man. Joh. 1.9. And what then? May not Christ Enlighten a man, that has a Natu∣ral Light in his Ʋnderstanding? Indeed, how otherwise cou'd He Enlighten him, more than a Beast, if he had no more Natural Light than a Beast, to Ʋnderstand and Receive the Influen∣ces of the Holy Spirit? It is said, that Christ did open the Ʋnderstandings of His Disciples, to Ʋnderstand the Scriptures. Will it follow that they had no Natural Light in their Ʋn∣derstandings? No. Therefore they had. And Christ, by the Blessed Influence of His Holy Spi∣rit did Open and Improve their Light, and work upon it. You will not say, That Christ the Light did Open the Light, that is, Open or In∣struct Himself. Therefore it was another Light, i. e. The Natural Light of their Ʋnderstandings, which He Opened. Now here we have the Quaker Notion Truly. viz. That ther is no Light in man, that is Native or Inherent. Tho', as W. P. says, Some Mista∣kenly call it Natural Light. But what other men Mistakenly call Natural Light, that the Quakers say, is the Light which is Christ, and God. And they say, That ther is no other Light in the Ʋnderstanding of Man but that. Now no man ever call'd Christ the Natural Light of our Ʋnderstanding. What is it then which we Mistakenly call Natural Light? It is not Natu∣ral (say the Quakers) else, we do not call it so Mistakenly. Is it not therefore Plain that they Deny all Natural Light? otherwise, how do we Mistake in Calling it Natural? This Quotation out of W. P. is mention'd in Prim. Her. p. 20. But not a word is said to it in Appen. For,
indeed, I think, it cannot be Answer'd. It is a full Demonstration, that the Quakers Deny all Natural Light, all that ever Mankind meant by the Light of Nature. They will have no Light in Man, but the very Original Divine Light, which is God, And this is the Origi∣nal of all their Horrible Heresies, as shewn in Prim. Her. This do's necessarily Inferr, that every Man is God: for this Light which is God, howe∣ver it be, in it self, Supernatural to us, yet, if, as W. P. says, it be Natural for us to have it, then it is of our Nature: and consequent∣ly, every Man is God, even by Nature. And whatever is Natural for us to have, must needs be Native and Inherent. Why then will they not have it call'd Natural or Native and Inherent? Because Men do call the Light of Nature so. And this is, to beat down that Notion of any Natural Light in Man. Thom. Law∣son, in his Book call'd The Lip of Truth opened. Printed 1656. p. 47. says, As for a Natural Light, the Scriptures mention no such thing; so when thou writes again, acquaint People what thou means by Natural; the Apostle speaks of a Divine Nature, which the Saints were Partakers of. 2 Pet. 1.4. But why do's Thom. Lawson Li∣mit this to the Saints? Here the Quakers con∣found themselves. For they say, That every Man that comes into the World is Partaker of the Light within: But the Apostle here (even as T. L. interprets it) says of none but the Saints, that they are Partakers of the Divine Nature: which is Plainly the Import of that Text. And therefore, the Light within, and
the Divine Nature are two things. Because some may Partake of the One, who do not of the Other. Yet T. L. will not allow of Two Lights. Or that ther is any Light in Man, that can be call'd Natural, Spiritual, Reason, or Grace, for which his Adversary Con∣tends, in these very words. But he Answers p. 42. The Light is but one, even Christ. and p. 43. No Light we own, but Christ, who Light∣eth every one. i. e. The Light within is not a∣ny Inspiration from Christ, but Christ Himself. Nothing is more a Receiv'd and Common Prin∣ciple of the Quakers than this; nor more Zealously contended for. Tho' now they wou'd Smooth and Cover it, when they see it is tho∣roly Discover'd, and thereby grown Odious to the Eyes of the World. If you wou'd know (for it seems strange) why they are so Earnest against any Natural Light. It is this, That thereby they may bring Men to Lean wholly to their own Light within; while they think it to be no less than God Himself, and nothing of the Cor∣rupt Nature of Man. And so it becomes a Rule Superior even to Scripture, or any thing else. And thinking that they have no Light but this, consequently, whatever comes into their Heads, they must think it to be the very Voice of God. And then in vain is either Scripture or Reason urg'd to Remove them. For they think they have what is Infalli∣ble within them. This Renders them (as we find them) Deaf to all Arguments. This is the most Dreadful Snare of the Devil; where∣in when any are Caught, they are Proof a∣gainst Conviction or Repentance, even in the most
Senseless or Diabolical Heresies that Satan can put into their Heads. Whereas, if they did Acknowlege a Natural and Fallible Light in their Ʋnderstandings, they wou'd consider whe∣ther such Thoughts were Agreeable to the Rules of Scripture, and Reason; and Correct their Thoughts accordingly. They wou'd then (and not before) be capable of Instruction and Im∣provement. Then they wou'd Search for, and soon Find (what W. P. thought Impossible) a certain Medium and Way to Distinguish be∣tween the Fallible suggestions of the Light of Their own Corrupted Nature, and those Infalli∣ble Truths, which God has Reveal'd in His Holy Scriptures. They wou'd Determin and Limit their own Loose and Fleeting Thoughts, by those Infallible Oracles. Which they now absolutely Refuse, saying, That they have the same Spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures. Not only a Ray or Communication of that Spi∣rit; which all Good men do Experiment, Work∣ing upon, and Exciting the Natural Light of their Ʋnderstandings; yet Resistable, else none cou'd be in Error: Now it is not with our Hands or our Feet that we Resist it, but with our Mind: And our Mind cou'd no more Re∣sist it than our Hands, if our Mind had no more Light than our Hands, or no other Light than the Divine; unless you suppose that the Divine Light wou'd Resist it Self! But this Ar∣gument is more Largely Pursu'd in Prim. Her. p. 24. to 29. of which no notice at all is taken in Appen. This is not only a Specula∣tive Point, but of the last Consequence to the Quakers: And the first Step must be taken in order to their Recovery
That, by this, they are not only Equal to, God in some Sense; But that they are very God Himself. And that Every Creature is God, even the Devil!2. This has brought them (among other Dreadful consequences of this wild Notion) to say, That the Soul which God Breath'd into Man, was not a Creature, but the Breath, that is, as they Explain it, the very Essence, Nature, Substance, and Person of God (as shewn in Sn, Sect. 2. &c.) To Cover which, and make it appear less Frightful to all Men of Sense or Religion, they wou'd now make it be Believ'd, that they said not this of the Soul it self, but of what God Breath'd into the Soul. Tho' this cou'd not alleviat the Blasphemy, to say that God Breath'd His own very Essence and Being into our Soul. But when you Read the Quo∣tations in the Sn. in the Place above Cited, you will see plainly, that it was of the Soul it self, and not of any thing in the Soul which they spoke. And this will appear, past all Contradiction, if any wou'd be at the Pains to Read those Authors whom G. Fox there oppos'd; Who allow'd all that cou'd be said of the Divine Presence of God in the Soul, But put the Question concerning the Soul it self. Magnus Byne (one of their opposers) says, in his Scornful Quakers Answer'd. An. 1656. p. 104. Tho' ther be a Blessed Ʋnion between Christ and an Holy Soul, yet ther is a vast Difference between the Essence or Being of the Soul, and Christ; the one being still a Creature, the other the Creator of it. This G. Fox opposes (Gr. Mystery. p. 29.) and falls upon him, for calling the Soul a Creature. T. Law∣son in his Lip of Truth opened. p. 50. Charges him again for the same, and cries, Thou call'st the Soul a Creature. And I. Deny it (says he) shew me a Scripture calling the Soul a Creature, &c. Mag. Byne allow'd a kind of Infinitness in the Soul; But yet (says he) it is not Infinitness it self.
Which G. Fox opposes (Gr. Myst. p. 90.) but alters the words from Infinitness it self, to In∣finitness in it self; tho' p. 29. he says that the Soul is Infinit it self. This he Asserts, and was not content with any Kind of Infinity, less than Infinitness it self, which he ascribes to the Soul: And makes it without Beginning, as well as Ending; that is, from Eternity. And to be One with God, not in such a Spi∣ritual Ʋnity, as is allow'd by all Christians; but even in Essence, and to be God Himself. Ra. Farmer; in what he calls The Great Mystery of Godliness and Ʋngodliness. An. 1655. p. 26, 27. Allows in these words, That God and Christ and the Spirit dwell in Ʋs, and that God and Christ and the Saints are One: Yet are we to Ʋnderstand this Ʋnion to be only in a way of Re∣lation, through Participation of the same Spirit; And this Dwelling to be only in respect of Grace, and Powerful Operation and Influence, working in the Hearts of Believers. &c. But then he tells of another sort of Ʋnion which the Quakers drive at. viz. That Themselves are God and Christ, and what God is, they are; And what they are, God is. That they hold The Living Soul in Man to be Un-Created, and so Consequently, to be God Him∣self, and not Created by God. And so, That they have a God Within, and a Christ within, thereby Labouring to beget in Peoples Minds a Contempt and slight Esteem of Christ, His Word and Ordinances. That what is. Declar'd concern∣ing the Death of Christ at Jerusalem, and His bearing our Iniquities, in His own Body upon the Cross, is but a Meer History and Shadow; the Scriptures are but a Letter, and the Ordinances
of God, but Fleshly Forms. &c. To this Book G. Fox Answers, and to this very Page 27. which he Quotes, in his Gr. Myst. p. 173. But Recites only 2 or 3 ends of Sentences (accord∣ing to his Custom) of which the Reader can make nothing. And he do's not so much as Deny any Part of this Charge (for it is the true Quaker Doctrin) But, on the Contrary, Justifies it, in his silly Squinting Fashion, saying, That Jesus Christ is within, except ye be Reprobates. And where Jesus-Christ is within, the Word is there, and God is there &c. Not Denying such a Charge of Hideous Bla∣sphemy, is, in this Case, a Confessing of it. And to give such General no Answers, shews only a Mind to Dodge, and not Plainly to Discover the Monstrous Root of their Infernal Heresie. But they have Discover'd it, Plain enough, as before Quoted. For if the Soul of Man be not a Creature (which you see they have over and over again Asserted) then it must be God: for ther is no Medium. And not only thus Negatively have they Asserted it: But Positively, and in the Affirmative: They say, that the Soul is Infinite, even Infinitness it self; and with∣out Beginning. Which nothing can be but God. And if the Soul be God, it must follow that ther is no Soul but God. Which R. Farmer. p. 27. above Quoted, do's charge upon the Qua∣kers, That they say, Ther is no Spirit but One, and so Deny any Angel or Spirit. Which page G. Fox do's Quote in his Answer (Gr. Myst. p. 173.) but says nothing at all to this. he cou'd not Deny this to be the Quaker Principle.
And the Consequence of this is, That ther is nothing Natural in Man: for if all in Man be God, then ther is no Nature of Man, but only the Na∣ture of God. This is the true Ground why the Quakers will not allow any Light that is in Man to be Natural; no, not that Light or Reason which is Common to All Men. Nor will be Content to say That this comes from God. No. They will have it nothing Less than God Himself. It was Granted to G. Fox, That the Eternal word Enlightneth All men, with the Common Light of Na∣ture. This G. F. Repeats, and Opposes. The Light (says he) which Every Man that cometh in∣to the world is Enlightned withal, is not Natural.Gr. Myst. p. 172. What is his Reason? Because, says he, The Light was before any thing was Made; and all things that was made, was made by it, which Light∣neth every Man that cometh into the World. By this Argument, nothing at all can be Natural to Us; because, not only our Light, but out Life, and Every thing we have is from God. And Consequently, we, nor any other Creature can have any Nature at all. And then, ther can he No Creature at all; but All is God. This was the Ranters Blasphemous Notion. That God is Every thing: And Every thing is God. Thus they Understand that Text, That God is All in All. i. e. That Every thing comes by Emanation from God; or that Every thing is the Nature and Essence of God, Extended, and Vary'd: which Returns again into its self, as Ri∣vers come from, and Return into the Sea; And so All things Return into the Nature of God,
whence they Came. And that ther is no Na∣ture or Being but only that of God. And this the Quakers have Lick'd up from the Ranters, from whom they came: And tho' they seem to oppose them, yet from them they Learn'd, And still Propagate this, with others of their Vile Errors. This is the very Language of the Quakers. Is not this that cometh out from God, which is in God's hand,Gr. Must. p. 100.Part of God, and from God, and to God again? is not this of God's Being? And doth not the Scripture say, God is All, and in All? Is not the Soul without Beginning,ib. p. 90.coming from God, Returning into God again, who hath it in His hand— Which brings it up into God, which came out from Him; hath this a Beginning or Ending? And is it not Infinite in it self, and more than all the world? Now Consider what a Condition they call'd Ministers are in:ib. p. 29.They say, that which is a Spiritual Substance, is not Infinite in it self, but a Crea∣ture: That which came out from the Creator, and is in the Hand of the Creator, which brings it up, and to the Creator again, that is Infinite it self. And thou says,ib. p. 91.the Soul is a Spiritual thing, and yet a Creature— But the Bishop of their Souls Christ the Power of God— brings the Soul up into God from whence it came, whereby they come to be One Soul. Thus G. Fox, which he had learn'd from his Lear-Father (as he was call'd) John Hinks a Chief man among the Ranters. Who allow'd no Distinction at all betwixt God and Creatures, but said that All was God.
And after him, the other Quakers proceed in the same strain. Christoph. Atkinson sets down this, as a False Principle, which he opposes, viz. That God who is Creator,Sword of the Lord. p. 3.is Eternally DISTINCT from all Creatures, in His Being and Blessedness. And Replies in these words, The Being of God is not Distinct from them that are Begotten of Him: for as the Father and the Son are one without Distinction, so are they that are Begot∣ten by Him. And p. 5. he Denies that Christ or God is a Distinct Person from all Saints and Angels. For (says he) Christ is but one in All, and not Distinct. And this says he, in his Ti∣tle-Page, I was moved by the Lord God of Life to lay open—as it was made Manifest in me from the Lord. And now we see the Rea∣son why G. Fox did not oppose what R. Far∣mer charg'd upon the Quakers, of their Deny∣ing and Created Angel or Spirit, and holding no other Spirit, but God. This G. Fox cou'd not Deny, to be the very Principle of the Qua∣kers. Nay he Contends and Disputes for it. In his Gr. Myst. p. 207. he sets this as an Error of the Professors, that, they say, God hath a Christ Distinct from all other things whatsoever, whether they be Spirits or Bodies. And Answers, God's Christ is not Distinct from His Saints, nor His Bodies. So that, by this, not only all Spirits, but all Bodies are God's Bodies; nay every Body, as well as Spirit is God. For so it must be, if God is not Dictinct from them. This is true Ranterism. And is the Dreggs of that old Corrupt Hea∣then Philosophy, which made God. to be only Anima Mundi, the Soul of the World; and
consequently, every thing to be Part of God, of His Essence and Being. The Blasphemous Absurdity of which has been Expos'd by many of the Heathens themselves. And is now lick'd up again by the most Gross of Heathens, the Quakers. Mr. Farmer, in his Book before mention'd, is Large, p. 58. &c. in shewing now the Qua∣kers took up this from the Ranters. That they Approv'd of the Ranters Principles. But Blain'd them, for not keeping up to them, to the Light that was in them; as they say of their own Quakers, when they Listen to the Flesh, and are taken Napping. In a Book wrote by G. Fox, and Jam. Naylor. An. 1654. call'd A word from the Lord, unto all the Faithless Ge∣neration of the World, &c. p. 13. they give this Testimony to the Ranters, You had a Pure Con∣vincement, I witness, which did Convince you, and you started up to be as Gods. And Gods they thought Themselves, and were thought by the Quakers, till their Vileness (as of the Quakers now) was so fully Discover'd, that meer Shame Drove all People from them. Their Great Edw. Burrough, and Fr. How∣gill wrote an Answer to some Quaeres put by one Reeve, of which this is the Second. viz. What the true Creator was, in his own distinct Essence, Nature, and Glory, from all Eternity, in Time, and to all Eternity: And wherein Elect men and Angels differ in their Natures and Glory, Distinct from their Creator in their Persons? And the Answer of the Quakers is, That the Na∣ture and Glory of the Elect, differs not from the Nature and Glory of the Creator—For the E∣lect are one with the Creator— And, thy word,
Distinct Essence, I Deny: For the Elect is not Distinct from the Creator. The First Quaere Asks, How God is Distinct from all Living Creatures? And the Answer is, He is not Distinct from Living Creatures: for in Him Living Creatures Lives, Moves, and hath their Beings. This shews how the Qua∣kers and Ranters (their Predecessors) understand that Text. Act. xvii. 28. Not, as there Ex∣plain'd, and ver. 25. That God gives us, all these things: But that these things are Part of God's Essence, and not any Distinct Essence from Him. That ther is but one Essence or Being, which is God: Of which All Creatures do Par∣take, in their several Degrees. By which Hy∣pothesis, as Sebastian Frank (one of this Horrid Gang, in Germany) did Impiously Blaspheme, In Trunco, Dcum esse Truncum; in Porco, Por∣cum; in Diabolo, Diabolum. O Astonishment to Repeat it! That In a Block, God is a Block; in a Swine, a Swine; and in a Devil, He is a Devil. These last Quotations, I take from Mr. Far∣mer, not having seen that Answer of Burrough and Howgil to Reeve. But G. Fox, in his An∣swer to this Book of Mr. Farmer, do's not Deny them; which ther is no Doubt he wou'd have done had they been False. Nay, on the Contrary, he do's Justify the Doctrin and stand by it. He Quotes the very Place in Farmer, where these Quotations are, viz. p. 60, 61, 62. In p. 61. is that Dreadful Blasphemy a∣bove Quoted of Sebast. Frank; there call'd one of the same Gang with the Quakers: and in the same page, and beginning of p. 62. it is
Compar'd with what I have above Quoted out of Christopher Atkinson's Sword of the Lord, &c. where he Denies God to be a Distinct Being from All Creatures. And G. Fox in his Gr. Myst. p. 174. Quotes this same Page of Farmer. viz. p. 62. and sets down this, as one of Farmer's False Principles, which he Op∣poses, He saith (says Fox) That God is Distinct in His Being and Blessedness from All Creatures; and that God who is the Creator, is Eternally Distinct from All Creatures. He Quotes the same again from p. 53. of Farmer, thus, He saith, That this God, who is the Creator, is Eternally Distinct from All Creatures. And from p. 55. That Christ being God, only in one Man's Per∣son, remains a Distinct Person from All Creatures and Angels. And G. Fox's Answer is, This is Contrary to Scripture. And he Quotes some of the Scriptures, which they use to wrest to this Blasphemous Purpose, as That God is All in All. In Him we Live and move &c. And he Disowns not Sebast. Frank, or his Blasphe∣my. Thus they hold, That Christ is God, not on∣ly in One Man's Person, i. e. in the Person of our Lord Jesus of Nazareth; but in Every one of their Persons; and as much Incarnat in Them, as in Jesus: Nay, as much in Every other Man; ay and Beast too, by this Principle; which De∣grades God into a Stock, to a Swine, to a De∣vil! (O Horror!) who, by this Means, wou'd Maintain His Equality with God: And has Taught it to the Quakers,
Who, from his Inspiration, think Them∣selves to be Infinit and Eternal, as God is! Thus says G. Fox, in the Introduction to his Battle∣doore for Teachers and Professors &c. All Lan∣guages are to me (says he) no More than Dust, who was before Languages were. And p. 214. Next follow a few words by George Fox, Who is before Confusion or Many Languages were. In the same Strain, says James Parnell, in his Book Intituled The Watchers &c. p. 37. To the End of all Disputes and Arguments I am come; for be∣fore they was, I AM. And thus it must be, if their Soul be not a Creature, and have no Beginning, as before has been Quoted, out of their Books. It will not now seem Strange, That they Allow no Created, that is, no Human Soul to Christ, Since they Deny it to them∣selves. This you may see in George Whitehead his Answer to Thomas Danson his Synopsis of Qua∣kerism. Printed An. 1669. p. 18. There he says, As to T. Dansons telling of the Son of God's Incarnation, the Creation of his Body and Soul, the Parts of that Nature he Sub∣sisted in &c. To this I say, if the Body and Soul of the Son of God were both Created, doth not this render him a Fourth Person? for Creation was in Time—Where doth the Scripture say, That his Soul was Created? The Consequences of this Horrid Opinion En∣gages the Quakers to believe That God may Grow and Encrease, be Born, and Suffer, because they find it so with Themselves. They Sup∣pose that what they call the Seed in their
Hearts, do's Grow from a Seed to become a New-Born Child: Thence to be a Son, that is, in the Perfection of a Man: And thence, by Degrees to Encrease, till it be God! This is the Climax of the Quaker-Perfection; for they Cannot say that they were Perfect at first. Thus Will. Penn gives it Us, in his Christian Quaker. An. 1674. p. 98. When (says he) what was but in the Condition of a SEED, or NEW∣BORN CHILD, shou'd become the ONLY SON, the WONDERFƲL COƲNCELLOR, the MIGHTY GOD, the EVERLASTING FA∣THER. This is the same Language with Will. Bayly, in his Works. p. 291. CHRIST is known (says he) to be first a Holy thing; then a CHILD given; and a SON Born; Which is EMANƲEL God with Ʋs, a Saviour, a Won∣derful Councellor, the MIGHTY GOD, the PRINCE OF PEACE &c. And this is not said of Our Blessed Lord Jesus of Nazareth, his Conception in the Womb of the Virgin MARY, and being Born of her Body: But the Quakers Mean it, as all fulfill'd Within Themselves. viz. The SEED Sown, or Conceiv'd in their VIRGIN Hearts, which, at the first, in Embrio, is only a Holy thing; But Encreasing, it becomes a Child, in the Womb of the Heart; thence Repening, it has a Spiritual BIRTH, and is a SON Born; Which SON Grows up to be at last the MIGHTY GOD, the EVERLASTING EATHER. Nor do they Suppose that Christ was any otherwise Born of the Blessed Virgin, than as He is thus Born in Themselves. They Allego∣rize all the History of His Incarnation, into
this Spiritual Birth of the Light, which they Call CHRIST, in their Hearts. The Virgin MOTHER of God, is a Virgin HEART, where∣in God is Conceiv'd and Born. They have Spi∣ritual Shepherds too, heeping their Flocks by Night. A Spiritual STAR in the EAST, Spiritual WISE MEN who follow'd it, to a Spiritual BABE, in a Spiritual INN, MANGER &c. And all this Perform'd Within them, Now, at this Day! Awake therefore NOW (says Will. Bayly, p. 292. of his Works) Ye Shepherds, who have been keep∣ing your Flocks by Night, and Look ye Ʋpwards, ye Earthly-Minded, and behold His Star in the East; the Wise Men (whose Eyes are in their Head) have Seen it, and been Led by it, till the Babe was found Lying in a Manger, for in the Inn ther was no Room for him. He that hath an Ear to Hear, let him Hear. Thus they Commonly Conclude, when they Speak Mystically. This is to shew, that they Mean not according to the Letter. Therefore they Cry, He that hath Ears &c. For it is not given to Every One, to Understand these Quaker Mysteries! Therefore they speak to Us in Parables, that Seeing we might not See, nor Ʋnderstand them; for they think Us not Worthy; as having Harden'd our Hearts against them! Let me here set down a Quotation more at Large, out of the fore-cited place of Will. Bay∣ly's Works, p. 291, 292. It will give the Rea∣der a Plainer View of this their Principle. And they Complain often, that their Words are given too Short, and the whole Sentences not
Produc'd at Large. Thus then says that Re∣nowned Quaker. So now this Christ was before the World (that now is) began, and was a Seed before any Name was given to it; which, in pro∣cess of time, being Begotten of God, was Born of a Virgin, had a Body Prepared to do the will of his Father (as it is at this Day;) But none knows him (or ever shall) Born, but of a Virgin (he that hath Ears, let him hear) Whose Eye is Single, Mind stayed on God, Forsakes all, takes up the dayly Cross, denies Self—These only know him Born, tho' once, like Mary, said, How can this be, Seeing I know not a Man? (Seeing I have no Strength, Wisdom, Parts, or Abilities of my Own:) But the Answer is, at it was, (Be thou but the Virgin) The Power of the Most High shall Over-Shadow thee, And that Holy thing, which shall be Born of thee, shall be Called the Son of God: This was Christ's Name in the Womb, a Holy thing. Read within—This is the I AM, which was before Abraham—the Virgin is Subject to the Power of the Most High, Where Christ is known to be first a Holy thing, then a Child given &c. [as before Quoted]—That which may be known of God (or Christ, which is One) is Manifest IN People, there He is, and is ONLY to be found—This is that God (which Paul Prea∣ched to the Athenians) that Made the World &c. Thus Will. Bayly. And, by this, you see, That they make God and Christ to be all One. That this God was a Seed, before any Name
was givin to it. i. e. from Eternity. That this God, do's in process of time, even at this Day, Beget God, IN Us. That this God do's Grow and Encrease IN Us, from a Seed, to a Child, then to a Son, lastly, to be the MIGHTY GOD, the EVERLASTING FATHER! Again you see, how they Allegorize the Vir∣gin of Whom CHRIST was Born, to a Pure or Virgin HEART. That when Mary said, she knew not a Man, by Man here was only Meant Our own Wisdom, Strength, Parts, or Abilities, out of which Christ cou'd not be Born. That they know Him Born of them, at this Day, as Mary knew Him Born of Her. And indeed it do's not Appear, That they think Him to have been Born any otherwise of Her, than He is of Them. that is, Not of her Body, in a Literal Sense, but only in the Womb of her Heart, as in Theirs! They say that Christ, or the Light is Be∣gotten of God. But they say not this of that Prepared Body (as they call it) of Jesus of Na∣zareth, in which Christ or the Light Dwelt, which was Literally Born of the Virgin MARY. Whom they do not (that I can find) own to have been a Virgin, in the Common Accep∣tation of the Word, that is, who had no Carnal Knowlege of a Man: but only that she had a Pure, that is a Virgin HEART. There∣fore they are Desir'd to tell us, who they think was the Immediate Father, not of Christ or the Light, but of that Prepared Body of Jesus of Nazareth? Whether they think, as some Socinians have done, that it was Begot
by Joseph, in the Ordinary way of Generation? If they Wave giving any Answer to this, It is Owning that they do think so. For if they Be∣lieve as all other Christians do, they can have no Scruple in Owning of it. Especially Now, when they are upon Smoothing of their Princi∣ples, and Endeavouring to make them Appear the same with other Christians, particularly with the Doctrin of the 39 Articles of the Church of England. And in their Answer to this, I here give them Caution, to Avoid Ambiguity of Terms. That they Word it not, Who was the Father of Christ, or of Jesus; for they can call their Light within sometimes by the Name of Jesus, that is, a Saviour, as well as by the Name of Christ, that is, Anointed: But that they Answer Di∣rectly, Who was the Father of that Outward Body of Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Mary. And that they say not only, Who was his Fa∣ther; for they may say, it was God; which is true, in a Large Sense, as He is the Father of All Living: But that they tell, Who was his IMMEDIATE Father. And whether He was Begotten of Any Mere Mortal Man? I Desire them to keep in the word Mortal, because they have a Notion of an Eternal Man∣hood of God (as shewn in the beginning of the First Part) Therefore, I Desire they may say, whether our Jesus, was Begotten of any MOR∣TAL Man? And because they have a Sense too, in which they think that God or the Light may Dye in Our Hearts, Therefore, that they add the word Mere to Mortal, and say, Whether the Outward Body of Jesus of Nazareth, which
was Born of Mary the Wife of Joseph, was Be∣gotten by any Mere Mortal Man? Ther is Need of all this Caution with these Quakers, as sufficiently shewn before. It is Im∣possible otherwise to Hold them! Ther are None who have such Starting-Holes and Eva∣sions as they have: With all their Pretences to Flainness and Sincerity! Now if they shall Answer, in the Terms be∣fore set down, That Jesus was IMMEDIAT∣LY Begotten by God, in the Womb of the B. Virgin: Then that they give a Good Reason, Why He was not Properly the Son of God. Or otherwise, That they Disown that Representa∣tion of their Belief which Will. Penn has Given, and says it in their Name, viz. That the out∣ward Person which Suffer'd was Properly the Son of God, We Ʋtterly Deny. As has been before Quoted from p. 146. of his Serious Apolo∣gy. Then let them Own, That Christ was other∣wise Begotten and Born of the Blessed Virgin, than He is in their Hearts, or Ever was, or will be in any other Person. That only at that Time, in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin, and Never Before, He did Assume our Flesh into an Hypostatical or Personal Ʋnion with His Di∣vine Nature: And that He is now Truly and Properly a Man, in Compleat Human Nature, of an Human Soul, and Human Body, And like∣wise, Truly and Properly the Son of God (Con∣trary to Will. Penn.) And that He is not such in Any Other Person Whatsoever. Not in the Person of Will. Penn, G. Whitehead, or Any of the Quakers. Reader, forgive me for using so
many Words, Less Particular and Positive will not do with these Men. It is for their sakes that I do it, That I may, by any Means, if Possible, Open their Eyes, to Discover their Hor∣rible Delusions! They have, by this Means of Allegorizing the Incarnation and Birth of our Blessed Saviour from the Letter, to their Imagined Conception, Birth, Passion, Death, and Resurrection of the Light within, taken away all Certainty whereby we may know, Whether ever ther was Such a Man in the World as Jesus Christ, or that He ever did any Miracle, or had any Attestation from Hea∣ven for His Ministry. That Most Express, of the Glorious Appea∣rance of a Light from Heaven, Descending Leasurly and Hovering, upon the Head of Jesus, at His Baptism, after the Manner that a Dove Lights upon the Ground, the Quakers have Deny'd, that is, turn'd it to an Allegorie. Doest thou believe (says G. Whitehead to his Opponent, in his Truth Defending the Quakers. p. 42.) That it was visible to the Carnal Eye, as a Created Dove is? or its Lightning (I believe he Meant Lighting) upon Him as a Dove, was in respect of its Nature and Comliness? By this they Mean, That Inno∣cency and Simplicity, like that of a Dove, was all that did Light upon Jesus, or which Exprest His Nature and Comliness, at that Time. And then indeed they might well Ask, Was it visi∣ble to the Carnal Eye? But, by this, they have Quite Overthrown the Validity of that Miracu∣lous Attestation given to Christ, And so they have done to all the Rest. That, as I said, they have not left One Single Proof, that Ever ther
was such a Man in the World. For that can not be known, but by Outward Acts, and At∣testations. And if they can be thus Turn'd, ther is an End of all Proof from them. But they wou'd have no other Proof for Christ, or His Mission, than ther is for their Own: Since they vouch Themselves to be Christ and God! Indeed, as many Gods, as ther are Quakers! For if, as they say, the Seed in them can Grow up to be God: That God do's BEGET Himself in them: Then I do not see how they can avoid the Consequence of a Multiplication of Gods! Of God's having a Beginning, and be∣ing Created! For if He be Begotten in Time, Every Day, in Every New Quaker, He must be Created, and so, is both the Creature, and the Creator! If He be Capable of Encrease, of Growing up from a Seed, to a Child &c. He must likewise be Subject to Dissolution! He must be Lyable to Infirmities and Passions, as We are! And this the Quakers do not Deny. Nay, they Argue Expresly for it. They take in a Literal Sense those Expressions in Scripture, Where God is said to Repent, to be Weary, to Suffer &c. several of which G. Whitehead Quotes in his Divinity of Christ. p. 56. as Isai. 63, 10. Amos. 2.13. Hos. 11.8, 9. Psal. 95. Gen. 6.6. Psal. 78.40. Isai. 1. and chap. 43.24. These he brings as an Answer to the Argument of Thomas Vincent (against whom he Disputed) That Christ, as God, Cou'd not make Satisfaction for our Sins, because, as God, He cou'd not Suf∣fer. The Contrary of which G. W. here En∣deavours
to Prove; and brings these Texts, to shew, That God can Suffer. These are the Natural and Necessary Conse∣quences of this Mad Foundation of the Quaker Faith, in Setting up their Light Within for Christ and God. I am Weary in Pursuing their Blasphemies. But it is Necessary, in Order to Un-Deceive the Simple and Deluded among them: Who know not these Depths of Satan, into which they have been Led. Especially Considering the Tenacious Obstina∣cy of their Leaders, Who, tho' they know these things, Yet, for Popularity, or other Ends, will not Suffer their Implicit Followers to Re∣pent. But Buoy them up, with all the Artifice and Cunning they are Able, to Believe, That all is Well. And to adhere firmly to All that they haue Taught them from the Begin∣ing. And that, IN ALL THE PARTS OF IT. Some Texts Re∣scu'd from the False Glosses of the Qua∣kers, to fa∣vour the Universa∣lity of what they call The Light within.3. Let me, for a Conclusion, Rescue some Texts of Scripture, which the Quakers have wrested, to their own Destruction; And up∣on which they build their wild Notion of the Light-Within. That being undeceiv'd in this, they may, by the Blessing of God, see their Error and Return. Their Chief Text, which they have Constantly in their Mouths, is Rom. x. 8. The word is Nigh thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart: that is the word of Faith which we Preach. This word of Faith, they take to be the Light, which is in Every man of the World: and not to Refer to the outward Christ, or to the Faith in Him; His outward
Sufferings and Death: but to the Faith in their Light within, which Every man has, even those who never heard of Jesus of Nazareth. But the very next words, ver. 9. shew the Apostle's Meaning to be quite otherwise, and to Refer wholy to Faith in the outward Christ. This is the word of Faith, which we Preach (says he) That if thou shalt Confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt Believe in thine Heart, that God hath Raised Him from the Dead, thou shalt be saved. Now that by Faith the Apostle did not mean that Light which is Common to All men, is plain from 2 Thess. iii. 2. For all men have not Faith. Says he. You see here, That in the very next verse following Rom. x. 8. (which is the Quakers Text) the Apostle do's Limit it Expressly, not to the Light within, but to Faith in the outward Jesus. So in Deut. xxx. 11, 12, 13, 14. Whence the Apo∣stle Quoted it, the very next Verse immediate∣ly Before, viz. Ver. 10. do's Limit these words in Moses, to the outward Book of the Law, and not to their Light within. For thus says he, If thou wilt hearken unto the Voice of the Lord thy God, to keep His Commandments, and His Sta∣tutes, which are Written in this Book of the Law — For this Commandment, which I Command thee this Day, is not far off— It is not in Heaven— or Beyond the Sea &c. And Chap. xvii. 18, 19, 20. The King is Commanded to Write him a Copy of this Law, in a Book, out of that before the Priests the Levits. And to Read therein, all the Days of his Life: That he might (thereby) Learn to Fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes, to do them.
Was he to write a Copy of the Light within in a Book, out of the Levits Book? And by Kee∣ping the words of this Law, was no More Meant, than to Keep to his Light within? Cou'd that have told him all that was Commanded in the Law of Moses? How came all the Hea∣then then not to Know it? for they had the Light within. As little cou'd it, of it Self, without the Help of outward Revelation, have Discover'd a Messiah, the Son of God, to be Incarnat, and offer'd up a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. This Faith, as the Apostle truly Says, All men have not. None Ever had it, by Means only of their Light within. But either by Express Revelation, such as was Given of it to Adam, to Abraham, and the Prophets; or by the outward Means of Hearing, as the Apostle says, in that same Chap. of the x. Rom. ver. 17. Describing how that same Faith commeth of which he spoke ver. 8. And he says, That it cometh by Hearing. viz. The out∣ward Preaching of it. For, as he says, ver. 14. How shall they Believe in Him, of whom they have not Heard? And how shall they Hear with∣out a Preacher? So Mad and Void of all Com∣mon Sense, as well as most Impious and Here∣tical Is that Quaker Exposition of Deut. xxx. 14. And Rom. x. 8. Whereby they wou'd Ex∣clude the outward Christ from being the Ob∣ject of the Christian Faith: And Blasphemously Translate it to Themselves, that is, to their own Light Within. And, by this, make the Christian Faith Common to all Mankind, even to those who never Heard of the outward Christ: Which is, To make Him, His Blessed Death
and Passion, Ʋseless and Ʋn-necessary to the World! Another Text they urge mightily for the Ʋniversality of their Light within is Joh. 1.9. That was the true Light, which Lighteth Every man that cometh into the World. This they Un∣derstand of Faith, the True, Saving Faith: and so suppose that Every Man must have it. But the Apostle, from the beginning of this Chap. was speaking of the  the Divine Word, by whom All things were Made. And therefore, not only what Light, but what Life, Every man, or any Creature has is from Him.Act xvii. 25.28.Seeing He giveth to All Life and Breath and All things. For in Him we Live and Move and have our Being. Now that Light which He giveth to All Men, is not the Light of Faith; which All Men have not; But the Natural Light of our Ʋnderstanding, which is Common to All Men. And is a Ray Com∣municated from the Supreme  or Rea∣son. The Quakers, to Avoid this, set about that Mad Task, of Proving that All men have not Reason, as before is shewn. And yet wou'd give All men Faith; of which no man is Ca∣pable without supposing him to have the use of his Reason. Otherwise a Tree or a Stone might Believe, as well as a Man. I will Name but one Text more, upon which they Chime Exceedingly, that is, 1 Joh. 2.20, 27. But ye have an Ʋnction from the Holy one, and ye know All things— And ye need not that any man Teach you, but as the Same Anointing Teacheth you of All things. This they Interpret
of the Light within, which is Common to All Men. But then, by this, it wou'd follow, That All Men do know All things. Quite con∣trary to what the Apostle there Supposes, who speaks of those who Knew not the Truth. And Applys this of the Anointing only to those who Knew the Truth. Ver. 21. I have not writ∣ten unto you, because ye know not the Truth; but because ye Know it &c. Therefore this of the Anointing was spoken only To and Of the True Believers, and not of Infidels, or Generally of All Men, as is Plain to any who Read that Chapter. These are the Chief Texts they Insist upon, for the Ʋniversality of Faith, which they call The Light within. And they All prove Direct∣ly against them. Ther are others so Forc'd and Strain'd, as need not Confutation. As 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of Prophe∣sy &c. which they apply to their Light with∣in. Whereas it was plainly spoken of the Holy Scriptures; as the next Verse do's Expressly De∣termin it. Knowing this first, that no Prophesy of SCRIPTƲRE is of any Private Interpretation. I wish the Quakers wou'd Reflect Seriously upon this. It wou'd correct the Exorbitancy of their Private Interpretations, by what they call their Light within, Different from the Sense of the whole Catholick Church, in All Ages. And let them see and Consider, that ther was Great Reason for that Caution given in this same Epistle, Ch. iii. 16. That the Ʋnlearned and Ʋn∣stable do wrest the Scriptures to their own De∣struction.
The Quakers pretend sometimes to be De∣termin'd by Scripture: and to admit of no In∣terpretation, which is not in Express words of Scripture. See a Book of theirs call'd The Di∣vinity of Christ; Wrote by G. Whitehead and G. Fox, where in the Epistle, they speak thus. Where do the Scriptures speak of three Persons in the Godhead, in these Express words? Let us see where it is written. Come do not shuffle, for we are Resolv'd the Scriptures shall Buffet you about. And where doth the Scripture speak of a Human Nature of Christ in Heaven? And where doth the Scripture say, the Soul is Part of Man's Nature? Give us plain Scripture, without Adding or Di∣minishing. Come let us see Chapter and Verse, &c. Now the Quakers cannot Refuse the same Measure which they have Meated to others. Therefore let us see Chapter and Verse where The Light within is spoke of, In these Express words? wher is ther any thing of Faith in the Light within, of Believing In The Light with∣in, as this Appen do's often speak? Where is it said, that Christ was not the Lamb, but that the Lamb was in Christ? where is ther a word of the Manhood of God? of Christ's Heavenly Flesh, Blood, and Bones? of His Flesh that was Crucify'd, when Adam Fell? Where is His Bo∣dy call'd a Garment, or a Vessel? where shall we find the Distinction of Christ Without, and Within, of an Outward, and an Inward Christ? of the Shedding of His Blood within Ʋs? of the Blood and Bones of our Light within? where is it said, that the Person who Suffer'd upon the Cross, was not Properly the Son of God?
He is oft call'd The Son of God, what Text says, that He was not Properly so, In these Ex∣press words? Come Produce Chapter and Verse— Where are the Holy Scriptures call'd Beastly ware, Serpents meat, Death, and Dust? Where is the Text for Theeing and Thouing, and for not taking off your Hats? For your Silent-Meet∣ings? For the Ceasing of Baptism and The Lord's Supper? For Womens Preaching, and Wo∣mens Meetings, which you call the Good Ordi∣nance of Jesus Christ? what Text do's Abo∣lish Tythes, in these Express words? or Declare all going to War to be unlawful? To keep Holy-Days? or Marry by a Priest? Where is it said, that the Quakers are Infallible? That their Preachings are of as Great Authority as the Scriptures, and GREATER? And their Suf∣ferings more Ʋnjust than the Sufferings of Christ? That the Blood of Christ was no more than the Blood of another Saint? That ther is no Hea∣ven or Hell but Within Men? That ther shall be no Resurrection of our Dead Bodies; or Ge∣neral Judgment, at the End of the world? These are the men who call for Scripture, for every thing! And will allow of no In∣ferences: But will have All, in Express Words! And yet they have set up the most Ʋn-scrip∣tural Jargon that ever was heard of in the world. They Demand Scripture for Christ's having any Human Nature in Heaven: because they Deny it. They Require Scripture for the Soul being Part of Man's Nature: because they make it a Part of God, as before shewn. Let them then Produce Scripture for the Soul being a Part of God,Gr. Myste∣ry. P. 90. for its being Infinit, and without Beginning, which they Assert, in these Express words.
Will. Penn, speaking of Baptism, and The Lord's Supper; Denies them to be Ordinances of Christ. And for this Reason, says he,Reason against Railing. p. 108.The Appellation, Ordinances of Christ, I therefore Re∣nounce, as Ʋn-scriptural and In-Evangelical. Yet the Quakers call Womens-Preachings, and Wo∣mens-Meetings (set up by G. Fox) The Good Or∣dinances which Christ Jesus hath set up in His Church. And Accus'd those who oppos'd them,Solom. Eccles tter to  Sto-John Ba∣bels Buil∣ders. 1st. Part. p. 15. of no less than Rebellion against the Living God. This, to all Considering men, is sufficient to Render them Self-Condemn'd. But they have a Salvo, which will carry with their De∣luded Followers; that is, That their Appeal∣ing to Scripture, is only an Argumentum ad Ho∣minem, against those who do own the Holy Scriptures for their Rule: which the Quakers do not; but Resolve all into the Guidings of their Light within: which they make the only True Gospel and Faith. And my Design is not so much to Con∣found, as to Convert them. Therefore I wou'd Intreat the Sober-Minded among them, to Con∣sider of that Gospel and Faith which the A∣postles Preached; Whether they Taught a Faith in the Light within; or rather a Faith in the Outward Jesus? What was it, which St. Peter Preach'd to Cornelius? Ther was not a word of the Light within, or Reading within, List∣ning to that Within, or the like. But of Faith in the outward Jesus of Nazareth.Act. x. 38, &c.That through His Name, whosoever Believeth in Him, shall receive Remission of Sins. And Cornelius had the Light within before: and the Attesta∣tion
of God, that he had truly Follow'd it. ver. 2. And if that had been sufficient for Remis∣sion of Sins, what needed another Faith, in an Outward Man, Jesus of Nazareth, have been Preach'd to him? And why was that Faith which Peter Preach'd, call'd, Words by which Cornelius and all his House shou'd be saved: And that God had granted to the Gentiles Re∣pentance unto Life,Act. xl. 14, 18, by allowing the Faith in Je∣sus of Nazareth to be Preached unto them, if Faith in the Light within, and obedience to that, had been Sufficient, without any thing else? If Good Cornelius had Dy'd, before the Gospel had been Preach'd unto him (as I before have said) I will not take upon me to Determin of him; but leave him to the Ʋn-covenanted Mercy of God: But if Cornelius had Rejected the Faith in Jesus of Nazareth, for the Remis∣sion of his Sins, when Preach'd to him, all his Former obedience to his Light within, had not been Sufficient to Save him. And therefore the case of the Ʋn-converted Gentiles, upon which the Quakers do so much Depend, will be no Relief to them; who do, after the Preaching of the Faith in Jesus of Nazareth, set up their Faith in their Light within, as Sufficient with∣out It, for the Remission of their Sins. I do beseech these Quakers likewise to con∣sider that large Description which the A∣postle Paul gave of the Gospel which he Preach∣ed; whether it was the Faith in Jesus of Na∣zareth, His Outward Sufferings, Death, and Re∣surrection; or the Faith in the Light with∣in?
Moreover Brethren (says he) I Declare unto you the Gospel which I Preached unto you—by which also ye are saved,1. Cor. xv. 1, 2, &c.if ye keep in memory what I Preached unto you, unless ye have Be∣lieved in vain: For I Delivered unto you first of all, that which I also Received how that Christ Dyed for our Sins according to the Scriptures: And that He was seen of Cephas, then of the Twelve: After that, He was seen of above Five hundred Brethren at once—After that, He was seen of James; then of all the Apostles. And last of all, He was seen of Me also. This cannot be Apply'd, by any means, to the Light within, which cannot be seen of any body. And this Great Article of the Resurrection of Christ, was the Chief thing in consideration of which Matthias was Chosen in the Room of Judas. Wherefore of these men which have Company'd with us,Act. 1.21, 22.all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the Baptism of John, unto the same Day that He was Taken up from us, must one be Ordained, to be a witness, with us, of His RESƲRRECTION. This was the Great Foundation of the Christian Faith,1 Cor. xv. 14. for says, St. Paul, If Christ be not Risen, then is our Preaching vain; and your Faith is also vain. Do's not this make the Faith in the Light within, to be a Vain Faith? At least, this is a Demonstration, that it was not the Faith which the Apostles Preached. For the Apostles do Testify that the Faith which they Preached, had been Vain, if Christ be not Ri∣sen. Yea and we are found False Witnesses of God (say they) because we have Testify'd of God, that He Raised up Christ whom He Raised not up,ver. 15.if
so be that the Dead Rise not. But against all this Conviction, the Quakers will not let this be Meant of the outward Resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth, but of the Rising up of the Light in their Hearts: And therefore, they come in for Witnesses of the Resurrection of Christ, jointly with the Apostles. Which is Monstrous to Be∣lieve! But it is true. For thus says Edw. Bur∣rough in his works. p. 42. We witness the same Christ made Manifest in Ʋs, and His Resurrecti∣on; not because Paul said so; But we have seen it, And are Witnesses of it. And Will. Penn, in his Primitive Christianity. p. 103. Describing those who are True Mini∣sters of Christ, says Ministers of Christ are his Witnesses; And the Credit of a Witness is, that he has Heard, Seen, or Handled. And thus the Beloved Disciple states the Truth and Authority of their Mission and Ministry. 1. Joh. 1.1, 3. That which we have Heard, which we have Seen with our Eyes, which we have Looked upon, and our Hands have Handled, that Declare we un∣to you— I say, if Christ's Ministers are His Wit∣nesses, they must Know what they speak; that is, they must have Experienc'd and Past through those States and Conditions they Preach of, and Prac∣tically know those Truths they Declare of to the People; or they come not in by the Door, but over the Wall, and are Thieves and Robbers. Thus Will. Penn. And in the Contents of this Chapter. p. 97. He Intitules this Fourth Sect. thus. Christ's Ministers, True Witnesses, they speak what they Know, not by Report.
So that, by this, the Quakers know nothing of the Resurrection of Christ, by Report of the Apostles, or others who saw it: But only that sort of Resurrection which (they say) they have Experienc'd, Pass through themselves, and Prac∣tically Known, of Christ in their Hearts. And they Pronounce all those who Now Preach the Resurrection of Christ, which they have not Seen; or any other Christ, but whom they have Seen with their Eyes, whom they have Looked upon, whom their Hands have Handled, they Pronounce all such Preachers, that is, All the Christian Prea∣chers that are Now, or Ever were in the world since Christ Left it, to be Thieves and Robbers. In the same Manner do's. G. Fox, Conclude against them, Who are not the Eye-Witnesses, as the Apostles were. Gr. Mystery. p. 242. of whose Resurrection (say the Quakers) we are Eye-Wit∣nesses. Of whose Resurrection?Will. Bay∣ly's works. Re-printed 1676. p. 173. Was it of the Person of Christ, to the Resurrection of which the Apostles did Witness? No. For they lay no stress upon that Resurrection, neither do All of them Believe it. I have heard some, even of their Preachers, Deny it. But however, they make it of no Consequence to us. For says the same Quaker, Quoted on the Margin. ibid. p. 307. What was his Person, being Mean and Contemptible, to them (his Disciples) more than another Person? I can hardly believe my Eyes, tho' I take these words out of the Book now before me. For who cou'd think that such vile Contempt of the Person of our Blessed Saviour cou'd have come out of the Mouths of any who call themselves Christians! But they Deserve not that Name, who turn the Faith in Christ, to Faith in their Light within; and thus over∣turn
the whole Foundation of the Gospel. Their Light is Darkness, even that may be Felt! Which has led them, as thus to Allegorize the Resurrecti∣on of our Blessed Lord,See Sn. Sect. xii. p. 160. 161. into the Rising of their Light within; so Downright to Deny the Re∣surrection of our Bodies. Which Will. Penn do's utterly Deny to be Meant at all in the xv. Chap. of the 1 Ep. to the Corinthians. Which if it be true, then by the Apostles Argument, ver. 16. the Quakers must likewise Deny the Resur∣rection of Christ, as they Do, but will not al∣ways Confess. For if the Dead Rise not, then is not Christ Raised. And hence I Recommend to their Consideration the next verse. And if Christ be not Raised, your Faith is vain, ye are yet in your Sins. Are they not then in their Sins, and is not their Faith vain, who Preach, That Christ was never seen with Carnal Eye, nor His voice heard, with any Carnal Ears? These are the words of one Worlidge a Quaker, in his Declaration to the Baptists. p. 13. And Justify'd by G. White∣head, in his Light and Life. p. 39. For if Christ was never seen with Carnal Eye, how cou'd the Apostles be Witnesses of His outward Re∣surrection? What do's the Apostle mean by say∣ing, That He was Seen of Cephas, then of the Twelve &c? Did none See, that is, Fcel the Light within, but these only? Was it to keep the Light within from Kising, that the High Priests Desired Guards to be set upon the Se∣pulcher of Jesus, our Lord? Did not Thomas see Christ, when he thrust his Hand in his side; And upon that Conviction, said to Him, My Lord, and My God! What did Christ mean, when He said to him, Thomas, because thou hast
seen, thou hast Believed: Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have Believed: Is not here a Plain Difference put betwixt Seeing and Believ∣ing? Believing is the Inward Seeing; Therefore the other must be meant of the outward See∣ing, with the Carnal Eye. Christ said to His Disciples, Many Prophets and Kings have Desir'd to see what you see, and have not seen them. Did not the Prophets see the Light within, that is, Inwardly, in their Hearts? Did not Christ say The Poor ye have always with you: but Me ye have not Always. Is not the Light within Al∣ways with Us? Was not this then Spoke of His outward Person, which was to be taken from Us? Yet the Quakers will not Allow that He is Absent from Us even as to His Person, or we from Him. Tho' the Apostle says, Whilest we are at home in the Body,2 Cor. 5.6.we are Ab∣sent from the Lord. Which G. Fox Opposes, in his Gr. Myst. p. 8.210.222.247. &c. and many other Places, where he Denies, that Christ is Absent from Us, As touching His Flesh, and as to His Bodily Presence. And do's not Answer, but Confront the above Text with others, as That Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates &c. Now from the words of St. Paul above Quoted, I leave it to the Consciences of the Sober among the Quakers, whether it be True which Will. Bayly so Positively Averrs p. 600. of his Works, That Paul did not Preach a visible Christ, with Flesh and Bones— But the word, says he, that is, the Light within. But Paul Prea∣ched That Same Jesus, whom the Jews, Took down from the Tree, and laid him in a Sepulcher.Act. xiii. 29.
Did they take the Light within down from the Tree? I am Asham'd to offer Proofs for a Point so Obvious to Every Christian. But it is Ne∣cessary for these Miserably Deluded Quakers, who have thrown off the Lord Jesus, and turn All that is said of Him, to their Christ, their own Light within; Even his being the Seed of Abraham, according to the Flesh: as Will. Bayly says p. 210. This Seed of Abraham, which is Christ In Ʋs, which He hath Raised to offer up Living Sacrifices, acceptable in His Sight. So that, by this, the Living Sacrifice, and only Acceptible Offering for Sin, is Christ, or the Light within, Offer'd up, IN Us! But this has been Suffici∣ently Expos'd before. And ten times more Au∣thoritys than here Produc'd, are Ready when ther shall be need. To the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, I will add the Experience and Confession of the Quakers themselves, that their Faith in what they call their Light within, is a Vain and Ʋn∣certain Faith: That they can never be sure of it, or know when they have it Right. G. Whitehead, in his Judgment fixed. Printed 1682. Inserts, with Approbation, a Letter, which he calls a Testimony of Benj. Furly's, Retracting some things he had formerly wrote against Fox and Whitehead, where he says thus. p. 268. As for those Papers so long since given forth by me, not Discerning what Spirit did then Influence me (for so it is, that the Actions of men are ma∣ny times Influenced both by Good and Evil Spi∣rits, tho' they Perceive it not) I did many years since Recall them, &c.
Now, if so it is, that the Quakers (as Furly here) may be Influenced by Evil Spirits, and yet, not Perceive it, how know other of the Quakers, how knows Penn or Whitehead, but they are so Influenced, tho they Perceive it not? (yet others do Perceive it; and have Prov'd it) But their Light within has not told them. No. For then they wou'd Perceive it. There∣fore they may be Deceived; and yet their Light within not Reprove them. And therefore, by their own Confession, it can be no Sure Rule to them. And their Faith in it is Vain. And in that it leads them from the Sure Rule of the Holy Scriptures, to Trust wholly to it; it is Pernicious, and of most Destructive Conse∣quence to them. Their Divisions among themselves, who All pretend to be Guided by the Light within, were Sufficient to Convince them, if they had any Liberty of Judgment left, that this can be no Sure Rule. When G. Fox, by opposing all Or∣der and Decency in the Worship of God, had Gather'd a Party; and then Endeavour'd to Re∣duce them again to some Decency under himself, so far at least, as to be Ʋn-cover'd at Prayer. No. That wou'd not Do. The Principle of their Light within, wou'd Endure no Limits, but what e∣very one Pleas'd to put to Himself. Thus some of them Argue against him, from the Principles which he had Taught them. Hidden things brought to Light. An. 1678. Preface.George Fox (says they) has attain'd to Great Reputation among the Quakers, and is become of an Inconsiderable Shooe-Maker or Mean Servant, a Great Teacher and Leader of a Numerous Company of Men and Women, who All Profess to
be Guided by the Light within them; which they say Errs not, but leads Every one of them (and every man that is Obedient to it) into all Truth, Righteousness &c, Hence it is Manifest, that ac∣cording to their Doctrin, every man who knows him∣self to be Sincere, and obedient to his Light, and sees not Absolute Truth and Goodness in Geo. Fox and the Quakers Principles and Practices, is a Full Evidence against them, that they are Noto∣riously Defective both in Truth and Goodness— For whilst they are Sincerely Obedient to the Light in Themselves, it is certain, that, according to Geo. Fox's Principles, they are Justify'd before God: and then if G. Fox Condemns them, he Condemns whom God Justifies, he casts out whom God Receives. Neither can he Pretend against these as against others, That they were never Obedient to their Measure: for, as to Appearance, they were as Obedient as Himself. And therefore he can have no Ground upon which to Condemn them, but meerly his Pride, Censoriousness, or the like Ex∣orbitant Passion— Behold here! how they have openly Betray'd their Great Principle, of The Light in Every Man his Ʋn-Erring Guide. And say they (p. 35, 36. of the Book.) In as much as you Claim this Privilege to your selves, why shou'd you Deny it to others to Walk as God Enligh∣tens them? Thus the Quakers not only See, but Feel the Ʋanity, and Ʋncertainty of their Rule, The Light within. It turns upon Themselves. And Confounds them amongst Themselves. It Countenances all the Schism, Violence, Outrage that can be Committed. For having no Rule, it is a Rule to it self. And sets men Loose from all Tyes of Scripture, Reason, Laws, or any Re∣straint
whatsoever. Of which Will. Penn became so Sensible, in their own Concerns, that he Run it down, and call'd it a Loose Plea (as shewn, at large in the Sn. Sect. vi. n. x. par. 12. p. 79.) Yet since has wrote Books in De∣fence of it. So that he has given it two Handles. viz. That it is a Loose Plea, when Urg'd by others against Them: But when Urg'd by them against others, then it is Infalli∣ble, Indefeasible, &c. He has Represented the Quakers, and Twisted or Ʋn-Twisted their Light in such a Fashion, it Looks like playing of Booty; That, as he says of the Papists, Many Ʋnacquainted with their Practices,A seasona∣ble Caveat against Po∣pery. p. 3. An. 1670.are ready to believe them what they say themselves to be; whose Moral is, to have two strings to their Bow, to be Ambo-Dexters, and furnish'd with meanings to Sute the Compass of all occasions—We know they have so far Master'd their Ancient Fierceness, and Mask'd their Sanguin Looks, with those more Mo∣dest and Familiar: That tho' we need not more Reason than before, we need more Skill and Caution. Or else we may fatally Experience the force of that Vulgar Proverb, LAƲGH IN THY FACE, AND CƲT THY THROAT. This Hits two sort of Folks, with whom Will. Penn is very well Acquainted. And the Law that he lays down for the one, cannot, in Justice, be Re∣fus'd to the other, Since, one Sauce will serve them Both: Therefore (as he says ibid. p. 35.) To Conclude, If we wou'd not Receive a Thief, till he has Repented, Let the Papist Quaker first Recant his Volumnious Errors—But above all, let Ʋs have good Testimony of his Hearty Sorrow.
A COLLECTION OF SEVERAL PAPERS, Which Relate to the Fore-going DISCOURSE. Numb. I. Dr. Lancaster's Queries to the Qua∣kers, with the Christian Quaker's Answer, Given at their General Meeting in Phi∣ladelphia in Pennsilvania the 18 day of September, 1695. Sanctifie the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an Account to every man that asketh you a reason of the Hope that is in you, with Meekness and Fear, having a good Conscience, &c. 1 Pet. 3.15, 16. Printed in the Year 1695.
THE PREFACE. Christian Reader; SInce the Breach and Division has happened a∣among the Quakers here in America about the chief Doctrines & Principles of the Christian Re∣ligion, great has been the Noise they have made in the World one against another, each endeavouring to clear themselves, & cast blame upon the contrary party; so that many who live remote, are amazed at this Difference, not knowing where to lay the fault, both Parties pretending to Christianity; But there lately coming some Papers to my hand, which seem pertinent to make some further discovery in this Controversie, I thought my self obliged to commit them to publick view, for the Information of all Christian Enquirers. And further, I do under∣stand, that this Difference among the Quakers first began in Pennsilvania, in the year 1691. occasioned by Mr. George Keith's more earnestly preaching up the Person of our Saviour, the Necessity of Faith in him, as he Dyed, was Buried, Rose again and As∣cended, and as he is now in Heaven in the true Na∣ture of Man, our Mediator & Intercessor, and as he shall come again outwardly at the end of the World to judge the Quick & Dead, &c. But this
sort of Doctrine was disliked by many of the Qua∣kers, & caused many private Conferences among themselves, & at last a prevailing party Excommu∣nicated Mr. Keith out of their Society, but a consi∣derable Number of Quakers stood by and vindicated him and his Doctrine, and they set up several new Meetings, (as I am informed about twelve, in and near Pennsilvania) and Mr. Keith undertakes to write and print against the Errors of his old Friends, and tells the World, That there are such Damnable Doctrines and Heresies cloaked among the Qua∣kers here, that no Protestant Society in Christen∣dom would tolerate the like. His old Friends say they are belyed by Mr. Keith; This has made some to be curious in searching into this Controversie; and among the rest my very good Friend Coll. Quar∣ry, late Governour of Carolina, now residing in Philadelphia, has made some diligent enquiry into this Controversy, but received not full satsfaction (as he informs me) whether Mr. Keith, and these joyned with him, had falsly charged their old Friends, or not. And there lately coming to his hands, (very providen∣tially) a Copy of Queries, sent by Dr. Lancaster to the General Meeting of the Quakers in London last Whitsuntide, and not hearing of an Answer to the same, Mr. Quarry presents them to the Ge∣neral Meeting of the Quakers in Philadelphia, viz. both to that Meeting which joyn with Mr. Keith, and to that Meeting which Excommunicat∣ed him, desiring their Answer to each Query. That Meeting or Party of Quakers which joyn with Mr. Keith readily returned their Answer in wri∣ting to the Collonel, which is hereunto annexed. The other Meeting of Quakers which have Excom∣municated Mr. Keith send three Messengers to the
Collonel, viz. Mr. Cook, Mr. Jenings, and Mr. Pusey, who acquainted him, That they received his Letter, with the Queries annexed, which (they said) were read in their general Meeting, but not knowing whether their Friends in London had answered them, or not, they did not think fit to answer, till they had an account from their said Friends, and what Answer their London Friends gave, they would stand by, or to that effect. Whereupon the Collonel told them, That indeed they lay under severe Reflections, as to their soundness in the Christian Faith, and their answer∣ing the said Queries might have cleared them, and given the world satisfaction of their soundness therein. To which Mr. Jenings replyed, That tho' by the said Paper of Queries it was insinu∣ated, that they turned the Scripture into an Allegory, yet they did really believe that Christ was born, suffered, dyed, was buried, and rose again outwardly. But he stopping there, the Coll. repeated his words, adding, I also believe, that the same Body that so Arose, did Ascend into Hea∣ven, is now in Heaven, and will come again at the end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead. Ʋpon which Mr. Pusey (it seems) took up the Coll. very short, and interrogated him, Whether he be∣lieved that Christ's outward Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones ascended into Heaven? To which, when the Collonel answered, Yea, Mr. Pusey Replyed, The Scripture says, Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of Hea∣ven, &c. Ʋpon which the Collonel told him, He was sorry to find they understood the Scrip∣ture no better; and that he now perceived the Accusations against some of them was not
altogether groundless. But. Mr. Jenings im∣mediately brake off the Discourse, (whether upon finding his Friend Mr. Pusey had like to have spoiled all by discovering their Error, I'll not here determine, and) saying, We came not here to discourse, but to do our Message, took leave, and departed. I shall not here make any further Observation upon these Answers from each party of the Quakers, but commit the matter of fact to publick view, and leave every man to judge for himself, hoping it may make some further discovery into this great Controversie among the Quakers, about the fundamental Principles and Doctrins of the Chri∣stian Religion, and shew which party is the most Orthodox. I shall only add, Read impartially and judge Candidly. I am yours in all Offices of Love, and for the promoting the Cause and Te∣stimony of the crucified Jesus, and his sincere Fol∣lowers. J. C.
To the People called Quakers, assembled at their New Meeting-house in the second street in Philadelphia, Sept. 18. 1695. Gentlemen; I Have spent some time in perusing and con∣sidering what hath been printed on both sides, in reference to the Difference and Dis∣putes which hath lately happened betwixt you and some of your Friends; and upon the whole matter I must own and declare, That as to the saving Fundamentals of the Christian Religion in Controversie betwixt you and t'other Meeting, you have declar'd and publish'd to the World, That your Principles and Doctrine, in those con∣troverted Points, are sound and Orthodox, consonant and agreeable to the Scriptures, and Church of Christ in all Ages. But although it be my Opi∣nion, yet knowing my own weakness, and ve∣ry sensible that many of those called Quakers do abuse the World with false Glosses and am∣biguous Terms, hiding their true meaning, and imposing false Notions on People, therefore I am not willing to trust my own Judgment, without a further confirmation. And Provi∣dence hath given me an extraordinary oppor∣tunity to be fully satisfied, I having lately met with a Copy of Queries, sent by Dr. Lancaster of London, to the Yearly Meeting of your Friends there met last Whitsuntide, the answer to which I have not heard of nor seen, and
finding the Queries so full of substance, and so learnedly handled by the Doctor, and espe∣cially containing the full state of the funda∣mental Principles and Doctrines contested be∣twixt you and the other Meeting, I thought my self obliged to send it to you at this your general Meeting, and do beg the favour of a positive Answer, Yea or Nay to each Query, as the inclosed Paper doth intimate. Gentlemen, I do assure you, I have no other design or end in this my Address to you, but that by your clear and candid Answer to these Queries, I may satisfie my self and others of the Truth and Soundness of your Faith in the saving Fundamentals of the Christian Religion. I have sent another Copy of these Queries to the other Meeting, with the same request. Your Pardon for this trouble, and an Answer is desired by Your assured Friend & Servant, Robert Quary. Here follows the Answer of the said General Meet∣ing.
From our Yearly Meeting of the Christian People, call'd Quakers, (who are joyned in Testimony with George Keith) held at the New Meet∣ing-House in Philadelphia, this 18 day of the 7th Month. 1695. Friend R. Q. WE this day received thy Letter, with the Queries hereunto annexed, and not∣withstanding we might reasonally hope, that our former Printed Confessions of Faith might have given satisfaction to those who have had the opportunity of perusing them, yet because (as thy Letter intimates) some under our Pro∣fession have, as we are sensible, exprest them∣selves in Doubtful and Ambiguous words, and because (according to the Apostles command) we are ready and willing to give an account of the Hope and Faith that is in us, to eve∣ry sober Enquirer, and indeed are glad of an opportunity to satisfie any such Person who may be in doubt of the soundness of our Faith in the saving Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, we have, with the full and Unani∣mous Consent of this our said Yearly (or General) Meeting, given a plain positive (and we hope) Christian Answer to each of the said Queries, which that they may give thee full and am∣ple satisfaction of our soundness in the Chri∣stian Faith, in the sincere desire of Us, who in behalf, and by appointment of the said Meet∣ing, do subscribe, and remain,
They Loving Friends, Rich. Dungworth, John Hampton, Thomas Martin, Geo. Hutcheson, John Hart, Thomas Budd. Here follows Dr. Lancaster's Queries, with the above-named Meetings Answer to each Query. To the Quakers assembled in their Yearly Meeting at London, this Whitson Week. 1695. GReat objections have been made against you in many Books, which of late Years have been writ, as well by those who have departed from your Communion, as by others: But because we would not willingly take an Account of you only from your Adversaries, no, nor yet the advantage which may be had from some of your own Apologists, we have chosen this solemn Time of your most general Assembly that you have in the World, where there comes of your Number out of all parts, where any of your Profession live, even as far as from the West Indies, on purpose to attend this your Yearly Meeting at London. We have chosen this most solemn and convenient time for you to vindicate and clear your selves, and to give satisfaction to the World, par∣ticularly to the Church of England, as to these great and grievous objections which are made against you.
It is said of you, that as Hymeneus and Phi∣letus (2 Tim. 2.18.) did construe the Resur∣rection spiritually, saying, It was perform'd in∣wardly within our Souls; and so avoided the litteral and outward Resurrection of the Body, which the Scripture calls, Overthrowing the Faith: so that you do construe the Resurrection in the same spiritual manner to be the rising again of Christ, or the Light in our hearts, and consequently that the Saints generally have attained the Resurrection already, and that ther will be no Resurrection of these our Bodies after they lie down in the Dust. And not only this, but That you construe likewise those Scriptures which testify of our Lord Jesus Christ, in this Allegorical manner, to mean no more than what you call the Light within, and That this Christ or Light is Born and Crucified, Dyes, is Buried, Rises again, Ascends, and is Glorified within you: That it sheds its Bloods within you, and thereby quenches the Wrath of God in you, as your Sacrifice or Propitiation: And that Christ has now no other Blood or Body than what he has within his Saints, or other than he had with his Father before the World began: That the out∣ward Blood of that Man Jesus that was shed at Jerusalem, was not the Propitiation, or any Sa∣tisfaction to the Justice of God for our sins, but only the spiritual Blood, shed inwardly within us. And by these means, when you are asked, Whether you believe in Christ that Dyed for our sins, Rose again and Ascended, and that by his Blood we are saved, &c. You can readily answer, Yea, That you believe all this, and yet mean it all in an inward Allegorical sense, that
is, The Blood shed within you, The Light or Christ suffering within you, &c. and thereby de∣ceive others, and your selves, and keep your meaning hid and double, that the Truth of what you hold may not be known, which if in plain words told and asserted, would grate all Christian Ears, and shew you to be those mi∣serable Hereticks before told, who brought in damnable Doctrines, denying the Lord who bought them. Therefore that you may clear your selves from this great and grievous Charge, you are desired to give a plain, positive and direct Answer to these following Queries. Your Reasons or Explanations are not re∣quired, this not being intended for a Dispute, but only your plain Yea or Nay to each of these Queries, that your Doctrine and Faith may be known. Query 1. Do you believe in a Christ with∣out you now in Heaven? The Christian Quaker answers, Yea. Qu. 2. Hath he now in Heaven the same Body (tho' changed in Qualities and Glori∣fy'd) which he assumed in the Womb of the blessed Virgin, in which he Suffered, Dyed, was Buryed, Rose again, and Ascended outward∣ly? Ch. Qu. answ. Yea. Qu. 3. Will he return in that same Body outwardly, or without men, to judge the World in the last day? Ch. Qu. answ. Yea.
Qu. 4. Will our dead Bodies arise the same Bodies, (though altered in Properties and Qualities) which we now have, and shall lay down in the Dust? Or do you believe an outward and litteral Resurrection, contrary to Hymeneus and Philerus? Do you believe that the Saints generally have already attained the Resurrectien, either before or since Christ came into the World? Ch. Qu. To the former part of this Query we answer, Yea, To the latter, Nay. Qu. 5. Do you believe that Christ, or the Eternal Word, was so made Flesh, as that he truly and really became Man, as truly Man as he was God? and not only, as the Socinians say, that he dwelt in or did inhabit the Person of that Man Jesus Christ, as a Garment or a Vail, as he dwells in, or inspires other holy Persons, though not in so high a Degree: or as Angels assume Bodies like men, wherein they appear, without taking them into their own Nature, or thereby becoming Men? Ch. Qu. answ. Yea. Qu. 6. Is Christ now at this day, and for ever to come, truly and really a Man, in true and proper humane Nature, without all other men? Ch. Qu. To this we answer, Yea, under the Qualifications contained in the second Query, viz. [changed in Qualities, and Glorify'd.]
Qu. 7. And lastlv, Was his outward Blood, (outwardly shed at Jerusalem) the true Propitia∣tion and Satisfaction for our sins? Is this the true saving Faith? Was not his outward Blood, that Blood, without sheding of which there could be no Attonement? Heb. 9.22. Ch. Qu. Answer, Yea, not excluding the work of the Spirit of Christ in our hearts. The above Queries were signed by Dr. Lan∣caster, Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of Lon∣don, and delivered, Fryday the 17th of May. 1695. into George Whitehead's own hands, in their general Assembly in Grace-Church-street, and there publickly read. They were desired to return their Answer to Dr. Lancanster at Mr. Wiseman's House, a Chyrurgion in Long-Acre. But we hear of no Answer that they returned. Wherefore the said Queries were presented to the Yearly Meeting of the Qua∣kers in Philadelphia. That Party which have Excommunicated Mr. Keith, returned Answer as set down in the Preface. But that Party which joyn with Mr. Keith, presently returned the Answers above inserted after each Que∣ry. THis is Verbatim what was Printed at Phi∣ladelphia in Pennsilvania. An. 1695. And, by this, the Reader may Judge, whether it pro∣ceeded from Want of Capacity or Sincerity, in George Whitehead, and the Rest of the Lon∣don
Quakers, That in their Printed Answer to these Queries they say, They are Not Plain and Direct Queries, therefore cannot Positive∣ly be Answer'd by our Single Yea or Nay to Each Query, as Desir'd. We therefore at pre∣sent send this General Answer to the Queries. Of which Sufficient has been said in the First Part, Sect. v. p. 9. &c. But here I wou'd observe, That the Pennist Quakers in Pennsilvania durst not trust their own Light within, to Answer these Queries: And Bound themselves to stand by the Answer of their London Friends. Whereas those who (with G. Keith) had Return'd to the Truth of Christia∣nity, took no time to Consider, nor Ty'd themselves Implicitly to the Determination of Any Whatsoever. They said not, that the Truth was farr off be∣yond the Seas, in Old England: And they must stay till some Good Body shou'd Fetch it to them, with Safe Wind and Tyde, and Deut. xxx. 13. See before Second Part. p. 225. From all this we may take Notice of the Diffe∣rent Assurances which Proceed from a Rational Faith, Founded upon the Rock of the H. Scrip∣tures: And that which is Built upon the Sand of our own Imagination, which the Quakers call their Light Within.
A FAITHFUL RELATION Of the great Opposition, made by some Prea∣chers among the Quakers, to three great funda∣mental Doctrins of the Christian Faith, at Two several Meetings, at London, in the year 1678, appointed to hear the Charges made by them against me George Keith, for my asserting the said Three Fundamental Doctrins, in my Book call'd The way cast up. Printed 1677. AND The Reasons of my Publishing the said Relation. IN the Year 1678, at London, there being great Whisperings and Complaints, private∣ly spread among the People called Quakers, against Me; on the Account of Certain Prin∣ciples laid down by Me, in a Book of Mine, Printed in the Year 1677 called, The way Cast up, And I happening to be then at London, and hearing of the said Complaints against me, and my said Book, I spoke to diverse of the Ministry, of the People called Quakers, that they would appoint a Meeting, to hear the Complaints of those Persons that Object∣ed against some things Contain'd in my Book, charging them to be False and Erronious, and
also to hear my Defence, and Vindication, touching the things to be charged against me. A Meeting was procured, at a Friends house call'd John Osgood, a Merchant in White-Hart- Court in Grace-Church-street London, in the win∣ter Season, which began about the Sixth hour at Night; where a Considerable number of those called Friends of the Ministry were met together, with divers other Persons of ac∣count among the Quakers, among whom were William Penn, George Whitehead, Thomas Green, William Mead, William Gibson, George Watt, Francis More, Thomas Hart, James Claypowl, John Bull; And many other besides. The persons that appeared against me at the said Meeting, were chiefly Samuel Newtown, a great Preacher then among them, (who not long after Broke, and went to Virginia, and still Preacheth there among the Quakers, as I have been certainly inform'd by some that heard him, and are ready to bear witness to it,) and William Shewen a Preacher, and a great Writer among them, who hath Printed divers Books highly approved by many of the Peo∣ple called Quakers; Containing some abomi∣nable Principles, whereof I have given some account in my Second and Third Narratives, of the Proceedings at Turners-Hall; This man was never. Censured by Friends of the Mini∣stry for his Antichristian Doctrin Contained in some of his Books, but lived and dyed in Unity with them, and had Solemn Com∣mendations, and Testimonies given him by some of the Ministry at his Funeral.
The first Meeting not having time sufficient to hear all that was to be said, for and against, appointed another Meeting at the house of James Claypool Merchant in Scotch Yard in London, when some others were present, and mostly all the foremention'd: the Meeting began about the Sixth hour at night as did the former. The particulars were Three especially, where∣with these two above named Persons severally charged me and blamed my Doctrine, and op∣posed against it, to be Contradictory to the Ancient Friends Books, whereof they brought a Considerable number, which were laid on the Table; but it happened that none of them were used, but instead of them, the Bible was called for, and some places in it read and Discours'd upon. The First Particular they blam'd in my said Book, and charg'd to be false, was, that I had affirmed that Christ's Body that was Crucified on the Tree of the Cross, and was Buried,pag. 131. Rose again, and Ascended into Hea∣ven, and was in Heaven. Diverse spoke their mind to it, one after another, some against it, and some for it, and some very doubt∣fully, which I was greatly astonished to find. I Quoted that place of Scripture, in defence of the Resurrection of Christ's Body. Psal. 16.10. compared with Act. 2.30, 31, 32. Thou wilt not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see Corruption. Will. Mead said to me, dost thou understand this of an outward Body? that which was not to see Corruption, was the Seed within. I answered, let the places
be read and compared, and it will be found, that they are to be understood of Christ's Body that was laid in the outward Grave, so these two places of Scripture were read, and several gave their assent to it, that by the Holy one that was not to see Corruption, was to be understood Christ's Body that was laid in the Grave; whereupon Thomas Green an ancient Preacher said, Friends, one of two things we must needs say, either that Christ's Body remains in some hole or cave of the Earth, or that it Rose and Ascended, for it did not see Corruption; and for my part I rather think it Rose and Ascended into Hea∣ven, as George Keith affirms, than that it re∣mains in any hole or cave of the Earth. Di∣verse other places of Scripture I had, to bring forth to prove the truth of the Resurrection of Christ's Body, as his own words to the Jews; Destroy this Temple (meaning his Body) and after three days I will raise it up, and his appearing to his Disciples after his Resurrect∣ion; having said, as it is Luk. 24.39. Han∣dle me, and Feel me, for a Spirit hath no Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have. After Tho∣mas Green had spoke, as is above related: George Whitehead said, that whereas many both Priests and Professors had questioned Friends much concerning Christ's Body, what was be∣come of it, and where it was? by occasion of Friends Preaching Christ within so frequent∣ly; he confesses that Friends were at some stand to give a possitive answer, but rather evaded the Question. And though in former times, Friends were shy to answer the Priests
and Professors Questions about Christ's Body, fearing they sought by their subtilty to en∣snare them, yet now George Keith has given a plain answer to their Question; he tells them Christ's Body is Ascended into Heaven, and is in Heaven.Note this▪ fallacy G. W. knew well e∣nough that what I had assert∣ed about Christ's Body, his Ascension into Hea∣ven, did contradict both his and his Brethren's Doctrine. He doth Contradict what Friends had formerly said, but is possi∣tive and plain in his answer to the Pro∣fessors question. So my opposers ceased a∣ny more to object against me upon that Head. The Second Particular they charged against me, was that in my Book I had said, the Friends did pray to Christ Jesus, and did Wor∣ship and Pray unto the Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, the Anointed King, Priest and Prophet of his People, who also is God over all, blessed for ever, pag. 123. of The way cast up. And whereas I had set down some words of prayers that I had said I had heard some use in our own Meetings, and I had used, as Je∣sus son of David had mercy on us (pag. 121.) O thou blessed Lord Jesus, that wert Crucifi∣ed and Dyed for our sins, and shed thy Pre∣cious Blood for us, be gracious unto us, &c. the which prayer containeth a whole page in Print; wherein also the forgiveness of our sins is prayed for (a thing many say, they never heard in a Quaker's Meeting) to this these two men observed, that it was a sort of Popery, but with this difference; that the Papists prayed both to the Mother, and the Son: George Keith though he prayed not to
the Mother, yet he prayed to the Son. Some present said it was a part of Common Pray∣er, to say, Son of David have mercy on us, but these two before mention'd Persons, my chief opposers, put me hard to it, to give some Instance, where ever I heard any anci∣ent Friend of the Ministry, that was an Eng∣lish man, pray to Christ Jesus: It is possible (said they) thou hast heard some Scotch Friends pray so, whom thou hast taught so, and were thy Proselites. I confess I was at a stand, to name any one English man, that e∣ver I heard so pray, though in Scotland, I would have named one. But William Penn pre∣vented me, and said, Friends I am an. Eng∣lish man, and a Freind of the Ministry: I have oft prayed to Christ Jesus, to my great comfort, and have been answered. And not long ago, being under some great weight up∣on my Spirit, and like to have been swallow∣ed up by a power of Darkness; I uttered these words (its true I was in private) Lord Jesus who was Crucified for me, have mercy on me; and immediately I was eased and com∣forted. They objected, that William Penn was but a young Minister: Let George Keith give an instance, what ancient English Friend of the Ministry he ever heard pray to Christ Je∣sus. As I could remember none, so nor did any in all the Meeting give an Instance. But said George Whitehead, it is not what William Penn, or George Keith saith, let the Scripture decide it; whereupon he call'd for the Bible, and reads in 1 Cor. 1.2. Ʋnto the Church
of God, which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, call'd to be Saints, with all that in every place, call upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours. What say ye to this Friends? ye see, that Paul did-approve the Corinthians that called upon the name of the Lord Jesus. [Note Reader one would think that if G. White∣head had made it his practise to pray to Christ Jesus, being an ancient Minister, and using to pray frequently in the publick Meetings of the peo∣ple call'd Quakers, he would have named himself to have been one who had prayed to Christ Jesus, or some that had oft heard him, ther present, might have given him for an instance, but no instance was brought of any English ancient Friend of the Ministry, who had ever been heard so to pray; and had it been a frequent practise among them, to call upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, it could not be supposed to be possible that these two men my opposers could have objected it against me, as a novelty, or such a singular prac∣tise, as that no English ancient Friend could be pro∣duced as a witness for that practise] their answe to George Whitehead's Question was, Paul was dark and ignorant in that thing, as George Keith is: for our parts we know better. George Whitehead reply'd, hold Friends, say not so. Ye know, we have been accused by divers, that we esteem our selves equal to the Apostles, which for my part I never did; how will this be received by Professors, if they shou'd hear, that we did set up our selves above them, and above Paul, one of the chiefest of
them: after he had so plentifully received the Holy Ghost, and had planted so many Church∣es? Pray let us not exalt our selves above Paul, it is very well if we be where he was. But they still continued blaming my asser∣tion in my Book, for saying, that Christ was to be prayed unto, and especially they blam'd the manner of praying to him, by the name Son of David; objecting against one of the prooffs in my Book, how Bartimeus pray'd to Christ in these words, Son of David have mer∣cy on me. Poor blind Bartimeus (said they) had George Keith no better Arguments for him, than blind Bartimeus? he was as blind in his Soul, as he was in his Body. Thomas Hart replyed to them, Friends say not so, ye are under a great mistake to think he was blind in his Soul; he was greatly enlightned in his Soul, and had a great Faith; and Christ an∣swered him, and said thy Faith hath saved thee, which proveth he was not blind in his Soul, when he so prayed. They still remain∣ing dissatisfied, and greatly blaming that man∣ner of expression, Son of David, as improper, William Penn said, Friends we know that Christ after his Ascension, call'd himself the root and off-spring of David: Now why may it not be supposed, that a Friend may be moved in pray∣er to say, O thou root and off-spring of Da∣vid have mercy on us. Some also brought that place in Acts. 7.59. how Stephen being fill'd with the Holy Ghost, at his death, call'd, saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; so after se∣veral words of discourse made by other Friends present, mostly approving my assertion: they passed to their Third particular charg'd against
in my Book; the passage in my Book that they blam'd, is in pag. 123. Compared with pag. 136. where I had said pag. 123. He is that mighty one, upon whom the Father hath laid help, for that although the Father himself loveth us, and is most willing and ready to help us in all our Necessities; yet we can no otherwise receive his help, but as it comes to us by the Conveyance of the Man Christ Jesus, our alone Mediator. And pag. 136. I had said. —But still as in respect of Uni∣on, Manifestation, and Operation, and also in respect of Communion and Fellowship, the Man Christ Jesus, or word Incarnate, is the only and proper middle and Mediator be∣tween God and us; so that whereas God is immediately United with the Man Christ Je∣sus, no other Men, or Angels have, or in∣deed are Capable to have an immediate Uni∣on with God, their Union is only Mediate with God, and so their Communion and Fel∣lowship with him is but Mediate also; by the means of Christ Jesus, although inrespect of other means, it is Immediate. All this passage they mightily censured, as Contradicting their own experience: 'tis true, said they, when we were Young and weak, at our first Convincement and Beginning, we had need of Christ, but now we have no need of him, we have access to God Immedi∣ately, without Christ, Thomas Hart reply'd to them, Friends I am sorry you should think ye have not need of Christ now, I cannot say so, and I dare not say it. I have as much need of him now as ever formerly, I need
Him not only to cleanse me from my Sins, but to preserve me, that I sin not; let me tell you, It may be before ye Die, you may come to find your need of Christ. These words of Thomas Hart were much noticed and ap∣proved by divers Present, and after divers had spoke their minds about this whole mat∣ter, particularly George Whitehead and Wil∣liam Penn, who approved and Vindicated all these Three Particulars, which my opposers have objected against and severely censured, and all other lesser Matters, to every tittle and word that was objected; so that I had, need to say little, and indeed said not much, be∣cause I found them, (as seemed to me) well dispo∣sed and inclined to answer for me, as they readily did. Divers other Friends present, stood up in the Meeting and declar'd their great Satisfaction, with having heard those things so well cleared and opened to their understandings, which they Confessed, they had been formerly Mud∣led about, and blessed God for that good opportunity they had, to have things made so clear to them, among whom were Francis More, and James Claypool both Citizens of good account, and of good reputation among Friends and Neighbours. This is but a Summary and Abreviation of the matter, which was much more largely discoursed, and took up several hours time at each Meeting. In the Conclu∣sion, the persons that had accused me were desir'd by the Meeting, to desist from their Charge, and say nothing against the Book: and whereas some Friends that were dissatis∣fied at my Book, had forbidden the Stationer
in George-Yard, to sell it, because it was un∣sound: Order was given by the Meeting, that that the Stationer might be encouraged to Sell it, that it might have its Service in City and Country, as accordingly was done. And now Reader, wouldest thou not think that these men who had so exposed their Ignorance, Unbelief, and Antichristian principles directly opposest to the great Fundamentals of Christi∣anity, would have received some severe Cen∣sure from the Friends of the Ministry, or at least, that they would have put them to dis∣own their vile errors, before they could be owned, as either sound Ministers, or sound Friends? But nothing of this was done, and to the certain knowledge of divers as well as mine, these men, (as well as others that had privately sided with them,) remained Resolute and Stiff in their former errors, whereof the one, to wit William Shewen, sometime after gave a pub∣lick demomstration in the Face of the World, having after all this, printed a Book called by him A Treatise of Thoughts, where he saith pag. 37. Not to Jesus, the Son of Abraham, David, and Mary, Saint or Angel, but to God the Father, all worship, Honour and Glory is to be given through Jesus Christ, &c. Note Reader what he means by Jesus Christ &c. is easie to apprehend, not the Son of Abra∣ham, of David, or Mary, for him he hath ex∣cluded from being the object of Worship; to∣gether with Saints and Angels, as in his own words is manifest, but this Jesus Christ, &c. is the Light within, so here are two Christs with a witness by this Man's Doctrin, one the
Son of David, to whom no Worship Honour and Glory is to be given, another through whom God the Father is to be Worshiped; and certainly he through whom we Worship God the Father, must be the object of Wor∣ship together with the Father: But how long did he allow Jesus Christ, &c. to be him thro' whom God the Father is to be Worshiped? No longer than untill he hath restored all things into their primitive Or∣der, that is, brought William Shewen and his Brethren to a Sinless state, which many think they have attain'd already, and then Christ in them is known to surrender up the Kingdom to the Father, and God to become all in all. As he plainly declares in his pag. 38. and on the Margin he adds, This is the assending of Christ up, where he was before he descended, and before there was any Cause for his descension, he that can understand (saith he) let him. (this passage of Wiliam Shewen, is more fully Quoted out of his Book in my Third Narrative lately Printed) Judge Reader, what imaginary Heavens had this man got up into, after he hath witnessed a Sinless state, even in the mortal Body, then Christ surrenders up the Kingdom to the Father, in him, and it is no more Christ in him, but God all in all. And what Christ spoke of his Ascension, as Man, into Heavens without us, He wholly applyeth, to Christ's putting off his Offices as Christ, and ceasing any more to Officiate as Christ in them, but as God the Father. The mystery of this is Rank and wild Ranterism, to wit that God and Christ within men, are but two inward
Ministrations, and Operations; Christ is the lower, and the Father is the Higher, and by passing from the Lower to the Higher, as men pass from the lower story of a House, to the higher, they pass from Christ to God, and leave Christ behind or below them, and ascend up to God all in all, and so need not Christ either within them, or without them. That this is the real and genuine Sense of William Shewen's words in that above mentioned Treatise, any intelligent person that reads them, (more especially if he read those passa∣ges throughout, from first to last, a part where∣of I have but quoted, for brevity sake) can∣not but acknowledge. Now because it is probable many of the people call'd Quakers will say, that these things which I have above related as matter of Fact; are not truly related, and will be ready to oppose to the credit of my relation: That G. Whitehead who confesseth there was such a Meeting where he was present, denyeth that he remembereth that any such things were affirmed by them that found fault with me, for some things contained in my Book. But First, his not remembering, is but a Negative evidence against my possitive evidence, there∣fore not so strong as mine. Secondly, I have brought William Shewen's own Book; Writ and Printed after that Meeting; sufficiently declar∣ing, at least the Two last Particulars, or ra∣ther indeed all the Three. For since he construeth Christ's Ascension into Heaven, to be inward∣ly in Men; he has left us no proofs for his As∣cension outwardly. Thirdly, had G. Whitehead
been ingenuous, he would have been positive to have told what he did remember, seeing some present at these Meetings as old in years, and as weak in Memory as himself; hath ve∣ry lately told, what was said in one of them Meetings, and that is the chiefest of the Three, and indeed includes all the three Particulars a∣bove mention'd. Fourthly, know then, for a fur∣ther evidence; that Thomas Heart an ancient Citizen, of very good credit and fame, (a person of greater Age than G. Whitehead as I suppose; and one whom G. Whitehead I think will own to be worthy of Credit in any o∣ther thing, if not in this) hath lately declar'd to me, (in answer to my request to him, that seeing. I was called in question as a Lyer, for saying some of my opposers at one of these Meet∣ings had said, they needed not Christ then, he would be pleased for the truths sake, to speak what he did remember was said by them to that effect) that he did remember that they did say, They needed not Christ, and also that he did reply to them, It may be before they Dyed, they would find their need of Christ; thus he freely and voluntarily declared to me in my House 22d. 12. Month. 1697. in an∣swer to my request as above. I having told him, that to clear me of the Imputation of a Lyer, I did desire him (by a few lines in wri∣ting) to speak with me, who came to my House, in complyance to my desire; and I having repeated to him all his words as they are above mentioned, that he spoke to them; he answered me directly, that his memory was weak, and did not remember the other passa∣ges,
but this (said he) I do well remember, that when some of them said, they needed not Christ; I told them, before they Dyed they might come to find their need of him; and he said further, I own it to be a truth that I need Christ still, for I find my obedi∣ence so short, that I cannot rely upon it; and therefore I need that God be merciful to me, and forgive me my sins and failings for Christ's sake. And diverse things he spoke to this purpose, very sensibly and Christianly, with which I was much refreshed to find him so sound and sensible, and that he still adher∣ed to his former Testimony he gave at one of these Meetings. And seeing he hath con∣firmed the truth of my Relation, in one of the chief Particulars, that one containing all the rest: I judge it is an Authentick evidence to the whole; for if they needed not Christ, then sure they were not to Pray to him; and as sure it is, that there is no need of any such belief (according to their sentiments) that Christ's Body did Ascend into Heaven; for they having denyed the end of his As∣cension, which was that We might have him to be our merciful high Priest in Heaven, to make intercession for us, according to our need, they must consequently deny his As∣cension, otherwise say he Ascended to no purpose or end, as to us! For a further e∣vidence, I here add the Testimony of John Bull, who was present at one of these Meetings, who had also at my desire and request (obtest∣ing him to speak the truth, seeing my Chri∣stian Name and Reputation was concerned in
the case) declared, Note, since the writing of this Pa¦per John-Bull is det ceased: Bu I have E∣vidence of some alive who heard him so af∣firm. that it having been long a∣go, he did not remember much, but this he did remember, that they opposed to that pas∣sage in my Book, wherein I did assert that Christ's Body that was buried, rose again, and ascended into Heaven. As also that several Friends said, they were much benefited by the things that they heard discoursed, by way of Objections and Answers, and blessed God for that opportunity. This he told me at my House 23d. 12th. Mo. 1697. Having thus finish'd my Relation, touch∣ing these weighty Matters, which I solemnly declare to be true, and which I think I have give a sufficient Evidence of, by the concurring Evidences, of some of their Brethren, that re∣main in Unity with them, it now remains to give some Reasons of making publick this Re∣lation which I do thus. 1. My first Reason of making publick this Relation is to clear my Name both as a Man, and a Christian, from the imputation of Lyer, Slanderer, and false Accuser; which some of the contrary Party have cast upon me, for my having affirmed, that some noted men among the Quakers, yea and Teachers too, Twenty years ago have oppos'd some of the great Fun∣damentals of Christianity, and greatly Censured me for asserting them. 2. The second Reason, is, that this Account given by me here will serve for an Apologie, and Excuse to me, in great part, why I have in some of my former Books, especially in my Con∣troversies with some of the Preachers at Boston
in New England, praised and defended William Penn and George Whitehead, as sound and Ortho∣dox in the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Faith, Concerning Christ, and the real existence of his Manhood-Nature, consist∣ing of a glorified Soul and Body in Heaven, being both God, and Man, and yet one Christ: And our Faith in him as such, for Remission of Sin, and eternal Salvation, whom these men did represent as unsound. Now that which gave me (as I thought) just ground so to judge, was, that they seemed to me, by the defence they made for me at these two Meetings aforesaid, to be not only sound in their judgements as touching these great truths, but to be cordial∣ly and zealously concerned for the defence of them: And in this persuasion of them I conti∣nued, until the differences arose in Pensilvania, betwixt my Adversaries and me, in the year 1691, concerning the necessity of Faith in Christ without us, for Remission of Sin, and eternal Salvation, as well as the beleif of his inward appearance by his Light and Grace in our hearts, both which I affirmed was necessa∣ry, to our Christianity, which my Adversaries rose up against, charging it to be false as well new Doctrine, and contradicting the prin∣ted Testimonies and Books of sound Friends, and particularly of William Penn, and George Whitehead, so that I was accused by my Pensilva∣nian opposers, in our publick Meetings there, for contradicting the Principles of William Penn and G. Whitehead, in their Printed Books, particularly in that Book called the Christian Quaker, both in relation to the sufficiency of the Light within,
without any thing else, to Salvation, and also in relation to the Resurrection of the Body. And thus time after time they opposed me with these men's Books, and when I desir'd them to be∣gin with the Scriptures, and prove the Contra∣diction of my Doctrine first to the holy Scrip∣tures, and then it was time to Consider these men's Books, Samuel Jennings in a publick Meet∣ing at Philadelphia on a first day, said it was not necessary to prove me guilty of Heresie, (where∣of they had accus'd me) from the Scriptures, but from Friends Books, for (said he) the Que∣stion betwixt, G. K. and them, is not who is the best Christian, but who is the best Quaker. And though I still desir'd them to bring their Scripture proofs, yet they for most part waved that, and continued clamouring that my Doc∣trine contradicted Will. Pen. Geo. Whitehead, and other Friends, which I did not know all that time that it did, for though the places they quoted out of their Books, seemed much to favour my Adversaries, yet I was not wil∣ling to think so, but labour'd to retain my Cha∣ritable perswasion of them, putting the most Charitable Constructions upon their Words as was possible, so farr as I had read the passages in their Books that seemed to interfere with me. At last, I came to a firm Resolution in my mind to Come for England, having first writ to George Whitehead and other Friends of the Ministry about our differences, desiring to know their sense; they seemed to blame me for the separation, but in great part, to approve of my Principles; but the words in their Epi∣stles were so dubious, like the Heathen Ora∣cles,
that as to the main difference of Principles betwixt my Adversaries, and me in Pensilvania, it was rather increas'd by their Epistles, then allayd; my Adversaries Construing them one way, and I and my Friends another way. Af∣ter I arrived in England and came to London, And had some private Conferrences with George Whitehead and William Penn, about these very Principles of the sufficiency of the Light within to Salvation, without any thing else, by the something else that I did plead for, declaring that I meant the man Christ Jesus, and his most holy and perfect Obedience unto death, for our Sins, and his Intercession for us in Heaven, I began easily to perceive that they greatly differed from me in those great things, yet they did seek to hide themselves as much as they well could, mainly and almost only blaming me for the Separation, and making a breach, in Pensilvania, and the neighbouring Provinces among Friends. But by degrees, the difference in Principles betwixt them and me began plainly to appear, before they Excommunicated me, at their yearly Meet∣ing in the Year 1695. For at a large Meet∣ing of Friends of the Ministry, where were many Country Friends, about two days before the yearly meeting, in 1694. William Penn accused me, for seeking to bring in a new method of Preaching Christ, and Faith in him, differing from that of Friends, and that new method was, to preach the Man Christ without us, and his Death and Sufferings, in order to bring people to know the Divine Principle within them, and the work of Regeneration. And at the said Meeting G. W. blamed me, for affirming that
all the Light and Grace that any men had, in any age of the World, was the effect of Christ's Obedience unto death for us, and argued a∣gainst it thus, Men had Light and Grace, be∣fore Christ came in the Flesh, to perform that obedience: can the Effect be before the Cause? this plainly enough let me see into G. Whitehead's Principles, he had the same strength of Argu∣ment (but that's none at all) against any mens having Remission of Sin by Christ's death, be∣fore he came in the Flesh, why, can the effect be before the Cause? I told him, a Moral effect can be before its cause, and oft times is, and gave an Example, how a man by a Contract or Covenant buyeth a House or Field, and po∣sesseth it before the Money is paid, the Con∣dition of the Covenant being that the Money is not to be paid until such a time, so by Vir∣tue of the Covenant of Grace, which respected Christ to Come, and the satisfaction he was to make to divine justice, by his Death and Suf∣ferings for mens sins past, as well as to come, all the faithful had remission of sin, and inward Light and Grace, as well before he came as since. And some Months after this, at a publick Meet∣ing of the Quakers at Ratcliff by London, William Penn did publickly oppose my testimony, and charged me, to be an Apostate, and that I en∣devoured to pluck up the testimony of truth by the roots. And at the same time He told the Auditory, that Friends saw no great need to preach the Faith of Christ's Death, and Suffer∣ings, for all England had that Faith, and all Christendom had it, but it did not profit
them.Reader by this Ar∣gument it should not be Preach∣ed at all. With many Abusive words all which he father'd upon a transport of the glo∣rious power of God, at the next yearly Meet∣ing, when I Complain'd upon his so abusing me. Yet they have, after all this, sought to hide the differences in Doctrine betwixt them and me, from publick notice, so that in their sen∣tence of Excommunication, they blame not my Doctrine, nor Morals in any particular thing, but cast out some general charges against me, for being turbulent &c. and seperating my self from the Church of Christ. But their unchri∣stian dealings with me, as well as Antichristian Principles have sufficiently proved them not to be a Church of Christ, though still I have that charity to diverse among them, that they belong to Christ and his Church; but not as respecting that visible Society, that has less the face of a Church, than any Society of Prote∣stants any where in the world. A third Reason is, that this publication of the foregoing Relation, will be a true Evi∣dence and Witness for me, that as to the great fundamentals of the Christian Faith, I am not changed, from what I was Twenty years a∣go, when own'd among them; and for many years after, acknowledg'd by them, that I was in the Unity. And that therefore it is manifest to be a Calumny and false Accusa∣tion rais'd by some Malicious Persons among the Quakers against me; that I am Aposta∣tised from my former Principles of Christia∣nity, and have embraced new notions, or Priests and Professors Principles, as they are pleased  that formerly I had relinquish∣ed
and from a tentation that I had let pre∣vail over me, to seek and affect preheminence over my Brethren, and not finding my desire and end answered in that, I sought occasion to differ from them, and purposely chang'd my Principles, that I might have a ground of Strife and Contention with them, all which the Righteous Judge of the whole Earth, and the searcher of hearts knoweth to be false, and injurious charges. I have sufficiently in my late Printed Books, proved that I am the same in all Principles of Truth, that I was formerly, and wherein I am changed, in some lesser matters of Perswasion, it is to truth, and not from truth: God having been pleased further to Enlighten me, for which I desire to Praise him; and I have shewed my adver∣saries, both William Penn and George Whitehead, to be much more guilty of Contradictions, than any thing that any have laid to my charge, as in my first Narrative of the proceedings at Turners-Hall, and in other late Books: And wherein they charge me, to contradict some passa∣ges in my former Books, as in relation to Baptism and the Supper, and the having a better understanding of some places of Scrip∣ture than formerly I had, this is properly no Contradiction, but a Retractation. But my ad∣versaries are justly chargable with many con∣tradictions, that (without any Retractation) hold contradictory propositions at once to be both true. This is contradiction with a Wit∣ness.
Now judge Reader, whether as the above said Relation of the particulars mentioned in the first Sheet, is not some Apology for me, to excuse my praising G. Whitehead and William Penn, as Orthodox and sound Men, as to Chri∣stian Principles, they having, by their seeming Orthodox at that time, Deceiv'd me, so hath not the late discovery of their insoundnesses in the Christian Faith, given me a farr greater ground of Apology to excuse my charging them, to be guilty of Vile Anti-Christian Errors, as I have largely shewn in my late Printed Books, par∣ticularly my three Naratives of the Proceed∣ings at Turners-Hall, the Second and Third of which has as yet received no shadow of answer, and what shadow of answer the First re∣ceived by Thomas Elwood, hath been sufficiently demonstrated to be a meer Shadow, by the Book call'd Satan Disrob'd, and also by my Second and Third Narratives, all which lye on their hand unanswered; and yet they falsely glory in Print, that they have answered all my former Books. And their most partial sid∣ing with my Adversaries in Penselvania, to cloak their vile Errors, as well as unjust Practises, is another ground of my just Apology, for my changing my thoughts of them; besides other great Prooffs I have to manifest their un∣sound and Anti-Christian Principles.
Some Passages taken out of Humphry Nor∣ton's Ms. mentioned in the II. Part p. 99. 100. I Begin with a Letter of George Fox's, which is not only Inserted, but Attested in this Ms. of Humph. Norton's, Part of which Letter being Quoted in The Snake p. 113. The Quakers in their Last Answer, which they call A Switch for the Snake p. 175. say, That it may be either Adulterated by the Snake, or some Apostate, or Forged by them. And, if they were G. F's words, why did not the Snake give the whole Letter? To what purpose hath he made a Break in it? And what is Left out at it? Therefore you shall have the whole, and sufficiently Attested; Together with H. Norton's Impious Parallel of Oliver to our Lord Jesus Christ, his Death, Burial and Resurrection. Which take as follows out of the Ms. p. 21. The Message from O. Cromwell to G. Fox, upon 5th day of the 1st Month. That it was required by Oliver Cromwel from G. F. that he would promise, that he would not take up a Carnal Sword or weapon, against the Lord Protector, or Government, as it is now. And that G. F. would write down the words, in answer to that which the Protector required. And for G. F. to set his hand to it.
THIS was demanded of G. F. in our pre∣sence and hearing,p. 21. whose names in the Flesh, are called Tho. Aldam, and Robert Craven, Upon the Sixth day of the First Month, G. F. was moved to give forth these words follow∣ing, which were written and given to Oliver Cromwell by Capt. Dury. Ans. I who am of the world called G. F. doth deny the carrying or drawing any car∣nal Sword against any, or against thee O. C. or any man, in the presence of the Lord I de∣clare it, God is my witness, by whom I am moved to give this forth, for the truths sake, from him whom the world calls G. Fox, WHO IS THE SON OF GOD, who is sent to stand a wit∣ness against all violence and against the works of Darkness; and to turn the People from Darkness to Light, and to bring them from the occasion of the War, and from the occasion of the Magistrates Sword, which is a terrour to the evil doer, which acts contrary to the light of the Lord Jesus Christ; which is a praise to them that do well; which is a Protection to them that do well and not the evil; and such Soldiers as are put in place no false accusers must be, no violence must do, but be content with their Wages; And that Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain, from under the occasion of that Sword do I seek to bring people; my weapons are not Carnal but Spiritual, and MY KING∣DOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD, therefore with Carnal weapon I do not fight, but am from those things dead, from him who is not of this world, call'd of the world by the Name of G. F.
and this am I ready to seal with my Blood, this I am moved to give forth for the truths sake, who a witness stands against all unrighteousness, and all ungodliness, who a Sufferer is for the righteous Seeds sake, waiting for the redemp∣tion of it, who a Crown that is mortal seeks not, for that fadeth away; but in the Light dwells which comprehends that Crown; which Light is the condemnation of all such, in which Light I witness the Crown that is Immor∣tal, which fades not away, from him who to all your Souls is a friend, for establishing of righteousness, and cleaning the Land of evil doers; and a witness against all the wicked inventions of men, and Murderers Plots which answer shall be with the Light in all your Consciences, which makes no covenant with death, to which Light in you all I speak, and am clear. G. F. who a new Name hath which the World knows not. We are witnesses of this Testimony whose names in the flesh are Tho. Aldam Robt. Craven. A call to O. Cromwell, OLiver thou art shut up, the Stone is sealed,p. 37. and the watch is set, and Christ suffers, And the Lord God hath sent his Angel to call thee, and to rowl away the stone, and if thou wilt come forth, come forth. This call is to thee through his Servant Humphry Norton.
A Question put, with others, to all that stumble at the Light. p. 31. WHat Child is it Eve shall be saved by, she Continuing in Faith and Sobriety?Norton's Ms. p. 31. See∣ing the Apostle gave this Advice to the Un-Married that could so abide, not to Marry, for he did better that did not give in Marriage than he that did. [N.B. The Meaning of this is plain. viz. That the Child by which Eve, and consequently the rest of Mankind was to be saved, was not to be an out∣ward Child of Flesh and Blood, born of a Woman. Because that if so, it wou'd have been better for Men to have Marry'd, in order to have that Child brought into the World. This is the true Quaker Notion shewn in the Second Part from p. 215 to 220, That the Child Promised Gen. iii. 15. as the Saviour of the World, is a Child born within Every Regenerate Person, in their Hearts, and not any Child Conceiv'd in the Womb of a Woman. For as to what is Recorded of the Outward Jesus, His Birth, Passion, Resurrection &c. they can ap∣ply it to Oliver, or any other of their Favourites. They turn it all into an Allegory, and Suppose it Perform'd within Themselves. And that the Me∣rit of their Salvation Lies Within Themselves, and not in the Merits of the Outward Jesus. Of which See more in the Said Ms.] And whereas he accuseth us for denying Christ's Merits.Ms. p. 46. I say that which can be me∣rited is of self. And that which is of Christ is freely given. But such a word is not in
Scripture as Christ's Merits, but is fetch'd from the Whore at Rome by them. To all these that pretend to wait for that which they call a personal Reign,p. 70. for which they have no Scripture, but makes themselves mani∣fest to be these that know neither the Scrip∣tures nor the power of God, for they were Written for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. 1 Cor. 10.11. Mark, they knew the ends of the world come at that time, where sin was put away by the Sacrifice of Himself. Heb. 9.26. Now unto all you, this is the word of the Lord God; you that waits out of the Light wherewith you are Inlightened, waits out of the way, &c.—Tell me, have not many of your Brethren and Sisters pretended this waiting who are dead, (take warning) and said they looked as you do for a Christ to come, in another's Per∣son, and not in your own. Are you not look∣ing afar off, like Fools with your Eyes a broad. Pro. 17.24.—Answer these Que∣ries, and prove what you speak by plain Scrip∣ture. Whether is not God and Christ one in e∣very thing, Yea or Nay?p. 71. or wherein do they differ in any thing? and whether he is not the same in this Generation, that he hath been in all others the I AM. Is not the righteousness fulfilled in Christ? and is not God satisfied with this Righteous∣ness, where it is put on? as it is written, put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. Rom. 13.14.
Whether any one man visibly can put on another, and therein satisfie God for another man's Sins, Yea or Nay? or must not every Man or Woman put on the Lord Jesus Christ? and then no more a Carnal Christ; seeing it is written, woe unto them them that are covered and not with my spirit. And now all ye that speak of a Personal Reign, Answer this, from whence must this Christ come which must Reign Personally? Seeing the promises of God was but one, and to one; And all the Prophets of God pro∣physied but of one? and they declared of what Stock, and Family, and House, and Generation he should be off, Read Math. 1. and Luke. 3. And al∣so where he should be born, and of whom (to wit) of a Virgin, which things are fullfill'd, and come to pass, we are Witnesses of it, according to the Scriptures. Now Answer in plain words, whence must this Christ come you wait for? And in what Ge∣neration? Of what Family? And out of what Country? And of whom must he be born? that they may no Longer be deceived by you: who have kept them Gazing after a false Christ. Well may it be called Gazing. But leave it, and mind these in white Apparel which re∣proves you for it. Acts. 1.10, 11. And Seeing the Scripture saith that Christ is the way to the Father,p. 73. then is not this the Spirit of truth that Leads into all truth, to the God of all truth? And doth not these that Look for a Christ to come, deny the way to God, tell me? What way must people go to God, if Christ be not come? Seeing they die dayly. Joh. 14.6. Joh. 16.30.
Some Queries with there Answers put forth by John Draper. Answered by H. Nor∣ton pag. 81. IN one of thy Queries thou asketh me whe∣ther the Saints shall partake of any other Glory, or Perfection then that they now Injoy? or whether we that are called Quakers shall par∣take of any other Glory or perfection then what we now Injoy. Ans. I say, the Saints can partake of no other Glory nor Perfection then what they now In∣joy. And we that are call'd Quakers partakes of the same. But if our Hope, Glory, and Per∣fection were only in this Life, we were of all men most miserable. Wherein thou asketh me if there be any o∣ther Heaven then what's in the Saints? And where that Heaven is that Christ Ascended up into? I know and believe that there is no other Hea∣vens then that the Saints are in, wherein dwells Peace, Righteousness, and Joy. And that the Kingdom of Heaven is where that Christ him∣self preach'd it. Luke 17.21. viz. The Kingdom of God is within you. And whereas thou asketh me what I do believe concerning the second Coming of of Christ? or whether there is any other Co∣ming of Christ, besides what is in his Saints? I believe that there was,p. 81. five hundred Bre∣thren at once that saw his Second coming. And that there is a Thousand now that sees
the same. And that there is no other coming then what is revealed in his Saints. For herein is the righteousness of God revealed Rom. 1.17 and 19. therefore follow no more after the Lo hear and Lo there's. Wherein thou asketh me, whether it be not that very Christ that is in us that was Cru∣cified at Jerusalem, whose hands and feet was nailed to the Cross and side peirced? and whether we do expect any benefit by Christ Crucified at Jerusalem? I say no other Christ we own, but Jesus the only begotten Son of God; the brightness of his Glory, the express Image of his person Heb. 1.7. who in our Vanity his Sides often we peirced, for which now in our bodies we bear his marks. And this benefit we have Redemption by him alone, from the filthiness of flesh and Spirit; and Saved by him from the Pride and Vanity the World lives in, and cleansed from all Sin by his Blood, according to that Scripture 1 Jo. 1.7. [N. B. What Blood this was which he means, you will see in the First Part p. 14.94, 95. viz. The Blood of God's Heavenly Manhood, which He had from all Eternity. And not the Blood of our Nature which Christ took upon Him, and shed upon the Cross. They here Renounce any such Christ. Any Christ that do's differ in any thing from God, as before Quoted. Or who Suffer'd upon any other Cross than that Metapho∣rical Cross which He commanded His Disciples to take up Daily. Luk. ix. 23. And upon which He Daily Suffers in the Hearts of Wicked Men; as appears by his following Quaere.]
Querie to John Draper, by H. Norton. p. 84. of Ms. WHether Christ Jesus suffered not upon that Cross which he Preached when he was in the Body, and said, He that will be my Disci∣ple must take take up his Cross Daily. Luk. 9.23. Or what Cross he suffered on? And how oft he hath suffer'd since the beginning? [See Second Part. p. 114.] Ms. p. 81. Wherein thou asketh me what do I understand by the Eternal Judgment? Or whether ther shall be a time when God shall Judge all Men, and make their works mani∣fest, and also give to every Man according to his Deeds. Ans. The Eternal Judge is upon his Throne, and the time of his Judgment is come, and the Hearts of all Men are made manifest before him. And the wicked shall not Escape, but shall Receive a Portion according to their Deeds. Therefore say I, arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment, for the Hour is Coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall Live. Joh. 5.25. [N. B. This shews in what sense they Ʋnderstand the Scriptures, viz. That the Resur∣rection of the Dead, and the Final Judgment is already Come, as before Quoted, which they bid us Mark, That the End of the World was Come in the Apostles time, which they Infer from 1 Cor. 10.11.]
Ms. p. 57. in a Letter to Lieut. Scot. NEver hereafter suffer such words to pro∣ceed out of thy Mouth, as to say that the Glorious God was in a Wall, because thy Dark Wisdom finds it Written, that He fills Heaven and Earth. But this I say unto thee, That that Heaven, and that Earth which he fills thou knowest not, neither can any Vul∣turous Eye see into it— H. Norton. [N. B. The Quaker Means the Inward Hea∣ven in the Heart, which he says no Vulturous Eye can see into. And they Acknowledge no other Heaven or Hell. (See First Part. p. 62. Snake p. 164. And Sat. Dis. p. 55.) For the Outward Heaven the Quaker Eyes can no more see into, than those Eyes which they call Vulturous. I will close my present Excerptions out of this Precious Ms. with an Account which this Norton and one Will. Shaw gave of their Examination before John Bret Governor of Wexford in Ireland. p. 86. of the Ms.] Governor. Are you the Men? Quakers. Yea. Gov. Why did you Disturb the Minister ye∣sterday? Hum. Norton. Examine the business to the bottom: we were forc't out of our Meeting. and brought to the Steeple-house. And if there was any wrong done, we had it.
Gov. By whom. Hum. By a Lieutenant. Gov. But not to disturb the Minister. Humb. A Minister of Christ cannot be di∣sturb'd, neither is it contrary to the order of the Church of Christ for all to speak one by one. Gov. But you have transgrest the Law, in disturbing our Minister. Hum. What's your Law contrary to the Law of God? Gov. Nay. Hum. He is no Minister of Christ, neither have we transgressed any Law of God. Gov. Why is he not a Minister of Christ? Hum. He was found in the Idols Temple, having the chief seat in the assembly, standing Praying in the Synagogue. Gov. You all say so? Hum. Send for him hither, let us speak with him. Gov. I have no command of him, but I shall axamine the Lieutenant, and if he have trans∣grest let him suffer. Hum. Be not partial, but let it be before us. Gov. Take these men into your charge Gaoler. Hum. Well, mind the fear of God. This was the effect of what was spoken so near as can be remembred. Hum. Norton. Will. Shaw.
The Recommendation of the above named Humphrey Norton, by E. Bourrough, and Francis How∣gil, when he went to Ireland; and Answered, and put the above Queries. NOw dear Friends, I rejoyce in the Lord that his care is towards you, and his love abids for you, who are unto him begotten, and not of him forgotten in visiting you with his power, to the refreshing of you, in sending this my dear Brother and faithful companion in the King∣dom of Jesus call'd Humphry Norton, who com∣eth to you in the name and fear of the Lord, and not of his own will, but according to the will of God, as being moved thereunto by the spirit of the Father. And unto you all I do him recommend, as a faithful Labourer, to be received by you in the name of him that sends him, in tender pitty for you all; and the blessing of the Lord upon his Faithfulness I doubt not. But the flock will receive refreshment, the weak will be strengthened, the weary laden will be comforted, and the body will be edified, and for this cause hath the Lord chosen him into this service, to manifest further unto you the pow∣er of the Gospel of God, by his Ministry, up∣on which the blessing of the Lord be for ever. And with my dear Love in the Lord saluting you all that are faithful, farewel in the Lord. London 10th. of 3d. Month 56. to the Churches in Christ in Ireland, by a lover of your Souls, and a Labourer in the Gospel of Jesus Christ E. B.
Receive Hum. Norton in the Lord, whom the Lord hath moved to come unto you: who is a brother, and faithful in the Lords work, and be subject unto him in the Lord, all un∣to him, for I much desired that he might come unto you, and so the Lord hath orderd it. And as you receive him, you receive me Francis Howgill.
Some Few of the Many OMISSIONS and AL∣TERATIONS in the Re-printing of the Works of the Deceased QƲAKERS (tho' said to have been given forth by the SPIRIT of the ETERNAL GOD) to Trim with every Turn of Government; And Cover the Deceit of their Horrid Principles. 1. EDWARD BƲRROƲGH, the Second in Honour to the Great FOX, among the Apostles of the Quakers, Printed a Book An. 1656. to which he gave this Title. A TRƲM∣PET OF THE LORD, Sounded out of Sion: Which gives a Certain Sound in the Ears of All Nations; And is a True Noise of a fearful Earth-Quake at hand, which shall shake the whole Fabrick of the Earth, and the Pillars of its stand∣ing shall Fall, and never more be set up again. Or, Fearful Voices of Terrible Thunders, uttered forth from the Throne—And is an Alarum and Preperation for War against all Nations where Gog and Magog resideth. And sheweth the Wound∣ing Sword of the Mighty God, from whose Blow the Kings, nor the Captains, nor the mighty Men cannot Fly, to Escape. Declared and Written by a Son of Thunder: In an unknown Language, which none can Ʋnderstand, save the Redeemed of the Lord. By one whose Name is truly known by the Children of the same Birth, but unknown to the World, though it be called, EDWARD BƲRROƲGH.
Ther is more than here set down in that Magnificient Title-Page! But I would shew the Reader thus much, to let him see the no ordinary Stile of the Quakers! In this Book. p. 9. Ther is a Chapter against the King and his Cause, then under the Feet of the Rebels. But in the Re-Printing of the Works of this Son of Thunder; after the Restauration of the King. An. 1672. that whole Chapter is left out. And is as follows.
To all you who are, and have been always, Enemies to the very appearance of Righteousness, who are call'd Delinquents and Cavaliers. THus saith the Lord, my controversie is against you, even my hand in judgement is upon you already, and you are become cursed in all your hatch∣ings and endeavours, and from time to time my hand hath been against you in Battle, and you have been, and you are given up to be a prey to your Enemies, for the purpose and intents of your hearts have been known al∣ways to be against the form of Truth, and much more against my powerful Truth it self, and because you attempted to take my throne (Conscience) there∣fore I rose in fury against you, and will have war with all your followers herein for ever, and though my hand hath been evidently against you, yet to this day you remain in rebellion in your minds in hatching Murder and Cruelty in your wicked hearts, and though your Kings, and Princes, and Nobles have been cut off in wrath, and your cruel despe∣rate Inventions, and plots of wickedness (conceiv∣ed in your cursed womb) have been broken, and you cut short in your desires, yet you repent not, nor will not see how you are given to be a curse, and a desolation, and a prey, in houses and lands, and persons, to them whom I raised against you and gave power over you, yet you are hardened, and your cruelty in the persecution of my servants cannot be measured, where you have any power, you smite with the fist of wickedness, and count it your glory to despise my Name, in the Vallies of vain hopes you feed, and on the Mountains of foolish expectation, and conceive in your cruel womb of Tyranny, the overthrow of the Nations, but in the bringing
forth your selves are overthrown, and it is not for well doing that you suffer, but my hand is against you, and my judgments are upon you, and except you repent, shall continue upon Earth with you, and follow you, and pursue you to the Lake of destruc∣tion, where there is no repentance, and you and your Kings, and Lordly power, (by which you have thought to exercise Lordship over my heritage) shall be enslaved by the Devil in the Pit of darkness, in everlasting bondage, where he shall reign your King and Lord for evermore. 2. Ther is likewise, and for the same Rea∣son, left out in Burrough's Re-printed Works, a Paper of Council and Advice, directed To the Parlia∣ment of the Common-Wealth of England, Dated at Lon. 6. of 8. Mon. 1659. It is too long to Insert the whole here. But take these few Passages, which the Quaking Editors knew would lay them open to objections after the Restau∣ration of the Royal Family to their Hereditary Right; and of the People, to the Freedom of their Election in the choice of Members to serve for them in Parliament: Which at that time when this was wrote, An. 1659. was Obstructed by the then Army and other Short-Liv'd Rouling-Ʋsurpations, as well upon the Privileges of the People (which they had made the Great Pretence for their Rebellion) as upon the Pre∣rogative. For when the Members who had been, by Force, Secluded, were Restor'd to their Places in the House of Commons, they Immedi∣ately Voted in the King, and Ancient Heredi∣tary Monarchy. Against which, and the Free∣dom of Parliaments this Burrough thus Belches forth, in Justification of the then present Govern∣ment
that was in being, p. 2. of his Council and Advice to those Ʋsurpers who then call'd themselves The Parliament of the Common-Wealth of England, as follows. And while thus it hath been in our Na∣tion, that our Kings have attained to the Throne of Government Hereditarily, and by Succession of Birth: And our Parliaments and Rulers have attained to the Place of Judgment over us, by such a way of Tradi∣tional Choice as hath been the Custom in our Fore-Fathers days (that knew no better, be∣ing in the days of Apostacy and great Ig∣norance themselves) and thus it hath Con∣tinu'd for many Ages, whereby the Inhabi∣tants have been always suffering under, and liable to great Oppressions and Vexations, being subjected under such a Government, falling as aforesaid, from Parents to Children, after the manner of the Heathen Nations, and being subjected to such Laws, made and Executed by Men, not truly call'd and or∣dained of God thereunto, insomuch that no∣thing hath been perceiv'd or intended by Men of the hand of the Lord, and of his good Spirit in the calling of our Kings, and choos∣ing of our Rulers; but these things have com∣ed to pass, and been after the Traditions of Men, and not after the order and Coun∣cell of the Lord God. And our Nation hath been under the bonds of Slavery in this respect, even because Men have Govern'd that ought not: And while the Great and Rich men have been set to Rule over the Poor; and while Men for earthly Honour, and for Riches sake in Birth and Breeding,
have Claimed to be Princes over us Succes∣sively; And to be chosen our Rulers accord∣ing to Custom—And have com'd into the place of Authority over us, otherwise than by appointment and Right calling from the Lord, as I have said, and thus the Government of our Nation hath been out of Course, and not as the Lord requireth it, even until this Day. p. 3. But now in as much as the Lord God our Deliverer hath begun to appear for the Freedom of the Nations, and hath shew∣ed us the Captivity and Bondage which our Fore-Fathers hath Liv'd under, and we our selves been subject and lyable too, by reason of the Government standing in a Single Per∣son Successively; and we being Forced to live under the Authority of such Men as had no Right from God thereunto, as I have said, And now our Eyes are opened to behold better things, and we are in good expecta∣tions, that the Lord will suddenly so Ap∣pear, as to free us from future Oppressions in this Respect, &c. p. 6. Wherefore it is upon me to lay it before you, even you, as the First Asserters of, and Contenders for England's Liberty, and whom the Lord hath Honoured in Beginning to Remove Tyranny and Oppression, and Reach∣ing after our Long Lost Liberties, &c. [Here to Flatter the Taile of the Rump-Par∣liament (which then Rul'd the Rost) the Quakers Run down all the several sorts of Rebels, who had Usurp'd before them: Each of whom the Quakers had Worshiped, in their Day (as fully
shewn in Sn. Sect. xviii. p. 215. to p. 219. &c.) call'd them Restorers, Deliverers, Chosen Instruments in the Hand of God, by whom he did Great things. But now that they were all Gone, This last Par∣liament were the First Assertors of the Liberty of England; and were Honour'd in Beginning to Remove Tyranny. All the Rest had done nothing before them! And upon these the QƲAKERS built their Hopes: And Prophesy'd of the Migh∣ty things which GOD had to do with them! In order to which the QƲAKERS gave them their Di∣rections, from THE LORD, how to Ma∣nage. But their SPIRIT of DISCERNING Fail'd them here, as it us'd to serve them: For with∣in seven Days after the Date of this their Ad∣dress to that Parliament, they were Turn'd out by Lambert. Which they little suspecting, but think∣ing that they were to hold the Reins of Govern∣ment for a longer time, gave their Wise Instructi∣ons, in the above Quoted Councel and Advice, to Employ the QƲAKERS in their Affairs: And then all would do well, without Doubt! Tho' by the Advice they Gave, the Quakers were of all Men the least Fit to be Employ'd: They Hit Themselves Exactly, in the Description they gave of other Men: For they Advis'd, not to Employ WILLFƲL and HEADY Men, not ƲN-CON∣STANT and CHANGEABLE Men, nor TRAY∣TORS that have Turn'd for self Advantage, and will CHANGE with the TIMES to any way of Government, &c. But especially they Guarded against the Return of Hereditary Monar∣chy, as before Quoted. Yet as soon as that Re∣turn'd, in the Restauration of the Royal Fami∣ly,
(which was within 7 Months after this was wrote) then the Quakers were for the King and Monar∣chy! And without any Blush, Ʋpbraided and Accused the other Dissenters to the King, as Changeable Men, who Turn'd to Every Power, and every Government, as it Turn'd, And therefore not fit to be Trusted. (See their Two De∣clarations, in Sn. p. 224. and p. 227.) And from this time, they Began to Chop and Change, Curtail and Alter their Former Books, in the Re-printing of them. And this, not only in leav∣ing out whole Chapters, and some Intire Trea∣tises, as those before Instanc'd, which were so Rank, as could not possibly be Screw'd to mean any thing short of Bare-fac'd TREASON and REBELLI∣ON: But they took care likewise of Words and Expressions that might give Offence, for Exam∣ple.] 3. In The Trumpet of Burrough's, before Quot∣ed. p. 7. he Accuses the Officers and Souldi∣ers for Exercising the like Tyranny as the King had done. The same Oppression (says he) and Kingly Power of Cruelty stands in Dominion, un∣der another Appearance. But in his Works Re-printed p. 99. the word Kingly is left out. 4. In a Letter to Oliver, with whom he Re∣joyceth, and Congratulats for the Many Victories Honourable and Remarkable, which (says he to O∣LIVER) were given thee over them who had Exalt∣ed themselves above God, [And Ruled in Tyran∣ny over his People; whom the Lord pitied, and thou an Instrument in his Hand, was or∣dain'd by him, to lead forth a People, whom he Blessed with thee, against a Cruel People and Generation of Oppressors, who Exercised
Tyranny over the Lord's Heritage, till they were taken away, and cast out, and is a Re∣proach unto the Lord, and his People unto this day; and even so shall all be that follows their Example, and are Oppressors and Ty∣rants, over the seed of God, as they were] And this thou knowest, &c. This Letter is in p. 552. of Burrough's Works Re-printed. But all within the Crotchets, in Ro∣man Letters, is left out; which I have Copy'd out of the First Edition of what he Intitules, Good Councel and Advice, Rejected. Printed An. 1659. p. 4. And it bears this Direction, For the hands of the Protector. This Book consists of Letters from Burrough to Oliver and Richard Protectors. And on the Title-Page he says, Put to Publick View, by one that wished well to them in their Day. But this is likewise left out in the Re-print. Ther are several other such like Passages of this Book left out in the Re-printing of it, among the Rest of Burrough's Works. As 5. In p. 17. Where Instigating Oliver against his Enemies, Scatter'd through all these Nations, who is full of Wrath and Ravening Envy towards thee [Even of those known by the Name of MALIGNANTS party] in whose hearts to this day ther is continual Hatred, and evil surmising lodg∣eth against thee, and all thy offspring— And not slipping any Advantage how to Revenge them∣selves, and the Cause of their King. The above words within the Crotchet. viz. Those known by the Name of MALIGNANTS Party, are left out in p. 559. of Burrough's Works. And the last words
in this Quotation. viz. The Cause of their King, are Changed thus, To Promote their Cause. 6. In the same Page, he says thus to Oli∣ver, of the King, and the Malignants. I know the Lord hath Cursed them, and their Endeavours to this day; and thou hast had Dominion and Power given thee of God, to Bruise them and Break them to Pieces. [And what thou hast done unto their KING, should not be Reckoned against thee by the Lord, if now thou wert faithful to what he Requireth of thee] for because of the Wick∣edness of that Generation, which was Grown to the full, did the Lord Raise thee up, &c. These words within the Crotchets are left out in his Works. p. 560. Whereby neither King, nor Malignants being Nam'd, the Quakers may have a Latitude to Pretend, when Challeng'd, That they did not mean Them, but some other Wicked People. Es∣pecially they wou'd not Desire to have it known, That they Pronounced Absolution from the Lord to Oliver, for his Murther of the King. 7. In p. 38. He writes To the Protector's Kin∣dred, his Wife and Children, and says, God gave you the Palace of Princes [And threw out the High and Mighty before you, because of their Wickedness which was Great in the sight of the Lord—Even for that Cause was the Genera∣tions of the STEWARTS cast out] And if you walk in the same steps, &c. These words within the Crotchets are left out in p. 569. of Burrough's Works. Tho' in the same above cited p. 38. he says, Remember that you are now Warned from the Lord God, by whom I am moved to Write this unto you, in Dear and Tender Love to you all. What Spirit then was it which moved
the after Quakers thus to Diminish and Cur∣tail these Words which Burrough said he was Moved of the Lord to Write? 8. The following words in p. 64. are left out in p. 580. of his Works. viz. And as con∣cerning the Armies abroad, let Faithful and Just Men that will not seek themselves be put in trust, for the Army is of Great Consequence to thee, to stand or Fall by them, as to Mans account: And the War against Spain be faithful to God in it, and let Trusty Men have Authority, The Lord may Accomplish something by it to his Honour, and to Thine, if thou be Meek and Humble, and Walk with the Lord. And to say no more about it, ther is something in it known to the Lord, and he may bring it to pass in his Season. The after Quakers left out this Prophetical Admonition; for it was Given to Richard, in the Beginning of his short Protectorship, the 18. of the 8. Month. 1658. And they had Rea∣son to be Asham'd of those Auspicious Hopes, which their Light within had made them Conceive of his very silly Reign. Especially considering, that, according to their wont, they gave forth the above Quoted words to Richard P. in the Name of The Lord, for Immediately after those, these words follow, And thus Friend, accord∣ing as it lay upon me from the Lord, I have Writ∣ten this unto thee, in Dear and Pure Love, God is Witness. And yet they have Hypocritically Nibb'd This out of the aforesaid Letter, to Hide their Shame. And God is Witness of that too.
9. Ther are several other Instances of the like Practise in other Parts of this same Book as in p. 23. where the Quakers Boast to the Protector and his Council of their own Merits, thus, Who have in times past, as faithfully as your selves, serv'd their Nation, with their Lives and Estates, to the Purchasing of this Peace and Freedom out of the Hands of TYRANTS. But in the Re-print. p. 563. of E. B's Works, instead of the word Tyrants, they put the word Oppressors, that it might not look so Directly upon the Kings, Cha. I. and II. but be Turn'd to any other, as they saw Cause. Tho' it cou'd not properly be Apply'd to any other. For the Government was in Their Hands, and there∣fore cou'd not be Purchas'd out of Other Hands. And therefore They, the Kings, were the Ty∣rants here meant; at least Principally, and Chief∣ly, They having the Chief Part in the Govern∣ment, and it was against them, that Oliver and the Quakers took Arms. 10. Again, p. 35. they say to Oliver, in the like strain as that before Quoted to his Son Richard, And as concerning thy War, and Ar∣mies abroad in Spain, something ther is in it known to the Lord, seek not thine own Honour in it, but be faithful; and leave the Issue of all things to the Lord; Make no Covenant with Ido∣lators, but Tread down their Idol Gods that they have set up; and Hew down their Mountains, in which their Confidence stands; and Plow up their Ground, that the seed may be sowen after thee: it's Honour enough, to be the Lord's Plow-Man. All this is left out in the Re-print. p. 568. of E. B's. Works. They had conceiv'd migh∣ty
Hopes of that Army in Spain. Which they Hollood thus to Shed Blood without Mercy (see Sn. p. 239. what is there Quoted out of this same Book Councel and Advice) That they might Sow their Seed, in the Ruin and Destruction of whole Nations. This they then Greedily Gap∣ed for, and Expected. They were sure, Some∣thing ther was in it, known to the Lord. But the Lord knew, that ther was Nothing in it. For Oliver Dy'd about a Month after they had Wrote this Letter to him, which bears Date in the 6. Month. 1658. And was then De∣liver'd to him at Hampton Court, as is told at the end of this Letter p. 36. But their Confidence did not Dye with him. One Disap∣pointment is a small matter with a Quaker Pro∣phet! Two Months after, they renew'd the same to his Hero Son Richard, as before Quoted, And then they were as sure To say no more a∣bout it, That ther was something in it! But he fail'd them too. And now they have Dasht out Both these Prophesies, for Spite, or Shame. Yet they are not Asham'd! However, will say no more about it. 11. In this same Edw. Burrough his Message to the present Rulers of England. An. 1659. p. 6. these words viz. [He (God) overthrow the oppres∣sing Power of Kings, Lords, and Bishops, both in Church and Civil State: And brought some Ty∣rants and Oppressors to Just Execution, for their Wickedness] are left out in the Re-print of E. B's Works. p. 591. Yet this Message E. B. said he had from the Lord God, whose Ambassador he stiles himself, and says p. 1. In his Name and Authority, I am come unto you. And as such,
Affixes an Imprimatur to his Book, in these words, I order this to be Printed, and given to their Particular Hands, with Speed. E. B. 12. In what he calls A Just and Lawful Try∣al of the Teachers, and Professed Ministers of Eng∣land. The Re-print instead of England, put, of this Age, and so in several other places in this Book. And p. 8. where they Reproach other Mens Preaching to be, At the best, but what the Saints of the Lord said before them; And this is no more then stealing of the Prophets words. They seeing how this must Expose them, and make them Stea∣lers too, if they said any thing of what the Saints said before them, in the Re-print they Add to these words thus, And this is no more, AS DONE BY THEM, then Stealing, &c. i. e. It is Steal∣ing in Others, but not in the Quakers. 13. Ibid. p. 9. E. B. says of the Ministers of England, or of this Age, as they now turn it, Most of them are Lovers of Wine, &c. But his new Editors, knowing the Wicked Falshood of this Charge, and how it must Expose their Boundless Malice, have taken away the word, Most, and put in the Re-print only SOME of them are Lovers of Wine, &c. So that if they can fix this but upon One or Two, they may come off with the word SOME. The like Trick is us'd in several other Places of this Book. And thus they take upon them to Alter and Mend E. B's Message, which he said he had from The Lord God! It is not worth while to make Reprisals upon the nu∣merous Train of Wet-Quakers. That is not the business now.
14. But if they take from the full Extent of his Message in one Place, they Add to it in ano∣ther. Speaking of those who Profess themselves to be Orthodox Divines, he says p. 16. They seek to Allure all People to follow them, in their way of Wickedness. But the new Editors of his Works, thinking this not to be Angry enough; instead of their way of Wickedness, put it, their Idol Worship. 15. Ibid. p. 22. Says E. B. I have accounted, and I find the Sum of their (the Ministers) Mainte∣nance yearly in this Nation, being Reckoned in a whole Sum, is about or above Fifteen hundred Thou∣sand pounds a Year. This was wrote in the year 1657. And the Quakers being sensible how Gross∣ly their Prophet had over-shot himself, to make the Mistake more Easie, in the Re-print, they leave out the words, I have Accounted, and, I find; which being so Possitive an Assertion, wou'd Render this Horrible Prophet, a most Impudent Blasphemer, to Father what he knew to be a Lye upon the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost! And to Deliver it as a Message from the Lord God! But E. B. goes on to Prove it. ibid. If any doubt of this Account (says he) and shall think this not to be like to be true, upon an even Reckoning it may be Proved and made Appear, considering how many Parishes ther is in England, and Reckon what belongs to every Priest's Parish. But this very Reckoning will Prove him to be a Blasphemous Lyar, for what was Allot∣ted to every Parish Priest (as he calls them) in England, in the year 1657. will not Amount to near that Sum. Well then, having bethought himself, he after this, in p. 25. Inflames the Reckoning thus. Considering all things, it can
come to no less their Funeral Sermons, their Great Tythes, and Small Tythes, and Marriages, and Sprinkling of Infants, and Churching of Women, with other such Penuries claimed by the Priests (in the Re-print, it is changed into the Church) of England, with what is given to them out of the Nations Treasure, which is many Hundreds of pounds a year. Here he confounds the times of the Dissenters, and of the Church of England. For the Dissenters did not use the Churching of Wo∣men in 1657. And the Clergy now have not Stipends or Annuities out of the Treasury, as some of the Dissenters had. But put all these toge∣ther, it will not come near 150000 pounds. Therefore his Editors have endeavour'd to help him out, by Adding to what is before Quot∣ed, thus, Also considering how much a year is spent at 2 or 3 Colleges in this Nation, &c. as to bringing up some to Attain to the Ministry, with abundance of such Charges, consumed the Nations Treasure, which is wasted as in Relation to this Ministry spoken of. I do not speak against Good Education and Learning, which is, in its Place, a vertue (as for Travellers, and many others) nei∣ther do I account such Money wasted— But on∣ly as to the Ministry of Christ, or Inable them there∣unto, but that Money which is spent is Wasted— And how much is spent—for such an end only wise Men Judge, which will make up a long Sum in the whole. All this is Inserted in the Re-print. And yet do's not help this Lame-Dog over the Stile. They may as well Reckon the Charge of Nursing any Child his Parents design for the Ministry, if he should Prove fit for it: for, on that Condition it is that they send their Chil∣dren
to Schools or Colleges, in order to Qualify them for the Ministry. And to Reckon this a spending the Treasure of the Nation, to Swell the Account: To call the Charges of Education which comes out of Private Pockets, a Burden upon the Nation, is as Ridiculous, as it is over and above Malicious to Account this among the Expences which the Clergy put the People to. And this must go in to make up Will. Penn's Reckoning, who, in his Guide Mistaken p. 18. Ann. 1668. gives the same Account of the Revenues of the Clergy then, whom he calls I∣dle Gormondizing Priests of England, who Run away with above 150000 pounds a year, &c. as be fore Quoted. 2 P. p. 34. He comes up last of all with the same Bill. Alt a Mall. But this is not the subject I am upon. I am now shewing, how the Quakers deal with their Dead Prophets in the Re-printing of their Works. And the Instances Increase so fast up∣on me, that I will shorten my Labour for the present; because it wou'd make a Volume by it self, to go through with them. And a lar∣ger Collection is Ready, if it be thought ser∣viceable. In the mean time, the Reader will, I suppose, be easily Persuaded, from the Tast that is here given out of two or three of their Small Pamphlets wrote by E. Burrough, that their is not one of their Books, which they have Re∣printed of their Deceased Friends, that is given to us Truly as they were first Printed. Tho' God knows, they have left enough behind, to make them the Greatest Monsters, that this, or Perhaps any other Age has Produc'd.
Ther are are several Instances scatter'd in the Sn. of this their Mutilating, Adding, and Al∣tering the Testimonies of their Ancient Friends, to serve New Turns, as p. 216, 217, 218. you will see some Instances in the New Edition of of Howgil's Works. But especially p. 212. ther is a Passage Greatly to be notic'd, of their Concealing and Leaving out in the New Edition a most Material, Bloody, and Threatning Clause in a Declaration they Publish'd An. 1659. where∣in they Assert their Right, even to the Fight∣ing with Carnal weapons, and Killing of Mens Per∣sons, to Establish their Heirship to Possess the Ʋt∣termost parts of the Earth. And that they do Expect the Time to come, tho' they say it is not YET come. This is in p. 8. and 9. of the said Declaration, and left out in the New Edition of Edw. Burrough's Works, p. 603. This is put among his Works, because he was the Pen-man. And the Declaration ends p. 14. with these words, The substance of this was gi∣ven forth the Twentieth day of this Tenth Month, being moved of the Lord by His Spirit thereunto, through E. Burrough, and is now Judged Meet to be Published to the Nation, in behalf of Ʋs, and our Friends, under our Hands. GER. ROBERTS. THO. HARTE. GILB. LATYE. JOH. AND ERTON. J. OSGOOD—and others of them to the Number of Fifteen, all whose Names are subscrib'd. But the Names are left out in the New Edition, together with these last words. viz. And is now Judged Meet to be Published to the Nation, in behalf of Ʋs and our Friends, under our Hands. It was then Meet, in December 1659. when, Tumults in London, the Rump Re-admitted, and
an Abjuration of K. Char. II. and the whole Line of K. James; when ther was no settl'd Government in the Nation, but all things in that Confusion, that it seem'd a fit Time for the Quakers to strick in, and Assert their Ʋni∣versal Heirship. But in 1672, when the King was happily Re-Established, and the Kingdom Strengthned in his Hand, then this was to be kept Close, till some other fit Occasion should Offer. The Disclosing of it then, wou'd have given the Government a Just Jealousie of them. Therefore it was stifl'd at that time, in the New Edition of E. B's Works. And instead thereof, the Quakers Printed Declarations full of Loyalty and Affection to the King, and Re∣nouncing the Principle of taking to the Carnal Sword, upon any Pretence whatsoever, as shewn in Sn. p. 224. 227. and 229. In the Re-Print of the said Declaration, ther are several other things Left out, and Alter'd, according to the Times, as in p. 4. 7. 12. &c. the words Kings and Tyrants are left out in their Railings. And other such like Amend∣ments. The 15 Instances which are before related of the Quakers new Coyning, Adding to, and Diminishing from the Works of their Ancient Friends, are all taken out of two or three small Pamphlets only of Edw. Burrough, which came to my hands. Judge then what a Volume it wou'd make, if we had the First Editions of that Great Folio of his Works which is Re-Print∣ed, to Compare all the Alterations they have made in them. And so in the Many and Large Volumes of the Works of their other Prophets
which they have Re-Printed! Of which I will give but an Instance in two or three, and so Leave them, for this time. 1. In Sn. p. 113. ther is a Notorious Instance of this Forgery of the Quakers, in the Journal of G. Fox. I will add one more here. In a Book of his, and other Quakers, call'd The West answering to the North. Printed. An. 1657. p. 16. ther is a Long Letter to Chief Justice Glynn, which begins thus, Friend, we are Free-Men of England, Free-born; our Rights and Li∣berties in and with our Countries, with the Laws, the Defence of them, have we in the Late Wars, Vindicated in the Field with our Blood. Which in the Journal is Alter'd thus. Friend; We are Free-Men of England, Free-born, Our Rights and Liberties are according to Law, and ought to be De∣fended by it. Leaving out that Ugly Passage, The Defence of them, have we, in the Late Wars, Vindicated in the Field with our Blood. For this they have now a Mind shou'd be Forgotten. Both as to their Pretended Principle against Fighting: And also, their Siding with the then Ʋsurpati∣ons against the King. Whereas they say, in p. 14. of their Declaration just now Mentioned, We have been Silent, and not Medling with this Party or the other, but by way of Reproof of evil in All, and Informing all to the Good; And it can∣not be Charged upon us, that we have sided with One or other. But in the 9th Instance before Mentioned, they made their Braggs, That they had served, with their Lives and Estates, as Faithfully as the Protector Oliver himself and his Council, to the Purchasing that Peace and Freedom (An. 1657.) out of the Hands of TYRANTS. i. e. of K. Char. I.
and II. Of their Siding, and Medling to Purpose against the King, with all the Ʋsurpations in their time, see sufficient Testimonies in Sn. §. xviii. And which in their new Switch they do not Deny, nor Justify themselves any other∣wise than by Endeavouring to cast as Black Aspersions upon the King himself Char. II. And of their Silence you may Judge by that Paper which they have stifl'd of Ed. Burrough's which I have Printed in the 1st. of the 15 Instances, besides many others that can be Produc'd, wherein they Damn the King and Caviliers to the Pit of Hell. See Sn. p. 216. and p. 228. of their Giving Intelligence against Sir George Booth, and other Royalists who Rose for the King; And Commanding, in the Name of the Lord, to put such of them to Death, as they had taken Prisoners. And to stand out to the Uttermost, against the King, and think of No Reconciliation with him. 2. In the year 1659. One of the Quakers Great Apostles, Richard Hubberthorn wrote an Answer to A Declaration of the Ana-Baptists in London, wherein they Owned it as their Princi∣ple, That they were Willing to Live peacea∣bly Ʋnder whatever Government is, or shall be Esta∣blished in the Nation. This the Quakers then did violently Oppose, as a Poor, Time-serving, and Pernicious Principle, tho' of Late, they Pretend, That it is their own Principle, and that they do, Now, Govern themselves by it; And Pro∣mise so to do. But then, they fell upon the Ana-Baptists, and said, This is far below that Spi∣rit which was once in some of you in that Profession: for you told of having the Laws regulated accord∣ing
to the Scriptures; And of having Judges as at the first, and Councellors as at the beginning: And then not to submit to what Government soe∣ver, but that which is according to Equity and Ju∣stice. And what do you bear Arms, and Fight for, if not for a Government according to Truth, and that Righteousness may Establish the Nation? Some have Judged this to be the very Design and End of the War and Controversy against many that were called Governors and Magistrates, and were by some called the Ordinance of God, and the Higher Power: And if now you Resolve to live Peaceably, and submit to whatever Government shall be Established, then your Fighting is at an End: And if Charles Stuart shall come in, and Esta∣blish Popery, and Govern by Tyranny, you have begged Pardon, by Promising to live Peaceably un∣der it, as the Ordinance of God. &c. But this smelling so Rank, in the Re-Print∣ing of Hubberthorn's Works An. 1663. they leave out the words Charles Stuart, And instead of that, they put it thus, And if any Shall Come in and Establish Popery &c. That Principle for the Breach of which they Charge the Ana-Baptists, was not Peculi∣ar to the Ana-Baptists, nor any thing wherein they Differ'd from the Quakers; for it is most∣ly in the Quakers own words. But it was the Joint Principle of all these several sorts of Re∣bels, and is, and ever will be the Pretence of all Rebels, to Reforme, and Change for the Bet∣ter. And to this, that Principle of Submitting to whatever Government is Established, is most Adverse. And for which the Quakers did, at that time, Upbraid this Pretence of the Ana-Baptists.
As sincere, perhaps, in the Ana-Bap∣tists then, as it is in the Quakers now. For the Quakers Principle of Obedience to the Higher Powers; And what they mean by the Higher Power, I Refer backward to 2. P. p. 172, 173. &c. 3. Humphrey Smith a Notable Quaker Printed a Book An. 1658. Intitul'd, The True and Ever∣lasting Rule from God. Published from the Spirit of Truth. Where p. 48. he says, Where are Queen Mary's Judges and Bloody Persecutors? Where are King Charles's Nobles— and his Ʋn-Merciful Ty∣rants, who sought to Drive down all by their Devil∣ish Power, who were as High in Tyranny—as any of you— Where are your Cardinals, Jesuits, and Monks? Where are your Bishops, Arch-Bishops, Deans, and Deacons, your Abbots, Nunnerys, and Bishopricks, Altars, Crosses, Surplices, and Common-Prayer-Books, your Rails about your Tables, Organs, Quiresters, and Singing-Boys? Even as your Eyes have seen the Overturning of all these, so shall the Off-Spring and Residue follow after, and the Priests Howle. &c. But in the Re-Printing of this Man's Works after the Restoration, All that concerning King Charles, his Nobles, Tyranny, &c. And all concering the Church of England, then Established, of Bishops, Deans, Common-Prayer, Surplices, Organs, &c. are left quite out. Tho' said to be Publish'd from the Spirit of Truth! But the Spirit of Convenience, and World∣ly Politicks has Prevail'd. I have given but one Instance, a piece, in the Re-Printed Works of Fox, Hubberthorn, and Smith, because I wou'd keep within Limits, this hav∣ing swell'd so much already. And if I shou'd
go thro' all, it wou'd take up more Paper than all that I have Written. But we wou'd Desire them more Particularly to Produce two Tracts they have taken care to stifle; one is a Piece of Parnell's call'd Satan's De∣signs, mention'd 2 P. p. 106. The other of Lawson's mention'd ibid. p. 108. And now the Reason appears Plain, Why the Quakers are so Diligent in keeping up the First Editions of their Friends Books. That none might be seen, but as they have New-Drest and Vaumpt them. Their Book-sellers have Refus'd to Sell them, or so much as Shew them to several that I have Employ'd. Particularly W. Penn's Sandy Foundation. And where one I sent had found Six of them, over night; next day, when I sent for them, not one of them was to be had. When he is Dead, that too must pass the Index Expurgatorius, with the Rest of his Works. If Quakerism be not out of Fashion before that time; which I Hope he may Live to see. If they wou'd Call in, or Commit to the Flames all their Old Editions, I shou'd be very well Pleas'd to Rake no More into them; But let them and their Heresies Die together. And let the Present Quakers slide Gently from their Errors, without the Shame of Recanting. For it is their Conversion, not Victory over them that we seek. But when these Old Quaker Books, are still kept as Sacred Relicts by the Generality of the Ignorant and Besotted Quakers. And their Now Governing and Subtile Teachers, in all the Apolo∣gies they have, of Late, Published, still Pretend
to stand by, and Confirm All the Testimonies and Writings of their Ancient Friends, and that In all the Parts of them: And that they are thus En∣join'd by the Yearly Epistle of their General Council, as supposing them all Infallible, and Dictated by the Immediate Inspiration of the Ho∣ly Ghost, as they Horridly Pretend (yet are not Afraid to Alter, Correct, and Amend them!) It becomes Necessary, and our Duty to Search out, and Expose them. That being the Most Likely Means to Open those Eyes, which are not Seal'd up, to their own Destruction. And now, let others think, That if the Fi∣gure of Quakerism be so Abhorrent, even as Re∣presented to Us, in their Re-Printed, and Cor∣rected Books; How ten times more Deform'd and Frightful it wou'd Appear, if taken off their first Rude Draught, if their Original Books were Expos'd to Publick view; if the Publick wou'd take some Method, to have them Collected, and Reserv'd in some safe Place, till ther shou'd be no Longer Use for them, but what they first Deserv'd, the Animadversion of the Hang-Man, and a Faggot. In the mean time, Let the more sober among the Quakers Reflect how the Words of their Prophets give a Certain sound (as Boasted in the Title-Page of BƲRROƲGH's Trumpet before Quoted) when they are Chopt and Chang'd, as we have seen, and made Speak the Language of E∣very Turn, tho' in Direct Opposition to one An∣other! And if their Words are the Immediate Dictates of the Holy-Ghost (as they Blasphemously Pretend) then must the Curse of Adding to, or Diminishing from the Word of God Light upon
those, who have Added, or Substracted, or Al∣ter'd any thing in Any of these Quaker-Writings: Which Curse they May Read in the Book of Rev. xxii. 18, 19. To have their Part taken away out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things which are written in this Book: And to have the Plagues which are written in this Book added unto them. This they must take to Themselves; or else Confess, as the Truth is, That the Words of these Quaker-Pro∣phets were not Wrote from the Spirit of God: And if so, then because they do Pretend to be so Written, they must be Acknowleg'd to have been Wrote by the Spirit of Blasphemy, that is, the Devil. And that this is the Spirit which has Possess'd these QƲAKERS.
To Sir Thomas Lane, Lord Mayor of London. HAving been Lately Summoned before Thee, by Dr. Linford and Marmaduke Hopkins, who are more Diligent to seek thy Warrant to take Our Goods, than to seek us; thereby shewing, That it's Ours more than We they desire and Love: Which to us shews, That they have no more Right to esteem themselves Ministers of Christ, than as such to take Tyths, or Plead for them; For Christ said to his Mi∣nisters, freely ye have received freely Give. He did not Advise nor Teach, That if any would not Give they should take from them whe∣ther they would or nay. Therefore Consider whether such (who take by force) abide in or transgress the Doctrine of Christ. If they Transgress, as certainly they Do, who abide not in his Doctrine, Then his Apostle declares their Condition. 2. John. 9. And we Intreat thee Mayor seriously consi∣der how he either bids God speed to such, or assists them in such a Work; For, Thou, and All must receive a Reward from the hand of the Righteous God, According to your Works. We have also herewith sent a small Col∣lection out of the Book of Martyrs Fol. 669.670. To shew that the Priests have no Right to Tythes, and that it was anciently so Testi∣fied
by other Consciencious men besides us, and made an Article against them, as well as it is against us, Read and consider the following Collection is the Request of us who are Sincere Well wishers to the Mayor and All men, and truely desire that We nor any Other may Do that here that we cannot Answer hereafter in the Great Day of Account. John Feild. Will. Bingley. The Collection. IN the New Law neither Christ nor any of his Apostles took Tythes of the People, nor Commanded the People to pay Tythes, neither to Priests nor Deacons. But in the 1000 year of Our Lord 211. One Pope Gregory the 10th. Ordained Tythes First to be Given to Priests. Again, Paul saith, He was not Chargeable unto them but with his hands got his Own Living. It were Good Councel That all Priests took Good heed to the Heavenly Learning of Paul, not Charging the People for their Bodi∣ly Livelyhood. And Paul saith since the Priest∣hood is Changed its necessary a Change also be made of the Law, so that Priests Live without Tythes— For the Priests that Challenge Tythes say in effect, That Christ is not become Man, nor that he Suffered Death for man's Love.
Again, the Taking of Tythes and of such o∣ther Duties that Priests Challenge now wrong∣fully neither Christ nor his Apostles Challenged nor took such Duties, Therefore these taking of Priests now, are to be called and holden The Sclanderous Covetousness, and because of the Covetousness of Priests and Pride, it stirreth God to take Vengeance both upon Lords and Commons which Suffer Priests Charitably. This is Verbatim according to the Original Letter, which I have in my Possession. The Col∣lection added out of Fox's Martyrs, is not, as here set down, But gather'd out of several places of the Answers of one Will. Thorp, an Ignorant Zealous Man, but no Martyr, in the Reign of Hen. 4. I wou'd not Mend any of the words, to make sense of them (as In the 1000 year of our Lord 211.) but give them just as Quoted by the Quakers: Who took what was for their Purpose. 1. To make Tythes to be Anti-Christian, as being a Denyal of Christ's having Come in the Flesh. 2 That the Clergy are not to be supported, Nor so much as God Speed be given to them. 3 That the Ven∣geance of God is upon both Lords and Com∣mons, who suffer Priests, Charitably. The Ar∣guments of the Quakers against Tythes, I have Promised to Consider in a Treatise by it self. But I have Printed this Letter of theirs, to shew what Moderation they now, at this time of Day, have put on towards our Clergy: And do their Ʋtmost to stir up the Civil Power against them; Even to Destroy them, And not to Suffer them, tho' Cha∣ritably. This was in the Year 1695, when Sir Tho∣mas Lane was Lord Mayor of London.
In the Post-Man. 14 January 1699. The Quakers have Publish'd the following Pa∣ragraph. WHereas there have been several Fabulous Accounts in the Post Boy, concerning a dispute at West Deerham in Norfolk, between some of the Clergy of the C. of E. and some Quakers, which by reason of its partiality the Quakers were willing Charitably to suppose the said Clergy were not the Authors of. Since which there is a larger account called the Qua∣kers Challenge made to the Norfolk Clergy, which, altho far from an impartial relation, yet in it may be seen, (notwithstanding the Ti∣tle) that the Quakers were not first in the Chal∣lenge, but Defendants to the Clergys Charge of Blasphemy, &c. taken (as they say) out of their Ancient Writings; which the Quakers offered to meet them upon, provided they might have a Coppy of their Charge, Authors Names, Ti∣tles, and pages of such Books, with convenient time to prepare their Defence, which was de∣nyed them, altho timely demanded; and at the said meeting was insisted upon; and again prest thereto; THE QUAKERS NOT QUESTI∣ONING BUT TO ACQUIT THEIR ANCI∣ENT FRIENDS AND THEIR WRITINGS FROM THOSE BLACK CHARGES, NOT BEING CONSCIOUS OF DEVIATING IN
ANY ONE POINT OF DOCTRINE, FROM WHAT THEY FIRST HELD. And that no people have a greater detestation of the Sin of Blasphemy against God, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Scriptures then they; and one of the said Clergy was heard to say that he believed the Quakers of this Generation to be Ortho∣dox. N. B. This has been fully Answer'd by the Nor∣folk Clergy-Men. I insert it here only to shew, That the Quakers Adhere still to All the Blasphemies, Errors, and Heresies that can be found in Any of their Ancient Writings. For which Purpose it is Re∣ferr'd to in the foregoing Sheets.
A DECLARATION Against Wigs or Periwigs. Phil. 3.3. Jer. 22.24. Wigs no Pe∣ri-wigs. , [Peri] in composi∣tion signifies [Excellen∣cy,] as well as [about]  excel∣lent cut, as well as cut about. SEveral Testimonies having been given by Friends against Pride in Apparel relating to Women; 'tis considerable whether Women being reflected on may not reasonably reflect on Men, their artificial frizled Hair; for Womens Hairs on Mens Heads swarm like one of Egypts Plagues, and creep in too much upon and among Christians. And a Nehemiah is desirable, that might pluck off this strange Hair of strange Women lusted after, Nehem. 13.25. And the Heathen may rise up against us; for an Ambassa∣dor coming before a Senate with false Hair, a Grave Senator said, What credit is to be had to him whose very Locks do lie? And if upon necessi∣ty
the Locks of any amongst us do lye, 'tis fit they should lie to purpose, viz. so as not to be discerned from native Locks: For to seek to deceive, so as to be perceived, argues as much want of Wit as of Sincerity; and a want of an endeavour in it not to be perceived, argues a want of Humility and Moderation. Isocrates, a Famous, Wise, Virtuous Graecian, seeing his Neighbour wear his Hair of another colour than Natural, because in Fashion, gave this ironical excuse for him, viz. That it was lest any should ask Councel of him; intimating that none should seek Wisdom in so Fantastical a Head. Philip King of Macedon, put a Courtier of his out of his Office, because he wore Hair of another colour than Natural; saying, He would not be true to the Publick, that was treacherous to his own Hairs. And the Emperour Titus thrust one from him, because he smelt of Perfume, saying, He had ra∣ther he had smelt of Garlick; and denied him his Suit. Plato, in the Tyrant Dionysius's Court, said, He would not wear Womens Attire. Then, What wonder Women wear Gay Gold and Pearls, When Men Religious wear Gold Locks of Girles? Should Christian Guides affect a Whorish Guise, Which Heathen tempt by Tyrant did dispize? I have read in our Chronicles (I think it was about the twelfth Age) that the Clergy wore Pe∣riwigs of a light Colour, as our Priests and others do now; though I have heard that of late the
Bishop of Exeter, censur'd his Priests, in his Vi∣sitation, for wearing them. The Physician is but a course Covering, as if wearing of Gold and shaving of Heads were Wholesome: This pretence for Pride, is no better than that which is for Drunkenness and Whoredom; for they will say, 'Tis Physick to be Drunk once a Month: And Oxford Scholars had half a Crown a Month allow'd to go to a Whore, ad purgandos renes. But the Protestants of Bohemia disputing at the Council of Basil, about Fifty Days on Four Questions, one of them was, That no Sin should be Tolerated to prevent a greater: Then much less to prevent a bodily Infirmity, which may be done by other lawful means, and not by working Confusion in wearing Womens Coverings, Deut. 22.5. 1 Cor. 11.15. Some say, Shaving is to prevent the Pox; Small honour to Wig-wearers to incur such a suspition of it, or of any Infirmity or Defect. If Heat cause Head-ach, sure a Wig under a Hat is not a means to cure it. The Prophet Elisha likely had neither, when Bethel Boys cried, A bald Head. Polling of Heads came first in Fashion, by occasion of the Emperour Charles the Fifth, his being troubled with the Head-ach; whose Example all his Court followed, and all Europe theirs; (see ye the force of Example, and the a∣buse of it) yet they wore no Wigs: Insomuch, that a Ruffian with long Hair, meeting Earl Crom∣well, and excusing himself that he had a Vow for it, the Earl told him, He should lie in Prison till 'twas ended. One would think, that they that have for wearing Wigs the most excuse, should have most care to stop the abuse coming by Ex∣ample
that it may not produce the taking of an Ell, through the allowance of an Inch; and that they should stir up Sober, Virtuous People to take notice how far they that wear them are necessitated thereto; and if so, what Modesty they used therein. This as cold Water to dash them, expects something a coming hotter than a Crisping-Iron to burn them. John Milliner, a Friend about Northampton, a Wig-Maker, left off his Trade, and was made to burn one in his Prentices sight, and Print a∣gainst it. John Hall, a Gentleman of Northum∣berland, being Convinced, sitting at a Meeting, was shaken by the Lords Power, pluck'd off, and threw down his Wig; so 'tis considerable whe∣ther care may not be taken, that conceited counterfit Calvinists may not continue amongst us,Calvus bald. nor that any of the People of God make themselves bald for Pride now, as they did of old for Sorrow, Levit. 21.5. Objection, Wigs may be worn not only for Ʋse, but Ornament. Answer, It appears very opposit to the Apo∣stles Doctrin, and also their Practice; for not only the Apostle James, James 2.2. reproves respect to gay Cloathing in general, (and is not Gay Cloathing to gain Respect, as Modest is to avoid Contempt) but also in particular, the A∣postles Peter and Paul forbad ornament of plat∣ted Hair,1 Pet. 3 3. 1 Tim. 2.9. Vulger tortis. Lu∣cian, Cle∣mens, Chryso∣stom. (as ours translate, Crisped or Curled as others) and the Ancients write, that they both had Bald-Heads; and if they should have cover∣ed them with Womens Hair, would they not have retorted, Was that the Cause, Peter and Paul, that you bad us leave off our Locks, that you,
and such like, might get them your selves, to make Peri-wigs of? Can any Christian believe, that Peter and Paul would run into such an absurdi∣ty? who 'tis very probable, restrained Women, not Men, expresly as needless. Solon, a Wise, Virtuous Lawgiver, made none against Parricide, as not to be supposed. It was a shame then, for Men to have long Hair naturally like Wo∣men, among the Greeks and Romans too: For Julius Caesar, as I remember, was by his Foes called scornfully [Puer comatus] Long hair'd Lad, viz. in effect, a Lass. Was it then likely they would wear long Wigs of Lasses Hair for an Or∣nament? Woodland a Martyr, a Deacon, taunted by a Persecuting Bishop (for his stock'd Hose) saying, He was deck'd like a Deacon, answered, More like a Deacon, then thou like an Apostle. True, For if Deacons Wives must be Grave and Sober, and their Ornament not outward but in∣ward, much rather the Deacons, and then much more Bishops. And most Apostles, whom Christ sent forth with Sandals, a single Coat, &c. Math. 10.10. whose Examples the famousest Primi∣tive Christians followed. Origen went in a plain Coat, bare Footed, and that too before the Emperor, who yet admired his Majesty. Ter∣tullian left off the Gown, and took the plain Coat, for which he wrote a Book Depallio. Cle∣mens wore a White Coat, and writes in defence thereof. So did John Huss the Martyr, the eminentest Preacher in Bohemia, and bequeathed his White Coat to one, his Gray Coat to ano∣ther; not his White Wig to one, his Brown Wig to another. He suffered for opposing Prea∣chers Pride.
It remains to shew, That 'tis not an Orna∣ment, but a Deformity, more then that it would Cover, as if it were not in Fashion would appear, even to the simple natural Eye. The Americans seeing one, Captain Morley, take off his Wig, cryed he had two Heads. And 'twere apt to affright a Child unused to it, like the horrid and hideous Head of a Snake-hair-twisted Gorgon, or cristed Bellona; as Homer says Hector did his Son with his Horse-maned Helmet. And who can refrain to fall into a Po∣etical Vein, and Paint it out in such sad Colours, that it may look as ugly as it doth: For a glorying in a Shame, as an Ornament, sharpens a Pen to describe it to make it appear as it is. Difficile est satyram non scribere. Metamorphoses. The manner of this Age unmannerly Is, Man unmaning, Womens hair to buy, Dub Poles and Joles Dame Venus Knights to be, Smock-Coat and Petticoat Breech their Livery, Scarce Man-like Fac'd, though Woman like in Hair, As sting-tail'd Locusts in the Vision were, As of Hyena's kind, Hermaphrodites, Or as abus'd Italian Catamites; And like unto the Phrygian Ganymede, Or as Tiresias Femaliz'd indeed, Or one that (sith he would a Woman be) Put Period to Assyrian Monarchy. Hair in a Night turn'd hew, of Old 'twas said, An Old Man Young, a Boy a Girle was made;
Elders so now transformed to Girles appear, And Girles to Boys by their short curtail'd Hair. By Bulls some seem 'ith 'twilight turn'd to Owls, As Antique Harpyes or some new Night Fowls, As charming Sirens (bate their ugly Hair) Having their Arms, Necks, Brests, Backs, Shoul∣ders bare, Nay for their Knights rich Garters some pre∣pare. Richard Richardson. I have not Mended any of the Spelling or other Blunders, as Depallio for de Pallio &c. As in the foregoing Letter to Sir Thom. Lane N. V. p. 80. Sclanderous for Slanderous But I give it you in pure. Quaker Orthography, Points, Spelling and all.
The Excommunication of Will. Wilkins, for Marrying one who was not a Quaker: And for being Marry'd by a Clergy-Man. From our Quarterly Meeting held at Dorchester, the 15th of the 5th Month, 1696. WHereas William Wilkins of Ʋplime in the County of Devon Cloathier, have for a long time frequented the Meetings of the Peo∣ple called Quakers, and made profession of the holy truth (and been some time a Sufferer in Te∣stimony thereof) which as believed in is suffici∣ent to cleanse the heart, purge the Conscience, and preserve out of the evil of the world, but of late the said William for want of watchful∣ness in the pure Light of Christ have let in a contrary Spirit, by which his mind is drawn a∣side from the way of the Lord, so far as to joyne himself in Marriage with one who do not pro∣fess the same way and truth with us, and there∣by is become unequally yoaked, and also Married by a Preist contrary to the practice of God's people in all Ages, for we do not find in all the holy Scriptures the Priests in time of the Law or Ministers of the Gospel ever Married peo∣ple; and altho' we are far from judging all the Marriages of other people to be unlawful, yet for any of us whom the Lord hath seperated from the world (its ways customs and Traditi∣ons that are vain) to return thither again for
the sake of a Wife, Husband or any other advan∣tage, is no less then turning with the Dog to his vomit, and with the Sow that was washed to her wallowing again in the mire— And not∣withstanding the said W. W. have been often in the love of God visited and in much tenderness warned to avoid going into the aforesaid prac∣tise, as being perswaded it would prove to his hurt and loss, yet he have very wilfully and ob∣stinately slighted the love of God, and good counsel of his Friends, and followed the coun∣sel of his own evil heart, and is backsliden from the way of the holy truth he have long made profession off, by which he hath excluded him∣self from the fellowship of the Gospel and those that walk therein. And therefore for the clearing of the blessed truth and our holy profession, we do hereby Te∣stify and declare that the said William Wilkins is departed from the truth, and is gone into the Spirit of the World; and therefore we do not own him, nor can we have fellowship with him (altho' he may frequent our Religious Meetings) untill he shall publickly condemn his evil prac∣tise and unfeignedly repent of the same (if he can find a place) which is truely desired by us who are grieved, and our hearts saddened (whom the Lord hath not made so) at the hearing of this or any disorderly walking by any professing the holy truth. Signed by appointment and on behalf of the said Meeting, By Daniel Taylor.
The Quaker Disciplin go's on, (like the Ro∣man) to Deny what they call Christian Burial to those who Die not in their Unity. And they have Refus'd to those Quakers who had some Differences with their Church, or Governing Part, the Privi∣lege of Burying their Children in their Burying Ground, tho' they had been Contributors towards the Purchase of it. Of which I cou'd give seve∣ral Instances, But for the Present shall Name one∣ly one, because Part of the Cause was having been Marry'd by one of our Clergy. And I will give it in the words of an Account of it sent to me, from a Quaker who will make it good, if Deny'd; But I set not his Name, to Avoide the Now Ʋn-govern∣able Malice of the Quakers. THomas Bradly of the Parish of St. Olives Southwark Bodice-maker, died the 25th of October 1693. and that day upon his Death-Bed, desired that he might be inter'd in the Park Burying ground, where he had buried a Wife and Seven Children; he requested of those call∣ed Quakers that visited him that day while his sences Remain'd, that he might be buried there i. e. in the Quakers Burying ground. The next day following being the 26th, his Daughter Eliz. Bradly desired a Friend to go with her to have the Ground granted, (for her Father) and ac∣cordingly one went with her to James Braith∣waite one intrusted by the Quakers, to grant the Ground, but his Answer was he could not do it: And the said James Braithwaite went with
Eliz. Bradly and the Friend aforesaid to Hen. Snooke another intrusted for the same purpose, who also said he could not, nor would not i. e. give the Ground, notwithstanding the said Tho. B. so earnestly desired it upon his death Bed. And when an answer was demanded of J. B. and H. Snooke whether they would give it or not? The said J. Braithwaite answer'd, They could not do it, by Reason he was at a Twofold distance from them, First as belong∣ing to a seperate Meeting (by him so called) Secondly by Reason he was some years past Married by a Priest. And withall shifted Eliz. Bradly off, by sending of her to Walter Miers and William Chandler for to ask them: who also Denied it, saying there was the Arti∣lery nearer, so they would not give it, this is in short a true Relation of there Unchristian be∣haviour in Denying of the said Tho. Bradly his desire. Thus that Account sent to Me. FAS EST AB HOSTE DOCERI.
