L1459 R36327 15666402 104300
A LETTER From DUBLIN in IRELAND, CONTAINING A Remarkable Discovery of a horrid Design of the Papists, to de∣stroy that City by Fire, discovered to the Lord Justices, toge∣ther with their Lordships Proclamation, for Commanding all Pa∣pists to depart Ten miles out of the City, with other remarkable Occurrences relating to that Kingdom. Licensed according to Order. SIR, THE 28th of November, 1690. One Mr. Gamball arrived from Mullingar, who Commanded a Party of Horse in those Parts; who having Intelligence of some Persons who were straggling towards the Enemies Quarters through private ways, and through the Bogs, he went out after them and overtook them, near the Edge of the Mountain; but the Evening being dark he could not pursue them so close as to seize any of them, but found a Bag of Oatmeal; a Roll of Tobacco, and an old Petti∣coat, in the Petticoat were ten Letters quilted, and in a Cleft stick which was in the middle of the Tobacco Rolls, was another Letter, written by one Mrs. Hoegan, also Ruth Coffee (who was the Dutchess of Portsmouth's Operator) to her Husband, who is a Collonel in King James's Army. The Contents are as follow: She acquaints her Husband, that the English are very negligent and secure in their Quarters, by which means her Friends (meaning the Rapperies) have done very considerable Service in most Parts of the Kingdom, under the Obedience of the English, particularly, in the County of Wicklow, where they are in great Numbers daily doing good Service by cutting off the Hereticks, and plundering them of their Cattle; That there were some Horses and Kettle Drums lately taken from the English near Mullingar: That the French were not unmindful of them and their Cause; and Tyrconnel would soon visit them, with a very considerable Force from France; that the Soldiers in Dublin were very few and poor despicable Crea∣tures; for having no Pay, they would doe any thing for a bit of Bread: So that if Sars∣field moved over the Shannon, with any considerable Force, not only the Army, but the Militia would be drawn hence, and then her Friends here could easily set the Town on Fire, by doing it each in their own House and Lodgings, and whilst People were endea∣vouring to save what was valuable from the Flames, they had force enough to destroy them. And she farther adds, that they could not for some time agree to the burning, lest the Records of the whole Kingdom should be burnt, but had now found out an ex∣pedient to salve that Scruple, and therefore were fully resolved on that undertaking. Mr. Gamball having brought the Woman to the Lords Justices, who had the Night before received his Majesties Letter for calling a Privy Council, they ordered him to attend at the Council, where were Sworn Ten of them, which were all that were in Town, viz. The Two Lords Justices, the Arch-bishop of Dublin, Lord Longford, Lord Drogheda, Lord Granard, Lord Bishop of Meath, Lord Lisburn, Captain Fitsgerald, and the Chancellour of the Exchequer, before whom Mr. Gamball produced the Letters, and gave an Account of the manner of finding them. Mrs. Hoegan being askt if she wrote that Letter, she confest she did, and thought no one could blame her for doing what she had done. The Counsel ad∣journ'd till Five this Evening, and are now Sitting to consider of this Matter, and also what Course to take with the Papists which are taken into Custody, to prevent the michief designed. Collonel Brewer hath taken great pains in fortifying Mullingar, and hath planted Guns on the Works, that there is no Danger of their descent that way: About Sixty five Prote∣stant Women and some Children were sent by the Irish from Athlone under a Guard, who as soon as they brought them to the Bridge of Slain, most barbarously stripped them, not leaving them so much as would cover their Nakedness, Collonel Herbert being quartered at Longford was so exasperated at this usage, that he sent and stripp'd the Irish that were in the Villages adjacent to cloath them.
Here is a good Trade, and the Army are part Paid, and are daily receiving Money from the Treasury; so that by the indefatigable Pains and Care of our wise Governours, we do not question, but to have a good and speedy end of our Troubles. By the Lords-Justices of Ireland, A Proclamation. Sydney, Tho. Conningsby. IT having been observed, that divers Papists, and others disaffected to the Government, some of whom are lately come out of the Enemy's Quarters, do daily resort unto this City of Dub∣lin, and into the Liberties of S. Sepulcher's, Thomas Court, and Donore; and do pre∣sume not only in the Day, but in the Night time, to meet in Numbers, to the Intent, as We have great reason to apprehend, then to consult how to raise Disturbances, to the prejudice of their Majesties Government, and to continue the Rebellion in this Kingdom, as also to destroy this City by Fire, which some of them (as we are credibly inform'd) have threatned, and design to do. For Remedy therefore, of the Mischiefs that happen upon such Resort and Meetings; We do hereby strictly Charge, and Require all Persons wtsoever of the Popish Religion, who have not been noted House-Keepers within the City, or Liberties aforesaid, for the space of three Months last past, that within Forty Eight Hours after the Publishing of this our Proclamation, they do depart out of the said City, and Liberties, and rep to their  Habitations or other places in this Country▪ at least Ten Miles distant from this  if they shall neglect, or refuse to do, they shall  apprehended, and proceeded a∣gainst,  designing the Disturbance of th Publick Peace; And in order to the more effctual Exution of this Our Proclamation, We reby require the Lord-Mayor and Sheriffs of e City ublin, and the Seneschals of the said Liberties, to cause diligent Search and Enquir to be  mediately after the time hereby limited for the departure of such Per∣sons as aforesaid,  all Houses and Places throughout the said City and Liberties, and a true Account to be taken of the Nms, and Qualities of such as shall be found therein, not qualified as afore∣said, which is forthwith to be returned unto Ʋs, under the Hands of the said Lord-Mayor and Sheriffs, and Seneschals of the said Liberties, whereupon we will give Order to have them pro∣ceeded against with the utmost Rigour of Their Majesties Laws, and We do hereby farther Declare, That if any such Papist, or other Disaffected Person, after the Fourth Day of December next, not being House-Keepers as aforesaid, shall repair unto the said City or Liberties, and there abide by the space of Twenty Four Hours, after such Person, or Persons shall come thither, without rendring Him, Her, or Themselves, to the Lord-Mayor, or one of the Sheriffs or Al∣dermen of the said City, or one of the Seneschals of the said Liberties, to the end it may be known in what House, or Parish, He, She, or They, take up His, Her, or their Lodging; or, if above the number of Five Papists, or Disaffected Persons, as aforesaid, whe∣ther House-Keepers, or others, shall presume to meet together in any House, or place within the City, or Liberties aforesaid, on any pretence whatsoever either by Day, or by Night, or shall be out of His, Her, or Their Lodging, or Lodgings after Nine of the Clock at Night: In either of these Cases, if any Person, or Persons shall be so Hardy, as not to give due Obedience to our Directions aforesaid, they shall be prosecuted with the utmost Severity, as Contemners of Their Majesties Royal Authority. And because Rewards as well as Punishments are necessarily con∣ducing to the Discovery of such as shall offend in the particulars aforesaid: We do hereby Publish and Declare, That as we will severely punish such Offenders as aforesaid, the Receivers and Harbourers of them contrary to this Our Proclamation, so We will give a Reward of Twenty Shil∣lings to each  who shall give Information against any such Offenders, in any of the aforesaid Paticulars, to be immediately paid out of Their Majesties Treasury, upon Proof of such Offence, or Offences, made before the Lord-Mayor of the said City. Given at the Castle of Dublin, the Twentieth Day of November, 1690. And in the Second Year of Their Majesties Reign. JOHN DAVIS. God Save the KING and QUEEN. London, Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in Warwick-lane. 1690.
