L2013 R216521 99828248 32675
THE Life & Death OF That Pious, Reverend, Learned, and Laborious Minister of the Gospel Mr. RICHARD BAXTER. Who departed this Life De∣cemb. 8, 1691. and of his Age 77. Heb. XI. 4. He being Dead, yet speaketh. Licensed according to Order. LONDON: Printed for Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall. 1692.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. Richard Baxter. AS there is but a small part of the Earth Gold, so are there but a few Men good; and of these few which, to our Apprehension, seem Excellent, most may be but counterfeit Christi∣ans, Holy, but ad extra; their Work but Hay and Stubble, their Faith built upon a Sandy Foundation; and found but a vain Confidence in the day of Visitation. But this Pious, Reve∣rend, Learned and Laborious Minister of the Gospel, Mr. Richard Baxter,
has given such Evidences of his La∣bour, Zeal and Piety, that it is im∣possible a pretended Christian, or formal Hypocrite could either have done or endured what he hath, in his Pilgrimage towards Heaven, or the Promised Land. He ascended those Steps of Jacob's Ladder, which a giddy headed, or unstable minded Sophister could not Contemplate. As for his Life, it may be read in his copious and holy Writings; a du∣rable Monument of everlasting Me∣mory: Neither is any further Di∣scription necessary to make his Name famous to future Ages. Yet, for the satisfaction of those who admir'd him when alive, and yet bear a Respect to his Memory now when Dead, I have here set down his Life, in short Cha∣racters, for their satisfaction: But ex ungue Leonem, one may know, by this short Narative, what the whole course of his Life hath been.
That Laborious Minister of the Gospel Mr. Richard Baxter, was de∣scended of a good Honest Pedegree, born in a small Village in Worcester∣shire, the 12th of November, 1614. No sooner began he to be capable to know good from evil, than he was observed to send out the fragrant Blossoms of an holy Life, in Praying, speaking Reverendly of his Creator, and reprehending others for rash Oaths, and obscene Speeches, which was no small matter of Joy to his Parents, who were careful to send him to School when but a small Child, and keep a watchful Eye over him, lest he should have been Tainted with the small habits of Sin and Uncleanness when in his young∣er years. All his Father did intend him for, was some honest Trade, whereby to gain his Living, without being a burden to his Friends; but Provi∣dence had ordered it otherwise;
for he had such a Natural Inclinati∣on to Learning, that (notwithstand∣ing his Parents Reproofs for so fre∣quent Reading and Studying) it was his constant Exercise, without inter∣mission, so that in a very short time, he was more Learned in the Lan∣guages, and had greater Knowledg in Theology than those who had spent twenty years in prosecuting that which he attained in half the time. So that though he had not the Advantage of Vain Philosophy (as the Apostle calls it), or Ʋniver∣sity-Learning; yet was his sacred Knowledge in that Degree of Emi∣nence, such as few of the Universi∣ty Candidates ever attain to. When he was but a Young Man, he was u∣nanimously, by all the Holy Pastors of his Acquaintance, Invited, and Chosen to be a Labourer in Christ's Vineyard. But quickly after the Civil War began, and the Face of Affairs so long dropt Blood, that the whole Kingdom, Church and State
was in Confusion, and the Govern∣ment nothing but Anarchy; Which kept him from any setled Flock in Christ's Holy Mountain; therefore went, as a Preacher of the Gospel of Peace, in the time of War, with the Parliament's Army, praying, that God might compose the Differences betwixt his Anointed and his People, and make up the Breach with the Arm of his own Omnipotence. Thus his Neutrality made him sometimes to be look'd upon, by some Evil-minded Schismaticks, as a Malig∣nant. But he still behav'd himself so much a prudent Christian, that no Accusation could penetrate his Re∣putation, God's Glory and the Peo∣ple's Good being the only Design of his Soul. After the War was over, he was fixt Minister of Kederminster, where his Ministry was highly prized, much commended, yet more efficacious a∣mong his Hearers; whom, on his
first Entrance, he found both Igno∣rant, Obstinate, and void of all Godliness: but afterwards, in a short space, by God's Blessing, wrought so on them, that they were renewed in the Inner Man, be∣came New Creatures, and made that which once was their Glory, their Shame. He was very careful in Catechising the Families under his Protection, e∣specially Young People, by sowing the Seeds of Grace, before the Wic∣ked One had gain'd Ground upon their Corrupt Natures: Yea, (as it is said by the Apostle) he went from House to House, teaching and instru∣cting in the Knowledge of God, per∣swading stedfastly to persevere in the good Work of Regeneration. And notwithstanding, that he was a Dis∣senter from Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment, yet did he so behave himself, that no Man had ought wherewithal to stain his Reputation; but gain'd
so much their Affection, that by his Example and Advice, he quench'd the smoaking Animosities of all Con∣tenders, and united, in the Bond of Peace, both Episcopal, Presbyteri∣an and Congregational Parties, oft regretting, that Christ's Seamless Coat (which his Crucifiers would not tear) should be rent in Schisms. He continued at Kederminster till the Year 1660. in which time (seve∣ral Storms molesting the Church, af∣ter the Restauration of K. Charles II.) he went to London. And many En∣deavours, that time, being used, in order to an Agreement betwixt the Episcopal and Presbyterian Mini∣sters, Mr. Baxter behaved himself as a good Christian, and a blessed Peace-Maker: And, though his La∣bour was in vain, the Reward of his Willing Mind was sure, and his Name made more Famous among his Ene∣mies.
In the Year 1660. September 10. he married, at Bennet Fink, in Lon∣don, Margaret, Daughter to Francis Charleton, Esq; having been Contra∣cted before, in the presence of some Christian Friends. But before the Marriage, these Conditions were concluded upon: First, That Mr. Baxter should have nothing which before Marriage was hers; that so he (who wanted no Outward Supplies) might not so much as seem to marry her for Covetousness. Secondly, That she should so order her Affairs, that he might not be entangled in any Law-Suits about the same. Thirdly, That she should expect none of his Time, which his Ministerial Employ∣ment should call him for. After the Marriage was over, se∣veral of his Wife's Relations did look upon Mr. Baxter as Inferior to the Lady whom he had married; there∣fore the Lord Chancellor Clarendon (who had before proffer'd him a Bi∣shoprick,
so he would conform) with all Flourishes of Oratory, did again perswade him to acquiesce to his Re∣quests, and accept of a Rich Benefice, as the Church Government was then established. Thus it is evident, by his refusing a Bishoprick, and renouncing his Wife's Portion, which was 2000 l. that he did not marry upon any Worldly Account, as by the Method of their Wooing, doth plainly ap∣pear. For she, being a Pious and Devout Young Lady, fell in Love with him, upon the Account of his Holy Life and Fervency of Preach∣ing; and therefore sent a Friend to acquaint him with her Respects, in his Chamber. His Answer was, That since he had past his Youth in Cele∣bacy, it would be reputed Madness in him, to marry a Young Woman, whilst he could not discharge the Part of a Husband in all Respects. She at the Door, over-hearing, en∣tered
the Chamber, and told him, Dear Mr. Baxter, I protest, with a sin∣cere and real Heart, I do not make a Tender of my self to you, upon any Worldly or Carnal Account; but to have a more frequent Converse with so Holy and Prudent a Yoak-fellow, to assist me in my Way to Heaven, and to keep me stedfast in my perseverance; which I design for God's Glory, and my own Soul's Good. At this Mr. Bax∣ter was at a stand, and convinc'd, that, with a good Conscience, he could not despise so Zealous a proffer, springing from so pure a Fountain of Love. Now, though some ill-minded people, make a bad Constru∣ction of this Marriage (like Wasps, who suck Poyson from the sweetest Herbs) it is clear, That this Gentle∣woman had no Worldly or Carnal Design in this her matching with Mr. Baxter, an Old, Poor, Ejected Mini∣ster, descended of no great Family, after the heat of his Youth was over. Let people talk as they will, it is evi∣dent
on both sides, that the Matriage was rather a Demonstration of Self-Denial than Self-Interest. The first House they took was in Moorfields; from thence they remo∣ved to another at Acton, and short∣ly after to another. So that his House being frequented, or haunted with evil persecuting Spirits, he was forced to remove Nine times in Three years space. In the year 1661. a Parliament was call'd, wherein was past the Act of Ʋniformity. About this time Mr. Baxter was sent to the Common Goal, where he lay a considerable time; but neither he nor his Wife were seen to be troubled for suffering for Christ's Sake, but chearfully submitted to Providence, and bore the Cross pa∣tiently. Quickly after the Parliament made a New and sharper Act against Dis∣senters,
whereupon Mr. Baxter was forced to remove to another County, his Wife securing some small part of his Goods from being seized, by conveying them privately to Tot∣teridge, where she endured such hard∣ships as few poor People Endure. They could have no House, but part of a poor Farmers, where the Chim∣nies did Smoak so extreamly as was very prejudicial to her Health; For the Smoak was so gross, that it almost Choak'd them; and Mrs. Baxter had ever a great straitness in her Lungs, which occasioned the Smoak to be the more Offensive to her: Yet such was her Charity to her poor Land-lady, that she placed out her Son an Apprentice, who afterwards Lived well. When the King's gracious Decla∣ration came forth, which gave to Nonconformists Licenses to Preach and to Build places to Preach in. Mr. Baxter took a House in South∣hampton-Square
(where he continued till his Wife Died) and the Market-house in St. James's Market for a Meeting house. From this place the Lord was pleased, e're long, to re∣move him by a strange Providence, for the Roof of the House being of a vast height, and ill contrived, the weight lying much upon one Beam, in the midst of the Floor, and the place being greatly Crouded, the Beam gave so great a Crack that it put all the People into a Fright; but a second Crack set them all a running; Mr. Baxter reproved their inordinate Fears, and would have gone on in Preaching, had he not been dissuaded. The like formerly befel him in St. Dunston's in the West, where the Church-Steple fell, and was like to overthrow the Church and smuther all his Hearers, had not Divine Providence order'd it other∣wise. Mr. Baxter removed thence, and took a House in Oxendon street, for
which he gave 30 pounds per Annum, Ground-rent; and before he could fit it for his Function, he laid out 300 pound; but before he was set∣led in the place, he was forced to Remove, and Mr. Siddon, a Stranger, who first Preached in the House, in Mr. Baxter's Absence, was Appre∣hended by three Justices of the Peace, and sent to Prison. Mr. Baxter found that he could not keep up Preaching in that place and was glad that Dr. Lloyd and his Parishioners would accept of it, for the place of their publick Worship, asking them no more Rent than he was to pay for the Ground, and the Room over it for a Vestry, demand∣ing nothing for all the Mony laid out for the Building; yet the purchase of the Fee Simple, for the Ground on which the Chappel was Built, cost Mr. Baxter 200 pounds, and 200 more for the Ground adjoyning, to his great loss.
Then he hired a House in Swallow-street, that the poor People there∣abouts, with whom he began, with considerable Success, might still be Instructed; but there he was kept out by some Officers, who stood at the Door, with a Justice's Warrant. Therefore being hurried from one place to another, and driven to his Wits end, he took no certain Dwel∣ling-place, but Preached in several Meeting-Houses, as he was invited, but was most desirous to be at Dr. Mantou's Meeting-house in Covent-Garden, that his former poor Flock, about St. James's might come there and hear him, which they did, to his great Satisfaction. It was observed of him that for the first nine or ten years, after his Ejection, he never took any Gift to supply his necessity, except 10 pound per Annum, from Serjeant Fountain, which importunity forced him too. When Warrants were out to Di∣strain his Goods for Fines for his
Preaching, he did undergo the loss without repining, only his Library he was willing to save, which his Wife afterwards freely gave to the Colledg of New England, and other Friends at home. And though the paying 20 pounds, besides Imprisonment, for every Ser∣mon Preached, was the penalty im∣posed on every Dissenter; yet nei∣ther Goods, Mony, Imprisonment, could terrifie the Zealous Baxter from following his Spiritual Employment. His Wife fell Sick on Friday, June 3d, 1681. and Died June 14th. her Death occasion'd much Grief to Mr. Baxter; he Mourn'd, but not like an Infidel; hoping again to see her, and go to her, but not her to come to him. She was Buried June 17th, in Christ's Church, in the Ruins of her Mothers Grave; on which she had caused a fair, rich, and large Marble-stone to be laid, Anno. 1661.
The Rehearsal of Mr. Baxter's Afflictions were but a Repetition of the same Sorrow; for he was another Athanasius in respect of his Suffer∣ings; wherein he rejoyced. He was still the Butt of the Enemy of Man∣kind, who stirred up his Instruments to stop him in his Ministry, and con∣stant Labours in God's Vineyard; till in the Reign of K. James II. (Liberty of Conscience being proclaimed to all Subjects, for no good end) God, who catcheth the Wise in their own Craftiness, opened a Door of utterance to all his faithful Ministers, among whom Mr. Richard Baxter, though Old and Weak (yet strong in Faith, and constant in perseverance) renew∣ed his Strength and Endeavours, preaching in divers places, as occasi∣on offered, till he setled at last in Charter-House-Yard in London, where he preached with great Fervency of Spirit every Sabbath day at his Meet∣ing-house; which was more crouded than any Cathedral in England.
Here he continued several years, to the unspeakable Joy of all good Christians. But about the latter end of September 1691. he could hardly, without help, ascend the Pulpit. At last, finding his Natural Strength quite decayed, and that his Pilgrimage was near an End, he took Bed, with these Words in his Mouth, Lord, now let∣test thou thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word; for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Thus he con∣tinued sick and weak in Body, but strong in the Inward Man, till he de∣parted this Life, December 8, 1691. at his Dwelling House in Charter-House-Yard, London, whence he was carried to Merchant-Taylors-Hall, and on Decem. 17. to Christ-Church (se∣veral thousands mourning after the Corps) where he was decently buri∣ed near his Wife's Grave; all lament∣ing his Death, but none staining his Memory. Of his comfortable Expressions, Ejaculations, and sound Advice to his
Brethren, during the time of his Sick∣ness, many Worthy Ministers can give an Account. Some are set down in his Funeral Sermon, preached by that Worthy Servant of Jesus Christ, Wil∣liam Bates, D.D. who was wrapt up in Love with him, even to his Grave. His Words were Pious, his Writings Wonderful, and his Preaching so pow∣erful, that he made his Hearers quake and tremble. He was both a Barna∣bas and a Boanarges, a Son of Thunder as well as of Consolation. Wicked Men could not endure him, more than Felix could Paul, when he preached of Righteousness, Tempe∣rance and Judgment to come. But had he been of the World, that lyeth in Wickedness, the wicked World had certainly Lov'd him: But because his Affections were setled on a more sub∣lime Object, all Worldlings hated him (as they hated his Redeemer) with∣out a Cause. He was more in love with Poverty than Riches; and the last Sermon he preached, was in con∣tempt
of Worldly Enjoyments; his Text being, Luke 16.25. Thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; therefore now he is comforted, and thou art tor∣mented. His Days, in respect of any out∣ward Felicity, were but a Scene of Sorrow, a Holy Strife, and a Flood of Troubles. He was persecuted from place to place, carried from one Pri∣son to another, brought before Judg∣es, Counsellors, and mighty Powers: He was reviled, mocked and scoffed; yet God gave him a Mouth, and Wis∣dom, which all his Adversaries could not gain-say, and the Enemies of the Cross of Christ could not withstand. Had he lived a Roman Priest, under Pope Poul III. he had been Canonized a Saint, in Circulo per se, and fill'd all his Ware-houses with Works of Su∣pererrogation, and brought into his Temporal Treasury, more money than his 50000 Prostitutes, with their Ju∣lio's per month. In one word; His
Birth was Credible, his Life was Ve∣nerable, and his Death was Comfor∣table. The Wicked live not half their Days, but he departed this Life in a good Old Age, and full of Days. When the Church was over-cloud∣ed with Apostasie, a poor Man ask'd him, what was his Opinion of the Times: His Answer was, There's no fear but all will be well, for Christ is at the right hand of the Father. A young Oxford Schollar, in De∣rision, propos'd to him a foolish So∣phism, thus, Ʋbique est Adverbium, Sed Deus est Ʋbique, Ergo, Deus est Adverbium. His Answer was, Young man, if God be every where, have a care of taking his Name in vain, in his own presence. He was a Man of great Parts and Prudence, and in his Life time, both spoke and wrote great Sense; but,
after his Death, though many Wits strove to extol his Worth in Verse and Elegies, none Wrote any thing of Sense in his Commendation; his Worth being too sublime an Object for Maro' quill; or at least the doll Wits of this Ignorant Age. I my self began to Write a Latin Elegy in his praise, but could not accomplish my desire; his Encomium being ten Degrees above Parnassus. I wrote several Lines, whereof this was one, Aedes erat Aedis, erat integr Con∣cio vita, Os aurum, &c. But could get no further. FINIS.
