L2901 31363462 110789
The London Lasses Folly, OR, The MAIDEN Beguil'd. This Maiden wild she was Beguil'd, to loose her Maiden-Head, And when that he had got his will, away from her he fled. To the Tune of, The Iourney-man Shooe-maker. This may be Printed, R. L. S. NOt long ago it chanced so, abroad as I was walking▪ A Damsel fair I soon espy'd, and to her self was talking: Ah! woe is me, poor wretch quoth she, that had not forecast rather. For now I am grown big with Bearn, but I do not know the Father. One night when I lay in my Bed, to sleep as it was needful, And having but a careless head, and being much unheedful▪ A young-man came, but not his name by him I could not gather, That night i'me sure I prov'd with bearn but I do not know the Father▪ He made no stay, but whipt away, when he had had his pleasure, O that nights work hath me undone, I may repent at leisure; Now will I ramble up and down, to find out this young shaver, For if he live in London-town, my Child shall have a Father.
I think no Carpenter was he, no Shipwright, nor no Saylor, I rather think it for to be some lusty jovial Taylor: Or if he were a Glover good, a Black-Smith, or a Weaver, My meaning may be understood, my Child should have a Father. Or if he were a Butcher bold, a Baker, or a Brewer, No secret place my friend shall hold but I will find him sure▪ Or if he were a Serving-man, a Royster, or a Shaver. I'le find my Gallant if I can, my Child must have a Father. But if I can by no means find the Man that I adorn Sir, I'le rest my self content in mind, until my Child is born Sir; And when he comes to 7 years old, I by my Child shall gather, For he will be of qualities like unto his right Father. For if a Fleming got my Child, he will eat all the Butter Or if he be a Spaniard wild, he'll keep a deadly clutter: Of if he be an Irish Teague, my Child will ride the Hobby, Or if he be a Welsh-man like, Cotts-Plues he loves Cows-Bobby. Or if he be a Scotch-mans Son, he will begin a Quarrel, Or if he be of French-mans Bone, he'l pawn his best aparrel: Or if he be a Souldiers Son, I'le buy him a Hat and Feather, And with a Drum i'le send my Son▪ to seek out his right Father. When she had finish'd all her talk, from thence she soon departed, And then another way did walk, both blith and merry hearted; But then I cannot now surmise, or any way can gather, Or which way then she could, deuise to find out her Childs-Father. Printed for C. Dennisson, at the Stationers Arms within Aldgate.
