M1171 09955470 44381
The Wonderful Works of God Commemorated. PRAISES Bespoke for the God of Heaven, In a Thanksgiving SERMON; Delivered on Decemb. 19. 1689. Containing Just REFLECTIONS upon the Excel∣lent Things done by the Great God, more Generally in CREATION and RE∣DEMPTION, and in the GOVERN∣MENT, of the World; But more Par∣ticularly in the Remarkable Revolu∣tions of Providence which are every where the matters of present Observation. With a POSTSCRIPT giving an Account of some very stupendous Accidents, which have lately happened in France. BY COTTON MATHER. To which is Added a SERMON Preached unto the CONVENTION of the Massachuset-Colony in NEW-ENGLAND. With a short Narrative of several Prodigies, which New-England hath of late had the Alarms of Heaven in. Printed at Boston by S. Green. & Sold by Ioseph Browning at the corner of the Prison Lane, and Benj. Harris at the London Coffee-House. 1690
Copy AT THE CONVENTION of the Governour and Council, and Representatives of the Colony of the Massachusets Bay. IT having pleased the God of Heaven to mitigate His many frowns upon us in the Summer past, with a mixture of some very signal Favours, and in the midst of wrath so far to remember Mercy; That our Indian Enemies have had a check put upon their Designs of Blood and Spoil; That others have not sen their Desires accomplished upon us; And that we have such hopes of our God's ad∣ding yet more perfection to our Deliverances: In∣asmuch also, as the great God hath of late raised up such a Defence to the Protestant Religion and Interest abroad in the World, especially in the happy Accession of Their Majesties our Sove∣reigns, KING William and QUEEN Mary to the Throne. It is therefore Ordered, that Thursday the nineteenth instant, be kept as a Day of THANKSGIVING throughout this Colony; And all Servile Labour Labour on said Day is hereby inhibited: And the several Mi∣nisters and Assemblies are Exhorted to Observe the same, by Celebrating the just Praises of the Almighty God, Of whose tender Mercies it is that we are not Consumed. By Order of the Convention, Isaac Addington Secr. Boston Decemb. 3d. 1689:
To the Right Worshipful Sir Henry Ashurst, Baronet. SIR, TIS an obscure Pen, among the Anti∣podes of that World in which you dwell, which now waits upon you, to let you understand, That there is an England in America, as well as One in Europe, which the Name of ASH∣URST has been no less Dear, than Known, unto. Upon that Expression in the Sacred Scripture, Cast the Unprofitable Servant into Outer Darkness, there is an Interpreter who imagines that the Regiones Exterae of America are the Tenebrae Exteriores, which the unprofi∣table are there Condemned unto. Doubtless The Authors of those Ecclesiastical Impo∣sitions and Severities, which drove our Pre∣decessors into this American Wilderness, e∣steemed those old Puritans to be a very Un∣profitable sort of Creatures; and we their Children, desire with much Humiliation to Confess and Lament our own Unprofitable∣ness;
not without our wonder, that any Party in our Nation, should propound unto themselves any profit, by Endeavouring our further Misery. We nevertheless flatter our selves with Hopes, that as while we sat under the shadows of our Charters we at least made the other parts of the English America to be profitable unto the Crown of our King, so the Church of our God in the other Hemil∣hre, will not Excommunicate us from their Fellowship and Affection, when 'tis consider∣ed, that the Exercise of the Protestant Religion in the purest and fullest Reformation, is That very Thing which this considerable Planta∣tion was first built upon. He that shall Travel over New-England, will find a large Countrey fill'd with Churches, which I may without vanity call Golden Candlesticks, in this Outer Darkness, and which are Illumina∣ted with Able, Faithful and Laborious Mi∣nisters, among whom the person who now Addresses you, is no more worthy to be Reckoned, than the Seventh which appears not among the Pleiads, is to be counted One of the Seven Stars. These Churches, in their Doctrine, do profess, and in their Worship, do practise, most intirely the Protestant Religion, as our Confession of Faith, with our Platform of Church Discipline, has made notorious; and though they want the
Liturgies and Holydays and Ceremonies, which were not Conceived before the Man of Sin was Born, they do but approach thereby the nearer to that Primitive Christianity, which will be our Glory, while we continue in it. It is in these Churches that we have long seen the Goings of God our King, for the Regene∣ration, and Edification of multitudes, who after an Arrival to a pitch of Holiness equal to what any part of this Lower World af∣fords, have gone to the Spirits of Iust Men made perfect; and though a Decay of Piety has accompanied an Inercase of People in the midst of us, yet even among Vs of the Third Generation, the God of our Fathers, hath such a Number of Serious, Gracious, Fruit∣ful Christians, as encourages our Hopes, that He still has Reserves of Mercy for us. 'Tis in these Churches (however Degenerate) that One may see Discipline managed, He∣resy subdued, Prophaness conquered, & Com∣munion maintained, with a very beautiful subserviency to the Great Ends of the Gos∣pel. And if after all the Printed Books, not only of our Cotton, Shepard, Hocker, Bulkley, Mather, Davenport, Cobbet, Norton, New∣man, Whiting, Mitchel, and the rest now Asleep of the former Generation, but also of our Higginon, Fitch, Morton, Wigglesworth, Allen, Moodey, Torrey, Wilard, Baily, Stod∣dard,
(not to mention my own Fathers both English and Latine Composures) thro' the Favour of God, yet Alive among us, we must be judg'd unprofitable to the Church of God abroad, yet the prodigious and Atlaean in∣dustry of the Reverend Elit and of those whom that Venerable Saint yet Lives to see succeeding him in cares for Evangelizing the poor Pagans here, must be own'd profita∣ble to those, whose Outer Darkness we are sent into. But the Right of these Churches, to a good Re∣putation with all them, that have any value for the Protestant Religion, is not more palpable, than the Wrong which has been sometimes Ignorantly, and sometimes Maliciously done unto us, by them that have baited us for the sake of the Bear-Skins, which themselves have put upon us. Never was any thing more wicked than the Calumny, with Loads whereof our Enemies compelled our Fathers in the Infancy of this Planta∣tion, to do as divers of those, whom they call, The Fathers, did of old, even, To write Apologies; nor can any thing be more Slanderous and Romantic, than the Accusations that some Ill Men have more Lately tradu∣ced wital; One may see the very Spirit of Perse∣cution revived in them! Nevertheless, after all the Banter of our Adversaries, as I would never desire an Easter Task, than to prove, That their Majesties have not in all their Dominions, more Loyal Subjects than the People of New-England, so 'tis evident enough, That where any Real Miscarriage has procured One, our zeal for the Protestant Religion in the power of it▪ has procured more than Ten of the Complaints that have been made a∣gainst us. And therefore, we not only challenge an
Interest among the Reformed Churches, in whose Com∣forts we cannot but Rejoice, as we have most inquisi∣tively and affectionately mourned in their Sorrows; but we also expect the Friendship of all those particu∣lar persons who are well affected unto the stones of Zi∣on, and take pity on the Dust thereof. As 'tis a thing too observable to be denyed, or concealed, That tho' we are a very unworthy people, yet the Haters of New-England stil find themselves pushing hard against the Great Stone, so I believe none of those Noble Persons who have been sincerely concerned for our Wellfare, will ever see cause to Repent of it; but Goodness and Mercy shall follow them all their Days. Blessed be the God of our Fathers, that albeit we are as an Outcast, yet it may not be said, No man has cared for us! There were Three Knights among our first Patentees; it calls for our Extreamest Gratitude if there have been more of That, or Another Quality willing to be our Patrons. And Sir, whereas you have been pleased your self to let the World know, how much you are desirous to see New-England flourish, you will pardon it if One born and bred in that Countrey, and a Son of the Colledge there, take the Liberty to acquaint you, That we are not insensible. That you are, my Fathers Friend, is a thing that Lays me under Obligations; but your being New-Englands Friend, is a thing which we would All Resent; and though the Dedication of these two Lit∣tle Sermons to your Name, does not, Take of the best Fruits of the Land, as a Present for you, yet I humbly ask your Acceptance of them, as a part of our Ac∣knowledgments. Among the other Curiosities of New-England, One is that of a mighty Rock on a perpendicular side whereof by a River, which at High Tide covers part of it, there are very deeply Engrav∣ed, no man alive knows How or When, about half a score Lines, near Ten Foot Long, and a foot and half broad, filled with strange Characters; which would
suggest as odd Thoughts about them that were here be¦fore us, as there are odd Shapes in that Elaborate Mo∣nument; whereof you shall see, the first Line Tran∣scribed here. Sir, I take leave to add, That the English people here will study to have the Kindnesses of their Bene∣factors, not less Durably, hut more Intelligibly Recorded with them, than what the Indian People have Engraved upon Rocks; And therefore it is, That you shall now publickly find your Person and Family mentioned in our prayers to the God of Heaven, for your Enjoy∣ment of all the Prosperity engaged unto them that Love Ierusalem. The Voices that ascend from the Thrones of the Lord Jesus here are asking for you, Grace and Glory and every good thing: and among them, there are my own Wishes, That the Son▪ and the Church of God may find you their KNIGHT which is to say (in English) an hearty Servant, and that in the day when such a Word will be esteem'd above ten thou∣sand Worlds, you may hear a Well Done! from the mouth of our Glorious Judge. 'Tis with these, that I subscribe my self. SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant Cotton Mather.
PRAISES Bespoke for the GOD of Heaven, In a Thanksgiving SERMON. It is Written in Isai. XII.5. Sing unto the Lord, for He hath done Excellent Things; This is Known in all the Earth. OUr Blessed Saviour, being to Preach upon a Text, fetcht out of that very Book from whence we have now taken ours, began His Holy Sermon, with sayings This
Day is this Scripture fulfilled in your Ears.  is by an unhappy Encounter of Gods Mercies and your Desires, that upon the Reading of the Text now before us, I may in like manner, close the Book, and say, This day is this Text fulfilled amongst us. Truly tis known abroad, that our God has done excel∣lent things; and for this cause we are with no less Grounded than Solemn THNKSGIVINGS endeavouring to Sing unto the Lord. Behold a Word of the day in its day here provided for you. May our further considering and under∣standing of the Text, but promote our fuller Conformiy thereunto, and more exactly im∣print the shapes of this Heavenly Mould upon us. As the Noble Prophet Isaiah, is in the Books of the New-Testament quoted perhaps no less than threescore times; thus the Dayes of the New-Testament are those which his Prophecies have their frequent and special References to. Among other Employments of this An∣gelical, and Evangelical Pen, one was the pre∣paring of Sacred Songs, for the use of the Church, in the circumstances which there had been predictions of; and so, besides the Psalms which common conjectures have as∣cribed unto this Prophet the composing of; the forty-sixth particularly, which in imitaton
of the great Luther, we may at this day make the Anodyne of our cares▪ we have two in∣spired Songs in this Chapter laid before us; in the first of the Songs, the Confessors of God endeavour themselves to celebrate the praises of that Eternal one; in the next they en∣deavour to excite and engage others unto a consort with them in this glorious Exercise. And here we have the Text which we are now to descant upon. [In that Day ye shall say] But What day is That day? we must be beholden unto the foregoing Chapter, for an Answer thereunto. We there find, that there will a Day come, when the Lord will set His Hand again the second time, to recover the remnant of his People: which will be when the Tribes of lost Israel are converted unto the Faith of the Lord Jesus; when according to the Language of the New-Testament, All Israel shall be saved. There will a Day come, when the Root of Iesse shall stand for an Ensign for the People: which will be at the second coming of our Lord; when according to the phrase taken by our Saviour from this very place, the sign of the Son of man shall ap∣pear. There will a Day come, when the Lord shall with the Breath of His Lips, slay the wicked; which will be when Antichrist shall perish by the fiery approach of the Lord Jesus, to take vengeance on His wickedest
Enemy: when according to the phrase taken by the Apostle also from this very place, The Lord shall consume that wicked one with the breath of his mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightnesr of his coming. Tis that day which the Song now before us, is peculiarly calculated for. But certainly, we that are only getting into the Dawnings of that day, are not excluded from all medling with it; no, it is written for our Admoni∣tion. In the Words to be now Handled, we have two Things First, The Doings of God are here men∣tioned. It is said, He hath done Excellent Things: or as the Original imports, Great Things, and High Things: or as it may likewise be rendred Magnificent, and Il∣lustrous Things. The Hebrew Word () is indeed a Substantive; and it intimates, that the Works of God are even Excellency in the Abstract, and Majesty it self. And the Chaldee Paraphrase here fitly puts upon them the term of  or Magnalia, noting in them something eminent and po∣werful. Such things are done by Him, who is Wonderful in Working! Secondly, The Duties of men are then spe∣cified hereupon. Since excellent Things are done by God, there are two things to be done by us.
First, We are to sing the Praises of God. It is here said, Sing unto the Lord. And such is the expression in the Holy style, as to sig∣nifie, not only an exactness, but also an in∣strument used in the Song. We are with a Sacred Musick to magnifie the God, who is worthy to be Praised. Secondly, We are to spread the Praises of God. It is here said, This is known in all the Earth; but the version which is by some chosen for it rather is, Let this be known in all the Earth: We should not only our selves do it,, but likewise provoke and excite all the Earth to take notice of what Wonders have been done by Him who is fearful in Prai∣ses. Wherefore the Truth to be now en∣tertained with us, is, That it should be our study to SING and SPREAD the Praises due to the Eternal God, for the EXCELLENT Things which are done by Him in the World. It is by the Propounding of two or three Conclusions that this Doctrine, will have its due Advantages.
PROPOSITION I. There are multitudes of Praises due to the God of Heaven from us. To praise God, is to Acknowledge the persections that are in Him; 'tis to Acknowledge the infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice and Holiness, which are His Attributes; and this we are to do, In all our ways. We have received our Being for this End; and our Grand, our Chief Errand into the World, is, That our God may have a Number of Rational Be∣holders to be sensible of His Excellencies. When Mankind came first out of His Glo∣rious Hand, He then said, as in Isa. 43.21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall shew forth my praise. In our Lower Little World, no Creatures can be found capable of Conceiving and Expressing those Ac∣knowledgments of God, which are, The Glory due unto his Name, besides MAN; who is therefore not unfitly called, The High-priest of the Creation. The devout Psalmist once called upon all Creatures, with a Repeated Invitation, Praise ye the Lord; but they all reply that Man is to do it for them, and they all therefore conspire to offer the Notices of the Almighty God unto Mans affectionate Contemplation.
To praise God, is to Acknowledge in Him something Excellent, as 'tis said in Psal. 148.13. Let them praise the name of the Lord, for His Name alone is Excellent; thus, when we Acknowledge an Excellency in all those Ma∣nifestations which God maketh of Himself; then 'tis that we praise Him. Now the Praises owing to the God of Heaven from us, are ob∣liged not only by what He Is, but also by what He Does: indeed by what He Does it is that we come to Learn what He is. We ought to Acknowledge an Excellency in the Nature of God; which is to Ascribe Glory to Him. The Language of our praises is to be that in Psal. 89.6. Who can be compared, who can be Likened, unto the Lord? God should be truly Transcendent with us. We should appre∣hend, that as the Name of our God is, I AM, so all other Beings are as meer Non-Entities in comparison of Him; subscribing to that in Isa. 40.17. All are before Him as Nothing. We should apprehend the Being of God, so Independent, so Unchangeable, so Mysterious, as no other Being is; and with Dazzled Souls fall into such praises as to say, I cannot find out the Almighty to per∣fection. The perfections that are in the Al∣mighty God should even Astonish our Under∣standings; and fetch the Exclamations of Moses from us, in Exod. 15.11. Who is like
unto thee, O Lord, who is like unto thee? One while our praises are like Hannahs, to say. There is none Holy as the Lord! Another while our praises are like Ethans to say, Who is a Strong God like unto thee? Sometimes our Praises, like Pauls, are to say, God is only Wise; and sometimes again, God is True, but every man a Lyar; and then with David, we are to praise and say, O how great is thy Goodness! But the Excellency which is in the Works of God, is that which ren∣ders the Glory of His Essence, most apparent unto us; and the praises which we are to bring unto Him, are in a great measure to spring from thence. We are told in Isa. 28.29. The Lord of Hosts is Excellent in Working. Our praises of God, are in This to find the Reasons of them, He has done Excellent Things. First, We ought with many praises to ob∣serve the Excellent Things which God has done for our selves. As the Psalmist call'd upon himself, in Psal. 103.1. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his Benefits; thus ought we to Reflect upon the many Benefits and Kindnesses of the most High towards our selves, with praises too many to be Numbred, too Hearty to be ended. We ought to see something of God, in all our Circumstances, and upon all that happens to us, we are to say, The Lord be magnify'd! But there are some Excellent Things done for us,
by our God; Things which no Friend, no Hand, none else could have done for our Good; and These Things we should with suitable praises be particularly grateful for. It is the manner of the Iems, to receive the Comforts of their Lives, with a Baruk Ado∣nai, or Blessed be the Lord. We that are Christians may not suffer our selves to be ex∣ceeded by any people, in Thankfulness un∣to God. It is related concerning our Lod Jesus Christ, in John 6.11. that he would not Eat a Meals Meat, without a Thanksgiv∣ing over it. Much more ought the more Excellent Things that are done for us, to be so Acknowledged. When God had heard a Prayer, there was that praise returned for it, in John 11.41. Father, I thank thee for it. We ought seriously to think, What Answers of our Prayers, what Reliefs of our Wants and Woes, the great God has in an excellent manner favoured us withal; and the Re∣sult of all should be, Lord, I thank thee for these Excellent Things. A good Hezekiah himself may smart by failing here. Those persons are worse than Pharisees, in whose mouths God be Thanked, is not a frequent but yet solemn interject on. Secondly, We ought with many praises to observe the Excellent Things which God has done for Others as well as for our selves. Our
praises must not be confined unto those mer∣cies of God, which we our selves have been the Subjects of. But all His Dispensations a∣broad in the world, are to be the Occasion of our Hallelujahs to Him. A Soul that is Fill'd with all the Fullness of God, will be Fil∣led with praises to Him for all his Workman∣ship. We should be like him that said, in Psal 139.14. I will praise thee, for marvel∣lous are thy Works. Whatever our God is Doing, we should upon the sight thereof be praising; and we should Acknowledge Him, in all those Excellent Things, which we see done in any part of the Universe. It was said in Psal. 40.5. Many, O Lord, my God, are the Wonderful Works which thou hast done. God has done many Wonderful Works, and many Excellent Things, in which we our selves have not an Immediate, or at least not a peculiar share; but we should all render praises unto Him on the account thereof. It is mentioned as the priviledge of a Righte∣ous man, in Psal. 112.9. His Horn shall be exalted. What if one thing intended in it should be This? That as the praises of God were sounded by His People, in Cornets of old, so there were Exalted Horns, or Exalted Notes, which He would have their praises to be Raised with. Thus we read in 1 Chron. 25.5. of, Words to Lift up the Horn▪ To
accommodate the Allusion; The Praises of God are to Sound High, in our Devotions. When we praise God for being Excellently Good unto our selves, we do well; but we are to Raise our praises unto an Higher pitch than so; they are to Expatiate upon all those things, wherein our God has exhibited Himself as Excellently Great, throughout the world Such Abstracted Praises are agreea∣ble to the Inclinations of every Godly man; he argues at that Rate, Great is the Lord, and therefore Greatly to be praised. PROPOSITION II. We ought both to Sing, and to Spread, the praises which we owe unto the God of Hea∣ven. Behold, a double Office incumbent on us, with respect unto those Acknowledgments which we are to pay unto our God; beside and beyond the first Motions of them, in our own Souls. Indeed the Spring of all the Acknowledgments which we make unto God, must be in our Hearts, and the gracious Opi∣nions and Resentmens which are first formed there. We must first look to this, that God be praised by the Thoughts in our minds, and, as the Psalmist speaks, by, All that is within us Blessing his Holy Name. They ne∣ver will praise God sufficiently or acceptably, who cannot say, as in Luke 1.46. My Soul
does Magnify the Lord. As all worship of God, so particularly, all praising of God, must be performed in Spirit; otherwise it will not be in Truth. But the praises of God, being shaped in the Honourable Thoughts of our Souls, what are we then to do? First, We are to Sing the praises due to God for the Excellent Things that He hath done. And if we keep close to the Text, we shall see two things here demanded of us. First, There should be an Exactness used, in our praising of God. There should be in our Praises▪ as on one side an Amputation of all that is improper, so on the other side no Omission of any Article that calls for our me∣ditations. The charge given to us is That in Psal. 103.2. Forget not all His Benefits. We should not Forget so much as One of the Ex∣cellent Things, which we can Remember to be done by God. The skipping of One stroke in a Lesson, often spoils the grace of the Musick. So does the missing of One Thing, in a Commemoration of what God has done. We should be careful with an often, yea with a daily Examination, to in∣form our selves, about the Things for which God is to be praised. It is hardly convenient for a man to sleep at Night, until he have pondered, What New Excellent Thing has been done by God this Day, that I should particularly
praise Him for? And we should be careful that our Sorrows do not swallow up our prai∣ses. 'Tis often so, that as that worthy wo∣man of old could not eat of the Peace Of∣ferings, which was a Thank-Offering, because She Wept; thus we can't praise God, because He Smites us. We cannot see Excellent Things done by God, because we feel Terrible Thins done to our selves. But this is our Folly. Where we have One Trouble, we have a Thousand mercies of our own to be praising for. And if we were a million times more afflicted than we are, yet the Lord might challenge our Praises. It was a great Speech of the Renowned Gerson, Quiequid deme or∣dinaverit Deus, said He, However God may dispose of me for ever, whether to Eternal Weal or Wo; yet This I know, that He is worthy of my praises, and He shall have them all. Indeed Praises are a Debt owing to Him, even from those woful Spirits that are broken in the place of Dragons, and covered with the shadow of Death. Secondly, There should also be an Instru∣ment used in our Praising of God. But of what kind? Far be it from us to plead for that which is properly instrumental Music in the Church of the Lord Jesus. Indeed be∣fore the coming of our Lord, there was in the Church a Divine appointment for such a thing▪ and between the Neginoth and the
Nehiloth, I find, if I miscount not, sixteen or more kinds of Instruments for the main∣taining of it. But upon the Abolition of the Mosaic Pedagogy, we have no order for the continuance of this Temple Worship, by intro∣ducing of it into our Synagogues. The Primi∣tive Church had it not, as even a Bellarmine tells you; the Ancients often & loudly declaim against it, and Aquinas himself about four hun∣dred years ago, notwithstanding all his Po∣pery and Bigottry, yet bestows none of the kindest Remarks upon it. The Schoolmen themselves own, that Aliquid Figrabat, it was a Typical thing; and we having in the Tydings of the Gospel that grace and joy which this was a figure of, ought not to Iudaize by upholding the shadow in the presence of the Substance; nor ought we to bring into the House of God, a Troop of Of∣ficers which the Lord Jesus never instituted. What Instruments are we then to praise God withal? we are all furnished with two at least. First, Our Lips are to be employed in the praises of God. The Psalmist called his Tongue my glory. Our Tongues are then our glory, when we glorifie God therewith all. 'Tis a proper service for them; Hence the Apostle sayes, Therewith we bless God. It is Desired for the Saints in Psal. 149 6. let
the High Praises of God be in their mouthes. And it is Resolved by one of them, in Psal. 145.21. My mouth shall speak the praises of the Lord. Hence the Apostle urges it, in Heb. 13.15 let us offer the Sacrifice of praises to God continually, that is the fruit of our lips. There were Offerings of many sorts, which God was praised withal of old; but our Lips are to be instead of the Calves and Lambs, and other Euchrristical Offerings that then were customary. With our Lips we are to rehearse and re∣cite the Excellent Things that have been done by God, especially when we are with bended Knees and listed Eyes, presenting our selves before him. With mentioning what God has done, we are to do as he said, in Psal 145.2. Every Day will I bless thee my God. But there is one Exercise of our Lips which God is more peculiarly to be praised with; and that is the Singing of Psalms. In those Commands of God which require the praises of God, even in our Dayes, we have such clauses as those, in Psal. 95 1. O come, let us sing to the Lord, let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of our Salvation. The New Testament sufficiently inculcates this way of praising the most High; and if you will be¦lieve Tertullian, the Primitive Christians
hardly ever had a Feast without it. There are savoury Hymns, of an Humane Compo∣sure, which no doubt we may praise God by singing of. But Scriptural and inspired Hymns are those which we should principally thus put Regards upon. The Psalms of David are those which God is to be Praised by a Reverent, and Attentive Singing of. These were those, no doubt which our Saviour Himself Sang, at the Passover, more than a score of Times. And the very Angels whose Melodies the Shepherds overheard of old, seem to sing out of the Eighty fifth Psalm. Hence when the Apostle says, in Eph. 5.19. Speak to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; he alludes to the well-known Division of the Psalter. q. d. Go sing all the Psalms of David o∣ver. Till we can mend them, never let us leave them. He that shall sing those Blessed Psalms, and ordinarily spend at least one Observation, and one Ejaculation, upon every verse, as he goes along, will therein praise the great God, at no common rate. Secondly, Our Lives are likewise to be Employ'd in the Praises of God. We have Hands as well as Tongues for it; and some thing there is that our Hand finds to do. The best Thanksgiving is Thanks-living.
We should sometimes put that Question to our selves, in Psal. 116.12. What shall I render to the Lord for all His benefits? As a return to God for the Excellent things that are done by Him, we are to order our lives in such a manner as may be pleasing to him. Hence in Psal. 50.23. He that offers praise, and he that orders his conversation aright, are equivo∣lent. There is a general Return of Obedience, which we are to praise God by yielding of. It is said in Phil. 1.1. the fuit's of Righteous∣ness are unto the glory and praise of God. Where God had carried Israel over Iordan, there were Stons erected for His praise; but what was inscribed on them? was it any History of what and been done by God? No, it was a Copy of the Law. Our keeping the Law is our praising of him that gave it. We praise God when we seen and blush to do any thing that he may be displeased at. There is also a special Return of well-do∣ing which we should now and then praise God withal. As when David had seen ma∣ny mighty things done by God, he became inquisitive, in 2 Sam. 7.2 What shall I now do for the House of God? so some signal act of Piety, or of Charity should be done by us, that God may not be without his praise. We praise God when we are labouring
to do some singular thing, for the advance∣ment of His Truths and Wayes. Secondly VVe are to Spread the praises due to God for the excellent things that He has done. Yea, our outmost is to be done that they may be known in all the Earth. A good man desires that he may not be Alone in the praising of God, he would have all men to joyn with him in it. It is there∣fore said by such a man, Come, I will declare what God has done fr my Soul. We are to praise God as publickly and as openly as we can; and to say like him in Psal. 22.25. My praise shall be of thee, in the great Congregation. And we are to do what we fairly can, that the excellent things done by God, may not be concealed things, but that all men may be acquainted with them: so are we advised in Psal. 105.1, 2. Give thanks to the Lord, make known His Deeds among the people: sing unto Him, talk ye of all His wondrous Works. We should render them as Notorious as they are Notable; and publish them among all our Neighbours, as the happy partakers did the healing Miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ. Hence it was the wish of the Psalmist, in Psal. 26.7. That I may publish with the voice of Thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works.
Yea, when God has done Excellent things, we are not only to speak of them, but (if we can) to write of them too. Every good man should leave to his Children, a Diary for a Legacy. Some written Memorials and Experincs of Excellent things which a good man in the time of his Pilgrimage hath seen done by the most High: these would be well worth beqething to them that should come after him, that they may set their hope in God. And the more considerable Appearances of God in every Generation, ought with a fuller Publication to be transmitted unto Posterity, by the Pens of good Historians, That we have no more Books of Remarkable Providences, is an Omission that has wrong'd and rob'd the Almighty God of more than a Million praises: There should be compiled sufficient Narratives of the excellent things, oc∣curring in every Age and, every place; like the Books of Iasher, and Nathan, and Iddo, and other Seers; or like the Pillars among many Monuments of Antiquity. What shall I say more? when God has done a more conspicuously excellent thing, He is to be praised after that manner, in Psal. 102.18. This shall be written for the Generation to come, and the people that shall be Created shall praise the Lord.
But it remains, that these things be made useful to us. APPLICATION. And O that we might all stir up our selves this Day to Sing and Spread the praises due to the Eternal God for the excellent things which He has done. It is an excellent thing indeed, that we may have a Day of Thanksgiving, while the World is in so much Confusion and Combustion, and every where Mens hearts are failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are doing upon the Earth. Let us be at some pains, that this Day be not lost, or that it may not evaporate in a few sensual satisfac∣tions. The Excellent things done by God, are now to be the Repast of our Souls. Days of Thanksgiving as they are among the most Heavenly, so they will be among the most prosperous of all our Devotions. There are Pious Men that will now and then in secret places, keep their Dayes of Thanksgiving before the Lord; laying out whole Dayes in praising of the Great God for what He is, and what He does, and in pondering on What they shall do for God. And I'll assure you, such
persons ripen for Heaven a pace; yea they live in Heaven upon Earth. But as for Dayes of Thanksgiving observed in the Assemblies of good men, all men have seen the wonderful successes of them. New Englands Prosperity has more visibly followed upon its Thanksgivings than upon its Humiliations, as in times both of War and of Sickness, has been more than once percei∣ved. We have seen the fulfilment of that Word in 2 Chron. 20.22. When they began to sing and to praise, the Lord set ambushments a∣gainst their Enemies. Praises, thousands of high praises be to our God, that we may have a Day to celebrate His praises. But that our praises may be awakened, and that no man may make a Iar in our Harmony. Consider how Reasonable these praises are for us all. O consider with our selves, Who is God? it is He that Humbles Himself to behold the things that are in Heaven. Consider, Who is Man? a poor Worm, yea, a cursed Viper. Now that this GOD should look upon this man! Lord, What is man that thou shouldest be mindful of him? Yet the Eternal God has been doing of Ex∣cellent things, which we not only behold, but also enjoy. There is not one of us all, who has not excellent things to be this Day praising the Almighty for. They whose case is ne∣ver so bad, yet have cause to carry on this
Day of Thanksgiving with us, in that it is no worse. The most miserable person in all this Congregation, may with an eye to his own condition, say like him in Psal. 119.156. Many are thy mercies O Lord. If I could find out the most unhappy, and the most complaining person among you all, even to that person would I say, God has done Excel∣lent things for thee, and some that never sinned so much, yet suffer more than you. Consider Likewise, how profitable these Praises will be to us all. Behold an Expe∣dient for the obtaining of all the Blessings that can be wish'd for. It was said in Psal. 67.5, 6. Let the people praise thee; then our God shall bless us. If the Earth send Vapours up to Heaven, Heaven will make Showers to descend on the Earth. Let our praises be continually ascending from us, and they will soon issue in those things that are called, The Showers of Blessing. When we have a Jealousie of a Leaky Vessel, we try it by first putting of Water, before we trust Better Liquors in it; if we that have little more than Water to comfort us, will yet not permit it to Leak without Praises from us, then God has more Excellent Things to do for us. To be always Begging and Craving, as a Dog for his Mor∣sels, ad Spem futuri semper hians, without
multiplyed praises unto God; this is a most vile Disingenuity. 'Tis no less than a Loss of, yea, no less than a Curse on, all our Bles∣sings, which we incurr by not praising the giver of them. But the praising Soul may fill himself with such a Ioyful Hope, as that in Psal. 71.14. I will Hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more. Those that are sollicitous least God should Loose any of His Praises, are the persons, for whom God will be concerned that they don't Loose any of His Blessings; these are they that shall expe∣rimentally understand the Loving kindness of the Lord. Man, wouldest thou have any Excellent Things done for thy self? Then bring thy praises for what Excellent Things have been done in the world. I suppose by this time, we have generally got our Hallelujahs ready; but you call for a Catalogue of those Excellent Things, which they are to be fixed on. 'Tis a Feast that you are this Day to be treated at; and before you go out of these Doors, a Feast you shall have. I shall set before you a short Account of some Excellent Things, which I intend as a Feast for your praises; and believe me, though your praises had [and O that they may have!] no less than an Eternity to be Feeding on those matters in, they never would be glutted, never cloyed.
First, The Excellent Things done by God, in the Works of CREATION, call for our Praises. It was once the out-cry of the Psalmist, in a Rapture, Praise the Lord from the Heavens, praise the Lord from the Earth, praise the Lord all ye His Armies. Truly, 'Tis our Business to praise Him, for the Heavens, and for the Earth, and for all those Armies which He has replenished the World withal. We have a good pattern for us, in Psal 104.24, 33. says the Psalmist, O Lord, how mani∣fold are thy Works! in wisdom hast thou made them all. Well, and what is now incumbent upon us, that have the view thereof? It fol∣lows, I will sing praise unto my God, while I have any Being. Methinks the Children of Men too much imitate the Spider, when they Look after nothing but building a little House for themselves, and concern themselves with nothing but the petty Affairs thereof. We should remember that we are Citizens of the WORLD, and as far as we can, we should visit every Corner of it, with our Praises to Him, of whom and for whom is all! I make no question, but that we do in a blessed manner Antedate Heaven, by doing so. The Praises of God are Exhibited in e∣very part of the World, and we forfeit the priviledge of Reason, if we do not put as
many of them as we can, into our Aknow∣ledgments. There are above six Thousand Plants growing on that little Spot of the World, which we Tread upon; and yet a Learned Man, has more than once, found One Vegetable enough to make a Subject for a Treatise on it. What might then be said upon the Hundred and fifty Quadrupeds, the Hundred and fifty Volatils, the five and Twen∣ty Reptiles, besides the vast multitudes of A∣quatils, added unto the rich variety of Gems and Minerals, in our World? Our own Bodies are, to use the Phrase of the Psal∣mist, So Fearfully and Wonderfully made, that one of the Ancient Heathen at the sight thereof▪ could not forbear breaking forth in∣to an Hymn unto the praise of the great Cre∣ator; 'Tis impossible that any thing should be better shaped! Indeed, All the Things that we have every Day before our eyes, have a most charming prospect in them; and the very Deformities which the Flood has brought upon this Terraquecus Globe, are made Beauties, by the Disposals of the Lord that sat upon the Flood. There is not a Fly, but what may confute an Atheist. And the Little things which our Naked Eyes cannot penetrate into, have in them a Greatness not to be seen without Astonishment. By the Assistence of Microscopes have I seen Ani∣mals
of which many Hundreds would not AEqual a Grain of Sand. How Exquisite, How stupendous must the Structure of them be! The Wholes that are sometimes found more than an Hundred Foot in Length, me∣thinks those moving Islands, are not such Wonders, as these minute Fishes are. But alas, All this Globe is but as a Pins point, if compared with the mighty Uni∣verse. Never did any man yet make a tole∣lerable Guess at its Dimensions: but were we among the Stars, we should utterly lose the sight of our Earth, although it be above twenty six thousand Italian Miles in the com∣pass of it. Look upon the Wandring Stars, and you shall see so many Worlds, that swal∣low up all our Conjectures at the circum∣stances of them, and of their Satellites. Look upon the Fixed Sts, and what shall we say about the Bigness of them? Doubtless they many scores of times exceed the Bulk of this poor Lump of Clay, about a few Foot whereof the Inhabitants are so Quarrelsome. Or, what shall we say about the Number of them? For though they are but a few above a Thousand, That we ever see, without a Telescope, yet that will tell us, that the Six, which we commonly call, The Seven Stars, have above Sixty among them, and the rest are like the Sand of the Sea, in∣numerable.
But above all, the Sun, that pncipal Engine, which the whole Visible Creation hath such a manifest Dependence on; This declares the Glory of God, at such a Rate, that the Philosopher once thought himself Born on purpose, to Behold the Splen¦dors of it. This at last hath glar'd out my Eyes, that at this Time, I can look no fur∣ther upon the Marvels of the Creation. But, my Brethren, Let us take our Time to Tra∣vel over the World; (I hope, we shall one Day have Bodies more able to do it, than our Spirits at present are!) and then let us give many Thousands of Praises to Him, whose Omnipotent and Omniscient Hand hath Created all. O Sing unto the Lord, because He hath done Excellent Things, in making and managing the vast Fabrick of the World. Secondly, The Excellent Things done by God, in the works of REDEMPTION call for our Praises. It was the Exordium of a Psalm, in Psal. 107.1, 2. O give Thanks un∣to the Lord, for He is Good; Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so. Behold, a Constellation of Excellent Things here which the very An∣gels at this Day are with a million Praises adoring of. Could we steal a Look this Day into the Third Heaven, we should see
the multitude of the Heavenly Host there clap∣ping of their Golden Wings, and hear them reiterating that Heavenly Shout, in Luke 2.14. Glory to God in the Highest, because there is on Earth Peace, and good will towards men. When the blessed Angels beheld the horrible Pit which Man by Sin was fallen down in∣to, doubtless they were even at their Wits ends about a way for his Reeovery; doubt∣less with pity and much Despair, they cry'd out, Alas, for miserable man; He is helpless and hopeless now for ever! But they have now seen a Remedy provided for undone wretched man, and therein they see, what they Sp and Bend themselves to pry into; they see The manifold Wisdom of God; and they have ever since, even for more than five Thou∣sand years, been Praising of the God, that has Remembred us in our Low Estate, because his Mercy Endures for ever. That there should be a Man, who was Born perhaps in Septem∣ber, not seventeen Hundred years ago, and who yet is the Father of Eternity; a Man who lay in a Cradle, and who yet cannot be contain'd by the Heaven of Heavens; a man, who is his own Mothers Father, in a word, a man, in whom dwells the Fulness of the God-head, and from whose Fulness, all we receive! behold an Excellent thing which the very Angels cover their faces at. No man
Living is able to comprehend the Trium∣phant Praises that were among the Angels of God, when our Saviour was first Born into the world. When the Sun of Righte∣ousness first shone in our Horizon, doubtless these Morning Stars were presently making their Acclamations at it. The Tidings of it were quickly carried through all the quar∣ters of the Heavens, and the whole City of God was moved at the Report. When it was told, The Redeemer of Lst Man is Born! it set them all on Praising the most High God, and saying, Glory, Glory to the Highest, in the Highest for ever! Well, they call us, Their Brethren, and from the Lofty Battle∣ments of the Third Heaven, they call unto us, that we would not Leave them to Praise Alone. A famous Minister Lying at the point of Death, after he had been for some Time sensless, fell to Singing in a manner very extraordinary, and gave this Reason for it, I heard the Angels, and shall not I joyn with them! Surely our Interest in Redemp is not inferiour to Theirs; but then strike up, Ye Redeemed of the Lord; where, O where are the Praises due to Him that hath Delivered you from all the fiery plagues, which you have madly expos'd yourselves unto. What could we Children of wrath have imagined, but that a just and a terrible God
would have said concerning us, I will aveng me on those Adversaries! But instead thereo behold, He has ready for us, a Iesus, wh saves His People from their Sins; and th calls aloud unto us, O Look unto me, and  saved. This is an Excellent Thing! 'Tis a Excellent Thing which God has done, in  Loving the World as to give His only begotte Son, that whosoever Believes, may not perish▪ but have Everlasting Life. 'Tis an Excellen Thing which God has done, in ordering that He who thought it no Robbery to be Equal with God, should take on him the Form of a Servant for us thereby to gain the Dignity of Children. 'Tis an Excellent Thing, That He wh knew no Sin, should be made Sin for us; and w be made the Righteousness of God in Him; an that we who have lain in the Belly of Hell should be Renewed by the holy Spirit, and  made to sit together in Heavenly Places  Christ Iesus. I am to tell you, That the Blackest of all the Devils are Saints, in com∣parison of that Man, whom these Excellen Things do not Effectually bespeak all possible praises from. But you that by Regeneration are arrived unto a more Plenary, Actual sensible Interest in this Redemption, are  be more abundant in your praises, O strai the utmost of your Capacities, to shew fo the praises of Him, who has called you out
Darkness into his Marvellous Light; Come, SING unto the Lord, because He has done Ex∣cellent Things in the Recovering of Lost Man to an intimate, and Eternal Fellow∣ship with Himself. Thirdly, The Excellent things done by God in the Goverment of the World, call upon us to praise His blessed Name for ever. The continual providence of God, is disposing of all things in an Excellent subordination to His own praise; the Weels of providence are not carried on caeco impetu, but are full of eyes, and if we praise Him not for Things that every day occur unto us, tis because we are worse than blind. These two things are conjoned in Psal. 103.19, 20. The Lords Kingdom uleth over all, Bless ye the Lord. We may see our eternal King after an excel∣lent manner keeping all the World in a real Order, notwithstanding all the seeming Distractions of it. We may see him fulfil∣ling of His promises and His Threanings, and giving Recompences among the children of men We may see him frustrating and con∣founding of His Enemies, and preserving his Church, As a burning Bush not consumed. We should pursue a distinct sight of these things, and Bless the Lord. When we see, that His is the Kingdome, we should adde, And thine is the Glory too.
My arrival to this part of our Discours puts me into a capacity to give you som Recapitulations of the Excellent things which this Day of THANKSGIVING is more paticularly designed for. My Brethren, there are Excellent thing which our God has of late been doing i the English World. He that moves the fo Wheels of Providence through all the fo parts of the Earth, has given the English Na∣tion lately to see those Revolutions which the Histories of all Ages can hardly parallel And now let us this Day sing unto the Lord for He hath done excellent things. I. The Late Revolutions in the Land o our Fore-Fathers Graves, afford unto us  sight of Excellent Things which ought to b had in Everlasting Remembrance. And here, The first and great and most comprehen∣sive matter of our Praises is, The Happy accession of their Maiesties, King Wil∣liam, and Queen Mary, To the Throne of the Three Kingdoms. This was a Thing in all the parts of so Circumstanced, a to make all men
This is the Lords Doing, and it is Marvellous in our Eyes! It made a Second EIGHTY EIGHT out-shining that in the former Century. For, Consider, the Season of it. It was when the Protestant Religion was Lying at the Stake; and forreign Popish Writers did not stick to tell the World in Print, That there was a private League made between two of the most Potent Monarchs in Christendome, (which one of their own Ambassadors also▪ did in a manner own) for the Extirpation of Haeresy; and that not only the subduing of Holland, but also the Enslaving of Eng∣land were steps to be taken in order there∣unto. It was when the Indefatigable Drudg∣es of the Papacy, who had more than Ten years before declared, We have here a Migh∣ty Work upon our Hands, no less than the Con∣version of three Kingdoms, and by that perhaps the utter subduing a pestilent Heresy, which has domiereda long time over a great part of this Northern World; whereof never such Hopes as now; had now got all the Advantageous Posts of the Nation into their Hands, and had so model'd all their Business that they counted themselves out of the Reach of chance for ever; and were even ready like Haman to cast Lots for a Lucky Day to throw all their Vizards off. It was when the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom were overturned, and the Frogs of the Romistr Egypt were swar∣ming in a min, to take possession of the Glorious Holy Mountain between the Seas▪ When things were thought hastening to that pass, that every vacancy in the publick Employ∣ments would have made several Proselytes un∣to Popery; when a great Creation would suddenly have given the Papists a majority in the House of Lords, and New Charters with Bold Returns might quickly have given them a Majority in the House of Commons too; a Condition of Affairs that was for∣midable to all that penetrate into the Ten∣dencies of Popery. THEN it was that the (then) Prince of ORANGE entred upon his Glorious Enter∣prize of Rescuing the Church of God from the Bloody Altar, which it was now bound upon; and the Protestant Princes Com∣bining with him, offered up their Vows to God, for the prosperity of this Important Undertaking, as counting that in the mis∣carriage of it, All was Lost. There had been one or two Attempts made before, but a wrong step taken in them, onely brought a Ruine upon the unhappy peo∣ple Engaged therein. The Popish Party were then slash'd with their Successes, and forgot of slghted the Dying Words of one
whom they Burnt (tis said) for only Relieving Distrested Sufferer; Though you are seemingly xed, and using your Violence against those whom ou have got under you, yet unless you can secure he Lord Iesus Christ, and all His Holy Angels, ou shall never do your Business; but Vengeance ill be upon you, before you are aware. Consider also the Manner of it. It was he Expectaion which the Late Earl of Ar∣le Expired withal, That God would ac∣omplish His work, Not by Might, nor by ower, but by His own most Holy Spirit. And it has been done! The Spirit of God incli∣ed the Dutch to give their Great PRINCE  the Assistence that could be given. When∣e Navy, with such Wonderful Turns of  Wind, as argued a particular Care of God out it, was come into its Harbour, the Spi∣ of God strangely inclined persons of all egrees to an Agreement with the Princes claration: it was a Touch of God upon eir Souls! Whence, though the Nation re Debauched on purpose to make Popery ac∣ptable to them, yet many thousands that re of no Religion at all, could not sow  for that Religion. The same Spirit t a Terror into the Great Oppressors of  Nation, so that though there was a vast my to oppose the Prince, the very sound his Approach, put them to Rout, equal
to one given by the clearest Victory; and  they had endeavoured by Shams to establish themselves, One piece of Paper, which ('ti said) was a Sham, had no little Hand in th Defeat of those Daring Criminals; nor wa any blood shed in all these Transactions, bu of a Little and a desperate Party that seemed weary of their Lives, or they might hav kept them. Hence ensued, by the unexempled and scarce accountable Desertion of th Late King, such a Dissolution of the Government as never had been known; and th Throne becoming Vacant, the Crown is unavoidably placed upon, those Illustriou Heads, which, God grant Long to Reign! And then, Consider the Prospect of it. Fo what may be now hoped for, but a Protestant KING, Iust and Ruling in the Fear  God, as a morning without Clouds unto th Protestant World! We now see upon th British Throne, A KING, whose unparalel'd zeal for the Church of the Lord Jes at the Lowest Ebb, hath made Him the Phnix of this Age; A KING in whom Corage and Prudence make a Temper which  to be no where seen but in the Greatest Hroes; A KING that scornfully rejected  Soveraignty over his own Countrey, wh he might have have had it, by betraying
A KING, that uses to say, That be can annot have so unworthy a Conception of God,  so base Thoughts of Mankind, as to believe hat any one person should be designed by the Al∣mighty King, to trample and oppress a Society laced under him; A KING, that so abhors ll Persecution, that when he accepted the Crown of Scotland, he Explained a clause n the Coronation Oath, with this Proviso,  will not be obliged to be a Persecutor: A KING, that has twice had a Crown of Light, appearing in the Heavens over his Principa∣ity to signalize him unto the World: With him we see A QUEEN, whose Virtues ad long since Enthron'd her in the Hearts of the whole English Nation: We do not now see a Romish Dalilah for the Philistins to Plough withal; nor is our Solomon under he Temptations which the greatest Mo∣narchs have sometimes fell before. What can be hop'd for, but that the Chains with which the Tyrannous and Treacherous Grand Segniour of France had Fetter'd Europe, will now be broken? and that the most mon∣strous Tygre in the world, having the Forces of Three Kingdoms let loose upon him, while he is Attack'd with such a General Storm on every side as was never seen before, must quickly either perish, or proclaim Li∣erty for that Religion which he has out done
all that ever Liv'd, for the Perscution of 'Tis an unaccountable Coincidence wit this, That some hundreds of People i France are lately fallen into prodgious. Extasies wherein being Dead asleep, they bot speak of Things and speak with Tongues which before they had nothing of; an they agree to tell us, The Late Revolutions England were to begin the Deliverance of th Church of God. These are some of the Excellent Things done by our God! Thus a all the Affairs of Europe overturned. But there is a further matter for our Prases which has followed hereupon; and  that are a Countrey of Nonconformists, ma not pass it by unmentioned. It is, The Repeal of those Laws which the Protestant Dissenters wer long Harassed with. It is well-known, That those whose Cosciences did not allow them, to worship Go in some Ways and Modes then by Law Established, were not many years ago, Persecuted with a violence, to be abhorred by a sober Men. It is well known that Five an Twenty Hundred Faithful Ministers of th Gospel, were Silenced in one Black Day because they could not comply with som
things, by themselves justly counted, Sinful, but by the Imposers confess'd Indifferent. And it is affirmed, That by a modest Calcu∣lation, this Persecution procured the un∣timely Death of Three Thousand Nonconfor∣mists, by Imprisonment in Noisome Goals, and the Ruine of Threescore Thousand Fami∣ies, within five and twenty years. As the Dissenters are far from charging their Suf∣ferings upon all that the Church of England n its National Constitution acknowledges or her Sons; for we have seen the most Learned and Worthy Members of that Church make their publick Pleas for the Nonconformists, and Boldly beg for Moderati∣n to them; and advance this Assertion, That or every man to worship God according to his Conviction, is an Essential Right of Humane Nature; and we have Learnt, That the late ersecutors were mostly a Knot of Ill men ho professed, that they had rather be Pa∣sts than Presbyterians, and that they would  soon be Turks as Papists; and who sur∣endred themselves as meer Tools to a Po∣sh Party, that thought to grow great upon  Ruines, of both the Paties whom they  set together by the Ears: So, I hope, the issenters will now forgive and forget the most inhumane Injuries that they have ever  sustained. The severity of that Perse∣cution,
which at last had broke up the Congregations of them that had perfected the Testimony to the Kingly Office of th Lord Jesus, than Celebrating a Thanksgiing for it, indeed caused the Dissenters  Accept of Liberty, tho' upon some Ter which they approved not. You are not inorant that we then told you, There wou quickly come an Earthquake that should cary on that Liberty to more perfection; an behold it is now done in a Parliamenta Way! Blessed be God, that Protestants a come to a better understanding of the true Interest! May the Apples of Strife mong them now be removed! May all God men concur in pursuance of that Reformati which God now calls His Church unto and may the Reformers have Peace among themselves, and (as one speaks) War wi none but Hell and Rome. But for  Church of God, in Scotland, as their Calmities exceeded what their Neighbours fe which I suppose, the Martyrology they prmise us will demonstrate; so they have  come behind them in Deliverances. what has God wrought? my Brethren, looks as if God had begun the Resurrection His Dead People. O Lord God, Thou hast gun to shew thy Servants thy Greatness, and mighty Hand, for what God is there in Heav
or in Earth, that can do according to thy works? And if so, 'tis time for us to Lift up our Heads, with at least some Examination, whe∣ther we shall not shortly see the Vintage of the Papal Empire? Whether Italy be not near a greater Earthquake, than that which made hideous Desolations in above Thirty Cities, Towns, and Villages there, a little while ago? Whether the Blast of the Se∣cond Wo Trumpet, be not just expiring, and the Turkish Power be not within two or three years (at least) of that End, which will make him incapable to Disturb Europe any more. Yea, Whether the Gospel of the Lord Jesus will not quickly have Liberty with an Efficacy, not only in Popish Counteys where it is Restrained; but also in Pagan Countreys, in One of which, we hear of near two Hundred Thousand Heathen, Converted unto true Christianity, within these few years? In a word, Whether the Day is not at Hand, when the Kingdoms of the World, shall be the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ! Whether we shall not very quickly see those, glorious Things which are spoken of thee, O thou City of God! II. The late Revolutions among our selves, have also been attended with some Excellent
Things, where of we may say, The finger of God is here! Indeed nothing in the World could more exactly imitate and resemble the late circumstances of our Mother England than the Revolutions here, in all the steps thereof; and this, though we understood not one ano∣ther. This was from the Excellent operati∣ons of that God who turns a Wheel in a wheel! And what shall we now say? The Judg∣ments of God have been upon us heretofore; but this poor Land has cry'd unto the Lord, and the Lord has heard and sav'd. And the Ene∣mies of New-England have still perished be∣fore the Rebukes of that God who is our King, our Lord, our Lawgiver: It has been as dan∣gerous to seek the Hurt of this poor Coun∣trey, as ever it was to annoy the Piccardines of old; and they that have stretched out their long Arms to make us miserable, have brought upon their own Heads the vengeance of the Temple. But we were grown a world∣ly, Sensual, Factious People; and then our God fulfill'd unto us that Word of His, I will punish you yet seven times for your Iniquity. Our Charters were taken from us, and our Land, Strangers devoured in our presence. You have seen cause to Declare, That there were deny'd unto us the Common Rights, which all English-men justly, reckon themselves born unto; and that all that was dear unto us,
was entirely given up to the Arbitrary disposals of four or five Men, that beyond all measure hated us, and made no stick to tell us, We were but Slaves. You have seen cause to Declare, that we were now given to understand, Our Lands were none of our own; and that a Storm of un∣just Violence was every day falling upon the more Honest, and sober part of the Coun∣trey, while the wicked walked on every side, and the vilest Men were exalted. Our Churches also began to feel the kind∣ness of those, who had Sworn by the Living God, to ruine them; and all Debauchery was coming in among us like a mighty Flood. All this while we were in a Sea of fire, mi∣serably scorched and scalded; and yet it was mingled with Ice; there were great cakes of Ice over our Heads; there was no getting out. That one person, who now hazarded his All to obtain us Relief, by carrying our Addresses for us, was made sensible of this. Remember, O New-England, how often that cry then went up from thee to the Lord, Return we beseech thee, O God of Hosts! look down from Heaven and visit this Vine; And now, behold, He is Returned. Our Adversaries are what and where they are; and we see so far Our Iudges as at the first,
and our Councellors at the Beginning. And there are several Excellent Things that have been done for for us by our God, while He has been effecting of our Deli∣verance. We have cause to Praise the God of Hea∣ven, That in the Tumult of our Action, there was not the loss of a Drop of Blood, nor such Plunder and Outrage as would have been a Disgrace to our Profession. We have cause to Praise Him, that our Soveraign has Declared, He took very well what we had done for Him, and for our selves in the Revolution. We have cause to Praise Him, that we have been so comfortably carried through the Difficulties of a whole Summer, while we could not say That any Law was of any Force with us. Every Week erected a new Ebenezer for us! We have cause to praise Him, for putting it into the Heart of a Person, well known unto you all, to take a Voyage into England, just before the late Overturnings there: on purpose to be in the way of those Oppor∣tunities, which his Faith was that he should have, to serve the Churches of the Lord Jesus here; by which means, (as our Friends there assure us) it is that we have been pre∣served from being totally udome.
We have cause to praise Him, for giving a check to those Indian Blood-Hounds, which have been worrying of us in the East; who having destroy'd several Plantations, met with no full stop, till they assaulted the first Place where a Gospel Ministry was main∣tained; but there they found such a Bar in their Carrier, that we now hear no more of them. And may I not say it? We have cause to Praise the Glorious God, for some Excellent Things, which as yet we know not of. We gave Imperfect, but (with many) probable Accounts, of a Deliverance from a French Force, that the possession of this Territory, would have been a valuable Thing unto. But this is indubitable. If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, may New-Eng∣land now say, they had swallowed us up quick: Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us as a prey to their Teeth. New-England, Be humbly Thankful to thy God, and exalt the God of thy Fathers. God forbid there should be any Murmurers among us all. A year or two ago, we would have been Thankful for a small moety of what we now enjoy: But if our Praises are not yet enough animated, I pray then, let us make a comparison of our Condition. Compare our Condition with that of
them in Hngary. The Protestant Churches there, have been made a Desolation, and it would break an heart of Stone to Hear, what both Pastors and People have endured. Should you see one of the poor Confessors come out of an hideous Dungeon full of Tds, and Snakes, and Excremens; with their very Throats putrified, their Teeth fallen out, and their Eyes gone into their Heads, and their Flesh mangled in a thousand places, you could not forbear preaching a Sermon on, Thankfulness to God Imagine your selves under the continual Executions of the most witty Divels, and all that shall but relieve you with a bit of Bread, torn to pieces by the hand of an Hangman, and you will see what has befallen the most venerable Ministers of that Kingdome, until the Protestant Religion has been almost extirpated there, and this after the Oathes of their Monarch to support it. Compare our Condition with that of them in Germany. The French King has there made even the Popish Provinces them∣selves a Stage of Blood, and laid all in Ashes for many Leagues together. He has given the Sun for his Device upon many of his Coines; and by the Fiery Destructions which his Bombs have made, he has given us cause to suspect whether he be not the
Sn in the fourth Vial, that has power to Sorch men with Fire. Imagine that you were put under the French Contributions, and not only Rob'd of all you have in the World, but also driven like so many Cattle before their Slaughterers. Imagine your Towns laid all in Heaps, and your Persons obnoxious to all manner of Rapine and Murders from the worst of Hrpyes: this is what thou∣sands are now feeling of. Compare our Condition with that of them in France. Except in the matter of our Sabbaths, what are we better than the People of God in that rueful Countrey? But all the Bloody Butcheries and Cruelties committed in the By-past Ages, are meer Trifles in comparison of what that People have of late endured, and this after Faith given often nough unto the contrary. After they ad gone thorough intolerable vexations n all those things that they had ny kindness for, they have been at last iven up into the claws of the merciless ragoons: and were all the Divels of Hell In¦arnate, they could not invent more or worse ortures, than these Dragons inflict upon ersons of all sorts, till they have compelled em to abjure the Truth of God; and thus all he Flocks of the Lord Jesus have been wor∣ed and Ruined there. Imagine a Swarm
of Lew'd Souldiers, like Locusts quartered  your Houses, and there binding of you, that they might abuse your nearest Relations be∣fore your eyes; imagine them Hanging of you by the Hair of your Heads and then half Choaking of you with Smoke, or half Roasting of you with Fire; imagine them pricking of you with Knives and Bodkins, and with ten thousand lingring Tor∣tures, making you Desire, while you may not enjoy, such a priviledge as Death; until at last you have been worried into an Abju∣ration, which makes the wounds on your Consciences no less than those on your Bodies were before. To have done, Compare our Condition, with that of our English Brethren, in woful Ireland, especially the more Southern Coun∣ties of it. Behold, their Estates Confiscate: the value of Four Millions was long since the Account of the Losses felt by only them who had Fled into England. Behold their persons Confind; having sharp Skeins ready for their Throats, with just Fears day and nigh of a new Massacre. What would you think, if you were driven like Dogs into the Goals of Galloway: if you were Enjoyed to carry your own Fathers Heads upon Poles in the Head of a Regiment, or if yo lay at the mercy of a Wild Irish Rabble?
Behold these things, Behold them with Sympathy O New-England; and be not canty in thy Praises to Him that has known thee above all the Families of the Earth. Come, and Sing unto the Lord, for the Ex∣cellent Things which He has done. But yet let us not put Him off with a Song. 'Tis a thing very pleasing to God, that we have a Day of Thanksgiving to Praise Him in; and if this Day, he duely kept, I doubt not but Good News will quickly put us upon the keep∣ing of Another. He that Inhabits the Praises f Israel will keep House among us, if by Leaving off our Praises we turn Him not out of Doors. It was a Remarkable thing that befel One of our Neighbours, a while ago. By a Shipwrack, he was cast upon a desolate Island, where he was left many months Alone. After many a Day of Prayer, for succour, he at last kept a Day of Praise, or the support which he had so long En∣oy'd; and within a few Hours upon this, here came a Vessel by that saved him. New-England has been, and yet is, in so many Troubles, that some have questioned whe∣ther a Day of Thanksgiving would be Season∣ble! O Yes! most highly Seasonable! Keep it well, and it shall yet be said, Also in New-England, things went well. But the principal Thing in our Thanksgiv∣g, yet remains, and that is, a Thanks-Doing
Let us all Repent, and Reform, and set up on the Lively Doing of the Good Thing which the Lord our God Requires. The Aposstle speaks pathetically, I beseech you, Bre∣thren, by the Mercies of God. It is This, I conclude withal; I beseech you Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that New England ma be as a Noble Person sometimes call'd u The best people in the world; and that no scadalous Things may be done here, to offen the God that has done Excellent Things for us. I beseech you by the Mercies of God, that as we profess the Protestant Religion with the most exalted Purity, so we may practise it, in such an Exemplary manner, that, A New-England man, may be a Term of Hon∣our in the world. I beseech you by the Mercies of God, that we may all sincerely intend th ame Ends, which brought our Predecessor here, even to propagate the Spiritual Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. May all due pains be taken, that not only the Englis may every where have the Knowledge o God, but that the Indians too, may shar with us in it; for an Engagement whereunto God has given us to see, as that a ver visible Blast has attended the Estates of the who have grown Rich by Trading of Drin with them, so a visible Blessing has accopanied them who have Laboured in Preachng
of Truth to those poor Pagans; and since t this day, the most powerful Nation of hem, namely, the Mohawks, ask for the ospel, it cannot but be a piece of Policy as ell as Religon, in us to carry the Gospel unto em, while they cannot be reconciled unto  Superstitions of our French Neighbours, at have been Tampering with them. O at we might not forget the Errand of our ore-fathers hither! We shall then Flourish▪  spite of all that wish ill unto us; Thus ill Salvation be nigh unto us, and Glory shall well in our Land. May our God sanctifie  His Dispensations to us; particularly those  the Summer past, as well the Terrible as  Merciful. 'Tis a Metaphorical Earth∣ake which has lately been among us, and ere was a Literal one in some parts of the ountrey preceding of it. May these Earth¦akes produce better effects on us than those Lima in this our New-World America,  upon the people there a little while ago. e are informed, That an horrible Earth∣ake, after some Warnings of it, shook that eat and Lewd City; till with incredible ose and Fury, it sunk a large Part of it o the Earth, and the Sea came hideously lling in upon it. While the miserable niards were under Apprehensions of pe∣ing in speedy Ruines, they that had been Ene∣mies
one to another immediately made Rconciliations; they professed a Deep Repetance of their former Vices; their fine Onaments and other Vanities, they burie under ground; and with consternation cred out, Our Oppression, our Injustice, the Ext∣vagancies of our Cloathings and our Houses,  brought all this upon us! We have newly be passing tho' a Figurative Earth-quake, whic is not yet quite over with us. God forbi we should be Impaenitent after all; and, sin I would End, where I began, God forbi that we should be Unthankful for our presevations. New-England is not used unto suc Follies as Bonfires, nor do we think Ringi of Bells, but Sinng of Psalms, to be a Thangiving Exercise. Come then, Sing unto  Lord; Sing the Praises which He may  claim unto. It was a no less wonder than undoubted Thing which happened France a few months ago, when, upon  Dissolution of the French Congregations, a a particular Interdict upon the Singing  Psalms thro' the Kingdom, there were thosands of persons, in hundreds of places, scores of Times, that plainly heard  Singing of Psalms after the manner of  French Assemblies with a most Ravishi Melody, by Invisible Singers in the Air; thing so notorious that the very Psalms we
often Distinctly as well as Audibly enough ung, to let the Hearers know what Psalms hey were; such as the Fifth, the Forty Se∣ond, the Hundred and Thirty Eighth particu∣arly; and even the Parliament of Pau made  Decree that men should not go abroad to ear this unaccountable Singing under a for∣eiture of Two Thousand Crowns▪ upon which he Reflection of the incomparable Iurieu is▪ This is a Reproach that the Providence of God akes unto us; because you have not dared, nr een willing any more to Sing His Praises and ongs of Thanksgiving. God has made mouths n the midst of the Air! But behold an Happy Presage, that God will not suffer your oices and your Songs to Dy, the Angels have ezed on them. Thus, give me Leave to y, That if we ill not Sing unto the Lord, there are others hat will; and we that will not, never shall! Yea, our Silence may provoke the very ocks and Stones to loud Shouts, in praising e Eternal God. O come, and Sing unto the Lord; and ough we do not certainly know what Changes yet may come upon us, nor how r the Clouds may Return after the Rain; let s nevertheless be found, Singing to the Lord. They that Remember how many Princes nd Interests were concerned for the Protest∣ant
Religion threescore years ago, and how almost all of them afterwards Disappeared▪ cannot yet be without Apprehensions in the midst of their Thanksgivings. But, though we may not Sing Requems to our selves, ye we may Sing Praises to our God: and what ever Fears may be upon us, I am now  Repeat that Call; Awake, Awake, O Congrgation, Awake, Awake, and utter a Song.  was a memorable Accident which happened near one of the Lee-ward Islands some year ago. A Ship with some pious people in it was by a violent Storm driven between two hideous Rocks; where she lay on one side so that every moment they expected she would overset; In this Distress, in this De∣spair, they agree to Dy Singing, and ther they sat Singing the Hundred and Forty sixth Psalm. But behold, a Dutch Ship that had newly taken a Spanish Vessel, at that Instant came by, and not only delivered them from the perils of their own Ship, which immedi∣ately perished, but also bestowed an other Vessel on them. Methinks, this poor Coun∣trey has been, and yet is, much in the con∣dition in which That serious people were Well, but supose we should Sink after al the Excellent Things which have been done for us, (and yet we can't forbear saying, I the Lord were pleased to kill us, would He have
shewed us all these things!) Let us however Sink and Sing both at once, and keep Sing∣ing to Him that has done Excellent Things, while we have any Breath; (and when we have None, we shall do it Better!) such a Course it is, which gives the greatest Likeli∣hoods, that He will with a perfection of De∣liverance, Arise and Save us. FINIS.
A Passage in Mr. Flavels Thanksgiving-Sermon, Preached Febr. 14. 1688 SHall we Ingratefully Overlook the Be∣ginnings of Mercy, as small and Inconsiderable Things? Shall we say, All this i Nothing, because we have not yet All that we would have? God forbid. When Israe was in Egypt, then a Little Straw would have been Esteemed as a great Mercy; but afterwards Quails and Manna were Despised. Bre∣thren, Three or Four Years ago, you would have Accounted it a Special Mercy, to have Enjoy'd an Hour or Two together in Prayer or to have had a Little Spiritual Bread Hand∣ed to you, behind your Enemies Backs; and is it nothing in your Eyes this Day, to behol the Worship of God at Liberty? Yea, to see the Success of the Gospel, in bringing home of many Souls to Christ? The Fears of Po∣tery vanished? The Witnesses Risen; the Tenth-part of the City fallen; and such a prospect of far greater and more gloriou Things before your Eyes? O let not the Consolations of the Almighty seem small.
A Postscript. Endeavouring the Satisfaction of them that are Inquisitive after the late Stu∣pendous Extasies and Prophesies in France. THe Words of God are True, in the Notice which they have given us, That the Works of God are Great; and certainly no Age did ever afford In∣stances of Greater than those which are Now the matters of Discourse and Wonder throughout the World. Among the Marvellous Things which at this Day strike the minds of Men with a just A∣stonishment, there are not many more con∣siderable, than those of the late Extasies in France. Concerning which we have un∣doubted Information; That about the beginning of the Year 1688: a young Shepardess in the Province of Dauphine, fell into unaccountable Trances, wherein tho' the standers by, pull'd her, struck her, cut her and burnt her, yet it was impos∣sible to awaken her. In this condition, her custome was to utter many Divine things;
and though she could neither write nor read, nor could speak any Language but that of her Countrey, which has nothing of pure French in it, yet she now Pray'd and Preach'd at a most prodigious rate, and Sang Psalms after the manner of the French Protestant Congregations: and when Auditors that could thereby be edified, were present, she expressed herself, not only in French of a Dialect most Exact and Correct, but also having occasion to speak Latin, in the Refu∣tation of the Romish Superstitions, she did it with a distinctness that fill'd all the Hearers with Admiration- And though when she came out of her sleep, she remembred not what had befallen her; yet she had her wits thereby made more Sparkling and Refi∣ned. Those new French Apostles, the Dragoons, quickly did their utmost, for the suppression of this Rare Thing; but behold the event! It was not long before other persons fell into the like Trances, with Symptoms not unlike to those which had attended her; and the Number encreased unto several Hundreds of these Prophets, if I may call them so? where∣of even the Kings own Guards afforded One. And at length some that were Awake were carried forth unto Rapturous Exercises with an Eloquence and Energy equal to that of those that were Asleep.
They are People of all Ages and Sexes; but the greatest part of them are Boyes and Girles, from six or seven to five and twenty years of age; and persons very old; all of them the meaner sort of People: but of Fami¦lies Exemplary for their good living; the whole affair being indeed so prodigious, that the most obstinate Sadducees in the Kingdom confess it, A natural Distemper directed by Pro∣vidence to procure the Repentance of a sinful World. The Ministry of these Extraordinary People, does chiefly consist of two things. One part of it is, the Admonition of those unhappy persons that have provoked God by many notorious Miscarriages, but especi∣ally by Apostasie under the late Persecution. They deride the Follies of the Mass, with a surprizing ingenuity; and in a vast Assem∣bly of perhaps two thousand People come together to hear these Preachers, if there be any that have abjured the Protestant Religion, they will call them before them, and address them in such powerful Terms, as usually make not not only the whole Congregation shed floods of Tears, but the Apostates them∣selves to become Penitents: and there comes not one away, who does not positively de∣clare, That he had rather be torn to pieces with wild Horses than ever go to Mass again. No
man is able to resist their Words! And they make the Penitents now and then confess o∣ther particular sins, which they convince them of, though the Transgressors had ima∣gined these Faults impossible to be discover∣ed. A whole Council assembled could not manage any matter with more Authority than They do the Conviction of those, who have gone to Mass, that they may shun the Severities of the French Dragoons. It may not be unprofitable to recite a few of the Sentences, which fell from the mouths of these Extaticks. Have a care (said one of them) that you come not hither out of Curiosity. Better it were for the Wicked that hot Coals of Fire should pass through their mouths, than that they should mock at the Word of God; they had better swallow a Serpent with all its Poison. If the Wicked (said one of them) had the same power over God, that they have over you, they would do the same to Him that they do to you: but God will pronounce the Sentence of Ma∣lediction on them, and will say, Go into Eter∣nal Fire. Brethren, (said another of them) Pray hard; and then though we should meet an Army of Enemies at the Door, God will place a million of Angels for your Guard. Brethren, (said another of them) We
have alwayes apprehended more the Threats of Men than those of God, else what happened to us, would not have happened. One of them said, Your Riches have ruined you, and your Prayers must Relieve you. One of them said, I am afraid the first Per∣secution will make you return to Mass again; but O suffer your selves rather to be first cut in pees. Alas! Iesus Christ has poured out all his Blood for us, and we can't endure the prick of a pin for Him. To the Apostates, they generally so con∣clude their Warnings; You have sinned a∣gainst the Father, you have sinned against the Son, take heed of sinning against the Holy Ghost, for God will then pardon you no more. And when the Children are told, They shall be Hang'd, they are not at all afraid, but answer, That is but a little harm for a greater, good. But the other part of their Ministry is, The Prediction of Things quickly to come to pass. They do indeed foretell many Things of a more private concern; they foretell a thou∣sand Things that must happen to themselves and their Friends: and the issue confirms the Prophesie. One of them being thrown into a Dungeon, said, The man who sent her thither should within eight Dayes fetch her out, and i strangely was accomplished.
But the Things of a more publick Con∣cern, are chiefly those which they foretel. The Gentlemen, who give us the History, tell us, that they judge it not yet convenient to publish a large part of the Authentick and sufficient Collections which they have made of these Prophecies. However, they have given us a Taste. In general, The Subjects of this Enthusiasm all agree in fore∣telling, A Speedy Deliverance to the Church of God: and they declare, The Late Revolutions in England, to be the Beginning of that Delive∣rance. Tho' all France was fill'd with a Rumour, That the Late K. Iames had Defeated the (hen) Prince of Orange, both by Land and Sea, these then said, The Authors of these Re∣ports commit a great sin, for the Prince of O∣range has Chas'd, and shall Chase the King out of England; and that is the Beginning of the Deliverance of the Church. They foretold a fresh Assault of Persecu∣tion in France, and it had a very dreadful fulfilment; for after it Ensued a Terrible Storm of Outrage upon the Relicks of Pro∣tstantism in the Desolate Kingdom: in one Article of which, there was a Massacre, of about four hundred people; but they foretold within how many Days the Persecution should b over; and they give hopes of a Protestant
King, very quickly to be seen in France. They proclaim, The Divel is going to be shut up in the midst of Hell! They say, The Accomplish∣ment of the Prophetical Months and Dayes is at Hand; but it must be accompanied with very Terrible Wars and Plagues. The whole is a Thing very unaccountable: and when I consider the Fate of the famous German Prophets, which made such a Noise in the World: or, when I consider, that while the Iews were under their Infatuations about their false Messiah, Sabatai Saevi, some Hundreds of people fell into Extasies (as 'tis Reported) wherein they Prophesied, the speedy Deliverance of the Jews by that Impostor, and Little Children that could not stammer a word, yet repeated and pronoun∣ced the Name of this Deceiver, with Happy Omens of Him; but consider on the other side, That not to Regard the Works of the Lord, is a Destroying evil; I dare not make any Reflections on it. I dare not say, what Au∣thority, or what Original is to be assigned un∣to these Inspirations; but this I know, the Comfort and Counsil of the Church is without such things now sufficiently provided for; and our Lord Jesus having foretold the State of the Church until He come again, hath so concluded His Predictions, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add Plagues unto
Him. Nevertheless, This also I shall, take for granted, That the Great God intends hereby to Awaken us unto a Consideration of what is before us; That is a proper use of Miracles; and when we are once Awaken∣ed, there is provided for our Entertainment A more Sure Word of Prophecy: which O that our God may help us to Give Heed unto Amen.
The Way to Prosperity. A SERMON Preached to the HONOVRABLE CONVENTION Of the GOVERNOVR, Council, and Representatives of the Massachuset-Colony in New-England; on May 23. 1689. By COTTON MATHER. Jer. 23.28. He that hath My Word, Let him speak speak My Word faithfully. BOSTON. Printed by R. Pierce. for Ioseph Brunning, Obadiah Gill, and Iames Woode. MDCXC.
A Prophesy in the Divine Herbert's Church-Militant. REligion stands on Tip-toe in our Land, Ready to pass to the American Strand. When height of Malice and prodigious Lusts, Impudent Sinning, Witchcrafts and Distrusts, (The marks of future Bane) shall fill our cup Unto the Brim, and make our measure up; — Then shall Religion to America flee; They have their Times of Gospel, even as we. —Yet as the Church shall thither westward fly, So Sin shall Trace and Dog her instantly.
The Preface, THe Occasion which first produced the fol∣lowing Sermon, cannot be expressed in better Terms, than those which were used by the Worthy Gentlemen that were the Conservators of our peace, in their humble Address to Their Majesties, bearing Date, May 20th 1689. Wherein among other things they say, — Your three several Princely Declarati∣ons, Encouraging the English Nation, to cast off the Yoke of a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Power, which at that time they were held un∣der, have occurred unto the View and Consi∣deration of the people in this Countrey, be∣ing themselves under alike (if not worse) evil and unhappy Circumstances with their Brethren in England; First by being un∣righteously deprived of their Charter-Go∣vernment, & Priviledges, without any Hear∣ing or Tryal, and under utter impossibilities of having Notice of any Writt served upon them; and then followed with the Exercise of an illegal and Arbitrary power over them, which had almost ruined a late flourishing Countrey, and was become very grievous & intolerable; besides the growing miseries,
and daily fears of a total Subversion, by ene∣mies at home, and invasion by forreign sorce; the people thereby excited, to imitate so no∣ble and heroic an Exemple, being strongly and unanimously spirited, to intend their own safeguard and Defence, resolved to sieze up∣on and secure some of the principal persons concerned, and most active in the ill manage∣ment of the illegal and arbitrary Govern∣ment, set over them by Commission. Accor∣dingly upon the eighteenth day of April last past, arose as one man, siezed upon Sr. E. An∣anos the late Governour, and other of the e∣vil instruments, and have secured them for what Justice, Order from your Majesties shall direct. — Thus that Address. Vpon the late Revolutions thus described, en∣sued various debates about the further Steps that were needful to be taken for the service of Their Majesties and this afflicted Countrey; Which De∣bates quickly issued in the Return of our Govern∣ment, into the Hands of our Ancient Magistrates; who with the Representatives or Deputies of the several Towns in the Colony, made another Address unto Their Majesties, bearing date, Iune 6. 1689. in which Address there were these Words, — Finding an Absolute Necessity of Civil Government, the People generally manifest∣ed their Desires and Importunity once and a∣gain,
That the Governour, Deputy Govern∣our and Assistants, chosen and sworn in May 1686. according to Charter & Court as then formed, would assume the Government; — — the said Governour, Deputy-Governour, and Assistents, then Resident in the Colony, did Consent to accept the present Care and Government of this people, according to the Rules of the Charter, for the preservation of the Peace and common safety, and the put∣ting forth further Acts of Authority, upon Emergencies: until by Direction from Eng∣land, there should be an orderly Settlement; which we hope will Restore us to the full Ex∣ercise thereof, as formerly; notwithstanding we have, for some time, been most unrigh∣teously, and injuriously deprived of it. That Royal Charter being the sole Induce∣ment and Encouragement unto our Fathers and predecessors, to come over into this Wil∣derness, and to plant the same at their own Cost and Charge. In Answer to this Address, His Majesty in a most gracious Letter, bearing Date the 12th of August 1689. unto the Government here, uses these Expressions, Whereas you give Us to understand, that you have taken upon you the present care of the Government, until you should receive Our Order therein, We do hereby Authorize and
Empower you to Continue in Our Name, your Care in the Administration thereof, and Preservation of the Peace, until We shall have taken such Resolutions, and given such Di∣rections for the more orderly Settlement of the said Government, as shall most conduce to Our Service, and the Security and Satis∣faction of Our Subjects within that Our Colony. It was in the time of our greatest Heats and Straits, and at a time appointed for a General Assembly of this great Colony, that the ensueing Sermon was expected from me. Through the Grace of God, the Sermon Then was not alto∣gether unacceptable to some who desired the Pub∣lication of it. But I gave not my full Consent unto their Desire, until now, they had an Op∣portunity (with their Renewed Importunity) to join it with another Discourse which they have ob∣tained from me; and tho' the little Differen∣ces which were among us, when the Sermon was preached, are now s well Composed, yet I flatter my self with an opinion, that the things here in∣sisted on, will not, should not be judg'd Unsea∣sonable. I confess it is a very Bold thing, for one every way so mean as my self, to Address the whole Countrey in such a manner as here I do; but, Si crimen erit, crimen Amoris erit; and if the general Dispositions of the year will not ex∣cuse
a Breach of Order in me, I have but one thing more to offer by way of Satisfaction for it▪ There was once a people in the world, with whom it was a Custome, That when men would Conci∣liate the Favour of the Ruler, they were to pre∣sent his own Son before him, as a Sight which would speak more than any Advocate. Instead thereof, that I may not want the Favour of my Countrey, how blameable soever they may count my freedome with them, I shall only present them with my own Father; whose cheerful Encounter with an hazardous Voyage unto a strange Land, and with innumerable Difficulties and Temptati∣ons there, for no other Cause, than that he might Speak FOR them, has at least merited a Pardon for Mee, with whom he has for near two years now left both his Church and Family, if I have transgressed by taking a Liberty of Speak∣ing TO them at the same time, the things which may promote our Enjoyment of the Divine Pre∣sence with us. Now, may Salvation be nigh unto us, and Glory dwell in our Land! Cotton Mather.
The Way to PROSPERITY It is the Word of the Eternal GOD in II. Chron. XV. 2. Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin: the Lord is with you while you are with Him. IT is a Remarkable Occasion which has brought these Words to be the Sub∣ject of our present Meditations; but it was much more a Remarkable Occasion which these Words were first uttered upon. We find them in the Sacred Book of Chronicles, which Chronicles are not the Civil Records, in other parts of the Bible refer'd unto; but an Inspired History of things that concerned the Line of Christ and the Church of God for five hundred more than Three Thousand
years. It seems as an Epitome of the Whole, (for so tis in Ierom's Language) to be writ∣ten as late as the Last of all the Books in the Old Testament; and the Hebrew Bibles give it a place accordingly. The Greeks choose to entitle it, The Book of things (else where) passed by; because, as Lyra notes, according to the Rule of our Saviour, It gathers Frag∣ments that nothing may be lost; and if there were nothing else but the Story which affords our Text unto us, to justifie that Appellation, it were enough: 'tis a Story passed by in the Book of Kings; but worthy to be had in e∣verlasting Remembrance. The ready Pen of Ezra (for him we con∣jecture to be the Scribe of the Holy Spirit here, notwithstanding those few Clauses which may be judged to be added by another hand after his Decease, I say the Pen of Ez∣ra) is here informing us, That the people of God had newly been invaded by a vast Ar∣my of Cushites; but we are yet at a loss who these Cushites were? Far more Scholars in the World, than there were Souldiers in that Army have hitherto been content with our Translation, which renders them Ethiopians here. But that learned French-man Bochaert, by whose happy industry, more than any man's, the Treasures in the Bowels of the Scriptures have been delv'd into, has with
irrefragable Demonstration prov'd, That no Ethiopians but Arabians are the Cushites mentioned in the Oracles of God. These Arabians, tho they have not been called Sarace (as has been thought) from their word Sarak, that signifies, to Steal; yet for their Fracious Inclinations, they well deserved suc an Etymology; they were a wild sort  men, that liv'd much upon the Rapin an Ruin of their Neighbours; and particularly a Million of them now designed Ierusalem fo a prey. The blessed God gave His people a notable victory over these Invaders▪ and they were now returning from Gerar ( place between thirty and forty miles off) unto Ierusalem. The Holy Spirit of God excited and inclined a Prophet whose Name wa Azariah, to entertain them with a faithful & solid Sermon hereupon; and in my Te you have the Sum and Substance of it. We may observe, First, The Praeface of it; and that i very awful and earnest: Hear ye me Asa, an all Judah, and Benjamin. As he was probably none of the greatest, so tis like he wa none of the oldest men; for it seems by th eighth verse, that his Father was yet alive,  present at this time. Yet being to speak  the Name of the great and eternal God,  expects, he demands the attention of
whole Army to him. Secondly, the Design of it; and that is, to ecclare both the Rise and Vse of their late Prosperity. The Lord is with you, while you ou are with Him; or as the Vulgar Latin has t, Inasmuch as you have been with him. What ollows, is but an Explication, and Ampli∣ication of this. He saw they were taken up with various Businesses and Contrivances; they had their Enemies under Hatches, and heir minds were full of Thoughts and Cares, What to do next? But he calls them off to ac∣knowledge the Presence of God, as the cause of heir coming off so well in their late Action, and above all things to obtain & secure the presence of God, that they might come off as well, in in their future Enterprises. I am therefore to call for your Attention nto this Faithful Saying. DOCT. That The GOD of Heaven will be with a people while they are with Him. 'Tis by the ensuing Propositions, that the Explication of this Truth shall be endeavoured. PROPOSITION. I. It is the Interest, and should be the Desire, of Every people to have the God of Heaven With them. But we are to enquire, What is implied in that presence of GOD, which we are to be solicitous about?
For Answer to this; There is a Threefol Presence of God, mentioned in the Scriptur of Truth. First, God is Naturally present with all Crea∣tures. He is an Immense Being, and no Crea∣ture can be without him. The Apostle that argued in the Court at Athens, in Act, 1 27. God is not far from every one of us. No He is near us all, He is with us all. And Pai could have had the Gentiles themselves con∣fessing it; for besides what their Seneca di own, One of their own Poets had said, Iovis omnia plena. It is the Speech of our God, in Ier. 23.24. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, saith the Lord? Yea, That He do's. The Jews call God by the Name of Makom, or of Place, because all things are in Him; this is His Name in the Book of Esther, if I mis∣take it not. Whether we may count it pro∣per and physical to speak of an Imaginary, In∣finite space, beyond the utmost Selvige of the world, replenished with our God alone; yet we are sure that the Heaven of Heavens gives no limits unto His Being; and the Ancients were not mistaken when they said, Deus Ipse Sibi, et Mundus et Locus et Omnia. We can∣not so well say, That God is in the World as we may say, The whole World is in God; & we may say with the Psalmist, in Psal. 139.7. Whither shall I flee from thy presence?
Secondly, God is Gloriously present with the Inhabitants of the Third Heaven. The Hea∣ven of Heavens hath in it most intimate and marvellous manifestations of God. It is the Place, of which we may say, as tis said of that State, in Rev. 21.23. The glory of God doth lighten it. There the blessed ones have God with them, so that they Alwayes behold His face; and they are satisfied with His like∣ness for ever. When we come to Heaven, then as in 1. Thes. 4.17. We shall ever be with the Lord. So the Lord will be with us for ever. Heaven is the Throne of the Most High; He is there as a Prince in his Throne; the Great KING is in a manner very ineffa∣ble residing there. To be there, is called in 2. Cor. 5.4. A being present with the Lord. Hence unto the Heaven, and not unto a Bi∣ble, are we directed to make our Corporal Ap∣plications in our Prayers, or our Oathes before the Lord. But Thirdly, God is Graciously present with His people, by being Favourable unto them. And this Gracious presence of God is that which a people ought to be concerned for. It lies in The Engagement of Divine Providence for the Welfare of such a people. God is with us when God is for us. To particularize, First, God is with a people by Directing
of them. When Israel was to pass thro' the Wilderness, they had that encouragement in Exod. 22.15. The presence of God going with them. What was that? Why, They had a cloudy fiery Pillar miraculously Leading o them every step of the way; There was  wonderful Pillar which was a Cloud by day and a Fire by night; the Lower part of which rested on the Tabernacle, while the Vppo part was to be seen by the whole Congregati∣on: the Motions of this being managed by the Ministry of Angels, now God was with them, and He led them forth by the right way. A people are often brought into a Wilder∣ness of Difficulties and Emergencies: but if God be with them, He guides them to a good Issue of them all. The Presence of God ap∣pears in His Directing and Inclining of a peo∣ple to such Actions, as may be for His Ho∣nour and their Safety, and such Methods, a may extricate them out of all Distresses. When God is with a people, He shapes their Counsels for them, and he disposes them to the Things that should be done. He supplie them with Apprehensions beyond the Reach and Verge of their own Wisdome, and He layes before them Invitations, and Provocati∣ons, which as it were push them into the way wherein they should go. When the Jews were pon a  Assumption of the desireable thing
which the Babylonians had deprived 'em of, they took a Right Way to dissappoint all that were desirous to interrupt them in it. We find in Neh. 4.13. That while those Exer∣cises continued, they waited in a posture a∣greeable thereunto; and when the danger was over, then they returned every one to his work. How came this to pass? 'Twas be∣cause GOD was with them. Secondly, God is with a People, by Protect∣ing of them. 'Twas the promise of God un∣to His people, in Isa. 43.2. When thou passest thro' the Waters, I will be with thee, and thro' the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee. On which Text, blessed Bilney after his Condem∣nation so sweetly paraphrased, that his Friends caused the whole Sentence to be fair∣ly written on their Tables. A people may be ready to be swallow'd up, by a stormy, gaping Ocean of Troubles, but if God be with them, they shall escape clear of all. The Presence of God is a Defence, a Refuge to the people that are partakers of it. It was said unto David in 2. Sam. 7.9. I was with thee, and have cut off all thine enemies out of thy sight. When God is with a people, He distracts and confounds their enemies, and He troubles those who trouble them. A people who have God with them, are too strong for all the Malice and Power of their enemies; no Ad∣versary,
no Desolation, shall make such a peo∣ple miserable; they are the Iacob, unto whom in Gen. 28.15. Behold, I am with thee, and I will keep thee, saith the Lord. Thirdly, God is with a people by His Assist∣ing and Succeeding of them. When Ioshua had a vast Undertaking in hand, it was said unto him in Cap. 1.9. Be of good Courage, for the Lord thy God is with thee, whither soe∣ver thou goest. q. d. God will Assist thee, and succeed thee, in thy undertakings. The Pre∣sence of God will carry a people comfortably through all that they take in hand. If they have Canaanites to subdue; if they have En∣joyments to obtain or preserve, the Presence of God will prosper them in doing all. It was said unto Solomon, in 1. Chron. 22.11. My son, the Lord be with thee, and prosper thou, and build the house of the Lord thy God. Thus, if the Lord be with a people, they shall prosper in all their Affairs; in every Expedition, they shall come off with Satisfaction; and they shall not miscarry in any of their Applications. This is the Presence of the Lord. Proposition. II. The Presence of God with a people in Hi Outward Providence, has a diverse Foundation and Continuance from His Presence with H People, in the Covenant of Grace. As tis
observed by the great Owen, in a Discourse unto the Parliament, These two are to be care∣fully distinguished. We must not reflect on the Stability of the New-Covenant, for what Variety and Soveraignty we may see in provi∣dential Dispensations, toward this and that people in the world. This matter seems de∣termined by David, in 2. Sam. 23.5. Tho' my house be not so with God, yet He has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. David had promises for the prosperity of his House; He had also the sure mercies of the Covenant made over to him in the promises of God. These promises had now a different Establishment; The Sure mer∣cies of the Covenant, were unto him more Absolute and Immutable; but the prosperity of his House, we find under another Law, and subject unto a dreadful Alteration. To bring these things into the case before us. God has in the Covenant of Grace, promis∣ed, That He will be with His people. This we read in Heb. 13.5. He hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. The Alsuffi∣cient God, who is HEE that answers our Ne∣cessities, Let them be what they will; the Vnchangeable God, who is HE still, whatever He was to the Saints of old; this God hath said [and how much better is this Auos ireken than the best Ipse dixit in the world!
He hath said it, and this] with multipli Negatives, in the Original, heaped one upo another, I will not, I will not leave thee, I wi not, I will not, I will not  sake thee. Wel but God is not with a people in His outward Providence just after the manner there in observed▪ This Two-fold Presence of God; First, It has a Diverse Foundation. Whe we look on the Covenant of Grace, there t Sins of one are expiated by the Sufferings o another; and so, God comes to be with Hi people, for whom the Aonement is thus Pro∣cured. Thus tis said in 2. Cor. 5.25 Christ was made sin [or a Sin-offering] for us, tha we might become the Righeousness of God i Him. Now come to outward Providence, an there you see other measures taken. Her God is with a people, according to thos Terms, in Ezek. 18.20. The Soul that sinnet IT shall dye; one shall not bear the Iniquity . Again, It hath a Diverse Continuance When we look on the Covenant of Grace, then God hath bound Himself to be with His peo∣ple for ever; yea, to see that they shall there∣fore for ever be with Him. He there saies  in Jer. 32.40. I will not turn away from them  do them good, but I will put My fear in th hearts, that they shall not depart from M Now come to outward Providence, and the
you see tis otherwise. God is with a people for a while; and upon their misbehaviours and provocations, He changes the Tenour of His Dispensations to them. Tis with them, as it was with that family, in 1. Sam. 2.30. I said indeed, that thy house should walk be∣fore me forever; But now the Lord saies, that be far from me. The sense of these things will prepare your Thoughts for one Conclusion more, which is, Proposition. III. A People must be with God, or God will not be with them. And here also, to prevent Mistakes, Let that one Text be alwaies car∣ried in our Minds; Neh. 9.18. Being merci∣ful, thou for sookest them not; there is Mercy in the Whole of this matter. Let it be noted, That tho' this Condition seems to be imposed upon us; yet it is Grace, pure Grace, rich Grace that helps us, when we are helped un∣to the performance of it. When a people have so been with God, as that He has been with them, they are to shout, Grace, Grace! concerning all. It is also to be noted, that this Benefit dos not depend upon that Con∣dition, as an Effect upon the real and proper Cause of it. When a people has been with God, this does not merit, and so procure that God should be with them; but that is barely the Antecedent unto which, this is the Conse∣quent
Having praemsed this I must now affirm, God is with you, while you are with Him. We need only reflect on the People of Israel, for an Instance of it. That whole History, which almost fills the Bible, proclames nothing more than this; it loudly declares. That while a people are with God, God will be with them; but that He will be very Terrible in His pro∣vidential Dispensations towards such a people as do for sake Him. But, What is it for a people to be With God? In short, Our being With God, implies the Whole of our Obedience to Him. Our Duty to God must be attended▪ that we may have the Pre∣sence of God. The Whloe of this Duty is comprised in that Expression of our being with the Lord. Particularly the Hebrew Particle [Gnim] in our Text, admits of three Signi∣fications; it signifies, With, and For, & Like, [which last Signification I make the more free withal, because a little Philology will ac∣quaint us with many Exemples of it: for in∣stance, When David saith in Psal. 120, 5. I dwell in (Gnim Hebr.) the tents of Kedar; a very great Interpreter translates it so, I dwell As the tents of Kedar. i. e. Like the inhabitants of the Stony Sun-burnt Arabia; whom in∣deed I don't Remember David ever was a∣mong.] Accordingly, a people have Three
Things incumbent on them, if they would en¦joy the Presence of God. First, A People should be with God, by Communion [With] Him. This tis to be With Him; There are Certain meanes of Communion between God and us; and these we must be continually approaching to Him in. We are With God, while we are at Pray∣er before Him; hence in our Context here, it immediately follows, If you seek the Lord, He will be found of you. While we do seek Him, we are with Him. The Psalmist was a man much in prayer, and therefore he could say as in Psal. 73.23. I am continually with thee. A people much in Prayer may say the same, We are continually with the Lord. A people that will pray upon all occasions, a people that will pray over all Businesses, a peo- that will retire into the Mount for Prayer (and Fasting too) at every turn; that peo∣ple is with the Lord. And the whole Wor∣ship of God must be, diligently, graciously, faithfully frequented by a people that would be with Him. We are with God, when we are at His House. A people should support & esteem, and use all the Ordinances of God a∣mong them. The Church of God hath His very special Presence in it; the Name of the Church is that in Ezek. 48.35. Iehovah Sham∣mah, the Lord is there. We should all be there
too, and there give those Encouragements which are due to the Institutions of God; So shall we be with the Lord. Secondly, A people should be with God by Activity [For] Him. To be For God is to be with God. It was once the Summons giv∣en in Exod. 32.26. Who is on the Lords side? And all the Sons of Levi gathered themselves; they were with God in doing so. Tis a Sum∣mons given to the world in every Generation, Who is on the Lords side? They that obey the Summons are with the Lord. A people full of Contrivances for the Interest of God, are with Him. A people should set themselves to advance the Glory of God; they should own His Truths, and His Wayes; and endea∣vour to draw all about them into the Ac∣knowledgement of the same. A people should propound the Glory of God as their cheef End and the main Scope of all that they do; and they should think much of no Cost, no Pains, nor (tho, as a Martyr once ex∣pressed himself, tho' every hair on their heads were a life) should a Thousand Lives be dear unto them, in the promoting of it. Then are they with the Lord; they are so, when God can say of them, as in Isa. 43.10. Ye are my Witnesses, saith the Lord, and my ser∣vant. Thirdly, A people should be With God, by
Behaviour [Like] Him. To be Like God is to be with God. They that are with Him, do not walk contrary to Him. God and we should be One. A people should have the same Designs, the same Desires, which the Written Edicts of Heaven declare to be in the blessed God; and not only so, but the same Vertues too. Is God Hly? Thus a peo∣ple should not bear with them that are evil. Is God Righteous? Thus a people should abhor all Injustice and Oppression. Is God Merciful? Thus a people should be disposed unto all fair acts of Pitty and Kindness. Then they will be with the Lord; and, O that this people were so with Him! This is the USE to be now made of what has been delivered. Let us all now, Be with God, that God may Be with us. I suppose, whatever else we differ in, we generally concur in that wish, 1. King. 8.27. The Lord our God be with us, as He was with our Fathers, let Him not leave us nor forsake us. O that we might all as much concur in an endeavourous Resolution, to be with God, as our Fathers were with Him; not to leave Him, nor forsake him. There is as much of New-England in this great Con∣gregation as can well be reach'd by the voice of one Address; tis indeed, the best part of
New-England, that is, at least Represented in this Assembly. As the great Council at Ie∣rusalem satt near the Temple, thus the whole Convention of the Massachusets, is here come into the House of God this day: Wherefore I take the boldness to say, Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin. The Chef Sinner and least Preacher among all your Sons, now takes a Liberty to mind you, That God will be with you while you are with Him. Now that we may be all of us inspired with a Zeal for this great thing this Day, Let us Consider, First, How Desirable, How Necessary a Thing it is, that we should have God with us. Truly, This is the Vnum Necessarium of New-Eng∣land! Nothing is more Desireable, for us, than the Presence of our God. The Jews have a Fable of their Manna, That whatever any man had a mind to tast, he presently found in the Manna a Savour & a Relish of it. It is very true of this Blessed Presence; all manner of Blessings are enwrapped in it. There is a multitude of Blessings which we are desireous of; but they are all contained in this com∣prehensive thing: It will give every honest man, all that he wants. This will extricate us out of all our Labyrinths; This will set all things to rights among us; This will
wonderfully carry on all the Salvations which have been begun for us, by the God of our Salvations. If Christ, if God be aboard, our little Vessel will not sink in the gaping, roar∣ing, formidable Waves now tossing of it. Well did the Apostle say, in Rom. 8.31. If God be for us, who can be against us? Thus, If God be with us, we have All for us. One GOD will weigh down more than ten Worlds. If we have the Presence of that God, Who made and moves the Universe by a Word; if we have the Presence of that God, Who can Command and Create our Deliver∣ances, O most Happy We! We may then join in such Triumphant Acclamations as that in Psal. 118.6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear; what can man do unto me? We may then defie, even the Gates of Hell it self, for, Cur metuat hominem homo in sinu Dei po∣situs? and tho' abroad at this day, The earth is removing, and the Waters roar, and are trou∣bled, and the mountains are shaking, splitting, tumbling, with the swelling thereof; Tho' the great and the terrible God be at this Day, coming out of His place, to make all Europe a stage of blood and fire, and make the Nati∣ons everywhere drink deep of the Cup that shall make them giddy with all manner of Confusion & Astonishment; Yet WE shall be helped right early, for God is in the midst of us.
Add to this; Nothing is more Necessary for us, than the Presence of God. We are undone, thrice, and four times Vndone, if we have it not. Methinks I hear the Al∣mighty GOD with a voice more awful than that of the loudest Thunder, saying over us, as in Hos. 9.12. Wo to them when I depart from them. And Wo to us indeed; we are in a most woful estate, if it come to that! How can we endure the mention of it, with∣out our most importunate Deprecations, O our God, leave us not! We can have a prospect of nothing but horrible Disorders, Agonies and Vexations, if we lose the Presence of our Lord: We ly open to no less than a fearful Dissipation, and more than all our late Op∣pressors would rejoice to see brought upon us. We have lately been complaining of Burdens, that were grievous to us; but I may warn you of our danger to feel one Burden more, which will infinitely exceed them all; tis that in Jer. 23.33. What Burden? I will even forsake you, saith the Lord. Behold a Burden that will sink us into a bottomless A∣biss of Calamities! The Presence of GOD, This is no less than the very Soul of New-En∣gland; We are dead and gone, if that with∣draw. When Israel was nimbly enough possessing themselves of the promised Land, which God had given them such a CHARTER
for, they perished in the Attempt; for in Deut, 1.42. The Lord said, go not up, for I am not among you. Alas, if we don't in the first place look to this, That God be among us, we cannot avoid all manner of Dissap∣pointments, Desolations. Let us Consider, Secondly: What uncomfortable Symptomes we have had of God's not being with us. It seems as if God had fulfilled that sad Word on this poor Land, in Deut. 31.17. I will forsake them, and many evils shall befal them, so that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because God is not among us? There is a vast number of Calamities, which have gi∣ven us lamentable cause to fear, That God has forsaken us. Why have we suffered such a Blast, both on our Trade, and on our Corn, that the Husband-man complaines, I looked for much, and lo, it came to little! and the Ma∣riner complains, I went out full, & came home empty! Tis Because our God is not among us. Why have we had Fire after Fire, laying our Treasures in Ashes? What means the hear of this Anger, that Boston, the most noble, and vital Bowel of the Territory, hath with a twice repeted Conflagration suffered such a Loss of that which in the Body politic answers to Blood in the Body natural? Tis Because
our God is not among us. Why have we had War after War, made upon us by a Foolish Nation? Why have the worst of the Heathen had renewed advantages to disturb our Peace? And why have so many of our Brethren and Neighbours been made a prey to the most Sa∣vage Murderers in the world? It is Because our God is not among us. Give me leave to say, as in Judg. 6.12. If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? But we may find Humiliation enough to convince us of this deplorable thing, from what we have endu∣red upon the Loss of our Government. She of old said unto our Lord Jesus, in I-h. 11.21. Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not dyed. So, If the Lord had been here, tis possible we had not Died. If the Lord had been with us, would he have made our Wall so feeble, that (as they said of Ierusalem) the going up of a poor FOX upon it, should break it down? If the Lord had been with us, had all the wild Creatures that passed by this Vineyard, found such Opportunities to be plucking at it? No, Our God would have kept us, as A vineyard of red Wine; and lest any should have hurt us, He, (the Lord) would have kept it, night and day. If the Lord had been with us, had you ever thought you had seen cause to Declare, as you have lately & justly done, That a Company of abject strangers had made a meer Booty of us? Had
Had we ever felt the sore grievances of an ille∣gal & arbitrary Government? No; The God of Heaven was not with that oppress'd people, to whom He said in Isa. 1.7. Your Countrey is desolate; your land, Strangers devour it. What shall I say? It was an Appeal made in Ioel, 1.2. Hear this, ye old men,; hath this been in your dayes? Even so, I may say to the old men within the hearing of it; My Fathers, You Remember how we were, when God was with us; pray, was it so in your dayes, as it has been in ours? Were you visited with Plague after Plague, in a long Series of heavy Judgements, as We your poor Children are? Surely, They will tell us; God is not with us, as He was with them. In all these matters, our Case may at least have some Correspondence with that in Luc. 23.28. He made as though He would have gone; but they constrained Him, saying, Abide with us! Let us Consider Thirdly; If we are not With God, we shall be guilty of an Apostasie, and that under very shameful, very direful Aggravations too. We shall be Apostates, and O let us not be so, lest our God say, My soul can have no plea∣sure in them. But if we are so, we shall be of all Apostates the most inexcusable Let us Con∣sider, what Fathers we have had; they were with God. I may say of'em as in hos. 9.8. They were with my God: & they are gone to be so forever,
What an unaccountable thing will it be for us, to have that Character, which we have been so much cautioned against, There arose another generation which knew not the Lord? What? Shall the Grandchildren of Moses turn Idolaters? and shall the Children of Samuel become the Children of Belial? Shall we forget the Hope of our Fathers, or forsake our Fathers Friend? The very Graves of those blessed men, every Post, every Stone upon their Graves, is a Witness against us, if we do. With dismal Accents, Me∣thinks, their very Ghosts, will groan unto us, Alas, Is our posterity come to this! Nay, Abraham would be Ignorant of us, and Israel would not acknowledge us, if we should be so degenerate as to lose the Presence of the Lord. Let us also consider, what Warnings we have had. It may be said unto us, as in Jer. 25.4. The Lord hath sent unto you all His Servants the prophets. This Countrey has been blessed with a most faithful Ministry, by which, I suppose, every Assembly in this Ter∣ritory, has been called upon, to Be with God, and to keep with Him. Especially the Ser∣mons which our ELECTIONS have put the Embassadours of God upon Preach∣ing and Printing of; these have been so many loud Warnings unto us, That we leave Him not.
In them we have been faithfully warned, That our true interest is Not to Lye unto God. We have been Warned, That the latter end of our Misbehaviours will be Destruction from the Lord. We have been Warned, That We must Repent and do our first Works, or have the Candlestick of the Lord Iesus removed from us. In a word, We have been warned from Heaven, That If we forsake our God, He will cast us off for ever. O miserable We, if we do it after all. These Considerations, will not have their due Force, unless they expire in a Three∣fold Request, which I must now lay before you; and I may justly assert concerning the Things contained therein, They are not Vain Things, they are Our Life. Wherefore, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah, & Benjamin; Hear ye these things, all ye people of the Massachusetts! First, Let us Return to the Lord. We must Come to Him, if we would Be with Him. We have marvellously backslide from our God, but He calls after us, Re∣turn ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings. O that we may all as one man Reply what is in Jer. 3.22. Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. If we ask that Question, in Mal. 2.7. Wherein
shall we return? Methinks, t'were an harder Quaestion, Wherin should we not? But, Be∣hold, We have had a great voice out of the Tem∣ple in answer thereunto. We have had the Elders and Messengers of our Churches, con∣vend in a SYNOD, solemnly informing of us, Wherein we shall Return. God forbid the Advice of that Synod, should only serve to Convict us and Condemn us, in the Day when He shall take vengeance on us for our Contemning of it. That were dreadful indeed! But in Compliance with it, Let every man seriously now enquire of himself, What have I done? Mark what I say, That man who does not suspect himself, of having a share in the Sins which have driven away from us the Presence of our God; That man, I may safely affirm it, is one of the principal Trou∣blers of this Israel; I do without any Scru∣ple say it, Thou art the man. Let us all then Examine our selves, and set upon the Re∣forming of our own Hearts and Lives, and the Renewing of our Covenants with the Lord. Indeed, both the Objects in which, and the Authors from whom we have endured our Calamities, those are enough to indigi∣tate what Sins they are that have exposed us thereunto. Let me in two or three instances use a plain dealing with you, agreeable to my
station here this day. What have been the Objects in which we have been afflicted? Our Fruits have been blasted; & were they not abused in the exces∣ses of Sensuality? Our Lands have been threat'ned; and were not They the Idols, for the sake of which we have offended GOD, and almost Renounced all that was Holy, and Iust and Good? The most happy and easy Government in the world, was changed with us, into what has by the most impartial men been confessed to have become Intolerable; Why, Did not men despise the Best of Go∣vernments, and procure other things to be set over them, because they endeavoured to make Loggs of what they before enjoyed? To pass on, Were we not in the late unrea∣sonable Extortions of the Law, invited to consider, Whether our needless Multiplica∣tions of Litigious Contentious Law-Suits formerly amongst us, were not a Scandal thus chastised? Were we not in the late unsuf∣ferable Injuries, Abuses, and Exactions of them, that under the pretence of the Excise carried on very outragious Villanies, put up∣on Considering, Whether the Multitude or Quality of Drinking-Houses, in the midst of , had not once been a Stumbling-block of our iquity!
Again, What have been the Authors from whom we have been afflicted? Our Molest∣ations have risen very much from Indian Hands. And Alas, have we not very much Injured the Indians? I do not mean, by taking from them Their Land; For it was Hardly possible they should be more fairly dealt withal than they have been in that particular; but by Teaching of them, Our Vice. We that should have learn'd them to Pray, have learn'd them to Sin. Endeavors for their Conversion have by many people been blown upon; but there have been wic∣ked English, who have taught them to drink, yea, and to curse, and swear; things which they knew not the meaning of, till they came to School unto such White Pagans as some that wear the Christian-Livery among our selves. And have not we also Followed the Indians? The Indians are Infamous, especially for Three Scandalous Qualities: They are Lazy Drones, and love Idleness Exceedingly! They are also most impudent Lyars, and will invent Reports and Stories at a strange and monstrous rate; and they are out of mea∣sure Indulgent unto their Children, there is no Family-Government among them. But, O how much do our people Indianize in every one of those Abominable things! We must repent of these our miscarriages, or else our
God will take up that Resolution concerning us, I will even forsake them, saith the Lord. Secondly, Let not Sin be With us, and God will be so. Tis the purpose of our God, in Josh. 7.12. I will not be with you except ye destroy the Accursed Thing, from a∣mong you, Let us then Destroy that Accurs∣ed thing. Especially, Let us take heed of the Sins, which at this Time, we have a peculiar Dis∣position to. It was complain'd in Hos. 7.1. When I would have healed Israel, the iniquity of E∣phraim was discovered. It has bin thus, but God will not be With us, if it still be thus among our selves. Our good God, the Lord our Healer, is now Healing of us: O let us not now be impatient patients, lest that our blessed Physitian deal hardly and roughly with us. Impatiens aegrotus crudelem facit Medicum. Let us now no more discover Revengefulness against them that have deser∣ved Ill of us. Let the Law, and not the Sword measure out their due unto them. No more discover an Unthankfulness unto them that have deserved Well of us. Requite them not with Censure and Haired for their unwearied pains to preserve our Peace. No more discover a Contempt of the Ministers, who set themselves faithfully to Declare the
whole Counsil of God, and to Lift up their voice like a Trumpet in shewing us our sins. They are all agreed (I hope) as one man to live and dye studying of your Well-fare; but if they are unjustly ill-treated with you, the great God, whose Messengers they are, will take notice of it, and say, Ye have despised Me! And O let us no more Discover such a Spirit of Lying as we have made our selves worthy to be reproved for. We find menti∣on of an Evil Spirit, that said in 1. King. 22.22. I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all the prophets. Doubt-the-same Devil has been suing for a License to go forth and be a Lying Spirit in the mouth of near all the people here: I would to God, this Devil were in a Shorter Chain! I beseech you Let not this Land have that Character, A Countrey full of Lies. But of all our Errors, There is none of such dangerous and threatning Consequence as the Contention which we are too prone to break forth into. We are too much a Contentious, and that will soon render us a Wretched and a Ruin'd people. A Divided and Quarrelsome People, do even say to the Almighty, Depart from us; for He is the God of Peace. But O, What is our meaning then, to make a full submission & entire resign∣ation
of our selues to the Tyranny of our own Passions, as we have too much done, while we have been debating about the Measures of another Submission and Resignation in our various Revolutions! I have read of a peo∣ple with whom it was a Law, That in a Fray, where Swords were drawn, If a Child did but cry PEACE, they must End the Quarrel, or else he dyed that strook the first blow after PEACE was named. He that Considers the Feavourish Paroxysins which this Land is now raging in, through meer Misunderstandings about the Means leading to the End wherein we are generally agreed, and how ready we are to treat one another with fiery Animosities, had need cry, Peace, Peace! with a very speedy importunity. For my own part, I confess my self but a Child, and among the meanest, the smal∣lest of your Children too; but yet I am old enough to cry Peace! and in the Name of God I do it. Peace! my dear Countrey-men; Let there be Peace in all our Studies, Peace in all our Actions, and Peace notwithstan∣ding all our Differences. We cannot avoid having our Different Sentiments; but Peace! I say; O let not our Dissents put us upon Ha∣tred and Outrage, and every evil work. It has not a little surprised mee to read in a Greek Author, who wrote Fifteen hundred
years ago; that in the times long praeceding his, there was a Tradition among them, that Europe, and Asia, and Africa, were Islands, encompassed by the Ocean, without and beyond which was another as big as They: in which other World, were mighty and long-liv'd people, inhabiting of great Cities; the two greatest whereof were called, one of them, The Fighting City; the other of them, The Godly City. Behold very An∣cient Footsteps of the knowledge which the old World had of our America, some Thou∣sands of years ago. But I pray, which of them American Cities, must New-England become Incorporate into? Truly, If we are a Fighting, or a Disagreeing People, we shall not be a Pious one. We have hitherto, professed our selves, A Countrey of Puritans; I beseech you then let us have the wisdom to be first pure, then peaceable. Every man should count himselfe liable to follies, & mistakes, & Misprisions not a few. Are you so, or are you not? If you are not, what do you here in this Lower World, where you can find no more of your own Attainments? If you are so, then be patient and peaceable towards those who see not with your eyes! Let us all condescend one unto another; and let no man be in a foaming Rage, if every Sheaf do not bow to hi. There is one ingenious
way to unite this people, if it were so heed∣ed as it ought to be. I remember, an inqui∣sitive person of old, that he might know which was the Best Sect among all the Philoso∣phers, he asked one and another, and every one still preferr'd the Sect which he was of himself: But he then asked them, succes∣sively, Which do you reckon the next best? and they all agreed, that next to their own, Plato's was the Best: upon which, he chose That, as indeed the Best of all. Thus, We all have our several Schemes of things, and every man counts his own to be the Best; but I would say to every man, Suppose your Scheme laid aside, What would you count the Next Best? Doubtless we should be of One mind as to That: And if we could act by the common measures of Christianity, we should soon be united in it. O that we could receive the Word of the Lord Jesus, in 2. Cor. 13.11. Brethren, live in peace, and the the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. Thirdly. Let every man do his Part, and his Best in this Matter, That God may be with us. Behold, a work provided for all sorts of men. Pardon me, that I first offer it unto You, that are or may be our Superiours. It was said in Hos. 11.12. Iudah ruleth with God. When Rulers are with God, O happy Govern∣ment! Unto YOU, much Honoured,
I would humbly address this Petition, That Your first work may be to think on some consider∣able Expedient, by which the Presence of God may be secured unto us. A little Consultati∣on may soon produce, what all New-England may bless you for. Yea, tis very much in your Power to do what may have a Tendency to perpetuate the Presence of God unto the suc∣ceeding Generations. I cannot forbear uttering the Wish of the great Chytraeus in this Ho∣nourable Audience, Vt inam potentes rerum Do∣mini majorem Ecclesiae et Scholarum curam susci∣perent! May a godly and a learned Ministry be every where encouraged: and no Plan∣tations allowed to live without a good Mini∣ster in them. May the Colledge be maintain∣ed, and that River the wholsome streams whereof have made glad the City of God, and blest us with a priviledge above the other Out-goings of our Nation, be kept Running, with Issues beyond those from the Seminaries of Canada or Mexico; may Schools be coun∣tenanced, and all good wayes to nourish them and support them in every Town, be put in Execution; you shall then probably leave the Presence of God, as a blessed Legacy with such as may come after you. I know not whether we do, or can at this Day, labour under an iller Symtom, than the too general Want of Education in the Rising Generation;
which, if not prevented, will gradually, but speedily, dispose us, to that sort of Criolian Degeneracy, observed to deprave the Chil∣dren of the most noble and worthy Europae∣ans, when transplanted into America. The Youth of this Countrey, are very sharp, and early ripe in their Capacities, above most in the world; and were the Benefits of a Re∣ligious and Ingenuous Education bestowed up∣on them, they would soon prove an Admi∣rable People; and as we know that Eng∣land afforded the first Discoverers of America in these latter Ages, whatever the Spaniards may pretend unto the Contrary; for it may be proved that both Britains and Saxons, did inhabit here, at least Three or Four hundred years before Columbus was born into the world, which the Annals themselves of those times do plainly enough Declare; So our little New-England may soon produce them that shall be Commanders of the greatest Glo∣ries that America can pretend unto. But if our Youth be permitted to run wild in our Woods, we shall soon be Forsaken by that God, Whom our Fathers followed hither, when it was a land not sown; and Christianity, which like the Sun, hath moved still Westward, un∣to these Goings down of the Sun, will Return to the old World again, leaving here, not a New-Ierusalem, as Doctor Twiss hoped,
but a Gog and Magog, as Master Mede feared; for the last of the Latter dayes. Now may the God of Heaven, bless the Wisdome and Goodness of Your Endeavours, for the conti∣nuance of His Presence, with those that may rise up in your stead, when you shall be gone to be forever with the Lord. Allow me to say, unto the Fathers of this Countrey, what was said unto the Iudges of old, Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good. And as for Vs, that are and shall be Inferiors, Let us also do what we can, That our God may be still among us. We ought all of us humbly to lay before our worthy Rulers that Encou∣ragement in Ezr. 10 4. Arise, for this matter be∣longs to thee, we also will be with thee, be of good courage & do it. Let there be a publick Spirit in us all, for the good of the whole; the Rarity & Mortality whereof among us, New-England be∣wails among the greatest of its Calamities. Especially, Let us Pray hard, That God would not leave the Land. It was a Publique Spirit which was in that Famous Prince of Orange, who was the first Captain General of the V∣nited Provinces an hundred years ago; and the Ancestor of that Illustrious Person, whose glorious Design and Service, we have lately with so much Unanimity Declared for; that when he was basely murthered by the Pistol of a papist, His dying and only words were, O
my God, take pitty of my soul, and of this poor people. When he had but one breath to draw in the world His poor people had half of it! O Let this poor People have no less than Half our Cares, half our Prayers. Let no man say, I am a sorry Creature, of what ac∣count can my prayers be? For You that can do little else but pray, can yet be the instru∣ments of saving this poor people, by the Pre∣sence of the Lord. We find in Amos. 7.2. That a poor Hrdsman and Huckster, kept the great God from Leaving of the Land. A poor Husbandman, yea a poor Woman, by lively prayers, may do incredibly much towards the Keeping of our God yet among us. And if God be With us, then His Rod, and Staffe, His mighty Crook, which horribly breaks the bones of all that it falls upon, will crush and wound all that shall go to make this Wilderness, A valley of the shadow of Death unto us; and beat away all that may essay to do us any Harm. So shall we be Led and Fed among the Sheep of our GOD; He will Re∣store us, and His Goodness and Mercy shall follow us all our Dayes.
MANTISSA. THus have the Words of God been Calling upon us, to beware of Loosing His gra∣cious Presence. Now the Presence of God, will either go or stay with His Gospel; and the Principal Danger of New-England lies in its giving an ill Entertainment unto that glo∣rious Gospel of our Lord Jesus. Let us then see wether the Works of God, have not also been calling upon us to take heed of that Epi∣demical Evil; and let what has befallen some of our Neighbours, in our dayes be produced as a Warning unto us to avoid any Contempt of that Gospel, which others have smarted for the Slighting of. I would fill the Remaining pages of this sheet with a Discourse fetch't from a Reserved Collec∣tion of MEMORABLE PROVIDENCES, not improper to be produced on this Occasion. MATTH. X.14.15. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your Words, It shall be more tolerable for So∣dom and Gomorrah in the day of Iudgement, than for that City. To Despise and Reject the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, is an Evil, than which none is more evil; and yet nothing is more ordi∣nary than this extraordinarily sinful Sin; which Vnbeleef may be accounted, as Tertul∣lian of old esteem'd Idolatry, the Praecipuum rimen Humani generis, the grand Crime of
ankind. Low thoughts about the Person, nd the Office, and the Beauty of the Lord esus; contemtuous Apprehensions of His Truths nd His wayes, and His Ordinances; these re the Things which bring the most Signal ery Wrath of God upon the Children of un∣erswadeableness. The peculiar Controversy f God with man, in the managing of which he most High God inflicts upon particular persons, at once a Blasting on their Estates, nd a Blindness on their Spirits here, as the rologue to the Hottest Vengeance of Eternal re in the dismal vaults of Hell below, is not o much on the score of all their other Profa∣ity & Iniquity, as this one thing, They sleight the Redeemer of their souls. And this is that thing, by which whole Nations & Peoples bring wift Destruction upon themselves; that thing or which all the Seals, all the Trumpets, all the Vials in the Apocalypse, have brought in the direful plagues of the Almighty upon the Paegan and the Papal, after the Ruine of the Iewish World. They have maintained a vile Praejudice against the Saving and the Ruling, Hands of a Gracious Mediator. O that, besides the other innumerable Rebukes of Heaven up∣on mankind for this Madness in their hearts, the following Instances of Divine Displeasure may awaken us to Take heed of an evil heart of Vnbelief.
Exemple I. ¶ AMong all the Nations of wild Salva∣ges by which the vast Territory of New-England was inhabited, scarce any was more potent or populous than that of the Narragansetts. Unto those miserable Hea∣then was the Gospel, and a Gospel without charges too, offered by some English preachers of it, but they peremptorily with much af∣front & contempt refused the Glad tidings of Salvation by Iesus Christ, praeferring their own devillish Rites & gods before the New Thing tendered unto them. An holy man, then fa∣mous throughout our Churches, hereupon let fall a speech to this purpose, I speak altogether without the Spirit of God, if this nation be not speedily & remarkably destroyed. And so it happened. This Nation, much against the ad∣vice of the more aged men among them, en∣gaged in the late bloody armed Conspiracy with the other Indians in the Countrey to cut off the English: in prosecution of which, af∣ter they had done many Acts of Hostility, the English Army took the just provocation in the depth of Winter to assault the strong Fort & Swamp in which was their General Rendez∣vouz. The Number of our Forces was much inferiour unto theirs, but with a wonderful Valour, & memorable Success, on our part, the Day was carried against the tawny Infidel▪ Their City was laid in Ashes, two and twenty
of their Cheef Captains were kill'd, with we know not how many Hundreds or Thousands of the common Indians; after which, mor∣tal Sickness & horrid Famin pursued the Re∣mainders of them; so that there are scarce any of them that we know of, to be now seen upon the face of the Earth. Exemple. II. ¶ The Ringleader of the last Warr which the Indians afflicted the English in this Land withal, was Philip the Prince of the Wompan∣ags. That gracious and laborious Apostle of the Indians, the Reverend Iohn Eliot, made a Tender of the Gospel to this Monster, who after the Indian mode of joining signs with words, pulling off a Button on the good man's Coat, told him, He did not value what he said so much as that: and he moreover hindred his subjects from embracing the Christian Religion through a fear which he expressed, That it might obstruct something of their Civil absolute unlimited Obedience to him. After his Invasion of the English with some unhappy Success, the Hand of God so fell upon him, as that af∣ter many Calamities, one of his own Vassals upon a disgust at him, for killing an Indian who had propounded an Expedient of Peace with the English, ran away from him, inform∣ing our Forces where he was; and they came upon him in the Thicket, just as he was tel∣ling his Counsellours of his Dream the night
before, that the English had taken him, and while he endeavoured an Escape an Indian shott him thro' the heart, whereof he dyed immediately, nor are any considerable part of his people now to seen any where out of their own place. Exem. III. Some time since there were Sundry well disposed persons in Virginia, up∣on whose affectionate Letters, full of desires, that they might enjoy the meanes of eternal Salvation, diverse worthy Ministers were sent from hence unto them, Mr. Thomson, Mr. Knowles, & Mr. Iames; who after a passage so tedious & dangerous as made them almost suspect their Call, at length arrived there, where God gave them a blessed Success of their labours, with a loving & a liberal Entertainment in the Countrey: Yet it was not long before the Ru∣lers of the Plantation drove them away by an Order, That all such as would not Conform to cer∣tain things, which the consciences of these Gentle∣were known to scruple, should leave the Countrey by such a day. Before that black day came, the Indians, who for some hundreds of Miles had entred into a Consoederacy to cut off all strangers, made a dreadful massacre of the English, & 300 at least were suddenly kill'd by the natives there: A grievous Mortality by Sickness did also ac∣company the said Massacre, so that many re∣moved from thence, & many of the Rest glori∣fied & magnified the justice of God, thus aveng∣ing the Quarrel of His Refused Gospel. Finis.
An APPENDIX Touching Prodigies In NEW-ENGLAND. AS an Appendix to the Endeavours used in the foregoing Treatise, to Commemorate the Wonderful Works of God, and at the same time to awaken this Countrey unto such a Devotion and Repentance as the Works of God are cal∣ling for: It ought to be seriously enquired, Whether we have not been by any Prodigies Warned of the Evils near unto us? tho' it must be confessed, that our Hearts were Pr∣digiously obdurate and insensible, if we need∣ed any, while we have Moses and the Prophets. The written Word of God is that Firmament, spread over the Spiritual, which answers the Expansum in the Natural World; and the Threatnings with the Histories therein shining and Thundering, would givē to ā sinful Peo∣ple,
as great a praemonition of impendin Plagues, as the most Portentous Armies in th Air, or Comets in the AEther of the Universe. Yet even Insolit Accidents of Nature, as well as Faithful Cautions of Scripture have been em∣ploy'd for our awakening in our late stupidity. Indeed there are some from whom we might have expected a less unreasonable Scepticism, who deride all Prodigies; but these Gentle∣men, like Those who deny Original Sin, do in their own Disputation confute themselves, by Giving, yea, by Being an Instance of the very thing, which they oppose. Nay, Let no more than the Authorities and Varieties re∣cited by the Great Zuinger, in his Elaborate Theatre, upon the Head of Prodigies, be faitly considered, and I know not whether you will allow them to be called Gentlemen, that shall be so Disingenuous as to make a Ridicule of all in this kind, that has been hitherto Reported and Believed. I acknow∣ledge, That there ought to be much Accu∣racy in the Observation of Prodigies; and that those things ought not always to be ac∣counted Prodigies which are Extraordinaries; and that it is a simple thing to believe every word; and since I have seen the Nonconfor∣mist. Reproched for their minding of Pro∣digies, by the loose Pens of certain Writers, whom, weighing well their Accomplish∣ments,
by their own Rule, we ought not to mind, I have been desirous that we may so far take the Informations, tho' we value not the Iudgments of their Malice, as to be suf∣ficiently critical in this important point; yet we may not by profanity maintain our own Security. Altho' that the Eternal God, Hate Robbery for burnt offering, and it is as Dange∣rous as 'tis an officious thing, To Ly for Him: nevertheless those people, I am sure, were stigmatized for none of the wisest, Who Re∣gard not the Works of the Lord, nor the Ope∣ration of his Hands; and the Communion between Us and the Angels, either good or bad, which are Invisibly about us, is more frequent, and Upheld and Applied unto more purposes than Mankind is Happy enough to be well Aware. I therefore pass on to say, That New-England also seems to have had its Prodiges. We have had inded One Omen, which was rather a Prophesy than a Prodigy unto us. I Remember that Leontius, the Aged and Famous Minister of Antioch, poin∣ting to his own White Head, said unto his people, Brethren, when this Bank of Snow falls, I can tell you, that you'll have a dirty time on't; intimating the Troubles and Quarrels that should happen among them, after his De∣cease. Truly that sort of Snow fell so fast among us, and the precious, praying, Ex∣cellent
Old Disciples were so fast interr'd, that we might well conceive as much of our Quiet, would go away with them, as there went of our Glory. But I yet speak too figuratively, to answer the Expectations of my Reader; Let him then know: That Just before our late Vexations, we were terrified with an Earth-quake in the Southern Parts of the Countrey. And if so base a man as Polydore Virgil could reckon an Earth-quake in England long since, the Forerunner of a Bloody and Cruel French War, We that knew what Neighbours w had, were not without ground of Conjectures that were none of the most Comfortable or Encouraging. In the Summer of the Year, 1688. just be∣fore the first eruption of our unhappy War, we had growing in Boston a Cabbage Root, out of which there sprouted three very won∣derful Branches, one of them exactly re∣ebling a , another of them, as exact∣ly resembling a Rapier, and a third, extream∣ly like to the Club used by the Indians in their Barbarous Executions. I was my self one among the Multitudes that visied this Curios∣y, with no little surprize at the odness of it; and the Characters of it in my thoughts have grown more  and Solemn, since the  of it have been so agreeable. I  imagine my self herein impos'd upon,
as Lycosthenes who wrote of Prodigies, was in the Business of his Bearded Grapes; but it would be Cranibe his cocta for me to offer the Reader what Exemples parallel hereunto are mentioned by the exquisitely Learned, and Curious Authors of the Renowned German Ephemerides. Moreover, it was credibly affirmed, that in the Winter of the Year 1688, there fell a Red Snow, which lay like Blood on a spot of Ground, not many miles from Boston; but the Dissolution of it by a Thaw, which with in a few hours melted it, made it not capable of lying under the contemplation of so many Witnesses as it might have been worthy of. The Bloody Shower that went before the suf∣fering of the ancient Britains from the Picts, (a sort of People that painted themselves like our Indians) this Prodigy seem'd a second Edition of. And in the opinion of the most Critical Observers, throughout the Countrey, they were prodigious, or at least, Uncommon SIGHTS and SOUNDS, which on the first of October, in the Year, 1689. We were entertained withal, and not unlike those which Pliny mentions as presages to the Cimbric Wars of old▪ For on that Day, in the Morning, while the Sky was too clear, to give us a suspicion of any thing like Thunder ap∣proaching,
there suddenly Blazed a Flame in the fashion of a Sword; which Blaze af∣ter a continuance, far longer than that of an ordinary Lightning, expired in a smoke that gave Terror unto the Beholders of it. But hereunto succeeded immediately very terri∣ble and Repeated Noises, exactly like Volleys of small Shot, not without Reports like those of Great Guns super added thereunto. This was a Scaene which all the Colonies of this large Countrey, and Thousands of People, at once were Spectators of, carrying in it, something, beyond the known Laws which or∣dinary Meteors are Conform'd unto. And herein was indeed One Circumstance, that gave Demonstration, of something Rare and Great in this Occurrent; That persons which were Distant from one another many scores of Miles above an Hundred, yet at the same Time, both Saw and Heard the whole of what is now related; and though I know, the Fancies of men applying themselves unto what is in the Clouds, are Fruitful even to a Ridicule; strong imagination being able to find, even a Iuno in them▪ and all that can be any where imagined; the shapes of Clouds, like the Clinks of Bells, humoring the Thoughts▪ of any one; yet in This Accident, no small, Numbers of Gentlemen, who do not use to be imposed upon, but count no Trial severe
enough to Examine Things of this Nature with, were so surprised as with one mouth to say, The Finger of God was here! But with Him are left the Events of all. And in the mean time we are not ignorant, that Nunquam Futilibus Excandit Ignibus AEther▪ FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 1. l. Last, Read Saying. Page 9. Line 5. Read Iews. Page 37. Line 1. dele Can. Page 44. Line 1. Read as at. Page 44 Line last r. undone. Page 45. Line 13. for gave. r. have.
