P1224 12558907 63130
CERTAIN CERTIFICATES Received from AMERICA, On behalf of SAMƲEL JENNINGS, Tending to clear him from Scandals, Cast on him by George Keith, and others of his Opposers. Made publick by Iohn Pennington. He that hideth Hatred with lying Lips, and he that uttereth a Slander, is a Fool, Prov. 10.18. London Printed, and Sold by T. Sowle, near the Meeting-House in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street and at the Crooked-Billet in Holywell-Land near Shoreditch, 1695.
The Publisher to the READER. HAVING read Geo. Keith's Book, Entituled. A further Discovery, &c. pretended to be in Answer to S. J's. Book, called The State of the Case, and observing with what heat he flings his proofless Accusa∣tions against the said S. J. whom he might know to be remote, and out of the reach of his Charge (being on his Voyage to America) I thought it would not be unacceptable to the moderate and impartial, as well as a Duty to the injured, if I presented him with such Certificates, as the said S. J. re∣ceived, after the publication of his Book, not long before his leaving us, and had deposi∣ted with a Friend in London, to be dispersed, as Service might be seen in the Spreading thereof; having notice in an Advertisement printed in G. K's. late answer to T. E. that he designed an answer to his Book.
I shall say little to the Book it self, it chiefly relating to matters of Fact, trans∣acted in another part of the World, of which I am no Eye-and Ear-witness; nor is it so proper to be debated, but between persons privy to those several actions. But in as much as it is probable, that by reason of the distance of place, and unsafenes of the Seas, G. K's answer may not reach thither in a long while, and the return from thence must needs be yet longer, I offer these in the mean-while, advising all that would not condemn a Man unheard, to suspend their Judgment in the rest, till the accused can have an opportunity to defend him∣self. Yet two or three Observations (among the many that Book affords to an Observant Eye) I am not willing wholly to pass by, that, as ex pede Herculem, by this little the Reader may have a taste of the rest. First, As to the Stile and Language there∣of, I freely Submit it to the Considerate, who hath read both Books, to judge which of the two, G. K. or his Opponent, hath shewed himself most Master of his own Spi∣rit, it being a true Maxim delivered by the Apostle James, that if any Man among you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's Religion
is vain, Chap. 1. Ver. 26. Yet let me add, that while he magnifies his own Patience, saying, God hath endued him with a good mea∣sure of patience, and what he hath born with much Patience, p. 25. in the next line he Justifieth his calling Friends Blood-thirsty hounds, and in the same page these words, Cut me in Collops, Fry me, Eat me; the Reader may give a guess, what will pass for Patience with him. Secondly, The abovesaid instance leads me to take notice of his Language to Friends in Pensilvania, what artifices he useth to palliate it, and how he bespeaks his own Praise, in the slight, vain-glorious acknowledgment he makes. The Ministring Friends, at their Meeting held at Philadelpha the 24, 4th Month, 1693. relating his calling Friends in their Religious Meetings Hypocrites, Snakes, Vipers, Blood-thirsty Hounds, Impudent Rascals, and the like; bidding them Cut him in Collops, Fry him, and Eat him, and saying his Back had long Itched to be Whipt. And that at the same juncture, he said, he was like our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, Comparing himself to a Dove and a Lamb, (State of the Case, p. 23.) This Charge he doth not deny, but applauds his own Patience, as hinted already.
For the term Blood-thirsty Hounds, he alledgeth (but without a proof) that what  he was accused of tended to destroy his Natu∣al Life; then flies to the Hebrew word Ne∣bal, in Latin Nebulo, and translated in the Eng∣lish Bible, vile Person, to excuse the Epithet of Impudent Rascal (the word Snakes, and Vipers he toucheth not upon); and from Friends telling him (as he saith) he deserved to be punished, he feeling great boldness and Cou∣rage given him uttered some such words, as Cut me in Collops, Fry me, Eat me. Thus much in p. 25. of his Further Discovery. Now, Friendly Reader, where was the Dove-like, Lamb-like Nature in all this, thinkest thou? But he deems such an imputation injurious, and that G. F's. saying to the rude multitude, that Beat him on his Head, Arms and Shoulders, Strike again, here are my Hands, my Head and my Cheeks; bears a propor∣tion to his Case, as p. 28. That to turn the Cheek to the Smiter, as we are Counseled Luke, 6.29. is Lamb-like, I confess; but what is this to a Man that is not smitten? but at most told, he desreves to be punished (and for that we have but his word in his own Case) that shall retort, Cut me in Collops, Fry me, Eat me. This is not a meek, quiet, yielding to a suffering already inflict∣ed (as in the instance of G. F.) but a da∣ring, provoking to it, and that by Un∣savoury expressions, which relish of a diffe∣rent tincture. Nor doth he more suc∣cesfully come off, when p. 47. he denies
not, but he might say, by way of probability They should hear ere long, he were either Whipt, or Imprisoned; And in the next page, owns he said in a publick Meeting, on a First day, that his Back Itched for their Whip, assigning as the reason, their interrupting him in his Christian Testimony, and most extraordinari∣ly, threatning him with their Magistratical Power (but that depends upon his single say so, and wants proof). For these passages manifest an incensing, provoking temper which (though covered over with the Specious pretences of Godly Zeal) like to what Lawrence the Martyr said to the Tyrant, that caused to Roast him on a Grid-iron,Oh gross Com∣parison of the perse∣cuting Heathen Em∣perour, to our Chri∣stian abused Friends in Pensilvania: Have they not been more persecuted by his Tongue and Pen, than he by their Laws and Proceedings? to G. F. as a∣bove noted; and to E. Burrough, who said and writ in lines to his perse∣cutors (but when and where did they say) our Backs are ready for your Blows: Yet do G. K's. words declare themselves to proceed from a bitter Root. Now, one reason he gives, why he said, his Back Itched for their Whip, was their interrupting him in his (so called) Christian Testimony: Did Lawrence do thus, or G. F. or
E. B. either? Let him bring  the precedent, when and where; When they were in their Persecutors Hands, or exposed for their Christian Testimony, they in a Christian Spirit bore it, and that Chearfully: But when did they because in∣terrupted in their Christian Testimony, tell the Magistrates, they were not only ready (i. e. they were given up to the suffe∣ring, and that without reluctancy) but craved it, and their Backs Itched for it; for there is a difference between a bowed mind to the will of God, that is prepared (made ready) Patiently and Meekly to Suffer what evil Men may be permitted to do, and the seeking it, the coveting it, and having an Itch to tempt and provoke them to it; perhaps through a desire of Popula∣rity and to encrease a Party. Nor will the succeeding instance of what Christ said to Judas, help him, though it may shew the Fond conceit and High value he hath of his own doings, in the very Comparison. The Lord Jesus did not approve of the Tray∣tour's Act, neither did he seek the Suffering, when he said to Judas, What thou dost, do quickly; but on the contrary, warned against the doing it, and prayed the Father that the Cup might pass,
Mat. 26. v. 24, and 39. Yet foreknowing the Blessed benefit and effect, it would have towards Mankind in general, for our sakes he both embraced it,  and pressed the doing it quickly, for he was Straitened till it was accomplished, Luke, 12.50. But G. K. can assign no good, that his passionate and daring carriage to those Friends, could produce, or was proposed thereby.
Now when he had said, what he thought fit, towards his own Vindication, he goes on in the sum 48. p. thus; I have (saith he) never Justified all the words I have said to those my Adversaries (what words hath he not Justified? for these even now cited, I have made appear, he hath) but readily have granted, that it's possible I have at times exceeded on great provocation. But S. I. &c. have far exceded me in hard words, &c. And a few lines after, my great Comfort is, that what∣ever Human weaknesses have attended me, as to some Circumstances, which have been greater on their part, my Cause—is good, and with a Sincere and Ʋpright Heart, as to the main, I have managed it, and I have peace from my gracious God in so doing, as well as a sence of his Pardoning mercy, wherein I have failed in some particular Circumstances, and this is more than ever any of my Adversaries, that I know, have acknowledged, who Proud Pharisee-like, do justify themselves. Now consider, Reader, what is it to Act the Pharisee, if not to Extol himself and depretiate others. Sincerity  and godly Contrition, would have taught him to think more lowly of himself, and less aggravatingly concerning others: For his faint acknowledgment of human Weak∣ness is but ushered in to set a fair gloss upon his own conduct in the main, while he would insinuate how much worse Men his Adversaries are, and therein hath imi∣tated the style of the proud Pharisee, Luke 18.11. in his boast, That he was not as other men. But in what follows, ver. 14. he may read his own doom, viz. Every one that ex∣alteth himself, shall be abased, and so will G.K. when detected not only of Self-applause, but also of Self-contradiction. For although he declares he never justified all he hath said to his Adversaries, but grants he hath at times exceeded; Yet (in Causless Grounds, p. 11.) he saith, As I have not acknowledged unto any (nor seen just cause so to do) so they have not proved me guilty, either in words or deeds, that the truth condemneth, &c. so un∣certain a sound doth his Trumpet give, that either what he now saith, or hath said before, must be false, for they are not re∣concileable. Thirdly, His want of Candour cometh also under my Consideration, and that un∣der two Heads. First, The Friends of Burlington, in West-Jersey, in their Account, entituled, The
present Case stated, relates the orderly pro∣ceeding of that Meeting against him: He had, it seems, charged Friends, That they were met together to cloak Heresie and Deceit, and that tere were more Damnable Heresies and Doctrines of Devils among the Quakers, than among any Profession of Protestants; whereupon they first sent two of their Mem∣bers, S. J. and G. O. to admonish him; and to give him notice of their next Meeting, which followed in course Three Months af∣ter, at Philadelphia. But he justifying his Speeches, and declining his usual appear∣ance (tho' at home) and having set up se∣parate Meetings, and printed against Friends; they notwithstanding (for peace sake, and to prevent the dilateing of his Schism, if possihle) generally inclined to Adjourn their Meeting for a Fortnight lon∣ger, and gave him notice thereof, the same Evening. At the Fortnight's end, finding him not at Home, they forbore drawing any Testimony against him for two Days lon∣ger, and then sent two of their Members, William Biles and Walter Faucet, to enquire at his House of his return; but he being still absent, they gave forth their Testimony, yet with this Caution, that it should not be published till he had had an opportunity to hear it read, and such others as he approved of, as may be seen at large, State of the Case,
p. 17, 18, 19. Now what answer doth he give to all this? He denies they told him the precise day, hour or place of their Meeting; and alledgeth, That called a Fortnight, some∣times includes fourteen days, sometimes fifteen or sixteen days, p. 23. Is not this extreamly idle and shifting, shewing he was hard put to it for an excuse? And yet they deferred giving Judgment till sixteen days were ex∣pired, waiting his return two days beyond their time; so that had he been at Home within his longest Fortnight, he had come before Judgment had been published against him. But he again pretends, They met some∣times at one place, sometimes at another; sometimes at one part of the day, sometimes at another: And could not he, in a Fortnight's time (and living in the Town, where the Meeting was to be held) inform himself, where, and at what time of the day they met? or did the Friends sent refuse to tell him? Well, but he hath a third Salvo, Their Paper, saith he,
doth not so much as al∣ledge, that I had any call to come to their Meet∣ing: Why then, say I, did they take the pains to give him notice by the Friends they sent? And yet the Paper doth (to use his own terms) implicitely alledge it, if not explicitely, by their delay to pass Judgment in his absence. And in p. 29. he saith, he went out of Town upon his necessary Occasion,  (so not on Truth's account) and how nev¦cessary that occasion was, himself best knows: That it was more indispensible, than the attending the Meeting, he pre∣tends not. Yet as mean and trifling as these excuses are, he thinks they are too se∣vere in un-ministring and un-christianing him, without coming again and again, at least twice or thrice, not considering, that by this time things were too far gone to be very dilato∣ry, a separation was begun (which if he had not begun, yet the continuation, or remaining separate, if he will believe himself, Seasonable Information, p. 16. must lye at his own Door) and he had printed against them; so that the relation between him and them, as Brethren, ceased, and they under no such Obligation to him that was become an open Enemy. And although he expostu∣lates, Was this like the restoring me in a Spirit of meekness; yet afterwards, p. 29. says, At that time they neither owned our Judicatory, nor we theirs, which as I take to be the truest reason of his Non-appearance, so I cannot but observe, that his insisting on their com∣ing again and again, that it might be like the restoring in a Spirit of Meekness, is no∣thing but Artifice, he designing to make them Journies enough, and at last deny their Judicatory, which is far enough from sincerity.
Another instance, suitable to this Head, is, that when he would wind himself off from being Author of ALL that Book (what part he was not Author of, he saith not) which gave a relation of his own and others Tryals, called, New England's Spirit of Per∣secution, &c. he seeks to palliate the un∣proved Accusations, saying, Nor do I find, that the said Book of the Tryal doth charge him either with Drunkenness or Horse-racing, but simply (he should have said invidiously) as to that, narrates the Proceedings of the Court, how things did pass there, p. 31. But besides that this is a sly, mischievous way of insi∣nuating a slander, especially from a nameless Pamphleteer (whereby the Lives and Con∣versations of the most Innocent may be ex∣posed to every scurrilous, lurking Detra∣ctor) I wish the Reader to observe, that this Anonymous Author doth not narrate Proceedings impartially, as is manifest even from hence: For whereas that account sug∣gests, p. 19. that a Paper was read, sub∣scribed by Mary Budd, wherein she saith, That Sarah Biddle saith, that William Biddle saith, that John Slocum saith, that S. J. run a Race, and was Drunk; yet when S. J. appeals to Geo. Keith in open Court, whe∣ther J. S. himself did not tell him, the mat∣ter was not true, (see p. 67. of The State of the Case, and p. 50. of
G. K's Answer to  it) that tending to clear in part him, whom this Book of the Tryal was designed to prostitute, we find never a tittle of it men∣tioned there. So that the Author being thus partial, and withal concealing his Name, when by Name he could defame o∣thers, manifests Malice, not Sincerity and Candour; and that he touched on this Charge, not as driven to it, by its being in∣terwoven with the matter of the Tryal, but with an intent to fasten a Reproach and Slander, leaving out what might tend to the Party's purgation in any wise. This great∣ly discredits the whole Undertaking, and bespeaks Malice. Fourthly, What G. K. offers for proof, falls short of being so, himself being judge, cum sua res agitur. For he excepts against S. J's bringing only the Credit of John White, whom he calls a prejudiced Adversary, p. 4. Again, By whom will he prove them, seeing he hath none but his own Party to give proof in the Case, which (saith he) as it is no Authentick proof among men, &c. p. 31. And in p. 33. For no man ouht to be accused of a thing, and for a ground of his Accusation, say, he can prove the thing true, and yet give no proof. Also in p. 48. he tells S. J. he giving no proof but his bare say so, the impartial Reader will not be∣lieve it. And again in his Postscript, allow∣ing evidences on both sides, being confessedly
Parties, to be no proper Witnesses, adds, Nor did I any farther make use of evidences of that sort, but to make a balance against the evidences of their side. (But what balance were his Evidences to make, when he had printed so many Books against them, before they made any defence at all?) And yet that he may cast an Odium on his Opponent and others, of all the Charges he brings in this Book, he offers no evidence, but his own, who is their Adversary, and confessedly a Party indeed; and when he Cites F. Howghil, p. 33. J. Crook and Geo. Bishop, p. 30. (to fa∣vour his Notion of Baptism) and Edw. Bur∣rough, p. 48. he is so far from referring to the Page, that he doth not so much as give the Title of the Treatises, but in general terms, F. H. hath well asserted in one of his printed Treatises against a Romanist; I have the printed Testimonies of J. C. and G. B. in their Treatises concerning Friends Principles; and G. B. hath said and writ in Lines (so they were not Lineless Writings) to his Persecutors. Now is this Man fit to reprove another, who though a
Scholar, writes thus loosly? And when he is put to prove any matter of Fact, he tells us indeed of Witnesses, that some of them are here in England, and at London, as p. 14. and 36. That an honest Person of good repute here in Town is ready to witness, p. 47. and an honest Friend, p. 50. and that to a  matter, wherein he charges high. Nay so far is he put to it for Evidence, that he brings in William Bradford, p. 40. as an Evi∣dence in his own particular Case. Hath not this Man's Envy outrun his Judgment, and drawn Paul's reproof upon him, who said, Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thy self, Rom. 2.21. But if he will not see himself, I hope the Judicious will see him. Fifthly, But that which renders the Man yet more mean and base, is that he thus treats (and vaunts over) an absent Per∣son, who upon reading G. K's Advertise∣ment, wherein he threatned a Reply, wrote a Letter to him, (which a Friend left at his House for him) pressing G. K. to hasten his, that he might have an opportu∣nity to Rejoin, before he went off the Coast. Now surely any worthy Antagonist, if he had protracted his Work, till the other was too far gone, than to reach him; yet at least would have been sparing in offering any thing to blemish his Reputation, as a Man, or as a Christian, without very full, clear and undeniable Evidence, such as might bespeak its Credit, and not such, as in his own Case, he rejecteth; and also, in his Re∣ply, have taken some notice of the offer made; if this occasion, to detract him, had not been rather industriously embraced, than casual.
Sixthly, If it be not matter of Flourish, and to set off a bad Cause, why should he insinuate, that he hath Evidence so near as in London, many Witnesses, p. 14. some in London, ready to witness, p. 36. An honest Person of good repute here in Town, p. 47. An honest Friend here in Town, p. 50. and pro∣duce neither Testimonial from them, nor so much as name them, that others might be Judges of their Veracity, as well as himself? But the way he hath taken to slur another, slurs himself, and renders his own Charge the more suspected? And I may tell him, in his own words, p. 20. If it be enough to make a man guilty by the single Evidence of a preju∣diced Adversary, he hath hit the mark; but if otherwise, he only sheweth his Enmity and Pre∣judice. These short Touches, respecting G. K's partial way of managing Controversie, the ungovernedness of his Spirit, and his unfair way of treating his Opponent by obtruding as Evidence, what he disallows from others, (and that at a time, when he could not de∣fend himself, by reason of his distance) as they are matters deducible from his late printed Books, without dependance upon Evidence elsewhere, so are they left with the Reader, as Introductory to the following Certificates; my aim herein being to vindi∣ate
the Traduced, undeceive the Deceived, and lay open the Deceiver, and not to trace him through the several Parts of his Book, which affords matter enough, but shall re∣fer that to the Friends more immediately concerned, to do it, when G. K's Answer shall come to their Hands; and so conclude this Epistle, who am Thy Friend, J. P.
Certain Certificates received from Ame∣rica, &c. From our Monthly Meeting, held at our Meeting-house, in Chesterfield, in the Province of West-Jersey, the Second of the Sixth Month, 1694. To all our Faithful Friends and Brethren, that live and abide in the Truth, Greeting. HAving seen a Paper printed, wherein we find many black and dark Charges against many Faithful Friends of known In∣tegrity in these Parts, and in particular, against our Well-beloved Friend and Bro∣ther
Samuel Jennings, therein being Charg∣ed with such Enormities, as Drunkenness, running Horse-races and Persecution, &c. which we fully believe, are altogether false, and unjustly laid to his Charge; arising from the Spirit of Envy and Darkness, and to be judged by the Light, that discovers from whence it comes; seeing many of us have known him from the first of his coming into these Parts, and we know those things  wherewith he is charged, were always an abhorrence to him. As to his Conversati∣on amongst us, we can sincerely testifie, it was coupled with the Fear of God. He was a Man of great Tenderness and Love to all the Faithful. He was Just to all Men; and as to his Testimony, we had always good unity with it, and have been often re∣freshed hy him. An Instrument in the Hand of the Lord for good unto many, the Lord hath made him in these Parts of the World; and it is our earnest Desires to the Lord, that he may be preserved in the same Love and Life, in which he left us: And when his Service for the Lord, and his Truth is over with you for the present; our Prayers and Supplications are to the Lord for his safe Return unto us again, Amen. Signed by order, in behalf of the Meeting; by me Mahlon Stacey.
From our Monthly Meeting held at the House of Thomas Gardner, in Bur∣lington in West New-Jersey, the 6th of the 6th Month, 1694. TO our dear Friends and Brethren in the blessed Truth of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose habitation and standing is in the same, according to the Manifestation of it, wherein God, in the Riches of his Love, first visited us, to our great Satisfaction and Consolation; being by it brought into a blessed and sweet fellowship, dear and tender love one to another, in which (not∣withstanding all the Subtil workings of the Enemy, the Accuser of the brethren) we can say, to the Praise and Honour of the Lord, a little remnant is still preserved, feeling the good presence of our God, often to attend us, and refresh us, in our waiting upon him: And in this we dearly Salute you, desiring your welfare, preser∣vation and prosperity, every way as our own.
Now dear Friends, the writing of these few lines to you at this time, is occasioned,Who should spread this report but G. K's party here? by a report we hear, that our worthy Friend Samuel Jennings, now with you, is much Slighted by reason of a Book,We see whom these Friends repute, as the Authors. put forth by Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas Budd, and William Bradford, Printed in the Year, 1693 called New England's Spi∣rit of persecution, &c. Contrived and Pro∣mulgated chiefly, what in them lies, to the defamation of our said Friend S. J. And be∣cause he is a Man, who for several Years past, hath lived amongst us, both as a Mi∣nister and a Magistrate; we are free and willing, to signifie unto you something of our knowledge of him in both Capacities: As to his behaviour, and first, as to his Ser∣vice in the Church of God. He was a Man very Zealous for good order, and where any that professed the Truth, had walked disorderly, his censures of them were no other, then were very needful; for his endeavour hath been to keep Truth from being Reproached; not at all seeking Lordship or Superiority, as his Adversaries would insinuate. And as to his Testimony, it was Sound and Savoury, assisted by the good Power and Presence of the Lord there∣in,
to the day of his departure from us; and we hope you find it so with him still, we pray God preserve him. And Secondly, as a Magistrate, we be∣lieve he managed the Trust reposed in him, according to the best of his knowledge, and was no way lofty, or more high-mind∣ed then at other times. We could give some instances of it, as his Labouring with his Servants at Plough, Cart, Splitting-logs, and other such like servile Employ∣ments, even at the same time, when he was in the place of Governour, and many other things, too tedious here to relate. And as for Fines and perquisites, we think he was not, neither had cause to be eleva∣ted by reason of them; neither did he seek them, and if any wrong was done, it was his own estate that Suffered. Now as to the Book in general, and some of the Witnes∣ses that live amongst us in p rticular: As to that part of it, that relates to the Trial at Philadelphia, we shall say little, believing that you will have a large ac∣count thereof, from those that know more of it then we do. Only, we have seen so much of George Keith's insolent and provoking beha∣viour towards Friends here away, that we believe his carriage towards Friends there, as Magistrates, was intolerable, and what pro∣ceedings were against them there, are
aggravated beyond the bounds of Truth, with a design chiefly, to defame our Friend Samuel Jennings, as well as others. Now to be more particular: And first concerning this Man Peter Boss, that makes such a great Noise, with his Queries, and Witnesses to prove them; we shall say a little to what comes within our knowledge. First, we believe that prejudice hath entred him against S. J. ever since that time, the Meeting had to do with him, and gave Judgment against him, concerning a diffe∣rence he had with his Neighbour, and that ever since he hath been gathering up, and keeping, all that any could or would say against him, and if he knew of any, that had found the least dislike with S. J. he would Query with them, flatter, per∣swade,
&c. till he had made up those bundles of Stuff in the Book; and if Friends or sober People, did but know, how re∣proachful his Life and Conversation has been amongst us, and how Friends have been exercised and concerned with him, upon the account of his Servant Maid, for his rude and wicked Carriage towards her, and because he could not obtain his will, was cruel to her: Now though it never was our manner, nor hath been since the Separation, to expose them, as they have our Friends to the publick view of the  World; yet we think fit to give this ac∣count as aforesaid, and it is such matter of Fact, as he dare not deny it; and not∣withstanding all the endeavour of Friends, to keep it from the publick knowledg of the World, that so, neither the Truth, nor the Man might be reproached, yet, be∣hold this is the Man, thought a fit Instru∣ment to appear in Company with G. K. T. B. &c. in the Title page of the Book, to disgrace faithful Friends to the World. Thomas Budd, can, if he will, witness to the truth of this relation. Now we are willing to give some ac∣count, of the Evidence he produces to make proof of his Queries. First, as to Samuel Jennings's Riding a Race with John Slocum, you will have an account by a particu∣lar Certificate, of the falsehood of it. Secondly, as to the Query of his being drunk on board of Joseph Bryers Ship, the falsehood of that will appear, by a Cer∣tificate under the Hands of several Friends, and others that were then in his Compa∣ny. The Third Query is proved a lie, by Certificate from the Person concerned. The Fourth Query we need not say any more to, than the Letter S. Jennings at that time sent to
Elias Farr, mentions to clear it: On∣ly that we add, that that Witness, has for many Years, to our knowledge, been a  prejudiced Person, and declared that he hath not had unity with the Quakers, since he came into this Country, but hath since fallen in with our Adversaries, to the dis∣grace of Friends, both in his Almanacks, and as well other wayes. The Fifth: We are sen∣sible that there was a difference, between S. Jennings and John Skeen, about a Road
John Skeen had only upon Sufferance to his House, through Samuel Jennings's Corn-field, and the Gates being oftsn left open, and Cattel came in, and did much damage to the Corn, S. Jennings denied them of coming any more that way; upon which some dif∣ference arose on both sides, but were quick∣ly ended, and they were good Friends a∣gain, and we do believe that John Skeen, would have scorned such a small thing should have been published. But it is their great mistake (at best) to say, they never com∣plained to the Magistrate, or took a course in Law about it; for we have the warrant yet by us, to prove the contrary, but Friends made up this also. The Sixth Query is such a piece of nonsence, without any pretence of witness, time or place, we can say little to it, but leave amongst the rest of the rub∣bish. We must leave the Seventh Query there too, only with this mark upon them, that we believe they are two lies. And as to his witness Henry Beck, his discredit stands upon record in our Court Book, where the  Magistrates have dealt with him, for getting a young Woman with Child. And this John Smith, was under the like Circumstances, be∣sides his base carriage to his Master and Fami∣ly, by ill examples in wasting and purloyning his Master's goods. And as to John Bainbridge, tho he is now a great Man amongst them, as we hear, appears in publick in their Meetings; yet he hath been known, to be a Drunkard, Fighter, Quarreler, and so rude and wicked to his aged Mother, calling her Old Jezabel, and other such behaviour, which caused her to leave the Country, and come back to England. And as for James Silver, we have only this to say, that he said it was extorted from him, never thinking it should be put in Print. Truly, Dear Friends, this sort of work is very unpleasant to us, and looks so much like our Adversaries doings, that were we not hereunto constrained, for the Vindica∣tion of our traduced Friend Samuel Jennings, whose care for promoting the Truth, and service in the Church, is at this time fresh in our remembrance, we should not be thus concerned. Signed by Order and in Behalf of the Meeting; by me James Marshall.
Burlington, the 9th of the 6th Month, 1694. WHereas we whose Names are here un∣der-written, have seen a Book pub∣lished by Peter Boss, George Keith, &c. En∣tituled, New England's Spirit of Persecution, &c. and in the said Book certain Queries, by way of Reflection on our dear Friend Sa∣muel Jennings; the first, Whether S. J. did Ride a Race with John Slocum, &c? This may Certifie all to whom this shall come towards clearing Truth, and our Friend Samuel Jennings, that we have spo∣ken with the said John Slocum, and he po∣sitively affirms, that he never rode a Race, or Wager with Samuel Jennings; and there is no Truth in the said Query: And further the said John Slocum did tell us, that George Keith went to enquire of him, if that S. J. and he did not ride a Race, and John Slocum told him no. Isaac Marriot, Henry Grubb, Joyce Marriot.
WHereas a Book Published and Printed in Pensylvania in the Year 1693. of the Trial of Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas Budd, and William Bradford, wherein seve∣ral Queries are proposed concerning Samuel Jennings, implicitely intimating, and charg∣ing him, with several Notorious Trans∣gressions and Misdemeanors. We, whose Names are here under-written, do as to the Second Query, viz. Whether Samuel Jennings was drunk on Board Joseph Bryer's Ship at Burlington, declare, and positively aver, that he the said Samuel Jennings, was not in the least measure disordered in Drink at that time, nor at any other time to our know∣ledge. Dated this first Day of the sixth Month, 1694. We the Subscribers being then and there present. John Tatham, Elizabeth Tatham, William Biddle, Francis Davenport, Richard Basnett, Elizabeth Basnett.
WHereas Peter Boss in the Third Que∣ry in the Book, makes use of my Name about a Survey of Land; I do certifie all Friends, and others concerned, that it is nothing but a very Lie insinuated by way of Query: For I do utterly deny that I had ever begun to Survey, or had any Right there to Land. As witness my Hand, John Antrum. his mark Friend Elias Farr,
BY thy Letter, I perceive thy Trouble, concerning my late Sufferings, and withal thy Judgment upon it, which I think is full forward enough; however my Answer to thee is, that I have Surveyed all the un∣surveyed Lands in that place, and if this thou callest Matthews his Meadow be such, then I have Surveyed it, and not otherways. Thou judgest thou canst prove it to be Surveyed, and Recorded some Years ago to Matthews,  which if thou canst do, it ends the dispute, but I had Daniel Leads with me, who Sur∣veyed Matthews's Land, who would give me no account what number of Acres, or what course they steered, in any Surveyings of Matthews there; but says in some part of it, they marked a few Trees, which I de∣sired him to shew me, but neither he, nor I, could find them: So if this were a Sur∣vey, I shall leave to be tried and judged, and if it be none, I would be informed what I have done, that would be abominated a∣mongst sober Heathens, or that might not be done by as good a Christian as Elias Farr. So that my Answer and Resolution is, that as I have Surveyed all that vacant Land, which on all sides incloseth the Meadow a∣foresaid, to hold it until such time I can re∣ceive a better account of any other Title to it. For if Matthews have any, how much? For all was never pretended to; and if not all, but some, then how bounded, and how to be found, that the remainder may be known. These things I expect, and resolve to be satisfied in; and if it appear the Land I have taken, or any part of it, were Sur∣veyed to Matthews, I will give thee no trou∣ble to recover it, but will readily resign it; but if not, know I will not be frighted out of it, by being told of Matthews his great Estate and Interest: For I hope I have
enough to defend a Just Cause, which ends this. From thy Friend, Samuel Jennings. I am going just now a Journey, and shall scarce return, in less than a Week, in the mean while provide thy self, and at my re∣turn, I shall not refuse to meet thee in any way of a decision. I Benjamin More do testifie, that what is mentioned in the Book, about taking me by the Throat, is as great a Lie as ever was Printed: But I do say he was as good a Ma∣ster both to me and other Servants, as I would desire to serve: As witness my Hand, (I served him three Years). Benjamin More. I Thomas Brian having seen an Accusation in a Book, that my Master Jennings knocked down, and broke his Cane, on one
of his Servants. As to being knocked down, it is a very Lie, but it is true the Cane was broken, but not by unmerciful Blows, for they were no more than I then deserved. And as for his dealings with me, it was al∣ways as any honest Master ought to do to his Servants. I did serve him Six Years, and have known him Fourteen Years, and never saw him any ways disguised in Drink, or run Races. As witness my Hand, Thomas Briant. West-Jersey, the third of the sixth Month, 1694. To all Friends and People, to whose Hands this may come.
I Having heard and seen many dark and black Charges, against my dear Friend, and former Master, Samuel Jennings, whom the Lord hath made Instrumental in his Hand, for the good of many in this his powerful Day: And notwithstanding this his Service, yet he hath not escaped the re∣viling of wicked and ungodly Men. And I living with him about half a Year, am willing  to say something, as I did know him, and in particular concerning those Reflections cast upon him, concerning his hard usage of his Servants; I have from time to time, and all times, as occasion hath presented, and do at this time freely speak, and from the bottom of my Heart believe, that he was a real and a very honest-minded Man towards his Ser∣vants. I may omit to speak of divers Pri∣vileges, which his Servants had, which I think few in the Country had the like, to speak of the Care which I have known him take for his Servants, expressing that the desire of his Heart was; however the Lot of him or his Children might be, as to the outward, that he might have wherewithal, to do justly by his Servants; who were wil∣ling to come with him, and put their Trust in him. Truly it was manifest both in Food and Raiment, and as far as I did know, in moderation in Labour; and I being an Eye and Ear-witness to these things, and seeing the whole aim and drift, of the Backsliders in our day, (as was their practice in former Ages) to bespatter, defame and belie the true Followers of Christ, notwithstanding their great talk of him; this I was willing to signifie, and do rest and remain your lov∣ing Friend, John Willsford, Junior.
Burlington, the fourth of the sixth Month, 1694. THese are to certifie all whom it may concern, that I Benjamin More Ju∣nior, having been a Servant to Samuel Jen∣nings for Seven Years together, do testifie, that he was so good a Master to me, as that if I had a Service to perform again, I should chuse him for my Master, as soon as any one I know: But I must acknowledge, that my self, and other Servants, that were young Lads like my self, were quarrelsome, and oftentimes disorderly, for which he gave us moderate Correction. But when it was discovered, and made appear that young Silver had stolen Oats, Powder, Shot, Wooll and other things, as also John Smith for Stealing Eggs, &c. to bring to his Wife; I cannot remember he gave them one blow for that. As witness my Hand, Benjamin w More. his mark.
Philadelphia, the eighth of the sixth Month, 1694. I Having seen and heard many Aspersions, that are cast upon my Friend Samuel Jennings, the which I am well assured, and do certainly know, that they are cast upon him, from the Enmity and Bitterness, of the Spirits of such, who have not seeked the Peace of Sion, but rather have laboured, as much as in them lyes, for to make Breaches within her Walls, and who have worse than in the Case of Ham, as much as in them lyes, not only uncovered Nakedness, but have en∣deavoured, to make that show like Naked∣ness, where there was none; whose Labour and Works will be rewarded according to their own doings, if that they repent not, which that they may, hath been often the Desire of my Heart.
And having seen the Testimonies of seve∣ral of my Friends, whom I well know, and whose Testimonies I believe for to be true concerning him, and having had some cer∣tain knowledge of him my self, and been ac∣quainted with him, almost ever since he came hither, being here before him, and having  been at many Meetings with him, upon the account of Worshipping, as also at Monthly Meetings: In both of which, I can freely say, that I never had, that I know of, the least against his Testimony, but was well satisfied with it, and comforted by it; and as to his Carriage and Management in Monthly Meetings, I never saw but that it was according to Truth, and I did always believe and know, that he was serviceable to the Meeting, to the which he belonged upon that account. And as to other Con∣cerns, I have several times been concerned with him, in outward Affairs, and I always found him, to be wise to manage an outward Concern; and when he hath been grated up∣on, I can singly say, both in things Spiritual and Temporal, that I never saw, but that he behaved himself well. And this I freely sig∣nifie for Truth's sake, and to ease my Friend, of those Aspersions. William Biles.
POSTSCRIPT. THese foregoing Certificates, rela∣ting to some of the Charges exhi∣bited against S. J. I leave with the Candid, who is willing indifferently to hear, what may be offered on both sides, and is not prejudicate; withal advising him, that by a Letter I saw which came with them, more were behind, which could not be got ready to be sent by that Ship. Yet one ob∣servation (occurring from a Clause in that signed by the Monthly Meet∣ing at Burlington, mentioning G. K's insolent and provoking Behaviour to Friends there, and their Belief that his Carriage to the Magistrates in Pen∣sylvania was intolerable) I think not improper to bring in here, from the
Analogy or Proportion the one hath to the other. For in p. 47. G. K. discanting upon S. J's Cruelty (as he terms it) to a Boy and his Master, causing the Boy to be whipt with Thirty Five Lashes on his Naked Body, with a Horse-whip, and the Master to be put in the Stocks, he assigns the provocation to be but small, viz. a small default of a poor Boy, that did throw a little Dirt or Earth at a Constable, and the Master for calling the said S. J. (who was then Governour) Prick-Louse Taylor. Now is not the alleviating or extenuating such Offences, an indirect abetting them, which shews how light∣ly he resents an Affront upon Magi∣stracy, while the Persons are such as he hath a pique against, and it gives the greater ground to suspect, that his late Actions have been correspon∣dent. But is it indeed a small default to fling Dirt at a Constable (especi∣ally when in the Execution of his Of∣fice, and to suppress a Tumult, as this is said to be) or to call a Go∣vernour,
Prick-Louse Taylor? Doth the Principle he pretends to, teach any such thing? Or hath it been the Custom of Friends here or elsewhere, thus to demean themselves, towards those that were set in Authority over them, whatever their Extract might have been? Not that I count it a disgrace to be a Taylor, but the word
Prick-Louse is a by-name, and word of Scorn and Contempt, which who∣ever will presume to give to a Go∣vernour, must needs be uneasie to the Government. As for the Severity of the Punishment, he offers no evidence but his own, though he tells of an Honest Person, of good Report in London, but not producing him, his Allegation deserves no Credit. As to that part of it, which he would fa∣sten on S. J. that also wants Expla∣nation, viz. That it is the Custom there (for it is not here) for the Governour to award the Correction, which belongs to the Office of a Ju∣stice of Peace. However this deducti∣on  seems natural, that things were at an ill pass there, when such Insolen∣cies could be offered to Magistracy; and the Offenders ought to be made Exemplary, to prevent a growing E∣vil: But G. K. doth not commend his own Conduct, in being Patron to the Abuse, by making light of it, and yet so virulently attaching them, by whom those Malignants suffered, as if the Punishment were great, the default small; nor doth he less than betray an implacable Spirit against S. J. to rake up matter of Accusa∣tion against him, of so long standing, as that must needs be, who was in England in the Year 1684. and hath not since been Governour there. This makes good the saying of the Wise Man, with which I shall close, viz. Wrath is cruel, and anger is outragious; but who shall stand before Envy? Prov. 27.4.
And to these Certificates received from America, let me add one more,  received from a Friend in London, whom I will name, which is more than he doth: But what he wants in Evidence, he makes up in Charge, alledging, p. 50. That S. J. most cru∣elly Whipt his Maid in Bed, with a Horse-whip, and a few Lines after re∣presents the Act as most unmerciful, and obscene. The like Charge was ex∣hibited, p. 21. of New England's Spi∣rit of Persecution, &c. viz. That he inhumanely Whipt her Naked in her Bed, the manner and circumstances of which (saith that Nameless Libeller) I here omit for Modesty's sake. The truth of this, I have endeavoured to satisfie my self in; and as I understand that what was done, was about Twelve Years ago, and nothing so as repre∣sented, either Cruel or Obscene, but the very having a Whip in his Hand,
accidental, he being just ready to take Horse, and had done, had not the Child's crying prevented; so I pre∣sume that what follows will both de∣tect the Asperser's Malice, clear the  Innocent, and satisfie the Unbyassed. The Relation was thus. There being a Scandalous Report, published in Print more than once, That Samuel Jennings Whipt his Maid most unmercifully, naked in her Bed, thereby endeavouring to render him
Cruel, Immodest and Obscene, and I be∣ing at that time (when this pretend∣ed Act was done) in West Jersey, where I did much frequent his House, and knowing the Truth of this mat∣ter, do certifie it, as it really was, which is thus; The Maid lay with their young Child, which then cryed extreamly for a considerable time, and her Master and Mistress knockt and called very much, but by no means could make her take notice of it, in∣somuch that they feared the Child would have been harmed, whereupon her Master run up Stairs, having his Whip in his Hand, at whose coming she starts and sate upright in her Bed, and in that posture he gave her Two  or Three strokes over the Back, and no otherwise. The Maid lived with him a considerable time after this, and I have heard her speak very well of him, never complaining of any hard usage. This is Attested by me, London, 23. of 11. Month, 1694. Sarah Collins. FINIS.
