P506A R13971 12033736 52840
parliament consisting entirely of women A. PARLIAMENT. of Women
THE PARLIAMENT OF WOMEN: Or, A Compleat HISTORY Of the Proceedings and Debates, Of a particular Junto, of Ladies and Gentlewomen, With a design to alter the Go∣vernment of the World. By way of Satyr. LONDON, Printed for John Holford, at the Crown in the Pall-mall, 1684.
THE PARLIAMENT OF WOMEN. YOU are not to imagine, that this▪ Assembly was ever call'd together by Writ or Summons, nor do I believe the Penny-post was much concern'd in the Convocation. Only a certain Company of Select▪ La∣dies, and Female-Burgesses, ambitious of the Title of Patriotesses, never ceas'd, till they had talk'd themselves into a nu∣merous Society. These having been long brooding over the Grievances of their Sex, had first their private Con∣sults and Correspondenties, till a length encouragd by a General Unanimity▪
and Concurrency in their Complaints, they assum'd to themselves the Name of their Sexes Representatives, and took a Resolution to seek Redress in a Parlia∣mentary way. Having likewise agreed to carry on their Designs under the gau∣dy Mantuaes (for the word Cloak is now to be cast off) of Religion and Property. The Place that was debated on for this great Assembly, was the Blew-house in Enfeild-Chase; first, because it was by vul∣gar Fame reputed to be the place where the Gun-powder-Plot was fist hatch'd; and secondly, because the Red-Lyon at Barnet lay so convenient in the Road. But that being displeasing, as being too caty, and fearing to be troubled with their Capital Enemies the Fleas, if croud∣ed too much together at such a Busie time as that, they at last concluded upon Merton-Abby, which they found to be a place where their Husbands Ancestors had fat in former times, and made seve∣ral Laws; which they resolv'd to repeal upon the same spot. The next thing taken into considera∣tion, was, in what Robes they should sit, whether in Men's or Womens Ap∣parel, whether with Beards, or with∣out 'em.
Thereupon they agreed to sit in Mens habit, and for Quickness-sake, to make use of their Husbands Clothes. For it was but reason, they said, that they should wear the Breeches, that were go∣ing to assume the power. And as for Beards, it was alledged, That the gene∣ral Custom of shaving close among Men, had sav'd them the trouble of that Debate. Then, as for Perriwiggs, the Mode had already so much befriended them, that was but putting on a Hat, and they were perfect Man, without contradiction, as good as ever Leg was laid over, from the very Crown of the Head to the very bottom of the Chin, where the chiefest difference between the Sexes lay publick to the World. Now when the time of the Sessions began to approach, and that it behoved them to repair to the General Rendez∣vous, these Women made an easie shift to steal from their Husbands, whom they left snoring, and fast bound in the chains of Sleep, over-burden'd with the Ponde∣rosity of the last Nights Compotation. But Heavens! How you would have blessed your selves? In what an Agony you would have been for fear of losing the Drums of your Ears, to have heard
how the men swore Walsingham the next morning, when they awak'd? Some for being disappointed in the it Morning Exercises, others not being able to remember where they had laid their Clothes when they went to bed. One miss'd his Shoes and Stockings; another his Perriwigg, Hat, Sword, Fring'd—Gloves; a nother was confin'd to his Chamber for want of his Breeches and Coat. They that had but one Suit were in a miserable Condition; they who had two were great losers however, for the Women carried away Silver, Gold, Watches, French, Tweezers, and all away, they had only reason to laugh, who had co∣zened their Wives, by losing all their Money the night before. Upon the tenth of the month Anthe∣sterion or April, according to the Ama∣zonian Accompt, and in the two hun∣dred and fortieth Bissextile or Leap year from the Reign of Pope Joan, this fa∣mous Female-Parliament open'd. At what time the Honourable Pensithelea, Countess of Mount-Orguil, being chosen Speaker of the Upper House, after a deep Silence commanded, began as follows.
Ladies and Gentlewomen, IT is to me the greatest Sign and happy Omen in the World of future Success in our Debates, and prosperous issue of our Consultations, that I see ye here appearing so numerous, and with so much Alacrity in your Countenances. From whence I have conceiv'd assured Hopes, that all things will tend by your painful endeavours to the Dignity and Profit of the Female-Common-weale. You all know how we have suffered for a long-time under the Oppres∣sion of men, who have all this while taken upon them to govern the Business of the World, in their Councils, Assemblies and Cabals, while we ti'd to our Distaffs, and our Needles, have slothfully deserted our own Cause.— Ay by my faith have we, presently cryed one of the Commoners; You speak like an honest good Lady—And was going on with a long story, had not some of her Acquaintance check'd her—By my faith, quoth she, but I will speak—Do we not come all to speak here? And then she clapp'd her hands, and was beginning to lift up her voice against the Men—But then—
Madam, quo' the Speaker—Pray here me out—You shall speak as much as you please when it comes to your Turn▪—in the mean time hear me out—Now I say Ladies, that from this oppression f Men and our own neglect it comes to pass, that we have no share in the Go∣vernment of the Common-wealth▪ that Men only make use of Us, as we make use of our Bed-pans and Close-stools; So that if we let 'em go on to fool us as they have hitherto done, I refer it to your judgment what will become of us—Why then give me leave to speak—Ile tell ye, cry'd one—You speak! cry'd ano∣ther, why should you speak before me?—My Lady Speaker, since you have re∣ferr'd it to my Judgment—Nay Lord! which if ye interrupt me thus—I shall nere ha' done. With that they cry'd out all together, Go on, my Lady Speaker, go on—The interruption thus over—Bishops, said she, have their Convocations, Souldiers their Councils of War, even Emmets have their assemblies upon Ant-Hills; only Women of all other Creatures are de∣barr'd from all Society. Ay truly▪ Ma∣dam so they are—Pray be quiet there—Can't you hold one minute
or two?—I think the Devil's in ye all—And so having procur'd a third silence, she proceeded. Nor have we undertaken, Ladies, a thing that ne∣ver was a tmpted before, for I remem∣ber I have read a story of one Heliogaba∣lus. Who this Heliogabulus was, is no∣thing to you nor me; But I am sure he was an Emperor, and in his time the Woman had their Senates & Assemblies to consult of publick affairs as well as Men. This Example of our Ancestors for some time intermitted, it behoves us now to restore. Never more need—We find how that under the Reigns of Men your Monarchs are nothing but wars and destructions: the Divines are at daggers drawing with the Divines; the Philosophers at Mortal Enmity with the Philosophers; nothing but confusion in the World; which makes me be∣lieve that if the Reins of Government were delivered into our hands, it would go much better with the world then it does; let me advise ye therefore Ladies and Gentlewomen, to consider the great work ye have in hand, not to be tumultuous in your disputes, but to shew your selves moderate and discreet; for that it behoves us to out-do our Oppressors,
Men as well in Fact as in Talk; by which means when we have got the Govern∣ment of the World into our hands, we may be able to keep it by prudence and good Management. But above all things Ladies beware of quarrelling about tri∣vial things; have a care of peaching one another: For Women are not ig∣norant that Women do those things in secret which they would not have all the World know; therefore if any Gentlewoman or Lady be privy to any secret of her Friend, let her by no means divulge it in Heat and Passion; for that would be no to lay her self, but her intimate also open so our Oppres∣sors. And they heaven knows, when they find that Women lay themselves open, are apt enough to take all advan∣tages against them; therefore I say Ladies, and Gentlewomen beware how ye ex∣pose your selves; for women like all sorts of Commodities, lose their intrin∣sick value, by being too often exposed, we are not therefore now to expose our selves, but to oppose our selves; we are to oppose our selves against the Crafts▪ wiles, Subtilties and Polices of those that have for so many hundred years enslav'd us, and when we have brought our
Tyrants under our Girdles, they'l then be glad to expose, repose, depose, compose, or any pose that we shall impose upon 'em. And then Wee'l pick and choose, and leave and refuse—I have seen Women quarrel, and scold, and wrangle, and fight, and scratch one another at Church, and all about the precedency in a Pew; To prevent any such disorders in this great assembly let me advise ye in the first place, to let the most noble to take place according to their several degrees, and the Antiquity of those degrees. Let the Commoners take place according to the number of Children which they have brought forth; let others rank themselves according to their ages, of which they shall be bound to bring a Certificate out of the Parish Church Book; and let them that never had any Children sit lowermost; as for the Widows let them that have Children sit in the Middle between the Married Mothers; but for them that have none, nor ever had, let them sit lower∣most of all. Thus Ladies and Gentle∣women, I have as briefly as I could, tho I know with no little force upon your Patience, declar'd to you the end of this Assembly; go therefore together and
be quick in your dispatches; for by that means it may so fall out that we may surprize our Enemies; and I have heard my Husband say that the Surprize of one Town is more honourable than the taking of ten by force: therefore if we can, let us surprize our Enemies. The Lady Seker had no sooner fini∣shed, but she was unanimously applaud∣ed by the whole Assembly; you would have sworn they had all lay'd, there was such general Cackling over the whole House, and one of the Com∣moners among the rest, thrusting forth her Lily white Neck with a Swan-like grace, propounded to choose the Lady Speaker for their supream Captain; which proposition was immediately and universally received; and then they be∣sought her to stick close to them with her Counsel and Wisdom, protesting on the other side to stand by her with their lives and fortunes. By the plea∣sures of my Youth, then cry'd an anci∣ent Matron, a glorious Cause, a most glorious Cause—What must we now march after the Drums again, to the tune of, Cuckolds come digg, come digg?—Well, if I must, I faith I'le be one of the foremost—I have carry'd a basket
of Earth before now—Nay, my Lady Speaker (dropping a low Cur∣tesie) I am as ready once more to offer up my Bodkin and Thimble to the support of this glorious Cause, as ever I gave them formerly to the Publick Faith. With that, And I, and I, and I, they all cry'd; away, away, away, and so retir'd to their own Appartment. And now it is requisite you should know who were the most Eminent Speakers in this Assembly; and first, there were in the Upper House, The Countess of Mount Orguell, Speaker, The Dutchess of Female-Charmes. The Dutchess of Bleeding Hearts. The Dutchess of Wantage. The Dutchess of Babylon. The Dutchess of Decay'd Vertue. Countesses. Aabella Countess of Coyland. Mary Countess of Storm-land. Frances Countess of Rump-ford. Lucretia Countess of Mirth and Glee. Joanna Countess of Rule-the-Roast. Maudlin Countess of Maiden Broadlye. Artemisia Countess of Nothing-ham-shire.
Dorothy Countess of New castle Ʋnder legg. Martha Countess of Beafordia. Lucy Countess of Brickle-ware. Penelope Countess of Rutlandia. Rebeckah Countess of Whigg-land. Rachel Countess of Tory-land. Artemisia Countess of The Bagno. Ʋrania Countess of Cuckold-shire. The Lady Fsgig Baroness of Giddie-Hall. The Lady Rusty Fusty Baroness of Tongue-Castle. The Lady Crack-fart, Baroness of Lapdog Mere. The Lady Baisez-man cu Baroness of Great Harlotry. The Lady Clara Baroness of Itching. The Lady Susanna Baroness of Horn Fair. The Lady Ann Baroness of Rising. The Lady Lucida Baroness of the Darby Ale-house. Commoners. Madam Quaint of Whetstone Park Esq; Sr. Susan Lye-fair of Low-lye-down in the County of Effex Baronettess. Madam Fadomless Esquiress. The Lady Squeamish. The Lady Polyhimne. Madam Rantipol.
Madam Nere-deny-Man. Sr. Amy Nimble-Clack of Tattle-Hall, Baronettess. The Lady Twittle-cum-Twattle. all of the Long Robe. The Lady Voluble. The Lady Nose. The Lady Wrath. The Lady Lustful. Madam Tomboy. Mrs. Soake pot. Proserpina She-Devil of Hell-house Esquiress. Madam Tempest. Madam Rash. The Lady Restless. The Lady Sensual. Madam Fleshly-Given. The Lady Lofty. Mrs. Taradoodle, Sergeantess at Mace. Carnal Copulation Barebon Clark of the Junto. The Commons being thus retir'd to their Appartment, as I said before, they chose incontinently for their Speaker, Madam Quaint of Whestone-Park Esq; a Lady of great Abilities, and of great Eloquence as well as Power. Madam Quaint being thus elected was immediatly ordered to the Chair,
and to distinguish her from the rest, appointed to sit with a Chamber-pot upon her head, and a Tobacco Pipe in her Mouth. But then what to do for a Mace they could not tell: Madam Rash propounded to send for the large Rams-Horn Mace that was used to be carried before the Prsient of the Bulls-feather Clubb; and urg'd that nothing could be more convenient, for two Reasons; first, said she, the Horns are our own gift, so that we may make use of 'em when we please, and when we have done with 'em restore 'em again; if not the same, yet much larger and fairer. Secondly, it will be a great terror to our Husbands, to see what they must trust to, if they disturb us in our designs. How! said Madam Lofty, I'le never yield to it while I breath. Horns are the only Marks of Ignominy that we can bestow upon our Husbands; and stall we take their Marks of Ignominy from 'em, and appropriate 'em to our selves? No—in the name of vertue let 'em e'n carry them to their Graves. With that, up stept the Lady Poly∣himne, a great Poetess, and Antiquary besides, I think, quo' she, Ladies, I may
easily reconcile this difference among us. I have read, how formerly our Sex were want to meet frequently together to celebrate the Feasts of Bacchus. These women, mad as March Hares, that is as mad as our selves, were wont at those Meetings to have Trunchos of old Vines carry'd before them, adorned with those Utensils, for which as we our selves do, they in those times most affcted Men: for if it were not for those Utensils of theirs whene arises our kind∣ness to men, I know not I profess, of what use they would be to us; as I hope I shall make out in this Honourable House when time serves. Now Ladies, one of these Truncheons thus adorn'd was presented to me from beyond the Seas for a great peice of Antiquity, and is at the service of this Assembly if they order me to send for it; thereupon they cry'd out all together, Nemine cntra∣dicente, send for it, send for it. When it was brought into the House, vertu goi! What a twittering, and gig∣ling, and teighing, there was from one end of the Room to the other. It was viewed without any remorse of Con∣science; not one that lock'd upon it through her Fingers: Madam Rantipol
laugh'd out right—by my Fackins Ladies, quo' she, I never could find what my Husbands devices were good for before; for I'le assure ye Ladies, they are more for Ornament then use. Thereupon it was ordered that the Per∣ticular thanks of the House should be given to the Lady Polyhimne for her Ac∣ceptable present of such a proper Mace, which was presently delivered to Mrs. Taradoodle, Sargeantess Attendant. Having proceeded thus far they settl'd their several Commettees, one to draw up the heads of their Greivances against the Male Sex; and to consider of a speedy way of Redress, and of the fittest way to cast off the Yoke of Tyranny which they had so long groan'd under: another of due Elections, in case of the decease of any of their Members, a third for Religion, not that they car'd so much for the Religion Established, as what Religion to set up upon the Alteration of Government; as believing that the Mens and their Religion would never agree. The fourth and last was for Trade; which as they said had been very much abus'd by forraign Interlopers; a fifth Committee was also appointed to look over the statute Books and Law Cases
which had been made during the Go∣vernment of Men, and to report what Laws were fit to be repeal'd, and what to be added for the advantage of the fe∣male Commonweal. The same Com∣mittee was also to consider of scandalous and seditious Books and Pamphlets. Presently cry'd the Lady Twittle-cum-Twattle, I have heard my Husband talk much of these Commitees,—I I dont like these Commitees—No by my truly I don't like it, that some must be pack't one way into one Room others another way into another Room, and there forsooth they must have all the Talk by themselves, and we must sit here by our selves, and not hear a word what they ay—No, no, by my Faith, that's not the way; I say let's talk all together. I am for that Court ye call Dover Court, all Speakers and no Hearers,—the Lady Polihimne took her up, and told her that he Method of Parliamentary proceedings requir'd Committees to prepare Matter, and that then they were altogether to consider the Reason of things. How! quo the Lady Twit-cum-Twat, Reasons! what have we to do with Rea∣sons?—Tis an Innocation upon the
Female Sex, to bring in Reason amon us, Reason is the only thing where the Men pretend to excell us, the Engi which they have all along made use  to keep us in Subjection; the Cloak fo all their Oppression—when I gro impatient, and am a top o'the Hous with my Tyrant, hear Reason Wife▪ crys the sawcy Malapert Swaggerer—No, I'le hear no Reason for that trick—out upon it—fogh—Reason▪ Why we had as good continue as w are, they have got the Whip hand o us at Reason—they go first t School, and there they learn a hundre Tricks—then they march to the Universities, and there they get their Logick, their Syllogismes, and their Di∣lemma's, their Crotchets and their Quil∣lets, and beat us with our own Wea∣pons, Long Talk and Words—But I Faith wee'l pull down their Schools and their Universities for 'em—Wee'l spoil their Reasoning with a Ven∣gance— The Lady Wrath mov'd that every Membresses Husband (to begin with them first for example sake) might be sent for by Mrs. Taradoodle Serjeantess at Arms, and made to kneel at the Bar—
God's-life, quo' she, Mrs. Speaker, my Magisterial Grievance came in t'other night, at three a Clock in the Morning, with his forehead so well freighted, that had he had but as much wit in his Brains as he had juice of the Grape, all the Wise men of Greece might have been Ignora∣musses to him—and where d' ye think he had been?—No where but gaming—so far from having any Mony in his Pocket, that he was strip't from head to foot like a Cas'd Rab∣bet—and what d' ye think he would have had after all this?—Nothing but my Jewels—to have sent the Helve after the Hatchet. No, I appeal to this Honourable assembly whether he ought not to be made kneel at the Bar for this—and pray Mrs. Speak∣er do you be sure to rattle him soundly—is not the first time, I assure Ye. While these things were thus trans∣acting near the Chair, there was a most horrible Clamour at the further end of the House, where two she Country Bur∣gesses were ready to lay violent hands upon each others Coronet, about a dif∣ference that arose between 'em, which had the best Receipt for the Making of Almond Puddings. One cited the Queen's
Closet open'd; the t'other the learn Mays Cookery. Ladies, quo' Mrs. Speaker these a low things for the Men▪ to box abo shortly,  we are now for higher Co¦sultations. Well Mrs. Speaker tis true, crys th one, but I hate to be contradicted—and so do I as much as you, quo' th t'other—but you shall be contradicted▪ quo' the other, if I live and sit here—Slife quo' the t'other, speak such anothe word and I'le throw my Fan in you Face—another Hurly Burly hap¦pened in another part of the House, fo that one that sate upon the seat abov would needs set her dirty shoes again the Rump of her that sate just under he The one bid her keep her feet off, th t'other cry'd she would put her feet there▪ the lowermost swore by the bones of he Mother, she should not put her feet there▪ So that the discreeter sort fearing a di¦sturbance, cry'd out to the Bar, to th Bar, but when they were commande to kneel, one cryed, that she was such an Enemy to that humble posture o kneeling, that she never kneel'd at he Prayers. Another said she would be first burnt for a Coiner. A third said, her
Husband would once have had her kneel∣d and ask'd forgiveness, but she present∣y broke his Pate. A fourth cry'd 'twas dolatry, and that her Conscience would ot let her. The Lady Lofty told them they had roken the Orders of the House,—Orders of a Turd, cry'd one of the Delinquents—Order me▪ no Orders—for I'le obey none of your Orders, by the help of God, not I,  nere obey'd any hitherto, and I wont egin now— The Lady Squeamish urg'd, that the very Thieves and Cutpurses liv'd under Laws and Ordinances for Convenience-sake, and it was but reasonable that they who were about to Rob their Husbands of their long usurpt Authority, should agree against the Common Enemy. Thieves and Cutpurses Madam▪ cry'd the other, what's that to me what Thieves and Cutpurses do—I would have your Ladyship know—am neither thief▪ no Cutpurse, but as good a Women as your self, and for ought I know brought as good a Porti∣on to maintain me—upon that the Lady Voluble stept in, and told them that she highly commended the stifness
of their Kees in respect of their Hus∣bands, but as the ase flow stands, you standing so stifly upon your Pamables is contrary to Magna Charta, as they call it, by which it was enacted that the les∣ser number should always submit to the Greater. Madam Noise, a great pretender to the Law, as one that had sollicited a long cause in Chancery, against an Attorney of Clements Inn; urged the business more home, and offer'd to bring a hun∣dred presidents to prove what Madam Voluble had alledg'd. She also cited a Statute of the first of Maud the Empress, wherein it was ordained that tho' Wo∣man might not kneel to Men, upon any terms whatsoever. Yet that one Wo∣man should kneel to another, adding withall, that she had seen several Daugh∣ters kneel to their Mothers, and several Mothers ask their Grand-mothers bles∣sing upon their knees; and that it was a Common thing in France, for the Women to kneel when they kissed the Queens hand. But nothing would do, the Delin∣quents would no more buckle in the Hamms, nor cringe to the Chair than the Jews to Titus's Hogs; so that Madam
Noise moy'd that they might be expell'd he House for example sake. But Mrs. Speaker, unwilling to lose our such notable Membresses, propos'd  Medium; that they should only shed fteen tears in their Hankerchers by way of acknowledgment, and cunningly su∣orn'd a Messenger to bring the four Delinquents tydiugs at the same time, of their Husbands Deaths. Well know∣ng that if that news would not move hem, yet they would cry for Madness hat they could not have their wills;  the first Project took, for they no ooner heard their Husbands were gone o Pegg Trantums, but they presently ull'd out their Muckenders, and dropr fteen pearls a piece as naturally, poor ouls, as Maids cover Matrimony, to he great Satisfaction of the whole As∣embly, who presently voted them back o their Seats. Whither as they were oing one of them, more regretting the ews of her loss than the rest, gave such  loud sigh backward, as mov'd the whole Assembly to pity, believing her ause was extraordinary; and ordered hat the Verses upon the Parliament fart should be re-printed with certain Altera∣ions and Amendments; not deerning it
fitting that the Memory of a Male Tail¦shot should be more eterniz'd then a Fe¦male one. In the heat of these debates the Committee for Elections made  report of several Vacancies; some by death, others through the Imperiousnes of their Husbands, who upon discovery had lock'd up their Wives, and woul not let them come to the assembly, an desired the Opinion of the House abou supplying the Vacant Places. The latter Reason of the Commite presently put the House in an upproar Madam Lofty cry'd out, it was a Breach of Priviledge of the Highest Nature, and mov'd that the offenders might be sem for by the Serjeantess at Arms. Presently came in one of the She Burgesses for High-Wicked that ha made her Escape, and aud out a Com¦plaint as loud as a Saints Bell, how he Husband had lock'd her up in a gre Trunk, and fed her with nothing b Chocolate and Cheescakes for four day together to keep her from stirring abroa And that she might have layn ths  this time buried alive in a Deal Chest where she heard nothing all day lo but the Continual Alarms of Death Watches, had not her beloved Waitin
Maid and Cabinet Counseller deliver'd her, in her Husbands Absence, by the help of a false Key, and made her Su∣perstitious Tyrant believe, that the De∣vil wire-drawed her through the Key∣hole. By and by in came another foam∣ing and swearing Revenge; for that her Husband had kept her chained to the Bed-post with a long Chain, that gave her no more freedom then to rattle from the Bed to the Table, where he fed her with nothing but Carriers Pudding and brown Bread; pretending to make her good Condition'd, all which she had endur'd for seven long days together. And not only so, but that he had bound her up with an Italian Padlock, to se∣cure his Liberty and Property as he call'd it; that she had still continud under this heavy Oppression, had she not been very watchful of Opportunity's, and one night when her Husband came home drunk as a Rat, pick'd his Pocket, as he lay in the fetters of a sound Sleen, of the Key of her Horselock, by which means she got her heels out of Bondage and made her Escape to a Neighbours House in her Smock, and there borrow'd the Cloaths she had on to make her perso∣nal Appearance according to Summons▪
But for the Italian Padlock, that after all the Art that she or her Neighbours could use, she could not rid her self of it, but was still forc'd to carry it about her, as a badge of Matrimonial Slavery and Tyranny not to be endur'd; for the truth of which, if they would not be∣lieve her, they might believe their own Eyes, she being ready to shew sufficient proof of what she had alleadg'd when the Honourable House should think fit∣ting to require it. Which Complaints so incens'd the whole Assembly, that they flew high at the poor Men, and came to several Resolves. Resolv'd, that who ever should lock up his Wife in a Trunk or chest out of a Tyrannous design to keep or restrain her from gadding abroad at her own will and pleasure, shall be reputed a Capital Enemy to the Female Com∣mon-weal. Resolv'd, that whoever shall chain his Wife by the Legs or any other Mem∣ber to the Bed-post, or any other place whereby she shall be restrained from using her own Liberty of going a Swan∣hopping, shall be likewise reputed a Capital Enemy of the Female Common∣weal.
Resolv'd, that an Italian Padlock is a most unspeakable Grievance to the Female Common-weal, and an insuf∣ferable breach of the Liberty and Pro∣perty of the Subject. Resolv'd, that who ever shall by force and violence make use of an Italian Padlock, to debar his Wife from the free Exercise of her Conscience, and the performance of such charitable duties, or otherwise, that she shall think her self oblig'd to, or to be convenient for her Health or Recreation, shall be re∣puted a Capital Enemy to the Famale Common-weal, and as such shall be prosecuted to death. Thereupon they order'd an Impeach∣ment to be drawn up against the fore∣mention'd Offenders for High Treason, the one for Chest-Empounding, the other for Chaining and padlocking up his Lawful Soveraign Wife, contrary to the known Laws of the Common∣weal of Amazonia. Then they took into consideration the First Request of the Committee, touching the replenishing of Vacancies; and being resolv'd into a Grand Com∣mittee of the whole House for that Purpose, Madam Squeamish first stood up
and mov'd that no Virgins might be admitted into the Assembly. For, said she, many things may here hap∣pen to be debated, which it is not fitting for Virgins to hear; that they were met upon Affairs of great consequence which requir'd sober and mature heads, not raw and unexperienc'd Youth to determin. Nor was it proper that Young Flebergebits, that had not yet done playing with their joynted-Ba∣bies, should be Companions for their Seniours; she farther urg'd that there∣by the Men might come to have a strong Party in the House, for that it was na∣tural to Virgins to hanker after Men and Matrimony and to listen to the first Temptations of Youthful Titillati∣on; they think those Men that give them their Primitive Satisfactions to be Angels at first, till they know better, and have such a high Opinion of al Men for their sakes, that we shall have all our Designs thwarted, our counsel betrayed in hopes to pleasure the Me from whom they expect retaliation o kindness. There is such a kissing and toying, such protesting and vowing▪ such Adoration and Submission before Virgins yield up their fort of Modesty▪
that they will never desire Men to be greater▪ slaves or to be more in Subjecti∣on then they seem to be. And there∣fore should we discourse of subduing the whole race of Men before them, they would be sure to oppose us, as not desiring that men should be more their Vassals then they were. To this Madam Tomboy reply'd, that Virgins were no such Fools as Madam Squeamish took them to be; They did not go to the Boarding Schools for no∣thing; for tho they learnt but very lit∣tle of what they were sent thither to learn, yet either by discourse among themselves, or else by reading of▪ Ari∣stotl's Problemes, which they Dogseard more then their Psalters, and the learn∣ed Comments which the elder and more experienc'd made upon them they came to know as much at Thiteen as if they had been Mid-wives of twenty years standing. Nor do they want stories of the Inconstancy, Infidelity, Ingrati∣tude, Treachery, falseness, and deceit of Men; nor fresh Examples of delud∣ed Virgins stollen out of their School, and afterwards rejected, scorn'd, abus'd, misus'd, contemn'd and slighted by their once the fondest, kindest, most
protesting vowing, submissive Spaniel∣like Lovers in the World. And these things almost with their milk, cause them to suck in an inbred harred of the Male Sex; so that a Virgin that as but a barly Corn of discretion is as shie of a Man, as a Wheel-Dogg of a Cook-Maid. A man may as soon lay falt upon a Titmouses tayl, as come near to touch 'em; They will rather trust to the satisfaction of three pil'd velvet, then have to do with that Tray∣tor Man. By my truly, cry'd the Lady Nim∣ble-Clack, I'le tell ye Mrs. Speaker, I have been at one of these Boarding-Schools my self, and there we had a Woman to teach us French, Laud—what a pretty melting Language it is! But the Subject I met with melted me even into a gelly of Extasie; for this French Woman had a pretty little neat Book (if I had it here I could kiss it) call Esehole defilles. In this Book she would often read with great delight: which I observing, fed her with Cakes and sweetmeats (for my Mother, Mrs. Speaker always allow'd me Mony▪ in my Pocket) and never let her alone, till I made her read it all over to me;
But Laud—You cannot imagin Mrs. Speaker, what strange Passions it wrought in me! I minded my work no more—no more—no more, Mrs. Speaker what shall I say—no more then a man that is going up the Ladder to be hang'd minds a new suit of Cloaths—Laud—there were such Expressions in it as made my blood daunce new Boree, and the Tricketee's in every vain—Then she told me of another Book, call'd Ragionamenti D'Aretino: but that she said was in Italion and she did nor understand it. But I got another that did, and made her read it all over to me, and paid her weekly till she had done; then she told me of another Book, call'd Aloysia sigea, which was in Latin, and beyond her Spheare too. Thereupon I enquir'd after a Woman that understood Latin, and mony that finds out all things, soon found me an Interpreter, and I can assure ye Mrs Speaker, that it is not for nothing, that Latin is call'd the Language of the Whore▪ For certainly never did any Book in this World give such an absolute and perfect accompt of Cupids Tacticks as that Book: 'tis a Book so ravishing—I
lost my Virginity with only▪ hearing it read—And I am perswaded that were it translated▪ there would not be a Virgin in the Town, by that time a Girl had read her Primmer out—which woul'd certainly increase our contempt and hatred of Men, when we could have our Business done by hearing only, without being beholding to the sence of feeling. However by this means and cost I got that know∣ledge by fourteen, that had this Noble Assembly been then Summon'd, I should have tak'n it very ill to have been left out. But now I am to ask the Lady's that spoke last what sort of Virgins they mean? Whither Virgins so indeed, or Virgins so reputed? If Virgins so in∣deed, then I confess it were a madness to admit into such an Assembly as this, and up upon Affairs of so great Im∣portance, Girles of Ten or Eleven years of Age, from whose discretion we can expect nothing of Counsel or Manage∣ment: But if they be Virgins so reput∣ed, there can be none fitter for our turn; for they have certainly been deluded by Men, and must therefore of neces∣sity be their Mortal Enemys. Secondly,
'tis a great sign that they are persons of Conduct and knowledge, that they can so well conceal their Losses, and put a cheat upon the World without being discovered. We shall wont dissem∣bling Females to deal with Male Hypo∣crites, and therefore my humble motion is that all reputed Virgins after years of discretion may be admitted. Here the Lady Squeamish started a new Hair, demanding what should be done with Virgins through necessity, that is to say, such as had Marry'd Eu∣nuchs for their Husbands? How said the Lady Nimble Clack, I conceive Mrs. Speaker, this question is easily answered; for if they have mar∣ry'd Eunuchs and continu'd Virgins, without seeking to revenge the Injury done them, they are Fools indeed, and consequently not fit to have any Room in this Place. And yet one would think there are none that should shew less mercy to Men, then they that have been so vilanously abus'd by them; I am perswaded, if there be one that will patiently suffer under such a disgrace, there can be but one in the World at a time, and that's the Phoenix the Poets have so much talk'd of, for so many
years; and therefore if such a one do chance to come in among Us, wee'l nere turn her out for the Rarities sake. By and by there was one stood up, whose name could never yet be known, and mov'd, that Women who had been thrice marry'd might not be ad∣mitted. How quo' the Lady Lustfull, looking upon her with great disdain! What self-denying Philosophress have we got here? I have turn'd off two already, and the third is pitching over the Petch. Pray Madam, give me leave to be shod round; why should the having of five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten one after another, hinder a Woman from be∣ing a Member of this House? By my troth, I am for the French Proverb re∣verst. The Husband of her whom God Loves soon Dyes. And I my Conscience she's the best Commons-wealth Wo∣man that can hold out to send most to Old Nick; that's our Complaint, the Worlds over stock'd with 'em. And therefore the Old Amazon's wrung off the neck, of all their Mate Squabbs, but only a few of the Choicest which they kept for Breed and Recreation. Nay, I know no reason why a Woman that
kicks off three or four Husbands, or forty or fifty, one after another into the other World, ought not to be reward∣ed at so much a head as the Welch were for killing of Wolves; especially seeing the K. of Spain is so liberal to those that get Male Children. For we must act by Maximes contrary to those of Men Monarchs, what they build we must destroy; and therefore let no Wo∣man be put out of this Assembly for good Service. This debate being over the House adjourn'd till to morrow at nine of the Clock. As the Lower House was thus all in a Hurley Burley, so was the Upper not without some share of Mutiny and di∣sturbance. For upon the passing of a certain Or∣der, the Lady Fisgigg Baroness of Gid∣dy-Hall being desir'd to give her vote, and demanding in what form she was to do it, the Countess of Mount Orgueil, told her, by saying content or not content, How, quo' the Lady Fisgigg, I say I am content! Ye shall as soon draw my Tongue and all my Teeth as any such word out of my Mouth. No, I'le nere acknowledge my self to be content i'this
World, as long as I live; had I all the pleasures the Earth could afford, I would never be such a Fool to say I was cen∣tent. A Woman and content can ne∣ver set their Horses together, it was said of Messalina, the Great Empresses p∣fections, that she was never content, a Woman may be cloy'd, satiated and glutted for a Time, but never Content∣ed. The Dutches of Decay'd Vertue en∣deavour'd to convince her, that it was only a word of course to shew her dislike or Approbation of what was propound∣ed; don't tell me, quo' the Lady Fis∣gigg, i'le agree or disagree as I please, but i'le be contented with nothing, I sit here i'this House with a Soul above that of a Commoner: and I must tell ye, To be content, is for a Woman to confine and limit her Desires, which i'le never controul by saying I am contented; what a God's name, is there no other word in the World for a Wo∣man to signifie her approbation of a thing but to say she is Content? The Dutches of Babylon alleadg'd that it was the Form which the Men had us'd time out of mind, and very properly too, quo' the Lady Fisgigg, Content and
Cuckoldry go commonly together. Thereupon many debates arose what Alteration to make of the word con∣tent. The Countess of Pennsilania urg'd, that they were not to alter Old Customes for one Lady's humour; but the Dutches of Female Charmes inter∣ceeded, and said, that Niceties were not to be stood upon, where the Alte∣ration was easie, and therefore mov'd that to shew their consent, they should all clap their hands, and the Dissenters should cry hiss—as they did at the Play-Houses.—But the Lady Fisgigg utterly rejected that Motion, saying, that the Mode of the Play-Houses ill became the Grandure of such a Solemn Assembly,—thereupon the Countess of Rale-the-Roast stood up and swore there could be nothing better to shew their agreement, then to cry three times Ay, Ay, Ay; and to shew their dis∣like, to make a wrie face and cry Shawaw, and then to tell the Shawaws, and the Ay, Ay, Ayes. So that if the Sha∣waws were more than the Ay, Ays, then to let the Shawaws carry it; and if the Ay, Ay's out-did the Shawaws, let the Ay, Ay's carry it, which after a great Sputter and bustle was carry'd by 3 voices.
While they were in the Midst of these-Contentions, a Message came to the Upper House, to signifie that the Commoners desir'd to have a Mess of Chat with their Ladyships. For you must know that when the word Conference was mentioned in the Lower House, there was great distast tak'n at it by the Lady Nimble-Clack, with your good Leave, Mrs. Speaker, quo' she, I do not understand the mean∣ing of this word Conference; these men by going to School, and learning their Latin Tongue, have so confounded us with their Chap-screwing Expressions, that it is high time for Us now to re∣duce our Language to its primitive plain∣ness. Now I know what it meant by it, when we say come Neighbours, let us meet together such a time and have a Dish of Chat together, so 'tis another Cu∣stome among Us, when we design to go to the House of Office together, as we seldom go single, if we can get Com∣pany, we say, come let us go to such a place, and have a Dish of Chat; and thus when we come from making a Visit, we do not say, we have been at a Conference; Or when we have been
at a Christning, or an Upsitting, where we discourse of sundry Things, and Passages, we do not say we have been at a Conference; God bless us, and there∣fore my humble Motion is, that the words in the Message may be, that we desire a Dish of Chat with their Lady∣ships. The Lady Voluble approv'd of this Motion exceedingly: for, said she, I know no more how to manage a Con∣ference, then the Pope of Rome; but I can hold a Chat from New years Day to New-years Day, and so to New∣years Day again. This being agreed, the next thing mov'd was, Who, and how many should go to this Dish of Chat. How, quo' Madam Tomboy, Who and How Many! Is it come to that? By this Light I'le go for one, who everstayes behind. And I, cryes another; and I, cryes a third; and I, cryes a fourth; and I, and I, and I, and I, and I, and I; which that there was such a Terrible Dinn of and I's, that the noise of Fif∣teen steeple's with twelve Bells a peice was but meer Whispering to it; which was no sooner ceas'd, but presently fol∣lowed such a horrd Peal and confused
Cry of All—All—All—All—that the very sides of the wall were forc'd to open to give it vent. For while every one fear'd to be left behind, all tore their Throats with such a unanimous confusion, that the Sun scarce knew whether he should go forward or Back∣ward. And now they were all got Higgledy Piggledy together, Peeresses and Com∣moners without Distinction one among another; at what time, Madam Volu∣ble addressing her self to the Lady Speaker. Madam, quo' she, It is not unknown to your self and the Rest of these Re∣nowned Lady's, how that both your selves and we, and all the Female Com∣mon-weal have for many Ages even from the time of Lamech, labour'd and groan'd under the grievous weight of Male Tyranny and Oppression, from whence having now, as we suppose by a just Reckoning gone out our full time, we may at length expect to be deliver∣ed; we have at length with many shreiks and lamentations brought forth our Greivances, foul and Mishapen Births (thank the Fathers of them) and now we are here come to lay our
Conceptions before ye, hoping that you the Nursing Mothers of Amazonia well take care of their Relief. Not that we intend to leave them at your doors; for we are resolv'd to maintain them to be such as they are, the Legimate and true born Issue of our Sorrows, but in hopes that you will be so kind as to bear part of the Charge in putting them forth to the best Advantage: which is one end of our present Meet∣ing. Then the Dutches of Bleeding Hearts, Ladies, Madams, and Mistresses. I have had strange wambling i'my Gizzard, and it has pierc'd to my very Bowels, when I have lain stretched forth under the Pressure of Male-insur∣rection, to consider, that the more no∣ble Creatures Women sould thus be forc'd to submit, while the more Igno∣ble Creatures men Act over Us as they do. Surely nature was asleep, or rench'd in Noah's bowls, when she Order'd the Course of things in this manner; But methoughts, I could away with these sufferings we I enough: but when we had endur'd all this to sa∣tisfie their fierie Heat, and hot Humors, to be frown'd upon, to be curb'd and
snubb'd, to be revil'd, contemn'd, re¦proach'd and frumpt, to be bid  this, to be commanded to do that, wit an Or I'le make ye Husie; to assume  themselves the Title of Lords of the Cr¦ation, to be forc'd to petition to 'em fo our wants, and to have these our peti¦tions more frequently deny'd the granted, these are the hard Morsels o steel, that a Woman had need of a Ostriches Stomach to digest. Therefore it is, may it please your grace reply'd the Lady Voluble, (for there is not a word which you have spoken that we are not all most deeply sensible of) that we are now met to throw off the insupporrable Yoak of these Usurpers, and to cut the Gordian Knot of Male Dominion. Then Madam Nimble-Clack, I can∣not tell, but I am sure quo' she, we have little reason to be so serv'd; for by the Confession of men themselves we are their Equals. And if they con∣fess us to be their Equals, you may be certain there's more in it then we are at present aware of; they look upon Women as a Company of easie Souls, soon contented, and therefore allow us to be their Equals; to keep us from pry∣ing
Farther into the knowledge of that uperioritie, which they are too guilty ensible to be our due, therefore I say gain, there must be something in this Condescention of theirs; the Cat did ot winck for nothing: for which rea∣on I humbly move that the Ancient Records may be searched in the Raigns of Penthesilea, Semiramis, Boodicea, &c. o the end we may no longer be kept the Dark, but may be able to assert ur Right by way of claim. There's othing like legal claim to soveraignty; here are no Plots can prevail against t; it crumbles all Oppositions into Chickens meat. As it happen'd of late aye in the Claimes between Q. Mary nd Jane Seymour; for I must tell ye adies, when I'm at home, I don't pend my time in stitching of Point ace, but in reading of Histories. At the word History, Mrs. Soake Pot, ne of the Shee Burgesses for Sambich, eing wak'd out of a sweet Nap, cry'd oud from the farther end of the Room, y Lady Speaker, I never knew Histo∣y without Ale i' my Life; In our Town Ale and History go always together: e never tell a Canterbury story, but e drink; we never talk of this body,
or that body, of this Neighbour o t'other Neighbour; in short, we nev spend our verdicts upon any Man o Woman but we drink; and Ale is ou Liquor still, some indeed will call fo Ale and Beer, but that's rare. Whe I go to Church, I always Carry  Dram of the Bottle with me; Drowt is next to hanging, for it endange choaking; therefore I always take car of being a dry: but this is the Drye Meeting that ever I was at i' my Lif not one drop of Ale among five hun¦dred People. Heavens bless me! may the Hoops of all my Barrels fly off▪ if ever I saw the like before. If this be your Reformation of Government▪ Heaven deliver me from Reformati∣on,—Pray my Lady Speaker hea my Motion, my Motion is, that w may all joyn our two-pence apiece and send for some Ale; I'le assure you can∣not imagine how well Ale and History tast together. Mrs. Soake Pot, quo' the Countess of Mount Orguil, you seem to be a good well-meaning Gentlewoman; but your Motion cannot be heard: for it is not for the Soveraign assembly of the Female Common-wealth▪ to sit like a
Company▪ of Shoomakers or Tinckers, f you are a dry, with draw into the Courts of Requests: there you'l find tip∣pling bouses enough furnish'd with all sorts of Liquor; and perhaps you may find your own belov'd Sambich Ale among the Rest. A thousand thanks, quo' Mrs. Soake Pot, to your Ladyship, my Lady Speaker, for these kind di∣rections of yours, and now hang me like a Dog if I don't try the Experiment presently, and if I meet with any of our own Town-Bub—I'le drink your Ladyships good Health for your good Counsel. Mrs. Soake Pot being thus march'd off to make her discoveries, Madam Rantipol stood up and thus proceeded. By all the Lucky Chances at In and In, quo' she, surely all our Fore-Mothers slept in Boxes like Dormice; how easie had it been for 'em to have ranvers'd the Government of the World ere this? there are those Nicks of time, when Men may be brought to swear any thing, when they think there is no greater Felicity in this or the World to come, then▪ what they enjoy at the very present; if they revolt from their words, then there are those other Nicks
of time, when the Woman may catc 'em as Moss caught his Mare, and fairly Holophernes 'em to the Devil. That Prince was as good as his word, wh when he had promis'd the Lady he Husbands life in the Nick of time, to the Warrant for his Execution; an being ask'd the Reason by his Counsel∣lers, recited that Golden Sentence—Contre levit Estendu non esi pas aucun Reme∣de. Could we but bring the Women to observe that Nick, wat a world o business might we disparch in one Night But a pox upon Us, for a Company of Sots; we dream, while our Hus∣bands sleep, she that stands off, and crys, not a bit an t'were to save your life, and this at the very Nick, when you may light a hundred Cardmatches at his Eyes, may make a man give hand and feal and foot and all to the Perditi∣on of his Patrimony; were he sure of a Mansion in Paradise, at that Nick you might force him to resign it. I won∣der that these empty-fellows they call Men, should insist so much upon their Birth-right, which one of the chiefest in Renown among 'em, thought not worth a Mess of Porridge, and yet this same six penn' oth of Birth-right, count∣ting
the Porridge to be made of Balls nd Cocks Combes; is the main Stru∣ture upon which they build their Su∣eriorit over us. Let us down wih it, y Lady Speaker, down with it to the round; and level it as smooth as a owling Alley. Bravely spok'n, if we could but as ravely do, quo' the Lady Noise, y' are  the right an't Madam Rantipol, I'le ring ye Presidents for it, undenyable, controulable Presidents, there was rst the President of the Daughters of ne Danaus: I have read the story omewhere, but I can't tell very well here, because I have forgot, and I ave forgot because I don't remember, believe it is in a Ballad; for I have een a great Reader of Ballads, and llads afford a great number of excel∣nt Presidents in all sorts of your Book arning. In short, this same Danaus ad fifty Daughters, and one of the ings of Aegypt having fifty Sons, would eeds match his fifty Sons with these fty. Daughters; I know not how it me to pass nor how they fell ou, but pon the Wedding Day at the Wed∣ing Supper every one of the Marry'd usbands feloniously and of his malice
fore-thought, threw a Trencher at the Wives Heads; this pass'd on, al was reconcil'd again, every one seem' well satisfi'd, and so upon the Weddin Night every Spouse went to Bed wi her own Bride. But I faith by th next Morning the Women had chang their Husbands mony for 'em with  vengeance; that is to say, every Brid bravely and resolutely cut her Husband Wezands with a Nemine Contradicem just in the Nick of time; that is to say when tir'd with fighting. Cupids Battel they lay like so many Logs witho sence or Motion. The Young Gentl¦women thought 'twas High time to n themselves of such Proud Princox that began to play their pranks so ea¦ly. Nor must we forget our own For Mothers, that kill'd every one her L¦dain, a haughty, imperious sort  Male-Tyrants, that made the po Women eat Pompions and Rusty B¦con, while they fed upon Capons boyl in Frontiniac. Neither are Women now adayes suc Milk-sops as they take us to be, I hav seen a Poulterer and his Wife fait fight it out in the Open Street, and th
Poulterers Wife has got the Day. There was a York-shire Knight that was forc'd to gagg his Wife, and pull out three of her Teeth before he could make her condescend to let him have his own Coach to carry him to the next Market Town. And whereas the Lady that spoke last, said, that Men claim their Tyranny by Birth-right, I know of no such Birth-right they have; let 'em bring a President for it. You'l say, they bring Presidents that some men have beaten their Wives, and wee'l bring 'em ten Presidents for one that their Wives have beaten them again. The Devil that gelt the Baker of Mansfeild himself, was afraid of his Wife. If ye go to that, quo' the Lady Poly∣himne, I'le undertake to prove that Wo∣men have more right to Govern the State then Men. For first, we are hand∣somer then men, and men themselves allow, that nothing gains so much upon the People as the Comliness of the Governours Person; so that our Right comes by nature: theirs by Usurpation. And therefore notwith∣standing this usurpation, their own Consciences tell them, that it is our due for this reason it was that the greatest and
most famous of their Conquerours were all subdu'd in the heighth of their Tri∣umphs by Women; Alexander and Scipio, Caesar and Mark Anthony loar'd and cring'd before their Mistresses like so many Setting Dogs: they acted with the Spirits of their Mistresses, and won all their Victories with their Mistresses Souls; by which it is plain that nature gave Us the Propriety, however we came to be such Kitlings to lose it. Men are Brutish, rash and heady, Wo∣men smooth and temperate, which render them much more fit for Govern∣ment. Women have their tears at Command; which proves them to be the greatest dissemblers in the World, and it is a Maxim, that they who can∣not tell how to dissemble, can never tell how to Govern; it follows then that they who can best dissemble are most fit to rule. Madam, quo' the Lady Nimble Clack, you have talk'd out your ounce, now let me talk out mine. No by my Faith shan't ye, reply'd the Lady Polyhimne, I came here to talk, and I'le talk out my talk as well as the best of Ye.
Laud, quo' Madam Nimble Clack, how I long to talk, and this scurvy Women won't let me—My Lady Speaker forsooth—Have a little Patience Madam—Pati∣ence will do no good, Madam 'tis just at my Tongues End; 'tis like Bottle Ale, twill fly out in spite of my Teeth—Put a crust of Bread i' your mouth Madam, 'twill allay the fury of the Froth—Put a T—d i' my mouth, shan't I?—I protest and vow before all this Assem∣bly if ye won't let me talk, I'le Mis∣carry; and so saying, the Vehemency of her Passion overcame her Vital Spi∣rits in such a manner, that she sank down in a Swoon. Which put the whole House into such a fit of Gab∣bling, as would have silenc'd all the Hammers of a Paper-Mill. It was in vain to think of Assa Faeti∣da, being so far off from any great Town, therefore they unrip'd a Bolster, and set a whole Bushel of Feathers a Smoaking under the Ladies Noise, which created another disorder, of far greater Consequence; for the Smoak of the Feathers caus'd such a filthy stink from one end of the Room to the other,
that some fell a coughing, some fell a sneezing, but all fell a Trumping about with such a general concurrence, as if they had resolv'd since they could not make use of their Tongues, to carry on the work of the Day with their Tayles; there was Answer and Reply, Rejoynder and Surrejoynder, Rump—Trump, Bump—Thump with such a Continuando, as if Destiny had done it on purpose to try the strength of their Lower Bellows as well as their upper Lungs. So that the Lady Speak∣er finding there was no more good to be done that day, was forc'd to ad∣journ the House till the next Morn∣ing. Being re-assembled the next Morning the Lady Polyhimne continu'd her dis∣course; for she had clearly got the day of the Lady Nimble Clack, who was forc'd to keep her Chamber all the next day to recover her lost Spirits, and to have her Nostrills cleans'd, which were grown so full of soot with the smoak of the Feathers, that they were con∣strain'd to hang a wet sheet before her Face, and shoot off a Musket right against the tip of her Noise; so that the Lady Polyhimne being at liberty thus proceeded.
In the next place, quo' she, none can be thought to have a greater affe∣ction for their Country then Women, how many example's have we of Wo∣men that have cut off their hair to make Ropes for Engins, and strings for Bows. Who have been more li∣beral then they without the constraint of taxes and assessments, to throw their Rings and Jewels into the Publick trea∣sures to defray the charges of an Ex∣hausted Exchequer? Who redeemed her Country from the slavery of a Tri∣umphant Victor but Joan of Arque, so that 'tis they and not the Universities that are Properly to be call'd the Nur∣sing mothers of the People; I bless my self to consider, were our Noble Sex re∣stor'd to that Right which nature has be∣stow'd upon it, what quiet and serenity the Common-weal would enjoy, there would be no Room for Factions and Underminings, but all things would flow into Liberty and pleasure; Instead of raking every Corner of the land for Armies, there would be nothing but preparing for Masques, and Amorous Appointments, Men should then follow their Handy Crafts.—
Among which, cr'd Mrs. Soak Pot, interrupting her, I could heartily wish, there were more of one Trade, I mean, that of the Flea-Chainers, methinks 'tis such a proper sight to see a Man spend∣ing his time in chaining of Fleas, that I could wish the whole Sex were so Employ'd. I assure ye, if we get the Government into our hands 'tis the first thing I shall put 'em upon; for by my Soul, My Lady Speaker, I would will∣ingly that all the Fleas i' the Land were chain'd, they do so plague me at night,—'Tis thought she would have run on with the History of Flea's, but that my Lady Speaker assur'd her that care should be taken of that affair in due time, thereupon she sat down and the Lady Polyhimne proceeded.— I say, quo' she, that then Men should follow their handy crafts, as we should set them at work, the Ox might plow, and the blind Mil-horse turn about the Wheel in security, while all their sweat and labours should but serve for the use and splendor of our Courts, and Habitations. And then for slights and cunning tricks requisite for those that govern a state, where does the Devil reside but
among our Sex, for what by our Im∣portunities, glances, traines, Slights, Ambushes, Artificies and little Infide∣lities it is impossible for any Mortal to escape Us; we are so giv'n to deceive, it is impossible to deceive Us. But some may object, that we are Inconstant, the fitter then are we for all occasions of business, they that can turn and vere about ac∣cording as the wind serves, can never ship-wrack; whereas obstinate Men fre∣quently split themselves and their Po¦sterity by being too opiniater'd and fix'd∣to one Course. Marry Gap—cry'd Madam Sensual, what fools are they say Wo∣men are inconstant? I appeal to the whole Assembly, My Lady Speaker, whither it be not a confounded lye of the Male Sex, an Aspersion, Madam, a meer Aspersion, for let me ask ye a few Questions, my Lady Speaker. Do not the Women scold in these our daies as they did formerly? Do they not sit in the Winter time toasting their Fid∣dle Dedees before the fire, as they did formerly? Do they not Sip and Weep at Burials as they did formerly? Do they not Cuckold their Husbands, as they did formerly? Do they not exhaust
and tire their Gentlewoman Ushers, as they did formerly? Do they not love Rambling and Coaches, Exchan∣ges and Spring Gardens as they did formerly? Do they not love to amble between the sheets as much as ere they did? Nay to be short, are they more Inconstant then ere they were? Constant even in Inconstancy; And who then can say that Women are Inconstant? Beshrew your heart, quo' the Lady Polyhimne, for taking the words out of my Mouth, for this is no more then I intended to have spoke; truly my La∣dy Speaker, quo' the Lady Sensual, I was een ready to run over, and could not hold; and I must needs say, quo' the Lady Polyhimne, you ran over very much to the purpose; and truly I am very glad you did so, for this ve∣ry Excuse, my Lady Speaker, of the Gentlewoman that spake last, puts me in mind of another great Objection against Us, that we are Talkative. This is just according to the Pro∣verb, The Kettle calls the Porridge Pot Black-Arse; I would fain know which is most Talkative, the Female or the Male Sex? The Men forsooth can sit talking and prating in a Tavern an
hour, nay two or three hours together, and no body must contradict 'em; Nay they are so vain-gloriously conceited of their Prittle Prattle as to trouble the World with it in Print; we talk 'tis true, and perhaps sometimes as they do little to the Purpose, but we never Print to no Purpose; a free talkative Ruler shews his Familiarity to the People, while a reserv'd and sparing utterr of Quarter Sentences, one that would have the People know his meaning by his Gaping, leaves the People in suspence, and makes liberty either dangerous, or flattery misconster it. To conclude as Women bring forth Children, and multiply the World, and when they have brought them forth, are most tender and careful to bring them up; so it is most fitting, since they have all these Pre-eminencies and Indulgencies of Nature, that they should have the Government of the World which they have multiply'd and stor'd with the Fruit of their own Wombs. And I must tell ye, My Lady Speaker, by my consent, would all the Women agree to 't, we would not bring one Child into the World more, but suffer all the race of Manking to perish, that
Kings might be without Subjects, Com∣monwealths without Inhabitants, un∣less they would submit to let us have our wills, and suffer Us to Govern 'em that brought 'em into the World; which if we had not done, they had never been; and then what would be∣come of all the Pomp and Tyranny which they so unreasonably usurp? Quo' Madam Rash, I like this Project very well, and humbly move it may be taken into farther consideration. In the mean time my Lady Speaker, give me leave to add one reason more to prove, that the Government of the World belongs to the Female Sex; which I look upon to be the greatest, in regard it is the General Women's Reason, and so I say that Women ought to Govern the World rather then Men; because they ought. And this is a Reason which no Man yet from the Lord to the Peasaut ever durst contra∣dict, thus when my Husband asks me the Reason, why I will do such or such a thing, I answer, because I will; at which his mouth is presently bung'd up, he dares not mutter a word more; then again, if you ask me How I prove such a thing to be true? say I, Because
it is; if you demand, why I will have it done so, I answer presently without studying like your Hum drum Porers upon Books, Because I will: tell me any argument among Men without all their chopping of Logick, was ever so universally prevalent, and therefore should the Men ask Us why we should have the Government of the World ra∣ther then they, the reason's at hand, Because we will. This convincing Reason split the Hair, and it was resolv'd upon the Question, that let any one bring a thou∣sand Reasons after this, there should not one be receiv'd. Thereupon the Lady Polyhimne for∣bore to urge any more Reasons, and was going to proceed to Examples. Quo' she, my Lady Speaker, I shall now make bold to offer some Exam∣ples of Women that have been more famous for their Gorvernment then ever Men were—she had no soon∣er mention'd the Word Examples, but the Lady Nimble Clack, whose tongue was then running like the Flye of Jack, flung immediatly into the Throng—bear leave Ladies, quo' she, let me come—Hold, my Lady Speaker,
Hold—I'me just coming as fast as I can—Hold Mrs. Speaker—Pray hold—Ladies pray give Room—stand aside pray La∣dies. To omit Heathen story, quo' the Lady Polyhimne, Deborah did the busi∣ness, Barach was but the Instrument With that the Lady Nimble-clack, start mad to hear the t'other Lady going on—Hold, I tell ye—Hold—still as she prest on, hunch∣ing, punching, josling, thrusting, pu∣shing, and ever and anon squaling out—Hold I say—Hold a little Ladies, pray make way—Pray give way—Never did zea∣lous Sister press so eagerly to recover her folding stool i' the Clarks Pew at a Meeting House, as she shoulder'd it a long till she got nere to the Lady Speak∣ers Seat: when she came there, all be∣rumspl'd and Towz'd, as she had been skirmishing with boystrous Iniquity, sweating, panting, she stood almost breathless a good while; at length en∣deavouring to speak, she found her self dissastrously disappointed.—For she had made her self so hoarse with screaming that she was constrain'd to
have course to her Manus Christi Lo∣zenge Box. Now while she was thus smoothing her Ʋvula, and settling the Disorders of her Aspera Arteria, the interrupted La∣dy, whither out of Malice or otherwise, let the charitable determin, fell a Gal∣loping on with the Praises of Deborah at such a rate, that the Lady Nimble Clack not able any longer to endure it, was in such hast to clear her mouth of her Lozenges, that she spit one of her musk-Pellets full i' the Lady Speakers Face. The Countess of Munt Oguile pre∣sently began to colour, and cry'd out Scandalum Magnatum. But being as prudent as she was wise, and as wise as she was prudent, the sooner re-collected her self, and took it for fatisfaction, suf∣ficient that the Offender lent her Orange-Flowr'd Hand-kerchief to wipe her nose, who having now recover'd her lungs, and dismounted her friend the Lady Polyhimne, my Lady Speaker, quo' she, I would have you and all these Ladies to know, that I have heard as much, read as much, and talk'd as much as ever the Lady Polyhimne did in her Life, so that when I heard her talk of old
stories of things that were done I don't know when, by Deborah and Barack I don't know how I could not forbear; knowing I had a story of a far resher Date: a Novelty Madam, a perfect Novelty. Sliddikins, what have we to do with Deborah and Barack, 'tis Novelty that is most pleasing to Wo∣men; for my part had we had the Government of the World till now, I should have been then for translating it to the Men, as I am now for transfer∣ring it to the Women, because they ne∣ver had it before, and it would be a Novelty; now Madam, I'le tell ye a Novelty story to prove that Women are better able to Govern then men. The Great Mogul, don't be frighted Ladies when I talk of the Great Mogul; I confess my Nurse us'd to fright me formerly, and tell me the Great Mogul was coming; but now I fear the Great Mogul no more, Heav'ns be prais'd for it, then I do my little Page Slip-string, I say, this Great Mogul, now you'l say, where does this Great Mogul live (for I have found it by woful experience that 'tis better for a Woman to inter∣rupt her self then to be interrupted by others) this great Mogul lives, where
your Pepper grows—stay—no—not where your Pepper grows; that grows now I think out in another place; but where your Di∣amonds grow upon little Diamond-Trees as big as Cowslips. When these Diamonds are ripe, which is once in seven years, they fall of themselves to the Ground, and then the People come and pick 'em up, and sow the Diamond seed again. I have a Kin-sman that has seen of these Diamond-Trees; I ask'd him why he did not put a handful in his Pocket; but he told me no man might come near these Diamond-Trees to handle them, because they are guar∣ded, by Elephants. He told me farther, that these Diamond-Trees do glitter in a star light night, that you may read a Dr. of Physicks Bill by the light which they cast; In the same place are made our fine painted Calico's, I have several smocks of the Calico which was made where the Great Mogul lives. The first time I put on one of my fi∣est painted Calico Smocks, methought I lookt like one of the Ancient Pict-Women mention'd in our English Hi∣story; ask but any of the East-India Company and they'l tell ye where the
Great Mogul lives. Now this Great Mogul had a Mistress, that had got such a hank over him, that she could make him stand with his left finger in his tayl, and his right Thumb in his mouth for a week together; one time above the rest, this Great Moguls Mistress com∣manded him to let her have the full and absolute Rule and Government of the whole Empire, for four and twenty Hours, and he to be Jack hold my staff all the while, stript of all his power like an Eel of her Skin. The Empero glad of the opportunity, leapt for joy when he found it lay in his power to oblige her; for he thought it but  small matter to let her have so short  command of his Empire, that had so long domineer'd over his heart; thereup∣on the Day was prefix'd, the time cam and the Lady began her four and twen∣ty hours Raign. Now you'l say, wha did she do in this four and twenty hours time? Nay I must ask you, wha did she not do? She turn'd out all th Emperors evil Ministers, put wise an Able in their Places, she cut off all he Enemies, she built five hundred Almes Houses in several parts of the Empir for the Relief of the poor; for she ha
got all the Materials ready before, so that the Workmen who were like the sand of the Sea, had nothing to do but to clap 'em together, and when she had done this, and a thousand times more, she pass'd a Deed of Gifts by her own Impertial Authority from the Em∣peror to her self, and the heirs of her Body, which she commanded the Em∣peror to sign, and then pass'd it under her own great Seal, as irrevocable as any Law of the Meads and Persians; and the story tells ye farther that she did more good in that four and twenty hours then in all the Raigns of ten Mo∣guls before. To tell ye truth, quo' the Lady Vo∣luble, these men are a Parcel of meer Animals with two legs; they strut up∣on the Earth without sence or Reason; it is impossible to know where to have 'em: they make Laws to day, and unmake them to Morrow. They hang a Man under one sort of Government, for what he shall be rewarded in another. Nay that is lawful in France which is not lawful in Spain, and that is law∣ful in Spain which is Vilany in France. They are always plotting and contriv∣ing, and never well but when they're
undoing one another; so that I have often admir'd that the World has not come to an end long ere this, and therefore my humble motion is that we may come to a General Result in this grand affair. Thereupon it was resolv'd, Nemine Contradicente, that the men were no longer fit to Govern, and that the Go∣vernment of all the states of the Habi∣table Earth be deliver'd up into the hands of the Femal Sex. Resolv'd, that a General Associati∣on be enter'd into by the Women against the Men, and that Embassies be sent into all parts of the World to in∣vite the Women to this Association, and that a solemn League and Covenant be drawn up to the same purpose. Resolv'd, that an impeachment be drawn up against the whole race of the Male Sex, and that a Committee be appointed to prepare Articles and ex∣amin Witnesses. These resolves being made, the As∣sembly was adjourn'd till the next Morn∣ing, to consider of the waies and means to bring about this Important design.
Die Veneris prox. post Quinden. Omnium Diabolorum. The next day, the assembly being met again with every one a good Col∣lation i' their Bellies, Madam She Devil propounded a General Massacre▪ and put them in mind of the Sicilian Vespers, the Irish Rebellion, the Destruction of the Waldenses, and the Massacre of Paris, and that a certain number of Women might be sent in Men's Appa∣rel to the Colledges of the Jesuits, there to learn their Maxims and Methods of proceeding in order to the carrying on so pious a work. This she said was a sure way, according to the French Pro∣verb, Dead Men never bite. The Dutchess of Female Charms pro∣pos'd the milder way of Resignation, then Chronicle 'em for Fools indeed, quo' Madam She-Devil; there's a pro∣posal with all my Heart, Oh quo' the Dutchess you don't consider the force of Female Charmes; Women do Miracles with those Engins, the Magnificent So∣lyman with all his Pomp and Pride was not able to resist the Charms of his Roxohana, then I am able to take the
Moon by the Teeth, you may re∣member what was hinted by a worthy Lady the other day concerning the Nick of time; then again, they pretend∣ed to be guided by reason. If so, we are able to give them a thousand rea∣sons more then they are able to contra∣dict; If they are Govern'd by reason, we command that reason, and reason must be of our side, or else wee'l send Reason to the Devil. But suppose that the Male Sex had all the reasons in their heads, I am sure they carry none i' their Breeches, and there lies the chief Rudder of their Passions; there we stand at the Helm and can guide it as we please our selves. Ay, but, quo' the Lady She-Devil, why should we put things to the Hazard? Tomyris made sure work, she cut off Cyrus's Head; nay she did not think him safe then, till she had drownded his head and him to another Death in his own Blood. But cruelty, quo' the Dutchess of Female Charmes, is a thing so unnatu∣ral to our Sex—Y'are a Fool, reply'd the Lady She-Devil, why should we be less cruel to Men, then they are to themselves? We daily see how they destroy one another without Mercy,
without Compassion, worse then the wildest of beasts, that never prey upon their own kind. Bears will not prey upon Bears, nor Wolves upon Wolves, Lyons live in amity among themselves, and Ti∣gers live in Unity with Tigers. Only Men devour one another, and what pains do they take to do all this? What hardships do thay endure to compass their designs of Mischief? Heats and Colds, Hunger and Thrist, Wounds, loss of Limbs, slavery and what not? Now if the Women save them all this la∣bour, and do their own drudgery for 'em, by sending 'em from one quiet sleep to another, what injury do they do 'em? But the Dutchess of Female Charmes, still abhoring Cruelty argu'd stiffly against all such Barbarous Proceedings; and to stop the Lady She-Devils Mouth, pro∣pounded to get in fee with the Ministers, to perswade the Men to a Resignation upon the score of Conscience. The Women have been always their Great Friends hitherto, and therefore they had all the Reason i'the World to ob∣lige their Benefactresses with their ut∣most Diligence, and I make no question, quo' she, if they would set to work, but that they who could prove the law∣fulness
of the Imposition of Tunnage and Poundage by their great Book learn∣ing, may much more easily prove the right of the Female Sex to the Sove∣raigntie of the World from the same Authorities, I'le undertake (quo' she) that am no Preacher to prove it from the Confession of Zorobabel to King Darius himself; O ye Men, said he, it is not the Multitude of Men that Ex∣celleth, who is it then that Ruleth them, or has Lordship over them? are they not Women? By which words it is plain that Women have the sole Right of supe∣rioritie, which being so, then steps in the Common Text, give Caesar his due. Now to prove that by Caesar is meant the Women is the casiest thing for a nimble quick witted, Rhetorical ma∣nanger of Parodoxes to prove in the World; And the thing being once prov'd, then 'tis matter of Conscience to obey, or else there's Hell and Dam∣nation i'the Case. The Lady She-Devil reply'd, that many men had no Conscience, and that it was a usual thing among 'em to venture Eternity to rule the Roast in this World for ten or twelve Years; I have read of one Sixtus the Fifth, that
he was so ardently Ambitious of being Pope that he gave his Soul to the Devil for a lease of the Popedom, but for seven years, out of which the Devil couzen'd him of two to boot. The Dutchess reply'd, that those were not many perhaps two or three in a Kingdom, and might therefore be easily brought to conformity. And for that reason to avoid Massacre and blood∣shed, there was no way like working upon the Consciences to bring men to a Resignation; For that men were like Trouts: if you can but once come to ickle their Consciences, you may easi∣y bring 'em to the Frying Pan. The Lady Lustful propos'd the De∣truction of the Male Sex by hard La∣our, and undertook to exhaust a thou∣and a year for her own share; and et quo' she, this is more then I need o do, for do but let every Woman rom twenty to fifty, but undertake to xhaust fifteen a month for her propor∣on, the work would soon be done. The Lady Fleshly-given concurr'd in pinion with the Madam Lustful, but aid, that the Lady Lustful was too hort in her allotments of no more then fteen amonth to one Woman; for said
she, we find Mark Anthony complaining of Cleopatra to his Friend Saranus, that she had admitted a hundr'd and six in one Night, according to which pro∣portion every Woman might well be allowed seven in four and twenty hours, who if she took care to put Nature upon the stretch which strong Pro∣vocatives, might easily turn off seven in a weeks time, and so alluding four Weeks to a Lunary Month, one Wo∣man might Exhaust one and twenty  month, according to a true Arithmeti∣cal Calculation. To which the Lady Lustful made an∣swer, that it was not her Intention to be so precise or punctual in her prescription, but that every Woman might under∣take according to her ability, and so that difference was reconcil'd. The Countess of the Bagno, was fo erecting Bagno's in every street in every City and Corporation throughout th Land, not said she, that I speak this fo my own Interest, but because I know quo' she, these Bagno's are grea weakners of the Natural strength, and that thousands and thousands of Me would be carry'd off in a Trice with cold and Consumptions, by the pleasing use of 'em.
The Broness of the Darby Ale-hose said, she had known great effects of that Ale, and wish'd that the men might be confin'd to drink no other Li∣quor but that well moloss'd, and their La∣dysnips should quickly find a Consump∣tion of the Male Sex answerable to their desires. The Countess of Brittle-ware, was for the Infallible way of Destruction by Female Contamination, first care being taken to poison all the Drugs that were proper for the cure of the French Disease; or that there should be an In∣hibition upon the Colledge of Phisiti∣ans and approv'd Surgeons, and that none should be admitted to practise but Mountebanks. With that the Dutches of Decay'd Vertue stood up, and having highly applauded the Lady that spoke last, by my feth, quo' she, I have quite ano∣ther prospect then any of ye all. For here of late days I find the men gong to destroy themselves faster then we can do it; I find such a vast increase of the Number of Taverns, such an infinite Rendezvouze to the Swelltubs of damn'd adulterated, slumm'd and poisonous Mixtures of all sorts of that noble juice
call'd Wine, such a General debau∣shery; such a Universal thirst has seiz'd the Nation, and plung'd it into such a Sea of Drunkenness, that we shall see in short time the Men fall like Autumn leaves from the Tree of Life, and drop into their graves like rotten Plumbs; and then the Government of this Land, and what need we care for any other, will descend into our hands whither we will or no. And therefore Ladies take my advice, have a little Patience, I find the Tyde-turning already; the word Patience alarum'd the two Coun∣tesses of Stormland and Rule-the-Rost. Patience! quo' they, is this a time for Patience? Let us break forth into open Rebellion—and first seize all our Husbands Arms.—I say, let us take away their Weapons—let me have 'em disabl'd, and the way to disable 'em is to take away their Wea∣pons; and thats the way to make 'em as tame as Capons; the way to tame your Lyons and your Mastiffs is to ex∣peditate 'em, that is to pare their claws close to the flesh; let us stop up all the Iron and Lead mines; they destroy the Wood of the Country. Let us cut out their Drum heads, burn their pikes
break their Swords; and then for their Guns, said they, I, we have found out a way, when the men are at the Tavern, to stop 'em up and fill 'em with melted lead, and hide 'em in the Garret under the Maids Beds. When the Men are thus Disabl'd, let us proclaim open War against 'em; and when they are got drunk, then's our time so set upon them. I have seen (said the Countess of Storm▪ land) a Man drunk as David's Sow, and his Wife has come and pummel'd him, that you would have thought she had been pounding of Sorrel to make green Sawce; and the poor fellow has been able to make no more Resistance than a Log to the wedge and the Beetle, and why was this? Because the Man was disabl'd, I say then (said the Countess of Rule-the-Rost) let us first disable the Men, and then rise up against 'em as one Woman. Private Families are but the Epitomes of Great Common weals, and how many Women are there that are Mistresses and absolute Queens in their own private Territories? The reason is, because they rebel against their Husbands; and generally, when the Women have the courage to rebel,
they get the victory; what should hin∣der then, but that what Women do separately in their particular Domini∣ons, we thus united may do the same, in the great Body of the Common∣weal; at large I am apt to believe we are three to one in number; that is one at the head, another at the feet, and the third i' the Middle; nd if the Ene∣my be stubborn, and won't yield take a knife and disable him for good an all. Thus my Lady Speaker▪ we have delivered our Opinions faithfull and cordially, and out humble motion is, that the same may be put to the Que∣stion. Thereupon, the Question being put, it was unanimously resolv'd▪ that there should be a General Insurrection on the Women's side, and that notice should be given by the respective Membresses to the Women in their se∣veral Counties to get themselves in a readiness and to put themselves in a Po∣sture accordingly; but the Month, Day, and Hour was left to a farther debate▪ and so the whole Assembly adjourn'd till eight a Clock the next Morning.
Die Martis Cras. pur. The next morning they met as pun∣ctually again, as if they had been under a Club forfeiture of twelve pence a piece, and the first thing taken into conside∣ration, was, what form of Government they should make use of when they had got the power i' their Clutches. Thereupon the Dutchess of Babylon stood up and highly applauded the form of Confusion, which she alleadg'd to be the first, and consequently the most Ancient form of Government upon the Earth; for that the first time we read that the People of this world were ram∣mass'd together in one Body, was at the Confusion of Babel; she argu'd farther, that as the sweetest Harmony is pro∣cur'd by Discords; so the strickest uni∣ty was like to arise from Confusion; in like manner, said she, the Chaos was before the Creation, the wild Beasts of Desarts live without Statute aws, Order or Discipline in a perpetual confusion and yet you shall not hear of one Bat∣tle fought among 'em, once in a Thou∣sand years; and it s remarkable, that when People have liv'd some twenty years
or thereabouts in all the Peace and Tranquility imaginable, they are never at Quiet, till they are all in Confusion; nay, they make it their chiefest design to plot and contrive disordor and con∣fusion. And indeed the Form of Con∣fusion is most Agreeable to our Hu∣mours. View us at our Meetings, at our Gossippings, at our Christnings and Fu∣nerals. What a Noise, what a Con∣fusion is there among us? When one Woman happens to swoon at Church, what a Confusion is there among the rest? Go into every particular Family, and if she be a right Woman, that rules the roast, what a confusion is there? What is a Womans life without Brawling, Scolding, Rending, Tear∣ing▪ Maundring, beating her Children, rating her Servants, reviling her Hus∣band, and all the whole house turn'd topsie turvi? It is as natural for a VVo∣man to live in Confusion, as for a Sa∣lamander to live in the Fire, or an Eel i' the Mud, and therefore I say the form of Confusion is the best form. Here the Baroness of Tongue▪ Castle standing up, My Lady Speaker, quo' she, before we come to any Resolution in this affair it behoves us to consider,
what forms of Government there are, or have been in the World, that we may choose which we like best; you know Madam, that when we go to buy our Commodities at the Exchange we desire to see a great many Parcels afore we pitch upon that which pleases Us. And so it is requisite, that we should know what forms of Government there are before we conclude upon any certainty; Now I desire to know, whether ever there were any forms of Government or no; and if there were, how they are call'd, and by what marks they may be known. The Lady Polyhimne reply'd, that there were several forms of Govern∣ment which were Commonly distin∣guish'd by the names of Manarchee, Aristocracy, and Dimmocracy, Ty∣ranny, Olygarchee and Anarchy. Now the Devil take me, quo' the Baroness, if this ben't all conjuring to me; I could as well chaw a Pumice stone, as one of these words, have they no softer preserv'd▪ Apricot▪ Names than these? Why, now 'tis a strange thing, quo' the Lady Polyhimne, I'le un∣dertake, your Ladyship has rad Ari∣stotle's Problems—Yes that I have
quo' the Baroness—and yet you never read Aristotles Politicks—Not I by my faith—I never heard of 'em before—why there 'tis, quo' the Lady Polyhimne, had you but read the one as well as the other, there you had found all these hard Names sitting like a Covey of Partridges up∣on one side of a leaf of Paper. I bless my Education, I have read Aristotles Politicks, and the Lady Newcastles Oglio, and Hobbs's Leviathan, and can tell the meaning of all these hard Names. Pray then, quo' the Baroness, be so kind as to impart your knowledge. Why look ye then, quo' the Lady Polyhimne, a Manarchee is that form of Government when a State or Kingdom is under the Government of one Per∣son; and this the Men have alwayes accompted, I beseech ye Madam, cry'd the Lady Lofty, be not so sharp and severe against Tyranny; for though we do not love to be Tyranniz'd over by others, 'tis meat and drink to Us to Tyrannize over others Paradise it self fore-told what Vexers we should be; and threw it then upon Us as a Curse: but we soon turn'd the Scales, and improv'd it to a blessing; esteem∣ing
our selves never more happy than when we could Domineer and Tyran∣nize over our Husbands: Had Cain been marry'd, he had never been put to the trouble to go a rambling to build Cities in the Land of Nod; His wise would have taken his revenge upon her self, and been glad of the Oppor∣tunity; and therefore Ladies could we confine Tyranny within these Walls, and entayl it upon our heirs Females, 'tis not a pin matter whither Lawfully or unlawfully begotten, Tyranny were the most natural form of Government that we could desire, as being most sui∣table to our Genius. You'l say 'tis impossible, but Interlo∣pers would creep in among Us; that I answer, what have Men their Axes and Blocks, the Gibbets and Gallow∣ses for, but to cut off Interlopers. And then again, it is remarkable that the Male Tyranny have been the most du∣rable Forms of Government in the World, witness the Turkish, Persian and Ethiopian▪ Tyrannies; and there∣fore, said she, when your particular Committees consider of these things, let them not forget to think of Tyran∣ny.
Madam Squeamish, not liking this discourse, alleadg'd that there was not a more chargeable form of Goverment in the World then Tyranny, which the covetous and griping humor of Wo∣men would be soon weary of. That the People under Tyranny liv'd poorly, miserably, wretchedly, neither able to defend themselves nor their Governors, that she lov'd to see the Subject in good plight, hearty and rich, blessing and not cursing their Go∣vernors; that they who had something to lose, would stick close to their Go∣vernors, when they who had nothing to lose, car'd not a rush which way the World went, well knowing their con∣dition cannot be worse than it is: That the safety of a Government consisted in the Natives and not in Forraigners, the usual guard of Tyranny, who would be in continual Muiny, either for want of Pay, or else never think their Services fully rewarded. Well! quo' the Countess of Whigg∣land, what think ye then of a Com∣mon-wealth? that is such a form of Government where the Mobile bear all the sway—whereas they go along the streets, they march in couples, a
Brewers wife, and Dutchess, an Ale∣wise and a Countess, a Chandlers wife and Baroness, a Weavers wife and a Lady, the meaner still taking the Wall. Where Coaches must give way to Drays and Carts; and Porters are their own Gentlemen Uhers, and cry, make Room for themselves, and it is a Pillory business not to stand out of their way; for my part, quo' she, I propose this as a form that I have alwaies had a great kindness for, and have been long plotting to set up, but the Countess of Toryland, shame on her, has alwaies had the Whip-hand of me; for me∣thought it was but reasonable that the People should make their own Laws, since they were to be Govern'd by them. If I mistake not, quo' the Countess of Storm-land, the Lady that spoke last has not giv'n ye a true description of a Common-wealth; for in Common∣wealths, as I am told, there are neither Dutchess nor Countesses, nor Barones∣ses nor Ladies, or if there were, so much the worse: for it would be very Improper for persons of Rank and Quality to be familiar with Soap and Candle-Grease; now do I think it fit∣ting
to admit the Mobile to the Govern∣ment by any means, for what saies the Proverb, Set Beggars a Horseback and they'l ride to the Devil. And when the Devil has once got our form of Govern∣ment in his Clutches, who shall retrieve it out of his Pawes. I never lik'd any thing that was common i' my life; I hate the Fashion when it grows Com∣mon, I can be merry and sipp off my glasses in a Countess-like-way; I can be kind to a friend when I see my time; but Common-toss pots, Common strumpets, Common-wealths, they're all alike. Madam, quo' the Lady Fleshly-giv'n, I cannot jump with your sentiments; for nature surely at first made all things Common, till Law and pretended Ne∣cessity invented Hedges, and Bolts, and Bars, and Matrimony, and such like Usurpations of Propriety; the World was but one vast Common-wealth at first, till Mimrod first impal'd a part of it to himself by Tyrannical force, and taught others to follow his Example. And what do all these impalements and enclosures of law and necessity signifie? Not a Rush. For when nature is once set upon the Merry Pin, down go all
these Fences of scarecrow Morality, and we suffer our selves to lye Com∣mon as at first, as it is naturally there∣fore for Women to love Liberty, and to lay themselves Common, certainly there can be no form of Government so natural to the Female Sex as that of a Common-wealth which allow all the Liberty in the world. The Lady Voluble reply'd that Wo∣men were to take their liberty, what ever the form of the Government were. But as they lov'd liberty, so they lov'd honour, now what delight can the Women take (said she) in such a form of Government, where the highest Ti∣tle their Ambition can reach to, is only to be call'd Plain Mrs. Burgomistress, how sneakingly it sounds; I appeal to ye All, Ladies, whither it be a thing rational for us to admit of such a form of Government that will admit a Wo∣man neither Grace, nor Honour; no, not the home-spun Title of your Lady∣ship. 'Tis true when ye are all in a body ou shall be courted perhaps with the stile of your High and Mightinesses, but no sooner out of the Council cham∣ber, but all fellows at foot Ball again.
May that Woman die of a Clap that speaks for a Common-wealth for me, quo' the Lady Nimble Clack. Nay faith (quo' she) if your Common∣wealths won't allow us our Titles, and our Dignities, and our Precedencies, they have lost a friend of the Lady Nimble-Clack; a Woman had as good live in Hell as in a Common-wealth: Nay I am apt to believe, added she, that a Common-wealth is a kind of a Hell upon Earth. For there, they say, Popes, and Emperors, and Princes, Dutchesses, and Countesses, and La∣dies, live Higgledy Piggledy without any more respect given 'em then we give to our Lacqueys; nay I am told the great Men of the World, Xerxes, Caesar, Pompey, &c. are not only de∣priv'd of their Hands, but forc'd to cry Mustard, Old Hats or Cloakes, and empty Houses of Office for their living▪ Which makes me think that Hell is a Common-wealth, and all Common∣wealths are Hell. There is another damn'd Inconve∣niency in Common-wealths, quo' the Lady Voluble, going on—but to the best form that ever was in the world What? quo' the Lady Nimble Clack,
to be govern'd by one Single Person? Yes quo' the Lady that spoke last—Gods Niggers Daggers, quo' the Lady Nimble Clack, one Person rule all Us!—If that be your Manarchee, away wi' your Manarchee's, wee'l ha' none o' your Manarchee's; foh upon 'em—What say you Ladies, will you have a Menarchie: will you have one Single Person to controul ye all. With that they all set up their Throats and cry'd—Naw—Naw—Naw—Naw—No single Person—No Manarchee—No Manar∣chee.— Why, quo' the Dutchess of Famale-Charmes, would not you be willing to have had Queen Elizabeth to have raign'd over ye? Ay, quo' Madam Nimble Clack, Queen Elizabeth—Now you say something—Queen Elizabeth was a Phoenix, where will you find such another? She clapper claw'd the Spaniards in 88 and rod up∣on a horse like any Thing—at Tilbury Camp—I have heard my Grandfather say she was a Woman of ten Thousand▪
By my troth—quo' the Ba∣roness of Tongue-Castle, I never lik'd Queen Elizabeth in my life—I have seen her Picture upon Ludgate, and methinks she was but a homely Woman.—And then, what a strange fashion'd Gown did she wear? I should be afraid, had I such a Gown, that my maid would mistake the Kitch∣en shelves, and set up her Peuter round about my wast—Naw—Naw,—I am for none of your Queen Elizabeths—none of your Monarchee's, not I. By'r Lady, this is very fine indeed—I expected we should have been all Queens, and now to come and talk of a Plot—This smells like a Plot—and therefore my Lady Speaker, I humbly move wae may hear no more on't.— Thereupon the Lady Speaker desir'd Madam Polyhimne to give an account of the next form. Quo' she, the next form of Govern∣ment is that which the men call Aristo∣cracy; when the Government is in the hands of these that are of the highest Rank and Quality in the Common∣weal; Ay marry—quo' the Lady Nimble Clack now ye say some∣thing
—this same Cristocracee as you call it, comes something to the Point—For if the Government must be in the hands of the Nobility and Gentry, then it must be in our hands—for I look upon our selves as the best in the Parish—that is to say, the best i' the Nation.—Now what think ye Ladies? d' ye think we may challenge Rank and Quality or no? May we! cry'd the Lady Lofty—nay we will do't, and I would fain see that She that dares contradict my Pedi∣gree; my Fathers Fathers great Grand-Fathers Sons Father came in with William the Conqueror, and the Couqueror gave him Ten Castles, and fifteen Lord∣ships: and our Ancestors kept them too, till it was the Fashion for the Gen∣try to sell their Lands; and then you know, when a Fashion comes up, eve∣ry one strives to be i' the Fashion. But for all that, I must tell ye, that fo Rank and Quality, i'le not yield to the best of ye all. Quo' the Baroness of Tongue-Castle, my great, great, great, great Grand∣mothers Daughters great Grandmo∣thers Dghters Daughter was Helen of
Troy's Sister, and came along with Brutes and the Trojans into England. Mrs. Soake-Pot told their Ladyships, that she knew not who was Helen of Troy's Sister, but she was sure of this, that her Family by the Mothers side had born for their Arms three Jonas Whales, in a green Field ever since four∣teen year before the Flood, and that she had the Picture of one of her An∣cestors at home, that had been Maid of Honour to Kedorlaomer's Wife. The Lady Nimble Clack deriv'd her Pediree from the Queen of Sheba, who brought forth Queen Ester; who brought forth Judith of Bethulia, who brought forth Cleopatra, who brought forth Europa, whom Jupitur Ravish'd, from whence her Mother was descend∣ed in a direct line: and then for her Fathers side, she said, there was never a one i' the Company could shew such a scroll with round Circles and Coro∣nets upon 'em, as she could; the two first of which were Heathen Gods, and the three next also known Hero's, only she had forgot their names. This Braado of Madam Nimble-Clacks, had like to have put the whole House into Confusion, for the untess
of Whigg and Tory, to out-vye her was going to fetch her descent from Lucifer, himself, and the Dutchess of Babylon talk'd of nothing but Darius's Grand Cyrus's, Semiramis's and Atossa's, so that the storm was gathering apace, while one cry'd she was as well Born as her Ladyship, the other told her she ly'd; one call'd another Tapsters Daughter, other said her Mother was a Gardners Wife, and that her Husband was ne∣ver Knighted for his Honesty. And now it came to be Cuds life Hussey, and How Baggage—Speak such ano∣ther word,—when the Dutchess of Female Charmes, having without much ado perswaded silence; desir'd hem for the sake of the Common in∣erest to be quiet, and that every ones Rank and Quality should be consider'd by a select Committee appointed for that purpose, where they should every one of 'em have the liberty to put in, and make out their Challenges, when time requir'd, that as yet it was not seasonable, for that the Government was not as yet in their hands, or if it were, that it was not a straw matter of what Rank and Quality they were among themselves, when they intended
to go share and share like in the Go∣vernment; that these were but bone thrown in by the Men to distract their Counsels, well knowing that nothing could serve them in their Dominion but our own Divisions. These words were like the Sprinkling of sweet Wines among Bees in a ski∣mish, so that they sate down again i their places, though they could no but gloat upon one another like so ma∣ny gibb Cats, so dangerous a thing it is to raise disputes among Women abou Rank and Quality and Precedency, bu then, quo' the Lady Nimble-Clack, i this same Crystocracy, hold, there mus be no Ladies and Commoners; for tha would be as if some were better the other. No, reply'd the Dutchess o Female-Charmes, in Christocracy; ther must be no distinction of Houses, no difference between Ladies and Com∣moners; for why? for then Ladie would be Ladies, and Commone would be but Commoners; which i directly against the nature of Cristocra∣cy, where tho' many may excel in parts, and knowledge, yet all are equal in Pow∣er and Authority.
Thus far quo' the Baroness of Tongue-Land, I like it very well—all that I fear is, that we shall never a∣gree—but always be quarel∣ling about one foolery or other; one Woman will insist to have this thing her way; another will have that thing her way, and if all be not done as a third will, then she'l be all Fire and Tow. But the Dutchess made Answer that if they could but once agree upon the form, those things would be easily re∣concil'd by the number of voices; for thereby the stronger party carrying it, the weaker must yield of Course, or else undergo those little penalties and forfei∣tures that the stronger should lay upon 'em. But here's a worse Inconveniency than all this; for they say these Cristo∣cracies are subject to degenerate into Tyranny; now we had better continue as we are, slaves to men, then become slaves one to another, I know the hu∣mor of Women too well to be a slave to a Woman. How! quo' Mrs. Nimble-Clack will your Cristocracies degenerate into Tyranny? Away wi' your Cristo∣cracies away with 'em, wee'I ha' none
of your Cristocracies, they cry'd ou enough, enough—no Common-wealth, no Common-wealth—all thing Common but Wealths—Wealths in Common, and Common-wealths are things of dangerous conse∣quence,—no Wealth in Com∣mon—no Common-wealths—thereupon there was a Vote Immedi∣ately past against all sorts of Com∣mon-wealths, Ragusian, Venetian, Lo Dutch, Swiss, Geneva, Genoa, but espe∣cially against English Common-wealths∣for they, they said, were the wicked∣edest Common-wealths i' the world upon which the Countess of Whigg-lan entred her Protest. Come—come—Ladie quo' the Countess of Rule-the-Rost, I find ye must all be beholding to me for a form—I have one i' my head, I'me sure, will please ye all—my Husband, and he's one of your book-learn'd Cornuto's, calls it Anar∣chee. Anarchee, quo' the Lady Nimble-Clack, Lord bless us, what a prety word is that? 'Tis a feat Form I war∣rant it—the word is such a feat word—pray Madam go on—
I long to know what this Anarchee is, then, quo' the Countess, Anarchee La∣dies is a form of Government, where eve∣ry Woman may do what she pleases; the Quakers and Anabaptists are all of this sort of Government. Ay, ay, now we have hit the Nail o' the head, quo' the the Lady Nimble-Clack. This is the form for my Mo∣ny—Laud, that we should sit here hammering all this while and nor hit upon this Form—where were my Brains I now? Yet I knew there was such a form, but I could not hit upon that word, that pretty mun∣y fac'd word Anarchee; thank ye kindly—thank ye very kindly, Madam Rule-the-Rost. Why truly, my Lady Speaker, quo' the Countess, when I was first marri'd, I could hardly go to Piss without asking my Husband leave, I sent to the Tay∣or to come to me and he forbid him;  told him I wanted a new Gown, and he told me want should be my Ma∣ster—Ay, quo' I to my self, s it so? Then 'tis time to turn over a new leaf I feth, so at length I took heart-a-grace, broke open his Closet, forc'd open his Scrutory, took away
the Money, sent for the Taylor, went to the Exchange, and told him I would do it, that I would, or else—thus by degrees I got a Compleat Victo∣ry, and ever after that I did what I pleas'd. Now as I did what I pleas'd, so every one i' the House did what they pleas'd, the Wenches sate up all Night with their Sweet-hearts, and did what they pleas'd: the Foot men and Pages Guzzl'd up the Wine and the strong Liqour and did what they pleas'd: the Dogs run away with whole Shoulders of Mutton and did what they pleas'd: Me thought it was the pleasantest sight in the World to see every Body do what they pleas'd—my Hus∣band mutter'd, and mumbled, and grumbled, of which I took little notice, but went on doing what I pleas'd; feasting my accquaintance, spending, Revelling, throwing the house out at Window, and at length I sent my Gentleman, you know who I mean. Ladies a' t'other side the Water—and there let him lye and be hang'd; and now Ladies the Town's my own, I do what I please, and I find it to be the most delightful form of Go∣vernment that ever was invented—
God's Blessing of her heart that first set it up.— To the vote, to the vote with it, cry'd the Lady Sensual, this must be the form, when all's done.— Hold—quo' the Lady Squea∣mish—I am not for it, that we should do what we please.— With that, there was a loud cry, to the Bar, to the Bar with her—what speak against Anarchee! Speak against our doing what we please! Treason—Treason,—have  little Patience, quo' the Lady Speaker, hear the Lady tell her own tale first. 'Tis her pleasure to speak, and she must do what she pleases, or else you are Transgressors against Anarchee your selves.— Thereupon, the Lady Squeamish pro∣eeding, Homes home, said she, and he Publick's the Publick—Sup∣ose we make the best Laws in the World for the good of the Common∣eal, must they be stifled and not pass ecause they don't please this Mrs. Fid∣le-cumfart, or t'other Mrs. Twit-cum∣at? Feth and Troth, my Lady Speak∣r, I tell ye my mind, I do think 'tis fit∣ng that every one do what they please.—
Quo' the Lady Lofty, Government is nothing without obedience—if we sit to command, and there be no body to obey I'de not give a T—d to command, if we command there must be obedi∣ence—and it cannot be expect∣ed that we should enjoyn Laws and Or∣dinances to please every Body.— If this be all—quo' the Dutchess of Female-Charmes, i'le reconcile this difference presently. Let every one of us make our own Laws according to our own Fancies, and humors, as shall please Us best; and so every one of Us shall be pleas'd in issuing forth our per∣ticular Commands and Proclamations  and when we have so done, let the People obey with Command, which Law, or which Proclamation they please, they that like your Law, l them obey You; they that like my Law, let them obey me; they tha better like another Command, let them obey her; and so People shall be pleas' as well with their own Obedience a with the Command, while every on yields a Voluntary Submission withou controul, according to their Particula Affections. We find when there wa such a Troop of Heathen Deities
the World, and every one rul'd the Roast at pleasure, none having any su∣perior, but one Commanded one thing, another another; This God would be worship'd so, and that Goddess thus, the People then worship'd what God or Goddess they pleas'd. One worship'd Saturn, another Jupiter, another Mars, another Venus, as they pleas'd them∣selves; and so pleasing themselves every body was quiet & there was no harmdone. Never did Jupiter envy Venus, because she had more Adorers then he; for be∣ing a Smell Smock, as he was, he un∣derstood the reason of it well enough; and thus it will happen in this form of Common-wealth, every one will obey as their affection, their dependencies, their interest, or their judgment guides them, which being their own Acts much of ne∣cessity be done with pleasure and delight, for these reasons I move my Lady Speaker, that no other form may be so much as mention'd beside that of Anarchee. The whole House was astonish'd at the Wisdom of the Lady that spoke last, one said that Minerva her self had spoken, another cry'd that either some she Devil or else some Sybil spoke within her; and the Lady Nimble-Clack
was ready to put her brains out at her Ears, to think that she should be such a Dunce as not to hit of the Project, so that at length the whole House finding the Expedient to be unanswerable came to the following Resolutions. Resolv'd, that Anarchee is the most Proper form of Government, to pre∣serve the Peace and Tranquility of the Female Common-weal. Resolv'd, that Anarchee being re∣solv'd to be such, it be the business of this House to settle and establish it with all convenient Speed. Resolv'd, that who ever by Speak∣ing, Writing, or Printing, shall utter or Publish any things to the prejudice or in Derogation of Anarchee, shall be adjudg'd and shall suffer as a Capital Enemy of the Female Sex. All which Resolves being Order'd to be drawn into Bills, the House adjourn'd till the next Morning. Die Sab. prox. post di. Sat. antecedente. Though the next day were Sunday, yet they were loath to lose a day, knowing how much their business re∣quir'd hast, to Church they were un∣willing to go, presently because they were most of 'em in Men's Apparel, and
besides, they had neither a Marshal, nor a Nye, nor a Goodwin, nor a Sterry, to preach before them; therefore they hearto'd themselves up with an Old Proverb, The better day, the better deed, believing because their debates were to be about Religion, it would be the more excusable, and indeed it was no wonder that the Women should have their Religion to choose, when so many Men are in the same Laby∣rinth. The Dutchess of Decay'd-Vertue, the Countess of Mirth and Glee, the Coun∣tess of Brickle-ware, the Baroness of In and In, the Lady Fleshly-given, the Lady Sensual, Madam Fadomless, and the Lady Rantipol, desir'd to be excus'd their attendance for that day, in regard they were altogether unacquainted with matters of Religion, and believing they could better spend their time at Lantra∣loo or some other Chamber-practise, well knowing that their Consciences were not so streight-lac'd, but that they could dispence with playing at Cards a Sundaies, or any other time as opportunity offer'd it self. With these in the afternoon joyn'd the Countess of Rut-land-shire, and the Baroness of
Giddy-Hall, having first satisfiy'd the nicety of their Morning Devotions with a Lecture out of Cassandra, and two or three short Homilies out of the Queen of Navars Novels. But in the Grand Cabal debates ran very High; and indeed it was a mat∣ter of great Importance to find out what Religon was most Contentane∣ous to the Form of Government they had made choice of. Quo' the Lady Voluble it is not in choosing Religion, as it is in choosing a Piece of Point Lace. I would under∣take to see all the Point Laces in both the Exchanges in half a day—but I would not promise to survey all the Religions in the World in half a year, the Jewish Religion was the first in the World—but that is not for our Turn—for that allows the Men Plurality of Wives—but we must have a Religion that will allow Plurality of Husbands; and I doubt when all's done, we must be forced to make a Religion of our own. For I have alwaies lookt upon the Form of Government to be the Body, and Religion to be the Suit. Some call it the Cloak, but I say the Suit; now if the Suit be not made fit
to the Body, the Suit will never sit well; besides that it will be uneasie and troublesome. Thus the Gown and Cassock accommodates with Maner∣chee, and Calvinism agrees with none but Common-wealths; but we wave both those Religions, as having utterly rejected both those Forms of Govern∣ment as not being for our Turn. The Lady Rash was for introducing of Mahometism; but it w alleadg'd against her, that that Religion shut the Women out of Paradise, and put 'em to dance an Eternal attendance with Infidels and Heathens, so that she re∣canted her proposal, tho' not withou some regret, in egard the Mahomitan Religion gave the Women so much freedom to Paint and wash, while they durst hardly come to their Parish As∣semblies, for fear of being openly re∣buk'd for only restoring and repairing decay'd Nature. Quaquerism was utterly condemn'd, because it destroy'd the Manufactures of Ribbin-weaving and Gold-lace; be∣sides that it held Plaies and Romances in Abomination. Those people, quo' the Lady Fisgigg, look all as if they were bewitch'd; the Women simper like so
many Possnets of blew starch upon the Fire; if you talk to 'em out of the Aca∣demy of Complements, they are as shie as so many Black Birds; court 'em in Scripture Phrase and they come to the line like so many well manur'd Hawks, meer Hypocrites, incorrigible dissemblers. I hate a Hypocrite with my heart, quo' the Lady Nimble-Clack; I am for dealing fairly above board; they say the Anabaptists are the honestest people i' the World, they'l not take a Peny more then they ask ye.— Hang 'em, quo' Madam Tomboy, there's a Religion indeed! They never Christen their Children—they are a Niggardly Generation, that to save a little Burnt Wine and a few Boxes of Sweet-meats, destroy all the Pleasures of Female Society. They only go to a Pond and dowse one another, over Head and Ears, and so home again. Meer she Cynies not fit for Common Conversation; No, Madam, if we must choose our Religion among these sort of Enthusiasts, I am clearly for your Ranters. They are a jolly sort of People indeed, they meet together Male and Female, Higgledy Piggledy,
put out the Candles, put off their Cloaths and play at catch that catch can bravely without fear or Wit—there's some Sport in this sort of Devo∣tion Ladies—and I believe it would suit very well with our Form of Government. By my troth, and I think so too, quo' the Lady Rantipol; I like a Reli∣gion that has some mettle in't not to sit dream, dream at Church, as it were in so many Cornelius's Sweating Tubs—and so to a Muddy Ale-house at Isling∣ton; or a walk i' the Charter House-Garden—and then home to Repetition; What a World of Time is here lost? But the Ranters when they meet, improve their time, which is the only end of Meeting in the World.—There's no Sect there∣fore in all Rosse's Catalogue like the Ranters—I say—let it be put to the Vote. Not so fast pray now, quo' the La∣dy Nimble-Clack, we have forgot the Religion of the Papishes all this while Methinks 'tis a very prety Religion; they have the featest way of Worship i' their Chappels, they Come and Go, and Go and Come—and Pray
and Whisper and Laugh, and Laugh and Whisper and Pray all at a time—Methinks 'tis such an Easie way of go∣ing to Heaven—while others are pent up four hours together like sheep in Smithfield Pens upon a Munday Morning, and there they must stay murdering a farts, till the man with Kerchief about his neck has said out his, say.— Cuds Life the Papishes! quo' the Countess of Whigg-land, Lord! Ladys, would you have us all Murdered in our Beds? They are all for Powder Plots and Massacres, and Rebellion; should we suffer our selves once to become Pa∣pishes, we should never be at quiet among our selves; we should have the Jesuits among Us, those Monsters of People, Sawer-ey'd, and Devil∣pated; we should have nothing but Plots and Contrivances one among ano∣ther to the utter Ruin of our Infant state. Oh but quo' the Lady Nimble-Clack, I could willingly be content that we might have an Order of Popes among Us; I fancy a Triple Crown would become me mightily; if ye set up the Religion of the Papishes, we may so bring it to pass that all the Ladies Go∣vernantes's
shall be made Popes, and wear Triple Crowns to distinguish them from the inferior sort; or else we may give our selves the title of Cardi∣nals and that's as well. I fancy we should look very Majestically in Scarlet Gowns and Red Hats. But Madam, reply'd the Countess of Whigg-land addressing her self to the Lady Speaker, the Gentlewoman that spoke last, does not consider that the very Garments of the Papishes are in∣fectious; they will infuse into us all their▪ evil qualities, make us covetous as they are, cruel as they; we shall be presently laying Taxes upon the Bawdy Houses, making people pay for confes∣sing their sins. And then, another de∣vilish inconvenience would follow, that should we use our selves to the Cardi∣nals Habit, it would so habituate the Women to the practise of Male Vene∣rie, that we should have 'em all grind∣ing their Corn at the Mens Windmills, & so spoil the trade of their own Water∣mills, which would prove of very dangerous Consequence; or at least it would bring them to practise all toge∣ther with one another without any con∣sideration of the Men, as the Popes and
Cardinals converse and sport with their Caamites and He-Misses without any regard to the Women. The Lady sensual inveighed bitterly against their fasting and pennances, Especially the self punishment of Whip∣ping, which she alleadg'd was only for Beggars and vagabods. These were cruel Rubbs in the way of the Papishes; but nothing more hin∣der'd its advancement then that it was accus'd of being guilty of Idolatry; to which they were told the Papishes were so sottishly addicted, that they would worship an Old Mapstick, if you could but make 'em believe it to be a Piece of the Great St. Christophers Pike-staff. Thereupon with a General Approbati∣on they sent the Papishes to the Devil, not allowing of any Idolatry but what was given to themselves. Quo' the Lady Voluble, why such a deal of stir about Religion? The less we have, the better—'tis that which still sets the men together by the Ears, and alwaies had done ever since there was any Religion in the World; and therefore, said she, we have but little Reason to be so fond of Religi∣on—a little of that will go a great
way—we Women are not so sharp upon cutting one anothers throats—but if ye will needs set up a Religion, Ladies, as it will be very proper for outward Ornament, and shure you can never pitch upon a better Religion then that which they call the Independant, for as Anarchee permits every body to do what they please in Temporals, so Independency implys the same liberty in Spirituals; for they that depend upon Nobody Nobody, has any thing to do to contradict 'em: and I believe we should be as loath to be contradicted in Religion, as in the management of our temporal af∣fairs. Now being Independants in our Religion, what has any body to do with us? but that we may do in Reli∣gion what we please as we do in mat∣ters of State; a Pudding is not so pat for a Fryers Mouth as an Independant Religion for Anarchee, your Indepen∣dants are neither Debtors nor Creditors, they neither borrow nor lend their Re∣ligion, but every one follows her own humor, either goes to Church or stays at home, according to her own humor, or as her cloaths pleases her, being In∣dependant to all the World besides.
Then again, said the Lady Voluble, she that is an Independant, has an An∣swer ready to all impertinent Questions. Whither are you going? saies my Hus∣band, what's that to you say I, I am Independant, what made ye out so late? 'tis no matter, say I, I am an Indepen∣dant—where have you been? I am an Independant, that is to say, no body is to question my Will or my Conscience—because I am Inde∣pendant in Both. And thus, my Lady Speaker, here's the Proverb of Trim∣tram as truly verifyed as ever it was in this Earth; like form of Government, like form of Religion, as fit as Box and Box-lid. Quo' the Lady Rash, pray give me leave to speak, I have not spoke yet—and I think I shall propose a Religion without exception; my Lady Speaker, in short, I propound the Antinomian Religion; this is a Religion that admits of no Law; 'tis positively an Enemy to all Law, but is a Passionate indulger of Free-will, now what would Women have more then to be lawless, and en∣joy their Free-will; and this not only allowed by the form of Government, but by the Established Religion adapt∣ed to the form.
Madam, quo' the Lady Voluble, my Opinion is that the Antinomian is the same with the Independant; for they that are lawless are Independants, and the same are also they that enjoy their Free-will; Free-will being perfect Inde∣pendency, now therefore seeing the con∣test is only between Antinomian and In∣dependant, I humbly move that Indepen∣dant may carry it, as being the Top∣ping Denomination, and a word less subject to Scandal. Thereupon after a short debate it was resolved upon the Question, that the Religion of Independency was the on∣ly Religion agreeing to the form of Government, intended to be establish'd being Anarhee. Resolv'd, that so soon as we shall have set up Anarchee, we will cast off the name of Protestants; and go by the name of Independants. Resolv'd, that under the notion of Independancy there shall be a Toleration of all sorts of Religions, that ever were, or ever will be in the World; Chi∣neses, Bannians, Heathens, Turks, Jews, Tartars, Greeks, Romans, Lutherans, Calvinists; Papishes only excepted, be∣cause the Constitution of the Nation will
never disgest 'em, but that the Indepen∣dant be still the Grande of the whole Flock, the Master Bee of the whole Swarm. Resolv'd that the Independants, An∣tinomians and Thelemites be all one. These things being thus luckily re∣solv'd, the Grand Committee dissolv'd for the Present, and the Commoners return to their own House, where the leading Ladies resolv'd to set a hundred Gimcracks afoot; to which purpose they adjourn'd for a Week, to the end they might meet in the mean time and cabal what was fittest to be done. Being reassembled it was order'd after a very short debate, that both Houses should have a great Feast, and a Grand Gossipping together, for the better maintaining of Amity and good Cor∣respondence. Mrs. Soake-pot mov'd that there might be a Clock set up i' the House, for that she knew not how the time went away—but the Lady Nimble-Clack was utterly against the Motion, saying, that it was only for Nuns and Prickers of Clouts that wrought by the day to count the Hours. Business never minds what a clock 'tis—let me talk till I'me weary (quo she) and then give over—
I love a Gold Watch, purl'd with Dia∣monds to hang by my side for orna∣ment—but for Clocks and Clock Makers, let 'em all go to the Devil—shall I when my tongues upon the Gal∣lap, put a pegg i' the root of my Clap∣per, because the Clock strikes▪—not I, by my feth—what a fine sight it is to see a Sun-dial upon a Church Wall, with your Cambridge Pun at the Bottom, we must—But by this you may see what silly Creatures Men are to tickle themselves with such Idle Fancies and Gimcracks—away then with your One, two, three's—and your Dye-alls—let us live, and talk and be merry, and let Time with his Sith, and his Hour-glass, go and Contemplate at Salamanca, and come when we send for him— While they were thus debating, of a suddain they heard a most hideous noise in the Court before the House, as if all the City Crys had been setting up their Throats in one Compass of Ground, some with durty Forhead pieces, some with fowl Night railes, some with lac'd shoes all unript—durty Gloves, ton Mantuas, taudry Coronets, as if they had come from the
Plunder of Long-lane; Yawling, Baw∣ling, Raging, Fuming, Fretting, Sweating, Headgear disorder'd, here about their Eytraes, like so many Bess-a-Bedlams. It seems the Common Curtezans having intelligence of this Grand Sessions of the Ladies, and well knowing themselves to be so Considerable a Body of the Female Common-weal, look't upon it as an affront that deserv'd their highest Indignation, to be so neglected, as not to be thought worthy being Summon'd to a Place, where they thought they had equal Right to have their shares in Counsel. These Considerations put them into such a fury, that they pre∣sently muster'd together under the lead∣ing of Betty Mackarel, and Orange Moll, and march'd all night carrying several of their Bullies with 'em, intending to have surpriz'd the Ladies in their Quar∣ters; but not being able to travel far with∣out a sup of the Brandy Bottle, they made a stop at every good Town, so that the Ladies were sate before they could reach the Place of their Meeting. The Ladies beholding such a Frantick Rout, and hearing such a Terrible Hur∣ley Burley, sent out the Lady Rantipol, the Lady Fadamless, Madam Tomboy▪
and Madam Noise, to know what was the matter. Betty Mackarel made 'em no Answer, but press'd on with all her train, with an intention as it was thought to have brok∣en open the Doors of the House, and to have made their Entry, not after the manner of foraign Embassadors, but like so many Middlesex Bumms upon a Habere Facias Possessionem. Which the forlorn hope of Ladies seeing, they sent in for the rest of their Membresses, and in the mean time bestirr'd themselves with such an Amazonian Valour, that they put the whole Body of the leud Rabble to a stand; the Ladies percei∣ving their few friends so hotly engaged, come running forth with every one a Cushion in her hand, and to their im∣mortal praise be it spoken, bestow'd a most liberal Voley of Turky-work up∣on the Enemy, who were no less dili∣gent to return 'em their Artillery back again with the same Dexterity; This Cushion skirmish continu'd till the Flocks began to fly about their Ears, and then they came to a close fight, which was maintain'd on both sides for a time with that fury, that it would have made your heart ake, had you not been a
Millener, to see the dismal waste of Hoo¦nad Scarfs, Silk Mantuas, Men's Coats an Cassocks, lac'd Petticoats, she that was  fine, as Come and see, but now, th next moment would have been glad o a Figleaf to cover her Nakedness; yo would have thought they had been teat∣ing one another for the good of som Paper-mill; some with their Noses and Cheeks all bloody; others with thei Faces all bespit; others with their Eye dung'd up like an Ovens Mouth: fo their very fear had furnish'd 'em with materials for their Cruelty. The floo lay cover'd with pieces of Buttocks, bi of Chinns, tips of Noses, scraps of Ears, as thick among the strewings of swee Herbs, that you would have thought it had been a mixture for Lombardy Pies, several Bullies, coming to rescue their Mistresses, had their Chitterlings so stretched that they quite lost the use of 'em. At length, Betty Mackarel, and Orange Moll, being taken Prisoners, the Gil-Trapes's having lost their leaders, and the Ladies having their bellies full, both sides began to pause: and both sides be∣ing willing to lye by to mend their Rig∣ging, there followed a Cessation of Arms▪
And now ever one began to seek  their own—but alas among  many Raggs and Jaggs and tatters of k, fine Holland, Calico, Dowlass, rsey, Chalcon and other stuffs; that as such an endless work, that they were c'd to be content with what they ould get. They that could not find their own ew, must take anothers Red, and ey that could not match their own d must take anothers Black; happy as she that could get a piece of any lour to serve turn. The Common alamity made all things allowable, l they could send for recruits. The Ladies of the Upper House, aring of the Fray, kept themselves ose, till the skirmish was over, so sav'd ir Bacon. And now as their Passions grew cold, ey began to consider what they had one, and what all this was for, the La∣es, re-assum'd their Places, here one ith her arm in a string, another with  black patch upon her cheek, a third th a piece of Bown Paper over her yes—never was seen such a agged Regiment at the General Ele∣ion of Salomon King of the Beggars.
By and by Betty Mackarel and Orang Moll, were called in, and Chairs were brought them to sit down, for they were scarce able to stand; being sat the Lady Quaint, as Speaker, demand∣ed of them the reason of the late une¦pected and unseasonable Hurley Bur∣ley. Ladies, reply'd Betty Mackarel, for sh was both nimble of Tongue, and of grea experience, you need not wonder, w took it so much in dudgeon as we did▪ to see our selves so much contemn'd an slighted by those who had so little Rea¦son to do it. Surely said she, you coul not but think we were flesh and bloo as well as you; and what flesh and bloo could endure to sit still with our hand in our Plackets, to see such a consider¦able body of the Female Common-we excluded from our Birth-right; as if th general Consultations for the gener good of the Female Sex were not  equal Importance to Us, as to yo selves: or indeed as if you could do an thing without me, or those of my Profe¦sion, when we came to your Chamber under the pretence of bringing ye M¦lacotoons and boon Christians, an were wont to conveigh your Love
Notes and Ballets to ye in fair bunches of Grapes, then it was in a kind and familiar stile, Dear Betty Mackarel, Honest Orange Moll—and when we came again to receive your answers, then it was in a most obliging manner, Honey Betty, Sweet Moll, this was pri∣vate Chamber Practise, smoothly, hand∣somely, secretly, carry'd on, and d'ye think we are not as able to mannage a publick intreague against the Male Sex for the Publick Good? What could we think but that you were driving your own interests on to our Detriment, and that you were going about to de∣prive Us of our Ancient and undeni∣able Liberties and Properties. I'le as∣sure ye Ladies we look'd upon it as a heinous piece of Ingratitude, and it made our blood boyl within Us.— Betty having thus delivered the sence of her whole Train, they were both ordered to withdraw. The doors being shut, the House en∣ter'd into a deep debate concerning this business—The Lady Polyhimne alledged that the Ladies of Rome had admitted the Roman▪ Curtesans into Common Culsultations with them about the Elections of the Popes, for which
they gave most solid reason, for th  they were tax'd in the Popes Books▪ and pay'd largely toward the increase of his revenue, and therefore since it could not be expected but that the Curtezans would be assess'd toward the support of the Female Anarchee, they ought to be accompted Members of the State, and consequently have their votes by their Representatives in our Female Sessions as others our subjects have. To tell ye truth cry'd Mad. Fadomless I know no such difference between them and Us, they are Daughters of Joy and so are We. Only we have the best of the Market; like will to like, the rich to the rich, the meaner to the mean∣er sort, for my part ever since I have known the World, the World has been the World, and things have gone still in the same Road; the Ladies and the Daughters of joy have been alwaies the same thing, and there's ne're a Barber about the Town but well knows, that under the Appellation of Lady is com∣prehended that of a Daughter of joy, and under the name Daughter of joy is comprehended that of Lady, only with this destinction, that the Ladies were secret Daughters of joy, and the
Daughter of joy, Publick Ladies. These reasons prevail'd, and it was hereupon resolv'd that the Misses▪ Cur∣ezans should be admitted to vote and ct by their Representatives; and be∣cause the Curtezans had, it seems for∣merly yeilded the title of most Excellent to the Ladies, therefore it was ordered by the Ladies, that every Representa∣tive Curtezan should enjoy the Title of your Ladyship. Things thus compos'd, Betty Mack∣rel, and Orange Moll, with such others as they should think fit, were again called in, to whom the Lady Qaint declared the Resolves of the House in he following Speech. Most Dear and beloved I ady Procurers and Curtezans. I Have often heard my Brother when he was a School Boy frequently repeat a Latin Fragment, of which the Eng∣sh was this; The Falling out of Lovers  the renewing of Love. I must con∣ess this has been a fatal Day, a bloody ay, a day to be blotted out of the Al∣nack, Women sometimes, that's very
seldom, do govern their Passion, and some∣times, that is, much more frequently▪ do not. But now we are going to gover the World, we must learn to govern ou selves better; we have this day rent an torn and batter'd one another, about a par¦cell of Goates-wool, as the men say; for my part, I wish we had been all sick i our Beds when this Hubbub happened▪ But Ladies, it is in vain to recal wha is past, we are now to think of Reconci¦liation, now they say, Shitten come Shite is the beginning of Love, come on the do you Cack in our hands, and wee'l Ga in yours, then shake fists together, and  all shall be well. I am farther commanded to tell y that it is the Ladies desires that yo choose your Representatives who sha be freely admitted to the publick Co¦sultations, and have their free Vo equal with the rest, assuring your L¦diships that it was their Intentions a Resolution to have been as careful  your Priviledges and Immunities, as this Battle had never been fought; a for the farther preventing of all conte¦tions Animosities, Assaults, and B¦teries
for the future, they have order'd that from henceforth, all such as all be chosen by the Town Misses and Curtezans, whither Plyers or Standers t Mark for their Representatives in this present Sessions shall be allowed the Title of Ladiship, and shall be in∣corporated into the Company of Ladies of Rank and Quality. The Lady Quaint having finish'd her Speech, deliver'd a Coppy of it to the two Commissioners, who hav∣ing read it to the Rabble, and made a Comment of Moderation upon it, they were all very well satisfi'd. Thereupon they fell to the Election of their Representatives, and presently made choice of Betty Mackarel, the Lady Benness, Moll Hind, Orange Moll, Betty Darby, Young Currer, Winny Hack—and several others, who were presently admitted, and took their places accordingly. Peace being thus concluded on both sides, the House adjourn'd till the next Morning, having made three Orders be∣fore they rose. First, that there should be a General day of Thanks-giving throughout the Fe∣male
Common-weal, for the happy union concluded between both Parties, and that Parson Bull and the Vicar o Croydon be desired to preach before the House. Secondly, that a Considerable summ of Money be taken up upon the pub∣lick Faith to defray the charges of the late Dammages, and that Commoners be appointed to make an Estimate of every Persons particular losses. Thirdly, that Bonfires should be made at Night in the Court-yard of thei Parliament Palace; and that the Lady Curtezans be desired to get their Fire∣works ready to delight all Commers, and Goers. By this time the Impeachment against the whole Race of the Male kind was finished and brought in, wherein the had aggravated to the full height not only all their sins of Commission from the beginning of the World to the day of the Date, but also their sins of Omi∣ssion, but more especially that damn'd fowl Italian sin of Poaking for Gene∣ration in the Bowels of their own Sex; to the great Scorn, Contempt, Neglect, and Reproach of the whole Common∣weal of Women.
In the next place they took it into onsideration, that Men had been for  long time framing and patching up veral Laws and Statutes for their own se and advantage, which would by o means agree with the Female Pile  Man-modelling which they were go∣g to erect. To which purpose they condemn'd l the Statutes of Aility and Nonability  secula seculorum, and made it high eason for any body to be Judges of bility or Nonability but themselves. And whereas by a Statute in the 5 d 6 of Ed. 6. the Men had contrary  all bonos mores restrain'd the use of iggmills it was look'd upon as a igh Breach of Female Priviledge, d the Statute ordered to be utterly olish'd. They confirm'd the statutes of Gloce∣ and Westminster about Cessavits, ith this addition that he that ceas'd r Biennium should be sent to the Devil ithout Bayl or Mainprise: Great care as taken in the next place that no Wo∣en might want a Habeas Corpus as ten as she desir'd it; but as for the rits of supersedeas, it was left to the
Discretion of the Women to make  of them when they saw their time. Here the Question was put, wh Laws should be made concerning M¦trimony and Cuckoldry; which Mot¦on was no sooner made, but the Lad Fadomless, the Lady Lustful and the L¦dy Sensual began to set up their throat and so ask'd the Lady Quaint, as Spea¦er, why she permitted such a Motio to be made; for quo' the Lady Lustf in behalf of the rest, 'tis very true th while men had the Reines and Brid of Government in their own hand they have all along endeavour'd to i¦pale the Female Sex to themselve and by Matrimony and custom to ma marry'd Women their particular Pro¦perties, as if they had an absolute pow¦er of disposing Women as they pleas' and that they were their own as the Gloves and their Canes; or else by kind of Pye-corner-Law. This Chu of Beef is mine because I have put Scewer into it. For this reason so soon as we sha hold upon the Curbs, and Snaffles  Rule, we shall turn things into anothe Channel; and you shall see it will
much better with the World then for∣merly. You say very right, said Madam Fadomless,—for now then we shall see Women free, and Nature at Liberty. I would fain know when a Woman was resolv'd to make her Husband a Cuckold; what all the watchings, and wardings, and spies, and sentinel signified, though every one had been an Argos with a Million of Eyes? For that if a Woman had a mind to Cuckold her Husband, it was the same thing as if hate had destin'd him to that inevitable Doom. And therefore were not men a Company of Cack-thoughts, Cuckowbrained Ninny Hammers, to think to make the Pla∣nets run retrograde; to turn the Motion of the Spheares: or stop the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, which they might as well do as prevent their being made Cuckolds. And indeed it was but reasonable, that Matrimony should have that continual unlucky fortune at∣teding upon it, which Reprobate Man, has hitherto so unjustly made use of to Chain and Mue us up; contrary to all the Laws of Nature and Reason. Now
it is apparent that we have liv'd all th while under the Scourges of unjust a and unreasonable force, ad therefor the Revenges which we sought and pra¦ctised, were no more then what th unwarrantable proceeding of Men de∣serv'd; and these are your infallible Reasons that 'tis as impossible for a man to ovoid Cuckoldry as 'tis to take the Moon by the Hornes. Unless a man could wear upon his Finger Hans-car∣vells Ring which the Devil gave him in his Dream, as he lay a Sleep with his Wife, and when he wak'd he found his Finger in his Wive's, &c.— With all Reverence to Mahomet be it spoken, quo' the Lady Fleshly-given, there is no other way to avoid Cuck∣oldry as the Men had order'd their af∣fairs, but we shall set a new face of things upon the Shoulders of the World; For I do not believe 'tis the Judgment of this House that we ever intend to Mar∣ry.— No by my truly, quo' Betty Macka∣rel, wee'l ha' no more of your I Tom take thee T—ds—wee'l ha' no more of your serve honour and Obey's—but every one shall take
many as she pleases at board wages,  way of Subjection—Now ppose my Neighbour have a desire o have a piece of my raw flesh.—It may be said Orange Moll, I may ave a desire to have a piece of yours—his is but fair Exchange, as the Change oes—what I lend I lend, and what I borrow I borrow—this s nothing of Cuckoldry.—And o shall the fear of Horn beating never rouble the silly World more—e horrour of that Hobgoblin shall ease, and which is pity, Brow-anthers shall never be the Ornaments of suspi∣ious Jolt-heads, and jealous Jobbernols again—I have observ'd, quo he Lady Sensual, that all your Law∣givers of the Male Sex, have had the worst luck with their Laws, of any People i'the World; in their restraints which they have lay'd upon Women: and that among the rest there is nothing more slighted, more contemn'd, more rampled upon, nothing less regarded then Matrimony; a thing no more minded by the Women then St. Peter minds his Cathedral at Rome. The men did not consider, that nothing
so much encreases Female desire as the forbidding the Use of a thing; Women are never more a dry, then when they have no drink i' the House; I could muster up a hundred stories to prove this, quo' the Lady Voluble—among the rest I remember a certain Gentlewoman, that look't always as grave and demure as an Owl in a Bird Cage; you would have Sworn that the strings of Matrimony had they been no stronger then Cobwebbs would have held her, one would have thought that she had had a Husband too that night have given her content, proper, handsome, and well proportion'd, neat in apparel, gentile in his behaviour, and witty in conversation. But for all that, this Womna falls disparately in love with a certain Baconfac'd, greasy, nasty, tatterdemallionly slubberdegullion, that taught the Parish Children for a groat a week; this same walking dunghil so infernaliz'd this same Woman, that she never left tell she had got him into the House to teach a Sisters Son of hers, having no Children of her own; in short she so order'd the matter, that her Husband was the man must invite him.
He was the person that innocently ech'd the Cock to the Hay-House, and o this Pumkin of a Paedagogue was presently brought home with his haw∣kingbag containing a wardrobe which consisted only of two patch'd Shirts, and three old Books, and lodg'd by the Mistress in a Chamber convenient for her purpose. I need say no more; you may be sure, she, that had such a perswading fancy that the Paedagogue by his nose was furnish'd like an Emperor, was not long before she found an Opportunity to satisfie her Curiosity. I could tell ye Ladies, cry'd Madam Non-Denye of another Gentlewoman, who being the Vicar of the parish put out his Hyperbole's and make water un∣der her Window, was so befrenzy'd with his Codpiece Furniture, that her soul took no rest till she had brought him to hold forth much more to the purpose in her Pulpit then in his own. But we need not go far for stories of this Nature; for should some of Us give an accompt of our own Lives, I make no Question, but you would find as good Reading in Modern History, as
in any of the Legends of former Ages. Cat will after kind, and there's no thrusting back nature, tho it be with a pitch-fork. Thereupon it was mov'd that a Bill should be brought in for repealing all the Cnjugal-Laws that ever were made since Noah's Flood, but it was alledg'd that there would be no need of putting themselves to that trouble, for that all Matrimonial Laws, Ceremonies and Formalities would fall of course upon the change of the Government. There is one great Convenience more that sprouts forth and erects it self out of this Abrogation of Conjugal Laws, for thereby, quo' she, we shall remove two great sins at once out of the World and ease the Pulpits of a great Deal of Lip-labour, I mean Adultry and Forni∣cation, for Adultry can never be com∣mitted where no Property can be claim∣ed; Nor can she be said to Commit Fornication that has her Body▪ solely at her own dispose, and keeps her Midenhead for no bodies satisfaction bu her own, and when she parts with it, parts with it to please her self, not him that has it. There's no deflowr∣ing
in the case, nor depucelating, no frumps for anothers having had a Sop in the Pan before hand, no Scandal for coming in three Months, no injury done of either side, when a Woman may have as many Fathers for one Child as she pleases, since the Birth alwaies follow'd the Belly; nor was it an Acorn matter, who was the Fa∣ther. Thus Cuckoldry, or Wittalry, Forni∣cation and Adultery were to have made their Exits all together, and a kind of Community was to have made it's En∣try. Only it being consider'd that the Baroness of Horn-fair and the head Landlady of Cuckolds Point would be considerable losers by this same lop∣ping off the Entayle of their Demeaners, a private Bill was order'd to be brought in to give them plenary Satisfaction out of the Lands of that Italianiz'd Son of Despotic Tyranny that stood impeach'd for Padlocking his Wives Limbeck of Salt Water. Next day a Bill was order'd to be brought in for the Suppression of Ale∣houses and Taverns, for that men be∣ing
hence forward not to have any thing to do about the wast, the Wo∣men were resolv'd to keep them under their girdles, and to preserve them from the damages of continual Wear and tear by a due observation of tem∣perance and sobriety; for that was a certain Rule, that as Venus grew im∣potent without the Assistance of▪ Ceres and Bacchus, so men's indulging them∣selves too much to the Service of Bac∣chus render'd them unfit for Venus's Gambolls. Another bill was order'd to be brought in for the prevention of hard studying, and for encouragement of Idleness. As to the first, it was alleadg'd that there was nothing like hard study, to cause a dissipation of the Spirits, the wast whereof being a Total preventi∣on of their conveighance to the parts of Duty Now and Anon too; hinder'd intumidation and decay'd strength of Natures incumbent to the great Detri∣ment of Female Expectation. There∣fore it was that Minerva the Goddess of your Book worms was said to be a Virgin; and that Cupid being ask'd by
his Mother Venus why he never assail'd the Muses, he answer'd, that they were so intent, one upon Star-gazing, ano∣ther upon the Reconciliation of Debtor and Creditor, another upon her Dia∣pente's and Hexachordon's, another up∣on one thing, another upon another, that he no soon came nere 'em, but it presently put him into such a fit of Hy∣pochandriac Melancholy to see them so hard at work, that he immediatly unbent his Bow, shut up his quiver, and put out his Flambeau, partly out of shame, partly out of fear to hurt 'em. As to the second, the Lady Lustful alleadg'd, that there was nothing so advantagious to the Female service as Idleness, Ovid being asked why Egistus was so great a Cuckold maker, an∣swer'd, because he was an Idle Fellow, take away Idleness out of the World, and Monsieur Cupid may go hang himself with his Bow and his Arrows, as one that would soon become Bank∣rupt with the expence of daily recruit∣ing his quiver; therefore the Philoso∣pher being ask'd what sort of insects Love Toys were, answered, the Pa∣ssions
of Idle minds; and another grave Monsieur, Grey-beard said, that Le∣chery was the Occupation of people not otherwise employ'd. This debate produc'd an order for the bringing in two Bills more The one for a General Massacre of all sorts of Books, Historical, Theological, Astrological, Physical, Gresham, Col∣legetical, Romanical, Hermotical, Trismegistical, all treatises of the Arts of woing and Complementing, and more particularly for the committing of Bagnals Ballet and the Government of the Tongue to the Consumption of a Flam fit to Burn and Smother the Scandal of two such Egregious▪ Li∣bells. That both the Universities and all Schools of Learning be supprest: there being nothing that has made men so presumptuous to Crow over Women, then the Opinion of their Book∣knowledge, and their converse with blind needy Poets, and thredbare Phi∣losophers▪ But ignorance is the Mo∣ther of Devotion; therefore as they have been hitherto learning to be learn∣ed, let 'em now learn as long to be igno∣rant.
Provided never the less, and be it enacted, any thing herein to the Con∣trary notwithstanding, that Aloysia Si∣gea, L' Eschole de fils, and Peter Areines discourses be translated, and fairly Printed for the Particular good of the Female Common-weal; and for the eneral Instruction of Youth, and that he liberal sciences therein contain'd be ublickly taught in too particular Boarding Schools to be erected for that urpose, the one in Blow-blader-street, nd the other in Honey-lane mar∣et. After this they again fell to repeal ndry of the Statutes formerly made  the Mens Raign, and more parti∣ularly condemn'd Magna Charta, es∣ecially that clause of it, that men ould be try'd by their Peers, for said ey, though men cannot presume to e our Equals, yet by the new Altera∣on of Government, all tryals of Men elong to our selves besides the impos∣bility that Men should be able to try en so well as Women. They were exceedingly astonish'd hen they came to look upon the sta∣e of weights and measures and
found that in those times a yard wa to contain three Foot by the standar of the Exchequer. They cry'd th those Statutes sure were made in th time of the Gyants; no such yards hav∣ing been seen or heard of for these ma∣ny Years: and therefore they too great care to have those statutes utterl defac'd with a Spunge dipp'd in Lamb black and Size, because they woul not have that continually in their Ey which they could not hold in thei hands. With the same fury they utterl conceal'd the Statutes of Wast and Wills for they never look'd any farther the the Titles of the Statutes, and if th saw any thing that seem'd to trench up¦on their humor, they gave it a Da incontinently, there was but a wot and a blow. And so believing th Statutes of Wast had been against th Profuseness of Women; and that th Statutes of Wills, were made to cu and bridle their passions and to hind their Domineering at Rovers, the presently damn'd 'em without a more ado, debarring all pleas demu¦rers, or Arguments whatsoever.
Now as there never was a Parlia∣ment without a Projector, here was one that address'd himself to the La∣ies of a strange Kidney. He was a Doctor of Physick that had been of all the Religions that ever were since Adams time; He had cur'd a Raga∣muffin of the Neapolitan Canker on∣ly by touching his Back-bone three times with a piece of the Merry thought bone of a Young Pullet: He cur'd all sorts of Timpanys, Fevers, Consumptions, Gouts, Dysenteries, and a hundred other diseases by ordering the Patient only to shut his Mouth and open his Eyes for a time; he curd the Erysipela and all manner of Inflamations by applying a Fox tayl to the Patient under the left Arm∣hole. This Doctor having the Conceit in his Brain, was resolved to be his own Midwife, and so brought him∣self to Bed in several sheets of Pa∣per Printed upon one side, which were presented to all the Membresses as they went into the Houses. Where∣in he set forth what hearing the Wo∣men were going about to alter the
Employments of Men, he had found out a way to make the men give Suck and so swell out their Brests and Ni∣ples after the manner of Women which would be a great ease to the Wo∣men, and take a World of trouble o their Hands. The rest is to come.
