R1320 12485985 62283
A PANEGYRICK On her most Excellent Majestie, Katharine, Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland: OR Her Highness Cordiall welcome into England. Her Royal Majesty landed at Portsmouth, on Wednesday night, the 14. this instant May; to the great joy of all those that truly fear God, and honour the KING. By LANCELOT REYNOLDS, Gent. LONDON: Printed by R. Vaughan, in Great St. Martins.
On her most Excellent Majestie, Katharine, Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland: Her Highness Cordiall welcome into England. VVHen that you saw, Brave Englands Royal Fleece And many Nobles, of the English greet. Your Royal Brother, did them Entertain: And there Brave Company, and Princely Train; Where nothing was wanting, to shew his love: And enterchange of action; to approve. After great Feasting: they must then part thence. Take there great charge, a Royal Recompence. Much land, and watery Ocean, was between: I cannot now relate, what was there seen; In the great Court, of King of Pertugal; Grand happiness, I wish unto them all. When you did leave, your Brothers Royal Court: Many great Persons, did to you resort. At last into the Ship, you did enter: Resolving on a Royal adventure. I wish't that the Seas, might be calm, and fair: For to Convay, a Spouse, that is so Rae; Endu'd with Eminent quallities of mind: A Jewel so Rich, so Rare is hard to find. Aeolus breath'd fair, fil'd sailes to convoy: The choycest Jewel, of my Soveraigns joy.
Neptune stir not up, Thy Tempestious waves: Where many are buried, in untimely graves. May's Forehead now be smooth, no wrinkled brow: But fair, and calm, great Caesar it allow. May Fishes skip, and in the Ocean play: England Rejoyce, at this happy day. God Bless the place, where you did safely land: And keep your Highness, by the Almighties hand. Welcome Rare Princess, into great Brittains land: To gracious King Charls, that doth it command; And all our noble Nation beside: To be a Famous Queen, King Charls his Bride. Now you are past over, the Surging Seas: Down you may sit, and take your quiet case. When you shall come, in my dear Soveraigns sight: Oh how it will his Highness heart delight. The Birds will chant, and melodious sing: To welcome in our Queen, to'r Royal King. All creatures in their kind, may now rejoyce: So let all English men, with heart, and voice. So let Scotland, and Ireland then, now accord: Truly to love, and honour their dear Lord. Give him all comfors, of a Nuptial bed: And all things may delight's heart, hand, and head; All thigs that may please, my Sov'raigns sences: Friends Fathful, without fained ptences. Welcome Rare Princess, to Portsmouth's fair Town, Or every other place, of like Renown.
To Famous Cities, of this our Nation: In a Brave Order, and stately Fashion. Let Bonfires blaze, and Bels out loud Ring To express love, unto our gracious King. And to the grand Infanta Princess high: Of hopeful vertues, and bright Majesty. Who having now put off that youthful Name: And ta'ne the name of Queen, of Royal fame. The Name Infanta, you have laid aside: Taken the Name of Queen: that will abide. As much Happiness, as a Heart can Deem: I do wish, and pray, for Gand King Charls's Queen. As much as Tongue can speak, and heart think on: I'le wish, and pray, for great King Charls's Son. Lord fill my Sovraigns heart, with choice delight: May you be dear, and precious in his sight. Inflame his heart, with a holy fire: Grant to his confort Lord, a like desire. When you come, in brave London, to be seen: They'l Entertain you, as King Charls's Queen. The manner how, I cannot now Relate: Sure it will be according to your State. When that your Grace, shall Arrive at White-Hall: You'l find it to Exceed Court Portugal. Now you are landed free, from mortal harms: My Gracious King, will clap ou in his arms. You have made a fair Rich Happy, Exchange: Out of one Kingdom, into three to Range.
For you, and Royal issue, to Disport: In Each, where many Nobles, will Resort. God grant that we, in Gods due Time may see: A Hopeful, fruitful, Happy Progeny. As much as Tongue, Hand, and Pen, can Express: I wish you both, Eternal happiness. And when your Earthly Crown's, shall pass away: Give you a Kingdom, that shall ne're decay. Accroisticks, On her most Ex∣cellent Majesty, Queen Katharine Stuart. KAtharin pure, chaste: it doth signifie: A good name doth the owner dignifie. T reasures immortal, may your soul enjoy: H appiness, Transcendant, without annoy. A ll heav'nly Blessings, on your Head drop down: R iches immortal: after Death a Crown. I n Jesus Christ, you do put all your Trust: N ature being spent, ascendup to the just. S ing praise to God, by his sacred Spirit: T hat brought you three Kingdoms to inhert. U p ready be, t'uphold Gods precious word: A gracious Queen, you'r to our Soveraign Lord. R asing you up, above your Family; T o do service for your Grand King on high.
Knowledge, and Rare parts, doth adorn your mind: A Royal Virgen, Queen, Noble, and kind. The Angel of the Lord direct your wayes; H eavenly minded still, your God to praise. A nd may the holy Spirit comfort give: R efresh your Soul, and grant it e're to live. J udicious in your calling, happy be; N ext to our Soveraign Lord, in Majesty; E re blessed be; to all Eternity. S oare up aloft, by Meditation; T ruth, still maintain, and Reformation. V are the Object, on whom the Kingdoms fixt: A joy unto the Nations; Intermixt. R ejoyce rare Queen, in Christ your Saviour Dear: T hat will assist you: and our Sov'raign here. K ings, High, and Mighty: may from you proceed: A Generation, of a Heav'nly Breed. T he King of Heav'n your happy womb so Bless: H eap on you here, all Earthly happiness. A nd heav'nly joyes, after this fraile life's past: R obes of Christs Righteousness, to weare at last. I n life and Death, most happy may you be: N ot for a moment but Eternity. S alvation by Christ may you Obtain: T hat Blessed Guerdon: and Heavenly gain. V ertue doth make the Mind, most bright to shine: A dvance the Spirit, to a place Sublime. R aig royal Queen of England, God you bless: T he Father, Son, and God of Righteousness
Q ueen of Albions famous, and learned Isle: U pon us now, the Heavens begin to smile. E ternal Lord, our King, and Queen so blesse, E ven with joys of endlesse happinesse. N ot Earth, but Heaven crown your good successe. C hrist hath advanc'd you, bove your fathers throne: A bove all your Ancestors; God alone, T hat great Jehovah, to him yeild the praise: H eaven still protect your Grace, all your Dayes. A nd make you an instruments of his glory R ecord your , in a famous Storys, I n future Ages may learn'd Authors write, N ot ordinary, but rare things indite: A dvance, blest Soul to that Celestial Light FINIS.
