R2043 10763412 45729
New-England A Degenerate PLANT. Who having forgot their former Sufferings, and lost their ancient tenderness, are now become famous among the Nations in bring∣ing forth the fruits of cruelty, wherein they have far outstript their Persecutors the Bishops, as by these their ensuing LAWS you may plainly see. Published for the information of all sober People who desire to know how the state of New-England now stands, and upon what foundation the New-Eng∣land Churches are built, and by whose strength they are upholden now they are degenerated and have forsaken the LORD. The Truth of which we are Wit∣nesses, (who by their cruel hands have suffered) Iohn Rous Strangers. Iohn Copeland, Strangers. Samuel Shattook Inhabitants. Nicholas Phelps Inhabitants. Iostah Southwick Inhabitants. Whereunto is annexed a Copy of a Letter which came from one who hath been a Magistrate among them, to a friend of his in London, wherein he gives an account of some of the cruel suffering of the people of God in those parts under the Rulers of New-England, and their un∣righteous Laws. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1659.
New-England a Degenerate Plant, as is manifest by their following Laws. At a General Court held at Boston, the 14. of October, 1656. VVHereas there is a cursed Sect of Hereticks lately risen up in the World, which are commonly cal∣led Quakers, who take upon them to be immediately sent of God, and infallibly assisted by the spirit to speak and write blasphemous opinions, despising Government, and the or∣der of God in Church and Common-Wealth, speaking e∣vil of Dignities, reproaching and reviling Magistrates and Ministers, seeking to turn the people from the faith, and gain proselytes to their pernicious wayes. This Court ta∣king into serious consideration the premises, and to prevent the like mischief as by their means is wrought in our native Land, doth hereby order, and by the Authority of this Court be it ordered and enacted, That what Master or Com∣mander of any Ship, Bark, Pink or Catch, that shall hence∣forth bring into any Harbour, Creek or Cove within this Jurisdiction, any Quaker or Quakers, or other blasphemous Hereticks, shall pay, or cause to be paid the Fine of one hun∣dred pounds to the Treasurer of the Countrey, except it appear he want true knowledge or information of their be∣ing such, and in that case he hath liberty to clear himself by his oath, when sufficient proofe to the contrary is wanting, and for default of good payment, or good secu∣rity for it, shall be cast into prison, and there to continue till the said sum be satisfied to the Treasurer as aforesaid, and the Commander of any Catch, Ship, or Vessel that shall bring them, being legally convicted, shall give in sufficient security to the Governor, or any one or more of the Magi∣strates,
who have power to determine the same, to carry them back to the place whence he brought them, and on his refusal so to do, the Governor, or one or more of the Ma∣gistrates are hereby impowered to issue out his or their War∣rants to commit such Master or Commander to prison, there to continue till he give in sufficient security to the content of the Governor or any of the Magistrates, as aforesaid. And it is hereby further ordered and enacted, That what Quaker soever shall arrive in this Countrey from forreign parts, or shall come into this Jurisdiction from any parts adjacent, shall be forthwith committed to the house of Cor∣rection, and at their entrance to be severely whipt, and by the Master thereof to be kept constantly to work, and none suffered to converse or speak with them during the time of their imprisonment, (which shall be no longer then necessi∣ty require.) And it is ordered, If any person shall know∣ingly import into any harbour of this Jurisdiction any Quakers Books or Writings concerning their Devillish Opi∣nions, shall pay for every such Book or Writing, (being le∣gally proved against him or them) the sum of five pounds; And whosoever shall disperse or conceal any such Book or Writing, and it be found with him or her, or in his or her house, and shall not immediately deliver the same to the next Magistrate, shall forfeit and pay five pounds for the dispersing or concealing of every such Book or Writing. And it is hereby further enacted, That if any person with∣in this Collony shall take upon them to defend the hereti∣cal Opinions of the said Quakers, or any of their books or Papers as aforesaid if legally proved, shall be fined for the first time forty shillings; if they shall persist in the same, and shall  the second time, 4. l. if notwith∣standing  defend and maintain the said Quakers heretical Opinions, they shall be committed to the house of correction till there be convenient passage to send  out of the L, being sentenced by the Court of A∣  hereby ordered, That w  soever shall revile the person of M∣grates or M, as is usual with the Quakers, each per∣son
or persons shall be severely Whipt, or pay the sum of Five pounds. This is a true Copy of the Courts Order, as At∣tests Edward Rawson, Secretary. Made at the General Court held at Boston, the 14 of October, 1657. AS an Addition to the late Order, in reference to the Co∣ming, or bringing in any of the cursed Sect of the Quakers into this Jurisdiction, It is Ordered, That whoso∣ever shall from henceforth bring, or cause to be brought di∣rectly or indirectly, any known Quaker, or Quakers, or o∣ther Blasphemous Hereticks into this Jurisdiction, every such persons shall forfeit the sum of One hundred pounds to the Country, and shall by Warrant from any Magistrate be committed to Prison, there to remain till the penalty be satisfied and paid: And if any Person, or Persons within this Jurisdiction, shall henceforth entertain and conceal a∣ny such Quaker or Quakers, or other blasphemous Hereticks (knowing them so to be) every such person shall forfeit to the Country Forty shillings for every hours entertainment and concealment of any Quaker or Quakers, &c. as afore∣said, and shall be committed to Prison as aforesaid, till the forfeitures be fully satisfied and paid: And it is further Ordered, That if any Quaker or Quakers shall presume af∣ter they have once suffered what the Law requireth, to come into this Jurisdiction, every such Male-quaker shall for the first Offence have one of his Ears cut off, and be kept at work in the House of Correction till he can be sent away at his own Charge; And for the second Offence, shall have his other Ear cut off, and kept at the House of Correction as a∣foresaid. And every Woman-quaker that hath suffered the Law here, that shall presume to come into this Jurisdiction, shall be severely whipt, and kept at the House of Correction at Work till she be sent away at her own Charge; and so also for her comidg again, she shall be alike used as afore∣said: And for every Quaker, he or shee, that shall a Third
time herein again Offend, they shall have their Tongues bored through with a hot Iron, and kept at the House of Correction close to Work, till they be sent away at their own Charge. And it is further Ordered, That all and every Quaker, arising from amongst our selves, shall be dealt with, and suffer the like punishments as the Law provides against forreign Quakers. This is a true Copy of the Courts Order, as Attests Edward Rawson, Secret. At a General Court held at Boston, the 20. of May, 1658. THat Quakers, and such accursed Hereticks, arising a∣among our selves, may be dealt withal, according to their deserts, and that their pestilent Errours and Practises may be speedily prevented, It is hereby Ordered as an Ad∣dition to the former laws against Quakers, That every such person or persons professing any of their pernitious Wayes, by speaking, writing, or by meeting on the Lords-day, or at any other time, to strengthen themselves, or seduce o∣thers to their Diabolical Doctrines, shall after due means of Conviction, incur the penalty ensuing; that is, Every per∣son so meeting, shall pay to the Country for every time ten shillings; and every one Speaking in such a Meeting shall pay Five pound a piece; and in case any such person hath been punished by Scourging or Whipping the first time ac∣cording to the former Laws, shall be still kept at Work in the House of Correction, till they put in Security with two sufficient men, that they shall not any more vent their hate∣ful Errors, nor use their sinful Practises, or else shall depart this Jurisdiction at their own Charges: And if any of them Return again, then each such person shall incur the penalty of the Laws formerly made, for Strangers. By the Court. Edw. Rawson, Sec.
An Act made at a General Court held at Boston, the 20. of October, 1658. WHereas there is a pernitious Sect (commonly called Quakers) lately risen up, who by Word and Wri∣ting have published and maintained many dangerous and horrid Tenents, and do take upon them to change and al∣ter the received laudable Customs of our Nation, in giving civil Respect to Equals, and Reverence to Superiors; whose actions tend to undermine the Authority of civil Govern∣ment, and also to destroy the Order of the Churches, by denying all established Forms of Worship, and by with∣drawing from the orderly Church-assemblies, allowed and approved by all Orthodox Professors of the Truth; and instead thereof, and in opposition thereunto, frequenting private Meetings of their own, insinuating themselves into the minds of the Simple, or such as are least affected to the Order and Government of Church and Common-wealth; whereby divers of our Inhabitants have been infected and seduced, notwithstanding all former Laws made upon the experience of their arrogant and bold obtrusions to de∣seminate their Principles among us, prohibiting their co∣ming into this Jurisdiction, they have not been deterred from their impecuous attempts, to undermine our Peace, and hasten our Ruine. For prevention thereof, This Court doth Order and E∣nact, That every person or persons of the accursed Sect of the Quakers, which is not an Inhabitant of, but is found within this Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended without Warrant, where no Magistrate is at hand, by any Constable, Commissioner, or Select man, and conveyed from Con∣stable to Constable, until they come before the next Ma∣gistrate, who shall commit the said person or persons to close Prison, there to remain (without bail) until the next Court of Assistance, where they shall have a legal Tryal by a special Jury: And being convicted to be of the Sect of the Quakers, shall be sentenced to be Banished upon pain of
Death. And that every Inhabitant of this Jurisdiction be∣ing convicted to be of the aforesaid Sect, either by taking up, publishing, or defending the horrid Opinions of the Quakers, or the stirring up Mutiny, Sedition, or Rebellion against the Government, or by taking up their absurd and destructive Practises, viz. Denying civil Respect to Equals and Reverence to Superiors, and with-drawing from our Church Assemblies, and instead thereof, frequent private Meetings of their own in opposition to Church-Order; or by adhering to, or approving of any known Quaker, and the Tenents and Practises of the Quakers, that are op∣posite to the Orthodox received Opinions and Practises of the godly, and endeavouring to disaffect others to civil Government and Church-Orders, or condemning the Practise and Proceedings of this Court against the Quakers, manifesting thereby, their complying with those whose Design is to over-throw the Order Established in Church and State, every such person upon examination and legal conviction before the said Court of Assistance, in manner as abovesaid, shall be committed to close Prison for one Month, and then unless they chuse volantarily to depart this Juris∣diction, shall give Bond for their good Behaviour, and ap∣pear at the next Court of Assistants, where continuing ob∣stinate, and refusing to Retract, and Reform the said Opi∣nions and Practises, shall be sentenced to Banishment upon pain of Death; And in case of the aforesaid voluntary Departure, not to Remain, nor again to Return into this Jurisdiction, without the allowance of the Council first had and published, on penalty of being Banished upon pain of Death: And any one Magistrate upon Information gi∣ven him, shall cause them to be apprehended, and if upon Examination of the Case he shall find just ground of such complaints, he shall commit such person or persons to Prison, according to his best Discretion, until he come to Tryal, as is above exprest.
At a General Court held at Boston, the 13th. of May 1659. WHereas the General Court, Octob. last, for the rea∣sons mentioned in the Order then made for the pre∣venting of those evils which the cursed Quakers in their principles and practices are apt to procure in those places where they come, did order, That all such persons (not be∣ing Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction, that are of the cursed Sect of the Quakers) who have an any time suffered what the Laws of this Jurisdiction from time to time have provi∣ded against such persons again arriving in any place of this Jurisdiction, should be seized on, and committed to close prison, there to continue till the next Court of Assistants, when he, or they shall be sentenced to banishment on pain of death. And whereas William Breud (a known Quaker that hath formerly suffered the Laws) hath notwithstanding the a∣bovementioned Laws, come into this Jurisdiction, being sent to prison, and openly before the Court acknowledged himself to be one of those the World in scorn called Qua∣kers: this court doth therefore order, that the said William Brend be committed to prison, there to remain till the 16th. of this instant month, and then discharged the prison, and shall depart this Jurisdiction on pain of death; and that if after the 18th. day of this instant May, he shall be found within any part of this Jurisdiction, he shall be apprehend∣ed and committed to prison, to be proceeded with accor∣ding to Law: This is a true copy of the Courts Order, as attested Edward Rawson Secretary. To the Keeper of the prison in Boston, &c. you are required to execute this Order accordingly, Edw. Rawson.
At a General Court held at Boston, the 11. of May, 1659. IT is Ordered, That Lawrence Southwick, and Cassandra his Wife, Samuel Shattook, Nicholas Phelps, Joshua Buffum, and Josiah Southick, are hereby Sentenced, according to the Order of the General Court in October last, to Banishment, to depart out of this Jurisdiction by the eighth day of June next, on pain of Death; and if any of them after the said eighth day of June next, shall be found within this Juris∣diction, they shall be apprehended by any Constable or other Officer of this Jurisdiction, and be committed to close prison, there to lye till the next court of assistants, where they shall be tryed, and being found guilty of the breach of this Law, shall be put to death. This is a true Copy taken out of the Courts Records, as attests Edw. Rawson Secretary. The true cause of the banishment of those six Inhabitants of Sa∣lem in New-England, was because they went not to their Meeting, and met together by themselves at each others houses; the cause being so small, they were ashamed its like to tell the crime, or what it was for, in this their sentence, seeing also they had imprisoned, & whipt, and taken away great sums of money from them for the same thing before. The Law for paying 5. s. a week for such as go not to their Meeting. IT is ordered & decreed by this Court, & Authority there∣of, That wheresoever the Ministry of the Word is esta∣blished, according to the Order of the Gospel, throughout this jurisdiction, every person shall duly resort and attend thereunto respectively, upon the Lords Days, and upon such publike Fast-Days and dayes of Thanksgiving as are to be generally kept by the appointment of Authority; And if a∣ny person within this Jurisdiction shall without just and ne∣cessary cause withdraw himself from hearing the publike Ministry of the Word, after due means of conviction used,
he shall forfeit for his absence from any such publike meet∣ing, five shillings; all such offences to be heard and determi∣ned by any one magistrate or more, from time to time. This Law was made in the year 1646. and of late have been executed upon many Inhabitants, to the taking away land and houses, cattel and other goods from many that could not in conscience join with them in their Worship, be∣cause their hands are defiled with blood. There is certain information sent, That the last General Court held in the third Month, called May that they have made, a Law, and proclaimed it in all their Government, That all such children, and servants, and others, that for conscience sake cannot come to their meeting to Worship, and have not Estates in their hands to answer this forego∣ing Law of 5. s, per Week, must be sold for slaves to Barba∣dos or Virgenia, or other remote parts, to pay their Fines. A Copy of a Law made at New-Plymouth in New-England, in the first Month, 1658. VVHereas there hath been several Persons come into this Government, commonly called Quakers, whose Doctrines and Practises manifestly tend to the sub∣verting of the fundamentals of Christian Religion, Church-Order, and the civil Peace of this Government, as appears by the Testimonies given in several Depositions, and other∣wayes; It is Enacted by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That no Quakers, nor persons commonly so called, be entertained by any person or persons within this Go∣vernment, under the penalty of Five pounds for every such default, or be whipt; and in case any one shall entertain any of those persons, ignorantly, if he shall testifie on his Oath that he knew them not to be such, he shall be free of the aforesaid penalty, Provided, he upon his first discover∣ing
them to be such, do discover them to the Constable, or his Deputy. It is also enacted by the Court, and the Authority there∣of, That if any anter or Quaker, or any person com∣monly so called, shall come into any Township within this Government, and by any person or persons, be known or suspected to be such a one, the person so knowing or suspe∣cting him, shall forthwith acquaint the Constable or his Deputy, on pain of Presentment, and so liable to censure in Court, who forthwith shall diligently endeavour to ap∣prehend them, and command them to depart out of the Township, and this Government; and in case any such person delay or Refuse to depart, then the said Constable or Deputy shall apprehend them, or him, and bring him, or them before the Magistrate in their Township if there be any, & where there is none, to the Select men appointed by the Court for that purpose, who shall cause him or them to be Whipt by the Constable or his Deputy, or pay Five pounds, and then conveighed out of the Township, and the same course is to be taken with every of them as often as any of them transgress this Order, in case of extremity for Harbour or Food, the Constable or his Deputy shall Reserve them for their Money; Provided, They suffer not any per∣son or persons to Resort unto them whilest they are under their custody. And forasmuch as the Meetings of such persons, whether strangers or others, proveth to the destructing of the peace of this present Government, it is therefore enacted by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That henceforth no such Meeting be assembled or kept by any person, many place within this Government, under the penalty of 40. s. a time for every Speaker, and 10. s. a time for every Hearer, and 40. s. a time for the owner of the place that permits them so to meet together; And if they meet together at their silent (so called) then every person so meeting together, shall pay 10. s. a time, and the owner of the place 40. s. a time. Forasmuch as it was ordered at June-Court last, That all such as were house-keepers, or at their own dispose, that
were not Free-men, and have not taken the Oath of Fideli∣ty to this Government, should take the said Oath by the time then prexed, or to be fined to the Collonies use the sum of 5. l. And whereas divers persons notwithstanding all patience and long-forbearance, refuse to take the said Oath, and yet make their residence amongst us, It is therefore ena∣cted by the Court, That every such person or persons shall every General Court be summoned to make their appear∣ance thereat during the time of their abode in this Govern∣ment; and if any such person or persons shall refuse to take the said Oath, shall be fined the sum of 5. l. to the Collonies use. Whereas the multitude of Free-men is but small, and the Inhabitants of the Townships many more, who have e∣qual votes with the Free-men in the choice of Deputies, who being the body of the Free-men, Representative toge∣ther with the Magistrates, have equal votes for the enacting of Laws, who by weakness, prejudice, or otherwaies it hath or may come to pass, that very unfit or unworthy persons may be chosen, that cannot answer the Courts Trust in such place. It is therefore ordered, That at such Courts as Magistrates and Deputies are to act in, in making Laws, and being assem∣bled, the Court in the first place take notice of their Mem∣bers, and if they find any unfit for such a trust, that they, and the reason thereof be returned to the town from whence they were sent, that they may make choise of more and able persons to send in their stead, as the time will per∣mit. Whereas it hath been an ancient and an wholsom Order, bearing Date, &c. That no person coming from other parts be allowed an Inhabitant in this Jurisdiction, but by the appointment of the Governor, or two of the Magistrates at least, and that many persons contrary to this order of Court, crept into some Townships, which are, and may be a great disturbance to our more peaceable proceedings; Be it enacted, that if any such person or persons shall be found, that hath not, doth not, or wil not apply and approve them∣selves
so, as to procure the approbation of the Governor, and two of the Assistants, that such be enquired after; and if any such persons shall be found, that either they depart the Government, or else that the Court take some such course therein, as shall be thought meet. It is enacted by the Court, That henceforth no publike Meeting shall be set up, but such as the Court shall ap∣prove of. We had Information, that at a General Court at New-Ha∣ven, they made a Law to this effect. THat every Quaker that came into their Jurisdiction the first time, should be severely Whipt, and be kept at Work in the House of Correction; and the second time be branded in the one Hand, and be kept at Work as aforesaid; and the third time be branded in the other Hand, and kept at Work; and the fourth time be bored through the tongue with a hot Iron. This is the substance of their Law as we were informed, though not their Law word for word, be∣cause we have not a Copy of it. All these Laws have been cruelly and rigorously executed both on strangers and inhabitants, to the imprisoning, whipping many seve∣ral times over, Ear-cuttings, Brandings, and Banishments, Confis∣cation of Goods, and at last banishment on pain of death from their Habitations and Families, which at present is the state of some, and many more its like may be ere this time: Seven were banished on pain of death, and by late information five were in prison at Boston to receive the like Sentence, besides what may be more.
A true Copy of a Letter which was sent from one who was a Magistrate in New-England, to a Friend of his in LONDON. Honoured SIR, MY Respects presented to you and Mrs. Brown, ho∣ping and desiring your present and eternal wel∣fare, &c. As for the state and condition of things amongst us, it is fad, and like so to continue; the Antichristi∣an persecuting spirit is very active, and that in the powers of this World; he that will not whip and slash, banisih and persecute men that differ in matters of Religion, must not sit on the Bench, nor sustain any office in Commonwealth; Last election Mr. Hatherly and my self left off the Bench, and my self discharged of my Captain-ship, because I had entertained some of the Quakers at my House (thereby that I might the better be acquainted with their principles;) I thought better so to do, then with the blind World to cen∣sure, condemn, rail, and revile them when they never saw their persons, nor knew any of their principles: But the Quakers and my self cannot close in divers things, and so I signified to the Court I was no Quaker, but must bear my te∣stimony against sundry things that they held, as I had occa∣sion and opportunity; but withall I told them, That as I was no Quaker, so I would be no Persecutor: This spirit did work those two years that I was of the Magistracy, during which time I was on sundry occasions forced to declare my discent in sundry actings of that nature, which although done with all moderation of expression, together with due respect unto the rest, yet it wrought great dis-affection and prejudice in them against me, so that if I should say some of themselves set others on work to frame a Petition against
me, that so they might have a seeming ground from others (though first moved and acted by themselves) to lay me what they could under reproach) I should do no wrong, the Petition was with nineteen hands, it wil be too long to make rehearsal of; it wrought such a disturbance in our Town, and in our Military company, that when the Act of Court was read in the Head of the Company, had not I been pre∣sent, and made a speech to them, I fear there had been such actings as would have been of a sad consequence. The court was again followed with another Petition of 54. hands, that I might be restored to them, or some satisfactory Reasons wherefore I might not: The court return the Petitioners an answer with much plausibleness of speech, carrying with it great shew of respect to them, readily acknowledging with the Petitioners, my parts and gifts, and how useful I had been in my Place, professing they had nothing at all against me, but onely in that thing of giving entertainment to the Quakers, when as I broke no Law in giving them a nights lodging or two, and some victuals; for our Law then was, If any entertain a quaker, and keepe him after he is warned by a Magistrate to depart, the party so entertaining shall pay 20. s. a week for entertaining them: Since has been made a Law, If a∣ny entertain a quaker, if but a quarter of an hour, he is to forfeit 5. l. Another, That if any see a quaker, he is bound if he lives six miles or more from the Constable, yet he must presently go and give notice to the Constable, or else is subject to the censure of Court, (which may be, Hang him.) Another; That if the Constable know or hear of any quaker in his Precincts, he is presently to ap∣prehend him, and if he will not presently depart the Town, the Con∣stable is to whip them, and so send them away; and divers have been whipt with us in our Patent; and truly to tell you plainly that the whipping of them with such cruelty as some have been whipt, and their patience under it, hath sometime, been the occasion of gaining more adherence to them, then if they had suffered them openly to have prea∣ched a Sermon: Also another Law., That if there be a Qua∣kers meeting any where in this Collony the party in whose house, or on whose ground, is to pay 40. s. the Preaching quaker 40. s. every
hearer 10. s. Yea, and if they have Meetings, though nothing be spoken when they so meet, which they say, So it falls out sometimes. Our last Law, That now they are to be appre∣hended and carryed before a Magistrate, and by him com∣mitted to be kept close prisoner until he will promise to de∣part, and never come again, and will also pay his fees, which I perceive they will do neither the one nor other; and they must be kept onely with the Countreys allowance, which is but small, (namely, course bread and water) no friend may bring them any thing, none may be permitted to speak to them; nay, if they have money of their own, they may not make use of that to relieve themselves. In the Masatu∣sets (namely Boston Collony) after they have whipt them, cut their ears, have now at last gone the furthest step they can, they banish them upon pain of death if ever they come there again; We expect that we must do the like, we must dance after their Pipe; Now Plymouth-Saddle is upon the Bay-Horse, (to wit, Boston) we shall follow them on the ca∣reer, for it is well if in some there be not a desire to be their apes and imitators in all their proceedings in things of this nature; all these carnal and antichristian wayes being not of Gods appointment, effect nothing as to the obstructing or hindering them in their way or course, it is onely the Word and Spirit of the Lord that is able to convince gain∣sayers; they are the mighty Weapons of a christians War∣fare, by which great and mighty things are done and ac∣complished: They have many Meetings, and many adhe∣rents, almost the whole town of Saudwitch is adhering to∣wards them; and give me leave a little to acquaint you with their sufferings, which is grievous unto, and sads the hearts of most of the precious Saints of God, it lyes down with them, and rises up with them, and they cannot put it out of their minds, to see and hear of poor Families deprived of their comforts, and they brought into penury and want, (you may say, by what means? and to what end?) as far as I am able to iudge of the end, it is to force them from their homes and lawful habitations, and to drive them out of our coasts; Masathusets have banished six of their own Inha∣bitants
to be gone on pain of death, and I wish that blood be not shed; but our poor people are pillaged, and plunde∣sed of their goods, and happily when they have no more to satisfie this unsatiable desire, at last may be forced to fly, and glad they have their lives for a prey: As for the means by which they are so impoverished, these in the first place were scupulous of an Oath, why then, we must put in force an old Law, that all must take the Oath of fidelity, this be∣ing tendred, they will not take it, and then we must adde more force to the Law, and that is, if any shall refuse or neglect to take it by such a time, shall pay 5 l. or depart the Colony. When the time is come they are the same as they were, then goes out the Marshal, and fetches away their Cows, and other Cattle. Well, another Court comes, they are required to take the Oath again, they cannot, then 5 l. more, on this account 35 head of Cattle, as I am credibly informed, has been by the authority of our Court taken from them the latter part of this Summer; and these people say, if they have more right to them then themselves, let them take them, some that had a Cow onely, some two Cows, some three Cowes, and many small Children in their Families, to whom in Summer time, a Cow or two was the greatest outward comfort they had for their Subsistence. A poor Weaver that has seven small children, or eight, I know not which, he himself lame in his body, had but two cows, and both taken from him, the Marshall asked him what he would do, he must have his Cows, the man said, that God that gave him them, he doubted not, but would still provide for him To fill up the measure yet more full, though to the further emptying of Sandwitch men of their outward comforts, the last Court of assistants, the first Tuesday of this instant the Court was pleased to determine fines on Sandwitch men for meetings, sometimes on first dayes of the week, sometimes on other dayes, as they say, they meet ordinarily twice in the week besides the Lords day, 150 l. whereof William Nuland is 24 l. for he and his wife, at 10 s. a meeting, Wil∣liam Allen 46. l. some affirm it 49 l. the poor Weaver before spoken of 20 l. Brother Cook told me, one of the Brethren
at Bastable certifled him that he was in the Weavers house when (cruel Barlow) Sandwitch Marshal came to do∣mand the summe, and he said that he was fully enformed of all the poor man had, and thought if all laid to∣gether it was not worth 10 l. what will be the eud of such courses and practices, the Lord onely knows, I heartily and earnesily pray, that these and such like courses neither raise up amongst us, nor bring in upon us, either the sword or any devouring calamity, as a just avenger of the Lords quarrel for Acts of injustice and oppression, and that we may every oue find out the plague of his own heart, and put away the evil of his own doings, & meet the Lord by entrea∣ties of peace, before it be too late, and there be no remedy. Our Civil Powers are so exercised in things appertaining to the Kingdome of Christ in matters of Religion and Con∣science, that we can have no time to effect any thing, that tends to the promotion of the Civil Weal of the pro∣sperity of the place, but now we must have a State Religion, such as the powers of the world will allow (and no other) a State-Minister, and a State way of maintenance, and we must worship and serve the Lord Jesus, as the world shall appoint us, we must all go to the publick place of meeting in the Parish where he dwells, or be presented, I am infor∣med of three or fourscore last Court presented, for not co∣ming to publick meetings, and let me tell you how they brought this about, you may remember a Law once made, called Thomas Hinleys Law, that if any neglected the worship of God in the place where he lives, and set up a worship contrary to God, and the allowance of this Go∣vernment, to the publick prophanation of Gods holy day, and Ordinance shall pay 10 s. this Law would not reach, what then was aimed at because he must do so and so, that is, all things there expressed, or else break not the Law in March last a court of Deputies was called, and some Acts touching Quakers were made; and then they contrived to make this Law to be serviceable to them, and that was by putting out the word (and) and put in the word (or) which is a dis∣junctive, and makes every branch to become a Law, so now if any do neglect, or will not come to the publick Meetings,
10. s. for every defect, certainly, we either have less wit, or more money then the Massathusets, for, for 5 s. a day a man may stay away till it come to 12. or 13 l. if he had it but to pay them: and these men altering this Law now in March, yet left it dated June the 6th 1651. and so it stands as the Act of a General court, they to be the Authors of it se∣ven years before it was in being, and so you your self have your part and share in it, if the Recorder lie not, but what may be the reason that they should not by another Law made and dated that court, as well effect what was intend∣ed, as by altering a word, (and so the whole sence) of the Law, and leave this their Act by the date of it charged on another courts account; surely the chief instruments in the businesse, being privy to the Act of Parliament for liberty should too openly have acted repugnant to a Law of Eng∣land, but if they can do the thing, and leave it on a court as making it six years before the Act of Parliament, there can be no danger in this, and that they were privy to the Act of Parliament for liberty to be then in being, is evi∣dent that the Deputies might be free to act it, they told us that now the Protector stood not engaged to the articles for liberty; for the Parliament had now taken the power into to their own hands, and had given the Protector a new Oath, onely in general to maintain the Protestant Religi∣on, and so produced the oath in a Paper in writing, where∣as the Act of Parliament, and the Oath are both in one book in Print, so that they that were privy to the one, could not be ignorant of the other, but still all is well, if we can but keep the people ignorant of their liberties and Pri∣viledges, then we have liberty to act in our own wills what we please, we are wrapped up in a Labyrinth of confused Laws, that the free mens power is quite gone, and it was said last June Court by one, that they knew nothing the freemen had there to do; Sandwitch men may not go to the Bay, least they be taken up for Quakers, William Nland was there a∣bout his occasions some ten dayes since, and they put him in prison 24 hours, and sent for divers to witness against him, but they had not proof enough to make him a Quaker, which if he had he should have been whipt, nay they may
not go about their own occasions in other Towns in our Colony but warrants lie in ambush to apprehend them, and bring them before a Magistrate to give an account of their businesse. Some of the Quakers from Road Island came to bring them goods to trade with them, and that for far rea∣sonabler terms, then the professing, oppressing Merchants of the Country, but that will not be suffered, that unlesse the Lord step in to their help and assistance in some way be∣yond mans conceiving, their case is sad and to be pitied, and truly, it moves bowels of compassion from all sorts, except those in place, who carry with a high hand towards them, through mercy we have as yet amongst us worthy Mr. Dunster, whom the Lord has made boldly to bear testimony against the Spirit of persecution: Our Bench now is Tho∣mas Prince, Governour, Mr. Collier, Captain Willet, Captain Winslow, Mr. Alden, Lieutenant Southworth, William Bradford, Thomas Hinkly. Mr. Collier last June would not sit on the Bench if I sat there, and now will not sit the next year, unlesse he may have 30 l. sit by him: our Court and Deputies last June made Captain Winslow a Major, surely we are all mer∣cenary Souldiers, that must have a Major imposed on us; Doubtlesse the next Court they may choose us a Governor, and Assistants also, a free man shall need to do nothing, but bear such burdens as shall be laid upon him; Mr. Alaen has deceived the expectation of many, and indeed lost the af∣fections of such as I judge were his cordiall Christian friends, who is very active in such wayes, as I pray God may not be charged on him, to be oppressions of a high nature. Written in December 1658. This Letter was published, not by the direction or know∣ledge of the Author, who sent it over to his friend for pri∣vate information, but seeing that upon the perusall it is found to be of publick concernment, which coming into the hands of some, it was thought meet to be published to the view of all. Even the sea Monsters draw out the breasts, they give suck to their young ones. The Daughter of my people is become cruel like the Ostriches in the wildernesse, Lament. 4.3. THE END.
