S2722 99832464 36937
The Triumphs of London, For the Inauguration of the Right Honourable Sir Richard Levett, Kt. LORD MAYOR OF THE City of LONDON. CONTAINING A Description of the PAGEANTS, together with the Publick Speeches, and the whole Solemnity of the Day. Performed on Monday the 30th Day of October, Anno 1699. All set forth at the proper Cost and Charge of the Honourable Company of HABERDASHERS. Published by Authority. LONDON: Printed for A. Baldwin, at the Oxford Arms Inn in Warwick-Lane, MDCXCIX.
To the Right Honourable Sir Richard Levett, Kt. Lord Mayor of the City of London. My LORD, THE City in their Unanimous Choice of their Supream Magistrate, have put the Sword and Scales into so tryed a Hand, already so fam'd for the Administration of Justice, that Your Lord∣ship's Advancement to the Praetorian Chair, is no more than the Lawrel to the Conqueror; all the Heroick Bravery, and every Meriting Virtue that won those Bays were all his own before. Never was this Honour more Deserved, or less Co∣veted than by Your Lordship. The Popular Torrent of an Universal Esteem and Veneration carried their Darling Choice to the Chair. Yes, Sir, it was their common Oblation of Gratitude: They owed it, and they paid it You. In which Honourable Dignity they Crown'd Your Virtues, not Your Ambition. And to compleat that truly Excellent, that Prideless Character, so wholly Your own; all the private Satis∣faction Your Lordship shall receive from that Illustrious Administration, will be Your Glory of Serving the City, not that of Commanding it.
And indeed that which has attracted Your Lordship so general a Love and Respect, is, that Moderation that has always governed through the whole Conduct of Your Life. Your Lordship, with a true Judgment, and right Reason, has ever esteemed Opinion and Faith to lie only before a Higher Tribunal, and consequently to be only Answerable there. Under the Guidance therefore of that Golden Mean, not Byast or Warpt by Favour or Prejudice, an Assent with You never heighten'd Your Smiles, nor a Dissent from You ever lessen'd 'em. No, the Difference of Persuasion that has so often disturb'd whole Families, and even shaken States, never concerned Your Lordship. No, my Lord, Humanity and Common Right have ever been adjudged by Your Lordship the only Arbitrators in Humane Society. And therefore with a Justice without Severity, and a Mercy without Fondness or Partiality, Your Lordship has ever held the Ballance upright and even to all Mankind. 'Tis with this In∣nate and Unchangeable Principle the Chair finds You, and the World shall leave You. This Due all Tongues have ever paid You, and my Pen only writes after 'em, being, My LORD, With all profound Humility, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, E. SETTLE.
TO THE Worshipful Company OF HABERDASHERS. Gentlemen, THo' you have now had a pretty considerable Interval, viz. of near 35 Years, since the Chair has been fill'd by an Honourable Member of your on So∣ciety: However, your Fair Records keep a Long Roll of Honour among you, when you number no less than twenty Lord Mayors of your own. But tho', 'tis true, the Collar of SS, that Honorary Ornament for a Year, has not so lately shined among you; however 'tis not so long since you have re∣ceived that Honour that will shine Ages, a more Lasting Monument of the Ha∣berdashers Glory: A Pile of that Illustrious Charity (Charity of all Honour the Brightest) that we need take but a very short Walk to see as fair a Structure for another Inscription of a Deo Dante dedit Robert Aske Armig. as that of Thomas Sutton; whilst a Hoxton Foundation may even bear Head, and write Sister with a Chartreux one. But indeed 'tis not a single Glory of that kind that has thus shined among you. The Charitable Donation of Eighteen Thousand Pounds from one of your Mem∣bers in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth (a pretty round Sum in those early Days) deserves a very large Page in the Haberdashers Register of Fame. And really the Doners of Charity are the only Men (to say Truth) that pay their Debts before they die. They owe all their Riches to the Smiles of Heaven; and in the Provision for Fed Mouths and Cloath'd Backs, they pay it all Back to Heav'n again. For one yet Additional Honour more to your Company, 'tis a Numerous one. So large a Body of you seems to say, you have some extraordinary Attractions of Worth and Honour to invite and draw so General a Conflux to you. And to make it yet larger still, we must consider you as a very spreading Root, when no less than the whole Foundation of so Eminent a Society as the Merchant Ad∣venturers were Originally a Branch of You. Thus wishing You a daily Accumulation of new Honours to the Rich Portion you already possess, I am, GENTLEMEN, Your most humble Servant, E. S.
The Movement of the Morning. THE whole Company selected for the Management of the Triumph, meet at Seven in the Morning at his Lordship's House, viz. 1. The Wardens and Assistants in Gowns faced with Foyns. 2. The Livery in Gowns with Budge, and their Hoods. 3. The Foyns and Budge Batchelors and Gowns and Scarlet Hoods. 4. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each a Chain of Gold about his Shoulders, and a white Staff in his Hand. 5. Thirty other Gentlemen carrying Banners and Colours. 6. The Serjeant-Trumpet wearing two Scarfs, one of the Lord Mayors Colours, and the other of the Companies, with 36 more Trumpets, where∣of 16 are His Majesty's. 7. His Majesty's Drum-Major, wearing a Scarf of the Company's Co∣lour, with four more of His Majesty's Drums and Fifes. 8. Seven other Drums and two Fifes with Scarfs. 9. The two City Marshals riding on Horseback, and six Persons at∣tending with Scarfs and Colours of the Companies. 10. The Foot Marshal and six Attendants with like Scarfs, &c. 11. The Master of Defence and his Retinue in like Scarfs, &c. 12. Several Pensioners in Gowns and Caps, bearing Standards and Banners. 13. Other Pensioners in Gowns and Caps, carrying each a Javelin in one Hand, and Target in the other, having the Arms of the Company's Founders and Benefactors. All these Rank'd by the Foot-Marshal, marching Two by Two, the Company's Ensigns leading; the Pensioners, four Drums, and one Fife, and four more Drums and Fifes bring up the Rear of this Division. After them the Pensioners with Standards; four Trumpets, the Supporters and Crest of the Company, six Gentlemen Ushers, then the Budge Batchelors concluding the Second Division. Six Trumpets, two Gentlemen, one bear∣ing the City's, the other the Company's Arms. Then eight Gentlemen Ushers, and next the Foyn Batchelors make the Third Division. Two Gentlemen Ushers bearing Banners, two more Gentlemen Ushers, and then the Livery. Next the City Trumpets, then two Gentlemen bearing the City and Lord Mayors Banner. Then the Gentlemen and Court of Assistants, &c. Four Drums, six Trumpets, two Gentlemen bearing Ban∣ners, four Gentlemen and four Pages, and then the Wardens bring up the Rear.
In this Order they march from Guild-Hall, his Lordship being accom∣panied from thence by the old Lord Mayor, whence the whole Company move through Cheap-side to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Livery, and part of the Gentlemen Ushers, take their Barge for Westminster, whither his Lordship is attended, with the several Barges of the respective Companies, with Flags, Streamers, several Pleasure-Boats, with Hautboys, Flutes, Trumpets, and all manner of Mu∣sick, &c. His Lordship having taken the Oaths before the Barons of the Exchequer, returns with the same Attendants and Splendor to Dorset Stairs, where, at his Landing, he is saluted by the Artillery Company, in all their Mar∣tial Ornaments in Buff and Silver Head-pieces; and thus, with the whole Cavalcade, moves forward towards Cheap-side. In his March, he is first entertained with this Pageant. The First PAGEANT, The Triumphs of Honour. ON a stately Pedestal of the Compositive Order is erected the Lyon of England, Passant Or, being an Honourable Addition to the Arms of the Worshipful Haberdashers, by the particular Gift of the Crown in Reward of their Great Services, &c. On this Lyon sits a Figure re∣presenting TRIUMPH, with the Bannor of England in his Hand. At the four Angles are erected four flaming Pyramids fill'd with the Coats of Arms of all the Worthy Benefactors of the Company together with the Escutcheons of 20 Lord Mayors, all Members of their Society, viz. 1. Sir Robert Billisden, Anno. 1434. being in the First Year of Richard III. 2. Sir Stephen Peacock, Anno 1532. 3. Sir William Foreman, 1538. 4. Sir George Barns, 1552. 5. Sir William Gerard, 1555. 6. Sir Nicholas Wood∣house, 1579. 7. Sir Thomas Blanke, 1582. 8. Sir George Barns, 1586. 9. Sir George Bond, 1587. 10. Sir William Rider, 1600. 11. Sir John Gerard, 1601. 12. Sir Thomas Lowe, 1604. 13. Sir Francis Jones, 1620. 14. Sir Hugh Hammersley, 1627. 15. Sir George Whitmore, 1631. 16. Sir Nicholas Raynton, 1632. 17. Sir Richard Fenn, 1637. 18. Sir Tho∣mas Fowk, 1652. 19. Sir John Lawrence, 1664. 20. The present Lord Mayor. At the Basis of this Pedastal are seated four Figures, representing Charity, Liberality, Virtue and Honour. TRIUMPH thus Addresses his Lordship.
The Speech of Triumph. ON my triumphant Golden Lyon crown'd, I view my Pyramids and Trophies round. These Scutcheons most belong to the Great Dead, Whose shining Glories, Sir, before You led. Patrons and Benefactors, whose warm Smiles Founded their own Rich Monumental Piles; Structures of Charity whose proud Roofs shall raise To endless Time the Haberdashers Praise. To all those Worthies in the Front appear, Tis You, Illustrious Sir, bring up the Rear. The Second PAGEANT, The Temple of Time. A Stately Dome erected upon four Columns of the Dorick Order; over the Etableture of which are planted four Pedastals, supporting the proper Insignia of TIME. The whole Fabrick of Egytian Marble adorned with Gold and Precious Stones; the immediate Attendants are Truth, the Daughter of Time, with this Motto, Vincit Veritas, Truth overcomes. 2. Humility with this Motto, In terris Corpus in Caelo cor, The Body on Earth the Heart in Heaven. 3. Constancy with this Motto, Metam tangenti Corona, The Crown belongs to him that perseveres to the End. Four more Figures are placed at the Angles, representing Prudence, Pati∣ence, Temperance and Mercy. TIME thus Salutes his Lordship.
The Speech of Time. TIme measures out the Globe, Life's fleeting Sands And the keen Scythe of Fate are in my Hands. But tho' so swift my Rapid Minutes drive, I keep Records that shall to Ages live: The Memories of the Great, the Good, and Just, By me enroll'd in Fame, by me embalm'd their Dust. If Time is that Historian, I have here A glorious Theme for my Great Register. Your fair Memoirs, my Lord, th' auspicious Sway Of your Pretorian Pow'r, and that warm Ray Your Virtues, Justice, Equity display, Shall in Times Annals fill the noblest Page; And one Years Reign find Glory for an Age. The Third PAGEANT, The Palace of Pleasure. A Magnificent Fabrick supported by four Twisted Columns, and as many Pillasters of Lapis Lazuri richly adorned with Silver and Gold, the whole Structure Roof'd with several Intricated Angles, all centring and pointing into an Octagon Form. The principal Figure in this Pageant is the Goddess FLORA, whose chief Attendants are Ceres, Vertumna and Pomona. To which are added four more Attendants, ex∣pressing Joy, Harmony, Love and Felicity. FLORA thus Congratulates his Lordship.
FLORA's Speech. FLora, a Goddess of that sovereign sway, I cheer the Spring, I dress the Fields so gay; The Winged Choristers all sing to me; All Nature only wears my Livery. But tho' my Hand does that vast Scepter bear, I view that Head which I must Homage here. Here Albion's Metropolis, the Great Augusta's Lord, fills his more awful Seat. My pettier Empire reaches but the Plains, The Groves and Vales; commands poor Nymphs and Swains. Those Nymphs, my Lord, must your loud Triumphs greet, And strow their Flowry Garlands at your Feet. Augusta, 'tis to Thee my Swains must bow, For Thee they plant the Vineyard, guide the Plough: In Thee the Hopes of all their sweating Toils. Tis when the City shines the Country smiles. The Fourth PAGEANT, The Chariot of St. Katharine. A Stately Chariot all enrich'd with Emboss'd Work of Silver, driven upon four golden Katharine-Wheels. In this Chariot is seated St. KATHARINE, the Original Patroness of the Honourable Com∣pany of HABERDASHERS, the Chariot drawn by two large Indian Goats, Argent, being the Supporters of the Company; with her are seated two Figures in a Descent beneath her, representing Faith and Piety. On these Beasts ride two Persons expressing Victory and Peace sounding two Trumpets, with a Kettle-Drum; the Charioteer repre∣senting Conduct, with four more Attendants on each side the Chariot. St. Katharine speaks as follows.
St. Katharine's Speech. ST. Katharine did of old this Claim possess, Was th' Honour'd Habardashers Patroness. Tho' Rome's created Saint, sure I've not lost All Title to that Honourable Post. No; my Original Right to reassume, Henceforth I'll quit my Abdicated Rome. No more a Roman, but a Britain now, I'll to a True Great Faith's Defender bow. This Homage then to Albion's Caesar due; I owe a Knee to his Vicegerent too. Hail then Great Deputy to our NASSAU, Fill your proud Chair, and give Augusta Law. As Rome does now for Jubilees prepare This great Revolving Seventeen Hundredth Year. Why shall we have our Triumphs less than they? No, Sir, beneath your warm propitious Ray, Proud London shall those smiling Joys assume: She'll keep her Jubilee as well as Rome. The Fifth PAGEANT, The Factory of Commerce. ON a very large Stage are planted, almost all round, several Shops, viz. Milliners, Hosiers, Hatters, Cappers, &c. with Indian Planters and Cutters of Tobacco, &c. The whole Pageant in some part Arch'd over, and in other parts enrich'd with a Cornish of Gold over the several Shops; in the Rear of the Pageant is planted a stately Throne richly gilt and adorn∣ed, on which, under a Noble Canopy, sits a Person representing COM∣MERCE. During the Movement of this Pageant, several Papers of Tobacco are given among the People. At his Lordship's Approach, the Person representing Commerce descends from his Throne to pay his Homage to his Lordship as follows.
The Speech of Commerce. HEre in my Factory of Trade I stand; Trade that commands the World, You Trade com∣mand. All Heads, all Hands, to dig th' Industrious Mine, The Product of the Earth, Air, Seas, all join, From Trade's Rich Crop to make whole Nations shine. Nor shall the Virtues of this Generous Taking up a Hand of Tobacco. Plant, In Fame their just Recorded Glories want: Yes, thou dear Plant, from the vast Indian Coasts, The Richest Flow'r the Royal Garden boasts, Advance thy Worth, and raise thy Head yet higher, Till even proud London from thy Growth aspire, To gain by Smoke what once it lost by Fire. Here his Lordship moves forward to Guild-hall to Dinner, where he receives the Honour of Entertaining the Lords of the Council, the Judges, and the Chief of the Nobility; the whole Magnificence of which splendid Entertainment concludes the Solemnity of the Day. FINIS.
