S2998 12031971 52754
A SERMON Preach'd before the King & Queen, AT WHITE-HALL, The 12th. of November, 1693. Being the Day appointed for a Publick Thanksgiving To Almighty God, for the Gracious Preservation of His Majesty, And His Safe Return. By IOHN, Lord Archbishop of YORK. Publish'd by Their Majesties special Command. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1693.
THE ARCHBISHOP of YORK's Thanksgiving-Sermon, BEFORE THE King & Queen, At Whitehall, Novemb. xii. 1693.
A SERMON Preached before the King & Queen. PSAL. xcvii. 1. The Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof: yea, the multitude of the isles may be glad thereof. THAT is to say, it ought to be Matter of exceeding Joy to all the Inhabitants of the World, that amidst all the Uncer∣tainties, and Hazards, and Variety of Fortunes, which they here find themselves exposed to, there is One Above that governs All.
GOD that made the World is the King of it. All the Beings of the Universe, Angels, Men, and Devils, with all the other Animate or Inanimate things in Heaven and Earth, as they are His Crea∣tures, so are they truly and properly His Subjects, and act entirely in subordination to Him, as Mini∣sters and Instruments do under the Guidance of the Principal Agent. GOD doth as truly Reign in the World, as any King does in his Kingdom: He doth as truly order the Affairs of it, as any Master doth those of his own Family. Nay, a Man's own Thoughts and Actions are not by a thousand times so much attended by himself, are not so much his Care, as the Affairs of the Universe are attended by, and are the Care of God Almighty. This is the notion of the Lord's being King; and, Do you not think it ought to be matter of Rejoycing to all Reasonable Creatures? O Lord, what a gloomy dismal Scene of things do they present us with, that give other Accounts of these matters? To banish God's Providence and Government out of the World, is to banish all Joy, all Peace, all Hope, all Comfort for ever, from all those that have the power of Thinking.
A Brute indeed is not much concern'd how Matters are order'd: An Ox may grow fat in his Stall, and a Colt frisk in his Pasture, let the Hypo∣thesis of the Government of the World be what it will. But to one that is made with a Faculty of Reasoning, that has Hopes and Fears, and can re∣flect on what is past, and hath a prospect of what is future; what black and melancholy Apprehen∣sions must it cause in such a one, to suppose that no care is taken of Human Affairs; but that we sail in the tempestuous Ocean of this World, every minute in danger of Rocks and Quicksands, without any Pilot to steer us? Take what Hypothesis you will; either that there is no God, but that all things come to pass by Chance, or inevitable Necessity; Or, that there is a God, but that God having once put things into this Frame, never meant to trouble himself more about them, but left them to shift for themselves, Natural Events falling out from necessary Causes, and Civil Affairs being left to Mankind, who are to shuffle and divide the World among themselves as well as they can! I say, proceed which way you will, if you exclude God Almighty's Govern∣ment, you make this World so dark and miserable a place, that no serious-cidering man can tole∣rably enjoy himself in it.
For here, upon the former supposition, you are left without Counsel or Advice. You have no∣thing to propose, nothing to design in the course of your Lives. It is all one how you behave your selves, whether honestly or wickedly; whether you mind your Business, or mind it not, for the Event will be the same. You are obliged to no body for any Benefits; you can complain of no body for any ill usage. If you be in ill circumstan∣ces, you have none to apply to for Remedy; and if you be in good ones, you may be stript of them without Remedy the next moment: for all things are carried on by a whirl of Fate. And you are not much better'd by the latter Hy∣pothesis, That God hath trusted the Government of the World with Mankind, who are endowed with Reason and Understanding. For, if we consider how Mankind do sometimes use their Reasons, it is as good, if not better, to be exposed to the Hazards of Chance or Necessity, as to be subject to their Wills. The truth of it is, if this Systeme of the World be well consider'd, it will appear a more uncom∣fortable one than the other; for it doth not remove from us the Iron Ban of Fate, we are still under that Yoke as much as we were before. Yet besides
these, it puts upon us another Yoke, the arbitrary Pleasures of those of our own kind, which if they be not governed by Reason, are ten times more un∣supportable than the other. We are by this Hypothesis as much exposed to Natural Evils as we were before, and there is no help for them; but over and above, we must bear the Indignities and Insolences, the Ravages and Cruelty of every one that is stronger than our selves, and hath the will to oppress us. O hard Lot of Mankind, if this was their Con∣stitution! better by far were it for them to be Brutes, and think of nothing, than to be Men up∣on such Terms as these. Happy therefore are the Inhabitants of the Earth, happy are the remotest Isles thereof, that there is a King that reigns both over Fate and Men. Hap∣py are we, that there is a wise and intelligent Be∣ing, that superintends all our Affairs, and so go∣verns both the Powers of Nature, and the Powers of Mankind; that nothing can be done by either of them, but what is designed by, and pursuant to, his Counsels. Upon this Supposition we may live like Men, and enjoy our selves with some Comfort in this World. We may propose Ends and Designs to our selves, and hope that with our diligence and good management they may take effect.
Upon this Supposition we may and ought to look upon all our good Successes, as the Blessings of God to us, and particularly that which we are this day met together to thank Him for; I mean, the wonderful Preservation of His Majesty from all the Dangers to which he hath so often been ex∣posed, and his safe Return to us. Upon this Supposition, we may hope, that tho' all things have not yet succeeded according to our Wishes, yet in due time they may, since the King of the World hath, by the frequent and unexpected Deliverances he hath wrought for us, and the strange unusual Providences that have attended our King, given us some Encouragement to be∣lieve (provided we do our parts towards it) that He hath reserv'd Vs for better Times, and Him for the executing those Glorious Designs, which Good Men hope will at last be accomplish'd in the World. Lastly, Upon this Supposition, every Honest Man will find reason enough both to bear conten∣tedly whatever uneasie Circumstances he lyes un∣der, and to trust in God's Mercy for the removal of them; and in the mean time to possess his own Soul in a cheerfu dependance on God's Provi∣dence, and a hearty Thankfulness for all the innu∣merable Blessings he hath receiv'd, and doth daily receive from his Hands. And therefore, since the
Lord is King let the earth be glad: yea, let the multi∣tude of the isles be glad thereof. Now, That the Lord is really thus the King of the World, there are all the Arguments to per∣swade us that can be desir'd: It is the Voice of Reason: It is the Voice of all Mankind: It is the Voice of GOD himself, both in His Works, and in His Word. Give me leave to give you a Specimen in all these ways of Arguing, and but a Specimen, because it would be rather the Work of a Book than of a Ser∣mon to dilate upon these matters. First, I say, Reason tells us it must be thus. For admitting that the World did not make it self, but was made by God; it will follow, that the same God that made it must still govern it: For, the same Ends, and Designs, and Motives (whatever they were) that induced God to make the World at first, will oblige Him for ever to take care of it and look after it. Unless we suppose God to con∣trive and act as uncertainly and unstedily, and with the same inconstancy and levity of Mind that some of us Mortals here upon Earth do. Secondly, It is the Voice of all Mankind. For, otherwise how comes it to pass, that among all Nations, and in all Ages, there has been some Re∣ligion or other practised.
I pray, what is the meaning of worshipping God, of putting up Prayers and Supplications to Him for the things we need; of returning Thanks for the Benefits we have received; of appointing Religious Rites and Methods for the expiation of Guilt, or the averting of impendent Calamities (all which things have been practised in all Nations, from the beginning of the World to this day)? I say, what is the meaning of all this, unless it was hereby meant to be signified, That there is a God which doth concern himself in the Affairs of Mankind, and who doth dispense Good or Evil to them, as they well or ill behave themselves towards him? The Truth is, To say that God doth not govern the World, is to say, that all Religion is a Cheat; and, that all Mankind, except a few debauch'd Wits in the more polite Countries, and a few Brutes in the very barbarous ones, (who are of no Reli∣gion at all) have been, and are a company of cre∣dulous Fools. For this is certain, whatever Ar∣gument either Iew, or Turk, or Pagan, or Christian, can suggest to himself for the convincing him, that it is his Concernment, or his Duty, to worship God, or to be of any Religion at all, nay, or to make any conscience of any Action he does; I say, all these Arguments do not only prove, but sup∣pose, that God both knows and orders the Affairs of the World.
Thirdly, It may likewise be as strongly proved from Effects; from the tracks and footsteps of a Di∣vine over-ruling Providence, which are to be seen in the Events that happen in the World, which is that I call the Voice of God in his Works. These are indeed so many and so visible, that whosoever hath either read History, or hath made Observations, must needs have taken notice of them. If ever there were any extraordinary Deliveran∣ces vouchsafed to Kingdoms, or Cities, or particu∣lar Persons; or ever any remarkable Iudgments in∣flicted upon any of these, which so carried the Marks and Signatures of God's Hand in them, that the one could not in reason but be attributed to the Care that he had, that Religion or Innocence should not be oppressed; and the other must in reason be interpreted as a Divine Vengeance, that pursued the Guilty for their Crimes: If ever there were any Prophecies that did pun∣ctually foretell a Particular Event that came not to pass till many Years after, and such an Event as was perfectly contingent, and depended upon the Wills of Men: If ever there were any Notices given of Approach∣ing Calamities, by Voices from Heaven, by strange Appearances in the Air, and such other like
Presages, not naturally to be accounted for: If ever there were any Apparitions, any Witch∣craft, any effects of a Diabolical Power, by which it may appear, that there are a sort of Invisible Be∣ings in the World, which do bear ill will to Man∣kind, but yet are so curbed, that they cannot do all the Mischief they would: If ever there were any Miracles wrought either by Moses and the Prophets, or by Iesus Christ and his Apostles, for the confirmation of the Iewish or the Christian Religion: Lastly, If ever any Good Man did ever receive any Blessing, or avoid any Misfortune, which he might rationally look upon as an Answer to the Fervent Prayers that he had put up to God, or others had put up for him: I say, if any of these things that I have now named be true (as all Histories give us a World of Instances of the truth of all of them, and as for some of them, I do not doubt but they fall within the compass of our own Observation and Experience.) I say, if any of these things be true, then have we a convincing Proof, that there is a Power that doth interpose in the Affairs of the World, superiour both to that of Nature, and to that of Mankind, and which moderates all things, according as it seems good unto him.
But in truth, we need not go to supernatural Events, or to particular Providences for the Truth of this: For, in my Opinion, the daily effects that every one of us sees and feels; the very Subsi∣stence of the World for so many Ages, in that re∣gular frame that it was at first; and the fair Treat∣ment and Encouragement (how unequally soever things seem to be distributed) which virtuous and religious men have always found in it, and do yet find, notwithstanding that far the greatest number of men are of another stamp: I say, these very things seem an Argument beyond exception, That there is a God that presides over us, and takes care of us. But, Fourthly and lastly, God has yet given us a further Proof of this, by his own many Authentick Declarations in the Holy Scriptures (which we call his Word.) One of the main businesses of which is, to assure us, That He rules in the kingdoms of men,Dan. 4. 17. and dispo∣seth of all their Affairs. There He is set forth as the Author of all E∣vents, both good and bad;Amo▪ 3. 6. so that no evil happens in a City, but the Lord doth it. There He is represented as the searcher of all hearts, the Judge of all mens Designs and Actions, the Avenger of all Evil Practices, and the Refuge of all Good Men.
There we are told,Psal. 33. 16 that He is the God of battels, and that no King is saved by the multitude of his armies, nor any mighty man delivered by his own strength: but salvation is from the Lord. And so are Disappoint∣ments also. There we are assured,Psal. 33. 14 that He from his habitation looketh down upon all that dwell on the earth. He fa∣shioneth the hearts of them; he understandeth all their ways.Prov. 19. 21 And though many are the devices that are in their hearts, yet it is his counsel only that shall stand. In a word, it is God (as the Apostle tells us) that worketh all things,Eph. 1. 11. and he worketh them all accor∣ding to the counsel of his own will. So that nothing comes by chance, nothing is done in vain; but all Events are in pursuance of a Design. Nay, not so much as the Event of casting a Lot (which seems the most fortuitous contingent thing in the whole World) is left at random: For even in that Case the disposal of the Lot (as Solomon tells us, Prov. 16. 33.) is from the Lord. All this is not only the Doctrine, but in a great measure the very Language and Expression of those Holy Books. And, what can we desire more? Or, what words can we invent that shall declare more fully the thing we are speaking of?
None can that I know of, except perhaps those of our Saviour, with which I shall shut up this point. Fear not, (saith he to his Disciples) Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?Matt. 10. 29 yet not one of them falls to the ground without the will of your Father. Nay, I say un∣to you, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. O wonderful this! what! God Almighty num∣ber the very Hairs of our Heads! Lord, what is man, that thou shouldst have such respect unto him, and do that for him which even the nicest and most delicate of Men never yet did for themselves? But thus art thou pleased to express thy particular re∣gard to the Sons of Men. Thus art thou pleased to let us see, that none of us are so inconsiderable, but that we are within the Verge of thy Provi∣dence, and Objects of thy Care. And therefore much more are Cities, and States, and Kingdoms so, wherein the Fortunes of so many Individuals are wrapt up. O, blessed be God for his Love to Mankind. O, for ever adored be his Name for thus humbling himself to take notice of us and our Affairs, and likewise for giving us such abundant Assurance that He doth so. Since therefore we have such migh∣ty Evidence of all sorts, that the Lord is King, let the earth be glad: yea, let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof.
And we shall still see greater reason thus to be glad, if we consider a little more particularly the Rules and Measures by which God administers the Affairs of his Kingdom: Which are not, as too of∣ten happens in Human Governments, Arbitrary Will or Humour, but perfect Wisdom, and Iustice, and Goodness. Tho' it be true what the Psalmist saith, That Whatsoever the Lord pleaseth,Psal. 135. 6 that doth he in Heaven and in Earth, and in the Sea and all deep places: Yet it is as true, that the Lord will never be pleased to do any thing, either in Heaven or in Earth, but what is suggested by Infinite Goodness, and in such ways as are the Result of Infinite Wisdom. For, as the same Psalmist tells us, He loveth righteousness and judgment;Psal. 33. 5. the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. He is holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his do∣ings:Psal. 145. 17, 9. and his tender mercies are over all his works. To say, That God deals arbitrarily with any of his Creatures; or, that He dispenseth Good or Evil to them meerly because He will, without any other Reason, is in truth to disparage His Nature, and gives us such a notion of Him, as we have perhaps of some of the Great Monarchs of the World, but whom we are far from esteeming the Best Men.
No certainly, if we Mankind find in our selves, that the wiser and better we grow, the less are we led by Humour and Will, and the more do we shake off our Indifferency to Good and Evil, and the more steadily do we cleave to the eternal Laws of Reason and Righteousness in all our Actions: We may be sure that God, who is Wisdom, and Iustice, and Goodness it self, can never in any of his Acti∣ons or Dealings with his Creatures, depart from these Principles. The true Scheme of God Almighty's Govern∣ment is plainly this. His Infinite Mind clearly understood all the Pos∣sibilities of things long before they were in actual being. He knew what things were possible to be; and how they would act if they were put into being; and what the Events of all their Actings would be. His Infinite Goodness moved him to put into actual being every thing that he saw was Good to Be; and to give them all those powers of Action that they have; and withal, to look after them so, as that both they and all their Motions and Actions should at last be to the Praise and Glory of the same Goodness that first enclined him to create them. His Infinite Wisdom contrived the Methods in which all this should be brought to pass, and so laid the Scheme and Platform of things, that nothing
could happen in the whole Creation, from the be∣ginning of the World to the end thereof, (tho' it was in it self never so bad, never so mischievous) but what both might and should be so ordered, as to be subservient to that end. And lastly, The Scheme of Things being thus laid, His Infinite Power first produced All things, and still upholds All things, and from time to time, in their several seasons, actually brings to pass every thing, according to the Determinations of his eter∣nal Wisdom. And tho' it doth it in ways secret to us, yet it doth it certainly and surely, and withal, most easily and gently, with the least violence to the establish'd Laws of Nature, and without any force at all upon the Free Wills of Intelligent Beings. This, I say, is the Account that both Reason and Scripture give us of God's Making and Governing the World. Infinite Knowledge is the Foundation of All. Infinite Goodness is the Author and Mover of All. Infinite Wisdom is the Contriver and Di∣rector of All. And Infinite Power executes All. Admit now these Principles, and see what will follow from them. It will follow from hence, in the first place, that every Event that happens in the World, is beautiful in its season; as Solomon expresses it. That is to say, How unaccountable soever it may appear
to us, yet there is a good Reason to be given, both why it happens at all, and likewise why it hap∣pens at that time, and with those circumstances that it doth. It helps to adorn the Great Drama and Contrivance of God's Providence, and ministers to excellent Ends, tho' we poor Creatures do little apprehend how it makes for them. As indeed it is impossible we should, unless we had the whole Comprehension of Things in our Minds, and saw the entire Scheme of God's Government, from the be∣ginning to the end. This must needs be so, if we be Govern'd by Infinite Wisdom. Secondly, It follows from hence, that both Good and Evil are measured to Mankind according to their respective Capacities. If we be fit for Good, Good will come. If we deserve Punishment, we must expect that likewise. For, All God's ways are equal, tho' Ours be unequal. And therefore it is the most unreasonable thing in the World to impute our Successes, whether they be Good or Bad, so wholly to the immediate Hands that managed our Affairs, as not in the first place to take notice of the Hand of God in them. There is a Divine Power that governs all these matters. And tho' it be true, that no Misfortune, no ill Success ever happens, but there is a Human Reason to be given for it; it may be found out
upon what occasion, or by what neglect, or thro' what ill management that Misfortune happened: Yet it is as true, that if those that managed for us had the Wisdom, and the Conduct, and the Strength of the very Angels of God, yet their Endeavours would not be effectual, for the making us happy, unless we our selves were in a capaci∣ty of being so, by being proper Objects of God's Mercy and Favour. This must likewise be true, if perfect Iustice govern the World. Thirdly, It follows from hence, that even the severer Dispensations of God's Providence toward us; the things we complain of, and are uneasie under; our very Calamities, and Misfortunes, and Disappointments; even these are the effects of God's Kindness, tho' at the same time they may be like∣wise Instances of His Iustice. That is to say, they are meant really for our Good, and will prove so, if we make that use of them we should do. The very Nature of God is to do all Good, at all Times, to all his Creatures. For, He had no other End in making them, nor has he any other End in looking after them. But God cannot do good to All in the same way. Correction, and Chastise∣ment, and Punishment is in some cases more expe∣dient for the bringing People to Rights, and pro∣moting their true Interests, than the giving them
all that their own Hearts can wish. In such cases therefore God must deal with his Creatures as every wise Parent deals with his Children. And tho' these chastisements (as the Apostle tell us) areHeb. 12. 11 not joyous, but grievous, yet are they designed for the bringing forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness in all them that are exercised thereby. The truth is, we do not know what is good for our selves. We often wish for things, that per∣haps, if our wishes were granted, would undo us. But our Happiness is, that God knows all, and so tempers all, that all Events, even those that we are apt to look upon as the greatest Judgments, shall at last appear most visibly to have been the wisest methods that could possibly have been contrived for the doing the Greatest Good to us. And if they do not succeed accordingly, it will be our own fault. This must likewise needs be true, if perfect Goodness govern All: For even Iustice it self is but a different way of expressing Goodness. And all that which we call Iudgment and Vengeance is un∣accountable, unless it serve for the doing Good to the World. Fourthly, and Lastly; From hence it follows, that all Events whatsoever, that ever did, or do, or shall happen in the World, either with respect to
Nations, and Kingdoms, or with respect to particular Persons, are really the Best that could or can hap∣pen. And if things were ordered otherwise, it would not be so well. A strange Paradox you will say this is; that not only the Mischiefs and Calamities that fall upon Mankind, but even their Faults and Mismanage∣ments, nay, their very Sins and Wickednesses, should be for the best. But really so it is, and so it must be, if both Infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, and Power govern the World. Not but that a particular man's Sins may be the occasion of his Ruin, nay, and certainly will be so, if he persist in them. And likewise the Faults of a People may and will have such an ill influence upon the Community, as if they be not amended, the Desolation of the Nation may at last ensue thereupon. But still, tho' every thing that happens do not prove for the Good of that particular Person, or that particular People, that is immediately concerned in the Event; yet it will certainly prove for the General Vniversal Good. So that take all the whole Series of Events to∣geher, that have or shall come to pass all the World over, we may undoubtedly affirm, that All things have been as well managed, as it is possible
they could be, and will be so to the end of the World. And this we our selves shall be satisfied of, when we come to be in a condition of making a just estimate of things. For indeed, to suppose otherwise, is to say, ei∣ther that Infinite Wisdom doth not act so wisely as it might do; or, that Perfect Goodness might do more Good than it does do; or, lastly, that Omnipotent Power cannot do every thing that is possible. All which Suppositions are plainly absurd and con∣tradictious. And now, if all these things be true (as they certainly are) how natural is the conclusion of my Text? Since God is the King of all the World, and such a King likewise, that the Measures of his Go∣vernment are exact Goodness, and Wisdom, and Righ∣teousness; what have all Mankind to do, especial∣ly Good Men, but to Rejoyce and be glad? This is the Psalmist's Inference from this Doctrin. And this is the present Business of the Day: And therefore let us all practise accordingly. That is the only Application I desire to make of what hath been said. And Two ways we ought to express our Re∣joycing.
First, In a hearty sense of all God's past and pre∣sent Mercies to us, and an actual giving Him our Thanks for the same. Secondly, In a cheerful dependance upon Him for his Future Blessings. Give me leave to speak a little to these two Points, and I have done. First, Let us be heartily sensible of All God's Kindness to us, both past and present, and unfeign∣edly thank Him for the same. It is very remarkable, that not only David, but the Prophets likewise, when they are treating of God's Kingdom, call upon the Isles in a particular manner to take notice of it; [See Isa. xxiv. 15. xlii. 4, 10, &c.] as here in my Text, Let the mul∣titude of the isles be glad thereof: As if the Isles in a more peculiar manner were to have a share in the Blessings of his Government. And, no doubt, it was so intended, and accordingly hath so come to pass. For, it is the Isles of the Gentiles, by which Name the Scripture expresseth those Countries that were at the greatest distance from the Conti∣nent of Iudea; I say, it is these Isles, which now at this day (God's ancient People the Iews being
for their Infidelity long ago rejected) are the prin∣cipal Seat of his Church and Kingdom, and to which He vouchsafeth the Light of his Gospel, and the Means of Salvation; so true is God to all his Pro∣mises. But now, of all the Isles of the Gentiles, if any one above the rest hath felt the benign and gracious Influences of the LORD's being our King, cer∣tainly Ours is that Island. How wonderfully bountiful hath God been to us in a continued succession of Publick Blessings, even from the first beginning of Time, that we have had any Memorials of Events among us? We had the Happiness to be early made a Pro∣vince of the Roman Empire, and by that means were trained up to Civility, and Arts, and Good Man∣ners. That made way for the greatest Blessing that Heaven could bestow upon us, even the receiving Christianity: And that Blessing we had with the most early, being the first among the Nations that embraced it. When through the just Judgment of God, Bar∣barism and Ignorance overspread the face of Europe, and by the occasion thereof Superstition and Idola∣try made its way, and all the Western Kingdoms gave up their Power to a Foreign Usurper; even
then this Island made the longest stand; nay, and was never so perfectly subdued, but that Popery was here a different thing, from what it was in the Southern Climates. When the happy time came, that God thought fit to set on foot the Reformation, (having first made way for it, by the restoring of Learning) such was His particular Care of us, that this was one of the first Kingdoms that was brought over to it. And we have this Advantage above all other Reformed Churches, that as our Reformation was re∣gularly made, and by just Authority, so it was made most agreeably to the Pattern of the Primitive Churches of Christ. And, God be thanked, according to the good∣ness of it, such hath been its Success ever since; for we have all-along, from that time to this, (ex∣cept the interruption of a few Years in the late Times) served God in Peace and Happiness, under the same Establishment. And we trust we shall do so to the end of the World. Many indeed have been the Oppositions and Disturbances, that have been given us by our Ad∣versaries, both at home and abroad; but as mani∣fold likewise have been our Deliverances, and that in a most wonderful manner.
I need not mention them, for they are known to us all. How many Secret Conspiracies against our Pro∣testant Kings and Queens, hath God Almighty's Mer∣cy detected and defeated? How many Open Attempts against our Laws and against our Religion hath He by strange Providences brought to nought? More than once hath He by wonderful methods preserved us, when we gave up our Church and our Liberties in a manner as lost, and that in so easie and quiet a way, that there was no concussion of the Nation followed thereupon. Are not these Extraordinary Instances of God's Kindness to a People? And, ought not we, who have receiv'd, and do yet enjoy the Benefit and the Comfort of them, to remember them with Thank∣fulness all the Days of our Life? But some of us, perhaps, are not now in a Hu∣mour to think of these things; our present Cir∣cumstances fill our Minds, and Those are difficult enough. Let our past Deliverances have been what they will, yet we are sure we are now in a Hazardous Condition, notwithstanding all the Prayers we have put up for better Successes.
That is too true: And I pray God make us all sensible of it; and especially make us sensible of the things that have caused it, namely, our In∣gratitude for God's former Mercies; our Lewd∣ness and Debauchery; the Spirit of Atheism and Prophaneness, and Irreligion, that still reigns among us as much as ever; and above all, our un∣accountable dividing our selves into Parties, and pursuing particular Piques and Quarrels, not only to the neglect, but to the plain ruine of our common Interests. These are the things that have hinder'd our Successes, and provoked God's Displeasure against us; and till these things be amended, I am afraid, we shall never be a happy Nation. But yet, notwithstanding our high Provocations, yet so gently hath God corrected us, and even in his Iudgments so much hath He remembred Mer∣cy, that we have all reason to rejoyce at the Be∣nignity and Kindness of His Dispensations towards us; nay, and to render Him our most hearty and solemn Thanks, for the Mercies that He hath be∣stowed upon us, even with respect to the Matters we complain of. For God hath really so far heard our Prayers this Year, that He hath given us the most impor∣tant Successes, tho' not the Successes we desir'd.
He hath kept the War at a distance from us; and we have, under the Happy Government of Her Majesty, lived free from all Disturbance at home; every man sitting under his own Vine, and his own Fig-tree, (as the Prophet speaks) enjoying his Religion and Rights in perfect Peace; and with a bountiful Provision likewise, from God's Hand, of all the Things that were either needful or con∣venient. And as for our Successes abroad, tho' it is not proper for me to talk of those matters, yet I be∣lieve thus much I may decently and truly say, That tho' the King had not the Victory, being over∣power'd by Numbers; yet he gained more Honour, and sustained less Loss than those that boasted of the Victory. And which is yet more, God hath not only Preserved his Person, amidst the infinite Hazards he was continually exposed to, and Returned him safe to us, but returned him likewise with such Reputation for his Courage, and Vigilance, and Con∣duct in the Difficulties he had to struggle with, as hath gained him the highest Esteem among his Ene∣mies, and therefore ought much more to endear him to his own Subjects.
And now, let all this be considered, and then let any man say, that really loves the Interest of his Country, whether we have not reason to look up∣on these things as Great Blessings; and as such, to return our Solemn Thanks to God for them. And then, in the Second place, as to our Future Successes, let us all cheerfully depend upon God's Providence, and trust in his Mercy for them. This is all the Rejoycing that we can express as to Future things; and this is that which the Apo∣stle calls Rejoycing in Hope. And surely great Reason have we thus to do, when we consider who it is that orders our Af∣fairs; One, whose Kindness we have no reason to doubt of, having had so many Experiences of it, even beyond our Hopes and Expectations: And One likewise upon whose Power we may securely depend, since His Arm is not shortened, nor ever can be, how much soever our Arm of Flesh may. God Almighty is our King, and He both cer∣tainly knows, and will certainly do, that which is best for us, provided we take care to do that which becomes us. Away therefore with all Fear, and Distrust, and Despondency; it is an Argument of Infidelity and Ir∣religion, as well as Cowardise, to despair of the Common∣wealth.
We are in as good Hands as it is possible for us to be: Nay, we our selves cannot wish to be in any other. Let but us do our Parts, by qualifying our selves for God's Mercies; and that is to be done by con∣tributing our best Endeavours, every man in his Place and Station, to the Service of the Publick; and then we may safely cast all our care upon him who careth for us, and we may be sure we shall not be disappointed. This Method, as it is much more easie, so we shall find it much more conducing towards the ob∣taining the Successes we desire, than Complaining, and Fretfulness, and a tormenting Anxiety about our Affairs. We may indeed, by our Peevish and Querulous Humour, disquiet our selves, and put others into a Ferment, nay, and at last, perhaps, may contribute a great deal to the Glory of hindering and defeating the most wise Counsels that are proposed for our Safety; but that is the greatest Point we gain. God Almighty will not alter his Methods for any of our foolish Passions; but there is a way to prevail upon God himself, to do for us all that our own Hearts can desire, provided that which we desire be good for us; and that way is, to own Him and his Government; to love him, and to
serve him; to be thankful for his Mercies; to be easie and cheerful under all his Dispensations to us; and lastly, to referr our selves entirely to his Wise Counsels, and to trust in his Mercy for all that is to come. Great indeed, and wonderful, are the Promises that are made to those that put their Trust in God. Cursed (saith the Prophet) be the man that trustethJer. 17. 5. in man, and maketh flesh his arm: But, Blessed is he that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. Many sorrows (saith the Psalmist) shall be to the wic∣ked:Psal. 32. 10 but whose trusteth in the Lord, mercy shall embrace him on every side. And again, O taste and see, how34. 8. gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusteth in him. If now we believe these things, (and if we be Christians, we do and must believe them) consider I beseech you, the Vse we are to make of them. What have we All to do? Let our late Disap∣pointments have put us into never so bad a Humour; let our present Circumstances be entangled with ne∣ver so many Difficulties; yet what have we All to do, but to Rejoyce in GOD, and to Trust in his Mercy? All is well, and All will be well for ever to them that Love God, and put their Trust in Him.
Sing we therefore unto the Lord a new song: let the congregation of saints praise him. Let Israel rejoyce in him that made him: and let the children of Sion be joy∣ful in their King. God is the King of all the earth, let us sing praises with understanding. The Lord hath pleasure in his people: he will for ever help the meek hearted: for his delight is in them that fear him, and that put their trust in his mercy. He is our help and strength, a very present help in Trouble: therefore will we not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the hills be carried into the midst of the sea: Though the waters thereof rage and swell, and the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. Even, in that case, the rivers of the flood thereof shall make glad the city of God. All the Blusterings and Storms that threaten God's Peo∣ple, shall turn to their Advantage, and shall really at length prove matter of rejoycing to them, how ter∣rible and dreadful soever they appeared at first: For, as it there follows, God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God will help her, and that right early. God will be with his Church, and will deliver his People whenever it is proper and seasonable so to do.
Nay, let the Worst come; tho' we were reduced even to the utmost Extremities; which yet, God be thanked, we neither are, nor, I hope, ever shall be; yet even, in that Cafe, the Consideration that God is our King, ought not only to support us, but to fill us with Ioy. Even in that Case every Good Man should bear his part in the Song of the Prophet Habakkuk, (3. 17.) with which I conclude. Although the fig-tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine: Although the labour of the olive shall fail; and the fields shall yield no meat: Although the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there be no herd in the stalls; yet will I rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. FINIS.
