S3544 13034036 96809
A short Account Of the SIEGE OF BANTAM: And its Surrender to the Rebels, who were Assisted by the DUTCH, and their Fleet, in the East-Indies. In a Letter from an English Factor to a Mer∣chant of LONDON. SIR, GReat was our Expectation upon the Success of our late Em∣bassadour, Kaia Nebbe, his Negotiation into England, of setling a Commerce with that Kingdom, which as it is of all Nations in most esteem with, so is it most earnestly desired by the Bantamites, who have a natural kindness for the English in these Parts. Whilst we were big with these Joys, a suddain and unexpected Storm happen'd, which blasted all our hopes in an Instant, and unmercifully expos'd us, not onely to the fury of a Domestick Enemy, but the Spoil and Rapine of a Forreign Foe. Sir, It would be but a needless trouble to tell you the true Correspon∣dence, and real Friendship that has been preserv'd between the English and the Bantamites. These allowing them a Factory, and a Place of Residence for their Consult within the Walls of the Town of Bantam, which is the Capital City of Java, wheras all other Forreign∣ers, as the Bengallians, Cusarats, Malayans, Abyssins, Chineses, Portugals and Hollanders, are placed without the Town, nay, the very Indians them∣selves, who come from the Borders of the Country, have their places allotted them without the City, where they have their Markets for their particular Commodities, the Grand Bazor, or Exchange, being in the East part of the Town, wholy employed in the English Factory, and for stowing up the Commodities they Trade in. Since the last Massacre of the Dutch in this Nation, they have not dealt so freely amongst us, but keep within their own Plantation at Batavia, which is some 12 Leagues from Bantam. The Portugals that deal at Bantam, live out of Town in the same Quar∣ter with the Chineses. They drive here a great Trade in Pepper, Nut∣megs, Cloves, Mace, Sandal-wood, Cubebs, long Pepper, and other Commodities that are sent them from Malacca; for the greater part of them are Factors, and Commissioners of the Governour of Malacca, and the Arch-bishop of Goa. The English, besides their liberty of Residing within the Town of Bantam, have free Access through the whole Country of Java Major, which is a vast and spacious Isle, for, from East to West it stretches 150 Leagues, or of Miles 450, and from North to South 90 Leagues, which is 270 Miles English.
The Dutch, who joined with the Rebels in this unnatural Incursion, to Invade our City with the more ease, we being so unprovided of Ammunition, and all other Conveniences, to make any considerable Resistance. In which they had found much more Difficulty, and it is probable, we might have held out as yet, had we received that Re∣cruit of Arms and Ammuntion, as was every Day expected by the Embassador from England, who is not yet come. And this (Sir) leads me to the Tragical part of my Letter, which must needs create pity in you, when you consider in what Consterna∣tion this suddain change hath left us, not able to call our Lives or For∣tunes our own, nor can we yet tell whether we are Freeman or Slaves. During the Absence of our Embassador in England, a Match was proposed by the King of Bantam, between his Eldest Son Zerombia Zebbe, and the Daughter of the King of Mitram. This was a Match well proposed, and had been Fortunate for the English, had it taken its wished success, the King of Mitram being as it were Emperour of Java Major. The Young Prince going upon this Expedition, fell in Love, by the way, with the King of Tubans Daughter, which, next to Bantam, is the chiefest Town in Java. The Prince having forgot all other Obligations, it was not long e're the Marriage was unhappily Solemniz'd, tho' it was much inferiour to what had been formerly proposed. The King of Tubans Territo∣ries being but small, and he himself a Tributary to the King of Ban∣tam. Besides, the King of Tuban having Four Wives, Six Sons, and Two Daughters, besides Natural-Children, and Concubines innume∣rable; the Princess, which was the former Match proposed, being sole Heiress to the Emperour. This so Incensed the King of Bantam, that he Excludes his Son out of the Kingdom, making his Younger Son, by a Second Wife, his Heir. The Prince no less Incensed on the other hand, Marched with a small Army of the Tubanites towards Batavia, desiring Aid of the Dutch, who were forward enough to Assist him, as well for the old Grudg that conti∣nu'd between them, and the Bantamites, as to Enlarge their Dominions upon any opportunity that presents. There being a Dutch Fleet at Batavia, they took Shipping, and lay before Bantam, on the 23d of November, playing with their Great Canon upon the Town, during which time the King made several proffers of Ac∣commodation, but nothing wou'd be accepted. At last all our Ammunition being spent, and our Walls Battered down, on the 2d of December they Enterect the Town, Seizing upon the Bazor, and all places of Factory and Store, Killing and Plundering all before them. The King, with the chief Officers of the City, keeps his Army in the Field, where by Daily Recruits which flock to him from all parts, he hopes, yet, in some time, to Re¦cover his former Losses. The Hollanders have possest themselves of the Port, and the Rebels of the City. We are every Day Threatn'd to be turn'd out, and a Dutch Factory and Consul Establish'd in our place. All the hopes we have, is, of the Return of the Embassadour, and the Suc∣cess of the Kings Army, of which we hope to give you a better Account by the next. LONDON, Printed for John Smith, 1683.
