S3618 13783605 101794
A SHORT RELATION Concerning the Life and Death OF That man of God, and faithful Minister Of JESUS CHRIST, WILLIAM SIMPSON Who laid down his Body in the Island of Barbadoes, the eighth Day of the twelfth Month, M DC LXX. My Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen th¦of, 2 Kings 2. 12. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed are dead, which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, saith the Spirit, they may rest from their labours, and their works do follow th Rev. 14. 13. Printed in the Year 1671.
A SHORT Relation, &c. MErciful hath the Lord been to us of this Island, be∣yond expression, in sending his faithful Servants a∣mongst us time after time, early, yea, and now of late, preaching deliverance to us who were Cap∣tives, and under the region and shadow of Death, turning us from darkness to the light, and from Satans power to the pow∣er of God; being as lights set on a Hill, publishing the acce∣ptable year of the Lord, to the penitent, and the day of venge∣ance of our God on the rebellious, both within and without; which is now fulfilled and fulfilling in this day of his power, wherin his people are a willing people, let his will be what pleaseth him▪ here on Earth as it is in Heaven; though there be them that do murmur at it as in the dayes of old, saying to the Lord, DEpart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes: still imagining that the Lord delays his coming, ac∣cording to his promise, which is, without sin unto Salvation; and are still pleading for the Devils work, which is sin; although that is it which separateth from the Lord, and hindereth the will of the Lord to be done on Earth (or whilst they are in this world) which is, that they should be sanctified; but let such know, that after this Life, his Will will be justly done on them whether they will or no, though now they may resist the Holy Ghost, as their Fathers did of old; and they which are not obedient to his call and voice (which his sheep do hear and follow) whilst here, denying him before men, he also will de∣ny them before his Father, and the holy Angels. I do not question but that it will be granted, that the Call of the Lord is to depart from sin, and not to joyn to that which
separates from God. Then if we hold sin the term of Life, we shall find that its wages will be death. We cannot serve two Ma∣sters: If we serve Sin, we are free from Righteousness, neither is there fellowship between light and darkness, or Christ and Be∣lial; for they are contrary and opposite in all things, insomuch that the fruits of either are clearly descerned by the children of Light, who are not of this world, neither of darkness, though they once were, but are now of the Day, and are Light in the Lord, being turned thereto by his faithful Ser∣vants, speaking by the same spirit that of old said, Come ye, Oh house of Israel! and let us walk in the Light of the Lord. This as my Testimony, I write to those that have been con∣vinced of the Truth, declared largely by that Man of God, William Simpson, who hath bestowed much labour on us, that this may stand as a Witness against my self, or any that have received the Truth declared by him, if we depart from it: which that we may not do, let us all watch, knowing assuredly, that it is only they that continue to the end that shall be saved; as this faithful Warrior (yea, and more than a Conqueror) hath done, who is entered into his rest, having received an immortal Crown of an eternal weight of glory; The Spirit of the Lord bears true witness in me to the truth of the same this moment. And for the farther confirmation of the same, I shall instance something concerning his End (which was miraculous) I being with him the time that he kept House in his sickness, and to his Grave. On the third day of this instant (being the sixth day of the week, he powerfully preached the Word of the Lord, and made effectual supplication to him by Prayer) at the House of Katherine Norton) it being the fifth Meeting that he had been at that week, and last publication of the Gospel of Peace, ex∣cept nigh the hour of his death, which was so powerfully done, that it is beyond my utterance, especially considering the low estate of his outward man; which confirmeth his last Decla∣ration to be no less than a miraculous voice immediately from Heaven (as indeed it was) that we might then have said, (and now do) That he being dead, yet speaketh the wonderful things of God: From which Meeting (as aforesaid at K. N s.)
he with his yoke-fellow, John Burneyat, went to the house where Richard Clarke now lives, who kindly received them; and that night our dear Friend, William Simpson was taken very ill with a Feaver, so that the outward man grew weaker and fainter every day more than other, and the inward man was renewed with might (to our great rejoycing) as ap∣peared by his often making melody to the Lord with rich re∣joycings; so that though we sorrow for him, yet we sorrow not as those which have no hope: being Witnesses of the Glory of the Lord which did surround him to the last. And, his care was much over the Flock of which the Lord by the Holy Ghost had made him an Overseer, as appeared by his words to his (and our) beloved John Burneyat, that morning, who signified to him, That he had freedom to stay with him if he desired it; but dear William answered him, saying, All will not be well except thou be there (meaning mens meeting that day, and the general meeting on the morrow) with other words to that effect. Now for the service of Truth, these two faithful Stewards had separated themselves (outwardly) but having bemoaned each other, like Turtle Doves that miss their Mates, they re∣solved in the Will of the Lord to enjoy each others company so much as they could, yet with Williams consent John went to Town that day. And on the eighth day of this Month he grew very weak and faint in Body, and with being removed (according to his desire) he fainted away, not speaking nor knowing us, as he af∣terward said: And seeing us to be sad, he asked, If he had gi∣ven us any words in the time of his fainting, that might offend us? but we satisfied him that he did not, neither did he, for indeed he was harmless in all things, and was become as a little Child, for not one froward or hasty word proceeded from him, neither was he any thing less than a perfect man, who feared God and eschewed evil; yea, he walked before the Lord and was per∣fect, insomuch that the Lord hid not from him that which he hath accomplished on him, for in the forenoon the Lord shewed him in a Vision that he would take him away; and giving a start, he gave us to understand the same, saying, It lyes very hard up∣on
me, it is fixed in me, relating the thing that he had seen; and I observed, that the pangs of Death seized on him at that in∣stant, which might be about the eleventh hour: and being de∣sired to keep his bed (because moving of him caused him to faint) he gave us an innocent look, like a Babe (as he was) lying still submitting to what we said, whose innocent looks and behaviour caused tears from some, which he beholding was tro∣bled, speaking to us tenderly, that we should not be grieved, &c. And towards evening he grew so weak, that he spake very inwardly, so that we could scarcely hear him; and after that manner he spake much of, and to the Lord, praising him won∣derfully, but with a very low voice. And after a while we perceived that he did not know us, saying, Friends, be noble, and do not hinder me in my Passage, for I am an innocent man. And being asked whither he would go? he said, I must pass away. And by what else he spake at that time, we surely know That his heart was wholly fixed upon the Lord: For had any evil been in him, something of it would have shewed it self at such a time, yet this holy Man of God did not, neither spake he at any time any word unbecoming the Truth, which he once more pow∣erfully preached. Between the sixth and seventh hour he lay very still and si∣lent, and one came there (who hath been invited to Meetings but never came) and taking him by the hand, asked him how he did? who answered, I am a very sick man. And looking towards the man, William Simpson was on a suddain endewed with the Power and Spirit of the Lord, by which he marvelously preached the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ about a quarter of an hour, sweetly praising and magnifying the Lord; which was so contrary to our expectations, that it caused great amazement, with trembling and tears; who held forth power∣fully the Doctrine of Perfection and freedom from sin on this side the Grave, and that Friends should be valiant for the Truth upon Earth, and that they should not again be entangled with the Yoak of Bondage (which brings Imperfections) but to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ had made us free; that every Bond and Yoak may be broken, that that which is pure of the Lord God might go free in all; that God might be glorified and honoured,
and we preserved in the day of tryal which must come upon all flesh; and so to grow from grace to grace, and from strength to strength, and from one degree of holiness unto another, that a daily growth may be witnessed in all; (further saying) Oh Friends! It is the Life that the Lord looks at; for, he that hath the Son hath Life, and he that hath not the Son hath not Life. Examine your selves; no Son, no Life; without the Son, without Life, &c. And thus he Declared wonderfully and often, glorifying and praysing the Lord after this manner; Oh all that is within me, praise and magnifie the Lord God, who is worthy for ever and ever of all Glory; and everlasting Prayses to the God of my Life, who is only worthy, and lives over all, is above all, God blessed for ever. Amen. And after this sort did he often ascribe living praises to the God of his Life, &c. And in his Declaration he said, That what he had spoken, was laid upon his Spirit by the Lord so to do, &c. When he had spoke a word not plain, he repeated it again, and so went forward until he had finished his Last Testimony with supplication: Continuing sensible unto the last. Richard Clarke asked him, If he knew him; and William answered, That he could not tell. But when he told him his Name was Richard Clarke, the Candle being brought near, William wrung him hard by the hand and spake no more. And about the tenth hour of the Night he departed this Life like a Lamb, and the next Day his Body was carried to the Bridge-Town (it being General Meeting day) nigh which he was buried in a Garden belong∣ing to Richard Forstal, being honourably accompanied thither with several hundreds of Friends. This Relation, I hope, will give content to his Son (who I have heard him speak off) and all Friends who may enquire af∣ter him, for as he lived, so he died, Preaching the Word of the Lord in the Demonstration of the Spirit and Power; and many Seals are in this Island, confirming the Gospel that hath been ministred by him and his Fellow-Labourer.
And as for the Sufferings of this Just Man William Sim∣pson, his being often in Perils by his own Country-men (who honour not their Prophets) Whipt, Stockt, Stoned and Im∣prisoned: Such Bonds and Tribulations have attended him, yea, as much as any man; most Towns and Cities bear re∣cord for him in England and Scotland. He hath been a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, and was made perfect through Sufferings; who is ceased from his Labours, and is entred into his Rest. Written in Barbados, the 10th, of the 12th, Month, 1670. By one of the least of the Flock of Christ; whose Name is, William Fortescue.
Here are a few Lines more concerning our dear Friend and Brother WILLIAM SIMPSON. The Righteous perish and no man layeth it to heart; and merci∣ful men are taken away, and none consider that the Righteous are taken away from the evil to come,Isa. 57. 1. THE glorious day of God everlasting is dawned, and the light of his excellency hath shined by the glo∣ry of his heavenly virtue, through the thick clouds of darkness, which hath long been as a Vail over the hearts of the people of the Nations; during which time the world was as a Wilderness that was untilled, and brought forth Thistles, Thorns and Briars, in stead of Corn, Wine and Oyl; but since it hath been the good pleasure of the Lord of the whole earth, to manifest the glory of his Spirit of burning by the operation of Life, which appeareth through the Light to burn up the Briars and Thorns, and to sow his good Seed. He hath sent forth painful Labourers to gather the Harvest of the Earth; for his Seed hath long been sown in the heart of Man; and how can he expect any thing now but fruits; and he hath sent his Servants into many Nations, Kingdoms and Coun∣tries, some whereof have been raised from Death to Life by the Ministration of the glorious Gospel, and have brought fruits to the praise and glory of God Almighty. Now those whom the Lord hath been pleased so to send forth he hath not sent them empty, nor without the enjoyment of his heavenly presence, but hath endued them with the operation of the power of his Divine Spirit, even the Spirit of Wisdom and Ʋnderstanding, of Righteousness and true judgement. And among the many Regions, Kingdoms and Countrys, the Lord hath been pleased to visit this Island of Barbados, where∣unto
he hath sent his Servants time after time, endued with the Powe of his Spirit, to convince its inhabitants of the evil of their wayes, and many thereby are gathered into the way of Gods Covenant, of Life and peace. Everlastingly blessed be the Name of the Lord who hath remembred us in these remote parts of the Earth; and amongst the many that he hath sent, he hath sent two of his faithful Servants, with the Ministry of his Everlasting Gospel, whose Integrity and Innocency hath ap∣peared in the likeness and Image of God Almighty, to the con∣vincing of many of the way of Gods Truth, whereby the most High hath been pleased to enlarge the Assemblies of his Peo∣ple, by drawing nearer unto himself those that were afar off; for the gathering of whom, the Lord of Heaven and Earth hath made the two aforesaid, his fathful Servants (viz.) William Sympson, and John Burneyat, very instrumental in his hand, to declare the light of the eternal Day in the demonstration of the Spirit of Love and tendrness; who faithfully have dealt plain∣ly with all People, without respect of Persons, as the Lord commanded them; and they have not been as Idle-labourers in the Vineyard, but they have been willing to spend and to be spent, for the advancing and exalting of the Power and Truth of the most High God in the hearts of men. Now that which caused me more particularly to write this unto you (to whose hands soever it may come) is somewhat to signifie something concerning that Renouned Servant of the Lord, and Faithful Follower of the Lamb, William Simpson, who hath walked in faithfulness unto God, and followed the Lamb through many Tribulations, and washed his Robes, and made them white in his blood, and hath not loved his Life unto Death, but hath fought the good fight, and by Faith hath over∣come; and hath run the race that was set before him, and hath finished his course, and hath obtained a Crown of Life and Glory, and is set down in the Kingdom of Heaven, in the place of Ever∣lasting Rest, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and with the Saints of the most High for ever. And truly Friends, I cannot but give Testimony that he was an Innocent Man (as himself also said, when he was near his last breath.) I have sometimes known him in our native
Country, and then did his Life sound forth his Innocency: and having been here more than four Months, the same state of Innocency was found in him, even unto the day that it pleased the Lord to take him from amongst us, to reign with him in Eternity. And as the Lord alone had made him a Preacher of his Word, in the way of Righteousness, in the time of his Life, (as men of a right understanding can sufficiently evidence) so likewise in the same hour of his Death, he did wondefully de∣clare of the great work of the Lord, and of his compassion to all People, and having concluded said, That what he had said, was laid upon him from the Lord. And he said unto those that were with him, That he was an Innocent Man, and desired them not to be troubled, but to let him go. And now he is entred into everlasting Rest, in a Heavenly habitation, having laid down his Head in Everlasting Peace in the glorious State of Eternity, where he doth rest from his Labours and his Works do follow him, beyond the reach of all the Tyrants of the Earth, who can never come there except they repent: But their day will assuredly have an end, and they must come to Judgment before the Lord; and then let the stout-heart∣ed amongst them stand up in the might of his strength, and gird up his Loyns like a Man, and contend with the Almighty if he be able to answer him, when he calls to an account for the deeds done in the Body: And where is he that knows his latter-end? or whether this may be his last day here or nay, as the two aforesaid faithful Servants of the Lord have many times reminded all People here, to remember their latter end, and to strive to make their Calling and Election sure with the Lord, and not to grieve the good Spirit of the Lord, by following vanity and excess of Ryot, or whatsoever would hinder their passage to the Kingdom of Heaven, where Life and Salvation is attained: where the Soul of our dar Brother aforesaid, doth rest in Peace and Glory for ever, as I do assuredly know by crtain and in∣fallible Testimonies. I was with him sometimes in the time of his being sick and weak; and the night before his departure was with him all night, when his Spirit rejoyced in the Lord, and his Soul did behold the Salvation of God; then could he
not forbear to sing praises to his Maker, as did evidently ap∣pear at sundry times; and his faithful Companion and fellow-Labourer in the Ministry of the Gospel of Salvation, (viz. John Burneyat) was also with him almost all the time of his being sick, and although he could not but mourn with us at the parting with so dear and faithful a Friend and Companion; yet we could not but also rejoyce with him, to behold the Ex∣cellency of the Glory which he, (to wit) the Soul of our dear Brother, entered into, when the Mortal was put off, to enter with Immortality into the joyful place of Felicity and Heavenly Consolation, with the Spirits of Just men and An∣gels in the Heavenly Jerusalem, there to reign with the highest for ever. Where now thy Soul doth rest in quiet peace, Since that thy Labours here on Earth did cease. By Faith in Christ thou hast obtaind a Crown Transcending glory of the Worlds renown; For thee in Heaven is prepard a Throne, To live for ever with our King alone. In Life thou wast obedient unto him, And hast obtaind a Royal Diadem. The Cross thou didst embrace, despise the shame, And preach'st the the Gospel in his Holy Name. When in thy Native Country, wast a Sign, To preach Redmption unto Jacobs Line. For all the proud and lofty Ones shall say, That a true Prophet warned them that day. And happy they, if they in peace had known, Gods Word, through thee proclaimd, from him alon; For that in Life thou didst the Truth maintain, Through Death a Crown of Life thou dost obtain. Thou dearly love'st the way of Lifes infusion, And lived'st therein unto thy last conclusion. Thn to the Throne of Life thou didst ascend, Where Life Eternal never shall have end. Witten in Barbados the 16th. of the 12th. Month, 1670, by Oliver Hooton.
This William Simpson, who was a faithful Servant and Pro∣phet of the Lord to the Nations, in which he went through great Tribulations and Sufferings; who went into many Steple-Houses, and declared against their false Worships; and was oft∣en Imprisoned for the Truth, and under-went cruel and hard Suf∣ferings by the Goalers. He went three years Naked and in Sack∣cloth, in the days of Oliver and his Parliament, as a Sign to them, and to the Priests, shewing how God would Strip them of their Power, and that they should be as Naked as he was, and should be stript of their Benifices. All which came to pass after King Charles the Second came in. And moreover he was made oftentimes to colour his face black, and so black they should be and appear so to people, for all their great profession; and so it came to pass. And then when it came to pass he was made to put on his clothes again, who was made before many times to go through Markets, to preists-houses, and to great Mens-hou∣ses, and Magistrates-houses, and to Cambridge, stark naked. And the Mayor of Cambridge put his Gown about him, being sen∣sible there was somthing in the thing. And he was made to go through London naked; and this was all before the king came in. And he was obedient unto the heavenly command, and often ventured his Life and it was given up: Who many times did re∣ceive many stripes upon his naked body with Thorn Bushes, so that when his service was done, Freinds were forst to pluck the Thorns out of his flesh: But he was caried over all by the mighty power of God, I say over all his Persecutors: And the Lord brought the things upon them, for which he went as a Sign, who was moved by the Lord to go to Barbados, where he finish∣ed his dayes. He was bred and born in Lancashire, and there first received the Truth. G. F. And this is my Testimony for our dear Bothr William Simpson, who went naked for a sign against the Professors and their unjust dealings before the King came in. And many sore Blows he bore on his naked Back, with Staves, Wands, and Hedg-bindings; he bore a Testimony against their Profession
and standing; and through the most part of England he went, and now hath he laid down his Body in Barbados, where God made him serviceable in his Truth there to preach the everlast∣ing Gospel; so them that sate in darkness, he brought to the Light; and them that sate in Death, he brought to Life. This is my Testimony for him. Elizabeth Hooton. Going Naked A SIGNE. OH Church of England! This is unto thee, who livest in oppression and cruelty, pride and covetousness; a day of misery is coming upon thee, thy nakedness and shame is coming upon thee as an armed man, from which no man can hide thee, neither Hills nor Mountains shall be able to hide thee in this the Day of the Lord, neither shall the Clefts of the Rocks preserve thee from the Day of the Lords Controversy with thee; Thy nakedness and thy shame is near to come upon thee, from it thou shalt not fly: Oppression and cruelty hath been as a staff for thee, but the Lord is arisen to break thy Staff of Oppression, and thou shalt be left naked, though thou hast seemed to be the glory of the Nations with thy deceitful covers, but now thou shalt be left Naked, and Nations shall be ashamed of thee. Howl and weep ye Teachers, for the Lord is gathering his people from you, and ye shall devour his flock no more. The Day is coming upon you, that none shall buy your wares any more, ye Marchants of Babylon: All your Scarlet colour the Lord our God is coming to take off: Then your Nakedness shall
appear to many Nations, and you shall sit as a Widdow, and ther shall be none to comfort you; Distress and anguish shall take hold upon you, and pain as a woman in travell, and is not able to bring forth, so shall your misery come upon you: The Decree of the Lord is gone out against all unrighteousness, he will surely reward every one according to their works, for as a troop of Robbers lye in wait for a Man, so a company of Preists by consent lye in wait to murther the Innocent Lambs of God, and for their sakes the Lord is risen in his mighty power to break the bonds of wickedness, and to set the op∣pressed free, for the Lord hath heard the groaning of his Seed, and he is risen to deliver, to bring it out of Captivity, and from under the taskmasters, where his Seed hath been long op∣pressed by unreasonable Mn: But the Lord will spare no long∣er, but he will reward the oppressors double into their bo∣soms, and his seed he will deliver. Oh howl and weep! your day is far spent, Night is coming upon you that you shall not have a Vision, nothing shall be left to cover you: As naked shall you be spiritually, as my body hath been temporally naked in many places in England, as a sign of the nakedness and shame that is coming upon the Church of England, who liveth in oppression and cruelty, and all who lift up a weapon for her shall fall in the shame with her, which will assuredly come to pass; So all sober people consider your ways, and turn to the light which comes from Iesus, that with it you may be gathered unto the Lord from the false Teachers to the teachings of the Lord, from the false Worships to the worship of the Lord in spirit and in truth; for a necessity was laid upon me from the Lord God of Life and Power to be a Sign: But before I was given up to the thing, it was as death to me, and I had rather, if it had been the Lords will, have died than gone on in this service; But when the Word of the Lord came unto me saying, Go on and prosper; It was sweet unto me as the honey and the honey Comb. And blessed, saith Christ, are they that are hearers of my Word, and keep it. William Simpson. THE END.
