S96 12673396 65509
angler
The True Art of Angling: OR, The Best and Speediest way of Taking all sorts of Fresh∣Water Fish with the Worm, Fly, Paste, and other Baits, in their proper seasons; how to know the Haunts of Fish, and Angle for them in all Waters and Weathers, at the Top, Middle, and Bottom, Baiting of the Ground, and Night Baits, Oyls, and Oynt∣ments, Baits Natural and Ar∣tificial: The several ways of Angling; To make Oyl of Asper, and many rare Se∣crets never before made pub∣lick; containing the whole Body of Angling, and My∣stery of a Compleat Angler. By J. S. Gent. A Brother of the Angle. London, Printed for George Conyers at the Golden Ring, and John Sprint at the Bell in Little Bri∣tain. 1696. Prince bound 6 d.
TO THE LOVERS OF Angling. THough you see this Book but small, yet think not the matter is so it contains, for upon my Word, Brother Angler, you will find in it more than you are aware of, or could reasonably expect.
It is stored with such variety of choice Instructi∣ons, that I am bold to say, there are none of what Vo∣lumn soever, that in a di∣rect and easie method, can shew you any thing like it. It comprehends whatever they pretend to, and many secrets that never before appeared in Print; nor is any thing omitted, that I could upon mature delibera∣tion, reasonably conceive might tend to pleasure and profit, by well observing the Rules I have laid down, you need not be endowed with so large a stock of Patience, as some tell you
an Angler ought to be pos∣sessed withal, but soon fur∣nished with a Dish of Fish to your Mind, you may change yonr Recreation, and not make this Irk some to you, by a tedious poring on the Banks as many do, and for all that, return fretting at their slender success. But by the way let me tell you, Angling of all other Recreations, is the most Innocent, Contempla∣tive, and least Chargeable, it affords Advantage with∣out cost, and Pleasure with∣out toil or sweating, it much contributes to a
healthful constitution of Body, by the pleasant Airs that breathe from whole∣some Waters, to refresh and enliven Nature, and indeed has been held in high esteem, by Wise Men of all Ages; and therefore I re∣commend it to you, as the best winder-off of your leasure hours, wishing you Moderation in it, and Good Success. Vale.
Instructions for rightly pre∣paring Angling Tackle, as Rods, Lines, Hooks, Floats, Plummets, and other matters required to accomplish the An∣gler, &c. IF we consider Recreations aright, they are intended to refresh the Mind, and un∣bend our Cares after Toil, La∣bour or Study, and therefore ought not to e pursued with too much fatigue, least they appear more like a business, than pleasure, and so in the end become pall'd and tiresome; but when leasure hours will admit, they are very conveni∣ent
to sweeten the Cares of Life. Among these, Angling is held by all the Ingenious, the most diverting for those that are contemplative, and though it require much Inge∣nuity, yet is it performed with little Labour, yet as in all other curious matters, Rules are neces∣sary to be observed in it, and to that end I shall, as Expe∣rience, the best Master teaches, proceed Gradually, to lay down such, as perhaps the greatest part of Mankind are Ignorant of, and therefore according to the method I have chosen, it will be necessary first to speak of Tackle, without the Know∣ledge of which, the Angler must be like one that under∣takes business, and wants Tools to accomplish it. As for your Tops, Hasle or Yew Switches, gathered about
the middle of December, when most free from Sap, are ac∣counted very good, though the two following, or preceding Months, may reasonably serve, run them over a gentle heat, to make them tough; let the Stocks and Tops be taper, smooth and strait, the pieces of each Rod suitable in an ex∣act symetry, free from knots, or else they will be deficient in Casting, and never Strike well, nor be truly pliable, but at a knot be apt to break and spoil your sport: To keep them in good order, bind them close to a strait Pole, and so let them continue long, that they may not warp, fasten a Loop of Silk or Horse hair, at the end of it, with Shoemakers Thread, that the Line may have play on it, and though many use Silk Lines, yet I prefer the Horse Hair as
the best, and in twisting or breading, observe an Exact Evenness, for one Hair being shorter than the rest in a Link, the whole stress will lye on that, and it breaking, renders the rest much the weaker, and of∣ten a good Fish is lost for want of this observance; make your knots sure, that they slip not; as for the colour of your Hair, it being free from Nits or Goutiness, which some call Botches, the pale, waterish co∣lour is the best to deceive in a Clear Stream; but in Whey∣ish or Muddy Water, you may chuse indifferently a Line, for the Ground Angle need not be so strong as that you intend for your Rod at the Artificial Fly, abating in the latter a Hair from top to bottom, in every Link from one or two, to six or eight, or more.
As for the Hook, it must be long in the Shank, and of a compass somewhat inclining to roundness, for if the Shank be strait, the point will stand out∣ward, fasten the Hair on the in∣side of the Shank, to preserve it from fretting, whether you Angle at top or bottom, pro∣portion your Hook for strength and compass, to the number of hairs you Angle with next it, neither use great Hooks to small Baits, nor great Baits to little ones, Barbel and Chub must have large Hooks, Carps, Eels, Tench, Pearch, Breams, those of a much lesser size, and Expe∣rience teaches, Trouts in clear Water, Grayling, Smels, Roach∣es Salmon Smels, Dace, Ruff and Gudgeons are soonest taken with small Hooks, though ma∣ny use great ones for the Trout, especially in Muddy Water,
yet the Salmon must be Angled for with a Hook, according to his strength; Hooks for Dub∣flies should be generally small, and so for Cod-baits, but larger for Worms, yet such as some use for the latter, do not gene∣rally take in Clear Water: When you whip your Hook, which is stiled Arming, do it with Silk lightly rubbed with Shoerhakers Wax, twisting it round on the lower part of the Line, almost to the bent of the Hook on the inside, having first smoothed the Shank of the Hook with a Whetstone, and for Worms let it be red coloured Silk, but for Cod-bait, Pasts, &c. white. Floats should be of Cork for River Fishing, but for Ponds' Meers, and other standing Wa∣ters, Quill and Pens will do very well, and in very slow Rivers, especially when you are to
Angle near the Top with ten∣der Baits or Paste; as for your Cork, let it be the finest, free from holes or flaws, bore it through with a small hot Iron, thrust in a quill sizeable, shapt with a Knife to the likeness of a Pyramid, Egg, or Pear, a proportionable bigness, and with a Pumice-stone finely smooth it, run your Line through the Quill, and wedge it in with the uppermost hard part of the Quill, the smaller end of the Cork being towards the Hook, and the bigger to∣wards the Rod, let the Cork be so poised with Lead on the Line, that the Quill standing directly upright, the least Bite or Nibble may sink the Cork. To Lead your Line, do it with a Shot cloven, and then closed exactly on it, put not above
two of these on any Line, and that an Inch and a half, or two Inches distance from each other, and the lowermost plumb, se∣ven or eight Inches from the Hook, but for a running Line, either in Clear or Muddy Wa∣ter, nine or ten Inches, and if you in a River find a Sandy bot∣tom, it being full of Wood with few Stones, shape your Lead a Diamond fashion, or to that of a Barley Corn or Oval, bring the ends very close and smooth to the Line, yet make it black, for the brightness will scare the Fish. It is very necessary to have a landing Net and Hook, or you may lose many a large ish, by breaking line or hold, before you can land him. The Net you may fasten to the end of a long manageable Pole: As for the Hook it must be a large one
with a Screw, to screw into a Socket at the end of a Pole, and when your Fish is entangled, clap it into the Mouth of it, and draw it to Land, but this latter is chiefly for Barbel, Sal∣mon, and other strong Fish. As for your Pannier, let it be of light Osier twigs, neatly Wo∣ven and Worked up, and to be the more compleatly prepared on all occasions, have in a rea∣diness divers sorts of Hooks, Lines, Links ready twisted Hair and Silk of several colours, small strong Thread, Lead Plummets, Shoemakers Wax, and Floats of divers sizes; Line Cases, Whet-stone, Pen knife, Worm bags, Boxes, Baits, Sci∣sars. And thus having pretty well accoutred my Angler with Tackle, it will next be necessa∣ry to know what Baits he must
use, for on it mainly depends success or frustration. Baits bred on Trees, Herbs, Plants, Worms, their season, and what Fish take them, when and how, &c. BAits for the sundry kinds of Fish are numerous, and many of them must be consider∣ed in their proper Season, or they are of no value; as for Earth-worms, they are accoun∣ted a general Bait, they and Gentles are always in Season, Earth-Bobs only from Martle∣mas, till the latter end of April, Cowturd Bobs from thence till Michaelmas, Oak worms, Worms bred of Trees, Plants and Herbs,
Palmers, or Wool-beds, Flies Caterpillars, Cod baits, &c. all the Summer, and here it is requisite to note, that when one sort of Bait comes in Season, the other are not useless. If you are to Angle in Clear Wa∣ter at the ground, it will be ne∣cessary to have with you Cod∣baits, Worms, Gentles and Bobs, to try which will best take, but in Muddy Water for Trouts, with the running Line, you are required for better sport, to have Tag tailes, Gilt-tails, Brand∣lings, Meadow-worms, some scowered in Moss and Water, others directed with a Riddle, and some again with heavy Earth, for almost at the same time they will take them, some one way done, and some ano∣ther, as Experience has often demonstrated.
But to come nearer, and shew you what your Baits are, how shaped, and to be cho∣sen. 1. The Garden-worm, Lob∣worm, or Treachet and Dew∣worm, are one and the same, though in divers places their names thus alter, and this Worm one of the greatest size, is an Excellent Bait for Chevin, Salmon, Barbel or Eel, though the smaller of the same kind, are not much affected with them: That with a broad Tail, a red Head, and streak down the Back is the best, they are found in the latter end of the Sum∣mer in the Evening, in Gardens, Church-yards, and may be dri∣ven out of the Earth, with the Juice of Walnut-tree Leaves, and Water poured on their holes.
2. Marsh or Meadow-worms are found in Marshy ground, or on banks of Rivers in Fertile Mould, being somewhat blew∣ish, and being well scoured it will be tough and lively, and is a very good Bait, especially in March, April and September, for Pearch, Flounder, Bream, Smelts, Gudgeon, Salmon, Trout, Grayling, though many and not without success, use from Candlemas to Michaelmas, and in Moss and Water it may be kept fifteen days before use. 3. Brandlings, Red-worms, and Gilt-tails, are found in old Dunghills, rotten Earth, Cow-dung, Hogs-dung, or Tanners Bark when it is used and cast by. The Brandling and Gilt-tail, are especially good for taking Pearch, Tench, Bream, Salmon, Gudgeons, Smelts, they are taken by Trout and
Grayling in Muddy or Clear Wa∣ter, and the Red-worms well scoured, are taken by Tench, Pearch and Bream, and best in Muddy Water. 4. The Worm called Tag∣tail, is of a flesh colour, ha∣ving at his Tail a yellow Tag near half an Inch long, found in Meadows after a shower of Rain, or in Chalky ground in March and April, if the Weather be temperate; this is held an extraordinary good Bait for a Trout in cloudy Water, and a little scouring will serve it. 5. The Palmer-fly, Palmer∣worm, Wool bed and Cankers, are accounted one and the same, being bred on Herbs, Trees, and Plants, not being properly a Caterpiller, yet the shape of one, being in the outward parts Rough and Wooley, being ex∣cellent Baits for the Chub,
Grayling, Trout, Dace, or Roach. The Palmer-fly and May-fly are held the foundation of Fly-Angling, and have usually good success. 6. The Oak-worm, Caterpil∣lars, Cabbage-worm, Crabtree∣worm, or Jack, Colewort∣worm, or Grub, may be long kept with the Leaves of those Trees or Plants, that breed them in Boxes with holes for Air, or in Withey Bark. They take Chub, Roach, Dae and Trout, the Oak-worm being preferrable to any bred on Trees or Plants, being the best taken on the top of the Water, though you may go as deep as you will with them; to get these, learch the Colewort or Cabbage Leaves, beat the Oak, Crabtree, or Haw-thorn, some of them are hard and tough, others smooth and soft, some horned-tailed,
others have them on their heads, some smooth, other hairy. 7. Bobs of these, there are two sorts, they are found i Sandy or Mellow ground, espe∣cially after Plowing: The one is one is called the Earth Bob White Grub, or White Bait being much bigger than a Gentle, having a Red head, the Body soft, and full of white Guts, the other is lesser, and somewhat blewish, found many times in digging on Heaths, they are excellent Baits till after Mid-April to the first of Novem∣ber, to take Tench, Bream, Trout, Chub, Routh, Smelts, Salmon, Dace and Carp, they must be kept in an Earthen Vessel, with the Earth you find them in, co∣vered very close to keep out the Cold and Wind, some boil them about two minutes in
Milk before they use them, which makes them tougher and whiter, others dip them in Honey or Gum-Ivy for Carp, Bream, and oth ways prove successful. 8. Gentles or Maggots, may be kept with Flesh, and scoured well with Wheat-Bran, they are easis to be had, or bred, by Putrefaction. These are sometimes added to a Worm on he Hook, sometimes to a Dub∣ly, and so take Salmon Smelts, but oftner used by them selves two or three on a hook; the ay before you Angle, put them into a Box with Gum-Ivy and it will prove successful to your sport, they are good Baits or Tench, Barbel, Bream, Bleak, udgen, Trout, Dace, Chub, arp. 9. Flag-worms, or Dock∣orms are the same, found a∣ong Flags, in old Pits o
Ponds, viz The small Fib of the Flag roots, by open little husks, it is Pale, Yello or White, longer and slender than a Gentle, and these  be kept in Bran, and are go Baits for Bran, Tenh Ro Carp, D, Bleak and Pa when you fish with it for  Grayling, use the smallest L and the Float, and Fish nine ten Inches from the ground. 10. The Bark-worm, or A Grub, are all one, being ve full and white, bent round fi the Tail to the Head, the He being red, and the parts v∣tender, resembling a you Dorr or Humble-Bee, and  be used all the year, but par cularly from Michaelmas to  middle of May or June, and  cept the Fly and Cod-bait, the best for Grayling, D Roach and hb, it is found b
under the Bark of an Oak, Ash, Alder, or Beech; especially when fell'd, and they have lain about a year, or in the hollow f these Trees when standing, where doated or rotted; it is a very tender bait; and best on bristled Hook, by running the ook in at the Head, and up the elly, till it stays on the bristle, nd no part of the hooks point opears out of it; they are kept ell in Wheat-Bran, and take e Grayling with the smallest ne: Angle with the Foar, eeping the Bit seven or eight ches from the bottom; but if ou fish with it for Reach, Chub,  Dace, use Indifferent Tackle.  11. There is a Bob found un∣der a Cow-turd, called the ow-turd Bob, from the begin∣ng of May to Michaelmas, some ll it a Clap Bait, this is like a eutle, but bigger; you may
keep it sometime in Moss, but the best is to keep it in Earth dug up under the place where you find it; it is a very good bait for Trout, if you Angle with it on a bristled hook, on the top of the Water, and in the Water it is taken by Chub Carp, Bream, Tench, Dace and Roach. 12. The Cod-bait, Cad-baid Cadisworm, or Caseworm, are one and the same Bait, though of three sorts. The one i found under Stones that lie loose and hollow in small Brook shallow Rivers, or very fin Gravel, in a Case or Husk, an when fit for purpose, they an yellow; they are bigger than Gentle, having a Black o Blewish head; another sort i found in Pits, Ponds, slow run∣ning Rivers, Ditches, in Case or Husks of Rushes, Water
weeds, Straw, &c. and are by some called Ruff-coats, or Straw∣worms; these are accounted Principal Baits for Bleak, Sal∣mon-smelts, Tench, Bream, Chub, Tout, Grayling, Dace. The next is a green sort, found in Pits, Ponds or Ditches, in Marh, coming before the yellow ones, for they are not in season till the end of April, and in July are out of season; the third sort is proper in August, being smal∣er than the other, These must be kept tender in Woollen bags, when you carry them for use, but to keep them long alive, put in a green Withey Bark, taken off and hollowed like a Trunk, lay it in the Dew a night to moisten it.
Natural Flies for Baits their Seasons, and wher to be found, for wha Fish they are proper, &c 1. THE Ant-flies are foun in their Hills, about th end of June, July, August, an most part of September, with th Earth you take with them, the may be kept in Glass Bottles two or three of these fixed o the small hook, are certain Bait for Chub, Reach and Dace if you Angle under Water not above six Inches from the bottom. 2. The brood of Humble Bees, Hornets and Wasps, ar good Baits, dry them over  Fire, or in an Oven, so not be∣ing over done, they will la
long, and sit handsomely on the ook, to take Chub, Eel, Beam, Flounders, Roach or Dace, some oil them, but then they will ot keep long, Hornets, Wasps, nd Humble-Bees may be used live, when their Wings are a tle grown, and their Legs hort, especially for the Chub, s also the Black-Bee breeding n Clay Walls. 3. The Fern-Fly or Fern-ud, is found among Fern from May-day to the end of August, it s thick and short of Body, has two pair of Wings, the upper∣most reddish and hard, which may be taken off, the last ten ays of May the Tout will take t every day, and the Chub re∣uses it no part of the Sum∣mer. 4. The Stone-fly and Green. rke. The first of these is found under hollow stones at Ri∣ver
sides: The Body of it is pretty thick, and almost as broad at the Tail as in the mid∣dle, it is of a curious brown co∣lour, streaked a little with yellow on the back, but much more on the Belly; he uses much the Water, and seldom flies though he has large Wings that double on his back, he comes in about April, and con∣tinues till about the end of June, and is a very killing fly of Rach, Dace and Bleak, and the Green-Drake has his Wings standing high like a Butter-fly, and his motion in flying the same, the body is in some of a Paler, in others of a darker Yellow, Rib∣bed with Rows of Green, long and slender, his Tail turns up to his back, having three long whisks at the end of it, he comes in about the middle o May, and continues till Mid∣summer,
and is found by stoney Rivers, with this Bait for Floun∣ders, Dace, Bleak, Roach and Pearch. 5. The great Moth that has a considerable big head with whitish Wings, is to be found in Summer Evenings in Gardens, on Trees, and Plants, it speedi∣ly takes Chub if you dibble with it. 6. The Hawthorn-fly is black, found frequently on Hawthorn∣trees, when the Leaves are put out, the best use this can be put to, is to Dibb in a River for Trout. 7. The Ash-fly, Wood-cock-fly or Oak-fly is the same, under different names, and holds good from the beginning of May to the end of August, its of brown∣ish colour, and usually found in the body of an Oak, or Ash, standing with his head down∣wards
towards the Root of the Tree, and is a very good Bait for a Trout. And to make speedy work, put it long ways on the hook, and at the point a Cod bait, and let them sink six Inches or a foot into the Water, raise it gently, and having a short dibbing Line, you need not fear Trouts in clear Water, and instead of a Cod-bait, if you have it not, you may use an Oak-worm, or Green-Grub, you may dub this, or make it Arti∣ficially with Isabella, coloured Mohair, and bright brown Bears-hair, wrapped on yellow Silk. These being the Princi∣pal Flies, used in Angling, I now come to mixed Baits of ano∣ther Nature.
Miscellaena of Baits Very Taking, and much in use. 1. SAlmon Spawn biled, and fastned on the Hook, is a very good Bait for Chub, and in some Rivers for Trot, it being advantageous to the Angler, especially in Winter and Spring, if he keeps it salted; especially in places where Salmon used to Spawn, for thither the Fish ga∣ther to expect it. 2. Grashoppers the latter end of June, all July, and August if their Legs and outward Wing be taken off, especially fo Roach, Trout and Grayling, an here you may put a slende plate of Lead on the shank  your hook, slenderest at th bent, then draw your Grashop
over it, after put a lesser Grashopper, or Cod-bait at the point, and keep it moving, lift∣ing up and sinking again, a Chub will also take the Bait free∣ly, and so will a Trot if you dib with it. 3. The Water-Cricket, Wa∣ter use or Creeper is but one, these take Trout in March and April, and sometimes in May, if you Angle at the River: it is to be Angled with in Clear Water, within a foot of the bottom, some let it drag on the ground. This Creeper is bred in Stoney Rivers, and held to turn into a Stone-fly about the middle of May, that Fly not being any where seen before. Lamery Pride, or Seaven, is a very good Bait for Chub and Eels, Night or Day, this is no other than little live things like small Eels, no thicker than a
Straw, and are to be found in Sandy Muddy heaps, near to the Shoar in Rivers. Snails, the Black and White are good Baits for Chub, very early in the Morning, Trout and Eels take them on Night hooks, but the Bellies of the black may be slit, so that the white may appear, some dib for Chub with House-Crickets. For Chub, Barbl, Roach and Dace you may Angle with Cheese, or Oat Cake, especial∣ly at the Ledger Bait, the Cheese you may wrap up two or three days in a wet Linnen Cloath, or moisten it over with Honey and Water. Black-berries, Mul-berries, Cherries, or Raberries take the Chub in Ponds or Rivers, Lip-berries, or Aron-berries, being when ripe, of a transpa∣rent red, found in dry Ditches,
or dry Banks, fit for use in July and August, two of these on a hook will take a Roach, and four a Chub. As for the Pke he is a greedy Devourer, and therefore mostly delights in Fish, Frogs, &c. therefore your Baits for him must be small Dace, Minows, Roach, Salmon Smelt, Gudgeon, Bleak, Millers-thumb, small Pearch with the back fins out off, also Trot and Eels well scowred in Wheat-Bran, to take away the Slie; and indeed most sort of small Fish he takes, and how you are to manage them on your hook, I shall tell you when I come to treat of the taking him in the River of Tham's. Periwinckle, a kind of Water-Snall, is much used for Roach, being taken whole out of its Shell; Shrimps taken out of their Husk or Shell, may be used as a Bait for Pike or
Chub. The White-blte with much Seed, by some called All-seed, is a proper Bait for Fish. Pastes proper for the Angler. PAstes are of several kinds, though tending to one and the same end, for a Chb or Che∣vin, make a Paste of the fattest Old Cheese, the Suet of a Mut∣ton Kidney, a little strong Run∣net, mix them equally and fine∣ly together, then put as much Powder of Turmerick, as will give them a fine Yellow Co∣lour. For Roach and Dace, Grate fine Bread into a little fair Wa∣ter, wherein Gum-Ivy has been soaked. For the Barbel in Au∣gust, make a Paste of New
Cheese and Mutton Suet. For Roach or Dace, you may put a little Butter to your Crumb∣bait, and Colour it with Saffron. For Carp or Tench, mix crumbs of Bread with Hony, though for a Carp I reckon this the surest. Take Bean Flower, or for want of it Wheat-flower, the inside of the Leg of a young Rabbit, Catlin, or Whelp, white Bees-wax, and Sheeps Suet, pro∣portionable, beat them in a Mor∣ter till well Incorporated, then moisten the Mass with clarified Honey, and work it up into little Balls, before a gentle fire. The Chub in Winter takes a paste made of strong Cheshire Cheese, beaten with Butter and Saffron till it become a Le∣mon colour.
Stoned Cherries, fine grated Manchet, Sheeps Blood and Saf∣fron make a good Paste for Roach, Dace, Bleak, Chub, Trout, Pearch, and for the Chub only put a little Rusty Bacon in it. Another excellent Paste is made of the fattest Old Cheese, Mutton Kidney-Suet, strong Rennet, Anniseed Water, Wheat Flower, and the drip∣ping of Rusty Bacon held against the Fire. What is to be observed in Angling with Pasts. 1. YOU must proportion the quantity of your Paste you put on your hook, to the smallness or largeness of the Fish you Angle for, as in other Baits.
2. You may try Oils upon any of these Pasts, and as you see your success, so continue the one, or the other, and the best for this purpose are Oil of Po∣lipody of the Oak, Oil of Petre, Oil of Ivy, and as pro∣perly Gum of Ivy, and Assafoe∣tida. 3. To strengthen any Past, and so prevent its washing off the Hook, it will not be amiss to beat a small quantity of fine Flax cut short, Cotton Wool, or fine Lint among them, which will prove very binding, those that you would have keep long, put a little White Bees wax in∣to them, and anoint them with clarified Honey, the latter you may wipe off, when you use occasion. 4. Paste, or tender Baits must not be Angled with, in Ra∣pid Streams, but on a small
hook in Pits, Ponds, Meers, or slow Running Rivers; your Eye in this sort of Angling must be quick, your Rod somewhat stiff, and a nimble hand to pull up or else the Bait and Fish will quickly bid you farewell. This is better done with a Quill float than a Cork, which sooner shews the Nibble or Bite, and if you then be not very quick, your labour is lost, and with these Pasts, success is usually had for Bream, Bleak, Chub, Roach, Dace, Carp, Tench, Barbel. Oils and Ointments useful in Angling. TAke Oil of Ivy-berries, a∣noint the inside of an Oak∣en Box with it, and put three or four Worms, or other live
Baits into the Box, shutting i close, but keep them not there too long, least the strength of the Oil kill them, but take these out and put in more, and so they being scented with the Oil, it will allure the Fish the more readily to take them. This may be done in the same manner for want of Oil, with Gum-Ivy, which is a Tear that flows out of the Ivy Stalks, when slit, or wounded by peircing. Oil of Spike and dissolved Gum Ivy, are held to be much attracting, the Bait being an∣ointed with them. Oil of Polypodi, of the Oak, Venice Turpentine, and new Ho∣ney is very good, if eight Inch∣es of the Line next the Hook, be anointed with it; but then there must be two or three Hairs, for it will not well stick
to a single one, however do not clog your Line with it. Chimical Oil of Lavender, or for want of It, Oil of Spike six drops, three Drams of Assafoe∣tida, Venice Turpentine, one Dram, Camphite one Dram, make these into an Ointment, and anoint your Line, as the for∣mer, this in Clear Water won∣derful takes Gudgeons. Man's Fat, and the Fat of the Thigh-bone of a Heron, makes an Ointment that rarely fails, and is esteemed by those that have tried it, the best of any, being a new Experiment. But let me commend to you above others this, take the Oils of Chammomile, Lavender, Anniseed, each a quarter of an Ounce, Man's Fat, Heron's Grease, and Cats Grease, and the best Assafoetida, each two Drams, two Scruples of Cum∣min
seed, finely beaten to Pow∣der, Venice Turpentine, Cam∣phir and Galbanum, of each a Dram, add two Grains of Ci∣vet, and make them into an Un∣guent; this must be kept close in a glazed Earthen Pot, or i loses much of its vertue, anoin your Line with it as before, and your expectation will be strange∣ly answered. Oil of Asper so much noised about, and said to be Extracted from a Fowl called the Osprey, is now found to be a mixture of the Oils of Spike, Lavender, and re∣fined Oil of Turpentine, which however has a considerable ef∣fect in Still, or slow moving Waters, and observe in this case, your Line must be anointed eve∣ry second drawing up, or the strength of the scent being wash∣ed off, you may expect your sport to cease.
I might now speak something of Artificial Flies, and other Ar∣tificial Baits, but not to keep the Angler too long from the Water, I shall have occasion else∣where to treat of them. Fishes Haunts proper to be known. IF you are not certain of any Waters to Fish in, your busi∣ness is to try the most likely and promising, viz. Where Trees fallen, Wood, Rushes, Weeds, or Rubbish are in Rivers, or likely large Ponds, there are store of Fish promised, for thither they resort for warmth and shelter, but it is very troublesome Angling there.
The next are Weirs, Weir-Pools, Mill Streams, Flood gates, Piles, Posts, Pillars of Bridges, Cataracts and Water-falls, Ed∣dies, Whirling Pits, the side of a Stream in the Summer espe∣cially, for then they love to bask and lye shallow, unless the Weather be excessive hot; tho' I may herein except Carp, Eels and Tench, in the Winter, find for the generallity the deep as the warmest, in a gentle Ebb and Flow, by the beating of the Waters, at any turning or op∣posing Bank, there is good bi∣ting, so that strait Rivers are not so advantagious to Angle in, as those that are Winding or Crooked, having Eddies, Pits, and Pools in them, occasioned by the Waters beating on the Points and Doublings, and thence being forced back, and into those Pits and Creeks, the Fish
will get in some considerable numbers many times, where the Water is narrow, try both sies; but to come somewhat near∣er. The Salmon is found in large swift Rivers, that Ebb and Flow, Gravelly and Craggy. The Trout mostly in purling Brooks nd Rivers that are somewhat wift, and have Sandy bottoms. The Carp and Tench love Still Waters, or such as gently move, where Weeds or Roots of Trees re near to shelter them on occa∣ion. Eels generally covet Mud∣y Rivers, Ponds, or Slimy and, especially those of the arger size. The Pike, Bream nd Chub, are mostly found in andy or Clay Rivers, Brooks or onds, wherein Bushes, Bul∣ushes, or Flags grow. The arbel, Roach, Dace and Ruff, for e most are found in Sandy or
Gravelly deep Rivers, cove∣ting to be under the shade of Trees. The vmber is likeliest to be found in Marley or Clayey Streams, running very swift. The Gudgeon likes best'a Sandy or Gravelly bottom; yet for all this, a trial of divers Waters will not be amiss, where you may suspect any Fish are likely to breed; for Experience in this Art is the surest Instruct∣or.
Times proper above others to Angle in, according to the Water, Weather, &c. IN the hottest Months, take your opportunity when it  Cloudy, and the Water is mo∣d by gentle gales. 2. When the Floods have car∣ed away the filth, sudden owers incumber the Waters ith, and the Rivers, &c. re∣in their usual bounds, looking  a palish colour. 3. When a violent shower s Muddied or Troubled the ater, and after that the stream ns swift, for then they usual∣ seek for Creeks, and Shelter, d in the little Rivulets run∣ing into the great one. 4. If you Fish for Carp or nch, do it early in the Morn∣ing,
viz. a little before Sun-ri till eight, and from four in t Afternoon, till Sun set, wh the days are of a convenie length, June, July, and August but in March, the beginning  April, and end of September they refuse not to bite in t warmh of the day, the Wi being still. 5. If you Angle for the S∣mon, the best time is from thre in the Afternoon till Sun s and in the Morning as before his proper Months are May, June, July and August. The Bar bites best in May, June, July and the beginning of August, fro five to eleven in the Morning The Pearch and Ruff all day  very Cool and Cloudy Weather The Bream bites from Sun-ri till nine or ten in the Morning in Muddy Water, especial when the Wind blows hard, f
the most part keeping in the middle of the River or Pond in May, June, July or August. 6. The Pike Bites in July, Au∣gust, September and October, about Three in the Afternoon in gentle Water, and a clear Gale. n Winter he Bites all the Day ong, and in April, May, and the beginning of June, early in the Morning, and late in the Even∣ing. As for Roach and Dace, they Bite all the Day long, if the Weather be not in the ex∣tremities of Heat or Cold, on the top of the Water. The Gud∣geon Bites best in April, and till he has spawned in May, and if the Weather be Cool, till Wasp time, and at the end of the year all day long in a gentle stream, observe when you An∣gle for him, to stir and rake the ground, and he will Bite the bet∣ter. As for the Flounder though
he is found only in Ebbing a Flowing Rivers, that have Co∣munication with the Sea,  Bites freely all day in April, May, June and July, in a swift strea he will Bite in the Still, but  near so freely. Ground Baits to gather an feed the Fish, that you  better, and readily kno where to find them, &c. THE Ground Baits, or  baiting the Ground, a Barly or Wheat soft boile which for prevention of scatte∣ing, you may mix with so pleasant fresh Earth, Ale-gral Wheat Bran steeped in sheep blood, blood clotted, dried an cut in small pieces, Periwinkle
bruised in their Shells, black and white Snails, Worms cut in sunder, and made up in little Balls of Earth. The Guts of Fowl, the small Guts or Livers cut small, Old Cheese and Ot-Cakes, bruised together, Malt grosly ground, these especially gather Tench, Dace, Carp, Chub, Roch, Bream and Barbel, and the more you feed them, they will be the surer to keep to that place, and be the fatter to re∣ward your pains when taken, and these throw in a little above the place you Angle at, if it be a moving water, for before they ground, the stream will carry them some distance from the place you throw at. These are especially good when you Angle with the Cod∣bait, Gentle, Wasp, or Paste, for it will make them take your Bait more eagerly, and with less
suspition. And this directs you to the Pike or Pearch, for if those Fish you Angle for be not there, and neither others have circumvented you, nor the sea∣son improper, then are these two devourers of Fish, lurking thereabout, and the rest dare not approach for fear of being made a Prey, therefore use suitable Tackle and Baits to take them, and then other Fish will boldly approach. When you Angle in Clear Water, keep out of sight as much as may be, sheltered be∣hind some Bush or Tree, or by standing as far off as possible, keeping your Eye only on the surface of the Water where your Float is, and to effect this the better, your Rod must be pro∣portionable in length, to an∣swer the place you Fish at, and especially at the ground,
and a long Rod and Line at Ar∣tificial Flies are very necessary, an Angler must add Silence to his Patience, and move his Bo∣dy as little as possible may be, for the Fish are very quick∣sighted, and naturally fearful, particularly the Chub, Carp and Trout. When in a Clear Water you Angle at the Ground, or with a Natural Fly Dibble, always do it going up the River, but in Muddy Water, or when you do it with a Dub-fly use the contra∣ry; if you have hooked a Fish, and suspect the strength of your Line or Rod, let him Play and Tire within the Water, before you offer to bring him near the top, be sure to keep the Rod bent, least running to the end of the Line, he break his hold, or the hook, and if he be tired, and have in a manner done
flustering, bring him toward the top, and if there be occasion, use your Landing Net or Hook; and take this for a genera rule in hooking all strong Fish. How to take the Salmon and Salmon Smelt, by Angling, &c. THE Salmon though not found in many Rivers in England, is of Principal note for River Fish, though it as well belongs to the Sea. The chief Rivers noted for them are the Thanes, Severn, Trent, Lon at Lancaster, and about Cockersand-Abby at Workinton in Cumberland, Bywell in Northumberland, Durham, Newcastle on Tine, Dee in Cheshire,
and some Rivers in Wales, as Ʋsk, Wye and Tivy; he common∣ly is found in the Water deep, and about the middle. His best Biting is Nine in the Forenoon, and Three in the Af∣ternoon in Clear Water, espe∣cially when the Wind blows against the stream, but not very roughly: Then take the Baits directed, and the strongest Tackle, for when he is struck, he plunges and leaps, though not usually does he endeavour to go to the end of the Line. The younger sort of these are so tender mouthed, that unless you fasten two Hooks almost in a quarter of a Circle asunder  they usually break hold; for the great Salmon, the principal Bai is well scowered Dew-worms  for the Salmon-Smelts the Brand∣ling, Gilt-tail, Meadow-worm &c. and for Flies he takes them
Natural or Artificial and if you use these, a Cod Bait or Gentle at the top of the Hook is ef∣fectual, this with the Dub-fly takes Salmon-Smelts beyond Ex∣pectation, but for a greater Salmon, if your Fly be Artificial, make it very large with six Wings one behind another, that by that & the different colours, he may suppose it, as indeed it will appear in the Water, a Cluster of Flies. He is taken at the Ground with a running Line or Float, and sometimes he Bites lower than Mid-water at Ground-Baits, he is taken with Oak-Worms, Dub-flies, Cod-baits, Clap-baits, and the larger sort sometimes take the Minow and Loach, and for these you may Angle with a Wyer Ring on the top of the Rod, etting the Line run through it o a great length, and when
he's hooked, and is spent with plunging, fix your Land hook in his Mouth, that is screwed to the end of a Pole, as directed, to land him. Several ways to take the Pike, and where to find his haunts, &c. Pike TO find this Greedy Fish, you must Cast in Sandy, Chalkey, or Clayey places, somewhat near the Banks, for
he coveting solitude, often lurks in holes to surprize other Fish, as they fearlessly swim by, some∣times he shelters among Bul∣rushes, Water-Docks, Weed or Bushes, and then he Bite about the middle of the River, or Pond, at Mid-water, and for him you must keep your Bait in a gentle motion, and at all times to be above a foot from the Ground; he rarely Bites in the Night, for then he is for the most part gone to rest in his re∣tirement. In April, May, June, and the beginning of July, he does it most freely Morning and Evening in Clear Water, and a gentle gale in Still Water, or a moderately moving one, and in the rest of July, August, Sep∣tember and October, his best Bi∣ting time is about Three in the Afternoon, in Water as before in Winter Months, if the Wea∣ther
be pleasing, and the Water Clear, he will not refuse to Bite at any time, though the most certain time is about Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, if particularly in a gloomy, cloudy day, but the Water Muddied with Rains, there is no certain∣ty of him, his beloved Baits are Gudgeon, Roach, Dace, Minows, Salmon-Smelts no bigger than Gudgeons, very small Pikes; in the Winter Mouths a piece of an Eel, Fat Bacon, a young Trout or Pearch, if the Pricks be cut off the back, &c. but all his Baits must be very fresh, and a live one tempts him much the sooner, which may be put on by drawing the Line between the Skin and the Ribs of the Fish, and so on the Hook, fasten∣ing it in the Gills, and this you may use in Trowling, but here have your Tackle very strong,
with Wyre about a foot from your Hook, that next to it Silk, & the rest of the Line strong spun Flax, come as little as you can near the Weeds, least they spoil your Bait before the Pike comes at it, fasten the Tail of the Bait to the Joint of the Wire, and having fixed your Tackle, that the Line may Run and Play, let so much lead be at the Hook, as may carry the Fish's Head downward, as if after Playing on the top, she was going to the bottom, and when you have sunk it so, that it is at a conve∣nient depth for the Pike, slack your Line, and give it scope, that he may run to his hold, and there pouch or swallow it, which you may know by the moving of the Line in the Water, then with a smart Jerk, hook him, some use no Rod with this, but Lead and Float, holding the
Line in their hands on Links, and indeed there are several methods taken, though all to the same purpose, wherefore for brevities sake I omit them. Angling for him at the Snap, is to give him leave to run a little, and then strike, which must be done the contrary way to that which he moveth, there∣fore a double spring-hook is useful in this way of Angling especially, for great Pike usually will hold the Bait so fast in his Teeth, that you may fail to pull it out of his Mouth, and like∣wise strike him, when if he holds the spring hook never so fast, the Wire will draw through the Bait, and so the spring open∣ing you will frequently hook him on the outside of his mouth, though Trowling is surer than this, and more practicable, yet
this is best used in March, whe the Pike Bites ill, then upon Spawning they are Sick and lose their Stomachs, bait this as the former, and he may be taken this way, when he is so. Other Brief Rules for Pike Angling. 1. WHen the Pike has taken your Bait, observe how he moves, if slowly, give him time and you will rarely miss him; let not your Bait fall in one and the same place above once or twice, for if he take it not, then he is farther off. 2. If you find after he has taken the Bait, he lies still, as
sometimes he will, move your hand gently, to get notice which way his Head lies, least in striking you happen to pull the Bait out of his Mouth, if that cannot be discerned, strike directly upward: At the Snap have strong Tackle, and give two lustly Jerks quickly one after another, fastening a Swi∣vel at the end of your Line, which must be used at Trowl and Snap. and your Armed Wire must be hooked on it. 3. For the Snap, have a hol∣low piece of Lead, that it may pass over the Wire, and End of the Hook, which you draw with∣in the Fishes Gills or Mouth, that as directed it may keep the Head downwards, and at either of these baitings, if you out away one of the Fins of the Bait close at the Gills, also behind the vent, and one on the con∣trary
side, it will play the bet∣ter, and seem more lively. 4. Be sure to raise your hand in Casting, when the Bait is about to fall into the Water, so that by dashing it may not fright him away, and when it is sunk a little, draw it near the top towards you a little, and so let it sall again; and if your Wire Hook is joined with a Steel Ring, the Bait will play better, and sink more di∣rect; for Snap, March is the chief Month, February, April, May, September and October for the Trowl, and though a large Bait invites him most, yet a les∣ser takes him more surely, yet let your Bait be sutable to your Hook; and this way with a Minow, Loach or small Gudgeon, you may take Pearch, and if possible always Trowl in Clear Water in a Windy Day, and
then a Gudgeon will do well for the Pike, but if a Dark, Cloudy Day, Roach, Dace or Bleak, are to be preferred. To snare a Pike, when you perceive him rise, and staying near the Surface of the Water, fasten about a yard and a half of strong Pack-thread to a Pole, and at the end of it, a running Noose of small Wire, softly put∣ting it over his Head, with a quick Jerk throw him to Land; this is often done to Young Pikes, but the older are more wary, though sometimes carch∣ed by this means, especially in Pends, as also when they come out of Rivers, and go a frogging in Ditches, in May, June and July.
To Find and Angle for Pearch. Pearch THis Fish delights in a good Stream, of a moderate depth, abiding usually close by a hollow Bank, Pebbly, Gra∣velly bottomed, with Green Weeds growing in it, being commonly a River Fish, he bites little in Winter, but in the middle of the Day, yet in Sum∣mer all Day if the Weather be Cool and Cloudy, and the Wa∣ter
shaken with the Wind, but more Freely from Seven till Ten in the Morning, and from Two in the Afternoon till Six, and sometimes till Sun set, if in the middle of Summer, you must look to him when he is struck, for he's a very strong Fish, and will struggle hard, and long; they generally go many toge∣ther, and if there be a great many in a hole, if you light right on them, you may at one standing, catch the greater part, if you give them time to Bite; for if you are too hasty in stri∣king, you may chance to miss your Aim, he takes almost all manner of Worms, as Dew-Worms, Red-Worms, Meadow-Worms, Cod-baits, also the Minow, Loach, small Frog, Wasps, Hornets, and Humble-Bees.
He is best taken with a Float, resting the Bait about six Inche from the ground, and some∣times he is taken about mid-water, some use a Ledger Bait on the ground, but the first depth has usually the best suc∣cess.
To Angle for the Carp, &c. Carp THis Fish has always been in great esteem, and made many Industrious to find ways o take him. They delight in andy, or Muddy bottoms in till, Deep Water, and in Green r Grass growing under the water, by the sides of the Pond r River, though in a good ond they thrive best; they re very wary, and hard to be atched; their first Spawning
time is about May day, breeding three times a year, and won∣derfully increase if they like th Water they are in, they li long, though most disagree a∣bout their particular number  Years, and indeed I see no rea∣son how he should be exact known. They bite very early in April, May, June, July and August and sometimes all Night if th Weather be hot, and Star ligh in the Still deep Water, if yo Angle in the day time keep o of sight as much as may be therefore provide a long Ro he is very strong and must Pl when struck, or he'll carry o your Hook by breaking the Li or Rod. Use always the Float a Quill, Angle for him sometim
above, and sometimes below id-water, as the Weather is, enough in Mid-water he is the ertainliest taken, especially in  Pond, but in Rivers they are ery shy, lay a ground Bait for e Carp. with ground Malt. The Baits you use on your ook must be Gentles, two or three on the Hook, then put a ttle square bit of Scarlet on etop of the Hook, above the ait of Gentles, dipped in Oil f the Rock, or Petre, this is eld an excellent Bait; they ake likewise Bobs, Wasps, weet Paists, Marsh-worms, lag-worms, Gilt-tails, Dew∣orms, the Cod-bait and Bread∣rain boiled soft; and in June nd July, in the heat of the ay, they shew themselves on e top of the Water, and often∣ among Weeds, then you
may take them with a we scowred Lobworm, Angling  with a Natural Fly, but in thi case keep from their seeing you as much as possible you can;  Carp is a numerous breeder,  Spawning three or four times  year, therefore as a caution t those that stock Ponds with them, let them be warm and se∣cure from Cold Winds, fence by Trees, and the place allow∣ing good feed, for otherwise the Pond being over stored they will starve themselves, an the other Fish that are pnt  with them.
Observations on the Tench and the best way to Angle for him. Tench THE Tench is accounted a very good Fish, and much cove∣ted, yet he takes delight in Mud∣dy or Foul Water, and among Weeds, the Ponds that are suit∣able for Carp, please him better than the Rivers, and in Pits he thrives better than in either, if they be agreeable to time, though in some Pits they will
not, though they breed, com to any bigness, and in some it i held they will not breed at all, but if any be put in they wi thrive wonderfully; but this  believe may happen where the Storer is not skilful to distin∣guish Males from Females, b by an unlucky guess put in a of one ort, and though he co∣vets Mud, yet his Fins are very large, and to know him from others, there are two little Barbs at the Angles or Corner, of his Mouth, his Scales are small and smooth, and about his Eyes are Circles of a golden colour, he is accounted the Physitian to the rest, so that the Devouring Pike, who being sick is cured by him, will not, unless great hunger provoke, hurt or destroy him, though he spares not hisown kind. This Gift of healing is said to be by a Medi∣cinal
Balm, sweating frôm his Skin, which the Sick Fishes take in as Physick, and indeed his Flesh is good in Consumptions, (or any Languishing of the parts) for Men. They Bite best from as soon as it is Light, to Eight in the Morning, and from Four in the Afternoon, till a quarter af∣ter Sunset, but in the hot Months, if the Weather be not Tempestuous, they many times Bite all Night, their est sea∣son is, from the beginning of September, to the end of May, and about the beginning of Ju∣ly the Tench Spawns. He takes the Cod-bait, Marsh∣worm, Gentle, Flag-worm, or Red-worm well scowred, and to make it take the better, you may dip your Bait in a little Tar Water just before you use it, though the plain Bait many
times pleases him well: For want of the former Baits, you may use Pastes sweetened with Honey, or Wasps. Angle for him with a Float of Quill, letting the Bait into the Water two foot, sometimes more or less, but no great mat∣ter.
The Bream his Haunts, and how to Angle for him. Bream THE Bream is a Large but Bo∣ny Fish, he is found in Ri∣vers and Ponds, but in the latter if convenien, he delights best, he is long growing, and will be very fat, and is almost as great a Breeder as the Carp. The Breams swim divers together, es∣pecially in a gentle stream, they
Love a Sandy or Clayey bottom and the deepest and broadest part of the Water, your best time in Season, is to Angle for him from Sun-rise to Eight a Clock in a moderate stream, the Water a little Slimy or Mud∣dy, especially when a good breeze troubles the Water, and in Windy Weather, if in a Pond, he generally keeps the middle, and there you are most likely to find him. In the Af∣ternoon, your time is from Three or Four till Sun-set. But in a Darkish, Windy Day, he bites at any time. He is Angled for with much success, from the beginning of April till Michaelmas, and may be taken at other times except the very cold months.
He takes as Baits, Flag-worms, Wasps, Gentles, Grashoppers their Legs being off, Red-worms, Gilt-tails, and Meadow-worms well scowered, Bobs, and under Water, Flies, espe∣cially the Green ones; when he Bites, he runs off with the Bait to the further shoar, or as far that way as he can, and there∣fore you must give him Play, for though he seems a Fish made strong enough, he will not much struggle, but after two or three turns he falls on one side, and may be easily landed. Here you must Angle with a Float, so that the Bait may touch the Ground, you may make ground Bait for Bream, with Malt, and it will draw them together.
The Barbel how to Find, and Take him by Ang∣ling. Barbel THis Fish is very strong, and takes him name from the Barbs that hang at his Mouth, is curiously shaped with small Scales. In the hot months you will find him in the swift strong streams, though he shuns the current, and delights somewhat more out of the Rapidity, un∣der
shades of Trees, lurks under Trees that are fallen into the Water and Weeds, where they root in the Sands like a Hog, and so Nest, some suppose him to Eat much Gravel and Sand, but I rather fancy he seeks for Insects or other food, that Heat and Moisture produces in the bottom of Shallows, yet some∣times he is found in the deep and swift Waters, especially at Wears, Bridges or Flood-gates, where he shelters among Piles, or in hollow places, holding by the Moss or Weeds, to prevent his being carried away by the Stream, when Winter is coming on he retires to the still Deep. His best biting time is early in the Morning, That is, from the Sun Rising, till Ten, and from Four till the Sun-sets, and often later, and this principally
happens from the 20th of May, to the latter end of August, you must be wary in taking him, for he is very subtil, and struggles long, unless well managed, ma∣ny are found together frequent∣ly, but in April they are little worth, for then is the spawning time. As for the Baits you intend to take him with, care must be had that they are very sweet, and such as give him not distast; Angle for him with a Float, and so let down the Bait that it may touch the Gravel; He takes Bobs, Humble-Bees, Gentles not over-scowred, Dew-worms, New-Cheese, Red-worms, Pasts, the young brood of Wasps, Hornets, and so cunning he is, that you will be cheated of ma∣ny a Bait in Angling for him, if you do not have a watchful Eye,
and a quick hand, for he will Nibble and Such it off, and ten to one when your Float sinks, and you attempt to strike, whi∣ther he has the Hook in his Mouth, yet often if you strike the contrary way his Head lies, you may take him by the Nose, and give him Play till tired, or else if he be any thing large, unless your Tackle be very strong, part of it goes with him; he is not an over-pleasant Fish to Eat, by reason he's some∣what dry, and very full of Bones.
The Trout his Haunts, best way to Angle for him, and his Baits. Trout. TO be most sure of finding the Trout, address your Angle to small Purling Brooks, or swift gliding Rivers, not too great, observe whether their bottoms are Pebble, Gravel or smooth Stones, for on the sider of these he usually has his Resi∣dence, though he is often found
in the deep, especially a large one, also behind Banks, Blocks, Stones, at Turnings or Points, where the Stream much beats, or makes a kind of whirling, he loves coverture and shade, from whence he may most easily seize his Prey, but his hold or hole is usually in deep places, he is seldom found among Weeds, rather among the boughs of Trees that hang in the Water or Shady Bushes, he plies in Spring at the Tail of the Stream, but as many other Fish do, about the middle of May at the upper end, staying long in a place, if his hold be near it, in the hot Weather, he leaves the deep, and goes into the sharper streams among Gravels, unless by the Excessive Heat of the Weather, droughts ensue, and then the still deep delights him.
This Trout may be taken by dibbing, or if the Weather be Dark, Cloudy and Windy, you may taken him with the Cast-fly, he is in season from March till Michaelmas, but chiefly about the end of May, when he is in the best season; his Body is adorned with red spots, the Female is accounted better than the Male, they much affect to be near the Source or Spring of Rivers, and where they run on Lime Stones, there the best Trouts are found. Angle for him at the ground with a running Line, with two or three small Pellets of Lead, omitting the Float, or you may take him by Float Angling at the ground, if you are dexte∣rous at Angling with a single Hair, two Links from you Hook, he is much sooner take than with two or three Hairs
though you must be cautious he break not the Line, and this is better done at the bottom, than top, because there he has not so much force to shoot and spring, as on the top, and a single Hai next the Hook, if well chosen and strong, will take one of 13 Inches, if there be Water-room, free from Wood and Weeds. He Bites best in a Water that after a Flood is clearing, or ri∣sing, somewhat Troubled; Clou∣dy and Windy Weather, early in the Morning is the best time from the middle of April, to the end of August, from Sun-rising till near Eleven, and from two till Sunset, but Nine in the Morning, and Three in the Af∣ternoon are the best times at the Ground or Fly as the Water is most agreeable, in March, the
beginning of April, September, and till the fifteenth of October, and then you must cease Angling for the Trout, to the end of Fe∣bruary, after a shower has fallen in the Evening, you will find him rise at a Gnat In warm weather you may dib for him with the Minow or Loach. As for other Baits than what I have mentioned, the principal are at the Ground, Brandlings, Gilt-tails, Tag-tails, Meadow-worms, and for the greater, Dew-worms, well scowred, the two first hold him all the Sea∣sons, either in Muddy or Clear Waters, the rest do well when the Water is discoloured with Rain, you may use a God-bait, either for Top or Bottom, but then it must be in Clear Water, he takes the Palmer-y or Wool-bed, and all sorts of
Artificial and Natural Flies at the top of the Water. When you Bait with small Fish, as the Me∣now, Bull-head and Loach, cut off their Fins, and the Gills of the latter, and so with these In∣structions and a little practice to ripen Experience, depend on success.
The Eel their Haunt, Bait, and Taking them, &c. Eel. THere is many disputes about the Generation of Eels, whether they generate and breed as other Fish do, or proceed from Mud and Putrefaction, en∣livened by Heat and Moisture, but my business being to In∣struct you how to come by them, I shall lay no stress on that ni∣cety,
since Eels there are, and for their delicacy, are called by some the Queen of Fish. Their Haunts in the day time, are usually under the covert of Tree Roots, Brush-wood, Planks, or Piles, about Flood-gates, Wears, or Mill-dams, in hollow holes in Banks, they mostly de∣light in foul. still Water, or at least such as runs very slow, with Ousey Sand, or Muddy Bottoms, in Pits, Ponds and Meers. Bait for him with a young Lamprey, Dew-worms, scowr∣ed Earth-worms, any very small Fish their Fins cut off, Guts of Chickens or other Fowlcut in small lengths, Lean Beaf, the Brood of Wasps, the four first take him Day or Night, but
most of the rest are properest for Night hooks. Take him in the day by a Ledger Bait, by Snigling, Bob∣bing, Brogling; as for Brogling and Snigling, the best method I have known is this, get a long and strong Line, your hook of a small compass, Baited with scoured Red-worms, or Dew-worms, having one end of your Line in your hand, place very easily the upper end of your Hook in the Cleft of a Hazle-Rod of convenient length, so that it may slip out as you please, and where you fancy the Eel to be, let the Bait leasurely sink, and supposing it swallowed by giving time leasurely, draw him up by little and little, else lying double with the strength of his Tail, your Line is endanger∣ed.
This you must practise in hot weather, the Waters being low. As for Bobbing, take large Earth-worms out of good Mould, scoure them well in Moss, and run a strong thread with a needle through them end-ways, as ma∣ny as will lightly wrap a dozen times round your hand, make them into Links, and fasten them to a strong Pack-thread or Whip-cord two yards or more long; make a knot about six or eight Inches from the Worms, put about three quarters of a pound of Plummet, made Pyramidi∣tally on the Cord, by the means of a hollowness, or hole bored through it, and let it sink to the not, six the Cord to a manage∣able Pole; Angle with this in uddy or Cloudy Water in the ides of the Streams, or Deeps,
when the Eel or Eels Tug, let them be well fastened by the Teeth, before you draw up, then do it gently, till on the top, and hoist them quickly then to Land; many by this way have been taken at a time. Some near Eels haunts sink a Bottle of Hay hoosly bound, stuffed with Fowls Guts and Li∣ver cut in long shreads over∣night, and coming Early the next Morning, drawing it up hastily by the Rope fastened to the Bank, find large Eels bedded in it for the sake of the Prey. This may be done with a bundle of Brush-wood, out of which upon pulling up they cannot so easily get.
To Angle, &c. for the Grayling or Umber. THough this Fish has two Names given it, the for∣mer for the lesser sort, and the latter for the greater, yet both are the same Species. Their Haunts are in Marly Clay, Clear Water, and swift eams, the largest is account∣ed eighteen Inches, being in eason all the year, but their rime is December, when his Gills and Head are Blackish, nd his Belly a dark Gray, stud∣ied with Black spots, he will ite freely, but is very tender-outhed, therefore be careful  break not hold, though he
will not struggle much, as being very faint when he is hooked, Angle for him, in or near the middle of the Water, for he's always more apt to rise than de∣scend, wherefore he is rarely ta∣ken by a Ground Bait, rather than a running Line, use for him a Float of Cork, if you par∣ticularly Angle for him, but for Grayling and Trout the running Line is the best. As for Baits, he takes Brand∣lings, Gilt-tails, Meadow-worms Tag-tails, the Bark-worm, Flag-worm, Meadow-worm, Co bait, Natural or Artificial Flie particularly the Camlet Fly and Fly made of Purple Woo and one made of Tawny Cham let Hair, also the Earth-b and Clap-bait.
The Pope or Ruff, his Haunts, how to Angle for him, with proper Baits, &c. THE Pope or Ruff, is one be∣ing in Shape, Nature and Disposition, like the Pearch, though in bigness not exceeding a large Gudgeon, but of a more pleasing taste, he bites Eager∣ly, and many of them are usual∣ly together, where the Water runs slowly and is deep in San∣dy places, fifty of them have been taken at a standing. You may Bait him with the small Red-worm, Gilt-tal, Meadow-worm, and other Baits proper for the Pearch, he biting at the
same time the Pearch do's; yo may ground Bait with new turn∣ed up Earth of a Fallow, as also with a Clear Sand, you may take him with a single Hair, the Link next the Hook, the Body of i is rough, and hath prickly, and sharp Fins; it has its Season and Nature like the Pearch, and is a very wholesome Fish, eating short and tender.
The Bleak or Bley, to Angle for him, &c. THis Fish makes sport, though not much valued, as not being very wholesome, it is ma∣ny times destroyed by a Worm that breeds in its Stomach in hot Weather, he bites eagerly, and you may Fish for him with several Hooks on one Line, and if you catch three or four toge∣ther on the several Hooks, not fear the breaking of your Line, tying them about half a foot one above the other, he is easily ta∣ken with Gentles, small Red-worms, and the Dubfly which must be of a sad brown; Angle at middle Water, or at the Top,
for he is usually in motion; There is another sort of these, called the Sea-Bleak, better and wholesomer than this, called by some the Sea-Camelion, be∣cause in the Water he seems of∣ten to change his colour.
The Chub or Chevin his Haunts, and to Angle for him. THE Chub though large, is a very timerous Fish, he is found in large Rivers, having Sandy or Clayey bottoms, de∣lights much in Streams shaded with Trees, as also in holes, where many of them consort together, he is in season from the middle of May till after Can∣dlemas, you may take him with dibbing on the top of the Water, but in the hot Months he keeps Mid-water, in the colder Wea∣ther Angle at the bottom with the Ledger Bait.
He bites from Sun Rising till Eight, and from Three till Sun∣set, the large one when struck is soonest tired, the less will struggle longer, and in Sun∣shiny Weather they bite, in Winter the middle of the Day. He scarcely refuses any bait, if not too large, as Lamprys-Pride, the Eels-Brood, Dew-worms, lange Red-worms scow∣red in Moss and Gravel, Clap-Baits, small Snails, White and Black Cheefe Paste, the Marrow of an Ox or Cows back, a Beetle with the Legs off, all sorts of Baits bred on Trees, Plants and Herbs, Cod-baits, Brood of Wasps, Hornets and Humble-Bees, the Fat of Rusty Bacon, Dors, Grashoppers, al∣so Rasberries, Black-Berries, Mulberries, a Fly, and a Cod-bait,
and an Oak-worm on the Hook together, infallibly takes him in the hot months. When he is taken he must be eaten the same Day, or is little worth, most esteem his Head the best part.
Dace or Dare, and Roach, their Haunts, Baits, and how to Angle for them. THese delight in Ponds or Ri∣vers with Gravelly bot∣toms or Sand, they love deep Clear Waters, shaded with Trees, either in Rivers, or else∣where; the Dace Spawn about the middle of March, and are in season three Weeks after; the Flesh is soft and sweet in taste, and in Italy they are pickled as Anchovies. You must Angle for the Dace, within two Inches of the bot∣tom, and sometimes the Bait
may touch it if it be with Worms, but with Flies, at the Top of the Water, or within an Inch. The Roach Spawns about the middle of May, and is so health∣ful, that his Soundness has created an usual saying, though often causes some to tell Lies: the best Roach by reason of the abundance of Soil are found in the Thames near London; Angle for him abot two foot in the Water, and in Temperate Wea∣ther they bite all day long, the Float Angle takes them best. Their Baits are numerous as their Fry, as Worms bred on Trees, Plants, Herbs, Gentles, Cod-baits, Grashoppers with the Legs off, Flies Artificial or Natural; particularly the Ant∣fly, Meadow-worms scowred,
Bread-Corn boiled; the Roach in Ponds is chiefly found under the Water-docks, if there be any, and indeed few small come amiss to them.
The Flounder or Flook, his Haunts, Baits, and Angling. THis is properly a Salt-Water Fish, no where but in Ri∣vers that have Communication with the Sea, and is first brought up by the Tide loosing, and him∣self in fresh Streams, he after some time minds not his way back again; they love Gentle streams, Gravelly and Sandy bottoms, are very shy, and not easily taken, they bite all the Day, May, June, July, and the beginning of August, though he will Nibble much about the Hook, and suck off the Bait, if you be not wary to keep it in
motion, which hinders him from seeing the Hook, if he do, a∣way he flies from it, sometimes he's in the Deep, and some∣times in the Shallow, he takes scowred Meadow or Marsh-worms, Earth-worms, Gentles, the Brook of Wasps, Gilt-tails and Brandlings, he is to be Angled for with the Float, and your Bait must touch the ground.
The Minow, or Pench, Loach, and Bull-head or Millers Thumb, Lampreys. THese are rather Baits for other Fish than of any va∣lue in themselves. The first is taken with small Worms, Brand∣lings, and Gilt-tails; the two latter with Gilt-tails, Meadow-worms at the Ground; Lam∣preys are taken as the Eel, being much of that nature, therefore I omit for brevities sake to be tedious on these.
Observations on, and Rules for Natural Fly-Ang∣ling. THis is a choice point in Ang∣ling, requiring a quick Eye, and wary Hand; it is termed by Artists Dibling, Di∣bing, or Dapeing, and is per∣formed on the Surface of the Water, or at most sometimes, not letting the Bait sink above two or three Inches under, not that, unless the Oak-fly, for the Chub or Trout, has joined to it, a Clap-bait or Cod-bait. This must ever be done i Clear Water, without Lead or Float, in the Evening of a Hot Day, or in a Hot Calm day is
best, and the Still Dep is to be preferred before the Stream, though on the side of a Stream, when the Water is Clearing af∣ter great Rains, or a Flood, is very proper, and all hours you may Dib with the Green Drake-fly, and if you needs must do't in the Stream, use the Stone-fly, which is proper Early and Late, but if in the Evening it is Win∣dy, ake the Artificial Stone-fly, which I shall teach you to make; for then in the Stream the Fish, rise the best, and are soonest taken, and if you pull off the Wings, you may Angle in the Water with it, and it will take very much in a Stream near the bottom, you must in this case observe to keep out of sight, as much as may be, and keep your Fly moving, that it may appear to the Fish to be alive.
In Dibbing for Dace, Roach or Chub, let not your motion be swift, if you can perceive any of them coming towards it, but make two or three short re∣moves, as if there were a Rest, or the-Fly were Swimming or Playing, then let it gently glide with the stream if poffible to∣wards the Fish, but if it be slo or standing Water, you must keep it moving with your hand, not just upon him, but side-ways and sloaping by him, this least it should escape him, will make him mind it the more, for only the Trout, if it be moved swift∣ly, will of any certainty follow it. In a Calm Dibbing it is not so sure, as when a pretty good Gale stirs the Water, for then nei∣ther you, nor the deceit put o the Fish by an Artificial Fly,
so easily discovered, and then few Natural Flies at liberty can lye on the Water, and for want of choice, they will Snap at the first that comes in their way, and bite more eager for hunger; and if they will not rise at the Top, try them a little lower, for some will be sooner taken, as the Roach, particularly by Dibbing under the Water than at top; Roach, Dace and Chub will sometimes be pleased with an Artificial Fly, especially if an Earth-bob, Cod-bait, Earth-worm, or Gentle, be put on the point of the Hook, or an Oak-worm, is very pleasing on the Top or under the Water. At Dibbing and Trayling, Trout and Salmon-Smelts will take an Artificial Fly well, particu∣larly the Stone-fly and Green-drake, Early, or Late in the
Evening; and if you for Salmon-Smelt, Roach, Chub or Dace, with the Dub-fly, put on a Gentle, Wasp, Cod-bait or Clap-bait, let it stand well on the point of your Hook, when the Wind Furls the Waters, and few Flies appear on it, or over it, is the best time to Angle with the Fly Natural or Arti∣ficial; for then having no va∣riety of choice, they will quick∣ly take your Bait; if it be a Sun∣shiny day, get under the shade of Trees if you can, that neither the shadow of your Body, nor Rod may appear in the Water to fright them away; if you find the Fish rise not at top, sink your Fly by degrees, and try even to middle-water, and before the sorts of Flies are na∣turally in season, the Fish very rarely rise at them, therefore to know this, that you mistake
not in your Baiting, observe what Flies are on the Water, or flying near over it, or are on the Bushes or Trees, of Ponds and Rivers, and that Fly that Swarms there most, is chief in Season, and is to be used either Natural, or to be imitated by Artifice; some open the first Fish they take, and look in its Stomach to see what indigested Food there remains, and from that take their measures, tho' uncertain; for either it must be partly consumed, or so discolou∣red that it cannot well be known, and also Fish for Extream hun∣ger, take in such Food at one time, as at another they alto∣gether dislike. You may for other Baits found in Rivers, grope in the Sand, Bank-sides within the Water, under the Stones, or observe
what Insects are Playing, or Swimming in, or on the Surface of the Water, and so accordingly provide your self with seasonable Baits. In May you may Dibb with Oak-flies, Fern-flies, or Oak-worms for Trout, and all Summer with the Fern-fly for Chub, keeping the Bait moving on the Top of the Water, as if it were alive, and your self out of sight, as much as possible it may be.
Artificial Fly Angling. ARtificial Dub-fly or Cast-fly Angling, is somewhat more difficult, and requires more cunning than the former, and is more perfectly Learned by seeing it done, than by Print∣ed directions, however I doubt not but to give a satisfactory ac∣count of it to the Angler. The first thing to be mate∣rnally considered is, to know and chuse the proper colours of Flies in Season when you Angle, and these must be proportioned to the places you Fish in; for there are different Haunts of Flies, and are found much ear∣er in some places than in others,
as the Season proves Hot or Cold; a warm Spring brings them early, but the contrary later, sometimes by a Month, and always sooner in high grounds, than in those that are Low and Marshy, or Boggy. And though sometimes upon disgust, Fish suddenly change their Fly, yet it is not usual, until they have been glutted with one sort, and that must be some days first, and when that sort of Fly is near going out. Nor will they freely take them till they are at their best an most plentiful, and it alway follows, when one sort goes out, another comes in, which you must have a special regar well to note, and make th change with them.
The Fly required being found, your next business is, to make one in Colour, Shape, Propor∣tion of Body and Wings, as like it as possible, always having the Natural one as a Pattern; and to do this, you must have in readiness Bears-hair of divers Colours, Camels hair, Sad, Light, and of middle indiffe∣rent Colour, Badgers hair, Spaniels hair, Sheeps wool, Dogs air, Hog Down, such as is Combed from the Roots or Bri∣sties of a Hog, Camblets and Mohairs of divers Colours, Cows hair, Abortive Calves, and Colts hair. Furs of Squirrels Tails, the ails of Black Cats, Yellow and Dun Cats, of Hares Necks, the Fern Colour Ferrets Fur, Martins, Yellow Fur, Filmers ur, the Tails of White Weasles,
Moles, Black Rabbets, Down of a Fox Cub, Ash-colour at the. Roots of Fox, Fur that comes off the Otter, and Otter Cub, Blackish and Brown Bad∣gers hair, that has been in a Skinners Lime-Pit. Hackles or Feathers about a Cock or Capons Neck, and such as hang loosely down on each side the Tail, of various colours; particularly to make the Palmer-fly, or Insect called the Wool∣bed, you must have Feathers of all sorts of Fowl, and those co∣loured Feathers required that you cannot get natural, you may dye. You must also have Caddows or Blankets, out of which are got good Dubbings, so of C∣shions made of Abortive Skin of Calves and Colts, like Silver
Wire, Gold Twist, Silver Twist, White and Yellow Bees∣wax, for Ground Work, or to frame the Bodies and Heads on, as the Nature of the Fly more or less requires it, and a sharp pointed neat pair of Scissars, to trim and shape your Work.
How to make the Dub-Fly. WET your Materials to know how they will hold Colour, for though dry they may appear of the right Colour, yet Wet they may al∣ter, and be too Light or too Dark this done, take the Hook in your Left Hand, between your Fore-singer and Thumb, the Shanks back upwards, take strong Silk of that Colour the Fly requires and Wax it with Wax of the same Colour, and so draw it to the Head of the Shank, betwixt your Finger and Thumb, and whip it about the bare hook two or three times; draw your Line between
your Thumb and Finger, hold∣ing the Hook so fast, that it may only have space to pass by, so joining the Hook and Line, put on the Wings, fashion the Body and Head, by twisting the Dubbing on your Waxed Silk, and Lapping it on, so Work it by degrees up towards the Head, and part the wings of an even length, or the Fly will not Swim upright; then turn it into a proper shape, by nipping off the superfluous Dubbing from the Silk, so fasten and accouter your Fly: It would be well to see one done by an Experienced Angler, and then these Directi∣ons will be easie to you.
Directions relating to Dub∣flies, and Angling with them. 1. WHen you proportion your Dub-fly, confi∣der the largeness or littleness of the Fish you intend it for, and be sure the Belly of it is of the exact colour, because it is most obvious. 2. Let not the Tail of the Fly be only to the bend of the Hook, and not come unto the bent of it. 3. If the Trout at the top of the Water refuse it, the day is not proper for it, or the Fly either out of season or ill made.
When you Angle with the Dub-fly, it must be in such a River or Water which is clear, after Rain, or in a River a little discoloured with Moss or Bogs, in Moorish places, or else in a Cloudy, Gloomy Day, when the Water is stirred by gentle Gales; or if the Winds be pretty high, they will rise in the plain Deep, but in little Wind, the best is to Angle in the Stream. Keep your Fly in continual Motion in all Weathers, to pre∣vent the Fish from diseerning the fraud; in clear and low Wa∣ter let the Body of the Fly be the smaller, and the Wings very slender. In dark Weather and thick Water, let the Fly be of a darkish colour, but it must be pretty large Body and Wings, the better to be discovered;
in a clear day, a light colour∣ed Fly is preferrible. A Rod for the Dub-fly should be five yards at least, and the Line about seven, or somewhat more, if the Water be free from Incumbrance of Weeds, &c. and to adapt your Fly to the colour of the Water more pro∣perly, have three of the sort, the one Light, the next a de∣gree Darker, and the third the true colour of the Natural Fly, by trying all which, you may gain the more Experience, for one of them cannot well miss. In slow Rivers, Muddy and Sli∣my bottomed in great Draughts expect little success, but rather chuse Pebbly, Sandy or Stony bottoms, in a running Stream, which much Cools and Refreshes the Fish in the hot months.
Let your Eye be steady on what you are about, and your hand ready to strike when it is convenient, which is with the rising of the Fish; or the find∣ing his mistake will throw out the Hook again: But for a great Fish, most hold it proper to let him turn his Head with the Bait, which will less strain your Tacke, for so he will strike him∣self, and then do it moderate∣ly. Upon Casting, do it with a little circling about your Head, by waving the Rod: or else the Fly may with too smart a yerk be apt to snap off, Cast the Fly behind a Trout at his rising, and so with a gentle hand draw it over his Head, so that not sca∣ring him, he will quickly take it if it be the right colour.
In Casting, observe to do it always before you, that it may fall on the Water, and no part of the Line dash to scare away the Fish; and do it if you can without making any circling in the Water: But if the Winds be high, some part must be in the Water to keep the Fly from being blown out. Take your standing so, if possible, that the Sun may be in your Face, and the Wind to your Back. In Still or Slow Water, cast your Fly almost a cross the Ri∣ver or Pond, and draw it to∣wards you gently a little way, that you break not the Water, or put it into trouble, and let it bear with the Current if there be any, Fishing down∣wards and not upwards of the River. Thus having as I hope
given plain Instructions in these matters, to be understood by easie Capacities, I proceed to describe Artificial Flies, for the proper Month of Angling with them.
Artificial Flies proper in the Month of the Fish∣ing Season, how to make them. Febr. THE Palmer-fly or Plain Hackle must have a rough black body, which may be done with black Spaniels hair, or the Whirl of an Est∣ridge Feather, and the red Hackle of a Capon, all over. The Prince Dun, this may be Dubbed of the Down of a Fox Cub, with Ash-coloured Silk, the Wings of a Stares Fea∣ther, this must be made little.
The little Red, Brown Dub, with the softest hair on the black spot of a Hogs Ear, the Wings of Mallards Feathers near white, wrap it on with red Silk. March. The Green-tail may be made of the brown-hair of a Spaniel, taken from the out-side of the Ear, and a little from the extream of the Tail. Morish brown, may be Dub∣bed with Black Sheeps Wool, Red Silk, and the Wings made of a Partridges Wing Fea∣ther. Thorn-tree-fly Dub of a very good black, and mix a little Isa∣bella coloured Mohair; with it make a little body, and the Wings of a Mallards brightest Feathers.
The early bright brown, make of the Hair of a brown Spaniel, that of the flank of a Red Cow, and Wing it with the Grey Feather of a Wild Duck. April. The Violet-fly which takes excellently from the sixth to the tenth, make of Bears hair a light Dun, mixed with Violet Stuff, Wing it with the greasie Feathers of a Mallard: The Horse-flesh fly, which lasts all this Month, Dub with Pink colours, Blew Mohair, and Red Tammy, let the Head be dark brown, and the Wings of a light colour. The small bright Brown, is very well taken in a clear Day and Water, make it of Spaniels Fur with a light Grey Wing.
May. The Green Drake an excellent killer, Dub on a large Hook with Camels hair, bright Bears hair, soft Down combed from the Bristles of a Hog, mix yellow Camlet; let the Bdy be long, and Rib it with green Silk mixed with yellow; let the Whisks of his Tail be the long hair of Sables, his Wings, the light grey Feather of a Mallard died yellow. The Stone-fly Dub, with Dun Bears hair, mix it with a little brown and yellow Camlet, that she may be yellower on the Belly and Tail, than in any other part, to be the better liked by the Fish, who mostly Eyes the Belly of Baits; and to adorn it the more, place two or three hairs of the Beard of a Black Cat, on the top of the Hook, in the Whipping or Arming, and in
warping on your Dubbing, sta ring one from another something upright, Rib her with yellow Silk, make the Wings long and large, of the dark grey Feather of a Mallard, or other such like Feather. The Grey Drake comes in when the Green one goes out, much of shape with it, but in colour differs, and must be made of a paler and more blewish yel∣low and green, his Ribs quite down his body must be of black, with black shining wings very thin, and may be made of the grey feathers of a Mallard, the Down under Hogs Bristles, the black Hair of a Spaniel, and the Whisks of his Tail, of the Beard of a Black Cat. June. The Ant-fly is dubbed with brown and red Camlet, the Wing of the Feathers of a light-grey Pidgeon.
The Purple-fly, with Purple Wool, mixed with light brown Bears Hair, the Wings of a Stares Feather, Dub it with Purple Silk. The brown Hackle make of the lightest brown Hair, of a somewhat grown Colt, with a red Hackle or Cocks Neck-feather over it, warped with hair co∣lour or Ash coloured Silk. July. Orange-fly, Dub this with Orange coloured Cruel or Wool, and the Feathers of a Black-Birds Wing. The Wasp-fly. Do this with brown Dubbing, or else of the Hair of a black Cats tail; rib it with yellow Silk, and make the Wings of the grey Feather of a Mallard's Wing. The blew Dun must be made with the Down of a Water Mouse, and the blewish Dun found on an old Fox, mix them
well together, and Dub with sad Ash coloured Silk, the Feathers of a Stares Quill, will furnish you with Wings. August. The late Ant-fly may be Dubbed of the Hair of a Cow, that is of a blackish brown, and for the tagging of the Tails wrap in some red, and make the Wing of a dark Feather, this Fly takes admirably. The Fern-fly must properly be Dubbed with the Wool taken from a Hares Neck, of the co∣lour of Fern, when dry, make the Wings of the darkish grey Feather of a Mallard. The Hearth-fly, Dub of the Wool of an aged Black Ewe, with some Grey Hair to accom∣modate the Body and Head, Dub with black Silk, and take the
light Feather of a State for the Wings. September. The little blew Dun, make of the Fur a Water-Mouse, Dub it with sad Ash-coloured Silk, and Wing it with the Feather of a blew Pidgeon. The late Badger, do this with Badgers Hair that is Black, whip with red Silk, and use a darkish grey Mallards Feather for the Wings. The Camel brown-fly, pull out for Dubbing, the Hair in the Lime of an old Wall, whip it with red Silk, make the Wings of a Stares lightest Feather. October. This Month is sup∣plied by the Flies of the former, for all being now upon their go∣ing away, any almost will do.
And thus Reader keeping to my intended Brevity, I have singled you out the best killing Flies from a great many more, and by knowing how well to make these, you may soon imitate all others, by having a Natural Fly before you, and chusing your materials suitable to her colour, and shape her as you see the other, and then promise your self success in Angling with her as directed.
Various, but very Curious Observations on Angling divers ways of Angling not commonly known. NOte that sometimes all sorts of Fish take Baits at the ground? when but some sorts will take the Fly at the Top of the Water; and therefore to Angle for a Trout with a Worm, chuse the running Line without any Float, only small Plummets in their proper places. This is successful at the ground either in Clear or Muddy Water. As for the latter, use a Line a little more than half the length of the Rod, and sometimes less
than that length, and the lower most Links must be at least three Hairs, and one at top of four, where of have a Water Noose or Loop, to put it to another Link of four hairs, having also a Loop or Water Noose at its bottom; so proteed with Links of five or six hairs a piece, till you come to the top-most, make the low∣est of Chesnut colour, or Sorrel brown. Then to your Reed or Cane, have a Top neither too stiff nor too feeble, but between both, the Cane about three yards and a half long, and the Top about a yard and a half, or near two yards, in one or two pieces, and five or six Inches of Whale-bone, smooth, round, and pliant. Observe to Lead your Line, as is consistent with the Water; in rough streams more than in
small gentle streams, and least of all in Still Water; then carry the top or point of your Rod in a level with your hand, and so you will be the point of your Rod, perceive the Bite at the Ground, then strike strait and gently upwards, and by a little slacking your hand before, you will give the Fish time the better to take the Bait. Some are of opinion, if you know that a Trout bites, to strike at the first biting, but this is only allowed in Clear Water for Salmon-Smels, Trout, and Grayling, and the Bait is the best Red-worms scowred, or a Brandling, and Gilt-tail turned Head to Tail, and run cross wise through the middle, under the Wings, and so you may do in Muddy Water with
other Worms, as two Brandlings, two Meadow-worms, &c. a Trout will seize on the Bait when it drags on the ground, either in Clear or Muddy Water, but a large Grayling will rather rise a Foot or more at your Bait from the bottom, than descend. If a large Trout you Angle for in Muddy Water, then it requires some art in baiting your Hook, as suppose the Bait a Dew-worm, here you must thrust the Hook in towards the Tail, a little above the middle, and out again below the Head, then draw him above the Arm∣ing of the Hook, or Whipping, so put the point into the Head of the Worm, till it is very near the place where the point of the Hook first came out, and so draw back the Worm or that part that was above the
Shank. This Hook should be indifferent large. To Bait two Worms in Mud∣dy Water for a Trout, &c. from eight to ten Inches: Take Mea∣dow-Worms, or Brandlings, or a Brandling and Gilt-tail, and run the point of the Hook in at the Head down the Body, till it pass the knot, or come to the middle of the Worm; then strip it above the Arming or Whipping, not bruising it in any manner with your Fingers, so put on the other, by running the Hook in the same manner, and let the Head of it just cover the point of the Hook, then slip the first down, till the knots or middle of both Worms meet together; and thus you may do by any other Worms, for other Fish, as by
foregoing directions you find they take them. Directions for Angling with the running Line in Clear Water. PUT a Gilt-tail and small Brandling on your Hook, as before directed, well scowred, and here your Hook must be much smaller than in Muddy Water, two or three of th lowermost Links of your Line of a single Hair, so rise from two, to three o four, of  grey or duskish White, the Line about two yards shorte
than the Rod, leaded with a small black Plummet. Angle with this in the stream always up it, in a River with a light hand, still casting out the Worm before you; let the Rod be as the former: And thus you may Angle for Salmon-Smelts, Trout or Grayling, to whose proper Baits I refer you in my Treatise of Baits in this Book.
Directions for the Top-Water Angling with a Worm. YOur Line in this case must be longer than your Rod, without any Plummet or Float, drawing your Bait down and up the stream, in a clear day with a gentle hand, that it may glide as if it were swimming, and your Bait here must be a Gilt-tail, or Brandling, keep it from the shoar, and free from Intanglements of Weeds, Wood, Rushes, or other In∣cumbrances that hinder sport.
Farther Directions for Float Angling. HEre your Line must be two or three foot longer than your Rod in Rivers, but in Ponds and Pits something short∣er, Angling in Clear Water for Salmon Smelts, Trout or Gray∣ling, you must put but one Hair next the Hook, but in Muddy Water, and for other Fish two or three, observing the running Line and Rod for the Trout, and proportion this to it. Lead it moderately, but so that it may keep the Line strait and even, but for Tench, Carp, Barbel or Chub, your Rod and Line must have an addit o∣nal strength in the thickness of
the one, and the number of Hairs in the other, and your Float manageable in the Water, proportioned according to the swiftness or slowness of the Water, but with one Worm, the Water being very clear; and observe for some sort of Fish as Flounders, Salmon-Smelts, Bream and Gudgeon, your Bait must drag on the ground, but for other sorts, as Tench, Roach, Bleak, Pike, Ruff, and Carp, at mid-water; for Grayling and Pearch, at six or nine Inches from the bottom. The Chub is often taken at Bottom, Mid-water and Top. You may use the various sorts of Baits, Angling with a Vloat, but Ground Baits are most fre∣quently used, and with success.
Directions for Drabling. BY this, Barbe's of large size are taken; to do it com∣pleatly, observe these Rules. Have a strong Line of six yards, which before you fasten it to your Rod, must be put through a piece of Lead, that if the Fish bite, it may slip too and fro, and that the Water may something move it on the ground, Bait it with a pretty large Lob-worm well sowred, and so by its motion, the Barbel will be enticed into the danger without suspicion. The best places are in running Water near Piles, or under Wooden
Bridges, supported with Oaks doated and slimy. This Drabling way I have placed here, by the particular directions of my worthy friend Mr. Samuel Wright of Derby∣shire, an Experienced Angler, of the Crown Society of Jolly Anglers in Fleetstreet. Angling with the Ledger-Bait. THis is used for variety of Exercise, to give rest to the Anglers, and so differs from others, that are called walking Baits, and this is, when
the Bait continues to rest in one fixed and certain place. Here you must take off your Float, but let the Lead re∣main, and within half a yard of the top of the Line, wrap a thin plate of Lead, an Inch and half long, and pretty broad, viz. about an Inch, so fasten your Line to your Rod, cast in your Bait either into a still slow draught, or gentle stream, and when it is at the bottom you may stick your Rod in the Bank of the River, or hold it in your hand at discretion, and by the bending of the Rod, or mo∣tion of the Lead at top, you will perceive when the Fish Bites, give her some time, and strike contrary to where her head lyes. The Chub and Eel are successfully taken this way.
To lay Night Hooks. TO do this effectually, pro∣cure a small Cord, which may be about sixteen yards long, and to this at equal di∣stances, ye five or six fine twist∣ed. Flax or Silk Lines, about eighteen Inches each, of the thickness of your Trowling Line, fasten them so that they may be easily removed, and put on again, whip to the ends of each of them a pretty strong hook, Bait with a Loach, Mi∣now or Bull-head, the Fins and Gills cut off; or these being wanting, the Seven Eyes, Eel-brood, small Roach, Gudgeon, the Pith of an Ox or Cows Back Bone, &c. will
serve for the Fish, put the point of the Hook in at the Tail, and out at the mouth, so that the Fishes Head may have a resting in the Hooks bent, and that the point may not be discovered, cover it with a Worm, and casting the Cord by a weight, over the River, Stream or Pond, fasten both ends to stakes on either side, and be there Early in the Morning, and expect Chub, large Eels, Trout or Pike, but for a Pike keep the Bait with a Float, about a foot or something more from the bottom. For this to gather the Fish, you may Bait the ground with Blood and Grains, or Sweet, made up in Sweet Earth, taken from under the green Soard, or Pasts, &c.
Choice Receipts, or Rare or Secrets, never before made Publick. TAke Oyl of Amber, Rose∣mary and Myrrh, an equal quantity, infuse in them any Worms, or mingle Paste with them, and the Fish if near, will hasten to the Bait so dipped, and then not have power to go away, till she either Nibbles off the Bait, or is Taken. Oyl of Water Lillies, and the Juice of Mulberries, is ex∣cellent to make up Paste with, especially with a few drops of Oyl of Peny-royal in it, and the Fat of a Hedg-hog or Ur∣chin.
Ground-bait for Carp, with unpickled Samphire bruised, and made into Balls, with Wal∣nut Oil. This likewise allures Tench and Bream. Over-night, mix Bean Flow∣er with a little Honey, wet it with Rectified Spirits of Wine, and a little Oil of Turpentine, make it up into little Pellets, and such Fish as Nibble it, when thrown in, will be stupi∣fied, so that in the Morning, coming to themselves a little, they will bite very eagerly, as being after their drunken fit exceeding hungry. This like∣wise is a sure detainer of them all night in Summer, so that they will not wander from the place. Nux Vomica scraped in∣to Paste, makes them Drunk, so that if the Water be shallow, you may go in and take them,
when they rise and turn up their Bellies as if expiring, though in a little time they will come to themselves again, if the Wa∣ter be deep you may use a Landing Net. The Fat of Barnacles or Sea-Gulls is extreamly coveted by Fish, if mixed with the Juice of Eringoes, or Sea Holly. The Craw of a Turtle Dove well scowred, is taken very ea∣gerly by the Pike. The Fat of a Water Rat, takes Pearch if the Bait be rubbed with it, as that of a Mole does the Pike.
Some particular observa∣tions on Gudgeon An∣gling. THE Gudgeon though not o∣ver large, is approved a∣mong other Fish as a Dainty, being very wholesome Food. This Fish Spawns twice or thrice in the year, he delights in sharp Streams, with Gravel∣ly or Sandy bottoms, and shews the young Angler extraordina∣ry good sport, who not being well skilled in chusing, or not well knowing how to come by other Baits, may take him with a small Red-worm on the ground, or very near it, and rarely by reason of the tough∣ness of his Mouth, is he lost when struck. In the heat of Summer they make to the Shal∣lows
in Rivers, but when the Weeds in Autumn, grow of a bad taste, or rot, and Cold Weather comes on, then they get together in Deep places; and here it is properest to Fish for them at the ground, or a little above it; if you fish with a Cork or Float, but it may be done with a running Line on the ground, without a Float: As for particular Baits, I have already discoursed of them, and among others those relating to the Gudgeon. A special Winter Bait to get, and preserve. WHen Plowing begins in Autumn, before any rosts come that are forcible, to make entrance into the
Earth; observe where the Ploughs are going, if there be store of Crows lighted on the Ground, especially in that which is Heathy, Sandy, or Greensoard, follow, and you will find a white Worm, big∣ger than a Gentle, having a red Head, which is held to be bred of the Spawn or Egg of a Beetle, left in those holes she digs in the ground under Horse or Cow dung; which is March or April, turns to a Beetle again: You may put about two quarts of these, into half a Bushel of the same Mould, when you gather them, put them in a Tub or other Vessel, where the Frost or Wind may not come to kill them; and by this means, when most other Baits are out, you may be pro∣vided all the seasonable times in Winter, and early in Spring.
They take in those seasons, Bream, Carp, Roach, Dace and Chub. Gentles may be kept in Win∣ter, in Bran, Moss and Scower∣ing Earth, lightly over some putrefaction, in which at the first laying them in the ground, where the Frost cannot come at them, you perceive they be∣gin to live. Ʋnseasonable times to Angle in. HAving spoke much of pro∣per times to accommo∣date the Angler, I shall now speak somewhat more of un∣seasonable ones, that those who are ignorant in this Art, as to the Niceties of it, may not lose their labour.
The two extreams of Wea∣ther are not proper, viz. (1.) When great droughts have parched the Earth, so that the Rivers carry but low Currents, when the Weather is Excessive hot, in the Heat of the day, unless Clouds cover all, and Winds gently breath. (2.) In Frosty or Snowy Wea∣ther, or unhealthy Weather, for two reasons, viz. because you will little damage the Fish, but greatly injure your self. In the Morning, either in the Spring or advancing of the sea∣son, if a Hoar Frost happen, the Fish will be backward in their biting that day, and little sport can be expected, for they will not freely rise, except in the Evening, and soon after they have spawned they will not bite to the purpose, till with Grass and Weeds they have
well purged and scowered themselves, so that they may by that means recover their Strength and Appetite. It is not proper to Fish when the North or East Winds be ve∣ry sharp. In Brooks that are small and clear, where the Water is kept up by Mills or Dams, it is not good Angling, for there espe∣cially the Trout keeps her hole, and others bite faintly. Some other useful observa∣tions and directions. 1. IF you are doubtful what Bait will be taken, look in the first Fishes Stomach, and such Flies, Worms, &c. as you find there, that kind at that time delights in. Be sure always to keep your shadow off the Water, and
therefore let the Sun be in your Face, or on one side of you when you Angle, keeping out of sight, and making no noise; and when you are bent for Trout, you need make but three or four Essays with the ground Bait or Fly, for if it comes not then to Bite or offer, either there is not any there, or they keep close in their holes. If you Fish for Carp, cut no Weeds in the River, nor on the sides, to make you a con∣venient standing, for then they will perceive they are laid wait for, and forsake that haunt, not returning in a considerable time. A curious Paste with Oyls to take Fish. TAke the flower of Lupins, three ounces, the Fat of a
Rabbits Kidney an ounce, the Juice of Horse Radish a quarter of an ounce, Oyl of Turpentine three drams, mix these toge∣ther with a stiff hand, and make them up into a Paste, with a little Rabbits Wool felted in with it to strengthen it on the Hook, and it will take to ad∣miration Trout, Tench, Chub and Roach, and is an excellent ground bait for most sort of River or Pond Fish, and proportionable to direction, mix a greater quantity, adding a little Honey. And thus have I given you in a small Book, the whole Art of Angling, for by way of di∣rection, there needs no more; all that remains now, is to put it in practice, without which, what∣ever can be said on the Subject, signifies little. FINIS.
