T232 13558565 100277
THE ROYAL OAKE WITH Other various and delightfull Scenes pre∣sented on the Water and the Land, Celebrated in Honour of the deservedly Honoured Sir RICHARD BROWN Bar. Lord Mayor OF THE CITY OF LONDON The 29th. day of October in the 12th. Year of his Majesties most happy, happy, Reign, An. Dom. 1660. And performed at the Costs and Charges of the Right Wor∣shipfull Company of Merchant-Taylors, Being twice as many Pageants and Speeches as have been formerly showen, By JOHN TATHAM. London Printed by S. G. for R. B. 1660.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Sir RICHARD BROVVN Knight and Barronet, Lord MAYOR of the City of LONDON. My Lord, IT is said by the Philosopher, that he merits more Honour, who can maintain a City in Peace, then he that defendeth it in Warr, which is rather fear'd then belov'd, And Plutarch re∣ports that Pyrrhus (though a Mighty Vaunter) con∣fest, that Cyneas had won more Citties by his Wisdome, then he had Conquered with his Sword. Corona Civica, and Corona Ovalis, the one of Oake, the other of Mirtle, were ever held more law∣dable by the Romans than their Corona Aurea, the Golden Crown, otherwise Corona Triumphalis when the Chariot Wheeles swet Blood; When a Ci∣ty
is to be punisht with Warr, Sword, and Flame, any hair-braind Phaeton will serve the turn, but to pre∣serve it in Peace and Vnion, requires the Manage∣ment of a solid and wise Magistrate. My Lord, it is your happiness in this days Triumph to come with Corona Civica, the Cities Love, and (I may say, and flatter not) the soberer and better part of the Nations, The Company of Merchant-Taylors, Honoueed by the Brotherhood of so manyEdw. the 3. Rich. the 2d and Queen Ann his wife Hen. the 4th. Hen. the 5th. Hen. the 6.. Edw. the 4. Rich. the 3d. Hen. the 7. 22 Princes and Dukes. 2 Dutchesses 1 Arch-Bi∣shop. 3 Embassa∣dors. 42. Earls. 5. Countesses 1. Viscount 73. Barons and Lords. Kings and Princes, receive no small Ioy that you were plea∣sed to become a Member thereof; witness the readi∣ness of the Court of assistants, to promote the honour of the Day, and in particular Mr. Mawrice Ge∣things, Mr. Thomas Nevil, and Mr. John Smart, who took upon them the care of ordering, and mana∣ging the whole business. My Lord, vouchsafe the acceptance of this Dedication as the early tender of my serviceable affection who am My Lord Your Honours Devoted Servant IOHN TATHAM
TO THE WORTHILY HONOURED THE COMPANY OF MERCHANT-TAYLORS. Gentlemen, THough I may appear to you a stranger, your Goodness hath not been so to me; It is not long since I received a rellish thereof. Wines are tryed at the first peircing, not by quan∣tity, but taste, and by a little We may conclude the rest. My Ambition is satisfied, in that this Year I have had the happiness to serve you; if my endeavours fall short of your expectation, I shall blush that my Abilities are not answera∣ble to my Will, and begg your Pardon assuring you, that I have done asmuch as the short allow∣ance of my time would permit: but if in the Sur∣vey thereof any thing meet with your liking, it will be honour enough to him who is thereby Licensed to subscribe himselfe: Gentlemen, The Humblest of your Servants IOHN TATHAM,
TO THE READER. Reader, I Know thou dost expect something to be per∣formed, this day more then hath been in ordinary Triumphs heretofore; in regard it is Celebrated in Honour of a Person of that super∣lative loyalty, and Integrity, as the present Lord Mayor, Not to deceive thy Curiosity herein, let thine own eyes satisfie thee, and to that end, repair to the Water, where the first Sceane will be presented against White-Hall, consisting of a Rock and a Ship floating, Rigg'd, and Man'd. On the Rock is placed several Figures: Oceanus, the Father of Rivers directs his Speech to the Lord Mayor, and nere double the number of Pageants, that formerly were, are seen on the and I shall▪ detein thee no longer, but referr thee to the shew it self, or to the manner there∣of set down in the Book Farewell,
THE Royall Oake: With other various and de∣lightfull Scaens presented on the Water and the Land, and Celebrated in the Honour of the deservedly Honoured Sir Richard Brown, Baronet; Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON, the 29. October in the 12. year of his Majesties most hap∣py Reigne, Anno Domi 1660. And performed at the Costs and Charges of the Right Worshipfull the Company of Merchant Taylors. The Mornings Businesse. The whole Body being met at Merchant Taylors hall, that is to say: FIrst, the Master and Wardens in their Gowns faced, with Foyns and Hoods, each of them having a Page attending, habited with blew Cassocks, whire-stockings and flat Caps; each Page bearing a Target with their Arms in one hand and a Trunchion in the other. 2. The Assistants in their Gowns and Hoods.
3. The Livery in their Gowns and Hoods. 4. The Foyns Batchellors in Gowns and Hoods. 5. The Budge Batchellors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods. 6. Forty eight Gentlemen Ushers in Plush Coats, white Staves and Gold Chains. 7. Eight other Gentlemen carrying Banners in Plush Coats, and Skye coloured Scarffs about their Shoulders. 8. Three Gentlemen more in Buff Coats, and Sky coloured Scarffs about their middles. 9. The Foot Martiall with a like coloured Scarff about his Shoulder with six Attendants, and each of them habited in a white Fustian Dublet, black Breeches, blew stockings, a white Hat, and blew Hatband, and every one of them a Trunchian in his hand. 10. The Serjeant, Trumpeter, with a skye coloured Scarff about his Shoulders, and eight other of his Majesties Trumpeters, together with his Majesties Kettle Drums. 11. His Majesties Drum Major with a like coloured Scarff about his Waste, with his Ma∣jesties others Drums. 12. Twenty other Trumpeters divided and disposed of into eight Pageants. 13. Seven other Drums (whereof Iohn Bib∣by Drum Major to the City is chief) habited either in Buff coats or Buff coloured Dublets, and blew Scarffs about their wastes.
14. Francis Burgesse Master of Defence with his twelve Attendants. 15. One hundred and twenty poore aged persons Free-men of the Company in blew Gowns with red Sleeves, and red Caps, each of them having a Javelin in one hand, and an Es∣cochin in the other; Six other poore people also Free men of the said Company in blew Jackets and red Caps appointed to carry the Silk-works, and twenty foure poore men in disguises, commonly called Green men. Being so met and habited, as a∣foresaid, about eight a clock, the Foot Marshall Ranks them out by two and two▪ FIrst, the Pentioners in blew Gowns, in the head of them is placed three Drums, one Fife, and the Ensigne whereon the Crest of the Company is painted. Secondly, The severall Banners and Strea∣mers carried by the poore men in blew Coats; in the Front of them four Drums and one Fife. Thirdly, The Budge Batchellors, in the front of them eight Gentlemen Ushers, the other two Colours and six Trumpets. Fourthly, The Foyns Batchellors, in the Front of whom is placed ten Gentlemen U∣shers, and two other Gentlemen, the one car∣rying the Companies, the other the Cities Ban∣ner, and six other Trumpets in the head of them.
Fifthly, The Livery, in the front of them, twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and two other of the said Gentlement, each of them carrying two Banners, and foure of his Majesties Drums with one Fife. Sixthly, The Assistants, in the front of whom is placed ten Gentlemen Ushers, two o∣ther of the said Gentlemen, one carrying the Lord Mayor, the other the Cities Banner, and eight other of the best Trumpets. Seventhly, The Master and his four War∣dens, each of them having a Page attending, habited as aforesaid, carrying his Coat of Arms in the Escohin; likewise ten other of the said Gentlemen Ushers, and two other of the for∣mer specified Gentlemen, the one carrying his Majesties, the other the Duke of Yorkes Banner, his Majesties Serjeant Trumpeter, and eight other Trumpets, in the front of them. Being thus Rankt out, the Foot Marshall placeth himself in the head of the Pentioners, and leads the way towards his Lordships house, after them the Banners and Streamers, the Master, War∣dens and Assistants and Livery following next them; after them the Wardens of the Yeoman∣dry, the Foyns and Budge Batchellors. THe Master and Wardens being come to his Lordships house, or meeting him by the way, the Gentlemen Ushers, Colours,
Trumpets, Drums and Fifes, remove their Sta∣tions, and now place themselves in the head of the Juniors; whereas they were placed in the head of the Seniors before, and so lead on the accustomed way towards Three Crain Wharff, beginning with the Pentioners and Silk-works, and the Budge and Foyns Batchel∣lors, the Livery, Assistants, and the Master and Wardens march next the Lord Mayors Atten∣dants. The Pentioners and Silkworks being come to Colledge-hill, do open to the right and left, making a lane through which the Drums, Fifes Trumpets, Colours, Gentlemen Ushers, and Rich Batchellors do passe to the place assigned to refresh themselves; and the Livery Assi∣stants, Master and Wardens and their Gentle∣men Ushers do passe to their Barges laid at the Stairs at the East end of three Crain Wharff. The Lord Mayor, Aldermen and their At∣tendants passe into their Barge, laid at the ac∣customed place. Their Barges and all other the Companies, adorned with Streamers and Banners, and fit∣ted with Hoe-boyes, Cornets, Drums and Trumpets; being on the water move towards Westminster, and by the way his Lordship is saluted with twenty pieces of Ordnance, as peals of entertainment and joy; Against White-hall appears a large Stage or Fabrick at the one end whereof is a Ship, floating, rigg'd and man'd, at the other end a Rock with vari∣ous Figures; one representing Oceanus, who
is said to be God of Seas, and the Father of the Rivers; He was son to Coelum and Vesta; Ar∣chelous was his son begat of Thetis; and the Sy∣rens are said to be the daughters of Achelous; and Calliope to shew his Majesty, he walks or treads upon his Watery Regiment, severall Fishes are discovered to play at his Feet, and Tryton's sporting themselves; four Virgins cloathed in white loose garments, and their Brows circled with Sage, representing the Nymphs that frequent Rivers. Upon his Lordships approach Oceanus ad∣dresseth himself in these words. Oceanus Speech. I Oceanus of old Coelums race, That like a Ring doth Circle and Embrace The spacious Vniverse, God of the Main, And unto Rivers Lord and Soveraign Am come to grace my Daughter, Silver Thames, So much admir'd and lov'd byOr Cambden▪ Causabon speaks King James to be a great lover of this River. Royall James: Whose peaceful reign did make her murmures sweet Not harsh, her Tyde run with harmonious feet: 'Tis Peace that Barbs the Billows, scumbs the foam, Inviteth Trade abroad, and brings it home: My Lord, you are a Royall Substitute, Your clear Election, is without dispute; Imploy your Interest, Trade may now encrease, And be envol'd within the Arm of Peace. Then shall my Grand-GirlesSyrens Brittain is in∣compassed on the East by the German Oce∣an Sea, on the West the Irish, on the North the Scotish, & on the South by a narrow Sea, divided from Gallia Belgica not betray, but sing, And drink Carouses to great Britains King. The Speech ended, his Lordship and the Al∣dermen and Companies make for Westminster,
his Lordship being landed, and the accustomed Ceremonies in the several Courts performed, they return to Baynards Castle, in the way his Lordship receives another Peal of Ordnance, as a token of joy; and at Baynards Castle his Lordship and Attendants are entertain'd by the first Gentlemen Budge and Foyn Batchellors, their several Attendants; and being in like Or∣der as they marched from his Lordships house, the whole body move up Pauls Wharff hill to∣wards the East end of St. Pauls, in the Front of which, the Gentlemen of the Artillary march to shew their affection and loyalty, who are led by Sir Iohn Robinson, the President of the said Fraternity, and Lievtenant of the Tower, in his Scarlet Gown and Sword: After whom the Pentioners and his Lordships Company march in the same manner and equipage as before. His Lordship being come to the East end of Pauls, as aforesaid, is entertained by a Pageant or Scean representing a Pavillion or Tent Royal, flankt with two Camels, the supporters of the Companies Arms; on the back of each Camel a figure clothed in white, a Banner in his hand, and on the 2. stages 9. figures are placed, 5. of them in livery gowns, representing the Mr. and Wardens of the Company, and 4. representing Persons of honour that have been free of the Company: under the Pavillion sits the figures of 8. Kings that have been free of the Company. In the front whereof sits Hen. 7. holding in his hand their first Charter or Patent of Merchant Taylors; and on a lower seat is placed a grave Person representing a Souldier & Senator, un∣der
his Gown a white Armour, holding in the one hand a Gantlet, the property of a Souldier in the other a statute Book as a Senator and maintainer of laws: All parts of this Scaen is beautified and agreeable with their Arms: His Lordship drawing neer, the person under the Pavillion entertains him in these words. Senators Speech. My Lord, I As a Senator, and Souldier doe (Relating to your Triumphs) wait on you, You being both; A double Lawrell now Beset with Stars wreaths your deserving brow; Who but a Senator can Souldier be? 'Tis Valour to be read in Policy: For when the Martialist is at a stand, The wary Statesman takes him by the hand, And leads him through the way did dangerous seem " Nestor was more then Ajax in esteem; " Strength without Wisdom, madly runing on, " Receives its own Precipitation. The Oracle being askt why Iupiter Was the chief God, Mars being the Souldier, Repli'd, he has what to 'ther wants, he's wise; Can when he please with Thunder clear the skies, Implying that a Governour should be Endow'd with Courage and Philosophy, Reasons best ward to Argue and dispute; A watchfull eye, and a heart resolute: Great merrits require great rewards, nor is There one more happy then your self in this; You have oblig'd your King & Countries love, Your receiv'd honours will not barren prove, But multiply, since that the Government Of our three States rest in one Continent:
For where all Rule, no Rule at all can be Where dwels Confesion but in Anarchy?K. . discended lnlly of the Brittains by Gadwallo, of the Sor, by Fargus of the Picks of the daughter of Hungs of the Saxons, by the sister of Edger of▪ the Danes by the daghter of K Christian. and that of the Normans by the death of Henry th. 20. Edw. 4th. 1480, Nor can society possibly Twist, When every one will be even what he list, When Godlike-Monarchy, does keep in Aw, Licentious freedome, by a penal Law; Derivitive from Heaven; he that did spring, From mighty Ancestors, is now your Kign, By right succession As the hands of Heaven, We bagg'd him, and he was as freely given; To rescue us from Wolves, God under whom, He is Vice-Gerent, safely sent him home, To rule his People, that we may express, By former Griefs, our new-found Happiness; Nor ought we to omit th' Antiquity, Of th' Honour'd Company, of which y' are free,Hen th. 1501. and the 17th. year of his Reign. Sir Iohn Per∣cival. Sir Steph. Ien∣ning. Sir Hen. Hober∣thorne. By a new choice; Edward the fourth first made, Them Lynnen Armourers, a select Trade, After incorporated by the Name, Of Merchant Taylors, by that Prince of Fame. and several Kings and Princes have thought good To be admitted in their Brother-hood, Fiveteen Lord Mayor from the Royal stem,Sir Tho. White. Sir Tho. Offley Sir Wil. Harper. Sir Tho Roe. Sir Robert Lee. Sir Leo. Holly∣day. Have received Knightwood, you the last otf hem; Yet in as great Grace, with your Soveraign, Who, cannot of your Loyalty Complain. For through the thickest of your troubles you, Have shew'd your sellfe to him a Subject true And Providence that duty to requite,Sir Wil. Craven Sir Iohn Swy∣merton. Sir Iohn Gore Sir Rob. Ducy Sir Abra. Rey∣noldson, Hath now at last restor'd you to your right: For which the Company, and City may, Give hearty thankes for this so happy day.Sir Ric Brown.
The speech ended the Sceanes quitts the place and is conveyed into Cheapside, and make a halt about the Cross till further Order. His Lordship drawing near the Nagg-head Tavern is received by another sceane, seated like a wood in the midst whereof is a formal building like a house, on the stage or vacant part whereof several persons in the habit of Wood-men and Wood-Nymphs disport them∣selves, dancing about the Royal Oake, never out of Acti∣on. Vpon the Companies approach, one of the Woodmen calls to the rest of his Companions▪ Mass, Gotheard, Mass, Logred, zen, yee, zen, ye, what a warren a gay voke are yonden, Zibb, Tibb, Trot, Zquot Wab, Win, Nab, Gin, what done o mean wullo bee zen the vine zight, ho ho, what pestilent gay vellow's yon a Woodman tis the Lord Mayor. Che vears en not vor all that cham resolv'd to zay zomething tollen A speech to the Lord Mayor in a Ru∣stick Dyalect. A Meezle take thee, Neame cham glad to zee thee Give me thyn hond, how don mine Aunt I prithe Had Iche but knowno this zame gaudy Noone, Chad don'd on viner Clothes and viner Shoone.
Thone we but Rusticks are, and woods done keep, Ich know there is vine woole elongs to sheep, And zome there are now were the vinest thread In zimple Russet ha bin zheltered, Wee Woodmen ha been honest Chil zay that And a vart vort, cham sure that Iche know what The sturdy Oak ha bin a vrend to zome It wud no bow, no more o that but Mum Iche hope your Lordship takes all in good part Cham sure Ich love a Woodman wi mine heart, " In down right English Sir y'are welcome to " that place of Honour hath been long your due. The Speech ended Mr. Dyamond and others tumble and after the Sumerset is perform'd the Rusticks and the Nymphs make a great shout, at which noise (as from the Wood) Silvanus the Rural God, attyred like a Huntsman, about his wast a girdle of leaves, his Habit Russet, on his Brest a starr to distinguish him, and in his hand a Bugle horn, Accosts the Lord Mayor in these words. Sylvanus Speech. No more of noise as you respect our CareAt which they all bow. To the Lord Mayor. Between Staff. and Salo Forsake your Natures, and be still as Ayr. Er'e Time had laid his Iron Coat aside And Peace was rather ravisht then a Bride, Whil'st that the subtle Eye of Tyranny Greedily hunted after Majesty, The Close Trunck of the Oak did entertain And so secur'd your royal Soveraign,
Twice she receiv'd him in her happy womb At his conveying hence and coming home As though a greater knot had been t'unty Then e're was twisted in the Prophesy. The pendant leaves his head enshadow'd round only to conceale but to be Crown'd, The Barke that brought him, flew▪ as though it meant To steal upon us without Times consent▪ Thus does the Oak draw a fresh breath from Fame By the instinctive vertue of his Name; And consecrated ought to be to Iove Producing both th' effects of Peace and Love. The Rusticks shall be civiliz'd and now Imbrace what heretofore they'd not allow, About the Royal Oak the Nymphs shall sing And dance a measure to their Lord the King, The Woodmen so refus'd, shall on each Tree Inscription make of their quit slavery, And for a Girdle in a Garter sense 'Bout th' Oake write Hony soit qui maly Pence. Which done his Lordship passeth towards the East end of Cheapside, where he is entertained by another sceane, being a Charriot drawn by a Lyon and a Lamb, in the Chario is placed three figures, PEACE TRUTH & PLENTY the Chariot is driven by Time who salutes his Lordship in these words:
Times Speech. My Lord, TIME is the Register of all Mens Acts Or good, or bad, their vertue and their facts. Although by violence he hath bin made a Property unto the Traytors Trade; Yet Time (that every secret brings to light) At last (you see) their Treacheries requites, Payes them in their own Coyn, the bloody stamp, hath turn'd Surgeon, cur'd them of the Cramp. " Treason may flourish for a little space, " but Time at length writes Villane in its face. Whil'st Iulius Caesars death Revengless past Rome nere was free from sword Fire Plague and Wast Till Time reveal'd the Murderers and then their better Genius did return agen, And clos'd up Ianus Temple. Though Time hath bin curst by those had neither wit nor faith, But rashly did conclude hee'd never mend And therefore in despair did wish his End. Yet he for every sore and malady hath brought you home a Soveraign remedy, Occasion is his foretop, which had some long since ta'ne hold of, bad daies had not come, Twas not Times fault, but theirs that let him go, Hee's swift of foot, their Courage was but slow, You have been wise in this (Sir) to your praise, Oretak'n Time, renew'd the Alchion daies,
With such Alacrity, that poreing on with serious eye, my Enchyridion That monstrous Murder that outfac'd the Sun Appears to me as yesterday but done, So home hath Justice follow'd them, their heels are now tript up, each his own horror feels. This was Times worke, though wisdome was the scout without Time nothing could be brought a bout Peace is restor'd; Truth doth in Triumph ride, (not long since scorn'd, forsaken, and deny'd.) Plenty their hand-maid follows to maintain the Majesty of the Heroick Train It is a Maxime (Traytors bitter Cupp) " warrs maketh Theives, but Peace doth hang them up: Since Time has done such Cures by Providence, let him not be abus'd under pretence Of this, or that, seeds of Phanatick braines; But while you Govern (Sir) hold in the Reynes; And while the glorious starr-bestudy'd skye retains a light your Fame shall never dy. The speech ended, his Lordship and the whole At∣tendance pass down the old Iury, through Catt-eaten street and Ladd Lane, Mayden-Lane, from which place to his Lordships house a Gallery is a made by the Com∣pany of the Merchant-Taylors, on the North and on the South by the Gentlemen of the Artillery and their At∣tendants, where another sceane a Rock is placed on the top whereof is seated a figure representing Peace and upon his Lordships entring into his house, Peace salutes him from the top of the Rock.
PEACES SPEECH AFter so many various Sceans of strife Horror and Mischief acted to the Life, By those that seem'd to owne th shapes of men, But Monsters rather were of Caucus Denn, Whole sulphurous Nostrells breath'd into stine Jarrs, Sword, Fire, and Famine, the effect of Warrs, Peace (that their hate and fury did exile) Is once again return'd unto this Isle, And with her brought Truth to Illuminate, Your hearts to nourish Love, and banish Hate. Truth is the Center wherein all things meet, The Chard by which Wisdome directs her feet, The ground of science; scale to Charity, The unmov'd Rock; Tip of Eternity. While Peace and Truth do flourish in the Land. Plenty shall wait on it with a full hand, Ceres shall cram your Barns, and Bacchus Crown Your Boles, no more of Penury be known, Trade long since dead reviv'd, shall be again By th' Vertual Influence of your Soveraign, Whose gracious Beams, like to the Sun doth shine, Upon his Subjects by a power divine, Whose Immence, Majesty, and Glory shall Outlast Times Age, and the Worlds Funerall. Blest be the happy minute of his birth That elevates our Joys above the Earth. Flora the Queen of May shall honoured be By all the sons of Lyrick Poesy,
And you my Lord, whose Prudent care hath bin Imploy'd in the great work to bring him in, Keep Faction down, suppress Seditions seed, The bag being broke did the Imposthume breed, Let it not gather to a head again, Infectious matter dwells in a bad brain: So shall your years and happiness encrease, Live in your Countries, love and dye in Peace. The Speech being ended the Companies hasten to their Hall, the Gentlemen of the Artillery take leave by their severall Vollies. In the undertaking of this days Triumph were imploy¦ed, (by a person of approved Judgment, who design∣ed and modelled, the several Fabricks, and Structures thereof) Capt. Andrew Dakers Paynter, Mr. William Lightfoot, Paynter, Mr. Thomas Whiteing Joyner, Mr. Ri∣chard Cleere, Carver, all of them being the Cities Arti∣ficers, and deserve in their several qualities, ample Commendations.
