W1678A R30189 11258643 47182
A SMALL PRESENT To a Roman CATHOLIQUE, IN Opposition to his present Hear-say Tradition, as not agreeable to the Rule of Faith. By one that desires to walke with meek∣nesse towards them of a contrary way, if God peradventure will give them repen∣tance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may awake out of the snare of the Devil; as others awaking have wondred at their own vanity and misery, dreaming so long without any sound reason. By Henry Whistler, Bac. Theol. LONDON, Printed by W. W. for Thomas Paybody dwel∣ling in Queenes Head Court, in Pater No∣ster Row, 1657.
A small PRESENT To A Roman Catholique. In opposition to his present Hear-say Tra∣dition, as not agreeable to the rule of Faith. A Roman Catholique Neighbour, lately visiting me with usual respect, I, after my usuall manner of hearty affection, would have perswaded him to Refor∣mation, for the good of his soul. He replyed, If his soul and others like, were un∣safe, they were most of any men to be pittied, ha∣ving so many things perswading to rest under the Roman-Church Judgment for certainty. Before, I had long since given out some Papers to prove the Ro∣man-Church contradictory to herself in all her waies. So the beame being broken, it would not be safe or just to weigh in her balances. He desired of me something againe in writing, for their learned to read; whereof he had heard
lately divers say, that they wanted worke, and for reviving occasion, he brought Rushworths Dialogue which waveth my former allegations, in effect thereby granted; and endeavoureth an other way of certainty for his Disciple in dispute against Pro∣testancy, not to trust either Holy Scripture, or o∣ther Bookes alleadged for the proofe of the Roman Religion through all ages, though commending such students as for their great and profitable paines, but not appliable to the capacities of the Vulgar, who might therein be intangled if they meet with a cunning Adversary: but rather se∣curely to rest in prepossession of the Roman Church, of the present Age; believing his Christian Fathers in report from Christian Fore-fathers, of what they affirmed age after age, to have learned as by Tradi∣tion universall from Christ and his Apostles: with∣out any knowne opponent, it seeming impossible that at any time all Fathers should together deceive their children; or that all Children should in all Countries be suddainely deceived without any known cause, or any known time of such univer∣sall change: a meere Dreame. Before you require us to shew such time of change, prove any such time, of universall accord in the present points of the Roman Faith and pra∣ctice. The present points controverted, are not contained in the ancient Creeds, & therefore not then believed to be necessary. The points of anci∣ent Creeds are sufficiently grounded in holy Scrip∣tures: the Scriptures so sure, that the Romans were delivered thereunto (Rom. 6.17.) to obey,
not to overcome the form of Doctrine to which they were delivered, as since they deny, what the Canonical Epistle to the Romans affirmeth, (con∣cupiscence to be sinne) and affirm what is there∣in denyed (Justification by Workes.) The Ro∣man Church opposed the whole Epistle to the Hebrewes as not Canonical, witnesse Jerome and Augustine, who neverthelesse professed that they believed it to be Canonicall; A cleare proofe that they did not believe the Roman Tradition to beare the rule. Tradition for the power of a general Councill, alleadged in publique by the generall Councill at Basil against Tradition, al∣leadged in publique for the Popes power to be supreame. How excuseable from contradi∣ction. Hear now the Roman Catholique-Disciple his Interloquie. I am told that some of our Doctors doe main∣taine, that in the person of the Pope, resides the Rule of faith by a singular gift and priviledge be∣stowed on St. Peter and his successors. And this so rigorously, that no Generall Councill (no not though the Popes Legates be present and confirm it) is of force to oblige as of faith, till the perso∣nall confirmation of his Holinesse be obtained. Others they say, esteeme the Councill above the Pope, and so hold his approbation unnecessa∣ry; and that the rule of faith rests in the Coun∣cill. Others, to make all safe, joyne both in one, and neither admit the Councill without the Pope; nor the Pope without the Councill, to breed any Obligation of Faith. And farther, I
hear that, among these Divines (of what opini∣on soever they be; touching the subject in which this Rule or highest Authority resides) some thinke no new Doctrine can he breached or proposed as certaine, and as an Article of faith by what authority soever; unlesse it were esteemed certaine before, and al∣waies believed as such: yet they tell me, there are ma∣ny who maintaine, that this highest Authority of the Church (where ever it is) may define points of Do∣ctrine not certainly knowne hitherto, nor ever expresly believed before. And how all these opinions can be reconciled among themselves, or stand with this, that Tradition is our Rule of Faith, I confesse I know not; saith the Cousen in that Dialogue, to which the personate Uncle answereth. For the first part of your Objection, I see no great matter in the variety of opinions among our learned: for they onely seeke out the Decider of points of Doctrine (that is) by whose mouth we are to know (on occasions of dispute) which be our Articles of faith, whether by the Popes, or Coun∣cels, or both; which is not much material to our purpose, whatever the truth be. Supposing we acknowledge no Articles of Faith, but such as have deseended to us by Tradition from Christ and his Apostles. Among Protestants, are not allowed such un∣grounded suppositions (as petitio principii) beg∣ging the thing in question, unreasonable to be granted; in things of dispute where you ac∣knowledge no certaine Decider, whereby to know the rule of your supposed sureness: the name of Tradition being equivocall, as drawne
to several senses in their threefold vehement o∣pinions, so distinct about the rule with mutual denunciation of curses one against another in publique, as about the Roman Catholique pro∣posall of faith, therefore uncertain in it self, and uncertaine toward others: Particular men be∣ing unable to search all Books, whether coun∣terfeit, or not, in so many languages, or other∣waies to discern what hath succeeded in a tra∣ditionary way of all ages in their own or other Countries. The second part of your Objection seemes of greater force (said the Uncle to his Ro. ro. Co∣sen) because some of the learned acknowledge an authority in the (Roman) Church, not onely to determine either speculative or practicall points of Doctrine, new or old; so as the whole Church is obliged to accept, or not oppose its definition: but also that it can so decree even a speculative point of Doctrine hitherto alwaies held uncer∣taine, and never acknowledged as revealed, ne∣ver esteemed an Article of Faith; that hereafter the whole Church shall be obliged to believe it is a reveal'd and necessary point of Christian Faith, which you must know is but an Opinion: nor do the Authors of it oblige any to believe it as cer∣taine; nor condemn those who neither doe, nor ever will admit such Position: that there's now no Revelations for new points of Doctrine; that Christ Jesus was our only Law-maker in this kind, having delivered to his Apostles, and they to their Churches, all that was necessary to be
knowne of this degree, and therefore Stay Sir, out of such premises of such Ro∣man Catholique Teachers (as are agreeable to Protestants advisement) conclude not over ha∣stily to make your Disciple unsafe in not being troubled at your differences; since contrary to your minde, those high Competitors for Au∣thority, do decree new points of Doctrine, and would oblige all others under paine of eternall damnation. [Oblige and not oblige] How your speech cros∣seth it selfe? and yet (as an Aeger cutteth and smootheth) all smoothly submitted to Tradition: a name of strong delusion, inchanting to receive, as if that had come continually fluent from Christ, which is against Christ, and against the definition of generall Councils (as Image-worship against the com∣mandement of God, and against the determination of two severall Councils, one at Franck ford abbetting that o∣ther at Constantinople) and that at Constance for∣bidding to communicate lay people under both kindes, notwithstanding the institution of Christ, and the pra∣ctice of the primitive Church, communicating the peo∣ple under both; both Christ and his Apostles cal∣ling the Cup, the Covenant in Christs blood; which before the face of Christ, barreth the plea of Roman Tradition therein: and that (constantian non ob∣stante) pleadeth but custome, and that abusively, be∣ing not in memoriall à parte ante, before the begin∣ning, whereof the Primitive practice and institu∣tion are acknowledged on the contrary for us. In full communion; to say no more of other new points in the profession upon Oath, which
you acknowledge to make use of at admission of others to your Church, since P. Pius 4. Alas, un∣warie soules, engulphed thereby to professe the fatall insinuating guiles, under pretence of Tradi∣tions, not knowing what, nor how many, nor how safely to discern among so many false, unrighteous and evill; since evill spirits and false Teachers arose in the Apostles time, and multiplying afterwards, rendred Hear-say a most unsafe guide, especially since that Councill of Trent (through finall de∣volution of all to Pope Pius the 4. against the Papall confirmations of so many former Coun∣cil's Acts) hath frustrated the discretive Rules, ei∣ther by Pope or Councill, or both Pope and Councill together, evaporating in your fume as but Opinions; although most elaborate in so many named generall Councils, the latter the worse re∣presentative of your high minded Roman Church, all easie to be convinced of contradiction, a bar a∣gainst all hope of any certification by that your imaginary Traditioning way, without any rule or forme of certainty whereby to discern pretences of traditionall matters, either practicall, or espe∣cially speculative, experience enough in 2400 yeares from the beginning, when a man living 800 or 900 yeares, Doctrines might more easi∣ly descend by Tradition, from Grandfathers to Grandchildren; yet if then by the subtle enemy, Tradition was poisoned, and cursedly did poyson with Babylonion bitternesse, in ambition of an uni∣versal selfe-wise Monarchy, worshipping Images of the dead, and worshipping the dead false gods; abominable Idolatry, superstition, cruell perse∣cution
against the then worshippers of the onely true God. Traditionary wisdome so putrifying, man-kinde needed to have the Law written; and at need God writ it with his owne finger in Tables of Stone, and bid Moses write in a Booke, against which the evil spirit of enmity practised by force and fraud. First by force of lesser Potentates; after that, by the four mighty Beasts descried in Daniels vision Prophetically; the Babylonion, Persian, Grecian, Ro∣man, as in that Imperiall outragious publique Edict to burne the Bible; the Christians patience overcomming the Roman persecutors: thence∣forth the subtlest infernall enmity projected by fraud in Lamb-like profession, hypocritical∣ly to defeat the power of Christian Religi∣on, by subduing the written Word of God to Tradition again, in two grand perilous impostures. One, as if Tradition were more certain to men. An other, as if Tradition were more perfit; so piecing out salvifical Doctrine, partly by unwrit∣ten Tradition, and partly by depressing what is written as it were uncertain, and having no cer∣tainty toward us, but in dependence upon Tradi∣tion unwritten. A fraud most mischievous, most wisely preven∣ted by the providence of God, the Holy Ghost, in Booking the New Testament, with those two glo∣rious praises of Certainty, and of Integrity. More certainty by writing, then by preaching the Gospell, as affirmed in the first verses of St. Lukes Gospel; admirable caution of Gods holy
Spirit enditing; so that the Papists own authorized Testament unfasteneth it not, as an impertinent movable, but as the verses prime in that first chap∣ter of St. Luke. Having heard and learned the Gospel truths from those that were eye-witnesses and ministers of the word from the beginning, the very prime advan∣tantage of Tradition,  Tradiderunt tradition∣ed, or by tradition delivered the same from those first Teachers; yet it seemed good to me to write those things for certainty: the Rhemists translate it Verity: that is not enough, it was Verity before in the first Teachers, but in writing is more, assured certainty: yea more yet, as beyond all fallacy, without all fal∣lacious or fallible incertainty; free, from  tutum safe to write, Phil. 3.1. For me to write safe for you, (, the word here) security; secure verity taught before, yet farther for security to be written, it is good to read it written for as∣suring, securing, certifying the things wherein thou art instructed,  catechised even in the Prin∣ciples of saving Faith, although instructed, cate∣chised by the first Teachers, in the first spring of Tradition; yet it is safe, secure, to be further secu∣red of those things, most excellent Theophilus, by in∣terpretation, a lover of God. The ancient Epiphanius Haeres. 51. found it not certaine to be the name of any particular man, but saith, it might be spoken to every true lover of God, and the Papists Annotations acknowledge it; as the Bereans were esteemed more noble than others for searching the Scriptures, whether those things were so as they heard preached. If the case were so at first when tradition was more easie; much more
now (after so long time hath multiplyed errors, and the spirit of envy sowed tares, and numberless false Prophets have wrought their nets of subtle fal∣lacies) ought the lovers, if their own soules be lo∣vers of Gods written Word, to secure themselves, that as our Saviour argued the Jews to have been decei∣ved by Tradition from their forefathers: so the Gentiles might not unwarily be caught by pretended Tradition from the Apostles; as the Apostles of us Gentiles, forewarned. Here in Rushworths Dialogue, the 3d Sect. 9. the Ne∣phew interposeth in season, saying, P. 197. I have another great difficulty, that our Catechists and Preachers, when they teach us Christian Doctrine, tell us, Thus you are to believe, This you are to practise, without expressing the differences betwixt the points of Doctrine; whereof some perhaps are but onely the Answers of learned men, some definitions of the Church, and some matters of Traditions. The like I believe of former Ages; Christian Doctrine descending to us so in a heap or confusi∣on, that 'tis hard to distinguish what is of Tradition, what the general consent of the Church, and what onely Opinions of the learned; why then may not some Position of this last rank, passe for a Tra∣dition by the adoption of some ages, in which it will be forgotten that ever it had its beginning from the wit and industry of private Doctors? And Sect. 10 I feare it would break the rule and certainty of Tra∣dition: whereon relies the whole frame and building of our Faith; according to your discourse, if truth not delivered by Tradition, may passe for so delivered; what security can we have, that a falsity may not passe in the same manner, and so bring in error a∣mong us.
A doubt wisely framed in the name of a Learner but not well answered by Rushworth the Dialogist in the person of the Teacher, as appeareth in these his words, P. 199. However the Ʋulgar people seldome observe any difference what is Tradition, and what but of common Opinion. (How doth that seldome not o∣verthrow Tradition, so disabled from being the Rule or motive of their Faith?) Neverthelesse those know how to distinguish Doctrins of such different natures, whom we call Divines, if truly such as the name requires. Who can be truly such as the name requires? Truly the name appertaines to Gods attri∣butes, and works; as divine wisdome, divine po∣wer, divine goodnesse, divine sanctification, and divine indignation for condemnation, of such as take his divine name in vain. Therefore as learned Bellarmine in his Retracta∣tions, blamed his former Bookes wheresoever he had given the names of Divus or Diva, to Saints of the Roman Calender, because Divas and Diva were the Titles which Hethenisme gave to false gods and goddesses: hearty zeale, wisheth all would abstaine from naming men Divines. But to take your meaning, out of your follow∣ing words. Learned men know; of Doctrine and Disci∣pline, some parts are such as cannot be learned but by im∣mediate revelation; others such as no sensible person can doubt of, if he believe the former: other points there may be, which need art and study to deduce and draw them out of the two former — every one (conversant in Lo∣gick, and in judging the qualities of such propositions as belong to science) is capable of understanding these Theologicall conclusions.
Beware of Delusions in false Conclusions, Se∣ductions in pretence of Deductions, at that very time in that manner. Under the last Head-ship of Rome, grievous motions were to come, and so they came; Event the sure interpreter of truth, against Novelties crept in, (subtle insinuations of that mystery of iniquity foretold) the vulgar soules are enslaved to trust your Deductions by mans discourse which is fallible and easily mista∣ken, and uncertaine in various Opinions; depen∣dant on immediate revelations so long since, un∣certaine to this Age, but by the Rule of Gods Word written on purpose to be Canonicall, that is regular to regulate Faith and practice, with as∣sistance of the Holy Ghost the Teacher, which Christ promised to teach his Disciples all things, (John Chap. 14.) by vertue of his Prayer for the Believers of his Word, as well as for the Teachers from age to age (John Chap. 17.) Believers and Teachers are co-ordained; Peter and Cornelius, as Ananias and Paul, prepared one for another in heavedly vision, to prepare Teachers and Belie∣vers in ordinary dispensation, to seek of God the fruits of his blessing to the glory of his Word, Heb. Chap. 4. The word of God is quick and sharper then any two edged sword, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart () ju∣dicative. God the judge of all, could and would speak plain enough for judging all, if they would regard him speaking plainly, Ioh. ch, 12 He that receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him; the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day, Rev. chap. 20. The dead were judged out of those things which were writ∣ten
in the Bookes according to their workes. Prophecy speaketh of things future in the prae∣terit form. 1. Because as sure as if they were already done. 2. Because ordained from before. 3. Because in doing alwaies as they shall be judged at the end; what judgeth the end, judgeth all the meanes thereunto. The end and the meanes, as under the same de∣scription. 1. By the Book of Divine Providence, descri∣bing what men were abled to do. 2. The Booke of divine Law, and Gospel, de∣scribing what men ought to believe and to do. 3. The Book of divine Remembance, describes what men believe and do. 4. The Book of Life, what they shall receive for believing and doing or not. In this heavenly concatenation of divine Acts, shall men abusively calling themselves Divines, ad∣vance the Roman to be more regularly judicious then God? and the Roman word of Tradition, more indicatively regular than the word of God our Judge; avant blasphemy, which instead of mans Ministery, prideth mans Magisterality, to steal the glory from God, and his written Word, and his almighty Spirit, which helpeth Teachers to judge as Teachers, and learners to judge as learners; the ear judging words as the mouth tasteth meats, and the eye seeth fire by its own light, & by its own efficacy; fire warmeth, and a firie sword burneth and cutteth the hand that dasheth against it. The written Word of God is all this, Manna the bread of heaven, light in the face of Jesus Christ the
Sun of Righteousnesse; fire of zeal among the Che∣rubins, and their flaming sword; as bread feeding to life eternall, as light shining in faithull mens hearts, as fire inkindling Charity; but as the firy-flaming sword keeping out from Paradise, the proud scornfully refusing to depend on God his written Word of grace for certainty; The first praise. The second praise (of the new Testament writ∣ten) is Integrity witnessed by Luke the Evangelist in these large expressions. 1. Of the many which took it in hand to write, not excluding any that were then known of cre∣dit. 2. The creditable witnesses, which saw, or heard, and preached the word of the Gospel. 3. The matters from the beginning indefinitely, without exception, all things fulfilled (as fore∣told) the things wherein thou hast been Catechised; things needfull toward salvation by Christ our Sa∣viour. 4. The manner, having diligently attained knowledge, , having had perfect under∣standing of things from the very first. 5. The Author, the Holy Ghost, it seemed good to write , the same word which is in the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 15.28. It seemed to the holy Ghost, and 2 Tim. 3.16. All Scripture inspired of God; so this writing of the Rule was by divine in∣spiration of the Holy Ghost. 6. The intent to make the Gospel-truth, by wri∣ting, more certainly known than by meer narrati∣on, or unwritten Tradition. Thus both the praises of Christ his Gospell by writing, the praise of more certainty, with praise of
integrity meet together in the Evangelicall intenti∣on of Luke, and of St. John also, chap. 20. These are written that you might believe, and that believing ye might have life; and Chap. 22. of the Revelation, If any man shall adde, God shall adde to him the plagues that are written in this Book: and if any man shall take a∣way from the words of the Book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of life. I Iesus have sent mine Angel to testifie unto you these things in the Chur∣ches, the seven Churches of Asia by name. Christ Iesus not vouchsafing to name the Church of Rome, a sign of no such love unto her, nor trust in her. The Angell of Christ his face or presence, set∣ting his right foot upon the Sea; Wherefore his right foot? Peter having not walked with a right foot according to the truth of the Gospel, (Gal. chap. 2.); and called Satan by Christ, (Mat. 16.); and his pretended successor the Pope (Herod-like) suffering himselfe to be called God, to be worship∣ped and married to the Church-spouse of Christ; high time in spirit of jealousie, for the true trusty (messenger) Angelique presentative of Christ his glory, to stand with strength of his right foot. Wherefore upon the Sea? 1. The Sea is mystically significative of the general Council by decree, whereof that Harlot-like Church married to an other, set her seat of pretended full authority to sit over Nations as Rivers, meeting in general Council against the decrees of so many former general Councils: by which contradiction her general Councils (as the Red-sea-waters on both sides) afforded betwixt them safe passage a∣gain, for the people of God in spirit to depart from Egyptian bondage again, singing to the praise of God
the song of Moses (and the Lamb) again, Rev. ch. 15. 2 The Sea of the general Council, by whose decree that Harlotry-Church on her superconciliar seat of Authority, forbiddeth Christian people from communion of the Cup at wedding supper of the Lambe: Christ ordaining the Cup to be the new Co∣venant in his bloud; in forbidding whereof, as if the peoples union with Christ were by putting wa∣ter to the Wine. Her Trent Councill pointeth at the people as waters in the the 17. Chapter of the Rev. so discovering her to be the Harlot there, over the people as waters. 3. And in the same Sea over Tongues, advancing her Latin above all others; ranke Babylonian policy for advancing her universal Monarchy: Babylon in mystery commandresse over Hebrew and Greeke, wherein was written the word of God almighty. 1. By whose just judgement the Roman Church, stricken in brain; published two contradicto∣rious editions of the Bible in Latine, each to be received under denunciation of the greatest curse: the first putting that out as not the word of God, which the latter put in as the word of God; and the latter putting out as not the word of God, which the former put in as the word of God: So the Papists, whether they receive or receive not the Latin edition, are cursed by the Roman Church; and the Roman Church, and they while subject to the Roman Church, are under the curse of Christ, for ad∣ding & detracting from the written Book of Christ, both falsly published in the name of Christ, both by pretence of Trent Councill-authority; which not onely thus dejecteth the Book of Christ under the Roman word, as of more certainty for her adhe∣rents,
but imposeth unwritten Traditions to be recei∣ved with equall reverence. For prevention whereof, Christ by his Angelicall presence of his glory, bid, Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter, Rev. Chap. 1. For the fall of Baby∣lon, write Chap. 14. after the voice from heaven Come out of her my people. For holy communion of Iewes and Gentiles, write chap. 19. For Reformation of all, write, Untill he say, It is done, chap. 21. A voice from the Throne said, I make all things new; write, For these words are true, importing Caution to beware of the unwritten as untrue. In the midst of all that mighty Angel of the Covenant, with a Rainbow about his head, sware, the mystery of God shall be finished, as he hath declared by his ser∣vants the Prophets: Are not their Prophecies holy Scriptures? and did he not for that intent hold the Book open in his hand when he sware? and set his foot in despight on the Sea, after which no more Sea, the last Sea; and the Councill of Trent boasted to be the last, after which no more should need, no more intended by them, to hinder (the freedom of just and full Reformation) by that oath of that P. Pius, for the Trent-frauds and unwritten Traditi∣ons: how weak against Christs oath, out of whose mouth the two edged sword? How rashly doth their last Annotation on the New Testament, pray Christ to judge betwixt them and Protestants? hath he not thus judged already? Christ have mercy upon us all, that by his Grace we may repent, and be fully re∣formed, to his Glory. Amen. FINIS.
