W2044 R4013 11791913 49238
An Exact DIARY OF THE Late Expedition OF His Illustrious Highness THE Prince of Orange, (Now KING of Great Britain) From his Palace at the HAGƲE, To his Landing at TORBAY; And from thence To his Arrival at WHITE-HALL. Giving a particular ACCOUNT Of all that happened, and every Day's March. By a Minister, Chaplain in the ARMY. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old-Baily. M DC LXXXIX.
Licens'd, April 23. 1689. JA. FRASER.
AN Exact Diary of the late Expedition OF HIS ILLUSTRIOUS HIGHNESS THE Prince of Orange, INTO ENGLAND.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, WILLIAM, Earl of Bedford; WILLIAM, Earl of Portland; HENRY, Viscount Sidney of Sheppy, AND Sir JOHN MAYNARD, One of the Lords Commissioners of the GREAT SEAL. My LORDS, WHen I seriously reflect upon the stupendious Providence of the Al∣mighty, in bringing to pass the late and unpresidented Under∣taking of his Highness the Prince of Orange, now King of Great Bri∣tain,
I cannot do less than Com∣memorate those Noble Persons, that both favour'd and joyn'd in so good a Work, among whom your Honours had a considerable share, which made me prefume to lay this short Compendium of that Expedition at your Feet, hum∣bly craving your candid Accep∣tation and Patronage of it, (tho' not varnish'd with quaintness of Phrase, or Elegancy of Wit and Rhetorick, but in a lame and plain Stile). Your Honours are not insensible how near we were to Ruine, nor how his Sacred Majesty King WILLIAM, ha∣zarded all that was dear, for our good, which should oblige the most ungrateful to make some answerable returns of Gratitude and Loyalty. Your Honours have
fully convinced the World of your uprightness and steadiness in this Cause. All that I can say cannot add to, but will rather de∣tract from your Honours innate Worth and Goodness I heartily wish this good Work, so far alrea∣dy advanced, may be fully com∣pleated, so that we may have no reason to fear a relapse. And that the God of Heaven may preserve our gracious King and Queen, and prosper their good Inten∣tions with suitable success, and convert all their Enemies, or make them fall before them, is the daily Prayers of, May it please your Honours, your Honours most Humble and most Obedient Servant, JOHN WHITTLE.
AN Exact Diary of the late Expedition OF HIS ILLUSTRIOUS HIGHNESS THE Prince of Orange, (Now KING of Great Britain) HIS Illustrious Highness the Prince of Orange, who is of a truth another Joshua, in his un∣daunted Spirit and Magnanimity for the Lord's Cause, and prosperous Conduct of his People Israel: Another good Josiah, in doing that which is right in the sight of God, destroying Idolatry while he was yet young: Another David, or man after God's own heart, and a zealous Defender of that Faith which is tru∣ly Ancient, Catholick, and Apostolical; receiving an account of the exceeding great Cruelty and Barbarity of Roman Catholicks in France, towards all them that professed the true Reform'd Religion, or the Protestant Faith in that King∣dom; and that indeed without any regard to the Hoary head, (thô found in the way of Righteousness, which is a Crown of Honour) without any respect to Sex, or poor in∣nocent Babes, which could not discern between their right and left hands: and not only hearing of their unheard-of
Cruelty, but even beholding daily at the Court, and about his own Sacred Person, not a few who had sometime been the Objects of their Direfulness, and undergone, to their great sorrow, their Barbarity: among many others, a pious aged Minister of the Gospel, whom (for adhering to the Truth, and holding fast the profession of his Faith, without wavering) these Sons of Belial took and bound fast unto a large Spit, and turn'd him as a Pig at a great Fire, after a direful manner, until he was near half roasted alive, insomuch that his Eyes were almost ready to drop out of his Head, his Bloud in the Veins much dried, his Sinews not a little scorch'd, and the poor man a meer Cripple at this very day, as may be seen by the curious Inquisitors; althô God who is faithful, did not suffer him to be tempted above what he enabled him to bear, and in his appointed time made a way for him to e∣scape their cruel Hands, so much embrued in the Bloud of the Saints, and in the Bloud of the Martyrs of Jesus. And besides this Minister, many of both Sexes, who had been tor∣mented by their cruel Hands: Men, who had been bound fast with Cords, while their own Wives were most immo∣destly used and entreated, and then assassinated before their sorrowful eyes: Women who had been violently held, while the tender Bowels of their own dear Husbands were ript out even before their faces running down with tears; and the sucking Infant cruelly murdered in the arms of its Mother that bear it, to the breaking of many womens hearts. Nay, so exceeding great was the Cruelty and Barbarity of these Bloud-thirsty Papists towards the Protestants there, that no Pen is able to delineate it, or any Tongue express it, and ve∣ry few English hearts capable of conceiving it, our Nation (God be praised) being unacquainted with such abominable Practices. Now, as was said, the Prince of Orange hearing and behold∣ing their cursed Facts, was exceedingly concern'd for Jerusa∣lem, because he had a real love for her; and therefore this good Josiah's heart did even melt within him, and he har∣bour'd
and succour'd very many of these poor and deplorable Protestants, who were under so sore a Tryal. How did he long to have these Sons of Satan vanquisht, and the Walls of Jerusalem rebuilt! and therefore did not count his own Life dear to him, that he might cause the true Spouse of Christ to rest securely. And verily we may hope that Babylon's fall draws near, and that the Kings of the Earth, who have com∣mitted Fornication with her, shall partake of her Misery, and see her Plagues come in one day, Death, and Mourning, and Famine. Without doubt, those many thousands of Souls un∣der the Altar, which were slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held, do cry continually with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our bloud on them that dwell on the earth? Nebuchadnezzar the Great, may, before seven times pass o∣ver him, be driven to confess, saying, As I have done to the Saints, so God hath requited me; and the same measure that my cruel People measured to the Protestants in my Land, is now meeted to my Popish Realm. But for us of this Kingdom and Nation, we may well rejoyce in God that made us, in God that redeem'd us, in God that sanctified us and all his Elect; in God who hath so lately delivered us out of the hands of our implacable Enemies, when we were as Sheep appointed to the slaughter: We ought to extol him that rideth upon the Heavens, by his Name Jah, and rejoyce before him. And well may our Nation be right joyful in our King and Queen, by whom Jerusalem is made a Praise in the Earth, and who are (in truth) as good, as God hath made them great; and modestly and justly as far excel all others in Virtue and true Piety, as they are above them in Sphere or Station. Now his Illustrious Highness the Prince of Orange know∣ing that the Enemies of the Lord had broken down the Walls of Jerusalem, and raz'd them even to the ground in France, because the publick and solemn Worship of God in Spirit and in Truth, is not to be found in any part of that Kingdom now: And seeing that those Engines of Satan were at work in the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland (Kingdoms unto which this great Prince had such a Right and Title, not only by Affinity or Marriage of her Royal Highness, his most entirely beloved Consort, but also by Consanguinity or Birth, his Royal Mother, deceased, being Daughter to K. Charles I. of blessed Memory) for such was the Arrogance and Haugh∣tiness of all Papists now in England, Scotland, and Ireland, but especially of the Jesuits and Priests, that they consulted how to destroy the Protestants, and extirpate the Lord's In∣heritance, that they should be no more a People here, and that their Name should be rooted out: Nay, so far had they proceeded in this Diabolical Design, that even the Popish Kings of the Earth begun now to set themselves, and the Rulers took counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, and the purchase of his Bloud: therefore now they began to say of our Sion here, Down with it, down with it, raze it to the ground, and suffer not so much as one Heretical Branch to remain. But he that sitteth in the Heavens, did laugh; the Lord had them in derision: for he knew well their Fall was at hand, and that the Righteous should have cause to rejoyce. Nay, as if 'twere not enough for these Priests and Jesuits to insult over mens Bodies, they pretend Authority over mens Souls, and frequently would rush into what House they listed, in a very impudent manner, and molest the dying person with their destructive and pernicious Discourses, torment poor Souls departing this life, and where they could, they forc'd the Breaden or Wafer-God to be re∣ceived. And which was no small aggravation to our misery, or addition to our sorrow, no part of our Nation was now free from these Ravening Wolves, which went about in Sheeps cloathing. These Serpents had now crept into every little hole or creek about the Land. And all this came to pass by the great encouragement and protection of the late K. James and Q. Mary; persons, every man can tell, that made it their principal business to abet and protect the Priests and Jesuits, enlarge the Kingdom of Antichrist, and promote the Interest
of Babylon, the great Harlot and Mother of all Abomination and Wickedness: therefore without all controversie, their minds were blinded by the God of this World, because of their unbelief, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them: Hence they were wholly given over to a reprobate mind, to be∣lieve Lyes and Fables, and Traditions of men, before the pure Word of God, and more sure Word of Prophesie, which is Truth, as Christ himself testifies: Therefore they mightily encouraged the Evil, and discouraged the Good; abetted and protected them who said the Bible was false; (as Father Peters his Brother publickly preacht against our Bible, averring there was several hundred Faults and Contradictions in it, &c.) but suspended and disanimated our Reverend, Pious, and Learned Clergy, who did not walk in Craftiness, nor handle the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the Truth, commended themselves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God: for the Doctrine taught and maintain'd in our Church, is sound and uncorrupt, and grounded purely on the sacred Scriptures. Take but a glimpse of the irre∣gular Zeal of the late K. James, to promote the Mother-Church, when he said to Father Peters, in his Chamber, (who soon communicated it unto those at Antwerp, Keulen, and Liege, of his own Society, and commended his great and fervent Zeal) I had much rather reign but one year to an end, and then die a Martyr, with the Conversion of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to the Roman Faith, than reign thirty years pro∣sperously, and leave them at my death in Heresie as I found them when I came to the Crown. And I presume we may guess rea∣dily what would have been our Lot, and was intended for us, had not the Lord God Omnipotent shew'd himself Ele∣him in our behalf, and remembred us when we were in trou∣ble, by that saying of the late Q. Mary unto the Pope's Nun∣cio, I hope to dine all the Hereticks in the Kingdom, by such a day (naming the day) for one Half-crown: for even now they know not what to do, and are at their Wits end. God is al∣ways
stronger than Men; and greater is the Spirit that is in the Children of God, than the Spirit that is in the World: for when they concluded the Day was their own, then were they on the top of the Precipice, and all their evil Devices soon confounded. Was it then any wonder at all, to have our ancient English Laws sacrificed, our Rights, Liberties, and Priviledges destroyed, our ancient Charters wrested from us by violence of a Quo Warranto, our Colledgians at Oxford turn'd out by a superstitious Mandamus, and a Crew of Impo∣stures placed therein? The Law of God in effect made void, and Popish Legends set up in the place; when the late K. James and Q. Mary were fed with corrupt and unsound Food; nay, when they abetted and protected those who taught them Doctrines of Devils: for such is the Doctrine taught and maintain'd in the Church of Rome in these days, if we may credit St. Paul's words, instead of the sincere Milk of the Word of God, and wholsome Food of the Holy Scri∣ptures? What could our Nation expect from the hands of Bloud-thirsty Papists, and especially Irish, (had they not been prevented by the goodness of God, and the unparallel'd Re∣solution of the Prince of Orange) but Fire and Faggot, Wrack and Gibbet, when many of them judg'd that to be the only way for to merit the Kingdom of Heaven, by breaking Faith with Hereticks, and destroying them in such a manner? How many pious Lords and virtuous good men have lost their lives by the Papists Subtilty and Juggles, thô pretensively by Law, when unrighteous Popish Judges tryed and con∣demned them, who had no fear of God before their eyes, and whom the righteous Judge will accuse (no doubt) at the day of Judgment? But there is one step higher to ascend, and then we have done: What was likely to befal us, who de∣stroyed Idols, and burnt the Groves, and sometime since drove out the Priests of Baal, when one of that Communi∣on did reign over us? and one that thought himself cloathed with a Despotick and Arbitrary Power, exercising the same in Scotland, beginning here to do the like? And hence he
told our Right Reverend Bishops, when they waited on him about the reading of his illegal Declaration in the Churches, I will make you to know, that I am your King, and that I must, nay, I will be obeyed; be it at your peril. Althô this command was contrary to the holy Word of God, the Canons of our Church, and the ancient Laws and Statutes of our King∣dom, therefore our Right Reverend Bishops were hurried into the Tower. Now, when the Priests and Jesuits saw plainly, that they could not possibly get such a Parliament, which would ease them of the Test and Penal Laws, those two intolerable Yoaks, (as they forsooth called them) thô the late K. James himself, and all the Romanists within our Land, had done their very uttermost, using corrupt and unlawful means, in order thereunto: Then they thought to force us to take away the Test and Penal Laws, therefore the late K. James sent out Mandamus after Mandamus, but our brave English hearts would not be driven, thô they might be won, therefore they refused his Mandamus, because it was con∣trary to Law, Custom, and Priviledge. Then he com∣manded his Declaration to be read in every Church by the Minister, after Divine Service, and before Sermon; and this not taking effect, they knew not what to do, for very few read his Declaration, except some double minded men about our Church, which are unstable in all their ways. Now those Soul-deceivers about the Court, advis'd the late K. James for to send unto Holland, and try the inclination of the Prince of Orange and the Princess, and desire their as∣sent concerning the taking off the Test and Penal Laws, which accordingly was done by his Envoy, M. D' Abbeville. But these two, being like Zacharias and Elizabeth, righte∣ous before God, and walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blamless, not only refused to grant their royal Assent hereunto, but even sign'd their Abhor∣rence of such a wicked Fact, as appears apparently by the Lord Fagel's defence of himself, against some implacable
Papists in our Kingdom: For which deed they immediately set themselves on work against the very best of Princes, and broached the late Queens being with Child, and it would certainly be a Prince of Wales. But the All-seeing Eye, being upon them, soon brought to light their hidden work of darkness, and raised up a good Josiah, to break the power of Idolatry here: For his illustri∣ous Highness the Prince of Orance, by his most accurate eye, and with his profound sagacity, soon espy'd the Popish Mystery of Iniquity, which was so gloss'd over with equi∣vocation, prevarication, and mental reservation; and saw very plain thrô all the mists of their Roman and Italian Shams, and thrô the clouds of their specious Pretences, the inevitable ruin and destruction of England, Scotland, and Ire∣land, if that this suspected Child was not timely prevented: Nay, he saw in the bottom of this Plot, by the Sons of the Kingdom of Darkness, the total Subversion of the true Re∣form'd Church of Christ; therefore he judged it high time, for the Lord's peculiar People, now to stand up for his Cause, for the defence of his Truth and Gospel, to resist the Devil and all his Imps, now our necks being under oppressi∣on by Popish Governours, our Inheritance turn'd to Stran∣gers, and our Houses to Aliens, (I mean unto these Soul∣deceivers) wherewith our Nation did swarm: For the Je∣suits and Priests of Baal Anti-christ, did now feed on the best of the Flock, and devour the Fruit of our Land, while many able Ministers of the Gospel had scarce Bread left for to put in their mouths, (I mean those that were suspen∣ded by the Bishop of Durham) insomuch that the Prote∣stants hang'd down their Heads like a Bulrush, and were not a little concerned to see the partial proceedings of the Court; and being unable for to bear any longer their most unjust and abominable Actions, it pleased our heavenly Fa∣ther so to rule and guide the Hearts and Minds of the No∣bility, Gentry, and some others of our Land, that they join'd together, and with one accord, earnestly invited and desired
his most illustrious Highness the Prince of Orange (as being the only Person under Heaven capable of doing it) for to give himself the trouble and charge of coming over with an Army here, to deliver our Land and Nation out of the hands of all those implacable and blood-thirsty Enemies, who long'd now to destroy us, as also to free us from a Despotick and Arbitrary Power. Therefore the renown'd Prince of Orange, who was ever forward to hazard his own Person, and venture his Life for the Life of the Gospel, to preserve and maintain the Truth and Purity of it, against all sedu∣cers and opposers, did not delay answering their earnest In∣vitation, nor defer fulfilling their cordial Desires. There∣fore he consulted with the High and Mighty Lords, the States of Holland and West-Friezland, assembled now at the Hague, concerning this great Work, and the most proper Methods to be used by him, that the glorious deliverance of our Nation (thrô the blessing of Almighty God upon his Endeavours) might effectually be wrought: And the first step thereunto was, to make choice of fit Instruments, because God works in these days by Means (Miracles being long since ceased.) Hence he commands all the Dutch For∣ces for to Muster and Encamp about Nimeghen, not very far from the Brandenburghers Camp (the famous Duke of Brandenburgh being alli'd unto his illustrious Highness): The Regiments being all incamp'd, according to his Prince∣ly Order, he was pleased to view them one by one, and make choice of the very flower of the Army, to serve him in this glorious Expedition. He thought it very re∣quisite to carry over into England such a Force with him as might (thrô God's assistance, and the Protestants concur∣rence) make the enemies of the Lord to flee before him, and drive out all the Priests of Baal, and cleanse Judah and Jerusalem of Idolatry, as good Josiah did; for now the Altars of Baal were set up by those cursed Vipers, in most places of our Realm, as divers were set up in our Metropolitan City of London, (that renown'd ancient Protestant City)
to the exceeding great sorrow of our Reverend Clergy, and discouragement of our holy Reform'd Church. Having now made choice of what Officers and Soldiers he thought most fit here, he went unto the great Duke of Branden∣burgh's Camp, and made choice of what Regiments he plea∣sed there, for to take with him into England; and then, with all the speed that might be, he return'd to the Hague. It's certain, that very many people thought he took too much trouble upon him, to ride thus from one City to ano∣ther, nay to fly, as some express'd it, because he made such haste; and all was for to deliver the true Reform'd Church of Christ out of all her enemies hands, and to make the peo∣ple of God enjoy rest and peace, that every man might sit peaceably under his own Vine, and drink the Wine out of his own Cistern. Therefore order was sent unto every City in Holland, for to make clean their Men of War, and fit them out for Sea, with all speed, that they might be mann'd, victuall'd, stored with Powder and Ball, and all sorts of Utensils for War, and be ready to serve his Highness the Prince of Orange in his glorious design, for the good of the Protestant Churches of Christ, but especially those in Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland: Now, according to the Order, every City very willingly, and indeed with more than an ordinary cheerfulness, set their men to work and rigg their Ships, paying them double Wages, that they might labour day and night, until it was done, because they now shewed their zeal, and did strive which should be soonest prepared with their Vessels, for to go out to Sea, and serve his High∣ness the Prince of Orange. From Amsterdam were fifteen good Vessels well rigg'd, and every thing in compleat or∣der, set out to Sea the first Wind that serv'd, because every Wind will not bring them out of the Texel; it must be an Easterly Wind, or else they are block'd up, and they would not be hindred or backwards now for never so much, so they rode at anchor in the Sea. And from the City of Rot∣terdam, Dort, Delph, Leyden, Harlem, and all other Cities,
were many Vessels fitted out to Sea, according to each City's proportion in War, and their wonted Custom, which Ships join'd the other Ships from Amsterdam. Then in Zealand a considerable number of brave Vessels were set out, with all things necessary for War: As from Middleburgh, Vlis∣singen, Vere, Tertol, &c. and these sail'd to the Hollands Men of War, and joined them riding at anchor; so the Fleet be∣gan to compleat: Now the Navy rode at anchor about some two or three Leagues from the Brill, and there remain'd some days. It's worthy of any man's observation, to consider what an universal consent there was unto this glorious Underta∣king and Expedition of the Prince of Orange, for the wel∣fare of England, Scotland, and Ireland; for this consent and accord was not only generally among the high and mighty Lords, the States of Holland and West-Friezland, but even among all sorts and conditions of men, there was not one person in the Land heard to murmur, or speak the least word against it, (Papists only excepted) but all with one accord and one mind and heart, endeavoured to forward and expedite this glorious Undertaking; nay, the very Wo∣men, Maidens, and Children, were lifting up their Prayers unto the God of Heaven, for to bless the Prince of Orange, and crown his designs in hand, for the good of the true re∣form'd Church with success, according to the desire of his own heart: which thing I duly observ'd, and therefore was somewhat confirm'd in my opinion concerning this great Work in hand, which caused me to declare publickly, That the great Jehovah, or living and true God, had not only put it into the heart of the Prince of Orange, a Prince whom he had raised up to advance his Glory, and the Interest of his Church and People, and therefore made him so strong for himself, so great a terrour to the evil, as well as praise to those that do well; but that the Lord had also stirr'd up the hearts of all his people, to join together as one man: and hereupon I could not but judge, that God had a delight in
this Work, and would certainly bring it to pass in his due time, not when our silly fancies urg'd it: And made it now my work to endeavour for to keep our people that they did not tempt God, or limit the holy One of Israel; of a truth, the Reverend Clergy of the Netherlands, are not to be forgotten, because they did wrestle with God in their Prayers, in the great Congregations and Solemn Assemblies, after a most servent manner, with Sighs and Tears, in the behalf of our Churches, in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and mightily encouraged all the Soldiers, to shew their cou∣rage for the Cause of God, against the Children of Babylon, and Enemies of his Church and peculiar People. So that they have obliged our Nation (as the Reverend Dr. Burnet, in his Sermon at Exeter-Cathedral said) to be kind to the Netherlands, for sundry weighty Reasons, and, amongst others, their kindness to us, and towards our Land, in this happy Expedition. The Men of War were riding at anchor in the forementioned place, waiting for his Highness the Prince of Orange's Orders, what to do, or where to go; sundry hundred of Merchants Ships, Pinks, Fly-boats, and others, were hired for this Service, and many immediately sent to the Fleet; others went for Men here and there, ac∣cording as they receiv'd order; some were to carry Sol∣diers, others to carry Horses; some Hay, others Artillery, or Ammunition, and all sorts of Necessaries convenient for the War: Many Martscutes and flat-bottom'd Boats, which be∣long to the River only, to transport Goods and People from City to City, were hired now to transport the Soldiers from Nimighen unto the Men of War and Merchant-Ships, Pinks and Fly-boats, riding at anchor, ready to receive them, or any thing that was order'd them to receive by our great Master. I shall not retard the candid and ingenuous Rea∣der with an ample Discourse concerning the manner of their coming down the Rhine and Mose, or Maze; how the Bur∣ghers, at every City, with their Wives, Children, and whole Houshold, came crouding unto the great Head,
which is without the Ports towards the River, a place made purposely for convenience of taking in, or shipping off Goods, or for commodious lading, or unlading Vessels; and took their solemn leave, most Praying, and some Cry∣ing for them. The Soldiers were some of them playing on the Hoeboys, Dutch Flute, and other Instruments; others were beating the Drums, and some sounding their Trum∣pets, which I must confess made no discord in the harmo∣ny, as they were sailing down the River. There are di∣vers pleasant Cities upon the Rhine and Mose, between Ni∣mighen and the Brill, as all those who have travell'd in the Netherlands know very well: Being come unto the Fleet, all the Soldiers were presently set on board, some to the Men of War, some to the Merchant-Ships, some to the Pinks, and some to the Fly-boats: And the Schippers, with their Martscutes and flat-bottom'd Boats, return'd home. The Wind was now Northerly, or North-West, which is the very worst Wind that can blow for the Coasts of Holland; and the Weather waxed daily worse and worse, the Winds growing stronger and stronger, insomuch that the Seas grew very rough, the Waves swell'd, and lifted their proud tops towards the Clouds, and the poor smaller-Ships were ready to be overwhelm'd, shaking their Heads, as if they would shake their Sails off; and being unable for to endure such Weather long, (so far in the Sea as they now did ride at anchor) without very great hazard and danger, his Highness the Prince of Orange was inform'd thereof, who suddenly gave order for all the smaller Vessels to come into Habour. The Men of War weighed their Anchors, and sail'd to a far more safe and commodious place for anchorage, in case of a Storm, for every man saw the Weather was unset∣led, and the Air very troublesom. The second place where they rode at Anchor, was between Holland and Zeeland, about two or three leagues from the shore or coast: In this place they did ride at Anchor certain days; but while they were here the Weather grew stormy,
and one night the Winds were so very high, and the Air so tempestuous and stormy, shaking the very Houses and Peo∣ple in their Beds, insomuch that many judged it to be a Earthquake; the whole Fleet was in great peril: and after this, various false Reports were spread all over the Nether∣lands; without all doubt broach'd by the Enemies to this Expedition, who trumpetted it about for to amuse the vulgar People, That the Anchors and Cables of the Men of War were broken in the Storm, as if they had been a needleful of Thread, so that all the Ships were driven here and there, some to one shore, and some on another Coast, and as yet they were not heard of. Which Fables did startle the poor ignorant sort, and they knew not what to judge or say: others who were more dis∣creet, and understood better the Holland manner of Ships, and the Art of Navigation, soon made answer to this Sham of the Papists, That there was no question (by the blessing of God) but that the Men of War were all well and safe, because they were able to ride the Storm out, having good new Anchors and Cables; and if any Anchor or Cable should happen to break, these Ships could live well enough in the greatest Tempest, provided they have but sufficient Sea-room. And such was God's good providence, that all the Ships receiv'd very little or no dam∣mage, only a certain old Fire-Ship, which was soon chang'd for another, (that being sent to be mended). The common thing every morning, which was most us'd, was first to go and see how the Wind sate, and if there were any probability of a change. When any person came unto a house, in the heart of their City, concerning any manner of business, the very first Question by all was, Sir, I pray how is the Wind to day? Are we likely to get an Easterly Wind ere long? Pray God send it, and such like. The Ministers themselves pray'd, That God would be pleas'd for to grant an East wind. O∣thers, a favourable Wind, that might bring his Illustrious Highness the Prince of Orange, with his whole Fleet (which now attended him) unto the desired Haven: for nothing could possibly be more desired, than a fair Wind for the Na∣vy,
by all sorts and conditions of men (except Papists). There was a Report here, that the Jesuits had, promised the late K. James, that the Westerly Wind should continue until Christmas; but this was false, every man knows. After some time that the Weather had been so tempestu∣ous, it began for to settle, and God sent us an East Wind, to the exceeding great joy of all our hearts in Holland and the Ʋnited Provinces; nay, it blew a fresh Gale day by day, and continued favourable that quarter of the Moon; which cau∣sed our people to work day and night, that we might be under sail: The Prince of Orange order'd every Officer now for to go on board the Ships with their Men, and expedited every thing to the Fleet, with as much speed as men could make; but so many things were to be done, it was not possible we could be making sail, such great Bodies always moving very slowly, according to the Saying. Some Re∣giments were expected down the River, and those being come, every thing was sent to the Fleet, as Provision for one month, the Artillery, Magazine, Powder, Ball, Match, Tents, Tent-polls, Stocking-axes, Spades, and all sorts of U∣tensils convenient in War; and then Hay and Provender for the Horses, Fresh Water, and a hundred things more, which do not now occur to my memory. The Wind continuing East, the Horses began to be shipp'd at Rotterdam, which was a sign they were almost ready: So his Highness the Prince of Orange was pleased to take his leave of the High and Migh∣ty Lords the States of Holland and West Friezland, who most heartily desired that God would preserve him, and bless him with Victory over his Enemies, and give him joyful Success in his great Undertaking, for the good of the Protestant Church in general, but more especially those in England, Scotland, and Ireland. The people every-where began to be exceeding sorrowful for the loss of so Vertuous and so Reli∣gious a Prince from among them; and very many would weep bitterly at the thoughts of his departure (because all honest good men loved him extraordinarily;) and now his
Health is drank by every Gentleman, and Schipper, Mate, and Boy, and his prosperous Voyage. The Horses being most of shipped, the Guards began to come: So upon Friday-night all things were ready on board, and the Fleet prepared to sail, only it waited for the coming of his Highness. The number of our Capital Ships, or Men of War, was a∣bout Fifty, which were very well rig'd, mann'd, and provi∣ded with all things requisite; the number of our Fire-Ships, was about Five and twenty; lesser Men of War, or Frigats, about Six and twenty; the number of Merchant Ships, Pinks, Flyboats, and others, was about Three hundred and odd: so the total number of the Fleet, as they sailed from the Brill, was about Four hundred and odd Ships. But at our setting out the second time at Hellevoot-Sluys, there were near an hundred Vessels more, which were Schievelingers, or Boats which the Fisher-men of Schieveling went to Sea in, as we shall shew by and by. But to proceed: The Prince of O∣range having taken his Farewel of the States assembled at the Hague, went unto Houslaerdyke, where he dined with many of his Lords; and after Dinner, on Saturday, Oct. 19. old stile, Oct 29. new stile, being unwilling for to lose this fair Easter∣ly Wind which did blow all the week so freshly, attended with Mareschal Schomberg, Count Nassau, Count Solms, the Heer Van Zulustein, the Heer Bentink, the Heer Overkirk, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Viscount Mordant, the Lord Wiltshire, Earl of Macclessield, Earl of Argyle, with many other English and Scotch, Dutch and French Lords, Knights, and Gentle∣men; he went in a very rich Yacht unto Moseland Sluys: Her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange came in another, attended with her Ladies of Honour. Here his Illustrious Highness took his Farewel of his most entirely beloved Con∣sort the Princess, who was not a little troubled and grieved for to part with her dearest Lord and Prince, which caused the Tears to distil from her precious Eyes like so many. Pearls: so she return'd with her Maids of Honour unto Houslaerdyke again; but the Prince sail'd unto the Fleet,
which made the heart of every man glad, because the wind was still East: So his Highness went on board a Man of War with Admiral Herbert, but that Vessel proving leakie, he soon changed, and went on board another. At this time there was very great resorting unto the Brill from every City and Town in Holland, for to see this glorious, yet formidable Fleet set out, but especially to behold his Highness the Prince of Orange committing himself unto the mercy of the merciless Seas, and the courtesie of the unnatural Waves, so freely and willingly, for the sake of the true Reform'd Churches of Christ, but especially those of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The top of the Brill-Church and Steeple was extreamly throng'd, and the Beam or place made on purpose to view Ships, was almost broken down with the great crowd upon it; and every man's Eye was unsatisfied with seeing, for the more they looked upon the Navie, the more they desired to look. His Highness being come on board, every Ship weighed Anchor with all the speed possible, and made sail; the Trumpets sounded, Hooboys played, and the Souldiers gave a Shout for joy. So when the Spectators perceived that the Fleet was under sail, they could no longer refrain their Eyes from weeping, nor their Cheeks from running down with affectionate Tears; and many very fervent Prayers were poured for us all, but in an especial manner for the Prince of Orange. When we were sail'd so far that they could not see us well any longer, then they made use of Perspective-Glasses, and sent their hearts and well wishes with us, and so each departed to his own Habitation. Thus was our Great Prince crossing the proud Waves with all his Fleet round him, enjoying a very favourable Wind for England, (if it had but continued so for some days together.) It was about four a Clock in the Afternoon on Saturday, when the Fleet first weighed their Anchors, and made sail, upon the coming of the Prince of Orange on board.
The Evening draw'd on us very fast, the days being short, and the nights long; so when the darkness seized us, and night was shutting upon us, every Vessel set up a Light in the Lanthorn: The Men of War set up two, and the Ship wherein the Prince was, had three for a mark or distinction. After night, the Wind began to arise high, and the Seas wax'd rough, the Waves began to roar and swell, lifting up their head aloft, and many now began to suspect the Wea∣ther, as well they might: for within a while the Winds turn'd and blew a very dreadful Storm, insomuch that all thought we should never see Land more: for there were sun∣dry circumstances which did add to the peril of the Storm, as many skilful Mariners said, The darkness of the night, the matter of Carriage, Horses; which will rowl from side to side, if they break their Stays, our Pipes of Water, Barrels of Powder and Ball, and the vast number of Ships together, which was worst of all; for while the Schipper intended to escape one on his Starboard, then is he in no small peril of running against the other on his Larboard-side; nay, be∣hind, and before, and all round, there were Ships throwing themselves from side to side, after an exceeding fearful man∣ner, so that no Steer-man knew which way to steer: The Winds blew, as if they would have blown the very Elements away before them; the Seas raged and foam'd, being all in white forth for anger; the Waves rowl'd one upon the back of another, as so many great Mountains; the Ships threw themselves, and the people in them, from side to side, and from the fore-part of the Vessel unto the hinder part, as if they would have beaten themselves all to pieces; and if it had not been the good providence of the Almighty, we had most certainly dash'd against each other, and so perish one by the other. The men of War were better able to live than the rest, for they did not shake themselves half so terribly as the Merchantmen and Pinks, but especially the poor Flyboats; these strain'd their Ribs, and hurt their
Backs very much, because of their hard lading. The Wind was now North-West, and every Mariner did strive to bear up with that Ship wherein the Prince was, but it was impossible for all the smaller Vessels, in such a Tempest; there's a huge difference between Ships, one will bear a vast Storm, another an ordinary Storm en∣dangers; nay, many can live in the greatest Tempest, ha∣ving but Sea-room enough, when some can hardly live in a rough Sea. Now the people being thus toss'd and tumbl'd about the Ship, many wax'd exceeding sick, and vomitted con∣tinually after a dreadful rate; you could hear the men groan after a pitiful manner; others were sighing, and not a few praying, and committing their Souls unto God, for they thought their Bodies must be Meat for the Fish of the Sea. The Sea-men that did belong to each Ship, were almost kill'd in working so hard for to pre∣serve their own and our Lives; but now and then they would refresh themselves with a dram of the Brandy-bottle. According as the Sea and the Waves roar'd, so most Mens Hearts now fail'd them, for fear at the apprehension of approaching Destruction: A Holy Conscience (at this time) was a Magazine of Joy, and as good as a thousand Witnesses. Thus did we tumble and rowl about the Seas, and a∣mong the unnatural Waves, all this Night. How desi∣rable was the Day-light, which Solomon says is sweet! And what a pleasant thing would it have been, for our Eyes but to behold the Sun, though in the midst of such a dreadful Storm! A worse hath not happened for many years, as our ancient Ship-Masters and Mariners conclude: for Darkness adds terrour to terrour, and therefore the fear of death unto many at this time was almost as bad as death it self: some, Nabal like, were dead with fear, and their hearts as a stone. Many Ships had their Sails blown
off; others had their Masts broken with the violence of the Storm; the Waves often-times rowling themselves o∣ver the labouring Ships, some had their Main-yards bro∣ken; the Pipes of Water often-times bursting open, the Barrels of Powder and Ball stav'd; it cannot be conceiv'd what a dreadful thing it was, as also what a strange kind of rattling the Bullets running about the Decks, made: there∣fore sundry Souldiers cried out, I am sure I can feel the Hole where the Sea comes in at; when (as in truth) it was the Water and Beer together, flashing within the Ship; for you must know we were most of us all in darkness, (no Candle being permitted to come under Deck) because of the Magazine. After we had made our Supplications for our selves, and his Highness the Prince of Orange, unto the God of Hea∣ven, we submitted our Wills to his blessed Will; and I am perswaded that many now were willing to die, after the thoughts of Death had possessed their mind so long, and been impress'd in their memories so deeply. The Morning-light approaching, we were all much comforted, especially when we saw that our Vessels were whole and sound, and very little water in her Pump, when it was fathom'd. Now we long'd for to hear of our great Master, how he did after such a terrible Night, which had befallen us. The Seas continued raging, and the Waves roaring, and exalting their tops as they would touch the Clouds, and we rowl'd about, and could not tell what to do, or which way to steer after his Highness the Prince of Orange. The High and Mighty Lords, the States of Holland and West-Friezland, now assembled at the Hague, thrô their profound sagacity, and in their great prudence, concluded, that the Fleet must needs be dispers'd and scatter'd one Ship from another, and much damag'd by such a terrible stormy and tempestuous Night as that was, if not destroyed in a manner: so they
on the morrow morning, which was the Lord's day, com∣mand the Bow, or Messenger, which appertains to them, for to hasten unto the Brill, and give order for all the Lotes∣men to go out and cruise all the Seas over, between Holland and England, and bring into the Haven of Hellevoot-sluys, all such Ships as they met with or found. These which they call Lotesmen, are most skilful Pilots, living at the Brill, and bred up to the Sea, being accustom'd to sound all over the Coasts, that so they may know the depth and danger of most places: they have Ships made, by the Order of the States, on purpose to endure a storm, as indeed they will the greatest: And therefore by Nine or Ten of the Clock, there were not a few of these Lotesmen crusing up and down the Sea, and all the Ships which they found, they order'd for to go into Hellevoot-sluys. The Prince of Orange, seeing the Winds so stormy, and and the Seas so very tempestuous, return'd unto the Holland Coasts, and came into the Haven of Hellevoot-sluys, with a considerable number of Men of War and Merchant-men, Pinks and Fly-boats; and many Men of War more could have come into the Haven, but staid out on purpose to secure the Fleet. When we and other Ships had heard, that the Prince of Orange was safe in the Harbour, we gave thanks to God, and were not a little joy∣ful at this good News, and made towards Hellevoot-sluys, as fast as we could: Many Vessels in this storm were driven near the Coasts of England, others towards the North, some into the Texel, and others into Zeeland, and every day they came into the Haven from one place or other. The Lotesmen did no small service to the Prince of Orange and the States, in giving Ships information where to go; for many having no Orders, knew not what to do, whether they should make for the English Coasts, or return back to the Coasts of Holland. All those Ships which were any way damag'd in the storm, were now order'd to be repair'd here; so that the Smiths, Ship-Carpenters, and others, were forc'd
to work day and night, because they should be ready to go out again the first Wind that serv'd, for his Highness was fully resolv'd, by the blessing of God, for to set to Sea a∣gain, as soon as all the Ships were come in and made ready. The Lotesmen, having crused sundry days up and down the Seas, between Holland, England, and France, inform'd his Highness, that they could not hear of any Ships lost, thô driven far away, and safe in one Habour or another, excepting one Fly-boat laden with Men and Horses, which, having lost her Rudder in the violence of the storm, was driven upon the English Coasts, and so taken by the Eng∣lish, the Men being made prisoners, and the Horses sent to the late K. James. The taking of this Vessel (we heard) made no little noise amongst the Papists in England, but especially among the Irish Tories. But, to return, this Hellevoot-sluys is a small Haven, or Harbour, for the Dutch Ships, wherein they keep some of their Men of War, and build new Vessels, as well as repair old ones: Here they keep a good part of their Magazine and Artillery; and at Delph, Amsterdam, and other places, there is much more. Now this place, or Dorp, being so very small, and every man that could being so exceeding wil∣ling to get to shoar, after our being so long tumbled and toss'd on the Seas, in such a fearful Storm and Tempest, was exceedingly throng'd, every House in the Dorp being ex∣tremely crouded, insomuch that Provision grew exceeding scarce, and Lodgings could hardly be gotten for Money; those that were gotten, being excessive dear: indeed the people of this place made it their Fair, but I must condemn them, for imposing and exacting on us all, in such a man∣ner, after we had been so fateagu'd at Sea; certain honou∣rable persons were constrain'd for to seek Lodgings after Night, and in the Rain, their Servants trying every House,
insomuch that some worthy Gentlemen resolv'd for to sit up, and let these noble persons have their Beds; others gave a Duccatoon for sitting up by the Fire all Night; and not a few being destitute of Lodgings, were forc'd to go into the Villages thereabout: Provisions, after some days, were not to be gotten, and that little which was there, was very dear; therefore many travell'd into the Countrey, and bought their Provision at a Boors House, that is to say, a Countrey-mans House. The Weather was tempestuous, and the Seas continued very raging, however Ships came in daily, but people that were on shoar could not get back to their Ships, riding now at anchor in the stream before Hellevoot-sluys, the Boatsmen durst not adventure to carry them in those little Boats, for some had been cast away, coming to shoar. The Horses were taken out of the Ships, and sent here and there unto the Boors houses for to be kept, in order to recover them well again, and a very great num∣ber was taken out of the Ships dead, and many died after they were set on shoar; others were bruised after a wretched manner, so more Horses were sent for from William-Stadt, and other places, by the Prince of Orange. It was order'd here, That the Dutch should begin their Prayers in the Church every Morning at Nine of the Clock, the English at Ten, and the French at Eleven: The Dutch begin their Prayers in the Afternoon at Two, the English at Three, and the French at Four of the Clock; which Order was pun∣ctually observ'd so long as we were here. The Reverend Dr. Burnet, now Bishop of Salisbury, read the Prayers of of the Church of England, according to the Rubrick, and dai∣ly paraphras'd upon one or two of the Psalms for the day. The Dutch they preach'd, having divers Chaplains to the Regiments appointed them. The French sometimes had a Sermon, but generally Prayers. Upon Sunday, October 28. Old Stile, the Reverend Dr. Burnet preach'd in the Morn∣ing, the Prince being there, with Mareschal Schomberg, and
all the English and Scotch Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen: His Sermon was very pathetical, and very pressing unto a holy life and conversation, putting all in remembrance of the great peril we were in, so lately at Sea; and of the holy Vows and Covenants, which (says he) no doubt most of you did then make to God; and therefore he desired, that we would not forget our selves any more; and told us all in express words, That if we were not truly reform'd in our lives and conversations, that we should not be thought worthy to be instruments of so glorious a Work, notwith∣standing the Lord, as he had begun, would bring it to pass, not by us, but some others, who were more sincere in his Service, and in the due observation of his Laws. The Air was extreme tempestuous, and the Weather very stormy. At this very day, when I go to my Devo∣tion, methinks I see that most pious and exemplary Pat∣tern of his Highness the Prince of Orange before my face; how very earnest he was with the Lord, in his Prayers here, upon his bended knees, after a most devout manner, causing publick Prayer to be made in the House where he lodged twice a day; he was an Example and President unto all about him, how duly they ought to remember their Creator. The Weather continuing very stormy and tempestuous, and little or no probability of a change or alteration, the People of this place proceeding still to exact on us all; some of our Lords (whether Dutch or English, it matters not) were pleased to inform his Highness thereof; who presently sent to the States about it: Therefore a positive Order came forth in print, what we must pay, and no more; so much a night for Lodging, so much a pound for Cheese, Butter, Bief, Mutton, Veal, Bacon, &c. so many Eggs for a Styver, and so much to sit up by the Fire, Eighteen Styvers for one Night, having a fresh pair of Sheets, and lodging there no more, but if he continued,
Six Styvers a Night; Four Styvers for to sit up by the Fire, Ten Styvers a Pound of Butter, &c. Divers Lords came to visit his Highness after the Storm, and her Royal Highness came in her Yacht unto the Brill, where his Highness met her, with many English, Dutch, and French Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen; and having dined to∣gether, they parted each from the other, the Prince re∣turning in the Evening unto his Fleet at Hellevoot-sluys, and her Royal Highness the Princess of Orance unto Hon∣slaerdyke. People came daily from all parts of Holland to visit their Friends, and very many Dutch-women to vi∣sit their Husbands; but most went to the Brill for Pro∣vision and Lodging: the Brill is about some four or five English Miles from this place. Being noised abroad, that we were at Hellevoot-sluys, and that all sorts of Provisions were so excessive dear, the People came thronging with their Boats, and all things within a while was at a very reasonable rate. Here we heard, that the Priests and Jesuits, with the Papists at Ant∣werp, in the Spanish Netherlands, sung Te Deum in their Churches, because the Hereticks were cast away, with their great Conductor, and made use of Moses Song. when as we were daily rendring our hearty Praises and Thanksgivings unto the Lord our God, for his stupen∣dious deliverance of our whole Fleet out of such a storm, and all the Churches in the Netherlands did the same. His Highness the Prince of Orange was not in the least dismay'd in all the Storm, when most mens hearts were as stones, dead with fear, his Countenance was observ'd not to alter, as other mens did, but, like a true Paul, or servant of Jesus Christ, he encouraged all in the Ship where he was, making them cheerful, when their Spirits were dejected, saying to some in the Ship these words, or to this effect, (as I received information from one in the same Vessel) For my own part, I am not in the least doubt∣ful,
but that we shall do very well; I know God is a righ∣teous God, and trys the very hearts and reins, and sees the very end and bottom of my thoughts: He knows my inte∣grity in this Ʋndertaking, that 'tis not to get my self a name, or for my own sake, but for the promotion of his Glory, and his Churches good; and therefore he will not give his ene∣mies any cause to rejoyce in the destruction of the pure in heart. Our Horses dying daily were thrown over-board, and e∣very person now begins to think of setting out again: all the Ships are revictuall'd with a Month's Provision more, besides the old Store which was left; so that every Ship must needs have overmuch, rather than too little: And, thô people may speak their pleasure concerning Holland, how they feed on Hèrbs and Fish altogether, I am sure, there were sundry Barrels of good Beef and Pork, with sufficient Cheese and Butter, as could be eaten, on board every Ship. Order was now given unto all the Schievelingers for to come to the Fleet at Hellevoot-sluys, and accompany us to England, for to set the Horses and Soldiers on shoar, with all expedition, which the small Ship-boats could not do. And according as they receiv'd order, so they came, and sail'd about from one Ship to another. While we were here riding at anchor, (for we tarried here about eleven days) there was a certain Minister went unto the Brill, to purchase some things he wanted, to take along with him in the Ship for to eat, and a Papist seeing him in a Shop, and hearing him speak to the people about the Storm, (whether or no he was a Priest he could not say) in a taunting impudent manner began thus: Now, Sir, I suppose the Courage of you all is well cool'd, and you are convinc'd, that the Lord was much offended and angry, with the Prince of Orange, and his whole Fleet, for this rash Ʋndertaking, and therefore he made the Wind and the Seas to resist them, and take his Churches part, and it
may be a warning unto every one of you, that you do not fight against God. Unto which this Divine soon made answer, saying, Alas, you are very much mistaken, and far from the truth, for by these external Providences and Dispensations of Al∣mighty God, no man can judge aright of his love or hatred, because himself tells us plainly, that God maketh his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and unjust: St. Paul's Shipwreck was no argument God was angry with him; nor was that a sign, that he was a mur∣derer, because the Viper hang'd on his hand, altho' the cen∣sorious foolish Barbarians judged so in like manner. This Storm coming when our Fleet was at Sea, is no argument that God was offended with the Prince of Orange, or this Navy, for he is a consuming fire, when he is provoked. And hence we may certainly conclude, that it was to prove us, not to destroy us; for 'tis apparent to the World, that we are not consum'd: Therefore as the Barbarians chang'd their speech, when they saw Paul shake off the venomous Beast into the fire, without receiving any harm, so may you and all your blinded people, learn to judge better, seeing our vast Fleet hath been out in such a terrible Storm and Tempest, without so much as one Ship lost or cast away. This was to give an ample demonstration to the whole World of the power of God, and let all men see he could preserve his own children in the greatest of Storms: This was to exercise our Faith and Patience; and blessed be his holy Name for it, that we are living Monuments of his praise. All people, in the Netherlands, were now imploring the Lord, for to grant us an Easterly, or favourable Wind, which might bring the Prince of Orange, and his Fleet, unto the long desired Haven, that so the enemies of the Lord might be found lyars, and that the Jaw-bones of those Soul-deceivers might be broken in their mouths: And the
whole Fleet being once more in a readiness, long'd to be under sail; so much about Octob. 30. Old Stile, and No∣vemb. 9. New Stile, the Wind turn'd about, and came full East, and the Prince of Orange hearing thereof, and seeing the Wind blow so fresh, was fully resolv'd (by the blessing of God) to set to Sea on the Morrow, not to lose any time, and therefore every Ship took care to have all things in a readiness, insomuch that many were forc'd to work hard all Night, to get Water and other things con∣venient on board, for they had heard, that his Highness was resolv'd to tarry for nothing, and therefore he would leave all behind, which were not ready. So upon Thursday, Novemb. 1. Old Stile, Novemb. 11. New Stile, after the Prince of Orange had din'd with all English, Dutch, Scotch and French Lords, Knights and Gentle∣men attending his Sacred Person, about three or four of Clock in the Afternoon he went on board a new Vessel of about Twenty eight Guns with the Rotterdam's Admi∣ral, call'd the Brill, as some will have it, and being now in his Cabin, fired, for to give notice unto all the Fleet, to weigh their Anchors, and make Sail, which was accor∣dingly done by every Ship, with all possible expedition. The whole Fleet was divided into three Squadrons; the Red Flag was for the English and Scotch, commanded by Major-General Mackay; the White Flag was for the Prince's Guards, and the Brandenburghers, commanded by Count Solms; the Blew Flag was for the Dutch and French, commanded by Count Nassau. Now every Ship had a certain Mark, or Token, that it might be known unto what Squadron she belong'd. So once more the whole Fleet (thrô God's blessing) was under sail for England, with a very favourable East Wind. The darkness coming on us, all the Ships set out their Lights, which was very pleasant to see, and the Ship
in which the Prince of Orange was, had three Lanthorns, the Men of War two, and each other Ship one. The Tower of Gowre Steeple was seen a great way in the night, because of the Fire burning thereon. Now the Winds were very prosperous, the Seas very calm, and the Waves very humble, and by the Compass we all pointed towards the North; so that many conclu∣ded for certain we should land somewhere there. It was generally supposed, that the Scouts which came to watch us from the English Fleet, seeing we all made Northward, hastened to acquaint the Lord Dartmouth thereof; and after some hours sailing in the night, the whole Fleet strake sail, and was driven by the Waves. On the Morrow-morning Friday, November the se∣cond, old stile, the Men of War fled about the Fleet, en∣compassing the scattered Ships for to secure them, and keeping all the small Vessels under their protection; and by that time all the Ships were come within a reasonable compass, it was about ten or eleven of the Clock; and then every Vessel made sail, and ploughed through the Waves with all speed towards the English Coast. We saw none save only our own Ships. It was a very good Wind as could blow, and withal a brisk gale. When the Evening was come, we all strake sail, and were driven of the Waves all night, as we had done be∣fore. This driving was not very pleasant, the Vessels having no sail, would throw themselves from side to side, and all the people in them, after a sad sort; so that this put us in mind of the Storm: however, there was no peril in this, though 'twas a little trouble∣some. Many of the Schievéling little Vessels, which came out with us, were lost on the way in the night; I do not mean cast away, but broken off from our Ships;
they were made fast with Ropes to each Merchantman, and the tossing of the Waves, and rowling of the Ships, soon brake the Rope, if not prevented in time. On Saturday morning, November the third, old stile, as soon as the Sun-beams had dissipated the Mist, and dispers'd the Fogg, we could discover Land very easi∣ly; about which men did vary: some judging it to be in Essex, others in Kent, (as it was.) So the Men of War flew round us all, as before. Now it happen'd that two of our Pinks were driven out from us a vast way, as far as ever we could see, and making all the sail the Vessels could bear for to come up to the Fleet, they were espied by the Men of War, who judging these two Ships to be two English Frigats, or French Capers, because they made all the sail they could. Our Men of War making sail, hastened to see what they were. It would have made a Coward magnani∣mous, for to see how the Men of War fled proudly over the Seas; and within one quarter of an hour they had surrounded these two small Vessels, and finding them to be of our Society, they presently return'd, each departing from the other. The Wind continued very favourable, and withal blow∣ing a good fresh Gale, we made all the sail each Ship could bear, and now pointed towards the Channel. A∣bout mid-day we were entring between Dover and Calis: Here our Great Master tack'd about for to see the Reer well come up; for many Ships will not make speed, or sail swiftly, with never so much sail: It was a very clear and pleasant day, as heart could desire. The Reer coming up, we all made sail again, and ha∣stened towards the West of England; but between Dover and Callis the Prince of Orange call'd a Council of War,
and afterwards order'd that his own Standard should be set up; whereupon the Men of War set out their Co∣lours, and so did every Vessel in the Fleet. The Soul∣diers were all above Deck, for to view the Land on each side, and Dover-Castle; and the whole Fleet was resolv'd to make a Bravado: so each Vessel kept a due distance from the other, and bespangled the whole Channel with beautiful Ships, and Colours flying. Here we made divers Flourishes, and no ordinary Fi∣gure for the Spectators on the shores, it being a Sight worthy of the greatest Monarch to behold. Sundry Men of War sailed very near unto Dover, and gave the Town and Castle some Guns; others sail'd towards Calis, and did the same. The Prince of Orange, with three Men of War to at∣tend him, one at a distance before his Ship, and one on each side, sail'd forwards before the Navy; and the Mer∣chantmen, Pinks, and Flyboats sail'd next, beautifying the Seas, with Officers and Souldiers above Deck. The main Body of our Men of War were in the Rear, for to inter∣pose between us and our Enemies, if they had came after us, according as we expected. The People both at Dover and Calis having disco∣ver'd the Fleet, were amaz'd at such a glorious Sight, yet formidable Navie, insomuch that all the convenient places for beholding us, were much throng'd, especially in and about Dover. One man encourag'd another to come and look upon the Fleet, how the whole Seas were over-spread with Ships, and how each Ship was laden with Souldiers. Various was mens opinions concerning the place of our landing; for some judg'd in one place, and some in another: The Evening approaching, and it growing dark, all our Lights were set out, as be∣fore.
Now we could see the Fire on several Towers and pla∣ces as we sail'd along the Channel towards the West, and many thought that these Fires (which were only to direct all strange Ships in the Night) had been Beacons set up by the Countrey, according to the Order of the late King James, on purpose to alarum the Land; when we had sail'd some hours after Night, we all struck sail, as we had done before; the Weather was very good, and the Wind very favourable, and most of our Hearts exceeding∣ly reviv'd thereby. On the Morrow-morning, being the Lord's day, No∣vemb. 4. Old Stile, which was the happy Birth-day of his thrice Illustrious Highness, the Prince of Orange; most men were of opinion, that we should land either in the Isle of Wight, Portsmouth, or some other convenient place, about which matter they were much mistaken; for the Prince of Orange did not sail, but observe the duty of the day; so all were driven of the Waves. Prayers and Ser∣mon being done, he went to Dinner, with some Nobles at∣tending him, and about Four of Clock in the Afternoon made sail, all the whole Fleet following the example of his Ship; now every Schipper endeavour'd for to keep sight of the three Lanthorns or Admiral of Rotterdam's Ship, for the sake of his Highness therein. The darkness shutting upon us, all our Lights were set out, as before: It was no ordinary sight, for to behold the Seas all co∣ver'd with Lights, the Lanthorns appearing at a distance like unto so many Stars in the Water, dancing to and fro, here and there, according to the motion of the Ship; but above all, the Cabin of that Vessel wherein the Prince was, having so many Wax Lights burning within it, glit∣tered most gloriously, and (at a certain distance) being well gilt and varnished, it seem'd a Paradise for pleasure and delight.
The Wind was very favourable, and we did not drive by the Waves, as we had done every Night before, but made all the Sail that our Ships could bear to keep in sight of that Vessel wherein our Conductor was. Many delighted to be above-Deck, it was so exceeding pleasant, between the Stars in the Firmament, and our Stars; the three Lanthorns on the Stern, shining with Wax Lights, dazled our Eyes, and was the only Compass by which most of the Fleet sail'd this whole Night: The Wind blowed very fresh, which caused our whole Fleet to plow the curling Waves, and cross the appeased Seas, with very good speed and pleasure; and towards the morning all struck Sail, excepting those in the Rear, which endea∣voured to come up to us as fast as they could. So when the day began to dawn, we found that we were very near the English Shore, but whereabout we could not yet tell; The Ship in which the Prince of Orange was, sailed so near the Shore, that with much facility a Man might cast a Stone on the Land; we were driven very slowly, all our Sails being struck: The Morning was very obscure with the Fog and Mist, and withal it was so calm, that the Ves∣sels now as 'twere touch'd each other; every Ship coming as near unto the Ship wherein the Prince of Orange was, as the Schipper thereof would permit them. Here we were moving for a while very slowly by the Shore, and could see all the Rocks thereabouts very plain. We per∣ceived that we should land thereabout, but no place near was commodious for either Men or Horses, it being a steep Rock to march up. The Ships did all observe the motion of the three Lanthorns, which were driven by the Coast of England back again, for we had sailed somewhat beyond Torbay: And being thus calm'd for a while, it af∣terwards pleased the God of Heaven, that he gave us a West, or westerly Wind, which was the only Wind that could blow to bring us safe into the Bay; for even
to this place we had an East and South-East Wind, which was indeed a good Wind to bring us from Holland, and a∣long all the Channel, but not to carry us into the Bay, there were so many Rocks and Shelves on that side. Making some Sail again, his Highness the Prince of Orange gave order that his Standard should be put up; and accordingly it was done, the White Flag being put up∣permost, signifying his most gracious offer of Peace unto all such as would live peaceably: And under that the Red or bloody Flag was set up, signifying War unto all such as did oppose his just Designs. The Sun recovering strength, soon dissipated the Fog, and dispers'd the Mist, insomuch that it prov'd a very pleasant Day: Now every Vessel set out its Colours, which made a very pleasant shew. By this time the People of Devonshire thereabout had disco∣vered the Fleet, the one telling the other thereof; they came flocking in droves to the side or brow of the Hills to view us: Some guess'd we were French, because they saw divers white Flags; but the Standard of the Prince, the Motto of which was, For the Protestant Religion and Liberty, soon undeceived them. Others more discreet said, that it was the Dutch Fleet so much talk'd of in the Nation, and so long expected by most People. This Day was very remarkable in England before, being the fifth of November, the Bells were ring∣ing as we were sailing towards the Bay, and as we landed, which many judged to be a good Omen: before we came into the Bays-mouth, as we were near the Rocks, the People ran from Place to Place after us; and we being so near as to see and discern the Habit of the Country Peo∣ple, and they able to see us and hear our Voices; a certain Minister in the Fleet, on board the Ship called the Golden Sun, went up to the top of the uppermost Cabin, where the Colours hang out, a Place where he could easily behold all the People on the Shore, and where they might most
perfectly see him, and pulling a Bible out of his Pocket, he opened it, and held it so in his right Hand, making many flourishes with it unto the People, whose Eyes were fix'd on him, and duly observ'd him; there∣by signifying to the People the flourishing of the Holy Gospel, (by God's Blessing upon the Prince of Orange's Endeavours) and calling out as loud as he was able, faid unto them on the top of the Rock; For the Protestant Religion, and maintaining of the Gospel in the Truth and Purity thereof, are we all by the Goodness and Providence of God come hither, after so many Storms and Tempests: Moreover, said he, It is the Prince of Orange that's come, a zealous Defender of that Faith which is truly Ancient, Ca∣tholick, and Apostolical, who is the Supream Governonr of this very great and formidable Fleet. Whereupon all the People shouted for Joy, and Huzza's did now eccho into the Air, many amongst them throwing up their Hats, and all making Signs with their Hands. So after the Minister had given them some Salutations, and they returned him the same again, he came down from off the upper Deck, unto the vulgar one among his Acquain∣tance, who spoke to him about the People on the brow or side of the Mountain. 'Tis, methinks, impossible for any Man to be so blind∣ed, as not to discern the Finger of God in this Expedi∣tion, from the beginning to the end thereof; for a very favourable Wind now fill'd our Sails, and brought us un∣to the long-desired Haven, to the Joy of our Hearts, and comfort of England, and that the Wind should turn a∣bout from East to West, when we came to the very place where we were to tack about, is not to be forgotten: It is in effect, as if the living and true God should say un∣to the Prince of Orange, our Joshua: As I was with Mo∣ses, so will I be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: There shall not any Man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy Life. I have prov'd thee, and thou art
not faithless: I have weighed thee in the Ballance, and thou art not found wanting. Behold, now will I make the Hea∣vens to rejoice and smile upon thee: Now will I turn the Hearts of this great and strong Nation unto thee; I will bless thee with my right and left-hand Blessings: Enter there∣fore and possess this good Land, and be thou Ruler among my People Israel. The Prince of Orange being come into the middle of the Bay, called Torbay, attended with three or four Men of War only, that is to say, one or two failing before his Vessel, and one on each side the Ship in which he was; and all the Merchant Ships, Pinks and Fly-boats coming round him, as near as they durst for safety, the rest of the Men of War being out in the Rear to secure all the little Pinks and Fly∣boats, and withal to prevent the English Fleet from di∣sturbing us in our Landing: Here we all rode at Anchor for a little while before we landed. At the upper end of Torbay there is a fair House belonging to one Mr. Carey, a very rigid Papist, who entertained a Priest in his House: This Priest going to recreate himself on the Leads, on the top thereof, it being a most delightsome day, as he was walking there, he happended to cast his Eyes towards the Sea, and espying the Fleet at a distance, withal being pur-blind in his Eyes, as well as blinded by Satan in his Mind, he presently concludes, that 'twas the French Navy (because he saw divers white Flags) come to land the Sons of Belial, which should cut off the Children of God, or as they call us, the Hereticks: And being transported with Joy, he hastned to inform his own Disciples of the House, and forthwith they sung Te Deum. This was second grand Mistake, the third time will fall to our Lot to sing Te Deum for our safe Landing, (as the Prince had it done at Exeter Cathe∣dral in the Quire): And because false Reports were spread abroad, that the People of this House had shot several of the Prince of Orange's Souldiers, and there∣upon
they had burnt down the House: I must inform the candid Reader, that there was nothing at all in it, for our People did not give them one reviling word, nor they us; some lodged there, while we were at Torbay. The major part of the Fleet being come into the Bay, Boats were ordered to carry the Prince on Shore, with his Guards; and passing towards the Land, with sundry Lords, the Admiral of Rotterdam gave divers Guns at his Landing; the Boat was held length-ways until he was on Shore: So after he had set his Feet on Land, then came all the Lords and Guards, some going before his Sacred Person, and some coming after. There are sundry little Houses which belong unto Fisher-men, be∣tween the two Hills, at Tor-Bay, where we landed: The People of these Houses came running out at their Doors to see this happy Sight. So the Prince, with Mares∣chal Schomberg, and divers Lords, Knights, and Gentle∣men, marched up the Hill, which all the Fleet could see over the Houses, the Colours flying and flourishing be∣fore his Highness, the Trumpets sounding, the Hoit∣boys played, the Drums beat, and the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Guards, shouted; and sundry Huzza's did now eccho in the Fleet, from off the Hill, insomuch that our very Hearts below on the Water, were even ra∣vished for Joy thereof. On this Hill you could see all the Fleet most perfectly, and the Men of War sailing up and down the Seas, to clear them of all Enemies; the Ships in the Rear making all the fail and speed they could. The Navy was like a little City, the Masts appearing like so many Spires. The People were like Bees swarm∣ing all over the Bay, and now all the Schievelingers are set to work to carry the Men and Horses unto Shore with speed, for as yet they had done nothing. The Officers and Souldiers crowded the Boats extreamly, ma∣ny being ready to sink under the Weight; happy was
that Man which could get to Land soonest: And such was the eagerness of both Officers and Souldiers, that divers jeoparded their Lives for haste; sundry Oars were broken in rowing, because too many laid hands on them; some jump'd up to their Knees in Water, and one or two were over Head and Ears. Extraordinary pains was now taken, by all sorts of Men, to get their necessary things to Shore, every one minding his own Concern. The Night was now as the Day for Labour, and all this was done, left the Enemy should come before we were all in a readiness to receive them. The Country Har∣mony was, ringing of Bells for our arrival. The Officers and Souldiers were continually march∣ing up the Hill after the manner of the Guards, with their Colours flying and flourishing, Hoitboyes playing, Drums beating, and all shouting and ecchoing forth Huzza's. As soon as the Prince had viewed well the Ground upon the top of the Hill, and found the most commodious place for all his Army to encamp, he then gave Orders for every thing, and so returned down the Hill unto the Fishermens little Houses: One of which he made his Palace at that time, instead of those at Loo, Honslerdyke, and the Hague: The Horse Guards and some Foot were round about him at other Houses, and a strong Guard but a little below the House wherein his Highness was: All the Lords were quartered up and down at these Fishermens Houses, whereof these poor Men were glad: Now the Camp began to be fill'd with Officers and Souldiers; for no Officer must move from his Company or Post. The Foot Guards belong∣ing to the Prince of Orange did encamp within an In∣closure of plowed Land, about which there was a natural Fence, good Hedges and little Stone Walls, so that no Horse could touch them; Count Solms being their Colonel or Commander. Count Nassaw's Regi∣ment encamp'd in another Craft or Inclosure joyning
to that of the Guards, having the like Fence about it as before: The Regiment belonging unto Colonel Fagell encamp'd in a Craft or Inclosure next to that of Count Nassau, and so all the English, Dutch, French and Scots encamp'd according to the aforesaid manner. The Soul∣diers were marching into the Camp all hours in the Night; and if any straggled from their Companies, it was no easy matter to find them in the dark amongst so many thousands; so that continually some or other were lost and enquiring after their Regiments. It was a cold frosty Night, and the Stars twinkl'd exceedingly; besides, the Ground was very wet after so much Rain and ill Weather; the Souldiers were to stand to their Arms the whole Night, at least to be all in a readiness if any thing should happen, or the Enemy make an Assault; and therefore sundry Souldiers went to fetch some old Hedges and cut down green Wood to burn therewith, to make some Fire. Now one Regiment beginning, all the rest soon followed their Example: Those that had Provision in their Snap-facks (as most of the Souldiers had) did broil it at the Fire, and others went into the Villages thereabouts to buy some fresh Provisions for their Officers, being we were newly come from Sea; but alas! here was little Provision to be gotten. There was a little Ale∣house amongst the Fishermens Houses which was so extreamly throng'd and crowded, that a Man could not thrust in his Head, nor get Bread or Ale for Mony. It was a happy time for the Landlord, who strutted about as if indeed he had been a Lord himself, because he was honoured with Lords Company. On the Morrow after we landed, when all the Soul∣diers were encamp'd, the Prince with sundry Noble∣men rode and viewed each Regiment, and then return'd to Dinner at this little House. The Number of his Highness's Regiments landed here at this Bay, was a∣bout
six and twenty, the number of Officers about one thousand, the number of Field-Officers about seventy eight: The number of all his Forces and Souldiers about fifteen thousand four hundred and odd Men. You might have seen several hundred Fires all at once in this Encampment, which must needs signify to the Country round about that we were landed. The Prince here was pleased to accept of Peoples Good-Will for the Deed, because things were not here to be bought for Mony, no Market-Town being near. Many People from all the adjacent places came flocking to see Prince of Orange. The Horses were landed with all the speed that might be, and truly were much out of order, and sore∣ly bruised, not able to find their Legs for some days: Every thing that was of present use was posted to shoar, but the Artillery, Magazine, and all sorts of Baggage and cumbersom things were left on Shipboard and order'd to meet us at Exeter. Upon Wednesday about Noon, Order was given to march towards Exeter, and so every Souldier was commanded by their Officers to carry something or other besides his own Arms and Snap-sack; and this made many murmur exceedingly. Sundry scores of Horses were thrown over-board which died at Sea; so that by just Computation the Prince lost about six hun∣dred Horse at the least by the Storm. As we marched here upon good Ground, the Souldiers would stumble and sometimes fall, because of a dissiness in their Heads after they had been so long toss'd at Sea, the very Ground seem'd to rowl up and down for some days, according to the manner of the Waves: Therefore it was the Lord's Goodness that our Foes did not come upon us in this Juncture and unfit Condition. The whole Army marched all the same way in a manner, which made very ill for the Rear Regiments, and cast them much behind. Many Country People which met us did not know what to say or think, being afraid that we should
be served as the D. of Monmouth's handful of Men were. Notwithstanding, some were so couragious as to speak out and say, truly their Hearts were for us, and went along with us, and pray'd for the Prince of Orange; but they said the Irish would come and cut them in pieces if it should be known. Some Souldiers asked them if they would go with them against the Papists? and many answered, they were enough themselves, and wanted no more. His Highness, with Mareschal Scomberg, Count Solms, Count Nassau, Heer Benting, Heer Zulustein, Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of Macclesfield, Viscount Mordant, Lord Wiltshire, and divers others Knights and Gentlemen, came in the Rear of the middle Line; for as soon as we could conveniently, we were to march in three Lines, and the Prince was commonly or always in the middlemost Line, which was the meet∣est place: So he went unto a certain Gentleman's House about two little Miles off, where the last Line encamp'd the second Night, and lodged there, his own Guards being with him. This first day we marched some hours after Night in the Dark and Rain; the Lanes here∣about were very narrow, and not used to Wagons, Carts or Coaches, and therefore extream rough and stony, which hindred us very much from making any speed: Divers of the Dutch-men being unaccustomed to such bad ways and hard marching in the Dirt, wish'd themselves back again in their own Country, and mur∣mured because of the Dark and Rain: At length we came to the Corn-stubble Inclosures on the side of a Hill, where we encamp'd that Night: It was a red Clay, and it rain'd very hard the greatest part of the Night, the Winds being high and stormy: Neverthe∣less the poor Souldiers being much wearied with the Tent-Polls, spare Arms, and other Utensils for War, which they had carried all Day, and some hours after Night, as well as with the badness of the March, lay
down to take their Repose; and verily the Water run over and under some of their Legs the major part of the Night, and their Heads, Backs, and Arms sunck deep into the Clay, being so very wet and soft; not∣withstanding they slept all Night very sweetly in their Pee, or Campagne Coats. The Souldiers here fetch'd some old Hedges and Gates to make their Officers and themselves some Fire (as they had done the Night be∣fore) else would have perished in the Cold, be∣ing all over in a Froth with Sweat in marching. And the old Hedges and Gates not being enough, they fetch'd away the new Ones, for the Weather was not only raw and cold, but we our selves were so too, having nothing to eat or drink, after so bad a days Journey: The Souldiers had some good Holland's Beef in their Snap-sacks, which they brought, and their Officers were very glad to get part with them, so they broil'd it at the Fire; some had bought Chickens by the way, but raw, which they broil'd and eat, as a most delicate Dish. Sundry Captains offer'd any Mony for a Guide to bring them to a House thereabout, where they might have some Provision for their Mony: but no Guide could be found, it was exceeding dark, and being all Strangers, and unacquainted with the Country, we could not tell where to find one House, for those few that were scat∣tering here and there, were either in some little grove of Trees, and so hid from our Eyes, or else in a bottom amongst the Hills, and so could not be seen. These Quarters did not content our Minds, for tho we got as near to the Hedges as we could possible with our Fires, yet we could not be warm: Many of the Souldiers slept with their Feet in the Ditch, and their Heads on the side thereof. We thought this Night almost as long as that in the Storm at Sea; and judged it to be the dawn of the Day some hours before it was. The Morning appearing, rejoiced our very Hearts, for we thought now we should
march presently; and we were sure of this, that worse Quarters we could never meet with, but much better we hoped to find. A private Souldier therefore going in the next Croft for to seek a convenient place, he found it to be an Inclosure with Turnips; so bringing his Burden away with him, he came to the Fire, and gave those there some, telling his Comrades of the Place, who soon hastned thereto, and brought enow with them: Some roasted them, and others eat them raw, and made a brave Banquet. The Souldiers were busy in discharging their Musquets, after the Wet and Rain, for they drust not trust to that Charge; and about 11 of the Clock the Army received Orders to march. The Prince of Orange, with the Lords Gentlemen, rode from this place unto Sir William Courtney's, within a Mile of Newton-Abbot, the first Line being about New∣ton, and the last on their march thither. The Place where we encamped was troden to Dirt, and stuck to our Shoes wretchedly. Now the Regiments marched sundry Roads, of which we were right glad, hoping to meet with better Quarters than the Marl and Clay Crofts. The People came in flocks unto the Cross-ways to see the Army, but especially the Prince. We met with much civility on the Road; now they began to give us Ap∣plause, and pray for our Success: sundry Persons enqui∣red for the Declaration of his Highness. Now being on their march to Newton-Abbot, a certain Divine went before the Army; and finding that 'twas their Market-day, he went unto the Cross, or Town-Hall; where pulling out the Declaration of the Prince of Orange, with undaunted Resolution, he began, with a loud and audible Voice, to read as follows. William Henry, by the Grace of God, Prince of Orange, &c. of the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms in the Kingdom of England, for preserving of the Protestant Religion, and restoring the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, &c. When the People heard the Prince of Orange's Name mentioned, they immediately crowded about him in a prodigious manner to hear him, insomuch that some jeoparded their Lives. The Declaration be∣ing ended, he said, God bless and preserve the Prince of Orange: To which the People, with one Heart and Voice, answered, Amen, Amen; and forthwith shouted for Joy, and made the Town ring with their ecchoing Huzza's. The Minister, nolens volens, was carried in∣to a Chamber near the Place; the Windows were shut, the Doors lock'd and bolted, to prevent the Crowd from rushing in. The People of the House, and others, very kindly asked him; Sir, What will you be pleased to eat? or, What shall we provide for you? Name what you love best, it shall be had. The Minister answered, What you please, give me what you will. So they brought forth such as was ready; and having eaten and drunk well, they desired him to spare them but one Declaration. Yes, says he, for I have enow in my Pocket; and pulling them out, he, gave Three, because they were of distinct Parishes. He told the People, he would go and visit their Minister, and cause their Bells to ring, because the Prince of Orange was come into the Parish. at Sir Will. Courtney's tho not into the Town; and (says he) this being the first Mar∣ket-Town, I cannot but think it much the more proper and expedient. Whereupon he went to the Minister's House, and enquiring for him, he was courteously in∣vited in, and disired to sit down: The Reverend Mini∣ster of the Parish coming presently to him, they saluted each other; and after some; Communications passed be∣tween them, this Divine from the Army, desired the Keys of his Church-doors, for to welcome the Prince of Orange into England with a Peal, (that being the first Market-Town they came to.) The Minister an∣swered; Six, for my own part, I am ready to serve his Highness any
way, but of my own accord cannot give the Keys; but you know you may command them, or any thing else in my House, in the Name of the Prince of Orange, and then I will rea∣dily grant it. So the Divine said; Sir, I demand your Keys of the Church Door only for an hour, to give his High∣ness a Peal, and then I will return them safely unto you. The Minister presently directed him to the Clerk's house, and desired him to come and take a Glass of Wine with him after the Peal was ended, (but the Ringers coming together, they rung sundry Peals) and he returned the Keys to the Minister. The People of the Town were exceeding joyful, and began to drink the Prince of O∣range's Health. The Country People in the Town were well inclin'd towards us; and here was the first favour we met with worth mentioning. His Highness was most kindly receiv'd and entertain'd at Sir Will. Court∣ney's, the Souldiers generally well treated by the Vulgar. Now the Reverend Dr. Burnet, and another old Gen∣tleman, rode unto Exeter, to prepare Quarters for the Prince of Orange. The Bishop's Palace and Deanery be∣ing both viewed, the Deanery was thought to be the more convenient Place, and so concluded upon. The Army moved toward Exeter, some Regiments being at one Town, and some in another: And as they were marching over the Heath, or Common, between Newton-Abbot and Exeter, about five miles off the City, sundry Companies of young Men met them, with each a Club in his Hand; and as they approched near, they gave sundry Shouts and Huzza's, saying, God bless the Prince of Orange, and grant him victory over all his Enemies; We are his true Servants, and came to fight for him as long as we are able: So we all bid them welcome. Here the Army passed by a Popish Lady's House, which was cruel to all her Protestant Tenants; she forced some to turn Papists, or Apostates: But had the French King's Army passed thus by a Protestant House, it should soon
have been fired, the People put to the Sword, or burnt:But we have not so learn'd Christ, nor been thus taught by his Ministers in our Land; for no Man molested this House, nor did any visit it, unless a Captain and some Gentlemen, which would have bought themselves Horses there, having lost their own at Sea, and so constrained to walk on foot till they could supply themselves with more. It must needs be acknowledged by all People, that his Highness took special care in marching of the Army, that no Disorders should be committed; and never bet∣ter Order could be kept in any Army than in this, as all sorts of Men confess: Nay, they told us at Exeter, that when we were there, the City was more quiet in the Night, and freer from debauch'd and disorderly Persons than 'twas before. The poor Souldiers began now to grow lame, and so marched slip-shod, which was irk∣some. After the Prince of Orange had tarried two or three Nights at Sir Will. Courtney's, he, with a brave Train of Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen to attend him, rode unto Exeter; they long'd much for his com∣ing. It was a very wet and rainy Day when he came into Exeter with his Army. The manner of his coming into this City, being so glorious, was long since pub∣lished, so that I shall not speak much about it: The Guards rode, some before and some behind him, with their Swords drawn, their Colours flying, Kettle-Drums beating, and Trumpets sounding joyfully, their Officers courteously bowing unto the People; all sorts and condi∣tions of Men thronging on each side the Streets, making great Acclamations and Huzza's as the Prince passed by. The Windows of every House were extreamly crowded and beautified; the Bells ringing. The Foot Souldiers did not appear well, because they were sorely weather∣beaten, and much dabled in marching in the Dirt and Rain, and look'd very pale and thin after such a hard
days march which made some People conjecture that they were dull sluggish Men. As the Prince of Orange was riding thus towards the Deanary through the City, attended with Mareschal Schomberg, Count Solms, Count Nassau; Heer Zulustein, Heer Bentein, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Mac∣clesfield, Lord Viscount Mordant, Lord Wiltshire, Earl of Argile, Colonel Sidney, Sir Rowland Guyn, and divers other Lords, Knights and Gentlemen; Such was the Resolution and Desire of an old Woman to seé the Prince, that she throng'd in amongst the Horse Guards, and tho she was divers times in Jeopardy of her Life, yet for all, says she, I will see him tho it cost me my Life: so coming at length to him, she touched his Hand and said, I pray God bless you, Sir, and so was thrust away by the Guards: but as she was going from him, she put her Hand to her Heart and spake out aloud, Now my very Soul within me is the better for seeing him; at which Speech and Humour of this Woman, his Highness himself seem'd to smile. After the Prince was come unto the Deanary, and had refresh'd himself, with all his Lords and Gentlemen, then was he pleased to go and render his hearty Thanks to Almighty God in the Cathedral Church for his safe Arrival and the whole Fleet. The People thronged the Streets to see him as he went, and crouded the Quire where he was to come very much. Now there were sundry Men with Hol∣bards who cleared the way, besides Sentinels: So be∣ing conducted to the Bishop's Seat, he sat down, with about six of his Life-Guar-dMen on his Right-hand, and many more before him and about him in the Quire. As he came all along the Body of the Church the Organs played very sweetly, tho 'twas not the right Organist himself, he being gone aside on purpose, as I was inform'd there. And being sat, the Quire began and sung Te Deum for the safe Arrival of the Prince of
Orange and his Army in England (as also for his whole Fleet): After the Collects were ended, the Reverend Dr. Burnet began to read the Declaration of his Highness: William Henry, by the Grace of God, Prince of Orange, &c. Of the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms in the King∣dom of England, for preserving of the Protestant Reli∣gion, and for the restoring the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland and Ireland, &c. At the very be∣ginning of which Declaration the Ministers of the Church there present rushed immediately out of their Seats, and busled through all the Croud going out ofthe Church; the People remained, and were very atten∣tive to the Doctor's reading, and the Declaration being ended, he said, God save the Prince of Orange, unto which the major part of the Multitude answered, Amen. So his Highness return'd to the Deanary, the People ecchoing forth Huzza's as he went along. Another Evening at Service one of the Ministers reading that Prayer for the pretended Prince of Wales, a certain No∣ble-Man or two being present, stood up at the same and put on their Hats, Kneeling down to all the other Collects; and this they did to demonstrate their Abhor∣rence of it. The Right Reverend Bishop of this place and Diocess as soon as he had learn'd (for certain) that the Prince of Orange was-landed with an Army at Tor-Bay in Devonshire, took his Coach and came up to give the late King James Information thereof, for which he gave him the Bishoprick of York. The Reverend Dean likewise took his Coach and went about six or seven Miles in the Country, where he remain'd some days, but returned unto his own House or Deanary before the Prince came away; for we tarried at Exeter many days to refresh the Army after it had been so long on Ship∣board, and to recover the Horses to their former Strength, as also for the Gentlemen of the Country thereabout to come and joyn his Highness there. The Train of Ar∣tillery
Magazine and the whole Baggage of the Army was brought hither by Water; there were one and twenty good Brass Pieces for the Field, divers of which were too heavy for those Roads, and more than sixteen Horses could draw. Arms for sundry thousand Men were now given out here, which we brought with us out of Holland. The first Sunday after the Prince was come unto Exeter, being Novemb. 11. the Reverend Dr. Burnet preached before him at the Cathedral Church in the Morning, the Quire and Body thereof being ex∣treamly throng'd with People which came to see his Highness, some placing themselves in Seats by eight in the Morning: When his Highness came he was pleased for to sit in the Bishop's Seat in the Body of the Church, as he had done in the Quire before: Sundry Sentinels stood just behind him, two just before him, and many more in the Church-Isle; the Doctor's Text was Psalm 107. 43. Whose is wise and will observe those things, even they shall understand the loving Kindness of the Lord. The Doctor very accurately shewed the loving Kind∣ness of the Lord unto the Price of Orange, and his Fleet; how he caused the Winds to turn at Tor-Bay, where the whole Fleet was to tack about to come into the Bay; and then shew'd the upright Design of the Prince to promote the Glory of God, and good of his Church in England, Scotland, and Ireland; having ended his Sermon, he read the Prayer for the Expedition, and so concluded with the Blessing, &c. Some time was passed here before the Gentlemen of the West joyned his Highness, but when once they did begin to come in, then they came daily: The Mayor and Aldermen of the City came to visit the Prince, and were busie in their Consultations among themselves. The late King James we heard now was advanc'd as far towards us as Salisbury, with a very brave Army, of about thirty five thousand Men, and a prodigious great Train of Artil∣lery,
which made the poor Country People tremble. Moreover we heard, that he was fully resolved to encamp his Army about Sarum, in the Plain, where he intended to fight us. Some of our Men, being of the Van-guard, were advanc'd as far as Wincaunton to provide Carriage, at which place there was a small Skirmish or Action be∣tween 26 of our Souldiers, and about 150 of the late King's Party; which you shall have a particular ac∣count of by and by. We soon receiv'd information of this Skirmish at Exeter: Order was now given to get Waggons to carry the Magazine and Baggage of the whole Army, together with all sorts of Utensils fit and convenient for War, and Horses to draw the Artillery, and for the Country People round to bring in their Horses to be sold at Exeter, that so the loss of our Horses might be made up here: According to which Order the Country People came daily in with their Horses to sell, and the Officers gave great Prices for them, because they must have them there or now here: The Souldiers were ordered to keep themselves and their Arms in good order, and to get every thing here which they wanted. Much Mony was laid out in this City for all sorts of Commodities which the Officers or Souldiers lacked: Here at first the People were scrupu∣lous about the Dutch Mony, and many Country People refused it, but were forc'd to take it, because all the Army had little else, but Guineas and Dutch Mony. The People of the City began now to be more and more inclin'd towards our Army, and all fear almost of the other Army was banish'd out of their Thoughts, so that they would discourse more freely now than at the first. The Drums beat for Volunteers, and every Regiment of English or Scotch which wanted any, Men, was now compleated: The Regiment of Sir John Guyes, and Sir Robert Peyton fill'd up very fast; for Men came into the City daily from all Parts to list themselves,
insomuch that many Captains pick'd and chose their Souldiers: Very great crowding was here at the Dean∣ary, (it being the Prince of Orange's Court) by all sorts of People: Many coming 20 Miles on purpose to see him, and all the People of the adjacent Places were waiting there daily; insomuch that the Sentinels could hardly keep them out. The Guard was before the en∣trance into the Deanary, and sundry Sentinels two at each Door. Now his Highness received Information, That the late King James was gone back from Sarum to∣wards London, (with his whole Army) by reason of the false Report of some Tumult in the City, made by the Apprentices, which News did not in the least discom∣pose us. The Weather being somewhat favourable, the Prince of Orange, with all his Lords and Gentlemen at∣tending him, was pleased to ride and view the City, and Castle; and this Day the Deanary was embroider'd with the Officers in their Gold and Silver-Lace Coats. The Country People brought all sorts of Provisions in abun∣dance, because it yielded them Money, and went off well. We heard here that our Friends were up in the North of England, as the Lord Delamere, Earl of Devonshire, Earl of Stamford, Earl of Danby, Sir Scroop How; Sir William Russel with divers others: By this time the Gentlemen of Somersetshire and Dorsetshire were coming in to join his Highness; and on Thursday November 15, they waited on him at Exeter, upon which he was plea∣sed to speak to them as follows. Tho we know not all your Persons, yet we have a Catalogue of your Names, and remember the Character of your Worth and Interest in your Country. You see we are come according to your Invitation and our Promise. Our Duty to God obliges us to protect the Protestant Religion; and our Love to Mankind, your Liberties and Properties. We expected you that dwelt so near the place of our Landing, would have join'd us sooner, not that it is now too late, nor that we want
your Military Assistance so much as your Countenance and Presence, to justify our declar'd Pretentions, in order to accomplish our good and gracious Design. Tho we have brought both a good Fleet, and a good Army, to render these Kingdoms happy, by rescuing all Protestants from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power; by restoring them to their Rights and Properties established by Law, and by promoting of Peace and Trade, which is the Soul of Go∣vernment, and the very Life-Blood of a Nation; yet we rely more on the Goodness of God, and the Justice of our Cause, than on any Humane Force and Power whatever. Yet since God is pleased we shall make use of Humane means, and not expect Miracles for our Preservation and Happiness; let us not neglect making use of this gracious Opportunity, but with Prudence and Courage put in Execution our so honourable Purposes. Therefore, Gentlemen, Friends, and Fellow-Protestants, we bid you and all your Followers most heartily Welcome to our Court and Camp. Let the whole World now judg, if our Pretentions are not Just, Generous, Sincere, and above Price, since we might have even a Bridg of Gold to Return back; But it is our Principle and Resolution, ra∣ther to dye in a Good Cause, than live in a Bad one, well knowing that Vertue and True Honour is its own Reward, and the Happiness of Mankind Our Great and Only Design. The late King James coming up towards London, the Regiment of Dragoons belonging to the Lord Cornbury came away from him to join the Prince of Orange, and the Lord Cornbury with many other Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, came unto Exeter, and attended on his Highness, which made all the Army to rejoice. The Prince rode about five Miles out of Exeter, to view some new Regiments of Horse which were just come into his Service. He gave the Officers and Souldiers a courteous Reception, and made a Speech unto them, upon which the whole Regiments shouted, and Huzza'd for Joy. I preached at St. Carion's Church in Exeter, November 18.
My Text being in Isa. 8. 12, 13, 14. Neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts him∣self, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And he shall be for a Sanctuary. Now the Church-Wardens of this Parish, altho there was no Minister to preach, were unwilling to give the Keys (because they were no true Friends of our good Cause) insomuch that I was forc'd to threaten them for their great rudeness. The Clerk of the Parish going along with me the Day before for the Key, one of the Church-Wardens very rudely broke his Head in sundry places, for which intolerable Action I immediately had him brought before the Honourable Colonel Cutts for this bold Fact, who upon a due submission and acknowledg∣ment of his Faults, dismissed him with a sharp Repre∣hension: For Modesty-sake I conceal his Name, hoping that he's reformed with the Times. The late K. James finding his Army begin to moulder away, was very much at a stand; however he thought to give us Battel with the remaining part, whereupon he hasten'd to Sarum a second time, which we had notice of before we left Exe∣ter: The Army being now well refresh'd, and one Man as good as two when we were at Torbay, Order was gi∣ven for the Army to march in three Lines: The first Line march'd out of the City as far as St. Mary Ottrie, and were Quarter'd in and near that Place: The next day the se∣cond Line march'd forth of Exeter to the same place, and the first Line advanc'd to Axminster: The third Day the last Line march'd, as before, to St. Mary Ottrie, the first Line advancing some to Beminster, and some to Crook∣horn, the second to Axminster and the adjacent Towns; and the Regiments march'd some one Road and some another; as the first Line advanced, so the whole Army moved, which was always according to the Moti∣on of our great Master: For when he remained any where, then did the whole Army abide in the same
Quarters. The City of Exeter was now freed of all its Souldiers, only the Regiment, of Sir John Guyes (which was new raised) was order'd to keep this City, and he made Governour thereof. Now many Oxen being brought into this Town to draw the Artillery, and many Horses being come to carry the Ammunition, and all things necessary for War appertaining to our whole Ar∣my; We then were soon on the March; A Captain with some other Officers, and about a hundred Men, came along with it to guard it. Here at Exeter was a certain Person kept in Custody some Days, for speaking very threatning Words against his Highnese the Prince of Orange; but within a while was released. Another was apprehended for a Spy, because he said he had a Com∣mission from the late K. James to go into any Mans House, to search for Goods: This Man was also accused for stealing about ten pound from the People of the House where he lodged, but no Money could be found about him, where∣upon he also was dismissed in few Days. I suppose our Army was now in Circumference between 20 and 30 Miles. The Prince with all his Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen attending him, rode from Exeter unto St. Mary Ottrie; the Weather was very Rainy, and the Roads bad for Marching; however we had time enough, for our Stages were not far distant one from the other: The places where we Quarter'd were scarce able to re∣ceive us, insomuch that every House was crowded: Our Van-Guard was advanc'd as faras Sherborn, who coming into this Townat at one end, and a party of Horse (belonging to the late King James) coming in at the other, but hearing of our Men, retreated back towards Sarum: Our first Line being advanced from Axminster, to Crookhorn and Beminster; the second to Axminster and Lime; and the third Line according to the others Stage before them. Then the Prince of Orange rode to Crookhorn with all his Noble Attendance. The Country People were ex∣ceeding
desirous to see the Prince, and ran in great num∣bers from one Town to another, when they heard for certain which way he came. Here at Crookhorn his Highnese remained the Lord's Day, Novemb. 25. And the Gentlemen of the West came and joyn'd him now almost at every Stage. On Monday Morning the whole Army March'd; The first Line advanced from Sherborn to Wincanton, the second to Sherborn, and the third to Yet∣minster. The Prince of Orange with all his Nobles and Gentlemen came to Sherborn, and lodged at the Castle. The two Armies were near each other by this time, the late King James lay at Salisbury with his Army, and the Prince of Orange's lay about Sherborn, advancing towards him with all possible speed. The late King James seeing his Army moulder thus away, and that Prince George was gone to his Brother, with the Duke of Ormond, was in such a streight, that he knew not well what to do: And coming to the Market-place at Sarum, he made an Oration to the Citizens, telling them that he would spend his Blood for the Protestant Religion, whenas he had been seen at Mass all the Morning by many of his Auditors; who thereupon derided him in their Hearts. No sooner had he ended his Speech, but immediately falls to bleeding at his Nostrils very violently, (as many ob∣served there-about him) and his Blood could not be stopp'd any manner of way. The Citizens hearing the Army of the Prince of Orange was advanced within a few Miles of their City; some Persons coming in at one end of the Town, said they saw them not far off: which Re∣port being noised about, so Alarm'd the late King James, and his Army, That in the midst of his Bleeding, he commanded his Coach to be made ready, and drive away towards Windsor with all possible speed, which was ac∣cordingly done. The Foot-Soldiers were ready to desert the late King, and many did, some left their Baggage and Snapsacks behind them; And the Horse likewise being
in such a hurry to get away, that they were ready to spoil their Comrades; and the whole Army was in such a confused manner, and marched so disorderly, and in such haste, that the Country seeing them, judged they had been routed in a Battel. The late King James began to bleed at Sarum, and was observ'd to continue bleeding some days; and coming thus hastily to Windsor the Towns-People that saw him, judged that he had been overthrown in Battel: So coming from Windsor to Lon∣don, he turn'd out Sir Edw. Hales, who was Governor of the Tower, for he had threatned to Bomb this famous Ancient City, and put Mr. Skelton his late Ambassador in France, Governor, who was a Prisoner there but a few days before. His Highness the Prince of Denmark, with the Duke of Ormond, came and joined the Prince of Orange at Sherborn-Castle, upon Thursday Novemb. 29. about four of the Clock in the Afternoon; The Report of which made the Hearts of all the Country People to rejoice, as well as our Army, and many Person of Quality flock'd to the Prince to join him. From Winncanton the first Line of our Army advanced to Mere, and the adjacent Towns and Villages; the second Line marched to Winncanton, and the third, or last, came to Sherborn. Now the Prince of Orange, with Prince George of Denmark, the Duke of Ormond, and very many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, came from Sherborn-Castle unto Winncan∣ton, and quartered there. This was the place where the first Skirmish pass'd between the two Armies; the man∣ner of which I shall impartially relate to the candid and ingenious Reader, as I received an Account thereof from the Minister (Mr. Bulgin) and from Mr. VVebb a Cor∣net of Horse belonging to the late King James, who was shot there, between his Back-bones and Reins, and lay desperately ill when we marched by.
A Lieutenant having his Post at this Town, with about four and twenty Souldiers belonging to the Regi∣ment of the Honourable Major General Mackay, hearing that a party of Horse belonging to the late King James were posting thither, he was so magnanimous as to re∣solve to fight them; and in order thereto, posted his Men as securely as he could, in a small Inclosure, at the East end of the Town, on the left side; there was a good Hedg between them and the Road, which was to defend them against the Horse, and through which they were to fire upon the Enemy; but there was a little Gate at one Corner, and a weak dead Hedg. In this Field he posted most of his Men; and on the other side the way, just opposite to this place, he posted about six Souldiers in a little Garden, who had a thick old Hedg to cover them from the Horse, and through which they were to fire; the Officer himself, with four or five Men, keeping the Road: The Enemies Horse being now advanced with∣in Musquet-shot, the Souldiers would have fired upon them; but the Lieutenant, whose name was Cambel, not knowing what they might be, whether Friends or Foes, would not permit them, and the more, because a Regi∣ment of Horse belonging to my Lord Cornbury was come in and joined our Forces; and so advancing each towards other, our Officer first gave them the World, saying, Stand, stand, For who are ye? To which the Enemies Officer, at the Head of the Party of Horse, answered, I am for King James, Who art thou for? To which our Officer replied, I am for the Prince of Orange. God damn me, says the Enemies Officer, I will Prince thee. Whereupon our Officer said, Fire; and went bodly up to this Popish Officer, and shot him in at his Mouth and through the Brains, so he drop'd down dead; our Soul∣diers firing upon them through the Hedges on each side, maul'd them desperately, and kill'd several of them. They carried off their Dead presently, being ten to one:
[for the Enemies Party was about one hundred and fifty, and our Party but five and twenty.] They rode to find out a Place to break in upon our Men; so some Horse broke in at the upper end of the Croft, some at the lower Corner, and others got in at the little Gate, which, as is said; was open'd by a Towns-man that stood near the Place; so that our Men charged as fast as they could to fire upon them, but were now surrounded with the Enemy, our Souldiers were divers of them kill'd. They defended themselves as well as 'twas possible for such a handful against so many; and one or two of them being shot in five or six places, were offer'd Quarter by the Enemy for their great Courage, but they would not accept of it from the Hands of Papists, and therefore chose rather to die. Now the little Company in the Garden fired di∣vers times, and the Officer, with his Men, kept their Ground awhile, and then got into the Garden to their own Party. The Towns-people were much alarm'd by this Action, and came thronging into the Streets; and kind Providence having so ordain'd it, for the saving our Men, (else, no doubt, they would all have been cut off, being so mightily overpowred) that a certain Miller came riding in at the other end of the Town, and hear∣ing of this Skirmish, presently reported, that he had overtaken a strong Party of Horse belonging to the Prince of Orange, and that he believed they were now entring the Town: This was brought to the Enemies Ears very quickly, and moreover he call'd to them, and said, Away, for your Lives, save your selves, the Ene∣mies are at hand. Now these Souldiers of the late King James, seeing the People of the Town so thick in the Streets, running here and there, judged that it might be so, and hereupon they retreated with all speed, gallop∣ing away in a confused manner; however, they left more behind them kill'd on their side, than they had kill'd of our Men; for 'twas the Judgment of all here,
that this handful of Souldiers (appertaining to his High∣ness the Prince of Orange) kill'd more of their Enemies, than they themselves were in number. There were about fifteen tumbled in one Grave together, and about eight or nine of our Men, the rest being of the Enemies Party. Our Officers did most of them visit this Mr. Web, Cor∣net of Horse, to hear the manner of this small Action. From Mere the first Line of our Army advanced to∣wards Sarum, about six or seven miles; the second Line advanced to Mere, and the third to Wincanton. All along the West we dispers'd the Declarations; and where we hapned to quarter on Sunday, we read it there in the Church, as at Beminster, Collingburn, Kingston, and fe∣veral other places. Near unto Beminster there lived a Gentleman, whose Name I shall forbear, but a very rigid Papist, and one whom I cannot quite forget, because of his unkindness, and cursed Intention towards the Army: Hearing that some Regiments would pass that way, he resolved to give some their last Meat and Drink, (as his own Neighbours at Beminster informed us when we were there) therefore he caused a Beef or two to be kill'd, and poi∣son'd the Flesh, making it into Pyes; and poison'd also a Hogshead or two of Beer, and as much of Sider, for the hungry Souldiers (as he call'd them) against they came that way. Some of his Neighbours hearing of this cursed Design, spread it purposely about the Country, to prevent any of the Prince of Orange's Men from be∣ing destroyed; insomuch that every Regiment was timely warn'd hereof: But as in all great Armies, there will be some Straglers, so there was some in ours, tho not many; and these not hearing of this Bait, acciden∣tally passed that way; and as they approached near the House, they concluded 'twas their best course to call and drink (there) because it shew'd well to the Eye, and People all along were very kind to the Souldiers, and
would make them drink, and in many Places eat: Here∣upon these Straglers went to the House, and asked for some Beer; and the People there made them eat and drink freely, saying, Their Master had provided for them. After they had eat and drank, they hastned towards their Regiments, lest the Enemies Party should happen to meet them; Being come a little more than a quarter of a mile from the House, they grew suddenly so weak and faint, that they were not able to go any farther; so they lay down under a Tree, not suspecting what was the matter: As they were in this desperate condition, by meer Providence, there came a Surgeon-Major that way, who espying some Souldiers (supposed they were some of the Prince of Orange's Men) he went to speak with them; and seeing them look so fearfully, (their Eyes being prodigiously swell'd) he ask'd presently, What was the matter with them? or, what did ail them? they told him, they knew not, only they had eat and drank at the Gentleman's House behind (point∣ing to the House); The Surgeon having heard of their evil Preparations, prepared immediately an Antidote, and gave directions what they must do; whereupon they presently began to vomit, and after some time they waxed a little better, and made shift to get to the Wag∣gons which carried sick Souldiers; and were under the Surgeon-Major's Hands for some time. At the very next Town, called Yetminster, one Souldier died in the Night, and none could tell what was the matter with him, being very well when he went to bed, which Souldier I buried there according to our Liturgy: The others that were poisoned, were strangely altered, their Eyes being swell'd after an odd manner. Now the Army being advanced near Sarum; and the first Line being in the City, the second at Wiltion and the Towns adjacent, and the Rear Line at Tevent and Din∣ton; one Line about two or three miles off the City,
and the other about seven or eight. The Prince of O∣range, with his Highness the Prince of Denmark, his Grace the Duke of Ormond, Mareschal Schomberg, Count Solms, Count Nassau, Heer Zulustein, Heer Benting, Heer Overkirk, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Viscount Mordant, the Earl of Macclesfield, Lord Wiltshire, Lord Cornbury, Lord Colchester, and sundry other Lords, Sir Will. Portman, Sir Rowland Gwynn, Col. Sidney, and ma∣ny other Knights and Gentlemen, rode into the famous City of Salisbury. The manner of their Entrance into this City, was far more glorious than that of Exeter; For here the Mayor and Aldermen met his Highness the Prince of Orange in all their Formalities. First of all marched the Regiment of Foot Guards belonging to Count Solms, with their Colours flying, Drums beating, Hoitboys playing; the People thronging in the Street, and making great Accla∣mations. Next, some Troops of Horse, with their Kettle-Drums beating, Colours flourishing, Trumpets sounding, the Officers shewing their Courtesy to the Peo∣ple: Then came his Highness the Prince of Orange, with the Prince of Denmark on his right Hand, and the Duke of Ormond on his Left. Never were Windows more crowded with Faces of both Sexes than here; never were Bells ringing more melodiously than now at Sarum; ne∣ver were People shouting and ecchoing forth Huzza's in the Air more than now. The Bishop's Palace there be∣ing the best and most meet place, both the Princes rode thither, altho afterwards his Highness Prince George went to the Quarters assign'd him. The Princess Ann of Den∣mark was gone into the North, with the Ladys, Churchil and Berkley, and the R. R. Bishop of London, to those Forces there in Arms for the Prince of Orange. And hearing that the Army was advanced to Sarum, she came unto the City of Oxford, where Prince George met her Royal Highness, and conducted her safe to London,
having a Dutch Guard appointed them by the Prince of Orange. The late King James's Army was now much broken, most of the Protestant Officers and Souldiers come away, and join'd his Highness's Forces. So 'twas apparent to all Men, there would be no Field Battel. Whilst the Prince of Orange remained in this City, there was great resort from all the Country round about to see him, who was the Nation's Joy, and the Peoples Delight, because he had done so great Things for our Land: And such was his exceeding wise Conduct, that the the effusion of much Blood was prevented. After some stay here, the Prince of Orange went to Amsbury, attended with the Duke of Ormond, and many of the English Nobility and Gentry, besides Dutch, Scotch, and French: The first Line was advanced towards the most renowned City of London, a considerable way, the Roads here being good for marching: And as the Regiments marched over the Plains, they made pleasant Figures, sometimes marching in Battalia, and sometimes in a Line: The Weather now was very favourable, and the way very good. And being to march near one of the Wonders of the World, called Stonehenge, most Regi∣ments made an halt to view this strange Sight; none that saw it could render any satisfactory Account concerning it: Certain Officers ask'd the Minister of Amsbury what was his Opinion, because they presumed 'twas within the Bounds of his Parish; who told them, that he sup∣posed it to be a Trophy, or Monument erected in token of some notable Victory which was obtain'd there: I must confess, this is the general Opinion of the greatest Antiquaries of our Nation. The Custom of erecting a Trophy, or Monument, in token of Victory is of great Antiquity, and first began among the Greeks, who used in that place where the Enemies were vanquish'd to cut down the Boughs of great Trees, and in the Stocks, or Bodies of them, to hang
up Armour, or other Spoils, taken from the Enemy. Others argued strongly that these prodigious Stones were brought out of Ireland by Merlin's Magical Art, and so curiously fram'd and put together. To corroborate this Opinion, they assured us, that a piece broken off from these Stones, and put into the Wall of any Well, or cast into the Water, shall, for certain, kill and destroy all the venemous Creatures therein. To proceed, the Army moved daily according to the Motion of his Highness, who rode from Amsbury unto a certain Gentleman's House near Collingburn. The late King James being almost past all hopes, sent the Marquess of Hallifax, Earl of Nottingham, and the Lord Godolphin as Commissioners, to treat with the Prince of Orange, immediately; and a Trumpeter was sent down to know his Highness's pleasure, Whether he would admit of them as such? And his Highness was pleased to grant them leave. The place appointed them was Hungerford. His Highness with all his Nobles, &c. went to Littlecott, December 8, and remain'd there the Morrow, being the Lord's Day [for the Army never march'd on that Day, but once in case of Necessity, that the Souldiers should not abide about the Forrest of Windsor, because they kill'd the Deer. Hence they march'd from Barkham and Arbersield, unto Maidenhead, December 16, which was the Lord's Day.] The first Line was now advanced to Newberry, the se∣cond to Hungerford, and the Rear Line to Collingburn, Kingstone, and the adjacent Villages; who on Saturday Night December 8, received an Alarm (tho it proved a false One) sundry Tradesmen riding home from Hunger∣ford Market, late in the Evening, were seen by some of our Scouts, who presently apprehended them to be a Party of the Enemy's Horse (being 'twas both late and dark) who thereupon speedily made report unto some of the Officers commanding in Chief; insomuch that the
Souldiers were knock'd up in their Quarters to come pre∣sently to their Arms: The Country People were there∣upon in a great fear, not knowing what to do; and this Alarm came from one Regiment to another; for Colo∣nel Fagell's Regiment sent to advertise the Regiment of Colonel Sidney, That they might be ready to receive the Enemy. Now they thought this Alarm the rather to be true, because they had heard, That the late King James's Souldiers were resolv'd to make an Attempt upon those Men with the Artillery and Magazine, That, if possible, they might destroy our great Guns and Ammuni∣tion. The Souldiers being thus hurried out of their Beds, ran here and there to seek the Enemy: Thus were they marching to and fro the whole Night in the Rain. The Morrow Morning (being the Lord's Day) divers Officers went to search the Woods near to the place where those Tradesmen were first seen, lest they should lie in Ambush till the Regiments were march'd away, and then attack the Artillery and Magazine-Forces: But none could be found, or heard of thereabout; only they were now inform'd of these Tradesmen, and so they return'd to their Regiments. The Commissioners by this time were come to Hun∣gerford; and these following Words, in Writing, were delivered unto the Prince of Orange. Sir, THE King commanded us to acquaint you, That he ob∣serveth all the Differences and Causes of Complaint, (alledged by your Highness) seem to be referred to a Free Parliament. His Majesty, as he hath already declared, was resolv'd before this to call One, but thought that in the pre∣sent State of Affairs, it was adviseable to defer it till things were more compos'd. Yet seeing that his People still conti∣nued to desire it, He hath put forth his Proclamation in order to it, and hath issued forth his Writs for calling of it.
And to prevent any Cause of Interruption in it, he will con∣sent to every thing that can be reasonably required for the Se∣curity of all those that shall come to it. His Majesty hath therefore sent us to attend Your Highness for the adjusting of all Matters that shall be agreed to, necessary to the Freedom of Elections, and the Security of Sitting, and is ready immediately to enter into a Treaty, in order to it. His Majesty proposeth, that in the mean time the respective Ar∣mies may be restrained, within such Limits, and at such a Distance from London, as may prevent the Apprehensions that the Parliament may in any kind be disturbed; being desi∣rous that the Meeting of it may be no longer delay'd, than it must be by the usual and necessary Forms. Hungerford Decemb. 8. 1688. Signed, Hallifax, Nottingham, Godolphin. His Highness the Prince of Orange, with the advice of his Lords and Gentlemen, in answer to the same, made these Proposals. 1. That all Papists, and such Persons as are not quali∣fied by Law, be disarmed, disbanded, and removed from all Employments, Civil and Military. 2. That all Proclamations which reflect upon Us, or any that have come to Us, or declared for Us, be re-called; and that if any Persons for having so assisted, have been committed, that they be forth with set at Liberty. 3. That for the Security and Safety of the City of London, the Custody and Government of the Tower be immediately put into the Hands of the said City. 4. That if his Majesty shall think fit to be at London, during the sitting of the Parliament, that We may be there also, with equal Number of our Guards. Or if his Majesty shall please to be in any place from London, at whatever distance he thinks fit, that we may be at a place of the same distance. And that the Respective Armies
do remove from London Thirty Miles, and that no more Foreign Forces be brought into the Kingdom. 5. That for the Security of the City of London, and their Trade, Tilbury-Fort be put into the Hands of the said City. 6. That to prevent the Landing of French, or other Foreign Troops, Portsmouth may be put into such Hands, as by your Majesty and Us shall be agreed upon. 7. That some sufficient part of the Publick Revenue be assigned Us, for the Maintaining of our Forces, until the Meeting of a Parliament. Given at Littlecot, Decemb. 9. 1688. W. H. Prince of Orange. The late King James perceiving now that he was in an evil Case, in relation to sundry Matters, thought it high time to secure himself, whereupon December 10, he wrote a Letter to the Earl of Feversham, now at the Head of his Army, signifying his Intention therein. And on the Morrow Morning, December 11, he withdrew himself in order to his departure out of the Kingdom, and being on his Journey near Feversham in Kent, was taken in a Disguise and sent back to London. The Earl of Fever∣sham having read the Contents of the late K. James his Let∣ter, sent another speedily for to advertise his Highness the Prince of Orange, that his late Majesty was gone a∣way: And that for his own part He would make no Op∣position against any, and so prevent the Effusion of Blood. The news of the late King James being gone away, flew like lightening from East to West, and from North to South. Our Army was now advanc'd far towards the City of London, The first line being March'd from Newberry to Reading, Tylehurstone, and the adjacent places: The second line advanc'd to Newberry, and the third line to
Hungerford. The Prince rode to Henly, attended with his Nobility and Gentry; sundry Regiments of the first and second Line being marched thither, and the Rear Line was come to Newberry: Here we received the first positive News of the late King James being gone away, As soon as it was certainly known about the City of, Lon∣don, that the late King was withdrawn, in order to his departure out of the Kingdom, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal assembled at Guildhal, Decemb. 11. and there agreed upon, and signed a Declaration, Entituled, The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, assembled at Guildhal, &c. The substance of which being to shew, that the late King James was gone away, and to declare that they would assist his Highness with their uttermost Endeavours in the obtaining a Free Parliament with all speed, and in preserving, as much as in them lay, the Peace and Security of the Cities of London and Westmin∣ster; by taking care to disarm all Papists, and secure all Jesuits and Romish Priests, and in all things endeavour to promote his Highness's generous Intentions. This Declaration they ordered to be presented to his Highness, by the Earl of Pembrook, the Lord Viscount Weymouth, the Lord Bishop of Ely, the Lord Culpeper. The same Day the Lieutenancy of the City of London met there also, and agreed upon, and signed an humble Address to be presented to his Highness by a Committee appoin∣ted, viz. Sir Robert Clayton, Sir William Russel, Sir Ba∣sil Firebrass, Kts. and Charles Duncome Esq. The substance of which Address was, to acknowledg the great Danger his Illustrious Highness had expos'd himself to, both by Sea and land, for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, and the happy Relief he had brought to us; and therefore they humbly desired that his High∣ness would be pleased to repair unto the City of London,
with all the convenient speed he could, for perfecting the great Work He had so happily begun, to the general Joy and Satisfaction of all. The same day the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Com∣mon Council assembled, agreed on and signed an Address to be presented to his Highness the Prince of Orange; the Contents whereof was, To acknowledg the peril his Highness had exposed himself to, both by Sea and Land, and the happy Deliverance he had brought to our Nation; and therefore they, in the name of their Ca∣pital City, did implore his Highness's Protection, and did humbly beseech his Highness to vouchsafe to repair to the City, where his Highness should be received with universal Joy and Satisfaction. All which Addresses were presented to his Highness the Prince of Orange, by the Persons appointed, the 14th of December, at Henly; be∣ing accompanied with a great number of Citizens, &c. But whilst all this was transacting, the late King was sur∣prised at Feversham in Kent, in a small Vessel; his Guards and Coach was sent for him, and he returned to White∣hal, Sunday, Dec. 16. about six of the Clock in the Af∣ternoon, which was some surprise to the Prince of Orange; however he pursued his Journey to London, and from Henley went to Windsor, and set up his Standard; where we shall humbly crave the liberty to leave his Highness at this famous Castle, with all the Nobility and Gentry attending him, and proceed with his Highness's Puissant Army for a while. The Rear Regiments coming up, some were quartered in one Village, and some in another; at Tylehurston the Regiment of the Right Honourable Colonel Sidney, com∣manded by the Honourable Colonel Cutts, was now a∣larm'd, that the Irish were coming, and had burnt Kingston upon Thames, putting Man, Woman, and Child to the Sword; and that part of these Tories were gone unto Basing-stoke to do the fame there; insomuch
that a certain Person who was an Inhabitant of that Town, was constrained to keep away from the Place, and come to the Regiments. There was now riding and posting from one Town to another all the Night long, and People every where in a kind of confusion. As part of our Regiments of Horse were coming to Reading, the Irish Souldiers gave out great swelling Words, and lofty Speeehes, how they would hack them to pieces there, and how they would defend the seven Bridges; This was on the Lord's Day, (and as we were informed there, by divers Persons of Credit, they designed to massacre the People at their Worship, had they not been prevented) which obliged the Inhabitants to send to the advanc'd part of the Prince's Army, then a few miles di∣stant, who readily came to their Assistance, being con∣ducted a by-way into the Town, and fought so coura∣that in a few minutes they put the Irish to flight, took some, and kill'd about 20 upon the place, with the loss only of the Officer that led them, and the Guide that conducted them into the Town. At Maidenhead there was such another Action perfor∣med by the Irish, (as we heard there from a Worthy Divine); The Irish perceiving the Army of the Prince of Orange advanced so fast, and with such speed towards London, perswaded the late King James to fortify Mai∣denhead-Bridg, it being the ready Road, and a difficult Post to be taken. Therefore in a new Brick House which is built between the Bridg and Town, they made sundry Port-holes for their great Guns, and put new Pales to blind them, and sundry places above to shoot with Musquets: And on the middle of the Bridg, they plan∣ted a great Gun or two, and here they were resolved to maul the Prince's Army, as they said. Indeed, those that understand Fortification well, have presumed, that the Passage there might be so fortified, that thousands of Men should not win it, because the Water ran in the
Road-way a considerable length, or some hundred Yards; and the Bridg is so narrow, that a Man can hardly go a∣long without falling, except he hold by the Rails; the Water too being up to a Man's middle here in the Road at the lowest Ebb: So the Irish bravadoing here at this Post, what they would do, certain worthy Persons there consulted together how to disperse the Irish, or cause them to go away, for they perceived well the Hearts of all Protestants were set upon his Highness, their Deliverer, under God, and by his Blessing; and the End of their Consultation was this: Sundry Persons of Courage and Resolution should go in the Dark, about Midnight, having each of them an old Barrel, or an old Kettle, standing at a certain equal distance from each other, they should beat the Dutch March: Which Stratagem took goodeffect, for these Men being got within a small distance of the Irish, began to beat a Dutch March; they no sooner heard it, but were prodigiously surprized, crying, Hark, Hark; and another presently made answer, God damn my Blood if it be not the Dutch come upon us; and forth∣with they began to run and hasten away, without mind∣ing their great Guns, or taking away any thing; nay, happy was that Man that could get before his Comrade; and whither they went, no Man could tell. So the Souldiers belonging to his Highness, coming to Maiden∣head, hearing of this Exploit, highly commended both the Contrivers and Actors in it, brought away the Guns, and all that was left, to Windsor-Castle. And so I have done with both the Armies; in relation to Skir∣mishes or Actions. His Highness being now at Windsor, with all his No∣bility and Gentry about him, the Citizens of London flock'd mightily to visit Him, and congratulate his safe Arrival so far. The Army being now all about Windsor, and the ad∣jacent Towns and Villages, the Souldiers, through the
perswasions of the Country People; kill'd and destroy'd hundreds of Deer in the Forest; and hundreds more had been destroy'd, if so be his Highness had not given out his Royal Order to the contrary. The Irish Tories much abused the worthy Minister of Tylehurston, stripping his Rings off his Fingers, with the Skin and Flesh; threatning his Wife in Bed; and un∣doubtedly had murder'd the whole Family, if so be the Maid had not leap'd out of a Window, and call'd the Neighbours speedily to assist them, for they broke open the Door with on Iron made for the same purpose, which they forgot and left behind them, with their Dark Lanthorn, both which I saw, They swore di∣vers times by St. Patrick, they would cut them all into pieces, if they would not give them Mony, for they must shortly be gone, and the late King had not paid them: So hearing the Neighbours coming, they took their Horses and rode away, having above thirty Pounds in Mony, Plate, and Rings, for they took the old Gentle∣womans Rings off her Fingers. December the 18th, his Highness parted from Windsor, dined at Sion-House, and came that Evening to St. James's, amidst the loud Acclamations of a vast number of People of all Sorts and Ranks, the Bells every-where ringing; the Evening concluded with vast Bonsires, and such general Joy as can scarce be parallel'd. The next day the late King James (seeing the Scene of Affairs altered) parted from Whitehal, went down the River to Rochester, and from thence took Shipping for Brest, whither the Queen, and supposed Prince of Wales, was gone before, and himself soon after, where I'le leave him. Most of the Nobility congratulated his Highness's safe arrival at St, James's; and on the 20th the Aldermen and Common Couucil of the City of London, attended his Highness upon the same account; and the Lord Mayor
being disabled by Sickness, Sir George Treby Kt. Recor∣der of the Honourable City of London, made an Oration to his Highness, to this effect; Great Sir, WHen we look back to the last Month, and con∣template the swiftness and fulness of our pre∣sent Deliverance, astonish'd, we think it miraculous. Your Highness led by the Hand of Heaven, and call'd by the Voice of the People, has preserved our dearest Interest, the Protestant Religion, which is Primitive Christianity restored. Our Laws, which are our an∣cient Title to our Lives, Liberties and Estates, and without which this World were a Wilderness. But what Retribution can we make to your Highness? Our Thoughts are full charged with Gratitude. Your Highness has a lasting Monument in the Hearts, in the Prayers, in the Praises of all good Men amongst us. And late Posterity will celebrate your ever-glorious Name, till Time shall be no more. December the 25th, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal asssembled at the House of Lords, Westminster, and there ageeed upon, and signed an Address, wherein they hum∣bly desired his Highness in this Conjuncture, to take upon him the Administration of Publick Affairs, both Civil and Military, and the Disposal of the Publick Re∣venue, for the preservation of our Religion, Rights, Laws, Liberties, and Properties, and of the Peace of the Nation; and that his Highness would take into his Care, the Condition of Ireland, and endeavour, by the most speedy and effectual Means, to prevent the Dan∣gers threatning that Kingdom. All which the Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal make their Requests to his High∣ness, to undertake and exercise till the Meeting of the intended Convention, Jan, 22. next.
Moreover, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal assem∣bled at Westminster in this Extraordinary Conjuncture, did humbly desire his Highness to cause Letters to be written, subscribed by Himself, to the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral, being Protestants, and to the several Counties, Universities, Cities, Boroughs, and Cinque-Ports of England, Wales and Town of Berwick Upon Tweed; con∣taining Directions for the choosing in all such Counties, Cities, Universities, Boroughs, and Cinque-Ports, with∣in Ten days after the receipt of the said respective Let∣ters, such a number of Persons to represent them, as are of right to be sent to Parliament; And the Persons so chosen, to Meet and Sit at Westminster on the Two and Twentieth day of January: Both which were signed by all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal then Assembled, and presented to his Highness the Prince of Orange the same day at St James's. All which his Highness was pleased to Do according to their Desires. Now the Lords and Commons being Met at Westmin∣ster the Two and Twentieth of January 1688, According to the Direction of his Highness's Letters, They agreed upon and Ordered, That the Thanks of both Houses should be returned to his Highness in the behalf of the whole Nation, for his Highness happy Deliverance of this King∣dom from Popery, Slavery, and Despotick Power; and for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion and the Laws, Rights, Priviledges, and Customs of our Land, &c. And moreover to beseech his Highness to continue the Administration of publick Affairs Civil and Milita∣ry, and the Disposal of the publick Revenue, until such time as farther Application be made to his Highness: All which his Highness was pleased to do and exercise ac∣cording to their desire. And with all expedition on the 12th of February, the Lords and Commons consulted a∣bout the Settlement of our Government: And agreed that the late King James the Second having endeavour'd
to subvert and extirpate the Protestant Religion, &c. and having abdicated the Government, the Throne was thereby become Vacant, They did resolve that William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, be, and be decla∣red King and Queen of England France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, &c. On the 12th of February, Her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange arrived at Whitehall, the welcome news whereof was received with Ringing of Bells, Bon∣fires, and other publick Demonstrations of Joy. The next day the Lords and Commons assembled at Westmin∣ster, attended their Highnesses at the Banqueting-house with their Resolve, and received their Consent thereto, and about 11 of the Clock proclaimed William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, King and Queen of Eng∣land, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging. After that their Majesties were Proclaim'd before Whitehall; And the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the Famous City of London, together with the Sheriffs met the Lords and Heralds at Arms at Temple-Bar, and there Proclaimed their Majesties King William and Queen Mary,&c. And so proceeded to the Royal Exchange, where the same was done a third time. The day concluding with Ringing of Bells and Bon∣fires, to the General Satisfaction of all. After their most excellent Majesties were proclaimed all over England, there was great preparation made in order to their Majesties Coronation: The Day being come, viz. April 11, 1689. Their Majesties came from Whitehall to Westminster, and the Nobility being put in Order by the Heralds, They came down in State into Westminster-Hall, where the Swords and Spurs were presented to them. Their Majesties being at Westminster-Abby, the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bi∣shop of Sarum preached the Sermon, his Text being 2 Sam. 23, 3, 4. And after the Ceremonies of the Coro∣nation
were finished, about four of the Clock the Crowns were put upon their Royal Heads by the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of London, assisted by several other Bishops. At the sight whereof the People shouted, the Drums and Trumpets sounded, the great Guns at the Tower, &c. were discharged, and the Peers and Peeresses put on their Coronets. Their Majesties being Crowned, returned to Westmin∣ster-Hall, And Dinner being ended, and the whole Solem∣nity perform'd with great Splendour and Magnificence, about Eight in the evening their Majesties return'd to White-Hall. Where I most humbly leave them, hearti∣ly beseeching Almighty God to bless and preserve their most excellent Majesties, that they may long Live and Flourish together, To the advancement of his Glory, the Good of his Church, the Safety, Honour and Welfare of their Majesties Kingdoms, and the exceeding Joy and Comfort of all Good Protestants. As for all their Enemies let then (O God) be daily discover'd and brought to Shame and Confusion; But upon their Sacred and Royal Heads, let the Crowns of England, Scotland, France and Ireland long Flourish. FINIS.
