w3440 12380036 48657
Church-Government PART V. A RELATION OF THE English Reformation, AND The lawfulness thereof examined by the THESES deliver'd in the Four former Parts. Printed at OXFORD, 1687.
The CONTENTS. CHAP. I. EIGHT Theses pre-posed whereby to try the lawfulness of this Reformation. §. 1. CHAP. II. Three Heads of this Discourse. I. 1. Head. How the English Clergy were first induced to acknowledge a new Regal Supremacy in Spirituals. §. 17. And how far only at the first they seem to have allowed it. §. 23. CHAP. III. II. 2. Head. Concerning what Supremacy was afterward by degrees conferred on, or also claimed by, the Prince. §. 26. n. 2. 1. In the times of Henry the Eighth. CHAP. IV. 2. In the times of Edward the Sixth. §. 38. CHAP. V. The former Supremacy disclaimed by Queen Mary and by the Bishops in her days, and the Pope's Supremacy re∣acknowledged. §. 48. And the final judgment of Ecclesiastical matters restored to the Church. And the Church-doctrine under King Edward condem∣ned. §. 51. That Queen Maries Clergy was a lawful Clergy. That the Bishops in King Edward's days were not law∣fully ejected. §. 54. Neither as to the Authority ejecting them. Nor as to the Cause, That the Bishops, deprived in Queen Mary's days, were lawfully ejected. Both, as to the Cause. And, as to the Judge. §. 64.
Where Concerning the burning of those, who, in Queen Mary's days, were by the Church condemned of Heresy. §. 65. And therefore others lawfully introduced in their places. CHAP. VI. 3. In the times of Queen Elizabeth. That as ample a Supremacy was claimed, and by Parlia∣ment conferred on her, as on King Henry, or Ed∣ward. §. 70. Where Concerning certain qualifications of her Supremacy urged by the Reformed. §. 72. And the Replyes to them. But such Supremacy not acknowledged or consented to by the Clergy. §. 77. CHAP. VII. III. 3. Head. How, according to such Supremacy assumed, these three Princes acted in Ecclesiastical Affairs. §. 78. 1. The Actings of Henry the Eighth in Ecclesiastical Affairs. In the abrogating of former Ecclesiastical Laws, and com∣piling a new body of them. In putting forth a model of the Doctrine of the Christian Faith, and the Six Articles. §. 81. Where Concerning the complaints made by Protestants of his abuse of the Supremacy. In the consecrating and confirming of Bishops and Metro∣politans §. 86. In the putting down of Monasteries, &c. § 87. The pretences thereof. §. 89. Reflections upon these pretences. §. 93. In the dispensing with the former Church Canons concern∣ing Marriages, Fasts, Holy days, &c. §. 99. In the publishing and afterward prohibiting of the Scrip∣tures in a vulgar tongue. §. 101. CHAP. VIII. 2. The Actings of King Edward in Ecclesiastical Af∣fairs. §. 104. 1. Set down first more generally.
In putting forth certain Injunctions and Doctrinal Ho∣milies; sending Commissions thro the Realm, and ejecting the refractory Clergy &c. In the prohibition of Preaching till he had setled Re∣ligion. The Defence made by the Protestant Divines concern∣ing King Edward's proceedings in matters of Re∣ligion The Reply thereto. §. 111. Where Concerning the Clergy's concurrence and consent to the Kings Reformations. §. 119. CHAP. IX. 2. More particularly. In sending certain Doctrinal Articles to be subscribed by the Bishop of Winchester. In repealing the Six Articles passed by Synod in Henry the Eighth's time. §. 137. In seizing on Religious Houses and some Bishops Lands, and denying the lawfulness of Monastick Vows. In defacing Images. In enjoyning Administration of the Communion in both kinds. §. 142. In suppressing the former Church-Liturgies, Ordinals, and other Rituals. §. 143. In setting up new Forms Of celebrating the Communion. §. 144. Of Ordination. §. 145. Of Common-Prayer. §. 146. Out of which was ejected the Sacrifice of the Mass. §. 147. Where 1. Concerning the alterations of the first Common-Prayer-Book of King Edward's in relation to the Sacrifice of the Eucharist. 148. 2. Concerning the further alterations in the second Common-Prayer-Book in relation to the same Sa∣crifice. §. 149. 3. Concerning the reduction of some things touching
this matter, in the new Common-Prayer-Book pre∣pared for Scotland, to the first Form of King Ed∣ward. §. 150. Much complained of in Laudensium Autocatacrisis. §. 151. And the celebration of the Eucharist prohibited, when none other to communicate with the Priest. §. 152. And Invocation of Saints expunged out of the Litanies. §. 154. And the necessity of Sacerdotal Confession relaxed. §. 155. CHAP. X. In setting forth a second Form of Common-Prayer, than which the first was in many things much more mode∣rate. §. 157. In which second Book are rectified and removed many things which gave offence in the former. §. 158. Among the rest, Prayer for the Dead: and several expressions that seemed to inferr the Real or Corporal Presence in the Eucharist. §. 160. Where Concerning the reduction of some things, touching this Presence, made in the new Liturgy for Scotland, to King Edward's first Form. §. 161. Much complained of in Laudensium Autocatacrisis. In the abrogation of several Ecclesiastical Laws concern∣ing Fasts, Celibacy of the Clergy, &c Lastly, In the Edition of 42 Articles of Religion dif∣ferent from the former doctrines of the Church. §. 165. Where Whether these Articles were passed by any Synod. CHAP. XI. 3. The Actings of Queen Elizabeth in Ecclesiastical mat∣ters. §. 170. All the former decrees of the Clergy in King Henry and King Edward's days being reversed by the Clergy in Queen Mary's days. Her calling of a Synod; which declareth against the Reformation.
A Disputation between the Bishops and the Rmed Divines. §. 177. The Regal Supremacy and all that King Edward had done in the Reformation now re-established by the Qu. and Parliament. §. 179. But not by the Clergy. The ejecting of the Bishops for refusing the Oath of her Supremacy. §. 180. The unlawfulness of this Ejection. Concerning Regal Supremacy How far it seemeth to extend. §. 181. How far not. §. 183. That Submission to the Regal Supremacy in this later kind was required from those Bishops. §. 184. Concerning Forreign Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs: how far it is to be acknowledged. §. 185. That the renouncing such Supremacy was required of those Bishops. §. 186. That so many of Queen Mary's Bishops could not be lawfully ejected on any other ground, as would render the Pro∣testant Bishops a major part. §. 187. CHAP. XII. Concerning the defects of the Queen's Protestant Bishops re∣maining since King Edward's days. §. 190. n. 1. Concerning the defects of the new Bishops ordained in Qu. Elizabeth's days. §. 191. Whether their Ordination unlawful according to the Church Canons. §. 193. Where Concerning the Queen, as Supreme in Ecclesiasticals, her dispensing with the former Ecclesiastical Laws for their Ordination. §. 194. CHAP. XIII. Digression concerning The Opinion of several Protestant Divines touching the lawfulness of the Prince's reforming of Religion in matters of Doctrine against the major part of the Clergy, when to him seemeth a necessity that requireth it. 196.
Opinion; Of Dr. Field. §. 197. Of Mr. Mason. §. 199. Of Bishop Andrews. §. 201. Of Mr. Thorndike. §. 203. Of Dr. Heylin. §. 205. Of Dr. Fern. §. 208. Conclusion of the Fifth Part. Wherein The Ecclesiastical Supremacy of these Princes transcendeth that challenged by the Patriarch. §. 214. That several Protestants deny such a Supremacy due to Princes. §. 215. CHAP. XIV. Conclusion of this whole Discourse of Church Government. §. 218. Where Concerning the benefit that may be hoped for from a future free General Council for the setling of present Con∣troversies, §. 219.
OF Church Government PART V. Concerning the English REFORMATION. CHAP. I. Eight Propositions, whereby the lawfulness of this Reformation is to be tryed. TO finish these Discourses of Church Govern∣ment,Eight Theses pre-posed, whereby to try the law∣fulness of this Refor∣mation. there remain yet behind some Con∣siderations concerning the lawfulness and re∣gularity of the Reformations made here in England, in the days of Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, according to the Principles already established. Of which Reformations that you may make the more exact judgment; 'tis fit to remind you, first of these few Propositions, which have been cleared, or
do necessarily follow from what hath been cleared in the former Discourses. And they are these; The First,§. 2. Thes. 1. That, amongst other offices and authorities which the Clergy, Christ's substitutes, (by Clergy I mean the lawful Church-Authority) have received from him, as God's High-Priest and Prophet, these are two prin∣cipal ones. First, The power to determine Controver∣sies in pure matters of Religion, and to judge and de∣cide, (where doubts arise) what is Gods Word and di∣vine Truth; what are errors, in the Faith, or in the practice and performance of Gods Worship and Service (which errors in Practice always pre-suppose some error in matter of Faith.) And Secondly, The power, to pro∣mulgate, teach, preach, and make-known such matters, when decided by them, to Gods people, who are, for doctrine in Spiritual things, committed to their charge; and to require their obedience and submission thereto; with power to execute the Ecclesiastical Censures (which have reference to things not of this, but of the next, world) upon all such, as disobey their Authority: else what profits the Church a silent determination of a Con∣troversy, more, than letting it alone; a concealed, more than a non-decision thereof? And these things from our Saviours Commission they are obliged to perform, and consequently to use such Assemblies and Meetings toge∣ther, Consults, Summons, Examinations, &c. Without which such things cannot be performed, tho' any Civil or Secular power, Heathen, or Christian (who perhaps may be an Heretick or Schismatick; as some Christian Princes have been Arians) doth oppose them. [So, a Christian Emperor Constantius being an Arian, and prohibiting in his Empire the promulgation of the Orthodox Doctrine of the Trinity, yet the Western Catholick Bishops, nevertheless, did promulgate their definition of the Con∣substantiation of the Son with the Father.] And in∣deed of these two Secular Powers the Christian, if either, seems to have the less capacity to hinder or resist them: because he professeth himself, with the rest of the Christi∣ans, as to the knowing of Spiritual Truths, a Subject,
and a Scholar of the Church; and because he so earnest∣ly claimeth a Supreme Power, and professeth an Obli∣gation from God over all persons, in all Spiritual mat∣ters, to bind them, upon Temporal punishments, to the obedience of the Church's (or Clergy's) Determi∣nations and Decrees. But if he meaneth here, only where himself first judgeth such their Decrees orthodox and right, this power is, (in effect,) claimed, to bind all persons, in all Spiritual matters, only to his own De∣crees; whilst he pretends an Obligation both of himself and of his Subjects to the Churches. Yet so it is indeed, that all Princes whatever, even the Heathen, have such an Obligation from God: Nor doth any Text of the New Testament give Christian Princes more Authority over the Church, to restrain any Liberties thereof, than it giveth to the Heathen Princes. For all the Texts, which are urged thence, ordain obedience of Church men to the Pagan Princes that then Reigned, no less, than to others. And all Princes are obliged, with the Sword, which God hath given them, not only not to persecute, but to protect and defend, his true Religion and Service in their Dominions, whensoever it offereth it self to them, and claimeth their Subjection and Pro∣tection. See Psal. 2.1, 2, 10, 11, 12. Tho the Obliga∣tion of some Princes to this may be more than that of others, as he hath had more divine Truth revealed, and hath received more favors from God and his Church. See these things more largely handled before, in Suc∣cession of Clergy, &c. And in Church Government. 1. Part. §. 38. Neither doth that, which is ordinarily urged, viz. That the Acts and Laws of the ancient Councills of the Church de Facto had always the Christian Emperors con∣sent, (tho indeed they always had not: not the Anti∣arian Councills in Constantius his time, and yet they were obliging in the establishing the Nicene Decrees) prove, that they were not of force without such consent: nor doth the Councills intreating the Emperors consent, when Christian, prove; they did this, to legitimate the
making or enjoyning of such laws (for such laws they had formerly both made, and imposed, when Emperors were their enemies) but to strengthen the observance of them. Indeed the Prince, who beareth the Secular Sword, his giving to the Ministers of Christ his li∣cence, to exercise their office, and their ecclesiastical censures in his dominions, or in any part or province thereof, as it implies the prohibiting of his officers or subjects any way to disturb them, is to great pur∣pose, and therefore much to be desired; But it sheweth not, that it is in his just power to deny them such li∣cence. (I mean in general; for I meddle not here with the Princes denying some of them to do these things, whilst he admits others); or that his officers or sub∣jects, without it, may lawfully disturb them in any part of their Spiritual Function. Touching these things this is the concession of Bishop Andrews (Tort. Tort. p. 366) potestatis merè Sacerdotalis sunt Liturgiae, Conciones [i. e, docendi munus, & dubia legis explicandi, as he saith, ibid. p. 380] claves [to which he adds Censurae p. 380] Sa∣cramenta [& omnia, quae potestatem ordinis consequun∣tur p. 380] and (somewhat more plainly) of Bishop Carleton in his Treatise of Jurisdiction Regal and Epis∣copal 1. c. p. 9. As far Spiritual Jurisdiction (saith he) standing in examination of controversies of Faith; judging of Heresies; deposing of Hereticks; excom∣munications of notorious and stubborn offenders; or∣dination of Priests and Deacons; institution and colla∣tion of Benefices and Spiritual Cures; this we reserve entire to the Church; which Princes cannot give to, nor take from, the Church. So he saith, p. 42. That external jurisdiction is either definitive or mulctative. Authority definitive in matters of Faith and Religion belonged to the Church: Mulctative power is un∣derstood, either as it is with coaction, or as it is re∣ferred to Spiritual censures. As it standeth in Spiri∣tual censures, it is the right of the Church, and was practiced by the Church, when without Christian Ma∣gistrate, and since. But coactive Jurisdiction was al∣ways
ways understood to belong to the Civil Magistrate, whether Christian, or Heathen. And by this power (saith he, c. 4 p. 39.) without coaction, the Church was called, Faith was planted, Devils were subdued, the Nations were taken out of the power of darkness, the World reduced to the obedience of Christ; by this power, without coactive Jurisdiction, the Church was governed for Three Hundred years together. [But, if it be inquired what was done, when the Emperors were Christian, and when their coactive power came in?] The Emperors (saith he, p. 178.) never took upon them by their authority to define matters of Faith and Re∣ligion; that they left to the Church. But when the Church had defined such truths against Hereticks, and had deposed such Hereticks; then the Emperors, con∣curring with the Church by their Imperial Constitu∣tions, did, by their coactive power, give strength to the Canons of the Church. But then: what if the Emperors, being Christian, should take upon them, by their authority, to define matters of Faith, or should use their coactive power against the Canons of the Church? Take the answer of another reformed Writer, Mr. Thorndike.Right of Church 4. c. p. 234. The power of the Church is so absolute (saith he) and depending on God alone, that if a Sove∣reign professing Christianity should forbid, the Professi∣on of that Faith, or the exercise of those Ordinances, which God hath required to be served with, or even the exercise of that Ecclesiastical power which shall be necessary to preserve the Unity of the Church; it must needs be necessary, for those that are trusted with the power of the Church not only to disobey the Commands of the Sovereign, but to use that power, which their quality in the Society of the Church gives them, to provide for the subsistence thereof without the assistance of Secular powers. A thing manifestly supposed by all the Bishops of the ancient Church in all those actions; wherein they refused, to obey their Emperors seduced by Hereticks, and to suffer their Churches to be regulated by them, to the prejudice of
Christianity. Which actions whosoever justifies not, he will lay the Church open to ruine, whensoever the Sovereign power is seduced by Hereticks. And such a difference falling out [i. e, between Prince and Clergy, in Church matters] as that to particular persons it cannot be clear, who is in the right; It will be re∣quisite (saith he) for Christians, in a doubtful case, at their utmost perils, to adhere to the Guides of the Church against their lawful Sovereigns, tho to no other effect, than to suffer [if the Prince impose it] for the exercise of their Christianity, and the maintenance of the Society of the Church in Unity [tho contrary to the Sovereigns commmands.] Thus Mr. Thorndike, in Right of the Church, 4. chap. And like things he saith in his Epilog. of the Church of Engl. See there 1. l. 9. c. the Contents whereof touching this Subject he hath briefly expressed thus: That that power, which was in Churches under the Apostles, can never be in any Christian Sovereign. That the Interest of Secular power in determining matters of Faith presupposeth the Society of the Church, and the Act of it. That the Church is the chief Teacher of Christianity thro Christendome, as the Sovereign is of civil Peace thro his Dominions. And there he giveth reasons why the Church is to decide matters of Faith, rather than the State, supposing neither to be infallible. And see 1. l. 20. c. p. 158. Where he saith, That He, who disturbs the Communion of the Church, remains punishable by the Secular power (to inflict Temporal Penalties) not absolutely, because it is Christian; but upon suppo∣sition, that this Temporal power maintaineth the true Church. And afterward, That the Secular power is not able of it self to do any of those Acts, which the Church (i. e, those who are qualified by and for the Church) are qualified by vertue of their Commission from Christ to do, without committing the Sin of Sa∣criledge (in seizing into its own hands the powers, which by Gods Act are constituted; and therefore consecrated and dedicated to his own Service) not
supposing the free Act of the Church, without fraud and violence, to the doing of it; [i. e. joyned to the Secular power, doing such Act.] Now amongst the Acts and Powers belonging to the Church (which he calls a Corporation) by divine right and appointment he names these l. 1. c. 16. p. 116. The power of making Laws within themselves; of Electing Church Governors (of which see 3. l. 32. c. p. 398,) and of excommunicating, and (3. l. 32. c. p 385,) the power to determine all matters, the determination whereof is requisite to maintain the communion of Christians in the Service of God; and [the power] to oblige Christians to stand to that determination under pain of forfeiting that Communion; the power of holding Assemblies, of which he speaketh thus 1. l. 8. c. p. 54. I that pretend the Church to be a Corporation Founded by God upon a Priviledge of holding visible Assemblies for the common Service of God, notwithstanding any Secular force prohibiting the same, must needs main∣tain by consequence, that the Church hath power in it self to hold all such Assemblies as shall be requisite to maintain the common Service of God and the Unity in it, and the order of all Assemblies that exercise it. Thus Mr. Thorndike.Discourse of Episcopacy and Presby∣tery p. 19. And thus Dr Fern of the power of Judicature belonging to the Clergy. It is confessed (saith he) on both sides, that the power of Ordination and of Judicature, so far as the Keys left by Christ in his Church do extend, is of divine Institution; and that this power must be exercised or administred in the Church by some [either Bishops or Presbyters] is also confessed to be of divine right Therefore, surely, no Secular Prince can justly prohibit within his domini∣ons the exercise of such Judicature; nor, prohibiting is to be obeyed; and Christ's substitutes, herein being denyed the assistance of the Civil power, are to pro∣ceed without it. To these I will add what Dr. Taylor hath delivered on the same Subject in Episcopacy assert∣ed; and this the rather, because this Treatise was pub∣lished by the Command of so understanding a Prince. He,
after that, p. 263. he hath laid this ground for the se∣curity of Secular Princes; That, since that Christ hath professed, that his Kingdom is not of this world, that Government, which he hath constituted de novo, doth no way make any intrenchment on the Royalty; hath these passages. P. 237. he saith, That those things which Christianity (as it prescinds from the interest of the Republick) hath introduced, all them and all the causes emergent from them the Bishop is Judge of. Such are causes of Faith; Ministration of Sacraments; and Sacramentals; Subordinations of inferiour Clergy to their superiour; Rites, Liturgies, &c. As for the rights of the Secular power, he layeth down this Rule, p. 236 Whatsoever the Secular Tribunal did take cog∣nizance of before it was Christian, the same it takes notice of after it is Christened. And these are: All actions civil, all publick violations of Justice, all breach of Municipal laws. These the Church (saith he) hath nothing to do with, unless by the favour of Princes these be indulged to it [these by their favour then indulged, but not so the former.]. Accordingly p. 239. he saith: Both Prince and Bishop have indicted Synods in several ages upon the exigence of several occasions, and have several powers for the engagement of clerical obedience and attendance upon such Solemnities. That the Bishops jurisdiction hath a Compulsory, derived from Christ only, viz. Infliction of Censures by Ex∣communication, or other minores plagae, which are in order to it. And that the King is supreme of the Ju∣risdiction, viz. that part of it, which is the external compulsory [i. e, as he saith before] to superadd a temporal Penalty upon contumacy, or some other way abett the censures of the Church. P. 243. he saith, That in those cases, in which by the law of Christ Bi∣shops may, or in which they must, use Excommunica∣tion, no power can forbid them. For what power Christ hath given them, no man can take away. And p. 144. That the Church may inflict her censures upon her delinquent children without asking leave; that Christ
is her  for that; he is her warrant and security. And p. 245. That the Kings supreme regal power in causes of the Church consists in all things, in which the Priestly office is not precisely, by Gods law, em∣ployed for regiment and cure of Souls: [I suppose those he named before p. 237.] and in these also, that all the external Compulsory and Jurisdiction [as he ex∣poundeth it before p. 239] is the Kings. And lastly, p. 241. he saith, that the Catholick Bishops [in time of the Arian Emperors] made humble and fair remon∣strance of the distinction of Powers and Jurisdiction; that as they might not intrench upon the Royalty, so neither betray the right which Christ concredited to them to the encroachment of an exteriour Jurisdiction and Power, [i. e, the Royal.] See the like expressions frequent in Bishop Bramhal, Schism Guarded, p. 61. All which our Kings (saith he) assume to themselves, is the external regiment of the Church by coactive power to be exercised by persons capable of the res∣pective branches of it [i. e, of that regiment;] and p. 63, He comments thus on the 37th Article of the Church of England. You see the Power is political, the Sword is political, all is political. Our Kings leave the power of the Keys and Jurisdiction purely Spiri∣tual to those to whom Christ hath left it. And p. 92, he saith, We see the primitive Fathers did assemble Synods and make Canons before there were any Christi∣an Emperors; but they had no coactive power to com∣pel any man against his will [this therefore is the power which Christian Princes bring in to them, with∣out taking away, I hope, any of that power which the Church from Christ held under Heathen Princes.]And p. 119, We acknowledge, that Bishops were always esteemed the proper Judges of the Canons, both for composing of them, and executing of them; but with this caution, that to make them laws [he means such Laws, for observance of which Secular coaction might be used,] the Confirmation of the Prince was requi∣red, and to give the Bishop a coactive power to exe∣cute
them, the Princes grant or concession was needful. [Doth not this Bishop mean here, that Bishops may both compose and execute Canons in the Kings domini∣ons, and use the Ecclesiastical censures by their own authority; only that they can use no coaction by pecu∣niary or corporal punishments in the execution of them, without his? But see below§. 22. The Bishops de∣prived of the former power in the Reformation: See more of this §. 35. N. 2.] And Answer to Chalc. p. 161. he saith, It is coercive and compulsory and cor∣robatory Power, it is the application of the matter, it is the regulating of the exercise of actual Ecclesiasti∣cal Jurisdiction in the [external] Court of the Church; [Why or under what pretence?] to prevent (saith he) the oppression of their Subjects, and to provide for the tranquility of the Common wealth, [not therefore to examine, what in those external Courts of the Church is passed agreeable or disagreeable to Gods word; for this Princes are to learn from those Courts] which belongs to Sovereign Princes. Thus he Lastly see the Kings last Paper in the Isle of Wight, p 3. where it is said. That tho the Bishops in the times under Pagan Princes had no outward coercive power over mens persons or estates [no more have they now except from and during the Princes pleasure:] Yet inasmuch as every Christian man, when he became a member of the Church, did, ipso facto and by that his own volun∣tary Act, put himself under their Government [so Christian men do still, Princes and all] they exercised a very large power of Jurisdiction in Spiritualibus; in making Ecclesiastical Canons, in receiving Accusa∣tions, conventing the accused, examining witnesses, judg∣ing of crimes [against Gods law] excluding such men, as they found guilty of scandalous offences, from the Lords Supper, enjoyning Penancies upon them, cast∣ing them out of the Church, receiving them again upon their Repentance, &c. [Now I subsume, the same ma∣king of Ecclesiastical Canons, the same Church Disci∣pline, casting out of the Church or Excommunication,
&c. they are, and must be allowed still in Christian States; being things which as Bishop Carleton saith, Princes can neither give to, nor take from, the Church. And there∣fore they must be allowed still all those means absolutely sine-quibus non such things can be done: and these are means absolutely necessary; Convening, for the making of Ca∣nons: Knowing the Fact, for Excommunication: there∣fore, in case the Christian Prince will not call them, they may assemble themselves, when the Church's necessi∣ties require such Canons; and when the Christian Secu∣lar Courts will not, they may examine the Facts of those who are accused to them of Delinquency: but this in order to Church punishments only. When ever the Christian Prince or State is to them as a Heathen, in his withdrawing and prohibiting these necessary things, then may they behave themselves as formerly in Heathen∣ism, i. e, do these things without their leave, against their prohibitions. All the Plea, that a Secular State subjecting it self to the Church can make for medling in such Spiritual affairs, seems to be this; that the Church shall not be troubled (now as formerly) to do all, because the State with its more awing power will do something for it. Which is, the assisting of the Church in her business, not the abridging of her in her power.] The Second Thesis. That the Clergy cannot alienate or make over and give away to the Secular Governor,§. 4 Thes. 2. or to his Ministers and Delegates, any authority or office, which they have received and been charged with by Christ, with a Command to execute the same to the end of the world, and with a threat to become answerable to God for any miscarriage of the people by their de∣fault therein. From which it follows, that the Clergy's doing of either of these Two things. First, The binding themselves for ever to any Secular Governor, never to make, or never to teach abroad and publish to the peo∣ple his Subjects any judgment or decision of theirs, made in matters of Faith and Gods Worship, or made for re∣forming some Error or Heresy, or other abuse in Gods Service, without the consent of such Governor first ob∣tained
thereto (which Governor, as I said, tho Christian and a Believer, yet may be a Sectarist, an Heretick, &c.) 2. Or Secondly, (which is yet worse) the authorizing of the Secular Governor, or of those whom he shall please to choose and nominate (who will be sure to name those rather of his own Sect) to determine, and decide, and promulge such Spiritual matters; for the Clergy, and in their stead: So that now not only the Clergy cannot do such things without such Secular Governor, but also such Governor may do those things without the Clergy. I say, these two are unlawful, as being contrary to the duties of the Clergy, said above (Thesis the First,) to be committed to them by Christ. The Third Thesis.§. 5. Thes. 3. That the Secular Prince cannot de∣pose or eject front the exercise of their office in his Do∣minions any of the Clergy; neither absolutely, with∣out any cause pretended: as he may remove those Offi∣cers and Ministers under him, who hold their places only durante beneplacite. Nor for a cause alledged: if it be such as this; namely, for their not obeying the decisions which he or his civil Council shall make in Spiri∣tual matters; or for their transgressing of the Ecclesiasti∣cal Canons; 2 nor can introduce others into the places of the ejected; without the consent of the major part of the Clergy, or of their Ecclesiastical Superiors (which consent if he obtain I reckon not this deposition &c. to be his Act, but theirs:) [And here note, that what is said of other Clergy, may be said likewise of the Patri∣arch, for any authority in such Princes Dominions which he stands possessed of by such Ecclesiastical Canons, as cannot justly be pretended to do any wrong to the civil Government. Touching which matter see Church Gov. 1. Par. §. 38. &c.] First: The Prince cannot eject them.1. 1. Neither without giving any cause thereof;  because they hold not these their Offices from the Prince; much less from him, only during pleasure; but they receive them by So∣lemn Ordination from their Predecessors in this Ministery, the Substitutes of the Lord Christ; even this Office
among the rest, to oversee, instruct and use Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in making or publishing Ecclesiastical Laws, and imposing censures over the flock of Christ in what Princes Dominions soever, or in whatsoever Province or Diocess thereof, as every one by his Ecclesiastical Su∣periors is appointed; as appears by their equally exer∣cising such Office in the three first Centuries in all Do∣minions distributed into several Provincial and Paro∣chial Governments, (the Twelve Apostles being said at the first to have allotted to themselves several Circuits after the same manner) even when the Supreme Power-civil not only licenced not, but opposed and prohibi∣ted them to do it on pain of death. Of which matter see Mr. Thorndike Right of the Church 1 chap. Seeing the Church (saith he) subsisted Three Hundred years, before any State professed Christianity, whatsoever right it used during that time, manifestly therefore it ought still to use and enjoy: this being the most pertinent evidence to shew the bounds of it [(i. e.) of such rights independent on any Temporal Governor] See him 4. c. p. 169. And the Apostles themselves were they, who first set up this Church Government in Civil States. And St. Paul made Titus Superintendent of Creet, and Timothy of Ephesus for Spiritual Affairs, without the Secular Go∣vernors leave; * who were, in these places, to ordain others, to preserve for ever the Doctrines and Disci∣pline delivered to them. For this cause (saith Paul to Titus 1. chap. 5. ver.) left I thee in Creet, that thou should∣est set in order the things that are left undone, and ordain Presbyters in every City, as I had appointed thee. [Which ordaining of others signifieth also Institution in the charge, or cure, whereto they ministred (as Bishop Carle∣ton confesseth Jurisdict. Regal Episcopal 4. chap. pag. 40.) Again, * Who were, in these places, to receive Accusa∣tions; hear Witnesses; (which cannot be without ap∣pointed Assemblies and Meetings) silence false Teach∣ers; excommunicate Offenders. See Tit. 1.11. Rev. 2.20. 1. Tim. 1.3.5.19. Against an Elder receive not an Accusation, but before two or three Witnesses.
[Now he (saith the same Author pag. 42.) that is ap∣pointed to hear Accusations, and to receive the testi∣monies of witnesses, is seated in a place of judgment with Jurisdiction.] (See more of this in Succes Clergy. §. 4.) and this they did, when the Temporal Gover∣nors of those places licenced them not, yea persecuted them. So Athanasius, ejected by Constantius his Emperor from the charge which the Church had committed to him of Alexandria, and Paulus from Constantinople, were nevertheless accounted still the true Bishops of those Sees. Princes indeed may deprive the Clergy at pleasure or according as Covenants made, of what they bestow on them, Houses, Lands, Priviledges, Jurisdictions, Lord∣ships Temporal; but the Offices abovenamed they be∣stow not. 2. Again, as Princes may not depose them, at pleasure; so neither, for any cause, which concerns things Spiritual, without the Clergy's consent. For it is necessary, that a Judge, to be a competent one, have as well potestatem in causam, as in personam: and the Prince (as hath been mentioned in the first Thesis,) hath no authority to judge such causes meerly Spiritual. To this may be added; that neither Heathen nor Heretical Prince can justly prohibit totally all that Clergy, whom the Church declares Orthodox, from entring into, or from preaching and otherwise officiating in Divine mat∣ters within his Dominions. And if he put such to death for disobeying this his Command, when as it is contrary to Gods, and Christs, who sendeth them to all Nations, in effect he puts them to death for obeying Gods Com∣mand, and they dye Martyrs. As also the Primitive Martyrs were put to death for not obeying the Emperors Laws concerning matters of their Religion. Second:2. As the Prince cannot thus eject or depose Clergy; so neither can he introduce any into the place of those who are ejected or deceased, without the con∣currence of the Clergy. For such person must be or∣dained by the Clergy, before he can officiate; and must have the consents or approbation of his Spiritual Supe∣riors; a Bishop of his Metropolitan; a Metropolitan,
of his Patriarch; and also of the major part of the Clergy of the Province which he belongs to [I mean Clergy Episcopal] before he can be rightly ordained. See Conc. Nic. can. 4. and 6. And Conc. Nic. 2. can. 3. Can. Apost. 31. Conc. Gen. 8.nm can. 10.12.22. Conc. Laodic, can. 13 With the Concessions of Dr. Field of the Church, p. 581, and p. 551. And of Bishop Bramhal Vindic. p. 257. and others quoted in Chur. Gov. 1 part. §. 9. And of Mason de Minist. Angl. 4. l. 6. c. And of Mr. Thorn∣dike Right of the Church, 5 c. p. 248, &c. Which Canons were purposely made to exclude for ever out of the Clergy those, who are, in the common judgment of that Clergy, corrupt in manners, or factious in opini∣ons. Tho Princes therefore for the greater security of their civil Government, and for the recompence of the great Obligations which the Church hath to their Libe∣rality and to their Secular power, may nominate and recommend a person to the Clergies Election; yet if they propose not any whom the Clergy thinks fit and ca∣nonical; the Clergy may refuse such presentment; and in case of no new presentation of a person worthy, may elect some other to teach, officiate, &c, in any part of their Dominions: whom such Princes ought not to re∣fuse, if he be no way prejudicial to the good of their civil Estate. For the Prince can neither prohibite to Christi∣ans, tho his Subjects, all Pastors; nor yet all such Pastors, as the Governors, whom Christ hath set over his people, only think worthy. See Mr. Thorndike, Right of the Chur. 5. c. And indeed all this is but necessary for the propo∣gating, of the Gospel against Infidelity, where the Prince is Heathen; and of the truth of the Gospel, against He∣resy, where the Prince is, or at least may be, a Sectarist, amongst all Nations without depending on any ones leave; and for the preserving of the Church uniform, entire, and incorrupt, in her Doctrine and Discipline. For if Temporal Governors could at their pleasure, or, as they thought meet, place and displace the Clergy, tho they cannot state all Divine matters by themselves, yet may they make the Church's Synods (which is all one)
to state them according to their minds, either by intro∣ducing some de novo who are for them; (as Princes can never want those who conform to, or at least comply with, their judgment;) or by removing some who op∣pose them; and so making, the formerly lesser, then, a major part in such Assemblies. Thus Constantius an A∣rian, by unjustly displacing the Bishops procured Arian∣isme to be voted in several Eastern Synods. Meanwhile, let it here be granted; that, cui conceditur regnum, necessario omnia censentur concessa, sine quibus reg∣num gubernari non potest; and therefore that the civil power may judge and eject, and disauthorize Spiritual persons for matters of Secular Judicature, as Treason, and other moral and civil misdemeanors damageable to the Common-wealth; and such I suppose was the case of Abiathar. And if upon this it should at any time hap∣pen; that the thus ejected be numerous; and the new ones introduced by any connivance of the rest of the Clergy and by the importunities and threats of the Prince, should be also heterodox and factious; and by this means the prevailing part of a Provincial, or Na∣tional, Church, corrupt; yet whilst Christ hath pro∣mised to preserve the main body of his Church from such corruption, we have some remedy from the General, for the delinquencies of such a national Church: in that their Decrees are subjected to the Decrees of superior Coun∣cels, nor may these decide any thing against those; the next Thesis; which in such case we must repair to. The Fourth Thesis:§. 9. Thes. 4. That a Provincial or National Synod may not lawfully make any definitions, in matters of Faith, or in reforming some Error or Heresy, or other abuse in Gods Service, contrary to the Decrees of for∣mer superiour Synods; or contrary to the judgment of the Church Ʋniversal of the present age shèwed in her publick Liturgies; which judgment is equivalent to that of a General Council of the same age. See this Propo∣sition amply proved in 2. Part. §. 27. and 44. and 55. &c. and in many other places of the precedent Dis∣courses.
The Fifth Thesis: That,§. 10. Thes. 5. could a National Synod make such definitions, yet that a Synod wanting part of the National Clergy, unjustly deposed or restrained; and consisting partly of persons unjustly introduced, partly of those who have been first threatned, with fines, im∣prisonment, deprivation, in case of their non-conformity to the Prince's Injunctions in matters meerly Spiritual; is not to be accounted a lawful National Synod, nor the Acts thereof free and valid; especially as to their establishing such Regal Injunctions. The Sixth Thesis:§. 11. 1. . Thesi 6th. That the judgment or consent of some Clergy-men or Bishops of a Province, whether sitting by themselves, or joyned with some of the Laity, cannot be called the judgment and consent of the Clergy, or Church of that Province (tho the Metropolitan be one of them) when these are only some smaller part of such Clergy. See Can. Apost. 35. Conc. Antioch. 9. c. Neither, since the Clergy is in its self a subordinate and united body, can the Prince, when following the di∣rections of some few Clergy, whom he knows or fears to differ in their judgment from the main body thereof, be said to be guided by his Clergy, but to go against it. For if some smaller part of the Clergy joyned with the Prince could by this outweigh the rest, what opinion can the Prince entertain so extravagant, wherein he can∣not draw some Church-men to his side? Much less may an Act of Parliament be urged for an Act of the Clergy, because the Lords Spiritual sit there∣in;§. 12. n. 2. or because it commonly runs thus: [Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal] unless it be first shewed that the major part or the Bishops of the Nation gave their consents therein. For since, herein, the Clergy do vote together with the Laity; and since it is enough, if the major part of the Parliament vote any thing, to pro∣mulgate it as an Act of all the Members thereof, and to use the form above-named; so long as the others Mem∣bers have no Negative voice to what is passed by this major part; It would hence follow, that it were an Act
of the Clergy, or Synodal, where, not one, or where only some few, of the Clergy do give their consent, if so be that the Laity, that vote with them, do equal or exceed their number.1. Eliz. 1. c. So An. 1. Eliz. the reintroducing of the Protestant Religion passed as an Act of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons assembled in Par∣liament, when all the Bishops, therein present, opposed it. See Camden's An. 1. Eliz. And 1. Eliz. 1. c.. The Seventh Thesis: That,Thesis 7th. tho Secular Princes were allowed to have a decisive power in some matters of Faith, such as are no way formerly determined (which is con∣trary to the First and Second Thesis) yet, for such points as have been formerly determined on any side, here, since a National Synod may not define any such thing contrary to former superior Councils, much less may any Secular person define any such things contrary to those Councils; or also contrary to a National Synod. The Eighth Thesis: That,Thesis 8th. as touching Divine truths and matters of Faith (spoken of hitherto;) so now for things of meer Ecclesiastical Constitution, and not Di∣vine Command, Neither National Synod nor Secu∣lar power may make any new Canons concerning the Government and Discipline of the Church contrary to the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of former superior Coun∣cils, nor reverse those formerly made by them; at least, so many of these; as neither the Prince can shew some way prejudicial to his civil Government; nor the Na∣tional Synod can shew some way more prejudicial to their particular Church, than the same Constitutions are to the rest of Christian Churches See this Thesis proved in Chur. Gov. 2. Part. §. 63. And 3. Part. §. 13. n. 3. And §. 27. n. 2. These Theses being set down whereby to judge of the Regularity of a Reformation; let us now view the car∣riage thereof here in England in the time of Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth; and how far it hath deviated from them. Touching which Reformation, I would desire you to read together with these ay Observations what is related in defence there∣of
by, Dr. Hammond, Schism, 7. c. Dr. Fern in Con∣siderations touching the Reformed Church, 2. and 9. Chap. And Dr. Heylin's Treatise called the Reformation of the Church of England Justified; lest I may have related some things partially, or omitted some things considerable, in this matter. And here,§. 16. 1. Three Heads of this Dis∣course. confining my Discourse to Three Heads, I will first give you an account, how the Clergy, in Henry the Eighth's days, were at the beginning induced to ac∣knowledge the Kings Supremacy in Spiritual matters after another manner, than his Predecessors had exer∣cised it formerly: and, how far only at first they seem to have allowed it. [I say after another manner than his Predecessors had exercised it formerly. Because some Su∣premacy, namely this; of assembling a Synod of the Clergy, upon Temporal punishments in case of Disobe∣dience, by their Writs (the ancient form of which see in Dr. Heylin, p. 4) when any urgent occasions required: as likewise of enjoyning to all their Subjects, as well Clergy, as others, upon Temporal Penalties, the obser∣vance of the Decrees and Constitutions of such Synods, or of any other former lawful Councils (such as the Clergy shall acknowledge to have been the Decrees there∣of) these Supremacies (I say) the Princes of this Land before Henry the Eighth, had and exercised; neither was any such Supremacy usurped, or interrupted, by the Pope. Neither do the Roman Doctors deny such an external coactive Jurisdiction of Princes in Spiritual Affairs; 1. as to bind their Clergy, upon Temporal Mulcts, to meet together in Council, when the same Princes shall think it necessary; the Ecclesiasticks being their Subjects, as well as Christs Clergy, and on this account bound to obey them, as well as their Spiritual Governors on the other; and there being often good cause of their assembling in order to the peace and wel∣fare of the civil State committed to the Princes care, because this dependeth much on the right Government of the Church committed to theirs. Provided only, that these Assemblies be so timed and disposed by the
Prince, as that the authority which our Saviour hath com∣mitted to the Church concerning the assembling of the same persons be no way disturbed thereby. For doubt∣less, when both at the same time cannot be done, their Service to the Church is to be preferred before that to the State. 2. as to bind their Subjects, upon External and Temporal Mulcts and Punishments, to observe the Laws and Determinations of the Church. But, First that the Governors of the Church have also power, upon Ecclesiastical Censures, to assemble a Synod of Clergy, when there seems need, tho the Prince oppose it, this indeed those Doctors affirm. And secondly whether, in case that a Prince use his coactive Jurisdiction in Spiri∣tual matters against the Definitions of the Church, then the Pope hath not also virtually some Temporal coactive power against the Prince, namely; to dissolve the Prince's coactive power, or to authorize others to use a coactive power against such a Prince, in order to the good of he Church, this they bring in question. But then, as his last is affirmed by some of the Roman Doctors, so it is opposed by others of them.] 2. We will consider what manner of Supremacy was afterward by little and little either challenged by the Prince; or by the Clergy or Parliament given unto him, as his right. 3. And Thirdly how, according to this their conceived right, those Three Princes acted.
CHAP. II. The Inducement of the English Clergy to acknow∣ledge a Regal Supremacy in Spirituals.I. Head. FOR the First. Henry the Eighth, whether because scrupulous in Conscience,How the Engl. Cler∣gy were first induced to acknow∣ledge a new Regal Su∣premacy in Spirituals. occasioned by his Daugh∣ter Mary's being offered in Marriage first to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and then to Francis King of France; and by both refused (as is said) upon this account, be∣cause they doubted of the lawfulness of Henry' s Mar∣riage with her Mother: or whether because much en∣amoured on another Lady Anne Bullen, Daughter to the Treasurer of his Houshold, and an Attendant on the Queen [yet between whom and him it is said, that the King was conscious of some Impediments, why he could not lawfully marry her, for which an Act of Par∣liament 28. Hen. 8.7. c. never after repealed plainly de∣clared her Daughter Elizabeth uncapable of the Crown: and of which those words in the Dispensation procured from Clement the Seventh. Etiamsi illa tibi aliàs secundo aut remotiori consanguinitatis, aut primo affinitatis gradu, etiam ex quocunque licito vel illicito coitu, proveniente in∣vicem conjuncta sit, do give some suspicion.] Had a great desire, after Twenty years cohabitation, to be divorced from Queen Katherine, because having been formerly his Brother's Wife. Cardinal Wolsey being made the Bishops Legate together with Cardinal Cam∣pegius for the hearing and determining this matter, tho at first he much corresponded with the King's Inclina∣tions, having designed his Matching with the King of France his Sister (as is thought) from some Self-interests; yet, when he discovered the King's Affections settled on Anne Bullen, one inclined to Lutheranisme,See Fox p. 988. 1036. he proves averse now to what he had formerly advanced, and de∣lays the decision of the Divorce so long, till at last the
Pope, moved thereto by the Emperor, Nephew to Queen Katherine, did, upon her appeal, revoke the cause to Rome, and inhibited the Legats Proceedings. 'Tis said also, that some others of the chief of the English Clergy,See Fox p. 96. and 962. Edit. 1610. whether it were conscientiously, or out of the same dis-affection of their's to Anne Bullen, I cannot tell, much disliked the same Divorce. The King, for this, much displeased with both Car∣dinal and Clergy, first accuseth the Cardinal to have in∣curred a Premunire, for having exercised his Legantine Office in his Dominions, without the Kings Licence, contrary to a Statute made in the days of King Richard the Second. Yet had the King formerly been pleased to appear before him in Court, as the Popes Legate, and his delegated Judge, together with Campegius, in the Cause of the Kings Divorce. Upon this he is con∣demned,See Godw. Annal. An. Reg. Henr. 21. and all his Estate seized on by the King. Tho the Cardinal pleaded: That it was well known to his Majesty that he would not presume to execute his power Legantine before the King had been pleased to ratify it with his Royal Assent given under his Seal, which notwithstanding he could not produce, that and all his Goods being taken from him. See Godwin's Annals p. 107. who also (p. 119.) saith;See Godw. Annal. p. 107, and p. 119. that it was certain that Wolsey was Licensed to exercise his Authority Le∣gantine. After this fall of Wolsey; Next a Bill was given up in the Parliament held 1530. (and the Summe demanded from the Clergy, as conspiring with the Cardinal,) of an 100000 l. Charges, that the King had been put to, to obtain so many Instruments from Forreign Univer∣sities, which had decided this matter. From which Universities the King is said to have procured their Suffrages for his Divorce not without seeing several of them with great Summs of Money. Concerning which see the Testimonies of several Authors produced by Sanders (p. 49. &c.) Some of those he quotes saying, that they had Money offered to themselves; some, that they were Eye-witnesses of it received by others. [Tho
(with your leave to make here a little digression touching this Controversy) these Universities, at least some of them, considered only the point of the unlawfulness of one marrying his Brothers Wife, when such former Mar∣riage was consummate by carnal knowing of her (See the Determinations of Paris, and others in Hollinsh. (p. 924.) putting in the Clause; so that the Marriage be consummate.) Without considering that circumstance, whether Katherine was carnally known by her first Hus∣band, which was denied by the Queen and her Advo∣cates (Prince Arthur being thought somewhat infirm, and being but Fifteen years old when he Married her, and dying shortly after.) You may see, if you have the curiosity, what is said for the consummation of that Marriage in Fox Mon. p. 958. Edit. 1610. against it in Sanders de Schism Ang l. 1. l. p. 40. Yet, tho the former Marriage had been consummate, many Learned Men of that Age of several Nations (amongst whom were Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Tonstall Bishop of Duresme) whom you may find diligently reckoned up to the num∣ber of almost Twenty by Sanders de Schism Angli. 1. l. p. 42. 53, 54. writ Books in Justification, that the Marriage of Henry with Katherine was a matter dispen∣sable. For tho this was agreed on all sides, That Papa non habet potestatem dispensandi in impediment is jure divino naturali conjugium dirimentibus, sed in iis quae jure Canonico tantum dirimunt: Yet some of these Authors held first, that all the Impediments named in the Mosaical Law were not dirimentia conjugium jure divino naturali (which only now oblige Christians:) and then secondly that, in matter of Affinity, only primus gradus rectae lineae, as between Father and his Sons Wife, and not primus gra∣dus lineae, collateralis or transversae, as between the Brother and his Brothers Wife, was such an Impediment, as did dirimere conjugium jure divino naturali, and indispen∣sably. Others gathered the Law in Levit. 18.16. dis∣pensable in some cases, from the express dispensation made therein Deut. 25.5. Now the preservation of Peace between the two Kingdomes of England and Spain
is a motive for such dispensation much more considerable, than that mentioned in Deut. the preservation of the name and honor of the deceased. (See Card. Cajetan de Conjug. Reg. Angl. 6. c.) And for the general judgment of the Learned in this matter, and particularly of the Universities, after you have read the Story in Sanders, p. 49, 50, 51. concerning them and especially concern∣ing Oxford, as likewise what is said by Lord Herbert. Hist. Hen. 8. p. 324, 325. See what the Act of Parlia∣ment 1. Mar. 1. c. saith of them. viz. That this Mar∣riage betwixt Henry and Katherine was solemnized by the deliberate and mature consideration and consent of the best and most notable men in Learning, in those days, of Christendome. That the perverse affections of some, a very few, persons, for their own singular glory and vain reputation, pretended the same Marriage to be against the word of God: and to this intent caused the Seals as well of certain Universities in Italy and France to be gotten (as it were for a testimony) by the corruption with Money of a few light persons Scholars of the said Universities, as also the Seals of the Universities of this Realm to be obtained by sinister working, secret threatnings, &c. And that Arch-Bishop Cranmer in giving Sentence, that the said Matrimony was unlaw∣ful, took his Foundation, partly upon his own unad∣vised judgment of the Scripture, joyning therewith the pretended testimonies of the said Universities: and partly upon bare and most untrue conjectures [i. e, concerning the consummation of the former Marriage of Katherine with Arthur.] And see what Lord Hrbert delivers of the hesitancy of the German Protestant Divines (being several times and that long after the Divorce made requested thereto by King Henry) to declare the Divorce lawful p. 448. and 379. where he saith, That for the Approbation of the Divorce proposed to the German Divines Luther, Justus Jonas, Philip Melancthon and others, they delayed to approve it, and the King was judiciously advised by his Agents from thence, not to require any thing of them, which would be too hard to grant. I have made this Di∣gression
to shew you the diversity of opinions, which was in this difficult matter (that you may see the Pope stood not alone in his judgment:) and how the several interests of several times justified and condemned the same thing. Now to return to our matter in hand.] The foresaid Summe of 100000 l. spent upon the Uni∣versities abroad was demanded by the Parliament from the Clergy at home; because it was said, that the Car∣dinal, and some other chief amongst them were, thro their falshood and dissimulation, the cause of this For∣reign Expence: Which Summe they resolutely refusing to contribute, the whole Clergy are sued by the King, and condemned by the Kings Bench in a Premunire also, for receiving and acknowledging the Cardinals Power Legantine, exercised by him ignorantly or presumptu∣ously, without the Kings consent and allowance first ob∣tained. The Clergy, thus become liable, at the Kings pleasure, to the Imprisonment of their Persons, and confiscation of their Estates, assemble themselves in the House of Convocation; offer to pay for their Ransome the demanded 100000 l. But the King, having now no hopes of obtaining a Licence for his Divorce from the Pope, (who at this time stood much in awe of the Emperor, victorious in Italy, and a near Kinsman and Favourer of Queen Ka∣therine) that the Popes Decrees might be of no force against him, negociates also by his Agents with the Clergy, (whilst, in these fears,) to give him the Title of Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters within his Do∣minions; making account that, this obtained, he had the assent of his own Clergy at his beck for the nulling of his former Marriage. Therefore, in the drawing up of the Clergy's Petition to the King for release of the Premunire, it was signified from the Court (cujus consilii Cranmerus & Cromwellus clam authores fuisse existima∣bantur; saith the Author Antiq. Brittanic. p. 325.) that a Title should be prefixed, wherein they should stile the King ecclesiae & cleri Anglicani Protector & supremum Caput, or else the Petition would not be accepted. To
which with some difficulty they agreed, so, as qualifying it with this Clause [Quantum per legem Christi licet.] But, the King again excepting at this limitation, as un∣worthy the Clergy (who either did or ought to know, and definitively instruct others, what Christs Law did, or did not, allow) at last upon renewed threats this Clause also was procured to be omitted. See Antiquit. Brit∣tannic. p. 326. Sed Regi (saith that Author) displicuit ancipitem dubiamque mitigationem & moderationem verbo∣rum a cleri sui Synodo, quae de Christi lege aut certa fuit, aut certa esse debuit, tam frigide proferri. Itaque Crom∣wellum ad Synodum iterum mandans, eam aut tolli voluit, aut clerum incursas Sanctionum paenas pati. Omnium igitur ex sententiis Rex sine ambiguitate ullâ ecclesiae Angliae supre∣mum caput declaratus est. But yet this was not done; till after the Clergy, who much alledged, that the King, or some of his Successors might, upon this Title, ruine the Church of England in their ordering Spiritual matters without or against the Clergy thereof, had obtained a voluntary promise from him to this effect: That he would never by vertue of that Grant assume to himself any more power over the Clergy, than all others the Kings of England had assumed; nor that he would do any thing without them, in altering, ordering, or judging, in any Spiritual matters. See Bishop Fisher's Life published by Dr. Bayly. And this was the first Act of the Clergy, which, being so un∣derstood, as excluding all authority of the Western Patriarch over the Church of England, and transferring such authority for the future to the King is contrary to the Fourth Thesis: because some such authority was con∣ferred on this Patriarch by Superior Councils. And which Act was so passed by them, that, as Dr. Ham∣mond acknowledged, (of Schism 7. c.) it is easy to be∣lieve,See Church Gov. 1. Part §. 4. and §. 20. that nothing but the apprehensions of dangers, which hung over them by a Premunire incurred by them, could pro∣bably have inclined them to it. After the conceding of this Title of Supremacy to the King, and exclusion of the Pope's Authority out of his Dominions, and the voiding of all appeals made hence
unto him; and after the Kings Marriage to Anne Bullen also, but before the publication thereof; Cranmer, being now chosen Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, upon the death of Warham, a Favourer of the Queen Katherine's Cause, Summons her to appear before him and some other Bi∣shops and Commissioners; and, upon her neglect, so∣lemnly dissolveth the Kings former Marriage with her, and divorceth him from her. But, the Kings ends thus obtained, yet things rested not here. And how far only at the first they seem to have allowed it.But, whereas formerly till the Twenty fifth year of Henry the Eighth the Synods of the Clergy (saith Dr. Heylin §. 1. p, 7.) after called by the Kings Writ, acted absolutely in their Convocations of their own authority, the Kings or Parliaments assent or ra∣tification neither concurring nor required; and whereas by this sole authority, which they had in themselves, they made Canons, declared Heresies, convicted and censured persons suspected of Heresy, &c: Now, they having declared the King supream Head of the Church, instead of the Pope the Western Patriarch, it seemed reasonable therefore that no Acts of the Church should stand good without the concurrence of the Head: And conducing much to this end (as I learn from the fore∣named Dr) was a Petition or Remonstrance exhibited to the King by the House of Commons (after the Ice was broken) A. 1532.See Fullrs Appeal of Injur'd In∣nocence Pa. 2. p. 65. In which (saith he) they, de∣siring that the Convocation should be brought down to the same level with the Houses of Parliament, and that their Acts and Constitutions should not bind their Sub∣jects, as before, in their Goods and Possessions, until they were confirmed and ratified by the Regal power, they shewed themselves aggrieved, that the Clergy of this Realm should act authoritatively and supreamly in the Convocation and they in Parliament do no∣thing but as it was confirmed and ratified by Royal assent. An Answer unto which Remonstrance (saith he) was drawn up by Dr. Gardiner then newly made Bishop of Winchester, and being allowed of by both Houses of Convocation was by them pre∣sented
to the King. But the King not satisfied with this Answer resolved to bring them to his bent, and therefore on the Tenth of May sent a Paper to them by Dr. Foxe (after Bishop of Hereford) in which it was peremptorily required: that no Constitution or Ordi∣nance shall be hereafter, by the Clergy Enacted, pro∣mulged, or put in execution, unless the Kings Highness do approve the same, and his advice and favour be also interponed for the execution &c. Whereupon on the Fifteenth of the same Month they made their absolute submission. So He. And thus the next step therefore of this Reformation was; that, the King so requiring it, they bound themselves by a Synodical Act for the time to come, not to assemble themselves at all without the Kings Writ; and when assembled not to enact, pro∣mulge, or execute any Canons, Constitutions, Ordinan∣ces Provincial or Synodical, or by whatsoever name they shall be called, unless the King by his Royal assent command them to make, promulge, and execute the same. See for this the Preface of the Act of Parliament, Twenty fifth year of Henry the Eighth, 19. c. where it is said; that the Clergy of the Realm of England had not only acknowledged, that the Convocation of the same Clergy, is, always hath been, and ought to be assem∣bled always by the Kings Writ; but also, submitting themselves to the Kings Majesty, had promised in verbo Sacerdotii, that they would never from henceforth pre∣sume to attempt, alledge, claim, or put in ure, enact, promulge, or execute any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, Provincial or other, or by whatsoever other name they shall be called; unless the Kings most Royal assent may to them be had, to make, promulge, and execute the same. (But they gave up also their power to execute any old Canons of the Church, with∣out the Kings consent had first thereto; as appears by what follows in the next Section.) The whole Debate with all the traverses and emergent difficulties which appeared herein (saith Dr. Heylin) are specified at large in the Records of Convocation 1532, which were well
worthy the viewing. Now, if the First and Second Thesis above-named stand good, this Act of the Clergy is utterly unlawful. For by this the Prince hath autho∣rity to hinder the Clergy from altering or reforming any former setled Doctrine in his Kingdome. As King Charles also in his Declaration before the 39 Articles ma∣nifesteth; that he will not endure any varying or de∣parting in the least degree from the established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England; any varying; i.e, by the Bishops and Clergy in their Convocation. In what case then had the Reformation been, if former Princes, in the same language as King Charles, had used this pretended lawful power in prohibiting Bishops &c. to attempt, enact, promulge, &c any thing contrary to the, then, here setled, Popish Doctrines? To advance yet somewhat further. In the Preface of the same Act of Parliament the Clergy are also said (which thing neither Dr. Heylin, Dr. Hammond, nor Dr. Fern, have sufficiently weighed in their Re∣lations of the English Reformation) to have humbly besought the Kings Highness, that the Constitutions and Canons Provincial or Synodal which be thought to be pre∣judicial to the Kings Prerogative Royal, or repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, or to be other∣wise overmuch onerous to his Highness and his Sub∣jects may be committed to the judgment of his High∣ness and of Thirty Two Persons, Sixteen of the Tem∣poralty, and Sixteen of the Clergy of the Realm, to be chosen and appointed by the Kings Majesty; and that such Canons as shall be thought by the more part of them worthy to be annulled, shall be made of no value; and such other of the Canons as shall be approved to stand with the Laws of God &c, shall stand in power. Constitutions and Canons Provincial and Synodal: not only such as were the sole Constitutions and Canons of the Synods of this Nation, which the like Synods may lawfully correct; but such as were also the Canons of superior Synods, which the Synods of this Nation could not lawfully
annul. This appears, both by the practice of their abrogating and reforming of several Canons, that were such; (nay I think such were all that were re∣formed:) and also by the Tenent, (See below §. 28. Statute 25. Hen. 8.21. c.) that all the Constitu∣tions made only by mans authority are by the King, being supream in his Dominions, as he thinks fit, muta∣ble. To stand with the Laws of God: therefore any Ca∣non, tho it were not against the Kings Prerogative or Law of the Realm, yet if thought by these Judges not to stand with the Laws of God, might be annulled. Shall be thought by the more part of them. Therefore an Act of the Laity in these Spiritual matters, if obtaining the consent only of one Clergy-man, tho all the rest oppose, nay if obtaining the consent of the King, tho all the Clergy-Commissioners oppose, stands good, as being an Act of the major part. In this Act of the Clergy, if it be supposed a Synodi∣cal request of the whole Clergy, and not only of some persons thereof more addicted to the Kings Inclinations; and if Canons and Constitutions here be not restrained only to those that seem some way to intrench upon the rights of Civil Power, or to some Ecclesiastical exter∣nal Rites and Ceremonies: I see not, but that the Clergy here gives away to the King and to the Laity, at least if assisted with one or two, or indeed without any, Clergy, their Synodical power to conclude and deter∣mine matters of Faith, and to order the Government of the Church as they shall think best; since all the for∣mer Canons and Constitutions Synodal are not about matters of External Rite and Ceremony; but some, doubtless, concerning matters of Faith, and such Christi∣an Practices, and Ecclesiastical Government and Disci∣pline, as are prescribed in the Holy Scriptures, and ne∣cessarily involve Faith; of all which Canons the 32 are now made Judges, what stands with Gods Law or what is contrary thereto: and the Reformatio legum Eccle∣siasticarum, drawn up partly in Henry the Eighth's, partly in Edward the Sixth's time, by such Commissioners (Re∣printed
1640) is found to meddle not only with Ca∣nons repugnant to Civil Government, or with Rites and Ceremonies; but with matters of, the Divine Offices, and Sacraments, Heresies, &c, as appears in the very Ti∣tles of that Book. Now such Act of the Clergy must needs be most unjust and unlawful, if the First, or Se∣cond, or Seventh Thesis above-recited stand good But, whatever sense these words in the Preface of the Act were, or may be, extended to, I do not think, that the Clergy at first intended any such thing, as to make the King or his Commissioners Judges of matters of Faith or Divine Truth; By which authority Princes might (as they also did) change Religion in this King∣dome at their pleasure; but imagined, that, as they obliged themselves to do nothing without the Kings consent, so neither, in these matters especially, should the King do any thing without theirs: as may be ga∣thered; First, by the Promise they obtained from the King at their giving him the Title of Supream recited before. Secondly, by the Declaration of the Bishops against the Pope,See Fox. p. 971. wherein they alledge against him the Third Canon of the Second General Council Enacting, ut controversiae ab Episcopis Provinciarum, ubi ortae sunt, termi∣nentur; that all Causes shall be finished and determined within the Province where the same began, and that by the Bishops ef the same Province: urged also by Bishop Tonstal in his Answer to Cardinal Poole. And Thirdly, By several of the said Bishops and particularly by this Tonstal's and Gardiner's (of whom Dr. Fern saith: that none could have written better against the usurped Papal Supremacy,Examin, Champ. 2. c▪ p. 69. than these Bishops did) retracting their ac∣knowledging of such a Regal Supremacy: and that upon deprivation of their Bishopricks and Imprisonment of their persons, some in King Edward's, and some in Qu. Elizabeth's days: retracting, &c I suppose for this reason, because by sad experience they saw it much enlarged beyond those bounds, within which only they formerly had maintained it just. And Fourthly, By the early Act of Parliament 24. Henry 8.12. c. where, in the Pre∣face
it is said: That when any Cause of the Law Di∣vine cometh in question, that part of the Body Poli∣tick called the Spirituality, now being usually called the English Church, is sufficient and meet of it self, without the intermeddling of any exteriour person or persons, to declare and determine all such doubts; and where, in the Act, it is ordered, that such Causes shall have their appeals from the Arch-Deacon to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Arch-Bishop of the Province, and there to be definitively and finally adjudged.Finally, i.e, without any further appeal to the King. Neither can it be shewed, that expresly this authority or juris∣diction, [To repress, reform, correct, and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Abuses, Enormities, whatsoever they be, which by any manner of Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction ought or may lawfully be repressed, re∣formed &c, any Forreign Laws, Forreign Authority, Prescription, or any thing or things to the contrary thereof, notwithstanding,] tho it was allowed to the King as a Branch of his Supremacy by the Parliament, was conceded or voted by the Clergy, or pretended to be so; but was built, only by consequence, upon the Clergy's recognizing him the supream Head of the Church of England; as appears in the Preface of that Act 26.Hen. 8.1. c. By these things therefore it seems, that as yet all the Jurisdiction for determining Spiritual Con∣troversies, that was taken from the Pope, was commit∣ted to the Community of the English Clergy, or finally placed in the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. But you will find by what follows, that it long rested not here, but was shortly after removed from hence into the hands of the King. And as it was thus with the Clergy; so in the Laity also in the Parliament its self (in the new power given of altering and dispensing with former Church Laws 25. Hen. 8.21. c.) there seemeth at first to have been a kind of jealousy upon the new introduced Supremacy, left it might afterward proceed to some exorbitancy as to changing something in the sub∣stance of Religion. Therefore in the forenamed Act
they insert this Proviso. Provided always, this Act nor any thing therein contained shall be hereafter interpreted, that your Grace, your Nobles, and Subjects intend by the same to decline and vary from the Congregation of Christs Church in any things declared by the Scriptures and the word of God necessary, concerning the very Arti∣cles of the Catholick Faith of Christendome, or any other things declared by the Scripture necessary for your and their Salvation; but only to make an Ordinance by Polities necessary and convenient to repress vice, and for good conservation of this Realm in peace, unity, and tranquility, from rapine and spoyl, insuing much the old ancient Customs of this Realm on that behalf. Not minding to seek for any reliefs, succors, or reme∣dies for any wordly things and humane laws in any case of necessity, but within this Realm at the hands of your Highness, which ought to have an Imperial power and authority in the same, and not obliged in any worldly Causes to any Superior. Upon which Proviso Bishop Bramhal hath this note (Schism Guarded p. 63.) That if any thing is contained in this Law for the abolishing or translation [i. e, from the Clergy] of power meerly and purely Spiritual, it is retracted by this Proviso at the same time it is Enacted.
CHAP. III. The Supremacy in Spirituals claimed by King Henry the Eighth.II. Head. II. VVE have seen how far the Clergy and Laity also at first seem to have proceeded in the advancing of the Kings Supremacy.Concerning what Su∣premacy was after∣ward by de∣grees con∣ferred on, or also clai∣med by, the Prince. Now to come to the Second thing I proposed to you: Concerning what Supremacy was afterward by degrees conferred on, or also claimed by, the Prince. After the Title then of Supream was thus yielded by the Clergy, as likewise, that they would thence-forward enact or publish no Sy∣nodal Decrees or Constitutions without the consent first obtained of this their declared Supream, It was thus Enacted by the Authority of Parliament 26. Hen. 8.1. c.1. In the times of H. the 8th. That the King shall have and enjoy, united to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, all Jurisdictions to the said Dignity of Supream Head of the same Church belonging: [which Jurisdiction how far it is under∣stood to be extended, see 1. Eliz. 1. c. where it is Enacted] that such Jurisdictions, Priviledges, and Preheminencies Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power hath heretofore been or may lawfully be exercised or used for the Visitation of Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, &c, shall for ever by authority of this present Parliament be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And further see the Act 37. Hen. 8.17. which runs thus. Whereas your most Royal Majesty is justly Supream Head in Earth of the Church of England, and hath full au∣thority to correct and punish all mannner of Heresies, Errors, Vices, and to exercise all other manner of Ju∣risdictions commonly called Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: Nevertheless the Bishop of Rome and his Adherents
have in their Councils and Synods Provincial establish∣ed divers Ordinances, that no Lay-man might exer∣cise any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, or be any Judge in any Ecclesiastical Court; which Ordinances or Con∣stitutions, standing in their effect, did sound to be directly repugnant to your Majesties being Supream Head of the Church, and Prerogative Royal, your Grace being a Lay-man. —And whereas, albeit the said Decrees by a Statute 25. Hen. 8. be utterly abolish∣ed; yet, because the contrary thereunto is not used by the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, &c (who have no man∣ner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but by, under, and from, your Royal Majesty) it giveth occasion to evil disposed persons little to regard and to think the pro∣ceedings and censures Ecclesiastical made by your High∣ness and your Vice-gerent, Commissaries, &c, to be of little or none effect, whereby the people have not such Reverence to your most Godly Injunctions, as becometh them; In consideration, that your Majesty is the only and undoubted Supream Head &c, to whom by Holy Scripture all power and authority is wholly given, to hear and determine all manner of Causes Ecclesiastical, and to correct vice &c: May it there∣fore be Enacted, that all persons as well Lay, as those that are Married, being Doctors of the Civil Law, who shall be deputed to be any Chancellor, Commissary, &c, may lawfully exercise all manner of Jurisdiction commonly called Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, any Con∣stitution to the contrary notwithstanding. And see Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum tit. de Officio & Jurisd. omnium Judicum. —Rex tam in Episcopos, Clericos, &c, quam in Laicos, plenissimam jurisdictionem tam civilem, quam Ecclesitasticam exercere potest, cum omnis Jurisdictio & Ecclesiastica & Saecularis ab eo tanquam ex uno & eodem fonte derivantur. Amongst which Jurisdictions I understand also Ex∣communication, Suspension, and Deprivation ab officio; of which see more below p. §. 46. Not that I affirm the King did ever claim the right of exercising, (himself,)
this power of the Keys, but that he claimed this right (which is contrary to the First Thesis) that no Clergy-man be∣ing a Member of the Church of England should exercise it in his Dominions in any Cause, or on any Person, without the leave and appointment of him the Supream Head of this Church; nor any forbear to exercise, where he the Head commanded it: As, before the Reforma∣tion, the inferiour Clergy might not exercise any Church Censure contrary to the commands of their law∣ful Spiritual Superiors; which Jurisdiction of their for∣mer Spiritual Superiors was now enstated on the King. On the King, Not as one subordinate to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction herein: For so a Lay-person in foro exteriori or contentioso, as 'tis called (which Court the Church used before any Prince was Christian) may excommu∣nicate sometimes, tho not ligare or solvere in foro inte∣riori or poenitentiali (yet for the exteriour also, see what Provision is made against this in 16. Caroli 1. Can. 13.) But as one by God primarily invested with the disposal thereof; from whom the Ecclesiastical Governors with∣in his Dominions derive this authority, as you have seen in the Preface of this Act. Again in vertue of this Jurisdiction translated to the King, by another Act of Parliament 25. Hen. 8.21. c. the Supreme Power of giving all manner of Licences, Dis∣pensations, Faculties, Grants, &c, for all Laws and Constitutions meerly Ecclesiastical, and in all Causes not being contrary to the Scriptures and Laws of God, is not only taken from the Pope, but from the Clergy too, and is committed to the Secular Power, contrary to the Eighth Thesis. [The Statute saith thus. That, where∣as it standeth with Natural Equity and good Reason, that in all humane Laws, in all Causes which are called Spiritual induced into this Realm, your Royal Ma∣jesty, and your Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in Parliament [where you see the Parliaments Supremacy, as to admitting or abrogating Ecclesiastical Constitutions, joyned with the Kings] have full power and authority, not only to dispense, but also to autho∣rize
some elect persons to dispense with those and all other humane Laws of this your Realm, as the quality of the persons and matter shall require: as also the said Laws to abrogate, admit, amplify, or diminish. Be it therefore Enacted, That from henceforth every such Licence, Dispensation, &c, that in cases of ne∣cessity may lawfully be granted without offending the Holy Scripture and Laws of God, necessary for your Highness, or for your Subjects, shall be granted in manner following: that is to say: the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury shall have Power to grant them to your Majesty, &c. And if the foresaid Arch-Bishop shall refuse or deny to grant any Licences, Dispensations, &c; that then upon Examination had, in your Court of Chan∣cery, that such Licences may be granted without offending against the Scriptures, your Highness shall command the Arch-Bishop to grant them &c under such Penalties as shall be expressed in such Writ of Injunction. And it shall be lawful to your Highness, for every such de∣fault of the said Arch-Bishop; to give Power by Com∣mission to such two Spiritual Prelates, or Persons to be named by your Highness, as will grant such Li∣cences and Dispensations.] Here the Supream Power of dispensing with Ecclesiastical Constitutions is ascribed to the King and Parliament, as recognized Supream Head of the Church; and the Arch-Bishop made his Delegate; and, after the Arch-Bishop, the King, or his Court of Chancery made the last Judge, what things in such Dispensations offend against Scripture, what not. By vertue of the same Jurisdiction translated to the King by an Act of Parliament 25. Hen. 8.20. c. The necessity of the Metropolitan's being confirmed by the Pa∣triarch is taken away; and the Clergy are bound, to ad∣mit and consecrate what person soever the King shall present to any Bishoprick upon Penalty of incurring a Premunire; and the Consecration is to be performed by such, and so many, as the King shall appoint. A thing contrary to the Third Thesis, and the Canons of former Superior Councils; and ruining the Church,
when the Prince is Heretical. See the Statute. Again; it is Enacted by the Statute above-mentioned 26. Hen. 8.1. c. That the King should have full power, from time to time, to visit, repress, reform, correct, and amend, all such Errors, Heresies, &c, as is set down but now, §. 25. Again; 25. Hen. 8.19. c. It is Enacted by the same authority; That all such Canons and Constitutions Provincial or Synodal which be thought prejudicial &c; as I have set it down before, §. 23. The like is Enacted 32. Hen. 8.26. c. viz. That all such Determinations, Decrees, Definitions, and Ordinances, as, according to Gods Word, and Christs Gospel should at any time hereafter be set forth by the said Arch-Bishop and Bishops and Doctors in Divinity, now ap∣pointed, or hereafter to be appointed by his Royal Majesty; or else by the whole Clergy of England [either by the one, or by the other, therefore is the latter not held necessary, but the former sufficient with the Confirmation of the Head] in and upon the matter of Christs Religion and the Christian Faith &c by his Majesties advice and confirmation under the Great Seal, shall be by all his Grace's Subjects fully believed, obeyed, observed and performed to all purposes and intents upon the pains and penalties therein to be comprised. [Where note that whereas under the Reformation private men are tyed only to obey and believe the Definitions of Coun∣cils, when they are set forth according to Gods Word; i. e, when private men think them to be so: Yet here this Liberty was thought fit to be restrained; and private men tyed to believe these Definitions, when set forth as according to Gods word; i. e, when the setters forth deem them to be so. To obey a thing defined accord∣ing to Gods Word, and to obey a thing defined as being according to Gods word, are Injunctions very different.] Again, whereas the Act 24. Hen. 8.12. c. set down before, §. 25. ordered Appeals in Causes Spiritual to be finally adjudged by the Arch-Bishop of the Province: It is Enacted by Parliament 25. Hen. 8.19. c. First,
That no manner of Appeals shall be made out of the Realm to the Bishop of Rome in any Causes or Matters of what Nature soever. Secondly, That, for lack of Justice in the Court of the Arch-Bishop; Commissio∣ners, by the Kings Highness to be appointed, shall have full power and authority, to hear and definitively to determine every such Appeal, with the causes and all circumstances concerning the same; and no further Appeals to be made. These Commissioners therefore, (appointed by the King,) are the ultimate and unap∣pealable Judges after the Arch-Bishop in all Spiritual matters; of which doubtless many are concerning what is lawful or unlawful by Gods Word; wherein accord∣ing to the Canon when they were Causes of moment, Appeals were formerly made from the Bishop to a Synod, or to the Patriarch. Again; 25. Hen. 8.14 c. It is Enacted by authority of Parliament: That no speaking, doing, or holding against any Laws called Spiritual Laws, made by au∣thority of the See of Rome, by the Policy of Man which be repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, or the Kings Prerogative, shall be deemed to be Heresy. From which all that I would note is this: that the King and Parliament undertake to be Judges of Heresy, and do declare, that no Laws of the Realm nor the Preroga∣tive assumed by the King have any thing of Heresy in them. —Again; it is Enacted by Parliament 34, 35. Hen. 8.1. c. That if any Spiritual Person or Persons shall preach or teach contrary to the Determinations which since An. Dom. 1540, are or shall be set forth by his Majesty as is aforementioned; that then every such Offender offending the third time contrary to this Act shall be deemed and adjudged an Heretick, and shall suffer pains of death by Burning. Where the King is made the ultimate Judge of Heresy, without any Ap∣peal, as appears by the former-quoted Act 25 Hen. 8.19. c. contrary to the First and Seventh Thesis. And the Protestants, in justifying this Supremacy, must allow their own Condemnation, if teaching against any thing
written in the Book called the Institution of a Christian Man; Or, A Necessary Doctrine for all sorts of People, set forth by the King's Authority at that time; or a∣gainst the Six Articles, which were in the same Act Established; as likewise in 31. Hen. 8.14. c. the Publish∣ing of which Act (saith Lord Herbert, p. 447.) gave no little occasion of murmur; since to revoke the conscience, not only from its own Court, but from the ordinary ways of resolving Controversies; to such an abrupt de∣cision of the Common-Law, as is there [Stat. 31. Hen. 8.14. c.] set down,§. 35. n. 1. was thought to be a deturning of Religion from its right and usual course. Now to reflect a little upon these several Acts fore-quoted. 1. Whereas it is said by Bishop Bramhal (Schism Guarded §. 3. p. 262. the Title of which Section is, That Henry the Eighth made no new Law. See likewise his Vindic. p. 86.) 1. That these Statutes of Henry the Eighth, were only declarative of old Law, not enactive of new Law, proving it by the authority of Fitz-Herbert, and of the Lord Coke (Reports, Fifth Part.) And 2ly (Schism Guarded, p. 61, 62.) That these Statutes do attribute no Spiritual Jurisdiction to the King at all, save only an External Regiment by coactive Power in Ecclesi∣astical Causes in foro contentioso. [Fox the First of these, if you please to compare the Clauses of the Statutes before rehearsed, with the former Statutes of this Land diligently collected by the Lord Coke (Reports,§. 35. n. 2. Fifth Part) and with those also mentioned by Bishop Bramh. Vindic. 4. c. p. 63. &c. You shall find no such thing, if you take all and all the extent of King Henry's Statutes. You may find Appeals to the Pope (or other Forreign Judge,) and Bulls or Excommunications or Legations from him (except that of the Bishop of Canterbury who was Legátus natus) to have been prohibited by former Laws; that is, in some particular Cases, wherein the Prince conceived Himself or his Subjects to be injured thereby in his or their Temporal Rights, Profits, Securities, or also in some Ecclesiastical Indulgements obtained formerly from the Pope, (See that Indulgement granted to King Edw.
the Confessor. Vobis & posteris vestris Regibus, &c. in Spelm. Conc. A. 1066 Bishop Bramhal's Vindic. p. 66.) [This appears in that much urged Statute 16. Rich. 2.5. c. quoted in Vindic. p. 80. where, upon pain of a Premunire, all are prohibited to purchase any Bulls or Sentences of Excommunication from Rome. But this is in certain Cases only (see Vindic. p. 81.) Cases in∣deed Ecclesiastical; but such as were conceived contrary to the Temporal Rights of the King and his Subjects (which, all Ecclesiastical matters (I hope) neither are nor are pretended to be) viz. these Cases. Popes re∣fusing the King's or other Laity's Presentment of a Person to the Benefices of the Church [that is of such a Person whose Orthodoxness and Canonicalness the Clergy cannot question.] Again; The Translation by the Pope of English Bishops out of the Realm without the Kings assent, whereby (saith the Statute) the Kings Liege Sages of his Coun∣cil should be without his assent, and against his Will carried away and gotten out of his Realm, and the Substance and Treasure of the Realm shall be carried away, and so the Realm destitute as well of Council, as of Substance [surely these are Temporal Considerations] and so the Crown of England, which hath been so free at all times that it hath been in no Earthly Subjection, but immediately subject to God in all things [not abso∣lutely as the Bishop represents it Vindic. p. 80. but in all things] touching the Regality of the same Crown, and to none other, should be submitted to the Pope, &c. [the Regality; (that is) in those Temporal things above named.] In these Cases Bulls, &c, from the Bishop of Rome were prohibited, as infringing the Civil Rights. And to this Statute in such case (it is said there) the Lords Spiritual gave their consent: But meanwhile making Protestations (saith the Statute) that it is not their mind to deny or affirm that the Bishop of Rome may not excommunicate Bishops, nor that he may make Translation of Prelates after the Law of Holy Church. And Richard the Second, notwithstanding this Act, was far from the denying the Popes Supremacy in his Realms
as to many other respects, as appears by his zealous supporting of Ʋrban the Sixth in it. 2. Rich. 2.7.] Again you may find perhaps Appeals, Bulls, &c, pro∣hibited, in general, without the Kings content first ob∣tained thereto; But this not out of an intention of sup∣pressing all such Appeals, or Ecclesiastical Laws or Cen∣sures whatsoever coming from the Pope or other Spiri∣tual authority abroad, or out of an intention of deny∣ing these in several Cases to be rightfully belonging unto them: but only out of an intention to examine them first, whether any thing were contained in them prejudicial to the Temporal and Civil Rights, and Emoluments and Priviledges of the Prince and of his Subjects, that the Mitre might not encroach upon the Crown; both which have their certain limits of Jurisdiction, and may do wrong one to the other. Such authority as this (then) in Church-matters you may find exercised by for∣mer Princes of England; or perhaps some other power used by them against the Church, and defended by the common Lawyers of those days, more than is justifiable. But, on the other side, I think you will not find either assumed by the Prince, or allowed to him by any Statutes before the times of Henry the Eighth, such Powers in Ecclesiastical matters, as some of these following. Name∣ly; A Power to correct and reform all Errors and Heresies in Religion by such persons, as the Prince shall appoint to judge thereof, half of them being Laicks, repealing also the former course of tryal of them by the ordinary Church-Magistrates, as you may see below, §. 39. A Power to make and reverse Ecclesiastical Laws, alter the Church Liturgies, publick Forms of administring the Sacraments, Ordinals, &c without the consent of the major part of the Clergy or any lawful Church Au∣thority. A Power to hinder and prohibits the Clergy, that they may correct or reform any such Heresies, or may make or publish any such Ecclesiastical Decrees or Laws within the Kings Dominions without his con∣sent thereto first obtained. Without his Consent, not to examine, whether such their Constitutions might be any
way prejudicial to the State Temporal (for this were but meet and just) but whether such be agreeable or repugnant to Gods Word, and dangerous to the Peoples Salvation and Spiritual State. A Power thus in all Causes Ecclesiastical, Licences, Faculties, Dispensations to be the final Judge (by himself or by his Court of Chancery or by some other Deputies whom he pleaseth to choose) to whom Appeal may be made concerning what is agreeable, or what repugnant to the Holy Scrip∣ture. A Power to restrain all Forreign Appeals and Cen∣sures from thence, not only in all Cases mixt with the Interests of the Temporal Government, but also in all matters meerly Spiritual and of Ecclesiastical Cogni∣zance. A Power to prohibit or reverse any Ecclesiasti∣cal Constitutions of Councils Patriarchal or General, tho in things wherein Temporal Regalities or Preroga∣tives, or the Temporal safety and peace of the people is not concerned; but, as I said, upon pretence of their being conceived to contain something repugnant to Gods Law. A Power to hinder that no Ecclesiastical Governors may call any Synod or Assembly within his Dominions, nor exercise in foro externo any Ecclesiasti∣cal Censures without his consent. A Power to command such persons to be induced and instituted in Ecclesiasti∣cal Benefices and Dignities, whom the lawful Ecclesiasti∣cal Power refuseth as Unorthodox or Uncanonical.See Schism Guardd p. 61.161. Vindic. p. 268. Lastly, A Coactive Power in foro externo so far extended, as that it leaves, for the Clergy (as independently be∣longing to them,) only an Internal Power or Jurisdiction in the Court of Conscience: or an Habitual Power of Preaching, Administring the Sacraments, exercising the power of the Keys in foro conscientiae, ordaining and de∣grading Ecclesiasticks; but without any Liberty actually or lawfully to exercise the same in any Princes Domini∣ons, if he denyeth it: without any Power allowed to the Clergy to summon Offenders in foro externo, and to punish them with the Spiritual Sword, either for their convicted crimes, or for non-appearance, and this whether Secular Princes either favour or oppose: without
any Power to call or keep any publick Assemblies for publick Worship, for decision of Controversies in Re∣ligion, for making Church Laws, i. e, such as prejudice no Temporal Rights, and publishing and imposing the same Determinations and Canons (upon Ecclesiastical Censures) upon the Church's Subjects, in the several Dominions of Princes, whether they consent or resist. Without any Power of their electing and ordaining future Clergy in the several Dominions of Princes Christian as well as others; whenever these Princes shall propose or assent to the admission of no such persons, as they (I mean the lawful Church Authority) shall judge Ortho∣dox and capable. Such Powers are not mentioned, at least clearly, by Bishop Bramhal to belong to the Clergy, but seem to be swallowed in the Coactive Power of the Prince. Such Powers were in the possession of the Church independently on Princes for the first Three Hundred Years. Such Powers being translated to the Secular Governors (when Christian) do arm them (when Christi∣ans Heretical) to change and overturn the Church in their Dominions as they please, whilst the Clergy ought not to contradict. Such Powers are said to belong to the Prince since the Reformation (and indeed without these the Reformation could not well have been effected) and I think are given to them in the fore-quoted Statutes. If these Powers are said not to belong to these Princes, let them name which of these are not. But Lastly, such Powers cannot be shewed to have been given, or been due, to our Kings by the former Laws, unless we will believe that the Laws of the Land then contradicted that Obedi∣ence, which those Princes yielded to the Church; or that those Princes, even when most fallen out with the Church, would voluntarily forego so many of their rights. Thus much to the first Defence used by Bishop Bramh.§. 35. n. 3. That Henry the Eighth's Statutes were only declarative of the former Laws. For the second thing said by him, That King Henry the Eighth by these Statutes claimed only an External Coactive Power in Causes Ec∣clesiastical in foro contentioso; if by External Coactive
Power he meaneth the exercising of all those Powers, which I have but now named, with Coaction and the Material Sword, then the Secular Prince, seems to assume and exercise several of those Powers which are only the Churches rights. But if by Coactive Power he meaneth only the Kings calling of the Clergy together to consult of Church Affairs, and his assisting with the Secular Sword their Constitutions and Decrees, and making their Laws his own by Temporal Mulcts and Penalties, and compelling particular Clergy, as well as Laity, to do that which the Church declares to be their duty; compelling, I say, with outward force, for herein the Bishop seemeth to place the Kings Power in Spiritual matters [See Schism Guarded, p. 93. How can the Pope (saith he) pretend to any Coactive power in England, where the Power of the Militia and all Co∣active force is legally invested in the King? And p. 92. The Primitive Fathers did assemble Synods and make Canons, &c: But they had no Coactive Power to compel any man against his Will; the uttermost they could do was to separate him from their Communion. And p. 166, Who can summon another mans Subjects to appear where they please, and imprison and punish them for not appearing without his leave? Likewise p. 168. and compare them with his former Saying, p. 92.] If thus the Bishop will have Secular Princes to have nothing to do in the making or hindring any Decrees or Laws of the Church-men in matters meerly Spiritual; but only to have such a sole dominion over the Secular Sword, as that none can use it but he, or by his leave, in the execution of such Laws, all is well: but then the former-quoted Statutes of Henry the Eighth shew much more Power challenged, than the Bishop alloweth. This in Answer to the Bishop Secondly, If it be further said here touching that par∣ticular Statute of much concernment 26. Hen. 8.1. c. quoted before §. 26, and §. 25. [Namely;§. 35. n. 4. 1 That the King shall have full power from time to time, to visit, repress, reform, all such Errors, and Heresies, as by any
manner of Spritual Authority &c lawfully may be re∣formed, &c.]See §. 25. If it be said here; that the King hath only this power therein ascribed to him, to redress and reform the Errors and Heresies, which are declared such by the Church, by former Councils, or by the Synods of his Clergy;  but, that he hath no power given him to judge or declare, what is Error, or Heresy. 1. First thus then he hath not all the power given him, which by any manner of Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction may be exercised (as it follows in that Act) because there is a Spiritual Authority also, that may declare new Er∣rors and Heresies, or that may reform such Errors, as have not been by Synods formerly declared such;  and it seems this He hath not. Secondly, Thus the Clause end∣ing the Act [any Custome, Forreign Laws, Prescription, &c, notwithstanding] is utterly useless; because no Forreign Laws, or Prescriptions deny this Authority to Kings, to reform Errors &c in their Dominions; so that they still confine themselves to the precedent Judgments of the Church. Thirdly, In the Act fore-quoted 25. Hen. 8.19. c. 'Tis granted to his Highness and Thirty Two Commissioners elected by him, to annul and make in∣valid what former Synodal Canons they think not to stand with the Laws of God; therefore they have power to judge, which Canons are such, and to reform them, i. e, to teach and declare the contrary truths to them, when thought by them Errors, against the judgment of former Synods, and without the judgment of a new Synod; and what is this but to judge and pronounce de novo, what is Error, and Heresy, Enormity, Abuse, &c? Fourthly, Lastly; how comes the King or his Com∣missioners to be made the ultimate judge (See before §. 31.25. Hen. 8.19. c.) in all Appeals touching Divine matters, if he or they cannot judge in these, what is Error? Since some Causes and Controversies may haply come before him, not determined by former Councils. And, for the Errors he reforms, if he is still to follow the judgment of his Clergy what are such Errors; how are there in these things Appeals admitted to him from the judgments of his Clergy?
This said to remove the mis-interpretation of that Act, I will add to these Acts of Parliament which I have been reciting to you from §. 26. those words in the Kings last Speech which he made in Parliament not long before his death; reprehending his Subjects for their great dissension in Opinion and Doctrine. If you know surely (saith he) that a Bishop or Preacher erreth or teacheth perverse Doctrine,Lord. Herb. Hist. p. 536. come and declare it to some of our Council or to us, to whom is committed by God the high authority, to reform and order such causes and behaviours, and be not Judges your selves of your fantastical Opinions and vain Expositions. [Here making his Council or himself Judge of the Bishops Doctrines.] And those words in King Henry the Eighth's Proclama∣tion, 1543. made for the eating of White-Meats, Milk, Butter, Eggs, (heese, in Lent: where he saith That the meer positive Laws of the Church may be upon considerations and grounds altered and dispensed with by the publick authority of Kings and Princes,In Fox pag. 1104. when∣soever they shall perceive the same to tend to the hurt and damage of their people. [Ʋnless perhaps he restrain damage here to Civil Affairs.] Contrary to the Eighth Thesis. And those words in Cromwell's Speech, when he presided, as the Kings Vicar-General, over the Clergy assembled to state something in Controversies of Faith then agitated betwixt the Roman Church and Lutherans; who told them; That His Majesty would not suffer the Scripture to be wrested and defaced by any Glosses,Fox. p. 1078. any Papistical Laws, or by any Authority of Doctors or Councils. By which if this be meant; that we are not obliged to embrace the Doctrine of Scriptures according to those Determinations and Expositions which lawful Councils have made of them, it is contrary to the Fourth and Seventh Thesis, and overthrows the Government of the Church. See the same thing said on the Kings behalf by the Bishop of Hereford against other Bishops urging the Doctors of the Church.Fox p. 1079. I will conclude with what Bishop Carleton in Jurisdict. Regal and Episcopal Epist. dedicat. And Calvin upon
those Words in Amos 7.13. [Prophecy not any more at Bethel for it is the Kings Court;] say of these times. Bishop Carleton relateth out of Calvin, That Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, being at Ratisbon in Ger∣many upon the Kings Affairs, and there taking occasion to declare the meaning of that Title, Supreme Head of the Church given to Henry the Eighth, taught; that the King had such a power, that he might appoint and pre∣scribe new Ordinances of the Church, even matters concerning Faith and Doctrine, and abolish old. As Namely, 'That the King might forbid the Marriage of Priests; and might take away the use of the Cup in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and in such things might appoint what he list. And there likewise Bishop Carleton confesseth; That when Henry the Eighth took this Title of Supreme Head, &c, tho the sounder and more judicious part of the Church then understood the words of that Title so, as that no offence might justly rise by it [I suppose he means; in that sense, as himself takes it; which is: For the King to have a Jurisdiction Coactive in External Courts, binding and compelling men by force of Law and other External Mulcts and Punishments, to what the hurch in Spiritual matters defines. For this Bishop saith; that the Church is the only Judge of such matters (See before p. 4.) and in his whole Book, written purposely on this Subject, I do not find that he gives the King any Coactive Authority in Spiritual matters against any de∣finition of the Church:] Yet (saith he) they that were suddenly brought, from their old Opinions of Popery not to the love of the Truth, but to the ob∣servance of the Kings Religion, received a gross and impure sense of these words. But this gross sense is such, as Bishop Gardiner expressed, and as I think some of these Instances in the Parliaments Acts, &c made above do confirm; tho some Writers in our latter times seem to be somewhat unwilling to acknowledge it. And it is plain, that Calvin (in Amos 7.) understood those times (in which he writ) to have given Supremacy to
Kings, and particularly to Henry the Eighth in this gross sense. Whilst he complains thus. —Et hodiè quam multi sunt in Papatu, qui Regibus accumulant quicquid possunt juris & potestatis; ita, ut ne qua fiat disceptatio de religione, sed potestas haec sit penes Regem unum, ut Statuat pro suo arbitrio quicquid voluerit, & sine controversiâ hoe firmum maneat. Qui initio tantoperè extulerunt Henri∣cum Regem Angliae certè fucrunt inconsiderati homines. Dederunt illi summam rerum omnium potestatem; & hoc me semper graviter vulneravit: erant enim blasphemi, cùm vocarent ipsum summum caput Ecclesiae sub Christo. Hoc certè fuit nimium: Sed tamen sepultum hoc maneat, quia pec∣carunt inconsiderato zelo. Sed impostor ille [Stephen Gar∣diner] qui postea fuit Cancellarius hujus Proserpinae, quae hodiè illic superat omnes diabolos [he means Queen Mary] Ille, cum esset Ratisponae, non pugnabat rationibus (loquor de hoc postremo Cancellario qui Episcopus fuit Vintoniensis) sed quemadmodum jam caepi dicere, non multum curabat Scripturae testimonia, sed dicebat fnisse in arbitrio Regum, Statuta abrogare, & ritus novos instituere. Si de jejunio agitur, illud regem posse populo indicere, & jubere ut hoc vel illo die vescatur populus carnibus: licere etiam prohibene Sacerdotes a conjugio: licere etiam regi interdicere populo usum calicis in caenâ: licere regi statuere hoc vel illud in regno suo: Quare? Potestas enim summa est penes Regem. He goes on complaining. Certum quidem est Reges, si fungantur suo officio, esse & Patronos Religionis, & nutri∣cios Ecclesiae. Hoc ergo summoperè requiritur a Regibus, ut gladio, quo praediti sunt, utantur ad cultum Dei asserendum [but of whom shall they learn the right cultus Dei? Of the Body of Church-men? Then what will become of Galvinisme?] Sed interea sunt homines inconsiderati [such as Arch-Bishop Granmer and others] qui faciunt illos nimis Spirituales. Et hoc vitium passim regnat in Germaniâ. In his etiam regionibus nimium grassatur [amongst the Genevois and the Swisses] & nunc sentimus quales fructus nascantur ex illâ radice; quod sic Principes & quicunque po∣tiuntur imperio putant se ita Spirituales esse, ut nullum sit am∣plius Ecclesiasticium regimen. Non putant se posse regnare,
nisi aboleant omnem Ecclesiae authoritatem, & sint summi Judices tam in doctrinâ, quam in toto Spirituali regimine. Tenendum est igitur temperamentum, quia hic morbus semper in Principibus regnavit, ut vellent inflectere religionem pro suo arbitrio & libidine, & interea etiam pro suis commodis. Hodiè dolendae sunt nobis nostrae vices & deplorandae. Thus he goes on complaining of the reforming Princes in those times making themselves the summi Judices both in Ec∣clesiastical Doctrines and Government; Himself mean∣while, thus, being destitute of any Judge at all in these matters (the judgment of Seculars being (by his sen∣tence) invalid) of the Church opposing him. To this of Calvin may be added what Dr. Fern saith, in his Consid. concerning Reform 2. c. 6. §. That the Bishops and Clergy under Henry the Eighth may seem, at least in words and expression, to have over-done their work; not in that part which they denied to the Pope, but in that part which they attributed to the King. [I add, which part wrongly attributed to the King, by consequence they faultily denied, if not to the Pope, yet to some other, whose right it was: And then I ask what person or persons this should be?]
CHAP. IV. The Supremacy claimed by King Edward the Sixth. NExt to come to the Times of Edward the Sixth. Here we find the Power and Priviledges of the Kings Supremacy nothing diminished:2. In the times of Ed∣ward the Sixth. but all those by Act of Parliament confirmed to Edward the Sixth, which were formerly conceded to Henry the Eighth. 1. First, Whereas there had been in former Ages several Parliament Statutes made in Confirmation of the Determinations of the Church, and concerning the Tryal of Hereticks by the Bishops their Ordinaries [As, that Act, 2. Hen. 4.15. That none shall preach, hold, teach, or instruct contrary to the Catholick Faith, or Determination of Holy Church; and if any person shall offend in this kind, that the Diocesan shall judicially proceed against him; and that Act, 2. Hen. 5.7. That, for so much as the Cognizance of Heresy belong∣eth to the Judges of Holy Church, and not to the Secu∣lar Judges, such persons indited shall be delivered to the Ordinary of the Places to be acquitted or convicted by the Laws of Holy Church;] we find these Statutes repealed by King and Parliament 1. Edw. 6.12. c. And when-as they were again revived by Queen Mary 1, and 2. Mariae 6. c. with this Preface: for the eschewing and avoid∣ing of Heresies, which of late have much increased within this Realm, for that the Ordinaries have want∣ed authority to proceed against those that were infected therewith; we find them again repealed, as soon as Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown. 1. Eliz. 1. c. the Tryal of Heresies and Hereticks by the Clergy accord∣ing to the Determinations and Laws of Holy Church being admitted or excluded here, according as the Prince was Catholick or Reformed.
Further; we find it affirmed in the Act 1. Edw. 6.2. c. That all authority of Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is derived and deduced from the Kings Majesty, as Supreme Head of the Church and Realm of England. Consequently (in 1. Edw. 6.2. c.) we find ordered, That no Election be made of any Bishop by the Dean and Chapter; but that the King by his Letters-Patents shall confer the same to any person whom he shall think meet, and a Collation so made stand to the same effect, as tho a Conge-d'-eslire had been given &c. That all Processes Ecclesiastical shall be made in the name and with the stile of the King, as in Writs at Common-Law, and the Teste thereof shall be in the name of the Bishop. These likewise to be sealed with no other Seal but the Kings, or such as should be authorized by him. Con∣cerning which Act, thus Dr. Heylin candidly (Hist. of Reform. p. 51.) By the last Branch thereof it is plain, that the intent of the Contrivers was by degrees to weaken the Authority of the Episcopal Order by forcing them from their hold of Divine Institution, and making them no other than the Kings Ministers only, his Ec∣clesiastical Sheriffs to execute his Mandates. And of this Act such use was made (tho possibly beyond the true intention of it) that the Bishops of those times were not in a capacity of conferring Orders, but as they were thereunto impowered by especial Licence. [Where he quoteth out of Sanders what is set down below §. 145.] Which (saith he) being looked on by Queen Mary not only as a dangerous diminution of the Episcopal Power, but as an odious innovation in the Church of Christ: She caused this Act to be re∣pealed, leaving the Bishops to depend on their former [i. e, Divine] Institution; and to act in all things, which belonged to their Jurisdiction, in their own Names and under their own Seals, as in former times. In which Estate they have continued, without any legal inter∣ruption, from that time to this. Thus He. Now to go on. Consequently we find (in 2. Edw: 6.1. c.) the King and Parliament authorizing Arch-Bishops, Bishops, &c.
by vertue of their Act, to take Informations concern∣ing the not using of the Form of Common-Prayer &c therein prescribed; and to punish the same by Excom∣munication &c. And in Stat. 5, 6. Edw. 6.1. c. it is Enacted likewise concerning the same Common-Prayer Book Established by Parliament. That all Arch-Bishops, Bishops &c shall have full power and authority by this Act to correct and punish by Censures of the Church all persons, who shall offend against this Act and Statute. Which Clause, by vertue of this Act, and the like, im∣plies, that the Bishops might not excommunicate and use the Church Censures for that matter without the King and Parliament's Licence; or ought to excommu∣nicate in all matters, wherein the King and Parliament command it. Whereby we may understand more clearly the meaning of that Act (forementioned p. 44. §. 26.) 26. Hen. 8.1. c. and that 1. Eliz. 1. c. That the Spiri∣tual Jurisdiction, there ascribed to the King or Queen, involves the Jurisdiction of Excommunication, as well as others; not for the King to exercise this himself, but to appoint when and in what matters the Clergy within his Realm shall execute, or not execute, it: so that they derive the power of exercising of this Ecclesiastical Cen∣sure in his Dominions also from the King; contrary to the Second and Third Thesis. And indeed if the Clergy may not make nor enjoyn any new or old Spiritual Laws, may not correct what they judge Heresies, Errors, Vices, &c, without the Kings consent had thereto (See the Acts set down before §. 31, 32, 33, &c.) it is but reason∣able, that they should not excommunicate his Subjects without his consent, for not obeying such Laws, or for being thought guilty of such Crimes. And this is the reason, I suppose, of Dr. Heylins Observation (Hist. of Reform. p. 94.) That in those times the Wings of Episcopal Authority were so clipped, that it was scarce able to fly abroad; the Sentence of Excommunication, wherewith the Bishops formerly kept in awe both Priest and People, not having been in use and practice from the first of King Edward: and, of that Suit of Latimer
to the King in his Sermon before him quoted ibid: That the Discipline of Christ in the Excommunication of open Sinners might be restored and brought into the Church of England. Consequently in the Act of Parliament 3, and 4. Edw. 6.11. c. We find the Kings Power in Spirituals delegated to Thirty Two Persons, half Seculars, to be nominated by him (as was done in Henry the Eighth's days, in 35. Hen. 8.16. c. 27. Hen. 8.15. c. 25.19. c.) who are authorized to reform the former Laws of the Church: and these reformed Laws only, established by a major part of them, and published by the Kings Proclamation, thence forward to stand in force. [The Statute runs thus. Albeit the Kings Majesty ought most justly to have the Government of his Subjects, and the Deter∣minations of their Causes as well Ecclesiastical, as Tem∣poral; [therefore you see the Statutes, concerning the Bishops determining Ecclesiastical Causes, repealed in Statute 1. Edw. 6.12. c. above-mentioned] yet the same, as concerning Ecclesiastical Causes, having not of long time been put in ure, nor exercised by reason of the usurped Authority of the Bishop of Rome, is not per¦fectly understood nor known of his Subjects and there∣fore may it please his Highness that it may be Enacted &c, that the Kings Majesty shall, from henceforth during Three years, have full power to nominate and assign by the advice of his Council Sixteen persons of the Clergy (whereof Four to be Bishops) and Sixteen of the Temporalty (whereof Four to be learned in the Common Laws of this Realm) to peruse and examine the Ecclesiastical Laws of long time here used, and to gather, order and compile such Laws Ecclesiastical, as shall be thought to his Majesty, his said Council, and them, or the more part of them, convenient to be used, practiced or set forth within this his Realm, in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Courts and Conven∣tions. And that such Laws compiled by the said Thirty Two Persons or the more number of them, and set forth by the Kings Majesties Proclamations shall, by
vertue of this present Act, be only taken and put in ure for the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, and no other: Any Law, Statute, or Prescription to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.] Again, we find, in the same Act, Six Prelates, and Six others, such as the King should nominate, delegated by the same authority to make a new Form of Conse∣cration of Bishops and Priests; and this, devised by them, and set forth under the Great Seal, to be used, and none other. The words are these. Forasmuch as, that concord and unity may be had within the Kings Majesties domini∣ons [some it seems then devising to themselves new Forms of Consecration and Ordination cut of dislike of the Superstitions of the old] it is requisite to have one uniform manner for making and consecrating of Bishops and Priests; be it therefore Enacted, that such Form, as by Six Pre∣lates and Six other Men of this Realm Learned in Gods Law, by the King to be appointed, or by the most Number of them shall be devised for that purpose, and set forth under the Great Seal, shall by vertue of this present Act be lawfully used, and none other; any Law, Statute, or Prescription, to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. Here the King and Parliament assume power, to abrogate the former common Rituals of the Church, and, by their Delegates, to constitute, and by their sole Act, to authorize, new, without any con∣sent and ratification given thereto by any Ecclesiastical Synod. And in this new Book of Ordination was inserted this Oath of the Kings Supremacy and renunciation of all Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome to be taken by every one entring into Holy Orders. I from henceforth shall utterly renounce and forsake the Bishop of Rome, and his Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction. And I shall never consent nor agree that the Bishop shall practice exercise or have any manner of Authority, Jurisdiction or Power within this Realm: but shall resist the same at all times to the uttermost of my power. And I from henceforth will accept, repute, and take the Kings Ma∣jesty to be the only Supreme Head on Earth of the
Church of England. And to my Wit and uttermost of my Power I will observe and defend the whole Effects and Contents of all and singular Acts and Statutes made and to be made within this Realm in derogation, ex∣tirpation and extinguishing of the Bishop of Rome and his Authority; and all other Acts and Statutes made or to be made in Confirmation and Corroboration of the Kings Power of the Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England, &c. Here is the Clergy tied to swear, as to all Acts of the Civil Power already past, so indefinitely and beforehand to all also that are to come, which may derogate any thing from the Popes power, or add to the Kings, in Spiritual matters; as if no bounds or limits at all were due thereto. Again; in the Sixth Year of King Edward, the whole Synod of the Clergy, if we may credit the relation of Mr. Philpot,See Fox p. 1282. in the Convocation 1. Mariae did grant Authority to certain persons to be appointed [not by them, but] by the Kings Majesty to make Ecclesiastical Laws: [where it seems to me somewhat strange, that the Synod should now de novo give to the King what was before assumed as his Right.] And accordingly, a Catechisme, bearing the name of the Synod, was set forth by those persons nominated by the King without the Synods revising or knowing what was in it; tho a Catechisme (said Dr. Weston the Prolocutor 1. Mariae) full of Here∣sies. This Book being then produced in Convocation, and denied by the Synod to be any Act of theirs, Phil∣pot urged it was; because the Synodal Authority (saith he) was committed to certain persons to be appointed by the Kings Majesty, to make such Spiritual Laws as they thought convenient and necessary. Which Argumentation of Philpots seems to be approved by Dr. Fern in Consid. upon the Reform. 2. chap. 9. sect. Here then the Synod grants Authority in Spiritual matters, that they know not who shall in their name establish that which they please, without the Synods knowing either what Laws shall be made, or who shall make them: which is against the First and Second Thesis; and is far
from adding any just authority to the Ecclesiastical Con∣stitutions of those times; or to any Acts, which are thus on∣ly called Synodal, because the Synod hath in general given, away their Power to those who make them afterward, as themselves think fit. Whereas to make an Act law∣fully Synodical, the Consent of the Clergy must be had; not to nominate, in a Trust which Christ hath only com∣mitted to themselves, in general another Law-giver; viz. the King or his Commissioners; (for (thus) King Edward will choose Cranmer and Ridley; and Queen Mary will choose Gardiner and Bonner to prescribe Laws for the Church:) but to know, approve, and ratify in particular every such Law, before it can be valid. Besides these Acts of Parliament and Synod, the man∣ner of Supremacy then ascribed to the Prince yet fur∣ther appears in the Imprisonment of Bishop Bonner in the First year of King Edward, for making such an hypotheti∣cal Submission, as this, to the Kings Injunctions and Ho∣milies then by certain Commissioners sent unto him: I do receive these Injunctions and Homilies,See Fox p. 1192. with this Protestation, that I will observe them, if they be not contrary and repugnant to Gods Law, and the Statute and Ordinance of the Church; the fault imputed here to him, I suppose, being, that he refused to obey any In∣junctions of the King, when repugnant to the Statute and Ordinance of the Church; for which Fox calls this Protestation Popish. But the manner of this Supremacy appears yet more specially in the several Articles proposed to be subscribed by Bishop Gardiner,§ 45. n▪ 1. upon his refusing to execute or sub∣mit to divers particular Injunctions of King Edward in Spiritual matters imposed upon the Clergy; the Subscription required of him was,—To the Book of Ho∣milies, affirmed to contain only godly and wholsome Doctrine, and such as ought by all to be embraced; —To new Forms of Common-Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, —and to the denyal of Real Presence or of Transubstantiation; if any thing in that Form may may be said to oppose either of these: —To the new
Form of Consecration of Bishops and Priests;—To the dis∣annulling and abolition of the former Church Liturgy and Canon of the Mass, and of the Litanies to Saints, and Rituals of the Church; — To the abolition of Sacred Images, and Sacred Relicks; — To the per∣mission of Marriage to the Clergy; — To the acknow∣ledging, that the Statute of the Six Articles was by Au∣thority of Parliament justly repealed and dis-annulled;— To the acknowledging, that the appointment of Holy∣days and Fasting-days (as Lent and Ember-days) and the dispensing therewith, is in the Kings Majesty's Au∣thority and Power, as Supreme Head of the Church of England: — To the acknowledging, that Monastick Vows were Superstitious and the Religious, upon the dissolution of their Monasteries, lawfully freed from them: as likewise, that the suppressing and dissolution of Monasteries and Convents by the King was done justly, and out of good reason and ground. For all which see the Copy of the Second, and of the Last, Articles sent to Bishop Gardiner, in Fox p. 1234, and 1235. In which Articles the Kings Supremacy is thus expressed, in the Second of the First Articles sent to him: That his Majesty as Supreme Head of the Church of England hath full Power and Authority to make and set forth Laws, Injunctions, and Ordinances concerning Re∣ligion, and Orders in the said Church for repressing of all Errors and Heresies, and other enormities and abuses; so that the same alteration be not contrary or repugnant to the Scripture and Law of God (as is said in the Sixth of the Second Articles sent to this Bishop.) [Now how far this repressing and reforming of Errors, &c. claimed by the King, did extend, we may see in those points but now named.] In the Fifth: That all Subjects who disobey any his said Majesties Laws, In∣junctions, Ordinances [in such matters] already set forth and published, or hereafter to be set forth and published, ought worthily to be punished according to his Ecclesiastical Law used within this his Realm. Again; in the 7.11, 12.14.16. of the Third Articles
sent to the same Bishop: That the former Liturgies of the Church, Mass-Books &c, that the Canons for∣bidding Priests Marriage &c, are justly taken away and abolish'd: and the new Forms of Common-Prayer, and of Consecration of Bishops and Priests are justly established by Authority of Parliament, and by the Statutes and Laws of this Realm; and therefore ought to be received and approved of all the faithful Mini∣sters of Gods word. Where note; That tho, in some of these Articles,§. 45. n. 2. the Authority of Parliament is mentioned; yet in none of these is any thing said of the consent of the Clergy as necessary to make such Regal or Parliamentary In∣junctions in Ecclesiastical matters valid. From which may be collected; That when the Synodal consent of the Clergy is any where else mentioned, as sometimes it is, (See the Letter of the King and Council to Bishop Bonner, Fox p. 1186, and the Kings Message to the Re∣bels of Cornwal, Fox p. 1189:) it is not to add any Authority to those Injunctions thereby; (which Injuncti∣ons were imposed on the Clergy before any Synodal consent of the Clergy was either given or asked:) but to propose the judgment and example of the Clergy con∣senting, as a motive to render others, that stand out, conformable; as whose judgment they ought to reve∣rence, and whose example they ought to follow; not, as whose Decree and Constitution they ought to obey. And if you wonder, why the King and Parliament of those days never pleaded this last (as you shall never find it pleaded by them); the reason (I conjecture) was (besides that they were conscious of some changes made by them of these Ecclesiastical Judges, displacing those who would not conform to their Inclinations; which rendred them not so authentical) because they saw, that the Laws of this National Clergy could stand in no force, by vertue of their Office or any Commission from Christ; but that so would also the Laws of the Church and her Synods, which were Superior to the English Clergy, and which were contrary to the Laws
of this National Synod; and so would void and make them of none effect. And if the King by vertue of his Supremacy urged his, and his Subjects, freedome from the former Laws and Constitutions of the Church Ʋniversal; so must he, from the present Laws of his own Church National: He, and his Subjects, being tied in no more Duty to the one, than to the other; nor in so much. If you would know how Bishop Gardiner behaved himself in this Tryal; it was with great perplexity and distraction: as neither knowing now, how, safely, to recal and recant that Supremacy of the King in Spirituals, which he had formerly acknowledged and sworn to; nor how, in that Duty which he owed to the Church, to obey those particular Injunctions, which the King imposed upon him by vertue of this Supremacy acknow∣ledged by him; and so he incurred, for this latter, de∣privation and imprisonment. And perhaps it may be thought a just judgment from God, that he should be thus ensnared and undone by that sense of Supremacy; of which he had been, in Henry the Eighth's days, both at home and abroad,See §. 37. as you have heard from Calvin, so zealous an Abettor. I will conclude these Evidences under Edward the Sixth, with what is said in Antiquit. Brittannic. (p. 339. which quotes for it the Archives) touching the re∣sentment of their lost Synodal Authority which some of the Clergy shewed in a Synod called by Arch-Bishop Cranmer, in the First Year of King Edward's Reign, for the furthering of a Reformation, tho he could effect nothing therein. In which Synod the Clergy (now too late perceiving, that, not only the Pope, but them∣selves, had lost their former Ecclesiastical Power; and that the King and Parliament ordered Spiritual Affairs as they pleased, without their consents) requested, that, at least, the rest of their Convocation might be joyned, with the House of Commons; as the Bishops were, with the Lords: that so they might have a Vote also in passing Church matters; but this request would not be granted
them. The Authors words are these, —Animadver∣terunt Praelati omnem vim authoritatemque Synodi non modò diminutam, sed penitus fractam eversamque esse; postquam Clerus in verbo Sacerdotis Henrico Regi pro∣misisset, sine authoritate Regiâ, in Synodo se nihil decreturos; [or indeed that the King might decree what he pleased without the Authority of the Synod: for such a Su∣premacy was either granted to, or assumed by, the King.] Quâ Ecclesiasticarum rerum potestate abdicatâ, Populus in Parliamento caepit de rebus divinis, inconsulto Clero, sancire; tum absentis cleri privilegia & immuni∣tates sensim detrahere; juraque duriora, quibus Clerus in∣vitus teneretur, constituere. Haec discrimina pati Clericis iniquum atque grave visum est. Proinde petierunt, ut in Concilio inferiori Praelati Clerique procuratores cum populo permixti de Republicâ & Ecclesiâ unà consulant &c. Thus that Author. And you may see also the Petition it self lately Printed out of a Manuscript of Arch-Bishop Cran∣mers by Mr. Stillingfleet Irenicum 2. Part 8. c. Where, seeking too late to recover their former Steerage in Ec∣clesiastical Affairs now transacted in the Court of Parlia∣ment, the Lower House of Convocation prefers these Requests, That, Whereas in a Stat. 25. Hen. 8. the Clergy had promised in Verbo Sacerdotii never from thenceforth to Enact &c any new Canons, Constitutions &c unless the Kings Assent and Licence may to them be had &c: therefore they desire that the Kings Ma∣jesties Licence may be for them obtained, authorizing them to attempt and commune of such matters, and therein freely to give their consent; which otherwise they may not do, upon pain and peril premised. That either the Clergy of the Lower House of the Convo∣cation may be adjoyned and associate with the Lower House of Parliament; or else, that all such Statutes, as shall be made concerning matters of Religion, may not pass, without the sight and assent of the said Clergy; [or (as it runs in the Second Petition) the said Clergy not being made privy thereunto, and their An∣swers and Reasons not heard] That [since the former
were annulled] Ecclesiastical Laws may be established in the Realm by Thirty Two persons, or so many as shall please the King to appoint, &c. That all Judges Ecclesiastical proceeding after those Laws may be without danger and peril. That, whereas they were informed, that certain Prelates and other Learned Men were appointed to alter the Service in the Church &c; and did make certain Books &c: the said Books may be seen and perused by them, for a better expe∣dition of Divine Service &c. That such matters as concern Religion, which be disputable, may be reasoned and disputed amongst them in this House; whereby the Verity of such matters shall the better appear &c. Thus laboured then the poor Clergy to obtain a joint share at least with the Parliament and civil State, in transacting the Affairs of the Church. And Dr. Heylin (in Reform. Justified §. 4. p. 21.) grants thus much, That the Censures of the Church were grown weak, if not invalid, and consequently, by degrees, became neglected; ever after that King Henry the Eighth took the Headship on him, and exercised the same by a Lay Vicar-General: and p. 20, That the Power and Reputation of the Clergy was under foot; and therefore the Authority of Parliament of more use, than afterward in times well ballanced and established [meaning those following times, wherein the Clergy were now changed and fashioned to the inclinations of the Prince.] And, as for these days of King Edward; what Authority concerning Spiritual matters not only the people, but the new Divines of Edward, acknow∣ledged and enstated in the King and Parliament, may appear from that Letter of Bishop Hooper, when in Prison, sent to the Synod called in the beginning of Queen Mary: Episcopis, Decanis &c; wherein he cites them before the High Court of Parliament,ox p. 1933. as the competent Judge in those Controversies, i. e, for so far as any man can be Judge. In this Letter, after having urged Deut. 17.8. because of the mention made there, of a Judge besides the Priest; Vo omnes (saith he) obtestor, ut causam hanc
vel aliam quamcunqne, ob religionem ortam inter nos & vos deferre dignemini ad supremam Curiam Parliamenti; ut ibi utraque pars coram sacro & excelso senatu sese religiosè & animo submisso, judicio & authoritati Verbi Dei sub∣jiciat. Vestra ipsorum causa certè postulat, ut palam e. c lites inter nos componantur; idque coram competenti judice. Quid hoc est igitur? Quo jure contenditis? Vultis & nostri, & causae nostrae testes, accusatores & judices esse? Nos tantùm legem & evangelium Dei in causà religionis judicem competentem agnoscimus. Illius judicio stet vel cadat nostra causa. Tantum iterum atque iterum petimus, ut coram compe∣tenti judice detur nobis amicum Christianumque auditorium. Non vos fugit, quomodo publicè, palam, & in facie ac in presentiâ omnium statuum hujus regni, in summâ curià Par∣liamenti, veritas verbi Dei per fidos, doctos, & pios mi∣nistros de vestrâ impiâ Missâ gloriosè victoriam reportavit. Quae, quocunque titulo, tempore, universalitate, splenduit, ubi per Sanctissimum Regem Edvardum 6. ad vivum lapidem Lydium verbi Dei examinari, per proceres, heroas, ac doctos hujus regni, erat mandatum, statim evanuit &c. Here that Bishop professeth, when any do oppose a Synod in a Cause of Religion, not the Synod, but the Parliament, the competent Judge therein; and urgeth, if I rightly understand him, the just Authority thereof in King Edward's time for putting down the Mass. Will he then stand to the Parliaments judgment; which as it was then affected, would have cast him? It seemeth, Not; by that he faith [Tantum legem Dei in causâ re∣ligionis judicem competentem agnoscimus. Illius judicio stet vel cadat causa nostra.] By whose mouth then shall the Scripture decide it; that Sentence may be executed accordingly on him, a Prisoner for this Controversy? By the Clergy's? No. By the Parliament's? No; for he makes sure to wave that in his Letter? By the Scrip∣ture then its self? But this is urged, by both sides, to speak for them; and saith not one word more after the Cause heard by the Parliament, than it did before. So that, in nominating no other final Judge, the Bishops Request here in summe is; that his Cause may never be tryed by any Judge.
CHAP. V. King Edward's Supremacy disclaimed by Qu. Mary. AFter King Edward's Death, in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign (a Princess otherwise princi∣pled,The former Supremacy Disclaimed by Q. Mary and by the Bishops in her days; and the Popes Su∣premacy re-acknowledg¦ed.) all that had been done in the Two former Kings Reigns, by Prince, by State, or by Clergy; in setting up a new Lay-Supremacy in Spirituals; in restraining the former Power and Supremacy of the Church; in in∣novating the Forms, of Divine Service and Admini∣stration of the Sacraments, of Ordination, of Church Rites and Discipline, and Jurisdiction; in disannulling several former Ecclesiastical Canons and Constitutions, and composing new ones; All was now, by an equal Authority of Prince, Clergy, and State, reversed, re∣pealed, ejected; and Religion, (only rendred much poorer) as for Temporals, put into the same course, which it had in the twentieth Year of Henry the Eighth; before a new Wife, or a new Title, was by him thought on. So that any new Reformation, to come afterward, must begin to build clearly upon a new Foundation; not able to make any use of the Authority of the former Structure, being now, by the like Authority, defaced and thrown down. This Restitution of things, made in Queen Mary's days, will chiefly appear to you; in the Statute 1. Mar. 2. chap, where, the ancient Form of Divine Service &c, used in Henry the Eighths days, is restored; as being the Service (saith the Act) which we and our Fore-fathers found in this Church of England, left unto us by the Au∣thority of the Catholick Church:And the fi∣nal judg∣ment of Ec∣clesiastical matters re∣stored to the Church. and several Acts of Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, that abrogated some former Ecclesiastical Laws &c, or introduced new Forms, of Divine Service, of Election and Ordination of Bi∣shops and Priests, are repealed. And in 1, and 2. Mar. 6.
chap. where the ancient way of judging Heresies and Hereticks first at the Tribunals of the Church is set on foot again; and the Statutes to this purpose, which were repealed upon the coming in of a new Supremacy, are revived. And in 1, and 2. Mar. 8. c, where the Pope's Su∣premacy is re-acknowledged; when also (as Fox ob∣serves p. 1296.) the Queen's Stile concerning Supre∣macy was changed; and in it Ecclesiae Anglicanae Supremum Caput omitted: as also Bonner Bishop of London, being Chief of the Province of Canterbury in the Restraint of the Arch-Bishop, did omit, in his Writs to the Clergy, Authoritate Illustrissimae &c legitime suffulttus. In which Statute also the whole Nation, by their Representative in Parliament, ask pardon and absolution from their former Schism, repealing the Oath of the Kings Supre∣macy, and all the Acts made formerly in Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth's time against the Popes Supremacy: and amongst them particularly this Act of the Submission of the Clergy, set down before §. 22. and §. 23; whereby the Clergy had engaged themselves to make nor promulge no Ecclesiastical Canons with∣out the Kings consent; and bad also besought the King to delegate some persons whom he pleased, to reform Errors, Heresies &c, i, e. to do the Offices of the Clergy. In which Statute also the Clergy, in a distinct Suppli∣cation beginning, Nos Episcopi & Clerus Cantuariensis Provinciae in hac Synodo congregati &c, calling the former Reformation perniciosum Schisma, do petition to have the Church restored to her former Rights, Jurisdictions, Liberties, taken from her by the injustice of former times. [The words are, Insuper Majestatibus vestris supplicamus, pro suâ pietate efficere dignentur, ut ea, quae ad jurisdictionem nostram & libertatem Ecclesiasticam per∣tinent, sine quibus debitum nostri pastoralis officii & curae animarum nobis commissae exercere non possumus, nobis su∣periorum temporum injuriâ ablata, restituantur; & ea nobis & Ecclesiae perpetuò illaesa & salva permaneant: & ut om∣nes leges, quae hanc nostram jurisdictionem & libertatem
Ecclesiasticam tollunt, seu quovis modo impediunt, abrogen∣tur, ad honorem Dei &c.] Which Rights how wel∣come they were to them when now regained in Queen Mary's days, we may guess from their former complaint in the beginning of King Edward's days; where we see how much they grieved, when they saw them lost. Sand∣ers 2. l. p. 244. adds also, that at this time Singuli Epis∣copi (uno tantum Landaffensi excepto) peculiariter petierunt à sede Apostolicâ veniam prioris gravissimae culpae,See before §. 47. & con∣firmationem in suo cujusque Episcopatu. Lastly in the same Statute it is concluded: That the Ecclesiastical Juris∣dictions of the Arch-Bishops, Bishops and Ordinaries, should be in the same State, for process of Suits, punish∣ments of Errors, and execution of Censures of the Church, with knowledge of Causes belonging to the same, and as large in these Points as the said Jurisdiction was in the Twentieth Year of Henry the Eighth. After these Statutes, see to the same purpose the Synod held presently after the Coronation of Queen Mary,Ad the Church Do∣ctrine un∣der King Edward con∣demned. before the introduction of any new Bishops, save only some of those that were ejected in King Ed∣ward's Reign. In which Synod the Bishop of London presided, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury having been, about a Month before, by the Council, committed to the Tower for Treason; for which he was, some Two Months after, condemned, but afterward pardoned by the Queen. In this Synod Fox saith (p. 1282.) that the whole House of Convocation,Fox p. 1698. except Six persons, did immediately assent, and subscribe to the natural presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar; and Transubstantiation: and to the renouncing, of the Ca∣techisme put forth in the latter time of King Edward, in the name of the Clergy, and of the new Book of Common-Prayer; these things being proposed to them by the Prolocutor. At which time (saith he) Mr. Philpot Arch-Deacon of Winchester was as it were astonied at the multitude of so many Learned Men as there were on purpose gathered together to maintain old Traditions, rather than the Truth of Gods Holy Word.
After this Synod see in Fox p. 1294.§. 52. n▪ 1. the Eighteen Ar∣ticles sent by the Queen to the Bishops (but these Ar∣ticles such as only enjoyned them the observance of for∣mer Church Constitutions, from which the late Inno∣vations had disobediently deviated) commanding them, to see to the Observance, in their Diocesses, of the Church Canons used in the time of Henry the Eighth; securing them herein from the incurring any danger from the Laws of the Realm; see the 1. Act. The Second of which Articles requires them to omit in their Writs: Regiâ authoritate fulcitus. The Third, not to require the Oath of the Queens Supremacy, in their admission of any into Church Preferments. The Fourth excludes Sacramentaries from all Ecclesiastical Functions; the Synod, held in October before, having declared against them. The Seventh excludes, according to the former Church Canons, all married Persons from Ec∣clesiastical Promotions. The Ninth appointeth the Di∣vorce of married Monks and other Religious Persons, who had formerly taken the perpetual Vow of Conti∣nency; and the rest are to renew some or other former order of the Church. Lastly see the Retractation made by the Clergy in Queen Mary's days, confessed by Mason de Minist.§. 52. n. 2. 3. l. 4. c. Regnante Mariâ alia Episcopis mens, alius animus fuit [i, e. concerning Supremacy:] To which all that he answers is this, Eorum subsecuta inconstantia confessi∣onis [prioris] soliditatem abolere non potuit. Quamvis sententias revocarunt, suis tamen ipsorum argumentis non satisfecerunt. But, however that he will not grant the Kings Supremacy (I mean in such a sense as it was then maintained) to have been confuted by the Bishops reason∣ing; yet he grants it to have been revoked (so much as in them lay) by their Authority. The only thing which can here be questioned, is; whether this Clergy in Queen Mary's days,That Queen Mary's, Cler¦gy was a lawful Cler∣gy. who in their following Synods abrogated the Acts and Concessions of the Clergy's former Synods in Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth's days, were a lawful Clergy? Which
if they be now; note, that they will also be so in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's days; when also they opposed her Reformation. Now it is questioned whe∣ther they were a lawful Clergy:α α because many of King Edward's Bishops were, in the beginning of this Queens Reign, ejected;β β and some also burnt for Hereticks, and others put into their places;γ γ whilst some of them were living, and so those Sees not vacant:δ and δ that without the consent of the Metropolitan, who for the three first Years of Queen Mary was Cranmer; without which Metropolitan's consent the Ordination of any Bishop in his Province was unlawful. See Can. Nicen. 4. Can. Apostol. 35. Now these Bishops are numbred by Fox to have been then ejected:Pag. 1289. Cranmer from Canterbury; Holgate from York; Ridley from London; Poynet from Winchester; Hooper from Worcester; [he might have said from Glocester too, for Hooper, in the latter end of Ed∣ward the Sixth's time, held both these Sees together in Com∣mendam: and for Worcester,See Godw. Annal. An. Dom. 1555. Latimer (then living) had been Bishop thereof in King Henry's days; out of which, for Non-conformity to the Six Articles, he was ejected, or for fear resigned it, and was imprisoned in the Tower till King Edward's time; yet (for what reason I know not) could never then be restored to his Bishoprick;] Barlow from Bathe; Harley from Hereford; Taylor from Lincoln, [but this was by death; not by the Queen, as appears in Fox p. 1282.] Ferrars from St. Davids; Coverdale from Excester; Scory from Chichester; Besides these I find two more mentioned by Mason de Minist. p. 248. Bush from Bristol; and Bird from Chester. Of which Bishops (Mr. Fox saith, p. 1280) Five were put out; that the former Possessors of those Bishopricks might be restored, Bonner to London, Gardiner to Winchester, Day to Chiche∣ster, Heath to Worcester [but Heath was afterward tran∣slated to York in Holgates room, and Pate to Worcester in Hoopers room,] Vesy to Excester; Besides which Ton∣stal was restored to Durham; a Bishoprick which, after Tonstal's Imprisonment, was first, kept void in King Edward's days; and at last, by Act of Parliament, dis∣solved to increase the Kings Revenue.
Now in Vindication of the just Authority of Queen Mary's Clergy,Reply to α notwithstanding what hath been ob∣jected, you must First 1. take notice, That the Ejection of Bishops in Queen Mary's days was not the First, but Second Ejection; the first being made in King Edward's time, when Gardiner, Bonner, Tonstal, Day, Heath, Vesy,That the Bi∣shops in K Edward's days were not lawful∣ly ejected. and probably some other Bishops were removed from their Sees: for I find not the Ecclesiastical History of those times accurately written by any; nor Mr. Fox to use the same diligence in numbring the Change of Clergy under King Edward, as he doth that under Queen Mary; yet something may be conjectured from those general words of his, p. 1180, For the most part the Bishops were changed, and the dumb Prelate compelled to give place to others that would Preach. Secondly, That, if the Ejection of Bishops in King Edward's time was not lawful, so many of the Bishops, as were then ejected, were, by Queen Mary, justly restored; and those, who were introduced into their places, justly excluded. Thirdly, That to prove the Ejection of those Bishops under King Edward lawful; it must be done, both by a lawful Authority; and for a lawful Cause. Fourthly, But that, in both these respects, their Ejection, if the Principles formerly laid in this Discourse stand good, appears not just. For 1. First, these Bishops being questioned about matters Ecclesiastical and Spiritual,1. Neither for the Judge. their Judges were the Kings Privy Council, or his Commissioners, part Clergy, part Laity, as the King pleased to nominate them (contrary to Third Thesis.) Amongst whom tho the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury was one: yet he was so, not for his Canonical Superiority in the Church; but from the Authority he,-jointly with the rest, received from the King, when the former Statutes, concerning the Tryal of Hereticks by the Clergy,See Fox. p. 1237, and p 1202. had been first abro∣gated, (See before §. 39:) whereas the Clergy only are the lawful Judges of these matters; namely, to de∣clare what is done contrary to the Laws of God, and of the Church; and to depose from the exercise of their
Office the persons found faulty therein. See Thesis Third. Secondly, The Causes Ecclesiastical urged against them, for which they were removed from their Bishopricks, were these;2. Nor for the Cause. their non-acknowledgment of such a large extended Power of the Kings Supremacy, as he then claimed and exercised in Ecclesiastical matters; their non-conformity to the Kings Injunctions (confirmed, if you will, with the consent of the National Synod of the Clergy) in Spiritual matters. And amongst these especially; their not relinquishing the usage of the for∣mer Church Liturgies, and Forms of Divine Service, and particularly the Canon of the Mass; which had been a Service approved by the general Practice of the Church Catholick for near a 1000 Years; in which were now said to be many Errors,See Church Gv. 4. . §. 39. for which it might not be law∣fully used: their not using, and conforming to, the new Form of Common-Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, the new Form of Consecration and Ordi∣nation of Priests; and many other clear Innovations against the former, not only Ecclesiastical Constitu∣tions, or External Rites and Ceremonies (which it was affirmed, in one of the Questions disputed on in the first Year of Queen Elizabeth, that every particular Church hath Authority to take away and change) but also Ec∣clesiastical Doctrines established by Synods superiour to that of this Nation; as hath been shewed in the Fourth Part of Church Govern. A Catalogue of which Doctrines and Canons I have set down before §. 45, having ta∣ken them out of the Three Copies of Articles proposed to the then Bishop of Winchester,See Fox p. 1234, 1235. to be subscribed. Now such Canons, whether concerning matters of Doctrine, or of Ecclesiastical Constitution, cannot be lawfully abrogated; neither by the King (See Thesis 1, 2.7, 8;) nor by the National Synods of this Church, (See Thesis 4.8:) and therefore the Ejection of those Bishops in Edward the Sixth's days, for not obeying the King, (I add, or the National Synod, had there been any such before their Ejection,) in breaking such Canons was unjust; and therefore they justly by Queen Mary re∣stored,
and the others that were found in their places, justly dispossessed. Fifthly, As for the rest of King Edward's Bishops; who, besides those Bishops that possessed these non-vacant Sees, were ejected in Queen Mary's days:5. That the Bi∣shops depri∣ved in Qu. Mary's days were law∣fully ejected their Ejection (contrary to the other) will be justifiable; if done for a lawful Cause, and by a lawful Judge, 1. First then; the Causes of their Ejection were these chiefly. First, For their being Married (which many, if not all, the Ejected were, Cranmer,1. Bth as to the Cause. Holgate the Arch-Bishop of York, Coverdale, Scory, Barlow, Hooper, Farrar, Har∣ley, Bird, Bush; and some of them, after having taken Monastick Vows, as Holgate, Coverdale, Barlow, as ap∣pears in Fox and Godwin) contrary to the Canons of the Church both Western, and Eastern (as to those that marry after having received Holy Orders) both Mo∣dern and Ancient, even before the Council of Nice; as is shewed at large in the Discourse of Celibacy, §. 18: and contrary to the Provincial Canons of the Church of England. (See Fox p. 1051, and 177, granting Celi∣bacy of the Clergy to have been established here for a Law by a National Synod in the time of Anselme Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, about An. Dom. 1080:) The Pen∣alty of transgressing which Canons was Deposition from their Office. See Conc. Constant. in Trullo (less strict in this matter than the Western Church) Can. 6, Si quis post sui ordinationem conjugium contrahere ausus fuerit, deponatur. See the same in Concil. Neocaesar. before that of Nice, Can. 1. Conc Elibert. 33. c. Affrican. Can. 37. And see the same in the Canon of Anselme, that all Priests that keep Women shall be deprived of their Churches and all Ecclesiastical Benefices. Secondly, For their not acknowledging any Supremacy at all of the Roman Patriarch,2, more than of any other Forreign Bishop, over the Clergy of England; contrary to the former Canons of many lawful Superior Councils, as is shewed in Church Gov. 1. Part. §. 53. &c; and also contrary to the former Provincial ones of the Eng∣lish Church. And for their placing such an Ecclesiasti∣cal
Supremacy in the Prince, as to use all Jurisdiction, to reform Heresy, constitute or reverse Ecclesiastical Laws, in the manner before expressed. Which Supre∣macy in the Church, since some body in each Prince's Dominion, where Christians are, ever had here on Earth under Christ; I say, ever; not only after that Princes became Christian, but before: Arch-Bishop Cranmer, rather than that he would acknowledge it at any time to have lain in the Church, said that, before the first Christian Emperors time, it resided in the Heathen Princes; and namely in Nero for one; affirming also the Grand Seignior now to be the Head of the Church in Turky; as you may see, in the Conference between Dr. Martin and him at his Tryal, in Fox p. 1704. Which Relation if any think false, let them say, what other answer, upon the former Suppositions there, can ra∣tionally be returned. 3. For their refusing to officiate or celebrate Divine Service,3. and administer the Sacraments, according to the former established Church Liturgies received and used by the whole Catholick Church for near a 1000 Years; or so much as to be present at it: which Divine Service they accused, not only of many superstitious Ceremonies; but of many Errors also, and of flat Idola∣try, in the Adoration of Bread in the Eucharist. See Fox his Preface to the Reign of Queen Mary p 1270; and Bishop Ridley's Conferences with Latimer. Fox p. 1560, and 1562, 1563. For their maintaining several Tenents,4. especially a∣bout the Holy Eucharist, such as had been formerly de∣clared Heresies by the Definitions of lawful Superior Councils. As 1. First the denying of any corporal Presence of Christ, either with the consecrated Elements; or with the worthy Receiver; whether by way of Transub∣stantiation, or Consubstantiation: urging, that because this Body was in Heaven, ergo, it could not be in the Sacrament; and affirming only a Real Presence (I give you the very words of Bishop Ridley)if taken generally, and so as it may singnify any manner of thing which belong∣eth
to the Body of Christ. Hence Bishop Ridley's expres∣sing of the manner of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist are such as these: That the Consecrated Bread is the Body of Christ, in remembrance of him and of his death. That, besides a signification of Christ's Body set forth by the Sacrament; the Grace also of Christ's Body, i, e. the Food of Life and Immortality, is given to the faithful. That we recieve the vertue of the very Flesh of Christ; the Life and Grace of his Body: The Grace and the Vertue of his very Nature. Spiri∣tual Flesh; but not that which was Crucified. That Christ's Body is in the Sacrament; because there is in it the Spirit of Christ, i, e. the Power of the word of God, which seedeth and cleanseth the Soul. That the Natural Body and Blood, even that which was born of the Virgin Mary &c, is in the Sacrament, ver & realiter; and that the difference from the Roman Church is only in modo, in the way and manner of Be∣ing: [how is that?] for we (saith he) confess it to be there Spiritually by Grace and Efficacy; because that whosoever receiveth worthily that Bread and Wine, receiveth effectuously Christ's Body and Blood; i, e. he is made effectually Partaker of his Passion. But otherwise▪ Christ's Body is in the Sacrament really, no more, than the Holy Ghost is in the Element of Wa∣ter in Baptisme; (therefore the Question proposed thus. An Corpus Christi realiter adsit in Encharistiâ? In King Edward's time was held Negatively. See Disput. Oxon. 1549, and King Edw. 28. Article.) Thus Ridley, who spake most clearly;Fox. p. 1703 and whose Schollar in this Opinion Cranmer was, he being formerly a Lutheran, and hold∣ing a Corporal Presence. See these words of Ridley, Fox p. 1598. in his last Examination, and p. 1311, 1312. in his stating of the first Question disputed on at Oxford: which was not about Transubstantiation, but about the Corporal Presence of Christ, or the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist; which those Bishops denied, as well as Transubstantiation. The very same with whose Doctrine, was that of Peter Martyr pub∣lished
in King Edward's days,Disput. Ox∣on. 149. Fol. 88. Illud idem corpus nos ha∣bere in coenâ Domini, quod Christus obtulit in Cruce, quoad substantiam & veritatem naturae fateor, sed non eodem modo: quia spiritualiter, i, e. per fidem ipsi percipimus; id vero substantiali & corporali praesentiâ pependit in cruce. Cum Chrysostomo id ipsum nos [in Eucharistiâ] habere corpus quod in Cruce fuit oblatum fatemur: Sed non est modus recipiendi per praesentiam corpralem; sed per praesentiam fidei, quae potest res absentes spiritualiter praesentes facere. Secondly, The denying, that the Eucharist might be offered as a Sacrifice propitiatory; and asserting that there was in the Eucharist no other Oblation of Christ's Body, than the Oblation of our Thanksgiving for Christ's Body offered on the Cross. To use Peter Martyrs words, Substantia hostiae nostrae est gratiarum actio de Corpore Christi tradito in Crucem;Disput. Ox∣on. 1549. & hac gratiarum actione, fide atque confessione dixerunt Patres in Caenâ offerri corpus Christi. Which matters are contrary to the Doctrines, and De∣finitions of former lawful Superior Councils; if those Positions stand good, which have been said at large in the Discourse of the Eucharist. §.251. &c; and (Conc. Sacrif.) §.  &c; and which have been laid down concerning Councils, in Ch. Gov. 4. Part: which former Positions it must not be expected that I prove again, wherever I make use of them. To justify which Tenents not to be Heresies, those Bishops were fain to appeal from Councils to Scripture, and (not to deny such Councils to be General or Su∣perior; but) to deny the Authority of General or Su∣perior Councils to be obliging, when contrary to the Holy Scriptures; i, e. to that sense wherein themselves, contrary to the Exposition of the Church, interpreted the Holy Scriptures: as was soberly urged to Bishop Ridley at his Tryal by the Bishop of Glocester. Fox p. 1602. You (saith he) refusing the Determination of the Ca∣tholick Church, bring Scripture for the Probation of your Assertions; and we also bring Scriptures. You understand them in one sense; we in another. How will you know the truth herein? If you stand to your
own Interpretation, you are wise in your own conceit; and Vae qui sapientes &c. Isa. 5.21. But if you say, you will follow the minds of the Doctors and Ancient Fa∣thers: semblably you understand them in one mean∣ing, and we take them in another. How will you know the truth herein? If you stand to your own judgment; then are you singular in your own conceit, and cannot avoid the Vae. It remaineth therefore, that you submit your self to the determination and arbi∣trement of the Church; with whom God promised to remain to the world's end. Thus the other side argued with them. But meanwhile what aversion they had of submitting to the judgment of the Church, or Coun∣cils, see in the forecited Conference of Bishop Ridley with Latimer. Where, having objected the Authority of General Councils for the Mass, he answereth thus, That, whensoever they, who rule and govern the Church, are the lively Members of Christ, and walk after the guiding and rule of his Word; Councils ga∣thered together of such Guides do indeed represent the Universal Church; and have a promise of the guiding of his Spirit into all truth: But that any such Council hath at any time allowed the Mass &c, I affirm (saith he) to be impossible; for Superstition [i, e. the Masy] and the sincere Religion of Christ, can never agree together. For Determination of all Controver∣sies in Christ's Religion, Christ hath left unto the Church not only Moses and the Prophets, to ask coun∣sel at; but also the Gospels. Christ would have the Church his Spouse in all doubts to ask counsel at the word of his Father written. Neither do we read, that Christ in any place hath laid so great a Burthen upon the Members of his Spouse; that he hath commanded them to go to the Universal Church. It is true, that Christ gave unto his Church some Apostles, some Prophets &c. But that all men should meet together, out of all parts of the world, to define of the Articles of our Faith; I neither find it commanded of Christ, nor written in the Word of God. To which Bishop Latimer
nexeth these words, In things pertaining to God and Faith, we must stand only to the Scriptures; which are able to make us all perfect and instructed to Salva∣tion, if they be well understood. And they offer them∣selves to be well understood, only to those who have good wills, and give themselves to study and Prayer: nei∣ther are there any men less apt to understand them, than the prudent and wise men of the world. Thus Latimer in application of his Discourse to General Coun∣cils. See likewise Bishop Ridley's Disputation at Ox∣ford; where being pressed with the Authority of the great Lateran Council;Fox . 1321. after having replyed, that there were Abbots, Priors and Friers in it to the Number of 800; he saith that he denyeth the Authority of this Council, not so much for that cause, as for this especi∣ally; because the Doctrine of that Council agreed not with the word of God [i, e. as he understood this word.] Thus he (who was counted the most Learned of those Bishops) concerning the Authority of Councils. See like matter in the Discourse between Lord Rich and Mr. Phil∣pot, Fox p. 1641. To proceed. These Canons and Definitions, I say not, of Popes and Pontificians, as they were ordinarily then Nick-named, but of supposed former lawful Superior Councils, were then in just force in Queen Mary's days; notwithstanding any abrogation of them made by a Na∣tional (i e. an Inferior) Synod; See Thesis the Fourth, and the Eighth; as also was frequently urged against those questioned Bishops. See the Examination of Arch Bishop Cranmer, Fox p. 1702. where Dr. Story the Queens Commissioner thus objecteth; but receives no answer there to it; The Canons, which be received of all Christendome, compel you to answer. For altho this Realm of late time, thro such Schismaticks, as you, have exiled and banished the Canons; yet that cannot make for you; for you know: that, par in parem, nec pars in totum aliquid statuere potest. Wherefore this Isle, being indeed but a Member of tire whole, could not determine against the whole. Thus Dr. Story.
Yet neither, in Queen Mary's time, could the Authority of a National Synod, or an Act of Parliament be pleaded, for such an abrogation of the old Canons or Liturgies or Supremacies, and the establishment of new: because both the Synod and Parliament of this Nation, in the beginning of her Reign, had pulled down again, what those under King Edward and Henry had builded; so that those Bishops could not hereupon ground their non-con∣formity: which Argument Dr. Story there also prose∣cuteth against the Arch-Bishop. Such as these then being the Causes of the Ejection of those Bishops, I think it is evidenced;And 2,  to the J that they were Regularly and Canonically ejected, as to the Cause. And 2. Next: so were they, as to the Judge, They being con∣demned, as guilty of Heresy,2. or other Irregularities (which are mulcted with Deposition) and so ejected, or also degraded, and excommunicated with the greater Ex∣communication (further than which the Ecclesiastical Power did not proceed) not by any Secular Court, or by the Queen's Commissioners; but by those whom the Church hath appointed, in the Intervals of Councils, the ordinary Judges of Heresy, or other Breaches of her Canons: Amongst whom the highest Judges are the Pa∣triarchs; and, above them, the first Patriarch of Rome. By whose Delegates the more Eminent Persons, that were accused of Heresy, the Arch-Bishop and the Bi∣shops were here tryed (according to the Authority shewed, to be due to, and to be anciently used by, him, in Chur. Gov. 1. Part. §. 9.20. &c, and 2. Part §. 77;) and other Inferior Persons were tryed by the Bishop, who was their Ordinary: Queen Mary having revived the Statutes repealed by King Henry and Edward concerning the Tryal of Hereticks by the Church's Authority; as hath been noted before §. 49. The issue of which Tryal by the Church, if they found guilty, was either De∣position only from their Benefice and Office, for Breach of her Canons; or also Excommunication excommnni∣catione majori, and Degradation, for Heresy and Oppo∣sition of her Definitions hi matters of Faith; and so the
yielding them up, as now by degradation rendred Secu∣lar Persons, to have inflicted on them by the Secular Power the punishments appointed for such crimes by the Secular Laws; as you may see, in the Forms of the Condemnation of Cranmer, Ridley, &c Fox p. 1603, and elsewhere; and in the Profession of the Bishop of Lincoln to Bishop Ridley, Fox p. 1597. All (saith he) that we may do, is to cut you off from the Church; for we cannot condemn you to dy (as most untruly hath been reported of us) &c. As for the burning of such afterward, whom the Church first condemns of Heresy,To β. it is to be con∣sidered;Where Concern▪ the buing of those, wh, in Q. Mary, days, were by the Cu condemned of Heresy. That the Secular Laws, not Ecclesiastical, appoint it; and the Secular Magistrates, not Eccle∣siastical, execute it: Again; That Protestant Princes, as well as Catholick; King Edward, King James, Queen Elizabeth, as well as Queen Mary, have thought fit to execute this Law upon Hereticks. So in Edward the Sixth's days, Joan of Kent, Anne Askews Maid (who was burnt in Henry the Eighth's days, for denying the Real Presence) and George Paris were burnt for Here∣ticks. Fox p. 1180: And some other Anabaptists con∣demned and recanting were enjoined to bear their Fag∣gots. See Stow p. 596. And, in Henry the Eighth's time, Arch-Bishop Cranmer, in the Kings presence, dis∣puted against Jo. Lambert for denying the Real Presence; and the Lord Cromwel pronounced Sentence upon him to be burnt for it. Fox p. 1024, 1026. And the same Arch-Bishop, being as yet only a Lutheran, saith Fox p. 1115, prosecuted others upon the same grounds; and also in the beginning of King Edward's Reign, be∣fore that the Protector and his Party appeared much for Zuinglianisme, committed to the Counter Thomas Dobb, a Master of Art, upon the same Account; who also dyed in Prison. Fox p. 1180. In Queen Elizabeth's days one Jo. Lewes and Matthew Hammond were burnt for Hereticks; after they were first condemned by the Bishop, and so delivered over to the Secular Power; as those were in Queen Mary's Reign. So also was Hacket
executed then partly for Heresy and Blasphemy;See Hollin. Qu. Eliz. A. Reg. 21. & 25. and Two Brownists, Coppin and Thocker, hanged at St. Ed∣munds-bury, An. Dom. 1583 for Publishing Brown's Book written against the Common-Prayer-Book: Likewise several others in her time condemned and recanting bare their Faggots. See Stow p. 679, 680.Stow p. 1174 Cambden 's Hist. Eliz. p. 257. In King James's time Bartholomew Legat was burnt for an Heretick. And in his time An. 3. Jac. 4. c. a Law was Enacted concerning Hanging, Drawing, and Quartering any who should turn Papist and be reconciled to the Pope and See of Rome, tho a meer Laick, tho one taking the Oath of Allegiance (as several reconciled do:) The Words are If any shall be willingly reconciled to the Pope or See of Rome, or shall promise Obedience to any such pretended Authority; that every such Person or Persons shall be to all intents ad∣judged Traytors. Is not this putting to death for pre∣tended Heresy? And to a Death worse than Burning? So in Protestant States abroad, Servetus by that of Ge∣neva, Valentinus Gentilis by that of Berne, were burnt for Hereticks, Calvin approving. This to shew the Protestant's judgment, concerning the justness and equity of the Law of burning Hereticks. But whether this Law in it self be just: and again if just, whether it may justly be extended to all those simple Peo∣ple put to death in Queen Mary's days (such as St. Austine calls Haereticis credentes) because they had so much Ob∣stinacy, as not to recant those Errors, for which they saw their former Teachers Sacrifice their Life; espe∣cially when they were prejudiced by the most common contrary Doctrine and Practice in the precedent times of Edward the Sixth; and had lived in such a condi∣tion of life, as neither had means, nor leisure, nor ca∣pacity, to examine the Church's Authority, Councils, or Fathers; ordinarily such persons being only to be reduced (as they were perverted) by the contrary fashion and course of the times, and by Example; not by Argument, either from reason, or from authority (and the same, as I say of these Laity, may perhaps also be said of some illiterate Clergy:) whether I say this
Law may justly be extended to such, and the highest suffering, death be inflicted (especially where the De∣linquents so numerous) rather than some lower Cen∣sures of Pecuniary Mulcts or Imprisonment; these things I meddle not with, nor would be thought at all in this place to justify. Tho some amongst those unlearned Lay-people I confess to have been extreamly Arrogant and obstinate, and zealous beyond knowledge; and, tho they had suffered for a good Cause, yet suffering for it on no good or reasonable ground: as neither them∣selves being any way Learned, nor pretending the Au∣thority of any Church; nor relying on any present Teach∣ers, but on the certainty of their own private judgment interpreting Scripture; as you may see, if you have a mind, in the Disputations of Anne Askew (Fox p. 1125.) Woodman the Iron-maker, (Fox p. 1800.) Fortune the Smith, (Fox p. 1741.) Allen the Miller, (Fox p. 1796.) and other Mechanicks, with Bishops, and other Learned Men, concerning the lawfulness of the Mass, the Au∣thority of the Church, the Number of the Sacraments, the manner or possibility of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist, &c: themselves afterward penning or causing to be penned (you may judge with what Integrity,) the Re∣lations, which we have of the said Disputations. See more concerning the erroneous zeal of such like Persons in Fox Monuments later Edition Vol. 3. Fol. 242. 286. 396. 886. This concerning the lawful Ejection of those Prote∣stant Bishops in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign;And there∣fore others lawfully in∣troduced in their places To. γ. 1. which if lawful, so also will be, the introduction of those who were chosen in their rooms: tho this Introduction was, * 1. whilst they Living; or * 2. without their, or the Metropolitan's, Consent. 1. Tho whilst they Liv∣ing; if such Election of them be, after that the other are justly ejected: Of this none can doubt. Now most of the Protestant Bishops were ejected, at the very be∣ginning of Queen Mary's days, for being married; tho some of them not so speedily sentenced for Heresy. But suppose the Introduction of the other was whilst they
living, and before their lawful Ejection: yet these Bi∣shops that are so (unjustly, I grant,) introduced, if, after that the others are ejected, then their Superiors, having the power to elect into such place, do acknowledge and approve them, from thence forward begin to be legiti∣mate; and enjoy a good Title. 2.To δ. 2. Tho without their, or the Metropolitan's, Consent. For if the Arch-Bishop, without whose consent the Canon permitteth not any Bishop to be consecrated in his Province, be, upon just cause, and especially upon suspicion of Heresy, in any restraint; so as he cannot safely be suffered, either in respect of the Church, or State, any longer to execute his office, till cleared of such guilt: here his Office is rightly administred, as in Sede vacante, by some other; whether it be, by some Bishop of the Province, his Ordinary Vice-gerent or Substitute in such Cases; or by the Delegates of that Authority, which in the Church is Superior to the Arch-Bishops; or by the consent of the major part of the Bishops of such Province. And so Arch-Bishop Cranmer being, at Queen Mary's first Entrance, accused, 1. of being Married (an Irregularity incurring Deposition; and also confessed;) and 2. of Treason; and 3. of He∣resy; and for the Second of these being by the Queen's Council immediately imprisoned; and shortly after condemned to dye, before the Consecration of any new Bishop: his Office was now lawfully supplyed by another (either by Cardinal Pool the Popes Legat; or by the Bishop the next dignified Person after the Arch-Bishop in the Province; or by whomsoever the Queen should depute:) as for any exceptions, that the Arch-Bishop could make against it; since he acknowledged her for the Supreme Head of the English Church. Or if, notwithstanding such his restraint or condemnation, according to the Canon, no new Bishop could be made without the Arch-Bishop's consent: yet could Arch-Bishop Cranmer justly claim no such Authority from the Canon as indeed he never did.) 1. Because he held the abrogation of such Canons to be in the Power of the Prince, as the Supreme
Head of this Church; at least when assisted with the Parliament, and major part of the Clergy: And so then was this (arguing ad homines) abrogated by Queen Mary appointing, allowing, these new Elections. 2. Because he had consented to the Statutes made formerly. 25. Hen. 8.20. c. and 1 Edw. 6.2; where the Arch-Bishop is necessitated to consecrate such person, as the King, from whom all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is derived, shall pre∣sent: or, he refusing, the King may appoint any other two Bishops for him, to do it in his stead; ergo, so might Queen Mary, according to these Statutes. Thus much, That Queen Mary's Clergy were a law∣ful Clergy; (which indeed, except for a few, and those not yet chosen or acting in the beginning of her Reign, cannot be called in question;) and That their reversing the former Constitutions of Henry the Eighth, or Ed∣ward the Sixth's Clergy, as to the Authority that did it, was a lawful Synodical Act. But in the next place, suppose that the Queen had acted singly without or a∣gainst her Clergy (but with the Approbation of those Governors in the Church Catholick as are the lawful Superiors to this Clergy) in re-establishing the former Profession of Religion used in Henry the Eighth's time, before the Reformation; yet, so far as this Profession is evident to have been according to the Constitutions of the Church, and of former Synods Superior to the Synods of this Nation, (which Constitutions do there∣fore stand still in their just force;) this Act of hers would still be justifiable: because Sovereigns have such a Su∣premacy acknowledged by all due unto them, as to use a Coactive Power in causing the Execution, within their Dominions, of such Church Canons, as are granted to be in force; without any inferiour further Licence or consent thereto. Nor is this doing any more, than if the King of England, now re-established in his Throne, should, without, or against the Vote of the present Mini∣stery hee, restore the Bishops, and the Ecclesiastical Laws again to their former office and vigour; which these men never had any just or superior Authority to displace, or abrogate.
CHAP. VI. The former Supremacy re-assumed by Qu. Elizabeth. IN the last place we come to the times of Queen Eliza∣beth; where we find, by the Authority of the Queen and her Parliament,3. What Supremacy claimed &c in the times of Q. Eliz. all the repeals of the Statutes of Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, in order to the Regal Supremacy and Reformation, which Repeals were made in Queen Mary's days, now again repealed [except in Two, 26. Hen. 8.1. c. and 35. Hen. 8.3. c. which give to Henry the Eighth the Title of Head of the Church of England; which was changed by the Queen into that of Governor, as better befitting a Woman. As for Bishop Bramha's Observation of Two other Statutes of Henry the Eighth, unrestored by Queen Eliz. 28. Hen. 8.10. c. An Act (saith he) of extinguishing the Autho∣rity of the Bishop of Rome out of this Realm: and 35. Hen. 8.5. c. An Act made for Corroboration of the former; if you please to view them, and compare with them 1 Eliz. 1. c. you will find the cause to be, not the Queens pre∣serving and retaining here any Authority of the Pope, which Henry renounced; but the Six Articles in the one, and the old Forms of Oaths in the other, thought fit by her to be laid aside.] and all the Power and Priviledges whatsoever of Supremacy in Ecclesiasticals, that were conceded to Henry the Eighth, or Edward the Sixth,That as am∣ple a Su∣preacy was claimed, & by Parlia∣ment con∣ferred, o her, as on K. Hen. or Ed. as fully transferred to Queen Elizabeth. For which see the Act 1. Eliz. 1. c. (see the same 8. Eliz. 1. c.) run∣ning thus; That all Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Supe∣riorities Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power hath heretofore been exercised, for the Visitation of Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation, Orders, and Correction of the same, and of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, &c, shall for ever, by Authority of this Parliament, be
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And that your Highness, your Heirs &c, shall have full Power and Authority, by vertue of this Act, to name and authorize such persons, as your Majesty shall think meet [without any being obliged as Henry the Eighth was, that half the number should be of the Clergy] to exercise and execute under your Highness all manner of Jurisdictions, Priviledges &c; and to visit, reform, and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms &c, which by any manner Spiritual or Ec∣clesiastical Power may lawfully be reformed; and that such persons shall have full power by vertue of this Act to execute all the Premises; any matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always that no manner of Order, Act, or Determina∣tion, for any matter of Religion or cause Ecclesiasti∣cal, made by the Authority of this present Parliament shall be adjudged [i.e, by those persons] at any time to be any Error, Heresy, Schism &c, any Decree, Con∣stitution or Law, whatsoever the same be, to the con∣trary notwithstanding [this Proviso perhaps was put in, because all the Bishops that were in the Parliament op∣posed this Statute. See Cambden 1. Eliz. Provided [again] that such persons authorized to reform &c, shall not in any wise have Authority to determine or adjudge any matter or cause to be Heresy, [I suppose by Heresy is meant here any Error contrary to what ought to be believed and practised in Divine matters] but only, Such as here∣tofore have been determined to be Heresy by the Au∣thority of the Canonical Scriptures; or by the first Four General Councils; or by any other General Coun∣cils, wherein the same is declared Heresy by the express and plain words of the said Canonical Scriptures; or Such, as hereafter shall be judged and determined to be Heresy by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the assent of the Clergy in their Convo∣cation [here therefore nothing, whether by the Clergy or other, could be de novo declared or adjudged Heresy; un∣less the High Court of Parliament also adjudged it to be so]
In the same Statute concerning the Extent of the Queen's Supremacy, it is expresly ordained That the Branches, Sentences, and words of the said several Acts [i. c. made in Henry the Eighth's time touching Su∣premacy] and every one of them, shall be deemed and taken to extend to your Highness, as fully and largely, as ever the same Acts did extend to the said late King Henry the Eighth, your Highnesses Father. The same thing also appears in the Queen's Admonition, annexed to her Injunctions, to prevent any sinister Interpreta∣tions of the Oath of Supremacy then imposed: which saith: That the Queen's Majesty, informed that some of her Subjects found some scruple in the Form of this Oath &c, would that all her loving Subjects should understand; that nothing was, is, or shall be meant or intended by the same Oath, to have any other Duty or Allegiance required by that Oath, than was acknow∣ledged to be due to King Henry the Eighth, her Ma∣jesty's Father, or King Edward the Sixth her Majesty's Brother. [It proceeds, shewing those scruples that were made by some against the Oath.] And further her Majesty forbiddeth her Subjects to give credit to such persons,See Canod. Hst. Elz. p. 20. who notify to her Subjects, how by the words of the said Oath it may be collected, that the Kings or Queens of this Realm may challenge authority of Ministery of Di∣vine Offices in the Church; Wherein her Subjects be much abused. For her Majesty neither doth nor ever will challenge any other Authority, than that was chal∣lenged, and lately used by King Henry, and King Ed∣ward; which is and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Grown of this Realm; that is, under God to have the Sovereignty and Rule over all manner of persons born within these her Realms, whether Ec∣clesiastical or Temporal, so as no other Sovereign Power shall or ought to have any Superiority over them [but this Sovereignty and Rule, I suppose, must be understood to extend to all the Particulars, which Queen Elizabeth's Sta∣tute but now recited alloweth to belong to it, and wherein Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth used or were
allowed it.] And if any Person, who hath conceived any other sense of the Form of the said Oath, [i. e. that in it the Queen challenged Authority of Ministery of Divine Offices in the Church] shall accept the same Oath with this interpretation, sense or meaning [i. e. that she had such Sovereignty as was challenged and lately used by her Father and Brother:] Her Majesty is well pleased to accept every such Person in that behalf as her Obedient Subject. Thus the Admonition; and the same is said in the Statute 5. Eliz. 1. c, referring to the Admonition, That none other Authority was by that Oath acknow∣ledged in her Majesty, than that which was challenged and used by those Two Kings. See likewise 1 Eliz. 1. c, the Repeal of the former way of the Tryal of Hereticks, that was revived according to the former Statutes by Queen Mary, leaving the Supremacy in Spirituals to Church-men. Neither do the several things,Where Concerning certain qa¦lifications of her Su∣premacy ur∣ged by the Reformed. that are noted by Dr. Fern (in his Examen. of Champny 9. c. §. 16.20.) and others, as qualifications and bounds of the Supremacy of Queen Elizabeth, seem to come home to their pur∣pose so far, as to render it justifiable. There are urged by them; 1. The Stile she used, in calling her self not Supream Head, but only Supream Governor. 2. The Words in the Admonition, viz. Her Majesty doth not challenge any other Authority, than under God to have the Sovereignty and Rule over all manner of Persons &c: as the words are recited but now. 3. The words of the 37. Article of the Church of England relating to these of the Admonition; We give not to our Princes the mini∣string either of Gods Word or of the Sacraments; the which thing the Injunctions lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen do most plainly testify; but that only Prerogative which we see to have been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by God himself: that is, that they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal; and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil Doers. 4. The Qualification of the Authority of the Queen's Commissi∣oners
to judge or determine Heresies, Provided always▪ that such persons authorized &c. See the Words quoted before §. 70. But to these it is rationally replyed;And the Replies to them. Reply to the First. To the First, That, if the same, and as much power be still signified by the Queen's Title now, as was before by the other; which hath been shewed but now in the Statute, in the Admonition &c: what matters the varying of words, that alters nothing in the sense? Neither is the Title of Head of the Church, so it be understood subordinate to Christ, incompetent to some person or other, here on earth. To the Second,To the 2d That the words quoted out of the Admonition may indeed be taken in such a general sense, that all sides will willingly subscribe to. For the Queen hath a Sovereignty and Rule over all manner persons born within her Realms so [i. e. in such manner] as no other Forreign Sovereign Power hath: namely, in this manner; to punish her Subjects whatsoever with the Temporal Sword, either for the Breach of the Church's Canons and Decrees, or for the Breach of her own Laws. Again; That the words may be taken in such a sense, as that, tho they signified no more (of which presently) yet none can justly subscribe them, supposing those things true concerning the Western Patriarch, and concerning Su∣perior Councils, and concerning Church Constitutions, which are laid down in the First and Second Part of Church Government, and in the Fourth and Eighth Thesis: name∣ly, if they be taken in this sense: That no Forreign Power hath any Ecclesiastical Superiority or Jurisdiction in any manner whatsoever over the Church of England (without reflecting on this Controversy at all; namely, Whether the Sovereign Power here at home, for the judging and reforming of what is Error, Heresy, Superstition &c, and for the abrogating or establishing the former Litur∣gies of the Church, Canons of Superior, or also Natio∣nal Synods, doth lye in the Prince; or in some others, viz the Clergy of this Nation; or also, in the Parlia∣ment: or in all these jointly; so that the Clergy can
do none of these things without the Prince, or Parlia∣ment; nor Prince, without the major part of Clergy.) But these Two Senses of these words (of which the later is not justifiable) are, both of them, too much restrained, in respect of the intent of this Admonition, as may be gathered from the Precedents in the same Admonition; where the Queen's Sovereignty is extended to all the Particulars, wherein Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth used or were allowed it. And from the Sta∣tute 1. Eliz. 1. but now recited; which surely this Ad∣monition was not written to contradict or repeal. And from the ordinary practice of these Princes, which shall be more shewed anon; without which Practice such Re∣formation could not have been effected; and therefore this Practice must be justified. And from the Testimony of the Protestant Writers; who vindicate and main∣tain a Supremacy of a much larger extent, and answer∣able to the Expressions in the Acts of Parliament; even to the Prince's not only ruling over all Persons Eccle∣siastical, but judging and determining in matters Eccle∣siastical, what therein is Dissonant from, or Consonant to, Gods Word; and then establishing it in their Do∣minions, tho contrary to former Church Canons, tho without or against the Vote of the major part of their own Clergy; as shall be shewed below §. 203 &c: which thing also is maintained to have been done by the Holy Kings of Israel. To the Third the same may be repeated, which is said to the Second;To the Third and this part of the Article, tho annexed for an Explanation, is couched in such general Terms, as that it will be subscribed to by all sides: (Fr. a S. Clara Expos. 39 Articles alloweth it; and saith also: Hic Articulus a Gallis & Parliamento Parisiensi, salvâ communione Ecclesiae, usurpatur.) Neither doth it con∣tain any thing but which may well consist with the con∣tradictory of that Proposition, which follows there, viz. That the Bishop of Rome hath no Jurisdiction in this Realm.
To the Fourth. 1. That the Proviso made by the Queen and her Parliament seems only to limit the Per∣sons,To the Fourth. 1. whom the Queen shall nominate for her Delegates; that they shall adjudge nothing Error or Heresy with∣out the consent of Parliament and Convocation (as like∣wise they made another Proviso, that they should ad∣judge no Order of the Parliament in Ecclesiastical mat∣ters to be Error or Heresy. See the same Statute:) but not to limit the Queen; who holds the Supremacy of this Church, and so these pretended Consequences there∣of, as her own right, and not from Gift, but Recog∣nition only, of the Parliament and Clergy; and, who, in the Statute, and, I think, in the Doctrine of our Di∣vines, See below §. 204. &c, is acknowledged to have Power to reform Error, Heresy, Schism (which pre∣supposeth judging what is so) without any such Proviso of consent of Councils, or Parliament: as also the pious Kings of Judah are urged to have done the like. Or if the Proviso limit the Prince also; That then the Practice of the Reforming Princes will not be justifiable, nor their Reformation; who have corrected many Doctrines with∣out consent of Councils (nay when lawful Superior Synods have decreed the contrary) and without con∣sent of Convocation; and others without consent of Parliament. But Secondly, The limitation here, whether of those Persons, or of the Prince, in adjudging Errors and Heresies in Divine matters, if the words be narrow∣ly considered, seems to be, in effect, none. For (as you may see in the Proviso) if such thing hath been de∣termined to be Heresy by the Authority of the Canoni∣cal Scripture (i. e. seem to them to be so) they need look no further for consent of Councils, or Parliament, or Clergy: and no more need they to regard Councils, tho defining the contrary, if they have not defined so by the express and plain words of the said Canonical Scrip∣ture; of which thing they are to judge. See before §. 36. the Speech of the Lord Cromwel. Thirdly, Suppose there be a consent of the King and Clergy, without, or against Authority of Parliament: such thing cannot
be adjudged Heresy, according to this Proviso; if it be extended▪ to the Prince. Fourthly, Supposing that the Clergy and Parliament judge something to be Error or Heresy, which former Councils, Superior to this National Synod, have determined to be a Divine Truth: this Proviso's allowing the Prince to follow the consent of his Parliament and Clergy, upon pretence of the Coun∣cils not defining according to express Scripture, will offend against the Fourth and Eighth Thesis. Thus much to shew,But such Su¦premacy not acknowled∣ged or con∣sented to by the Clergy. that the same Supremacy, that was acknowledged to King Henry and King Edward, was also to Queen Elizabeth, by her Parliament. But you may observe; that neither it (in such a sense as it was challenged) nor the Reformation, that was effect∣ed by it, were acknowledged, or consented to, by her Bishops, or the Clergy: I mean that Clergy which was in being at the beginning of her Reign; which hath been proved already, §. 54. &c, to be a lawful Clergy. And, when these things touching Supremacy and Reformation were passed by the Parliament, all the Bishops, that sate there, opposed them (See Cambden A. 2. Eliz.) probably, because in those Two former Kings days they had by Experience learnt the Trespasses which such a Supremacy made upon the proper Rights and Jurisdicti∣ons of the Clergy; and the Irreverence, and Liberti∣nisme, and Distraction which the Innovation of the Li∣turgies and other Religious Rites brought into the Church; besides the unlawfulness of a part reforming against the whole. Thus at that time the Clergy be∣haved themselves. Neither, in lieu thereof, can the Concessions to these or the like things by the former Clergy that was under Henry the Eighth, or Edward the Sixth, be here pleaded; because these were retracted again by the Clergy in Queen Mary's time: neither can the Concession of the Clergy of later times, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, be urged; because this Clergy was first changed and moulded to the Queen's Religion; the former being unlawfully ejected, as shall be shewed here∣after.
CHAP. VII. The Actings of Henry the Eighth (upon such Su∣premacy acknowledged) in Ecclesiastical Affairs.III. Head. I have spoken hitherto from Sect. 26. concerning what manner of Supremacy it was, that these Princes assumed,How, accord¦ing to such Supremacy assumed, these Three Prieces act∣ed in Eccle∣sistcal Af∣fair. or also the Clergy or Parliament recognized, as their Right. In the Third place I promised to shew you, how, according to this their conceived right, these Three Prin∣ces acted in matters Ecclesiastical And first to begin with Henry the Eighth. First, By vertue of such a Supremacy, he committed the for∣mer Canons and Laws of the Church, calling them the Pontificial Laws,The Actings of Hen. 8th in Ecclesi∣astical Af∣fairs. In the abro∣gating of former Ec∣clesiastcl Laws, and compiling a new Body of them. to the Arbitrement of Thirty Two Persons nominated by him, half Laicks; to be abro∣gated, corrected, reformed, as they, with his Confir∣mation, should think meet. Nec eo contentus (saith the Prefacer to the Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum Re∣printed 1640.) cordatus Rex [Henry the Eighth] ut no∣men, nudosque solum titulos a se suisque depelleret, nisi & jura decretaque omnia, quibus adhuc obstringebatur Ec∣clesia [Anglicana] perfringeret; huc quoque animum adic∣cit, ut universam secum remp. in plenam adsereret liberta∣tem. Quocirca tum ex ipsius, tum ex publico senatus de∣creto, delecti sunt viri aliquot, usu & doctrinâ praestantes, numero 32, qui penitùs abolendo Pontificio juri (quod Ca∣nonicum vocamus) cum omni aliâ Decretorum & Decre∣talium facultate, novas ipsi leges, quae controversiarum & morum judicia regerent, Regis nomine & authoritate surro∣garent. And thus saith the King himself, in his Epistle to all Arch-Bishops, Barons &c printed before the same Book; Abundè vobis declaratum hactenusfuit, quantopere, in hac nostrâ Brittanniâ, multis retro saeculis Episcopi Ro∣mani vis injusta religioni Christianae, verae doctrinae propa∣gandae adversata est. Potestatem hanc huic cum divino mu∣nere
sublatam esse manifestum est: & ne quid superesset, quo non planè fractam illius vim esse constaret; leges omnes, decreta atque instituta, quae ab authore Episcopo Romano profecta sunt, prorsus abroganda censuimus. Quorum loco en vobis authoritate nostrâ editas leges damus, quas a vobis omnibus suscipi, coli, & observari volumus, & sub nostrae indignationis paenâ mandamus. Thus the King. Where the meaning of the words, decreta quae ab authore Episcopo Romano profecta sunt, must be extended to Decrees, not only Pontifical, but Synodal, wherein the Pope pre∣sided; for the Canon-Law is compiled of both these: and over both these did the Kings Supremacy claim Au∣thority in his Dominions; and over whatsoever else seemed to him established, not by Divine, but only by Humane Authority. See before §. 22.23.27: And also the things changed by him were not the Decrees of Popes, but of Councils. By vertue of such a Supremacy he put forth certain Injunctions A. D. 1536. concerning matters of Faith, Intitled Articles devised by the Kings Highness, to stable Christian quietness and unity amongst the People; (you may read them set down at large in Mr. Fuller's Church History 5. l. p. 216, for Mr. Fox his Epitome of them con∣ceals many things.) It is true that these Articles (as also the Six Articles published afterward 1539, and the Necessary Doctrine set forth 1543.) do, for the matter of them (as they seem to me) discede in nothing from the Doctrines of former Councils; nor have nothing in them favouring the reformed Opinions [for they allow Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the Dead, and Purgatory; kneeling, and praying before, tho not to Images; the Cor∣poral Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; Auricular Con∣fession; and do not deny Seven Sacraments, (as some mis∣relate them) because they speak only of Three; which Seven Sacraments are all acknowledged and treated on in Necessary Doctrine, &c.] And it cannot be denyed, that the Clergy of King Henry also (whom he used, much more than his Successors, King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth, in his Consultations concerning Religion) were, except
in the introducing of the Kings Supremacy, very op∣posite to the Reformation of other Doctrines or Cere∣monies in the Church; as appears by the Mala dogmata, transcribed out of the Records by Mr. Fuller (5. l. p. 209.) to the Number of 67. (much agreeing with the Modern Tenents of Puritans, Anabaptists and Quakers;) which Mala Dogmata being by the Lower House of Con∣vocation at this time presented to the Upper House of Bishops, to have them condemned, occasioned the pro∣duction of these Injunctions. But yet notwithstanding all this, for the manner of the Edition of these Injuncti∣ons or Articles, it is to be noted; that the King by vertue of his Supremacy commands them to be accept∣ed by his Subjects, not as appearing to him the Ordi∣nances or Definitions of the Church, but as judged by him agreeable to the Laws and Ordinances of God: and makes the Clergy therein only his Counsellor and Ad∣viser; not a Law-giver. See besides the Title, his words in the Preface to those Injunctions: Which de∣termination, debatement and agreement of the Clergy (saith he) forasmuch as we think to have proceeded of a good, right, and true judgment, and to be agree∣able to the Laws and Ordinances of God &c; we have caused the same to be published, requiring you to ac∣cept, repute, and take them accordingly [i. e. as a∣greeable to Gods Laws and Ordinances.] So where in these Injunctions he commandeth the Observation of Holy∣days, he saith, We must keep Holy-days unto God, in Memory of Him, and his Saints, upon such days, as the Church hath ordained: except they be mitiga∣ted and moderated by the Assent and Commandment of us, the Supream Head, to the Ordinaries; and then the Subjects ought to obey it [such command.] By vertue of such a Supremacy he afterward publish∣ed a Model of the Doctrine of the Christian Faith,In putting forth a Mo∣del of the Doctrine of the Christi∣an Faith, and the Sx A ticles. and of the lawful Rites and Ceremonies of the same, for matter of Doctrine not much differing from the Injuncti∣ons mentioned before; which Book he Entitled, A Necessary Doctrine for all sorts of People; adding a Pre∣face
thereto, in his Royal name, to all his faithful and loving Subjects, That they might know (saith he) the better, in those dangerous times, what to believe in point of Doctrine; and how to carry themselves in points of Practice. Which Book, before the publishing thereof, after it (saith Dr. Heylin, Reform. Chur. Engl. §. 4. p. 23.) was brought into as much Perfection, as the said Arch-Bishops, Bi∣shops and other Learned Men [appointed by the King to this work] would give it without the concurrence of the Royal Assent, was presented once again to the Kings consideration; who very carefully perused and altered many things with his own hand, as appears by the Book it self extant in Sr. R. Cotton's Library: and having so altered, and corrected it in some Passages, re∣turned it to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury [Arch-Bi∣shop Cranmer] who bestowed some further pains upon it; that, being to come forth in the Kings Name, and by his Authority, there might be nothing in the same, that might be justly reprehended. For a Preparatory to which Book, that so it might come forth with the greater credit, the King caused an Act to pass in Par∣liament,34, 35. Hen. 8.1. c. for the abolishing of all Books and Writings comprising any matter of Christian Religion contrary to that Doctrine, which since the Year 1540 is, or any time during the Kings life shall be, set forth by his Highness. Thus Dr. Heylin. Which Definitions De∣crees, and Ordinances, so set forth by the King, all his Subjects were fully to believe, obey, and observe. 32. Hen. 8. 26. c. See before §. 32. And if any Spiri∣tual Person should preach or teach contrary to those Determinations, or any other that should be so set forth by his Majesty; such Offender the third time contrary to that Act of Parliament was to be deemed and adjudged an Heretick, and to suffer pains of death by Burning. See before §. 34. By which Act there∣fore, amongst other things, the holding of the Pope's Supremacy, which is contrary to the Doctrine of that Book, is declared Heresy. And see the like ordained by Parliament concerning the Six Articles in 31. Hen. 8.14.
c. where it is Enacted, That every Person that doth preach, teach, declare, argue against any of the Six Articles, being thereof convicted, shall be deemed and adjudged an Heretick. And thus Heresy, now belonging to the Kings Cog∣nizance, as the Church's Supream Head, became also, by reason of the Parliaments co-legislative Power joyned with the Kings, a thing of the Parliaments Cognizance as well as the King's. Of their Cognizance; not only for the declaring and punishing, but the adjudging of it. And their Vote herein was joyned at least with that of the Clergy, if not in Authority preferred before it; as appears by these, and those other Passages in the Statute 25. Hen. 8.14. c. mentioned before §. 34; and in the two Proviso's of the Statute 1. Eliz. 1. c. mentioned §. 70. And see the Reason given by Dr. Heylin, why Parliaments, which in former Ages abstained from them, in this Age of Henry the Eighth began to intermeddle in stating of matters of Religion (namely this reason, A new Supream in Ecclesiastical Affairs then set up) Engl. Reform. Justified p. 41. Where he first relateth, out of Walsingham, how (long since) Wickleff, having many Doctrines strange and new, which he desired to establish in the Church of England, and seeing he could not au∣thorize them in a regular way, addressed his Petition to the Parliament; laying this down for a Position, That the Parliament might lawfully examine and reform the Disorders and Corruptions of the Church, and upon a discovery of the Errors and Corruptions of it, devest her of all Tithes and Temporal Endowments, till she were re∣formed. But neither his Petition, nor Position (saith he) found any welcome in that Parliament: [and then he goeth on thus;] To say truth; as long as the Clergy were in Power, and had Authority in Convocation to do what they would, in matters which concerned Religion; those of the Parliament conceived it nei∣ther safe nor fitting, to intermeddle in such business as concerned the Clergy; for sear of being questioned for it at the Church's Barr [the Church being then con∣ceived
to have the just Supremacy herein:] But when that Power was lessened (tho it were not lost) by the Sub∣mission of the Clergy to King Henry the Eighth, and by the Act of the [Kings] Supremacy [in matters of Religion] which ensued upon it; then did the Par∣liament begin to intrench upon the Church's Rights; to offer at, and entertain, such businesses, as formerly were held peculiar to the Clergy only; next to dispute their Charters, and reverse their Priviledges; and finally to impose many hard Laws upon them. Thus he. Which Example, of the Parliaments meddling with Opinions and stating of Heresy, thus begun under Henry the Eighth's Church Supremacy, hath made some Par∣liaments since also so active (with the assistance of some Persons, selected by them out of the Clergy, of the same Inclinations) in altering, modelling, establishing, an Or∣thodox Religion: and hath emboldened Mr. Prinn (see Heylin. p. 27.) to affirm it an ancient, genuine, just and lawful Prerogation thereof, to establish true Religion in this Church [by which establishing if Mr. Prin means, not judging of Truth and Error in matter of Religion, but only requiring Obedience to the Judgment of the Church; this is willingly granted to be an establishing, duly belonging to that Supream Court.] I have dwelt the longer on the Instances foremen tion∣ed,Where Codeer. the complats made by Ptestaats of his abuse of the Su∣prenacy. that you may see, when a Prince (together with his particular Clergy, or rather whom out of them he shall choose, without these being linked in a due sub∣ordination to the whole) claimeth such a power of com∣posing Models of Christian Faith; and declaring all those his Subjects Hereticks, who do not believe and obey such his Determinations; what danger, what mu∣tability Christian Religion incurrs, in such a Nation; as often as this Supreme and Independent Head is not every way Orthodox. And so it happened in the Acts of this new-sprung Supremacy of Henry; that those, who much pleased themselves in it, whilst it run the course they would have it, in abating the former Power of the Clergy, in throwing down Monasteries, Religi∣ous
Vows, Relicks, Images, &c: yet afterward la∣mented it as much, when necessity of the Kings com∣pliance with Forreign Princes, and the influence of new evil Counsellors (saith Fox p. 1036.) made the same Supremacy produce a contrary sort of Fruit; which they could not so easily digest. I mean the Six Articles, here also pronouncing Heresy to the Opposers, and pun∣ishing the same with Fire and Faggot: and the Prohibi∣tion and suppression of many Godly Books, as Mr. Fox calls them; but full of Errors and Heresies, as the Su∣pream Head of this Church, and also as Arch-Bishop Cranmer (whose Declaration against them see in Fox p. 1136.) then judged them (some of the Contents of which Godly Books, as they were then collected by Cran∣mer, and other Prelates, you may see in Fox ibid.); and the Prohibiting all Women, Artificers, Husbandmen, &c, from reading the Scriptures; of which more anon. Which Supremacy so ill used, as he thought, forced from Mr. Fox that sad complaint, both, in particular, concerning the Kings imposing of the Six Articles p. 1037. That, altho they contained manifest Errors, Heresies, and Absurdities against all Scripture and Learn∣ing [whereby we may see; how these Supream Heads also may deviate from, the truth; and how dangerous it is to commit the Reformation of all Errors and Heresies into their hands, who by this Power, instead thereof, may enjoyn Errors, and Heresies; and that even against all Scripture and Learning (as Henry the Eighth, tho a Scholar, is here supposed to have done;) and that even to pronouncing those Hereticks, that do not submit to such Heresy.] (he goes on) Yet such was he miserable Adversity of that time, and of the Power of Darkness [yet King Henry said the times were full of Light] that the simple Cause of Truth was utterly forsaken, of all friends. For every man seeing the Kings mind [who was now the Legislator in Spirituals] so fully addicted, upon politick respects, to have these Articles to pass forward, few or none in that Parliament would appear; who either could perceive, that which was to be defended; or durst
defend, that they understood to be true. And also in general concerning that Kings managing his Supre∣macy, p. 1036. (from which Posterity might have learnt some wisdome) To many (saith he) who be yet alive, and can testify these things, it is not unknown; How variable, the State of Religion stood in these days; How hardly, and with what difficulty, it came forth; what chances and changes it suffered: even as the King was ruled and gave ear, sometimes to one, sometimes to another; so, one while it went forward, at ano∣ther Season as much backward again; and sometime clean altered and changed for a Season; according as they could prevail who were about the King. So long as Queen Anne lived, the Gospel had indifferent Success. [Here (then) the Supream Head of the Church was di∣rected by a Woman; and managed the Affairs of Religion accordingly.] After that she, by sinister Instigation of some about the King, was made away, the course of the Gospel began again to decline; but that the Lord stirred op the Lord Cromwel opportunely to help in that behalf; who did much avail for the increase of Gods true Religion [Here then the Supream Head of the Church was directed by a Laick; and managed Religion accordingly] and much more had he brought to per∣fection; if the pestilent Adversaries, maligning the prosperous Glory of the Gospel, had not supplanted his vertuous Proceedings [Mr. Fox names not Cranmer amongst these Worthies; because he was an Agent in many of those Proceedings of Henry the Eighth, which displease Mr. Fox.] After the taking away of which Cromwel, the State of Religion more and more decayed, during all the residue of the Reign of King Henry. And a∣mongst these Adversaries was Stephen Gardiner; who brought the King at length clean out of credit with the Reformed Religion &c. Thus Fox describes the Steerers of the King in his Determinations concern∣ing Church matters. And had Mr. Fox been of another perswasion; you would have found, in his Stile, the Lord stirring up the zealous Bishop of Winchester Gardiner;
and Satan raising Cromwel the Pestilent Adversary of True Religion. And somewhat like to Mr. Fox's is that Saying of Old Latimer to Ridley, p. 1562, to shew the miserable fluctu∣ating of this Nation, after its having left the rest of the Body of the Church, and set up a new Head for its self, I refer you (saith he) to your own Experience, to think of our Country-Parliaments, and Convocations; how and what you have seen and heard. The more part in my time did bring forth Six Articles; for then the King would so have it, being seduced of certain. Afterward the more part did expel the same Articles; our good Josias [King Edward] willing to have it so. The same Articles now again (alas) [when the Lay Supreme Head was removed] another great (but worse) part hath restored. O what an Uncertainty is this! Now to proceed in our Story. By vertue of such Supremacy King Henry took away the just Authority of the Patriarch established by Coun∣cils,In the conse∣crating and confirming of Bshops and Metro∣politan. for Confirmation of Metropolitans in this Church subject to his Patriarchy; and necessitated also his own Clergy, under the Penalty of incurring a Premunire, to consecrate, and invest into Bishopricks and Arch-Bishopricks void, any Person whatever whom he should nominate and present.Sec. before §. 29. He also took away the Patri∣archs Authority, for the receiving of Appeals, and ex∣ercising final Judicature in Spiritual Controversies; con∣trary to what is shewed in Chur. Gov. 1. Part: And also took away the final judging and decision of such Con∣troversies, not only from the Patriarch in particular, but also from all the Clergy in general; not making the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, or Convocation, but him∣self, or his Substitutes, the ultimate Judges thereof. See Statute 25. Hen. 8, 19. c. §. 31. contrary to the First and Second Theses. By vertue of such a Supremacy, and Headship over this Church,It the put∣ting down of Monaste∣ries &c. he took Possession of all the Monasteries and Religious Houses of this Land (which were very numer∣ous, small and great; and likewise of all Chaunteries,
Free-Chappels, Hospitals, Colledges (except those of the Two Universities; which, upon their humble Ad∣dresses made to the King, were reprieved, Herb. Hist. Hen. 8. p. 537;) of their Lands and Goods: Places dedicated to Pious and Sacred uses; and put into the hands of the Church, as by the gift of the Doners, so not without the consent of the Prince. Their Buildings he caused to be defaced, their Churches demolished. Their Lands he enjoyed himself, setting up a Court of Augmentation of the Revenues of the Crown; or sold, or gave to particular Families of the Laity (Cromwel telling him, that, the more had interest in them, the more they would be irrevocable) to them and their Heirs, without any condition (advantageous to Re∣ligion, Learning, or Charity) save only one; that Hos∣pitality and Husbandry should be preserved by them, which he cautioned, upon the Penalty of paying every Month 6. l. 13. s. 4. d; for which reason the King is said to have passed them away at such easy Rates. Lord Herbert p. 376. Which Forfeitures, upon the Hospitality and Husbandry neglected, being very great, were abolished by King James, at the Supplication of the Parliament 21. Jac. 28. c. And all this he did without any benefit returned to Gods Service, or to the Church, in lieu thereof; save only that having possessed himself of 645 Monasteries, 90 Colledges in several Shires, 110 Hospi∣tals, 2374 Chaunteries and Free-Chappels; the yearly value of all which is cast up to have been 161100 l. (Be∣sides the Plate, Church-Ornaments and Treasure given in Honor of some Saints; Besides the Money made of Timber, Lead, Bells &c; Besides the Stock also of Cat∣tle and Corn, the Goods and Chattles of the 376 smaller Monasteries; being valued at a low rate at 100000 l.) I say,Her 377 having possessed himself of all this, he is said to have returned to Pious Uses some 8000 l. per annum (per∣haps about a Thirtieth part of what he took away) in erecting some new Bishopricks, of Oxford, Peterborough, Chester, Bristol, and Gloucester; and in changing of the former Monks of many of the Ancient Cathedral
Churches into a Dean and Canons. (See for what is said Cambd. Brit. and Lord Herb. p. 377. 443, 444.) Nei∣ther doth the Parliament, in giving their consent to such alienation, caution any further concerning Pious Uses; save only, that the King should do and use therewith his own Will, to the pleasure of Almighty God, and to the honor and profit of the Realm. See Statute 27. Hen. 8. 28. He freed and dismissed the Religious therein from observ∣ing those Rules of Poverty and Obedience in a Mona∣stick Life, which they had before solemnly vowed: I suppose by vertue of that dispensative Power; which he finding annexed to the Pope's, conceived that he in∣herited by his, Supremacy. See Fox p. 1235. where 'tis said, That the Persons therein bound and professed to Obedience to a person, place, habit, &c, upon the dissolu∣tion appointed by the Kings Majesty's Authority, as Supream Head of the Church, are clearly released &c. All which things are done by him contrary to the Definitions and Canons of the Church in former Councils, concerning their Interpretation of Sacriledge, and concerning the un∣lawful alienation of things, and non-violation of persons, once dedicated and consecrated to God: And all which things were done by him without any Concession or Ap∣probation (that I can find) even of the particular Clergy of this Nation; and with the great grief of the People, saith Lord Herb: p. 377. (those who got nothing by this Plunder) to see the Monks and Nuns wandring abroad; and the Churches and Chappels perverted to secular and pro∣fane Ʋses. For these things see the Relation of zealous Mr. Fox, p. 976. Shortly after the overthrow of the Pope (saith he) consequently began by litle and litle to follow the ruine of Abbies and other Religious Houses in England; in a right Order and Method, by Gods Divine Provi∣dence. For neither could the fall of Monasteries have fol∣lowed after, unless that the Suppression of the Pope had gone before; neither could any true Reformation of the Church have been attempted, unless the Subversion of these Superstitious Houses had been joyned there∣with.
with. Whereupon the same Year the King, having Tho. Cromwel of his Council, sent Dr. Lee to visit the Abbies, Priories, and Nunneries in all England; and to set at liberty all such Religious Persons, as desired to be free; and all other that were under the Age of 24 Years: providing withal, that such Monks, Canons, and Fryars, as were dismissed, should have given them by the Abbot or Prior, instead of their habit, a Secular Priests Gown, and Forty Shillings of Money; and likewise the Nunns to have such Apparel, as Secular Women did then commonly use; and be suffered to go where they would. [Cromwel saying, Lord Herb. pag. 462. That this Expulsion of the Monks &c was no more than a restoring them to their first Institution of being Lay and labouring Persons; and that they might keep the austerity of life, in their several Orders, enjoyned them, in any con∣dition.] At which time also from the said Abbies, and Monasteries were taken their chief Jewels and Relicks. And see the words of the Statute 31. Hen. 8.13. c, where all and singular Religious Persons, of what Order, Rule or Habit soever, are said to be put at their liberties from the danger, servitude and condition of their Re∣ligion and Profession, whereunto they were professed: and have free liberty given them to purchase to them and their Heirs in Fee-Simple, Fee-Taile &c, Mannors, Lands, &c. in like manner, as tho they or any of them had never been professed, nor entred into any such Religion. And for the ground of all this, viz. The Kings conceived lawful Church Supremacy to act such things, see some of the Forms of the Monks Re∣signations transcribed by Mr. Fuller Chur. Hist. 6. l. p. 321. which runs thus. Whereas your Highness being Su∣pream Head, immediately after Christ, of his Church in this your Realm of England, and so consequently general, and only, Reformator of all Religious Persons there, have full Authority to correct or dissolve, at your Grace's Plea∣sure and Liberty, all Convents and Religious Companies abusing the Rules of their Profession &c therefore &c.
Now the whole carriage and pretence of the disso∣lution of these Religious Places,The Preten∣ces thereof. if you desire to know the Particulars, was this. The King tho having left to him a very great Treasure by his Father Henry the Seventh, yet by his high Expences, and frequent-Engage∣ments in Forreign Wars and the Interests of Neighbor Princes, became very necessitous; and for the continu∣ance of the like Expences stood in need of an extraordi∣nary recruit. Whereupon, as some think, he was first invited to this Act, by those 40 smaller Monasteries, which he saw Wolsey (who likewise had much used in this Affair his diligent Servant Cromwel) had obtained by grant from the Pope, Clement the Seventh, to translate this Means of some of those Houses of Devotion, which in this Nation abounded, to the maintenance of two Colledges built by him for the advancement of Learn∣ing; of which Houses there was more scarcity. And he is said to have been excited also thereto by Cromwel, who was now, after Wolsey's fall, the Kings Servant; one already experienced in this matter; and who could best inform concerning the Treasure attainable thereby: especially when the King, being now invested with the Supremacy, could confer on himself the same Dispen∣sation, for taking more; which the Pope had done on Wolsey, for a few. The King knew also, that he had the Laity and the Parliament ready to second him; who were willing by any means to remove the burthen of furnishing the Kings necessities from themselves, and to give up the Church's Patrimony to save their own: and besides, who in those days looked, with no good Eye, on the Authority of the Clergy (against whom the Commons had formerly put up a Supplication to the King) and the Wealth of the Monasticks;Iord Herb. p. 329. Fox. p. 960. and who also might expect no small share in this Booty. And some reason he had also to hope for the connivance of the Clergy, from the ancient difference, that is between Regulars and Seculars; and from these Religious Houses being exempted from the Jurisdiction and Visitation of Bishops; and from the access of Benefit, which they
might hope from the others mine, to some places of cure, that were meanly provided for. Add to this; that the number of them in this Nation was conceived to be excessive, in proportion to a well composed State, (so the multiplying of them accidentally being their de∣struction): and Lastly; that these Religious Houses were looked on as the chief Supporters of the Papal Su∣premacy, and Opposers of the Regal Authority in matters Ecclesiastical: and in Innovations in Religion, their Vow of Obedience to their Superiors leaving them less flexible to change, and their Vow of Poverty and Single Life less obnoxious to those fears in declaring of their minds; which others are subject to, in respect of their Estates and Posterity, or their expectation of Pre∣ferments. Swayed by these Motives yet the King invaded not all the Religious Houses in the Land at once; but first be∣gan to take Possession of the smaller Ones, such as were under 200 l. annual Revenue; and this upon these Three Pretences (see Statute 27. Hen. 8.28. c.) 1. That the Persons living therein were very vicious; whereas (saith that Statute made for the alienation of these, before the Attachment of the rest thought on) in the great Solemn Monasteries of the Realm, Thanks be to God, Religion is right well kept and observed. 2. That these small Societies were not so capable of Reformation, as the greater. 3. That the greater were not sufficiently re∣plenished. Whereupon (saith that Statute) the Lords and Commons by a great deliberation finally be resolv∣ed; That it is and shall be much more to the Pleasure of Almighty God, and for the Honor of this Realm, that the Possessions of those small Religious Houses, not being spent, spoiled and wasted for the increase of maintenance of Sin, mould be used and converted to better uses; and the unthrifty Religious Persons so spending the same should be compelled to reform their lives. But afterward, the Revenue of these by the King sold, spent, or disposed-of, the sweetness of such a con∣siderable
wealth already tasted, the Kings great Ex∣pences very craving, and his Courtiers and Favourites not yet satisfied; from smaller beginnings he ascends higher; and the great Monasteries also begin now to be looked after. And now within three or four years they of the great Monasteries are so overgrown with vice, that were so right before; that complaints are made of them: and Visitors, Cromwel being made Visitor-Gene∣ral, are sent, both to discover their crimes, and to restrain, by certain Injunctions from the King, their former li∣berty. Amongst whom many hainous faults (especially as for Incontinency) are found out: whilst the more notorious Offenders, somewhat to excuse themselves, impeached others; and the Religious mutually recrimi∣nated one another. Upon these Delinquencies now dis∣covered in the great Houses, as before in the lesser; together with many impostures and falsifications of Miracles, to procure greater resort and gain to such Houses; Next, the more dignified and powerful amongst the Religious are acquainted, what Penalties they have incurred, and have seen already inflicted on others; and that the King, as Supream Head of this Church, might also depose their Societies, alienate and dispose of their Estates, as he saw sit, to those who would serve God better; but that they might one way sooner obtain, both security and pardon for their past faults, and pro∣vision for their future livelihoods; if they would rather preventively resign their Foundations and Possessions into the King's hands, then stay to have them by his just power taken from them: especially, since the King on such condition would either to the present Incumbents give other Preferments; or allow considerable Pensions, equalling their former Income, to the unpreferred, for their lives. And thus; many, if not all, of these greater Foundations having seen already the lesser seized on; some persons having fair hopes of being well provided for, others of Impunity, others also desiring more li∣berty, and weary of the fetters of a Cloistered life, especially as restrained by the new Regal Injunctions,
give-up and make-over their Monasteries, and all the Estate belonging thereto, under their Hands and Seals, to the King and his Heirs for ever. And the King again returns yearly a vast summe of Money in Pensions be∣stowed on the more Eminent of the Monasticks for term of life. A many of which Pensions you may see set down in Mr. Fuller 6. l. p. 304. &c; who also ibid. p. 316. makes this Relation how the Monks were tempted with them; It was also pressed upon the Monks, Fryars, and Nuns; that they thro their viciousness being ob∣noxious to the King's anger, this [i. e. the taking away of their Estates] might and would be done without their consent: So that it was better for them, rebus sic stantibus, to make a Vertue of Necessity; the rather, because this Compliment conduced nothing to the Kings Right, on whom the Parliament had already bestowed those Abbey-Lands; but might add much to their own advantage, as being the way, whereby their Pen∣sions might be the more easily procured, largely alotted, and surely paid unto them. Thus He. And thus the Lord Herb. p. 442. to the same purpose, Cromwel, betwixt Threats, Gifts, Perswasions, Promises, and whatsoever might make men obnoxious, obtained of the Abbots, Priors, Abbesses, &c, that their Houses might be given up. Among which those, that offered their Monasteries freely, got best Conditions of the King: for if they stood upon their right, the Oath of Supremacy, and some other Statutes and Injunctions, brought them in danger; or their Crimes at least made them guilty of the Law; which also was quickly executed, and particularly on the Abbots of Glassenbury, Colchester, and Reading; who more than any else re∣sisted. When these Lands also were dispersed and disposed-of, and this great income spent, the King's Necessities being no less argent upon him, than formerly, nay more (he having lately engaged a War with France and Scot∣land) the gleanings as it were of this Harvest, which before lay unregarded, are now looked after; and all
the Chaunteries, Free-Chappels, Colledges (except the Universities) Fraternities &c (Dedicated also to such pious uses, as neither the King nor Parliament of that time disallowed, viz. offering the Holy Eucharist, distri∣buting Alms, and saying Prayers for the faithful de∣ceased, as likewise the advancing of Learning, sustenance of the Poor &c,) are thrown into the King's Lap, upon pretence of abuses found in these too. For which see Statute 37, Hen. 8.4. c. where the reason of giving them away to the King and frustrating the uses for which they were founded is; lest the Priests or Governors, that enjoyed them, should sell them away and frustrate the same uses; (as some had done already, probably for preven∣tion of the Storm they saw coming upon these after the Monasteries:) as if such faults of the Incumbents were capable of no other cure; nor these Lands preservable by Law to the Founders intentions. Now to reflect a little on these Ads of King Henry so odious to the memory of posterity;Reflections upon these Preeaces. in them he seem many ways void of excuse, For 1. First; For the King's Necessities, many of them seem to be faultily contracted, 1. by (to say no worse) needless expence; and because this high-spirited and valiant Prince would needs en∣gage himself (as Lord Herb. p. 511. judiciously ob∣serves) beyond what was requisite; and would be an Actor for the most part, where he needed only to have been a Spectator. And methinks these things do not sute well together; to pull down Religious Houses for meer necessity;Herbert. p. 513. and in such Expeditions to cross the Seas in a Ship trimmed with Sails of Cloth of Gold. Secondly, For the Precedent of Cardinal Wolsey; 1. 2. There was nothing done in it, but what was justifiable by the Ecclesiastical Canons: it being lawful in some Cases, and on some Conditions, for the Supreme Gover∣nors amongst Church-men to alienate, or rather to trans∣fer from one pious use to another, those things which are given to them; or, being given to God, are in his right possessed by them, as his Ministers. But hence will it riot follow; that any Lay, tho the Sovereign,
Power, who is not the Receiver or Possessor of such a Gift, but rather the Doner (for without the King's Consent the Church receives no such Gifts) can after∣ward resume from God and the Church the disposal of it. Here I may say as St. Peter Acts 5. 4. Before it was so bestowed by him, was it not his own? But once so passed away, and his Mort-main allowed to it; it can∣not then be recalled, upon any Secular Title. But Secondly, Suppose the King Heir to all that Supremacy, which in these matters the Pope or other Ecclesiastical Persons have formerly exercised; yet this Power will not extend to that which the King assumed. For the Pope pretends to no such Power, as to alienate the Church Revenues, for to spend them himself; or to dispose of them in what manner, or to what Persons, he pleaseth; but only for some just cause, i.e. in a pru∣dential arbitration, for an equal or greater Benefit thence accrewing to the Church, or Christianity. Which also was observed in his concession of those to Cardinal Wolsey, in a time when Religious abounded, more than Schollars; and by that Concession the Church still en∣joys them. But whither Henry the Eighth's Abbey-lands went, and what uses they have served, we all know; and this some think, to the enriching of few, but ruine of many, Noble Families in this Nation. See Dr. Heylin's Hist. of Reform. of Qu. Mary p. 45. and p. 67, 68. Thirdly, Neither were the Vices of those Religious a sufficient ground of overthrowing their Societies and Foundations;3. because the King might have punished, ejected, changed, the Persons, without taking away the Houses or Maintenance (as is frequently done in all So∣cieties; and, particularly, in Religious Houses abroad) unless we will say, that the English only are in such faults incurable. Neither can it be pleaded, That such Lands are given to pious uses with such a tacit condition, That, when abused, they may be recalled; so long as these abuses are some other way remediable: for else, what thing is there dedicated to Gods Service; which some Possessors do not, at some time, abuse? But if it be said,
that the abuse and fault lies chiefly in the very Institu∣tion and Laws themselves of such Foundations: Yet are these Laws also capable of being rectified and reformed, so as God may be holily served in such a Monastick life; as the Protestants themselves say he was, in the Primi∣tive times. But, if the Monastick Laws here were so corrupt; how come the very same Laws abroad not to produce the same fruit, in Nations said to be more in∣clined to such Vices? How come those Houses there, to this day to be not only tolerated, but reverenced? Or how happened, under the same Laws here, but three or four Years before, in the great Monasteries, Religion, Thanks be to God, to be right well kept and observed? Stat. 27. Hen. 8.28. c. But suppose the King had questioned the lawfulness of these Institutions; yet was he no com∣petent Judge thereof; it being a Theological Contro∣versy, and decided on the other side by the lawful judge thereof in several Superior Councils, as is shewed in Dis∣course of Celibacy. But indeed that which leaves the King the more destitute of any Apology in this kind is; that, whereas the chief fault charged upon these cloistered People was Incontinency, the King, whilst he took away these Orders, did justify this Vow, at least of per∣petual Chastity, to be a Vow lawful, and by every one observable; as you may see in the fourth of the six Fa∣mous Articles: and still did prohibit all such Persons, as had taken this Vow, when in Monasteries, from marrying afterward, when they were ejected; con∣demning the Transgressors hereof to suffer death. The Words of that fourth Article are these, That the Vows of Chastity or Widow-hood by man or woman made to God advisedly [i. e. as I suppose, deliberately; or, if you will, with the approbation of our Spiritual Father] ought to be observed by the Law of God; and that it exempteth them from other liberties of Christian People, which without that [Vow] they might en∣joy. The Penalty of which Article was, That if any, after a Vow advisedly made, did marry; in so doing he should be adjudged as a Felon; and lose both Life,
and forfeit Goods without any benefit of Clergy. See Fox p. 1037. Now if any can make this Vow [ad∣visedly] I see not how we can say, that the Monks do not so; unless you will say, That any Breach of a Vow argues it not to have been formerly made with advice; but then, why are these Religious expresly restrained afterward from Marrying? Stat. 31. Hen. 8.6. c. where also [advisedly] seems to be interpreted the vowing after One and Twenty Years old, uncompelled. As for the falsification of Miracles; to discover and publish the Cheat, is sufficient to cure the present Fault, and to prevent the like: and when the Images were taken away, the Houses needed not to be pulled down. And as unexcusable seems the King to be, in taking away Chaunteries &c, given for the relief of the faith∣ful, deceased with some Imperfections, by the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, and annual Alms, and Prayers offered to God for them; whilst he allowed a benefit in these things; and himself left the like Pensions; and ordered, that the same things, of which he had deprived others deceased, should be done for himself, when deceased; as you may see at large in his Will transcribed by Mr. Fuller. And therefore, whereas Edward the Sixth had these things given him again by Parliament (because Henry the Eighth dyed not long after the Donation) upon this reason; because the Opinions of Purgatory, and Masses satisfactory to be done for them that be departed, were vain and superstitious: Stat. 1. Edw. 6.14. c. Yet so it was, that other causes and other grievances, than these, were glad to be invented, to make way for King Henry to lay hands on them. Stat. 37. Hen. 8.4. c. Fourthly,4. If it be said, that the Religious themselv voluntarily resigned these Possessions into the King's hands (See Stat. 31. Hen. 8.13. c.) Yet was this Act of their's (supposed never so free from Compulsion) invalid: because they could not give away for ever, what they had Title to only for term of Life; neither yet could they alienate them for their lives from that use, to which they were dedicated; without commit∣ting Sacriledge.
Fifthly, Lastly, That which is said,5. of an excessive number of them in this Nation, if it be a just Apology for taking away some, the Supernumerary; yet will it be none, for taking away all the rest. And that which follows, concerning their averseness to the King's Refor∣mations, is granted; and shews indeed, that the demo∣lishing of them was to good purpose for attaining the Kings ends; but it shews not, that the demolishing therefore of them is lawful; unless, first, such ends be justifiable; and secondly, cannot otherwise be compassed. And thus much of the Kings destroying Monasteries. By vertue of such a Supremacy, by which he was conceived to have Power to dispense with any,In the dis∣peasing with the former Church. Ca∣nous con∣Mar∣riages, Fasts Holy-days &c. if only humane, tho Ecclesiastical, Constitution (See Stat. 25. Hen. 8.21. recited before §. 27.) He made Orders, and gave Dispensations in matters of Marriage; against the former Ecclesiastical Canons. See Stat. 32. Hen. 8.38. c. where it is said, By this Act we [i. e. the King and Parliament] do declare all persons to be lawful, that be not prohibited by Gods Law, to marry. Of which Licence (saith Fuller Chur. Hist. 5. l. p. 236.) the King himself had the first fruits, in marrying Katherine Howard, Cosen-German to Anne Bullen his second Wife. [And you may find, in the Preface of the same Act, this urged also as a motive of casting off the Pope's usurped Power in such matters, That King Henry was otherwise by Learning, taught, than his Predecessors in times past long time have been. For King Henry was designed by his Father for a Church-man: and during the life of his Elder Brother, was educated in Learning, and not unstudied in School Divinity. Lord Herbert's Hist. p. 2. Therefore in the first Articles of Religion, which he put forth 1536, which were devised by the King himself, and so recommended to the Convocation house by Cromwel (part of which House, saith Lord Herb. p. 405, leaned to the Lutheran Doctrine and Rites) he took pains to peruse and moderate their Ar∣guments on either side, adding Animadversions with his own hand, as may be seen in the Records. And
in the second Articles of Religion, called a Necessary Doctrine for all sorts of People, published 1543. he care∣fully perused them (saith Dr. Heylin p. 23.) and al∣tered many things with his own hand, as appears by the Book still extant in Sr. R. Cotton's Library. And in the Answer, which he writ himself to the York-shire Rebels offended with the State of Religion, he hath this Clause; That he marvelled much, that ignorant People would go about to take upon them to instruct him (who had been noted something Learned) what the Faith should be. With∣out which consciousness and esteem of his own Learning and Abilities, it is probable he would have been a more dutiful Son of the Church;Her. p. 417. and never have owned such a Supremacy in stating Theological Controversies, with such severe punishments to all that thwarted his Doctrines: Whereby he seemed to act the Part, tho he assumed not the Title of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; to which place his Father is said to have designed him.] By ver∣tue of the same Supremacy he made Orders, and gave Dispensations in matters of Fasts; of Holy-days; of Election and Consecration of Bishops; as you may see in Fox, in the King's Injunctions and Proclamations p 960. 999. 1104. and before in §. 36. and §. 68. By vertue of such a Supremacy, concerning several other Ceremonies, as he calls them, the King speaketh in this wise,Fox p. 1035. in his Injunctions put forth 1539. Com∣manding that the Holy Bread and Holy Water, Pro∣cession, kneeling, and creeping on Good-Fryday to the Cross, and Easter-day setting up Lights to the Corpus Christi, bearing of Candles on Candlemas-day, Purifi∣cation of Women delivered of Child, offering of Chry∣somes, keeping of the four Offering-days; paying their Tithes; and such like Ceremonies be observed and kept; till it shall please the King to change or abro∣gate any of them. [Where note, that as Colledges (see before §. 87.) so here Tithes also are conceived to be in the disposal of this Supream Head of the English Church.] By vertue of such Supremacy he, without any con∣sent of the Clergy,1. by his Vice-gerent Cromwel, first,
ordered; That English Bibles should be provided and put in every Church; and that the Parson of the Parish (say the Injunctions 1536. and 1538. set forth by Crom∣wel) shall discourage no man from the reading or hear∣ing of the said Bible; but shall expresly provoke, stir and exhort every Person to read the same, admonish∣ing them nevertheless to avoid all contention and al∣tercation therein, and to use an honest sobriety in the inquisition of the true sense of the same; and to refer the explication of the obscure places to men of higher judgment in Scripture. Which Publication of the Scriptures, in the beginning of his recession from Rome, perhaps he was the more inclined to; for two things, wherein he pleaded much their evidence in his justifica∣tion, The one;See Fox p. 1000. That it was unlawful for him to have his Brothers Wife. The other; That the Pope could not, by them, claim any Jurisdiction over England: He justly therefore relinquishing the one, because it was there prohibited; and disacknowledging the other, because not there commanded. Also in this Translation (as those words 1. Pet. 2. were then, and till the end of King Edward's days, rendred , submit your selves unto the King.) He was declared the chief Head of the Church of England. But these words were changed afterward, when Queen Elizabeth had refused such Title, into King as having the Preheminence, and King as Supreme. But upon what ground soever it was, that he made the Holy Scriptures common to the Vulgar for a time; afterward, when by three or four Years experience he had seen, that so many Divisions came thereby; the unlearned and unstable, now, as in St. Peter's time, z. Pet. 3.16. wresting these holy wri∣tings, hard in some things to be understood, to their own destruction (when the People had now ceased to depend on the authoritative Exposition of their Spiritual Su∣periors; especially when they had also seen the King and his Vicar Cromwel, Lay-men, to judge of the Judg∣ments of the Clergy, and to reform their former Er∣ments of the Clergy, and to reform their former Er∣rors;) after this experience, I say, by Authority of
the same Supremacy. 2. He commands again the Scrip∣tures to be shut up and withdrawn from them, prohibi∣ting, upon the Penalty of a Months Imprisonment toties quoties, that any Woman, Husbandman, Artificer, Yeo∣man, Serving-man, Apprentice, or Journy-man, La∣bourer &c, should read them to themselves, or to others, privately, or openly; See Stat. 34, 35. Hen. 8. 1. c. Because, saith the Preface of that Statute, his High∣ness perceived, that a great multitude of his Subjects, most especially of the lower sort, had so abused the Scriptures, that they had thereby grown and increased in divers naughty and erroneous Opinions, and, by occasion thereof, fallen into great divisions and dissen∣sions among themselves. And if you shy, that the Opinions; the King calls here erroneous, were the Pro∣testant Doctrines, discovered by the vulgar from the new light of the Scriptures; First you may see the very Opini∣ons, as the Bishops collected them, in Fox p. 1136. &c unownable by any sober Christian. Secondly, We, who have had sad experience what monstrous opinions the vulgar; by wresting those farted Writings, have taken up in our days, may rationally allaw the same inci∣dent to former times. Of the same thing I find that King much complaining, in his Preface also to Necessary Doctrine, in this manner. Like as in the time of dark∣ness and ignorance [so he calls the ages of the Church preceding his own] finding our People seduced from the Truth by Hypocrisy and Superstition, we by the help of God and his Word have travelled to purge and cleanse our Realm from the Enormities of the same; wherein; by opening Gods Truth with publishing of the Scriptures, our labours have not been void and frustrate: So now we perceive, that in the time of knowledge [so he calls his own times] the Devil hath attempted to return again, into the House purged and cleansed, accompanied with seven worse Spirit; and Hypocrisy and Superstition being excluded, we find entered into some of our Peoples hearts an inclina∣tion to sinister understanding of Scripture, presump∣tion,
arrogancy, carnal liberty and contention; we be therefore constrained &c. And afterward, It must be agreed (saith he) that, for the instruction of those whose Office it is to teach, the reading and studying of Holy Scripture is necessary; but, for the other part ordained to be taught, it ought to be deemed cer∣tainly, that the reading of the Scripture is not so ne∣cessary for those Folks, that of duty they be bound to read it; but, as the Prince and Policy of the Realm shall think convenient, so to be tolerated, or taken from it. Consonant whereunto, the politick Law of our Realm hath now restrained it, &c. [Where note that he puts the just power of this toleration or restraint in the States, not in the Church-men's, Power.] Sec the like complaint made by him in his last Speech in Parliament, 1545, Lord Herb. p. 536. I am very sorry to know and hear, how irreverently that most precious Jewel the Word of God is disputed and jangled in every Ale-house and Tavern, contrary to the true mean∣ing and doctrine of the same, I am sure that vertuous and godly living was never less used, nor God never less reverenced or honoured. Thus King Henry. And this, to shew you, how and when this vulgar Theology first began; and how much then, so early, it was re∣lented by the Magistrate. By vertue of such a Supremacy these things that King did; some of them against the Canons not of Popes, but of the Church Catholick, and of Superior Councils: and as some of them with, (for he used the consent of his Convocation more than his Successor) so others of them without, the consent of his Clergy; whom (saith Lord Herb. p. 439.) he every day more and more devested of their former Authority. And, for the beginnings of his Reformation, Arch-Bishop Parker in his Antiquit. Brittan. p. 325. saith, that Cromwellus, cum Cranmero Archiepiscopo, tanquam in puppi sedit, clavum∣que Ecclesiae Anglicanae tenuit. Nam Praelatorum fides eo magis dubia & incerta Regi visa est; quod long â morâ & difficultate tanquam taedio abducti sint a Papa; sibique Su∣premi
Capitis titulum detulissent. But whether these things done with or without his Clergy; yet the stile of his Injunctions sufficiently sheweth, in what person the legislative power in Spiritual matters was then con∣ceived to reside: these Injunctions running authorita∣tively, and for the submission of all mens judgments to them; either in his own name single, as the Church's Supreme Head; or in the name of his Vicegerent in Ecclesiastical Affairs, Cromwel (who therefore is order∣ed 31. Hen. 8.10. c. in regard of this Office (and all those who should succeed him therein) to sit in the Par∣liament-house above the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury;) or in the name of the King and Parliament. The usual Phrase of the King and Parliament in such Decrees you have seen in former instances; where they do not ground these Decrees any further on the Authority of the Clergy, save only on their recognizing of the Kings Supremacy; upon which Supremacy all the rest are Super-structions. Now hear the Stile of his Vicegerent Cromwel, (upon whom, a Secular Person too and unlearned, that the King should derive his whole Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Authority, you may read, in Lord Herb. Hist. p. 402, what a wonderment it caused amongst many, as a thing in no other time or person to be parallelled; neither in the much pleaded Patterns of the Kings of Israel, nor in the former practice of Popes.) This Vicegerent thus prefaceth to the Injunctions that were published 1536. I Tho. Cromwel &c Vicegerent to our Sovereign Lord the King for and concerning all his Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical within this Realm, to the Glory of Almighty God, to the Kings Highness's Ho∣nor, the publick Weale of this Realm, and increase of Vertue in the same, have appointed and assigned these Injunctions ensuing to be kept and observed of the Dean, Parsons, Vicars &c, under the pains here∣after limited and appointed. And the like Expressions much what are observed in the Injunctions set forth in 1538, p. 1000 By the Authority and Commission of the most excellent Prince Henry, in Earth Supreme Head under
Christ of the Church of England, I Tho. Cromwel Vice∣gerent &c, do, for the discharge of the King's Majesty, give and exhibit these Injunctions following to be kept and fulfilled &c. First, that ye shall truly observe all and singular the Kings Highness's Injunctions given unto you heretofore in my name by his Grace's Autho∣rity &c. This is enough to shew where the legislative Power for Spiritual matters rested in Henry the Eighth's days. After which Injunctions this is Mr. Fox's Epi∣phonema. By these Articles and Injunctions (saith he) thus coming forth one after another for the necessary Instruction of the People [but surely Mr. Fox had here forgot the Contents of the Kings first Articles (which I mentioned before §. 80.) much contrary to the Reformed Doctrines, conformable to the Romish] it may appear, how well the King deserved then the Title of his Supreme Government given unto him over the Church of Eng∣land [but to moderate Mr. Fox his Acclamations here; let me put him in mind, at another time, in his esteem, how ill he deserved it, remembring his words set down before § 84.] By the which Title and Authority he did more good for the redressing and advancing of Christ's Church and Religion here in England in those three years; than the Pope, the great Vicar of Christ, with all his Bi∣shops and Prelates had done in the space of three hun∣dred years before.
CHAP. VIII. The Actings of Edward the Sixth in Eccle∣siastical Affairs. THE Breach upon the Church's former Authority, Doctrines, and Practices, being thus made by Henry the Eighth,2. The Act∣ings of K. Edward in Ecclesiasti∣cal Affairs. No marvel if by his Successors it was much enlarged. Next then to look into the actions of Ed∣ward the Sixth with relation to Church affairs. This Prince, being not yet ten years old when he came to the Crown, was chiefly directed and steered by Arch-Bishop Cranmer; and by his Uncle the Duke of Somerset, who was made Protector of his Person and Realm, not by the will of Henry the Eighth, who dreaded to trust any one person with this Charge; but by the major part of those sixteen persons, to whom in common he com∣mitted the government of his Son and Kingdome. Of which Duke Mr. Fox saith p. 1180 and 1248, That he bare great favour to Gods word; and that he brought with him, to the State of that his Dignity, his an∣cient love and zeal Of the Gospel and of Religion [he means, reformed.] The proof whereof (saith he p. 1183.1184.) was sufficiently seen in his constant standing to Gods truth, and zealous defence thereof against the Bishops of Chichester, Norwich, Lincolne, London, and others moe, in the consultation [about composing a new form of administring the Sacrament] had at Windsor in the first year of the King's Reign. So inclined was the Protector; and so inclined were many of the Council;§ 105. n.1. and some of those, who were otherwise, yet openly complyed with the prevailing party for secular ends; and, amongst these, even Dudley the great Duke of Northumberland, the chief Agent in the later times of Edward; who confessed so much at his death: he then exhorting the people; See Stow An.
1553. Fox p. 1280. and Goodwin p. 278. That they should embrace the Religion of their Forefathers, re∣jecting that of later date, which had occasioned all the miseries of the forepast thirty years [i. e. from the be∣ginning of Henry the Eighth's Supremacy:] and that, for prevention for the future, they should expel those Trumpets of Sedition, the Preachers of the reformed Religion. [and declaring to them] That as for himself, whatsoever he had pretended, his Conscience was fraught with the Religion of his Fathers; but being blinded with ambition he had been contented to make wrack of his Conscience by temporizing &c. Which calls to my mind likewise the death of Cromwel the great Agent for Reformation in Henry the Eighth's days; who (then) renounced the Doctrines in this time called He∣resies; and took the people to witness, That he dyed in the Catholick Faith of the Holy Church, and doubted not in any Sacrament thereof [i. e. I suppose, as the Doctrine thereof was delivered in those times, to be seen in the Necessary Doctrine before mentioned] See Fox pag. 1086. comp. Lord Herbert p. 462. As for those of the Council who thus complyed not, they were, after some time, expelled; as Bishop Tonstal, Wriothsley the Chan∣cellor; and the Earl of Arundel, Goodwin p. 242. And as the Kings chief Governors in the Council, so his Under Tutors, who had the nearest influence upon him, Dr. Cox and Sir John Cheek, were men much inclined to the Reformation: the one whereof in Queen Eliza∣beth's days Was made Bishop of Ely; the other, being imprisoned in Queen Mary's days, and upon it abjuring the reformed Religion, afterward (saith Goodwin pag. 287.) became so repentant for it; that out of extre∣mity of grief he shortly languished, and dyed. Such were his nearest Governors. And the Complexion of his Parliament (for he had but one all his days continued by Prorogation from Session to Session,§ 105. n. 2. till at last it ended in the death of the King) you may learn from Dr. Heylin (Hist. of Reform, p. 48.) The Parliament (saith he) consisted of such Mem∣bers,
as disagreed amongst themselves in respect of Religion; yet agreed well enough together in one common Principle; which was to serve the present time, and preserve themselves. For tho a great part of the Nobility, and not a few of the chief Gentry in the House of Commons, were cordially affected to the Church of Rome: yet were they willing to give way to all such Acts and Statutes as were made against it; out of a fear of losing such Church-lands as they were possessed of, if that Religion should prevail and get up again. And for the rest, who either were to make or improve their fortunes; there is no question to be made, but that they came resolved to further such a Reformation, as should most visibly conduce to the advancement of their several ends. Thus he. As for the Kings Supremacy how far now some of the complying Clergy extended or acknowledged the just power thereof,§ 105. n. 3. even as to Ordination and Excommuni∣cation, and administring the Word and Sacraments, I think I cannot more readily shew you, than by setting down the Queries proposed concerning these things (in the first year of this Kings, Reign) to Arch-Bishop Cran∣mer, and other Bishops and Learned Men, when assem∣bled at Windsor for establishing a publick Order for Di∣vine Service; and the Arch-Bishops answer to them (printed lately by Mr. Stilling fleet out of a Manuscript of this Arch-Bishop. (Iren. 2. Par. 8 chap.) The first Query is, Whether the Apostles lacking a higher power, as in not having a Christian King among them, made Bishops by that necessity; or by authority given them of God? To which the Arch-Bishop answers to the King, first in general; That all Christian Princes have committed unto them immediately of God the whole cure of all their Subjects, as well concerning the administration of Gods word for the cure of Souls, as concerning the ministration of things Political; That the Ministers of Gods word under his Majesty be die Bishops, Parsons, &c. That the said Ministers be appointed in every State by the Laws and Orders of
Kings; That in the admission of many of these Officers be divers comely Ceremonies used; which be not of ne∣cessity, but only for a good order and seemly fashion That there is no more promise of God, that Grace is given in the committing the Ecclesiastical office; than it is in the committing the Civil. Then he answers more particularly, That in the Apostles time, when there was no Christian Princes, by whose authority Mini∣sters of Gods word might be appointed &c. Sometimes the Apostles and others, unto whom God had given abundantly the Spirit, sent or appointed Ministers of Gods word; sometimes the people did choose such as they thought meet thereunto. And when appoint∣ed by the Apostles; the people of their own volun∣tary will did accept them, not for the Supremity, Impery or Dominion, that the Apostles had over them to command as their Princes or Masters; but as good people ready to obey the advice of good Councellors. A second Query is, Whether Bishops, or Priests, were first? And if the Priests were first; whether then the Priest made the Bishop? He answers, That Bi∣shops and Priests were at one time; and were not two things, but both one office in the beginning of Christ's Religion. The third Query. Whether a Bishop hath authority, to make a Priest, by the Scriptures, or no? And whether any other [i.e. Secular person] but only a Bishop may make a Priest? He answers. A Bishop may make a Priest by the Scriptures; and so may Prin∣ces and Governors also, and that by authority of God committed unto them; and the people also by their Election. The fourth Query. Whether in the New Testament be required any Consecration of a Bishop and Priest; or only appointing to the office be suffici∣ent? Answer. In the New Testament he that is ap∣pointed to be a Bishop or a Priest needeth no Conse∣cration by the Scripture; for election or appointing thereto is sufficient. The fifth Query. Whether (if it fortuned a Prince Christian learned to conquer cer∣tain dominions of Infidels, having none but temporal
learned men with him) it be defended by Gods Law, That he and they should preach and teach the Word of God there, or no? And also make and constitute Priests, or no? [In the next Query, which I omit for brevity sake, is mentioned also the ministring Baptism and other Sacraments.] He answers to this and the next, That it is not against Gods Law: but (contrary) they ought indeed so to do. The seventh Query. Whether a Bishop or a Priest may excommunicate; and for what Crimes? And whether they, only, may excommu∣nicate, by Gods law? He answers, A Bishop or a Priest, by the Scriptures, is neither commanded nor forbidden to excommunicate. But where the Laws of any Region giveth him authority to excommuni∣cate; there they ought to use the same in such crimes, as the laws have such authority in: And where the laws of the Region forbiddeth them; there they have none authority at all; and they, that be no Priests, may also excommunicate, if the law allow thereunto. Thus the Arch-Bishop explains the Kings and Clergies power and right, concluding, That he doth not te∣merariously define this his opinion and sentence; but remits the Judgment thereof wholly to his Majesty. This Text needs no Comment; it is plain enough: and perhaps posterity might have done better to have co∣vered this nakedness of their Forefather; then to have published it after so long a silence.Set down. Now to proceed. 1. First more gene∣rally. It putting forth certain Injunctions and Doctri∣nal Honi∣lies; send∣ing Commis∣sioners thro the Realm and ejecting the refracto∣ry Clergy &c.Thus this young Prince armed in such a sence with the Title of Supreme in Church-affairs, and directed by such a Council, did set forth from time to time (no∣thing being deferred herein by reason of his nonage, tho this much sued-for by some Bishops,) Injunctions concerning Religion; and many of them in matters of faith; and these contrary to the determinations and de∣crees of former obliging Councils. Set them forth, some∣times with the sole authority of this Council; some∣times also with that of his Parliament, without any pre∣cedent consultation with, or consent of, I say not some particular Bishops, or Divines (most of them known
to be of the same inclinations with the Council, as chiefly Cranmer and Ridley; to whom I may add Lati∣mer, Hooper, Rogers, Coverdale,) but of any Ecclesiasti∣cal Synod of his Clergy (the Act of which only hath force in such matters) and usually without the prece∣dent consent of other Bishops very considerable for their learning or place; as Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, Bonner Bishop of London; Tonstal Bishop of Durham, and one of the chosen Governors of the Kingdome; Heath Bishop of Worcester, and others. And he imposed the same Injunctions so set forth upon the Bishops also and the rest of the Clergy; to be submitted to by them, as being the Orders of their Supream Head in Spiritu∣als, upon penalty of suspension, imprisonment, depri∣vation. Of which actings of the King and State, before we descend to particulars, hear what Mr. Fox saith in great applause of them, p. 1180; where after having told us, That the Protector had restored the holy Scrip∣tures to the Mother-Tongue, had extinguished and a∣bolished Masses, and the Six Articles; After softer beginnings (saith he) by little and little greater things followed in the Reformation of the Churches; such as before were in banishment for the danger of the truth, were again received in their Country [to supply voided places:] and to be short (saith he) a new face of things began now to appear, as it were on a Stage, new Play∣ers coming in [what needed this, if the old consented to the Kings Mandates?] the old being thrust out. [there∣fore the consent of Clergy, so much urged in the later end of this Kings Reign, will be that of the new.] For the most part the Bishops of Churches and Diocesses were changed. Such as had been dumb Prelates before, were compelled to give place to other then, that would preach and take pains.. Besides; others also out of Forreign Countries [which argues scarcity at home of these Clergy, who would second the Kings Reformation] men of learning and notable knowledge were sent for and received; among whom was Peter Martyr, Martin
Bucer, and Paulus Phagius [he might have added to them Bernardinus Ochinus (but that this man would do him no credit) who, we read in Coodwin, p. 281. was packed away again with Peter Martyr in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign; and three of these, Martyr, Bucer, and Ochinus, were Fryars, forsaking the Cloister, and marry∣ing Wives; after solemn Vows to the contrary.] Of whom (saith he) the first taught at Oxford; the other two professed at Cambridge, [sure this was so appointed, not because the Ʋniversities here at that time were not held so learned, but because not accounted so orthodox; as appeared shortly after in the beginnings of Queen Mary, notwithstand∣ing Martyrs and Bucers Lectures there.] He addeth; And that with no small commendation of the whole University [and I put in, not without opposition of many learned men there, disputing ex animo before the Kings Visitors against them and their Tenents; as you may see in the solemn disputations had in Cambridge, Fox. p. 1250. &c. Where I would recommend to your reading, when at leisure, the rational arguings, and Apologies for the Church's Doctrines, of Dr. Glyn, and Mr. Langdale, and others, Members of the Ʋniversity of Cambridge, against this re∣forming party, and against the interlocutions of Bishop Rid∣ley one of the Visitors. As for the Oxford Oppositions, Mr. Fox hath not communicated them. There is extant P. Martyrs relation of them,Fox p. 1255. perhaps not the most impartial; yet wherein you may find in his Opponents, Tresham, Chad∣sey, and Morgan, much learning, reverence to the Church, and zeal in their cause; and (as we may gather from his Preface) a conceived victory; of whom there he saith, Omnes anguli, plateae, domus, officinae, & aenopolia ad∣huc eorum mentitos triumphos de me &  resonant. By which you may guess, how the Ʋniversity of Oxford then stood affected. Mr. Fox proceeds;] Of the old Bishops some were committed to one ward, some to another. Bonner Bishop of London was committed to the Mar∣shal see, Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, with Jonstal Bishop of Duresme, was cast into the Tower. [to whom may be added,ox p. 1280. as appears out of Fox elsewhere, Day re∣moved
from Chicester, Heath from Worcester, Vesy from Excester; Likewise Pate Bishop of Rochester, Goldwel Bishop of St. Asaph, — Bishop elect of Bangor, are said to have been banished. And some more might be remo∣ved in like manner; who happen not to be mentioned, be∣cause deceased before the Reign of Queen Mary; as Wake∣man Bishop of Gloucester, Holbeck Bishop of Lincolne, Skyp Bishop of Hereford, Rugg Bishop of Norwich; as may be probably conjectured from Mr. Fox his expressions but now rehearsed.] After this Mr. Fox goeth on to describe, what course the King and that his Council took in the very begin∣nings of their power, before any Parliament of Synod yet assembled, to effect a Reformation in the Church. The King (saith he) following the good Example of King Josias determined forthwith to enter into some Reformation of Religion in the Church of England. Whereupon intending first a general Visitation over all the Bishopricks (thereby as well to understand, as also to redress the abuses of the same) the chose out certain wife, learned, discreet, and worshipful persons, to be his Commissioners in that behalf; and so, divi∣ding them into several companies, assigned into them several Diocesses to be visited: Appointing likewise unto every company one or two godly learned Preach∣ers [by which it seems the Commissioners were Laicks; un∣less we say they appointed some godly Preachers to assist the Divines; see the names of those for the Diocess of London, Fox p. 1192.] which Preachers at every Session should instruct the people in the true Doctrine of the Gospel; and dehort them from their old Superstition and Idola∣try. And that they might be more orderly directed in this their Commission, there were delivered unto them certain Injuctions and Ecclesiastical Orders, drawn up by the Kings learned Council; the which they should command, in his Majesties behalf, to be thenceforth observed of every person, to whom they did appertain, within their sundry Circuits. [These Injuctions (as we find in the Kings Preface to them) are di∣rected
to both Clergy and Laity, for the suppression of Idola∣try and Superstition; and the extirpation of enormities and abuses; by the King supreme authority assisted by the ad∣vice of his most dear Ʋncle the Duke of Somerset, and the esidue of his most honorable Council.] And of the same universal Visitation made by the Kings appointment thus speak the Antiquit. Britann. p. Paulo post om∣nes Papales caremoniae, Missationes, Exequiae, Sanctorum invocationes, mortuorum expiationes, precationumque formulae è templis & christianorum caetu sublatae atque de∣letae sunt. Ad hanc rem a Rege visitatio totius regni gene∣ralis decernitur: datique cum amplissimis mandatis certi Visitatores, qui singulas Dioceses lustrarent. And in this Visitation, beside the general Injunctions for the whole estate of the Realm (saith Mr. Fox Ibid.) there were shops only; which were by the Commissioners com∣mitted to the said Bishops, with charge to be invio∣lably observed upon pain of the Kings Majesty's dis∣pleasure. First: That they should see and cause all the Kings Injunctions, theretofore given, or after to be given, from time to time, thro their Diocess faith∣fully to be observed. —Moreover; that they should not at any time or place preach or set forth unto the peo∣ple any Doctrine contrary to the effect and intent set forth in the Kings Highnesse's Homilies [which Homilies are the stating of several Doctrinals in Religion] neither yet should give Licence to preach to any, but to such, as they should know for at least assuredly trust) would do the same: of whom if any offended herein, that they should inhibit and punish him; and revoke their Licence. Thus much at large out of Mr. Fox, touching the first proceedings of the King and his Council in the Re∣formation,In the pro∣hibition of Preaching till he had setled Re∣ligion. before the calling of any Parliament or Synod. But to prosecute this matter a little further: after the enjoyning the Doctrine of the Homilies and other mat∣ters, the King finding much reluctance and opposition to them in many also of this Ministery licenced by their Ordinaries, or rather in the Ordinaries also themselves,
He, in the beginning of the second year of his Reign, by his Proclamation February the Sixth, inhibited any to preach, except he were licenced under the Seal, either of the Lord Protector, or of Cranmer, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. About this time he restrained likewise the Bishops themselves, thought too actively busy in several places of their Diocesses, [how doth this agree with Mr. Fox his dumb Prelates? See before §. 107.] to preach only in their own Cathedrals; a thing (saith Winchester writing to the Protector) the like whereof hath not been known in any time.Fox p. 1224 Some seven Months after, neither finding those licenced by the Protector and Arch-Bishop of Canterbury conformable to the Do∣ctrines prescribed, By a Proclamation put forth Sept. 23, he inhibited the whole Clergy thro the Kingdome, as well (saith the Proclamation) the said Preachers before licensed, as all others, whosoever they be, to preach in open audience, in the Pulpit or otherwise: [the reason there given] because those licenced had a∣bused the said authority of Preaching; and had be∣haved themselves irreverently and without good or∣der in the said preaching; contrary to such good in∣structions as were given unto them: [the time of si∣lence there prescribed] because that his Majesty minded to see very shortly one uniform order throughout this his Realm, and to put an end to all Controversies in Religion; for which cause at that time certain Bishops and notable learned men by his Highness's command were congregated; therefore he inhibited them, until the said order shall be set forth [which should shew them what Doctrine they were to preach, The defence made by the Protestant Divines con∣cerning K. Edw. Pro∣ceedings in matters of Religion. composed by some such Bishops and other Learned, as were elected to this by the Prince] See the Proclamation in Fuller p. 388. Lib. 7. And thus much of the first beginnings and manner of King Edward the Sixth's Reformation. In defence of which I find these things said by Dr, Fern, (Consider. of Reform. 2. c. 9. § &c.) Dr. Hammond, (Schism 7, c. 14. §) and other. 1. That these Injunctions (and the like) of the King and Council were not set forth,  α but
by the advice and consent of the Metropolitan, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury (to the authority of which Metro∣politant much is to be attributed. See Cart. Apost. 34. and Concil. Nicaen. 4. c. ) and of β other Bishops and learned men first consulted with.  2. That γ these In∣junctions were not set forth, as a Body of Doctrine; which was an Act of the Synod held in the fifth year of King Edward's Reign: but were Provisional only, for the publick exercise of Religion and Worship;  δ which was necessary to be provided for in present. Dr. Fern p. 74, 75. 3.  ζ That they extended only to some evi∣dent points, the abolishing of Image-worship, the resto∣ring of the Liturgy in a known Tongue, and Communion in both kinds, and the abolishing of Romish Masses;  (ε in which things was the main of King Edward's Refor∣mation, p. 71;) ζ and that in them the King restored only what was established and used in the ancient Church. viz. Divine Service in a known tongue; Communion in both kinds; without Image-worship, p. 76. 4.  η That the Kings Injunctions were generally received and put in practice by the Bishops in their several Diocesses; as is avouched expresly in the charge given in against Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, p. 77. Fox p. 1219: where it is said; 'That they were of all men of all sorts obediently received and reverently observed and exe∣cuted, save only of the Bishop of Winchester.  θ At least, that the Kings Injunctions were consented and submitted to by the much major part of Bishops; the Bishops imprisoned or ejected being a much smaller num∣ber compared with the rest. Dr. Hammond, p. 147.  κ And then, that it can make no real difference, whether the Reformation begin from a vote of Bishops in Synod, and so proceeding to the Prince be by him received and established; or take beginning from the Piety of the Prince, moved by advice of faithful Bishops, and so proceeding to the whole body of the Clergy be by them generally received, and put in practice, accord∣ing to the command of the Sovereign authority. Dr. Fern, p. 80.79. 5.  μ That, at least in, the fifth, year
of King Edward, it must be granted, that an Ecclesi∣astical Synod acknowledged the truth and lawfulness of the former Injunctions, constituting the same things in a body of forty two Articles of Religion: which Arti∣cles were shortly after published by the Kings authority with this Title prefixed. Articuli de quibus in Synodo London: An. 1552. ad tollendam opinionum dissensionem, & consensum verae religionis firmandum, inter Episcopos & alios eruditos viros convenerat, Regia authoritate editi. In the thirty sixth of which Articles is also ratified the second corrected Form of Common-Prayer, and the new Form of Ordination in these words: Liber, qui nuper∣rimè authoritate Regis & Parliamenti Ecclesiae Anglicanae traditus est, continens modum & formam orandi, & Sa∣cramenta administrandi in Ecclesiâ Anglicanâ similiter & libellus eâdem authoritate editus de Ordinatione Mini∣strorum Ecclesiae, quoad doctrinae veritatem pii sunt, &c. Atque ideo ab omnibus Ecclesiae Anglicanae fidelibus mem∣bris, & maxime a Ministris verbi, cum omni promptitu∣dine animorum & gratiarum actione accipiendi, approbandi, & posteritati commendandi sunt.λ λ And also for the first new Form of Common-Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, it must be granted, that, in the second year, and second Parliament of the Kings Reign, the whole body of the Clergy in Convocation gave their approbation and consent thereto: as appears both, by the Kings message to the Rebels of Cornwal; where it is said, That what-ever was contained in the new Common-Prayer-Book &c. was by Parliament esta∣blished, by the whole Clergy agreed, by the Bishops of the Realm devised; Fox p. 1189: and by the Let∣ter of the King and his Council to Bishop Bonner; where it is said yet more fully; That, after great and serious debating and long conference of the Bishops and other grave and well learned men in the holy Scrip∣tures, one uniform Order of Common-Prayer and Ad∣ministration of Sacraments hath been and is most God∣ly set forth, not only by the full assent of the Nobility and Commons of the late Parliament; but also by the
like assent of the Bishops in the same Parliament, and of all other the learned men of this our Realm, in their Synods and Convocations Provincial. Fox p. 1186. And see much-what the same said in the Answer to the Lady Mary's Letter. Fox p. 1212. 6.  ν That, such con∣sent and such Constitutions of the Clergy of this Realm being not to be denied, at least it will follow: that the Reformation, as touching the Common-Prayer-Book, from the second year of his Reign, and, as touching the other Articles of Religion, from the fifth, was regular and canonical; as being the act of the Clergy. Thus have I here put you together the ordinary de∣fence (excepting the ultimum refugium;The Reply thereto. That Princes may reform in matters of Religion and of Faith, with∣out and against the major part of their Clergy; of which hereafter) which is made for the regularity of Edward the Sixth's Reformation. To which now consider with me, what, it seemeth, may reasonably be replyed: tho some things cannot be so fully cleared, till I have given you the rest of the Narration of this Kings Proceedings; to which therefore I must refer you for them.Reply to α To α then I answer, That the Arch-Bishop acted not, in the setting forth of these Injunctions, as the Metropolitan; but as one of the Sixteen Councellors whom Henry the Eighth nominated for the Government of his Son; and in the same manner as he would have acted had he been Bishop of Asaph or Bangor. Neither are the Injunctions grounded at all upon the Metropolitan's assent, but on the Kings Supremacy; nor do they make any mention of him or his authority, but only of the Council in ge∣neral, and of their advice; as you may see in what is before related §. 108. Neither were those Canons, being of humane constitution only, conceived, either by King, Council, or this Arch-Bishop, to be of any force under this Regal Supremacy, But secondly, Sup∣pose them in force, and these Injunctions published by the Metropolitan's authority, yet is not such authority made valid in such things, when single, without the con∣currence of his Bishops, by any such Canon. For the
very same Canon that saith, Nihil praeter Metropolitani conscientiam gerant Episcopi &c. saith also, Nec ille praeter omnium conscientiam faciat aliquid in eorum Parae∣ciis; Sic enim unanimitas erit. See Can. Apost. 35. Thirdly, lastly: every thing set forth by the advice of this Council is not necessarily so by the Arch-Bishops advice or vote, because he is one of the Council: For here the vote of the major part (who were all Lay-men save himself, and one Dr. Wotton: if Bishop Tonstal's vote was cast out) tho it were contrary to his vote, bears the name of the whole. To β.To β. That the advice of many Bishops was used in many of the Kings Injunctions (unless in that, touch∣ing the new Form of Common-Prayer) is not evident: that the advice of some Bishops was used in all, is credi∣ble; but those, such as were presumed to be of the same inclinations with the King and Council (as whatsoever colour the State is of, it cannot want some Clergy of the same complexion.) For Example; Cranmer and Ridley now called to consutation, but Gardiner, Tonstal, Bonner, Heath, &c. shut out; and in Queen Mary's days, contra. That the advice of many Bishops used is not sufficient for to impose Laws on the rest, where all have a decisive vote; and, where the legislative power lies in the major part, viz. in a Synod, to prevent Inno∣vations by such Prelates, as are singular in their opinions. To γ. That King Edward claimed by his Supre∣macy, according to the power, which,To γ. as I have shewed above §. 39. &c. was judged then to belong to it, the giv∣ing of Laws to his Clergy, not only for rectifying their practice, but Doctrines (only using the assistance of such Divines, or other learned men, as he thought fit to single out for this purpose) as you may see, In his prescribing the Doctrine of the Homilies unto them; and also,Before §. 108. In his injoyning them, that, whatsoever else should come from him, they should see, and cause, it faithfully to be observed: In his silencing the Ministery, till something were drawn up by certain Bishops and other learned men congregated by his authority, that should put an end to
all controversies in Religion: before §. 109: In the stile of his Proclamation before the order of the Com∣munion; where he saith: We would not have our Sub∣jects so much to mislike our judgment; as tho we could not discern what was to be done &c. God be praised, we know both what by his word is meet to be redressed, and have an earnest mind by the advice [of whom?] of our most dear Uncle, and other of our privy Coun∣cil, with all diligence to set forth the same: and In the last. Articles to the Bishop of Winchester (drawn up (saith the Kings Diary) by Bishop Ridley,Pullr 8. l. and Secre∣tary Sir W. Peters) which required his Subscription to several points of Doctrine, mentioned above: be∣fore §. 45. To δ.To δ. That if there was then a present necessity of providing for the publick exercise of Religion and Wor∣ship; so, this being a matter of the greatest moment, there was also a necessity, that the judgment of the Na∣tional Synod, and not only of the Kings private Coun∣cil should be had therein: lest, by remedying such things hastily, they should be remedied amiss. 1. That it is most probable, had the Clergy been generally consulted-with herein, they would have discovered no such necessi∣ty: because the same Clergy, but a year ago, in Henry the Eighth's time, at least for a major part of them, saw no necessity of charging the Church's Service; as ap∣peareth in the first, second, fifth, sixth of the Six Ar∣ticles, ratified as by the King, so by Synod. And this their judgment not likely to be mistaken, because the judgment of the whole Catholick Church for near a 1000 years had been the same; using the same publick exer∣cise of Worship, which King Edward found in this Church of England, See Church Govern. 4. Part: and therefore some of King Edward's Bishops saw a necessity of leaving their Bishopricks, rather than to admit any change thereof. To ε. That the sew things here mentioned are not the only considerable things that passed in King Edward's Reformation,To ε. as will be seen by and by; and as is mani∣fest
in Queen Elizabeth's and the modern Reformation, which our Writers contend scarce in any thing to differ from King Edward's. But, if it be meant, that those matters were the main of his Reformation in the begin∣ning of his Reign, the Doctrines of the Homilies then also imposed contradict this; and the Articles to Win∣chester: before §. 108. But now to come to what is said of the points here mentioned. To ζ.1. That first, where a pretension is, that the things by the King enjoyned are things evident;ζ. and e∣stablished in the ancient Church; the Clergy also ought to be Judge of this (especially when the contrary was said in King Henry's days) whether evident, whether primitive: because to judge whether primitive requires much learning; and is indeed the chief means, by which Controversies are decided; namely this, the examining how former Church hath interpreted the Scriptures; which Scriptures all sides draw to their own sense. But secondly it is denyed,2. that all the Reformation made in the publick Service was established in the ancient Church; and affirmed, that the Reformation proceeded also further in these points, than is here mentioned. Thus much is granted (to remove here that ambiguity and deceit which lies in Universals;) That Images, and so the veneration or worship of them, were very seldome (if at all) used in the Christian Church for some of the first Centuries. That the publick Communion was, then, most commonly, if not always, administred in both kinds unto the people. That the Divine Ser∣vice, which then, as now, was celebrated usually in the Latine, or Greek, Tongue, was much better, in those days, than now, understood of the common people. Likewise it is granted, That the having the Liturgy, or Divine Service, or the Holy Scriprures, in a known tongue is not prohibited; nor the using of Images en∣joyned; nor the Priests administring and the Peoples receiving the Communion in both kinds, if the Supreme Church Governors so think fit, declared unlawful, by any Canon of any Council.
But the Reformation of King Edward in these things went further. For it translated not simply the former Divine Service into a known Tongue (a thing which might easily have been done, for Mr. Fox himself hath done so much, see p. 1272. in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, to expose it to laughter and lay open its Errors and Superstitions;) but changed and altered it (of which is made no mention in ζ) taking away the Sacrifice of the Mass,See Stat. 1. Edw. 6.14. c. Ad Ar∣ticles sent to Winche∣ster. and declaring such thing unbene∣ficial and vain either pro vivis or defunctis; Contrary to the tenent and practice of the Primitive Church, which in such sense offered it, as is shewed elsewhere in the discourse of the Eucharist, and in Chur. Govern. 4. Part; and Contrary to the declared judgment of the English Clergy but a few years before; as appears in the fifth of the Six Articles: and declared likewise the Mass-book to have many Superstitions in it, and to be full of abuses; contrary to the long approbation of the whole Church Catholick in the publick use thereof from age to age without any considerable difference. Again; his Reforma∣tion held no consideration sufficient to deny the Cup to the Communicants; contrary not only to the defi∣nition of a former Superior Council, that of Constance, and the declared opinion of the English Clergy, in the second of the Six Articles; but contrary to the te∣nent and practice of the Primitive times, who some∣times in private Communions administred it only in one kind; as is shewed in the discourse of Communion in one kind. It took away all private Masses, as holding it un∣lawful for the Priest to celebrate and communicate alone; contrary to the ancient practice of the quotidian Christian Sacrifice, (whether any of the people communicating, or no,) offered unto God for the impetration of his mercies upon the Church: and contrary to the declared judgment of the English Clergy in the fifth of the Six Articles. In which single communicating of the Priest (casually happening) if there be any fault made, it is to be laid not on the Priests performance of this dayly Service, but on the people's indevotion and neglect to
accompany him in that holy Banquet. Whereas the Church that useth such private Masles, wisheth, that the Priest might never communicate alone, but if this some∣times happen, which is not the Priests fault, the Church doth not therefore command this Sacrifice of the Eu∣charist to be omitted: quod Sacrificium a publico Ecclesiae ministro non pro se tantum, sed pro omnibus fidelibus, qui ad Christi corpus pertinent, celebratur. See Conc. Trid. 22. Sess. 6. cap. This loss is a worse thing than the other indecency. Lastly, It held the veneration of Images or Saints Reliques unlawful: contrary to the definition of a former General Council, the second Nicene; which Council also justifies it by Antiquity. Now King Ed∣ward's Reformation proceeeding thus far, you see, in∣terests it self not only in matter of Practice, but Doctrine. And indeed there could be no such necessity pretended of reforming the publick Service in such a manner, had they not judged the former frame thereof to be ground∣ed on some erroneous opinions. But, had the Refor∣mation only translated the former Church Liturgies and Scriptures into a known Tongue; administred Com∣munion in both kinds; thought fit not to use Images; changed something of practice only without any de∣cession from the Church's Doctrines: 'tis probable, the Church-Governors would have been facile to li∣cence these, where they could be secure of no breach in greater, matters. To η. Where concernig the Clergy's concurrence and consent to the Kings Reforma∣tions.To η. That the words urged out of the charge against Winchester prove not the Clergy's reception of, or submission to, all the Kings Injunctions touching the Reformation; but only to the first Injunctions. That whether they be extended to the first, or to all, they must be understood in some such sense, as this; That at that time, when this charge against Winchester was drawn, there were as yet none other known to the Council that did by open Protestation and Letters (as it follows in that charge) shew a wilful disobedience thereto &c. Or else the verity of them will not consist with the story of those times; which often signify a great opposition and averse∣ness,
in many of the Clergy besides Winchester, to the Kings proceedings in the alteration of Religion; so far as that many were silenced, suspended, imprisoned, ejected out of their Spiritual Preferments for this cause. For evidencing which; see first in Fox p. 1192. Bi∣shop Bonner's protestation concerning these first Injuncti∣ons and Homilies, when they were tendered unto him by the Commissioners; which protestation was so far from being interpreted an obedient reception or reverent observance of them; that for it he was sent to the Fleet. And what was done by Gardiner and Bonner leading Bishops, that it was done also by many others, I pray you review Mr. Fox's words before recited § 107 That for the most part the Bishops of Churches and Diocesses were changed [which you may compare with what is said before (§. 107.) of the many new Bishops made by King Edward] That Learned Men were sent for out of forreign Countries; surely not because the Leaders of the Uni∣versities were not so well studied (see their Disputations) but because not so conformable to the new prescriptions. That of the old Bishops some were committed to one ward, some to another: where he names Bonner, Gardiner, Ton∣stal; but might have mentioned also Heath, Day, Vesy, that we know of. And to the same purpose much-what speaketh Godwin p. 223. A. D. 1548; who after ha∣ving commended Day and Tonstal for very learned Pre lates, saith, That the drift of the punishments of such men, when in Henry's time they were accounted the chief Lights of our Church, he conceives to have been, that the rest of that Order might by their Example be admonished, without dissimulation, either to resign their Bishopricks to others that were thought [by the present times] more worthy; or be induced [by this terror] to conform themselves to the present Refor∣mation of the Church, according to the prescript of the Laws in that behalf lately enacted [i. e, by Parlia∣ment.] Thus he. But that the imprisonment of these or of some other Clergy, as also that the dissent of many others to the Kings Injunctions, who were not as yet im∣prisoned
for it, preceded the confirmation of these In∣junctions by any Act of Parliament or Convocation, appears from the very Act it self. 2. Edw. 6.1. c. Where the Parliament desires of the King, That all persons that have offended in the Premises [i. e, in refusing the Form of Common-Prayer, or at least of the Mass,Fox p. 1184 im∣posed by the King before this Act] other, than such per∣son or persons as now be and remain (saith the Act) in the ward of the Tower of London, or in the Fleet, may be pardoned thereof. Some Clergy therefore were imprisoned for this cause before this Act: and more also had offended in this matter, than those who were imprisoned; whose pardon here was begged by the Par∣liament. Which reluctance of the Clergy may be seen also in what Mr. Fox relateth p. 1184; who, after he hath first told us, how a new Form of Communion was agreed on by certain learned men appointed by the King (which Form, you must know, was not allowed, or seen, by the first Parliament of King Edward; which Parliament ap∣pointed Communion in both kinds indeed; but this might have been observed without altering or adding one Syllable to the Mass) and enjoined by the Council to be duly executed both by the Bishops and their subordinate Clergy, thus complains; Nevertheless (saith he) as at no time any thing can be so well done of the godly, but that the wicked will find some means to deface the same: so likewise at this present, thro the perverse obstinacy and dissembling frowardness of many inferiour Priests and Ministers of Cathedral and other Churches of this Realm, there did arise a marvellous Schism and variety of fashions in celebra∣ting the Common Service, and administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church. For some zealously allowing the Kings proceedings, did gladly follow the order thereof; and others, though not so willingly admitting them, did yet dissemblingly and patchingly use some part of them: but many carelesly contemning all would still
exercise their old wonted Popery [i. e, in other lan∣guage, would still retain the former solemn Church Service.] Thus He. Now this variety of fashions on∣ly mentioned by Fox if you desire more particularly to know; we find a more punctual relation thereof in Parsons 3. Convers. of England, 2. Part, 12. Chapter. What a Babylonical confusion (saith he) in the two first years of the Kings Reign ensued upon these innova∣tions in all Churches, is wonderful to recount. For some Priests said the Latine Mass; some the English Communion; some both; some neither; some half of the one, half of the other. This was very ordinary, to say the Introitus & Confiteor in English; and then the Collects, and some other parts in Latine: after that again, the Epistles and Gospels in English, and then the Canon of the Mass in Latine; and lastly the Benediction and last Gospel in English. But that which was of more importance and impiety; some did con∣secrate Bread and Wine, others did not: but would tell the people before-hand, That they would not con∣secrate, but restore them their Bread and Wine back again, as they received it from them; only adding to it the Church's benediction. And those, that did consecrate, did consecrate in divers forms; some aloud, some in secret; some in one form of words, some in another. And, after Consecration, some held up the Host to be adored after the old fashion, and some did not; and, of those that were present, some did kneel down and adore, others did shut their eyes, others turn away their faces, others run out of the Church crving Idolatry. Hitherto Parsons. View also Dr. Hey∣lin's Hist. of Reform. p. 63.74. concerning this-matter. Whereby we see how averse and unsatisfied divers of the Clergy were with the Kings alterations. And this not only before his new Liturgy is said to be confirmed by Act of Parliament and Convocation; but after also. For afterward we find the King and his Council, in their Letter to the Bishop of London, Fox p. 1186. complaining: That it was no small occa∣sion
of sorrow unto them to understand by the com∣plaints of many that the said Book; so much travelled for, remaineth in many places of the Realm, either not known at all, or not used; or if used, very sel∣dome; and that in such a light and irreverent sort, that &c. The fault whereof [say they to the Bishop] we must of reason impute to you, and others of your vocation. And thus Fox in the same Page. What zealous care was in this young King concerning Re∣formation by these Injunctions it may tight well ap∣pear. Whereby we have to note not so much the care∣ful diligence of the King and his learned Council, as the lingring slackness and drawing back on the other side of divers, but especially of Bishops, and old Po∣pish Curates [he meaneth the Clergy, such as had not been changed by King Edward:] by whose cloaked contempt, wilful winking, and stubborn disobedience the Book of Common Prayer was, long after the pub∣lishing thereof, either not known at all; or else very irreverently used throughout many places of the Realm. And the same thing may be collected from the many Ri∣sings in several Counties, that were in King Edward's days, chiefly for matter of Religion. First in Somerset-Shire and Lincoln-shire; then in Essex, Kent, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cornwal, and Devon-shire; and afterward also in York shire. Which Risings of the Laity in such num∣bers for their former way of Religion would not have been, had not their Clergy justified it unto them. To these give me leave to add yet further the testi∣mony of Bishop Ridley, one who knew well the pulse of those times, in his Treatise, lamenting the State of England, apud Fox p. 1616. Even of the greatest Ma∣gistrates (saith he) some spurned privily; and would not spare to speak evil of those Preachers, who went about most wholsomely to cure their sore backs. As for the common fort of other inferiour Magistrates, as Judges &c, it may be truly said of them, as of the most part of the Clergy, Parsons, Prebendaries, Arch-Deacons, Deans, yea and I may say of Bishops also; I
fear me, for the most part (altho I doubt not, but God had, and hath ever whom he in every state know∣eth to be his) but for the most part, I say, they were never perswaded in their hearts, but from the teeth forward, and for the Kings sake, in the truth of Gods word [i. e. in the Protestant tenents;] and yet all these did dissemble [he meaneth many, for of all it is not true. See before §. 107.] and bear a Copy of a countenance, as if they had been sound within. Hither∣to Bishop Ridley. Where note; that some outward compliance, at the first, of those Bishops, who made an open opposition afterward, might be upon a fair pretence; because the first Acts of the Reformation might be not so unsupportable, as the later: for the Reformation winded and insinuated it self into the com∣mon practice by certain gentle degrees; the greatest blow to the former doctrine and discipline of the Church being given in the later times of this Kings Reign, when it was now by some success grown more bold and con∣fident. But however it be; such compliance, used for a while, but after ward renounced, does avail nothing the Protestant cause: since the later judgment in such mat∣ters is to be taken; especially where it is no way cor∣rupted by, but proceedeth against, secular advantages. Again; the perpetual outward compliance of some o∣ther Bishops contrarily affected, since there preceded before it penalties, and fears, and the seeing of the prime Bishops to be imprisoned and ejected for standing our, is far from an authentical consent, and unjustly reckoned as such. For tho none can know mens hearts but by their outward appearance; yet where mens votes are asked after penalties, imprisonments of others, threats &c; which are so strong motives of dissimulation: now all that conform in these, are to be presumed compilers; and none free voters. This testimony of Bishop Ridley's I will second with Mr. Fuller's Chur. Hist. 7. l. p. 414. We find (saith he) the Bishops [of that time] divided into three sorts, zealous Protestants, Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Farrer,
&c. [but these named were made Bishops, or consecrated (as Ridley) in King Edward's time, all save Cranmer]: 'Zealous Papists, Bonner, Gardiner, Tonstal [he might have named so many of the rest, as were then ejected for their Religion; Voicy, Heath, Day]: Papists in their hearts, but outwardly conforming to the Kings [Ecclesiastical] Laws; as Heath then Bishop of Worcester [yet Heath was ejected] and many other Bishops [amongst whom, elsewhere he numbreth,S. l. p. 11. Sampson Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, (of whom Godwin in Catalogue of Bishops saith; That he began to shew himself a Papist in the second year of King Edward, and was put out of the Presidentship of Wales.) Capon Bishop of Salisbury, Thirlby Bishop of Norwich, Buckly Bishop of Bangor; add Parfew Bishop of Asaph, Kitchin Bishop of Landaff, Aldrich Bishop of Carlile, Goodrich Bishop of Ely, Cham∣bers Bishop of Peterborough, King Bishop of Oxford; who all returned to the profession of the old Religion in Queen Mary's days. Some of these forenamed flinging up a good part of their lands to keep their ground, and com∣plying with the Kings commands so coldly and with such reluctancy, as laid them open to the spoil, tho not to the loss, of their Bishopricks, as Dr. Heylin re∣lates it in Hist. of Reform. p. 100.] And here it is wor∣thy of enquiry (saith Fuller) why this later sort, which so complyed under King Edward, should be so stubborn and obstinate under Queen Elizabeth: whereof I can give but this reason assigned; that growing old and near their graves they grew more conscientious and faithful to their own (tho erroneous) Principles. Thus he. I add; to the open maintaining of which Princi∣ples, their long experience, having seen the arbitrary and floating state of Religion under a secular Supremacy, in their old age excited them. Lastly, for the inferior Clergy, tho many of them doubtless were changed in King Edward's days: yet so many of them then remained still of the old Religion, either in heart, or also in profession, that a Synod be∣ing called within five or six days after Queen Mary's
Coronation, before any new moulding of this Eccle∣siastical body, all of them, except six, voted against King Edward's Reformation: See before §. 51. To which may be added the zeal and forwardness of the Clergy and People at the same time preventing the Queen's Edicts, in erecting again the Altars, and using the Mass and Latine Service &c. (of which see Heylin Hist. Q. Mary, p. 24.) All which could not have hap∣pened so soon after King Edward's death, if during his life they had all so really and unanimously received and observed it. Which Reformation also the Lady Mary, in her Letter to the Council, who blamed her for in∣conformity to the Kings laws, intimates; that it was not done without partiality, nor consented unto with∣out compulsion. See Fox p. 1212. I have offended no law (saith she) unless it be a late law of your own ma∣king, for the altering matters of Religion: which is not worthy to have the name of a Law; both for &c, and for the partiality used in the same. But I am well assured, that the King his Fathers Laws were all al∣lowed and consented to, without compulsion, by the whole Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal &c. Thus the Lady Mary, An. Dom. 1549. which calls to my re∣membrance what Mr. Fox saith in commendation of the Protector:Sec before §.04. That, in the first consultation about Religion had at Windsor, he, in the zealous defence of Gods truth, opposed the Bishops. I have here on purpose thrown to∣gether thus many testimonies; to give you a fuller view of the Clergy's temper in the time of those innovations; and to manifest the more, how neither the Prelates (except those new ones, whom King Edward advanced); nor the inferiour Clergy, neither at first, nor at last, were so conforming to the Kings proceedings, as is pre∣tended out of the charge against Winchester, That the Injunctions were by all of all sorts obediently received &c. To θ.1. To θ. First; That whereas there was many Acts of Reformation from time to time set forth by King Edward; we do not find, that the major part of the Clergy, in any Convocation or Synod before the fifth
year of the Kings Reign, is pretended to have consented to any of them, save one; namely the new Form of Common-Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, in the second year of the King: and that consent was also had after this Book was, first, passed and made a Law by Act of Parliament; as may be gathered: 1. Both by the Act, which mentions only the composing of this Book by Bishops and other Learned men (which were in all fourteen, whereof seven Bishops; two of which were Cranmer and Ridley) but not any concur∣rence or authority of a Synod.See Heylin Sect 5.7 3. (But, had the decree of Synod preceded the Act of Parliament; this, which was more, would rather have been mentioned, than the other, which was less.) and which Act also by vertue of it self, see before §. 40. not of arty Synodical Act, confers authority on the Clergy to excommunicate the Opposers of this Common-Prayer-Book. 2. And by the manner of sending to the Clergy the second re∣formed Common-Prayer-Book in the fifth year of King Edward; which was authoritate Regis & Parliamenti; as you may see in the 36 of the 42 Articles, Liber qui nu∣perrime authoritate Regis & Parliamenti Ecclesiae Angli∣canae traditus est, similiter & libellus eâdem authoritate editus de Ordinatione Ministrorum quoad doctrinae veri∣tatem pii sunt &c. Which stile differs much from either of these, A Rege & Farliamento Ecclesiae Anglicanae tra∣ditus; i. e, that it might be established by the Church's authority; or; Ab Ecclesiâ Anglicanâ Regi & Parlia∣mento propositus, i. e, that, being established by the Church, it might be enjoyned also, under temporal punishments, by the State Laws. Neither do the words following in that Article (see them recited before §. 110.) Ex∣press any authoritative ratification, but only a single testimony of their judgment concerning those Forms; or say any thing which any other person, void of au∣thority, may not use. Now of this consent of the Con∣vocations, An. 1549. to the Act of Parliament, and to the draught of the fourteen Composers of the first Common-Prayer-Book, a chief motive, (besides fear of
punishment in disobeying the King and Parliaments In∣junctions or Laws,) was, as I conceive, this; because this new Form contained in it only the omission of some former practices of the Church (as likewise the later Common-Prayer-Book more omissions) but no decla∣ration against any former Church-practice or Doctrine; of which I shall say more by and by. And had King Edward's Reformation been content to have staid here,See §. 157. it had been much more tolerable (tho these omissions I excuse not, as faultless, or not offending against former Church-Canons:) But his Reformation proceeded much further, to the condemning also of the Church's tenents and practice; which cannot be shewed to have been ratified by the first Clergy of King Edward till the fifth year of his Government; of which I shall speak here∣after. But, as for any other consent of the major part of the Bishops or Clergy, proved to be yielded to the Kings other Injunctions, from the paucity of the num∣ber of those who were imprisoned, or ejected, in com∣parison of the rest; the argument is not good. First, Because many more might dissent, and refuse obedience thereto, then were ejected or imprisoned or questioned for it. Might? Nay did dissent; for the Parliament beggeth their pardon; see before §. 120: and it is ac∣counted a prudent policy of State, where very many are guilty, only to punish some of the chief for Example sake. Secondly, And again many more might be ejected, or questioned for this, than are by name mentioned in Fox or others: and were so; if you consider the testi∣monies before cited. Thirdly, But suppose only a few of the Clergy imprisoned or ejected; yet as, where all the rest unanimously accord, this restraint of a few chan∣geth not the Church-affairs: so when such a body is di∣vided, and all the rest are not of one mind; this with∣drawing of a few, especially if these be the prime Lead∣ers, and the introducing of so many new voters, who are of a contrary perswasion, into their rooms, (suppose, taking away six old Bishops, and putting six new ones in their places) may render that, which was before a
major and the more prevalent, now a lesser and a weaker, part; and consequently, if they be unjustly withdrawn, will render the Act of this major part invalid. Secondly,2. That submittance of Convocation to the new Form of Common-Prayer &c. may not be reckoned for a lawful Synodical Act; because of the violence used formerly upon the Clergy, inforcing, as other Ecclesi∣astical Injunctions of the King, so also, the new Form of Communion, before it was proposed to any Parlia∣ment or Convocation; for proof of which I refer you to the former testimonies; that I may spare the taedium of repeating them. But what the inclinations of the old Clergy were (for I speak not of the new induced by little and little into their places by King Edward) if the hand of violence and threats of a new law-giving civil-power had been removed from them (touching which see their sad complaint before §. 47) may be gathered, 1. both From what they did immediately before King Edward's days in their establishing by Con∣vocation the Six Articles; and the the Necessary Doctrine:31. Hen. 8.14. c. And 2. From what they did in King Edward's days; in the very beginning of which Arch-Bishop Cranmer called a Synod of them, wherein he endeavoured to have effected a Reformation, but could not: See Antiquit-Brittan. p. 339. And you see by the Testimonies fore∣cited, how many suffered for opposing the Kings Injuncti∣ons, and particularly this new Form of Common-Prayer; and how many more of the old Clergy are said to have opposed them in every place, where they might hope for impunity; (insomuch as that this Book in many places was not so much as heard of:) and how a major part even of the Bishops are by Protestants confessed in their conformity only to have used an ontward com∣pliance and dissimulation. Lastly 3. From what they, so many as remained of them, did immediately after King Edward s time, so soon as this Yoke of fear was re∣moved in the entrance of Queen Mary: at which time they threw-off their former vizards; and plainly renoun∣ced not only the rest of the Reformation, the fruit;
but also the Regal Supremacy (i.e, quoad talia) the root. Nor could fear, when the Sovereign power re∣changed, ever make them (taught by long experience) to take up again their former disguise: amongst whom the major part of those seven Bishops chosen to compose the new Common-Prayer-Book, who survived to Queen Mary's days, namely Day, Thirlby, and Goodrich (Skyp Bishop of Hereford, and Holbeck Bishop of Lincolne being dead before) deserted this new Form, and returned a∣gain to the Mass. And it is probable, that some of those Bishops, who by Queen Mary were ejected for Marriage (some of them even after a Monastick profession) con∣formed themselves likewise to the old Religion: because tho they lived here at home in so inquisitive and severe times, we find not, that they were restrained, or pro∣ceeded against as Hereticks. Such were Holgate, Bird, Bush, &c. Now; since such were the inclinations of all or most of King Edward's first Clergy; and to be swayed only from the profession thereof by fear: no marvel, if his Council went about reforming (at the first) by vertue of the new Supremacy, before the calling of any Synod; save that wherein Arch-Bishop Cranmer was frustrated of his intentions. And Dr. Fern, Exam. Champ. 2. c. §. 8. makes this Apology for such proceeding. That Reformation of Gods worship may be warrantably done without a foregoing Synodical vote; where there is just and apparent cause of fearing more danger from the persons, which are to be convocated, and the times wherein they are to assemble. To which purpose (saith he) sounds that known complaint of Nazianzen, That he saw no good end of Councils [spoken by reason of the prevailing faction of the Arrians in his time] We can∣not say the Sovereign Prince is bound in the way of prudence always to receive his directions from a vote in a Synod; especially where there is just cause of fear [I suppose, that he means Fear, that the Synod will go con∣trary to what the Prince thinks to be right:] but he may have greater reason to ask advice from persons free from
the exceptions of factious interests; to which the most of them that should meet are apparently obnoxi∣ous. And (saith he) how far this was considerable in the beginning of King Edward's Reign [i. e, till the King had otherwise moulded the Members of the Synod] or whether such fear made them forbear to put it at first to a Synodical Vote, I cannot say. Thus Dr. Fern. And much-what in the same manner doth Dr. Heylin, Eccles. Vindic. 2. Par. 5. §. p. 82. discourse of King Edward's Reformation (to shew you, that our modern Writers are not without some apprehension of the neg∣lect of the Church authority in it.) Which reviving (saith he) of the ancient Forms of Gods worship rather than the introduction of a new, as the King [Edward] did here in England by his own authority, the body of the Clergy not consulted in it; so, possibly, there might be good reason, why those, who had the con∣duct of the Kings Affairs, thought it not safe to put the managing of the business to a Convocation; [and then having shewed that such change of Religion would be both against the reputation and profit of the Clergy, he goes on.] So that as well in point of reputation, as of profit, besides the love which many of them had to their for∣mer Mumpsimus, it was most probable; that such an hard piece of Reformation would not easily down, had it been put into the power of a Convocation; especi∣ally under a Prince in nonage, and a State unsettled. Thus he. As for that which afterward he saith: That this was passed by the Bishops, when it passed in Parliament, the Bishops making the most considerable van of the House of Peers, It is answered by what hath been said before §. 11. n. 2. And what he saith, That all was confirmed by the Clergy on the Post-fact in the Convocation of 1552: sall be answered by and by. See likewise what the same Dr. saith on the same subject in 1. Par. 6. §. p. 36; where, after doubting, whether several particulars of King Edward's Reformation were done of the Kings meer motion, or by advice of his Council, or by Consulta∣tion With his Bishops; (For (saith he) there is little left
upon record of the Convocation of that time, more than the Articles of the year 1552) He speaks also of Queen Eliza∣beth's Reformation done after the same sort, Thus also (saith he) in Queen Elizabeth's time, before the new Bishops were well setled, and the Queen assured of the affection of her Clergy; she went that way to work in the Reformation, which her two Predecessors [Henry and Edward] had done before her, in the well ordering of the Church; she published her Injunctions &c. But when the times were better setled, and the first difficulties of her Reign passed over; she left Church-work to the disposing of Church-men: who by their place and calling were most proper for it; and they being met in Convocation did make Canons &c. And thus if a Prince, according to the Sect which himself and his Council favours, may take the liberty, with coactive power, to reform at the first against his Clergy: he, within a short time no doubt, may secure∣ly leave the Church-work to Church-men (as the Dr. saith) and justify his Reformation by his Clergy, that is, ei∣ther changed first; or terrified. To χ.To χ. These two I grant differ little. 1 The Cler∣gy's first motioning to the King, 2. or, The King's first motioning to the Clergy, a Reformation of something in Doctrine or Manners; so that the Clergy, uncom∣pelled or forced by the King, establish it, before it be enjoyned, or imposed on, any, to be observed. But this following differs from the former toto coelo: viz. When the King, directed by some particular Bishops, (whom he thinks good to advise with) proposeth to the Clergy a Reformation in Doctrine, not to be consulted on by them and their judgment to be exhibited to him; (upon the assent or denyal of a major part of whom, as having in these things the legislative power, such Re∣formation may be established or laid aside) but to be obeyed and submitted-to by the Clergy; as the King having the legislative power in these things by his Ec∣clesiastical Supremacy; to be obeyed and submitted to by them, upon penalties of suspension, imprisonment,
deprivation, &c. and when upon this in the issue (after some of the Clergy punished) the rest do conform to the Kings commands. Now which of these two were the proceedings of King Edward; I refer the matter to the Story of those times, and the testimonies above produced. First, And note here, 1. That tho the whole Clergy should have submitted to such a Reformation;  yet can∣not it be said to be their authentick Act at all; or to be done, but suffered, by them: as long as anothers command and force comes in; especially, where an after departure of a many of them shews us, that their former compliance was feigned. 2. That tho the sub∣mittance of the whole Clergy to such a Reformation had been ex animo and voluntary; yet this rendereth not the former Imposition or Injunction of the King lawful or obligatory: the lawfulness or unlawfulness of which cannot depend on an after casual event. For I ask: Suppose the Clergy generally had opposed them, were these Injunctions justly imposed upon them by the King or not? If not; Then neither were they justly imposed, tho the Clergy had consented; because im∣posed before they consented, whose consent is held ne∣cessary, that they may be justly imposed. But, if justly imposed; then why is the Clergy's consent or reception of such Injunctions at all urged here to justify them? Suppose a Prince should first decide some Theological Controversy; and then require submission thereto, just on the same side affirmatively or negatively, as a Synod of the Clergy would have done both these; yet thus, he taketh their office not rightly; tho he manageth it not amiss. And such Act will not be allowable; because to the justifying of an action two things are requisite: That the thing be right which is done; That the person have lawful authority to do it. 3. That the King or State never sought for, or pre∣tended the Synods consent, as authoritative to make the Kings or their Ecclesiastical Injunctions lawful or obligatory: but required the duty of their obedience
to these Acts of the Kings Supremacy; which Supre∣macy was confirmed both by the Clergy's Recognition and Oath. Which thing is sufficiently manifested; in that many of the Kings Ecclesiastical Injunctions were set forth, and did exact the Clergy's obedience to them, before any Synods consent given or asked; and when it was yet uncertain, whether a major part would ap∣prove, or condemn them. But, if you desire further evidence thereof, I refer you to the matter delivered before, In §. 40, 41. &c; where you may see the Par∣liament Acts establishing such Laws, without pretend∣ing or involving any Synodal authority; nay giving authority by vertue of such Act to the Clergy to execute such Laws; and In §. 45; where you may see, why it was necessary, according to their principles, that they should do so; and In §. 45; where you may see, the obedience thought due in these matters to the regal Supre∣macy, and the edicts issuing from it, required to be sub∣scribed by Winchester: and In §. 47; where you may see the description of the exauctorated State of the Clergy in those times; and In §. 103; where you may see the usual stile of Henry the Eighth (whose Supremacy was no way remitted by his Son); and In §. 107. &c. and, §. 113. the practice of Edward the Sixth; which yet will be further declared in the following instances of his Supremacy. W hen therefore the consent of Synod or Convocation is urged, to the people or to some single person, by the King, or his Council; it is not urged, as an authority (see the reason §. 45.) which these, as subject to their decrees, ought to obey; but as an example, which these, as less knowing, ought to follow. But if the bare mentioning sometimes of the Clergy's consent argues this then thought necessary to the estab∣lishing of such decrees; then would the mentioning of the consent of Parliament argue as much, which is urged together with that of the Clergy; and so no Ecclesiasti∣cal Acts of the King and Clergy would be obligatory, unless confirmed by Parliament. But this will destroy the authority of the 42 Articles made in the fifth year
of King Edward; ratified by no Parliament. To λTo λ the Answer is prepared out of what hath been already said to θ. That, before there had been any force used upon the Clergy, a Reformation was en∣deavoured in a Synod by Arch-Bishop Cranmer; but repelled. That the vote of a Convocation, after such violences first used, after Clergy restrained or changed, is not to be reckoned free. That the major part only outwardly complyed for fear, as is confessed by Pro∣testants; and seen both in their former decrees under King Henry; and in their suddain recidivation (I mean the Clergy not introduced by King Edward) under Queen Mary. That this consent of Convocation can only be urged for the Common-Prayer-Book; but not for other parts of the Reformation: which new Form of Com∣mon-Prayer omitted rather than gain-said the former Church-tenents and practice; and these omissions not so many in the former Book of King Edward, as in the latter. That this consent of Convocation is not urged in the places cited as necessary to make the King and Parliaments Church-Constitutions valid; but as exem∣plary, to make others more conformable to them. That the Bishops that framed this new Form of publick Ser∣vice, were but seven: whereof those who survived till Queen Mary's time, except Cranmer and Ridley, returned to the Mass. To μ.To μ. First, Whether there was indeed any such Synodal Act, as is here pretended in the times of King Edward, shall be examined hereafter. But Secondly, Supposing, for the present, that there was so; I answer, (besides that which is said in the Reply to λ and θ ap∣pliable to this;) That by this time the Clergy was much changed, according to Mr. Fox's description made thereof before §. 107; a many new Bishops introduced by King Edward; several old ones displaced; so that now, after the State's five years reforming, Church-work, (to use Dr. Heylin's Phrase) might more securely be committed to Church-men: Yet that many also then, for fear of the times, either absented themselves from
this Synod; or in the Synod were guilty of much dissi∣mulation; as appears by their contrary votes soon after in the beginning of Queen Mary. See before §. 51. To ν.To ν. I answer, That if such Synodal Acts were of the right Clergy, and their Acts voluntary and unforced; the Reformation here in England from the time of such Synods, was, as to this authority, re∣gular and canonical; till reversed by the like autho∣rity. But then this Reformation, as it is supposed to be made by the Clergy, is void upon another ac∣count; viz. as being contrary to the former defi∣nitions of lawful superiour Councils; as may be seen in the several decrees of those Councils (set down in Chur. Govern. 4. Part) compared with these 42 Arti∣cles, and the Homilies approved by them. CHAP. IX. Continuation of the same, descending to Par∣ticulars: And of his first Change of the Publick Liturgy. HAving thus described in general the way of King Edward's Reformation,H. More particularly and exercising his Su∣premacy, and partly examined the Apologies made for it: we will now proceed to nominate to you the several particulars of his Reformation; which is usually covered under the name of alteration only of some Rites and Ceremonies; as if the Doctrines of the Church suffer∣ed no change under him. In sending certain do∣ctrinal Ar∣ticles to be subscribed by the Bi∣shop of Win chester.By vertue of such Supremacy then were sent those Articles to the imprisoned Bishop of Winchester, to be subscribed; containing several points of Doctrine, or practice involving Doctrine; (some of which have been named before ???. 45.) proposed to his Subscription, not as matters passed by any former Synod; but (saith the
twentieth Article) as published and set forth by the Kings Majesty's authority, by the advice of hit Highnesse's Coun∣cil, for many great and godly considerations. Fox p. 1235. Which Articles the Bishop is required there to sub∣scribe, publish and preach; upon the pain of incurring such Penalties, for not doing the same, as may by his Majesty's laws be inflicted upon him. By vertue of such Supremacy the Six Articles (which contained matter of Doctrine and Faith,Ia repealing the Six Ar∣ticles passed by Synod in Hen 8. time. Stat. 31. Hen. 8.14. c. Fox p. 1036 and that in things of no small moment; and which, being determi∣ned, and the observance of them enjoined as well by a Synod, as a Parliament, justly stand in force, till a revocation of them by another Synod of like authority) were repealed in the beginning of King Edward's Reign without any such Synod; see Stat. 1. Edw. 12. c. and the Members of the Church of England freed from any further obedience to them. By which it now became free for any, tho having formerly made contrary vows, to Marry, to omit sacerdotal Confession, to preach a∣gainst the Real Presence, and the Sacrifice of the Mass; contrary to the decrees of former Councils, and this National Synod. Ia seizing on Religious houses and some Bishops lands, and denying the lawfulness of Mota∣stick Vows.By vertue of such Supremacy this King (I mean al∣ways the Council in the Kings name, and by his autho∣rity) not only justified the power used by his Father over the possessions of Monasteries and Religious Houses; but declared also Monastick Vows to be unlawful, su∣perstitious and unobliging. Therefore the first Arti∣cle drawn up for Winchester's Subscription was this, That the late King Henry the Eighth justly and of good reason had caused to be suppressed and defaced all Mo∣nasteries, Religious Houses, &c. and, That the same being so dissolved, the persons therein bound and pro∣fessed to obedience to a person, place, habit, and other superstitious Rites and Ceremonies, are, upon that or∣der appointed by the Kings Majesty's authority, as Supreme Head of the Church, clearly released and ac∣quitted of those Vows and Professions, and at their full liberty, as tho those unwitty and superstitious vows
had never been made. Thus the Article. And hence it was, that some, formerly Monasticks, in King Ed∣ward's days married Wives; but this Doctrine his Su∣premacy did deliver, contrary to the Doctrine which his Father's Supremacy published: See before §. 95. This King also continued his Fathers practice, in seiz∣ing upon that piously devoted means, which his Fathers suddain death, after the concession of them by Parliament, had left undevoured: I mean Chaunteries, Free-Chap∣pels, Colledges, Hospitals, &c. See Stat. 1. Edw. 6.14. c. But this he did upon another pretence than his Father; by reason that his Doctrine herein varied from his Fathers: His pretence being, the unlawfulness of of∣fering the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, or giving alms, for the defunct; but his Fathers pretence, who in his Do∣ctrine justified these, being quite another; as you may see before, §. 92. And therefore the second Act of Parliament in his,Stat. 37. Hn. 3.4 c. 1. Edw. 6.14. c. and in his Fathers time, that agree alike in the donation of these Revenues, yet vary in their prefaces and motives. But in this he went beyond his Father; that He began the taking of Bishops lands also: Sacriledge, now after the gain thereof was grown sweet, keeping no bounds. After therefore that learned and vertuous Prelate Ton∣stal (left by his Father one of his Governors) ejected, He (I mean his Council and Courtiers; for happy was that King of his Child-hood, that it preserved him un∣blameable for these things) seized upon that rich and tempting Bishoprick of Durham. Of which thus Bishop Godwin, The removing of these obstacles [the ejected Bishops] made way for the invasion of their Widow-Sees. For as soon as Tonstal was exauctorated, that rich Bishoprick of Duresme by Act of Parliament was wracked: the chief Revenues and Customes of it be∣ing incorporated to the Crown; and the rest so guel∣ded, that at this day it scarce possesseth the third part of its ancient Revenues. The hungry Courtier find∣ing how good a thing the Church was, had now for some years become acquainted with it, out of zealous
intent to prey. Neither could the horridness of her sacred Skeleton as yet so work on him, as to divert his resolutions, and compassionately to leave the Church to her religious poverty. Beside, the infancy of the King, in this uncertain ebb and flow of Religion, made her opportune to all kind, of Sacriledge. So that (saith he) we are to thank the Almighty Guardian of the Church, that these Locusts have not quite devoured the maintenance of the labourers in this English Vine∣yard. Thus he concerning that Bishoprick; who, had he lived in these days, might hare seen the multiplied generation of those Locusts devour his own. Besides Duresme, (for any thing I can find) the Bishoprick of Rochester after 1551 (when Scory was removed thence) and that of Westminster after 1550 (when Thirlby was removed thence) were enjoyed by the Crown, until Queen Mary's days; besides that of Worcester given in Commendam to Hooper, to exercise the Jurisdiction and Episcopality thereof, with some short allowance for his pains, saith Dr. Heylin, Hist. of Reform. under Edw. 6. p. 101. In which Author also see the spoyl committed in those days upon the Bishopricks of Bath and Wells p. 54; of Coventry and Lichfield; of Landaff, of Lin∣colne, and others p. 100, 101. 129. and elsewhere. Sure, foul things were done in this kind in those inno∣vating times; because I find even some of King Edward's favourite-Bishops highly to dislike them. For Bishop Ridley in his Treatise,Apud Fox 9. 1616. lamenting the State of England relates how he and Cranmer were both in high displea∣sure [with the great ones] for repugning, (as they might well) against the late spoyl of the Church-goods, taken away only by commandment of the higher pow∣ers, without any law or order of Justice; and with∣out request or consent of them to whom they did be∣long. And Calvin in a Letter to Arch-Bishop Cranmer written about An. Dom. 1551. giving a reason why the English Church was so ill stored with good Pastors hath these words, Ʋnum apertum obstaculnm esse intelligo, quod praedae expositi sunt Ecclesiae reditus. So early you see, even
together with the first dawning of the Reformation, began that Sacriledge to be committed on some Bisho∣pricks; which our days have seen accomplished on the rest: Lay menders of Religion ordinarily terminating in these two things; the advancing of their carnal Li∣berty, and temporal Estates. In defacing of Images.By vertue of such Supremacy, He caused to be re∣moved out of Churches, and to be defaced and destroy∣ed, all Images of Saints. Concerning which Reforma∣tion his Council writes to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury in this stile, We have thought good to signify unto you, that his Highnesse's pleasure with the advice and consent of us the Lord Protector and the rest of the Council is, that immediately upon the sight hereof you shall give order, that all the Images remaining in any Church within your Diocess be taken away; and also by your Letters shall signify unto the rest of the Bishops within your Province this his Highnesse's plea∣sure &c. Fox p. 1183. See likewise Stat. 3. and 4. Edw. 6.10. c. This he did when as the second Nicene Council not only had allowed, but recommended the use of them. But he proceeded also further than this; and declared the worshiping and veneration of any such Images or Relicks to be repugnant to Gods word, and unlawful, superstitious, idolatrous. See the 22 of the 42 Articles; and Article to Winchester 11; and the Doctrine of his Homilies. By vertue of such Supremacy, He imposed (An. Dom. 1547) a Book of Homilies, not approved by any Synod before, nor after till 1552, if then; in which Book were stated several Controversies of Divinity. See Ar∣ticle 11 of the 42 referring to these Homilies for the stating of Justification ex solâ fide; the King forbidding the Clergy to preach any Doctrine repugnant to the same Homilies, under pain of being silenced, or otherwise punished.injoyning administra∣tion of the Communion in both inds. See before, §. 108. Winchester Articles 15. Fox p. 1255. By vertue of such Supremacy, He laid a command upon the Clergy to administer the Communion to the
people in both kinds,Stat. 1. Ed. 6.1. c. Co∣cil. Con∣stant. 13. sess. See before, §. 118. contrary to the Injunction of the Council of Constance; and without any preceding con∣futation of a National Synod; and notwithstanding the former late decree concerning the non-necessity there∣of by the same National Synod in Henry the Eighth's days, in the second of the Six Articles. In suppres∣sieg the for∣mer Church Liungies, Ordiaals, and other Rituals.By vertue of such Supremacy, He caused to be re∣moved and suppressed the former Church Liturgies and Rituals for the publick Prayers, for the celebration of the Communion and other Sacraments, for the Ordi∣nations of the Clergy. See Fox p. 1211. The King (saith he) with the body and state of the Privy Coun∣cil then being, directed out his Letters of request and strait commandment to the Bishops in their Diocess to cause and warn all Parsons, Curates, &c. to bring in and deliver up all Antiphoners, Missals, Grailes, Pro∣cessionals, Manuals, Legends, Pies, Ordinals, &c; and all other Books of Service, the having whereof might be any let to the Service now set forth in English; charging also and commanding all such as should be found disobedient in this behalf to be committed unto ward. Saying in the Articles sent to Winchester, That the Mass was full of abuses,Fox p. 1235. and had very few things of Christ's institution, besides the Epistle, Gos∣pel, and the Lord's Prayer, and the words of the Lord's Supper: that the rest for the more part were invented and devised by Bishops of Rome, and by other men of the same sort [i. e. by Ecclesiastical Constitution] and therefore were justly taken away by the Statutes and Laws of this Realm [this being the perswasion of those times, That the King as Supreme might change, as to him seemed good, any thing established only by humane- (tho it were Church-) authority.] And see Stat. 3, 4. Edw. 6.10. c. Whereas the King hath of late set forth and established an uniform Order of Common-Prayer &c; and whereas in the former Service-Books are things corrupt, untrue, vain, and superstitious: Be it enacted by the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parlia∣ment
assembled, that all Missals, Ordinals, &c. here∣tofore used for Service of the Church shall be utterly abolished, extinguished, &c. And injet∣ting u new Forms of ce∣lebrating the Commu∣nion.But you must observe that all was not done at once, or at the first, but by certain steps and degrees. For Exam∣ple. The Form of administring the Communion suffered three Alterations or Reformations one after another; the later still departing further from the ancient Form used in the Church than the former. First the King: assembled certain Bishops and others at Windsor in the first year of his Reign (such as he pleased to appoint) to compile a new Form of celebrating the Communion according to the Rule (saith Fox p. 1184) of the Scrip∣tures of God, and first usage of the Primitive Church. Yet the Bishops at this time so ordered and moderated the matter (which perhaps may be the reason of those words in Fox see before §. 125.See Heylin Hist. of K. Edw. p. 57. That the Protector at Windsor in the zealous defence of Gods truth opposed the Bishops) that the whole office of the Mass should proceed as for∣merly in the Latine, even to the very end of the Canon, and the receiving of the Sacrament by the Priest him∣self. Which done the Priest is appointed to begin the exhortation in English. [We be come together at this time Dearly Beloved &c.] as it is in the present English Liturgy. After which follows also the disswasion of great offenders impenitent from receiving, the General Confession and Absolution, the Prayer [We presume not &c.] and so the administration of the Eucharist to the people in both kinds. The words of the Rubrick in that first Order of the Communion reprinted at London 61 are these, The time of the Communion [of the people] shall be immediately after that the Priest shall have received the Sacrament, without the varying of any other Rite or Ceremony in the Mass (until other order shall be provided.) But as heretofore usually the Priest hath done with the Sacrament of the Body, to prepare bless and consecrate so much as will serve the people, so it shall yet continue still after the same manner and form; save that, he shall bless and consecrate the biggest Cha∣lice
or some fair and convenient Cup or Cups full of Wine with some water put unto it, and that day, not drink it up all himself; but taking one only sup or draught leave the rest upon the Altar covered, and thus exhort the people, Dearly beloved &c. Thus the Rubrick. And this Form (as Mr. Fox goes on) ex∣habited unto the King was by his Majesty's Council particularly sent to every Bishop of the Realm, re∣quiring and commanding them, by their Letters on the Kings Majesty's behalf, that they should forthwith have diligent respect to the due execution thereof &c. In which Letter the motive urged by the Council why this new Form was drawn up and imposed, is; That the Statute of the former Parliament, ordering that the Sacrament should be distributed unto the people in both kinds, might be well executed, in such sort as is agreeable with the word of God [as if for the di∣stribution of the Sacrament in both kinds there was any need of altering or superadding any thing to the Mass; when as, with that same Form of the Mass it was in the publick Com∣munions, for many Centuries, only so distributed; and when as that same Form of the Mass is urged by Protestants, as contrary to communicating the people only in one kind; but the true cause of altering it I shall shew you by and by.] Now this new Form was thus imposed by the King and his Council, before allowed by any Synod of the Clergy, or Act of Parliament; which were procured afterward in the second Parliament of King Edward. Meanwhile such alterations in King Edward's time about the Do∣ctrine and the Administration of this Sacrament as they were uncanonical, so they were, in this respect, also very hurtful; in that they occasioned (in the ignorant especially) much profaneness and irreverence toward the Blessed Sacrament in those days; as you may partly also gather from an Act (1. Edw. 6.1. c.) made against such irreverent speaking against it. For whereas the Sacrament was, according to ancient custome, delivered to each Communicant in a small round Wafer, hence they gave it the name of Round-Robin. And because the
parts thereof, that were reserved to be carried to the sick, were hanged up over the Altar in a Pix or Box; they named it Jack in a Box; and instead of the Sacra∣ment of the Altar, called it the Sacrament of the Halter. (See Heylin's Hist. of Reform. 49.63.) Such profaneness followed the remedy of what they called Superstition. Secondly,2. Of Ordina∣tion. See 3, 4. Edw. 6.10. c. Having likewise condemned, amongst o∣ther superstitious Books, the former Church-form of Ordination and Consecration of Bishops and Priests, the King caused a new Form to be prescribed, upon this pretence in the Act of Parliament, That so concord and unity might be had, within his Majesty's domini∣ons, in these Ordinations. [But could not this have been done without innovation, by strictly confining all to the use of the former Church form; or, if these were various, to some one of them?]Stat. 3, 4. Edw. 6.12. c. Now for the compiling of this new Form the Parliament orders, That such, as by fix Prelates,See before, §. 42. and six others to be appointed by the King, or by the major part of them, should be devised for that purpose and set forth under the great Seal, should by ver∣tue of their Act (without obtaining or requiring any rati∣fication thereof from any Synod) be lawfully used, and none other, any law or prescription to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. In which new Form, amongst other things, which were in the former, now cast out, this is one, (to the great contradiction of all Antiquity) The Bishops conferring on the ordained Presbyters po∣testatem offerendi sacrificium propriè dictum & verè pro∣pitiatorium (see in what sense understood and explained by the Church in Discourse of the Eucharist, §. 251. &c) Deo, Missasque celcbrandi tam pro vivis quam pro defunctis. Quod omnem superat impietatem, saith Mason de Minist. p. 242. 17. c. And this is another: The Oath of Sub∣mission of the Ordained or Consecrated to the Supre∣macy of the Patriarch: instead of which is prescribed another Oath, to the Supremacy of the Temporal Prince. From which Regal Supremacy also we find Cranmer (after fifteen years governing the Province of Canter∣bury) receiving, at the coming in of a new Sovereign, a
new Licence of ordaining Bishops and Priests therein durante Beneplacito Regis. [The Form, as Sanders p. 170. hath set it down, runs thus, Quandoquidem omnis juris∣dicendi authoritas atque etiam jurisdictio omnimoda, tam illa quae ecclesiastica dicitur, quam seecularis, a Regia pe∣testate velut a supremo capite manta &c. Ad ordinan∣dum igitur quoscunque intra Diaecesim tuam Cantuarien∣sem & ad omnes etiam sacros & Presbyteratus ordines pro∣movendum, per praesentes ad nostrum beneplacitum duratu∣ros, tibi damus potestatem.] And some such thing is in∣timated by Mr. Prin (unbishoping of Timothy p. 80.) I must inform our Bishops (saith he) for their Learn∣ing, that all the Bishops in King Edward the Sixth's time had special clauses in their Letters Patents autho∣rizing them to ordain Ministers and Deacons; as Bi∣shop Poynet's, Scory's, Coverdale's Patents (5. Edw. 6. pars. 1.) testify at large (and there is no wonder in this, if you recall to mind Arch-Bishop Cranmer's An∣swers to the Queries made concerning these matters re∣cited before §. 105. n. 3.): Which Patents, if they imply such a Supremacy Ecclesiastical in the Prince, as that he may, if he please, prohibit any Ecclesiastical person at all from ordaining Ministers in his dominions, are contrary to the first Thesis above. §. 2. But yet this new Ordinal was not so well purified from former Superstitions,See in Fox p. 1366. the Kings and Earl of War wick's Let∣ters. but that some who were presented to Bishopricks were stumbled therewith; and the Kings dispensation was obtained, in order to the consecrating of Bishop Hooper, for his not observing of some things therein; and particularly for his not taking the new Oath, either that of obedience to the Arch-Bishop; or that of the Kings Supremacy; which perhaps he, late∣ly seasoned abroad with Calvin's Doctrine,See before: §.37. could not so easily digest. Thirdly,3 of Common Prayer. Not long after the production of the new Form in administring the Communion, in the second year of his Reign he caused it to be reviewed; and also then to be drawn up a new Form of Common Prayer for Mattins and Evensong, and the Administration of
the other Sacraments of the Church (if I may use the phrase of the Act, 2. Edw. 6.1. c.): which Form com∣posed by seven Bishops, and seven other learned men of the Clergy chosen by the King (yet one of them Day Bishop of Chicester, after it was done, refused to sub∣scribe it; who was afterward also turned out of his Bishoprick. See Heylin's Hist. of Reform. p. 65. quoting the Register of Petworth) was authorized by Act of Parliament, and at the same time consented to (as it seems by what is urged above §. 110) by a Convocation of the Clergy: of which see what is said §.126. And the pretence of making this new Form, in the Preface of that Act, is this, That, whereas of long time there had been in the Realm divers Forms of Common Prayer, the use of Sarum, of York, of Bangor and Lin∣colne; and besides the same, now of late much more divers and sundry Forms and Fashions have been used &c: to stay Innovation and Rites concerning the Pre∣mises; his Highness, being pleased to bear with the frailty and weakness of his subjects in that behalf, hath appointed the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury &c. having as well respect to the most pure Christian Religion taught by the Scripture, as to the usages in the Primi∣tive Church, to draw and make one convenient and meet order, rite and fashion of Common-Prayer and Administration to be had and used in his Majesty's Realms. Thus the Act. But to remedy these inno∣vations or diversities of Forms, how easy had it been to establish any one of the ancient Forms? Or at least reasonable, to retain in the new draught those things wherein all the former Church-Services agreed? And not themselves to innovate, for the hindering of inno∣vations? But the fact discovers the intention. Out of which was ejected the Sacri∣fice of the Mass.For in this new draught was ejected and left out the Sacrifice of the Mass, or the oblation to God of the Holy Eucharist, as propitiatory or impetratory of any bene∣fits, to the living, or to the dead; contrary to the be∣life of former Church and Councils, as is mentioned before §. 118. And for this reason were the Altars
in Churches commanded to be changed into Tables; that the eating might be thought on, but not the offering. Whenas Hooper had preached before the King, That so long as Altars remained, both the ignorant people, and the ignorant and evil-perswaded Priest would al∣ways dream of Sacrifice: and besides, the great men about the Court (saith Dr. Heylin, Hist. of Reform. p. 95.) had promised themselves no small hopes of profit by the dis-furnishing these Altars of the Hangings, Palls, Plate, and other rich Utensils. — The leaving of one Chalice to every Church with a Cloth or covering for the Communion-Table being thought sufficient. Upon the same excuse were the Chaunteries, Free-Chap∣pels &c. seized on, as chiefly erected for the relieving of the deceased with the offering of this Sacrifice, and the Alms and Prayers accompanying it; of which see before §. 138. The benefit of which Sacrifice for the dead was yet a thing the more maintainable in those days; because the new Form still retained this manner of praying for the dead, Grant unto this thy Servant that the sins which he committed in this world be not imputed unto him; but that he, escaping the gates of Hell, and pains of eternal darkness, may ever dwell in the region of light with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the place where is no weeping, sorrow, nor heavi∣ness, &c. See the Order for Burial, Fol. 28. For the exclusion of this Sacrifice,Where 1. Concern∣ing the al∣terations in the first Com¦mon-Prayer Book if K. Edward's in relation to the Sac ifice of the Eu∣charist. you may find in the new Communion (see Communion, Fol. 128.) all those expressions in the former Liturgy, that signify it, dili∣gently cancelled (forbidding also the elevation of the Host after Consecration;) as these following, In the Canon before Communicating; Te supplices rogamus ac petimus, uti accepta habeas & benedicas haec dona, haec mu∣nera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata; inprimis quae Tibi offeri∣mus pro Ecclesiâ tuâ sanctâ Catholicâ &c. And, Memento Domine famulorum &c, pro quibus tibi offcrimus hoc sa∣crificium laudis pro redemptione animarum suarum, pro spe salutis & incolumitatis suae &c. And, Memores ejusdem Christi filii tui, tam beatae passionis &c. offerimus praeclarae
Majestati tuae de tuis donis ac datis, Hostiam puram, Hosti∣am sanctam, Hostiam inmaculatam, panem sanctum vit aeternae, & calicem salutis perpetuae: supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris, & accepta habere sicuti ac∣cepta habere dignatus es munera pueri tui justi Abel, & sacrificium Patriarchae nostril Abrahae, & quod tibi obtu∣lit summus sacerdos tuus Melchisedech, sanctum sacrifici∣um, immaculatam hostiam. Jube haec perferri per manus Sancti Angeli tui in sublime altare tuum in conspectu Di∣vinae Majestatis tuae: ut quotquot ex hac altaris participa∣tione, sacrosanctum Filii tui corpus & sanguinem sumpseri∣mus, omni benedictione caelesti & gratiâ repleamur. And that in Post-Communion; Praesta, ut sacrificium, quod oculie tuae Majestatis indignus obtuli, Tibi sit acceptabile, & omnibus, pro quibus illud obtuli, sit, te miserante, pro∣pitianile. These Expressions I say are cancelled, and, instead of these, the new Form makes an oblation to God, not of the consecrated Gifts or Sacrament, (at least expresly) but of our thanks, and of our own per∣sons and service. But this Oblation, in imitation of the former, it brings in immediately after the Consecra∣tion, and before Communicating, whilst the cones∣crated Elements yet remain upon the Table. This new Form I thought good to transcribe; because perhaps you may not have the Book. Wherefore (O Lord and heavenly Father) according to the institution of thy dearly beloved Son, we do celebrate and make here before thy Divine Majesty, with these thy holy Gifts, the Memorial, which thy Son hath willed us to make, having in remembrance his blessed Passion &c. [where, whether some of the Composers (who were of different per∣swasions see before, §.127, 128.) retaining the former in∣tentions under an only-varied expression might not extend these ambiguous words to an offering of the holy misteries to God the Father, as a commemorative Sacrifice of that of his Son upon the Cross, I cannot say: but thus it goes on] Rendring unto thee most hearty thanks for the innu∣merable benefits procured unto us by the same. En∣tirely desiring thy Fatherly goodness mercifully to ac∣cept
this our Sacrifice of praise and thansgiving. Most humbly beseeching thee to grant, that by the merits and death of thy Son Jesus Christ, We and all thy whole Church may obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his Passion. And here we offer and present unto thee (O Lord) our selves, our souls and bodies to be a reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto Thee: humbly beseeching thee, that whosoever shall be par∣takers of this Holy Communion, may worthily receive the most precious body and blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, and be fulfilled with thy grace and heavenly benediction [the ancienter Form, Ut quotquot ex hac altaris participatione Sacro-sanctum Filii tui corpus & sanguinem sumpserimus, omni benedictione &c. replea∣mur, seems to be thus changed, because Christ's body and blood were held by some only to be present to, and received by, the worthy Communicant, and not to the Symbols.] And altho we be unworthy &c. to offer unto thee any Sacri∣fice; yet we beseech thee to accept this our bounden duty and service, and command these our Prayers and Supplications [put instead of panis sanctus & calix sa∣lutes] by the ministery of thy Holy Angels to be brought up into thy holy Tabernacle [formerly. Altare] be∣fore the sight of thy Divine Majesty &c. Thus were things mended in the first Form of King Edward.2 Concern∣ing the fur∣ther altera∣tions in the second Com∣mon-Prayer Book in re∣lation to the same Sacri∣fice. Stat 5, 6. Edw. 6.1. c. But in the latter Common-Prayer Book, which came out a new-reformed three years after, there is no oblation at all made, nor no petition put up, be tween the Consecration, and the receiving of the Holy Mysteries: but the one immediately follows the other. The Collect of humble access [We do not presume to come &c.] and the Lord's Prayer with its Preface [Divinâ institutione formati audemus dicere;] and the Memorial or Prayer of Oblation; which are put, according to the manner of the Mass, after the consecration of the holy Mysteries, and before the receiving of them in the first Form, are all removed in the second: and the first placed before the Elements begin to be consecrated; and the other two placed after the holy Mysteries are
removed from the Altar or Table, and are distributed to the Communicants; and in the Prayer of Oblation, the first part thereof [We do celebrate and make the Me∣morial &c.] is omitted. The reason of which altera∣tion seems to be, That so the new Service might still appear more remote, from making any oblation to God of the consecrated Mysteries remaining on the Table; or from making any request to God in the vertue of the Body and Blood of our Saviour there present. But,3. Coucern∣g the re∣duction of sne things ouching this matter in the new Cö∣mon Prayer Book prepa∣red for Scot∣land to the first Form of K. Edward. again, in the last English Liturgy prepared for Scotland, the sober moderation of those, who governed the Church at this time, thought fit to reduce things, as far, as without offence they might, to the first Form of King Edward: restoring all these Prayers to their former place again; and re-inserting the Memorial in the Front of the Prayer of Oblation. Moreover, in the Prayer for the State of the Catholick Church, add∣ing these words [We commend especially unto thy merci∣ful goodness the Congregation here assembled to celebrate the Commemoration of the most precious death and sacrifice of thy Son and our Saviour Jesus Christ;] before which Prayer also they order an oblation to be of the Bread and Wine, prepared for the Sacrament, upon the Lord's Table. All which they seem to have done, as regretting the mistaken zeal of their Fore-fathers, mis-led by Calvin and other forreign Reformers; but not finding as yet a season for a more compleat reduction of the Reforma∣tion to the former universal practice of the Church of God. Much com∣plained of in Laudensi∣um autoca∣tacrisis.Of all which things thus complains the contrary Party, who looked upon their alterations with a zea∣lous eye, in Laudensium Autocatacrisis p. 109. As for that wicked Sacrifice of the Mass, which the Canon puts at the back of the Consecration, the English [i. e. the later Reformation of Common-Prayer Book under King Edward] banisheth it all utterly out of their Book. But the faction, to shew their zeal in their reforming the Errors of the English Church their Mother, 1. puts down here in our Book [the Book sent to Scotland,] at
the back of the Consecration, their Memento and Prayer of Oblation. 2. That Prayer of Thansgiving [begin∣ning O Lord &c. we thy humble servants entirely desire] which the English sets after the Communion, (in a place where it cannot be possibly abused, as it is in the Mass, for a propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood,) they transpose and set it just in the old place where it stood in the order of Sarum at the back of the Consecration, and before the Communion. 3. The clause of the Missal which for its savour of a Corporal presence the English put out of this Prayer [may wor∣thily receive the most precious body and blood of thy Son Christ Jesus] they have here restored. 4. That we may plainly understand, that this Prayer is so transplanted, and supplied for this very end, that it may serve, as it did of old in the Missal, for a Prayer of Obla∣tion of that unbloody Sacrifice by the Priest for the sins of the world, behold the first eight lines of it, which of old it had in the Missal, but which in the Re∣formation [the second Reformation under Edward] were scraped out, are plainly restored; wherein we profess to make, and, over again, to make, before God's Di∣vine Majesty, a Memorial; as Christ hath commanded. Which making not only the Papists, but Heylin, speak∣ing from Canterbury, expounds, far otherwise, than either Andrews, Hooker, Mountague, or the grossest of the English Divines, for a true, proper, corporal, visible, un∣bloody, sacrificing of Christ; for which [sacrificing] first the Apostles, and then all Ministers, are as truly Priests, tho Evangelical and after the order of Mel∣chisedech, as ever the Sons of Aaron were under the Law; and the Communion-Table, as true and proper an Altar, as ever was the Brasen Altar of Moses [you may see Dr. Heylin's words in Antid. p. 6. § 2.] 5. After the Consecration and Oblation they put to the Lord's Prayer with the Missals Preface, Audemus dicere. Where the Papists tell us, that the Priest having offered up, in an unbloody Sacrifice, the body of Christ, for the reconciling of us to the Father, becomes bold to say
with a loud voice, Pater noster. The English, to ba∣nish such absurdities, put away that naughty Preface, and removed the Prayer it self from that place: But our men, to shew their Orthodoxy, repone the Prayer in the own old place; and set before it the old Preface. 6. The first English Prayer [We do not presume &c.] which stood before the Consecration (where the pas∣sages of eating Christ's Body, and drinking Christ's Blood could not possibly be detorted to a corporal presence) yet now in our Book must change the place, and be brought to its old Stance, after the Consecration and Oblation, immediately before the Communion, as a Prayer of humble access. Thus Autocatacrisis sound∣ed the Trumpet, not without a sad storm falling after∣ward upon the heads of the English Clergy. Aad the C∣lemation of the Eucha∣rist prohibited, whn note other to commu∣nicate wih the Priest.All use of the Eucharist, as a Sacrifice, being thus dis-avowed by King Edward's Reformation, and no benefit acknowledged of this high Service, save to the Communicants in their receiving it, and in the Priests distributing of it to the people; in the next place the Priest was prohibited the celebration thereof, whenso∣ever there were no other Communicants besides him∣self. [Tho this communicating of the Priest alone is no de∣signed, but a casual, thing, as hath been said; and can only be charged upon the peoples neglect and fault: who ha∣ving the same need thereof, and benefit thereby, as the Priest, might, being many, at least by turns, accompany him in the dayly breaking of that celestial Bread (if it were so hainous a thing for him to feed thereon alone) rather than that this the most honorable part of the divine Service should be discontinued in the Church;See before, §.118. contrary to the former uni∣versal practice of Christianity, and also the late judgment, under Henry the Eighth, of the English Clergy.] It was ordered therefore, that all those, called private, Masses should be suppressed: add that on the Litany-days, Wednesdays and Frydays, and all other solemn days of worship, when there was none disposed to commu∣nicate with the Priest, he, after the Litany ended, should put upon him a plain Albe or Surplice, with a
Cope, and say all things at the Altar appointed to be said at the Celebration of the Lord's Supper,See K. Edw. first Com∣mon-Prayer Book Rubi∣fol. 133. until after the Offertory: and then letting alone the fore∣said Celebration, add one or two of the Collects which are annexed to the Communion; and then turning him to the people, shall let them depart with the ac∣customed Blessing. And thus first began the Christian Sacrifice,See the first Com. Prayer Book of Ed. 6. fol. 133. (that ne∣ver ceased formerly in the Church every day, or at least on all solemn days to be offered,) by certain degrees to be omitted in this purified Church; the practice there∣of decreasing, from once a day, to once a week; from once a week, to once a month; from this to once a year; and of late in many Churches not to be had at all. Tho they, who in these days of King Edward made the first breach upon the Church's former practice, as it were foreseeing this evil, endeavoured in some part to remedy or prevent it, by enjoyning: That, in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches [where they sup∣pose, that there should be still dayly Communion. See King Edward's first Common-Prayer-Book, Fol. 113, compared with Fol. 123.] there should always in them some com∣municate with the Priest that ministreth: And that in Parish-Churches, whereas the Parishioners of every Parish were ordered in such a course as they were wont to find the holy Loaf formerly, now to offer every Sunday, at the time of the offertory, the just valor and price of the holy Loaf, with all such money and other things, as were wont to be offered with the same, out of which the Pastors were to provide sufficient Bread and Wine for the weekly Communion; In these Parish-Churches, I say, it was enjoyned, that some one at the least [for one, besides the Priest, was as yet suf∣ficient] of that house in the Parish, to which by course it appertained to offer for the charges of the Com∣munion, should on that Sunday receive the Holy Com¦munion with the Priest. Which [saith the Book] may be better done, for that they know before, when their course cometh, and may therefore dispose themselves
to the worthy receiving of the Sacrament. And by this means the Minister, having always some to com∣municate with him, may accordingly solemnize so high and holy mysteries with all the suffrages and due order appointed for the same. But in the second re∣formed Book these Orders are relaxed, the weekly offer∣ing by turns for the charges of the Communion now remitted, the Celebration of the Lord's Supper or Com∣munion required in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches every Sunday; and that in Parish-Churches it should be celebrated at least three times in a year; and that it should be celebrated in no place, at no time, unless there be three to communicate besides him that office∣ates. By which, when none or only fewer than three offered to communicate with the Priest, he was necessi∣tated to omit this Service, as well in Cathedral as Pa∣rish-Churches; notwithstanding any Injunction of fre∣quentation. But the first Innovators might have pru∣dently discerned, that when as the Celebration of this Service, thus, would depend only on the peoples de∣votion, either a reception of the mysteries by the Priest alone must some times be permitted, or this Sacrifice many times omitted. [There are two Injunctions in∣deed, wherein these Reformers seem to have endeavour∣ed, to some degree, the preservation of the former Devotion of the Clergy in Prayer and Communion. The one,See the Rub. after the Communion. this (forementioned.) That in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, where be many Priests and Dea∣cons, they-should all receive the Communion with the Minister every Sunday at the least, except they [i. e. some, not all, of them] had a reasonable cause to the contrary.See the P∣face to the Com. Prayer Book. — The other, this (for saying their office dayly, as formerly,) — That all Priests and Deacons shall be bound to say dayly the Morning and Evening Prayer [yet how short this in respect of the office they quit∣ted!] either openly, in the Parish Church or Chappel, if at home and not being otherwise reasonably letted; or privately, except they be let by Preaching, study∣ing of Divinity, or some other urgent cause. But
here also the two exceptive Clauses annext [Except they have a reasonable cause to the contrary, in the former; and Except they be let by Preaching, studying of Divinity or some other urgent cause, in the latter,] have rendered these Injunctions, as to the general, without vigour and effect, or practice in this Church. Which the Prudence of those who contrived the Scotch Liturgy well observing thought fit thus to qualify the latter Exception:See the Pre∣face to the Scotch Li∣turgy. Of which Cause, (say they) if it be frequently pretended, they are to make the Bishop of the Diocess, or the Arch-Bishop of the Province the Judge and Allower.] Aad In∣vocation of Saiats ex∣punged out of the Lita∣nies.Besides the Sacrifice of the Mass thus removed out of the second new Form of the Communion; the Invo∣cation and Suffrages of the Saints were also expunged out of the publick Litanies: When-as, even in the first English Litany put out under King Edward, after O Holy Blessed and Glorious Trinity &c. have mercy upon us, it followed thus, Holy Virgin Mary, Mother of God our Saviour Jesus Christ Pray for us. All holy Angels and Arch-Angels, and all holy orders of blessed Spirits pray for us. All holy Patriarchs and Prophets, Apostlet, Martyrs, Con∣fessors, and Virgins, and all the blessed company of Heaven, Pray for us. Likewise in the Parliament-Act, 3, 4. Edw. 6.10. c. it is commanded: That in the Primers the sentences of Invocation or Prayer to Saints be blotted and clearly put out of the same. And this contrary to the former universal practice of the Catholick Church. See Chur. Govern. 4. Par. 98. §. Ad the ne∣cessity of Sa∣cerdotal Co∣fession re∣laxed.Besides this, in the same new Form is remitted the necessity of Sacerdotal Confession, and the performing of such penitence and humiliation as the Priest shall judge meet; and the receiving of his absolution and re∣conciliation for those who are conscious to themselves of mortal sins, or grievous crimes, before they may presume to approach to Gods Altar, and to the holy Communion of Christs body and blood (contrary to the former decrees of superior Councils, and practice of the Church Catholick:) Instead whereof it is only here ordered, That if any be an open and notorious
evil liver, (so that the Congregation by him is offend∣ed) or have done any wrong to his Neighbors, the Curate shall not admit him to the Communion before his giving satisfaction of his repentance to the Con∣gregation, and at least declaring his full purpose to recompence the party wronged: And, before the Communion,Fol. 123. a general exhortation made, That if any be a blasphemer, adulterer, or be in malice, or envy, or any other grievous crime, he should not come to that holy Table, except he be truly sorry therefore, and earnestly-minded to leave the same vices, and do trust himself to be reconciled to Almighty God, and in charity with all the world. This is said indeed in the second Exhortation,Fol. 124. If there be any whose Con∣science is troubled, or grieved in any thing, lacking comfort or counsel, let him come to me, or to some other discreet and learned Priest taught in the Law of God, and confess and open his sin and grief secretly; that he may receive such ghostly counsel, advice, and comfort, that his conscience may be relieved; and that, of us, as of the Ministers of God and of the Church, he may receive comfort and absolution, to the satisfaction of his mind, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtsulness. But the words following [viz. Re∣quiring such, as shall be satisfied with a general Confession, not to be offended with them that do use, to their further satisfying, the auricular and secret Confession to the Priest; nor those also which think needful or convenient, for the quietness of their consciences, particularly to open their sins to the Priest, to be offended with them that are satisfied with their humble confession to God, and the general confession to the Church.] I say these words (which are omitted in the second reformed Com∣mon-Prayer-Book, I suppose, as speaking too favour∣ably of the use of Auricular Confession) do argue, that thenceforth no necessity of Sacerdotal Confession was imposed upon any, for any crime. Likewise in the Visitation of the Sick it is said; Here shall the sick person make a special confession, if he feel his conscience troubled
with any weighty matter: which is also retained in the second Form of Common-Prayer. But here such Con∣fession is commanded only hypothetically; not, if he have committed, but if his Conscience be troubled with, any weighty matter, which he hath committed. Which unfortunate [If,] as experience hath shewed, quickly ruined the practice of Sacerdotal Confession. [And indeed (with your leave to digress a little) when grievous sins are committed, this [If,] might well have been spared. For 1. every one, that hath committed such sin, as is supposed to have put him out of the State of Grace, and out of his Baptismal Regeneration (for which only the Church requires Sacerdotal Confession) either hath, or ought to have (and probably would have, if the Clergy taught him so) his Conscience troubled; till he hath obtained a new reconciliation to God, by those whom God hath appointed to do this office for him; 2. But if his private repentance, when this is done proportionably to his offence, is sufficient for his recon∣ciliation; yet what grievous sinner, after much repen∣tance, ought not still to be troubled concerning the un∣worthines of it, till he hath consulted, in such an ha∣zard, his spiritual Father much more knowing therein than himself? And then if all such ought to be troubled; all ought to confess. Indeed lets trouble of mind is many times a sign of less penitence; and, of such high offend∣ers, those have most need of the Priest's cure, who are least troubled. And those who are least troubled, ought to be so much the more troubled, that they are so little troubled: and ought to go to the Priest and confess such sin, that he may excite them to greater trouble and sor∣row for it, and may put them to some pain in search∣ing their wound to the bottome, that so it may be more capable of cure. And on the other side; those, who in, and after long penitence, and even from all their life, are much troubled for such their crimes, are likely to be the best penitents; and consequently to have least need of Sacerdotal Confession for the examining of their repentance: which examination, and not consolation, I
imagine, is the chief end and design of the Reformed's prescribing such Confession to those, who are troubled. 3. But then add to this; that when once such Sacerdotal Confession for great sinners is commanded by the Church (i. e. by a lawful superior Council) to be observed, as necessary, jure divino, or by divine Institution, Now, it comes to pass, that tho such Confession were supposed not necessary to be observed or practised from any such divine institution; yet, after decreed by such a Coun∣cil, (as who have authority to impose it also upon seve∣ral other motives; from which they think it the most beneficial and the securest course for such sinners so to do;) it becomes necessary to be practised and observed as the Church's constitution, even by those, who think it not necessary jure divino. 4. But yet further; were not such Church-constitution in this respect obliging; yet when as a thing is so far disputable and doubtful, whether jure divino, as that such a judgment, as this of a superiour Council, hath declared, it so; and when∣as on the otherside we our selves grant thus much, that such thing, if not necessary, is very beneficial, and may upon this title be lawfully enjoyned by the Church's Superiors: reason will dictate here, that it is the most prudent way, both for the Subjects of a particular Church to observe it; and for the Superiors of such Church to enjoyn it, upon pain of incurring their censures, to be observed. But now to return to our business.]
CHAP. X. Of the Second Change of the Publick Liturgy in his time. Ia setting forth a se∣cond Form of Common Prayer than which the first was in many things much more moderate.THus much concerning the Reformation made in the first new Form of the Publick Service under King Edward, (to say nothing here of the first additions to the Mass made at Windsor) much more temperate, and less varying from the former Service than the present is; as ordinarily things do not on a suddain move from one extreme to another. In which Book also it is to be noted; that many of the alterations, which were made, were only omissions; As of the Sacrifice of the Mass; of Invocation of Saints; of Auricular Confession; of Elevation of the Eucharist (Adoration being not-pro∣habited) &c. without tying any to professing his faith to be contrary to such things as were omitted: which I impute to the wariness and moderation of some of the Composers, who retained a different perswasion from the rest. See before, §. 127. And again, that in it were many former usages of the Church still retained: which gave great offence to the forreign Reformers; and to other Precisians here, who had been nursed abroad under their Discipline. Amongst which usages retained may be numbred these. At the Communion, in the Prayer for the estate of the Church Catholick, a solemn Com∣memoration of the Saints, and other faithful departed,Fol. 128. (which was thought fit by the late Composers of the Scotch Liturgy to be restored again in part into the same Prayer; where is made a distinct and different Com∣memoration of other faithful deceased, and of the Saints deceased) Prayer for the dead, and that in the same manner, as formerly: See Burial of the dead, Fol 28. (as supposing some of them in a state purgative or bet∣terable by such Prayers. See before, §. 147.) Exorcisme
[I command thee, unclean Spirit, that thou depart &c. Fol. 2.] and anction of Infants in Baptisme.Fol. 4. Sanctifying, or Benediction of the Water in the Font before it be used in Baptisme,Fol. 8. (resumed by the Scotch Liturgy.) Extrcam Ʋnction also still retained. Consecrating only so much Bread and Wine, as shall suffice for the persons appointed to receive the Holy Communion. And ming∣ling Water with the Wine.Fol. 126. Reservation of the Sacrament after publick Communion to be carried home to the sick if there be any that day to be communicated (which reservation were it made for some longer time I see not how this difference can alter the lawfulness thereof.Visit. Sick. fol. 22.) The quotidian Celebration of the Eucharist in all Ca∣thedral and Collegiate Churrches as yet practiced, tho not enjoined.Fol. 21. See Ruhr. Fol. 123. The Altars still left in the same Position and with the same furniture, as formerly. The Communion-bread made in the same Figure as formerly, only to be somewhat thicker and without any print upon them. The same Holy Vestments, Albes, Copes, still retained. The Oblation made after Consecration, before receiving, spoken of before. And chiefly, the retaining still, in the Consecration and other passages of the Communion, all those former expressi∣ons of the Mass, which imply, whether by Trans- or Con-substantiation, a corporal presence. For such pre∣sence was not a thing declared against, till the Fifth year of King Edw. in Art. 28. [and then declared against upon this Philosophical reason: because ejusdem hominis corpus in multis locis simul esse non potest. But this part a∣gainst real or corporal Presence, with its reason, was after∣ward thought fit to be cast out of this Article, when they were reviewed by Queen Elizabeth's Synod 1562.] The Obligation of Henry the Eighth's Six Articles being void∣ed, all persons in this point were then left, as it were, to their own opinion: amongst whom, as some were Zuinglians, so a major part seem to have been in the former days of King Edward either of the Roman, or Lutheran, perswasion. Neither is there any mention concerning the manner of Christs Presence in the Eucharist
in the Articles proposed to Winchester, or in any other of the Kings Injunctions: and therefore Bonner and Gardiner (when forced to preach in publick) to the great offence of some of their Auditors, made this the chief subject of their Sermons; and many, in the pub∣lick Disputations had in Oxford and Cambridge about this matter, freely and ex animo maintained such cor∣poral Presence. See before, §. 107. And Cranmer him∣self also for a long time was a Lutheran in his opinion, till at last he was otherwise perswaded by Ridley, Fox p. 1115. and p. 1703. Neither was there such agreement between Ridley and Peter Martyr at first: but that the one in the Oxford Disputations held a change after Con∣secration in the substance of the Bread and Wine; which the other denyed in Cambridge. Fox p. 1255. Thus stood things somewhat moderated in the first Form:In which se∣cond Book are rectified and remo∣ved many thing which gave offence in the for∣mer. against which therefore were made many com∣plaints. Calvin writ to the Protector soon after it was set forth; where he incites him to a new Reformation thereof: and after having found fault with. Prayer for the Dead he goes on, — Sunt & alia non perinde dam∣nanda fortasse, sed tamen ejusmodi, ut excusari non possint. Illa omnia abscindi semel praestiterit, ut nihil in Ecclesiâ Dei usurpetur, quod non & ipsius verbo conforme sit, & ad Ecclesiae aedificationem pertineat; ita verò tolerandi sunt infirmi, ut ad meliora promoveantur. After this, about 1551. Epistle, p. 135. he writ thus to Arch-Bishop Cranmer. — Sic correctae sunt externae superstitiones, ut re∣sidui maneant innumeri surculi, qui assiduè pullulent. Imò ex corruptelis Papatus audio relictam esse congeriem, quae non obscuret modò, sed propemodum obruat purum & genui∣num Dei cultum. Writ likewise to Bucer, then a Teacher of the reformed Religion in Cambridge, that he should solicite this matter; telling him that he was censured for too much moderation, and might thus free himself from such an aspersion. Epistle, p. 107. — Dominum Protectorem, ut volebas, conatus sum hortari, ut stagitabat praesens rerum status: tuum quoque erit modis omnibus in∣stare, praesertim verbo; ut ritus, qui superstitionis aliquid
redolent, tollant ur e medio. Hoc tibi nominatim commendo, te invidiâ liberes, quâ te falso gravar apud multos non ignoras; nam modiis consiliis te vel authorem vel approba∣torem semper inscribunt. Scio hanc quorundam animis sus∣picionem altius infixam asse, quam ut eam revellere facile sit, eciamfi nihil omittas. Bucer thus excited by Calvin, and also requested by Cranmer, having the Book translated in to Latine, An. 1551. writes a censure thereof; where∣in he desireth the alteration or omission of many things (even to the disallowing of the use of the Surplice, and of such other vestments, as are there appointed; of saying of the second Service at the Altar; of the Pres∣byter's taking the bread in his hand, and the using of the sign of the Cross in the Consecration; besides greater matters, of praying for the dead &c.) Yet, of several of those things, which he would have to be changed, he confessed, both that they were ancient, and might in some manner be inculpably used, but yet thought it better that they should be removed: 1. because not ap∣pointed in Scripture by word or example: 2. because they might be, or also had been, abused'to superstition: 3. because the Church should partake as little as might be of the same usages with Anti-Christ. Bucer Censur. in Ordinat. Eccles. Angl. p. 458. 467. &c. Upon such exceptions taken at the Liturgy, as well from abroad, as also by some of the preciser sort at home (saith Dr. Heylin, Reform, Justif. p. 31. and Hist. of Reform. p. 107.) and because there had risen divers doubts for the fashion and manner of the ministration of the said Service, rather by the curiosity of the Minister and mi∣stakers, than of any other worthy cause (saith the Act of Parliament: it self, 5, 6. Edw. 6.1. c. which shews what a good opinion they had of the former Book) It was committed to be new corrected, but by what per∣sons we know not. The Act, without any such En∣comium of these Reviewers, as of the first Composers, faith only, — That the King caused it to be faithfully and godly perused, explained and made fully perfect. Perhaps
it was corrected (which is one of Dr. Heylin's conje∣ctures: See before, §. 42.) by those who were appoint∣ed by the King about this time to compose a Form of Ordination; which Form the Act joined with this new Service-Book. But it could not be done by the same persons, that composed the former, at least not by all of them; because, Day before this was ejected out of his Bishoprick; and two more Shyp and Holbeck, as I think, before this deceased; and Harley and Taylor were chosen their Successors. The thing matters not much-Thus corrected it was presented to the Parliament, and it only by them authorized to be used. Which second Form (besides casting out several other things that were retained in the former;Among the rest, Prayer for the dead and several expressions that seemed to ser the Reaor Cor∣poral Pre∣seace in the Eucharist. as the Comme∣moration of Saints, and Prayer for the dead; many Rites in the Administration of Baptisme; the liberty of ex∣tream Ʋnction; the Oblation and Prayers in the Com∣munion; which were made immediately after Conse∣cration, spoken-of before §. 148, 149.) above all seems to have taken a vigilant special care for the altering and removing out of the former Form all those passages, Which might, argue any real or corporal Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ (whether it be by Trans- or Con-substantiation, or any other way) with the Sym∣bols. Whereas therefore, in the Prayer of Consecration, these words are in the Missal, Quam oblationem tu Deus in omnibus quaesumus benedictam acceptabilemque facere dig∣neris, ut nobis Corpus & Sanguis fiat; dilectissimi Filii tui Domini Nostri Jesu Christi; and so in the first Form of King Edward these words, Hear us O Merciful Father, we beseech the: and with Holy Spirit and word vouch∣safe to bl ✚ ess and sanc ✚ tify these thy gifts, and crea∣tures of Bread md Wine, that they may be unto us the Body and Blood of thy most dearly beloved Son (Both the Missal and that Form ordering the person consecrating at this time to take both the Bread and the Cup into his hands): Instead of this, the second Form is thus changed, Hear us, O Merciful Father, we beseech thee, and▪ grant, that we▪ receiving these thy Creatures of Bread and
Wine, according to thy Son our Saviour Jesus Christ's holy Institution; in remembrance of his Death and Passion, may be partakers of his most blessed Body and Blood (omitting also the Priests touching or handling the Pattin or Chalice:) which is done according to Bucer's directions in his Censura p. 468. Whereby seems to be avoided the acknowledging of any Presence of Christ's Body and Blood with the Symbols; of which also Bucer saith, p. 476. Antichristianum est affirmare quicquam his elementis adesse Christi extra usum praebitionis & receptionis. For the same reason it seems to be, that the Glory be to God on high &c. and the Benedictus, qui venit in nomine Domini after the Sursum Corda, the one is transferred after the Communion; and the other, o∣mitted. Likewise; whereas in the administring of these Mysteries, the Missal useth this Form, Corpus Domini Jesu Christi custodiat animam tuam in vitam aternam; and so also the first Book of King Edward the Second (as it were against the apprehending of any Real Presence to the Symbols, or any oral feeding on that Body) re∣moveth those words, and placeth instead thereof only these: Take and eat this, in remembrance that Christ dyed for thee, and feed on him in thy heart by Faith with thank∣giving: Again; Drink this in remembrance &c: So, whereas it is said in the first Form in the Player of hum∣ble access, Grant us so to eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood in these holy Mysteries; the second omits [in these holy Mysteries.] Likewise, at the end of the Communion-Service is added this Rubrick (declaring, that kneeling at the participation of the Sa∣crament is required? for a signification of the humble ac∣knowledging of the benefits of Christ given therein unto the worthy receiver; and not, for giving any adoration to the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily re∣ceived; or in regard of any real or essential Presence of Christ's natural Body and Blood.) Whereas its or∣dained in the Administration of the Lord's Supper, that the Communicants kneeling should receive the Holy Communion, which thing is well meant for a
signification of the humble and grateful acknowledg∣ing of the benefits of Christ given unto the worthy receiver, and to avoid the profanation and disorders which about the Holy Communion might else ensue: Lest yet the same kneeling might be thought or taken otherwise, we do declare that it is not meant thereby, that any Adoration is done or ought to be done either unto the Sacramental Bread or Wine there bodily re∣ceived, or unto any real and essential Presence there being of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood. For as con∣cerning the Sacramental Bread and Wine, they remain still in their natural substances, and therefore may not be adored; for that were Idolatry. And as concern∣ing the natural Body and Blood of our Saviour Christ, they are in heaven and not here: for it is against the truth of Christ's true natural Body to be in moe places than one at one time. Thus that Rubrick; thought fit to be omitted in the Common-Prayer-Book of Queen Elizabeth; of which see the Reason below § 179. n. 2. Accordingly the Altar was changed into a Table (the sides whereof were set North and South) set near the Reading-place; ordered, at the Communion time, to be covered with a fair white Linnen Cloth; the other vestments prohibited; save only a Surplice for a Priest, and Rochet for a Bishop; and to take away all Super∣stition, the Communion Bread appointed to be such as is usually eaten at the Table; but the purest of that sort that can conveniently be had, See the Rubricks of King Edward's secondCommon Prayer-Book Fol. 126.And Visita, S ck Fol. 22. And lastly; whereas the first gives caution, that so much Bread and Wine shall be consecrated,Where Concerning the reducti∣on of some∣thing touch¦ing this Pre¦sence made in the new Liturgy for Scotland to K. Edw. frst Form. as shall suffice for the persons ap∣pointed to receive the Holy Communion; except some shall be reserved for the Communion of the Sick: The se∣cond omits any such caution; ordering only, that the Curate have the remains to his own use. But the new Liturgy composed for Scotland, well discerning what these alterations aimed at, reduceth all things to the former way; restores those words in the Consecration [with thy holy spirit and word &c. that
They may be unto us the Body &c.] ordering (again) the Presbyter, that officiates, to take the Pattin and Chalice in his hands; and leaving out also the caution of non-ele∣vation, which was inserted, in the first Book of King Edward: removes the words added in the delivering of the Mysteries [Take and eat this &c.] and instead thereof adds aster the former words the people's response [Amen] according to the custome of Antiquity (See Dionys. Alexand. apud Euseb. Histor. 7. l. 8. c. Leo Serm. 6. de jejunio 7. mensis. August. ad Orosium quaest. 49.) spoken as a Confession of their Faith, that they acknow∣ledged that which they received to be Corpus Domini. Lastly requires him that officiates, that he consecrate Bread and Wine with the least, to the end there may be little left; and that what is left be not carried out of the Church, but reverently eaten and drunk by such of the Communicants▪ only, as the Presbyter, that celebrates, shall take unto him. All this could not pass the Observation of the Scotch∣man, who in the Laudensium Autocatacrisis,Much com∣plained of  Lauden∣sium Auto∣catacrisis p. 107. thus censures it. In the next Prayer, saith he, [i. e. that of Consecration] are put in the words of the Mass, where∣by God is besought by his omnipotent Spirit so to sancti∣fy the Oblations of Bread and Wine, that they may become to us Christ's Body and Blood. From these words all Pa∣pists use to draw the truth of their Trans-substantia∣tion; wherefore the English Reformers [i. e. the lattor] scraped them out of their Books; but our men put them fairly in. And good reason have they so to do. For long ago they professed, that, about the Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament after Con∣secration, they are fully agreed with Lutherans and Papists; except only about the formality and mode of Presence [here quoting Mountag. Appeal, p. 289.] They make an express Rubrick for the Priest's taking the Patin, and the Chalice in his hand in the time of Con∣secration. Which taking, not being either for his own participation, or the distribution to others, why shall we not understand the end of it to be, that which the
Mass there enjoyns, their Elevation and Adoration? The Elevation being long ago practiced by some of our Bishops; and Adoration, when the Patin and Chalice are taken in the Priest's hands, avowed by Heylin's Answ. to Burt. p. 137. The English indeed, in giving the Elements to the people, retain the Mass-words; but to prevent any mischief,Autocat. p. 111. that could arise in the people's mind from their sound of a Corporal Presence, they put in at the distribution of both the Elements, two Golden Sentences: of the hearts eating by Faith; of the Soul's drinking in remembrance. But our men, being nothing affraid for the people's belief of a Cor∣poral Presence, have pulled out of their hands, and scraped out of our Book, both these Antidotes. And the Mass-words thus quit of the English Antidotes must not stand in our Book simply: but that the people may take extraordinary notice of these Phrases, there are two Rubricks set up to their backs, obliging every Communicant with their own mouth to say their Amen to them. The English permit the Curate to carry home the relicks of the Bread and Wine, for his private use: but such Profanity by our Book is discharged. The Consecrate Elements are enjoyned to be eaten in the Holy place, by the Priest alone, and some of the Communicants that day: yea, for preventing of all dangers, a cautel is put in, that so few Elements, as may, be consecrate. And our Book will have the Ele∣ments after the Consecration covered with a Corporal &c. Thus the first Form, both when first established in King Edward's, and when revived in King Charles's time, found many Adversaries. But did the new one escape any better? No. For when all these offensive things in the second draught were amended according to several preciser fancies; yet neither so did the second content all palats, for the humour of Innovation know∣eth no bounds. Soon after it was framed, as the chief body of the Clergy under Queen Mary deserted both it, and the former, and returned to the old Church-Ser∣vice; so the English Protestants, that were then dis∣persed
abroad at Franckford in Germany, fell into great dissensions about it: as some for, so many against, it. See a fuller relation in Heylin's Hist of Reform. in Queen Mary. p. 59. &c. And Calvin hearing the noise thereof, as he had formerly used his Pen to the Protector &c, against the first Book; so now doth he to the English in Franckford,Calvin Ep. p. 213. against the second; saying, In Anglicanâ Liturgiâ qualem describitis [i. e. the new one, which some of them then used at Franckford] mult as video fu∣isse tolerabiles ineptias. Sic ergo a talibus rudimentis in∣cipere licuit, ut doctos tamen & graves Christi ministros ultra eniti & aliquid limatius ac purius quaerere consenta∣neum foret. Si hactenus in Anglia viguisset sincera religio, aliquid in melius correctum multaque detracta esse oportuit. Nunc cum, eversis illis princtpiis, alibi instituenda vobis sit Ecclesia & liberum sit formam de integro componere [he thinks it seems any Pastors have power to make to them∣selves new Liturgies] quid sibi velint nescio, quos faecis Papisticae reliquiae tantopere delectant. Amant ea quibus assueti sunt? Hoc nugatorium & puerile est; &c. Thus Calvin. And so Bucer likewise in his censure of the first (who died within a few weeks after he had writ it, be∣fore the compiling of the second) hath blamed many things that remain in the second. After Queen Mary's death, the second Book being restored here again to its former authority, many of the more zealous Refor∣mists, both by words and writings, made such oppo∣sition against it, that Queen Elizabeth, in terrorem, executed two for this cause: See before, §. 65. and caused Arch-Bishop Whitgift to exact of all those, that entred into the Clergy, a Subscription that they would use it, and no other Form. Cambd▪ Eliz. An. Dom. 1583. Ecclesiastical Can. 36. Which Subscription (the party that opposed this Book at last prevailing) was remitted by the Parliament 1640; and, since that, I need not tell you what it hath suffered. The old Form supplanted the Mass; the pew Form the old; and then the old one being raised again out of its ashes in the new Scotch Liturgy (which began all the troubles) had almost
brought, in the late tumults, a fatal overthrow both upon the new one and upon it self. Thus much from §. 143. concerning this Kings new Liturgies. By vertue of such a Supremacy, the King conceiving he had power to alter and reform the Ecclesiastical Laws,In the abro∣gatio▪ of se∣veral Eccle∣siastical law, coe∣ning Fast, Clbacy of the Clegy &c. tho established by former superior Councils, appoint∣ed (the Parliament assenting thereto) eight persons (amongst whom were two Bishops Crannier and Thirlby, and Peter Martyr) to prepare this work: Who drew up a body of them; which was then made publick, and since, reprinted 1640. But indeed it appeareth not, that this Reformation of them was ever ratified by King, Parliament, or Convocation.See the Pre∣face to Re∣form. Leg. Eccl. By such Supre∣macy he abrogated all former Church-laws concerning days of fasting or abstinence: and appointed those he thought fit, by his own and the Parliaments authority; and dispensed with whom he thought fit, for not ob∣serving them. See Stat. 2, 3. Edw. 19. chap. Wherein after a Preface declaring, That the Kings Subjects now had a more perfect and clear light of the Gospel and true word of God shewed, declared and opened, thro the mercy of God, by the hands of the Kings Majesty, and his most noble Father; and thereby perceived, that one day or meat of it self is not more holy, more pure, or more clean, than another &c. [as if the former Church, which they left, had taught them otherwise] after this Preface, I say, the King with the consent of Parlia∣ment first ordains, That all manner of Statutes, Laws and Constitutions concerning any manner of fasting, or abstinence from any kinds of meats, shall, from the first of May next ensuing, loose their force and strength, and be void and of none effect. Then sets down the days upon which he will have abstinence from flesh ob∣served, upon the Penalty of paying Ten Shillings, and suffering ten days Imprisonment; except those, who being not enfeebled with age or sickness, shall receive a licence to eat flesh from the King or his Successors. For you must know, that the maker of a Law hath power to dispense with it. But here note, that only abstinence
from flesh is enjoyned on those days by this Statute; not Fasting: nor is Fasting enjoyned by any other Statute that I can find; save only on Holy-day-Eves, by a Sta∣tute made two or three years after.Stat. 5, 6. Edw. 6.3.. Neither is there any obligation for the observation of either fasting or abstinence on these days, by any express Canon of this Church reformed (when as now the former Church-Laws concerning this were by the Kings Supremacy nulled in this Act;) but only, by Act of Parliament; and the end of such abstinence, in the Parliament, Act 5. Eliz. 5. c. professed to be only upon a Politick consideration, the increase of Fishermen and Mariners, &c. And not for any Superstition (saith that Act) to be main∣tained in the choice of meats or, as if such forbear∣ing of flesh were of any necessity for the saving of the Soul of man; or, that it is the Service of God, other∣wise, than as other Politick Laws are and be. Tho King Edward in the fore-cited Statute, I confess, men∣tions partly another end: viz. because that due and godly abstinence is a means to vertue, and to subdue mens bodies to their Soul and Spirit; And I doubt not, that many devout persons in this Church holding themselves bounden to the former Ecclesiastical Constitutions, not∣withstanding the Kings abrogation, have still observed this duty in obedience thereto. See likewise 5, 6. Edw. 6. 3. c. the same Regal authority appointing the Holy∣days. And these things are done in Parliament, without the least mentioning or referring to any Synod. Likewise by vertue of such Supremacy, the King with consent of Parliament ordained,Sta. 2, 3. Edw 6.21. c. That all Laws posi∣tive, Canons, Constitutions heretofore made by man only, which prohibit Marriage to any Spiritual Per∣son, who by Gods Law may lawfully marry, shall be utterly void and of none effect: and this upon con∣sideration (as it is in the Preface of the same Act) of such uncleanness of living and other great inconveni∣ences which have followed of compelled chastity [as if the Church compelled any person to such chastity; except hypothetically, if he will take on him such a profession.
Or as if in this the Church enjoyned any thing, which she first stated not to be in every ones power to observe, if using a just endeavour?] Now whereas it is said, in 5.6. Edw. 6.12. That the slanderous reproach of holy Matrimony [i. e. of Priests] doth redound to the dishonour of the Clergy of this Realm; who have determined the same [Marriage of Clergy] to be most lawful by the Law of God, in their Convocation, as well by their common assent, as by the subscription of their hands: Such assent, as likewise that which they say to the same purpose in the 42 Articles Art. 31. no way opposeth the Law of the Church. For things most lawful by Gods Law (as Marriage of the Clergy is, by the Church, allowed to be) yet may be lawfully prohibited by the Church: Whose Law in this matter the Clergy of this land justified in the third and fourth of the Six Articles. Neither, if they had here op∣posed it (as they do not) would their sentence be of any force; because contrary to the Constitution of for∣mer superiour Councils. By vertue of such Supremacy, the King in the Sixth year of his Reign published by his authority 42 Articles of Religion, containing several matters of Faith,Lastly, In the Edition of 42 Arti∣cles of Re∣ligion df∣ferent from the fomer decte of the Church. which are there stated contrary to the definitions of former superiour Councils. Which Articles are said indeed to have been first decreed and agreed on by a Synod of the Clergy held at London; the Title presixed to them being this, Articuli, de quibus in Synodo London. An. Dom. 1552. ad tollendam opinionum dissensionem & consensum verae religionis firmandum inter Episcopos & alios eruditos viros convenerat, regiâ authoritate in lucem editi. But this I cannot thus easily concede,Where whether these Arti∣cles were passed by any Synod. notwithstanding this Title. Thus far indeed I grant; that they seem to be compiled or consented to by some members of that Synod, whom the King after the Synod had appointed (the Synod leaving this business to him) to draw up such Ecclesiastical Laws: and so I grant that de illis conve∣nerat inter Episcopos & alios eruditos viros qui erant pars aliqua Synodi London. But that these Articles were
published, established, or passed by that Synod, I think there is good reason to deny, from these relations which follow. Where I will first transcribe you, what Mr. Fuller, Hist. Eccles. 7. l. p 420. who had perused the Records concerning it, saith of this Synod or Convocation. As for the Records of this Convocation (saith he) they are but one degree above blanks, scarce affording the names of the Clerks assembled therein (for which see also Heylin's Hist. of Reform. King Edw. p. 121.) In∣deed they had no Commission from the King to meddle with Church-business; and no Convocation can hear complaints in Religion, nor speak in redress thereof, till a Commission be granted unto it from Regal au∣thority. Now the true reason, why the King would not entrust the diffusive body of the Convocation with a power to meddle with matters of Religion, was a just jealousy, which he had, of the ill-affection of the major part thereof; who, under a fair rind of Pro∣testant Profession, had the rotten core of Roman Su∣perstition. It was therefore conceived safer for the King to rely on the ability and fidelity of some select confidents cordial to the cause of Religion, than to adventure the same to be discussed and decided by a suspected Convocation. However this barren Convo∣cation is entitled the Parent of those Articles of Re∣ligion, 42 in number, which are printed with this Preface; Articuli, de quibus &c. as is recited before. With these Articles was bound a Catechisme, younger in age, as bearing date of the next year, but of the same extract, relating to this Convocation as Author thereof. Indeed it was first compiled, as appears in the Kings Patent prefixed, by a single Divine (character∣ed pious and learned:) but afterwards perused and allowed by the Bishops and other learned men (under∣stand it the Convocation;) and by Royal authority commended to all Subjects, commanded to all School-Matters to teach their Scholars. Yet very few in the Convocation ever saw it; much less explicitly con∣sented
thereunto. But these had formerly, it seems, passed over their power to the select Divines appointed by the King. In which sense they may be said to have done it themselves by their Delegates, to whom they had deputed their authority. A case not so clear, but that it occasioned a Cavil, at the next Convoca∣tion in the first of Queen Mary: When the Papists [i. e. all the Convocation save six persons] therein assem∣bled renounced the legality of any such former Tran∣sactions. Thus Mr. Fuller, one interessed in this mat∣ter on the other side. Next, if you would know the questioning of this Ca∣techisme (to which as well as the Articles, was pretend∣ed the name of the Synod) and the answer returned thereto; In the Relation made thereof in Fox p. 1282. thus speaks the Prolocutor Dr. Weston to the Convoca∣tion concerning it: For that (saith he) there is a Book of late set forth; called the Catechisme, bearing the name of this Honorable Synod [i. e. the last which sate;] and yet put forth without their consents, as I have learned, being a Book very pestiferous and full of He∣resies; and likewise a Book of Common Prayer, very abominable: I have thought it therefore best, first to begin with the Articles of the Catechisme, concern∣ing the Sacrament of the Altar, to confirm the natural Presence of Christ in the same, and also Transubstan∣tiation. [for which conference the next Fryday being ap∣pointed] Then (saith the relation) the Prolocutor ex∣hibited two Bills unto the House; (The one, for [the forementioned Article of the Catechisme] the natural Presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar; the other concerning the Catechisme; that it was not by that House's agreement [formerly] set forth; and that they did not [for the present] agree thereunto) requiring all them to subscribe to the same; as he himself had done. Where∣unto the whole House did immediately assent; except six. Jo. Philpot [one of the six Renegers] stood up and spake first concerning the Catechisme; That he thought, they were deceived in the Title of the Catechisme,
in that it beareth the Title of the Synod of London last before this; altho many of them, which then were present, were never made privy thereof in setting it forth: for that this house had granted the authority to make Ecclesiastical Laws unto certain persons to be appointed by the Kings Majesty; and whatsoever Ec∣clesiastical Laws they or the most part of them did set forth,3, 4. Edw. 6.11, c. according to a Statute in that behalf provided, it might well be said to be done in the Synod of Lon∣don; altho such as be of the House now had no notice thereof before the promulgation. And that in this point he thought the setter-forth thereof nothing to have slandered the House, as they by their Subscrip∣tion went about to perswade the world; since they (saith he) had our Synodal authority committed unto them to make such Spiritual Laws, as they thought convenient and necessary. This concerning the que∣stioning of this Catechisme and Articles in the beginning of Queen Mary's days; and the Answer returned thereto. But to clear the matter a little further; We find in the same Fox p. 1704, after this, Arch-bishop Cranmer, in his tryal before the Commissioners at Oxford, (Brooks Bishop of Gloucester and others) charged amongst other things with being the Author of this Catechisme and Arti∣cles, and with compelling men against their wills to sub∣scribe them; the former of which he there confesseth; but denyeth the latter. The words in Fox are, —7th In∣terrog. Item. That the said Tho. Cranmer did fly and recuse the authority of the Church; did hold and fol∣low the Heresy concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, and also did compile and caused to be set abroad divers Books. Answer. Whereunto when the names of the Books were recited to him he denyed not such Books, which he was the true Author of. As touching the Treatise of Peter Martyr upon the Sacrament, he denyed that he ever saw it before it was abroad; yet did ap∣prove and well like of the same. As for the Catechisme, the Book of Articles, with the other Book against Winchester he granted the same to be his doings. 8th In∣terrog.
Item, That he compelled many against their wills to subscribe to the same Articles. Answer. He exhorted (he said) such as were willing to subscribe: but against their wills he compelled none. Having given you these three relations, now to reflect a little on them. First, if you well consider the words in the Title of the Articles, de quibus inter Episcopos & alios eruditos viros &c. they seem not the ordinary ex∣presion of a Synodal Act which runs more generally; as thus [de quibus convenit inter Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, & Clerum universum] or the like. Next, you may ob∣serve, that tho the Prolocutor in the Synod 1o Mariae questioneth, and Philpot answereth concerning the Ca∣techisme, why it should be published in the name of the Synod; yet they both speak, not of the Catechisme taken by it self; but only of the Articles which were first printed at the end of this Catechisme, and bound up with it; which the Prolocutor therefore calls the Articles of the Catechisme, and proposeth the matter of the 28th of these Articles for disputation; and so also calleth them the Catechisme, because the first title of this Book is Catechismus brevis &c. Now that they must speak of the Articles is plain; because the Catechisme as taken by it self is not at all entitled to the Synod; but only the Articles at the end thereof. The Title of the Catechisme is only this Catechismus brevis Christianae disciplinae summam continens omnibus Ludimagistris autho∣ritate regiâ commendatus. Neither do those words in Philpot's Answer [that the house had committed their Sy∣nodal authority to certain persons to be appointed by the King to make such Ecclesiastical Laws as they thought convenient &c.] agree at all to this Catechisme; but to the Ar∣ticles only. For this Catechisme was made before by a private person (that is, by the Arch-bishop, if we may believe his own confession related above) and after∣ward approved only by some Bishops and other eruditi viri, as the King saith in the Preface thereof. Cum bre∣vis & explicata Catechismi ratio a pio quodam & erudito viro conscripta nobis ad cognoscendum offerretur, ejus dili∣gentem
inquisitionem quibusdam episcopis & aliis eruditis commisimus, quorum judicium magnam apud nos authori∣tatem habet; & quia conveniens cum scripturis &c. visa est, placuit non solum eum in aspectum lucemque proferre, sed etiam propter perspicuitatem omnibus ludorum magistris ad docendum proponere &c. Neither is this Catechisme ab∣stracted from the Articles any such pestiferous Book, or so full of Heresies, as the Prolocutor complains of; be∣ing composed in general terms for School-boys; and not stating, scarce touching, any controversy. Add to this, that, tho the Catechisme was not made by the Synod, yet if the 42 Articles that were then printed and bound with the Catechisme, were framed by it; neither had the Prolocutor any reason to have fallen upon and gotten hands against the Catechisme, as being falsly ascribed to that Reverend Assembly, (when as, that, which was far more opposite to that which he accounted the Orthodox Religion, (namely these Articles) were known to be passed by them;) Neither would Philpot have concealed this matter; since this known Act of the Synod composing these Articles would have justified that Act of the Delegates composing the Catechisme; for the Doctrine of the Catechisme is contained in the Ar∣ticles. But, if by this Catechisme both the Prolocutor and Philpot meant the Articles at the end thereof, (as it cannot be otherwise) then Philpot hath revealed to us all the truth concerning the composing or ratifying of them; and why, in the impression, they were ascribed to the Synod: Namely because the Synod had given authority to those the King should nominate, to make Ecclesiastical Laws; and so by those persons (being Epis∣copi. & alii eruditi viri) were these Articles compiled or confirmed; the Synod it seems leaving both this mat∣ter, and the election of the persons for doing of it to the Kings care, without reserving any review thereof to themselves, contrary to the First, Second and Sixth Theses. But Mr. Philpot discovers the motive which this Synod (if he meant this, and not some former Synod) might have to do this, when he mentions a former
Act of Parliament, 3, 4. Edw. 6.11. c. enstating the King in this power; which Act was made two years be∣fore the Session of this Synod: but then this is somewhat strange, that what was acknowledged (formerly) as the Kings right, is (now) made by Mr. Philpot the Clergy's concession to him. Thus then were these Ar∣ticles made, not by, but after, the Synod: and this is the reason, why tho the production of such a Body of Articles would have been by much the solemnest Act of a Synod, that was done in King Edward's days; yet both the Records and the Historians, Fox, Godwin, An∣tiquitates Britanicae, and those others, that I have seen▪ are silent therein. And the Arch-bishop, to whom it would have been an excellent defence, to have shewed them, tho of his compiling, yet to have been confirmed and generally subscribed by such a full Synod; yet he also pleads no such thing. And hence we may learn the rea∣son of that which Dr. Heylin observeth p. 25. That tho a Parliament was held at this very time, and that this Parliament had passed several Acts, which con∣cerned Church-matters, as, an Act for Ʋniformity of Divine Service, and for the Confirmation of the Book of Ordination 5, 6. Edw. 6.1. c. An Act declaring, which days shall only be kept for Holy-days, and which for Fast∣ing-days. 3. c. An Act against striking or drawing any weapon in the Church, or Church-yard. 4. c. An Act for the legitimating of the Marriages of Priests. 12. c.: Yet neither in this Parliament (saith he) nor in that which followed, is there so much as the least Syllable which reflecteth this way, or medleth any thing at all with the Book of Articles. Thus Dr. Heylin. Which Observation, as to him it affords an Argument, that Religion reformed in these Articles therefore can be called no Parliament-Religion; so to me, that it was also no Synodal-Religion: because we see the Parliaments in King Edward's time corroborating or rather prevent∣ing the Synod in all other Transactions about the Refor∣mation. See before, §. 47. Neither can it be said im∣proper to the Parliament to enjoyn obedience to these,
as well as it had done to other Church- or Synod-decrees. If it be urged here, what Philpot urged of the Cate∣chisme, that these Articles are Synodical; because the Synod conceded to the King the election of such persons, who should frame and publish these Articles, without any communicating them first to the Synod: See the Answer returned to this before, §. 42. CHAP. XI. The Actings of Queen Elizabeth in Eccle∣siastical Affairs: And of the unlawful Ejection of the Catholicks. HAving thus from §. 104. viewed the course of the Reformation under King Edward;3. The Act∣ing of Qu. Elz. in Ec∣clesiastical matters. now I pass to that under Queen Elizabeth, one much interessed to re∣new an opposition to the Pope; in as much as his pro∣nouncing King Henry's Marriage with Anne Bullen her Mother unlawful, invalidated her Title to the Crown. Upon which Mary the Queen of Scots a Catholick,All the for∣mer decrees of the Cler∣gy in King Henry and Edw. days being rever∣sed by the Clergy i Q. Mary's dys newly married to the Daulphin of France, and animated by the Pope, did also assume unto her self the Stile and Title of Queen of England (as Cosin and next Heir to Queen Mary deceased) quartering the Arms thereof upon all her Plate and Escutcheons. Only let me first mind you this concerning Queen Maries Reign that lyeth be∣tween; That whatever the Reformation had built upon any Synodal vote under Henry the Eighth, or Edward the Sixth, was now revoked and demolished under Queen Mary, by the like Synods of a legal Clergy; as is shewed before §. 52. The Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters was re-acknowledged by this National Synod, now, not due to the Civil, but to the Ecclesiastical, Chief Go∣vernor, the Bishop of Rome, the Patriarch of the West: yet not challenged by him in so high a degree, as these Princes used it. The Six Articles, established by Synod
in Henry the Eighth's days, as also the ancient Church Liturgy, ancient Form of Ordination, ancient way of Tryal of Hereticks, ancient Canons &c, were now by the like Synodal power again restored, and re-inforced. See before, §. 48. So that the Reformation under Queen Elizabeth was to begin upon a new foundation, without grounding any plea upon any Synodal Act or consent of the Clergy made in King Henry or King Edward s days; either concerning the new Supremacy, or the new Li∣turgy, or the new 42 Articles of Religion, &c: since all these were by the same Synodal authority in Queen Mary's days desclaimed. Here seemeth no evasion: If we accept the decrees of later Synods, rather than of former; then Queen Mary's Synods will void King Henry's and King Edward's: But if of former Synods, rather than of later; then the Synods of Henry the Eighth, and of former times for the Six Articles &c. will void King Edward's and Queen Elizabeth's too. And here first, concerning the course which Queen Elizabeth took in repairing the Reformation defaced by Queen Mary, Dr. Heylin speaks thus of it in general. Reform. Justified, p. 37. In Queen Elizabeth's time (saith he) before the new Bishops were well setled, and the Queen assured of the affections of her Clergy, She went that way to work in her Reformation, which not only her two Predecessors, but all the godly Kings and Princes in the Jewish State, and many of the Chri∣stian Emperors in the Primitive times, had done be∣fore her; in the well ordering of the Church and Peo∣ple committed to their care and government by God. And to that end she published her Injunctions An. Dom. 1559. A Book of Orders 1561. Another of Advertise∣ments 1562. all tending unto the Reformation; with the advice and counsel of the Metropolitan [him, that was first ordained so by her appointment] and some other godly Prelates, who were then about her: by whom they were agreed on, and subscribed unto, before they were presented to her. But when the times were better setled, and the first difficulties of her Reign passed over;
she left Church work to the disposing of Church-men, who by their place and calling were most proper for it: and they being met in Convocation, and thereto authorized, as the Laws required, did make and pub∣lish several Books of Canons &c. Thus the Doctor. The brief of which is, That Queen Elizabeth did the Church-work at first her self without any Synodal authority of the Church-men (as not being assured of their affection) till she had setled new Church-men according to her mind; and then she did Church-work, by Church-men. This testimony premised concerning her proceedings in general.Hr calling of a Syod which de∣clareth a∣gainst the Rforma∣tion. Now to mention some particulars which are of the most note. In the beginning of her Reign the Queen together with a Parliament called also a Synod; in which Bonner Bishop of London, in the va∣cancy of the Arch-Bishoprick of Canterbury, was Pre∣sident; and Dr. Harpsfield was Prolocutor for the infe∣riour Clergy. But this Synod continued in the former resolutions made under Queen Mary; and remained in∣flexible to the Queens inclinations, and the Reformation: nay, declared against it. The full relation of which Synod I will give you out of Mr. Fuller's History 9. l. p. 54. (who copyed it out of Lib. Synod, 1559.) be∣cause tho somewhat long, yet it is very remarkable. The Convocation at this time (saith he) was very small and silent. For as it is observed in nature, when one twin is of an unusual strength and bigness, the other born with him is weak and dwindleth away: So here, this Parliament being very active in matters of Religi∣on, the Convocation, younger brother thereunto, was little employed, less regarded. Yet in it; in the lower House of Convocation were passed over certain Arti∣cles of Religion; which they tendred to the Bishops, that they might present them to the Parliament. The Bishops likewise by their President Bishop Bonner pre∣sented them to the Lord Keeper. Likewise in the tenth Session of this Convocation an account was given in by both the Ʋniversities in an Instrument under the hand of a publick Notary; wherein, they, both, did concur to
the truth of the foresaid Articles the last only excepted. The Articles together with their Preface are these, which (saith he) we here both transcribe and translate (copyed by me out of the Original) considering, they are the last in this kind, that ever were represented in England by a legal Corporation in defence of the Popish Religion. Reverendi in Christo Patres ac Domini Colendissimi. Quoniam, famâ publicâ referente, ad nostram nuper notitiam pervenit, multa religionis christianae dogmata publico & unanimi gentium christianarum consensu hactenus recepta & probata, atque ab Apostolis ad nos usque concorditer per manus deducta, praesertim Articulos infra scriptos, in dubi∣um vocari: Hinc est, quod nos Cantuariensis Provinciae inferior secundarius Clerus in uno (Deo sic disponente, ac Se∣ren. Dominae nostrae Reginae, Decani & Capituli Cant. man∣dato, Brevi Parliament, ac monitione ecclesiasticâ solitâ declatatâ id exigente) convenientes, partium nostrarum esse existimavimus, tum nostrae, tum eorum, quorum curae nobis committitur, saluti, omnibus quibus poterimus modis prospi∣cere. Quocirca majorum nostrorum exemplis commoti, qui in similia saepè tempora inciderunt, fidem, quam in Articulis infra scriptis veram esse credimus, & ex animo profitemur, ad Dei laudem & honorem, officiique, & aliarum nostrae curae commissarum animarum exonerationem, praesentibus duxi∣mus publicè afferendam, affirmantes, & sicut Deus nos in die Judicii adjuvet, asserentes. 1. Quod in Sacramento Altaris, virtute Christi verbo suo a Sacerdote debitè prolato assistentis, praesens est realiter sub speciebus Panis & Vini naturale Corpus Christi conceptum de Virgine Mariâ. Item naturalis ejus Sanguis. 2. Item. Quod post Consecrationem non remanet substan∣tia panis & vini, neque ulla alia substantia, nisi substantia Dei & Hominis. 3. Item. Quod in Missâ offertur verum Christi Corpus & verus ejusdem Sanguis, Sacrificium propitiatorium pro vivis & defunctis. 4. Item. Quod Petro Apostolo & ejus legitimis Suc∣cessoribus in Sede Apostolicâ tanquam Christi vicario data
est suprema potestas pascendi & regendi ecclesiam Christi mili∣tantem, & fratres suos confirmandi. 5. Item. Quod authoritas tractandi & definiendi de iis quae spectant ad fidem, Sacramenta, & disciplinam ecclesi∣asticam, hactenus semper spectavit, & spectare debet tantum ad Pastores ecclesiae, quos Spiritus Sanctus in hoc, in ec∣clesiâ Dei, posuit; & non ad Laicos [In which Article (penned with some tender sense of the invasion which formerly in King Henry and King Edward's days had been made upon the Clergy-rights) both the Regal and Par∣liamentary power being excluded totally by a [tantum ad Pastores] not only a definiendo, but a tractando, not only quae ad fidem, but quae ad disciplinam ecclesiasticam spectant, I suppose made the University so cautious to subscribe thereto.] Quam nostram assertionem, affirmationem & fidem nos inferior Clerus praedistus vestris Paternitatibus tenore prae∣sentium exhibemus; humiliter supplicantes, ut quia nobis non est copia hanc nostram sententiam & intentionem aliter illis, quorum in hac parte interest, notificandi, Vos, qui Pa∣tres estis, ista superioribus ordinibus significare velitis. Quâ in re officium charitatis ac pietatis (ut arbitramur) praesta∣bitis, & saluti gregis vestri, ut par est, prospicietis, & vestras ipsi animas liberabitis. These were the last words and testament as it were of the ancient Clergy now expiring; seeing their defini∣tive authority assumed by the Laity, and, upon this, a flood of innovations coming upon them. Which Pro∣testation of theirs remaineth upon record to all genera∣tions, to shew, that, in the Reformation, the Laity deserted their former Guides, and Spiritual Fathers the Clergy, in Henry the Eighth's, and Queen Mary's days, all constant to the ancient Church-doctrines (saving on∣ly Supremacy for King Henry's time;) and also in King Edward's days, the major part of this Clergy, tho ex∣ternally guilty of some dissimulation, yet inwardly re∣taining the same judgment, as may be seen by what is ac∣knowledged above §. 122. &c. and 127. This Declaration of the Clergy and Universities was
ended in the Queens proposal of a Disputation in West∣minster Church,A Disputa∣tion between the Bishops and the re∣formed Di∣vines. between some of the Bishops and others of Queen Mary's Clergy, and some of the reformed Di∣vines lately returned home from beyond Sea. Of which Disputation the Lord Keeper Bacon, one of the Prote∣stant Religion, was appointed the Moderator. The three Questions which were proposed by the reforming party to the Bishops to be the subject of the Conference were these, 1. It is against the word of God, and the Custome of the ancient Church to use a tongue unknown to the people in Common-Prayer,Fox p. 1924. and the administration of the Sacraments. 2. Every Church hath authority to appoint, take away and change Ceremonies and Ecclesiastical Rites, so the same be to edification. 3. It cannot be proved by the word of God, that there is in the Mass offered up a Sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and dead. Of which questions to pass by the first (there being nothing either in the former Convocation-Articles, or in any decree of former Church, against the lawfulness of having the Divine Ser∣vice in a known tongue; which is all that the Refor∣mation desires in this matter; and which could be no occasion of difference among Christians, were all other Controversies of Doctrine well composed.) In the se∣cond Question, it seems to me somewhat strange; that, whereas the Convocation speaks chiefly of the autho∣rity of defining points de fide; and contends, that the authority of defining such points belongs not to the Laity, or to any Civil Power, but only ad Pastores; and whereas also the main of the Reformation consists in altering such Doctrines belonging to Faith, and not in altering some Rites and Ceremonies: yet the questi∣on here stretcheth no further than to Rites and Ceremo∣nies; and then speaks of these as alterable, not by the Laity, or a Civil Power, but by a particular Church; i. e. as I suppose, by the Clergy thereof. And then leaves us in the dark also; whether this particular Church be put here as contradistinct only to other particular Churches, on which it is independent, and hath this power granted to it by all: or be put as contradistinct
to the Church, Ʋniversal, or to Superior Councils; on which surely it hath some dependance. Again; in the last question, it seems as strange; that, whereas the Convocation in their Preface founds this Article toge∣ther with the rest on Primitive and Apostolical Tra∣dition, as well as on Scripture: Publico christianarum gentium consensu &c. atque ab Apostolis ad not usque &c. And whereas the reformed, in the first question, (where seemed some advantage) add the custome of an∣cient Church to the testimony of the Scriptures; and in their Preface promise adherence to the Doctrines and Practice of the Catholick Church (unless there be some evasion in the limitation there used,Fox p. 1930. where they say, by Catholick Church they mean that Church which ought to be sought in the holy Scriptures, and which is governed and led by the Spirit of Christ:) Yet here they use that restraining Clause [it cannot by the word of God be proved;] the judgment of the ancient Church, the authoritative expounder of the word of God, being indeed in this matter very clear against them. See Discourse of Eucha∣rist, §. 92.111, &c. If you would know, what end this Disputation had, it is thus set down in Cambden, Hist. Eliz. An. Dom. 1559. That all came to nothing: for that, after a few words passed to and fro in writing, they could not agree about the manner of disputing. The Protestants triumphing, as if they had gotten the victory; and the Papists complaining, that they were hardly dealt withal, in that they were not forewarned of the que∣stions above a day or two before: and that Lord Keeper Bacon (a man little versed in matters of Di∣vinity, and a bitter enemy of the Papists) sate as Judge, whereas he was only appointed as Moderator, or keeper of Order. But the very truth is; that they weigh∣ing the matter more seriously durst not, without con∣sulting the Bishop of Rome, call in question so great matters, and not controverted in the Church of Rome; exclaiming every where: When shall there be any certain∣ry touching Faith? Disputations concerning Religion do
always bend that way as the Scepters incline: and such like. And so hot were the Bishops of Lincolne and Winchester, that they thought meet, that the Queen and the Au∣thors of this falling away from the Church of Rome should be stricken with the censure of Excommunica∣tion. But the wiser sort resolved, that this censure was rather to be left to the Bishop of Rome; lest they, being Subjects, should seem to shake off their obedience to their Prince, and take up the banner of Rebellion. Thus Cambden. Now the contention about the manner of disputing, which Cambden omits, was, what side should speak last; which the Bishops, because of their dignity, desired to do, after having observed:Fox p. 1924 that their cause suffered by the other side speaking last cum ap∣plausu populi, the verity on their sides being thus not so well marked. But this the Queens Council would not yield to them, the first agreement being pretended con∣trary; and so that conference ceased. After this Disputation followed the suppressing,sect;. 179. n. 1. The Regl Suremancy and all that K. Edw. hd done in the Refrmtio now re-esta∣blished by the Queen and Palia∣ment. of the Mass; of the Popes Supremacy; of the Six famous Articles restored to their vigor by the Clergy in Queen Mary's days: the re-establishing of the Regal Supre∣macy, in all those spiritual Jurisdictions, which had for∣merly by any spiritual power been lawfully used over the Ecclesiastical State in these Dominions. To which Supremacy also were restored the tenths and first fruits given back by Queen Mary, and (upon pretence, that the Crown could not be supported with such honor as it ought to be, if restitution were not made of such Rents and Profits as were of late dismembred from it) all those Lands again were resumed by this Queen, which were returned to the Church or Religious Orders by Queen Mary. Besides which, because there were many Impropriations and Tithes, by dissolution of Religious Houses, invested in the Crown, the Queen kept seve∣ral Bishopricks void, till she had taken into her hands what Castles, Mannors and Tenements she thought good; returning unto the Bishops as much annual rent of Im∣propriations and Tithes; (but this an extended instead
of the other old, rent.) Bishopricks being thus kept void also in following times one after another, upon several occa∣sions (saith Dr. Heylin) till the best flowers in the whole Garden of the Church had been culled out of it. See his History of Queen Elizabeth, p. 120, 121. 156. and be∣fore in Edw. 6. p. 18. &c. sect;. 179. n. 2.Again: Now also followed the re-establishing of King Edward's later Form of Common-Prayer; but altered first in some things by eight Learned men, all of the reformed party, and non-Bishops, to whom the reviewing thereof was committed by the Queen. In which review (saith Dr. Heylin, Hist. of Reform. Qu. Elizabeth, p. 111.) there was great care taken for expunging all such passages as might give any scandal or offence to the Popish party, or be urged by them in excuse for their not coming to Church. Therefore out of the Litany was expunged the Petition to be de∣livered from the tyranny and all the detestable enormities of the Bishop of Rome. And whereas in King Edward's second Liturgy the Sacrament was given only under this Form: Take and eat this in remembrance &c. (see before, §. 160.) The Form also of King Edward's first Liturgy was joined to it, The Body of our Lord &c. Take and eat; lest (saith that Author) under colour of rejecting a Carnal, they might be thought also to deny such a Real, Presence, as was defended in the writings of the ancient Fathers. Likewise the Ru∣brick about Adoration mentioned before ibid. was also expunged upon the same ground. And to come up closer (saith he) to those of the Church of Rome, it was ordered by the Queens Injunctions; that the Sa∣cramental Bread should be made round in the fashion of the wafers used in the time of Queen Mary; that the Lords Table should be placed where the Altar stood (as also the Altar in the Queens own Chappel was fur∣nished with rich Plate, two fair gilt Candlesticks with Tapers in them, and a massy Crucifix of Silver in the midst thereof Ibid. p. 124.) that the accustomed reve∣rence should be made at the name of Josus; Musick re∣tained
in the Church, Festivals observed &c. Thus Dr. Heylin. And some such thing likewise was ob∣served, if you will give me leave to digress a little, by the Synod afterward in her days 1562 in their review∣ing King Edward's Articles of Religion, both concern∣ing Real Presence; (For whereas in King Edward's Ar∣ticle of the Lords Supper we find these words [Since as the Holy Scriptures testify, Christ hath been taken up into Heaven, and there is to abide till the end of the world; It becometh not any of the faithful to believe or profess, that there is a Real or Corporal Presence (as they phrase it) of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Holy Eucharist] the alteration under Queen Elizabeth casts these words out:) and concerning Church-Authority and Church-Ceremo∣nies. For whereas many of the English Protestant Clergy (that were dispersed in Queen Mary's days) being taken with the Geneva-way, were, when they returned, great Opposers of the Rites and Ceremonies used in the Church of Eland, and of Church-authority in general; there∣fore to King Edward's twenty first Article was this new Clause now added', The Church hath power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and authority in Controversies of Faith. For Queen Elizabeth is said to have been a zealous Pa∣troness of Real Presence. Insomuch as when one of her Divines (see Heylin's Hist. of Queen Eliz. p. 124.) had preached a Sermon in defence of the Real Presence on Good-Fryday 1565. she openly gave him thanks for his pains and piety. And in Queen Mary's days she at some time complyed so far as to resort to the Mass, see ibid. p. 98. And her Verses of the Eucharist, in an∣swer to a Priest desiring her judgment therein, are well known; 'Twas God the Word that spake it, He took the Bread and brake it; And what the Word did make it, That I believe, and take it. She was also a rigid Vindicator of the Church-Cere∣monies,
and great Opposer of the Puritans (see before §. 162. and Dr. Heylin's Hist. p. 144. &c.) several of whom, tho (in such a scarcity of Divines) she pre∣ferred in the beginning of her Reign, as Sampson to be Dean of Christ Church, Whittington to be Dean of Dur∣ham, Cartwright Lady Margaret's Professor in Cam∣bridge &c: Yet were they afterward no way counte∣nanced by her, And when Alexander Nowel Dean of Pauls had spoken less reverently in a Sermon preached before her of the sign of the Cross, she called aloud unto him from her Closet Window, commanding him to retire from that ungodly digression, and to return unto his Text. (Heyl. Hist. p. 124.) But notwithstand∣ing a certain moderation used in this Queens days (in comparison of those last violent times of King Edward agitated and spurred on still further by Calvin from abroad, and by Peter Martyr and others here at home) and that tho some reforming Acts passed by King Ed∣ward and repealed by Queen Mary were not thought fit now to be revived (as particularly that 1. Edw. 6.2. mentioned before §. 40:) Yet so it was that all the chief Acts that King Edward's Parliaments or Clergy had made concerning the Reformation were now re∣vived;Sec 1. Eliz. . c. 2. and all, that Queen Mary's, or Henry the Eighth's (save in the matter of Supremacy) Parliaments or Cler∣gy had done against it, was repealed. But this,§. 179. n. 3. Bt nt by the Clergy. tho done in spiritual matters, was done by the sole authority of the Queen and her Parliament, without obtaining any Synod to reverse the contrary decrees of the former Synods under those two Princes: nay further, whilst all the Bishops, that fate then in Parliament, openly opposed these Innovations. Cambden. Hist. Eliz. p 9. By her own sole authority the Queen likewise published certain Injunctions to the Clergy. And now the Regal Supremacy being thus restored only by the Civil power, an Oath of Supremacy was also drawn up and imposed on all Ecclesiastical persons upon penalty of the Refuser's losing all their Ecclesiastical pro∣motion, benefice and office. 1. Eliz. 1. c. And so this
Oath being unanimously refused by all the Bishops that then sate, save only the Bishop of Landaff, [I say all that then sate: For, by reason of a contagious sickness that then reigned, within less than the space of a twelve∣month (saith Dr. Heylin, Hist. of Reform. Qu. Mary, p. 81.) almost one half of the English Bishops had made void their Sees (three Bishopricks having been void from 1557; three Bishops dying some few weeks before the Queen; three not long after; one on the same day) which, with the death of so many of the Priests also in several places, did much facilitate the way (saith he) to that Refor∣mation that soon after followed:] they were all eject∣ed out of their Bishopricks; and with them, of the chief of the Clergy, fifteen Presidents of Colledges, twelve Deans, twelve Arch-Deacons, six Abbots,Camb. p. 17. fifty Pre∣bendaries, lost their Spiritual Preferments, Mean∣while, many others (saith Dr. Heylin Hist. of Qu. Eliz. p. 115.) who were cordially affected to the interest of the Church of Rome, dispensing with themselves in outward conformities; upon a hope of such revolu∣tions in Church-affairs as had hapned formerly. Here, that we may examine the lawfulness of the ejection of these Prelates for refusing such Oath,The ejecting of the Bi∣shops for re∣fusing the Oath of her Supremacy. The unlaw∣fulness there of. upon which depends the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the Acts of the Clergy succeeding them, I will first set you down the form of the Oath which was this: I do testify and de∣clare in my conscience, that the Queen's Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as Temporal: and that no Forreign Prince, Person, Pre∣late, State, ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminence, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm: and therefore I do utterly renounce all forreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities: and do promise that from henceforth I shall assist and de∣fend to my power all Jurisdictions, Priviledges and Authorities granted or belonging to the Queens High∣ness, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.
This Oath, you see, consists of two parts: a Supre∣macy attributed and professed to the Prince;Concerning Regal Su∣premacy. How far it seemeth to extend. and a Su∣premacy denyed and renounced to any Forreign power. And that I may speak more distinctly in this matter. 1. As to the first of these, thus much is freely conceded: That the Civil Magistrate hath a Supremacy in Spiri∣tual and Ecclesiastical Affairs; and that such as none other hath; namely this: An external coactive power or jurisdiction committed to him by God, to enjoyn to his Subjects the observance of the Laws of the Church; and of the Laws of God, as they are declared to him to be such by the Church: and to restrain and punish the transgressors of them, whether Clergy or Laity, within his Dominions, with the Civil Sword, which God hath put only into his hands. So that no Canons of the Church can be by the Ecclesiasticks or others, executed or enforced on the Subject as Laws, viz. with external Coaction, pecuniary or corporal mulcts or punish∣ments &c. before the Secular Prince is pleased to admit such Canons and enroll them amongst his Laws, or to concede such coactive power to his Clergy. How far also the Kings Supremacy may extend over all Ecclesi∣astical persons concerning the Investiture and presenta∣tion of them (so long as their canonical sufficiency is not denyed by the Clergy) to such Temporal Church-Possessions, as either Princes, or others by their permissi∣on, have conferred on the Church (about which hath been in ancient times great Controversy between seve∣ral Kings of England and the Pope) I meddle not to de∣termine. Let this, for the present, be granted as much as any Prince hath claimed. It is likewise conceded: that in those words of the Oath [only Supreme Governor in Spiritual things] there is not any thing that expresly extends the Regal Supremacy any further; which may be the only supreme power m Ecclesiasticals in one re∣spect, and not in another. Nor no more is there in the thirty seventh Article of the Church of England; which expounds the Kings Supremacy thus [That he is to rule all estates and degrees committed to his charge by God, whe∣ther
they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and to restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil-doers.] All which he may do; and yet be tyed in all things to obey the Church her Laws, and to leave to her the sole judg∣ment, who are these evil-doers, as to the breaking of Gods Laws, or who stubborn and heretical persons. And such Regal Supremacy will well consist with another; either with a domestick Supremacy of his own Clergy, in judging Controversies and promulgating Laws in meerly Spirituals; or also with a forreign Supremacy and Jurisdiction, of a Patriarch over all the Bishops of his Patriarchy in what Prince's Dominions soever; or of a General Council over all Provincial or National Churches. If therefore only such a Regal Supremacy, as this, were intended in the Oath, it cannot be justly refused. viz. If the Oath should run thus, — I do testify that the King is the Supreme &c. as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Causes as Temporal [that is, (as this Supremacy is expounded in Article thirty seventh) to rule with the Civil Sword all estates and degrees committed to his charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Tem∣poral, and to restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil-doers.] And if this word [such] be inserted in the words following: — And I do testify that no forreign Prince, Prelate &c. ought to have any [such] jurisdiction &c. And Ergo I do utterly renounce all [such] forreign Jurisdiction &c. — You will say, what is gained to the King by an Oath so limited? This, that no Forreign or Domestick Power within his Dominions may, upon any pretence of Religion or other whatsoever, either take up himself, or licence any others to take up the Civil Sword against the King; or make any resistance to him therewith in order to any person, or cause, what∣soever. Which thing sufficiently secures his govern∣ment, and the peace of his Kingdome. 2. Again: as to the second part of the Oath, thus much shall be freely conceded: That there is some Su∣premacy, in or dine ad Spiritualia, to which no Forreign State or Prelate may lay claim. As, besides that which
is named already to belong only to the Civil Magistrate, it shall here be granted; (as being the opinion of several Catholicks,) That no General Council hath any autho∣rity to make any Ecclesiastical Law, which any way entrencheth upon any Civil Right: Nor any forreign Prelate hath authority to use a Temporal power over Princes, (when judged heretical,) to kill or depose them, or absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance. Were therefore these words of the Oath understood only of such a Forreign power, which opposeth the security of the Queens Civil Government; as Dr. Hammond urgeth. Schism. 7. c. §. 17. Or; which layeth intolerable burthens and exactions upon the Subjects of the Land [i. e. as to tempo∣ral matters] and which draws after it Positions and Do∣ctrines, to the unsufferable prejudice of the Prince's Crown and Dignity; to the exemption of all Ecclesiastical persons (such as makes them but half-Subjects,) to the deposing of Kings, and disposing of their Kingdomes; as Dr. Fern urgeth Examin. Champ. 9. c. p. 279: it shall be grant∣ed here, without disputing any such controversy, that the Oath, for such thing as this, could not be justly refused. But after these Concessions, now to review the two parts of the Oath again,§. 183. n. 1. How far not. to see what more might lye in them. 1. For the First. There is a Supremacy in Spi∣ritual and Ecclesiastical Affairs, which the Civil Magi∣strate cannot justly claim; viz. Such Supremacies as these: that a Prince may, when a Superior Council abroad, or the major part of his Clergy at home, hath or doth determine against something, which he, with some few, or a lesser part, of his Clergy, is perswaded to be consonant to the word of God, may (I say) sup∣press, and forbid the Doctrine of those, and establish and promulgate the Doctrine of these; may thus make and publish new Ecclesiastical Articles or Canons, and correct, suspend, or dispense with former, and that where no just pretence of their violating any way his Civil Government. That he, without any Synodal con∣sent of his Clergy; or, He with it, against the decrees
of Superior Councils, may change the publick Church Liturgies, her Service, or Discipline; and that when these no way hurtful to the Civil State. That the Clergy may not assemble about Spiritual concernments (which none deny that they may do even under Heathen Prin∣ces) but when he pleaseth to call them; may teach or promulgate no Ecclesiastical Decisions in matter of Doctrine, or Constitutions in matter of Discipline, to their flocks, being his Subjects, unless he first give his consent unto them, tho these concern no civil right. That he may introduce into Bishopricks whom he ap∣proves, without the consent of a major part of the pre∣sent Episcopacy; or may displace any, or prohibite the function of their office, within his Dominions, with∣out any concurrence of the Clergy, and where is no just pretence of danger to his Secular Government. Briefly; to use Bishops Carleton's words cited before. That he may use any such Spiritual Jurisdiction, as stands in examination of Controversies of Faith, judg∣ing of Heresies, deposing of Hereticks, excommuni∣cation of notorious offenders, Institution and Colla∣tion of Benefices and Spiritual Cures. All or most of which Supremacies are not Supremacies belonging to the Prince, but to the Clergy, to Prelates, to Coun∣cils and Synods, Provincial, National, or higher. As hath been laid down in the first and second These;See before sect;. 2.4. and as will appear to any one at the first sight, if he will but empty his fancy a little of the prime Patriarch of the Catholick Church his being Anti-Christ; and of an erroneous, and Superstitious Hierarchy; and, on the other side, of an orthodox and godly Jesias-Prince: and seriously consider, what a mischief it will bring upon a National Church, when the supreme Secular Magistrate thereof is an Heretick or Schismatick, and invested with the above-named Supremacies in Spiritual Affairs. Nay I may further add to these, that there is some Supre∣macy in Ecclesiastical Affairs, which the Protestants themselves or the most Learned of them do not allow to the Prince: as this; That the Prince alone without the
consent of some of his Clergy may make or impose upon his Subjects Ecclesiastical Laws, or decide such Contro∣versies. And secondly there is another Supremacy which all the Presbyterian Protestants do not allow to the Prince: namely, that he may prohibite the Church Ministery and Officers from making or imposing any Ecclesiastical: Law without his licence and consent first ob∣tained thereto; as you may see below §. 211. [Meanwhile how both these do safely take this Oath (there being neither of these limitations by the Oath-imposer mentioned either in it, or elsewhere with reference to it, nay the contrary being declared concerning the later of these two Supremacies) I see not, unless the Oath-taker may qualify his Oath ac∣cording to his own sense.] To require therefore submissi∣on by Oath to such Supremacies of the Civil Magistrate, as these now named, is not lawful. And that such submission was required from these Bi∣shops is evident I think;That sub∣mission to the Royal Supremacy in this la∣ter kind was requi∣red from those Bish∣ops. 1. Both from that Supremacy, which the Queen, at that very time, in these very things, exercised, without any Synodal consent, against former Synods (a Specimen of which you may see below §. 201. in Her Majesties Commission to the Uncanonical Or∣dainers of Arch-bishop Parker; and to the same pur∣pose, in Stat. 8. Eliz. 1.) and which the Kings Henry and Edward had formerly exercised. 2. And from that Supremacy, which the Parliaments granted and acknow∣ledged due in these things to the Prince, as hath been shewed, I think, sufficiently in this former discourse; they granting to the King all that authority and juris∣diction, which any Spiritual person or persons had for∣merly; excepting only the authority of ministery of divine offices in the Church. See before §. 71. All which authority formerly thus granted by the laws and an∣nexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, the taker of this Oath is bound to assist and defend. (The like to which see also in the 1. and 2. Canon Ecclesiast. 1603.) Altho the former Clergy, under Henry the Eighth, had never annexed these Supremacies to the Crown. See be∣fore. §. 25; or, if they had, had again, under Queen
Mary, reversed it. Neither is it enough for our men, for the setling of such Supremacies upon the Crown,Ham. Schis. c. 7. p. 150. to prove, that they belong not to the Pope, as long as they may belong to the National Clergy, and to Councils. The qualification of such Regal Supremacy, which Dr. Fern, Examin. Champ. p. c. §. 16.20. hath pro∣duced as mitigating it, see replyed to before §. 72. And see himself, (if I mistake him not) also defending such Regal Supremacy, as is here affirmed to be claimed in the places quoted below, §. 205: and not only him, but many other learned Protestant Divines. And there∣fore well might those Bishops understand the regal Su∣premacy in the Oath, in the same latitude, as these still do allow and maintain it. But see Mr. Thorndike (Just Weights, 20. c) freely acknowledging what we have said here, and desiring therefore the abrogating of this, and the enacting of a new, Oath. — It is manifest (saith he) that not only the unlimited power of the Pope, but all authority of a General Council of the Western Churches (whereof the Pope is and ought to be the chief Member) may justly seem to be disclaimed, by other words of the same Oath; and that, whereas the Pope usurped not only upon the Crown, but upon the Clergy of this Kingdome; all those Usurpations [as welt upon Clergy as King] are, by the Act of resump∣tion under Hen. 8. invested in the Crown. So that, when the Oath declares to maintain all Rights and Pre∣eminences annexed to the Crown, you may understand that maintenance which a Subject owes his Sovereign against those that pretend to force his [just] claim from Him; But you may also understand that mainte∣nance, which a Divine owes the Truth in asserting the Title of the Crown to all Rights [whatever now] vest∣ed in it. Which [maintenance] he that believes that some Rights of the Church are invested in the Crown, ought not to undertake. — And again below: There is an appearance (saith he) that the mis-understand∣ing of this Oath hath produced an opinion destructive to one Article of the Creed; [viz.] to the being of
any Visible Church, as Founded by God. And besides it is not possible that all they, who are called to this Oath by Law, can ever be able to distinguish that sense in which they ought, from that wherein they ought not, to take it. And therefore of necessity, the Law gives great offence; and that offence is the sin of the King∣dome, and calls for Gods Vengeance upon it. There∣fore there is great reason, why, the Kingdome should enact a new Oath &c. Thus He. 2. For the second part of the Oath:2. Concerning Forreign Supremacy in Ecclesi∣astical affairs: how far it is to be acknow∣ledged. And therefore I do utterly renounce all Forreign Jurisdictions &c: You are first to note. That from what is said before in the Oath [that the Queens Highness is the only Supreme Governor in all Ecclesiastical things] it followeth; That so far as the Oath binds any to renounce all Forreign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or Authority, save the Queens, (that is, for any such Jurisdiction in Spirituals, as the Queen claimeth, whether such Jurisdiction be challenged by the Pope, or by a General Council &c; for here none is excepted) so far the Oath bindeth him also to renounce all Domestick Jurisdiction and Authority, (whether it be of the Arch-Bishops, or Bishops, or of a National Synod) in respect of, such Jurisdiction as is claimed by the Prince. So that none, who holdeth any such Jurisdiction in the Clergy at home, as others put in the Clergy or some Prelate abroad, may think that he escapeth the reach and power of the Oath, because of the word [Forreign] inserted therein. Having given you this pre-caution then, that you swear as well a∣gainst any Jurisdiction of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, or the National Synod of this Church, as of the Pope, or of a General Council concerning the Jurisdiction that is challenged by the Prince: Now to consider the thing it self. There may be such a Forreign or also Domestick Ecclesiastical Supremacy and Authority, as no way op∣poseth the good of the Civil State, nor any just privi∣ledge of a Secular Prince; but rather much corrobo∣rated and fortifieth it: and again as mainly tendeth to the unity and peace of the Church; which thro all
the world is only one Corporation and Body. And such Supremacy may be instituted and established, either by our Saviour; or by his Apostles; or later Eccle∣siastical Constitution: as the varying State of the Church may stem to require. Neither can an Authority, thus established, and relating only to Spiritual Affairs, be justly disturbed or annulled by any Secular Governor; neither Heathen (as is granted by all) nor Christian (as there is more reason, that he, who is a Son and Subject of the Church, should never do it) as hath been she wed in Chur. Govern. 1. Par. §. 38. and Succes. Cler. §. . Again there actually is such a Supremacy for some Spiritual matters by some of the former ways given to the Representative of the whole Church Ca∣tholick, General Councils (which have been hitherto Forreign, and perhaps will always be so:) which Coun∣cils have a Jurisdiction and Authority over, and whose Canons and Decrees do oblige, particular Churches, tho the Secular Magistrate dissent or oppose; as the Em∣peror Constantius opposed the Nicene condemnation of Arianisme. Secondly, There is also given, at least in the intervals of these Councils, a Supremacy to the Bishop of the Apostolick See of Rome: to whom also is committed the care of seeing to the execution of the Canons and Decrees of these General Councils in all par∣ticular Churches: as hath been shewed in Chur. Gov. 1. Par. And such Supremacy was ratified by the Clergy of this Nation; as formerly, so in their late Synods under Qu. Mary, and also under Qu. Elizabeth: See before §. 175. Art. 4. which Synods stood in force at the imposition of this Oath. Of these Supremacies thus Mr. Thorndike (Due way of composing differences p. 7.) It were a contradiction for the Church of England to pray for the Catholick Church and the unity thereof, and yet renounce the Jurisdiction of the whole Church, and the General Councils thereof, over it self. King James acknowledgeth the Pope to be Patriarch of the West; that is, Head of the General Council of the Western Churches. And Thomas Lord Bishop of Winchester
under Queen Elizabeth being demanded, why we own him not so in effect? Answereth bluntly but truly, be∣cause he is not content with the Right of a Patriarch. For should he disclaim the pretence of dissolving the bond of Allegiance, should he retire to the Priviledges of a Patriarch, in seeing the Canons executed; the Schism would lye at our door, if we should refuse it [deny such his Patriarchship.] Thus He. Now whether, upon ones demanding more than his right; we may (after∣ward) lawfully deny him his right, or, for ever after, swear that he hath no right, judge you: as likewise whether the General Councils have lost their right, to∣gether with their Head, the Pope? Again of the Su∣premacy of a General Council over particular Churches, and so over this of England thus Bishop Bramhal (Reply to Chalced. p. 293.) upon the words in the Oath [and that no Forreign Prelate hath &c.] A General Council, which is no standing Court, but an aggregate body, composed partly of our selves [i. e. of the Prelates of the Church of England] is neither included here nor in∣tended. General Councils then, it seems, of which the English Prelates are a part, have a Jurisdiction, over a particular Church, not subordinate to the Secular Go∣vernors thereof. And if a General Council be once thus admitted, I see not how the Head thereof will be totally excluded;  nor yet inferior Synods. Thirdly, There is a Supremacy in Spiritual matters, Decisions, and De∣crees (I mean as to an independance on the Secular Power for the exercising their office, and enacting or divulging of such Decrees) belonging to the Metropoli∣tans and their Provincial Synods in all National or Pro∣vincial Churches; if the First and Second Thesis above stand good. To require therefore upon Oath an utter renouncing of any such Forreign,That the renouncing such Supre∣macy was required of those Bi∣shops.or also Domestick, Clergy-Supre∣macy, is not lawful. But such was required of these Bishops, as appears; 1. by the express words of the Oath; and 2. by the giving of all such Jurisdiction Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by Any Spiritual or Eccle∣siastical
power [i. e. Forreign or Domestick] had thither∣to been lawfully used over the Ecclesiastical State of this Realm, to the Queen, at the same time, that this Oath was made; See before §. 70. And 3. by the practice of these times suitable. Neither, here, are those Pleas good: that one may take away a just authority from him, who hath exercised an unjust. (for will Secular Princes admit this Rule concerning themselves?) Or that any small part of the Church Catholick, if declining to joyn with the whole, is not obliged to the Constitutions of the whole; Or, not later ages to the Constitutions of the former: Or, that no particular Church is tyed to the Constitutions of Superior Councils past or present in matter of Church Government or Discipline, but only in matters of Faith: Or,See Church Gv. par. 1. sect;. 38.40.59. 2. Par. §. 63. 3. Par. §. 27. n. 2. that the Church of England hath not given her consent to such for∣mer Constitutions concerning such Church-Government, as well as other Churches: All which have been discussed in their places. Now if these Bishops were, thus, un∣justly ejected for refusing to take an unlawful Oath; it follows,Sac. Clerg. §. that the Bishops succeeding them were un∣justly introduced; and, consequently, their Synodal Acts illegal and void. To prevent which inference, I find this pleaded by Dr. Fern, Examin. Champ. 2. c. p. 84.That so ma∣ny of Queen Mary's Bi∣shops could not be eject∣ed on any other groūd so as to rea∣der the Pro∣testant Bi∣shops a ma∣jor part,That, had none of these Bishops been removed, yet the Queens Re∣forming-Bishops in Synod would have made a major part For (saith he)  α there were six Bishops re∣maining [of King Edward's;] and besides, there were many Bishopricks actually void at Queen Mary's death; which Bishopricks being supplyed [by Queen Elizabeth] there was no fear, that the Popish Bishops (who were very suddenly reduced to Nine by death or by quitting the Land) should make the major part; had the business of Reformation been put at first to a Synodical Vote. Thus He. To which it is added by others: β That no new Bishops had been elect∣ed into the vacant Bishopricks, yet if so many only of these Queen Mary's Bishops should have been displaced, as
came into the Bishopricks of King Edward's former Pro∣testant Bishops unjustly cast out; the six remaining Bi∣shops of King Edward, with Landaff joyned to them, would have out-numbred the remainder of Queen Mary's Bishops. Reply to αBut to these 'tis easily replyed. To α; That 1. First it hath been shewed already, That some of these six Bishops could not lawfully now act, because justly re∣moved from their Bishopricks in Queen Mary's days;  of the Suffragan Bishops,See before, §. 54. &c. more by and by. Secondly, That Queen Elizabeth could not justly and legally sup∣ply the then vacant Bishopricks with any persons, but such as the major part of her present Clergy (which surely were Catholicks, and would have admitted no other) did first approve of, consecrate, and confirm. Of which see what is said before in the Third Thesis, and in the Church-Canons there-cited. To which I will add the testimony of Mr. Thorndike, Right of the Church, 5. c. p. 248. &c. The fourth Canon (saith he) of the Council of Nice requireth, that all Bishops be ordained by a Council of the Bishops of the Pro∣vince [sifieri potest.] Which Council because it can∣not always be had; therefore it is provided [there] that two or three may do the work, the rest consent∣ing and authorizing the proceeding. And this is that, which the ordinance of the Apostles hath provided, to keep the visible Communion of the whole Church in unity. But when, among the Bishops of any Pro∣vince, part consent to Ordination, part not: the unity of the Church cannot be preserved; unless the con∣sent of the whole follow the consent of the greater part. And therefore it seemeth, that there can no valid ordination be made, where the greater number of the Bishops of the Province dissent. Which is con∣firmed by the Ordination of Novatianus for Bishop of Rome. Which, tho done by three Bishops, yet was the Foundation of that great Schisme; because Cornelius was ordained on the other side by Sixteen. Thus Mr. Thorndike.
To β.To β. 1. First, that those may be lawful Bishops, who come into the places of other Bishops whilst living, if the other be justly ejected, as King Edward's Bishops were. Secondly, That of the fifteen Catholick Bishops there were only four that came into the place of any Protestant Bishop living when he was first elected there∣to, namely Heath, Bourne, Christophorson,See before, §. 54. and Turber∣vile, into the place of Holgate, Barlow, Scory, and Co∣verdale. (For all of the rest, Bonner, Pate, White, Gold∣well, Watson, Poole, Scot, Bayne, Oglethorp, Thirlby, Ton∣stal succeeded either Catholick Bishops, or Protestant Bishops deceased:) And those four Protestant Bishops were all married persons, and so excluded by the Canon; and three of them, Holgate, Barlow, Coverdale, married Monks. But of the fifteen Catholick Bishops there were only two that came into the place of any Protestant Bishop, when living: which Protestant Bishop had not first entred into the place of a Catholick Bishop, when living. For Coverdale and Scory Protestants came into the Catholicks Day's and Voicy's Bishopricks in King Ed∣ward's time whilst they living. The truth of these things you may see in Godwins Catalogue of Bishops. CHAP. XII. The Canonical Defects of King Edward's, and Queen Elizabeth's new Bishops. NOW instead of these Catholick Bishops expelled, being all that then sate,Concerning the defects of the Qu. Protestant Bishops re∣maining since King Edward's days. save only Anthony Bishop of Landaff (whom Cambden calls the Calamity of his See, and who I think can be much challenged by no side; in Henry the Eighth's time, in Edward the Sixth's, in Queen Mary's, in Queen Elizabeth's, still acquiescing for his Religion on the Princes direction) the Queen had onely six others surviving since King Edward's time, out of whom to raise her new Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; Scory Bishop of Chicester, Coverdale of Excester, Barlow
of Bath, two Suffragan Bishops of Bedford and Thetford and one Bale Bishop of Ossery in Ireland: amongst whom was no Metropolitan; and of whom but one was con∣secrated in Henry the Eighth's days; the other five in King Edwards, whose times were full of uncanonical Proceedings, and liable to several exceptions. Again two of which Bishops, Scory, and Coverdale in King Ed∣ward's time came (as is said) into Bishopricks not void. Besides that on another account they, as also Barlow, were lawfully ejected in Queen Mary's days, as being marryed persons; two of them Barlow and Cover∣dale doing this, contrary to the Canons, both as Priests and as Religious. The later of whom also, going beyond-Sea in Q. Mary's days, there turned Puritan as they are called; and in the troubles of Frankford was one of the Op∣posers of the Common-Prayer-Book of England: and after his return,See Bishop Bramhal's Consecrat. of Prote∣stant Bishops jstified ollinshed p. 1309. 26. He. 8.14. c. 1, 2. Mar. 8. c. at the Consecration of Arch-Bishop Par∣ker, refused to wear an Episcopal habit as is found upon Record; nor would resume his Bishoprick of Ex∣cester, but to his dying day lived a private Preacher in London; William Allen in the second year of Queen Elizabeth being made Bishop of Excester in his stead, As for the Suffragan Bishops, as they were (in a way and manner differing from former times,) first set up by King Henry: so were they put down again by Qu. Mary; and quite laid aside under Queen Elizabeth. This for the reformed Bishops that are said to remain from King Edward's days:Concerng the defect, of the nw Bishop O∣dained in Qu. Elz∣beth' days. now touching the new ones who were made by Queen Elizabeth; I think not fit to trouble my Reader here with an exact discussion of the validity of their Orders, by reason of defects either in the Ordainers or the Ordained, since such a discourse, for the most part Scholastick, disputing of the Cha∣racter, Matter, Form, Intention, &c. essentially requi∣red for the conferring of this Sacrament, may better come out in a Treatise a part, then interrupt this Hi∣storical Narration: Concerning these new Bishops and Prieststhen, I will briefly only observe two or three things, whereof the first shall be the judgment and esteem the
Catholick Church has made of these and the like Orders, the second, that tho these Orders be supposed valid, yet were they certainly unlawful and against the Canons; and moreover unprofitable yea noxious to those who conferred and received them. As to the first,sect;. 192. 1. the new Ordination grew so far sus∣pected, as deficient, to Queen Mary, that in her Articles sent to the Bishops this is one. That touching such persons as were heretofore promoted to any Orders,Fox p. 1295. after the new sort and fashion of Orders; considering they were not ordered in very deed; the Bishop of the Diocess, finding otherwise sufficiency and ability in those men, may supply that thing which wanted in them before, and then according to his discretion admit them to minister. Bishop Bramhal indeed urg∣eth this following passage out of Cardinal Pool's Dis∣pensation, to prove,Consecrat. of Prote∣stant Bi∣shops justi∣fied, 3. c. p. 63. that King Edward's new Form of Ordination was judged valid in Queen Mary's days by Cardinal Pool; by the Pope confirming his Acts; and by all the Clergy and Parliament of England. Ac omnes Ecclesiasticas saeculares, ceu quorumvis Ordinum Regulares, personas, quae aliquas impetrationes, dispensa∣tiones, concessiones, gratias, & indulta, m Ordines, qua Beneficia Ecclesiastica, ceu alias Spirituales matrias prae∣tensâ supremitate authoritatis Ecclesiasticae Anglican, licet nulliter & de facto obtinuerint, & ad cor reversae [peonae] ecclesiae unitati restitutae fuerint, in suis Ordinibus &Be∣neficiis per nos ipsos, ceu a nobis ad id deputatos, miseri∣corditer recipiemus, prout multae receptae fuerunt, secumque super his opportune in Domino dispensabimus. From which words of the Cardinal the Bishop argueth; That, If King Edward's Clergy wanted some essential part of their respective Ordinations, which was required by the Institution of Christ; then, it was not in the power of all the Popes and Legates, that ever were in the world, to confirm their respective Orders, or dis∣pense with them to execute their functions in the Church. Thus the Bishop. But if you look narrowly into the words of the Instrument, you may observe, that
the Cardinal very cautiously here First saith not, dis∣pensamus or recipimus in the present, as he doth in every one of his other dispensings throughout the whole In∣strument, tho in matters uncanonical, dispensamus, re∣laxamus, remittimus, concedimus, &c. in the present Tense, but here dispensabimus, in the future. And Secondly saith not singlely dispensabimus; but recipiemus per nos ipsos, seu deputatos: which reception per nos, seu deputatos, was not necessary for a dispensation with a matter only un∣canonical. And Thirdly saith not recipiemus simply, but with a prout multae personae receptae fuerunt; referring to the manner of the reception, which had been used for∣merly in this Queen's days; which we find set down in the Queen's thirteenth Article: viz. That such new ordained repairing to the Bishop, and he finding them other∣wise sufficient should supply that which was wanting to them in respect of their Orders, as they being before not or∣dered in very deed. And this is the Reason, why the Cardinal could not apply in this Instrument a present recipimus or dispensamus for these Ordines, as he doth for other things; tho here he ingageth to make good to every one such orders, as they then bare the title of. This is a sence of which the Cardinals words are very capable, and seem also to favour; and which accords well with the Histories of those times: whereas that, which the Bi∣shop puts upon them, makes them to contradict the pub∣lick actions and proceedings both before and after the passing of this act. For that the Cardinal, when Arch-Bi∣shop of Canterbury, and the Roman Bishops held not the Orders received by the new Form sufficiently valid quoad Characterem; as it may be gathered from Queen Mary's thirteenth Article forecited, and first considered, no doubt, by her Bishops: so it is clear from the Bishop of Glou∣cester, the Popes Legate his degrading Ridley onely from his Presbytership,See Fox p. 1604. and not his Episcopacy: For, saith he, We do not acknowledge you for a Bishop. Which had he under∣stood quoad Excercitium, and not also quoad Characterem; then neither so ought he to have acknowledged him for, or degraded him as, a Presbyter; he being, quoad excer∣citium,
no more the one then the other. Now the reason why he acknowledged him no Bishop quoad Cha∣racterem, was, I conceive, upon supposition that Ridley was not ordained by the old Form; because much of∣fence being taken at that old Form, we may conjecture by the reason given in the Preface of the Statute recited before §. 42. that also before the new set-form estab∣lished, there were in Ordinations some varyings from the old. The same you may see in Fox concerning Hooper made Priest by the old Form; Bishop by the new: and therefore degraded in Queen Mary's days only as a Priest. Again Mr. Bradford made Priest by the new Form: and therefore, in his condemnation not degra∣ded at all, but treated as a meer Laick. In these days likewise Bishop Bonner writ a Book call'd A pro∣fitable and necessary Doctrine, &c. wherein he contend∣eth,See F. a S. Clara E∣chirid. p. 93. that the new devised Ordination of Ministers was unsufficient and void: because no authority at all was given them to offer in the Mass the Body and Blood of our Saviour Christ; but both the Ordainer and Or∣dained despised and impugned not onely the Oblation or Sacrifice of the Mass, but also the Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar. Lastly 'tis probable, that Mason and others,Art. of Edw. 6.28. Art. to whom this dispensation could not be unknown, and was so serviceable for this Controversy, would not have left it unmentioned; could they have made any such con∣struction thereof as Bishop Bramhal doth. 2. In general, those who are truly ordained, yet, if in an Heretical or Schismatical Church, their true Orders, as to the exercise of them, are unlawful; and so, unless a Church be first cleared from Heresy and Schisme, these Orders are not rightly employed in it. And those also, who receive the Sacraments from their Ministery, do (tho truly, yet) fruitlesly receive them. I mean so many, as by their obstinacy or ignorance culpable are guilty of the same Heresy or Schisme: because these do not receive with the Sacrament gratiam sanctificatio∣nis or charitatem, or jus ad regnum caelorum, thro such
their sin; without which Charity any other fruition of the Sacrament is nothing worth. [Of which thus St. Austine, De Baptis. 7. l. 52. c. against the Donatists concerning their Priests giving, and others receiving the Sacrament of Baptisme from them. Habent [po∣testatem dandi baptismum] quamquam inutiliter habe∣ant: & accipitur ab eis etiam, cum inutile est accipientibus: quod ut fiat utile, ab haeresi vel schismate recedendum est. 54. c. Infructuose atque inutiliter [tradunt baptismum] tales talibus in eo, quod regnum Dei non possidebunt. Haereticis correctis baptisma non incipit adesse quod deerat, sed prodesse, quod in∣erat. And thus the Schools-Haereticus [i. e. manifeste ab ecclesiâ praecisus] excommunicatus &c. non amittit potestatem conferendi Sacramentum, sed licentiam utendi hâc potestate, & ideo quidem confert, sed tamen peccat conferendo: & similiter ille, qui ab eo accipit Sacramentum; & sic non percipit rem Sa∣cramenti [i e. gratiam sanctificationis] nisi forte per ignoran∣tiam excusetur. Si sunt manifeste ab ecclesiâ praecisi, ex hoc ipso, quod aliquis accipit Sacramenta ab eis peccat, & per hoc impeditur, ne effectum Sacramenti consequatur. Thus Aquinas, p. 3.64. q 9. a.] And then what great difference in the giver of such Sacraments, not to have true Or∣ders, and not to have the power to use them? Or in the receiver of the Sacraments, not to have true Sacra∣craments, and not to be benefited by them? Excepting only such, who living in such a separate Society are by their invincible ignorance excused from fault; to whom it is granted, that such Sacraments are effectual. When they return to the unity of the Church indeed, then his true Orders formerly received become to the one usable, and the true Sacraments formerly received to the other profitable. But this is in effect all one, as if then the one first de novo received Orders; 3. and the other the Sacraments.Whether their Ordi∣nation un∣lawful ac∣cording to the Church C. 3. But again, tho I do not here state the question; Whether they had such due Ordination and Ordainers as to be truly and essentially Bishops: Yet their Introduction and Ordination, if valid, seems several ways uncanonical and unlawful: Because they came many of them into the
places of others unjustly expelled. 2. Because neither the major part nor any, save one, of the former in∣cumbent Bishops consented to their Election or Ordi∣nation:See Thes. 3. §. 6.7. which consent is a thing most necessary for preservation of the Church, both in true Doctrine and in Unity. Of which you have heard but now Mr. Thorn∣dike's Testimony. Who, in the same place, applying his Doctrine to this very fact, goeth on thus; Now it is manifest, that the Ordinations, by which that Order [of Bishops] is propagated in England at and since the Reformation, were not made by consent of the greater part of Bishops of each Province; but against their mind, tho they made no contrary Or∣dinations. And by the same means it is manifest, that all those Ecclesiastical Laws, by which the Reforma∣tion was established in England [i. e. by these new Bi∣shops] were not made by a consent capable to oblige the Church; if we set aside the Secular power, that gave force unto that which was done [by the Bi∣shops] contrary to that rule, wherein the unity of the Church consisteth. But in other parts, the Refor∣mation was so far from being done by Bishops and Presbyters, or any consent, which was able to con∣clude the Church by the Constitution of the Church; that the very Order of Bishops is laid aside and forgot, if not worse, i. e. detested, among them. Upon which precedent it sounds plausibly with the greatest part among us; that, the unity of the whole being [thus] dissolved by the Reformation [i. e. by the Reformers either being against Bishops, or being Bishops made against the consent of the former Bishops:] the unity of the Re∣formation cannot be preserved, but by dissolving the Order of Bishops among us. The like he saith before, p. 248. If the Clergy of that time [i. e. in the begin∣ning of Queen Elizabeth's Reformation] had been sup∣ported in that power, which, by the premises [set down and justified in his Book] is challenged on behalf of the Clergy; this Reformation could not have been brought to pass, 3. Because to prevent all division
and faction, as likewise to appoint a certain place and bounds for the exercise of his Jurisdiction, no Bishop, by the Church-Canon, can be made without the con∣sent of his Superior, the Metropolitan; nor Metropoli∣tan without the consent of the Patriarch:See Chur. Gov. 1. par. 9. §. who is to ordain or confirm the Metropolitans under his Patri∣arch-ship; either by imposition of hands himself, or by appointing his Ordainers, (at which time his Bull for authorizing the Ordainers was used to be read) and by Mission of the Pall: See Conc. Nic. 4. c. Can. Apost. 34. Council Chalced. 27. c. and 16. Act. 8. Ge∣neral Council, 10. c. confessed by Protestants: by Dr. Field, 5. l. 31. c. p. 518. and 37. c. p. 551. Without the Patriarch's assent none of the Metropolitan's subject unto them might be ordained. What they bring proves nothing, that we ever doubted of. For we know the Bishop of Rome had the right of Confirming the Metropolitans within the Precincts of his own. Patriarch-ship. By Bishop Bramhal, Vindic. 9. c. p. 297. What power the Metropolitan had over the Bishops of his own Province, the same had a Pa∣triarch over the Metropolitans, &c. Wherein then consist∣ed Patriarchal Authority? In ordaining their Metropo∣litans, or confirming them, in imposing of hands, or giving the Pall, &c. And indeed what defence can the Church have from frequent Schisme, if two or three, or a few Bishops, dissenting from the whole, may not only make other persons of the like inclinations Bishops to govern the people with them; but also may make new Metro∣politans to preside over themselves? But Arch-Bishop Parker was thus ordained by two Bishops of the same Province, without and against the consent, of the Pa∣triarch; and of the Arch-Bishops Vice-gerent, side va∣cante, the Bishop of London; and of the other Metro∣politan, the Arch-Bishop of York. Neither did he re∣ceive any Spiritual Jurisdiction at all from any Eccle∣siastical Superior; but meerly that which the Queen (a Lay-person) by these men, her Delegates in this im∣ployment, did undertake (according to the warrant of the Statute 1. Eliz. 1. contrary to the First and Third
Thesis above) to confer upon him. Which Delegates of her's were none of them at that time possessed of any Diocess, (Barlow and Scory being then only Bishops Elect of Chicester, and Hereford; and Coverdale never admitted or elected to any; and Hoskins a Suffragan) nor, had they had Diocesses, could have had any larger jurisdiction save only within these; at least, being single Bishops, could have no Metropolitical Jurisdiction; which yet they conferred on Parker, not on their own surely, but on the Queens score. And then, might not she at pleasure take away and strip Parker again of all that Jurisdiction, which he held only on her gift?See above the First and Third Thes. 4. Of their four Bishops, that undertook to ordain Parker, three, Barlow, Coverdale and Scory, were upon several accounts justly before deprived or their Bishopricks;  and as for the fourth, Hoskins the Suffragan,See before, §. 58.189.190. these had their office formerly taken away, and never after re∣stored. Neither, their authority standing good,See before, §. 190. is one or two Bishops a competent number for Ordination. 5. The Form of the Ordination of these new Bishops, as it was made in Edward the Sixth's time; so it was revoked by Synod in Queen Mary's days; and by no Synod afterward restored, before their Ordination. Revoked also by an Act of Parliament in Queen Mary's days, and not by any Act restored,1. Mar. 2. c. till long after the Or∣dination of Queen Elizabeth's first Bishops, viz. in 8. Eliz. 1. Upon Bonner's urging hereupon, that the Queens, were no legal, Bishops. And for such considerations as these, it seems, it was, that the Queen in her Mandate to Coverdale, Scory,Where Concerning the Queen as Supreme in Ecclesi∣asticals her dispensing with the former Ec∣clesiastical Laws for their Ordi∣nation. &c. for the Ordination of her new Arch-Bishop Parker, &c. was glad, out of her Spiritual Supremacy, and Univer∣sal jurisdiction, (which the Parliament had either given, or recognized to belong to her; and had enacted also, That Her Majesty might assign, name and authorize any per∣son being natural born Subjects to her Highness to exercise all manner of Spiritual Jurisdiction, [of which Jurisdiction one Act is that of Ordaining.] See 1. Eliz. 1.) to di∣spense, and give them leave to dispense to themselves,
with all former Church-laws, which should be transgrest, in the electing, consecrating, and investing of this Bishop. The words in her Letters Patents to them are these, Mandantes, quatenus vos eundem in Archiepiscopum & pa∣storem ecclesiae praedictae confirmare & consecrare &c. velitis. Supplentes nihilominus Supremâ authoritate nostrâ regiâ, si quid in vobis aut vestrum aliquo, conditione, statu, aut fa∣cultate vestris, ad praemissa perficienda desit eorum, quae per leges ecclesiasticas in hac parte requiruntur aut necessa∣ria sunt, temporis ratione & rerum necessitate id postulante. [Which Dispensation some would restrain only to these Ordainers their using of the new Ordinal before it was licensed again by a new Parliament after the repeal thereof by Parliament in Queen Mary's day.Bish. Bram. Consecrat. of Protestant Bishop 4. c. P. 94. But this was a scruple started afterward by Bishop Bonner; and not now dreamt on. Nor did the new Ordinal want sufficient Lay-licence, having the Queens; nor had the Parliament been defective in re-licensing it (for which see ibid. Bishop Bramh. p. 96:) nor are those words in the Dispensation — Si quid in vobis conditione, statu &c, rerum necessitate id postulante, applicable to it.] And these are the words in the Instrument of Arch-Bishop Parker's Confirmation — Nos &c, praedictam electionem Matthaei Parker in Archiepiscopum &c, Supremâ authoritate regiâ nobis in hac parte commissâ confirmamus. Supplentes ex supremâ authoritate regiâ nobis delegatâ, quicquid in nobis aut aliquo nostrum &c. And, notwith∣standing this regal Dispensation, yet afterward, Di∣vers questions [to give you it in the words of the Statute 8. Eliz. 1. c.] by overmuch boldness of speech and talk, amongst many common sort of people being un∣learned, growing upon the making and consecrating of Arch-Bishops and Bishops within this Realm, whe∣ther the same were and be duly and orderly done ac∣cording to the Law or not? [give me leave here to suppose that these scrupulous people meant according to the Ecclesiastical Law; for what doth the observing of the Civil Law concern them in the ordaining of their Spiritual Governors?] which is much tending to the slander of
all the State of the Clergy, being one of the greatest States of this Realm; It is answered to them in the same Statute thus, That the Queens Majesty in her Letters Patents &c, had not only used such words, as were accustomed to be used by King Henry and Edward, but also had put, in those Letters, divers other general words, whereby her Highness by her Supreme power and authority had dispensed with all causes, or doubts, of any imperfections or disability, that could be ob∣jected against the same. So that to all those that will well consider of the supreme and absolute authority of the Queens Highness [i. e. in Ecclesiasticals] which she had used and put in ure in the making and conse∣crating of the said Arch-Bishops and Bishops,See it be∣fore, §. 70 it is evi∣dent, that no cause of scruple, ambiguity, or doubt, can be justly objected against the said Consecrations, &c. Thus the Act. And this is proposed for the satis∣faction of those, whose chief solicitude was concerning the transgressing the Laws of the Church, in these Church matters. And the Answer seems in effect this, That tho these Bishops were ordained contrary to the Laws of the Church, yet they were ordained according to the Laws of the Land: and that this was sufficient to warrant the Ordination; because these Laws of the Land had given authority to the Queen to dispense with any re∣pugnant Laws of the Church. Thus much of Queen Elizabeth's change of her Clergy. And here I think meet to prosecute no further this Sub∣ject; this reformed Clergy being such persons, as would act according to the pleasure of a reformed Prince; and therefore it is not strange, if the Prince acted no more against, but by, them; and began now a-new to use the Synod more, than the Senate, in the transaction of Spiritual Affairs.
CHAP. XIII. The Opinion of several Protestant Divines con∣cerning a Reformation in Religion made against a Major Part of the Clergy. ONly, before I conclude this Discourse, let me shew you,The opinion of several Protestant Divines touching the lawfulness of the Prin∣ce's reform∣ing of Reli∣gion in mat¦ters of do∣ctrine a∣gainst the major part of his Cler∣gy, when to him seemeth a necessity that requi∣reth it. after all the rest; that, as it hath been affirm∣ed here, that the Reformation was not effected by the Clergy of this Nation, but by the Princes and their Council against the inclinations of the much major part thereof: So some of the ablest of the reformed Divines, tho they contend, that our Princes did not so; Yet, as if they doubted much, whether they should be able to make this good, do reserve this as a secure retreat for themselves; that a Prince, when there is a necessity that requires it, of which necessity the Prince is to judge, or in cases extraordinary, of which cases the Prince is to judge, may lawfully reform Religion, both in matters of Doctrine and Discipline, contrary to the major part of the Clergy (these Learned Men defending the Secular powers herein by the example of the good Kings of Israel.) Upon which also they make no scruple to joyn Communion with those Transmarine Protestants, whom all grant to have reformed against all their Spiritual Su∣periors: Nay also, in the beginning of this work, such Reformers were sent for from abroad to assist them here against the contrary current of the Clergy of this Land. And indeed it seemeth but necessary that they should patronize this Tenent; because if they should once maintain, That no Reformation is valid, which is done against the major part of the National Clergy; by the same reason they must assert, that the Reformation of no National Clergy is valid, which is done against a major part of the Patriarchy; or of the Church, or Council; to which this National Clergy will be found to owe obedience.
The first testimony of those I shall produce for this assertion, is that of Dr. Field. He,The Opinion of Dr. Field. after these specious Concessions, We do not make our Princes with their Civil States supreme in the power of commanding in matters concerning God and his Faith and Religion without seeking the direction of their Clergy.Of the Chur. 5. l. 53. c. Again: We do not attribute to our Princes with their Civil Estates power newly to adjudge any thing to be He∣resy, without the concurrence of the State of their Clergy; but only to judge in those matters of Faith, that are resolved on, according to former resolutions. [Where the Dr. seems to leave the Prince no liberty to judge or establish any thing in matters of Faith according to his own opinion: but, in matters formerly determined confineth him to the judgment of former Councils; in matters not formerly determined, to the judgment of his Clergy [i. e. the major part thereof:] Yet, after such specious Con∣cessions, I say, he proceedeth, as it were to protect the Reformation, on this manner, Touching errors of Faith or aberrations in the performance of God's Wor∣ship and Service, there is no question, but that Bishops and Pastors of the Church, to whom it appertaineth to teach the truth, are the ordinary and fittest Judges: and that ordinarily and regularly Princes are to leave the judgment thereof unto them. But because they may fail [they; i e. the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, and not onely single persons, but Synods of them; else single persons failing may easily be reduced by Synods, and a minor by the major part, and so long the Prince judges with his Clergy not against them; and the Judgment of such things being made by this major part is still ordinary and regular. Nei∣ther needs the Prince to remove the matter from these, to other, Judges] either thro negligence, ignorance, or malice, Princes having charge over Gods people; and being to see, that they serve and worship him aright, are to judge and condemn them [the foresaid Clergy] that fall into gross errors contrary to the common sense of Christians; or, into any other Heresies formerly condemned [I conceive he meaneth, condemned by for∣mer
Councils.] And tho there be no general failing [in the Clergy:] yet if they see violent and partial courses taken, they may interpose themselves to stay them, and cause a due proceeding; or remove the matter from one sort of Judges to another [I suppose he mean∣eth, either from the whole Clergy to Secular Judges; or from that part of the Clergy tho more which he dislikes, to some others of the Clergy tho fewer whom he approves: for to remove the matter from fewer to more is regular and ordi∣nary. But here he speaks what the Prince may do extra∣ordinarily.] Thus Dr. Field. Who (not to urge Bishop Andrews his observation against him:Tort. Tort. p. 372. Ad extraordinariam potestatem confugere non solet quis, nisi cui deplorata res est.) here seems to six the Prince, as one that cannot fail thro negligence, ignorance or malice to others, or at least cannot fail so soon, as the whole body of the Clergy may; (what not fail in ignorance of Divine matters sooner than they?) As one that hath a charge over Gods people, and is to see, that they worship God aright: as if the Clergy had not such charge much more than he; or, as if he could judge what was right in Gods Worship, better than they. Again: he represents this body, or the major part of this Clergy as those that may fall into gross errors contrary to the common sense of Christians; and into Heresies con∣demned, he meaneth, by former Clergy. But why may not those former Clergy be supposed by the Prince to have erred sometimes contrary to the common sense of Christians, as well as the present Clergy? And if the present Clergy may err against common sense in Spiri∣tual matters; why may not the Secular Prince sooner? And why should not they discern former condemned Heresies, better than he? Or if in all these things the Prince be liable to mistakes, to sects, and sides, and par∣tialities, as much as they: why are not they made his Judges in these Spiritual matters, who cannot be denyed to be his Spiritual Fathers in respect of his Christianity; rather than he theirs? But however this Dr. plainly saith: that there may be some cases, wherein, concern∣ing
errors in Faith, or aberrations in the performance of Gods Worship, the Prince may judge and condemn the whole Clergy; or may remove the matter from their, to a Secular, judgment, or to such other Eccle∣siastical Judges, as he shall choose; who hardly can ever want some amongst the Clergy, suting with his desires. In the next place hear the judgment of Mr. Mason de Minist. Angl. He,Of Mr. Mason. De Minist. Ang. 3. l. 3.. after having thus expostulated with his Adversary [Quis enim nostrum unquam affirmavit Principes in causis fidei & religionis supremos esse cognitores & judices? De hac a Cardinale Bellarmino & aliis Pon∣tificiis ecclesiae Anglicanae illatâ injuriâ sic olim conquestus est doctissimus Whittakerus — Affirmat Jesuita hunc ju∣dicem non esse Principem aliquem saecularem. Respondeo: Hoc quoque nos dicimus.] Thus states this matter to Phi∣lodoxus, p. 272. Pastorum est dubia Legis explicare: Regum vero veritatem cognitam [sibi] promulgare & sub∣ditis cujuscunque sint ordinis [i. e. whether Clergy or Laity] imperare. [But here I cannot but ask one que∣stion: May not the Clergy then veritatem cognitam, quan∣docunque rex contra nititur, promulgare subditis suis, in illi∣us regno, quorum animarum curam gerunt? Now to go on] Regis enim est (saith he pag. 273.) ex praestituto legis omnia facere. Adhibebit igitur media, quae hac in causâ adhiberi par est: leget scripturas, orabit Dominum, & juris divini peritissimos consulet. Nec tamen splendidis ho∣minum titulis aut suffragiorum numero, aut locorum privi∣legiis, tantum deferet, quantum veritati [i. e. that which he conceives to be truth:] paucis secundum scripturas do∣centibus [i. e. whom he conceives to teach so] potius credet, quam 400 pseudoprophetis pro cultu Baalis conten∣dentibus. [And after such consultation, then] Illius est serenitatis suae edicta sancire & promulgare. So 3. l. 4. c. he saith concerning his opposing Councils, Imperator etiam in sacrosanctis fidei mysteriis pro veritate [i. e. quae sibi videtur] jubere potest, Concilii decreto in contrarium non obstante. And, Penes Imperatorem esse potestatem Con∣ciliorum constituta sacris Scripturis consentanea [i. e. quae
sibi videntur, aut aliis paucis] confirmandi, contraria vero cassandi, agnoscit Leo [but he mistaketh Leo.] And Neque ad Primatum Regium quicquam interest,See below, §. 211. sive prae∣lucentes Synodorum sententias habeat rex, sive non habeat. Sive enim veritatem caelestem ipsi dignoscant, sive a praelatis suis edocti ediscant, dummodo pro veritate [i. e. quae sibi videtur] jubeant & leges condant, verè se exhibent su∣premos gubernatores. Thus Mr. Mason. Let us now see, what he hath said: The King, be∣fore he do any thing in Controversies of Religion, ought to consult the Clergy, and to follow the truth known. What? That which the Clergy tell him to be the truth? No. But only that, in which he findeth them to judge aright and according to the Scriptures; which judge∣ment he may entertain, tho it be a smaller part of the Clergy that judge so. Here therefore the King judgeth, when, or which of the Clergy judgeth aright, and which otherwise: and is at his liberty, to follow there∣in any number of them. And neither is he thus a Judge for himself-only, judicio discretivo, as they call it; but for others too, judicio decisivo (which the Clergy are not) so far, as to promulgate and command all his Subjects, and amongst them the Clergy, to obey that which he, upon consulting the Clergy and hearing their reasons, judgeth to be according to Gods word: and this without the consent of the Clergy at all; or at least of the major part of them. But they may not promul∣gate what they judge according to Gods word in such Controversies without the Kings consent. And yet quis enim nostrum unquam affirmavit, Principes in causis fidei & religionis supremos esse cognitores & judices? I would fain speak it plainly, if I could. A Controversy is agitated in Religion; the King consulteth his Clergy about it; they give him their reasons, why such a Pro∣position is agreeable to the Scriptures. He considers the Scriptures and their reasons, and judgeth, upon it, that their reasons are faulty; and that they define not juxta legem &c; and that the contradictory Proposition, which perhaps some few of the Clergy compared with
the rest, or perhaps none of them maintain, is accord∣ing to Scripture. Whereupon he publisheth this con∣tradictory Proposition to all his Subjects, Clergy as well as Laity, by his edicts; and requireth their obe∣dience thereto. Is not the Prince then a Judge of such Controversy, as well as, nay rather than, the other, and over, and after, the other? Commanding obedience to him from the other? 'Tis true: that Mr. Mason and others acknowledge in matters of Religion no visible judge on earth, that is infallible. But he acknowledg∣eth a Judge, judicio discretivo for himself; and this is every private man. Again he acknowledgeth a Supreme visible publick Judge on earth, judicio decisivo; so far as to command such a Doctrine to be received by all his Subjects Ecclesiastical and Laick for a truth, which he, by his judicium discretionis, holds to be so. And this is every Christian Prince within his own Domini∣ons. Therefore Mr. Mason sticks not to say elsewhere; Nihil impedit, quin Principes doceant suo modo, i. e. regali.De Minist. 3. l. 6. c. Nam qui legem salutarem sancit, is quid faciendum sit docet. Docet (inquam) omnes suos subditos, etiam Epis∣copos; eosque, si forte in hujusmodi legem incurrant, [i. e. his Spiritual Law, made by him sometimes against their consent, when by his judicium discretivum he discovers them to err] juxta eandem judicare potest. However this is clear out of Mr. Mason; 1. that, Regis est veri∣tatem cognitam promulgare, & subditis, cujuscunque sint ordinis, imperare. And 2. that, in consulting his Clergy about such truth, he ought not suffragiorum numero tantum credere, quantum veritati; and ought paucis secundum scrip∣turas docentibus [i. e. in his opinion, which Prince is, casually, of an able, or weak, judgment, as other men are] potius credere, quam 400 non docentibus secundum scripturas. Which I undertook to shew you. There∣fore King Edward shall rather believe Cranmer and Ridley, and Queen Elizabeth Dr. Cox and Mr. Grindale docenti∣bus veritatem, (i. e. most commonly, that Doctrine, to which such Princes have been formerly educated and ac∣customed,) than 400 in a Synod teaching the contrary.
The next I shall name to you on this subject is Bishop Andrews;Of B shp Andrews. who after he had declared thus in Tort. Tort. p. 380. Rex noster vestrum illud (quod ad primatum pontificium proprie pertinere dicitis) docendi munus, vel dubia legis explicandi, non assumit: Yet in his Resp. ad Apolog. cap. 14. p. 332. to Bellarmine urging Deut. 17. &c. That the supreme decisive judgment in divine matters belongeth to the Priests, thinketh fit to answer thus; Rex adibit Sacerdotes; ubi tamen hoc fecerit, cum in Deute∣ronomio dicere jubeantur sacerdotes & docere juxta legem Dei,See the like Tort. Tort. p. 370. leget exemplar suum Rex (quod sibi descripsit, ut se∣cum habeat) ut sciat an ex eâ respondeant. E Malachiá sciet, cos a quibus requirere jubetur legem, interdum rece∣dere de viâ, & scandilizare plurimos in lege: quare recurret denuo ad exemplar suum. A Christo autem discet, ut Phari∣saeos e cathedrâ docentes audire, ita a Pharisaeorum fermento, i. e. doctrinâ aliquâ, cavere.—Pascua petet; nec sibi Pastor erit, sed sibi tamen gustabit: &, si amarum pabulum & noxium, gustabit, ut Christus acetum: quod, cum gustasset, noluit bibere. Where the Prince is allowed both to try and reject the Clergy's doctrines; when, upon tasting, he finds the doctrine to be pabulum amarum & noxium, and the Clergy, recedere de viâ & non docere juxta legem Dei. And then, since the Prince doth not tast and try only for himself, as private persons do, but for all his Subjects also; consequently it will belong to him, veritatem cognitam promulgare, & subditis suis cu∣juscunque sunt ordinis imperare against the Priests, when recedentes e viâ. Wherein the Bishop's, concurs with Mason's, Doctrine. Again: Cap. 1. to Bellarmine urging a place of S. Ambrose he replies thus; Verum laudat Am∣brosium,St. Ambros. Ep. 2. l. 13. Epist. qui negat in causis ecclesiasticis Imperatorem idoneum cognitorem [i. e. judicem] Quem? Valentini∣anum juniorem, imberbem, nec dum baptizatum, totum ex matris arbitrio pendentem, quae ipsa . Sed esto. Quid hoc ad rem? Non de cognitione causarum hic agitur, ad quam non tam fortasse semper idoneus Rex (qui saepe immaturâ aetate, saepe infans, saepe Marti magis ad∣dictus, quam Mercurio.) Agitur de authoritate, quae ido∣neos
cognitores det. Where the Bishop 1. first seemeth very loth to yield Princes in causis ecclesiasticis non esse idoneos cognitores; using a non tam fortasse semper; and catching at Valentinian's being junior, imberbis, nec dum baptizatus, ex matris arbitrio pendens, &c. When as S. Ambrose giveth his reason plainly, for that the Emperour was Laicus. (But upon this word the Bishop thought not fit to touch) Quando audisti (Clementissime Imperator) (saith St. Ambrose) in causâ fidei laicos de Episcopo judicare? What? not, quando Episcopus recedit de viâ, quando non docet juxta legem; then shall not the Prince recurrere ad ex∣emplar suum &c? 2. The Bishop in allowing, at last, this authority to the Prince [ut det idoneos cognitores] I think will be found to allow, what he would fain wave. For what meaneth he by dare idoneos cognitores? The authority to call a Council or Synod of the Clergy, those Judges whom our Lord Christ hath given us for these matters; to be changed or altered by no other Lord whatever; whose final judgment in these matters the Prince himself is to stand-to and follow?See 3. Thes. §. 5, 6. But this can∣not be his meaning; because after their teaching and judgment, the Prince is to recurrere ad exemplar suum: a fermento e cathedrâ docentium cavere: not only sibi, but subditis suis gustare; whether their Pabulum be dulce & salutare, or amarum & noxium; and accordingly to re∣commend, or prohibite it to his people. Or meaneth he, that, amongst this Clergy that are not all of one judgment (for example, some reformers, a smaller part; some anti-reformers, a greater;) the Prince may autho∣rize those of them, whom he judgeth the more orthodox, to be the cognitores in causis ecclesiasticis? But thus, a∣mongst these Cognitores differing, for the Prince to chuse and decide which party of them shall decide such con∣troversies, is all one in effect, as for himself to decide such controversies; He allowing such and not another to be teacher, from first a judging and an approving of, his Doctrine. I must confess I find elsewhere a timorousness, as to me seemeth, in Bishop Andrews, tho speaking much on
this Subject, to speak out plainly concerning this branch of Supremacy; Whether the Prince may reform any thing in matters of Faith against the major part of Church-Go∣vernors or against Synods: Yet is this the chief point of Supremacy which sustaineth the English Reforma∣tion. Amongst all the parts of the Regal Primacy, which he reckoneth up p. 373. and again p. 380, 381. against Tortus, this is not, that I can discern at all, di∣rectly spoken to. He saith indeed p. 380. Regi jus nul∣lum esse vel fidei novos articulos, vel cultus divini novas for∣mulas procudendi. But here novos may be opposed either to the former decrees of the Synods and Councils of the Church; or only to the Scriptures; and he may mean the later. Again, p. 365. to Tortus saying; Regi ex officio incumbere, ut qui in doctrinâ sunt abusus & corrup∣telas tollat; sed post ecclesiae declarationem: he answers; Nos vero citra declarationem omnem, ubi repurgatae sunt corruptelae per Reges, docemus. Where you may observe this still left in doubt: Whether Rex contra declarationem &c. may do such things; and yet, if the King be bound to consult the Church first in such matters, according to Mal. 2.8, his reforming will still be either secundum; or contra; and not citra only. Neither is it credible, but that both Hezekiah and Josiah &c. consulted with the Priests in their Reformation. Again, p. 369. he saith: Authoritate Rex propriâ resecare potest superstitio∣nes quas sacerdotes ipsi tolerant; but he saith not; quas sacerdotes ipsi docent nen esse superstitiones. Again, p. 364. he speaks thus of a thing done. In Israele praecipuae in re religionis partes penes Regem extiterunt; vel uno hoc argu∣mento, quod per sacrae historiae seriem totam mutato novi regis animo mutata semper est facies religionis. Nec Pon∣tifices unquam vel praestare poterant, ut fieret mutatio in me∣lius; vel ne fieret in pejus, impedire. And p. 368. Passim per fastos sacros quod in religione fit, a rege fieri diserte dici∣tur, Regis factum esse: Pontificis haud unquam, nisi ex Regis mandato. But I hope he will not hence infer; that summa religionis is not penes Pontifices, if the Prince apo∣statizeth from the true Religion; or that the Church
Governors may do nothing contra Regis mandatum; nor may oppose him and teach the people contrary to his Reformations; where they judge that he reformeth not aright (what did the Church-Governors for the first 300 years?) Especially since p. 377. (which I desire you much to mark) he alloweth such Ecclesiastical Pri∣macy as the good Kings of Israel used, not to all, but only to Christian, Princes; and to Christian Princes, not all, but only those not heretical; and I suppose he would say also, not schismatical (for if the Prince were heretical or schismatical he well saw the mischief of such a power) so he saith there. Interim autem sit vel infide∣lis [Princeps] sit vel haereticus; Oretur pro eo, non minus quam pro Nebuchadonozar; nemo vitae ejus insidietur, non magis quam Ahasueri. Fidem penes semet habeant Christiani subditi coram Deo, caeteris in rebus pietatem colant. Non ergo id agitur, ut ecclesiae persecutores ecclesiae gubernatores habeantur &c. And something toward this saith Mr. Mason, de Minist. 3. l. 5. c. if I rightly understand him. Regibus, qui vel non sunt christiani; vel si christiani, non tamen orthodoxi; vel si orthodoxi, non tamen sancti, prima∣tus competit quidem, sed secundum quid: i. e. quoad au∣thoritatem, non quoad rectum & plenum usum authoritatis; quoad officium, non quoad illustrem executionem officii [none such therefore may execute any Ecclesiastical Primate∣ship, unless the Author seek for some refuge in the Epi∣thets rectus, plenus, & illustris.] And the same saith Bi∣shop Bicson. When the Magistrate doth not regard, but rather afflict the Church, as in times of infidelity and heresy; who shall then assemble the Pastors of any Province to determine matters of doubt or danger? [To which question he answers] The Metropolitan. Now if no Prince heretical, tho Christian, hath any Primacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs; before we yield such Primacy to a Prince, we must know, whether he be not hereti∣cal; and who can so rightly judge of this, as the Church or Clergy? And then, will not the Church (and is it not right to,) judge him such, when he opposeth her present or former definitions in matters of Faith? See
Church Govern. 3. Part, §. 42. And what just Supre∣macy, then, for matter of Doctrine, is left here to the Prince, but an authorizing by his coactive power the Church's decrees? Which Regal Supremacy all sides allow. But, as I said, this is contrary to what Bishop Andrews saith elsewhere; that the Princes Supremacy may oppose the Clergy, when they do (i. e. when he thinks they do) recedere de viâ, & non docere juxta le∣gem Dei &c. The fourth Author I shall produce is Mr. Thorndike, who writing very rationally and resolutely in vindica∣tion of the Church's authority,Of Mr. Thorndike. as using his Pen against modern Sectarists, yet takes care also to save the Phae∣nomena of the Reformation. He therefore, in his Right of the Church, 5. c. p. 248. after he had with much free∣dome shewed, That the Succession of the Clergy in such a Government as that the visible Communion of the whole Church might be perpetually kept in unity,See before, §. 188. was a Law ordained by the Apostles: and That the Refor∣mation made in England had plainly violated this Law, in that the new Bishops that were introduced were made without and against the consent of the former (some of his words are cited before §. 200.) taketh this course to solve this difficulty, and to preserve the English Re∣formation, notwithstanding this, from being unlawful or schismatical. To come then (saith he) to the great difficulty proposed: it is to be acknowledged, that the power of the Church, in the persons of them to whom it is derived by continual Succession, is a Law ordained by the Apostles, for the unity of the Church &c. But withal it is to be acknowledged, that there are abundance of other Laws given the Church by our Lord and his Apostles, whether they concern matters of Faith; or matter of Works, &c. which proceeding from the same, if not a greater, power, than the Succession of the Church, are to be retained all, and every one of them with the same re∣ligion and conscience [as the succession of the Church.] Again, I have shewed indeed, that the secular power
is bound to protect the Ecclesiastical, in their deter∣mining all things which are not [otherwise] deter∣mined by our Lord and his Apostles; and to give force and effect to the acts of the same. But in matters al∣ready determined by our Lord and his Apostles, as Laws given to the Church, if by injury of time the practice become contrary to the Law; the Sovereign power, being bound to protect Christianity, is bound to employ it self in giving strength, first, to that which is ordained by our Lord and his Apostles. By conse∣quence, if those, with whom the power of the Church is trusted, shall hinder the restoring of such Laws; the Sovereign power may and ought, by way of penalty to such persons, to suppress their power; that so it may be committed to such as are willing to submit to the superior Ordinance of our Lord and his Apostles. Here Mr. Thorndike holds, that the Secular power may restore any law, which Christ or his Apostles have or∣dained, not only against a major part, but all, the Clergy, and Governors of the Church: and may, for a penalty of their opposing it, suppress their power and commit it to others, tho they also be established by another Law Apo∣stolical. Which was the thing I undertook to shew you. But to say something to this discourse of his. What reasonable man is there hearing this, that will not pre∣sently ask: Who shall judge, whether that be indeed a Law ordained by our Lord or his Apostles, which the Prince would introduce or restore, and the succession of the Clergy doth oppose? Which Clergy sure will never confess such to be a law of our Lord, but always will profess the con∣trary: nay will say, that the succession of the Clergy shall keep, teach, and maintain, our Lord's laws to the end of the world? This question he asketh not; he solveth not; as writing against the Presbyterians, who will not ask it him. But what can he say? Shall the Clergy judge? They deny it to be the Lord's law, what he, against their consent, would restore. Shall the Prince judge? But this is most unreasonable, that the judg∣ment of a Laick shall be preferred before the whole suc∣cession
of the Clergy in Spiritual manters. And what mischief will come hereupon, if he judge amiss? And here let me set before him his own rules: Right of Chur. 4. c. p. 235. Such a difference falling out [saith he, i. e. between the secular power and the Bishops] so that to particular persons it cannot be clear, who is in the right [as how can it be clear to particular persons, which is not to their guides in those matters; and which is not to other particular persons, who also think the contrary clear?] it will be requisite for Christians, in a doubtful case, at their utmost perils, to adhere to the guides of the Church, against their lawful Sovereigns. But, if this his answer, that the Prince may suppress the Apostolical power of the Clergy, when this goeth against other our Lords or the Apostles Laws, be unsatisfying to the great diffi∣culty he proposeth, I know not what other can possibly be returned to that his objection. And I wonder that this considerative man, who holds not the Pope to be Anti-Christ, or the Hierarchy of the Church to be the followers of Anti-Christ, should make such a suppo∣sition as this: that the Apostolical Succession of the Clergy should oppose our Lords or the Apostles laws, so far, as that we shall depend on the Laity to restore them, and to protect Christianity against their Guides. The fifth is Dr. Heylin. Whose testimonies justify∣ing King Edward and Queen Elizabeth's reforming by their own sole authority;Of Doctor Heylin. or only with the advice of some few of their Clergy, where they perceived that the rest would not comply, See before, §. 129. Yet, this their reforming I have shewed to have been, for some part of it, in matters of Doctrine and Faith. To which former testimonies I will add here;Reform. Jstisted, p. 86. 1. First, what he saith concerning the Clergy's not having any law∣ful power to conclude any thing in Spiritual matters that may bind King or Subject, till the Royal autho∣rity confirmeth it; contrary to the first Thesis. It is true (saith he) the Clergy in their Convocation can do nothing now, but as their doings are confirmed by the Kings authority. And I conclude; it stands
with reason, that it should be so. For since the two Houses of Parliament can conclude nothing, which may bind either King or Subject in their civil rights, until they be made good by the royal assent; so nei∣ther is it fit nor safe, that the Clergy should be able, by their Constitutions and Synodical Acts, to con∣clude both Prince and People in Spiritual matters [what not in such, as Prince and People grant to intrench upon no civil Right?] until the stamp of Royal Autho∣rity be imprinted on them. [What if such supreme Go∣vernor be an Heretick, an Arrian, an Anabaptist, &c?Ib. p. 84.2.] 2. What he saith concerning the King of England's ha∣ving lawful power to act without his Clergy; as the Clergy, having conferred on him all their power, which they formerly enjoyed in their own capacity. Which was Philpot's Plea recited before, §. 168. contrary to the Second Thesis. The Kings of England (saith he) had a further right as to this particular; which is a power conferred upon them by the Clergy (whether by way of recognition, or concession, I regard not here) by which the Clergy did invest the King with a supreme authority, not only of confirming their Synodal Acts not to be put in execution without his consent, but in effect to devolve on him all that power which firmly they enjoyed in their own capacity [a∣mongst which Powers (p. 85.) he nameth this, To reform such Errors and Corruptions, as are expresly contrary to the word of God] And to this we have a parallel case in the Roman Empire; in which the supreme Majesty of the State was vested in the Senate and Peo∣ple of Rome, till by the Law, which they called Lex Regia, they transferred all their power on Caesar and the following Emperors. Which Law being passed, the Edicts of the Emperor were as binding, as the Senatus-consulta had been before. Whence came that memorable Maxime in Justinians Institutes, Quod Prin∣cipi placuerit, legis habet vigorem. The like may be affirmed of the Church of England. The Clergy had self authority in all matters which concerned Religion;
and by their Canons and Determinations did bind all the Subjects; till by acknowledging King Henry the Eighth for the Supreme Head, and by the Act of Sub∣mission not long after following, they transferred that power upon the King and his Successors. After which time whatsoever the King or his Successors did in the Reformation, as it had virtually the power of the Con∣vocation; so was it as good in law, as if the Clergy in their Convocation particularly and in terminis had agreed upon it. And tho in most of their proceedings toward Reformation the Kings advised with such Bi∣shops as they had about them, or could assemble with∣out trouble; yet was there no necessity, that all or the greatest part of the Bishops should be drawn toge∣ther for that purpose, no more than it was anciently for the godly Emperors to call together the most part of the Bishops in the Roman Empire for the establish∣ing of the matters which concerned the Church; or for the godly Kings of Judah, to call together the greatest part of the Priests and Levites, before they acted any thing in the Reformation of those corrup∣tions and abuses, which were crept in amongst them. Thus Dr. Heylin, p. 84. Indeed elsewhere he seemeth to put some limitations to the Prince's acting in such matters without or against their Clergy; but then these limitations are such, as that the reforming Prince's acts have transgressed his Rules. To this purpose he saith,p. 80, 81. That, whereas Reforma∣tion may be, first, in corruption of manners or abuses in Government; secondly, in matters practical; third∣ly, in points of Doctrine;  1. First, That if the things to be reformed be either corruptions in manners, or neglect of publick duties to Almighty God; be abuses either in Government, or in the parties governing; the King may reform this himself by his sole authority, tho the whole body of the Clergy or the greatest part thereof should oppose him in it. 2. That if the practice prove to have been both ancient and universally re∣ceived over all the Church; the King consulting with
so many of his Bishops and others of his most able Cler∣gy as he thinks fit to call unto him, and having their consent and direction in it, may in case of intermission or corruption, restore such practice to its primitive lustre [tho he do it against the major part of his Clergy or Synod, as you may see, p. 83.] 3. He intimates;  That if the Reformation be in such point of Doctrine, as hath been before defined in a General Council or in particular Councils universally received and countenanced; the King consulting with some of his learned Bishops may enjoyn it without or against a Synod. 4. But he saith: That if the Reformation be in such points of Doctrine, as have not been before defined in such manner; the King, only with a few of his Bishops and Learned Clergy tho never so well studied in the point disputed, can do nothing in it. That belongs only to the whole body of the Clergy in their Convocation rightly called and constituted. So he saith, p. 85. That the King cannot determine Heresies. From this by necessary consequence it follows: That if any point of doctrine hath been determined by a former General Council (I add, or law∣ful superior Council) the King neither against, nor with∣out, (I add, nor with) the major part of his Clergy, can reform, or establish the contrary of, such doctrine. Now to reflect op the Drs. Limitations. Concern∣ing the two last, I leave it to your judgment, whether, in the instances made above, the contrary to several doctrines determined by former lawful General, or other superior, Councils, have not been established by our reforming Princes, without, or also against, the major part of their Clergy. And again; whether other do∣ctrines not determined by any former lawful Council, yet have not thus also, without any such consent, been established by them. Both which Dr. Heylin condemn∣eth. Again, concerning all these limitations, I ask; when all or the major part of Clergy affirmeth, that such things are not corruptions in manners, nor abuses in Government; that such practices are not primitive, nor universal; that such doctrines are not formerly so deter∣mined;
and none or a smaller part of the said Clergy saith the contrary: How will Dr. Heylin here direct the Kings Supremacy? Will he here allow him, after hearing all, to follow his own judgment? Or that of the fewer against his Synod, or the major part thereof? It seems in some things he will not allow it; (See Limi∣tation the fourth) and it seemeth unreasonable to be allowed in any of the rest. For why should not a Synod discern corruption in manners, as well as he, or some few? Or why may not he mistake and miscall their reason, passion, or partiality? But if the Prince follow the major part of his Clergy in their judgment of what are corruptions, what are formerly defined &c. then cannot the Prince be said or supposed to reform such corruptions &c. against this major part; whose judg∣ment in this Reformation of them he followeth. The last I shall propose to your considering is Dr. Fern,Of Doctor Pern. Exam. Cha. 9. c. 19. §. p. 290. who speaketh somewhat more particularly in this matter. He, first, affirmeth indeed in behalf of the Clergy, that the Bishops and chief Pastors of the Church are the immediate, proper and ordinary, Judges in de∣fining and declaring what the Laws of Christ be for Doctrine and Discipline.— And, That they have a co∣ercive power in a Spiritual restraint of those that ob∣stinately gain-say, as far as the power of the Keys, put into their hands by Christ, for Spiritual binding and loosing, will reach. And that this power is coer∣cive or binding upon all such as are willing to be Chri∣stian and continue in the Society of the Church [I sup∣pose therefore upon Christian Princes also, if obstinately gain-saying] And 20. §. He quoteth, 1. Eliz. 1. That the judging of Heresy is restrained, for Heresies past, to the Declaration of the first General Councils, and for such as shall arise, to the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation. And §. 15. he saith: It is a mi∣stake to think, that the Prince by his supreme power in Spiritual things is made supreme Judge of Faith, and decider of all Controversies thereunto belonging, and may ordain what he thinks fit in matters of Re∣ligion.
—Again, Ibid. he affirmeth; that the Prince's giving publick establishment [to the doctrine defined by the Clergy and evidenced to him] is not in order, to our believing (as the Romanists use fondly to reproach us, in saying our belief follows the State;) but to our secure ind free profession and exercise of Religion. For Kings and Princes are not Ministers by whom we believe, as Pastors of the Church are. 1. Cor. 3.9. And §. 21. That we must attend to the evidence of truth given in or propounded by the Pastors of the Church, who have commission to do it in order to our believing; and must yield obedience to the establish∣ment of the Sovereign, either by doing and conform∣ing thereunto, or by suffering for not doing accord∣ing thereunto. And §. 25. That it is the office of the Pastors of the Church to evidence what is truth and conformable to Scripture, and that in order both to our and to the Prince's believing. —Again §. 21. he affirmeth, that the immediate and ordinary judgment of matters of Religion belongs to Bishops and Pastors of the Church in order to our believing: but that a secondary judgment is necessary in the Sovereign; for his establishing by Laws that which is evidenced to him upon the judgment and advice of the Pastors of the Church [or (as §. 23.) for his being satisfied, that what is propounded as Faith and Worship is according to the law of Christ, before he use or apply his authority to the pub∣lick establishment of it:] and this upon a double reason. [the first of which is] In respect of his duty to God, whose Laws and Worship he is bound to establish by his own Laws within his dominions, and is accounta∣ble for it, if he do it amiss; as the Kings of Israel and Judah were. But then he saith these things (further) in behalf of the Supremacy of the Prince, which seem to reduce the Clergy's power into a very narrow compass, and to render it uneffective toward the Subjects of the Church, unless thro the coacting of the Prince. He saith then▪ 1. That Princes are not bound to follow the directions of the
Clergy any further than they are evidenced to them. See 9. c. §. 21. Princes are not meer Executioners of the de∣terminations and decrees of the Church Pastors, nor bound blindly or peremptorily to receive and establish, as matter of Faith and Religion, whatsoever they de∣fine and propound for such. But they are to do their work so, as it may by the demonstration of truth be evidenced to the Sovereign Power. That Princes are not bound to take the directions of the whole Clergy, or of a Synod, where they fear the Synod will not go aright. 2. c. 8. §. Reformation of Gods Worship (saith he) may be warrantably done without a foregoing Synodi∣cal vote (p. 73.) especially when there is just cause of fear that the most of them that should meet are ap∣parently obnoxious to factious interests: And (p. 72.) If the Prince by the law of God stands bound to establish within his dominions whatsoever is evidenced to him, by faithful Bishops and Learned men of the Church, to be the law of Christ, shall he not preform his known duty, till the vote of a major part of a Synod give him leave to do it? [And here I suppose Dr. Fern will grant, that the Prince is bound also to establish Christ's Law (in which he is accountable if he do amiss 9. c. §. 21.) when∣ever it should happen to be evidenced to him by any other, tho none of, or contrary to, the Clergy; provided, that be first consult and hear the reasons of some at least of his Clergy.] 3. That Princes may prohibit the decrees even of General Councils, when they are evidenced to them non docere legem Christi (9. c. 28. §. General Councils being the great∣est and highest means of direction, which Kings can have in matters of Religion, but still with the limi∣tation quatenus docent legem Christi [of which I suppose the Prince must judge] it being possible, that the major part should be swayed by factious or worldly interests; therefore Kings and Emperors (saith he) may have cause given them, upon evidence of things unduly carried, to use their supreme power for forbidding of their decrees: as was done by Theodosius against the second Council of Ephesus, and by the Kings of France
against the Conventicle of Trent, forbidding the de∣crees of it to be received for the space of fourty years. 4ly 9. c. 21. §. He approveth— The concession of the Clergy under Henry the Eighth, in binding themselves by promise in Convocation in verbo Sacerdotis, not to enact or promulge or execute any new Canons or Con∣stitutions without the Kings assent. [Which assent, were it required only for securing the Prince, that nothing be acted in such Synods prejudicial to his civil rights, 'tis wil∣lingly allowed; but it is extended further, for the Prince's prohibiting any other decrees whatever, when not evidenced to him to be made juxta legem Christi; against which if any thing be done in his dominions, he remaineth account∣able to God, as you have seen before.] Now, to reflect on what Dr. Fern hath said. He seemeth 1. first to grant that the Clergy can publickly establish nothing against or without the Prince's consent. So that whatever they cannot evidence to the Prince, that so he may concur to the publishing thereof; they are hindred from promulgating or evidencing it to the people: So that they are in such a manner the ordinary Judges and Definers of Controversies &c; as that their definitions, if not evidenced to, may be suppressed by, the Prince, nor ought to come abroad to their flocks. And how consists this with what he saith 9. c. §. 21. That, in order to our believing, we must attend to the evidence of truth given in or propounded [I suppose he meaneth, to us] by the Pastors of the Church? Again; how consists this with the Clergy's coercive power (9. c. 19. §.) upon the Prince, if Christian, when obstinately gain-saying them? Unless his gain-saying can never be called obstinate? Will not this follow from hence, that the Clergy might not promulgate Anti-Arrianisme in the Empire, until they had evidenced it (i. e. by his approbation thereof) to Constantitus the then Emperor? 2. When he saith, That a Prince is not bound to take the directions of the whole Clergy, or of a Synod, but only of some faithful Bishops, &c. when he hath just cause to fear faction in such Synods; he seems in this only to
keep a gap open for justifying they past Reformation, and, in effect, to affirm, that the Prince may go therein against his Clergy. For since the Clergy is a subordi∣nate and regularly-united body, he that taketh directi∣ons only from some of them, whom he knows or doubts and fears to be different in their judgment from the main body, taketh directions not from the Clergy, but from those that are against them, as hath been laid down in the sixth Thesis. I mean against them, that are the Judges in Spiritual matters, and the Definers of things in Con∣troversy, and Judges of Heresy, what hath been, or ought to be, condemned, as such. Without whom therefore the Prince cannot certainly know, what is, or is not, such. As for that which is said, that the estab∣lishments of the Prince are not in order to our believing; if Dr. Fern meaneth, that the Prince doth not propose, what is evidenced to him to be the law of Christ, to his Subjects, with a requiring of them that they should be∣lieve, that it is the law of Christ; the contrary is clear at least in the practicals enjoyned, all which necessarily involve Faith. See Chur. Gover. 2. Part, 34. §. 3. Part, 12. §. But if he meaneth, that the Subjects cannot justly be necessitated to believe, what the Prince estab∣lisheth: so neither are they, what the Clergy establish∣eth, in his, opinion; who I think alloweth to all men judicium disoretivum in respect of any Church-authority. 3. The Prince thus establishing Church-matters, not upon the Clergy's authority, but upon evidence; he seems equally to oblige the Prince to establish them, by whomsoever evidenced to him, or by his own search discovered: for what mattereth it to the evidence, who bringeth it? And then how is the Prince's judgment said to be secondary in respect to the Clergy? Indeed, if the Prince could always be certain in his evidence, so as not to mistake, to think something evidenced to him, when indeed it is not, and not to think other things sufficiently evidenced, when they are: so, there were less hazard, in leaving Church-matters thus to his dis∣posal. But fince things are much otherwise; and evi∣dencing
truths to any one, by reason of different un∣derstandings, education, passions and interest, is a thing very casual; so that, what is easily evidenceable to ano∣ther, may happen not to be so to the Sovereign power; when not patient enough to be informed; mis-led and prepossessed by a faction; not so capable as some others, by defect of nature or learning; facile to be perswaded by the last Speaker, &c: what an uncertain and muta∣ble condition would Church-affairs be put in (as we see they have been here in England since the times of Henry the Eighth) when all the influence of the authority of the Clergy upon the people is cast upon this evidence∣ing first of their matters to the present Sovereign Power. Concerning Theodosius's Act urged by Dr. Fern, the Story in brief is this. The second Ephesine Council was General in its Representation, but not in the free votes of the Representatives, nor in the acceptation thereof by all or the major part of Catholick Churches. In it, paucis imprudentibus (about some Ninety in all) obvian∣tibus sacramento verae divinitatis & humanitatis Jesu Christi by necessary consequence (which was established in the Council of Nice superior to this in number, and uni∣versally accepted) Ex iis, qui convenerant, rejectis aliis (amongst which the Legates of the Bishop of Rome and Western Churches) aliis subscribere coactis a militibus cum fustibus & gladiis, reclusis in ecclesia usque ad ves∣peram. Upon such reasons the Bishop of Rome,See cons. Chalced. Act. 1. and th Synod of the Occidental Churches with him, not accept∣ing the decrees of this Council supplicated the Em∣peror,See Leo. Epist. 23. ad Theod. not to confirm, but cassate, the Acts thereof, and defendere contra haraeticos inconcussum ecclesiae statum, sending him the Canons of the Council of Nice. Now thus a Prince both may and ought to cassate the Acts of an illegal Council, (such as you see this is but now described to be) when a major Ecclesiastical power, I mean the greater part of the Church Catholick, de∣clareth it to him to be factious, and opposing the truth and definitions of former General Councils universally accepted. Neither doth the Prince. herein exercise any
Supremacy, but that which all allow; namely the de∣fending and protecting of the Church's judgments. But therefore a Prince may not oppose the Acts of a Council when himself, or a few others, against the main body of the Church, judge it to have been factious; or to have opposed, or not to have sufficiently evidenced, the truth. The former was the case of Theodosius: The later, of the Reformers. Of which Theodosius, how religi∣ous an observer he was of the Church's decrees; and how free from challenging any such Supremacy, as to alter or establish any thing against them; see his cau∣tious message to the first Ephesine Council when he sent Candidianus to preside therein.Concil. E∣poes. Tom. 1. — Eâ lege Candidianum Comitem ad sacram vestram Synodum abire jussimus, ut, cum quaestionibus & controversiis quae circa fidei dog mata incidant nihil quicquam commune habeat. Nefas est enim qui S. Episcoporum Catalogo ascriptus non est, illum ecclesiasticis negotiis & consultationibus sese immiscere. From which all that I would gain is this; That Theodosius was of opinion, that no Lay-person whatsoever might so far interest himself in Religious and Episcopal Controver∣sies (not, as to make himself Arbitrator of the Con∣ciliary proceedings to see that the votes thereof be free from Secular violence, and all things therein regu∣larly carried, &c. for this is his duty who beareth that Sword, which keepeth men most in awe; but) as to make himself Arbitrator of the Councils Definitions; to examine, whether they are made secundum, or contra, legem Christi; and to prohibit them, when not evi∣denced to him by the Council to be so; because he is Custos utriusque Tabulae: for in these things it is his duty to submit to whatever is the judgment of those, who are appointed by Christ to interpret to Princes his Law. A Prince therefore may void the Acts of a Council freely, on this account; because such Council is unduly carried, and its decrees not accepted by the Catholick-Church, and so because its doctrines are not the doctrines of the Church: but never on this account; because such Coun∣cil hath made some definition to him seeming contrary
to the Law of Christ; or hath not evidenced, to him, their definition to have been according to it. So that a lawful Regal Supremacy, in confirming any definitions of the Clergy made in Spiritual matters, omitteth that clause of limitation, which is every where put in by Dr. Fern, [when evidenced to it to be the law of Christ] or [when the law of Christ is not evidenced to be contrary to their defini∣tions] which is indeed the chief Pillar of the Reformation: and changeth it into this limitation [when evidenced to it to be the Law or Judgment or Sentence of the Church.] The instance in the King of France his forbidding the decrees of the Council of Trent hath been largely spoken to in Chur. Gover. 4. Part, 64. §. 7. n. 1 No decrees of that Council concerning matters of Faith or Doctrine were opposed by the French King, but only some decrees concerning Reformation. 2 His opposition of it further, than he can pretend it to have some way encroached on his civil rights, is, not justifiable; and, by his own Clergy, as well as the rest of the world, disallowed. Lastly, the instance in the good Kings of Judah, in∣culcated so frequently by all these Writers, is copiously spoken-to in Succession of Clergy, §. 38.68. 1. As the Kings of Judah had a charge of conserving the true Religion by their coactive power, with temporal punish∣ments on offenders; and were justly blamed for their defects herein: So had the Priests, by their coercive power, with their Spiritual censures; and were as justly blameable, as the Prince, in any neglect thereof. — 2. It cannot be shewed in holy writ, that the Princes of Judah ought not and did not both, in their Reformations of Religion, ask counsel of the Priests, and exactly follow their advice and decrees; except in such matters of duty, as were not controverted at all, nor contradict∣ed by the Priest. Now where no doubt is made by any party, there needs no consultation; and the Prince may tell the Priest of his unquestioned duty, without asking his leave. — 3. It cannot be shewed, that the Princes of Judah ever reformed any thing against the judgment of the whole body, or of the major part of the Priests. I
mean those Priests, who continued in their former pro∣fession of the Law of Moses, and did not professedly relinquish it, and openly apostatize to Idolatry: with whom being extra ecelesiam, the Prince had nothing to do. — 4. It cannot be shewed there, that the Priests might not lawfully have reformed Religion, without, or against, the Prince; nor that they did not at some times endeavour it with inflicting their Spiritual censures; tho successless herein, whilst opposed by the Temporal power. We are to take heed of negative arguments from Scripture [such a thing is not said there, therefore it was not] but rather ought to infer [the contrary to this is not said there, therefore it might be.] — 5 The Kings part in the Reformation being acted with Temporal power, therefore was successful and went thro with the business: and having the chief, or only, success, there∣fore is most spoken of, especially, in those Books, which were written for Histories of the Kings Acts. And in∣deed when have not Princes (by reason of this their Secular power) had the greatest reputation for altering of Religion, even where the Clergy have been most active? See the doctrine of Bishop Bramhal and Dr. Hammond in this point of Supremacy set down already in Chur. Gover. 1. Part, §. 39. &c. — And of Bishop Bramhal in Cathol. Thes. Head. 9. §. 17. The Ecclesi∣astical Su∣premacy of these Prin∣ces tran∣scending that ch l∣eaged by the Patri∣archs.Thus much concerning the English Reformations un∣der the three Princes, Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth; what manner of Ecclesi∣astical Supremacy was conceded to, or recognized in, them; what, exercised by them. Where it is evident, that tho these Princes pretended only to translate upon themselves the Supremacy formerly used by the Patri∣arch (not forgetting to seize on most of the profits thereof:) yet theirs was far from being restrained within the same bounds, as the Patriarch's was. For, whether we review, the pretended innovations intro∣duced into the Church Catholick, before, or those in∣troduced since the Council of Trent, by the Patriarch's, concurrence, We cannot say of them; that He, with∣out,
out, or assisted only with some few of, the Clergy im∣posed them upon the world by his single authority, with∣out, or contrary to, the votes, of the major part of the Clergy, as King Edward and Queen Elizabeth did: Who had they called a Synod of their Clergy, and then behaved themselves in it, as Constantine in the Council of Nice, i. e. left all in pure Spiritual matters to their disposal; judge what would have been the issue. But it seems, by the proceedings forementioned in this Dis∣course, that the Secular Supremacy took it to be the Prince's right to establish in their dominions, with, or without, the major part of the Clergy (which, they were instructed, might fall away from the truth, a tenent the Patriarch owns not) what they apprehended to be the Law of Christ, upon evidence of Scripture (i. e. to them so seeming) by whomsoever manifested unto them. From which apprehensions, in single, and unstudied, persons, very mutable, and having no such fixedness, as the body of the Church hath (being tyed by so many subordinations to several degrees of Superiors,) newer and newer Reformations for ever do flow and multiply without end, as we see at this day. And so it is also, that these Acts of Supremacy coming from the hands of the Temporal power, whatever way they incline, have much more strength and validity, in case of opposition, than those coming from the Spiritual; this Sword not wounding, to sense, so deep, as the other; and there∣fore is such a Supremacy, where Prince's judgments are liable to mistakes, much the more dangerous. All which ill-consequences the Protestant Princes of Germany (who,Several Pro∣testants de∣nying such a Supremacy du to Prin∣ces. being in some respects subordinate to another, could not so well settle this Supremacy on them∣selves) in the dawning of the Reformation did well fore∣see; and were as loth to acknowledge the Emperor Supreme, as the Pope: Nor would they ever allow of this Title assumed by Henry the Eighth; out of a jea∣lousy, that Charles the Fifth should claim the same. And for this reason, it is thought that, no Accord was made, tho much attempted, between them and this King. See
Lord Herbert's Hist. p 378, and 448. The Protestants of Germany (saith he) would not allow the King's Supremacy, lest they should infer an investing of the same authority in the Emperor, whose absolute power they seemed to fear, more, than that of the Pope him∣self. And this suspicion alienated secretly the mind of our King: who saw, that, if he embraced their Refor∣mation, they would abridge his power [i. e. regu∣late or alter the point of his Supremacy.] The same reluctance against such Regal Supremacy was in Calvin and other Reformers, as I have shewed before;See before, §. 37. and hath remained still in the reformed Presby∣terian Clergy of Scotland, and in those Sects called Pu∣ritanical in England, and elsewhere (which is said to have rendred both Queen Elizabeth and King James much more averse from the Presbyterian Government and Discipline:) who discharging the authority of the Pope, of Councils, such as the Church hath had, of Bishops; yet have endeavoured to reserve the Supre∣macy, as touching all Ecclesiastical Affairs to the Officers of their particular Churches: as the power of calling and constituting their Assemblies at time and place as they think fit; the making of Ecclesiastical Constitutions and Ceremonies; the correcting and ordering all things pertain∣ing to the Congregation, tho without the Kings consent, and against his will; unless he be pleased to be included in the number of the Church Officers, there to enjoy a single vote; requiring the Civil Magistrate to be sub∣ject to this their power. To which purpose are those Positions of theirs,Seatch. Di∣scipline, 2. l. 1. c. As the Ministers, and others of the Ecclesiastical State are subject to the judgment and punishment of the Magistrate in external things, if they offend; so ought the Magistrates to be subject to the Kirk Spiritually, and in Ecclesiastical Government. And to submit themselves to the Discipline of the Kirk, if they transgress in matter of Conscience and Religion. All men as well Magistrates as Inferiors, ought to be subject to the judgment of the National Assemblies of this Country in Ecclesiastical causes,Scot. Disc. 2. l. 12. c. without any re
or appellation to any Judge Civil, or Eccle∣siastical, within the Realm. See Dr. Heylin's Reform. Just. p. 88, and Rogers on Art. 37. p. 216. and 218. and the two Books of the Scottish Discipline. To which may be added those passages of the English Presbyterian in their Confession of Faith, An. Dom. 1647. cap. 30, and 31. which say, — That the Lord Jesus as King and Head of his Church, hath therein appointed a Go∣vernment in the hand of Church-officers, distinct from, the Civil Magistrate. — And, that, if the Magistrates be open enemies to the Church, the Ministers of Christ of themselves by vertue of their office may meet to∣gether in such Assemblies, — And there may Ministes∣rially determine Controversies of Faith; set down rules for the better ordering of the publick worship of God and Government of his Church; receive complaints, and authoritatively determine the same. Which de∣crees and determinations, if consonant to the word, are to be received [and therefore may be divulged] with reverence and submission, for the power whereby they are made, as [this power] being an Ordinance of God. All this (they affirm) the Church-officers may do of themselves, by vertue of their office, if the Magistrate be an open enemy to the Church. And all this they did, King Charles's Supremacy giving no consent thereto, but opposing it. And then for the meaning of open ene∣my, I have reason to suppose, they will pronounce a Popish, an Arrian, any heretical, Prince such, as well (tho perhaps not every way so much) as an Heathen. Lastly, The same reluctance also was in those Bishops who first conceded such Supremacy to Henry the Eighth. Who, as at the fiest they swallowed the Oath of it, not without some straining: so afterward, when, by long experience they had seen such Church-laws issuing from it, as they thought very grievous and dammageable to the Church, and found uncontrollable by their power, they very stoutly, to the loss of their Bishopricks, made resistance to the same Oath, in Queen Elizabeth's days: and also in Qeeen Mary's days, upon some respiring,
took care to reverse as well the Supremacy of Henry the Eighth, as the Injunctions of Edward the Sixth. And those Bishops only, who came to their Bishopricks and Church-Government by the high-hand of such Supre∣macy, have since maintained it. CHAP. XIV. The CONCLƲSION. HAving thus brought this whose Discourse of Church Government to an end,Conclusion of this whole Discourse of Chur. Gov. I pray you consider a lit with me, how matters stand with the Reformation ge∣nerally in application thereto. Where Concerning the benefit that may be hoped for from a fu∣ture free Ge∣neral Coun∣cil for the setling of present Con∣troversies.1. First it seemeth clear: That in Controversies of Religion (which Christ hath foretold shall arise) and in contests concerning the true sense of his word, he hath not left his people under the Gospel without some visible Judge thereof, beside the words of the Gospel; since he did not leave his people under the Law without such Judge, beside the words of the Law. See what hath been said of this in Success. of Clergy, §. 6. &c. And, in such Controversies concerning the meaning of the Scrip∣tures, for any party to fly only to the same Scriptures to judge this matter between them and their adversaries, is, as if Titius and Sempronius, suing one another at the Law, would have no other judge in the matter, but Justinian's Code or Pandects, about the meaning of which they are already in the debate. 2. But, if it seem reasonable, that, in such Controversy concerning the understanding of Scripture, there should be some other Judge besides Scripture; secondly it is out of question, that the Church Catholick, which hath such ample promises from our Saviour, should be this Judge sooner, than any particular person or Church therein: and, if the Church Catholick, then a legal General Council thereof; since this is the highest and ultimate way, where∣by
the Church Catholick is capable of declaring her judg∣ment; as hath been shewed in the 2. Part, §. 22. &c. 3. Hence therefore 3ly are the Reformed forced, as it were, in their debates of Religion to refer their matters to, and not to decline, the decisive judgment of a fu∣ture legal and free General Council. 4. But this seem∣eth by consequence to oblige them somewhat further; and that in this their appeal to, and acquiescence in, a future General Council, they cannot reasonably refuse the judgment of such Councils fore-past, as have been legally General. 5. And again 5ly that, to denominate any former Councils to have been such, they cannot rationally require any fuller conditions, than have been set down in 2. Part, §. 4. unless they will make either no Councils at all; or not all those, which themselves allow, to have been General. And 6ly if they will thus stand to the judgment of former legal General Councils; then it seems they ought also to stand to the doctrines, which are cleared to them to be held and taught by the Church Catholick of that age, wherein they reformed: since we may presume, that had a Council thereof been collected in the same times; they would in it have testi∣fied the same doctrines, which the Catholick Church then held., But thus the Reformation will be cast; since I think it is sufficiently cleared in 2. Part, §. 30. &c. that the doctrines they opposed, at least for the most of them, were not only the Tenents of the Roman or other. Churches adhering to it, but of the whole Church Catholick of that time: a thing which is of great weight, and ought diligently to be examined. And, 7ly, if they will submit to a General Council; I do not see how, in the absenee of a General, their duty doth not bind them to submit also to a Patriarchal, Council; as being, tho inferior to General, yet superior to any Provincial, or National, one, within the same Patriarchy. And, if submit to such; I see not why they should reject the judgment of the Council of Trent, as to the Protestant Controversies free and unforced: there needing to be used no illegal or indirect proceedings herein; because
the Fathers, in condemning these, did unanimously agree; as hath been shewed at large in Par. 4. §. 70. by Soave's testimony in particular to these points. But, notwithstanding the fair inclinations the Reform∣ed (I mean some of their writers, desiring that nothing here may be charged on any further, than proved by some testimonies in the other places of this discourse, which are here referred to) may seem, to have to a final decision of differences; and the happy issue to their cause they seem to hope-for from the sentence of such a future Council, general and free, could it once be pro∣cured: Yet there are not a few things, which well con∣sidered do discover their diffidence in any such tryal; and no such submission in them to such Council, could it be assembled, as is necessary to the ending of conten∣tions. As namely these following. 1. That, for the Councils which have been held already in the Church, they have so limited the obligation to their authority, and clogged it with such conditions (which you may be pleased to review in 2. Par. §. 36, 37. &c:) that, in respect of these, they have reserved to themselves liberty to yield, or withdraw, their obedience, as they see fit. From which we may gather, that, if they see need thereof, they will in like manner limit the future, and so render it as unobliging to them, as former have been. 2. That they have been so scrupulous about the Universality, legal actings, &c. of past Councils beyond what seems requisite (See 2. Par. §. 4.) that, of eighteen or not much fewer, General Councils, which the other side accepts, they acknowledge only four or very few more: and not these four for all those decrees, wherein the rest of the Church admits them. See 4. Par. §. 92.95. 3. That they maintain, that, tho all the Church-guides never shall, yet the major part of the Church guides and of such Councils may, dangerously err, to the imposing of false belief and false worship, and pars melior a majore vinci. See 2. Part, §. 29. Which tenent will overthrow the authority of such future Council also; because it can hardly happen in so great n Body, but that there
will be some dissenters; and then they will not be tyed to a major part. 4. That, for a future Council they demand such a one, for the universality of it, as probably can never be had: and such voters therein, as is contrary to the former customes of the Church, and such other con∣ditions, as are several ways unreasonable, and destructive of having Church-matters governed by the Church. See, concerning these, the 4. Part, §. 65, 66. &c. Tho, were all such their conditions observed, excepting only one, that nothing done in such Council should oblige, till their con∣sent first obtained, I see not, but that things will thus also go against them because as the major part of the Clergy of Christianity, so of the Laity and Princes, were they made the Judges in that Council, are opposite to the Re∣formation. 5. That they do set up the authority of Pro∣vincial or National Synods, in some cases,See 2. Part, § 29.44. against Gene∣ral (the ill consequences of which introducing such an Ari∣stocratical, or rather so many several Monarchical, Go∣vernments into the Church, as there are several Metropo∣litans or Primates, see in 2. Part, §. 78. n. 2.) and do hold this a sufficient foundation of Reformation; tho indeed so much, if the things said in this 5th Part stand good, can∣not be pleaded for it. Now all these guards and fences of the Reformed seem to me to render a future Council, were it never so universal and free, of none effect, as to ending Controversies; unless it pass on their side: and again seem to argue an Autocatacrisis in them, as to the judgment of the Church Catholick, and of Councils; viz. that they apprehend, they should be cast by those, whom yet they shew a willingness to be tryed by. Especially when as, after now an 140 years divulging of their doctrines, their rea∣sons, and their demonstrations; they see, that, tho at the first (perhaps out of novelty) their opinions made a wonderful progress and growth: yet, for above half of this age, the Reformation hath stood at a stay; and of late hath rather lost ground, and is grown decrepit and much abated of its former bulk and stature. To conclude. In such a rejection of, or aversion from, the Church's judgment, let none think himself secure, in
relying on the testimony of his conscience or judgment; 1. either that he doth nothing against it; which security many of all sects, not only living, but dying, have (for sickness ordinarily hath no new revelations of truth in it) and what sect is there, that hath not had Martyrs? The Roman party many at Tiburn, and the Protestant, in Smith∣field; and even Atheism it self hath had those that have dyed for it, Vaninus, and others: 2. Or that he hath taken sufficient care to inform it; which thing also all sects shew themselves confident-in. I say let none think him∣self secure in any of these things, so long as his conscience witnesseth still to him this one thing, namely, his disobedi∣ence and inconformity to the Church Catholick. I mean to the major part of the Guides thereof, as formerly explained in Chur. Gov. 2. Part, §. 8. &c. 24. &c. (a disobedi∣ence which Luther and the first Reformers could not but acknowledge;Epistle to Melancthon 145. Nos discessionem a toto mundo (saith facere coacti sumus.) And let him know, that his condition is very dangerous, when he maketh the Church-guides of his own time, or the major part thereof, uncommuni∣cable-with in their external profession of Religion; when, for the maintaining of his opinions, he begins to distin∣guish and divide between the doctrine of Scripture, and the doctrine of the Church; between the doctrines of the Catholick Church of the former ages, and of the Catho∣lick Church of the present; between the Church's ortho∣doxness in necessaries, and in non-necessaries, to salvation; when he begins to maintain the authority of an inferior ecclesiastical judge, against a superior; or of a minor part of the Church-guides, against a major. Which whosoever doth, tho perchance he wanteth not many companions, had need to be sure, and sure again, that he is in the right: because this thing, in the day of judgment, will hinder all those, that err, from pleading invincible or inculpable ig∣norance, when as they do grant, both that God hath given them, beside the Scriptures, guides of their Faith; and that they have in their judgment departed from these guides, i. e, from a major part of them; which, in a Court consist∣ing of many, is the legal Judge. I say; In the Name of God let every Religious Soul take heed of such Autocatacrises. FINIS.
SIR, WEll knowing your Fidelity and Loyal∣ty to your Prince; lest you should be offended with some expressions in this discourse concerning the limited authority of the supreme Civil Power in Spiritual matters, I must pre-acquaint you with these three things. 1. That there is nothing touched herein, concerning the Temporal Prince his supreme power in all Civil or Tem∣poral matters whatever; nor in such, as it is dubious, whether they be Spiritual or Tem∣poral: but only concerning the Supremacy in things that are purely Spiritual and Ec∣clesiastical. Namely such, as Christianity hath de novo, by our Saviours authority and commission, introduced into the world, and into the several Civil States thereof, which do voluntarily subject themselves unto its laws: and such, as the Church Gover∣nors, our Saviours Substitutes from the be∣ginning, have lawfully exercised in several Princes dominions, when the same Princes
have prohibited them the exercise of such things under pain of death. Which things you may see numbred by Bishop Carleton be∣low § 3. or by Dr. Taylor, or by the Kings Paper, Ibid. 2. That there is nothing asserted here concerning the lawfulness of any Spiritual power's using, or authorizing any others to use, the material or temporal Sword in any case or necessity whatsoever; tho it were in ordine ad Spiritualia. 3. That I know not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denyed to the Prince, but which (or at least the chiefest of which) all other Christian Princes, except those of the reformed States, do forego to exercise; and do leave to the management of the Clergy; and yet their Crowns, notwithstanding the relinquishing this power in Spirituals, sub∣sist, prosper, flourish: And not any, but which the Kings of England have also fore∣gone, before Henry the Eighth. Now; no more Supremacy in such Ecclesiastical matters, as are delegated by Christ to the Clergy, and are unalienable by them to any Secular power, can belong to the Princes of one Time, or of one Nation, than do to any other Prince of a former Time, or a diverse
Nation; Because what are thus the Church's Rights, no Civil or Municipal law of any Kingdome, in any time, can lawfully pre∣judice, diminish, or alter; Nor may any such Secular laws, made, be urged as au∣thentical for shewing what are, or are not, the Church's Rights. And therefore in res∣pect of the foresaid Clergy-Rights the Kings of England can have no more priviledge or exemption, than the King of France; nor, in England, Henry the Eighth, than Henry the Seventh; Nor can any person, in maintaining the Church's foresaid Rights, be any more now a disloyal Subject to his Prince in these, than he would have been in those, days.
CORRIGENDA. PAg. 2. line 38. of Christians. p. 3 l. 16. to Hea∣then. p. 6. l. 15. l. 19. c. p. 8. l. 1. pag. 236. p. 35. l. 37. pag. 53. p. 38. l. 10. §. 24. p. 41. ult. from denying, p. 53. l. 16. pag. 34. p. 56. l. 17. Mariae, p. 106. l. 7. §. 340. p. 180. l. 18. Edward, the. p. 184. l. 5. §. 194. p. 210. l. 8. §. 204. p. 211. l. 10. §. 197. p. 215. l. 37. that tho no. p. 226. l. 22. their words.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE EIGHT THESES Laid down, and the INFERENCES, Deduced from them, in a DISCOURSE ENTITL'D Church-Government. PART. V. Lately Printed at OXFORD. They went out from Us, because they were not Us: for if they had been of Us, they would have no doubt have continu'd with Us; but they went out that they may be made manifest, that they were not all of Us. 1 Joh. 2.19. Sheldonian Theatre, Oxford OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. Anno 1687.
Imprimatur. JO. VENN Vice-Can. Oxon. Jun. 2. 1687.
To the UNIVERSITY READER. THESE Papers neither have, nor need any other recommendation, then that of the Cause which they maintain. They are extorted by the impor∣tunity of those Adversaries, who have endeavour'd to wound us in all our nearest concerns, The Honour of our University, the Autority of our Church, and the Rights of our Sovereign. The Laborious Author of the Discourses spar'd no pains to shake the foundations of our Religion; and the designing Publisher has with no in∣considerable expence, endeavoured a farther advantage from them, by casting a reproach upon these Seminaries of our Education. But it is justly hop'd, that their de∣signs against the University will prove as successless as their attempts on the Church; Of which we know, that tho' the Rains descend, the Flouds come, and the Winds blow, yet it cannot fall, for it is founded upon a Rock. The hopes of our Enemies abroad have been entertain'd, and the solicitude of our Friends awaken'd by the news of our Oxford Converts daily flocking into the bosom of the Roman Church. But we hope All men are by this time convinc'd that they deserve as little consideration for their Number, as they do regard for their accomplish∣ments. No one need to be alarm'd at the Desertion of Six or Seven Members, who shall consider their de∣pendence on One who by the Magazines, which He had stor'd up against Us, shews that He has not now first chang'd his Complexion, but only let fall the Vizour. Nor ought we more to regard the Insinuations of those, who tell us of the secret Promises of such as have not openly Profest, as having no other ground but the confidence of the Reporters. But be it as it will, God covers us with his Feathers, and under his Wings will We trust; We
will neither be afraid of the arrow that flieth by day, nor for the Pestilence that walketh in darkness: But we least of all fear any danger from this praesent attempt of our Author, since the Regal power seems engag'd with our Church in one common defence; For she is no farther concern'd in this present Controversie, then as she is accus'd to have been too great a friend to the Prae∣rogative of the Crown. And certainly that Doctrine which invades the just Rights of the Prince, can hope but for few Proselytes amongst those, who have constant∣ly defended them in their Writings, asserted them in their Decrees, and upon all occasions vindicated them with their Swords. For We do not lie open to the impu∣tation of a condition'd and distinguishing Loyalty, who have shew'd our readiness to imitate the glorious exam∣ples of our Fathers, and were prepar'd (had not Gods good Providence prevented our service) to have tran∣scrib'd that Copy lately at Sedgmore, which they set us formerly at Edge-hill. And in truth our steady fidelity to the Prince is so unquestionable, that our Enemies have been pleas'd to ridicule what they could not deny, and have made Passive Obedience bear a part in our Charactery, when the Muse has been inclin'd to Satyr. As for our Author and his Theses there is nothing here advanc'd which was not in King Edwards time ful∣ly answer'd by Protestant Writers; and had he written in Henry the 8th's Reign, he might have receiv'd a Reply from a Roman Catholic Convocation; So vain is it to urge Us now with the stale pretences of a Forreign Jurisdicti∣on, which our Ancestors of the Roman Communion eje∣cted with so Universal a consent, and which our Fathers of the Reformation resisted even unto death; I mean those Glorious Prelates, who here dying seal d the truth of our Religion with their Blood, and left it as a Legacy to us their Children, by us to be convey'd to the Genera∣tions yet to come.
Animadversions on the Eight Theses &c. AS that Person, who would prove himself a genu∣ine Son of the Church of England, had need of more Sincerity then this Editor shew'd, whilst He profest to be of Her Communion; so one, who has the ambition of appearing a potent Enemy against her, had need of greater Strength then he has either produc'd of his own, or borrow'd from others, since he has been her declar'd Adversary. Had he continued still to dis∣semble his Faith, and affected an aequilibrium betwixt both Churches, His writings would have been more sui∣table to such a Character; where the attentive Reader will find the Church of England but weakly attacq'd, and that of Rome as faintly vindicated. But since some Motives have prevail'd with him to assume the Name of another Church, as that which he has left has no great cause to lament the loss of such a Member, so that which He would seem to have fled to will have little reason to boast that She has gain'd a Proselyte. For how plausib∣ly soever He may discourse of Church-Autority, He a∣bounds in too great a Plerophory of his own sense, to sub∣mit himself either to a Convocation at home, or Council abroad; and altho' he would appear an Enemy to Lu∣ther, he seems at this very time to be drawing up a novell Scheme of Doctrines, and modelling to himself a new Church. Hence it is that in one of his Treatises he has deserted
the antient Plea of Transubstantiation, upon which the Tridentine Fathers founded their Adoration of the Host; and from which all the great Champions of that Church have constantly deduc'd it. Hence his modifying the Council's Sacramentum into Res Sacramenti, his pre∣scinding from the Symbols, his certain inferior cult only due to them, his stripping them even of the School∣mens latricall, qualified, secondary, improper, accidental co∣adoration; and such other his abstractive Notions of that Worship, as do indeed befit a Nominal Philosopher, but have no agreement with the avowed doctrines and pra∣ctises of the Roman Communion. Hence it is that in the Discourse we are now upon, We read nothing of the Dominus Deus Papa of the Canonists; Nothing of the Vi∣car of Christ; the Holy, Apostolick, and Infallible See which their former Writers have endeavour'd to establish Jure divino; Nothing of the Supreme Pastour, Gover∣nour and Head of Christ's Church, the Successor of S. Peter, and other Titles which even our Representers of late (whose business it hath been to mollifie) have fur∣nish'd us with; No not so much as of the modest Bishop of Meaux's Primacy of S. Peter's chair and common Center of Catholic Unity; but instead of these we are told of a Western Patriarch, one who pleads the Prescrip∣tion of some Years for his Autority, and thinks himself hardly dealt with,pag. 214. that because He claims more then his due, that which is his due should be denyed him. Hence it seems to be that He is so wary in giving us his own Opinions; that He disputes so much, and affirms so lit∣tle; that he bounds all his Positions with so many limi∣tations that they seem contriv'd on purpose for subterfu∣ges; and that He very cautiously ventures not any far∣ther then He thinks, tho' falsly, the Autority of our Writers will bear him out. Hence those Concessions
(which will perhaps by that Party be judg'd over-libe∣rall) That Images, and so the veneration or worship of them were very seldom, if at all, us'd in the Primi∣tive Church. That the publick Communion was then most commonly, if not allways, administred in both kinds unto the People. That the Divine Service which then, as now, was celebrated usually in the Latin or Greek Tongue, was much better in those days then now understood of the Common people. That the having the Liturgy, or Divine Service, or the Holy Scriptures in a known tongue is not prohibited, nor the using of Images enjoyn'd; nor the Priest's admi∣nistring, and the people's receiving the Communion in both kinds, if the Supreme Church-Governours so think fit (and we say they ill discharge the Office of Church-Governours, who do not think fit our Saviours Institution should be observ'd) declar'd unlawful by any Canon of any Council. Ancient Council he means, for latter Councils have declar'd these unlawful. These are large grants from a Romanist, and which give a great shock to their so much magnified pretence of Universal Tradition. Had this Author liv'd in those Ages when the Secular Prince countenanc'd the beginnings of Refor∣mation, He would have scarce lost any thing for his too rigorous adhaesion to the C. of Rome. For he thinks it probable that had the Reformation only translated the former Church Liturgies and Scriptures into a known tongue;  administred Communion in both kinds, thought fit not to use Images; changed something of practise only without any decession from the Churches Doctrines, the Church-Governours would have been facile to license these. Where by the way it seems something unintelligible how they should change practice without decession from Doctrines, if Doctrines enjoyn'd
such Practices,pag. 2. §. 2. and if according to him, Errours in pra∣ctice allways presuppose some Errour in matter of Faith. But at least we may expect He would have outwardly complied, since he notes, That some outward compli∣ance at the first,pag. 140. §. 123. of those Bishops, who made an open Opposition afterward, might be upon a fair Pretence, be∣cause the first Acts of the Reformation might not be so insupportable as the latter. Where it is worth our Observing, that the very first Act, which gave life to the Reformation, was shaking off all manner of Obedience to the See of Rome, then which I believe his Holiness, con∣trary to this Author's Sentiments, thinks no Act more unsupportable. These things consider'd, We could not have had a more easie Adversary then this Gentleman, and the Church has less reason to fear his open Opposition, then had he still continued in her bosom. For it seems not to be his Province to publish what is Material against us, but to publish Much. But, God be thanked, our Religion is not establish'd upon so weak a basis, as to be overthrown by a few Theses unprov'd, and falsly appli∣ed. Nor is it any wonder if that arguer doth not convince, who uses for Principles Conclusions drawn from Praemisses, which the world never saw, and then as∣sumes such things as every one acquainted with Hi∣story is able to contradict. Certainly his University-Readers will not be very fond of the Conclusion of that Syllogism, whose Major is a petitio principii, & Minor a down-right fals-hood in matter of fact. They no doubt are surpriz'd to find Consequents come before their Ante∣cedents, and Church-Government part the 5th to have stept into the World (somewhat immaturely methinks) before the other four. But the Lawfulness of the Eng∣lish Reformation was to be examin'd, and it would have
took up too much time to shew why he impos'd upon us such a Test. It might therefore be thought seasonable enough to examin the Truth of his Theses, when he shall be pleas'd to communicate to us whence they are inferr'd. In the meanwhile, it may not be unuseful to consider what disservice he had done to our Cause, had his success aequal'd the boldness of his attempt. After all his The∣ses and their Applications, his Correspondent Alpha's and Beta's, his perplex'd Paragraphs, his intricate Parathe∣ses, and his taedious Citations, what Doctrine of the Church of Rome has he establish'd, or what principle of Ours has he disprov'd? Should we grant that the Clergy only have power in Controversies of Religion, that the Secular Prince has no Autority to reform Errours in the Church, that our Princes did wrongfully usurp such an Autority, and that our Reformation was not the act of the Clergy; will it hence follow (which yet is to be prov'd by this Author, e're he can perswade us to enter∣tain any favourable Opinion of Popery) That the se∣cond Commandment ought to be expung'd out of the Decalogue? that Idolatry is no Sin? or worshipping of Images no Idolatry? that Transubstantiation is to be be∣liev'd in despight of Sense, Reason, Scripture, and An∣tiquity? the Service of God to be administred in an un∣known tongue, as it were in mere contradiction to Saint Paul? and the Communion to be celebrated in one kind notwithstanding our Saviours, Drink ye all of this. It is indeed our happiness, that the Reformation was carried on by the joynt concurrence of the Civil and Ecclesiastical power; that We are united together by common Rules for Government and Worship agree'd on by the Bishops and Presbyters in Convocation, and made Laws to us by the Autority of the Sovereign:
We are allways ready to prove that the Church of Eng∣land being a National Church, and not Subject to any forreign Jurisdiction, ow'd no Obedience to the Bishop or Church of Rome, & therefore might without their leave reform her self, and that accordingly our Religion is establish'd by such Laws as want no autority either Ci∣vil or Ecclesiastical, which they ought to have. This is a Plea which we shall be allways prepar'd to justifie; and a Blessing for which we thank God, and for the con∣tinuance of which we shall never cease to pray. But now had those which we esteem corruptions of the Ro∣man Church never been cast out, or were they reestab∣lish'd (which God in his mercy forbid) by as good au∣tority as that by which they are now abolish'd; Yet even then we could not submit to such Determinations, and being concluded by an antecedent Obligation to God durst not obey even lawful autority commanding un∣lawful things. He therefore that would gain a Prose∣lyte, who acts upon prudent and Conscientious principles, in vain entertains him with Schemes of Church-Govern∣ment, since the things contested are such as no Govern∣ment in the world can make lawful; It would be more rational to shew (were not that an attempt long since despair'd of) that the particular doctrines and practises to which we are invited, are agreeable to the word of God; or that it doth not concern us, whether they be, or not. For if either it may be prov'd, that the Errours of the Church of Rome were so great, that there was a necessity of reforming them, that every National Church has a right to reform her self, that this right of the Church of England in particular was unquestionable, that she us'd no other then this her lawful right, and that accordingly the Reformation was effected by the Major part of the then legal Church-Governours: Or if in fai∣lure
of this (which yet we say is far from being our case) it may be prov'd, that where evident Necessity requires, and the prevailing Errours are manifest, there the Civil power may lawfully reform Religion without the con∣currence of the major part of the Clergy, for Secular Interests averse from Reformation; Or if lastly, supposing no such Reformation made by lawful authority, but the Laws which enjoyn such erroneous Doctrines, remain∣ing in their full force and vigour, every private Christian can plead an Exemption from his Obedience to them, by proving them evidently contradictory to the known laws of God; if any one of these Pleas are valid, all which have by our Writers been prov'd to be so beyond the pos∣sibility of a fair Reply, then Nothing which is aim'd at in these Papers can affect us, and tho' the author would have shew'd more skin in proving his Question, yet he had still betray'd his want of prudence in the choice of it. By what hath been sayd, the Reader will be induc'd to think that these Papers do not so much concern the Church of England, as the State; and that a Reply to them is not so properly the task of a Divine, as of a Law∣yer. The Civil power is indeed manifestly struck at, and an Answer might easily be fetcht from Keble and Coke. He may perswade himself that he acts craftily, but certainly he acts very inconsistently, who erects a Triumphal Statue to his Prince, and at the same time undermines his Autority; in monumental Inscriptions gives him the glorious and astonishing Title of Optimus Maximus, and yet sets up a superiour Power to his. If nei∣ther Loyalty nor gratitude could perswade him to speak more reverently, yet out of wariness he ought to have been more cautious in laying down such things, as seem to have an ill aspect on his Majesties proceedings. For
it may seem very rash to deny,§. 5. p. 12. that the Prince can re∣move from the Exercise of his Office any of his Clergy for not obeying his Decisions in matters of a Spiritual Nature, when a Reverend Prelate suffers under such a Sentence;§. 7. p. 14. to assert that the Prince, ought not to collate to Benefices, where the Clergy have Canonical excepti∣ons against the Person nominated, whilst a Friend of his thus qualified enjoys the benefit of such a Collation; to find fault with the Reformers that they gave their Prince leave to dispense with Laws and Constitutions Ecclesia∣stical,§. 28. p. 36. when he himself is in that case most graciously dispens'd with. How far the Regal power extends it self in these cases, especially as it may be limited by the municipal laws of the Realm, I am not so bold as to de∣termine; but where such Rights are claim'd by the So∣vereign, and actually exercis'd, there it becomes not the modesty of a private Subject to be so open and liberal in condemning them. But then above all he renders his Loyalty justly questionable, when he tells us it is dis∣puted by the Roman Doctors, and leaves it a Question, Whether in case that a Prince use his coactive Jurisdi∣ction in Spiritual matters against the Definitions of the Church,§. 16. p. 20. then the Pope hath not also virtually some Temporal coactive power against the Prince? namely to dissolve the Princes coactive Power, or to authorise others to use a coactive power, against such a Prince in order to the good of the Church? Now I appeal to the judicious Reader, whether the substance of that infamous Libel, which was part of a lateSee Sidney's Trial. Tray∣tour's Indictment, and which was written by way of Po∣lemical Discourse, as he pleaded, might not if manag'd by this Author's pen have been thus warily exprest; Whether in case that a Prince use his coactive Jurisdi∣ction
in Civil matters against Acts of Parliament, then the Parliament hath not also virtually some tempo∣ral coactive power against the Prince; namely, to dis∣solve the Princes coactive power, or to authorize others to use a coactive power against such a Prince in order to the good of the State? Such bold Problems as these ought not to be left undecided; and one who had any zeal for his Prince, would scarce let the Affirmative side of the Quaestion pass without affixing a brand on it. These Expressions among others He might well be conscious would be offensive to any SIR of known Fide∣lity and Loyalty to his Prince; and therefore such person's good Opinion was to be courted in an Epistle Apologe∣tick. But certainly it was expected that the kind Sir should read no farther then the Epistle; for if he did, he would find himself miserably impos'd upon. The Au∣thor in this Epistle praeacquaints him with these things. 1. That there is nothing touch'd in this Discourse concerning the Temporal Prince his Supreme power in such matters, as it is dubious whether they be Spi∣ritual or Temporal, but only in things which are pure∣ly Spiritual and Ecclesiastical. 2. That he knows not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denied to the Prince, but which, or at least the chiefest of which, all other Christian Princes ex∣cept those of the Reformed states do forego to Exer∣cise. 3. Nor of any, but which the Kings of England have also foregone before Henry the Eighth. Now I shall humbly beg leave to undeceive the un∣known Sir, and to represent to him that in all these he is misinform'd. As to the first, 1. That there is nothing touch'd in this Discourse concerning the Temporal Prince his Supreme power in such Matters as it is dubi∣ous
whether they be Spiritual or Temporal but only such as are purely Spiritual and Ecclesiastical. Now if by dubious he means such things as He does not doubt, but they are Spiritual, then this doth not reach our case; because We may doubt whether some things are not Temporal, which He doubts not but they are Spi∣ritual; But if by dubious He means such things as are doubted by no body but that they are purely Spiritual, then are we agreed; since neither do We allow the Tem∣poral Prince any power in things of which We our selves doubt not but they are purely Spiritual. That there are some Powers merely Spiritual, appropriated to the Cler∣gy and incommunicable to the Prince, no true Son of the Church of England will deny; but now altho' the substance of those Powers be immediately from God, and not from the King, as those of Preaching, Ordaining, Absolving &c. Yet whether these are not subject to be limited, inhibited, or otherwise regulated in the out∣ward Exercise of them by the Laws of the Land, and the Autority Regal is the thing quaestion'd. This cannot per∣haps be better exprest then in the words of the Reverend Bp. Sanderson; The King doth not challenge to him∣self as belonging to him by Virtue of his Supremacy Ecclesiastical the power of Ordaining Ministers, ex∣communicating scandalous Offenders, or doing any o∣ther act of Episcopal Office in his own Person; nor the power of Preaching, Administring the Sacraments, or doing any other act of Ministerial Office in his own person: but leaves the performance of all such acts of either sort unto such persons, as the said several respe∣ctive powers do of divine right belong to, viz. of the one sort to the Bishops, and of the other to the Priests. Yet doth the King by Virtue of that Supremacy chal∣lenge a power as belonging to him in the right of hisEpiscopacy not prejud. to Reg power p 22
Crown, to make Laws as well concerning Preaching, Administring the Sacraments, and other acts belonging to the Function of a Priest, as concerning Ordination of Ministers, proceeding in matters of Ecclesiastical Cognisance in the Spiritual Courts, and other acts be∣longing to the Function of a Bishop: to which Laws as well the Priests, as the Bishops are subject, and ought to submit to be limited and regulated thereby in the Exer∣cise of those their several respective Powers; their claim to a Jus Divinum, and that their said several powers are of God notwithstanding. Now to apply this; That the deciding Controversies of Faith, and Excommuni∣cating Offenders, &c. are the proper Province of the Clergy, we deny not; but that the indicting Synods in order to such Matters, or making Laws to regulate the Exercise of them are purely Spiritual, is not so undoubted as He would perswade us. Again, that the Spiritu∣al Autority which is to be exercised in the Episcopal or Sacerdotal Functions can be derived from none but those spiritual persons who were invested with that Autority, and power of delegating it to others, is willingly al∣low'd; but that collation to Benefices can be the act of none but the Clergy will not be hence infer'd. For the Spiritual Autority it self, and the application of it to such an Object are very different things. The power by which a Clergy man is capacitated for his Functi∣on is derived from the Bishop which ordains him; but the applying this Power to such a Place, the ordering that the Ecclesiastical Person shall execute that Autority which he deriv'd from the Church in such a peculiar part of the Kingdom is not without the reach of the Civil Ju∣risdiction; and therefore Collation to Benefices (in the sence this Author understands it) should not have been reckon'd by him amongst those things of which it is not
doubted but they are purely Spirituall. Another power of which he abridges the Prince, and by consequence would have to be esteem'd purely Spiritual, is the deposing from the Exercise of their Office in his Dominions any of the Clergy for transgressing of the Ecclesiastical Ca∣nons. Now that the Secular Prince should have an Obligation from God over all Persons in all Spiritual matters to bind them by Temporal Punishments to the Obedience of the Churches or Clergy's determinations, and decrees (as he words it) and yet that the Exerci∣sing this power, their performing what they are obli∣ged to by God, should be without the reach of their Autority, seems to me a paradox. That the Christian Emperors in the Primitive times challeng'd such a po∣wer is plain from the undoubted testimony of the Learned Petrus de Marca.Cura principum Christianorum olim non solum Haereticorum furoros com∣pressi, contumacia Episcoporum aut Cle∣ricorum adversus Synodorum sententias rebellium ab externa potentia repressa; sed etiam Principum studio prohibiti E∣piscopi ne legibus secularibus vel Canoni∣bus violatis injuriam subditis inferrent De concord. l. 4. cap. 1. par. 2. Who tells us, that by the care of Christian Princes, Hereticks were represt, the contumacy of Bishops and Clergy-men against the De∣crees of Synods punish'd, and Bishops restrain'd from op∣pressing their subjects by the violation of the Canons. If we inquire how the Princes secur'd the Keeping of the Canons;Canonum custodiae duobus modis prospiciebant Principes, tum delegatione Magistratuum, qui vetarent ne quid con∣tra Canones tentaretur, tum exactis poe∣nis à contumacibus si quid perperam ge∣stum esset. lb par 4. He tells us they did it by these 2 Methods. 1st. By delegating Magistrates to see they were observ'd. 2ly. By punishing those who were guilty of the breach of them. And he particularly mentions Deprivation inflicted by the Secular power for violation of the Canons.In manifestissima violatione, canoni∣bus factam injuriam iis poenis Principes ulsciscebantur, quae legibus irrogatae e∣rant, nempe expulsione à sede. Deturba∣tionem enim illam quae vacantem Eccle∣siam redderet sui arbitrii esse putabant; non autem regradationem vel dejectio∣nem ab Episcopali dignitate, quae erat poe∣na mere Ecclesiastica. Ib. par. 6. For that, they thought removal from the See
within the reach of their Jurisdiction, tho' not Degra∣dation, which is a punishment merely Ecclesiastical. (Which neither did the Reforming Princes ever think in their power to inflict.) And heIbid. there gives instances of Bishops so depriv'd. And indeed this seems to be a Necessary branch of power, which naturally flows from his being Custos Canonum, which he is prov'd by this Author at large to be. How far the Prince may abridge himself of this power by the laws of the Land, I meddle not; it suffices to shew that it is not origi∣nally a power merely Spirituall. And from this and the former Instances the Reader will be able to judge the truth of that assertion, That there is nothing touch'd in this Discourse concerning such Matters, as it is dubious whether they be Spiritual, or Temporal. Come we now to that other assertion of his, That he knows not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Di∣scourse denied to the Prince but which (or at least the chiefest of which) all other Christian Princes ex∣cept those of the Reformed States do forego to ex∣ercise. Now if by the chiefest, which he excepts, he means preaching the word, and administring the Sacraments, Excommunicating, and absolving; neither do the Re∣formed States challenge the Exercise of these; and as for others it will appear that the Princes of the Roman-Catholick Communion extend their Supremacy as far as the Reformed. And here it may not be improper to instance in that right which the Kings of Spain enjoy in Sicily, which seems to extend even to those Spiritual powers which our Author calls the chiefest. And this I find usher'd in by a Roman-Catholick Writer with an assertion quiteHist. of Eccl. Rev by a Learned Priest in France. p. 116.
opposite to that which is laid down in this Epistle. It even surpasses (saith he) that which Henry the Eighth of England boldly took when he separated from the Church of Rome. The King of Spain as King of Si∣cily pretends to be Legate à latere, and born Legate of the H. See; so that he and his Viceroys in his ab∣sence have the same power over the Sicilians as to the Spiritual that a Legate à latere could have. And therefore they who execute that Jurisdiction of Sicily for the King of Spain have power to absolve, punish, and excommunicate all sorts of persons, whether La∣icks or Ecclesiasticks, Monks, Priests, Abbots, Bishops, and even Cardinals themselves, that reside in the Kingdom. They acknowledge not the Popes Auto∣rity, being Sovereign Monarchs as to the Spiritual. They confess that the Pope hath heretofore given them that priviledge: (So that his Holiness it seemes thought even those chiefest Powers of the Church alienable) but at the same time they pretend that it is not in his power to recall it; and so they acknowledge not the Pope for head, to whose Tribunal no Appeal can be made because their King has no Superiour, as to the Spiritual. Moreover this right of superiority is not consider'd as delegate, but proper; and the King of Sicily or they who hold Jurisdiction in his place, and who are Lay-men take the title of Beatissimo & Santissimo Padre attributing to themselves in effect in respect of Sicily what the Pope takes to himself in re∣gard of the whole Church; and they preside in Pro∣vincial Councils. As for the title of Head of the Church which taken by the Reformers so much offends our Discourser, this Critical Historian farther observes; It was matter of great astonishment that in our age Queen Elizabeth took the title of Head of the Church
of England. But seeing in the Kingdom of Sicily, the Female succeeds as well as in England, a Princess may take the title of Head of the Church of Sicily, and of Beatissimo & Santissimo Padre. Nay it hath happen'd so already in the time of Jean of Arragon & Castile the mother of Charles the 5th: So that this Critick concludes that it may be said there are two Popes, and two sacred Colledges in the Church, to wit, the Pope of Rome, and the Pope of Sicily, to whom also may be added the Pope of England. What Jurisdiction Spiritual the King of France chal∣lenges will best be learnt from the Liberties of the Gal∣lican Church, publish'd by the learned Pitthaeus and to be found in his Works. Two of them which seem to come home to our purpose are these. Le Rois tres Chrestiens ont de tout temps selon les occurrences & necessi∣tez de leur pays, assemblè ou fait assem∣bler Synodes ou Conciles Provinciaux & Nationaux, esquels entre autres cho∣ses importantes à conservation de leur estat, se sont aussi traitez les affaires con∣cernans l'ordre & discipline Ecclesia∣stique de leurs pays, dont ils ont faict faire Reigles, Chapitres, Loix, Ordon∣nances, & Pragmatiques Sanctions sous leur Nom & autoritè: & s' en lisent encor aujourd huy phisieurs ès recueils des Decrets receus par l'Eglise Univer∣selle, & aucunes approuvees par Conci∣ciles generaux.The most Christian King hath had power at all times according to the occurrences and necessity's of his own affairs, to assemble or cause to be assembled Synods or Councils Provincial and National; and there∣in to treat not only of such things as tend to the pre∣servation of his State, but also of affairs which con∣cern the Order and Discipline of the Church in his own Dominions; and therein to make Rules, Chapters, Laws, Ordinances, and Pragmatick sanctions in his own Name and by his own Autority. Many of which have been received among the Decrees of the Catholique Church, and some of them approv'd by General Councils. Le Pape n'envoy point en France Legates à latere avec faculte' de refor∣mer, juger, conferer, dispenser, & tel∣les autres qui ont accoustumè d'estre specifiees par les Bulles de leur pouvoir, si non a la' postulation du Roy tres-Christien ou de son consentement: & le Legat n' use de ses facultez qu' apres avoir baillè promesse au Roy par escrit sous son sein, & jurè par ses Sainctes Or∣dres de n' user desdites facultez e's Roy∣aume, pays, terres & Seigneuries de sa sujettion si non tant & si longuement qu'il plaira au Roy; & que si tost que le dit Legat sera adverty de sa volonte' au contraire, il s' en desistera & cessera Aussi qu' il n' usera des dites facultez si non pour le regard de celles dont il aura le consentement du Roy & conforme∣ment à iceluy sans entreprendre ny faire chose au Saincts decrets. Conciles gene∣raux, Franchises, Libertez, & Privileges de L'Eglise Gallicane & des Universi∣tez, & estatez publiques de ce Royaume, Et à cette fin se presentent les facultez de tels Legats a la Cour de Parlement, ou elles sont veus, examinees, verifiees, publiees & registrees sous telles modifi∣cations que la Cour voit estre à fair pour le bien du Royaume: suivant lesqnelles modifications se jugent tous les process & differents qui surviennent pour rai∣son de ce, & non autrement.The Pope cannot send a Legat à latere into France,
with power to reform, judge, collate, or dispence, or do such other things which use to be specified in the Bull of his Legation, except it be upon the desire or with the approbation of the most Christian King. Neither can the said Legate execute his Office untill he hath promised the King in writing under his seal, and sworn by his holy Orders, that he will not use the said Legantine power in his Kingdom, Countreys, Lands and Dominions any longer then it shall please the King; and that so soon as he is admonish'd of the Kings pleasure to the contrary he will cease and for∣bear; and that whilst he doth use it, it shall be no otherwise exercis'd then according to the consent of and in conformity to the King, without attemping any thing to the prejudice of the Decrees of General Councils, the Franchises, Liberties, and Priviledges of the Gallican Church, and the Universities, and pub∣lique Estates of the Realm. And to this end they shall present the Letters of their Legation to the Court of Parliament, where they shall be view'd, verified, publish'd and registred with such Modifica∣tions as that Court shall think fit for the good of the Realm; and all processes shall proceed according to such restrictions, and no otherwise.
In these two Liberties, we find the Autority of the French King farther extended, and the Papal power more limited, then our Author can be contented the Regal Jurisdiction should be enlarg'd, and the Patri∣archal confined by the Reformed. What power the most Christian King claims in confirming Canons we may learn from Petrus de MarcaDe Conc. l 6. c. 34. par. 2. Nun∣quam discedere oportet ab hac certissima Regula, deliberationes Ecclesiae Gallica∣nae considerari non posse aliter quam ve∣lut consilium Regi datum, easque execu∣tioni non posse mandari absque consen∣su & confirmatione ejus. who lays it down for a Rule which never fails, That the deliberations of the Gallican Church can be look'd upon no otherwise then as Counsel given to the King; and that they cannot be put in execution without his consent and confirmation. And he there saith, that the King may praeside in Coun∣cils asTanquam caput, comme Chef Ibid. Head.An ex co quod Suprema Canonum protectio ad Regem pertinet, sequatur eum jubere posse ut observentur, non ex∣pectata etiam sententia Ecclesiae Gallica∣nae? And in another place proposing to him∣self this Quaestion,Certum quidem est earum con∣stitutionum obseruationum fore sancti∣orem, si conderentur cum generali Cleri consensu; quoniam unusquisque eam rem obtinere modis omnibus cupit quam ipse suo judicio comprobaverit. Nihilominus aeque certum est Regem ex sententia Concilii sui, quod auget aut mi∣nuit prout ei lubet, posse latis edictis de∣cernere ut Canones observentur, ac cir∣cum stantias & modos necessarios addere ad faciliorem eorum executionem, sive etiam ad veram eorum mentem explican∣dam, eosque accommodare ad utilitatem Regni lib. 6. c. 36. par. 1. Whether, since the supreme pro∣tection of the Canons doth belong to the King, it thence follows that He can command that they be observ'd without expecting the sentence of the Gallican Church? He answers, * that it is indeed certain that the Observa∣tion of them will be the more sacred, if they be made with the Universal consent of the Clergy, because eve∣ry one desires that that should take place, which he him∣self approves of: But then, that it is aequally certain, that the King with the advice of his Council, may by his Edicts decree, that the Canons be observ'd, and may add such Modes and Circumstances as are necessary for
the better Execution of them, and accommodate them to the Interest of the State. This Autority he confirms from the Examples of the first Christian Emperors, and the former French Kings, and adds expreslyUtuntur adhuc eo jure Reges Chri¦stianissimi. Ib par. 3. That the most Christian Kings still use that right. And now me∣thinks the revising of the Canons by the Kings of Eng∣land, especially when humbly besought to do it by the Clergy, should not be an Invasion of the Churches rights, when the French Kings even without such Interposition of the Church, exercise the same Right, and yet do, ac∣cording to our Author, leave to the management of the Clergy all power in Spirituals. I might here insist upon Collation of Benefices, which the French Kings challenge by right of the Regale; but I shall choose rather to men∣tion the assembling of Councils, because a French King in the last Century seems to have doubted whether his Clergy might convene without his consent; as appears from that bold Speech of his Embassadour in the Council of Trent, which because it gives us some insight into the freeness of that Synod, I shall beg leave to transcribe the latter part of it from GoldastusCollect. Constitut. Imperial. T. 3. p. 373 Pii quarti imperium detracta∣mus, quaecunque sint ejus judicia & sen∣tentiae rejicimus, respuimus, & contem∣nimus. Et quanquam, Patres Sanctis∣simi, vestra omnium Religio, Vita, & eruditio magnae apud Nos semper fue∣rit & erit Autoritatis, cum tamen nihil à vobis, sed omnia magis Romae, quam Tridenti agantur, & quae hic publican∣tur magis Pii Quarti placita, quam Con∣cilii Tridentini decreta jure aestimentur, denunciamus▪ & protestamur quaecunque in hoc conventu, hoc est, solo Pii nutu & voluntate decernuntur & publicantur ea neque Regem Christianissimum pro∣baturum, neque Ecclesiam Gallicanam pro decreto Oecumenici Concilii habi∣turam. Interea quotquot estis Galliae Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Do∣ctores, Theologi, Vos omnes hinc ab∣ire Rex Christianissimus jubet, reditu∣ros ut primum Deus Optimus Maximus Ecclesiae Catholicae in Generalibus Conciliis antiquam formam & liberta∣tem restituerit, Regi autem Christianis∣simo suam dignitatem & Majestatem. We refuse to be sub∣ject to the Command of Pius the 4th, All his judg∣ments and decrees we refuse, reject, and contemn; and although, most Holy Fathers, Your Religion, Life, and
Learning was ever and ever shall be of great Autority with Us, Yet seeing You do nothing, but all things are manag'd rather at Rome, then at Trent; and the things that are here publish'd are rather the Placita of Pius the 4th, then the Decrees of the Council of Trent, We de∣nounce and protest here before You all, that whatsoever things are decree'd in this Assembly by the will and pleasure of Pius, neither the Most Christian King will ever approve, nor the French Church ever acknowledge for the Decrees of an Oecumenical Council. In the mean time the Most Christian King commands all you his Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Doctors, and Di∣vines to depart hence; then to return, when it shall please God to restore to his Catholick Church the anci∣ent methods and liberty of General Councils, and to the Most Christian King his Honour and Dignity. Now I leave it to the Reader to judge whether any Reformed States ever assumed to themselves greater Au∣tority over the Ecclesiasticks, then this R. Catholick Prince, or Whether ever any Protestant exprest himself with greater warmth concerning this Council, then that Protesting Embassador. It might be easie to shew how much power the Venetian Republick exercises in Spiri∣tuals, had not this been done so lately by another Pen. But what hath been said may suffice to evince, that this Epistolographer impos'd upon the credulity of his Sir, when he told him, that he knew of no Ecclesiastical powers denied to the Prince but which (or at least the chiefest of which) all other Christian Princes, except those of the Reformed State, do forego to exercise. But our Discourser perhaps presum'd his Friend a Stranger to sorreign affairs, and therefore thought he might the more securely use a Latitude in his treating of those; it remains therefore to examine whether he
has been a more faithful Relator of our own History, and what truth there is in his last Epistolary assertion, that he knows not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denied to the Prince, but what the Kings of England have foregone before Henry the 8th. Now whatever in relation to a power in Spirituals is in this Discourse accus'd of Novelty seems easily re∣ducible to these two Heads: 1st. A Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical denied to the Western Patriarch: as appears by our Princes taking away all manner of Forreign Jurisdiction, prohibiting all appeals to the See of Rome, all Bulls from it, and in generall all Intercourse with it. 2ly. The same Supremacy invested in the Sovereign; as appears by King Henry's assuming the title of Head of the Church; by the Kings making Ecclesiastical Laws; by that Synodical act of the Clergy not to assemble or promulgate any Canons without his leave; by that power granted to the King to visit Ecclesiastical per∣sons, and to reform Errours and Heresies; by his col∣lating to Benefices without consent of the Clergy; and by hindring Excommunications in foro externo. Now in Answer to this charge of Novelty; It is confest that the Pope did for some Years usurp such a superiority; but then, as it is granted that he did de fa∣cto claim such a power, so that it did de jure belong to him is denied; and not only so, but farther we affirm, that he neither from the beginning challenged such a power, nor was he afterwards in so full possession of it, but that our Princes have upon Occasion vindicated their own right against all Papal, or, if he pleaseth, Pa∣triarchal Encroachments. And here waving the dispute of right I shall confine my self to matter of Fact, that being the only case here controverted.
Where 1st of the Supremacy of the Western-Patriarch. That when Austin came over to convert the Saxons, no such Supremacy was acknowledg'd by the British Christians is evident from the celebrated Answer of Dinoth Abbot of Bangor to Austin requiring such subje∣ction. Notum sit Vobis &c.Spelm. Conc. p. 108. Be it known unto you that we are all subject and obedient to the Church of God, and the Pope of Rome; but so as we are also to every good & pious Christian, viz. to love every one in his degree and place, in perfect Charity, and to help every one by word and deed, to attain to be the Sons of God; and for other Obedience I know none due to him whom you call the Pope, and as little do I know by what right he can challenge to be Father of Fathers. As for us we are under the rule of the Bishop of Caerleon upon Ʋske, who is to overlook and govern us under God. This is farther manifest from theSpelm A. C. 601. British Clergy twice refusing in full Synod after mature deliberation to own any such subjection. That appeals to Rome were a thing unheard of till Anselms time appears from the application of the Bishops and Barons to him to disswade him from such an attempt; Inauditum in regno suo esse & usi∣bus ejus omnino contrarium, quemlibet de Principibus & praecipue Te tale quid praesumere. Eadm. p. 39.30. telling him it was a thing unheard of in this King∣dom, that any of the Peers, and especially one in his station should praesume any such thing. That Legates from Rome were for 1100 Years unheard of in this King∣dom, we may learn from a memorable passage in the same Historian concerning the Arch-Bishop of Vienna reported to have the Legantine power over England granted him A. C. 1100Quod per Angliam auditum in ad∣mirationem omnibus venit, Inauditum scilicet in Britannia cuncti scientes quem∣libet hominum super se vices Apostolicas gerere nisi solum Archiepiscopum Cantu∣ariae. Ead. p. 58. 41. The News of which being
come to England was very surprizing to all people, e∣very one knowing it was a thing unheard of, that any one should have Apostolical Jurisdiction over them, but the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. And the event of that Legacy was suitable,Quapropter sicut venit, ita reversus est, à Nemine pro Legato susceptus, uec in aliquo Legati officio functus. Ibid. for as he came, so he return'd, be∣ing taken by no one for a Legate, nor in any thing discharging the office of a Legate. That the Church of Canterbury own'd no Superiour Bishop to her own but Christ, appears from her being call'd,Ger. Dorob. Coll. Hist. Angl. 1663. 24. Col. 1615. 60. Omnium nostrum ma∣ter communis sub sponsi sui Jesu Christi dispositione; and in another place, Mater omnium Anglicanarum Ecclesia∣rum, quae suo post Deum proprio laetatur Pastore. That appeals to Rome were prohibited in King Henry the 2ds time is manifest from the famous Capitula of Cla∣rendon, amongst which this is one Article. If any ap∣peals shall happen they ought to proceed from the Arch-deacon to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Arch-Bishop, and if the Arch-Bishop shall fail in doing Justice, the last Address is to be made to the King. That Doctrines prejudicial to the Popes power were then publickly maintain'd, appears from these Pro∣positions amongst others censur'd by Becket. 1st. That none might appeal to the See Apostolick on any account without the Kings leave. 2d. That it might not be lawful for an Arch-Bishop or Bishop to depart the King∣dom and come at the Popes Summons without the Kings leave. 3d. That no Bishop might Excommu∣nicate any who held of the King in capite, nor Inter∣dict his Officers without the Kings leave. Which pro∣positions so censur'd are selected out of the Capitula of Clarendon; to the Observation of which all the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiasticks (even Becket
himself amongst the rest, tho' afterwards falling of) had oblig'd themselves by a solemn Oath, acknowledg∣ing them to be the customs of the King's Predecessours; to wit, Henry The 1st his Grandfather, and others, and that they ought to be kept inviolable by all. To what party the Bishops were inclin'd in these differences be∣twixt the King and Becket we cannot better learn then from Baronius, whose severe animadversion on these Praelates, (wherein he teaches us what Kings are to ex∣pect if they displease his Holiness, and how dreadful his Fulminations be when they come out with full Apo∣stolick vigour) the Reader may peruse in theEpiscopi Angliae suffraganei Sancti Thomae literis ejusdem sui Archiepis∣copi Apostolica legatione fungentis ex∣agitati, resilientes, haud (ut par erat) parere mandatis, salubres admonitio∣nes suscipere, Catholicae Ecclesiae uti∣litati consulere, vendicantes eam à mi∣scrrima servitute studuerunt, sed ex ad∣verso oppositi pro Rege contra ipsum scriptis, verbis, factisque repugnant, ac tantum abest ut (quod eorum muneris erat, ad quod & suis eos literis excitave∣rat ipse Sanctus) adversus Regem pro Ecclesia starent, redarguerent, & com∣minarentur; oentantes quae in ar∣cu sagittae paratae erant ad feriendum, censuras nimirum Ecclesiasticas ab Ec∣clesia Romana Apostolico vigore pro∣deuntes, ut potius adversus eundem pro Ecclesiae libertate pugnantem Sanctis∣simum Virum bella cierent, telis oppe∣terent jurgiorum, in scandalum omnium ista audientium Episcoporum Ortho∣doxorum. Bar. An. A. C. 1167. Margin. A like warm Expostulation upon these proceedings we meet with in Stapleton (de tribus Thomis, in Thoma Cant.) Quid aliud hic Henricus secundus tecte postulavit, quam quod Henricus Octavus completa jam malitia aperte u surpavit, nempe ut supremum Ecclesiae caput in Anglia esset? What did this Henry the 2d tacitly demand, but that which Henry the 8th afterwards openly u∣surp'd, viz. to be Supreme Head of the Church of Eng∣land? and againQuid hoc est aliud, nisi ut Rex An∣gliae sit apud suos Pap? what was this, but that the King of England should be Pope over his own Subjects? So that according to this Author, Henry the 8th was not the first of that name who pretended to be Supreme Head of the Church. It would be too tedious here to recite the several Statutes made in succeeding Reigns against the Popes Encroachments, viz. the 35 of Edw. 1
25 Edv. 3. Stat, de provisoribus. 27 Ed. 3. c. 1. 38 Ed. 3. c. 1.2. 4. stat. 2. 2 Ric. 2. c. 3. 12 R. 2. c. 15. 13 R. 2. stat. 2. cap. 2. 16 R. 2. c. 5. 2 Hen. 4. cap. 3. 2 Hen. 4. cap. 4. 6 Hen. 4. cap. 1. which speaks of hor∣rible mischiefs and a damnable custom brought in of new in the Court of Rome. 7 Hen. 4. cap. 6.8. 9 Hen. 4. cap. 8. 3 H. 5. c. 4. Which see collected by Rastal un∣der the title of Provision and Praemunire. fol. 325. It may suffice to add the Opinion of ourCokes Inst. l. 4. c. 4. Lawyers that the Article of the 25 of Hen. 8. c. 19. concerning the prohibition of appeals to Rome is declaratory of the ancient laws of the Realm;1. Eliz. c. 1. and accordingly the Laws made by King Henry the 8th for extinguishing all for∣reign power are said to have been made for the Restor∣ing to the Crown of this Realm the Ancient right and Jurisdictions of the same. Which rights are destru∣ctive of the Supremacy of the Pope, as will farther ap∣pear by our 2d Inquiry, how far the Regal power ex∣tended in Causes Ecclesiasticall? Where 1st. As to the title of Head of the Church, we find thatTwisd c. 5. par. 2. King Edgar was reputed, and wrote himself Pastor Pastorum, the Vicar of Christ, and by his Laws and Ca∣nons assur'd the world he did not in vain assume those titles;Chap. 5. par. 14. c. 6. par. 8. That our Forefathers stil'd their Kings Patrons Defenders, Governours? Tutors, and Protectors of the Church. And the Kings Regimen of the Church is thus ex∣prest by King Edward the Confessor in his laws. Rex quia Vicarius summi Regis est, ad hoc est constitutus, ut re∣gnum terrenum, & populum Domini, & super omnia San∣ctam veneretur Ecclesiam ejus, & regat, & ab injuriosis defendat. Leg. Edv. Conf. apud Lamb. Where it is plain that he challenges the power of Governing the Church
as being the Vicar of God, so that it was but an Ar∣tifice in Pope Nicholas the Second to confer on the same King as a priviledge delegated by him, what he claim'd as a right deriv'd immediately from GodVobis & posteris vestris Regibus Angliae committimus advocationem e∣jusdem loci, & omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum, & ut vice nostra cum Con∣cilio Episcoporum statuatis ubique quae justa sunt.. To you (saith that Pope to the Confessor) and your Successours, the Kings of England we commit the Advowson of that place, and power in our stead to order things with the advice of your Bishops. Where by the way if we may argue ad hominem this Conces∣sion gives the King of England as much right to the Supremacy over this Church, as a like Grant from ano∣ther Pope to the Earl of Sicily, gives the King of Spain to his Spiritual Monarchy over that Province. But the Kings of England derive their Charter from a higher Power. They challenge from St. Peter himself to be1 Pet. II. 13. Supreme, and from St. Paul thatRom. XIII. 1. every Soul should be subject to them. And the extent of their Regal power may be learn'd from St. Austin who teaches us In hoc Reges, sicut eis divinitus prae∣cipitur, Deo serviunt in quantum Reges sunt, si in Regno suo bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae pertinent ad divinam Religionem. Aug. contra Crescn l. 3. c. 51. that the Divine right of Kings, as such, authorized them to make Laws not only in relation to Civil Affairs, but also in matters appertaining to divine Religion. In pursuance of which. 2ly. As to the power of making Ecclesiastical Laws; That the Kings of England have made Laws not only concerning the External Regimen of the Church, but also concerning the proper Functions of the Clergy, namely the Keyes of Order and Jurisdiction, so far as to regulate the Use of them and oblige the Persons entru∣sted with them to perform their respective Offices, is evi∣dent
to any one, who shall think it worth his leisure to peruse such Laws yet extant. A Collection of the Laws made by Ina, Alfred, Edward, Ethelstan, Edmund, Edgar, Ethelred; Canutus, and others we have, publish'd by Mr. Lambard, in which we meet with Sanctions concerning Faith, Baptism, Sacrament of the Lord's Supper Bishops, Priests, Marriage, Observance of Lent, appointing of Fe∣stivals, and the like. And here it may not be unseason∣able to urge an Autority which our Editor cannot justly decline; I mean Mr. Spelman jun. in his Book de Vita Al∣fredi written by him in English but Publish'd in Latin by the Master of University College in Oxford, in the Name of the Alumni of that Society. This Author, speaking of the Laws made by King Alfred in Causes Ec∣clesiastical, makes this Inference from them. Hae leges hactenus observationem merentur, quod ex iis constat, etiam il∣lis temporibus, Reges Saxonicos Alfre∣dum & Edvardum sensisse se Suprema∣tum habere tam in Ecclesiasticos, quam in Laicos, neque Ecclesiam, quae in ip∣sorum ditione esset, esse quid peregri∣num, vel Principi alicui extraneo sub∣ditam, domi autem Civitatis legibus so∣lutam, quod Anselmus,. Beckettus, ali∣ique deinceps insecuti acriter eontende∣runt. Vita Alfr. lib. 2. par. 12. These Laws do therefore deserve our particular Observation, because from them it is evident that the Saxon Kings Alfred and Edward were of Opinion that they had a Supremacy as well over Ecclesiastical persons as Lay-men; and that the Church which was within their Dominions was not out of their Jurisdiction, or subject to a forreign Power and exempted from the Laws of the Countrey, as Becket, Anselm, and others afterwards fiercely contended. And again;Ex ipsius (Alfredi) legibus constat vel Suprematum ilium Romanum istis qui∣dem temporibus nondum eo modo, quo posterioribus saeculis, sese extulisse, sci∣licet ut Christiani Principes angustius regnarent; vel si eatenus pertigerit, non tamen eo usque se ei adjeci sse Alfred. lb. From his (King Alfred's) laws it is evident either that the Ro∣man Supremacy was not yet risen to that heighth as in after Ages, so as to lessen the Jurisdiction of Chri∣stian Princes, or if it was, yet that King Alfred did
not so far subject himself to it. Nay so far was King Alfred from paying any such Subjection that we are told Rex viam ingressus est, qua univer∣sali isti Imperio, quod crassis tempori∣bus recens extruxerant (Pontificii) & absolvere deproperarant, ruinam & ex∣cidium, minaretur. l. 3. par. 98. He found out away to ruine and destroy that Universal Empire which the Romanists in those dark Ages had newly founded and were hastning to finish. Which is spoken in reference to his restoring the se∣cond Commandment expung'd out of the Decalogue, of which thus that Author; Neque hoc sane penitus omittendum, videtur, quod inter Decalogum recitan∣dum secundum quidem Praeceptum de sculptilibus non faciendis ex usu secundi Concilii Niceni ante centum annos ce∣lebrati suo loco plane praetermissum est Veruntamen ut ex ipso Sanctorum Bib∣liorum contextu quod deest suppleretur, post decimum quod dicimus mandatum aliud insuperad justum Numerum ab∣solvendum, adjicitur. Non tibi facies Deos aureos. Quod, cum ab ipso Rege subjungutur, Ecclesiam jam turn corrupti dogmatis arguit, rectae autem confessi∣onis Regi testimonium perhibet. l. 2. par. 5. And here it may not be pass'd over, that in reciting the Decalogue, the second Commandment concerning the not making of graven Images was according to the use of the 2d Nicene Council, which was celebrated. am 100 Years before, in its place omitted. But that this defect might be supplied out of the context of the Holy Bible, after that which we call the Tenth Commandment, ano∣ther was added to complete the just Number, in these words, Thou shalt not make to thy self any Gods of Gold; Which being added by the King himself as it doth argue the Church to have been corrupt in her Doctrine, so it is a testimony of the Kings Orthodoxy. From which one Instance it is plain that, contrary to the pretensions of our Author, King Edward the 6th was not the 1st that took upon him to Reform Litur∣gies; for King Alfred here restores the Decalogue to its primitive Integrity: to judge what is agreeable to the word of God; for He supply's the defect, which he finds in the Missal, from the Scriptures: to judge
contrary to the Determinations of the Church; for the Church is here said to have been corrupt in that Do∣ctrine in which the King was Orthodox; to alter the Constitutions of General Councils because repugnant to the law of God; for this Omission of the Command∣ment was ex usu secundi Concilii Niceni, and the Wor∣shipping of Images here forbidden was introduc'd by that Council which the Romanists acknowledge Ge∣neral. These passages cited I take to be some of the perperam scripta which the Publisher of that life men∣tions in theErrores (Authoris) retinuimus, & perperam scripta medicari potius, quam tol∣lere maluimus. Praeface. And accordingly we find that whatsoever is advanc'd against the Papal Autority in the Text is qualified in the Comment, and it is plain that King Alfred was a greater Adversary to the power of the Pope then his Alumnus the Annotator; so that it is matter of surprize to find him appear in the Fron∣tispiece of this Treatise of Church Government, who was so great an Enemy to the Anti-regal designs of it. 3ly. As to the power of calling Synods, we need no more to clear this point then the very words of the Statute by him urg'd: 25 Hen. 8. c. 19. Where it is said, that the Kings Humble and Obedient Subjects the Clergy of the Realm of England had acknow∣ledg'd according, to the truth that the Convocation of the same Clergy is, always hath been, and ought to be assembled only by the Kings Writ: Which is farther evident from the ancient form of calling and dissolving Synods by a Writ in each case directed to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, as may be seen in Dr. HeylinRef. Justif. p. 1. c. 2.. The Clergy did indeed before this act of King Henry 8th promulge and execute those Canons by their own autority, which they here promise not to
put in Execution without the King's consent But since no such Canons could be put in ure till made; nor be made but by the Clergy assembled; nor the Clergy be as∣sembled but only by the King's Writ; this executing of Canons did in effect as much before this Statute as after depend upon the King's pleasure. 4ly. As for visiting Ecclesiastical Persons, and re∣forming Errors and Haeresies by proper Delegates, this is a necessary consequence from the Supremacy they challeng'd. Without such a Power how shall the Con∣fessor regere Ecclesiam, & ab injuriosis defendere? If such a Power as this be inconsistent with the Principles even of Roman-Catholiques, Whence is it that we find Arti∣cles sent from Queen Mary to Bp. Bonner to be put in Ex∣ecution by him and his Officers within his Diocess? Whence is it that we find a Commission directed to some Bishops to deprive the Reformed Bishops? But to speak of former times, if our Kings had not such a Power, Whence is it that in King Henry the fourth's Reign upon the Increase of Lollardy We find the Clergy thus petiti∣oning that Prince in the Names of the Clergy and Prae∣lates of the Kingdom of England,Quatenus inclytissimorum progeni∣torum & antecessorum vestrorum lauda∣bilia vestigia gratiose considerantes dig∣netur vestra Regia celsitudo pro conser∣vatione dictae Ecclesiae Anglicanae ad Dei laudem &c. super novitatibus & excessi∣bus praedictis in praesenti Parliamento providered de remedio opportuno. Tw. c. 5. par. 19. That according to the Example of his Royal Predecessors He would find out some remedy for the Haeresies and Innovati∣ons then praevailing? Whence is it that we find a Com∣mission from that King as Defender of the Catholick Faith to impower certain Persons to seize upon Haereti∣cal Books, and bring them before his Council, and such as after Proclamation be found to hold such Opinions, to be call'd and examined before two Gommissioners, who were of the Clergy.Ibid.
5thly. As for Collation of Benefices. Our learned Law∣yers assure us that all the Bishopricks are of the King's Foundation, and that they were Originally Donative, not Elective; and that the full right of Investitures was in the Sovereign who signified his pleasure therein per traditionem baculi & annuli by the delivery of a Ring and Crosier Staff to the Person by him elected and Nominat∣ed for that Office.Cokes Instit. l. 3. S. 648. Accordingly we find in the Statute of Provisors Ed. 3. A. 28. "the King call'd Advower Parantount of all Benefices which be of the Advowrie of people of Holy Church. And it is there said, That Elections were first granted by the King's Progenitors upon a certain form and Eondition, as to demand Li∣cense of the King to choose, and after Election to have his Royal Assent, and not in other manner. That if such Con∣ditions were not kept, the thing ought in reason to resort to its first Nature. Lastly as for Hindring Excommunications in fore exter∣no, It is one of the Articles of Clarendom; That None that hold of the King in capite nor any of his Houshold Servants may be Excommunicated, nor their Land in∣terdicted, unless our Lord the King, if he be in the Kingdom, be first treated with, or his Justice, if he be abroad; so that he may do what is Right concerning him. And amongst the Articuli Cleri. c. 7. It is complain'd that the King's Letters us'd to be directed to Ordinaries that have wrapt their Subjects in Sentence of Excommunica∣tion that they should assoil them by a certain day, or else that they do appear and answer, wherefore they excom∣municated them. This short account, however imper∣fect, may suffice to shew that the Regal power in Spi∣rituals challeng'd by King Henry the 8th was not quitted by his Predecessors. And if the Reader desires a more
full account of these things I shall refer him to Dr. Ham∣mond's Dispatcher Dispatch'd c. 2. Sect. 5. Bishop Bramhal's just Vindication c. 4. Repl. to the Bishop of Chalcedon c. 4. Sch. guarded c. 12. Sect. 3. as also to Sr. Roger Twisden in his Historical vindication of the C. of England in point of Schism; Which Learned Author has by a through in∣sight into History, Law-books, Registers, and other Mo∣numents of Antiquity enabled himself to give full and ample satisfaction to every unpraejudic'd Reader concern∣ing this Subject; and to convince him that this Author knew very little either of the English History or of his own Book, if He knew not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denied to the Prince, but which were fore∣gone by the Kings of England before Henry the Eighth. As for what he adds, that no more Supremacy in such Ecclesiastical matters,Ep. as are delegated by Christ to the Clergy and are unalienable by them to any Se∣cular power, can belong to the Princes of one time or of one Nation, then do to any other Prince of a former Time, or a diverse Nation, We willingly acknowledge it, since no such powers belong to any Prince, at any time; or of any Nation. But then there is a Supremacy in Ec∣clesiastical matters delegated by God to the Prince, which may be invaded by a Forreigner under a forg'd pretence of his being Head of the Church; and here Secular Laws may be made for the protection of such Rights, and for the punishment of those who shall either invade them, or vindicate such Invasion. And that person who un∣der praetext of maintaining the Churches rights shall impugn the just Autority of his Sovereign may be more a disloyal Subject in these days, when this Autority is by the Laws vindicated from Forreign Usurpation, then he would have been in those days, when such Usurpation was tolerated, and conniv'd at.
Having dwelt hitherto on the Epistle, and discover'd so much Insincerity in that, which yet was to bespeak the Reader's good Opinion of the ensuing Discourse, We have no great reason to expect any fairer dealing in the prosecution of his design. And here I shall be excus'd if I be the shorter in the Examination of his Theses, both because they are such as being propos'd only and not prov'd, it lies in our power to accept, or reject them at pleasure; as also because they have al∣ready undergone the Censure of a Noble Pen, and have not been able to abide a fair Tryall. Some of them are so ambiguously exprest that they may be either true or false according to the different construction they are capable of. The fals-hood of others is self-evident; But then for the better vending of these, some truths are intermix'd according to the policy of Luther's An∣tagonist observ'd by his BiographerConsid. concerning Luther § 48. p. 90., Who, to make his bad wares saleable, diligently mixeth some small stock of good with evil, so to make this more cur∣rent, and all easily swallow'd down together by the imprudent and credulous. Another Artifice much practis'd by our Author is that he lays down his Propositions in general terms, but afterwards restrains them by such limitations, which if adher'd to would make them utterly disserviceable to his Cause; but then when they come to be applied, the Theses are refer'd to at large without any regard to such limitations. Thus when in his first Thesis he has pro∣pos'd That it is not in the just power of the Prince to deny giving the Ministers of Christ license to exer∣cise their Office,§. 3. p 4. and their Ecclesiastical Censures in his Dominions. He means he saith in general, for he meddles not with the Prince, his denying some of them
to do these things whilst he admits others. Now if this Restraint be observ'd, then all which he would e∣stablish from this Thesis will come to Nothing. For he will not, I believe, presume to say that the Reform∣ing Princes ever laid a general Interdict upon all the Clergy to prohibit them the exercise of their Ecclesi∣astical Functions. This is an Act which the Refor∣mation detests, and which we leave to the charitable∣ness of the Universal Pastor, who by Virtue of our Sa∣viour's Command of Pasce oves; challenges to himself a power of depriving the flock of all Spiritual food. Thus again, When in his third Thesis he has asserted that the Secular Prince cannot eject from the exercise of their Office in his Dominions any of the Clergy,§. 5. p. 12. nor con∣sequently the Patriarch from any Autority which he stands possest of by Ecclesiastical Canons, He restrains such Canons to those only that cannot justly be pretended to do any wrong to the Civil Government. Now he knows that all Canons which would obtrude upon us a for∣reign usurp'd Autority are by us pretended (whether justly or not, they will best judge who impartially weigh our Reasons) injurious to the Civil Government. Another Limitation of this Thesis is that the Civil power may judge, and eject,§. 8. p. 16. and disauthorize Spiritual Persons for Moral and Civil Misdemeanors damageable to the Common-Wealth; But this Limitation is forgot when from this Thesis He would prove the ejection of the Bi∣shops, in Queen Elizabeth's time unlawful; For their Deprivation was for refusing the Oath of Supremacy made first by Roman-Catholicks in King Henry the 8th's time, and reviv'd by Queen Elizabeth; so that the Ju∣stice of it depends merely on the Right of the Civil power to make Oaths for the better security of their Government, and to impose such Penalties as are ex∣prest
in the Law on the Violators; and if such Refu∣sal be damageable to the Common-Wealth (as it was then judg'd) then the Deprivation of those Refusers will be justifiable according to his own Principles. Thus again in his 8th Thesis When he has laid down, That as for things of meer Ecclesiastical Constitution,§. 14. p. 18. Neither National Synod, nor Secular power may make any New Canons contrary to the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of former Superior Councils, nor re∣verse those formerly made by them. He restrains it to those only as neither the Prince can shew some way pre∣judicial to his Civil Government, nor the National Synod can shew more prejudicial to their particular Church, then the same Constitutions are to the rest of Christian Churches. (Where by the way methinks it should suffice if they were aequally prejudicial, for one Church is never the less wrong'd because another suffers.) Now we desire no more then the benefit of this limitation; for if the Prince may reverse such Constitutions when prejudicial to Civil Government, and the National Synod when praejudicial to their particular Church, and each of These are Judges of such praejudice, (for neither doth Aequity admit, nor doth He appoint any other Arbiter) then each of these have as much power granted them as they challenge, which is only to alter such Constitutions as are prejudicial to them. Having praemis'd thus much in general, and cau∣tion'd the Reader against this piece of Sophistry, which runs through the greatest part of this Discourse, I shall now proceed to a particular survey of his Theses. As for the first and second, I shall at present grant him that favour which he seems to request of all his Readers, i.e. suppose them to be true, and shall content my self on∣ly to examin what Inferences he deduces from them. And here I cannot but commend his Policy for setting
his Conclusions at so great a distance from his Praemisses, for they are commonly such as would have by no means a∣greed to stand too nigh together. From his first and second Thesis, that the Clergy have power to determine Controversies in pure matters of Religion, and to judge what is divine truth, what are Errors; & that they cannot alienate this Power to the Secular Prince;§. 22. p. 29. he infers That that Synodical Act of the Clergy in K. Henry the Eighth's time, whereby they promise not to Assemble without the King's Writ, nor when Assembled to execute any Canons without the King's consent, is unlawful. Now it is to be observed that the Clergy neither do deny that they have a Power to determine Controversies in pure matters of Religion, which is what the first Thesis would prove; nor do they transfer such a Power on the King, which might be against the Tenor of the second. The utmost which can be de∣duc'd hence is, That the Clergy did for prudential mo∣tives limit themselves in the Exercise of one branch of their Spiritual Power; and it will be difficult for this Author to prove that He, who has a power jure divino, may not by humane Laws be limited in the Use of it. Husbands have a power over their Wives, Fathers over their Children, and Masters over their Servants by the Law of God, and yet this power may be regulated by the Laws of the Land.§. 27. p. 36. Thus the Priest has a power to bind and loose from our Saviour's Commission, and yet according to this Author, before the Reformation the In∣ferior Clergy might not exercise any Church Censure contrary to the Commands of their lawful Spiritual Su∣perior. Thus also if a General Council have power to determine matters of Faith, then according to his Prin∣ciples they have power to convene in order to such De∣termination, and this power of theirs is unalienable; and
yet the Romanists will not allow that such Conven∣tions may be made at pleasure, but that the hic & nunc are determinable by the Pope, who only has power to indict Councils, and to give Autority to those de∣crees, which yet derive their power from the Coun∣cil's being infallible, and from the Holy Ghost assist∣ing them. Another Act, which from the same Thesis he accuses of Injustice, is the Clergy's beseeching the King's High∣ness that the Constitutions and Canons Provincial and Synodal,§. 25. p. 31. which be thought prejudicial to the King's Prerogative Royal, or repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or to be otherwise overmuch onerous to his Highness and his Subjects may be committed to the judgment of his Highness, and of 32 Persons, 16 of the Temporally, and 16 of the Clergy of this Realm to be chosen and appointed by the King's Majesty, and that such Canons, as shall be thought by the more part of them worthy to be an∣null'd, shall be made of no value, and such other of the Canons as shall be approv'd to stand with the Law of God &c. shall stand in power. Now it is to be consider'd that the Laws, which the Clergy here desire may be revis'd, are of a far different Nature, and there∣fore the Inspection of them may well be committed to different Judges. Some of them were suppos'd pre∣judicial to the King's Praerogative Royal, or repugnant to the Laws of the Realm, and here the Lay-Commissioners, be∣ing persons of the upper and lower House of Parlia∣ment (see the Stat.) were, the best Judges; Of others it was to be enquir'd Whether they were agreeable to the word of God or not, and here the Clergy were ready to give their Determination. And altho' they both acted in a joynt Commission yet no good reason seems
assignable why both Lay and Ecclesiastical Judges should be appointed, but that, the matters to be examin'd be∣ing of different cognizance, those which related to Civil Affairs should be determin'd by the Temporalty, those which were of a Spiritual Nature by the Spiritualty. And if so, then the deciding of these matters is not transfer'd from the Spiritualty to the Temporalty, but from one part of the Clergy to another. And this He himself, after all his descants upon this Act, confesseth, For, whatever sense the words in the Praeface of this Act were or may be extended to,§. 26.10. I do not think the Clergy at first intended any such thing, as to make the King or his Commissioners Judges of matters of Faith or Divine truth: and for this Opinion of his He gives us his Reasons in that, and the subsequent pages. Another Act, which is by this Author judg'd contrary to his first Thesis, is that Statute of King Henry the eighth which orders that no speaking, holding, or doing a∣gainst any Laws call'd Spiritual Laws made by Autority of the See of Rome, which be repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm,§ 34. p. 39. or the King's Prae∣rogative shall be deem'd to be Haeresie, from which he infers that the King and Parliament undertake to be Judges of Haeresie. Now the King and Parliament do not here in my Opinion take upon them to decide mat∣ters of Faith, but only to Enact that in such a case the Subject shall not suffer the Punishment usually inflicted on Haereticks; Whether such speaking or doing be Hae∣resie or not, they have power to ordain that it shall not be deem'd so i. e. the Speaker shall not suffer as an Haere∣tick. Something parallel to this we have in that Sta∣tute of much concernment (to use our Author's expres∣sion of another Act) made 23. Eliz. c. 1. Wherein it is
enacted that The Persons who shall withdraw any of the Queens Majesties Subjects from the Religion established by Law to the Romish Religtion, shall be to all intents ad∣judg'd as Traytors, and shall suffer as in cases of High Treason, and the like of Persons willingly reconcil'd. Where without disputing whether every such Recon∣ciler, or Reconciled, is necessarily for that Act ipso facto a Traytor, all that is here enacted is that he shall suffer as such; For it is undoubtedly within the reach of the Civil Power to ordain where they will inflict or not in∣flict their Secular Punishments, without being accoun∣table for this to any Autority under God's. And it seems very hard that if a Subject expresses himself, or acts against such Laws of a Forreigner as are repugnant to the Laws of his own Country, there the Prince cannot exempt him from a Writ de Haeretico comburendo without invad∣ing the Churches right. Another Act condemn'd by Virtue of his 1st and 2d Theses is The Convocation's granting to certain persons to be appointed by the King's Autority to make Ec∣clesiastical laws,§. 43. p. 56. and pursuant to this, 42 Articles of Religion publish'd by the Autority of King Edward in the 6th Year of his Reign. Now not to engage my self in a dispute Whether these Articles were not really what in the Title praefix'd they are said to be? Ar∣ticuli de quibus in Synodo London, A. D. 1552. ad tollendam opinionum dissentionem, & consensum verae Religionis firman∣dum inter Episcopos & alios eruditos Viros convenerat, Regia autoritate in lucem editi, I shall only accept of what is by him granted that de illis convenerat inter Episco∣pos & alios eruditos Viros qui erant pars aliqua de Sy∣nodo London.§. 166. p. 187. So that here is only a part of the Synod employ'd in drawing up these Articles, and not any Ju∣risdiction Spiritual transfer'd from Ecclesiastial per∣sons
to Secular, which was by him to have been prov'd. Another Inference, which he deduces from these The∣ses, is the Unlawfulness of the Oath of Supremacy.§. 185. p. 214. Now how far the Regal Supremacy is by us extended, will best be learnt from our Articles.Art. 37. The King's Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other his Dominions: Unto whom the chief Govern∣ment of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ec∣clesiastical or Civil, in all causes doth appertain, and is not or ought not to be subject to any forreign Jurisdi∣ction. So far for the extent of this power; but now for the restraint. Where we attribute to the King's Majesty the chief Government, by which Titles we un∣derstand the minds of some slanderous folks to be of∣fended, We give not to our Prince the ministring ei∣ther of God's word, or of the Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions also, lately set forth by Q. Elizabeth do most plainly testify, but that only Prerogative which We see to have been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Tem∣poral, and restrain with the Civil Sword the Stubborn & evil doers. It is therefore by our Author to be prov'd that they who give no more to their Prince, then hath been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy Scripture by God himself, do alienate to the Secular Governour any Autori∣ty or Office which they (the Clergy) have receiv'd and been charg'd with by Christ, with a command to exe∣cute the same to the end of the World; which being a Contradiction I leave it to him to reconcile. That by this Oath, or any other Act of Queen Eli∣zabeth a greater Power was either assum'd by her self, or given to her by Others, then is consistent with that
Autority that is given by our Saviour to the Church will be very difficult for any Reasonable man to con∣ceive who shall have recourse to the Injunction of this Queen to which this very Article refers us; Sparrow's Collection pag. 83. Lond. 1684. Where she declares that she neither doth nor ever will chal∣lenge any Autority, but what was challeng'd and lately us'd by the Noble Kings of famous memory King Henry the 8th, and King Edward the 6th, which is and was of Ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; that is, under God to have Sovereignty and Rule over all manner of Persons born within these her Realms, Dominions, and Countreys, of what E∣state either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be; so as no other forreign Power shall or ought to have any Superiority over them. And if any Person that hath conceited any other sense of the form of the said Oath, shall accept the same Oath with this Interpre∣tation, sense, or meaning; Her Majesty is well pleas'd to accept every such in that behalf as her good and Obedient Subjects; and shall acquit them of all man∣ner of penalties contain'd in the act therein men∣tion'd, against such as shall peremptorily and obstinate∣ly refuse to take the same Oath. So that it's evident from this Injunction that it's no way here stated what Autority belongs to the Church, and what to the Civil Magistrate, farther then that the Queen (as justly she might) challenged what was due of Ancient time to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and neither did nor would challenge more; but what that was, is not here determin'd; and she is content without such De∣termination, if any Person would take this Oath in such a sense as only to exclude all forreign Jurisdiction whether Ecclesiastical or Civil.
Another Act which He finds repugnant to his his 1st.pag. 36. Thesis is King Henry the Eth's claiming a right that no Clergy-man, being a Member of the Church of England, should exercise the power of the Keys in his Domi∣nions in any Cause or on any Person without his leave and appointment. But it is to be remembred that the Ecclesiastical Censures asserted to belong to the Cler∣gie in the first Thesis have reference to the things only of the next world; but the censures here spoken of, are such as have reference to the things of this world. The Habi∣tual Jurisdiction of Bishops flows, we confess, from their Ordination; but the Actual exercise thereof in publick Courts after a coercive manner is from the gracious Con∣cessions of Sovereign Princes. From the 1st and 2d Thesis he farther condemns the taking away the Patriarch's Autority for receiving of Appeals,pag. 99. and exercising final Judicature in Spiritual Controversies, as also the taking away the final judg∣ing and decision of such Controversies not only from the Patriarch in particular, but also from all the Cler∣gy in general, not making the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury or Convocation, but himself or his Substi∣tutes the Judges thereof. For which he refers us to Stat. 25. H. 8.19. c. But in that Statute I find no mention of a Patriarch, or Spiritual Controversies, but only that in causes of Contention having their com∣mencement within the Courts of this Realm no Ap∣peal shall be made out of it to the Bishop of Rome, but to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and for want of Ju∣stice in his Courts to the King in Chancery; Upon which a Commission shall be directed to such Persons as shall be appointed by the King definitively to deter∣mine such Appeals. Here is nothing of determining Con∣troversies in pure matters of Religion, of deciding what is
Gods word, and divine Truth, What are Errors in the faith or in the practise of Gods Worship, and Service, nor any of the other Spiritual powers by him enumerated in the 1st Thesis; Or if any such Quaestions should be in∣volv'd in the Causes to be tried, Why may not the Commissioners, if Secular, judge according to what has been praedetermin'd by the Clergy? or let us suppose a case never yet determin'd, How doth he prove a power of judging in such causes transfer'd on secular Persons, since if Occasion requir'd, the Delegates might be Per∣sons Ecclesiastical? But not only the Acts of State and Church, but the O∣pinions of our Doctors are to be examin'd by his Test, and therefore from the same Theses he censures that As∣sertion of Dr. HeylinHeylins Ref. Justified, part. 1. §. 6.p 240., that it is neither fit nor reasonable that the Clergy should be able by their Synodical Acts to conclude both Prince and People in Spiritual matters, until the stamp of Royal Autority be imprinted on them. Now it is plain to any one that views the Context, that the Dr. speaks of such a concluding the Prince and people in matters Spiritual, as hath influence on their Civil rights. For he there discourses of the Clergy under King Henry obliging themselves not to execute those Ecclesiastical Canons without the Kings consent which formerly they had put in Execution by their own Autority. But the Canons so executed had the force of Civil Laws, and the Violators of them were obnoxious to Secular punish∣ments. The Dr. therefore very justly thought it unrea∣sonable any should be liable to such Punishments with∣out His consent, who only has the power of inflicting them; Nor is this inconsistent with our Authors first The∣sis (had he at so great a distance remembred it) which extends Church-Autority only to Ecclesiastical Censures,
which have reference to things not of this, but the next World. These are the Inferences which I find deduc'd, from his first and second Theses in the several parts of this Dis∣course, which had they been as conclusive, as they are false, yet I do not find but that his own party (if that be the Roman Catholick) had suffer'd most by them. For if the Supremacy given to King Henry was so great an In∣vasion of the Churches right, what shall we think of that Roman Catholick Clergy, who so Sacrilegiously invest∣ed him with this Spiritual power? If that Synodical Act was betraying the trust which the Clergy had receiv'd from Christ, what shall we think of those Pastours, who so unfaithfully manag'd the Depositum of their Saviour? If denying the Popes Authority was so piacular a Crime, what Opinion shall we entertain of those Religious Per∣sons in Monasteries, who professing a more then ordina∣ry Sanctity, and being obliged by the strictest Vows of Obedience soBurn Ref. l. 3. p. 182. resolutely abjur'd it? What of those Learn∣ed in theConvocatis undique dictae Acade∣miae Theologis, habitoque complurium biorum spatio ac deliberandi tempore sa∣satis amplo, quo interim cum omni qua potuimus diligentia, Justitiae zelo, religi∣one & conscientia incorrupta perscruta remur tam Sacrae Scripturae libros quam super iisdem approbatissimos Interpretes, & eos quidem saepe & saepius à nobis evo∣lutos, & exactissime collatos, repetitos, & examinatos, deinde & disputationibus solennibus palam ac publice habitis & ce∣lebratis tandem in hanc Sententiam una∣nimiter omnes convenimus ac concordes fuimus viz. Romanum Episcopum ma∣jorem aliquam Jurisdictionem non habere sibi à Deo collatam in sacra Scriptura in hoc Regno Angliae quam alium quemvis Episcopum. Antiq. Oxon lib. 1. pag. 259. Ʋniversity, who after a solemn debate, and se∣rious disquisition of the cause, so peremptorily defin'd against it? What of theRef. l. 2. p. 142. Whole Body of the Clergy, whose proper Office it is to determine such Controversies,Pag. 2. and to judge what is Gods Word, and divine Truth, what are Errors, who in full Synod so Unanimously rejected it? What of the leading part of those Prelates,Ibid. p. 137. Gardiner, Bon∣ner,
and Tonstal, who Wrote, Preach'd, and Fram'd Oaths against it? What of theIbid. p. 144. Nobles and Commons, Per∣sons of presum'd Integrity, and Honour, who prepared the Bill against it? What lastly of the Sovereign a declar'd Enemy of the Lutheran Doctrine, and Defender of the Roman Catholick Faith, who past that Bill into a Law, and guarded the Sanction of it with Capital punishments? If all these acted sincerely, then it is not the Doctrine of the Reformed, but of the Romanists which is written a∣gainst: If not, we seem to have just praejudices against a Religion which had no greater influence over its Profes∣sors, then to suffer a whole Nation of them perfidiously to deny that, which if it be any part, is a main Article of their Faith? But to return to our Author, What shall we judge of his skill in Controversie who from Principles as∣sum'd gratis, draws Deductions which by no means fol∣low, and which if they did follow, would be the greatest Wound to that cause which he pretends to Patronize? But because he has offer'd something under this first Thesis, why the Prince should pay an implicit Obedience to his Clergy, I come now to consider it. He tells us there∣fore that the Prince professeth Himself with the rest of the Christians as to the knowing of Spiritual Truths a Subject and Scholar of the Church; and he earnestly claims a Supreme power and confesseth an Obligation from God over all Persons in all Spiritual Matters to bind them upon Temporal Punishments to Obedience of the Churches (or Clergy's) Determinations and De∣crees. But here he either willingly misrepresents, or ignorantly mistakes our Principles; For the Prince claims a supreme power over all persons, to bind them by temporal Punishments to the Obedience not of the Churches, but of Christs Laws; or of the former, no farther then they are agreeable with the latter. But, saith He,
if the Prince meaneth here only where himself first judgeth such their Decrees Orthodox and right, this power is in effect claim'd to bind all persons in all Spi∣ritual matters only to his own Decrees; whilst he prae∣tends an Obligation both of himself and His Subjects to the Churches. But, what if the Prince judge such Decrees neither Orthodox nor right? Must he here give them the Autority of Civil Sanctions? This is to establish Iniquity by a Law; and a power is claim'd in effect to bind all persons to the Decrees of the Clergy, whilst, as has been said, He praetends an Obligation of Himself & Sub∣jects to the Laws of Christ. But he goes on and tells us, That all Texts of the New-Testament do ordain Obedi∣ence of Church-men to the Pagan Princes, that then Reigned, no less then to others. From which I suppose he would infer an exemption from Obeying the Prince in Spiritualibus. But supposing that all Texts do aequal∣ly ordain Obedience to Princes Pagan, and Christian, yet the Obedience to a Christian Prince will be of greater la∣titude, since because he professes the true Religion, his Commands in Spirituals not contradicting our Saviours will exact our Compliance. Obedience in licitis is all the Subject ow's to a Prince either Christian on Infidel; but the Christian Prince will oftner challenge my Obedience, because he more rarely transgresseth the bounds of licita. If as he adds, all Princes are oblig'd with the Sword which God hath given them to protect and defend his true Religion, and Service in their Dominions, when∣soever it offers it self to them; Since many Religions offer themselves, it becomes the Prince to take Care which is the true; and not to take, whatever is offer'd; which would be utterly destructive of our Authors Prin∣ciples. As for the Acts of Ancient Councils obliging even without the Emperours consent, We own their Obligation
over their proper Subjects, so far as they were agreeable with the Laws of Christ, and his Apostles; and urge the Autority of Emperours no farther then as adding their Civil power to the Spiritual Power of the Church. And here we challenge no other Power to our Princes, then was exercis'd by Christian Emperours, that is, to call Synods, and to have a liberty of confirming, or not con∣firming their Decrees by Civil Sanctions. As for what he cites out of our Writers, all amounts to no more then this, that there are some Offices peculiar to the Church; Which neither do we deny, nor did our Princes ever invade these Functions. But because from hence He would insinuate that the Prince has no power at all in Causes Ecclesiastical, &c in his Citations from these Writers comes up to that Character which theBook of Educ Ox. 1677 p 86. Book of Educa∣tion gives us of the SLY, the CLOSE, and the RE∣SERV'D, who take notice of so much at serves to their own designs, and misinterpret and detort what You say even contrary to Your intention; I shall as briefly as may be shew that their Concessions are far from giving any Counte∣nance to his Cause. Bishop Andrews doth indeed say (as all other of our Church) Potestatis mere Sacerdotalis sunt Liturgiae, Conciones. i. e. dubia legis explicandi munus; claves, Sacramenta, & omnia quae potestatem ordinis conse∣quuntur; But then there are other Ecclesiastical powers which he challenges to the Prince; viz.In iis, quae Exterioris politiae sunt, ut praecipiat, suo sibi jure vindicat, Tort. p. 380. To have Su∣preme Command in the exteriour Polity of the Church;Custos est non modo secunadae Tabu∣lae, sed & primae. p. 381. To be keeper of both Tables;Quodcunque in rebus Religionis Re∣ges Israel fecerunt, id ut Ei faciendi jus sit ac potestas. Ib. To exercise all that Power which the good Kings of Israel did;Leges Autoritate Regia ferendi, ne blasphemetur Deus, ut jejunio placetur Deus; ut festo honoretur. Ib. To make Ecclesiastical Laws; ToDelegandi qui de lege sic lata judi∣cent Ib. delegate Persons to judge in
causes Ecclesiastical; ToSiqui in Leges ita latas committant, etsi, Religionis causa sit, in eos Autoritate Regia animadvertendi Ib. punish the breach of those Spiritual Laws; ToNon ut totus ab lieno ore pendeat, ipse à se nihil dijudicer. Ib. learn the will of God not only from the Mouth of the Clergy, but also from the Scrip∣ture; ToOmnibus omnium ordinum jus di∣cendi. Ib. have autority over all Persons; ToAbiathar ipsum, si ita meruit, Ponti∣ficatu abdicandi. 382. eject even the High Priest if he deserve it; ToExcelsa diruendi. i. e. peregrinum cultum abolendi. Ib. pull down High-placesSive in Idololatriam abeat Vitulus au∣reus; sive in Superstitionem Serpens aene∣us, utrumque comminuendi. Ib.; and to Reform the Church from Idolatry and Superstition. These He claims to appertain to the PrinceHaec Primatus a pud nos jura sunt, ex jure divino. Ib. Jure Divino. The next Author is Dr. Carlion. He amongst other rights of the Church reckons Institution and Collation of Benefices, which this Writer marks with Italian Chara∣cters, and makes much Use of. But this Apostolical Institution and Collation by the Bishop alluded to, doth also involve in it Ordination, even as the Ordination (which is observ'd by himselfPag. 13. from the Bishop) sig∣nified also Institution in the charge and cure. But the Collation challeng'd by our Princes is of another Na∣ture, and signifies no more then the Nominating a Per∣son to be Ordain'd to such an Office, or presenting a Person already Ordained to such a Benefice; And the right of Investitures (which is the same with such a Collation) is by this BishopJurisd. eg. Ep. p. 137. asserted to Emperours. This being clear'd which was by him on purpose per∣plex'd, If we take the extent of the Regal power from this Bishop, He tellsId. p. 10. us, That Sovereign's as Nursing Fathers of the Church are to see that Bishops and all Inferiour Ministers perform their faithfull duties in
their several places, and if they be found faulty to punish them. His next Author is Mr. Thorndike, Who is as large as any one in the Vindication of the Churches rights; and Yet He tells usEpilog. Pag. 391., that No-Man will refuse Chri∣stian Princes the Interest of protecting the Church a∣gainst all such Acts as may prove praejudicial to the common Faith. He holds (as this Writer with great concernChurch Government, pag. 390. observes) that the Secular power may restore any law, which Christ or his Apostles have ordained, not only against a Major part, but all the Clergy and Governours of the Church; and may, for a Paenalty of their opposing it, suppress their power and commit it to others, tho' they also be establish'd by another Law Apostolical. Thus that considerative man, who held not the Pope to be Antichrist, or the Hierarchy of the Church to be followers of AntichristChurch Government, pag. 391. Bishop Taylour (his next Author) doth with the rest assert, that the Episcopal Office has some powers annex'd to it, independent on the Regal; But then he farther lays down these Rules,Ductor Dub. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. That the Supreme Civil-power is also Supreme Governour over all Persons, and in all Causes;Ibid. r. 5. Hath a Legislative power in Affairs of Religion and the Church;Ibid. r. 7. Hath Jurisdiction in causes not only Ecclesiastical, but also Internal and Spiritual;Ibid. r. 7. n. 9. Hath autority to convene and dissolve all Synods Ecclesia∣stical;Ibid. r. 8. Is (indeed) to govern in Causes Ecclesiastical by the means and measure of Christ's Institutions, i. e. by the Assistance and Ministry of Ecclesiastical Persons;Ibid. r. 8. n. 6. but that there may happen a case in which Princes
may and must refuse to confirm the Synodical decrees, Sentences, and Judgments of Ecclesiastics;Ibid. l. 3. c. 4. r. 8. That Cen∣sures Ecclesiastical are to be inflicted by the consent and concurrence of the Supreme Civil power. The next Author cited is the Learned Primate Bramhal; and We have here reason to wonder that one Who praetends to have been conversant in his Writings, dares appear in the Vindication of a Cause, which the Learned Author has so longe since so shamefully defeated. As for the right of Sovereign Princes, This Arch-Bishop will tellBp. Br. Works Tom. 1. p. 88. him, That to affirm that Sovereign Princes cannot make Ecclesiastical Constitutions under a Civil pain, or that they cannot (especially with the advice and concurrence of their Clergy assembled in a Natio∣nal Synod) reform errors and abuses, and remedy In∣croachments, and Usurpations in Faith or Discipline, is contrary to the sense and practise of all Antiquity, and as for matter of Fact He will instruct him,Ibid. p. 76. that our Kings from time to time call'd Councils, made Ecclesiastical Laws, punish'd Ecclesiastical Persons, saw that they did their duties in their calling &c. From this Bi∣shop's acknowledgment, that the Bishops are the pro∣per Judges of the Canon, this Author that He may ac∣cording to the Language of aEduc. p. 98. modern Pen, as well waken the Taciturn with Quaestions, as silence the Loquacious with baffling fallacies, takes Occasion briskly to ask whe∣ther this Bishop doth not mean here that the Bishops may both compose and execute Canons in the King's Dominions, and use Ecclesiastical Censures by their own Autority? But see, saith He, the Bishops depriv'd of the former power in the Reformation. To which I answer that the power of which they were depriv'd
in the Reformation was only of such an executing the Canons as carried with it pecuniary and corporal Pu∣nishments, and this power the Bishop has told him they could not Exercise by their own Autority. And here it were to be wish'd that our Author in reading this Bi∣shop's Works had made use of his advice,Ibid. p. 156. To cite Authors fully and faithfully, not by halves, without adding to, or new moulding their Autorities according to Fancy or Interest. The next Advocate against Regal Supremacy is King Charles the First; But if we may take a draught of that Blessed Martyr's Sentiments from his own Portraiture, E I K.  Adv. To the Pr. of Wales. He did not think his Autority confin'd to Civil Affairs, but that the true glory of Princes consists as well in ad∣vancing Gods Glory in the maintenance of true Reli∣gion, and the Churches good; as in the Dispensation of Civil power with Justice, and Honour, to the publick Peace.Ibid. cap. 17. He thought himself (as King) intrusted by God and the Laws, with the good both of Church and State, and saw no reason why he should give up, or wea∣ken by any change, that power and Influence which in right and reason He ought to have over both. He thought himself oblig'd to preserve the Episcopal Go∣vernment in its right Constitution, (not because his Bi∣shops told him so, but) because his Judgment was fully sa∣tisfied that it had of all other the best Scripture grounds, and also the constant practice of Christian Churches. He was no Friend of implicit Obedience, but after he has told the Prince,Adv. to the Pr. of Wales. that the best Profession of Religion is that of the Church of England, adds I would have your own Judgment and reason now seal to that Sacred Bond which Education hath written, that it may be ju∣diciously your own Religion, and not other Mens Custom,
or Tradition, which you profess. He did not give that glorious Testimony to the Religion established in the Church of England, that it was the best in the World, not only in the community as Christian, but also in the special Notion as Reformed; and for this reason requuired and intreated the Prince as his Father, and his King, that he would never suffer his Heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection from it; till he had first tried it, and after much search, and many disputes thus concluded. These are the Sentiments of our Authors, in which if I have been over-long, the Reader will excuse me, that I choose rather to intermix something useful from these great Pens, then to entertain him altogether with the Paralogisms and prevarications of this Writer. There is nothing that remains considerable under this first Thesis, but his Sub-sumption, that whatever powers belong'd to the Church in times of persecution, and before Em∣perours had embrac'd Christianity, are, and must still be allowed to belong to her in Christian States. Which I conceive not altogether so Necessary that it must be al∣lowed, and I am sure by our Authors it is not. As for Convening of Councils (the power of greatest concern) BishopSerm. of the right of Assemblies. Andrews to this Quaestion ( What say you to the 300 Years before Constantine? How went Assemblies then? Who call'd them all that while?) returns this Answer. Truly as the people of the Jews did before in Aegypt under the tyranny of Pharaoh: They were then a Church under persecution, until Moses was rais'd up by God a Lawful Magistrate over them. The cases are alike for all the world. No Magistrate did assemble them in Aegypt, and good reason why; they had none to do it. But this was no barr, but when
Moses arose, authoriz'd by God, & had the Trumpets by God deliver'd to him, He might take them, keep them, use them, for that end, for wch God gave them, to assemble the Congregation — Shall Moses have no more to do then Pharaoh? or Constantine then Nero? See alsoField of the Church. l. 5. c. 52. Dr Field. His Third Thesis is, That the Secular Prince cannotSoave Hist. of Conc. Tr. Pag. 77. de∣pose or eject from the exercise of their Office in his Dominions any of the Clergy, nor introduce others into the place of the ejected. But the Quaestion here is not, Whether the Prince can eject any of the Clergy from the Exercise of their Office, but, Whether he can depose any for not Ex∣ercising it? While the Clergy faithfully discharge their Office, the Prince ought to protect them; and if for this they suffer, no doubt but they are Martyrs. But it is possible they may abuse their power, and then it is to be enquir'd, Whether Civil Laws may not inhibit them the Ʋse of it? This Author holds the Negative, and tells us 1st. They cannot eject them at pleasure, with∣out giving any cause thereof. But he doth not pretend that the Reforming Princes ever ejected any without a Cause given. And therefore he adds 2ly, Neither may Princes depose them for any Cause which concerns things Spiritual; but with this Limitation, without the con∣sent of the Clergy. I could wish he had here told us what he ment by things Spiritual. For things, as well as Persons Spiritual are of great Extent. (d Pope Paul the 3d told the Duke of Mantua, that it is the Opinion of the Doctors, that Priest's Concubines are of Ecclsiasti∣cal Jurisdiction.) But he gives us his reason for his as∣sertion; Because it is necessary that a Judge to be a competent one have as well potestatem in causam, as in Personam, and the Prince as has been mention'd in the 1st Thesis has no Autority to judge such Causes purely
Spiritual. Now the power denied to the Prince in the 1st Thesis is to determine matters of Faith. But may not the Prince judge whether an Ecclesiastick deserves Deprivation without determining a Matter of Faith? May not he judge according to what has been already determin'd by the Church? Or may not he appoint such Delegates as can determine matters of Faith? Or are all the Causes, for which a Clergy-man may be depriv'd, merely Spiritual? By Virtue of this Thesis he proves the Ejection of the Western Patriarch unlawful.pag. 37. Now was not this Matter of Faith already determine by the Clergy? Had they not unanimously decreed, That he had no more Autority here, then any other forreign Bishop? And can the King be said here to have acted without the consent of the Clergy? And yet that matter of fact is applied to this Thesis. As for the Ejection of the Bishops in King Edward's time; is not that confest to have been for not acknowledging the Regal Supremacy?pag. 70. But this was a matter which wanted no new Determi∣nation, for the Church-Autority had decided it in their Synod in King Henry's Reign. But it is said, the Judges were not Canonical, as being the King's Commissio∣ners, part Clergy, part Laity. But neither was the cause purely Canonical; for denying the Supremacy was not only an infringment of the Canon, but also a Violation of an Act of Parliament. As for the Bishops, Bonner and Gardiner, they were accus'd for not assert∣ing the Civil power of the King in his Nonage. Nor do they plead Conscience for not doing it, but deny the Matter of FactBurn. His. Ref. part. 2. l. 1. p. 127. 165. The same Objections were then made against their Deprivation, as are reassum'd by this Au∣thor now; and therefore it may suffice to return the same answers. That the Sentence being only of De∣privation
from their Sees, it was not so entirely of Ec∣clesiastical Censure, but was of a mix'd nature, so that Lay-men might joyn in it; & since they had taken Com∣missions from the King for their Bishopricks, by which they held them only during the Kings pleasure, they could not complain of their Deprivation, which was done by the King's Autority. Others who look'd farther back, remembred that Constantine the Emp. had appoint∣ed Secular Men to enquire into some things objected to Bishops, who were call'd Cognitores, or Triers; and such had examin'd the business of Coecilian Bishop of Carthage, even upon an Appeal, after it had been tried by several Synods; and given Judgment against Dona∣tus, and his party. The same Constantine had also by his Autority put Eustathius out of Antioch, Athanasius out of Alexandria, and Paul out of Constantinople; and though the Orthodox Bishops complain'd of their par∣ticulars, as done unjustly at the false suggestion of the Arrians, yet they did not deny the Autority of the Emperors in such cases.Ibid. p. 127. But neither is the Arch-Bi∣shop of Canterbury by this Author allow'd to be a pro∣per Judge; & that, because He did not Act by his Canonical Superiority in the Church, but by the Autority he joyntly with the rest receiv'd from the King; As if he had ever the less the power of a Metropolitan, because He was also the King's Commissioner. By this way of arguing the De∣crees of Oecumenical Councils will be invalid, because they were call'd to determine Controversies by the com∣mand of Emperors. But how Uncanonical soever King Edward's Bishops are said to have been, He does not ex∣cept against Queen Mary's Bishops, tho' they in depriving the Reformed, acted by Commission from the Queen. As for the Bishops ejected in Q. Elizabeth's time, it has been already said it was for a Civil cause, i. e. refusing the
Oath of Supremacy; which why it should be lawful in her Father's time, and unlawful in her's; why it should be contriv'd by Roman Catholics in that Reign, and scrupled by the same Roman Catholics in this; Why it should be inoffensive, when exprest in larger terms, and scandalous, when mitigated; whence on a sudden the Refusers espied so much Obliquity in that Oath, which they had all took before probably either as Bishops or Priests in the reigns of King Henry the 8th, and Edward the 6th; whence this change of things proceeded, unless from secret intimations from Rome, or their own Obsti∣nacy, will not easily be conjectur'd. As for his Note, that what is sayd of the other Clergy, may be said likewise of the Patriarch, for any Autority which he stands posses'd of by such Ecclesiastical Canons, as cannot justly be pretended to do any wrong to the Civil Government. He has been often told by our Authors, that Patriarchs are an Humane Institution; That as they were erected, so they may be dissolv'd by the Prudence of Men; that as they were erected by leave and confirmation of Princes, so they may be dissolv'd by the same; that the Bishop of Romes Patriarchate doth not extend beyond the sub-urbicary Churches; that we are without the reach of his Jurisdiction, and therefore that the power claim'd over us is an Invasi∣on; that did not Popes think fit to dispence with them∣selves for Perjury, having sworn to keep inviolably the Decrees of the Eight first General Councils, they would not in plain opposition to the. Can. 6. . Can. 7. Here the Council de∣crees that Ancient Customs should pre∣vail; that the Priviledges of all Churches in their distinct Provinces should be kept inviolable. We desire the Bishop of Rome's Patriarchate over the Britannic Churches should be prov'd to be an Antient Cu∣stom; and if not that the Priviledges of these Churches may be preserv'd. Nicene andThe Fathers of the Ephesine Council having decree'd that the Cyprian Prelates should hold their rights untouchd and un∣violated, according to the Canons of the Holy Fathers, and the Ancient Customs, Ordaining their own Bishop, and that the Bishop of Antioch who then pretend∣ed Jurisdiction over them, (as the Bi∣shop of Rome now doth overs us) should be excluded, add farther.  &c. Conc. Eph. Can. 8. Let the same be observ'd in other Diocesses, and all Provinces every where, That no Bishop occupy and other Province, which formerly and from the beginning was not under the power of him or his Predeces∣sors. If any do occupy any Province, or subject it by force, let him restore it▪ Now we plead the Cyprian Priviledges, and de∣sire we may be exempted from the Juris∣diction of the Bishop of Rome till it is prov'd that He or His Predecessors did from the Beginning exercise any power in these Churches. Ephe∣sine
Canons pretend to any Jurisdiction over us; That they so invading ought to be judg'd by a free Oecu∣menical Synod if such an one could be had; but that this Remedy being praecluded us, Each National Church has liberty to free her self from such Usurpation; that the Church of England pleads the benefit of this Right; and her Sovereigns having power to transfer Bishop∣ricks, might remove the Patriarchate from Rome to Canterbury, and justly exclude any forreign Prelate from Jurisdiction within their Territories; But that the power claim'd by the Pope (however mollified by the Novices of that Church) is more then Patriarchal, and that it is not our Rule (which this Author so much dislikes) but Pope Leo's theEp. 54. 1st, that propria perdit, qui indebita concupiscit. This plea of a Western Patriarchate is fatally confounded by that one plain Period of BishopTrue Dif. part. 2. Bilson. As for his Patriarchate, by God's law he hath none; in this Realm for Six Hundred years after Christ he had none; for the last 6 Hundred years looking after greater matters he would have none; Above or against the Princes Sword he can have none; to the subversion of the Faith, and Oppression of his Brethren he ought to have none; He must seek farther for Subjection to his Tri∣bunal; this land oweth him none. So much for the first branch of this Thesis; the 2d is,
that as the Prince cannot eject, or depose the Clergy, so neither can he introduce any into the place of those, who are ejected, or deceas'd without the concurrence of the Clergy. If by the con∣currence of the Clergy, he means that the Person assign'd by the Prince to any sacred office cannot execute it till he be ordain'd by the Clergy, No one will deny it; Or if he think that the Ordainer ought to lay hands on none but whom he esteems fit for the discharge of so sacred an Office; here also we agree with him; But how doth it follow that because Ordination, which is consecrat∣ing Men to the work of the Holy Ministry, is the pro∣per Office of the Clergy, the Prince may not recom∣mend to the Church a fit Person so to be consecrated, or assign to the Person already consecrated, the place where he shall perform that Holy Work? As for the Canons by him alledg'd, they being Humane Institutions are not of Aeternal Obligation, but changeable according to the different State of the Church. If the 31st Apo∣stolick Canon, which excommunicates all who gain Be∣nefices by the Interest of Secular Princes, and forbids the People to communicate with them, still oblige; then we are exempted from Communion with the Bishop of Rome. How comes the latter part of the 6th Canon of the Nicene Council which concerns the Election of Bishops still to be valid, and the former part, which li∣mits the Jurisdiction of Patriarchs, so long since to be null? Why must the C. of England accept the 2d. Nicene Coun∣cil in matters of Discipline, which thePetr. De Marc. l. 6. c. 25. §. 8. Gallican Church rejected in matters of Faith? Were the Canon of the La∣odicean Council, here cited, pertinent to the purpose, as it is not, (it being directed only against popular Elections) yet why must that be indispensable, when another Ca∣non, which enumerates the Canonical books of Scripture,
has so little Autority? It is plain the manners of Electi∣ons have varied much in the divers States of the Church. The Apostles and Apostolical Persons nominated their Successors; afterwards Bishops were chose by the Clergy, and the people; after, by the Bishops of the Province, the Metropolitan ratifying the choice; In process of time Emperors, when become Christian, interpos'd and con∣stituted and confirm'd even Popes themselvesMarca. de Conc. Imp. & Sac cap. 8.. Nor is this Power of Princes repugnant to Holy Scripture, in which we find that1 King. c. 2. v. 35. King Solomon put Zadok the Priest, in the Room of Abiathar; That2 Chr. 19.11. Jehosaphat set Amariah the Chief-Priest over the People in all matters of the Lord: That Hev. 8. set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and of the Chief Fathers of Israel, for the Judgment of the Lord, and for Controversies. As for his alledg'd Inconvenience, that, if temporal Governors can place, and displace the Clergy, they will make the Churches Synods to state divine matters accord∣ing to their own minds, and so the Church will not be praeserv'd incorrupt in her Doctrine and Discipline, They who main∣tain the just rights of the Prince are not obliged to de∣fend the abuse of them; there is perhaps no power or∣dain'd for our good, which may not be perverted to mis∣chief; were this right of placing and displacing left to a Patriarch or a Synod, yet either of these might so manage their trust that a corrupted majority of Clergy might state divine matters according to their own mind, and so the Doctrines of Christ be chang'd for the Traditions of men. But to these objected Injuries which the Church may suf∣fer from a bad Prince, we ought to oppose the benefit she receives from the Protection of a good one; Nor is it more true that Constantius an Arrian, by his unjustly displacing the Orthodox Bishops, procu'd Arrianism to be voted in several Eastern Synods, then that the succeeding Emperors by
justly displacing the Arrian Bishops procur'd the Nicene Faith to be receiv'd in succeeding Synods. But for these mischiefe, which a National Synod is liable to, our Au∣thor has found out, as he thinks, a Remedy in his Fourth Thesis, That a Provincial, or National Synod may not lawfully make any definitions in matters of Faith, or in re∣forming some Error, or Heresy, or other abuse in God's Service contrary to the Decrees of former Superior Synods, or contrary to the judgment of the Church Ʋniversal of the present Age shew'd in her publick Liturgies. But there is a Thesis in our Bibles, which seems to me the very contradictory of this. For saith the Prophet expresly,Hos. 4.15. Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah Sin. Tho' ten tribes continue corrupted in their Faith, yet let the remaining Tribe take care to re∣form her self. For that Judah had sinned, and consequent∣ly was here commanded to reform is plain from the words of Scripture, where it is said, that2 King. c. 17. v. 9. Judah kept not the Com∣mandments of the Lord her God, but walk'd in the Statutes of Israel which they made. But this argument of National Councils reforming without the leave of General has been manag'd with so great Learning and Demonstration by Arch-Bishop Laud in his Discourse with Fisher, and his Lordship's Arguments so clearly vindicated by the Reve∣rend D. Stillingfleet, that as it is great Praesumption in this Author to offer any thing in a cause which has had the Honour to have suffer'd under those Pens, so neither would it be modest in me to meddle any farther in a Contro∣versie by them exhausted. I shall therefore proceed to his Fifth Thesis, That could a National Synod make such Defi∣nitions, yet that a Synod wanting part of the National Clergy unjustly depos'd, or restrained; and consisting partly of persons unjustly introduc'd, partly of those who have been first threat∣ned with Fines, Imprisonment, and deprivation, in case of their Non-conformity to the Princes Injunctions in matters purely
Spiritual, is not to be accounted a lawful National Synod, nor the Acts thereof free and valid; especially as to their establishing such Regal Injunctions. Now how this is pertinent to our case I can by no means conjecture. For it has been shew'd that neither were the Anti∣reforming Bps. unjustly depos'd, nor the Reformers un∣justly introduc'd. But what he means by the Clergy's be∣ing threatned with fines, imprisonment, and Deprivation in case of their Non-conformity to the Prince's Injunctions may be learnt from another passage in his Discourse, where he tells us that the Clergy being condemn'd in the Kings Bench in a Praemunire for acknowledging the Car∣dinal's power Legantine, and so become liable at the King's pleasure to the Imprisonment of their Persons, and Confisca∣tion of their Estates,pag 26. did to release themselves of this Prae∣munire, give the King the title of Ecclesiae & Cleri Angli∣cani Protector, & Supremum caput. Which Act, saith he, so passed by them, that, as Dr. Hammond acknowledges, It is easie to believe that Nothing but the apprehensions of dangers, which hung over them by a Praemunire incurred by them could probably have inclined them to it. But here we have great reason to complain of the unpardo∣nable praevarication of this Author in so foully misreprae∣senting Dr. Hammond. Which that it may be the more per∣spicuous, and that the Reader may make from this In∣stance a true judgment of this Writer's sincerity, it will be necessary to transcribe the whole passage as it lies in the Doctor.Sch. c 7. §. 5. Though the first act of the Clergy in this was so introduc'd, that it is easie to believe that nothing but the apprehension of dangers which hung over them (by a Praemunire incurr'd by them) could probably have inclin'd them to it, and therefore I shall not pretend that it was perfectly an Act of their first will and choice, but that which the Necessity of affairs recommended
to them, Yet the matter of right being upon that oc∣casion taken into their most serious debate in a Synodi∣cal way, and at last a fit and commodious expression uni∣formly pitch'd upon by joynt consent of both Houses of Convocation, there is no reason to doubt, but that they did believe what they did profess, their fear being the Occasion of their Debates, but the Reasons and Argu∣ments observ'd in debate, the causes, as in all Charity we are to judge, of their Decision. Thus the Doctor. Now this Prevarication is the more culpable, because it is not an Original, but copied from Mr. Sergeant, whom this Writer cannot but be praesumed to have known to have falsified it. For Bishop Bramhal (in whose writings we find him very conversant) had detected this mis-quo∣tation in Mr. Sergeant, and severely Reprimands him for it. His words are so applicable to our Author, that I can∣not excuse my self the Omission of them.Bp. Br. Wor. Tom. 1. p. 360. He citeth half a passage out of Dr. Hammond, but he doth Dr. Hammond notorious wrong. Dr. Hammond speaketh only of the first Preparatory Act which occasion'd them to take the matter of right into a serious debate in a Synodical way; he applieth it to the subsequent Act of renunciation af∣ter debate. Dr. Hammond speaketh of no fear but the fear of the Law, the Law of Praemunire, an Ancient Law made many ages before Henry the 8th was born, the Pal∣ladium of England to preserve it from the Usurpations of the Court of Rome; but Mr. Sergeant mis-applieth it wholly to the fear of the King's violent cruelty. Lastly, he smothers Dr. Hammond's sense express'd clearly by himself, that there is no reason to doubt, but that they did believe what they did profess, the fear being the Occasion of their debates, but the reasons or Arguments offer'd in de∣bate, the causes (as in all charity we are to judge) of their Decision. He useth not to cite any thing ingenu∣ously.
This Author must be thought to have read these passages, and yet ventured the scandal of promoting this Forgery, tho' without the Honor of being the first In∣ventor of it. Such practises, as these, require little Contro∣versiall skill, but much fore-head; and we have seen a Machine lately publickly expos'd for this laudable Quali∣ty of imbibing whatever is blown into it's Mouth, and then ecchoing it forth again without blushing. Whether this be not our Author's Talent, let the Reader judg; as also what Opinion we ought to have of his Modesty, who after all this has the confidence to desire us to read, together with these his Observations on the Reformation, Dr. Hammond of Sch. c. 7. (the very Chapter whence this is cited) least, saith he, I may have related some things partially, or omitted some things considerable in this Matter. As for this Objection of the Clergy's being aw'd by fear in this Act, he himself has unluckily cited a passage from the (then) Lady Mary, which shews the vanity of it.p. 142. I am well assur'd (saith She speaking of Edward VI. in her Letter to the Council) that the King his Father's Laws were consented to with∣out compulsion by the whole Realm both Spiritual and Temporal. I shall say nothing more to this Thesis but op∣pose another to it, That could an Oecumenical Synod make de∣finitions contrary to the word of God, yet that a Synod wanting the greatest part of Christian Bishops, unjustly excluded, and consisting partly of Persons unjustly introduc'd, partly of those who have been first bribed with Mony, and promises of Church-praeferment, or praeengag'd by Oaths to comply with the Ʋsurpa∣tions of a praetended Spiritual Monarch, is not to be accounted a lawful Oecumenical Synod, nor the Acts thereof free and va∣lid, especially as to their establishing such usurpations. This is a Thesis, which needs no Application. I proceed to his Sixth Thesis. That the Judgment and consent of some Clergy∣men of a Province, when they are the lesser part, cannot be call'd
the judgment and consent of the Whole Clergy of the Province. This Assertion, that a lesser part is not aequall to the Whole, is the only thing which looks like Mathematics in the whole Discourse; and the Reader may hence be convinc'd that our Author doth sometimes travel in theEduc. p. 119. High road of Demonstration. But here we desire it may be prov'd, either that the Reformation was not effected by the major part of the Clergy, or that a minor part judging according to truth are not to be obey'd rather then the Major part judging contrary to it. In the mean time it is easily reply'd, that the judgment and consent of some few Bishops (Soave Hist, Conc. Tr. p. 153. suppose 48. Bishops, and 5. Cardinals giving Canonical Autority to books Apocryphal, and making Authentical a translation differing from the Original) cannot be esteem'd the judgment and consent of the Ca∣tholic Church. 7th. Thesis. That since a National Synod may not define matters of Faith contrary to former Superior Councils, much less may any Secular Person define contrary to those Councils, or also to a National Synod. The defining matters of Faith we allow to be the proper office of the Clergy; but be∣cause every one must give an account of his own Faith, every one is oblig'd to take care that what he submits to the belief of, be consistent with his Christianity: I am oblig'd to pay all submission to the Church-Autority, but the Church having bounds, within which she ought to be restrain'd in her Determinations, if she transgresses these Limits, and acts against that Christianity, which she pro∣fesses to maintain, I may rather refuse obedience, then for∣feit my Christianity. If in a cause of this moment I make a wrong Judgment, I am answerable for it at Gods Tribu∣nal, not because I usurped a right, which was never gran∣ted me, but because I misus'd a Liberty which was in∣dulg'd
me. This we take to be the case of each private Christian; and farther, that the Prince having an Obliga∣tion not only to believe a-right, and Worship God (as is praescrib'd) himself, but also to protect the true Faith and Worship in his Dominions, ought to use all those means of discovering the Truth, which God has afforded, viz. consulting the Pastours of the Church, reading the word of God &c. And that, having discover'd it, He may pro∣mulgate it to His Subjects by them also to be embrac'd, but not without the use of that Judgment and Discretion which to them also is allowed. If here it happens that the Civil and Ecclesiastical power command things con∣trary, there is nothing to be done by the Subject but to enquire on which side God is; and if God be on the King's side by a direct Law in the matter, He is not on the Churches side for her Spiritual Autority. Thus a good King of Israel might2 King. 38.22. take away the High places and Altars, and say unto Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall Worship before the Altar at Jerusalem, because such a Command was justifia∣ble by the Law of Moses; Nor is it any Praejudice against it,2 King. 23.9. That the Priests of the High places refus'd to come up to the Altar at Jerusalem. Thus might King Alfred restore to the Decalogue, and to its Obligation the Non tibi facies De∣os aureos, tho' Veneration of Images was commanded by the second Nicene Synod. And tho' the Councils of Con∣stance and Trent had thought fit to repeal Our Saviour's In∣stitution, yet King Edward might revive the Ancient Statute,Mat. 26.27. . As for his Eighth Thesis it has already been prov'd to be Felo de se, and that the limitation destroys whatever the Proposition would have establish'd. When the Gal∣lican Church shall have receiv'd all the Decrees of the Council of Trent, and the Roman Church observed the Ca∣nons of the first General Councils, When the Western Pa∣triach
shall have rechang'd his Regalia Petri into the old regulas Patrum; it may then be seasonable to examine, How far National Churches are oblig'd by things of meer Ecclesiastical Constitution. I should now proceed to examine the Historical part of his Discourse; but that I understand is already under the Consideration of another Hand, from which the Rea∣der may shortly expect a satisfactory account. But I may not omit for the Reader's diversion a Grammatical Criticism which our Author hath made upon the little particle as.pag. 38. It is enacted the 32d. Hen. 8.26. c. That all such Determinations, Decrees, Definitions and Or∣dinances, as according to God's word, and Christ's Gos∣pel shall at any time be set forth by the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and Doctors in Divinity appointed by his Ma∣jesty, or else by the whole Clergy of England, in and upon the matters of Christ's Religion &c. shall be by all his Grace's Subjects fully Believ'd, Obey'd, &c. Ʋpon which he makes this learned Note. Whereas under the Reformation private Men are tied only to obey and believe the Definitions of Councils when they are set forth according to God's word. i. e. when private Men think them to be so, yet here this Liberty was thought fit to be restrain'd, and private men tyed to believe these Definitions when set forth as according to God's word. i. e. when the setters forth believe them to be so. To obey a thing defin'd according to God's word, and to obey a thing defin'd, as being according to God's word, are Injunctions very different. Now a little skill in Honest Walker's particles would have clear'd this point, and a School-boy that was to turn this pas∣sage into Latin, would have known that as is put for which; Accordingly Keble abridging this Statute makes it run thus, All Decrees and Ordinances which according to Gods word, &c. But this it is for people to meddle in Controversie at an Age when they have forgot their
Grammar. Notwithstanding therefore this Aristarchus, We still retain the Liberty of believing and obeying on∣ly such things, which be defined according to God's Word. For which we are much blamed in the Conclusion of this Discourse. p. 260.In rejection of the Churche's Judgment (saith he) let none think himself secure in relying on the Testimony of his Conscience or judgment. But what reason soever he may have to un∣dervalue the Testimony of a good Conscience, we think it advisable from St. Paul,1 Tim. c. 1. v. 19. to hold faith, and a good con∣science which some having put away, concerning faith have made Ship-wrack; Of whom are — But saith he, let none think himself secure in any of these things, so long as his Con∣science witnesseth still to him this one thing, namely his Diso∣bedience and Inconformity to the Church-Catholic. But our Consciences do not witness to us any disobedience to the Church-Catholic, but only to that Church which falsly praetends to be Catholic. He means to the Major part of the Guides thereof. But the cause has not yet been decided by Poll, that we should know which side has the Majority. Let him know that his Condition is very dangerous, when he maketh the Church-Guides of his own time, or the major part thereof, incommunicable-with in their external profession of Re∣ligion; There was a time then, when to believe the Con∣substantiality of the Son was a dangerous Condition; and this perhaps made Pope Liberius externally to profess Ar∣rianism. When for the maintaining of his Opinions he begins to distinguish and divide between the doctrine of the Scripture, and the Doctrine of the Church. But why not distinguish, where the Church her self distinguishes, and saith, Christ indeed in the Scriptures instituted so, but I institute o∣therwise; as in the case of denying the Cup. Between the Doctrines of the Catholic Church of the former ages, and of the Catholic Church of the present. But here again the Church
her self distinguishes, when She tells us thatConc. Const. Sess. 13. licet in pri∣mitiva Ecclesia sub utraque specie Sacramentum reci∣peretur, Yet now the contrary Custom habenda est pro lege quam non licet reprobare. Between the Church's ortho∣doxness in Necessaries, and non-necessaries to Salvation. If there be no difference betwixt these, why doth aGuide in Controv. Disc. 1 c. 6. par. 56. Friend of the Author tell us of an Obedience of Assent in the one, but of Non-contradition only in the other? When he be∣gins to maintain the Autority of an Inferior Ecclesiastical Judge against a Superior. But what if this be only where the In∣ferior Judge agrees tho' not with his immediate Superi∣or, yet with the Supreme? Or of a minor part of the Church-Guides against a Major. But that is not a case yet fairly de∣cided. When they grant that God hath given them, beside the Scriptures, guides of their Faith. But those Guides them∣selves to be guided by the Scripture. And that they have in their judgment departed from those Guides. i. e. the major part of them. But this we would have prov'd. Which in a Court consisting of mapy is the legall Judge. Guides and Judges are different things; but we hope when this Court sits, the Judges will consult the Scripture, the Statute they are to go by, and if they judge according to that, they will judge well. These are the Doctrines of blind-Obedience which this Author so studiously inculcates. For sice Doctrines are taught us different from Scripture, we are advis'd to use another way of discerning Doctrines, then what the Gos∣pel prescribes. Our Saviour bids us,Mat. 16.6.12. Beware of the leaven. i. e. the doctrine of Pharisee's, tho' sitting in Moses his Chair. We are now advis'd to embrace all the doctrines of those that sit in the Chair of S. Peter. Christ bids us,Mat. 24.4. Take heed that no man deceive us tho' coming in his Name. We are now told that they who come to us in the Name of Christ
cannot deceive us. St. Paul saith,Gal. 1.8. that If an Angel from Heaven preach to us any other Doctrine then that which he preach'd, Let him be accurs'd. Now, if we do not em∣brace whatever a Patriarch from the West preaches, tho' never so contrary to the Gospel, we are concluded under an Anathema. The Apostles tell us, that they2 Cor. 1.24. have no Dominion over our Faith; but their Successors exercise a Despotic power in requiring a servile Obedience to all their Dictates. S. Paul's practise was toGal. 2.11.14. withstand Pe∣ter to the face, When he saw that he walk'd not up∣rightly according to the truth of the Gospel; but St. Pe∣ter's Successor pleads that in no case he may be with∣stood, because it is impossible, but that he should walk uprightly in the truth of the Gospel. The inspir'd Di∣vine bids usRev. 18.4. Come out of Babylon, that we may not par∣take of her Sins; Our modern Theologists advise us to come back intoBabylonia apud Joannem Romanae urbis figura est. Tertul. adv. Marc. l. 3. c. 13. Roma quasi secunda Babylonia est. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 18. c. 2. Babylon, for that She only is impeccable.
Imprimatur. GILB. IRONSIDE. Vice-Can. Oxon. Octob. 19. 1687.
REFLECTIONS ON THE HISTORICAL PART OF Church-Government, PART V. He, that is first in his own cause, seemeth just; but his Neighbor cometh and searcheth him. Prov. 18.17. Sheldonian Theatre, Oxford OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. Anno 1687.
The Introduction. THE Pamphlet proposes to relate the Eng∣lish Reformation, and to examine the law∣fulness of it. Now from an Examiner we might justly expect Argument, and from a Relator, Truth. How he argues I find consider'd by the Animadverter: Two small defects he has been charg'd with. 1st. That he pro∣ceeds upon dubious or false Premises; 2ly, That were they granted, his Conclusions would not follow. It is my business to examine his Narrative, which yet is not so purely Historical, but that it is perplex'd with dispute. For it is peculiar to this Author that when he should rea∣son, he barely affirms, as if he was writing an History; but when it is his business to relate, being conscious that the stream of Autority is against him, he is forc'd to dis∣pute it out as if he was proving a Problem. But his ar∣guing is such, as the Cause would bear; and his History such, as it necessarily requires. The former has gain'd him no great credit with the Men of Reason; and this, I doubt, will little recommend him to the Honest and Ingenuous. But I forbear to prejudge the cause, and de∣sire nothing may be farther charg'd on him, than it is prov'd. I pretend to no Critical skill in the History of the Reformation, and I am beholden to the Author that
I need it not. His prevarications lie so open, that a No∣vice in History may detect them. Should I give a complete Catalogue of 'em, I should out-swell the bulk of Church-Government; but I consider that every one, who desires to know this Author, may not be willing to be charg'd with a Volume. I shall there∣fore confine my self to such only, as are worthy of this Writer, and beyond the aim of a common Under∣taker. A Reply to Chapter the 2d. IT Might inquir'd, why this Author dates the Re∣formation from the days of King Henry, since the Principal Actors in those times were such, as the Smith∣field-Protestants had no reason to think Reformers. I might therefore wave the threeChapters 2d. 3d. 7th. Chapters, that concern that Reign, were I not by the justness of an Answer o∣blig'd to my Author's method. But before I enter up∣on this subject, I would acquaint the Reader once for all, that the glory of these Fables is owing to the Pen of the inimitable Sanders: Who was so great a Ma∣ster of Invention, that no Ingenuous Author would have condescended to transcribe him. He does not however pay such an implicit deference to the estab∣lish'd Character of that great Original, but that he dares refine upon those Strokes, which seem'd inca∣pable of improvement. That he may give us a tast of what we are to expect in the body of his Histo∣ry, he entertains us in the first entrance into it with a false and groundless aspersion of the Marriage of King Henry with Ann Bullen. Sanders for the deeper blackening of Q Elizabeth tell's his Readers that King
Henry, before his Marriage with Ann Bullen, had known her Sister, and her Mother, and that she was his Natural Daughter. This he affirms with an air of Autority, without offer of proof, as became one, who addrest himself to a Spanish Reader; but our Author, who could not expect so great a resignation of Reason, presents this Calumny in a better dress, and suborns Parliaments and Popes to support it. The King, he saith, was conscious of some Impediments why he could not lawfully marry her, for which an Act of Parlia∣ment 28. Hen. 8.7. c. never after repeal'd, plainly de∣clar'd her Daughter Elizabeth uncapable of the Crown: and of which those words in the Dispensation procur'd from Clement the seventh, Etiamsi illa tibi alias se∣cundo aut remotiori consanguinitatis, aut primo affi∣nitatis gradu, etiam ex quocunque licito vel illicito coitu proveniente invicem conjuncta sit, do give some suspicion. If ever Sanders's Title was endanger'd, this Period shakes it; for certainly never was Assurance so perfect in Idea as that of this Author; Who in a know∣ing age, Protestant Country, and Learned University, to prove that the King was conscious of some Impedi∣ments very calmly refers us to aAlbeit those Acts [concerning the ratification of the King's Marriage with the Lady Ann Bolen] were then made, as it was thent hought, by Your Majesty, Nobles, and Commons upon a pure, per∣fect, and clear foundation, thinking the said Marriage then had between Your Highness, and the said Lady Ann in their Consciences to have been pure, sin∣cere, perfect, and good; and so was reput∣ed, accepted, and taken in the Realm till now of late that God hath caus'd to be brought to light certain just, true, and lawful Impediments unknown at the making of the said Acts — Albeit that Your Majesty not knowing of any lawful Impediments entred into the bonds of the said unlawful Marriage &c. 28. Hen. 8. c. 7. Pultous Coll. Lond. 1632. Statute, which in express words saith that the King knew not of any Im∣pediments. The Act: doth, as any one may see, men∣tion some Impediments, for which the Marriage is declar'd unlawful; but withal plainly saith they were
unknown to the King; and then how could they be such as this Author from this Statute would have us understand? This Act of illegitimating Elizabeth, he saith, was never after repeal'd. From which I gather that our Author is much-what of the same Opinion, as to Q. Elizabeth's Le∣gitimacy, with his Brother the Author of the late Test, tho' it seems he is better bred, than to use his expression. But I cannot think that one, whose Circumstances have made it so much his concern to consult the Statute-book, could be ignorant of the Repeal of this Act, and therefore am of Opinion that this Clause was inserted only, that he might throughout observe a Decorum, and maintain his Character. Not to mention the 35 of Hen. 8. c. 1. which provides for the Succession of the L. Elizabeth, I desire the Reader to cast his Eye on the MarginThere is nothing, which We Your Subjects for our parties can, may, or ought more firmly, entiredly, and assuredly, in the purity of our hearts think, or with our mouths declare and confess to be true, then that Your Majesty our Sovereign Lady is, and in very deed, and of most meer right ought to be, by the Law of God, and the Laws and Statutes of this Realm our most rightful and lawful So∣vereign, Liege, Lady, and Queen: and that Your Majesty is rightly, lineally, and lawfully descended, and come of the blood Royal of this Kingdom, in and to whose Princely person without all doubt ambiguity, scruples, or question, the Impe∣rial Estate of this Realm is invested & — For which Causes we Your said Subjects as thereunto constrain'd by the Laws of God and Man can no less do then humbly beseech Your Majestie that it be en∣acted &c. — And that all Sentences, Judgments, and Decrees had, made, declared, set forth, published, and promulged: and also as much of every Clause, Article, Branch, Matter, or thing contained or exprest in any Act or Acts of Parliament, as be in any thing repugnant, contrary, or dero∣gatorie to this our said Declaration &c. shall be utterly frustrate, void, and of none effect, and also shall and may be cancel'd, defac'd, and put in perpetual Oblivion &c. — 1st. Eliz. c. 3., where he will find the Act of Illegitimacy repeal'd in Expressions so full and vigorous, that it is hard to imagine what could tempt our Author to so extravagant an Asser∣tion, but the ambition of exceeding all Examples. But the citing of an Act, which, when consulted, proves the contra∣dictory of that for which it was refer'd to; and the deny∣ing the Repeal of a Statute, which is abrogated in as plain words as possible, do not furnish Matter enough for a
Parenthesis with this Author. To close it therefore a passage is cited from a Dispensation, which he has pro∣cur'd from Clement the seventh. Since he urges us with this Dispensation, it is to be hop'd that he esteems it genuine. If so, we have met with a Bull, wherein the Marriage betwixt King Henry and Katherine is declar'd null and invalid. But he, who in this Paragraph cites a passage from Pope Clement's Bull of Divorce, will, in the next Paragraph but one, shew us that the Pope was not singular in his Judgment, when he refus'd to grant such a Bull. It is indeed certain that the Pope was both for and against the Divorce according as diffe∣rent Interests inclin'd him; but this is a truth, which it ill becomes a Roman-Catholic to confess. All Histo∣ries agree that a Bull was brought over by Cardinal Cam∣pegio; but that this, which our Author refers to, could be the Copy of that or of any other Bull is absurd to imagine. For tho' false Latin and incoherence are per∣haps no arguments of its being spurious, yet there is in it one Blunder, which I dare not think his Holiness could be guilty of. The Pope after he has declar'd the Marriage of King Henry with Catharine, as being his Brother's Relict, null, gives the King license to contractSee the Bull in Anti-Sanderus, or in Lord Herbert's Hist. of King Hen. 8th. p. 279. Lond. Edit. A. 1683. cum quacunque alia muliere, modo ne sit Relicta di∣cti Fratris tui. i. e. with any other Woman provided it be not the same Woman; Which one, who had not an aversion to a quibble, would call a Bull of his Holi∣ness's. As for the Clause of Dispensation here cited, Lu∣ther in all his sallies has not miscall'd that Prince, if he was so fatally stupid, as that when he pretended scruples of Conscience for having married the Relict of his de∣ceas'd Brother, he could at the same time desire the
Pope to dispence with his Marrying within the same de∣gree of Affinity. The whole series of the original In∣structions, Messages, and Letters, which past between Rome and England on that Occasion, are allIn Dr. Burnet's Collections Vol. 1st. Lond. 1679. extant, in which there is not the least mention of a matter of so grand importance. We have also theBurnet's Hist. of Ref. Vol 1. Coll. p. 31. Decretal Bull, which was desir'd in favour of the King and drawn up in England to be subscrib'd at Rome, which yet contains not any such Dispensation. But I need not insist any longer in proving this Bull to be inauthentical, since I am certain it is more this Author's Interest than ours, that it should be so. I doubt not but the Reader is sa∣tisfied from this one specimen, wherein he finds so much falshood crowded up into so little room, what esteem he ought to have of this Writer's Integrity. Cardinal Wolsey when he discover'd the King's affe∣ctions setled on Ann Bullen, one inclin'd to Lutheranism, he proves averse now to what he had formerly advanc'd, and delays the decision of the Divorce so long, till at last the Pope revok'd the Cause &c. I confess there is other Autority for this besides Sanders, higher than whom this Author seldome rises. But Dr. Burnet, whom the Author, or at least the Editor ought in justice to have consulted, has made it appear from undoubted Records that this is a Mistake.Burn. V. 1. p. 55. The joynt thanks of the King and Ann Bullen to the Cardinal for his diligence and in∣dustry in their behalf; theBurn. V. 1. Coll. p. 80. tears and supplications of Dr. Bennet the Cardinal's Agent to the Pope, that He would not avocate the cause, but leave it in the hands of the Legates; and theIbid. p. 81. Apologetic Letter of the Pope to Wolsey, wherein he excuses himself for having avo∣cated
it, and thereby griev'd the Cardinal, stand upon Record to the contradiction of this dream of Sanders, and to the shame of those, who, after these Authentic Re∣gisters are publish'd to the world, go on without remorse to transcribe that hardy Writer. It is said that some others of the chief of the English Clergy, whether it were conscientiously, or out of the same disaffection of their's to Ann Bullen, I cannot tell, much dislik'd the Divorce. It is said, that is, by Sanders, whom our Author faithfully translates. That some others dislik'd the divorce. i. e. besides Wolsey, who did not at all dislike it. Of the chief of the English Clergy. The Bishops use to be esteem'd the chief of the Clergy; but we are assur'd from the Autority of all our Historians, that all the Bishops did under their Hands and Seals declare the Marriage unlawful, except Fisher, who doth not amount to our Author's some others. Whe∣ther it were out of Conscience, or out of the same disaffe∣ction of their's to Ann Bullen, I cannot tell. How auk∣ward this Author is, when he would seem to be impar∣tial? Had they dislik'd the Divorce, He ought in Chari∣ty to have judg'd it was out of Conscience; if their disaf∣fection to A. Bullen was the same with the Cardinal's, we have found it was none at all. After the fall of Wolsey, a Bill was given up in the Parliament held 1530 (and the summ demanded from the Clergy as conspiring with the Cardinal) of an 100000 l charges that the King had been put to, to obtain so many Instruments from Forreign Universities, which had de∣cided this Matter. Here indeed Sanders fail'd our Hi∣storian, and therefore this was supplied from Dr. Baylie, a fabulous Writer, who affects too much the of Oratory to be a slave to truth. The Book being not in all hands, the Reader will excuse me if for his Diversi∣on,
and to shew him what Authors this Writer of Church-Government builds upon, I entertain him in theHe begins his Legend thus. "At the time when as the Stars of Heaven frown'd upon the Nation to behold Innocence swaying the Scepter of this Land so mis∣becomingly, in the seven and thirtieth Year of the Reign of the most Noble (though unfortunate) King Henry the sixth, and in the Year one thousand, four hundred, fifty and nine after the time that a Virgin Daughter had produced her Fa∣ther, and a Creature her Creator, (when the blessed Vine sprang from the same Grape it bare, and the root of Jesse shot from the Spring) the Divine Providence brought forth under succour, whose after growth made it soon known to the world how worthily he received the 2 Names (which both his Christendom and his Pa∣rents bestow'd upon him within the Col∣legiate Church and Town of Beverly sci∣tuate within the Province of York, about eight score miles distant Northwards from the Head-City of the Nation) viz. of John and FISHER. He goes on to com∣pare him with John the Baptist not without Ob and Sol. One of his Comparisons it, that the First died for saying to King Herod, it is not lawful for thee to take thy Bro∣ther's Wife. The second for saying to King Henry it is not lawful for thee to put away thy Brother's Wife. Having shew'd how deservedly the name of JOHN was bestowd upon the Subject of his History, he next shews that he deserv'd also to be calld FSHER being indeed (as in∣deed he was) a true FISHER of men. So much may suffice to give the Reader a just Idea of this Author's Intellectuals. The Con∣clusion shews how servilely he employ'd them in flattering the Usurper Cromwel, whom that party hop'd to make a Proselyte. "Oli∣va vera is not so hard to be construed Oli∣verus, as that it may not be believ'd that a Prophet rather then an Herald gave the common Father of Christendom the now Pope of Rome (Innocent the tenth) such Ensigns of his Nobility (viz. a Dove hold∣ing an Olive-branch in her Mouth) since it falls short in nothing of both being a Prophesie, and fulfilled, but only his High∣ness running into her Arms, whose Em∣blem of Innocence bears him already in her Mouth. Life and Death of J. Fisher. Lond. 1655. Margin with the Prologue and Epilogue of that Co∣medy which the Author of it call's, The Life and Death of John Fisher Bishop of Rochester: When He has read it, he will excuse me, if I decline the trouble of so much as considering what relies upon the sole Autority of that raving Legendarie. From which Universities the King is said to have pro∣cur'd their suffrages for his Divorce not without feeing several of them with great Summs of Money. Concern∣ing which see the Testimonies of several Authors pro∣duc'd by Sanders, (p. 49. &c.) some of those he quotes saying that they had Money offer'd to themselves; some that they were Eye witnesses of it receiv'd by others. I once indeed thought that Sanders was the most im∣pudent and shameless Writer, which ever pretended to
History; But am now afraid, having seen those Forge∣ries, for which that Author has been so deeply stigma∣tiz'd, brought upon the Stage again, some may be apt to think there is one Person in the World who has a fairer title to that Character, than He. For as if San∣ders had not enough of imposture, even his Testimo∣ny is by this Writer corrupted. Some of those saying they had Moneys offer'd to themselves. But the Some, the they, and the themselves do with Sanders amount only to one, and he no other then Cochlaeus. Nor was Money offer'd to him for his suffrage, as it is here repre∣sented, but on condition He would write a book in De∣fence of the King's cause, or give himself the trouble of collecting the Sentences of the German Universities in favour of it. So that, were Cochlaeus a Person of credit, and we oblig'd to believe him, this would be capable of a fair Interpretation, and the Money might justly be presum'd offerd not as a Bribe, but a Reward. Some that they were Eye-witnesses of it receiv'd by Others. But the some, and the Eye-witnesses are again but one unknown Bishop of Brasile. As for this Calumny of Sanders concerning the buying of Subscriptions, the Reader will find a full Confutation of it inBurn. Hist. Vol. 1. p. 89. 90. &. Dr. Burnet, who amongst other undoubted Evidences of the fals∣hood of this Scandal, has given us the Original Letters of the King's Agents, wherein with the greatest earnestness imaginable they labour to satisfie the King, that his In∣structions not to corrupt Subscribers had been religi∣ously observ'd. Tho' with your leave to make a little digression con∣cerning this Controversie, these Universities, at least some of them, consider'd only the point of the unlawful∣ness of one Marrying his Brother's Wife, when such
Marriage was consummate by carnal knowing her, With∣out considering that Circumstance whether Catherine was carnally known by her first Husband. It is only his Modesty to call this a Digression, for it is as much to his purpose, as that which goes before, or follows after. It is true that some of the forreign Universities do men∣tion the Consummation; ButSee these Censures of the Univer∣sities. Bur. V. 1. Coll. p. 89. they put no other Terms in their Answer then was propos'd to them in the Que∣stion; so that this is no Argument that their Sentence did not reach the King's case, but that the Consumma∣tion by Arthur was not then doubted of, since the Que∣stion was propos'd by the King's Agents indifferently; sometimes with, sometimes without that Limitation. It is therefore an impertinent Observation which is here made of their not considering whether Catherine was carnally known or not by her first Husband, since they were desir'd only to answer a speculative Question, not to judge of a matter of fact. Prince Arthur being thought some-what infirm and being but fifteen years old when he Married her, and dying shortly after. In Latin thus,Sand. de Sch. p. 2. Edit. Colon. 1628. Eo quod Arthu∣rus decimum quintum aetatis annum vix dum attingens, ex lento praeterea morbo laboraret, cujus tabe post quin∣tum mensem confectus ex hac vita migravit. So the 2 Deponents, Sanders, and this Author. But theSee the Depositions taken from the Original Records. Herbert. p. 270. Wit∣nesses examin'd upon Oath before the Legats depos'd that Pr. Arthur was above fifteen at the time of his Marriage, of a good and Sanguine Complexion, vigo∣rous, and robust, that he bedded with his Princess every Night, and that the decay of which he died was imputed to his excesses in the Bed.
You may see if you have the curiosity what is said for the consummation of that Marriage in Fox, against it in Sanders. Not to indulge our curiosity too far, it may with modesty be affirm'd, that the forsan cognitam in theSee the Bull, and Breve in Lord Herbert. p. 264. Bull and the cognitam without forsan in the Breve, (and these words not put into the body of either, as a Clause to make the Dispensation more large, but in the Preamble as part of the matter of Fact repre∣sented to the Pope) theBur. V. 1. p. 35. not giving Prince Henry the title of Prince of Wales for half an Year after Arthur's death, theLord Herbert. p. 270. Solemn benediction of the Nuptial Bed, theIbid. Depositions of so many honourable Witnesses of their being constantly bedded together, theFox's Acts and Mon. p. 1051. Edit. Lond. 1583. proofs ta∣ken by the Spanish Embassadors of the consummation of the Marriage, and theLord Herbert. p. 271. Expressions of Prince Ar∣thur to his Servants which implied the same, are grea∣ter Arguments for the Affirmative, then any thing which is by Sanders, or can be by this Author, advanc'd for the Negative. Tho' the former Marriage had been consummate many Learned Men of that Age of several Nations (amongst whom were Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Tonstal Bishop of Duresme) whom you may find dili∣gently reckon'd up to the Number of almost Twenty by Sanders, wrote books in Justification that the Marriage of Henry with Catherine was a matter dispensable. It has been already said that all the Bishops except Fi∣sher had given it under their Hands and Seals that the King's Marriage was unlawful. In all the Memorials of those times, Fisher is the only Bishop we find men∣tion'd to have wrote for it. If Tonstal wrote for it, yet
the Bishop of Duresme did not; For Tonstal's book ac∣cording toSand. p. 42. Sanders, who is this Man's Author, was given in to the Legates, and Tonstal then was Bishop of Lon∣don.Lord Herbert. p. 402. Being afterwards made Bishop of Duresme he was sent with others to perswade Katherine to acquiesce in the Divorce; he us'd several Arguments to convince her of the justice of it; She urging his former Opinion in favour of her cause, he replyed that he had only pleaded for the amplitude and fulness of the Bull; but that the Consummation of the former Marriage had now been judicially prov'd, the second Marriage declar'd by the Sentences of the Universities incestu∣ous and contrary to the Law of God, and therefore by the Pope's Bull, however ample, indispensable. Which is a Demonstration against what this Author asserts that Tonstal was one who justified the second Marriage, tho' the former had been Consummate. San∣ders his diligence in reckoning up those who wrote for the Queen's cause, we do not question, but we much doubt his Veracity. It requir'd an extraordinary di∣ligence to find a book written by aSand. p. 53. Bishop of Bristol 13 Years before ever there was such a Bishop-rick. But should we grant Sanders's full tale of almost twenty these are neither to be compar'd in Number, nor Au∣tority with those, who wrote against it. AnBurn. Hist. V. 1. p. 106. hundred books were shewn in Parliament written for the Di∣vorce by Divines and Lawyers beyond Sea, besides the Determinations of twelve the most celebrated Uni∣versities of Europe. To which might have been ad∣ded theSee the Abstract of what was written for the Divorce Burn. V. 1. p. 97. Testimonies of the Greek, and Latin Fathers, the Opinions of the Scool-men, the Autority of the
Infallible Pope, who in our Author's Introduction granted a Bull of Divorce, and the Sentence of one more Infallible then He, theLev. 18.16. and c. 20.21. Author of the Pentateuch. This was agreed on all sides, that Papa non habet pote∣statem dispensandi in impedimentis jure divino naturali con∣jugium dirimentibus, sed in iis quae jure Canonico tantum dirimunt. This was not so Universally agreed as our Author would perswade us, for those,Burn. Hist. Vol. 1. p. 103. who wrote for the Queen's Cause, pleaded that the Pope's power of dis∣pencing did reach farther then to the Laws of the Church, even to the Laws of God, for he dayly dis∣penced with the breaking of Oaths and Vows tho' that was expresly contrary to theWith us the third. second Command∣ment. And when the Question was debated in the Convocation, OneId. ibid. p. 129. voted the Prohibition to be Mo∣ral, but yet Dispensable. Others gather'd the Law in Levit. 18.16. dispensable in some cases from the express Dispensation made therein Deut. 25.5. But on the other side it was then an∣swer'dIbid. p. 105. that the Provision about marrying the Bro∣ther's Wife only proves the ground of the Law is not in it's own Nature immutable, but may be dis∣pensed with by God in some cases; but because Moses did it by divine Revelation, it does not follow that the Pope can do it by his Ordinary Autority. For the general Judgment of the Learned, and particu∣larly for the Ʋniversities, after you have read the Story in Sanders concerning them, and especially concerning Ox∣ford, as likewise what is said by Lord Herbert, See what the Act of Parliament 1o Mariae saith of them. What the general judgment of the Learned was, has been in∣timated
already; What were the Sentiments of the Ʋniversities, will best be learnt from their solemn De∣terminations; After I have read the Story in Sanders con∣cerning them and especially concerning Oxford, I am very well satisfied that I have been abus'd; and that the ra∣ther when I see what is said by Lord HerbertLord Herbert. p. 352., who on purpose publishes an Original Instrument to confute the lie of Sanders who had call'd the Resolution of our Universities in a sort surreptitious. As for the Act of Queen Mary, it was the Act of a Queen in her own cause, and the 25 Hen. 8.22. c. is as great a proof of the Lawfulness of the Divorce, as this is of the Un∣lawfulness of it. What censures were past upon this Act, when made, may be seen inBurn. Hist. V. 2. p. 254. Dr. Burnet. The Act mentioning certain bare and untrue conje∣ctures upon which Archbishop Cranmer founded his sen∣tence of Divorce, This Author will have these relate to the consummation of the Marriage of Katherine with Arthur. But this is but a bare conjecture of his, and very probably untrue. For CranmerSee the Abstract of the grounds of the Divorce Burn. V. 1. Coll. p. 95. thinking the Mar∣riage of a Brother's Wife unlawful, and the Essence of all Marriage to consist not in the carnalis copula, but in the conjugal pact, might upon these Principles conclude the Marriage with Henry unlawful, tho' that with Arthur had been prov'd not consummate, and therefore need not build on any conjectures concern∣ing the Consummation. Tho' had he founded his judg∣ment upon that supposition, It, if I may so speak with due reverence to an Act of Parliament, was neither a bare conjecture, nor untrue. As for the Hesitancy of the German-Protestant Divines to declare the Divorce lawful. I cannot conceive why
it is urg'd by this Author who certainly doth not pre∣fer the Judgment of these Protestant-Doctors to the contrary Determination of the Roman-Catholic Univer∣sities. It has been observ'd upon this Author's writ∣ings that he is no great Friend of either Communion, of which We have here a very good Confirmation; when to prove the illegality of K. Henry's Divorce, he declines the Autority of the Roman-Catholic Universi∣ties, as Mercenary, and appeals to the German Divines, whom he will have to be of his Opinion. Now what can be a greater blemish to the Roman Communion, then that those great Bodies, which may justly be sup∣pos'd it's greatest Strength, should so cheaply barter away their Consciences? Or what more Honourable testimony given to the Leaders of the Reformation, then that their judgment should be appeal'd to in an instance which makes it appear that their Integrity could not be so far sway'd by the prospect of a com∣mon reform'd Interest, as their Adversaries are said to have been by the scandalous temptations of a Bribe? But this is not a single instance how much more he regards his Hypothesis, then the honour of his Com∣munion. Thus below, to prove that King Edward's Reformation was not Universal, he accuses those Cler∣gy, that did comply, of Hypocrisy; and to shew there were some non-complyers, he instances in the frequent Rebellions of the Romanists which he saith would not have been, had they not been justified to them by the Clergy. The most bitter Adversary to the Church of Rome would wish her such Advocates. I have made this Digression to shew you the diversity of Opinions, which was in this difficult Matter (that you may see the Pope stood not alone in his judgment) and how the several Interests of several times justified and con∣demn'd
the same thing. I am very well convinc'd, tho' not from our Author's proof, that the Pope stood not alone in his judgment. For certainly He that holds both sides of a Contradiction cannot be singu∣lar in his Opinion. The Pope judg'd for the Divorce in the 17th Paragraph, when the Dispensation was procur'd from him; but here in the 19th he judges against it. But our Author mistakes that Pope's Cha∣racter, when he represents him as passing Sentence ac∣cording to the merits of the Cause, it being certain that in this whole procedure He acted by no other Principles, then his Passions or Interest. And there∣fore this Author observes a greater Decorum when, tel∣ling us in the same Page, that the King had now no hopes of obtaining a Divorce from the Pope; he does not pretend the Reason to have been because the Pope was convinc'd of the Unlawfulness of it, but because at the same time he stood much in aw of the Emperor victorious in Italy, and a near Kinsman and Favourer of Queen Ka∣therine. He needed not therefore to have instanc'd in the different Opinions of diverse Men, since the actings of the Pope alone would sufficiently have convinc'd us that the several Interests of several times justifi'd and con∣demn'd the same thing. Now to return to our Matter in hand. So that it seems he has digress'd for 2 Pages to no other purpose then to shew that his Paratheses are of the same Stamp with his Parentheses. The aforesaid Summ of 100000 l spent upon the Ʋniver∣sities abroad &c. This is again a transcript from Dr. Bailie, and I need say no worse of it. The King, he saith, excepted at the Limitation of [Quan∣tum per legem Christi licet] in the Title given him by the Clergy, and so at last upon renew'd threats this Clause also
was procur'd to be omitted. See Antiquit. Britannic. The Author knew, or might have known, that the Author of the Antiquities was in this mistaken. For Dr. BurnetHist. V. 1. p. 112. from the Cabala p. 244. has upon this passage in A. Bp. Parker observ'd, that King Henry, when the Province of York demurr'd upon gran∣ting the King the Title of Head, as improper, in his Answer to them urges that Words are not always un∣derstood in the strictest Sense, and mentions the Ex∣planation made in the Province of Canterbury, that it was in so far as is agreeable with the Law of Christ, Ac∣cordingly it is represented as pass'd with this Qualifica∣tion by our otherHerbert p. 348. Full. Eccl. Hist. Book 5. p. 184. Dr. Heylin Ref. Justif. § 2. Historians. He refers us again to Dr. Bailie. But the Reader, I presume, has had enough of him already. The excluding the Patriarch is, he saith, contrary to his 4th Thesis. It is pity these Theses were not writ∣ten in the last Century for the Use of those Roman-Catholics who excluded the Pope. They could find no grounds for the Papal Autority from Scripture, Anti∣quity, or Reason; but they might perhaps have been convinc'd from our Author's Theses, which are an Au∣tority distinct to all those. This Paragraph concludes with the mangled Citation from Dr. Hammond which has already been animadverted on, and is a sore which if I do not here again touch upon, it is because I would not gall him too much. Cranmer is said to have divorc'd the King from Q. Ka∣therine after he had excluded the Pope's Autority out of his Dominions.  The DivorceBurn. V. 1. p. 131. compar'd with p. 144. was pronounc'd in May 1533, and the Extinguishing Act did not pass till March following: Cranmer in the Sentence is call'd Legate of the
Apostolic See. By this Instance it is plain how impli∣citely our Author followsSand p. 73. Sanders in his Chronology, as well as History. Warham a favourer of the Queen's cause;Sand. p. 55. Varamus qui summo studio Reginae partes adjuverat, saith Sanders. This favourer of the Queen's Cause when the Marriage was first propos'd,Burn. V. 1. p. 35. declar'd it was contrary to the Law of God; He induc'dIbid. p. 36. theHen. the 8th. Prince when of Age to en∣ter his Protestation against it;Ibid. p. 38. He subscrib'd and per∣swaded the other Bishops to subscribe to the unlawful∣ness of it; He earnestly prest Fisher to concurr, and up∣on Refusal made another set that Bishop's Name and Seal to the Resolution of the other Bishops. These are some of the favours, which Warham shew'd to the Queen's Cause. The Clergy having declar'd the King Supreme Head of the Church, it seem'd reasonable that no Acts of the Church should stand good without the concurrence of the Head. This is a wild and senseless Calumny; the C. of England thinks no Acts which are purely Spiritual want the King's concurrence; her Sacraments and her Censures she esteems valid independently on all humane Autori∣ty; her Charter she derives immediately from Christ. The Clergy did indeed bind themselves not to promulge and execute any Canons without the King's leave; but the execution, of which they abridg themselves, is such as hath influence on the Civil Rights of the Subject, and therefore necessarily requir'd the concurrence of the Su∣preme Civil power. He cites from Dr. Heylin an Answer made by Gardi∣ner (and allow'd by the Convocation) to a Parliamen∣tary
Remonstrance. But either myReform. Just. in the Historical Tracts Edit. Lond. 1681. Edition of Heylin, or (which I am the rather apt to think from the infi∣delity of his other citations) this Author deceives me. The next Paragraph descants upon the request of the Clergy that the Laws Ecclesiastical might be review'd by 32 Commissioners.  This he complains was never sufficiently weigh'd by Dr. Heylin, Dr. Hammond, nor Dr. Fern. The business of those Advocates was to defend the Reformation, and it is one of our Author's pertinent remarks, that they did not meddle with what was not reform'd. The Reformation of the Canons was a design, of which Nothing worse can be said, than that it did not take effect. If it trouble him that Canons contrary to the King's Prerogative, Laws of the Land, good of the Sub∣ject, and Laws of God should be reform'd, no Honest man can pity him. If he quarrels with the competency of the Reviewers, that has been spoke to by theAnimadv. p. 36. Animad∣verter. If by Canons Synodal he will understand the Constitutions of any other Synods but those of this Na∣tion, it is out of his wonted pride to outface the Statutes. For theForasmuch as such Canons, Consti∣tutions, and ordinances as heretofore have been made by the Clergy of this Realm, cannot now be view'd, examin'd, and determin'd by the▪ King's Highness, and the 32 Persons according to the Pe∣tition of the Clergy — 25. Hen. 8.19. c. Act expresly limits the Review to those Canons which had been enacted by English Synods, and had no need to meddle with any other, since We never did own the Autority of any but what were so establish'd. I need not speak any thing to the 25th Paragraph,§. 25.26. be∣cause what is said there, is unsaid in the 26th. But our Author has a Supposal here which may deserve a Remark. He supposes that Gardiner retracted his acknowledgment of a Regal Supremacy for this reason, because by sad experience he saw it much enlarg'd beyond those bounds within which only they formerly had maintain'd it just. But else-where this
same Author will suppose that Gardiner was ensnar'd in King Edward's time by that Sense of Supremacy, of which he had been a Zealous abettor in King Henry's; and this Sense, which Gardiner had of King Henry's Supremacy, in another Paragraph is said to have been gross and impure,  and to have extended the King's power even to the Al∣teration of Faith and Doctrines; beyond which bounds I would learn of this Author how it could be enlarg'd. In this methinks he is something Autocatacritical. If it can be worth our while to look back upon what has been perform'd in this Chapter, We shall find that Nothing farther has been advanc'd, then that the Clergy gave King Henry the Title of Supreme, pro∣mis'd to enact no new Canons without the King's As∣sent, and requested that the Old ones might be Re∣form'd. The rest of his Discourse is only flourish, which our Author made Use of that he might have the greater scope for his Invention. All that is mate∣tial in 7 Leaves might have been compriz'd in fewer Words, and this would have heightned our Esteem of the Author, tho' it might have deprest the price of the Pamphlet. A Reply to his 3d Chapter. WE are come now to our Author's Second Head; the Supremacy of King Henry is still the Topick, i. e. He is still writing against his Forefathers the Roman-Catholics. The Extent of this Supremacy he takes from Acts of Parliament; Repeal'd, and not Repeal'd make no difference with him. All the Expressions, which seem to extend the Supremacy, are invidiously rak'd together; and those, which limit it, craftily sup∣prest. The Statutes are put upon the rack, and because
the Text doth not speak plain enough, our Author has added his Gloss. He tells us that the Clergy having given the King the Title of Supreme, the Parliament vested in him all Jurisdi∣ction to the said Dignity belonging. The Parliament gave the King no New Jurisdiction, but restor'd the Old; nor did they place in him any Power but what was recog∣nized by the Clergy, who certainly did not delude the King with the Complement of an empty Title. The extent of this Jurisdiction annex'd to the Crown He will have us learn from the 1st of Q. Elizabeth; but it seems more proper to learn it from the words of the same Statute of King Henry. His Comments upon the Eccle∣siastical Jurisdiction, here ascrib'd to the Prince, might have been spar'd, if he had attended to an easie distincti∣on frequently met with in our Writers. They divide Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction into Internal, the inward Go∣vernment which is in the Court of Conscience; or Ex∣ternal, that which is practis'd in exterior Courts; That proceeds by Spiritual Censures; this by force and cor∣poral Punishments; That is appropriated to the Clergy, and incommunicable to the Secular power; this is origi∣nally inherent in the Civil Supreme, and from him de∣riv'd to Ecclesiastic Governours. Ecclesiastical Jurisdi∣ction when said to be annex'd to the Crown ought to be understood in the latter Sense. This also answers what is here cited from the Reformatio Legum, tho' what is urg'd thence needs no Reply, that Book having never been ratified by any Autoritative Act of our Church. In Virtue of this Jurisdiction translated to the King by another Act of Parliament 25. Hen. 8.21. c. the Supreme power of giving all manner of Licenses, Dispensations, Facul∣ties &c. For all Laws and Constitutions merely Ecclesiastical, and in all Causes, not being contrary to the Scriptures, and
Laws of God, is not only taken from the Pope, but the Clergy too. Nothing is done in that Act by Virtue of any new-Juris∣diction translated to the King, but by this power origi∣nally inherent in the Sovereign. Every Government has a right to dispence with it's own Acts, and nothing farther is challeng'd in that Statute. No Ecclesiastical Constitutions had ever the force of Laws in this Kingdom, but from the Legislative power of the Realm: and the same power, which gave them life, might dispense with them. This the Act saith is evident not only from the wholesom Acts made in King Henry's Reign, but from those made in the time of his Noble Progenitors. It was not therefore a power now first attributed to the Prince, but his Ancient Right, for some Years indeed usurp'd by the Pope, but now vindicated. This is the true import of that Statute, which when it is fairly represented is at the same time justified. The power of granting Licen∣ses is indeed taken from the Pope, to whom it never right∣ly belonged; but not from the Clergy, it being expresly pro∣vided in the Act, that all Licenses be granted by the Arch-Bishop, or 2 Spiritual Persons. In case of the Arch-Bishop's refusal, the Court of Chancery is to judge whether such refusal be out of Contumacy; which power of the Chan∣cery if it be contrary to our Author's 8th Thesis, it ought the rather to be excus'd since thep. 34. Animadverter has ob∣serv'd that that Thesis is contrary to it self. His Notion of the Parliament's coordinacy, with the King in the Su∣premacy I leave to the Censure of the Learned in the Law; this Act I am sure whence he infers it, positively asserts the King to be Supreme. By Virtue of the same Supremacy translated to the King, the necessity of the Metropolitan's being confirm'd by the Patriarch is taken away. The Statute whence he collects this men∣tions neither Metropolitan nor Patriarch. It enacts in∣deed
that no Person of this Realm shall be presented to the Bishop of Rome, otherwise cal'd the Pope, to or for the office of Bishop or Arch-Bishop of this Realm. But the Arch-Bishops of this Realm are such Metropolitans as ow no Subjection to any Patriarch, and therefore have no necessity of being confirm'd by him. Nor doth the Statute take away any such Necessity, for it supposes none. The King's Presentation to a Bishoprick, against which he is so warm, was no new Usurpation, but an ancient Right: had he liv'd some Centuries before the Reformation, he would have had this Grievance to com∣plain of. The 2 next Paragraphs he tells us he had set down be∣fore,§. 30. and 31. and I see no reason why they are repeated, but for the Reader's mortification. The 32d Paragraph is that which has got the particleSee the Animadv. p. 65. as in it. The said Arch-Bi∣shop, when no Arch-Bishop had been mention'd before is another of our Author's Idioms in the same Period. The Act here descanted upon, expir'd with King Henry, and it will be time enough to consider it, when it is reviv'd again. If Prohibition of appeals to Rome, and making the King the last Appellee be an Act of the Reformation,  it has been prov'd that King Henry the 2d, and all his Bi∣shops (except Becket) were Reformers. Some Acts of Parliament are cited in the 34th Para∣graph which were repeal'd by King Edward, and yet make up part of that accumulative charge which is laid on the Reformation. Even the Six Articles are urg'd, which drain'd the blood of so many Reformers. But the Protestants in justifying the King's Supremacy must allow their own Condemnation if teaching any thing contrary to the six Articles &c. That is, all those who own an Autority, must justify the abuse of it; They who obey the just
Commands of their Prince, must obey him when he commands what is unjust. Father Walsh acknowledges, I suppose, the Pope's Supremacy; but he thinks himself severely dealt with, when he is censur'd for not being a Rebel. Having quoted several Acts he comes to reflect upon them a little. viz. for six Pages. First he copes with Arch Bishop Bramhal, but I should be unjust to that Pre∣late's memory, if in so unequal an engagement I should think he wanted my Assistance. What is said by the Bi∣shop is not said only, but demonstrated. This Author has urg'd nothing against him, but what he might have fetch'd from the Bishop's own Confutation of Serjeant. The Question here discust has already been debated in thep. 20. Animadversions, and, if the Reader desires to be farther satisfied, I cannot more oblige him then by sending him to the Most Reverend and Learned Author. He will find there a just and solid Vindication of a Noble Cause, which suffers when it falls into weak management, and is made part of an Occasional Pamphlet. Having cate∣chiz'd the Bishop he next canvaseth that Statute of much concernment, that the King shall have power from time to time to Visit, Repress, and Reform all such Errors, and Heresies as by any manner of Spiritual Autority lawfully may be Reform'd. But this Act will be without the reach of our Author's cavils if it be observ'd; That the Power, by which the King Visits and Reforms, is not Spiritual, but Political; That a Power is not given him to declare Errors, but to repress them,; that the determination of Heresie is by Act of Parliament limited to the Autority of Scriptures, 4 first General Councils, and assent of the Clergy in their Convocation; that the King hath not all the Power giv∣en him which by any manner of Spiritual Autority may be lawfully exercis'd, (for he has not the power of the
Keys) but a power given him to reform all Heresies by Civil Authority, which the Church can do by her Spiri∣tual; That it is impossible it should be prov'd that this power of Visiting and Reforming is a necessary Invasion of the Office of Spiritual Pastors, because when the Prince doth it by them, commanding them to do the Work, and exacting of them a discharge of their duty, He doth this without Usurping their Office, and yet doth it by a power, distinct from, and independent on their's: And lastly, that the Prince is oblig'd to take care that all Acts of reforming be executed by their proper Mini∣sters, because else he transgresses the Power prescrib'd in this Statute, so to reform Errors as may be most to the plea∣sure of Almighty God. The Application is obvious, and will satisfie the Reader that our Author must part with a whole Paragraph, if He will, as he pretends,§. 35. n. 4. remove the Mis-interpretation of this Act. The next Paragraph makes remarks upon a Proclama∣tion, and speech of King Henry's, and some words of Cromwel; which were very justifiable, if it were either necessary that we must defend them, or the Defence not obvious to every one who thinks. His Conclusion of this Chapter amounts to no more then that Bishop Gar∣diner was too great a Courtier, and Calvin too credulous; One was gross in his sense of the Supremacy, and the other zealous against it so misrepresented. Which will then begin to be pertinent, when it is prov'd that Gardiner was a Protestant, and Calvin a son of the Church of England. There is so little in this Chapter which affects the Refor∣mation, that it cannot be worth recapitulating.
A Reply to Chapter the 4th. NOW he comes to the times of Edward the 6th. Now then he first begins to remember the Title of his Book. Here he finds all the Supremacy confirm'd to Edward the Sixth, which was formerly conceded to Henry the 8th. And yet the Reformers are accus'd of Innovation, for con∣tinuing what they found establish'd by Roman-Catholics, he complains of the Repeal of several Statutes made in con∣firmation of the Determinations of the Church.  But by the Church is meant the Church of Rome, and it is no great Crime in a Reforming Prince that he did not think him∣self oblig'd to punish with Death all her Determinations. These Statutes now repeal'd were reviv'd by Q. Mary, and a∣gain repeal'd by Q. Elizabeth. Which amounts to no more then that Q. Mary was a Roman-Catholic, and Q. Elizabeth a Catholic Reformed. Hence he infers by way of Corollary, that the trial of Heresies and Hereticks by the Clergy according to the Determinations and Laws of Holy-Church was admitted or excluded here, according as the Prince was Catholic or Reform'd. This sentence, car∣ries two faces, and is capable of two very different Constructions. Either it may signifie that the Clergy were, or were not the tryers of Heretics, according as the Prince was Romanist or Reformed,‖ and then it is false; Or that the Determinations of Holy Church (You must understand the C. of Rome) were or were not the Rule of such Trials, according as the Prince was of the Roman or Reform'd Communion, and then it is wonderfully im∣pertinent. This seeker goes on, and finds it affirm'd in an Act of Parliament, that All Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is deriv'd from the King as Supreme Head of the Church and
Realm of England. But if he had pleas'd He might have found too, that this Act is repeal'd, and that therefore we are under no Obligation to defend it. But if Juris∣diction be understood in the limited sense before ex∣plain'd, this Act has no poison in it. And so it will be understood by any one, who consults the Context. But this Act has been so largely and distinctly discuss'd by a LearnedBishop Sanderson's Episcopacy not prejudicial to Regal power. Casuist that a farther disquisition of it is need∣less. The change of Election of Bishops by Conge d'eslire into Collation by Letters-Patents is a bad instance of the King's Supremacy; for if such collation infers a Regal Supremacy, those, who have read that Bishopricks were originally Donative, not Elective, will be apt to conclude that the King's of England were always Supreme. Nor is this Nomination at all injurious to the Divine Right of Bishops, which is not deriv'd from the Persons Electing or Nominating, but the Pastors Consecrating. But we have him again crying out . He finds the King and Parliament authorizing Arch-Bishops, Bishops &c. By Virtue of their Acts, to take Informations concerning the not using of the Common-Prayer &c. Therein prescrib'd and to pu∣nish the same by Excommunication &c. The first and last of these &cs, are very artificially placed for corrupting the Text. After Bishops should have follow'd, Chancel∣lors and Commissaries, after Excommunication, Sequestra∣tion, and other Censures and Processes. So that the Auto∣rity given by this Act doth not necessarily respect the Bi∣shops, and that Power of Excommunicating, which they have jure divino, but may relate to the power given to Chancellors, and Commissaries, and other Officers, who plead no such divine right to their respective Functions; or if the Bishops are included, yet not so as that they de∣rive
the power of Excommunicating from this Act, but of inflicting the other punish-ments, which by this Act may be inflicted. Or let us suppose the Bishops autho∣riz'd by this Act to Excommunicate, and Excommunica∣tion taken in the strictest sense for internal Censures, yet this will be no injury to their Jus divinum; untill it be prov'd that because God has gave the Bishops a power to Excommunicate, therefore the King may not command them to put it in Execution, where there is a just Cause. He finds 32 Persons commission'd to reform the Laws Eccle∣siastical. But this he found before in King Henry's Reign, where it has already been consider'd, and whither I refer the Reader, as often as this Author shall be pleas'd to re∣mind us of this Discovery. He finds Six Prelates and Six others commissioned to make a new form of Consecration of Bishop's and Priests. He might have found that this Act as well as the former was made at theSee the Petitions of the Clergy. Burn. Vol. 2. p. 47. request of the Convocation. Nothing is by him excepted against the Form it self; and for the Autority, the Synod petition'd such a Commission might be gran∣ted; theSix Prelates, and six Divines Bur. V. 2. p. 141. Persons commission'd were all Clergy Men; andKing Edwards Articles. Art. 35. Bur. V. 2. Coll. p. 218. the Synod confirm'd it when done. As for the Oath against the Pope inserted in the new Ordinal, it was by birth a Roman-Catholic;Fox. p. 1092. King Henry's Bishops took it without scruple; ThatCompare the Oath in Fox with the Oath of Supremacy as it now stands. part of it, which this Author thinks most offensive is since put out, and he may be as severe as he pleaseth upon a Non-entity. The Heretical Catechism in the 43d Paragraph shall be spoken to when it meets us agen in the 166th. The 44th would justifie a Protestation of Bishop Bonner's,
which that Bishop himselfBur. V. 2. Coll. p. 112. recanted. He is angry at Fox for calling that Protestation Popish. But the Prelate himself in his recantation of it calls it unadvised, of ill ex∣example, unreasonable, and undutifull. If Fox abuses the Bi∣shop it is because Popish signifies something worse then all these. We are next entertain'd with a confus'd Catalogue of Articles propos'd to Bishop Gardiner's Subscription toge∣ther with our Author's Notes upon them. One of the most pertinent Notes would have been, that BishopFox. p. 1350. 1357. Gar∣diner subscrib'd most of these Articles; but this was not for his Interest to observe. His remark is that tho' in some of these Articles the Autority of Parliament is mention'd, yet in none of these is any thing said of the Consent of the Cler∣gy, as necessary to make such Parliamentary or Regal injuncti∣ons valid. That the consent of the Clergy was urg'd to this Bishop, I hope he does not deny; I am sure§. 110. it is urg'd by r. that in the charge given in against Gardiner it is said, that the Injunctions were of all men for all sorts obediently receiv'd. And that this charge was given in, is not denied in the Reply to r. §. 119. else∣where He confesses it. The meaning must be, that this consent was not urg'd under the modality of making the Regal Injunctions valid, Nor do I see any Neces∣sity it should; for Gardiner had not yet so far refin'd his gross sense of the Supremacy, but that he still own'd his Obligation to obey His Majestie's Godly Injunctions and Ordinances concerning Religion. Neither could the Imposers of these Injunctions, according to their Princi∣ples, lay so great a stress on the consent of the Clergy; for if the matter of the Injunctions was unlawful, no Church-Autority could make them lawful; but if it was agreeable to the Law of God, then the Civil Autority without the Synodal (if that had been wanting) was suf∣ficient. From this idle remark the Author has rais'd
as idle a Consequence; From this non-mentioning the consent of the Clergy he collects, that when the Synodal con∣sent of the Clergy is any where else mention'd, as sometimes it is, it is not to add any Autority to these Injunctions thereby. Now to me it seemes a wild Inference that because the Synodal consent was once not urg'd as necessary, there∣fore, when-ever it was urg'd, it was thought to add no Au∣tority. I may certainly obey my Prince in a thing law∣ful, tho' my Pastor doth not at the same time exact this Obedience from me; But when they both require the same Duty, there ariseth a new tie of Obedience, and I am now under a double Obligation. But least we should wonder why the King and Parliament never pleaded any Necessity of the Synodal consent, the Author conjectures the reasons to be, 1st. Because some of the Voters were dis∣plac'd, and so their suffrage less Authentical. But these places were supplied, and then I would know why those, who succeeded into their Pastoral charge, did not also suc∣ceed into their Synodal Autority? and if so, why the Re∣formers should think the Act of a Synod less Authenti∣cal when Ridley sat there, than when Bonner did? His se∣cond reason is, Because they saw that the Laws of this Na∣tional Clergy could stand in no force, but so would also the Laws of the Church, and her Synods which were superior to the English Clergy; And if the King urg'd his and his Subject's freedom from the Laws of the Church Ʋniversal, so must He al∣so from the Laws of his own Church National. Church, Su∣perior Synods, and the Church-Ʋniversal are words, which sound big; but when they come to be construed, the Laws of the Church, signifie Papal Decrees; Superior Sy∣nods are put for any Council that is forreign; and the Church-Ʋniversal dwindles into Roman-Catholic. In this case I hope we may obey our Lawful Pastors, tho' we reject an Usurper; Nor are we quitted from our Obligation to
the just Autority of our own Bishops; because we do not submit to the Invasions of Forreigner. But if by Church-Ʋniversal, and Superior Synods is meant what other Peo∣ple understand by those words, it rests to be prov'd that the Reformed plead an Exemption from their Autority. The 46th Paragraph tells us of God's just judgment on Bishop Gardiner, for having so zealously abetted the King's Supremacy. But the divine Judgments are differently in∣terpreted, according to the different Sentiments of the In∣terpreters. Other Writers tell us of severer Judgments inflicted on this Prelate, than Deprivation, and that for more flagrant crimes then asserting the Regal Supre∣macy. He concludes this Chapter with the resentment of the Clergy for their lost Synodal Autority. It is confest that the Extreme of raising the Ecclesiastical power too high, in the times of Popery, had now produc'd another of depres∣sing it too much. But this was the Infelicity of the Clergy, not their Crime. The same Autority, which tells us the Clergy complain'd of this, tells us also that those com∣plainers were the Reformers. But this is a truth, which is industriously conceal'd, and the Citation mangled lest it should confess too much. Haec discrimina pati Clericis iniquum atque grave visum est, saith he, from the Antiquita∣tes Britannicae. Clericis multo jam acrius atque vigilantius in divina Veritate, quam unquam antea laborantibus, say the Antiquities. This Omission I believe was not for brevity sake, for he doth not use to be so frugal in his Citations. But the Reader was to understand by Clerici the Popish Clergy exclusively to all others, and the decay of Synodal Autority was to be represented not as the grievance, but the fault of the Reformers. For this reason it is that we find this Author indecently insulting oven that pious Martyr Bishop Hooper. All, which I shall observe of it, is
this, that what is here said of this Bishop's Appeal from the Ecclesiastical to the Civil power, is applicable to St. Paul'sActs 25.11. Appeal to Caesar. The cause then was Ecclesiastical, for TheyActs 25.19. had certain questions against him of their own Supersti∣tion. And the Bishop might have us'd St. Pauls Plea,Acts 24.14. That after the way which they call'd Heresie, so worship'd he the God of his Fathers, believeing all things which are written in the Law and in the Prophets. This Chapter more nearly concerning the Reformation it may not be amiss to give a brief Summary of what is perform'd in it. It is said, that all the Supremacy was confirm'd to Edward the 6th, which was conceded to Henry the 8th; But no reason is given why it should have been diminish'd: that some Statutes against Heretics were repeal'd; but this repeal not shewn to be without good reason, or good Autority: that all Jurisdiction Spiritual is said to be deriv'd from the Prince; but this Expression taken in a due Sense may be justifyed, and if it could not, the Act being void, we are under no Obligation to defend it; that the Bishops are authoriz'd by Virtue of an Act of Parliament to excommunicate; but this Interpretation is forc'd upon the Statute, and the words taken even in this Sence will not bear the Stress which is laid upon them; that 32 Commissioners were appointed to reform the Laws Ecclesiastical, and 6 Prelates with 6 others to reform the Ordinal; but nothing said to shew that these did not want a Reformation, or that the Persons commis∣sion'd were not qualified, for such a trust; and these two urg'd as the mere effects of Parliamentary Supremacy, which were the Synodical request of the Clergy: that an Oath of Supremacy was impos'd on Persons entring in∣to Holy Orders; but this Oath invented by Papists, and in that part which gives Offence since alter'd: that an
Hypothetical Submission of Bonner was not accepted; but this such a Submission as that Bishop recanted: That the consent of the Clergy was once not urg'd as neces∣sary to make the Regal Injunctions valid; But no reason assign'd why it should have been: That the Clergy com∣plain'd of their lost Synodal Autority; But these the Reformers, who yet are accus'd of being no Friends to it: That Bishop Hooper appeal'd to the Civil power; But so also did St. Paul. The title of this Chapter (least the Contents may have made the Reader forget it) was, The Supremacy claim'd by King Edward the 6th. A Reply to Chapter the 5th. WE are come now to Q. Mary's Reign, the fatal Revolutions of which We would willingly forget, did not the unseasonable importunity of these Men re∣fresh our memories. Our Author had acted the part of a skilful Painter, had he cast a veil over this piece of his History; for the Calamities of this Reign tend little to the Honour of that Religion, and are never properly in∣sisted on, but by those who write Invectives against Po∣pery; But those Reflections, which create horror in other men's breasts, seem to have a different Effect on this Writer: for in his entrance upon this Reign, it is easie to discover such a new Warmth and Vigor in his Expressions, as betray him to be in a more then ordinary rapture. All that had been done in the two former Reigns by Prince, by State, or by Clergy, were now by an equal Autority of Prince, Clergy, and State revers'd, repeal'd, ejected. His Discourse here has put on a new air, and like the Orator in his triumphs over exil'd Cataline he prose∣cutes declining Heresie with an abiit, excessit, evasit. But here to moderate his Acclamations, let me tell
him that this Prince, who thus reverses, repeals, and ejects, was the sameBurn. V. 2. p 237. that gave the Suffolk men full as∣surance that she would never make any Innovations or changes in Religion; The same, that made an open De∣claration in Council,Bur. V. 2. p. 245. that though her own Conscience was staid in matters of Religion, yet she was resolv'd not to compel or restrain others: So that this after repealing reflects severely on those Guides, who had the Govern∣ment of her Conscience, and those Principles, by which She acted. Lay-Supremacy was indeed at last ejected by her, but not till the other parts of the Reformation were reverst by it's Influence. If sending out Injunctions in matters Ecclesiastical, using the Title of Head of the Church, convoking Synods, ejecting Bishops by Com∣mission, prohibiting some Preachers, licensing others, inhibiting the Pope's Legate to come into the Kingdom, if these, I say, are admitted to be signs of a Lay-Supre∣macy, it must be confest that Q. Mary was such a Su∣preme. It is not therefore Regal Supremacy, as such, but as countenancing the Reformation, which these men condemn. Those Powers, which in the former Chapter were Invasions of the Church's right, do in this easily escape our Author's Censure. We are told now of the power of the Prince when Protestantism is to be defac'd, who in the establishment of it was allow'd to have no power in Causes Ecclesiastical. Nor is the Clergy, which here reverses, repeals, and ejects, less liable to Ex∣ceptions. For the first change was not of Religion, but of the Pastors; and the Reforming Bishops were ejected be∣fore the Reformation.See them reckon'd by this Author. §. 53. Thirteen Prelates we find depriv'd to make room for a reversing Hierarchy; and ofBur. V. 2. p. 276. Six∣teen-thousand
Inferior Clergy-men (as they were then computed) 12000 turn'd out for committing the unpar∣donable Sin of Matrimony. As for the Autority of the State, i. e. the Parliament, it was none, we were told, in the 2 former Reigns, and sure it had no advantage in this if it be remembred, howBurn. V. 2. p. 252. Elections were manag'd, and how predominant Spanish Gold was. The 4 next Paragraphs give us an account of the Re∣stitution of things made in Q. Mary's days;§ 49 50.51.52. which I al∣low, and only desire the Reader to carry a long with him what has been hinted of the manner of it. Paragraph the 53d questions, whether this Clergy in Q. Mary's days were a lawfull Clergy?§. 54. ad §. 65. And the succeeding pages endea∣vour their Vindication. The Bishops ejected by Q. Mary he has numbred from Fox, but least we should have too much truth together has took care to qualifie it with his Paratheses. Fox mentioning Hooper ejected from Wor∣cester, it is added [he might have said from Glocester too, for Hooper in the latter end of Edward the 6th's time held both these Sees together in Commendam.] Our Author might have spar'd this Observation from San∣ders, had he consulted theBurn. V. 2. App. p. 396. Appendix to the History of the Reformation, where this lie of Sanders is confuted. Hooper was first made Bishop of Glocester, which before King Henry the 8th's time, had been part of the Bishop∣rick of Worcester: In King Edward's time these Sees were reunited, so that Hooper had not two Bishopricks, but one that had for some Years been divided into two; He only enjoy'd the revenue of Glocester. [For Wor∣cester, Latimer for Non-conformity to the Six Articles had been ejected out of it, or for fear resign'd it, yet (for what reason I know not) could not in King Edward's time be restor'd to it.] This again is a transcript from
the inexhaustibleSand. p. 181. Sanders. LatimerBur. V. 2. App. p. 385. 392. & Hist. V. 2. p. 95. was not ejected, but freely resign'd his Bishoprick upon passing the Six Articles, with which he could not comply with a good Conscience. In King Edward's time the House of Com∣mons interpos'd to repossess him, but he refus'd to accept of any Preferment. [Taylor was remov'd from Lin∣coln by death, not by the Queen, as appears from Fox. p. 1282.] Q. Mary'sBur. V. 2. Coll p 257. Commission for displacing the Bi∣shops is extant, amongst which Taylor is one. Fox posi∣tively saith He was depriv'd; He saith indeed in the place cited that he died, but not that his Death was before his Deprivation. Having given us this Catalogue of the ejected (thus adulterated with his false mixtures) he desires us in Vindication of the just Autority of Q. Mary's Clergy to take notice; That the Ejection of Bishops in Q. Mary's days was not the First, but Second Ejection; the first being made in King Edward's time, when Gar∣diner, Bonner, Tonstal, Day, Heath, Vesy, were re∣mov'd from their Sees. But here we have a Supernu∣merary put in to enhance the Catalogue. VesyGodw. Catal. of Bishops. was not depriv'd, but did resign. His Character in History is so scandalous that he ought to have been depriv'd, and therefore it had been pardonable to have guess'd that he was; but it was unlucky to assert it. Probably, he saith, some others were remov'd from their Sees. To which it may be enough to answer, probably not. I find not the Ecclesiastical History of those times accurately written by any. An Accurate Writer in his Sense is one who favours his own Cause, and is careful to insert a necessary Supplement of his own, where the History wants it. His admir'd Sanders is in this Sense accurate
enough, but not so accurate, as our Author could have wish'd. Nor Mr. Fox to use the same diligence in num∣bring the change of Clergy under King Edward, as he doth that under Q. Mary. As for the Bishops which are the Clergy here meant, Fox mentions the Deprivation of all that were depriv'd; and it is because He had not this Author's diligence, that he named no more. Something may be conjectur'd from those general words of his, For the most part the Bishops were chang'd, and the dumb Prelate compel'd to give place to others that would preach. Mr. Fox was no great Master of Style, nor rigorous in his Expressions, from which our Author would make advantage. But it is a sign his cause is de∣sperate, when he is forc'd thus to build upon empty con∣jectures. The Deprivation of Bishops is not a matter of so little importance, that our Historians should take no notice of it; but amongst them all, We find no more Depriv'd, then have been mention'd. Dr. Heylin, and Dr. Burnet have been very exact in this particular, but they have not arriv'd to our Author's diligence and accu∣racy. He must therefore be content with the ejection of only 5 Bishops in King Edwards time; which he pro∣mises us to prove not lawful, and consequently the eje∣cted justly restor'd, and the introduc'd justly ejected in Q. Mary's time. The ejection he proves not lawful; Be∣cause 1st. Not done by Lawful Autority. 2ly. Nor for a Lawful Cause. 1st. Not done by lawful Autority: Because the Bi∣shops being tried for Matters Ecclesiastical, their Judges were the King's Commissioners. But neither is it true (at least not prov'd) that they were tried for Matters Ec∣clesiastical; Nor is it true that the King's Commissio∣ners (amongst whom was the Metropolitan) were not proper Judges in such Causes, as has been prov'd by the
Animadverter; Nor can the Autority of such Commis∣sioners, tho' unlawful, be declin'd by this Writer, who presently will prove the Bishops in Q. Mary's time eje∣cted by lawful Judges, Who yet were no other, then that Queen's Commissioners. So that there is in this one Period such a complication of falshood, as nothing can match, but what follows concerning the Causes of their Deprivation. The Causes he supposeth to be all the Articles of Po∣pery as distinct to the Religion Reform'd; Their not owning the King's Supremacy; Non-conformity to his Injunctions; Not-relinquishing the Use of former Church-Liturgies; Not conforming to the New-Service, and other Innovations. He supposes he has by this time confirm'd his Autority with the Reader so far that he will credit his bare assertion without vouching any Hi∣story. But it is impossible He could have falsified so grosly, had not an implicite Faith in Sanders given him over to a Spirit of delusion. TonstalBur. V. 2. App. p. 390. 391. was depriv'd for Misprision of Treason; He was a firm Friend of the Protector, and so well satisfied with the first changes which were made, that he is complain'd of by Gardiner (as well as Cranmer) in a Letter which he wrote to the Protector.Ibid. Bonner and Gardiner were depriv'd for not Preaching up the King's Autority to be the same un∣der Age as after; which is a point purely Secular, and relating to the Constitutions of this Government;Bur. Hist. V. 2. p. 70. Gar∣diner in the Sermon (for an Omission in which he was depriv'd) exprest himself very fully concerning the Pope's Supremacy, as justly abolish'd, and the Suppression of Monasteries and Chantries; approv'd of the King's pro∣ceedings; thought Images might have been well us'd, but yet might be taken away; approv'd of Communion
in both kinds, of the abolition of Masses, and new Order of Communion; asserted indeed the Corporal Presence, but that was not yet declar'd against.Bur. V. 2. p. 121. Bonner compli∣ed so easily with every Order of Council, that it was not easie to find any complaint against him.Bur. V. 2. App. p. 390. Heath and Day complied with all the changes that were made in the first 4 Years of this King's reign, and both preach'd, and wrote for them. They were depriv'd by Lay-Dele∣gates in the 5th Year of King Edward, and my Author hence guesses it was for some Offence against the State. After this account I need not be sollicitous to examine, Whether the Causes assign'd by our Author were just Causes of deprivation or not, having prov'd that they were not at all the Causes. As for the Ejection of the rest of King Edward's Bi∣shops by Q. Mary, this, he saith, will be justifiable if done. 1st. For a lawful Cause. 2ly. By a lawful Judge; which therefore he assigns. The Causes here he suppo∣ses to be all the Articles of Reformation, as distinct to Popery, viz. Marriage of Clergy; denying the Papal and asserting the Regal Supremacy; accusing the Church-Service of Idolatry, denying the corporal presence in the Eucharist, or that it was a propitiatory Sacrifice, &c. This again he asserts upon his own Autority; which had need to be great, since it contradicts all others. Of the Bishops ejected by Q. Mary, (besidesBur. Hist. V. 2. p. 247. those who made room for the re-entrance of the former Possessors, not un∣justly ejected, so far as has yet apped, and therefore unjustly reintroduc'd)Bur. V. 2. Coll. p. 256. Four of them, Holgate, Farrars, Bird, and Bush were ejected for Marriage.Ibid. p. 257. Three o∣thers Taylor, Hooper, and Harley were depriv'd by De∣legates,
who were empower'd to declare their Sees void, as they were already void.Bur. V. 2. p. 275. Barlow was made to re∣sign.Bur. V. 2. p. 257. Cranmer, the only remaining Bishop in the Ca∣talogue, was esteem'd Arch-Bishop till he was degraded for Heresie; so that he indeed was depriv'd of his See, and of his Life together, for the Causes alledg'd. Now as for those, which were ejected for Marriage, it was warranted by the Law of God, the Autority of the Pri∣mitive Church, the Statutes of the Realm, and the Sy∣nodical Act of the English Clergy. Nor is it to any purpose, which our Author urges, that these Acts of the Parliament and Synod were repeal'd; since a repeal could only abrogate the Law for the future, not void it from the beginning; it might make that Marriage should be, not that it should have been unlawful; it might legiti∣mate the proceedings against these Bishops if they re∣tain'd their Wives, not warrant the deprivation of them for what was past. Nor is it more material which is here urg'd, that the Laws which legitimated such Mar∣riage were void in their making, as being contrary to the Canons of Superior Councils, untill it be proved that those Councils, which prohibited such Marriage, were our lawful Superiors, and, if so, had power to lay such a Yoke upon their Subjects. For these Councils he refers me to the Discourse of Celibacy, and for a Reply I refer him to the Answer to it. As for the next 3 Bishops Taylor, Hooper, and Harley their Judges were not to seek for a Cause, who had power to declare their Sees void, as they were already void. But let us at last sup∣pose the Causes of their Deprivation the same as are by him alleg'd; as it is confest they were the Causes, for which Cranmer was depriv'd, and for which He and o∣thers were burnt; Yet whether these were just Causes
of Deprivation or not, doth not depend upon this Man's confident Assertion, but on the truth of the thing. It seems something arrogant thus Magisterially in one breath to condemn all those Doctrines of the Reformation, which have hitherto stood the shock against all their Ar∣guments, and their Faggots; their Bellarmines and their Bonners. The Reformers for some Years have been writing and dying in Justification of these Doctrines, and doth this Author at last think that the very naming of them is Evidence enough that those Bishops, who were ejected for their adherence to them, were rightfully eje∣cted as to the Cause? But it is enough with these Men to condemn an Opinion, that it is not their own; For as for the truth of particular Doctrines, whether there be a Trinity, whether Christ and the Holy Ghost be God, or the like, these, we are told,Guide in Controv. Preface. are things that trouble none, who hath once undergone the Mortification of dethro∣ning his own Judgment, and hath captivated it to the Unity of the Church's Faith. But as they were regularly ejected as to the cause, so they were as to the Judg, they being not ejected, he saith, by the Queen's Commissioners, but by the delegates of the Western Patriarch. This, not to speak too bluntly, is aBook of Educ. p. 294. Edit Ox. 1677. Gasconade with a Witness. Had not the World been pre∣sented with a Collection of Records, such an Assertion, as this, would have been more tolerable; but to tell us they were not depriv'd by the Queen's Commissioners, when we can have recourse to theBur. Vol. 2. Coll. p. 256. 257. Original Commissions, by which they were depriv'd, became one, who writes as if he had no reputation to lose. But the Judges were to be prov'd Canonical, the Delegates of the Prince had be∣fore been affirm'd to be Uncanonical, and this being a
knot impossible to be untied, the Knight-Errant boldly cuts it. Having prov'd that these Bishops were regularly eje∣cted as to the cause, and as to the Judge, the next Que∣stion is, whether they were regularly burnt too? As for the burning of Heretics, it is to be consider'd, He saith, that the Secular Laws, not Ecclesiastical appoint it, and the Secular Magistrates, not Ecclesiastical, execute it. This amounts to no more than that Kings are the Pope's Executioners; they are requir'd to extirpate Heretics upon pain of being themselves extirpated; and if they will not be active, must be passive. It is farther observ'd that Protestant Princes, as well as Catholic, have thought fit to execute this Law upon Heretics. He in∣stances in Joan of Kent, and George Paris burnt in Ed∣ward the Sixth's days. But these suffer'd for Impieties directly against the Creed;B. V. 2. p. 111. Joan of Kent for denying that Christ was incarnate of the Virgin Mary;Ibid p. 112. George Paris for denying that he was God. We have King Ed∣ward'sIbid tears recorded which he shed upon signing the warrant for Joan of Kent's execution; but I have not read of any tears shed upon that Occasion by Q. Mary. Some other Anabaptists condemn'd and recanting were enjoyn'd to bear their Faggots. ButIbid. p. 111. the Opinions of these Anabaptists would have made an Anticreed to that of the Apostles; and bearing the Faggot is ill oppos'd to the cruelty of that Reign, whenCranmer's case. recanting did not ex∣empt from burning. In Henry the 8th's time, Crom∣wel pronounc'd Sentence on Lambert to be burnt. I never read before that King Henry was a Protestant Prince. Arch-Bishop Cranmer committed to the Counter Tho∣mas Dob a Master of Arts, who also died in prison. The Consequence is, that Protestant Princes burn Heretics.
In Q. Elizabeth's time Lewes and Hammond were burnt for Heretics. Hammond's Impieties against God and his Christ were such, asCambd. Hist. of Eliz. p. 235. Edit. Lond. 1675. Mr. Cambden will not mention, but desires they may be buried in Oblivion. Lewis was an Heretic of the same Magnitude. Hacket was exe∣cuted for Heresy and Blasphemy.Ful. Hist. Book 9•h. p. 205. Such blasphemies as might have been utter'd by a faln Angel. Coppin and Thocker were hang'd for publishing Brown's book against the Common-prayer. ButStow's Chron. Q. Eliz. p. 696. that book full of Sedition against the State. In King James's time Bartholomew Legate was burnt for an Heretic. ButSee his Opinions. Full. l. 10. p. 62. he an Arrius Redivivus. As for the Statute of King James An. 3. Jac. 4. c. it does not punish the reconcil'd as Heretics, but as Traytors. The Crime there reputed Treason is with-drawing the Natural Obedience from the Prince; and none can suffer by that Act, who takes the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. Had the Writ de Haeretico comburendo lain as quiet as this Act, We should not have reflected with so much horror on the Cruelty of the C. of Rome. This instancing in a Statute made only in terro∣rem, and never put in Execution (tho' the demerits of some Apostates have been sufficiently provoking) would tempt one to look back into the last Century, and review the Treasons and Rebellions which extorted the making of that Statute: but I forbear to pursue this Topick, least too warm a zeal against the disloyalty of that party be it self interpreted dis-loyal. Having shew'd us the Protestant's judgment concern∣ing the justness of burning Hereticks, he next gives us his own Sentiments. The ignorant Laity, and illiterate Clergy he in his great mercy rescues from the Faggot, and
condemns only to Poverty and Prisons. This in Spain or Italy had been a great Act of grace; but He might be sure few of our Laity or Clergy could plead the benefit of it. The Fathers of the Church and Learned Sons of it are not mention'd in this Indulgence, and there seems to be no reserve for them. Indeed He had stretcht his kindness too far in favour of the Haereticis credentes, and as if he repented, confesses some of them to have been extremely arrogant and ignorant. It provokes his In∣dignation that Mechanics should dispute with Bishops. But the advantage these Mechanics had in the cause, made amends for the imparity of the Advocates. And after all, Bonner, and the Miller were not such unequal Disputants, as He would perswade Us. They relied he saith, on the uncertainty of their own Judgment. But this Protestant certainty such, as has been prov'd to rise as high as the Popish Infallibility. He is not satisfied that the Relations of these disputes are pen'd with Inte∣grity. Indeed the reasonings of the Roman Prelates and Doctors are such, as One would be apt to think them mis∣related; but when I read our Modern Controvertists, I begin to have a great respect for their Fore-fathers. The next Paragraphs tell us,§. 67.68. that if the Ejection of these Bishops were lawful, then the Introduction of o∣thers will be so too, tho'. 1. Whilst they living, 2ly. With∣out the Metropolitan's consent. But I am so well satis∣fied he has not prov'd the lawfulness of the Ejection, that I shall not dispute with him concerning the Consequen∣ces of it. Our Author him-self, who doth not use to be scrupulous, seems here unsatisfied with his own perfor∣mances. For being conscious he has not prov'd Q. Ma∣ry's Clergy lawful,  He has another hold to which he makes his last retreat. He is willing to justifie Q. Ma∣ry's re-establishment of the former Religion, even with∣out
her own Clergy, from the Autority of Superior Sy∣nods. This he knows is part of our Plea, but with this advantage on our side, that Whereas, he will have the Prince oblig'd to execute the Church's Canons without Inferior license, We think him much more concern'd to provide for the Execution of Christ's Laws without such consent of the Clergy. What has been said in this Chapter cannot want a Re∣capitulation. The ejection of Bishops in King Edward's time was to have been prov'd unlawful, because for an unlawful Cause, and by an unlawful Judge; the ejection of Bishops in Q. Mary's time lawful, because for a law∣ful Cause, and by a lawful Judge: the Judges in both cases were the same, viz. the Commissioners of each Prince; the Causes in neither are rightly assign'd; and of those which are assign'd, Nothing is said to prove their respective lawfulness or unlawfulness. This is the great Argument of the Chapter; to repeat all the fals-hoods in it, would be to transcribe it. A Reply to his 6th Chapter. THat the former Supremacy was reassum'd by Q. E∣lizabeth,§. 70.71. is confest: Thus much is said in the Ti∣tle of this Chapter, and no more in 3 pages of it. Some bounds of this Supremacy are own'd to be assign'd by Protestant Writers:  Who therefore are wrong'd by this Author, when they are represented as Advocates of an unlimited Supremacy. The Qualifications by us urg'd are taken from the Queen's Title, her Admonition, the words of the 37th Article, and the Proviso in the first Act of Q. Elizabeth.  Now as to his Rational Reply to the Title; that Head and Governor in a due sense are Synonymous, I allow; but because the Style of Head
gave Offence, the changing of it into a word, which was less obnoxious to cavil,  was material. As to the Admo∣nition, it has been observ'd by thep. 40. Animadverter that no more power is there challeng'd to the Prince, than was due of Ancient time to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; and so much our Church-Governour, if he will be constant to his own Principles, cannot deny. As to the Clause of the 37th Article,  that, he tells us, will be subscrib'd by all sides; I hope therefore the Supremacy is there limited; Else the Romanists will subscribe to an unlimited power of the Prince.  As to the Proviso, that the adjudging of Heresie should be confin'd to the Canonical Scriptures, four first General Councils, and As∣sent of Convocation, and that this should be no confine∣ment of the Supremacy, is to me a Paradox. That the re∣establishment of the Supremacy was not consented to by the Bishops, who were in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, is true; but whether those in the former Chap∣ter have been prov'd a lawful Hierarchy, must be left to the Reader. This indeed was asserted strongly; but proving is not this Author's talent. A Reply to Chapter the 7th. I Have hitherto, not without great patience, pursued this Author through all his windings, and turnings, and every where discover'd his constant fallacies and pre∣varications. Being arriv'd to Q. Elizabeth's Reign, in which the Reformation had it's last settlements, We might justly have hop'd He would have been drawing towards a Conclusion. But We have been wandring in a Labyrinth, and after this tedious pursuit are brought to the same point again, whence We first set out. Four
long Chapters have been spent to shew us what Supre∣macy King Hen. Ed. and Q. Eliz. assum'd; and the same things are to be repeated again in above an hun∣dred pages more,  to shew how they acted according to such Supremacy. This I know is a frightful prospect to the Reader, but that He may not be dejected, I pro∣mise him to dispatch the succeeding Chapters with grea∣ter brevity, and to give them an Answer more propor∣tionable to their weight, than their bulk. We are told that King Henry by Virtue of his Supre∣macy committed the Laws Ecclesiastical to be reformed by 32 Commissioners. But this was a Repetition when we met it last; it was spoke to when it first offer'd it self; and I should follow a bad pattern, if his Example should invite me to repeat. By Virtue of such Supremacy he set forth certain In∣junctions concerning Matters of Faith. These Injun∣ctions were the genuine Acts of the Convocation. The setting them forth therefore was not by virtue of any such. i. e. any new Supremacy. For it is confest, that to enjoyn the observance of Synodical decrees by Temporal punishments was such a Supremacy,  as the Princes of this Land, before Hen. 8th, had and exercis'd. These Ar∣ticles set forth seem to him to have nothing in them fa∣vouring the Reformed Opinions, and to discede in nothing from the Doctrine of former Councils. Why then are they brought here as an Evidence that the Reformation was carried on by mere Civil Supremacy? But however our Author and Sanders agree in their History, they dif∣fer much in their judgment.Sand. p. 119 Sanders styles some of these Articles Heretical, the Doctrines of Luther, and Zwinglius, and saith they are diametrically oposite to the Catholic Religion. The body of them he compares to
the Alcoran, as made up of a Medley of Religions, and, af∣ter his usual manner of treating Princes, calls King Hen∣ry upon this Occasion another Mahomet.Bur. V. 1. p. 218. The Refor∣mers at that time thought a great Step made by these Ar∣ticles towards a Reformation: The Papists here were much mortified by them, and the Papal party abroad made great Use of them to shew the necessity of adher∣ing to the Pope, since King Henry, having broke off his Obedience to the Apostolic See, did not, as he had pre∣tended, maintain the Catholic Faith intire. If there∣fore these Articles do in nothing discede from Popery, it is because the New Popery of this Age has disceded much from the antiquated Popery of the former. It is noted, that the King by Virtue of his Supremacy com∣mands these Injunctions to be accepted by his Subjects, not as appearing to him the Ordinances or Definitions of the Church, but as judg'd by him agreeable to the Law of God. Our Author had little matter for Censure, when He urg'd this as an Accusation. It is imputed that he paid more deference to Christ's Law, then to the Act of a Convocation; and chose rather to resolve his and his Subjects Obedience into the Autority of God, then of Man. Thus are We taught that we must put out our Eyes, e're We can follow Our Spiritual Guide, as We ought; and in our Faith prescind from Christ's Autority, if We will approve our selves good Catholics. For if what is enjoyn'd by the Church seem agreeable to the Word of God, and therefore is accepted, such acceptance is accus'd of not being sufficiently resigning; So that no one, according to these Principles, is a true Son of the Church, but he who pays a blind Obedience to her Di∣ctates, either without any regard to God's Laws, or in formal Opposition to them.
By Virtue of such Supremacy he publish'd a Book entitl'd, A necessary Doctrine for all sorts of People. The twoBur. V. 1. p. 274. Arch-Bishops, several Bishops, and Doctors of the Church compil'd this book. If the Doctrines in it were as Or∣thodox, as they were thought necessary, I see no harm in the Publication. Whether they were or not, concerns not us, it being not pretended that these (or the Six Ar∣ticles, which are here also urg'd) were Acts of the Re∣formation. Heresie became a thing of the Parliament's cognizance, as well as the King's; Of their cognizance, not only for the declaring and punishing, but also the adjudging of it. What the nice difference is betwixt declaring, and adjudging Heresie, I am not so subtle a Nominalist as to determine. Heresie was no farther of the Parliament's cognizance, then to declare, how it should be punish'd. It was, in this sense, of the Parliament's cognizance before King Henry the 8th's time, when the Laws were made against Lollards, and after King Edward's time, when those Acts were by Q. Mary's Parliament reviv'd. He has dwelt the longer on these Instances that We may see, when a Prince (together with his Particular Clergy,§. 83, 84.85. or rather whom out of them He shall choose) claims a power of composing Models of Christian Faith, and declaring all those his Subjects Heretics, who do not believe and obey such his Determinations; what danger, what mutability occurrs in such a Nation, as often as this Independent Head is not every way Orthodox. It concerns not us, what ill Consequences may attend the claim of such a power, untill it be prov'd that we ascribe such an Autority of New-Modelling the Faith to our Princes. The Apostolic, Nicene, and Athana∣sian Creeds we receive and embrace; but I know not of any Henrician Creed incorporated into our Faith. The
Romanists have a Creed Younger by some Years then King Henry; but nothing is a part of our Faith, but what sprung up with Infant-Christianity. It is therefore a wild Inference, that because we own the King to be Su∣preme Head of the Church, therefore We make the Christian Religion mutable. Did we make Acts of Par∣liament the Rule of our Faith, there would be ground for such an Objection; For then an Article of Faith might be enacted and repeal'd at pleasure, and He, who was Orthodox in one Session, might become an Heretic in the next. But Scripture is the Rule of our Faith, a Rule like it's Author, unchangeable; the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. The Christian indeed is obnoxious to the pow∣er of the Prince, but Christianity is without the reach of his Sword. Nor has the King this influence over the external profession of Religion, as he is the Ecclesiastical Head, but as he is the Civil Supreme. God has intrusted him, as such, with the power of the Sword, with a com∣mand indeed to use it for the protection of the true Reli∣gion, but with a natural liberty still of using it for the Protection of a false. This Author, I confess, has a reme∣dy against this, namely, some Temporal coactive power lodg'd in the Pope, in order to dissolve upon Occasion the co∣active power of the Prince; But we do not envy him this Catholicon against Innovation. Passive Obedience is our Principle, and if this renders the legal Establishment of our Religion more obnoxious to the pleasure of the Civil Magistrate, Yet it better secures our common Christiani∣ty. Q. Mary therefore may repeal King Edward's Laws, but unless she could repeal Christ's Law too, Ridley's and Latimer's Religion will still be the same; The only dif∣ference is, that the Faith, which before they defended from the Pulpit, they now more effectually propagate at the Stake. To conclude this point; whilst Princes have
the power of the Sword, and Subjects are oblig'd to Non∣resistance, the Supreme Governor will have an influence over the outward State of Religion; and He, that com∣plains of this, repines against the Methods of God's provi∣dence. It is no blemish therefore on the Reform'd Re∣ligion (which is here dwelt upon by this Author) that it went forward or backward under King Henry, accord∣ing as his different passions or Interests inclin'd him. Whilst Q. Ann liv'd it had indifferent success, saith Fox. Here then, saith our witty Observer, the Supreme Head of the Church was directed by a Woman, and manag'd the Affairs of Religion accordingly. Now admitting this were a truth, which had escap'd him, Yet the curious Editor, I doubt not, amongst his Collections has met with a Medal re∣presenting Donna Olympia with the Pope's Mitre on her Head, and St. Peter's Keys in her Hands; and on the Reverse, the Pope with his Head drest like a Lady, and a Spindle in his hand. Be it also true, that Cromwel, a Laic, had the total management of Ecclesiastical affairs under King Henry, Yet any one, Who is conversant in History, knows that the administration of the Popedom has been in the Hands of more obnoxious Favourites. What is said in the next Paragraph, is not of more mo∣ment here, then when first mention'd in Paragraph the 19th. By Virtue of such Supremacy, he took Possession of all the Monasteries and Religious Houses. Our prolix Author, who never spares his own Labour, or his Reader's Pati∣ence, has enlarg'd upon this point for 12 Paragraphs, and is very copious against Sacrilege. But I do not see how our Cause is concern'd in this charge; Avarice and Sa∣crilege are as great Sins in our Homilies, as they are in the Popish Canons; and Cranmer and Ridley were as severe against robbing the Church, as this Declaimer. We
are no more concern'd to defend King Henry's rapines, then the Lusts, some have charged him with. Were the Suppression of Abbies as great a crime, as it is here under false colours represented, I do not see why we are more oblig'd to plead in it's favour, than this Writer would think himself bound, because he asserts the power of the Roman Patriarch, to justifie the foul and unparal∣lel'd enormities of those, who have sat in St. Peter's chair. But were the dissolution of Monasteries represented im∣partially, it would be easie, were it necessary, to give it a fair appearance; and it must be at last confest that the fault of King Henry was not so much in taking away those foundations of Superstition, as in not applying all the Revenues, as he did some (and had done more, if the Reformers had had more Influence over him) to Uses truly Religious. By Virtue of such a Supremacy he made orders and gave Di∣spensations in matters of Marriage,§. 99.100. of Fasts, of Holydays, of Election and Consecration of Bishops, and Challeng'd a power of abrogating several other Ceremonies. It ought to have been shewn, that any Constitutions concerning these did ever oblige us, but such as either were made and or∣dained within this Realm, or such other as were indu∣ced into the Realm by sufferance, consent, and custom; for until this Proposition laid down in the Statute25. of Hen. 8.27. c. be disprov'd, the Assumption there, that the State hath power to dispence with it's own Laws, will be unsha∣ken. Ecclesiastical Canons with this Author is another expression for Papal Decrees; the Autority therefore, which supported them, being justly taken away, it is no wonder if they fell with it. Amongst the Rites, which King Henry commands to be observ'd, till he shall be pleas'd to alter them, Fox reckons paying of Tithes;
Where this Annotator observes, that, Tithes are here con∣ceiv'd to be in the disposal of the Supreme Head of the English Church. Now whether King Henry thought Tithes to be jure divino or not, doth not concern the Reformation; But what is here said of payment of Tithes doth not prove that he thought them alienable from the Clergy; For he might by his Laws regulate the payment of them, tho' he did not think them disposable in this Author's sense. Several Statutes were made in his Reign for the better securing this Right of the Clergy; In them27. Hen. 8. c. 20. Tithes are said to be due to God and the Church; the detainers of them to have no regard of their32. Hen. 8. c. 7. duties to Almighty God; And theRef. Leg. Tit. de Decimis cap. 1. Reformatio legum derives the Clergy's original right to them from the Laws of Christ. By Virtue of such Supremacy, he without any consent of the Clergy, by his Vice-gerent Cromwel order'd that English Bibles should be provided and put in every Church. The translation of the Bible was petition'd by the 2Bur. V. 1. p. 195. Houses of Convocation; and the publication of it was included in that request. This Act therefore had the consent of the Clergy, tho', had it wanted it, it would have been justifiable from the Law of God. The prohibition of the Scriptures to the Vulgar, which follow'd afterwards, was no Act of the Reformation, but of the Anti-refor∣mers. It was pretended that some erroneous Opinions were propagated by a free Use of the Scripture; and therefore that Use was restrain'd. Now least it be ob∣jected by Us, that the Opinions, the King call'd erroneous, were the Protestant doctrines discover'd by the Vulgar from the New light of Sciptures, this Author bids us see the very Opinions a the Bishops collected them in Fox: unownable by any sober Christian. It is my fate to deal
with One, who glory's in his Shame; and Who is sel∣dom content to be mistaken, but he refers his Reader to the very Page, which confutes him. Fox, in the very place by him cited, has shew'd how unfaithful the Bi∣shops were in that Collection; He has with great In∣dustry compar'd the Bishop's Catalogue of Errors with the Books, whence they are cited, and from the Com∣parison has prov'd the Bishops guilty of a fault (which this Author inherits from them) that they perverted the sayings of the Protestants otherwise then they meant, fasly be∣lied them, or untruly mistook them, either in mangling the places, or adding to their words, as might serve for their most advantage to bring them out of credit. By Virtue of such a Supremacy these things that King did, some of them against the Canons, not of Popes, but of the Catholic Church, and Superior Councils. The truth of this depends upon the four first parts of Church-Govern∣ment: When we know what he means by Church-Catho∣lic, what by Superior Councils, and what those Acts of the Reformation are, which are thus opposite to such Obligatory Canons (for we do not desire to justifie all King Henry's proceedings) it will then be seasona∣ble to give in our Plea to this (at present) indefinite charge. That the King should derive his Ecclesiastical Jurisdi∣ction on Cromwel a secular person, and unlearned; con∣cerns not Us, since the placing such Jurisdiction on a Per∣son so unqualifi'd is no part of the establish'd Discipline of this Church. But that this is not a thing unparallel'd, the Animadverter has given an Instance in the King of Spain's exercising by Lay-Delegates greater Autority in Spirituals, then can be pretended to have been lodg'd in Cromwel.
If now we look back to theBur. Hist. Pref. preparations, which were made towards a Reformation in this King's Reign, and consider that the Papal Usurpation was by him abolish∣ed, the Rites and Constitutions, which depended merely on that Autority, faln together with it; the Superstition of Images, Reliques, and redemption of Souls out of Pur∣gatory supprest with the Monasteries; the extravagant Addresses to Saints reduc'd to a mere ora pro Nobis, and that left at Liberty to be us'd or omitted; the Scriptures translated, publish'd, and made the Rule of Faith; and the power of a National Church to reform her self vin∣dicated; We shall not be scrupulous to sdbscribe Mr. Fox's Epiphonema, which so much grieves this Author, That King Henry did by his Autority more good for the re∣dressing and advancing Christ's Church here in England in three Years, then the Pope the great Vicar of Christ with all his Bishops and Prelates had done in the Space of three hun∣dred Years before. A Reply to Chapter the 8th. THis Chapter is usher'd in with a reflection on the breach made by King Henry upon the Church's Do∣ctrines; I confess my self very curious to know how a breach here is reconcil'd with a Non-discession from the Church's Doctrines above;  but will by no means engage this Author upon so immoderate a task as that of salving all his Contradictions; I rather choose to own it as an extraordinary piece of modesty, that he has plac'd the two Contradictory Propositions in different Chapters. He challenges the Duke of Northumberland to be of the Roman Church.§. 105. n. 1. We confess it, nor do we envy him such a member. His striking in for ambitious
ends with the Reformers, who went upon honest prince∣ples, casts a blot upon his memory, but no blemish on the Reformation. Whether Cromwel died a Roman Catho∣lic, as this Author intimates, or not, the term Catholic faith us'd in his last Speech made doubtful. This Writer bids us compare Fox with Lord Herbert. Fox supposes him a Protestant, and in the Margin calls his SpeechFox. p. 1190., A true Christian profession of the Lord Cromwel at his death: Lord Herbert in his History saith no more then thatLord Herbert. Hist. p 524. he made profession of the Catholic faith; the IndexUnder the Letter C. indeed saith, he died a Roman-Catholic. Th eAntiq. Brit. p. 334. Author of the Antiquities gives him an High Character, and sup∣poses him of the Reformed Religion. I do not find that Heylin or Godwin mention any thing of this.Ful. Hist. 1. 5. p. 233. Fuller af∣ter his way descants upon it, and inclines to think him a Protestant. Dr. BurnetBur. V. 1. p. 285. makes it appear that the term Catholic faith was then us'd in it's true Sense, in Opposi∣tion to the Novelties of the See of Rome. He argues from his praying in English, and that to God only through Christ without those tricks, which the Roman Church use when they die, that he was none of theirs. After all, this Controversie is not perhaps worth the de∣ciding; but this Author is over peremptory in affirming that he died a Catholic in his Sense. King Edward had but one Parliament all his days,§ 105. n. 2. con∣tinu'd by Prorogation from Session to Session, till at last it en∣ded in the death of the King. It betrays gross Ignorance in one, who sets up for an Historian, thus blindly to mi∣stake in a matter so notorious.Bur. V. 2. p. 195.214. The first Parliament was dissolv'd. Apr. 15. 1552. and a second call'd the 1st. of March after. As for the complexion of King Edward's
Parliament, which he has given us from Dr. Heylin, It arises to no more then that in so great a Body, All did not act upon pure principles of Conscience, but some were sway'd by their Interest: An imputation, from which None can pretend to vindicate their Infallible Councils, not this Author himself. Cranmer is accus'd of unorthodox Opinions concerning the power of the Church.§ 105. n. 3. Cranmer pretended not to be Infallible, and all that is here said, is, that he was not. HeBur. V. 1. p. 172. had some singular Opinions concerning Ecclesiasti∣cal Functions, which yet he enjoyed by himself, and never studied to make them part of the doctrine of this Church. TheseBur. V. 1. inter Addenda. p. 357. afterwards he corrected, and we find him subscribing a Declaration, in which it is affirm'd, that the Power of the Keys is formally distinct from that of the Sword. And least it be thought that in this subscription he was over-rul'd by a majority, in aBur. V. 2. p. 71. Work, which was wholly his own without the concurrence of any other, He sets forth their Divine Institution. Poste∣rity, saith our Commentator, might have done better to have cover'd this Nakedness of their forefather, then to have publish'd it after so great Silence. A caution this of great use to the Followers of Ignatius and Francis, but till we come to draw Parallels betwixt Cranmer and our Saviour, we shall not be asham'd to own in him the frailties of a Man. King Edward sent out Injunctions in matters of Religion. True! And these contrary to the Decrees of former Obliging Councils. Which, till the four former parts of Church-Government are publish'd, I may safely deny. Without the consent of a Synod, the Act of which only has force in such Matters. This has been said often, but never yet at∣tempted to be prov'd.
He next presents us with a summary of the King's pro∣ceedings from Fox, but, according to his usual method, very much interpolated. Men of Learning were sent for from forreign Countries, saith Fox; Which argues scar∣city at home of those Clergy, who would second the King's Refor∣mation, saith the Comment. After his rate of arguing, very possibly it may; men of great Learning, say Tra∣vellers, are at this time great rarities in some Popish Countries; Yet my Logick gives me no encouragement to argue, that in those places there is a scarcity of Popish Clergy. Among those sent for, saith Fox, were Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and Paulus Fagius; He might have added, saith the Parathesis, Bernardus Ochinus. Had he been as much delighted in adding, as we find this Church-Governor, he no doubt would have added it. But Mr. Fox very probably had not read that Ochinus was sent for, and therefore besides other reasons made Conscience of saying it. "Martyr taught at Oxford, Bucer and Fagius at Cambridge, saith Fox. Sure, saith our Au∣thor, not because the Ʋniversities were not held so Learned, but because they were not counted so Orthodox. Very sure it is, that a composition of both was requir'd, and it is no wonder if in the very dawnings of Reformation, Persons so qualified were very rare. Fox addeth And that with no small commendation of the whole University. The Author puts in, not without opposition of many Learn∣ed Men there, and recommends to our Reading, when at leisure, the rational arguings of Mr. Glyn, Mr. Langdale, and others against the Reformers. How rational their arguings are, he, that is at leisure, may consider; but this Writer has given us such a Specimen of his own, that I doubt his Judgment will little recommend them. But, since he has impos'd this task upon us, I hope, by way of return, he will be pleas'd to peruse the Dialogue between Custom and
Veritie, which immediatly follows that part of Fox, which he has assign'd us. As for the Oxford oppositions, Peter Martyr's relation is perhaps not the most impartial. And some may say our Church-Governor is perhaps not the most Honest. For if by this scrupulosity of Expression he would insinu∣ate that Martyr was partial, this is a Calumny borrow'd from Sanders, and replied to by hisBur. V. 2. App. p. 394. Confuter. You may find in his Opponents, Tresham, Chadsey, and Morgan, much Learning, Reverence to the Church, and zeal in their Cause. I have not the Relation by me, and therefore can pass no judgment on this Learned Triumvirate. But as for Tresham we have a Specimen in FoxFox. p. 1475. how great a Ta∣lent he was Master of in disputing. Being Pro-Sub-Dean of Christ-Church he call'd all the Students together, and recommended Popery to them upon these convinc∣ing grounds. 1st. He urg'd, that there were a goodly company of Copes that were appointed to Windsor, but he had found the Queen so gracious to him, that they should come to Christ-Church; Now if they, like ho∣nest men, would come to Mass, they should wear them on Holy-days. A second motive was, that he would get them the Lady-Bell of Bampton, and that should make the sweetest ring in all England. The third was, that as for an Holy-Water-Sprinkle, he had allready the fairest within this Realm. He thought therefore no man would be so mad, as to forego these commodi∣ties. It may be needless to remark to the Gentle-men of that Foundation, that our Adversaries are still the same dangerous Orators, and therefore, if any should have irrecoverably engag'd his Affections to a pretty pair of Beads, or set his heart immoderately upon the great Bell, it concerns him to have a guard upon himself. The Author having muster'd up the Bishops ejected in King
Edward's days, adds; Pate Bishop of Rochester, Goldwel Bishop of St. Asaph, — Bishop elect of Bangor are said to have been Banish'd. If the Author was Jesuite enough to say this to himself, before he wrote it, he may come off, If not, it will prove a most unconscionable Gasconade. PateGodw. Catal. of Bishops in Worce∣ster. Bur. V. 2. p. 324. was never Bishop of Rochester, but of Worce∣ster; he was not Banish'd, but Fled; and this not in King Edward's time, but in King Henry's. So here was multum in parvo. GoldwellHeylin's History. p. 224. was not Bishop of St. Asaph, nor any other Bishop till A. 1555. which was in Q. Ma∣ry's time, and therefore it was an unreasonable Prolepsis to make him one of the exil'd Bishops in King Edward's time. Anonymus Long-stroke Bishop Elect of Bangor is one of our Author's own Creation. Some more, he saith, might be remov'd in like Manner; who happen not to be men∣tion'd because deceas'd before the Reign of Q. Mary; as Wakeman Bishop of Glocester, Holbeck Bishop of Lincoln, Skyp Bishop of Hereford, Rugg Bishop of Norwich. No doubt they might have been, if this Church-Governor had pleas'd, for never Committee-man ejected more arbi∣trarily, then he. But that they actually were not re∣mov'd, we have these good reasons to think. The eje∣ction of Bishops is particularly insisted on by our Histo∣rians; but these Bishops make none of the number. All these Bishops do happen to be mention'd, not as depriv'd, but deceas'd; Tho' their Deprivation had deserv'd men∣tioning, as well as their Death.Burn. V. 2. p. 152. Heylin's Hist. p 90. Wakeman dyed in Dec. 1549.Burn. V. 2. p. 203. Heylin's Hist. p. 129. Holbeck in August 1551.Burn. V. 2. p. 218. Skyp in the Year 1552. Rugg dyed in the Year 1550, according toGodwin's Catalogue in Norwich. God∣win; Dr. BurnetBurn. V. 2. p. 150. call's him Reps, and saith heresign'd.
So that what our Author has inserted here de proprio is like to be lookt upon as one continu'd Forgery. The next two Paragraphs have more truth in them,§. 108.109. being transcrib'd from Fox, But the Proclamation inhi∣biting the whole Clergy to preach, cited from Fuller, is question'd byBurn. V. 2. p. 81. Burnet, who met with no footsteeps of it neither in Records, nor Letters, nor in any Book written at that time. The succeeding Paragraphs of this Chapter pretend to give Us the defence made by the Protestant Divines con∣cerning King Edward's proceedings,§ 110. to § 136 together with our Author's Rational Replies. But besides, that from the fair dealing of this Author already detected, we have no rea∣son to expect him ingenuous in representing the Argu∣ments of our Divines with their just weight; it may be farther offer'd by way of Precaution, that those excellent Divines, which he refers to, wanted one advantage, which we of this Age have from a more complete and Authen∣tic History of the Reformation, and, among other things, not knowing of theBur. Hist. V. 1. Pref. rasure of Records made in Q. Mary's Reign, pleaded to those Negative Arguments which we have good reason to reject. This premis'd, I proceed to con∣sider with all possible brevity his Alphabet of Arguments. α Urges that these Injunctions were not set forth but by the advice and consent of the Metropolitan; and β of other Bishops.§ 111, 112, The substance of his Reply to α and β is, that these Injunctions had not the Autority of the Metropolitan, as such, i. e. as acting with the major part of the Synod. Now α β may easily rejoyn that where the matter of the Injunctions is lawful, much more where it is necessary, as being commanded in Scripture, there the coactive Autority of the Prince is sufficiently Obligatory; and that since the Office of Pastors (whe∣ther
in or out of Synod) is directive, these Injunctions proceeding from the direction of both the Metropolitans (forBur. V. 2. p. 25. Holgate also Arch Bishop of York was a Reformer) andIbid. other Learned Bishops, were not destitute of Ec∣clesiastical Autority. γ Saith these Injunctions were not set forth as a body of Doctrine (which was the Act of the Synod in the 5th. of King Edward) but were provisional only for the pub∣lick exercise of Religion and Worship; and Gamma is in the right of it, for any thing his Replyer faith to the contrary, who doth not pretend that they were. A new Objection indeed is started, and pretended instances given that King Edward claim'd a power for rectifying the Doctrines of his Clergy.  But not to trouble the Reader with examining the Instances, we say that such a power might have been justly exercis'd, and that a Prince, re∣quiring his Clergy to receive and teach such Doctrines, as were taught by our Saviour, usurps no Autority not invested in him. δ Saith, The publick Exercise of Religion was ne∣cessary to be provided for at present.  It is answer'd, that the Judgment of a National Synod was necessary for such Provision. For the proof of that, we are refer'd toCh. Gov. Part. 4th. a Book, which no Bookseller has yet had the courage to undertake; and therefore for a Reply, I remit him to the Answer to it; which he will find at any Shop, where Church-Government Part the 4th is to be sold. ζ Saith, The Injunctions extend only to some evident points, the abolishing of Image Worship, the restoring of the Liturgy in a known tongue, and Communion in both kinds, and the abolishing of Romish Masses, and that in the three former the King restor'd only, what was establish'd in the Ancient Church.  It is replied that
nothing is said in ξ of taking away the Mass; But if the Reader be pleas'd to consult ζ he will be satisfied of our Author's modesty. If ζ did not charge the Mass with Novelty, it was because the Respondent had the manage∣ment of the Opposition. As for the other three points,  he confesses that the Reformation in them restor'd the practice of the Primitive Church, and so kind he is, that he could have pardon'd us this, had we not proceed∣ed to pronounce the contrary Doctrines unlawful. A ve∣ry heynous aggravation this, when he himself confesses, that Errurs in practice do always presuppose Errors in Do∣ctrine.  From which Zeta doth humbly subsume, that those Church Governors who would have been facile to licence a change of their practice, ought not to have been difficile in allowing us a decession from their Do∣ctrine. The Controversie betwixt out Author and ε is so tri∣fling that it is not worth troubling the Reader with it. For this reason perhaps it was, that Zeta took Epsilon's place. η Urges that these Injunctions were generally receiv'd, and put in practice by the Bishops; and θ much-what the same, that they were consented to by the major part of Bi∣shops. The Answer to this consists of some Pages; but what is material in it will ly in a less room. It is urg'd that some were averse to the Reformation, that the Com∣pliers were guilty of dissimulation, of an outward compliance whilst contrarily affected, that they remain'd of the old Religion in their heart, wore vizours, took up a disguise, and were sway'd by the fear of a new Law-giving Civil power. To this η and θ will not be so rude as to rejoyn, that it may perhaps be this Editor's personal Interest to prove that these Bishops complied against their Consci∣ences, and that Hypocrisie was the general principle of
that party; but that it is little for the honour of the Com∣munion, which he would seem to be of, to urge, that the whole body of it's Pastors were guilty of the highest pre∣varication possible with God and Man. But this doth doth not at all affect our Divines, who only urge that those Bishops conform'd, and might in charity have hop'd that they did it Honestly, but are not concern'd, that this Compliance was from base and ungenerous Motives. What is said here of the Liturgy shall be consider'd in λ, where it ought to have been said. I cannot dwell upon the History of these Paragraphs; but there are in it some bold strokes worthy of our Author. He blushes not to cite Parson's Conversions,  a book made up of lying and Treason, and which might have made the Mastery in Assurance betwixt it's Author and San∣ders disputable, had not Posterity seen a third Person, who may seem to have put an end to the quarrel. In a citation from Fuller,  tho' he refers us to the very Page, he puts upon us four Popish Bishops more then Fuller reckons; Aldrich Bishop of Carlile, Goodrich Bishop of Ely, Chambers Bishop of Peterborough, and King Bishop of Oxford. Now, tho' by the absolute Autority of a Church-Governor he might have impos'd these four Bishops on us, Yet it seems very hard that Fuller should be commanded to satisfie us of this point, who not only mentions no such Bishops, but in his Marginal notes tell's us, that he thinks Oxford and Ely were at that time void. We are told that Cranmer in the beginning of King Edward's days call'd a Synod,  wherein he endeavour'd to have effected a Reformation, but could not; for which we are bid to see Antiq. Britann. p. 339. But he, who would see any such thing there, must borrow our Author's Spectacles. χ Urges, that it makes no real difference whether a Reformation begin from a Vote of Bishops in Synod,
and so proceeding to the Prince be by him established, or take beginning from the Piety of the Prince mov'd by advice of faithful Bishops, and, so proceeding to the whole Body of the Clergy, be by them generally re∣ceiv'd, and put in practice according to the command of Sovereign Autority. The Answer is,  that the King did not propose a Reformation to the Clergy by them to be consulted of, and upon their Assent or denial to be establish'd or laid aside, which would have been lawful; but by them to be obey'd, as impos'd by the King, which He thinks unwarrantable. But to this it may be replied, from what has before been urg'd, that the matter of the Command being lawful (not to say necessary) the Au∣tority of the Prince is Obligatory, and that the confor∣mity of the Bishops is an Evidence that the matter was by them judg'd lawful. In λ it is urg'd that the first Form of Common-pray∣er, and Administration of Sacraments in the 2d. Year and 2d. Parliament of King Edward's reign had the ap∣probation and consent of the whole body of the Clergy in Convocation. To this it is offer'd by way of Answer, That no other Act of Reformation before the 5th of King Edward had the consent of Convocation.  But nei∣ther is this true, nor doth it prove that therefore this Liturgy had not. That it was confirm'd by Act of Par∣liament before it had this consent. But, granting this, had it therefore not the consent of Convocation? But, how doth he prove that the Act of Parliament preceded the Decree of the Synod? Because the Act of Parlia∣ment doth not mention the consent of Convocation. Ne∣gative Arguments he knows do not conclude, and it is positively said in theFor. p. 1303. Letter of the Council to Bishop Bonner that this Liturgy (not only had the Assent) but
was set forth with the Assent of the Clergy in Convo∣cation. Our Author himself, when he has forgot the debate here,  will tell us, that the Liturgy was at the same time authoriz'd by Act of Parliament, and con∣sented to by Convocation. But it is said, the Second Li∣turgy was sent to the Clergy, autoritate Regis & Par∣liamenti. Ergo, the first Liturgy had not the consent of Convocation. But, a motive to this consent might be fear of punishment. Yet theBur. V. 2. p. 101. Convocation, which gave this consent, acknowledg'd to King Edward the quiet∣ness they enjoy'd under him, having no let nor impedi∣ment in the Service of God. But the with-drawing of a few Clergy, especially if prime leaders, and introdu∣cing new Votes of a contrary perswasion into their rooms (suppose taking away six old Bishops, and put∣ting in six new ones) may render that, which before was a major part, now a lesser, and consequently the Act of this major part invalid. This putting of cases is very impertinent here, for when the consent of Con∣vocation was given to the Liturgy, not one old Bishop was depriv'd. For the Letter to Bonner before men∣tion'd, which mentions this Assent of Convocation to the Liturgy, is directed to him then Bishop of London, who yet was the first of the Bishops depriv'd. This Li∣turgy, he saith, rather omitted, then gainsaid the for∣mer Church-tenents and practice. This is urg'd by way of Apology for the Convocation's consenting; but whether the Liturgy omitted or gainsaid the Church-practise, it was one main branch of the Reformation, and it is not denied that it had the Vote of a Synod. The errors reform'd were such as corrupted, either the Worship or Doctrine; that the Reformation of Worship had the Autority of a Synod, is after much shuffling
granted; Whether the Articles, which were the Refor∣mation of Doctrine, were not confirm'd by the same Autority is to be examin'd? This μ with good reason affirms; the Replier defers the dispute, Whether the Articles were the Act of the Synod? and upon Supposition that they were, Answers that the Clergy were now much chang'd, many old Bi∣shops displac'd, new ones introduc'd; many absented from Synod, others dissembled. All this is said upon our Author's bare credit, which by this time may not be altogether unexceptionable. Only five Bishops have been prov'd to be ejected; two of these, Heath and Day, in the same Year wherein these Articles were past; and their Deprivation plac'd in History after the passing of the Articles; the Bishoprick of Durham was not yet dis∣solv'd; only two New Voters therefore (Ridley and Poinet) introduced by the Ejection of the old (Bonner and Gardiner) and those old, not prov'd to have been unlawfully ejected. What is said in ν is not denied in the Answet to ν, but something said which must wait for a Reply, till Church-Government Part the 4th has overtook the 5th. A Reply to Chapters the 9th. and 10th. OUr Author having describ'd the general way of King Edward's Reformation proceeds to parti∣culars: His description of the general has prov'd very Poetical; the particulars are most of them serv'd up the second time, and very little alter'd in the dressing. By Virtue of such Supremacy he sent Articles to the Bishop of Winchester to subscribe. But these Articles were sent once before in the 45th Paragraph, and needed
not have been sent again here, since the BishopFox. p. 1350.1357. sub∣scrib'd all (but that which contain'd an acknowledg∣ment of his fault) at the first sending. By Virtue of such Supremacy the six Articles were repeal'd without a Synod. The repealing of an Act of Parliament is not, I suppose the business of the Convo∣cation. King Henry's Parliament had affix'd severe Pe∣nalties on the Violators of the Six Articles; these King Edward's Parliament took off. Nothing therefore was repeal'd by the Civil power, but it's own Act. But neither is it true that none of these Articles were re∣vok'd by Synod. For theBur. V. 2. p. 50. Convocation, that sat with this Parliament, declar'd for Communion in both kinds, and Marriage of Priests, contrary to two of those Articles. Had not the Registers of this and other Synods beenIbid. lost, I doubt not but we could have prov'd most Acts of the Reformation Synodical. By Virtue of such Supremacy he justified the power us'd by his Father over the possessions of Monasteries and Religious Houses. That is, He did not throw up his right to them. This power was justified by Gardiner, and Bonner, and others, whom our Author must own for Catholics. This Power was justified by Q. Mary's Par∣liaments, who would not part with their Lands, as they did with their Heresy. This power is still justifiable by the Romanists, or else a lateNath. Johnson. Author deceivs Us, who has invited us to his House to a Volume of satisfactions, that the Alienation of Church-Lands consists with the principles of that Church. But 'tis said, King Edward went farther, and declar'd Monastic Vows to be unlaw∣ful, superstitious, and unobliging. The Reformers have always declar'd the same, and must continue to do so, till some reasons are brought to convince Us of the falshood
of such a Declaration. Those, which are offer'd in the Discourse of Caelibacy, are not demonstrative. King Ed∣ward seiz'd upon Chauntries, Free-Chappels &c. his pretence being the Unlawfulness of offering the sacrifice of the Eucharist, or giving alms for the defunct. The unlawfulness of these is not pretended by the Reforma∣tion, but prov'd; The Chauntries were dissolv'd, that the provisions for them might be converted to more pious Uses; this was the design of the Act of Parlia∣ment (for which only We can be thought oblig'd to answer) how ever it might be defeated: For the statute expressly provides that they be converted to good and Godly Uses, as in erecting Grammar-Schools for the Edu∣cation of Youth in Virtue and Godliness, the farther augmenting of the Universities, and better provision for the poor and needy. In this he went beyond his Father, that He began the taking of Bishop's Lands also. This must be reckon'd an Act of the Reformation, tho' he knows it is as pathe∣tically lamented by our Writers, as by his own. He cites the complaints of three Protestant Bishops (Cran∣mer, Ridley, and Godwin) and a Protestant Dr. (Heylin) to prove this charge, and yet at the same time has the boldness to charge it on the Reform'd. Sure, saith he, foul things were done in this kind, because I find even King Edward's favourite Bishops highly to dislike them. If Cranmer, and Ridley, and other King Edward's fa∣vourite-Bishops disliked the spoyl of the Church-goods, why is the Odium of this cast upon the Reformers? Or why must very foul things be done, before these declare their dislike, when it will be found upon History that Cranmer and Ridley were more inveterate Enemies to robbing of the Church, then Gardiner, and Bonner? He shuts up this Paragraph with a remark, that Lay∣menders
of Religion, ordinarily terminate in these two things, the advancing of their carnal Liberty and tem∣poral Estates. Sure this Author thinks that We know nothing beyond the Alps; that we never heard of the rich Nephews of Popes, which are flagrant evidences that Carnality and Avarice are not only Lay-vices. But perhaps he may object, that Popes are no menders of Religion. By Virtue of such Supremacy he remov'd Images out of Churches, and this when the Second Nicene Council had recommended the Use of them. This Second Ni∣cene Council is often appeal'd to by this Writer; there is a Second Divine Commandment, (or at least there once was such a Commandment) which will deserve his Consideration. What Reverence we pay to this Coun∣cil, he may have learnt from a lateReply to the 2 Disc. Oxon. Reply, where the Reader will find a just Character of this celebrated As∣sembly. By Virtue of such Supremacy, he impos'd a Book of Homilies. i. e. He took care that the people should be instructed in things concerning their Salvation, who before had been kept in ignorance. He laid a command upon the Clergy to administer the Communion in both kinds to the people. Which Command had been laid upon them by our Savior. Contrary to the Injunction of the Council of Constance. Which Injunction was made with a non-obstante to the Institution of Christ. Without any preceding consultation of a National Synod. ButBur. V. 2. p. 50. others tell us it was agreed to by the Convoca∣tion, which sat with that Parliament, and particularly that in the lower House it did not meet with a Con∣tradictory Vote. The succeeding Paragraphs to the 164th treat at large
of the Suppression of the former Church-Liturgies, Or∣dinals, and other Rituals; the setting up of New Forms of Celebrating the Communion, Ordination, and Com∣mon-prayer; the alterations of King Edward's first Common-Prayer-Book in his Second, and the reduction of some things, in the Scotch Liturgy, to the first Form of King Edward, and the complaints concerning this in Laudensium Autocatacrisis; But the Reader will excuse me, if I think a defence of our Liturgy at this time of day needless; the unlawfulness of the Mass, and Invo∣cation of Saints, and the non-Necessity of Sacerdotal Confession have been defended in Volumes; besides that this, which is here said, is only a Second Edition of the two Discourses concerning the Adoration &c. Where this change of the Services is animadverted on. So that this has been already consider'd, and any farther Reply is superseded by the two Learned Answers from London and Oxford to those Discourses. By Virtue of such Supremacy the King conceiv'd he had a power to alter and reform the Ecclesiastical Laws. This is the 4th time that this Reformation of the Laws has been insisted on; it is here confest, that this Rerformation of them was never ratified by King, Par∣liament, or Convocation, i. e. that it was no Act of the Reformation; Nothing is urg'd against it but that these Laws were establish'd by former Superior Councils, and the Reader, e're he can be satisfied of that, must be at the charge of four more Volumes of Church-Govern∣ment. By such Supremacy he abrogated all former Church-Laws concerning days of fasting or abstinence, and ap∣pointed those, he thought fit, by his own and the Parlia∣ment's Autority. The Canon-Laws, which he call's the Church-Laws for fasting, were full of mockery and su∣perstition;
Religion was plac'd in those Observances, and yet Sensuality was consistent with them; It was ad∣viseable therefore to take off those Laws, and yet to keep up such as might make Fasting and Abstinence a∣greeable to their true End; Which is to be a means to Virtue, and to subdue men's Bodies to their Soul and Spirit, the End expressly provided for in the Statute. There is no Obligation, he saith, for the Observation of either Fasting or Abstinence by any express Canon of this Church Reformed, but only by Act of Parliament. The days of Fasting are prescrib'd in the Liturgy, which has the Autority of Convocation; Fasting is enjoyn'd in the Homilies, which have the same Autority; It is there recommended from precepts of Scripture, from the Example of Christ, and from the Constitutions of the Primitive Councils; It is defin'd to be a with-hold∣ing from all meat and drink, and all manner of Natural food, in contradiction to this Author, who saith, that not Fasting is enjoyn'd us, but only Abstinence from Flesh; He might with as good reason have urg'd, that Praying to God, and believing in Christ are not enjoyn'd by the Church, as that Fasting is not; For if by Canons he means those, which are properly so call'd, neither is there any Canon, that I know of, which enjoyns such Prayer, or such Belief. By Virtue of such Supremacy the King and Parlia∣ment ordain'd that such Laws which prohibited Mar∣riage to any Spiritual Persons, who by Gods Law might Marry, should be of none effect. The Convocation had declar'd the Marriage of Priests lawfull by the Law of God; the State found the Prohibition tended to the detriment of the Republic, and therefore (had they had no other reason) might according to our Author's own principles take it off.
By Virtue of such Supremacy the King published 42 Ar∣ticles of Religion, said to be agreed on in a Synod of the Clergy held at London. If these Articles were the le∣gitimate Act of the Synod, then they were not the ef∣fects of mere Regal Supremacy; and that they were so, will, I doubt not, appear, notwithstanding all his cavils. If any one should question whether the Iliads and Ae∣neids were the genuine works of Homer, and Virgil, the Title they carry, and the Universal Tradition, which as∣signs them to these Authors, would be thought a suffici∣ent Vindication of them. This Author builds part of his Faith on the second Nicene Council, and opposes it's Decree, in favour of Image-Worship, to the second Com∣mandment forbidding it. If I should ask him how he knew such a Decree to be genuine, he would not, I be∣lieve, produce the Records, but think it a good Reply, that it is found amongst those Acts which bear the Name of that Council, and which the Church has allways ac∣cepted as such. These Articles are published with the Title of the Synod; this publication was Anno 1553, the next Year to that, in which we say they were past in Convocation; the Church for the first 5 years of Queen Elizabeth retain'd these Articles as her Doctrine; the Convocation in that Queen's time reestablish'd them with very little Alteration; they have been appeal'd to, ever since, by our Writers as the Acts of that Synod; they have been own'd by our Adversaries as such; and if so general a Tradition of a thing so notorious, and so lately done, may not be admitted, the Church of Rome is built upon a weak Foundation. But all this not∣withstanding, this Author thinks he has good Reason to deny that these Articles were establish'd by that Sy∣nod. First, he transcribes what Mr. Fuller saith of this Convocation, which I shall not hear copy, because the
Author has here (once for all) dealt ingenuously. Mr. Fuller saith the Records of this Convocation, are but one degree above blanks; and to the same purpose Dr. Heylin. But neither of these Historians had seen Q Ma∣ry's Commission for razing the Records; else they could have given us an account, why these Registers are so bare. Dr. HeylinHeylin's History. p. 121. found left upon Record in that Convocation a Memorandum concerning the Dissolution of the Bishoprick of Westminster; and it is not improba∣ble that these Articles were expung'd by some Persons, who yet were willing that the Dissolution of a Bishop∣rick, which they thought might cast an odium upon the Reformation, might remain upon Record. As for Ful∣ler's Assertion, that the Convocation had no Commission from the King to meddle with Church-business, it is only a conje∣cture which he makes from the silence of the Records. Fuller's Discourse of the Catechism doth not at all affect the Articles, unless it be prov'd, that by Catechism must be understood Articles, which our Author endeavours to perswade his unwary Reader. For this purpose, he next presents us with a Relation from Fox, concerning the questioning of a Catechism in the 1st Synod of Q. Mary; but here he is himself again, as will appear to the Rea∣der, if he compares this Relation with Fox's. He con∣cludes this Story with this Epiphonema. This concerning the questioning of the Catechism and Articles; whereas in the Relation nothing is said of the Articles, but the Ca∣techism only. To clear this point a little farther, He finds in Fox Arch-Bishop Cranmer charg'd amongst other things, with being Author of the Catechism and Articles, and with compelling men against their wills to subscribe them. Here again he shuffles; Arch-Bishop Cranmer is not there charg'd for compelling Men to subscribe the Catechism,
but the Articles; as appears from Fox's relation, as it is transcrib'd even by himself; but he makes the Catechism subscrib'd, that it may look like a Synonymous term to Articles. Arch-Bishop Cranmer answer'd to that charge, that he exhorted such as were willing to sub∣scribe, but compell'd none against their wills; Now, where this Exhortation, and Subscription was, unless in Synod, will not easily be answered. Having given us these three relations, he next proceeds to make reflecti∣ons on them. First he excepts against the words in the Title of the Articles, de quibus inter Episcopos & alios eruditos Viros, &c. that they seem not the ordinary ex∣pression of a Synodal Act, which runs more generally; as thus [de quibus convenit inter Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, & Clerum universum] or the like. This, which he calls an ordinary expression, will scarce be found in the Title of any Synodal Act before Q. Elizabeth. These Articles are by him confest to have been subscrib'd by part of the Synod; Cranmer who drew up the Articles, and pro∣cur'd Subscriptions to them must himself be a Subscrib∣er; probably also Holgate Arch-Bishop of York, who was a Reformer; Archiepiscopal Autority therefore might have been mention'd, had they been the Act of only a part of the Synod, and therefore that it is not explicitly mention'd (for it is implied in the Episcopal) can be no argument, that they were the Act of a part only. But the other words in the Title, ad tollendam opinionum dis∣sensionem & consensum verae Religionis firmandum shew they must have been the Act of the whole Synod, since the Opinion of a part could not be effectual to such an End. Next he observes, that tho' the Prolocutor in the Synod 10 Mariae questions, and Philpot answers concerning the Catechism, yet they speak not of the Catechism, but only of the Articles, which were first printed at the end of the Cate∣chism,
and bound up with it, which the Prolocutor therefore calls the Articles of the Catechism, and proposeth the mat∣ter of the 28th of these Articles for disputation; and so also calls them the Catechism, because the first Title of this Book is Catechismus brevis, &c. In this Period we have as much crude unconcocted reasoning, as would have furnish'd an ordinary Writer for some Pages. Weston ill deserv'd the Office of Prolocutor, if speaking of a Catechism he meant not that, but the Articles, which are two as distinct things as can well be imagin'd. The ArticlesThey are so bound up together in the public Library. were indeed bound up with the Catechism; but have a new Title-page, and are as distinct from it as the Di∣scourse of Caelibacy is from the Considerations on the Spirit of Martin Luther. Now had the Answerer to the Con∣siderations on Martin Luther entitl'd his Book, an An∣swer to the Discourse of Caelebacy, or should the Re∣plyer to the Discourse of Caelibacy call his Book a Reply to the Considerations on the Spirit of Martin Luther, they would not take it ill to be laught at; and yet this is our Author's way of arguing. But the Prolocutor speaks of the Articles of the Catechism, and therefore must mean the Articles at the end of the Catechism. Now this is only a quibbling upon Mr. Fox's way of expres∣sion, who by the Articles of the Catechism means no more then the matter of the Catechism, as is evident both from the Context, and from Fox'sDecretis simul rebus de quibus acturi essent, nempe de Catechismi libro, deque iis quae ad Sacramenti altaris praesen∣tiam, & transubstantiationem attinebant, postquam de his ita rebus atque id genus prolegomenis primo die transactum est, secundo deinde die Prolocutor in Syno∣dum ingressus duas secum Schedas affert, quarum unâ Christi naturalis in Sacra∣mento praesentia affirmabatur, alterâ ve∣ro Catechismum neque Synodi autorita∣te editum, neque eidem etiamnum ad∣huc Synodum assentiri — Job Filpottus; Videmini Vos omnes turpissime falli quod vos ita oftendat Catechismi inscrip∣tio Rerum in Eccl. gest. Comm. à Joh. Fox. p. 215. Edit Basil. Latin History, where the Conference is related in such words, as, being void of all Ambiguity, leave no room for Sophistry. Fox
saith, Philpot stood up and spake first concerning the Article of the Catechism, that He thought they were deceiv'd in the Title of the Catechism. Where I hope our Author will not understand by the singular Article the 42 Articles. And it is observable that what Fox in English calls in one place the Articles of the Catechism, and the Article of the Catechism in an other, that the La∣tin Fox calls Catechismi liber in one place, and Catechismus in the other. So that it is evident our Author here on∣ly sports himself with a poor clinch upon the English word Article. But it is said, that the Prolocutor propos'd the matter of the 28th of these Articles for disputation. I am apt to lose my patience, when I find one cavilling at this rate, who seems not so much as to have seen King Edward's Articles. The matter propos'd for disputation was the Natural presence of Christ in the Sacrament; but the 28th of King Edward'sSee them in Sparrow's Collections, or Bur. V. 2. Coll. Articles concerns Bap∣tism. In the 39 Articles as they now stand, the 28th concerns the Doctrine of the Lord's Supper; and there∣fore he unthinkingly judg'd it must have been the same in King Edward's 42 Articles. But how doth it follow that because the Natural Presence is spoke of in the Ar∣ticles, therefore when another question was propos'd, "whether the Catechism was agreed to by the former Synod "by Catechism there must be meant the Articles? This is such a Consequence as ill becomes a Disciple of Occham. What if the same matter be also propos'd in the Catechism? Then I hope proposing this for disputa∣tion is no Argument, that by the Catechism is meant the Articles. I desire therefore the Reader to consult theInde non efficitur ut nobis sit corpo∣re praesens, cum alia divinitatis ejus sit ratio, humanitatis alia; Haec est creata, alia increata; haec in aliquo coeli loco, il∣la autem sic ubique est, ut coelum & ter∣ram impleat, Quod ad corpoream Chri∣sti hic in terris praesentiam attinet (si mag∣na parvis componere licet) sic Christi corpus praesens est nostrae fidei, ut Sol, cum cernatur, praesens est oculo, cujus corpus tametsi corporaliter oculum non contingat, atque hic in terris praesens prae∣senti adsit, tamen corpus Solis praesens est visui, etiam reluctante intervalli distan∣tia; Sic corpus Christi quod in gloriosa ejus Ascensione nobis sublatum est, quod∣que reliquit mundum, & ad Patrem abiit, ore nostro abest, etiam cum sacrosanctum corporis & sanguinis ejus Sacramentum ore nostro excipimus; fides autem nostra versatur in coelis, ac intuetur Solem ju∣stitiae, ac praesens praesenti in coelis haud aliter illi adest, ac visus adest corpori solis in coelis, aut Sol in terris visui, &c. M. Video, mi fili, te neutiquam ignorare quomodo dicatur Christus corpore ab∣sens, & Spiritu praesens. — Quemad∣modum pane & vino vita nostra natura∣lis sustinetur ac nutritur, sic corpore. i. e. carne & sanguine Christi anima per fi∣dem nutritur ac vegetatur. — Ista fiunt occulta quadam energia Spiritûs, quando credimus Christum corpus & sanguinem suum pro nobis tradidisse, &c. See much more to the same purpose in the Catechism. Margin, and he will be satisfied, that the Corporal
Presence is there denied, and that the Prolocutor had greater reason to call this Book Heretical, then our Au∣thor has to affirm, without any regard to truth, that it doth not State, scarce touch any Controversie. But still, it is plain they must speak of the Articles, because the Ca∣techism, as taken by it self, is not at all entitled to the Synod, but only the Articles at the end thereof. The Catechism, which we now find bound up with the Articles, is not, I confess, entitled to the Synod; but that either this, or some other Catechism, of which the dispute here is rais'd, was so entitled, is put out of all doubt by a passage we meet with else-where inp. 1440. Fox, where Weston thus charges Cranmer, You have set forth a Catechism in the Name of the Synod of London, and yet there be 50, which witnessing that they were of the Number of the Convocation, never heard one word of that Cate∣chism. Cran. I was ignorant of the setting too of that Title, and as soon as I had knowledge thereof I did not like it. Here the Discourse proceeds altogether upon a Catechism; and there is no subterfuge for a pre∣tence that Catechism; is another word for Articles. Phil∣pot's words are not applicable to the Catechism, but to the Articles only. Philpot pleads that the Catechism might be entitled to the Synod, because the House had com∣mitted
their Synodal Autority to certain Persons, to be appointed by the King, to make such Ecclesiastical Laws as they thought convenient. Now I see no reason why a Catechism doth not as properly come under the Deno∣mination of Laws Ecclesiastical, as Articles; or how the Catechism's being drawn up by Cranmer, can be a rea∣son that it could not be meant, but the Articles; when the Articles also were drawn up by Cranmer, as our Au∣thor himself proves from Fox. But, if the 42 Articles were fram'd by the Synod, the Prolocutor had no reason to get hands to the Catechism, as falsly ascrib'd to that Synod, when what was more opposite to what he accounted the Orthodox Religion, namely the Articles, was known to be past by them. It was not the Doctrine of the Catechism, or Articles, which was here question'd, but the false ascription of the Catechism to the Synod; Now the Articles being undeniably genuine, they content themselves only to condemn the Doctrine of them; but the Catechism be∣ing suppos'd illegitimate, they subscribe both against it's Doctrine, and Autority: Nor could Philpot have pleaded, as our Author would have had him, that the Synod's composing the Articles justified the Act of the Delegates composing the Catechism; since this might indeed war∣rant the Doctrine of the Catechism, but not the entitling it to the Synod. He saith, all the Historians that he hath seen are silent concerning these Articles. In this dispute concerning the Articles Dr. Heylin is twice mention'd, and two several Books of his refer'd to in those very pa∣ges where he mentions these Articles. In hisHeylin's Hist. p. 121. History He thinks them debated and concluded on by a Grand Committee, on whom the Convocation had devolv'd their power, and esteems it not improbable that these Articles being debated and agreed upon by the said
Committee, might also pass the Vote of the whole Con∣vocation; though we find nothing to that purpose in the Acts thereof, which either have been lost, or never were registred. [I add, or being once Registred were expung'd.] In his Reformation justified,Ref Justif. § 4. He positively affirms that the Clergy in Synod 1552. did compose and agree upon a book of Articles. Neither therefore is Dr. Heylin silent herein, nor is he one of the Historians, which this Author never saw. Dr. Burnet is another Hi∣storian, whom either this Editor had seen, or ought not to have publish'd this Relation, till he had first consulted him. He peremptorily affirms,Bur. V 2. p. 195. that in the Year 1552. the Convocation agreed to the Articles of Religion, that were prepar'd the year before. But our Author has still another Objection in reserve, that the Arch-Bishop Cranmer, to whom it would have been an excellent Defence to have shew'd these Articles to have been subscrib'd by a full Synod, yet pleaded no such thing. That Reverend Mar∣tyr pleaded that the Opinions, which he maintain'd, were the Doctrines of the Scripture, and Primitive Church; that the rejection of the Pope's Supremacy (the fun∣damental Heresie, of which he was accus'd) was the Unanimous Act of the whole English Clergy and Na∣tion, and, which his very Judges had solemnly sworn to. Now if this Plea could avail nothing in his De∣fence, it must have been a weak Plea to have insi∣sted on Articles past in a Synod call'd by himself, and over which he, by reason of his Archiepiscopal Autority, had great Influence. This dispute is con∣cluded with a shrewd Remark, which our Author raises from a passage of Dr. Heylin. The Dr. observes that this Book of Articles was not confirm'd by any Act of Parliament; whence he concludes, that the Re∣form'd
Religion cannot be call'd a Parliament Religi∣on; Hence this Author gathers that, neither was it a Synodal Religion, because we see the Parliaments in King Edward's time corroborating the Synods in all other trans∣actions of the Reformation. Now tho' there is ground for the Drs. observation, because there is never an Act, which formally gives Sanction to these Articles, yet there is in one of those very Acts (cited from the Do∣ctor in this Pamphlet) that, which quite overthrows our Author's Conclusion. For in the Act for Legiti∣mating Marriages of Priests, it is said that, the untrue Slanderous report of Holy Matrimony did redound to the High dishonour of the Learned Clergy of this Realm, who have determin'd the same to be most Lawful by the Law of God in their Convocation, as well by common Assent, as by the Subscription of their Hands. Which words plainly refer to the 31st of these Articles, and are an Authoritative Testimony, that they are the ge∣nuine Act of the Synod; and had, I doubt not, been expung'd, had the Commission of rasure extended to the Statute-Book. I have insisted the longer on this particular, because it is a matter of some moment, and because the Au∣thor has here us'd more then ordinary Artifice; I have not had the benefit of any Registers, or Manuscripts, nor am I skill'd in these niceties of History: What has been said, sufficiently overthrows all his Cavils; but the Curious and the Learned are able to give a more Authentic and Solid account of this matter.
A Reply to Chapter the 11th. THat the Reformation was restor'd by Q. Elizabeth, after the extirpation of it by Q. Mary, might have been said in fewer lines than this Author is pleas'd to use Paragraphs. That some things were at first re∣duc'd without Synodal Autority, I confess; and that the Reformation had it's last settlement by a Synod, he cannot deny. The Act of the first Popish Convo∣cation I esteem illegal, because the Q. had sent and re∣quir'd them under the pain of a Premunire not to make Canons. The Canonicalness of Q. Mary's Clergy, here acting, depends upon his former Proofs, which were not altogether Demonstrative. But let their Autori∣ty be suppos'd just, yet these Constitutions were repeal'd by a later Synod, whose Autority must be conceded equal; and therefore their Act, as being the last, Au∣toritative. The stress therefore of the Controversy lies in this, whether Q. Elizabeth's new Bishops were lawfully introduc'd; and this depends upon the lega∣lity of the ejection of the Old. The Cause of their ejection is confest to be their denial of the Oath of Supremacy, and is just, or unjust, according as that Oath was lawful, or unlawful. Our Author therefore sets himself to examine that Oath; where he first puts his own Exposition upon it, and then attacqs it, as so expounded. Neither Q. Elizabeth's explication of her own Sense, nor the Church's Exposition in her Ar∣ticles favour his Construction. Those, who take this Oath, are not perswaded that they abjure the Autori∣ty of a General Council, or the Jurisdiction of their own National Clergy. But if we accept it in that Sense, which he is pleas'd to impose upon it, Yet still
the Strength of his Arguments depends on such As∣sertions, as are to be supported by his four first part of Church-Government. We must therefore wait the Edition of those, before We can be satisfied of the Strength of these. But if we may make an estimate of future performances from past, there is no reason to expect any thing formidable from that Quarter. For the only business of our Modern Controvertists is to rally up those scatter'd forces, which have long since quitted the field to our Forefathers. This Oath of Supremacy has exercis'd the Pens of the greatest Cham∣pions of both Churches; and there is not a shadow of an Argument here brought against it, but what has been baffled, when manag'd with better skill, and more Learn∣ing, than this Author is Master of. The Regal Supre∣macy in Opposition to the Papal has been asserted by our Kings, (James the first, and Charles the first in their Writings) Prelates, (Bishop Andrews, Bilson, Carlton, Mor∣ton, Bramhal, &c.) and Doctors, (Hammond, Barrow, &c,) who have exhausted this Subject, and made it impos∣sible, as to oppose it, so to add any thing farther in Defence of it. I shall choose therefore rather to re∣fer the Reader to these great Men for the lawfulness of this Oath, then to imitate this Author in tran∣scribing. Having attacqu'd this Oath in Opposition to repea∣ted Acts of Parliament, which guard it against such attempts with the severest Penalties, he may more securely fall upon Dr. Fern, who pleads, that had none of these Bishops been remov'd by Q. Elizabeth, Yet the 6 Bishops remaining of King Edward's being re∣stor'd, and the vacant Bishopricks supplyed, the Popish Bishops would have been outvoted. To prevent this Inference, our Author tells us. 1st. That King Edward's
Bishops being justly ejected by Q. Mary could not now lawfully act. That their ejection was just, he supposes, we were convinc'd above; The Reader therefore, ac∣cording to the Degrees of Conviction, which he found there, is to pass his judgment here. 2dly. That Q. Eli∣zabeth could not justly supply the vacant Bishopricks with any Persons, but such as the Major part of her present Bishops did first approve of. But this, if it prove any thing, proves too much; For if want of the appro∣bation of a major part of Bishops, makes the Election and Consecration of a Bishop void, then neither was Q. Mary's Hierarchy lawful, nor the Acts of her Sy∣nods valid: if none can be a true Bishop, who has not the approbation of a major part of the Bishops of the Province, no true Bishop has sat in St. Peter's chair for some Centuries. If this rule be admitted, it will cut of the Episcopal power of the Bishops of Amasia, and Adramyttium. A Reply to Chapter the 12th. THis Chapter concerns our Ordinations, in which I miss the story of the Nags-head; a Fable hist out of the world with so much scorn, as 'tis well and wisely o∣mitted even by this Author. But to make some amends for this Omission, what is here offer'd is pickt up from the Confutations of our Writers. There is not an Objection, which has not been replied to by Mr. Mason, Arch-Bishop Bramhal, and, more lately, by Dr. Burnet. As will more clearly appear, if I leave this dispute to be manag'd betwixt the Pamphlet, and them. Pamphlet. The new Ordination grew so far suspected, as deficient, to Q. Mary, that in her Articles sent to the Bishops this is one. That touching such Persons at were
heretofore promoted to any Orders, considering they were not ordered in very deed, the Bishop of the Diocess find∣ing otherwise sufficiency and ability in those men, may sup∣ply that thing which wanted in them before, and then ac∣cording to his discretion admit them to minister. A. Bp. Bramhal. To this Objection, that the Form of ordaining in King Edward's days was declar'd in∣valid in Q. Mary's days, I answer, that we have no reason to regard their Judgment. They, who made no scruple to take away their lives, would make no scruple to take away their Holy Orders. I answer also (and this Answer alone is sufficient to determine this Controversie) that King Edward's Form of Ordi∣nation was judg'd valid in Q. Mary's days by all Catho∣lics, and particularly, by Cardinal Pool then Apostolical Legate in England, and by the then Pope Paul the 4th, and by all the Clergy, and Parliament of England. This appears clearly from the words of the Cardinal's Dispensation, wherein he confirms all Persons which had been Ordain'd, or benefic'd in the time of King Henry or Edward, in their respective Orders, and Be∣nefices. From which I argue, that if King Edward's Clergy wanted some essential part of their respective Ordinations, which was requir'd by the Institution of Christ, then it was not in the power of all the Popes and Legates, that ever were in the world, to confirm their respective Orders, or dispence with them to execute their Functions in the ChurchConsecr. of Protest. Bps. Vindicated c. 4. p. 445. A. Bp. Br. W. T. 1. Edit Dub. 1676.. Pamphl. But if you look narrowly into the words of the Instrument, you may observe, that the Cardinal very cau∣tiously here saith not dispensamus, or recipimus, in the pre∣sent, as he doth in every one of his other dispensings, but dispensabimus in the future.
A. Bp. Br. It may perhaps be objected that the Di∣spensative word is recipiemus, we will receive, not we do receive. I answer, the case is all one; If it were unlawful to receive them in the present, it was as unlawful to receive them in the futureIbid.. Pamphl. He saith not recipiemus simply, but with a prout multae personae receptae fuerunt, referring to the manner of reception, which had been us'd formerly in Q. Mary's days, which we find set down in the Queen's 13th Article. viz. That such new Ordained repairing to the Bishop, and he finding them otherwise sufficient should supply that, which was wanting to them in respect of their Orders, as they being before not order'd in very deed. A. Bp. Br. All that was done after, was to take a particular Absolution, or Confirmation from the Pope or his Legate, which many of the principal Clergy did, but not all. No not all the Bishops, not the Bi∣shop of Landaf, as Sanders witnesseth; yet he en∣joy'd his Bishoprick; so did all the rest of the Cler∣gy, who never had any particular confirmation. It is not material at all, whether they were confirm'd by a general, or by a special dispensation, so they were confirm'd or dispens'd with at all, to hold all their Benefices, and to exercise their respective Fun∣ctions in the Church, which no man can denyIbid.. Pamphl. That the Roman Bishops held not the orders receiv'd by the new Form sufficiently valid, is clear from the Bishop of Glocester his degrading Ridley only from his Presbytership, not his Episcopacy; for saith he, We do not acknowledge You for a Bishop. Mr. Mason. Ridley was consecrated by the old form, and therefore this Objection is impertinentMas. Vindic. Eccl. Angl. l 2. c. 15. §. 10. p 209. Edit. Lond. 1625..
Pamp. The same You may see in Fox concerning Hoo∣per made Priest by the old form, Bishop by the new, and therefore degraded in Q. Mary's days only as a Priest. Dr. Burnet. They went upon this Maxim, that Or∣ders given in Schism were not valid; so they did not esteem Ridley nor Hooper Bishops, and therefore only degraded them from Priesthood; tho' they had been ordain'd by their own forms, saving only the Oath of Obedience to the PopeBurn. Hist. V. 2 p. 290.. Pamph. Again, Mr. Bradford made Priest by the new form, and therefore in his condemnation not degraded at all, but treated as a mere Laick. A. Bp. Br. Popish Bishops are no competent wit∣nesses to give evidence concerning the Orders of Pro∣testants. If one of us should urge a Determination in either of our Universities against them in a point of Controversy, agitated between us, for an authen∣tic proof, how would He make himself merry with Us? Yet we might do the one, as well as he doth the otherProtest. Ordin. def. against S.N. Tom. 4. Disc. 7. p. 1006.. Pamphl. Bishop Bonner wrote a book, wherein he con∣tended that the new devis'd Ordination of Ministers was in∣sufficient and void, because no Autority at all was given them to offer in the Mass, the body and blood of our Sa∣viour Christ; but both the Ordainer, and Ordained despis'd and impugn'd, not only the Oblation or Sacrifice of the Mass, but also the Real Presence of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar. A. Bp. Br. He saith, We are not order'd to offer true Substantial Sacrifice. Not expresly indeed. No more were they themselves for 800 Years after Christ, and God knows, how much longer. No more are the Greek Church, or any other Christian Church, except
the Roman, at this day. Yet they acknowledg them to be rightly Ordain'd, and admit them to exercise all the Offices of Priestly Function in Rome it self. We acknow∣ledge an Eucharistical Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiv∣ing; a Commemorative Sacrifice, or a memorial of the Sacrifice of the Cross; a Representative Sacrifice, or a representation of the Passion of Christ before the Eyes of his Heavenly Father; an Imperative Sacrifice, or an impetration of the fruit and benefit of his Pas∣sion by way of Real prayer; and lastly, an Applicative Sacrifice, or an application of his merits unto our Souls. Let him that dare, go one step farther then We do; and say, that it is a Suppletory Sacrifice, to supply the defects of the Sacrifice of the Cross. Or else, let them hold their peace, and speak no more against us in this point of Sacrifice for everBp. Bramhal's Works. Tom. 1. Disc. 3. c. 9. p. 255.. Pamp. Those, who are truely ordain'd, yet, if in an He∣retical or Schismatical Church, their true Orders as to the Exercise of them are unlawful; and so, unless a Church be first clear'd from Heresy and Schism, these Orders are not rightly employed in it. A. Bp. Br. First I deny that the Protestant Bishops did revolt from the Catholic Church; Nay they are more Catholic than the Roman-Catholics themselves. Secondly, I deny that the Protestant Bishops are He∣retics. Thirdly, I deny that they are guilty of Schism. Fourthly, I deny that the Autority of our Protestant Bishops was ever restrain'd by the Catho∣lic Church. Fifthly, No sentence whatsoever, of whomsoever, or of what crime soever can obliterate the Episcopal Character, which is indeleble, nor disa∣ble a Bishop from Ordaining, so far as to make the Act invalidIbid. Disc. 7. p. 990..
Pam. Tho' I do not here state the Question, Whether they had such due Ordination and Ordainers as to be tru∣ly and essentially Bishops, yet their Ordination, and In∣troduction, if valid, seems several ways uncanonical and un∣lawful. A. Bp. Br. For the Canons, we maintain that our form of Episcopal Ordination hath the same Essen∣tials with the Roman, but in other things of infe∣rior allay it differeth from it. The Papal Canons were never admitted for binding Laws in England, farther then they were receiv'd by our selves, and incorporated into our Laws; but our Ordination is conformable to the Canons of the Catholic Church. And for our Statutes, the Parliament hath answer'd that Objection sufficiently, shewing clearly that the Ordination of our first Protestant Bishops was le∣gal; and for the validity of it, we crave no man's favourIbid. Tom. 1. Disc. 5. cap. 8. p. 471.. Pamph. They came many of them into the places of o∣thers unjustly expell'd. A. Bp. Br. "This is saying, but we expect provingIbid.. Pamph. Neither the major part nor any, save one, of the former incumbent Bishops consented to their Election or Or∣dination. Dr. Bur. If Ordinations or Consecrations upon the King's Mandate be invalid, which the Paper drives at, then all the Ordinations of the Christian-Church are also annul'd, since for many Ages they were all made upon the Mandates of Emperors and Kings. By which You may see the great weakness of this ArgumentDr. Burnet's Vindic. of our Ordi∣nations p. 09.. Pamph. No Metropolitan can be made without the con∣sent
of the Patriarch, but Arch-Bishop Parker was or∣dain'd without and against the consent of the Patriarch. A. Bp. Br. The British Islands neither were, nor ought to be subject to the Jurisdiction of the Ro∣man Patriarch, as I have sufficiently demonstra∣tedBramhal's Works. Tom. 1. Disc. 2. cap. 9. p. 128.. Pamph. Neither did be receive any Spiritual Jurisdi∣ction at all from any Ecclesiastical Superior, but merely that, which the Queen (a Lay-Person) by her Delegates in this Employment did undertake to conferr upon him. Dr. Bur. All Consecrations in this land are made by Bishops, by the power that is inherent in them; only the King gives orders for the Execution of that their power. Therefore all, that the Queen did in the case of Matthew Parker, and the Kings do since, was to command so many Bishops to exercise a power they had from Christ in such or such InstancesVindic. of Ord. p. 89.. Pamph. Which Delegates of hers were none of them at that time possest of any Diocess, Barlow and Scory being then only Bishops Elect of Chichester, and Hereford; and Coverdale, never after admitted or elected to any; and Hos∣kins a Suffragan. A. Bp. Br. The Office and Benefice of a Bishop are two distinct things; Ordination is an act of the Key of Order, and a Bishop uninthron'd may ordain, as well as a Bishop inthron'd. The Ordination of Suf∣fragan Bishops, who had no peculiar Bishopricks, was always reputed as good in the Catholic Church (if the Suffragan had Episcopal Ordination) as the Or∣dination of the greatest Bishops in the worldBramhal's Works. Tom. 1. Disc. 5. c. 5. p. 452.. Pamph. Nor had they had Dioceses, could have had
any larger Jurisdiction save within these; at least, be∣ing single Bishops, could have no Metropolitical Juris∣diction, which yet they confer'd on Parker, not on their own sure, but on the Queen's Score. Dr. Bur. Does he believe himself, who says that none can Install a Bishop in a Jurisdiction above him∣self? Pray then, who invests the Popes with their Jurisdiction? Do not the Cardinals do it, and are not they as much the Pope's Suffragans, as Hodgskins was Canterburie's? so that if inferiors cannot invest one in a Superior Jurisdiction, then the Popes can have none legally, since they have their's from the Car∣dinals, that are inferior in Jurisdiction. There are two things to be consider'd in the Consecration of a Primate, the one is giving him the Order of a Bi∣shop, the other is inverting him with the Jurisdi∣ction of a Metropolitan. For the former all Bishop are equal in Order; none has more or less then ano∣ther; so that the Consecrators of Matthew Parker being Bishops by their Order, they had sufficient Au∣tority to Consecrate him. As for the Jurisdiction of Metropolitans, Primates, and Patriarchs, it has no Divine Institution; it rose upon the division of Pro∣vinces, and the Kings of Western Churches did first give those Preheminences to some Towns and SeesVindic. of Ord. p. 77. &c.. Pamph. But then might not She at pleasure take away, and strip Parker again of all that Jurisdiction, which he held only on her gift? A. Bp. Br. We hold our Benefices by humane right, our Offices of Priests and Bishops both by divine right, and humane right. But put the case we did hold our Bishopricks only by humane right, is it
one of Your Cases of Conscience, that a Sovereign Prince may justly take away from his Subjects any thing, which they hold by humane right? If one Man take from another that, which he holds justly by the Law of Man, he is a thief and a robber by the Law of GodBramhal's Works. Tom. 1. Disc. 5. c. 11. p. 489.. Pamph. But the Autority of these Ordainers stand∣ing good, one or two Bishops is not a competent Num∣ber for Ordination. A. Bp. Br. The Commission for their Consecration limited the Consecrators to four, when the Canons of the Catholic Church require but three. Three had been enough to make a valid Ordination, yea, to make a Canonical OrdinationIbid. Tom. 1. Disc. 5. c 5. p. 451.. Pamph. The Form of the Ordination of these new Bishops, as it was made in Edward the 6th's time, so it was revok'd by Synod in Queen Mary's days, and by no Synod afterwards restor'd before their Ordi∣nation. Dr. Burn. It is a common place, and has been hand∣led by many Writers, how far the Civil Magistrate may make Laws, and give commands about Sacred things. The Prelates and the Divines by the Auto∣rity, they had from Christ, and the warrant they had from Scripture, and the Primitive Church made the Alterations and Changes in the Ordinal; and the King and Parliament who are vested with the Su∣preme Legislative power added their Autority to them to make them Obligatory on the Subject. Let these Men declare upon their Consciences, if there be any thing they desire more earnestly, than such an Act for Authorizing their own Forms; and would
they make any Scruple to accept of it, if they might have itBur. Vindic. of Ordin. p. 51. &c.? Pamph. But this Form was revok'd also by an Act of Parliament in Queen Mary's days, and not by any Act restor'd till long after the Ordination of Queen Elizabeth's first Bishops. viz, in 8. Eliz. 1. upon Bon∣ner's urging hereupon, that the Queen's were no Legal Bishops. Pamphlet, it self in the next Page. The new Ordi∣nal (when Arch-Bishop Parker was to be Consecrated by it) did not want sufficient Lay-license, having the Queen's, nor had the Parliament been defective in re∣licensing it, for which see Bishop Bramhal. Pamph. For such Considerations as these it seems it was, that the Queen in her Mandate for the Ordina∣tion of her new Arch-Bishop Parker, was glad out of her Spiritual Supremacy and Universal Jurisdiction, of which Jurisdiction one Act is that of Ordaining to dispense, and give them leave to dispense, to them∣selves, with all former Church-Laws, which should be transgrest in the electing, and consecrating, and inve∣sting of this Bishop. A. Bp. Br. There is a double power Ecclesiastical, of Order, and of Jurisdiction. Which two are so different the one from the other, as themselves both teach and practise, that there may be true Or∣ders without Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and an actu∣al Jurisdiction without Holy Orders. He leaves the Orders in the plain field, to busy himself about the power of Jurisdiction, which is nothing to the Que∣stion. That which the Statute calls the Autority of Jurisdiction, is the coercive and compulsory power of summoning the King's Subjects by Processes, which
is indeed from the Crown. The Kings of England neither have any power of the Keys, nor can derive them to others; He need not fear our deriving our Orders from themTom. 4. Disc. 7. p. 1000.. As for the Dispensative clause, it doth not extend at all to the Institution of Christ, or any Essential of Ordination, nor to the Canons of the Universal Church, but only to the Statutes, and Ecclesiastical Laws of England. The Commissioners authoriz'd by these Letters Patent to Confirm and Consecrate Arch-Bishop Parker, did make use of the Supplentes or Dispensative power, in the Confir∣mation of the Election, which is a Political Act (as appears by the words of the Confirmation) but not in the Consecration, which is a purely Spiritual Act, and belongeth merely to the Key of OrderTom. 1. Disc. 5. c. 5. p. 453.. Pamph. Notwithstanding this Regal Dispensation a Statute was afterwards made [8. Eliz. 1. c.] to take away all Scruple, Ambiguity, or doubt concerning these Consecrations. A. Bp. Br. It was only a Declaration of the Par∣liament, that all the Objections, which these Men made against our Ordinations were slanders and ca∣lumnies; and that all the Bishops which had been ordain'd in the Queen's time had been rightly or∣dain'd according to the Form prescrib'd by the Church of England, and the Laws of the Land. These Men want no confidence, who are not asham'd to cite this Statute in this caseIbid. p. 439.. I have transcrib'd the very words of the Authors, to shew the importunity of these Men, who are not asham'd to transcribe not only the matter, but the very form of those Arguments, which have been so
often confuted. But there is, I confess, one thing new in this Chapter, which seems as if reserv'd for this Writer. He would prove that the Queens dispensa∣tion relates not to her own Laws, but to the Laws of the Catholic Church. The words in the Com∣mission are Supplentes &c. Siquid desit, aut deerit eorum quae per Statuta hujus regni aut per leges Ec∣clesiasticas requiruntur. So that the Clause extends only to the Statutes and Ecclesiastical Laws of this Kingdom; as the LearnedA. Bp. Br. W. T. 1. Disc. 5. c. 5. p. 453. Primate understands it. But this Author with his wonted ingenuity omits the words, per Statuta hujus Regni, and then construes the Leges Ecclesiasticas, to be the Laws not of the English, but the Universal Church. A Reply to Chapter the 13th. A Reply to his former Chapters has made any Consideration of this needless. He supposes he has prov'd that the Reformation was not effected by the major part of the Clergy; and I may be allow'd to suppose that he has not prov'd it. He has indeed affirm'd that it had not Synodical Autority under King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth; and he had not ventur'd much farther, had he affirm'd, that there never were such Princes. In this Chapter he has found Six Protestant Divines who are of Opinion, that Princes may in cases extraordinary Lawfully Reform without or against a major part of their Clergy. He is very large in proving, that they have deliver'd this
Doctrine, but very sparing, when He comes to confute it. We think it sufficiently justified from the single Instance of the good Kings of Judah; This is copi∣ously, he saith, spoken unto in the Succession of the Clergy, and so that Instance is confuted. This refe∣rence to his  is a new way of arguing, but perhaps not altogether irrational, since his Arguments are as likely to operate with Us whilst confin'd to his Desk, as if they were urg'd from the Press. As long as the Sacred History of Hezechiah's and Josiah's Reformation shall be preserv'd, this Prero∣gative of Godly Princes will need no other defence. The particulars of the Parallel have been so exact∣ly drawn in aDr. Steward's Sermon Preach'd at Paris. Reprinted Lond. 1687. Discourse lately reprinted, that a∣ny farther attempt would be a Presumption. It may be enough to say that He who denies that the major part of the Guides of the Jewish Church err'd, must also denie Christ, since by such Church-Autority he was rejected. He, who will determine the Prince to judge allways with the majority of Church-Guides, o∣bliges him in Elijah's time to establish Baalism; and at other times Calve-Worship. He who can excuse the Kings of Judah for not consulting with those Priests, who were guilty of Idolatry, because they were ex∣tra Ecclesiam, and he had nothing to do with them, puts a new Plea into the mouth of the Reformers. The latter part of the CONCLUSION has been parti∣cularly spoke to by the Animadverter; the former part depends altogether on the unpublish'd Tracts of Church-Government. He takes his farewel of the Re∣form'd Religion with this Observation, That, tho' at the first (perhaps out of novelty) it made a wonder∣full
progress and growth, yet of late it hath rather lost ground, and is grown decrepit and much abated of it's former bulk and Stature. I leave the Author to consider, Whether this Argument be not bor∣row'd from the Jew. It is a surprizing instance, how intent our Adversaries are upon the Interest of a Faction, when they urge such Objections against the Reformation, as equally affect our common Chri∣stianity. The Close. THIS Church-Governor has now been examin'd through-out: Of the strength of his Arguments, and the Autority of his History, the Reader has by this time determin'd. Great things were discourst of this piece, whilst it threatned us from the Press; but it has seen the world, and our Church is not yet overturn'd. It is to be hop'd that those well-mean∣ing Gentlemen, who hence expected such an increase of their Numbers, do not owe to this their own Con∣version. I cannot tell with what degree of Esteem others may entertain this Relation; I who have read it through (a piece of diligence which few can boast of) must con∣fess to have discover'd nothing so eminent in the Writer, as an undaunted Courage, and presence of Mind. For there is not the least distrust signified, where the Fictions are most bold and open; the gros∣sest falshoods being deliver'd with all the security and confidence of Truth. Indeed the main Artifice of
these forgeries consists in the extravagant boldness of them; for it is not easy for an unexperienc'd Rea∣der to think so foul practices consistent with so much unconcernedness; and nothing but a Conversation with some Authors could excuse such a Suspicion from be∣ing uncharitable. One, who finds Autorities vouch'd for that, of which they prove the direct contrary; passages distinctly cited, which never were extant; matters of fact barely denyed, which all History as∣sures Us of; is rather apt to mistrust his own Un∣derstanding, then to pass so severe a Judgment, as such dealings deserve; But how incredible soever these practises appear in the Theory, yet the Reader may, if he please, satisfy himself that they are not wrongfully charg'd: Nor indeed would I hope that He should believe them from me, without consulting my Authority. I was my self willing at first to think Him little conversant in our Ecclesiastical Historians; but a narrower perusal inform'd me, that his peculiar excellence lay in an intimate acquaintance with those Writers. He seems to have studied them on purpose to prepare matter of cavil, and to have examin'd e∣very passage with the prejudices of an Adversary, and the insidious diligence of a Spy. I would slill per∣swade my self, that these Papers are of so Ancient a date, that the Composer never had Opportunity to consult the latest Account of our Reformation. The exactness of that History would have oblig'd him to a stricter care in his Relation; that large Collection of Authentic Records would have requir'd from him a better proof of his Assertions; and the Appendix must have satisfied him of the Character of that in∣famous Writer, on whose Autority he so much de∣pends.
The possibility of his not having seen these would incline me to a more favourable Opinion of some particulars: but I consider that the more one is willing to Apologize for the Author, the less he is able to excuse the Publisher. FINIS.
