18507.67 99854204 19613
The 26. of Iuly. 1622. A TRVE, PLAINE, AND COMPENDIOVS DIS∣COVRSE OF THE BESIEGING OF BERGEN VP ZOME, Shng the late Actions of SPINOLAS Forces before the same. With the Proceedings of the Prince of Orange before Sattingambus. As also what hath happened of late to the rest of the Armies in the low Countries. LONDON: Printed by E. A. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at their Shops at the Exchange, and the Popes-head-Pallace. 1622.
A true, plaine, and Compendious Discourse of the Besieging of Bergen vp Zome, shewing the late Actions of Spinola's Forces before the same. With the proceedings of the Prince of Orange before Sattingambus. As also what hath happened of late to the rest of the Armies in the Low-Countries. THIS attempt of Spinola's vpon Bergen, makes me re∣member that famous Siege in 1590. or thereabouts, when the Prince of Parma came before it with 30000. and continued the battery almost halfe a yeare. But because I would reuiue the memory of famous men to the good example of others, and relate some passages worthy the obseruation to the renowne of vertuous and worthy exploites,
giue me leaue by way of introduction to speake something of those times, and so by coherence of Story you shall see me fall into the matter now proposed. It pleased the Prince of Parma in the behalfe of the King of Spaine, being then his absolute Gouernour in the Low Countries, after that e∣uer memorable Victory in 88. to lay siege vnto Bergen with aboue 30000. men, as if hee resolued to doe some thing worthy of his Honour, and memorable to posterity, as it were in recouery of those losses and fortunes, which both hapned to him and his Master at that time: but so many Skirmishes, Stratagems, and encounters were then put in practice, that hee was compelled to rise and leaue the Siege, till better opportuni∣ty and fairer dayes. I will not speake a worde of neither Armies, nor their skirmishes, nor their Assaults, nor their Batteries, nor their Sallies, nor their stratagems, nor of Grimston and Redhead, by whose pollicy and seruice, 400. of Parma's best Gentlemen lost their liues: but of the brauery of the besieged and the glory of the English, whose fame flori∣shed ouer the world. For in this siege, that Sonne of Mars the Lord Willoughby was Generall of the English, and such a Generall, that his authority extended in be∣stowing of honour vpon well deseruers, which appeared in Knighting those famous Dutchmen
Sir Paul Buxe, and Sir Marcellus Buxe, who after∣ward proued Gouernour of Bergen, and so con∣tinued many yeares. But at this instant Sir Thomas Morgan a Colo∣nell was Gouernour of the place, and had 6000. braue defendants in the Towne: there were also famous Commanders all English, the Lord Bo∣rough Gouernour of Brill, a spirit of vnmatchable Valour: Sir Nicholas Parker called Captaine of the blacke Lances: Sir William Drury, Sir William Pellam, and so many other, all Commaunders, that their well deseruing commaunds me to si∣lence, least I should by this my slender discourse extenuate their Noble fame, and merit. There came likewise as Voluntiers, and specta∣tors of this Theater of Warre, the Right Hono∣rable Earle of Northumberland, Sir Iohn Bo∣roughs and diuers others: yea heere were faire Ladies too, who were so farre from artificiall ef∣feminatenes, that they scorned the smoake of powder, and knewe (besides the iustification of their courages) that true beauty would not, nor could not be impaired with a little dust, and va∣pours of a thickned ayre. All these endured this Siege, and in steed of Courtly musicke had the roaring Cannon soun∣ding in their eares: in steed of sumptuous im∣broderings, and bespangled Cloakes with golde and Pearle, or other dainty fights, many times beheld bloody Cassocks, & wounded Soldiers:
and all the sences both of men and women were here to suffer vnsauery obiects, and subiects, and to make tryall of their patience and constancy, which they did with perseuerance to the end: yea this is most remarkeable, that when the Prince of Parma made his approaches, as if hee pretended a battery, and so a breach, the heroijck Lord Willoughby sent him word to spare that la∣bour, if he pleased: For he should haue a Port o∣pen, enter if hee could: whereupon the Prince was much amazed, and so hauing a full halfe, yeares tryall of the busines, and still encombred with the dayly sallies, and excursions of the Sol∣diers, he thought it farre better to raise his siege with honour, and vpon equall tearmes, then ad∣uenture so many liues, and yet (as he had beene in some cases put to it) hazard his renowne with fearefull losse and detriment. Let vs therefore ouerlooke their actions to vnderstand, which way this siege comes about, and how time hath brought them into this threatning and danger. After the taking in of Wesell and Gulick by Spi∣nola, wherein the first they left Don Lewis de Va∣lasco for Gouernour: and in the last Henry Vande Bergen, the Army retired to their seuerall Gari∣sons, and surely meant to repose themselues in some rest and quietnes, had not contrary to cu∣stome, and the time of the yeare to draw men in∣to the fields. Don Ynigo, Gouernour of the Citta∣dell
of Antwarp, proiected to doe something worthy of his renowne, and the seruice of his Mistresse the Arch-Dutches, and this was the besieging of Sluice: whereupon hee vndertooke the businesse in the beginning of Aprill last, with seuen or 8000. Wallons and Spaniards, dispier∣sing them some to Dysendike: some to St. Kathe∣vine, a Fort builded and possessed by the States, and some to such places, where hee thought it most conuenient to bestow them, resoluing to enter vpon Cassant, and other passages, whereby hee might with ease come vpon the bankes, and so bring his approches neerer the Towne, which to effect, he built a Fort, and put therein a Ga∣rison to come neerer and neerer, to set his de∣signe on her best feet. This he first attempted, when Spinolas Army watched the Rhine, & the Prince of Orange ouer∣looked his Army by Wesell: and this hee did of purpose, as I take it, to diuert his Excellencie from following him any further, supposing hee would returne to defend a Towne of such im∣portance, as Sluice was: but the States had leisure and meanes (without troubling the Prince of Orenge at all) to supply their wants, & send more Companies into the Towne: so that Spinola got nothing, but the losse of men, with cold, hunger, and sicknes all the Winter, and so consumed his Army, that he tried many friends and Countries
to fill vp his troupes and Companies. At last, the Winter falling out so strange, and Don Ynigo perceiuing all accidents to counter-checke his pretences; he tooke another course for the time, and returned to Antwarp, doing no great matter about Sluice, but raising a Fort a little neerer, which they say hee could not effect without the losse of 800. men. When my Lords the States vnderstoode of this retreat, and that Cassant and other Polders of land round about, were free from this threat∣ning perill and displeasure, they aduised them∣selues for the best, and by a premeditated setled Councell, resolued not to loose Sluice, nor haue her hedges trodden downe round about her, that is, her Bulwarkes and Trenches demoli∣shed, or possessed by Strangers: whereupon they concluded to cut all the ditches, and let in the Sea, which they did in the end of February, and in which worke the Contributory Boores were imployed: and although it turned much to their preiudice, as loosing both land, and dwelling by this course: yet when they saw, it was for the seruice of the States, and the preseruation of the Towne, they quickly accorded, and played the Pyoners in the businesse. They began behinde the Fort of St. Cateline, and so dispierced themselues to Crines, Saint
Margarite, Saint Hieronimo, Saint Iames, the Her∣mitage, and many Polaers of land, with the other Forts and Holds round about, but when the tide came in a pace: they made sure Rowfellares, Hollands dike, and many Fortifications on the other side, which might be preiudiciall to the maine businesse, so that at last the Sea swelled almost as farre as Gaunt, and the Enemy was glad to secure themselues by returning, and so the coast was in a manner cleared at this time: For Monsieur de Hautin the Gouernour of Sluice, made a salley with fifteene hundred, amongst whom were sufficient Commaunders, and well experienced Trenchers and Engineeres, who performed this worke in such a manner, that the principall Fortresses, which serued for the defence of Sluice, were all secured and kept vp∣right; and although the Sea swelled as farre as Vedo and Buscams Vell, yet was the land not com∣parable to the liues of so many braue Souldi∣ers, who must needes perish, if this had not beene done, and the siege of Sluice once at∣tempted throughly. When Spinola vnderstood, what was done, hee retired in his person to Brussels, from the clamours of the Army, who began to want their pay, and murmur for lacke of imploy∣ment, and satisfaction: whereupon hee gaue the Commaunders leaue to promise them faire, and threaten once againe the surprising of Sluice,
Breda, and Bergen, as though they would haue three Armies on foote at once, and meant to make an end of the Warre in one Summer, to which they were the rather animated, because they heard of new supplies out of England, to fill vp the Regiments of the Earles of Tyrone and Argile, who were both heere entertained as Co∣lonels vnder the Archdutches seruice. But when this threatning passed ouer with∣out attempting any thing worthy of moment, the Prince of Orenges brother, Graue Henry, with fiue thousand foot, and sixe hundred horse, en∣ters into Brabant, burning Villages, spoyling Townes, and forraging all the Countrey, in so much that the fires were seene at Brussels, and the Inhabitants ranne into their walled Townes for their preseruation: yea, when Spinola feasted the Ambassadours, and attended the determination of the truce, was this braue Souldier reading his Subiects a lesson of Warre and Slaughter, and tyed them to harder conditions then euer they learned in their liues; by which occasion hee mightily enriched himselfe, and returned to the Hage with great booty, spoile, treasure, and pri∣soners. Whereby the Enemy grewe enraged, and thought vpon nothing but reuenge, which at last they effected vpon the surprizing of Bergen vp Zome, wherein failing, they fell into the course of
besieging it, whereat they remaine at this houre; but because many remarkeable thinges chanced in this preparation, I thinke it not amisse to or∣der the Discourse in this manner. The Towne of Bergen is of as great impor∣tance to the States in Brabant, as Sluice in Flaun∣ders: For as this watcheth Ostend, Newport, Dumkirke, and other maritine Townes, yea ope∣neth a doore to Ipers, Gaunt and all the land Countrey, that keepeth the Riuers, and is the Key of the continent letting you in to the fieldes of Antwerpe, Thurmount, Auschiroten, and all the great Townes of Brabant: It standeth on the East side of the Riuer of Some, comming from Ant∣werpe, & Antwerpe is scituated within 15. English mile, and was one of the famous Marte Townes of the world: and as this Bergen is the very Gate or entrance into the Countrey, so is it in a manner the barre and hinderance of the Enemy into Zealand and Holland: The States haue likewise diuers Sconces in the Iland of Tole or Tertoll of great respect and necessity, and with∣in Fiue mile of Bergen, they possesse a Towne called Steen Bergen, on the West banke of ano∣ther Riuer comming out of the Countrey, at the mouth whereof, they haue another Sconce and other Fortes. I will not speake of Breda, and some places in
the States iurisdiction, nor how the Townes are diuided, though the whole Countrey in a man∣ner is in the Arch-Dutchesse possession: but the truth is, that the Gouernour of Antwerpe taking aduantage of certaine Companies, which mar∣ched out of Bergen toward Breda, and vnderstan∣ding that the Gouernour of Bergen was also ab∣sent, sent Spinola word of the same, who present∣ly proiected to make vse thereof, and take ad∣uantage of their absence: and the truth is, that the Gouernour being called as they say Rehonen, perceiuing his Commission growing to an end, and vnderstanding that the Prince of Orenge was comming with his Army toward Breda, tooke a Conuoy of 2000. and went thither with intent and purpose to renue his Patents, but ere hee came there, a Messenger was sent vnto him to returne in all hast to his Gouernment, for the Enemy was on foot and had some proiect in hand, which somewhat amazed him, conside∣ring as he thought hee had not full Authority to commaund the Garrisons: notwithstanding this meditation, the necessity of the time ouer∣swayed all nicety and exceptions, and hee re∣turnes very opportunely with all his Company to the Towne. Spinola followes his first purpose, and ap∣points 3000. from Antwerpe to giue the at∣tempt: among whom they will haue the Earle
of Argiles Regiment to bee thrust: the charge and rule of this Company is committed into the hands of two Spaniards, the one called Bor∣gia, the other Velasco, some say Lewis de Velasco Gouernour of Wesell, who vnderstanding the re∣solution of the Armies to quarter about Brabant, found occasion to bee dispenced withall, and at∣tend the seruice nearer home. Well, let the Names passe, the Company march downe apace, and with all expedition take the same side of the Riuer where Bergen stands, but it should seeme they came short halfe a day at least: For before they had mar∣ched 7. English mile, they vnderstand how Ber∣gen was supplyed (as you haue heard) yet they goe forward, and come at last to their Rendey∣uous, where they grewe so angry and exaspera∣ted, that they would needs giue an attempt in a rage both on the Wall, and at the Ports, where the Cannon from the Towne played so violent∣ly, and the Musket at rest shot so effectually, that they lost 600. men at the first assault, the most of them Irish and English newly come out of their Countries. This began on Wednesday as I take it the Tenth of Iuly: the next day they attempted a∣gaine, and proffered another Assault, but heere
they were repulsed with a Salley, in which a va∣liant Colonell Scotchman lost his life in the be∣halfe of the Towne, but it was a deare losse to the Enemy: For before the skirmish ended, there lay 200. on the ground, and they were enforced to retire, some will haue them fight the third day likewise, but I thinke that was imployed in another busines, for the Enemy finding the re∣sistance of this strong Towne, tooke another course and marched to a weaker, I meane Steen-Bergen, which not able to endure either battery or assault, they easily tooke by composition, as also a Sconce by it, which they obtained with finall repulse. I haue yet said little of the Prince of Orange, who thought as little of this attempt or enter∣prise, but onely supposed that Breda or Sluice might bee the obiect of his Sommers imploy∣ment, and so the Warre to continue either in Brabant or Flaunders, whereupon hee brought downe most of his Forces, and setled himselfe a while about Schetogen Bosch, and was (as they said) himselfe gone toward Rees, where hee sur∣ueyed the Townes in the States possession, and tooke order, that all the Garrisons should bee ready to come into the Field at his appoint∣ment, for which purpose hee also sent to the Commaunders and Captaines that were in England, to come ouer with expedition.
In the meane while this was done, as you haue heard, the Gouernour Reehouen returned to his charge, and ordred Bergen against the Obsession and expugnation, if Spinola so determined the matter. Now they will haue 2000. foote, and 300. horse all ready in the towne, amongst whom they haue named the companies of Sir Th. Winn, Sir Michaell Eueret, Captaine Appleton, who had mar∣ried a Dutch woman and dwelt in the same place, with diuers others attending the seruice, and the issue of these troubles: the greatest part of the ar∣my lying, as I sayd, about Breda, a towne of their owne, and Schetogen Bosch belonging to the Arch-Dukes, which peraduenture they determined to besiege, howeuer they may now be disappointed, either in raising the enemy from Bergen, or im∣ploying themselues to ouer-looke their actions, if they continue there this Sommer. By this time Spinola vnderstands what is done on both sides, and how his forces haue beene dis∣appointed, which made him alter his purpose for a Rendez-vous at Maestrich, and draw all his Gar∣risons toward Antwarp out of Mechlin, Arschot, Husset, Bissell, and other townes and villages, where they had wintred: so that though he lay himselfe still in person at Brussels vpon greater matters of importance: yet he disposed of his busines, that the country was resolued, he determined an absolute siege: for 15. peeces of Ordnance were sent out of Antwarp downe the Riuer, and 10000. more men marched by land to the new begun Campe. Hee
also sent supplyes to the Gouernour of Gaunt, with a speciall command to haue an eye vpon Sluise, and make some attempt that way, as occasion shall serue. It is also sayd that the Gouernours of Ipren and Lisse in Flanders, who had lost a sonne in a skir∣mish in the Palatinate, desired to bee at this ser∣uice. All this while the siege is but preparing, for the army was not quite come downe, nor the prouision for the expugnation brought together, as Hurdles, Gabions, Cariages, Munition, Traces for horses, Carts, Wagons, and such like: yet was some ex∣traordinary matter accomplished: for the Post of Antwarp reports, and the letters certifie as much that they heard the Cannon play thither: so that by all likelihood it is fully resolued, and the Spaniards settle themselues to the enterprise, although they want men to fill vp their companies, as hauing lost this winter by casualty at least 6000. They say, that in the first attempt there were so many dead bodyes, that thirty Wagons at once haue come with them into Antwarp, and in the lat∣ter enterprises the towne was so strong and well prouided, that they made diuers sallies ere their enemies could be setled to their much preiudice, and retired themselues to their fastnesse at pleasure Other letters assure vs, that the country sending in three hundred Wagons with prouision to sup∣ply the wants of the army, which began already to feele some inconueniences: they were set vpon by some of his Excellencies troopes and companyes lying about Breda, as they were going ouer the
Heathes, wide of Antwerp, and so after a skirmish surprised: for the Conuoy lagging behinde, and not keeping together with the rest, smarted for the disorder, and were compelled to shift for them∣selues. When the States of Holland vnderstood of all these proceedings, they bestirred themselues and sent diuers men of warre to attend about Zealand, of which some of them stept into the riuer, to in∣tercept such boates, as should come from Antwerp to the army: the rest that kept the Sea behaued themselues so well, that the Letters say, they tooke a ship full of Souldiers going to Dunckirke, whom they examined and finding that the Souldiers knew no other, but that they went into the Low Countries, they hanged vp the Lieutenant and carried all the rest prisoners to Middleburgh, resol∣uing to watch for those companies which are cō∣ming out of England to serue the Archduches. For rumor cannot be so sparing but that they know by name the Captaines of euery Countrey and the manner of raising their men. Amongst other things the Marchants assure vs, that at this instant there lie fiftie or sixtie sayle of Hollanders and Pirates of Argier before Lisbone, who not onely watch the harbours and townes but the Sea it selfe, as hauing made a contract with thē of Tunis also to associate and defend one anothers, both against Spaniards and Portugals, whom they resolue to empouerish and damnifie all they can, as men resolued to haue neither peace nor truce any longer with them.
But to returne to the siege at Bergen, for all these attempts it is supposed that the siege will not lye long before it, nor the enemy continue with such resolution, as to make it a worke of such conse∣quence, but euen doe as the Duke of Parma did in the beginning of this relation leaue it, and take some other enterprise in hand, and that for diuers reasons at this instant. First, because they cannot command the Riuer, but the towne will be relieued at all times by Sea, which they cannot auoyde. Secondly, because the seate of the warre is now as it were in their owne countrey, and the Prince of Orenges army must both be releeued and set on worke in Brabant, euen to the terrifying of the in∣habitants. Thirdly, because rumor hath played a womans part, and told them that some of Count Mansfields forces are come out of Alsatia, as farre as Loraine and Luizenberg: and either meane to bee their owne caruers of the blessings of these Prouinces, or vnite themselues to the Prince of Orenge, if occa∣sion serue to increase his army, and remoue the siege. Fourthly, because they are afraide to want mo∣money, considering their treasure is so many waies exhausted, and the Emperor must not be neglected in his designes. And last of all, because there are many hollow hearts in Antwarp, and what know they whether (besides the treason that may bee wrought) the Prince of Orenge if the peace of the Palatinate
thriue, will send for the Duke of Brunswicke, and set him on worke on these good townes: so that whether Tilley follow or no, or that Gonzales come to Spinola againe, yet must a bloody warre ensue, and the 17. Prouinces in the end smart for all. FINIS.
