C3937 15367496 103529
REFLECTIONS UPON A PAPER INTITULED, Some REFLECTIONS upon the E. of DANBY, in relation to the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey. In a Letter to a Friend. SIR, I Will not stay much upon those Reflections in relation to the Earl of Danby, because I doubt not but God will clear his Lordships Innocencie in due time, to the shame of his Enemies, and to the exposing those, by whose in∣satiable Malice his great Worth and Honour is calumni∣ated to the Parliament and Kingdom. Onely I hope no man can fail in his Observation what Sect of men his Lordship is beholding to for their good-wills, who knew they must destroy not onely Kings, but such Ministers as his Lordship, before they can compleat their Bloudy Reforma∣tions. For it is well known, not onely to Me and others who have had the honour of serving that Lord, but even to the worst
of his Enemies, who are acquainted with him, (if they will confess Truth) that no man was ever a greater Assertor of the Church of England, (which is the best Bulwark against Po∣pery) nor any man more Constant both in his own Devotions, and in the care of seeing them duely performed in his Family; so that I do not fear but God will reward him accordingly. A little time (when men will but have patience to be truely informed) will serve to wipe off such Scandals from so eminent and so good a man: But one so inconsiderable as I am, may suf∣fer under so foul and false an Aspersion, if I should not vindi∣cate my self against it; besides that by the falsity of that part which concerns me, Men will judge of the Truth both of that, and the rest of those scandalous and false Libels which are dis∣pers'd every day, not onely against the Earl of Danby, but against the King himself and his Government. The Author of that fore-said Libel would have done well, if he could have concealed his Religion, as well as his Name, that he might have got some little belief in the World: but although they be workers of darkness, I hope their works will at last, all come to light. And upon condition that J. B. the Author would appear, and might be hanged in case he doth not prove what he says against Mr. Christian, (whom he says took water with Sir Ed∣mundbury Godfrey at Whitehall the day of his being Murthered) Mr. Christian will submit himself to that Judgment which J. B. deserves, if either he, or any man else can prove Mr. Chri∣stian to be within Threescore miles of London that day; Mr. Chri∣stian being that very day, the whole day, and night following, at Stamford in Lincolnshire, as will be sufficiently testified. J. B. desires in Gods name, that this may be examined; but he must come in the Devils name to prove it: and just such Truths upon Examination will be found, the Earl of Dan∣by's having had any discourse with Sir Edmundbury Godfrey in divers months before his death, and his being at the Lady Cokes Chamber, either at two a clock, or any other time, (al∣though I have heard he did go through Hambden-house, where the Lady Coke then Lodged, about eleven of the clock that
day) nor was he seen after that hour at the Earl of Danby's House by any I can hear of, but the Author J. B. With the same truth is the Earl of Danby said to have Meetings with Doctor Tongue and Oates at Fox-hall; and yet J. B. draws a great many Conclusions from those things, be∣ing (as he saith) certain; and takes upon him to abuse the House of Commons, by saying, This is the true cause of their adhering to their Votes. I must confess, that at first sight, I wondred to think how a man who designs like J. B. to be thought a good Protestant, and concern'd for the safety of the Kingdom, could make this Relation consist, without blemish to the Reputation of Mr. Bed∣low, and Mr. Praunce, and others, by whose testimony so ma∣ny were Condemned and have suffered: but before I had read it half through, his design was as plain to destroy their Evidence, and make that pass for nothing, as it was to blast the Honour and Reputation of the Earl; although he would fain seem to say something in their excuse, by making it worse, (viz.) That we must not altogether rely upon what the Evidence say, because a great deal of it is by hear-say: which is to put a worthy Character upon the Judge and Jury. I should believe this J. B. to be Author also of that pre∣tended Paper, Intituled, An Answer to the Objections against the Earl of Danby; but (to give him his due) it is too silly, and would be thought to have some pitty and good nature in it: but I am confident, he is the Author of the Print Intituled, A perfect Catalogue of all the Lords Treasurers to this present year, with particular Observations on Thomas Earl of Danby, because of the falsity and Malice it speaks against this Earl; and yet in spight of his teeth, he hath said more for him in calling him A great Royallist, than he can do for some he has endea∣voured to commend. And as to this Lords Gentility, as it is a great deal more Antient than he would have it thought, (although he allows it as long a date, as divers great men, and some Lord Treasurers can pretend to) so his Estate when made Lord Treasurer, was known to be better than any of the greater number of the
Lord Treasurers for one hundred years before him have brought into the Kings Service; although many of them have left their Places with much greater Estates than he hath done. As wickedness is ever put under the disguise of Religion and Piety, so J. B. ends his Paper with very good Prayers and Thoughts, which I fear are least in his heart, (viz) That none will escape from Gods vengeance, but such as from their Souls love Truth, and preserve their hearts from Malice, and hands from seeking Innocent Blood. Whatever J. B. thinks, I am intirely of that opinion: and that both he and they may Repent, and turn to the Truth, is the Prayer of EDW. CHRISTIAN. FINIS. LONDON: Printed for Freeman Collins, 1679.
