3129.5 S124641 99900320 150798
THE ENGLISH VSVRER; OR VSVRY CONDEMNED, BY The most learned and famous Di∣uines of the Church of England, and Dedi∣cated to all his Maiesties Subiects, for the stay of further increase of the same. Collected By IOHN BLAXTON, Preacher of Gods Word at Osmington, in Dorcet-shire. Caluin, Epist. de Vsura. Adeò plus quàm rarum est eundem esse hominem probum et faeneratorem. It is more then rare, (or it is very seldome seene,) that one and the same person, should be both an honest man, and an vsurer. LONDON. Printed by IOHN NORTON, and are to bee sold by IOHN LONG, in Dorchester. 1634.
The Illustration. THe Couetous wretch, to what may we compare, better then Swine: both of one nature are, One grumbles, th' other grunts: both grosse and dull, hungry, still feeding, and yet neuer full. Resemblance from their habits may be had the one in Furre, th' other in Bristles clad. Rich men by others sweat augment their pounds: the Hog's still rooting in the neighbours grounds. They neyther of them vpward cast an eye, both downeward looke, and pray on what they spie, Nor differ they in death, The Brawne nought yeilds till cut tn Collers, into Cheekes and Shields, Like him the Vsurer howsoeuer fed, Profits none liuing, till himselfe be dead. Both with the Christmas-boxe may well comply It not hing yeilds till broke, They till they dye.
depiction of a man or userer seated at a table on which is laid the paraphernalia of his trade: coins, measures, books, etc.; beneath his seat is a strongbox; on the back of his chair, at his shoulder, is a black demon or devil The English Vsurer. I say I will haue all both Vse & principall. depiction of two pigs, one standing with its snout in the earth, the other lying on its back Mine is the Vsurers desire. To roote in earth, wallow in Mire. Liuing spare me, and Dead share me. Caluin Epist. de Vsura. In repub. benè constitutâ nemo foenerator tolerabilis est, sed omninò debet è consortio hominum reijci: An Vsurer is not tolerable in a well established Common∣weale, but vtterly to be reiected out of the com∣pany of men.
To the Reader. THere are some commit vsury,Why some are vsurers. not knowing it to be sinne: eyther be∣cause they haue not the Word, or they vse not the Word for the en∣lightning of their hearts.See Mr. Mosse, Treatise of vsury Epi∣stle to the Reader. Those that bee ignorant for want of the Word, are much to be pitied; and yet is their want that way, the iust punishment of sinne. Those that are ignorant for not vsing the Word, are sharpely to be reproued, as those whose ignorance accrewing from their owne negligence, is meere sinne vnto them.August. ad Sextum Rom. presby Ep. 105. In vtrisque non est iusta excusatio, sed iusta condemnatio, sayth Augustine, Neyther of both can iustly be ex∣cused; nay eyther of both is iustly to be condemned. Others commit vsury, and stand to excuse it, alead∣ging for themselues the authority of men: to these I answer, as Lactantius did to the Gentiles, who grounded their religion vpon the authority of their Ancestours, Id solum rectum est, quod ratio praescribit,Lact. de Origine er∣roris, l. 2. c. 7. not that which men say, but that which reason war∣ranteth, is right and to be approued.
Exod. 23.2.To them that alleadge examples, I answer with the ancient prouerbe, Viuitur preceptis non exemplis: we must liue by precepts, and not by examples. And with that of Moses, Thou shalt not follow a multi∣tude to doe euill. To them which iustifie vsury to be lawfull, I stand not heere to make answer: for to that end serueth the treatise following. One∣ly,Cyprian. De Simpli∣citate prae∣latorum. I applie vnto them, that which Cypri∣an spake of some Teachers of his time, Am∣bulantes in tenebris, habere se lucem existimant: walking in darkenesse, they suppose they haue the light. Distrust in Gods pro∣uidence the Vsurers sin.To them that pretend, they cannot otherwise liue, I replie: that they may accuse themselues of sloth and idlenesse, of infidelity and distrust in Gods Prouidence: which is indeed the Vsurers sinne. Others yet there are, who knowing the prac∣tise to bee euill, and themselues not being able to excuse it, they turne their nose vpon the very winde,Simile. like the weather Cocke, and like mad men rage at those that would binde them for their benefit: and are like the Swine of which Christ speaketh in the Gospell,Mat. 7.6. who when they haue Pearles throwne before them, turne againe, and all to rent those that cast them. God bee mercifull vnto these kind of Vsurers, and con∣uert them,Simile. (if it bee his will,) for their case is desperate. They are like vnto a foolish pa∣tient, who is ready to flie into the face of the Chirurgian, when hee searcheth his wound vnto
the bottome, for the curing of it. What will follow hereupon? But the ruine of the Vsurer? Others, when the Minister preacheth against Vsury, encourage themselues in their vnchari∣table course of life, by this conceit: that it is but his priuate opinion. This treatise will make it euident, that, Vsury to bee vnlawfull,The most iudicious Diuines condemne Vsury. proceeds not out of the mouths of some few Humorists in the Country, (for so the Vsurers account them:) but it is the iudgement of those who sit at the Helme, and deseruedly are accounted pillars in the Church of God. As for the Author of this Treatise: vnder∣stand, that hee neyther lendeth, nor taketh vpon Vsury: for hee followes his calling,Vsurers vile persons Ps. 15. and doth not busy himselfe much with the affayers of the world. As for profest Vsurers, hee esteemes them as vile persons, in whose eyes they are most iustly contemned, but hee honoreth those that feare the Lord. which the Vsurers do not. And therefore be∣ing free from the guiltinesse of this sinne, he may the moore freely giue sentence vpon the vngodlinesse thereof Iudicet ille de alterius errore (sayth S. Ambrose) qui non habet in seipso quod condemnet: iudicet,Ambros. su∣per, beati im∣maculati. qui non agit eadem quae in alio putauerit punienda. Let him iudge of another mans default, who hath not the same fault to condemne in himselfe: let him iudge of another who committeth not the same thing which hee deemeth worthy the punishing in another. Know moreouer, that he is a thorough conformable
Member and Minister of the Church of England. And for the Scope of this Treatise, it is for the information and saluation of thy soule, and his owne soule. Take the Treatise, andSi quid ex vsu tu∣reperias, iuvame pre∣cibus tuis apud deum; aliam mer∣cedem non defidero. vale. giue pray∣ers, for Thy fellow member in Christ Iesus, John Blaxton.
A Table of the Contents. CHAP. 1. VSury defined by Bishop Downam, and Mr. Fenton. CHAP. 2. The distinction of vsury into mentall and actuall. Where actuall vsury is distinguished from other contracts: as 1 From liberall contracts. 2 From all lawfull buying. 3 From lawfull Location or letting to hire. 4 From the contract of Partnership. 5 From aduenturers vsu∣ry. 6 From liberall vsury. 7 From recompencing vsu∣ry, which we call Interest. CHAP. 3. The testimony of sixe learned Bishops prouing it simply vnlawfull. CHAP. 4. The testimony of the learned Diuines of the Church of England condemning vsury. CHAP. 5. Cleare and apt Similies to which vsury and vsurers are resembled. CHAP. 6. Answereth the obiections which are commonly made in de∣fence of vsury. CHAP. 7. That vsurers are bound to repent, and to make restitu∣tion.
The Names of the most Reuerend and learned Bishops, and of the most learned and Iudiciall Diuines vsed in this Treatise. Bishop 1 Sands some∣times Archbishop of Yorke. 2 Iewell some∣times Bishop of Salisbury. 3 King some∣times Bishop of London. 4 Babington some∣times Bishop of Worcester. 5 Downam, the hammer of vsurers, Lord Bishop of Derry in Ireland. 6 Lake, late Lord Bishop of Bath and Wels. Doctor Pic. Willet. Sclater. Tayler. Smith. Preston. Williams Web. Sutton. Wilson. Mr. Wilkinson. Smith. Wheatly. Dod. Bolton. Perkins. Adams. Powel. Wilson. Scudder. Rogers of Wethersfield Rogers of Messing Rogers of Dedham. Northbrooke Philips. Robrough. Mosse. Fenton. Dyke. Bayne. Brinsley. Siluester. Withers. Quarles.
The Charitable happy, the Vsurers accursed. O! thrice, thrice happy he,Blessed are the mercifull. Math. 5.7. Psal. 37.19. whose free desires To charity a holy feruor fires: Who onely minds Gods glory, by his gift, And neyghbours good, without sinister drift; Famine (familiar vnto rogues that range) Shall not come neere his garner, nor his grange: His fields, with Corne, abundant crop shall couer, His vines with Grapes, his hedge with Roses ouer; His downes with sheepe, his dayery grounds with Neat; His mounts with Kids, his moors with Oxen great; His groues with droues (increasing night and day;) His hils with Heards, his smiling meads with Hay; His fens with foule, his pils, and pooles with Fish; His trees with fruits, with plenty euery dish; Content and health (the best of earthly blisse) Shall euermore remaine with him and his;Phil. 4.11.12. 1 Tim. 6.6. Him, pride or enuy neuer shall molest; Or corsiue care, foe to repast and rest. For, th' all-see eye still carefully respects The Almner's house, and euer it protects;Esay 58 8.9, 10, 11, &c. Till finally, when iustice endeth all, Sweet mercies voyce him to heau'ns Kingdome call. But th' Vsurer (how-euer here he thriue In heards and hoords) already dead aliue (No heat of loue, no heart to giue a mite,Cursed are the vsures. Psal. 15.5.
Ezek. 18.13.Except to gaine and gather double by 't) Him, in that day (to him a day of woe) The Holy-one the all-knower, will not know. Shame and confusion shall be-spread him ouer, Wishing the holes to hide, and hils to couer. Iames 2.13. Reuel. 6.15.16Eternall fire shall fry his thirsty veines; Immortall dying in eternall paines. His eyes, so nice to looke on Lazarus sore Shall swim in sulphury teares (tortur'd the more, To see aboue, in blisse and glory rife, Whom ruthlesse here, he would not see, in life) His eares here deafe vnto destressed ones; Shall there heare horror of the damned grones; Nor shall the voyce of mercy him salute, Who, in effect, to needy moane was mute: Millions of masses cannot him redeeme, Nor all Church-treasure euer ransome him, From all-thought-passing pangs of wretchednes; As, endlesse, caselesse, and remedylesse. IOSVA SYLVESTER.
On Vsurers. OF all men vs'rers are not least accurst; They robbe the Spittle, pinch th' afflicted worst: In others griefe they'r most delighted in; Whilst Giuers suffer for the Takers sinne: O how vniust a trade of life is that, Which makes the lab'rers, leane, and th' idle, fatte? FRA. QVARLES. FAEnere qui lucrum facit, est homicida Catoni, Furti dupla, huius quadrupla mulcta fuit. Non facit heredem, priuatur honore sepulchri Qui tenues lucro faeneris auget opes. Sermo sacer, patres, pius omnis damnat, at vna (Quae docet errores) Consuetudo probat. Iohannes Garbraudus Oxoniensis.
To the Vsurer. Mors tua, mors Christi, fraus mundi, gloria caeli, Et dolor inferni, sunt meditanda tibi. Thy death, the death of Christ, the worlds tentation. Heauens ioy, hells torment, be thy meditation. Three profi∣table helpes of a godly life. Psal. 119.57 58, 59. See Bb. Cowper in Rom. 8.1.THere bee three most notable helpes of a god∣ly life, deliuered to vs by Dauid, in three verses of the 119 Psalme, 57. O Lord, I haue determined to keepe thy Word. 58. I haue made my suppli∣cation in thy presence with my whole heart. 59. I haue considered my wayes, and turned my feete vn∣to thy testimonies. Determination is the first: It is a good thing by setled resolution to conclude with thy selfe that thou wilt liue godly. Supplication is the second: ex∣cept by continuall Prayer thy determination bee confir∣med, and strengthned by grace from God, thy conclusions which thou takest to day, shall vanish to morrow. Conside∣ration is the third, and it is profitable to reduce thee a∣gaine into the way of God, so often as of weakenesse thou
thou wanders from it, contrary to thy first determination. These are three helps to keepe thy heart in the way of God: so necessary, that if without them thou dost any worke, it is not possible but thou shalt be snared. First therefore determine to forsake thy Vsury, and to make restitution. Secondly, strengthen this determination by Prayer, say with Dauid, create in me a cleane heart, O God:Psal. 51.10. Psal. 119.36 and re∣new a right spirit within me. Encline my heart vnto thy testimonies: and not to couetousnesse. Thirdly, con∣sider thy former courses when thou wast a theeuish Vsurer, and say with our blessed Sauiour: What is a man pro∣fited, if he shall gaine the whole world,Math. 16.26 and lose his owne soule? Or what shall a man giue in exchange for his soule? Say with the holy Apostle S. Paul, they that will be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtfull lusts,1 Tim. 6.9. which drowne men in perdition and destruction. Finally, doe good,v. 18, 19. be rich in good workes, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying vp in store for thy selfe a good foundation against the time to come, that thou mayst lay hold on eternall life. Consider what I say,2 Tim. 2.7. and the Lord giue thee vnderstanding in all things, Farewell. Thy remembrancer, I. B.
THE ENGLISH VSVRER. CHAP. I. Of the definition of Vsury. THe contract of Vsury is nothing else but illiberall mutuation,Bb. Downam in Ps. 15. p. 151. Vsury defined. and may thus brief∣ly be defined: Vsury is mutuation, or lending for gaine. This briefe defini∣tion doth fully set forth the true nature of Vsury, and sufficiently distinguisheth it from all other contracts whatsoeuer. FIrst I say it is mutuation or lending,Subiectum vsurae mu∣tuum. which is also presupposed in the Scripture, Exod. 22.25. and the same if need were, might be proued by the other relatiue, which is borrowing: for lending and borrowing are relatiues: And if he which taketh vp mo∣ney vpon vsury, be a borrower; then he that giueth or putteth it forth vnto vsury, is a lender. The contract therefore of Vsury is a contract of len∣ding: now in the contract of mutuation or lending,Idem p. 152. diuers
things concurre, which also belong to the nature of Vsury. 1. That it is of such things as are spent in the vse, and consist in quantitie, that is to say in number, weight, or measure, as Money, and Victuals, Corne, Wine, Oyle, &c. which are particularly mentioned, Deut. 23.19. Leuit. 25.37. 2. And therefore is alienation not onely of the vse, but also of the propertie, from which the vse (of such things as are spent in the vse) cannot be seuered. 3: As the property is transferred to the borrower, so the borrower standeth to the hazzard of the thing bor∣rowed. 4. That it is not a perpetuall alienation of that which is lent, but for a time, which time being expired, the bor∣rower is bound to restore the principall. 5. Because the thing borrowed is to be spent in the vse, therefore the borrower is bound, not to restore the selfe same particular which he borrowed, but so much in the same kind, or the same valew. 6. It belongeth to the nature of lending, that it be free and liberall. And this is that which followeth in the definition, as the difference to distinguish it from free lending, that it is for gaine. Vsury is for gaine.By gaine is ment any addition, ouerplus, or in∣crease, ouer and aboue the Principall, whether it bee money, or money worth, required not for the indemnity of the Creditour,Idem p. 153. What is to be esteemed gaine. to saue him harmelesse, but for his aduantage, to make him a gainer by lending; for that onely is to be esteemed gaine, which is an ouerplus,
clearely gotten aboue the Principall. And whereas I say it is eyther money, or money worth: this money worth reacheth farre, not onely to goods and wares, but also to labours and seruices, and whatsoeuer else being va∣luable by money, may lawfully be let or sold for money. And when I say that vsury is lending for gaine, it is ment, that in the first act of lending vpon vsury, or after∣wards in the forbearing, whereby that lending is con∣tinued, gaine is, if not couenanted for, yet at the least intended. So that where there is a couenant or intent of gaine by loane, whether it be in the first act of len∣ding, or afterwards in the forbearing, it is vsury: and contrariwise, where there is neyther a couenant nor in∣tent of gaine in lending or forbearing, there is not vsury, though there be an ouerplus, or encrease receiued ouer and besides the Principall. The Hebrew word Nesheh, is the ordinary name to signifie vsury, as Foenus in Latine, or  in Greeke,Idem p. 154. or Vsury in English. For the money which is lent vpon vsury, is called Nesheh, a biter, or which biteth:The names of vsury. and the Hebrew phrase, which signifieth to be lent vpon vsury, is to bite, as appeareth plainely, Deut. 23.19. Thou shalt not lend vpon vsury to thy brother money or meat, or any thing else, Asher Ishak, which biteth, that is, which is lent vpon vsury. For whatsoeuer the Vsurer lendeth, it hath teeth, and iawes to eate and consume the sub∣stance of other men; his Corne or victuals which were made to be eaten, doe eate, and his money which was made to be spent, doth wast the substance of others, and therefore Hebrew writers doe teach, that in the name of Vsury is encluded an admonition, not to bor∣row vpon Vsury: for hee which taketh money vpon Vsury, taketh as it were a serpent into his bosome. This is confessed by Caluine himselfe, that whereas
Vsurers auoyd the name Nesheh, which signified biting, as they doe the name Vsury among vs, as being odious, and therefore alledged, that they tooke not Nesheh but Tarbith, as amongst vs they will not be thought to take Vsury, but consideration, vsance, or interest: therefore the Lord forbideth as well Tarbith as Nesheh,In Exod. 22.25 Levit. 25.36.. whereby he condemneth generally Quamlibet sortis accessionem (sayth Caluin) any addition or increase aboue the principall. And vpon Ezekiel chap. 18. he sayth the Prophet condemneth not onely Nesheh which signifieth biting,God forbids biting vsury and increase. but also Tarbith, which he translateth incrementum, increase: hoc est (sayth he) quicquid lucri sibi avari homines conciliant ex mutuo; that is, whatsoeuer gaine couetous men doe get to them∣selues by loane. Actuall Vsury is described by Dr. FENTON, to be pactum ex mutuo lucrum. Lucre for loane vpon couenant; or The couenant of lucre for lending: or Lending vpon couenant for lucre.Dr. Fenton Treatise of vsury, p. 15. So that these three words, mutuum, pactum, lucrum, doe define and circumscribe the entire nature of that Vsury whereof the maine question is made, whether it be lawfull or not. And to these descriptions of Vsury, agree those of our most reuerend, and iudicious Diuines: vide. Dr. Willet vpon Exodus, p. 509. Dr. Smith in Willet vpon Leuiticus, p. 625. Perkins, Comt. 8. Mr. Smith, 18. Sermon vpon Vsu∣ry. Dr. Pie, Vsuries Spright coniured, p. 4. Powels positions of Vsury, p. 4. Bb. Iewel, vpon 1 Thes. p. 113. Amesius de conscientia, lib. 5. cap. 44. Dr. Wilson, Discourse vpon Vsury, p. 85. Mr. Mosse, Arraignement and conuiction of Vsury, p. 31.
CHAP. 2. The distinction of Vsury. Vsury is eyther Inward and Mentall, or Outward and Actuall. MEntall Vsury is a lending for gaine without co∣uenant, that is,Mentall vsury. Bb. Downam in Ps. 15. p. 168. when the creditor onely inten∣deth and looketh for gaine by lending and for∣bearing his money, but doth not indent or co∣uenant with the borrower for gaine. And this may be called, the Vsury of the heart:Rom. 7.14. for the law of God being spirituall, doth not onely restraine the hands, and out∣ward man; but also the intent and purpose of the heart: insomuch, that morall actions though in shew good, are to be iudged euill, if they proceed from an ill intent, and tend to an ill end: for he that intendeth euill, hath the like euill will with him that worketh euill: and he which by lending onely intendeth his owne gaine, he lendeth for gaine, and therefore, if actuall Vsury be euill, then the intent and purpose thereof is also euill. Outward and actuall Vsury is, when the creditour doth not onely intend certaine gaine by lending, but also co∣uenanteth for a certaine summe to be allowed him at a certaine time, or times. This in the Scriptures is called im∣posing of Vsury, Exod. 22.25.Idem p. 170. Thou shalt not impose Vsury vpon him: Wherefore in actuall Vsury, a couenant is made for certaine gaine, and in that couenant the very forme of actuall Vsury consisteth: for which cause
some doe call such a contract, formall Vsury. And this couenant vseth to be confirmed by obligation, eyther ver∣ball, as bils and bonds, or reall, as pawnes, or mortgage; or personall, as suretiship; whereby the creditor is secu∣red for the receit, and the debtor bound for the pay∣ment, both of the principall and also of the Vsury. Let vs now see how by this definition Vsury is distinguished from other contracts, and also other things which may seeme to haue some affinity therewith: for of the rest it is needlesse to speake. It is therefore distinguished Vsury distin∣guished. 1 From all li∣berall con∣tracts. Idem p. 157.1. From all liberall con∣tracts, as that of donation or free gift, of mutuation, or free lending to spend, of commodation, or free lending to vse, because they be free and liberall, but Vsury is illiberall and for gaine. 2 From all law∣full buying2. From all lawfull buying: because in buying there is a perpetuall alienation of money, in Vsury but for a time. 3 For letting to hire.3. From lawfull Location or letting to hire: which is the rather to be obserued, because some imagine, that money and other things which are lent vpon Vsury,Idem p. 158. may as well be let as other things. But there is a great difference betwixt Vsury, and the lawfull contract of Location or letting. And first they differ in the sub∣iects. Vsury is in those things which are spent in the vse, and consist in quantity, standing in number, weight and measure. Location, is of such things as are not spent in the vse, neyther stand in number, weight and mea∣sure.
The subiect of Vsury, are such things as haue no fruitfull vse in themselues, but the gaine which is to be raised by imployment of them, is to be imputed to the industry and skill of the imployer. The subiect of Location haue a fruitfull vse in themselues naturally. The vse of things lent vpon Vsury cannot be seuered, or reckoned apart from the property and domini∣on, because they are such things as are spent in the vse, and therefore if you vse them, you spend them. The fruitfull vse of things lent, may be seue∣red and reckoned apart, and is valuable by it selfe, as of Lands, Goods, Hou∣ses, &c. which remaine in the vse vnspent. In the contract of loane, whether free or vpon V∣sury, the lender granteth to the borrower, not onely the vse, but also the proper∣ty of the thing lent, from which the vse of that, which we lend to be spent in the vse cannot be seuered: hence it is called mutuum, because by lending it is made ex meo tuum. In the contract of Loca∣tion, the letter granteth to him that taketh to hire the vse onely of the things retaining the property to himselfe.
Because that which is the subiect of loane, and Vsury, is spent in the vse, and is lent to be spent; therefore the borrower is bound to restore, not the same particular which he borrowed, but so much in quantity or full valew in the same kind, without any impairing, or diminution. Because, that which is the subiect of commodity and Location, is lent, and let, not to be spent, but onely to be vsed: therefore he that taketh the same to vse, is bound to restore the selfe same particular, which for the most part is impay∣red and made worse in the vse. As in mutuation, and Vsury, the property is tran∣slated to the borrower, so with the property also the hazzard wholy appertay∣neth to the borrower: for the very contract of mutu∣ation includeth in it an obligation, binding the borrower, that whatsoeuer becommeth of this particu∣lar which he borroweth, he shall restore the full va∣lew thereof at the day ap∣poynted, in the same kind. And to this purpose the borrower maketh promise, either by word or writing, entreth into bonds, and statutes, laying his goods to pawne, or his lands to mortgage, giueth sureties, to assure and secure the creditor for the principall. As in Location the vse is communicated to the Hirer, but the Letter retai∣neth the property: so the thing, if it shall miscarry without the default of the Hirer: belongeth to the Letter, and not to the Hi∣rer, because it came for his hire, Exod. 22.14. And it is a rule in law, to whom the hazzard appertaineth, to him the fruit and profit belongeth.
Where there is a Couenant to beare part of the losse, as well as to reape part of the gaine,4 From the contract of Partnership. and this con∣tract, is neyther vsury, nor loane: but a lawfull con∣tract. Which in Latine is called Nauticum,5 From aduen∣turers vsury. or Maritimum Foenus, and is a gaine or allowance made for money which is transported beyond the Seas, at the perill and hazard of the Creditor. This is not vnlawfull, prouided,Idem p. 164. 165. al∣wayes, that there be an aduenture or hazard in truth, and not in pretence onely; and also that the gaine be pro∣portionable to the hazard. Which is a gratuitie or free gift,6 From libe∣rall vsury when the borrower finding himselfe much benefited by the lenders curtesie, doth of his owne accord in testimony of his thankeful∣nesse, freely giue to the lender, who neyther intended when he lent, nor expected whiles he forbore, any gaine; and much lesse couenanted for it. From that which is called Vsura compeus satoria re∣compencing vsury, which we call intrest:7 From recom∣pencing vsury. Bb. Downam in Ps. 15 p. 166. Dr. Smith in Willet vpon Leuit. p. 631. Powels Posit. of vsury p. 14. Bb. Iewel. 1 Thess. p. 135. which is no∣thing else but a iust recompence which the Debter, ha∣uing through his default beene the effectuall cause of the Creditours hinderance, doth owe vnto him by the Law of nature, and that hinderance may be two fold, Damnum emergens, losse arising, or Lucrum cessans, gaine ceasing: but this ceasing gaine which must come into estimation, must not be vncertaine and doubtfull, but certaine: or at least very probable. Here are certaine cautions to be remembred. First, that intrest bee esteemed not according to the gaine or benefit which the borrower hath had by the im∣ployment of the money, but according to the hinderance
or losse which the creditour sustained through the bor∣rowers default. Secondly, that Interest is not to he required nisi post moram, but onely after delay and default committed by the borrower. Thirdly, that not alwayes after delay it is to be requi∣red, but onely then, when the creditour hath indeed sustained losse or hindrance by the borrowers delay. Fourthly, that he doe not voluntarily incurre any losse, meaning to lay the burthen thereof on the borrower, but doe his true endeauour to auoyd it, eyther in whole or in part. Fiftly, that when he suspecteth losse or hinderance by the debtors delay, he descend not into extremities with those who haue broken day, not through negligence or vnfaythfulnesse, but through want and necessity, which they did not foresee: and let him remember, that where is no fault, there ought to be no punishment. Sixtly, that the estimation of the interest be not referred to the creditors owne arbitrament, but committed to the iudgement of some other honest and discreet men: which conditions being obserued, it is lawfull for the creditour to require an ouerplus besides his principall: which ouer∣plus notwithstanding is not vsury. How vsury discovers it selfe in selling, in buying, in let∣ting, in partnership and exchange, vnder pretence of the ad∣uenturers vsury, vnder the colour of recompencing vsury, vide. Bb. Downam, vpon the 15 Psalme, p. 173, 175, 182, 183, 188, 191. Dr. Fentons Treatise of vsury, p. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Powels positions of vsury, in his Epistle Dedicatory. Mr. Mosse, in the Arraignement and Conniction of vsury, p. 62. to p. 68.
CHAP. 3. The Testimony of sixe learned Bishops of the Church of England concerning vsury. The Testimony of Bishop Sands. THis biting Worme of Vsury,Sermon vpon 1 Sam. 12.23, 24. Vsury a biting worme, a can∣ker. that deuowring wolfe hath consumed many, many it hath pulled vpon their knees, and brought to beggery: many such as might haue lived in great wealth, and ho∣nour not a few. This canker hath corrupted all England: we shall doe God and our country true seruice, by taking away this euill; represse it by Law, else the heavy hand of God hangeth ouer vs, and will strike vs. God sayth, Lend freely, and looke for no gaine:Idem Sermon vpon Luke 1.74.75. but will the Vsurer, whose money is his god, remit his Inte∣rest because of this; because the Lord hath so charged him? No, he will not let goe his ten or twenty, or thir∣ty, in the hundred. To him the glory of God,Note. Nothing pre∣cious to the Vsurer but money. yea and his owne soule is vile, nothing is precious but onely his money. What the Prophet speaketh of putting forth money to vsury, he full little regardeth, but seedeth still vpon his mast, and blesseth himselfe when he waxeth fat, not perceiuing that God hath already plagued him with a plague of all plagues, the obduration of his heart. And although that God hath giuen him ouer into a dull and sencelesse minde,Vsurers haue hard hearts. his eares being so damned vp that nothing can haue enterance to moue, or touch his hard heart, yet he still blesseth himselfe, and his accursed soule. Thou Vsurer, thou idolater, that dost glory in thy shame,
in thy euill gotten gold:Their wealth prospers not. dost thou not know, that thy wealth shall melt like snow before the Sunne? Thinkest thou still to hold it? O foole, this night shall they take away thy soule, perhaps this instant, and then whose is all this? After that Zacheus fell to the seruice of Christ, and that Christ entred into his house, he presently forsooke the seruice of Mammon, made a large restitution of that which he had gained by such vnlawfull meanes, and then began to be liberall: and not onely to lend freely, but to giue for nothing. He gaue the one halfe of all his goods to the poore. If God would at this day worke thus in the heart of one Zacheus, a rich Vsurer, how many poore might be relieued by such a restitution? He might maintayne many a needy man, and saue his owne soule. Well, this one thing we know, the word that proceedeth out of Gods mouth against vsury,Is. 55.11. shall not returne in vaine, if it cannot worke reformation, it will worke confu∣sion. Euery man is to his neyghbour a debtor, not onely of that which himselfe borroweth,Idem Sermon vpon Rom. 13.8, 9, &c. but of whatsoeuer his neyghbour needeth: a debtor, not onely to pay that he oweth, but also to lend that he hath and may conueniently spare; to lend I say according to the rule of Christ, Luke. 6. Lend looking for no∣thing thereby. So that these ouer-payments, the vsury which hath spoyled and eaten vp many,Vsury the can∣ker of the Common∣wealth. the can∣ker of the Commonwealth, is vtterly both forbidden to man, and abhorred of God. To bargaine for Lead, Graine, or Leases, with such as haue neyther Lead, Graine, nor Leases to pay, neyther any such matter meant, but onely vnlawfull gaine of money, the party to forfeit his obligation, because he ney∣ther can, nor meaneth such payment, and the lender not content to receiue lesse aduantage then thirty at the hundred, this is but a patched cloake to couer this
vild sinne withall.Note. Whatsoeuer thou receiuest vpon condition, or by what meanes soeuer thou receiuest more then was lent, thou art an vsurer toward thy bro∣ther, and God, will be a reuenger against thee. He whom thou shouldst obey if thou wilt be saued,Ezod. 22 25. Levit. 25 27. Deut. 23.19. doth in expresse words command thee, not to lend thy money for vsury. This Word of God, man can∣not dispence withall, and it shall not returne in vaine; if it cannot be a conuerting commandeme it, it shall be a confounding iudgement. The reasons of men for vsury must giue place to the precepts of God against it.The reasons of men for vsury, must giue place to the precept of God against it. What man art thou that wilt be wiser then thy Maker? Hath God condemned it, and darest thou defend it? is it in his iudgement iniurious, and doth thy iudgement thinke it e∣quall? Hath he seene reason to prohibit it, and dost thou see reason why thou mayst vse it? such reasons with the makers and vsers of them, the Lords iustice shall de∣stroy. And yet in truth all Nations, at all times haue condemned it, as the very bane and pestilence of a Commonwealth:The old Ro∣mans condem∣ned vsury whereof the old Romane both Hi∣story and practise is an often witnesse. These secret shifts are seene of God, and abhorred, and will be re∣uenged: well mayst thou escape the hands of man by thy coloured delusions, yet canst thou not escape the sharpe and swift iudgement of God:Note. who accordingly as hee hath threatned, will exclude thee out of his Kingdome, interdict thee his Tabernacle, and hurle thee into Hell: Where thy euill gotten money can neyther redeeme nor helpe thee, a iust reward for thy vniust vsury. Our Apostle requireth that we pay vnto euery man the thing that we owe, and we are as much debt¦tors to lend freely, as others faythfully to pay the thing which was lent. The bowels of compassion are in some men so mar∣ualously dryed and closed vp,Idem Sermon vpon Micah. 6 8 p. 100. that they turne away their
faces from all men, that desire any thing at their hands, though they aske it not of gift,Vsurers worse then Iewes. but of loane, vnlesse they aske to buy the loane with Vsury. The Iewes euen till this day will not lend vpon vsury among themselues, but lend freely to their brethren and without gaine. Iudas himselfe that sold his Master for money, was not more cruell hearted I suppose then these men are, who for money deuoure their brethren: their hearts are iron hearts, they haue no sparke of pity or compassion left in them, let them not thinke but that one day their gaine shall be their exceeding losse.Note. If Chrysostome thought that one euill got∣ten groat, layd vp amongst a chest full of money, would be a canker to fret out and eate vp the rest, what shall become then of so much gotten by so vnmercifull and vn∣godly meanes? Where is loue, where is mercy, when lending of money is become merchandize? Enough hath beene sayd in this place of this matter, which if it be not amended, be ye assured that the Lord God in his iust wrath will plague you both in your selues, and in your po∣sterity for it. 2 Testimony. Bb. Iewell. MAny liue in vsury, a most filthy trade, a trade which God detesteth,Sermon vpon Rom. 13.12. a trade which is the very ouerthrow of all Christian loue: But their gaine shall be to their losse, and their money to their de∣struction. He that giueth his mony vpon vsury, shall not dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, nor rest vpon his holy Moun∣taine. Treatise vpon the Sacra∣ments.Deceiue no man by wrongfull dealing, increase not thy goods by extortion nor by vsury. He that giueth his money to vsury, shall not enter into the Tabernacle of the Lord. He that taketh vsury of his neyghbour, killeth him without a sword, the Lord will auenge it. He will not blesse ill
gotten goodes, they cannot prosper: they will neuer con∣tinue, nor remaine vnto the third heire. Vsury is a kind of lending of money, or corne, or oyle,vpon 1 Thes. p. 113. Vsury defined. or wine, or of any other thing, wherein, vpon couenant and bargaine, we receiue againe the whole principall which we deliuered, and somewhat more, for the vse and occu∣pying of the same: as if I lend 100 pound, and for it co∣uenant to receiue 105 pound, or any other summe, greater then was the summe which I did lend:No good man an Vsurer. this is that which we call vsury: such a kind of barganing as no good man, or godly man euer vsed. Such a kind of barganing as all men that euer feared Gods iudgements haue alwaies ab∣horred and condemned. It is filthy gaines,Note. Vsurers say, Lord increase our fayth, and then make such a confession of it as Bb. Iewell doth in this place. and a worke of darkenesse, it is a monster in nature: the ouerthrow of mighty kingdomes, the destruction of flourishing States, the decay of wealthy Cities, the plagues of the world, and the misery of the people: it is theft, it is the murthering of our brethren its the curse of God, and the curse of the peo∣ple. This is Vsury. By these signes and tokens you may know it: For wheresoeuer it raigneth all those mischiefes ensue. Whence springeth Vsury? Soone shewed.Idem p. 115. The cause of vsury. Euen thence whence theft, murder, adultery, the plagues, and de∣struction of the people doe spring. All these are the workes of the diuell, and the workes of the flesh.Iohn 8. Vsurers of their father the diuell. Christ telleth the Pharisees, You are of your father the diuell, and the lusts of your father you will doe. Euen so may it truely be sayd to the Vsurer, Thou art of thy father the diuell, and the lusts of thy father thou wilt doe, and therefore thou hast pleasure in his workes. The diuell entered into the heart of Iudas, and put in him this greedinesse, and couetous∣nesse of gaine, for which he was content to sell his master. Iudas heart was the shop, the diuell was the foreman to worke in it. They that will be rich, fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noysome lusts,1 Tim 6.9 10. which
drowne men in perdition and destruction. For the desire of money, is the roote of all euill. And S. Iohn saith, Who¦soeuer committeth sinne is of the Diuell. 1 Ioh. 3.8. Thus we see that the diuell is the planter, and the father of vsury. Idem p. 116. The fruits of vsury.What are the fruits of vsury? A. 1. It dissolueth the knot and fellowship of mankind. 2. It hardneth mans heart. 3. It maketh men vnnaturall, and bereaueth them of charity, and loue to their dearest friends. 4. It bree∣deth misery and prouoketh the wrath of God from hea∣uen. 5. It consumeth rich men, it eateth vp the poore, it maketh bankrupts, and vndoeth many householders, 6 The poore occupiers are driuen to flee, there wiues are left alone, their children are hopelesse, and driuen to beg their bread, through the vnmercifull dealing of the coue∣tous vsurer. He that is an Vsurer, wisheth that all others may lacke and come to him and borrow of him:Idem p. 120. Our forefa∣thers abhorred vsury. that all others may lose, so that he may haue gaine. Therefore our old fore∣fathers so much abhorred this trade, that they thought an Vsurer vnworthy to liue in the company of Christian men They suffered not an Vsurer to be a witnesse in matters of Law. They suffer him not to make a Testament, and to bestow his goods by Will. When an Vsurer dyed, they would not suffer him to be buried in places appointed for the buriall of Christians. So highly did they mislike this vn∣mercifull spoyling and deceiuing our brethren. Idem p. 121. All professions of men con∣demne Vsury.But what speake I of the ancient Fathers of the Church? there was neuer any Religion, nor Sect, nor State, nor De∣gree, nor Profession of men, but they haue disliked it. Philo∣sophers, Greekes, Latins, Lawyers, Diuines, Catholikes, He∣reticks; all Tongues, and Nations, haue euer thought an Vsurer as dangerous as a theefe. The very sense of nature proues it to be so. If the stones could speake, they would
say as much. But some will say,Idem p. 124. The Vsurers obiection. all kindes of vsury are not forbidden, there may be cases where vsury may stand with reason and equity, and herein they say so much as by wit may be deuised, to paint out a soule and vgly idoll, and to shadow themselues in manifest and open wickednesse. Whatsoeuer God sayth, yet this or this kind of vsury, say they, which is done in this or this sort, is not forbidden. It profiteth the Commonwealth, it relieueth great numbers, the poore should otherwise perish, none would lend them. By like good reason,Answer. there are some that defend theft and murder, they say, there may be some case, where it is lawfull to kill or to steale: for God willed the Hebrews to rob the Aegyptians, and Abraham to kill his owne sonne I∣saac. In these cases the robbery and the killing of his sonne were lawfull. So say they.Some pleade for Vsurers, as Papists for whores. Euen so by the like reason doe some of our countreymen maintayne concubines, curti∣zans, and brothel-houses, and stand in defence of open stewes. They are (say they) for the benefit of the Country, they keepe men from more dangerous inconueniences, take them away, it will be worse. Although God say, There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a whore-keeper of the sonnes of Israel. Yet these men say all manner of whoredome is not forbidden. In these and these cases it is not amisse to alow it. As Samuel sayd to Saul, so may we say to the Vsurer?Idem p. 126. God cares not for Vsurers excuses. thou hast deuised cases and colours to hide thy shame, but what regard hath God to thy cases? What careth he for thy reasons? the Lord would haue more pleasure, if when thou hearest his voyce thou wouldest obey him. For what is thy deuice against the counsell, and ordinance of God? What bold presumption is it for a mortall man to controule the Commandements of immortall God? And to weigh his heauenly wisedome in the ballance of humane foolishnesse? When God sayth, thou shalt not take vsury, what creature of GOD art thou which canst take vsury? When God maketh
it vnlawfull,They are of a desperate mind. what art thou, oh man, that sayst, it is law∣full? This is a token of a desperate mind. It is found true in thee, that Paul sayd, the loue of money is the roote of all ill. Thou art so giuen ouer vnto the wic∣ked Mammon, that thou carest not to doe the will of God. Idem p. 144.Thus much I thought expedient to speake of the loathsome and foule Trade of vsury, I know not what fruit will grow thereby, and what it will worke in your hearts. If it please God, it may doe that good that I wish. I haue done my duety, I call God for a record vnto my soule, I haue not deceiued you. I haue spoken vnto you the truth. If I be deceiued in this matter, O God thou hast deceiued me. Thou sayst, Thou shalt take no vsury. Thou sayst, He that taketh increase, shall not liue. What am I, that I should hide the words of my God, or keepe them backe from the hearing of his people? The Learned old Fathers haue taught vs, it is no more law∣full to take vsury of our brother, then it is to kill our bro∣ther. They that be of God heare this, and consider it, and haue a care that they displease him not. But the wicked that are no whit moued, and care not what God sayth, but cast his Word behind them: which haue eyes and see not, and eares yet heare not: because they are filthy, they shall be filthy still: their greedy desire shall increase to their confusion, and as their money encreaseth, so shall they encrease the heapes of their sinnes.Note. Pardon me if I haue beene long or vehmeent, of those that are Vsurers I aske no pardon. Idem p. 145.I heare that there are certaine in this City which wallow wretchedly in this filthinesse, without repentance, I giue them warning in the hearing of you all,Vsury a cruell and detestable sinne. and in the presence of God, that they forsake this cruell and detestable sin. If otherwise, they continue therein, I will open their shame,
and denounce Excommunication against them,Bb. Iewel threatneth excomuni∣cation against Vsurers. and publish there names in this place, before you all. That you may know them, and abhorre them, as the plagues and monsters of the world: that if they be past all feare of God, they may yet repent and amend for worldly shame. Tell me thou wretched wight of the World, thou vnkind creature which art past all sense and feeling of God, which knoweth the will of God,Vsurers im∣pudent. 1 Because they come to Church. 2 Because they read GODS Word. 3 Because they come into the company of good men. They cause Gods wrath to fall vpon their children. and dost the contrary? How darest thou come into the Church? It is the Church of that GOD, which hath sayd, thou shalt take no vsury, and thou knowest he hath so sayd. How darest thou read or heare the Word of God? It is the Word of that God, which condem∣neth vsury; and thou knowest he doth condemne it. How darest thou come into the company of thy brethren? vsury is the plague and destruction and vndoing of thy brethren. And this thou knowest. How darest thou looke vpon thy Children? Thou makest the wrath of GOD fall downe from Heauen vpon them. Thy iniquity shall bee punished in them to the third and forth Generation. This thou knowest. How darest thou looke vp into Heauen? Thou hast no dwelling there: thou shalt haue no place in the Tabernacle of the highest. This thou knowest. Because thou robbest the poore, deceiuest the simple, and eatest vp the Widowes Houses: therefore shall thy Children bee naked, and begge their bread: therefore shalt thou and thy riches perish together. The third Testimonie, Bishop King. HOw long will the Vsurer and oppressor of others whose Lawes are as kniues,Vpon Ionas p. 90. and whose teeth be of iron, sleepe in his bed of mischiefe, as the Psalmist calleth
it, and in the contemplation and solace of his ill gotten goods? Idem p. 444. Lecture 32.How long haue we cried against oppressions, and smitten the oppressours with the rod of Gods vengeance, as Moses smote the Rocke? And yet what one drop of remorse haue we euer wrung from their stony hearts? How long haue we clapt our hands at the shamelesse vsury of this place?Ministers must preach against vsury. If vsury bee too stiffe to bee moued, yet we must free our soules, and if it were possible, we would also free them that are wrapt in their snares. If they little esteeme the warning of the fif∣teenth Psalme, that giue their money vpon vsury, let them at least take heede that receiue it. Let them not trie to beare an Oxe vpon their shoulders, when they are vnable to beare a Goate. That is, if pouerty be burthen enough vnto them, let them not adde the burthen of vsury. They aske what they shall doe? Dost thou aske? Saith Plutarke. Thou hast a tongue, begge. Thou hast hands, worke. Thou hast feete, walke. Thou hast an heart,Plutarch de vsura. Nihil tam molestum quam red∣dere. Idem p. 504. Lecture 37. thinke. Nauiga, renauiga, sale forward and backeward, take any paynes, rather then to fall into the mercy of an Vsurer. There is nothing so bitter as to restore. I would our Vsurers would marke this, that of all those grieuous offences whereof Nineueh had labour∣red a long time, the rest are held a sleepe, and their names spared, as not worthy in comparison to come in speech with their farre superiour iniquity; onely the wickednesse of their hands,Nam{que} meos nec aequos mihi nec ra∣puere iuven∣cos Plutar. de uitando aere alieno. which is not least in bi∣ting the poore, is remembred and reported in spe∣ciall wordes. Spake I of Vsurers? There are none: neyther is there a Sunne in the Skie. For mine owne part, I know them not. For they haue taken ney∣ther Horse nor Bullocke of mee. But for my bre∣threns sake both in the City and Country, I wish that
their billes and bonds were all heaped together in the Market place, and set on fire, as they were sometimes at Athens, that wee might all ioy and say, as Alcibiades then did, we never saw a clearer fire.Nunquam vidi ignem purionem. But because we cannot ease our hearts so soone of them, nor by such meanes I will tell them for their owne com∣fort what they shall trust to amongst other things that although they labour in the fire to get riches, yet the time shall come, when there shall nothing re∣maine vnto them but this, that they shall be able to know and recount with themselues, how many debters they haue quite vndone: As for their treasures of iniquity, let them plainely vnderstand that they put them into a bottom∣lesse bag which could hold nothing.De malè quaesitis, &c. Ill gotten goods ne∣uer descend to the third heire; perhaps, not to the second, nor first, not to benefit himselfe, who thinketh he hath most handfast. She gathered it of the hire of an harlot,Micah 1. Vsurers goods shall not pros∣per. and it shall returne to the wages of an harlot. They gathered their wealth by vsury, and vsury or somewhat else shall consume it. Gni∣pho the Vsurer as Lucian reporteth, lieth in hell, bemoaning his hard estate, that Rdocares an incestuous spend thrift should waste his goods: so may these, but I leaue their iudgement to God, to whom it belongeth. For vengeance is his, and he will repay it. Yet dare I giue sentence against it, as far as the ancient Romanes lawes did: wherein be∣cause a thiefe was bound to make restitution of double, the Vsurer of foure fold. Their meaning is plaine enough,Vsury double theft. that they esteemed vsury a double theft, and that at the least is my iudgement. And therefore as Alexander Seuerus made an Act, that none should salute the Emperour,Note. who knew himselfe to be a thiefe, so let our Vsurers, take them∣selues warned,Vsurers not to salute Christi∣ans. and discharged (so long as their hearts accuse them of their double and treble theft) from saluting Chri∣stians, and much more from eating, drinking, conuersing, most of all from praying, fasting, communicating with Christians.
The 4. Testimony, Bishop Lakes. In his workes vol. p. 343.THis is no small difference betweene God and the di∣uell. The diueil in shew, biddeth vs, loue our selues, doe all for our selues, and we are so simple as to beleeue him,The diuell the image of Vsu∣rers. and thinke that we doe so; whereas the euent proues that we doe all for him, and to our owne ruine: for he is the plaine image of Vsurers, who liue by the sweat of o∣ther mens browes, and cunningly grow rich by vndoing others with a seeming reliefe. Idem vpon Ps. 50.21. God will re∣proue Vsurers.God himselfe sayth it in the close of this Psalme, Heare this all ye that forget God. Iewes, Gentiles, whatsoeuer you be, if you be adulterers, drunkards, Vsurers, blasphemers, any way wicked liuers, Consider this (saith God) lest I suddenly take you away, and there be none to helpe you. For if we be guilty of such sinnes, and encourage our selues in them by base conceits of God, God will not faile to re∣proue vs, and marshall such wickednesse before vs, to con∣uict vs thereof, and to confound vs therewith. Idem Sermon vpon Iohn 2.16. Vsurers fill the land with poore.While the Gentleman depopulates the Countrey, and the Vsurer and Victuler are become the chiefe Tradesmen of Incorporations, what wonder if contrary to Gods Law, and the Kings, the whole Land be filled with miserable poore. The fift Testimony, Bishop Downam. This most reuerend and learned Bishop proues vsury to be vnlawfull by diuers arguments. 1 Argument. Proposition. vpon Ps. 13. p. 250.Whatsoeuer peruerteth and ouerturneth an act of ver∣tue, especially such a necessary act to humane societies, that is to say, free lending: it is not onely a vice, but a de∣testable vice.
But vsury peruerteth and depraueth this necessary act of liberality and charity, (free lending:Assumpt.) turning it into an act of selfe loue, couetousnesse and cruelty. Therefore vsury is not onely a vice,Concl. but a detestable vice. The proposition is proued, because nothing is opposite to vertue but vice. As for free lending, it is a commendable act of liberality, and a necessary duty of charity. The assumption is cleare and manifest. For whereas by the ordinance of God and by the Law of nature, lending is free and charitable, intending the good of the borrower, and not of the lender; vsury hath made it illiberall and vn∣charitable, intending the lenders profit chiefly, if not one∣ly, and seeking, yea couenanting for the lenders gaine as well out of the losse of the borrower as out of his gaine. The property of charity is not to seeke her owne, but the good of others, and whereas other vertues serue for the good of the subiect wherein they are, the acts of charity and liberality are referred to the good of others:Note. lending therefore being an act of liberali∣ty and charity, ought to respect the good of the borrower, if not onely, yet chiefly; but lending by vsury is made an act of selfeloue, wherein the good of the borrower is sought either not at all, or but in a secondary respect,Vsurers coue∣nant absolute∣ly for gaine. as it serueth to further the lenders gaine. For indeed the len∣der by vsury couenanteth absolutely for gaine, which hap∣neth sometimes out of the borrowers losse, and sometimes also out of his gaine, which the Vsurer will pretend to seeke and respect, but the truth is, he will neuer looke after his neighbours profit, vnlesse therein he may be sure to find his owne gaine. The vsurers lending therefore is an act of selfeloue,Lending pro∣ceedeth from 3 fountaines. and it is also an act of couetousnesse. For whereas lending pro∣ceedeth from one of these 3 fountaines, either from Chri∣stian charity, or from ciuill loue and humanity, or from couetousnesse: he is sayd to lend in Christian charity, who
lendeth for the Lords sake to his needy neighbour, looking for nothing againe: in ciuill charity or curtesie, who len∣deth to pleasure his friend, looking for his owne againe: in couetousnesse who lookes for more then his owne. For indeed what is , that is couetousnesse, but an vn∣lawfull desire of hauing more. 2 Argument. Idem p. 310.Vsury cannot be practised with a good conscience, be∣cause it cannot be done in fayth, that is to say, in a sound perswasion out of the Word of God, that it is lawfull: and whatsoeuer is not of fayth is sinne.Rom. 14.23. 3 Argument. Phil. 4.8. Rom. 12.17. 1 Thes. 5.22:That which is not honest and of good report, is not to be practised. For the Scripture teacheth vs, that we should doe such things as are honest, and of good report, proui∣ding for honest things, not onely before God, but also be∣fore men, abstaining from all shewes of euill. Improban∣turij quaestus qui in odia hominum in∣currunt vt faeneratorum De Off. lib. 1.But vsury is a very odious thing, and of ill report: the very heathen by the light of nature detested it. Tully saith, such things are to be misliked which are odious, as namely that of Vsurers. Columella sayth, that vsury is odious euen to those whom it seemeth to helpe. Aristotle sayth it is hated most worthily, &c. As for Christians, vsury in anci∣ent time was so odious among them, that if any were but suspected to be an Vsurer, his house was counted the house of the diuell, no neighbour would fetch fire at his house, or haue any thing to doe with him, children would poynt at him in the streets: yea, by the lawes of Christi∣stians they are diffamed persons.vid, Cent. 12. cap. 4. The vsurers house called the house of the diuell. The Scriptures censure vsury as an abomination; that is, as a sinne to be abhorred. and Ps. 109.11. the holy Ghost vseth this interpretation against the wicked: Let the exactour (meaning thereby the vsurer, as all Translations, almost, besides some English doe read) ensnare all that he hath. Whereby it may be ga∣thered, both that to be an Vsurer is an odious thing, and that it is a curse to fall into his snare.
Seing therefore vsury is and alwayes hath beene a thing so odious and of so bad report,The Vsurer denies the conclusion. no Christian can practise it with a good conscience. The Vsurer sinnes against God, his neighbour, and himselfe. First against God by impiety and vngodlinesse.Leuit 25.36. Neh. 5.9. For the Vsurer wants the feare of God. 2 He disobeyeth the Commandements of GOD,Idem p. 270. straightly commanding free loane, and sharpely forbid∣ding vsury, and contemneth the threatnings of God denounced against the same. 3 He sinnes by infidelity,Vsurers in∣fidels. in not beleeuing the gra∣cious promises of God made to those who lend freely: for as Chrysost. hath well said , vsury is the ofspring of infidelity. 4 By diffidence, ending commonly in prophanesse. For the Lord would haue our faith concerning spirituall blessings in heauenly things,Page 271. to be excercised and con∣firmed by our affiance reposed in his goodnesse for tem∣porall blessings in earthly things, as may be gathered by the order of the fourth and fifth petitions of the Lords Prayer.The vsurers dare not trust to Gods pro∣uidence. — But the Vsurers whole endeuour is to settle himselfe and his estate as it were out of the gunshot of Gods prouidence: he will not deale by husbandry, or traffique because of the hazards whereunto eyther of both is subiect: that is to say, because of his diffidence in God, to whose prouidence he dare not trust his goods: and therefore he will make sure worke for himselfe, that he shall not neede to stand to Gods courtesie. The practice of vsury shall bee as a Tower of Babel vnto him,Note. that whether GOD do blesse the traffique of men, or not, or whether it goe well or ill with Husbandrie, hee will bee sure both of his Principall and of his gaine. All is one to him, whether the Marchants gaine or loose, sinke or swime, whether there bee Fammine or plenty faire.
weather or foule, hee feareth no flouds In a word, his chiefe endeuour is, that in respect of worldly things hee may haue nothing to doe with God; and so at length of a faithlesse man hee becommeth also pro∣phaine,Ezeh. 22.12. hauing forgotten God, as for this sinne the Lord chargeth Ierusalem, neyther is God, I meane the true God in all his thoughts; for his god Mammon doth wholy possesse his heart. Vsurers idola∣ters.The Vsurer sinneth by Idolatrie. For seeing the roote of vsury is couetousnesse (which is the roote of all euill) it cannot bee denied; but that euery Vsurer is couetous; and euery couetous man is an idolater Eph. 5.5. And a Seruant of Mammon, Mat. 6.24. And there∣fore no true Seruant of the Lord, now you must remem∣ber, that for couetous persons and idolaters, there is no inheritance in Heauen. Idem p. 232. The Vsurer is both vniust & vncharitable.Secondly, the Vsurer sinneth against his neighbour for whereas there are two duties especially to be practised towards our neighbour, that is to say, Iustice and Charity: Iustice, to giue euery man his owne, and Charity, not to seeke our owne but other mens profit Iustice: to do no wrong, Charity, to do good to all; vsury offendeth against both, as being both vniust and vncharitable. Which copulation is duely to be marked. For whereas some alledge,Note. that vsury is not against Charity, when ney∣ther the lender nor borrower is hurt thereby, it shall hereby appeare, that if at any time it may seeme not to be opposed to Charity as an hurtfull thing, yet it is alwayes opposed as an vniust and vnequall thing. For first, the generall Law both of Iustice and Charity is this, as you would that men should do to you, so do you to them likewise.See the answer to obiect. 2. But when you haue neede to borrow, you would that Men should lend you freely, and not impose Vsury vpon you: there∣fore in like case, when others would borrow of you in
their necessity, you ought to lend them freely, and not im∣pose vsury vpon them. Thirdly, the Vsurer sinneth against himselfe by desperate folly.Idem p. 272. The vsurer sin∣neth against himselfe. For as euery notorious Malefactor may truly be said to cast away himselfe, and is guilty of selfe-murder, as it is said of Korah and his complices, Num. 16.38. so the Vsu∣rer likewise pulleth vpon himselfe the fearefull iudgements. of God, and is guilty of his owne ouerthrow. For the Lord hath threatned not onely the translation of their goods from them in this world, Pro, 28.8. but also, as touching the world to come, that they shall not dwell in the Moun∣taine of Gods holinesse (as may be gathered out of the 15 Psalme) but that they shall die the death, meaning therby the death of the soule.Ezeh 18.13.) and that you may know to whom the cause of the Vsurers damnation is to be imputed, it is added, and his blood shall be vpon him. And that is it which Leo saith, Poenus pecuniae, funus est animae, the gaine of vsury is the graue of the soule. The 6. Testimony, Bishop Babington. THere be great slyes, and those be great men,Vpon Exod. Ch. 8. p. 203. that ty∣rannously rule, not shearing but shauing to the very skin, if they take not skin and all. And there be lesser flies, and those be Vsures, and other biting binders, who with their Nouerint vniuersi, make an vniuersall ruine of many a mans estate, and doe fetch him in still with The conditi∣tion of this obligation, that in the end his condition is wo∣full, and his heart breaketh with the bitter griefe of Be it knowne to all men: Surely these are cursed flies indeed, the suckers of our sap, the bibbers of our blood,Vsurers be cur∣sed flies. the pinchers of our hearts, and the stingers and wringers of our very soules. The Aegyptian flies was nothing like vnto them, but yet you see was a great plague of God, sent to punish the sinnes of men. But let them remember that these flies of
Aegypt had but a time, God sent them in wrath, and tooke them away in mercy, vpon intreatie. Some Moses or other shall stand vp, and the Lord shall send a strong West wind, to take these canker wormes away, and cast them into the red Sea, that in our coast they may torment no longer. Amen. Idem vpon the Commande∣ments p. 69. 70.If a man (saith the Law) borrow any thing of his neighbour, and it be hurt or else die, the owner of it not being by, he shall surely make it good. If it be an hired thing he shall not make it good, for it came for his hire. In which Law, if we well weighe it we may first see, that if we haue that thing which our neighbour would borrow, and we be able, without our hurt, well to spare it him, we are bound to do it, or else we sinne against this Law of GOD, and we euen steale from our brother, that which in right is his. For God would not euer haue made a Law for recompence of the lender,It is a neces∣sary duty of loue to lend when we may. if his thing lent receiue any harme, vnlesse it had beene a necessary duty of loue to lend when we may: therefore this narrownesse of heart, and vnkind disposition, to grudge vnto any that good which by lending wee can possibly do him, it is hatefull in the eyes of God, and a plaine breach of this Commande∣ment. Secondly, in this Law, (as one hath very well noted,) wee may see a great light giuen to that hard controuersie concerning vsury of money. For marke I pray you, how he saith in plaine termes, that if the thing were hired, and though it perished in the vse, yet should it not be made good by him which hired it, for it came for his hire. The money which Vsurers giue out, is hired as you know. Therefore if it were a thing that might be hired, you see the sentence of God, though it perished.
Secondly, marke againe how the Lord sayth, though a man lend of meere loue freely without any hire, yet shall his recompence be nothing more, then good will againe, vnlesse it die, or be hurt which he lendeth. Now money neyther dyeth, neyther commonly is any whit hurt, but re∣turneth euery way as good as it came. Thirdly, consider how the Law will haue an apparent hurt of the thing lent, or else it alloweth no recompence,Vsurers haue consideration for likely losse. but Vsurers wil haue consideration for likely losse: for, say they, If I had had my money, possibly I could haue gai∣ned thus much with it: yet are they not sure they could haue done it, for God could haue crossed their expectati∣on, and being not sure that they could haue gained, it is not apparent that they haue beene hindred: but this Law of God prouideth in equity onely for apparent harme, and therefore nothing for them. Fourthly, the equity of this Law is onely this, that good will be no loser,They will haue certaine gaine. and therefore prouision is made for recompence, if the thing lent receiued hurt. But Vsu∣rers will haue their good will, as they call it, certaine and an excessiue gainer. Fiftly, in this law of God, the borrower is respected, that he should haue helpe of his neyghbour,Vsury regar∣deth wholy the lender, Vsury plaine iniury voyd of loue. and not pay for it, vnlesse he hurt the thing which he borrowed, but vsury regardeth wholy the lender. Wherefore it see∣meth that if this Law of God had euer any equity, this Vsury of money had euer plaine iniury, and that this kind of lending is voyd of loue, and therefore apparantly a breach of this Commandement.
CHAP. 4. The iudgement of our most Learned and Orthodox∣al Diuines concerning vsury. The first Testimony, Doctor Willet. vpon Exodus, p. 509. vsury defined.BEfore the seuerall poynts belonging to this question can be discussed, first we must see what vsury is 1. Plus ex mutuo velle, quàm mutuatum sit, iniquum est, to desire more by lending, then was lent is wicked, Caietan. 2. Vsura est lucrum quod accipitur, solius mutuationis causa. Vsury is a gaine, which is taken onely for lending. Vrsinus. Quic∣quid lucri praeter sortem dabatur, what gaine soeuer was giuen beside the principall: whereupon it is called in the Hebrew Tarbith, that is, encrease of the multiplying. Cal∣uin. 3. After the same manner was vsury defined in former times; as Carthag. 3. c. 16. Nullus clericorum amplius acci∣piat, quam cuiquam accomodavit, that none of the cleargy should receiue more then he hath lent. Augustine thus de∣scribeth an vsurer, Si plus quam dedisti, expectas accipere, fae∣uerator es, if thou looke to receiue more, then thou hast gi∣uen, thou art an Vsurer. That this kind of vsury is vtterly vnlawfull, and not to be practised among Christians, it shall appeare by these rea∣sons. Vsury condem∣ned. vnlawfull to the Iews.First, the Hebrews were forbidden to take any vsury at all of their brethren; of the Gentiles they might: but now diruta est maceries, the wall of partition is taken away, there is neither Iew nor Gentile, but all are one in Christ. Caluin. Of it selfe hurtfull.Secondly, Vsura ex suo genere nociua est, Vsury euen of it selfe is hurtfull, because it is called Nesheh, biting, Caietan. And the law of nature teacheth: that we should not doe that to another, which we would not haue offered to our selues.
Thirdly, vsury was detestable among the Heathen,Detestable a∣mong the Hea∣then. much more odious ought it to be among Christians: as Cato being asked what it was to play the Vsurer, answered, Idem quod occidere; all one, as to kill: and further hee said, that in former time, they vsed to punish a theefe but in two fold, an Vsurer in foure fold. Caluine. Fourthly, vsury is against the first institution of money,Against the first instituti∣on of money. Pecunia inuenta est, &c. Money was inuented, and found out, that thereby things necessary for the maintenance of this like might bee prouided: but now it is per∣uerted and abused to couetousnesse, that money may en∣crease money. Fifthly,Vsury against Scripture. the Scripture absolutely condemneth vsury Ps. 15.5. Ezeh. 18.17. And Chrysostome sayth, Vsura∣rius super omnes mercatores maledictus, the Vsurer is accursed beyond all Merchants and trading men.Hom 38. sup. Math. And hee further vseth this comparison, like as when one sifteth Wheate or any other graine in a sieue,Vsurers ac∣cursed. all the graine by little and little slippeth thorow, and so, Solum stercus remanet in cribro, onely the soile and durt remaineth in the sieue:An excellent comparison. so of all the substance and ill gotten goods of Vsurers, Nihil remanet praeter pec∣catum, nothing remaineth beside sinne, &c. If it be Obiected,Obiect. that God permitted the He∣brewes to take vsury of the Gentiles, therefore it was not simply vnlawfull: to this it may bee Answered,Answ. that they were those seuen Nations of the Canaanites, of whom they might take vsury, which Nations they were commanded to destroy: and so by this meanes they might weaken their estate, and empouerish them: whereupon Ambrose inferreth, Ab hoc vsuram exige, quem non sit crimen occidere. Exact vsury of
him, whom it is not vnlawfull to kill. Obiection. p. 511, 112.But Dr. Willet hath certaine considerations, which make the receiuing of some gaine by the loane of money, not vnlawfull. Answer.Obserue his considerations dilligently, and thou wilt vtterly dislike thy vsurious practises. First, if thou lend thy money vpon vsury, thou must not be such a one as maketh it thy trade to liue by letting of money. Secondly, thou must not lend money vpon vsury to those of the poorer sort: for to such it is simply forbidden to lend vpon vsury, Exod. 22, 25, and that which he allowes, is pro∣perly no vsury, (as he sayth:) but rather a gratuity, that he which hath gained by anothers money, should, to shew his thankefull mind, make him, which was the occasion thereof, a reasonable partaker of his gaine, Gratitudo animi lege naturali mandatur: this gratitude and thankfulnesse of mind is commanded euen by the law of nature. Thirdly, the interest which thou receiuest must be mo∣derate not excessiue. Fourthly, this consideration which thou receiuest for the loane of money, must not be ex pacto, it must not be agreed vpon by any certaine compact or couenant: as the words here are,Note. lo tesimun, non imponetis ei: you shall not impose or lay vpon him vsury. It is not lawfull to couenant with a man certainely to pay so much; he may loose by vsing the money, he may be in hazzard also of the principall; for the lender then to receiue a certaine gaine, where the borrow∣er is a certaine loser were not iust.What say you to these vsu∣rers. Such indifferency must be vsed, as that the borrower be contented, as to be made pertaker of the gaine, that commeth by his money, so also proportionably to beare part of the losse. The second Testimony, Dr. Smith. In Willet vpon Levit. p. 625.THis is the full definition of vsury: Quando aliquis ac∣cedit vsus rei gratiâ interpositâ pactione: When as any
things commeth for the vse of money aboue the principall,vsury defined. by way of contract, or compact: for so it is sayd in the law lo tesimun, non impones, Thou shalt not put vpon him vsury. That opinion which condemneth all vsury,vsury condem∣ned. 1 By Scripture. is groun∣ded vpon euident testimonies of Scripture, Ps. 15.5. Pro. 28.8. Ezek. 18.13.17. & 22.12. and these places haue somewhat in them more generall, then to be restrained to the poore: as that in Ezek. 22.12. In thee haue they taken gifts to shed blood, in thee haue they taken vsu∣ry and encrease, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbour by extortion: these kinds of oppression may be committed as well against the rich as poore, though more against these then the other. The second Argument against vsury, is from the decrees, of counsels, and testimony of Fathers, which generally forbid all vsury. vide locum. It is answered to these, and the like testimonies,Obiect. Idem p. 627. that the Fathers speake against cruell and vnconscionable vsury: Quae omnibus seculis plus satis obtinuit, which preuailed too much in euery age. But surely they condemne all vsury whatsoeuer:Answ. in ps. 36. con. 3. as Augustine sayth, Si plus quam dedisti expectus accipere, fae∣neratores: if thou exspect to receiue more then thou ga∣uest, thou art an vsurer. And Bernard sayth, quid est vsu∣ra? venenum patrimonij: quid est vsura legalis? latro prae∣dicens quid intendit, what is vsury? the poyson of ones patrimony: what is legall vsury? a thiefe foreshewing what he intendeth; inter praecept. familiar. The third generall Argument against vsury is, from naturall reason: as Aristotle thus reasoneth against it. First, from the vnprofitablenesse of it: Polit. 1. c. 9. for he that is rich in money, may oftentimes want necessary food.
ibid.Secondly, from the infinitenesse of the desire of money: all men that are desirous of money, doe encrease it infinit∣ly, whereas euery laudable act, hath a certaine and deter∣minate end. Thirdly, they peruert the end for the which money was appoynted, which was for commutation, and to be a meane to the end: but they make money it selfe the end. Fourthly, the manner of the gaine sheweth it to bee vnnaturall: for it is according to nature to reape profit from the fruits of the earth, or from Cattell: but it is against nature to reape gaine from men, from one another: and whenas money begetteth money; whereof vsury hath the name , of begetting. Obiect.To these reasons some answer, That although money be barren of it selfe, yet by money one may purchase grounds which will bring him fruit:Answ. But still the argument is good for originally this encrease commeth out of money by mans industry: and so by two things not apt to bring fruit, gaine is had: by men, and money: and besides this answer serues not, but onely for profitable vsury: but where one taketh vp money to supply his want, and necessity, there ariseth no such fruit. The third Testimony, Dr. Williams. The true Church. p. 438.THat you may perceiue and vnderstand, how odious and how detestable this biting theft is, I beseech you to consider. First, how vniust he is, especially in these two things:Vsurers vniust against all laws 1 Of nature: 1 In selling that which he oweth vnto the poore, for the law of nature tels thee, that he which hath, should lend and helpe him which hath not, as we see the floud, finding the emptinesse of a poole, will not passe vntill it fils it;2 Of Moses. Luke 6.35. 3. Of grace. the Law of Moses bids the same thing; and the law of grace confirmes it, saying, Doe good and lend ho∣ping for nothing againe: and yet the couetous man sels that which God commands him to giue: and he lets that for
vse which the Lord inioyneth him to lend for loue. 2 In eating that which he neuer laboured for;Gen. 3.19. for the Lord sayd, In the sweat of thy face thou shalt eate thy Bread: but the Vsurer eateth the labour of other men,The vsurer ea∣teth what hee neuer labour∣ed for. and for the vse of his money he vseth to get vineyards which hee planted not, Houses that hee builded not, and many other things that he neuer laboured for. Secondly, how cruell he is;Hee is most cruell. because he eateth and drinketh that with ioy and laughter, which the poore man hath gotten with griefe and teares. Thirdly,3 Hee is the worst of all Theeues. how for his theft hee transcends all other kind of Theeues whatsoeuer: for as there is not a more effectuall plague to hurt a man then a familiar enemy: so the Vsurers, being domesticall foes, they doe im∣pouerish and disinherit more men then any other Theeues can doe; because other Theeues steale secretly and in the night time, but the Vsurers follow their trade manifest∣ly, though cunningly, day and night: and therefore, when the Romanes enioyned other Theeues to make double restitution for their theft, they compelled the Vsurers to restore fourefold for their transgression. Fourthly,The punish∣ment of vsu∣rers. how fearefull is the punishment of such theft; because, as they haue spoiled others, so they shall be spoyled themseues; and their spoyle will bee the greater: because that as the Dog, snatching the Bread out of the Childrens hands,1 In this world snatcheth the hand withall; so Vsurers, seeking the wealth of the poore,Idem p. 439. are thereby become the vtter ruinne of the poore, and therefore their wealth shall be soone taken from them. 2 As they haue punished the poore on Earth more then many others,2 In Hell. so their punishment in Hell shall be greater then most sinners. And in this there infernall punishment,How the vsu∣rers and their children doe curse one ano¦ther euerla∣stingly in hell it is obserued that the vsurers and their children shall perpetually curse each other, the father saying, cursed art thou, O sonne, be∣cause that for thy sake I am tormented in this flame; for I
became an vsurer, lest I should leaue thee a begger; I gathered wealth, that thou shouldest not be poore, and I was contented to be poore in grace, that thou mightest be rich in goods; and therefore I am now poore in all things, but in torments. And the sonne, on the other side, saying vnto his father, nay, rather cursed art thou, O father, Quia nisi malè congregasses mihi diuitias, non malè congregatas conseruassem; because thou gatherest thy wealth with iniquity, and leftest them vnto me with a curse, which hath consumed them and destroyed my soule. That Seraphicall Doctor Antoninus, Arch-bishop of Florence, after he had heard the confession of a wretched Vsurer,The forme of an absolution which Antoni∣nus vsed to an vsurer. gaue him no other absolution than, Deus misere∣atur tui, si vult, et condonet tibi peccata tua, quod non credo: et perducat te in vitam aeternam, quod est impossibile: God be mercifull vnto thee, if he please, and forgiue thee thy sinnes, which I doe not beleeue, and bring thee to eternall life, which is vnpossible: that is, Rebus sic stantibus, if God doth not wonderful∣ly worke a strange conuersion in his heart, and the Lord himselfe threatneth, that he which robbeth or giueth to vsury, and receiueth the increase into his bags, he shall dye the death, and his blood shall be vpon him. The fourth Testimony, Dr. Sutton. THere is no sinne, be it neuer so prodigious and foule but his master hath some plea for it,Lectures vpon Rom. 11. p. 296: vsurers excuse their sinnes. p. 476. and some reason to vphold it. Some haue Scripture, as couetousnesse hath 1 Tim. 5.8. Vsury hath, Deut. 23.20. Vnto a stranger thou mayst lend thy money vpon vsury, though not to thy brother. Many perswade themselues that they haue lawfull callings when they haue none; such as liue by vsury, carding, dicing, playing, these haue neyther the Author, God, nor the end, the common good.
No calling is lawfull,Idem p. 477 when the action pleaseth not God, as 1 Cor. 10.31.Vsurers haue no lawfull cal∣ling. By this I hope some will learne at last to giue ouer their calling, whereby they bring not honour, but dishonour vnto God: those that liue vp∣on vsury, by dicing-Houses, by penning and acting of Playes, let them all remember this, mine heart trem∣bles to thinke, what calling these men haue, my Soule wonders how they glorifie God in them, I maruell how these make for a publicke good: How God is honoured, a kingdome bettered, the common good promoted by them I know not, I beleeue not. The fifth Testimony Mr. Wilkinson. LEt those who plead this cause consider,Debt booke p. 61. 62. All vsury for∣bidden. Vsurers do not as they would be don vnto. that God dispenceth with no vsury, when Nesheh the bitting: and Tarbith, which they call the toothlesse vsury are both condemned. Ezek. 18.8.13. That the lender, for eight or fiue in the hundred, deales not as he would be dealt withall, for he himselfe would neyther giue eight, nor fiue, nor two, if hee could borrow freely; and the rule of loue is, to doe to all men as we would they should do to vs, Mat. 7.12. Let them consider how vsury is cried downe, among other oppressions Neh. 5. & Ps. 15.5. How it is condemned by the Councell of Nice in Clergy men, as a matter of filthy lucre, (if filthy lucre in Ministers, then no righteous dealing in others.Vsury the ruine of thou∣sands.) how it hath beene the vtter ruine of many thousands in our Nation; how in the Church of Rome at this day), all Vsurers are excom∣municated monthly; how no man of note in all antiquity Iewes and Manichees excepted) none I say of honesty and learning,No honest lear∣ned men defen∣ded vsury for fifteene hun∣dred yeeres af∣ter Christ. for fifteene hundred yeeres after Christ hath euer vndertaken the defence thereof: wherefore as Ioash sometimes sayd to the men of Hophra, when they stood for Baal against Gideon, Will you contend for Baal? let him plead his owne cause: so say I to the patrons
of vsury; will you contend for Mammon? let him plead his owne cause. The sixt Testimony, Mr. Smith. VSury is vnlawfull, for: Vsury is a∣gainst charity. Sermon vsury.First, It is against the law of charity because cha∣rity, biddeth vs to giue euery man his owne, and to e∣quire no more then our owne: but vsury requireth more then her owne, and giues not to other their owne. Charity reioyceth to communicate her goods to other, and vsury reioyceth to gather other mens goods to her selfe. Against the law of nations.Secondly, it is against the law of nations, for euery nati∣on hath some law against vsury, and some restraint against vsurers. Against the law of nature, and of God.Thirdly, it is against the law of nature, that is the natu∣rall compassion which should be among men: the rich should distribute and doe good. Fourthly, it is against the Law of God. Exod. 22. Leu. 25.36.Gaine makes vsury lawfull. Deut. 23.19. Some thinke that vsury is lawfull, because it is gainefull as Saul thought that the idolaters beasts should not be killed,Note. ☞ because they were fat: But as he was commanded to kill the fat beasts, as well as the leane, so we are com∣manded to kill fat sins, as well as leane sins: gainefull sins as well as prodigall sinnes. The 7. Testimony, Mr. Wheatly. Caueat for the couetous. p. 71. Vsury a noto∣rious iniustice. 3 sorts of bor∣rowers.VSury is a notorious iniustice: when a man makes a gaine of lending, and binds the party borrowing, with∣out consideration of his gaines or losses, to repay the prin∣cipall with aduantage. For whereas there be three sorts of men that vse to borrow, either poore men, whom necessity driues to it, or vnthrifts, whom prodigality driues to it; or sufficient men, that hope to make a commodity of it: it is apparent by the confession euen of those that would seeme to say somewhat for this vsury, (as if it were not a needy
sinne simply that it is wicked to lend on Vse to the poore needy borrower, for God hath stately commanded to lend vnto him freely. And for the vnthrift, it is also certaine that he should not be lent to at all;Vsurers gaine most by vn∣christs. for that is to feede his issue with ill humors, and to put a Sword into his hand wherewith to destroy himselfe: and thus the Vsu∣rers most accustomed and greatest gaines are cut of. Now for the third kind of men, of them to exact gaine vnconditi∣onally, not respecting their loosing or getting, is altogether against the Law of Charity, and equity both for the light of nature will not suffer any to deny this principle of Equity, that he which will haue part in wealth, must also haue part in woes; and he that will diuide the sweet, must also diuide the sower: he that will take of the good successe, must also take of the bad. And the light of Religion will not suffer him that hath any of it, to deny this prin∣ciple of Charity; that Christians must serue one ano∣ther in loue, and not themselues alone in selfe-loue: both which principles are directly contrary to the very trade of the Vsurer;The Vsurer serues him∣selfe alone, not also his brother. for he makes sure for himselfe to haue a part onely and infalliably in the profit, and therefore serues himselfe alone, and not also his brother: and for this cause the Vsurer is set among those that cannot come to dwell in the Mountaine of God: which hee should not be, were he not vniust. So then the Vsurer, whether he do it plainely, or vnderhand, as men haue a thousand policies to couer their sinne in this respect, must vndergoe the imputation of liuing by wrong and iniurie. The eight Testimony Mr. Dod. IN the same colourable theft is that common sinne of Vsury, which is of euill report, and hurtfull effect amongst men and is forbidden of God in the Law and Prophets. It is euident in Leuit. 25.35.36.The causes of vsury. 1 Want of Gods feare. That the feare of God, and a louing and mercifull regard of
our brothers life,2 Loue to our brethren. be the preseruatiues to keepe men from this Vsury: therefore the practise hereof doth grow from the want of the feare of God, and of compassion to our poore brother. Adde hereunto, that vsury is not a calling appointed of God, but a humane inuention, deuised by worldly men to gaine filthy lucre to them∣selues,Vsury not a calling appoin∣ted of God. whereby they liue of the sweat of other mens brows, and doe many times adde affliction to the afflicted, and build vp themselues in the ruines of their poore neygh∣bours, whom they ought freely to support. The ninth Testimony, Mr. Bolton. OVt of the widenes of the consciences of wicked men, proceed much mincing and excusing, many interpre∣tations,Discourse of true happines. p. 55. All vsury con∣demned. fauourable constructions and distinctions of sinne. As for example, that vsury is of two sorts, biting and tooth∣lesse; when all kind of vsury is pestilent, and most certain∣ly damned in the booke of God. Ministers may tell the mercilesse vsurer that he is infa∣mously guilty of that sinne,Vsury condem∣ned by the best Diuines. Idem p. 183. of which a conuerted lew, an honest Heathen, a tolerable Turke, would be ashamed and remorsefull: stigmatized by ioynt-consent of charitable hearts, and strongest current of best Diuinity, with a brand of extraordinary hatefulnesse, hard-heartednesse and cru∣elty:It is a fretting canker. which at this day doth shrewdly shake the strong si∣news of this great Kingdome, like a fretting canker, with a plausible inuisible consumption, doth daily waste the states,Note. sucke the blood, and eate the liues of many poore distressed ones in this Land, fils townes and Cities with vnprofitable persons, and the country with miseries and inhumanities. Nay, and let carnall reason, couetous hu∣mours, supercilious, obstinate imperiousnesse fret, and con∣tradict, rage, and reclaime as long as they will; to set aside prouocation of Gods plagues, and consideration of piety; euen in the sense of nature, and morall conscience, it casts
an aspertion of inexpiable shame and dishonour vpon the ancient glory of this incomparable City.vsurers bee Harpies and vultures. It is very strange that such rauenous Harpies and vsurious Vul∣tures, (for so euen Paganisme stiled them by the light of reason,) should audaciously roust especially on high, in the Eagles nest, this Imperiall groue and Seat of Ma∣iesly. The tenth Testimony, Mr. Adams. THe Vsurer is a priuate theefe like Iudas,Adams workes p. 55. The vsurer like to Iudas. and for the bag like Iudas, which he steales from Christ like Iudas, or rather from Christians, that haue more need, and therefore worse then Iudas. This is a man made out of waxe: His Pater noster is a pawne: his Creed, is the condition of this obligation: his Religion is all religati∣on: a binding of others to himselfe: of himselfe to the Deuill,— infinite colours, mitigations,Note. euasi∣ons, distinctions are inuented, to countenance on earth, heauen-exploded vsury: God shall then frustrate all, when he powers his wrath on the naked conscience. God sayth, Thou shalt not take vsury. Goe now study pain∣tings, excuses apolegies, dispute the matter with God: hell fire shall decide the question. If Vsurers will not restore by themselues,Idem p. 120. vsurers shall restore by their posterity they shall by their posterity. For as Pliny writes of the Wolfe, that it brings forth blind Whelpes: so the vsurer light∣ly begets blind children, that cannot see to keepe what their fathers left. But when the father is gone to hell for gathering, the sonne often followes for scattering. But God is iust. A good man leaueth his inheritance to his childrens children: and the wealth of the sinner is laid vp for the iust. An vsurer is knowne by his very lookes often,Idem p. 454. The vsurer knowne by his lookes. by his speeches commonly, by his actions euer: he hath a leane cheeke, a meager body, as if he were fed at the Diuels
allowance: his eyes are almost sunke to the backside of his head with admiration of money. His eares are set to tell the clocke; his whole carcasse a meere Anatomy. Some Vsurers haue fatter carcasses, and can find in their hearts to lard their flesh: but a common meagernesse is vpon all their consciences. Foenus pecuniae, funus animae. Nature hath set a pitch or terme in all inferiour things, when they shall cease to increase. Old Cattell breed no longer: doted trees deny fruit; the tired earth becomes barren; onely the Vsurers money, the longer it breeds the lustier;Note. and a hundred pounds put out twenty yeares since, is a grandmother of two or three hundred children; pretty striplings, able to beget their mother againe in a short time. EAch man to heauen his hands for blessing reares; Onely the Vsurer needs not say his prayers. Blow the Winde East or West, plenty or dearth, Sicknesse or health, sit on the face of Earth, He cares not: Time will bring his money in: Each day augments his treasure and his sin. Be the day red or blacke in Calender, Common, or holy, fits the Vsurer. He starues his Carcasse, and true money slaue, Goes with full chests, and thin cheekes to his graue. Idem p. 455.The Vsurer shrinkes vp his guts with a staruing dyet, as with knot-grasse: and puts his stomacke into his purse. He sels time to his customers, his food to his cofers, his body to languishment, his soule to Satan. The eleuenth Testimony, Mr. Perkins. VSury is a gaine exacted by couenant, aboue the prin∣cipall,vpon Com. 8. vsury defined. onely in lieu, and recompence of the lending of it.
vsury being considered as it is thus described, is quite con∣trary to Gods Word, and may very fitly be tearmed byting lucre. Exod. 22, 14.15. Ezek. 18.8. 2. Cor. 8.13. The twelfth Testimony Mr. Fenton. LEt euery one who desireth to resolue his conscience for this matter by Scripture (the onely true ground of a Christian resolution I t him consider, I say,Treatise of vsury p. 48. how ney∣ther vsury nor interest,Vsury con∣demned in Gods Booke. biting vsury nor increase is euer once named in the Booke of God, but it is condemned; condemned amongst such abominations as bring a curse in stead of a blessing: an eternall curse vpon the Soule of the Vsurer, and a temporall curse vpon his wealth and posterity. Let some of these tender consciences,Is it not a shame for mē to deny knee∣ling at the Communion, and to be pro∣fest Vsurers. who are so vrgent to call for warrant out of the booke of God, for euery ceremony and matter of forme in the Church, seeke a warrant for this their practice, which so neerely con∣cerneth them; and let them seeke it at the Oracle of God who hath not left it, as he hath many other things, ey∣ther to the discretion of the Church, or wisdome of com∣mon-wealths, but hath vouchsafed to determine it in his owne booke to our hands: to set downe an expresse Law against it in Exodus: to renew and reuiue that Law againe and againe in Leuit. And Duter: to ratifie and confirme it with no other words then himselfe vsed at the publishing of the whole Morrall Law; to specifie the onely limitation which he meant to tolerate for a time; to adde the promise of blessing to the keepers of this Law: and to denuonce such fearefull iudgements against the transgres∣sors of the same: vpon their wealth and posterity in this world, vpon their owne soules in the world to come. The Vsurer hath great gaine and certaine:Idem p. 101. Vsurers haue certaine gaine out of losse, &c. sometimes out of little gaine: sometimes out of no gaine: some∣times out of losse; alwayes out of vncertainties; alwayes
out of labour and paines, out of care and cost, out of ha∣zard and perill to the borrower. Commeth all this on Gods Name? Idem p 142, No writer de∣fended vsury for fifteene hundred yeeres after Christ, Note.There was neuer any Church or Churchman, carrying the name of a Christian, who hath defended in writing any branch of vsury, for the space of fifteene hundred yeares after Christ. Neyther was this for want of occasion gi∣uen; for it hath beene both practised and written against in all ages. Neyther can we with modestie impute it to the ignorance of the Church: for as shee is acknowledged to be most Eagle-sighted in the time of her purity; so when she was ouershadowed with superstition, her wri∣ters in cases of conscience, for matters of morality were most exact: as by their schoole Diuinity is euident to be seene. Yet where shall we find any one, for so many ages of the Church, who could euer deuise a distinction to saue an vsurers soule. Mr. Fentons Treatise of vsury ii able, to satisfie those that be not desperately minded.He that desires to be fully satisfied concerning the vn∣lawfulnesse of vsury, by Scriptures, Fathers, the latter times of ignorance: by the testimonies of the Church assembled in Councels, by the testimony of Diuines in reformed Churches, by the testimonies of Philosophers, Historians, by the three Lawes, 1 Canon, 2 Ciuill, 3 Common: by strong and conuincing arguments: finally, he that desires to haue those motiues answered, which perswade some to the lawfulnesse of vsury, let him read with diligence the learned Treatise of vsury, written by Mr. Fenton, read his Treatise with a single eye, iudge of what thou rea∣dest without affection: and conforme thy affection to right iudgement. The thirteenth Testimony Mr. Rogers, of Weathersfield. THese being the most vsuall kinds of contracts, do shew the nature of the rest,7 Treatises vp∣on 8 Comman∣dement. vsury vnlawfull which are in vse among men, and doe leaue no place to that oppression in the world,
called vsury, or any other such seeking of mens priuate profit in their dealings, without regard of the common benefit of both: that is, when both parties are not pro∣uided for, to their contentation and satisfying according to equity, and to the meaning and prouision made by God in that behalfe: which is, that the one without the other should not be benifited or inriched; but the one to haue care and consideration of the other,Regard had of both parties is no vsury. and the Com∣mon-wealth of both (as I haue sayd) respected which if it were regarded betwixt both parties, could in no wise be iustly complayned of: neyther is such dealing of the na∣ture and kind of vsury, whether it be in hiring and letting, or in any other kind of contract whatsoeuer; but that common dealing for 10 in the hundred, or 9, or 8, or any such like, which is without due consideration of the Common-wealth, and vpholding of both, is vtterly to be condemned. Which if it be well and duely considered, will soone an∣swere all conscionable men,No vse of vsu∣ry in Church or Common-wealth. about the question of vsury and oppression, that there can be no vse of them in the Church of God, nor the Christian Common-wealth: the Law-maker hauing sayd of both, as of witchcraft and Ido∣latry, there shall be none such in Israel, that is, among Gods people. And as for teaching others their duty, (especially in money matters) who haue not giuen themselues in full resolution to be guided by Gods Word,Why Prea∣chers prauaile not with vsu∣rers. Preachers may sooner weare their tongues to the stumpes, then they may preuaile with them. If thou desirest the iudgement of other diuines, besides these before mentioned; read, Mr. Bayne, his directions to a godly life, p. 172. Mr. Philips, vpon Math. 4. p. 198. Mr. Dyke, vpon Repentance, p. 143, 144. Dr. Sclater, vpon the 2 Thes. p. 277. Mr. Robrough, Balme from Gi∣lead, p. 35, 176, 225, 285, 320, 325. 432. Dr. Preston, Reme∣dy against couetousnesse, p. 33. Mr. Wilson, Theologicall rules for the vnderstanding of holy Scriptures, p. 70.
and in his misticall cases and secrets of Diuinity, p. 180. Mr. Brinsley, in the third rule and watch of life, p. 97. Mr. Ro∣gers of Dedham, Treatise of loue, p. 235, 236. Dr. Web, on A∣gurs prayer, p. 323. 147. read also the 3d. part of the Homily, against the perill of Idolatry, p. 70. where vsury is ranked with grosse sins, and condemned for vniust gaine. Read the 2d. part of the Sermon or Homily for Rogation weeke, p. 225. where vsurers are said to haue their goods of the di∣uell, to be worshipers of the diuell, to kneele downe to the diuell at his bidding. See also Mr. Scudder vpon the Lords Prayer, p, 276, Mr. Fenton, of vsury. p. 2. Vsurers not ea∣sily perswaded to leaue their sinne.It is now time to draw to the conclusion; it hath beene obserued by wise men, that vsurers will not easily be per∣swaded to forsake their sinne; their gaine of Vsury is a sweet gaine, without labour, without cost, without perill; let it be granted that they will not forsake this so pleasant, and so profitable a sin; yet by these Testimonys, they may be conuinced in their iudgements, of the vnlawfulnesse of vsury; and so they shall be made without excuse at the last day, when Christ shall come in flaming fire with his migh∣ty Angels to render vengeance to all disobedient per∣sons. As for you that make a trade of vsury if you shall thinke your iudgements to be of such waight,Idem p. 77. The iudge∣ment of these reuerend Di∣uines should make the vsu∣rers to questi∣on their trade. that all these toge∣ther be not able to cast the scale against you, yet I hope they will so much moue you, as to bring the ballance to a suspence, that you will thinke vsury very questionable at the least; and if it be questionable, then it is vnlawfull to be done. But if all these reuerend Bishops and learned Diuines, will not so moue your vnderstanding, to make it questionable; then I will say no more, and I can say no lesse, but that you Vsurers thinke that you know some∣what.1 Cor. 8.2. And then S. Paul maketh vp the rest, that you know nothing as yee ought to know it. To him who knoweth vsury to be a sinne, it is a sinne, because he knoweth it. To him that doubteth, it is likewise
a sinne, because he doubteth. And to the rest it is a sinne of ignorance, but of affected ignorance: whose eyes are blinded eyther with pride, because they would be singu∣lar, or with lucre and gaine,Vsury a sinne of affected ig∣norance. because they would not di∣sturbe their consciences by examining or discouering that sinne wherein they haue so sweetly slept, and doe still re∣pose themselues. But such ignorance doth neyther excuse nor extenuate the fault, but rather agrauate the same, be∣cause it is wilfull. CHAP. 5. Similitudes to which vsurers, and vsurie are resembled. VSury is a thriuing occupation.Vsury like the Persian tree. Adams workes p. 503. Vsury is like that Persian tree, that at the same time buds, blossomes, and beares fruit. The moneys of interest are euer∣more some ripe for the Trunke, others drawing to maturity, the rest in the flowre approaching, all in the bud of hope. But the vsurer is mad; for his sinne at once buds,Vsurers mad. blossomes, and brings forth the fruit of vengeance. Euery Bond he takes of others, enters him into a new obligation to Satan: as he hopes his debtors will keepe day with him, the diuell expects no lesse of himselfe. Euery forfeit he takes scores vp a new debt to Lucifer; and euery mor∣gag'd land he seizeth on, enlargeth his dominion in hell. Money lent vpon vsury to a poore man to supply his need,Vsury like new cloth vpon an old garment. Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 206. may not vnfitly be compared to a peece of new cloth sowed vpon an old garment; for that, although it couer the rent for a time, and seemeth to haue mended the gar∣ment, yet after a while, the new cloth fretteth the old, and bringeth away a part of it, and so maketh the rent much worse. Though the vsurers sometimes doe vaunt, how kindly they deale with their debtors,Idem p. 254. Note. in forbearing them from
yeere to yeere: yet the truth is, the longer they forbeare, the greater is their gaine, and though they deferre the borrowers misery,The Vsurer compared to the greedy Cat. yet in deferring it, they do increase it: and therefore by some are not vnfitly compared to the greedy Cat, which though for a while she plaieth with the silly Mouse, yet in the end she will bee sure to de∣uoure it. The Vsurers money is like the biting of the Aspe,Vsurers money like the bit∣ing of the Aspe. for euen as he which is bitten of the Aspe, goeth to sleepe, as if he were delighted, and through the pleasantnesse of his sleepe dieth; so he which borroweth vpon vsury is de∣lighted for a time as one that had receiued a good turne; and so through the pleasure of the imagined benefit hee doth not perceiue how he is taken captiue. For euen as the poyson of the Aspe,Vsury disper∣ceth it selfe through all the borrowers goods. It is like lea∣uen. Apud Chrisost. 3. Homil 12. in fine. Bb. Downam Ps 15. p. 258. Vsurers drones Vsura est quaes: tuosa segniti: es. Vsury is gaine∣full idlenesse. secrety conueying it selfe into all the members, corrupteth the whole body: so vsury dis∣persing it selfe through all the borrowers goods, con∣uerteth them into debt. And euen as leauen which is put into meale, infecteth the whole lumpe, and drawing it to it selfe, turneth it into the nature of leauen: so when vsury entreth into any mans House, it draweth all his sub∣stance vnto it, and turneth it into debt. The Philosopher matcheth the Vsurer with the baud: and to the same purpose obserue the coherence, Deuter. 23.18.19. It is a wonder therefore, that in the hiue as it were of the Common-wealth, such drones are suffered, which liue of the sweat, yea blood of other men: who out of other mens labour attaine ease, out of other mens hazard gaine security, out of other mens losse reape gaine. Similes. LVther sayth, an Vsurer is a blood-sucker of the people:In decalog. and as a Worme in an Apple or Nut con∣sumeth all that is within: so an Vsurer deuoureth the substance of the City by wonderfull and secrete meanes.
The Vsurer,Mr. Wilkinson Debt booke p. 99. whose trafficke and trade it is to make men miserable, and to raise his gaine out of other mens aduer∣sity, hee is saith Chrysostome, Quasi manum suscipiens et in naufragium impelleus. As a man taking one by the hand to pull out of the water, but kicking him backe againe to the Shipwracke of his substance, and of himselfe, which is a rude and a barbarous part in any, to hurt infallibly,The Vsurer hurts those whom hee pretends to helpe. whom hee pretends to helpe. This is one of the bitter Potions which the world reacheth forth to ouer pur∣chasers, and ouer-traders, which they are forced to drinke to the very dregges, when they cannot bee content to walke within their compasse.Note. As a man cannot touch Pitch but bee defiled therewith: so hee cannot deale with vsury without detriment, ipso facto, the first moment. When the Vsurer saith that he lendeth for compassion,Mr. Smith. 1 Sermon vp∣on vsury. The Vsurer like the luye. he meaneth for compassion of himselfe, that hee may gaine by his pitty. The Vsurer loueth the borrower, as the Iuye loueth the Oke; the luye loueth the Oke to grow by it, so the Vsurer loueth the borrower, to grow rich by him. The Iuye claspeth to the Oke like a louer, but it claspeth out all the iuyce and sap, that the Oke can∣not thriue after: So the vsurer lendeth like a friend, but he couenanteth like an enemy, for he claspeth the borrower with such bands, that euer after he diminisheth, as fast as the vsurer encreaseth. The Vsurer is like a Butlers box:The Vsurer like a Butlers. box. for as all the counters at last come to the Butler: so all the money at last commeth to the vsurer, ten after ten, and ten after ten, and ten to ten, till at last he receiue not onely ten for an hundred, but an hundred for ten. This is the only difference,Idem. that the Butler can receiue no more then he deliuereth: but the Vsurer receiueth more then he deliuereth. He is like a Moath;Like a Moath. euen as a Moath eateth a hole in Cloth, so Vsury eateth a hole in siluer.
Adams works p. 1058. Vsury a sharpe thorne. Note.The gentlest vsury is a most sharpe thorne, and pricks the sides of the Country till the blood followes. An Vsu∣rer with his money, is like a man that hath no worke of his owne, yet keepes a seruant to let out: and takes not onely hire of others for his daily labour, but chardg∣eth him to steale somewhat besides, and neuer to returne home empty. An vsurer worse then all sinners. Worse then a Theefe. Then Hell.An Vsurer is worse then all sinners, he is worse then a Theefe: a Theefe robbeth but in the night, but the Vsu∣rer robbeth day and night. He is worse then Hell; for in Hell onely the wicked shall be punished: but the Vsurer punisheth; and spoileth both good and bad and spareth neyther holy nor vnholy. He is worse then a Iew,Then a Iew. for one Iew will not take vsu∣ry of another: but the Vsurer will take vsury of his Chri∣stian brethren. He is worse then death,Then death. for death killeth but the body, but the Vsurer killeth body and Soule. He is worse then Iudas,Worse then Iudas. for Iudas sold Christ but once for thirty pence, but they sell Christ continually, as often as they take vsury: Iudas restored the money againe, but the Vsurers neuer restore the money againe,Norrbbooke poore mans gardan f 270. Idem p. 2706. An Vsurer like a Pigge. that they vniustly haue taken. The Vsurer is like a Pigge, for while he liueth, he is good and profitable for nothing, for he will be euer root∣ing vp the Earth, running through, and tearing of hed∣ges: eating and deuouring vp good Corne, Beanes and Peason, so likewise doth the wicked swinish Vsurer whilst hee liueth: but when the Pigge is dead, then there commeth profit by him to many: so the Vsurer, when death taketh him, then the poore may haue some profit. Vsurers like the Worme in timber. Powels posits of vsury p 48.The Worme Teredo is soft to touch, but it hath such hard teeth, as it deuoureth and consumeth the hard tim∣ber: So the Vsurer is a soft beast at the first to handle, but in continuance of time, the hardnesse of his teeth
will eat a man vp, flesh and bone, if he haue not an espe∣ciall regard to shune him. The Vsurer is like the Beuer,The Vsurer is like the Beuer. which biteth so sore, as that he neuer looseth his teeth, vntill he haue broken the bones. It may be truly sayd of these,Note. desolation and destruction is in their path: wheresoeuer they set foot, they make hauocke of all. The Prophet Ezekiel doth hedge in this sinne betweene Bribery and Extortion. And in another place we shall finde,Ezek. 22.12. Exod. 22 25. that it and oppression is made both one: thus by Gods owne testimony these are oppressors.The Vsurer compared to the neather milstone. How he spends his time. Note. Not vnaptly may we compare the vsurer to the neather milstone, which is slow and sturres not; he sits at home, and spends his time in a de∣uillish Arithmeticke, in numeration of houres, dayes, and moneys, in Substraction from other mens estates, and mul∣tiplication of his owne, vntill he haue made diuision bet∣weene his soule and Heauen, and diuided the earth to him∣selfe, and himselfe to hell. His Broker we may compare to the vpper milstone (without which the neather milstone may seeme vnprofitable) that is quicke & stirring, & runs round: the poore (like Corne) who betweene both these is grinded into powder.Vsurers suffe∣red for our sinnes. Surely it is for our sinnes that God suffers vsu∣rers amongst vs: it may be he suffers these a while; as he did the Canaanites in Israel, lest the wild beasts should breake in vpon them; lest pride and a full estate should spill mens soules. Yet we may safely say of these, as Iosua did of those, they are prickes in our sides, and Thornes in our eyes. Now the mercy of God rid vs of them: let them bring what ex∣cuses, apologies, mitigations, euasions, or distinctions they, possibly can inuent: let them reply, vsury is no sinne, many learned men are of this opinion: yet what are they the better if,Mr. Rogers Strange vine∣card p. 312. 313. God himselfe be not of the same mind those lear∣ned men are of? and let them tel me if their consciences can be so satisfied. Would not the greatest Vsurer willingly giue an hundred pound bag to be secured in this point? It is not safe wading farre in a questionable water.
Mr. Perkins. vol. 3. p. 220.The Vsurer may pretend he pleasures the poore, but his helpe is no better then his is, that giues a draught of cold water to him, that is in a burning feauer, which seemes pleasant at the first, but after turnes to his great an∣noyance. Bb. Iewell. vpon Thess. p. 116. Idem p. 117.Vsury in the middest of a Citty worketh such good, as fire doth, when it is set to the roofe of a House: or as the Plague doth when it is taken to the midest of the body and toucheth the heart. An Vsurer worse then a Theefe.An Vsurer is much worse then a Theefe. For a Theefe is driuen by extremity and neede: The Vsurer is rich and hath no neede. The Theefe stealeth in corners, and in places where he may be vnknowne: the Vsurer openly and boldly, at all times, and in any place. The Theefe, to releeve his Wife and Children: the Vsurer to spoyle his neighbour,The Vsurer a Theefe at all times. and to vndoe his Wife and Children. The Theefe stealeth from the rich, which haue enough: the Vsurer from the poore that hath nothing. The Theefe sleeth, and will be seene no more: the Vsurer standeth by it, continueth, & stealeth still: day and night, sleeping and wa∣king,Note. he alwayes stealeth. The theef repenteth of his deed, he knoweth he hath done wrong and is sorry for it: the Vsurer, thinketh it is his owne, that is well gotten, and neuer re∣penteth,See Dr. Wil∣son. vpon Vsury p 95. but defendeth, and maintaineth his sinne impu∣dently. The Theefe, if he escape, many times becommeth profitable to his countrey, and bestoweth himselfe paine∣fully in some trade of life: the Vsurer leaueth his mer∣chandise, forsaketh his husbandry, giueth himselfe to nothing, whereby his countrey may haue benefite. The Theefe is satisfied at length:The Vsurer ne∣uer satisfied. the Vsurer hath neuer e∣nough, the belly of the wicked will neuer be filled: as the Sea is neuer filled with water, though all the streames of the world runne into it: So the greedinesse of an Vsurer is neuer satisfied, though he gaine neuer so vnreasonably. The Sea is profitable: the Vsurer is hurtfull and dangerous. By the Sea we may passe and come safely to the Hauen:
but no man passeth by vsury without losse or Shipwracke. Vsurers are in worse case, then common strumpets,Vsurers in worse case then harlots. Dr. Wilson, of vsury, p. 138 or harlots be; for a drab is not bound to make restitution of that she hath gotten vnlawfully, by abusing her body in filthynesse, but onely to doe penance: and yet an vsurer must restore his euill gotten goods, because he hath stolne them, or else, he cannot be receiued into the Church a∣gaine. Tully, in his first booke of Offices, compareth vsurers to vile artificers, that get their wealth by lying deadly,Idem p. 147. and vttering falsehood to saue themselues from famine. And with the vsurers, he reckoneth tole-takers, customers, and such money Officers, that pille and polle both Prince and people. Aristotle sayth, that vsurers and bauds may well goe together, for they gaine by filthy meanes all that they get. CHAP. 6. An answer to all such Arguments as perswade some to the lawfulnesse of vsury. 1 Argument, from the Parable, Math. 25.27. Thou oughtest therefore to haue put my money to the Ex∣changers, and then at my comming I should haue re∣ceiued mine owne with vsury. 1 Answer.Dr. Sclater vpon 1 Thes. 5 p. 392. 393. IS it not a worthy argument for vsurious contracts: drawne from the parable? worldlings looke for their owne with vsury; so the Lord for aduantage of his glo∣ry, by his gifts. Approues he their practise? or rather vpbrayds our negligence, by comparison drawne from mens courses in euill? They were best say, they may imbeazle their masters goods, because Christ,
by that worldlings wisedome, would teach vs prouidence for our soules: or because he resembles his comming to a Thiefe in the poynt of suddennesse, thence inferre the law∣fulnesse of theeuery. Comparisons are borrowed from things sinfull,Comparisons why borrowed from things sinfull. and vnlawfull, to teach truth, and admonish of duety: the vse of them is, not to iustifie their euill, but to remember vs of duety, or to explaine his truth. 2 Answer. Similitudes and Parables vsed in Scripture doe not hold in euery thing but wherein they are compared.Dr. Smith, in Wilet vpon Leuit. p. 627. 1 Thes. 5.2. Reuel. 5.5. 1 Pet. 5.8. As Christ, for his sudden comming, is likened to a thiefe in the night, yet hereby is not theft iustified: and as Christ is resem∣bled to a Lyon for strength and courage, so the diuell for cruelty; and so here, the spirituall increase of Gods gifts is likened to vsury, for the thing, that is, the encreasing, not to iustifie the manner. 2. And further, here the word vsury, Metaphoricè accipitur pro super excrescentia bonorum spiritu∣alium: is metaphorically taken for the encrease of spiritu∣all graces, Aquin. And so spiritually, the Lord receiueth vsury from vs in the encrease of his gifts,in Psal. 36. Con. 3. Commenda∣ble vsury. and we vsury from him, as Augustine sayth, Si vis foenerare, foenera deo, foene∣rator minus vult dare, et plus accipere: hoc fac et tu, da mo∣dica, accipe magna, da temporalia, accipe aeterna, if thou wilt be an vsurer, put out to vsury to God: an vsurer will giue lesse, and take more, doe thou so, giue small things, and take great, giue temporall things, and receiue eternall. If these answers will not giue thee satisfaction, as what will satisfie a resolued vsurer, whom the god of this world hath blinded? then consult with other Diuines of sound learning and sincere iudgment, as: with M. Fentons Treatise vpon vsury, p. 14. p. 137. M. Dyke, of the deceitfulnesse of mans heart, p. 209. Bb, Downam, vpon Ps. 15. p. 285. Bb, Iewel, vpon 1 Thes. p. 140.
2 Argument, for the lawfulnesse of vsury. I would willingly pay ten in the hundred, if I had need, and therefore I may take so.I. M. Answer. 1. THat royall rule, Doe as thou wouldst be done by,Mr. Boltons directions for a comfortable walking with God. p. 208. 209. Fenton of v∣sury. p. 137, 138. Dr. Pye, of vsury, p. 9. Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 233. 234. Powels po∣sitions of vsury p. 90. must be vnderstood and expounded, according to to the grounds of a good conscience, dictates of right rea∣son, and directions of a iust and rectified will: not out of the mists and miseries of a depraued and exorbitant iudg∣ment. Otherwise Abimelech, Saul, and other of that despe∣rate ranke and resolution, might conclude, that it were lawfull for them to kill other men, because they were wil∣ling to be killed themselues, See Iudg, 9.54. 1 Sam. 31.4. for they might say, they did but as as they would be done by. It would also follow very absurdly: the Magistrate be∣ing in the malefactors case would gladly be pardoned, ther∣fore he must pardon the malefactor: some sonne of Belial would be content villanously to prostitute his wife whom he cares not for himselfe, to others; therefore he may a∣buse another mans wife whom he loues better: these, and the like abominable and absurd consequents, demon∣strate the vanity of the vsurers inference, and that Christs rule is not so generall, but restraineable to that will, which is orderly,Note. and honestly guided by the light of nature, and Gods Law. 2. We must then haue recourse to this generall foun∣taine of the second table,Dr. Taylors Circumspect walking, p. 163. 164. and fetch light and direction thence: when we haue no expresse and speciall word in Gods Booke; but the Scriptures haue clearely and direct∣ly determined and resolued the poynt of vsury. 3 If the vsurer were in the borrowers case, he would not willingly, as he pretends, giue ten in the hundred. I meane with an absolute and free will, but of force and con∣straint, because without paying after that rate,Note. he could not
haue it. If a man would borrow vpon Vsury, to buy land, ingrosse, forestall, or compasse some vnlawfull matter; that were a corrupt will, and no rule: but if his desire so to borrow were iust and lawfull, as in some cases it may be, then it is no intire will, but mixed and forced by some ne∣cessity, for the auoyding of a greater euill: and therefore denyed in the eye both of law and reason, to be any will at all.Note: He that would borrow, should haue need to borrow, for a needlesse desire is vnlawfull, and an ingenious man who hath need to borrow, would not willingly borrow but for need, much lesse would he pay vsury. Therefore the will of the borrower, in this case, is eyther corrupt, or no will at all, and so consequently without the compasse of Christs rule. The will of the borrower in this case, is like the will of an honest traueller,Simile. in giuing his pur e to an arrand thiefe: for the feare he should loose both purse and life. Is such a man willing, thinke you to loose his money? or like the will of a man, whose house being on fire, pluckes downe part thereof to saue the rest: willingly indeed as the case stands with him,Simile. yet not simply, but vpon necessity. So the borrowers will is not free, but forced, and so a will against a will. 3 Argument. Some Diuines haue vndertaken the defence of some kind of vsury, especially to the rich, and so haue animated some in that course. 1 Answer. Dr. Taylers Progresse of Saints p. 96.This Doctrine brought to his tryall will not hold, see∣ing it is such a consumer of mens estates, and so vncharita∣ble, as the Lord would not admit of it in Israel, but a∣mong his enemies whom he would haue quite consumed. Besides, men deceiue themselues in their distinction: for
God in the case of vsury distinguisheth not betweene the rich and poore of Israel, but betweene the Israe∣lites, and the Canaanites, betweene strangers and brethren. The poore indeed are mentioned,The poore why mentio∣ned in the pro∣hibition of vsu∣ry. but onely thus: 1. Because they haue most neede to borrow 2. Because they are most liable to wrong and op∣pression. 3. The Commandement of loane is made especial∣ly for their good. 4. Vsury on them is a more grieuous sin and crying, Exod. 22.21. Ob. But if it were vnlawfull, God would forbid it to the stranger. Sol. 1. The Morrall Law forbids it to all. 2. It is by God dispensed with, by a iudiciall, for the hardnesse of the hearts of the Iewes, for the vniustice of the Gentiles, who exacted it on the Iewes, and for the ouerthrow of the Canaanits. The word is Deut. 23.20. Not Lemicro but Lamicro, Extraneo huic, that is, to this stranger, meaning the Canaanite. 3.See Fenton. of vsury p. 46. It is no more law∣full then Poligamy or a Bill of diuorce, which was a∣gainst the Institutor. 4. When the Canaanites were destroyed, all vsury was afterward absolutely forbid∣den; Ps. 15. And Pro. 28.8. Hier on Leu. 18. In the Law Vsury is forbidden onely to brethren, but in the Prophets to all absolutely: and in the Gospell much, more, because all are now brethren. 2 Answer. If any learned men do allow that vsury, which is pro∣perly so called, and practised in the world,Bb. Downam on Ps. 15. p. 310. I oppose to them the iudgements of many more worthy and learned men in this Age, the testimonies of all the learned in former ages, both Christians and heathen, the censures of Councels, the authority of the Word of GOD. 3 Answer. If those Diuines that speake or write for vsury proper∣ly so called, be Vsurers themselues;Dr. Sclater: vpon Romane p 122. may not this sinne winde it selfe into their affections, and thence creepe into
their iudgements, and vnderstandings, till it haue eaten out all soundnes of iudging and discerning betwixt good and euill? Doth not adultery creepe from the body to the affections bewitching them? Doth it not blind the iudgement: to thinke and censure it but a tricke of youth? Drunkennesse what an inward thirst of the desire workes it? And how easily inclines it to iudge it no worse then good-fellowship, yea so good as a poynt of manhood. This aduantage hath the diuell gotten against vs in the practise of this sinne,Dr. Fenton of vsury p. 3. Vsury why a bewitching sinne. that vsury being a trade so gainefull in respect of others, so easie, so cheape, so secure without all labour, cost, or perill, being also so common, behouefull, and requisit in these times for all occasions; it hath bewit∣ched euen the consciences of those who are most tender in other matters. For if the heart and affection be once won and possessed, it is an easie matter euen by slight proofes to turne the braine. Quod nimis miseri volunt, hoc facilè cre∣dunt,Seneca. strong affection giueth great credit to weake argu∣ments: whereas indeed it ought to be contrariwise; that our naturall pronenesse, and the generall inclination of the world to this practise of vsury, should moue a well tempe∣red iudgement the rather to suspect the lawfulnesse of it, and the soundnesse of such reasons, as are brought for it. Perit omne iudicium, cum res transit ad affectum. Men loo∣king by affection looke through a mist or a painted glasse; to whom nothing appeareth in his natiue colour and due proportion. 3 Answer. Powels posit. of vsury, p. 52, 53.Neuer any Diuine, that euer I could see or heare of, euer allowed vsury, but with such caueats and lessons, as alter the quality of vsury, and make it indeed no vsury at all. Caluin in Ezek. 18. Wilet vpon Exod. p. 511.1 All Diuines condemne it, as when men make a trade of it. Quisquis ex professo foeneratur, ille omnino debet ab ho∣minum consortio reijci. Thus also Dr. Willet, he that lendeth his money vpon vsury (sayth he) must not be such a one as maketh it his trade to liue by letting of money. And of all
other trades to be a professed vsurer is most odious. 2 They absolutely condemne vsury of vsury.Iun. in Leuit Vsura vsurarum, iudicio bonorum omnium etiam apud infideles dam∣nata semper et infamis fuit. Yet this in it selfe is no more vn∣lawfull then vsury. Cautions to be obserued by Vsurers, and that Exactè, to be precisely kept, as Mr. Caluin sayth. 1 Ne exigatur ab egente:See Fenton of vsury p. 62. 63. Amesins de conscientia. cap. 44. quae. 4, Perkins Condit. Com∣mandement, 8: Tantundem aut plus, Caluin. Bb. Downam in Ps. 15. p 274 275. it must not be taken of the needy, or such as be vrged to borrow vpon necessity. 2 The vsurer must not be so addicted to gaine, but that he must be still ready furnished, and willing to furnish his poore neyghbour in his need, freely. 3 The rule of Christ must euer be his touchstone, to deale no otherwise then he would be dealt, with in the like case. 4 The borrowers gaine must be so much more at the least as the vsurers interest comes vnto. 5 That not onely a respect be had to the borrower but to the good of the Common-wealth also, that, that receiue no preiudice: 6 That the vsurer neuer exceed the stint set downe in the Country, or Common-wealth where he liues. And because Zanchie, who is held another great patron of vsurers, doth vndertake to set downe the true meaning of Caluin, Bucer, and others in fauour of vsury, let vs heare what vsury that is, which they meant. Lictat pacisci de lucro, sed adhibitâ semper conditione vel expressâ vel tacitâ, at{que} in mente pij creditoris confirmata: nempe, vt si certò compereris, cui tuam dedisti pecuniam, cum vel parum, vel nihil lucri fecisse, id{que} non suâ culpa aut neg∣ligentiâ, sed propter res aduersus, et quia dominus noluit eius laboribus benedicere: tu quo{que} vel nihil, vel minus quàm erat in pactis accipias. Imo hoc animo esse debes, ô creditor, vt si de∣bitor, non solum non fecit lucrum, sed etiam accepit damnum,
tu quoque damni aliquid cum illo patiaris: hoc enim postulat aequitas et charitas. The Vsury that Zanchie allowes,It is lawfull to couenant for lucre, but vnder a condition either expressed in the couenant, or kept in mind, that if it appeare the borrower shall gaine little or nothing, (if with∣out his owne default he proues a looser:) thy vsury shall be little or nothing: and further if he lose of the principall, thou must beare part of the losse. For equity and charity require this. This is the vsury which Zanchie defendeth, and this (sayth he) was the meaning of Bucer and the rest.Zanchie in Epist. ad Eph. 4. quaest. 4 p. 173. Yet this is nothing but meere partnership. If the lender take part of losse as well as of gaine, it is no vsury. 4 Argument for vsury. The Law allowes eight in the hundred, therefore it is law∣full. Answer. Mr. Dyke, deceitfulnesse of the heart, p 205.THus the common vsurer deceiueth himselfe; why the Law allowes eight in the hundred: yea, but the law onely stints, and limits it to eight in the hundred, and so farre giues way to it for the preuenting of a greater mis∣chiefe. And this will not be enough to excuse the vsurer in the Court of Conscience: thus the Iewes deceiued themselues in the matter of their Poligamy, in hauing many wiues; and in their diuorces for euery trifle;Math. 19.8. they thought Moses Law had allowed them in these sinnes: whereas our Sauiour sheweth, Moses onely gaue a toleration for the hardnes of their hearts. Bb. Downam in Ps. 15. p. 265The permitting of vsury, argues that vsury in it selfe is euill, and the rule of conscience must be fetched, not from the ciuill lawes of men, but from the Word of God. Mr. Smith.The vsurer herein is like the Iewes, who sayd, We haue a
Law, and by our Law he ought to die, Iohn. 19.7. when they could not say, by Gods Law, he ought to die: they sayd by our Law he ought to die: so when the Vsu∣rer cannot say, by Gods Law I may take vsury; he sayth, by mans Law I may take vsury: this is the poorest de∣fence of all the rest: for if Gods Law forbid thee, can any Law of man excuse thee? In that act of Parliament wherein vsury was stinted at eight in the hundred, and at the latter end of that act,Anno Vicesimo primo Iacobi. regis. it is prouided: that no words in that Law contained, should be construed, or expounded, to allow the practise of vsury, in point of Religion or conscience. 5 Argument for vsury. Vsury is not forbidden in the new Testament, therefore it is lawfull. Answer. I Deny this consequence:Dr. Pie. Vsu∣rers Spright coniured p. 81 82, 83. Note. Many grosse sinnes not for¦bidden by name in the new Testa∣ment. there is no speciall mention of the forbidding of it by name in the new Testament: Ergo it is lawfull. For there are many breaches of the Morrall Law, yea many grosse sinnes, which are not expressely mentioned, and forbidden by name in the new Testament: as namely profaning of the Sabbath day: all the degrees of incest saue one; remouing the neighbours marke: taking for pledge, or vpon execu∣tion a poore mans onely weed; remouing of Landmarks, Polygamy; ielousie, &c. 2 An argument drawne from the testimony of some one part of the Scripture negatiuely, doth not hold, it is sufficient that it is forbidden in the old Testament, and namely in the Mortall Law of God, which is common and perpetuall; and farre bee it from vs to thinke that Christ in his Gospell alloweth any sin which is fordidden in the Morall Law.
3 Neyther is the taking of vsury of a poore man, that is in neuer so great distresse, forbidden by name in the new Testament, and therefore by this argument it should be al∣so lawfull. 4 By consequence vsury is sufficiently forbidden in the new Testament, as sometimes vnder the contrary affirma∣tiue: for where free lending is commanded, as Mat. 5.42.Bb. Downam Ps. 15 p. 282. 283. Not free lending (that is vsury) is condemned: some∣times vnder the generall, as Eph. 4.28 1 Thess. 4.6. Sometimes abstinence from vsury is commanded vnder the arguments of the greater and lesse, as Luke. 6.35. Sometimes by an argument drawne from the lesse, euen sinners, sayth our Sauiour, are willing and ready to lend one to another without vsury, how much more doth it become you that are Christians; to lend one to ano∣ther without vsury? 6 Argument for Vsury. It was in the Apostles time, therefore had it beene a sinne they would haue condemned it Answer. Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 284.I greatly doubt of this assertion, that vsury was in the time of Christ and his Apostles commonly practised a∣mong the Romanes: seeing Tiberius in the latter part of his reigne had vsed effectuall meanes for the abolish∣ing of vsury, as Alexander ab Alexandro reporteth: but much more in respect of the Iewes, among whom the practice of vsury was forbidden by the Law of God, and to whom our Sauiour giueth this testimony, that the very sinners among them would lend one to ano∣ther to receiue as much as they lent.Luke 6.34. Iames 5.3. St. Iames also find∣eth fault with the rich men of that time,See Dr. Pie. of vsury p. 84. 85. that they suf∣fered their gold and siluer to rust, which they would not haue done if they had beene addicted to vsury: and there∣fore
the lesse practise of vsury in those times, may be some reason why it is not expressely mentioned in the writings of the Apostles. 7 Argument for vsury. The law which forbiddeth vsury, is not morall, but iudiciall, and therefore not belonging to vs: they proue it to be a law iudiciall, because vsury is permitted towards a stranger.Deut. 23.20. 1 Answer. 1 If it were a iudiciall law, yet the equity thereof,Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 207. which is perpetuall, would appertaine to vs, viz. that vsury is not to be imposed vpon a brother: but behold we Christians are all brethren in Christ, this difference of Iew and Gentile being taken away, 2 The law which commandeth free lending, is not iudi∣ciall but morall, and is therefore renewed by our Sauiour Christ, therefore the law which forbiddeth vsury or lending for gaine, is morall; for the same law which commandeth the affirmatiue, condemneth the negatiue. 3 Vsury is reckoned in the Scripture among the trans∣gressions of the morall law.Fenton of vsury, p. 45. Looke into the Prophets and they euer combine this sinne of vsury with the transgressi∣ons of the morall law in the highest degree, with lying, back-biting, deceit, wrong, bribery, Ps. 15. with idolatry, op∣pression, adultery, cruelty, vnmercifulnesse to the poore, bloodshed, and murder, Ezek. 18. with the profanation of holy things: with the abomination of vncleanenesse: with the vnnaturall sinnes of incest, Ezek. 22.. Vsury (sayth S. Basil) is placed among the greatest abominations; all of them transgressions of the morall law. It is true indeed, there is a iudiciall and politique to∣leration annexed vnto this law, that the Iewes might take
vsury of strangers:.20. but that maketh not the law it selfe iu∣diciall but rather morall. The Iewes had a diuorce per∣mitted vnto them in the same booke of Moses, the next chapter, and yet the 7 Commandement, to which that be∣longeth, is morall notwithstanding; in like manner the Iewes might take vsury of strangers,chap. 24.1. which was a peculiar toleration for that nation, yet the law against vsury is mo∣rall. 8 Argument for vsury. If vsury be not lawfull for any to practise alas what shall become of those Orphans and widowes in these vniust daies, which haue stockes of money left vnto them, and want skill to employ the same. Answer. Fenton of v∣sury. p. 115,VVHat shall become of them? by the helpe of God they may doe well. My greater care is, what shall become of those Orphanes and Widowes in these vnchari∣table daies, which haue no stockes at all left vnto them. Though I confesse both the one and the other are alike in this, that they be not so able to helpe themselues as others be. Therefore there be no two estates among men, ouer whom God hath a more prouident and tender care, then ouerDeut. 10.18. & 14.29. & 18.11, 14. & 24 17 20. Ps. 68.5. Ps. 146.9. widowes and fatherlesse children. Exod. 22.22, 23, 24.Hath God then so many waies bound himselfe by pro∣mise to prouide for Widowes and Orphanes, and shall these by vsury withdraw themselues out of his fatherly protection? shall these be secured by vsurious contracts a∣gainst the act of God himselfe? verily God will take it more vnkindly at their hands, then at any other. If Almighty God in wisedome had thought it meet to haue tolerated vsury in these persons, he might as easily haue mentioned the same, as he doth the toleration of len∣ding to strangers. But it was so farre from Gods meaning, that in the very same place, where he maketh a law for the
safegard of Orphans and Widowes,Exod 22.22.23 24.25. presently and im∣mediatly vpon it, is annexed the Law against vsury. Shall then these who are so well prouided for, by a speciall Law of God, be transgressors of the very next Law vnto it? God forbid. Let Widowes and Orphans, &c.Bb. Downam. in Ps. 15. p. 268. Dod. in Com. 316. Dr. Wilson dis∣course vpon vsury p. 70. Eyther imploy their goods in some honest trade, wherein they haue as good cause to expect a blessing from God, as any other: or let them deale by partnership; or if other meanes faile, let annuities be bought for their liues, or Lands, or Rents purchased for euer; or let some other honest course be taken, which wise men can easily deuise, if they list: how Orphans may be maintained without impairing of their stocke. 9 Argument for Vsury. The state of the City cannot stand: trafficke cannot bee maintained: tradesmen cannot liue without Vsury: therefore vsury is lawfull. Answer. 1. I demaund first of these Trades-Men,Fenton of vsury p. 121. who cannot liue in their trade without taking vp at interest: is their meaning that they cannot liue in that fashion as they doe, maintaine their wiues in those fashons that they do: driue their trades to that height which they doe? If this be the case, the answer is easy:Prou. 5.15. it may be God would not haue them carry so great a saile as they doe, but to drinke of the waters of their owne well,Note. and content themselues with such meanes as Gods fatherly prouidence doth offer them:Prou. 15.16. there is no necessity for a man to inrich him∣selfe by such practises, as be eyther forbidden or doubtfull. Better is a little with the feare of the Lord, then great treasure with trouble; trouble of conscience at the houre of death. Thus farre we do agree: whosouer layeth this for his ground that he will be rich,1 Tim. 6.9. must insnare his conscience with many
necessary euils, whereof vsury is one: necessary, I say, not to a religious honest man, who is content with his e∣state; but to him who resolueth he will be rich: for they that will be rich (saith the Apostle) fall into temp∣tations and snares,1 Tim. 6.9. which drowne men in perdition and destruction. 2 If it be propounded, that trade and commerce be∣tweene man and man cannot be maintained in this City without borrowing and lending:Luke 6.13.  that is also granted. Gods Law did euer intend that men should lend one to another; in charity to the poore: in friendship to their equalls, to receiue the like courtesie againe. Which duty if men would performe, three were no necessity of vsury. 3 The third point then followeth. Presupposing the custome and corruption of these times wherein men will not lend freely as they ought; is there not a necessity of vsury admit that be granted: who did impose this necessi∣ty?Note. if God; then is this reason good, vsury is necessary, therefore lawfull. But if men or estates haue drawne a necessity of sinning vpon themselues by the custome of sinne, doth this extenuate or aggrauate the fault? Woe be vnto them (sayth the Prophet Esay) who draw sin,Esay 5.18. as with cart-Ropes. Cities and Incorporations haue drawne a necessity of this sinne vpon themselues by three strong cart-Ropes of iniquity.3 Cause of the necessity of vsury. First the hardnesse of mens hearts, and want of charity in those who be well able to lend and will not, haue for∣ced many to pay vsury. Secondly, the couetous desire and pride of borrowers, who out of an insatiable appetite to compasse great mat∣ters, do take vp great summes of money, for money: that no money is to be spared for such as be true bor∣rowers indeede.Is. 5.8. Woe vnto them that ioyne, Land to Land till there be no place for the poore to dwell in. That is the Country woe. But vpon the same ground, it is inferred: Woe vnto them who ioyne money to money, till there be none
left for the poore to borrow. This is the City woe: which bringeth a necessity of borrowing vpon intrest. Thirdly, falsehood and deceit in defrauding one ano∣ther of their monies at the times appointed, so as being disapointed of their owne, they are compelled to take vp of others, or to shut vp their doores. These three fold cart-Ropes, not easily broken, haue drawne a necessity of vsury vpon Cities. And shall it therefore be reputed no sinne? God forbid: it is no good consequence neyther in persons nor estates. Not in persons. S. Paul telleth vs of an heart that can∣not repent,Rom. 2.5. which heapeth vnto it selfe wrath against the day of wrath. Is impenitency in that heart no sin, because custome hath made it necessary? A drunkard hath brought his body into such an habit, that vnlesse he drinke bountifully, euen to the turning of his braine, he is sicke againe. Is not drunkenesse in that person sinfull, because so necessary? But for the lender, which is the Vsurer, there is no co∣lour or pretence of any such necessity which can befall him: seeing he hath authority from God as steward of his bles∣sings: and power amongst men as owner of his money: for variety of lawfull and vndoubted imployments. 2 Answer. The Common-wealth of the Iewes did stand without vsury, therefore why may not ours? 2 You may find a discouery of the infinite iniuries this kingdome endureth by the vnlawfull trade of vsury.In a tract a∣gainst vsury presented to our high Court of Parliament. 1621. Item in vsury arraigned and condemned. 1625. Where the allegations commonly made in defence of vsury, are sufficiently answered. 3 Vsury is the cheefest cause of the greatest misery in this Land, as well to giue occasion of great waste as also to make much want, and will be in the end, the vndo∣ing of all, if it be not looked to in time. The Romans neuer began to decay, till vsury Lorded amongst them,Dr. Wilson. of vsury. Epist. dedicat. for then priuate gaine thrust out common profit, lust was
holden for law, idlenesse more vsed then labour, ryot instead of dyet, vice better regarded then vertue, no charity at all, no loue betwixt man and man, but eueryman for himselfe, and the whirle-poole of pride and ryot ouerfloweth in all things, and in all places. 10 Argument for vsury. Proposition.No vsury is forbidden by the law of God, and by the law of nature, but that which is hurtfull, and ioyned with the hurt and losse of the neighbour. Assumption.But some vsury is not hurtfull, but rather helpfull to the neighbour. Conclusion.Therefore some vsury is not forbidden. Answer. First the proposition is vntrue, and of dangerous conse∣quence: for the law of God forbiddeth all vsury in gene∣rall,Bb. Downam p 293. as a thing in it owne nature and in his whole kind simply vnlawfull, without any restraint or limitation, euen as it condemneth adultery, lying, theft, or any other noto∣rious sinne. Thus a man might argue for an officious lye. Reply. But they proue their proposition thus. Proposition.Vsury is not forbidden, but as it is against charity, for cha∣rity is the summe of the law, and he which obserueth the rules of charity, keepeth the law. Assumption.But that which is not hurtfull to the neyghbour, is not a∣gainst charity. Conclusion,Therefore that vsury which is not hurtfull to the neygh∣bour is not forbidden. Answer. 1 To the Proposition: Charity which is the summe of the law, hath reference towards God; towards our neyghbour, not onely in priuate, but also in publike: and towards a mans selfe. And in this sence I acknowledge the proposition of his syllogisme to be true, viz. That vsury
is not forbidden, but as it is repugnant to charity. But here∣by the assumption of this syllogisme is proued to be false, for there be many things which are not perhaps hurtfull to our neigbhour in particular, with whom we deale,Note. which are notwithstanding repugnant to charity. The officious lie helpeth the particular neighbour, in whose fauour it is told, yet because it is repugnant to verity, it is repugnant to charity. God who is truth hath forbidden all vntruth, and he will destroy euery one that speaketh lies: the lying mouth destroyeth the soule: therefore no lying can stand with that charity and obedience which we owe to God, nor with that loue which we owe to our owne soules. So in like sort suppose that the borrower sometimes is not hurt by vsury, but rather holpen: yet notwithstanding all vsury is against charity, for the practice of it cannot stand with charity and our allegance to God; who hath forbidden it, denounced his iudgements against it, made gracious pro∣mises to them that will do the contrary: nor with our cha∣rity and duty to our Countrey, vnto which vsury is in many respects noysome, as hath beene shewed: nor with that loue which we owe to our owne soules; for whosoeuer putteth forth to vsury, or taketh increase, he shall not liue, but dye the death. Reply. Yea but say they againe, to proue the former proposition, That vsury which is ioyned with the hurt of the neighbour is con∣demned: therefore that which is not ioyned with the hurt of the neighbour is not condemned. Answer. I deny the consequence: for there are other respects which make vsury vnlawfull,Idem p. 297. besides the hurt of our neigh∣bour, as euen now I shewed; by the same reason the patrons of officious lies might argue thus; God forbiddeth vs to tell a lie against our neighbour, therefore the lie which is not against the neighbour, but for him, is not forbidden. But you will say, all lying is forbidden: so is all vsury, as I haue already proued.
And thus I haue shewed against the proposition that all vsury is vnlawfull, though all were not hurtfull. Now I adde against the assumption of the first Syllogysme, that all vsury is hurtfull: hurtfull I say, eyther to the borrower as commonly it is, or else to the Commonwealth, as before hath beene proued. 11 Argument for vsury. To lend vpon vsury and to borrow vpon vsury are relatiues, therefore if to lend vpon vsury be a sinne, it is a sinne to borrow vpon vsury, and if to borrow vpon vsury be law∣full, then is it lawfull to lend vpon vsury. Answer. I Deny the consequence which is grounded vpon a false supposition.Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 305. That there is alwaies the like reason of rela∣tiues. The oppressour, and he that is oppressed: the rob∣ber, and he that is robbed, are relatiues: but shall we hence conclude,He which bor∣rowes vpon v∣sury, necessity compelling sinnes not, Idem p. 338. that if to be robbed, or oppressed is not a sinne, therefore it is not a sinne to rob or to oppresse? He which vpon necessity, yeeldeth to pay vsury, doth suffer wrong and is oppressed: therefore such a one sinnes not. Which may be thus proued. To suffer wrong is not sinne. The borrower which vpon necessity yeeldeth to pay vsu∣ry, doth suffer wrong. Therefore he doth not sinne therein. Reply. He which borroweth vpon vsury is not oppressed, because he is willing to borrow vpon vsury: yea, and so willing, that he seeketh to the vsurer, and intreateth him to lend, offering to giue him consideration according to the Statute, that is to say, Vsury. Answer. He that borroweth vpon vsury in case of vrgent necessity
doth yeild to vsury against his will, yea although he both offer and promise it: for in cases of vrgent necessity, men seeme many times willing to that which is indeed against their will. When a man is in danger of shipwracke, how will he bestirre himselfe to vnlade and lighten the ship, and with such earnestnesse cast his goods into the sea, that he may seeme to be very willing to be rid of them: and yet the thing which he willeth,See the an∣swer to the 2 argument for vsury, is not the casting away of his goods, but the safety of his life. This is a conditionall necessity. Thus the borrower is no more willing to pay vsu∣ry, then that man was to cast away his goods: but his ne∣cessity for auoyding a greater inconuenience, makes him seeme willing to that whereunto simply he is vnwilling. 2 Reply. The vsurer cannot accomplish his sinne without the bor∣rower, therefore the borrower is partner of the vsurers sinne. Answer. The consequent is not good.Idem p 344, The sinne of rape cannot be without the innocent party that is rauished, yet she that is rauished, is not partner of his sinne that committeth the rape. So likewise one man cannot oppresse, vnlesse there be another to be oppressed, nor impose vsury, vnlesse there be another on whom it is to be imposed: and yet he that is oppressed is not partner of the oppressors sinne, nor the borrower who vpon necessity borroweth vpon vsury, of the vsurers sinne. 3 Reply. It may be doubted of, whether one may take money for his vse of an vsurer: 1 Because it is not lawfull to consent to him, that doth euill. 2 Nor to giue occasion to one of euill, as he seemeth to doe, that taketh money vpon vsury. 3. And Ieremy professeth,Ier, 15:10, Bb. Babing∣ton, vpon the Com∣mandements, p 70. that he neither gaue nor tooke to vsury, where the Prophet plainely insinuates, that if he had done eyther, hee could haue found iust cause in himselfe why he should be euill thought of.
1 Answer. Dr. Smith, in Willet, vpon Leuit. p. 336.1 He consenteth not to the sinne of the vsurer, that ta∣keth vp money of him, he consenteth to the lending, which is good, but the hard condition in lending, the vsurer im∣poseth, and the other is forced to accept, because of his ne∣cessity. 2 Neyther doth he giue him occasion of sinning, but of lending, the vsurer himselfe Sumit occasionem peccandi, ta∣keth occasion of sinning. 3 The word there vsed by the Prophet, is Nashah, which signifieth mutuo dare, to lend, as Iun. well tran∣slateth, as it is taken in other places, Deut. 15, 2. c, 24.10. where the Septuagint interpret it by the word , or  debt not vsury, and so Theodotion here readeth, I did owe nothing to any man: the Hebrew word Nashah, with He, signifieth simply to lend, but with Aleph, to lend vpon vsury, as Esay 24.2. and though the vsuall reading be receiued, it signifieth no more then this, that the Prophet had no trading at all with them,Cautions in borrowing vpon vsury. (as we say) he neyther bought nor sold with them and yet they hated him. Wherefore the resolution here is, that a man for his neces∣sary occasions may make vse of an vsurers money, but (not to make gaine of it by letting it out againe. 2 or to main∣taine his pride, gaming, drunkennesse. 3 Or to compasse great matters in the world,Bb. Downam in Ps. 15 p 318, 319, 320, &c. or to purchase Lands, or Hou∣ses. 4 Or to seeme poore, that he may giue nothing to the vse of the Church, or to the Commonweale in subsidies and taxes. 5 Or when he may borrow freely, at the first motion offering vsury to the lender) but driuen to it of necessity: for, non qui patitur, sed qui facit iniuriam peccat, not he that suffereth, but he that doth wrong, sinneth: and it is a very like case, as when a man vseth the oath of one that swea∣reth by false gods: as Iacob did of Labans oath, that sware by the god of Nahor, Gen. 31.53. who serued other gods, Iosh. 24.2. to confirme the league betweene them, as Augu∣stine sayth, Non peccato illius, sed pacto bono, quo fidem ser∣uavit,
vtitur in bonum, he doth not vse his sinne in swea∣ring by false Gods, but his couenant, whereby hee kept his fayth to a good end: Epist. 154.Note. And like as a man fal∣ling into the hands of Theeues doth reueale vnto them his treasure to saue his life, which otherwise he ought not to doe: as the tenne men did to Ismael, Ier. 41.8. So it is when one vrged by his necessary occasions falleth into the Vsurers hands. But better were it to preuent such occa∣sions, if it may be: and being once enwrapped, to follow the wisemans counsell: Giue not rest vnto thine eyes; till thou hast deliuered thy soule,Not to con∣tinue in debt to Vsurers. as a Doe from the hand of the hunter, and as a Bird from the hand of the fouler, Prou. 6.5. For as a Bird taken in a lime-bush, so one by dealing with the Vsurer, the more besnareth and entang∣leth himselfe. 12 Argument for vsury. Neshech, which signifies biting vsury is vnlawfull. But tooth∣lesse vsury is not so. Answer. IT is the nature of all vsury to bite,Mr. Fenton of Vsury p. 9. All Vsury bites though with great difference: some like the English Mastiue, some like the dogge-slie some scarce sensibly, and therefore not per∣ceiued to be a sinne. First,Why Vsury seemes not to bite. because many are content to moderate them∣selues in this gaine, and then, if it be a sinne, it is but a lit∣tle one, as Lot sayd of Zoar, Gen. 19.20. Modica sunt quae perdunt nos; they be those little ones that vndoe vs. A Moate in the Eye if it be not got out in time, may grow to a pin and web; and a mans conscience may suffer Ship∣wracke aswell vpon a Sand as vpon a Rocke. Secondly, it is not euer so sensible, because as the Vsurer moderating himselfe doth not seeme to bite the borrower: so the borrower releiuing himselfe by others, hath no cause
to complaine. Yea, many borrowers concurring in this practise, by their multitudes, are able to sway and inhance the market, in such manner, that they may liue themselues and pay the vsurer besides. So that in conclusion those do all set vpon the Commonwealth: which being a great bo∣dy, is able to beare many dogs, before she need to com∣plaine: and feeling the wound (as in time she must) she knoweth not well of whom to complaine.Multorum manibus grande leua∣tur onus. Burthensome therefore it is to the Commonwealth, yet so dispersed a∣mongst many, that it is the lesse sensible, but neuer a whit the more allowable. For these and the like causes the biting of vsury being sometimes not so sensible to particular persons, almighty God in his wisedome foreseeing how ready men would be to cauill at the Word Neshech, hath of purpose expressed his meaning more fully by the exegeticall addition of an∣other terme, which simply signifieth any increase at all. And this hath he done, not onely in the comments of the Prophets.Ezek. 18.17. Pro. 28.8. But in the very text of the law it selfe, Leuit. 25.36, vetarbith, and the 37. Vbemarbith: which word, Salomon forgetteth not to adde: for Salomons daies being both peaceable and rich in siluer and gold, men would be then more ready in all likelyhood to deuise any cauill, or colour to maintaine that sinne. Neyther are these my priuate coniectures, against the groundlesse distinction of biting and toothlesse vsury; but Mr. Caluin himselfe (vpon whom they seeme to relye as a chiefe patron of vsury) doth not onely condemne it as friuolous;The distincti∣on of biting and toothlesse vsury ground∣lesse. but addeth further, that it was the purpose of the holy Ghost, by adding that other word to preuent such cauils. Quia homines hac in parte nimium sunt accuti et versuti, et excogitant subterfugia, quibus crudelitatem suam tegant; ideo addit: et incrumentum non acceperit: be∣cause, sayth Caluin, men in this kind be ouer accute and subtile, and deuise euasions how they may cunningly couer their cruelty, therefore he addeth in the text, Vsury or in∣crease.
And for the distinction it selfe, Caluin his censure is, Ludunt homines suis cauillis, sed deus non admittit tales versutias: men cauill and play with words, but God ad∣mitteth no such sleights. His meaning is simple and plaine, that all increase aboue the principall is forbidden. 13 Argument for vsury. Vsury is forbidden to the poore, therefore lawfull towards the rich. Answer. THis euasion is very friuolous: for Deut. 23.19.Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 202. there is no mention of the poore, but all vsury is forbid∣den towards a brother, whether he be rich or poore. 2 By the same reason we may conclude, wrong is not to be done to the poore, the widow, the fatherlesse; or stranger; therefore wrong may be done to the rich,Pro. 22.22. to the married wife, to the children that haue their parents liuing, &c. 3 Or when Salomon sayth, Robbe not the poore, because he is poore, we might inferre; therefore thou mayst robbe the rich, because he is rich.Powels positions of vsury. p. 45. See the an∣swere to the 3 argument. God in the lawes of vsury, did specially, and by name forbid lending in that manner to the poore, for two re∣spects. 1 To shew what care he himselfe hath ouer them, who are commonly and vsually neglected of men. 2 Because the poore are soonest and easiest oppressed of the rich, as the lowest hedge is soonest stepped o∣uer. 3 If the law of lending to the poore without vsury, should inferre the lawfulnesse of lending to the rich vpon vsu∣ry; then it is euident that Gods intendment in those lawes for the benefit of the poore should rather proue a hurt and hinderance vnto them, because by this meanes it would
come to passe that the poore should not borrow at all.Dr. Mosse, of vsury: p 131. For, who will lend to the poore for nothing, that might lawful∣ly lend to the rich for vsury? of which poynt we haue so lamentable and euident experience in these our dayes, as no man, no not the vsurer himselfe is able to gainesay it. Yet of the two it were better for the poore man, that he should borrow vpon vsury, then that he should not be able to borrow at all: now borrow at all he shall not, if it be lawfull to lend to the rich for vsury, and not vnto him. And therefore as one sayd, Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum: accursed be that glosse or commen∣tary that destroyeth the text: so may I say in this case, e∣uill fare that interpretation which ouerthroweth the intent and purpose of the Commandement. 14 Argument for vsury. Many by imployment of money borrowed vpon vsury haue growne rich. Answer. Bb. Downam. in Ps. 15. p. 257.I Will not answer with Basil, , that is, but I thinke more (sayth he) haue come to the halter: but I thinke more haue proued banckrupts.Dr. Wilson of vsury. p 189. Dr Wilson hath a pretty story to this purpose, not vnworthy the remem∣bring. A man comming into a certaine Church, and seeing it fraught full of Images made of waxe,Note. demanded, what might be the cause of such an vnwonted sight? answer was made, that those whom these images did represent were certaine persons which on a time were saued from drowning by calling vpon our Lady. Nay then (quoth he againe) where be the Images of those (I pray you) that called vpon our Lady, and were drowned notwithstan∣ding? So say I in this case. If any man will set before me the instances, and as were the images of those, who tooke vp money on vsury, and grew rich thereby: I would de∣mand
on the other side, that he shew forth the hundreds, and thousands of those, who by that meanes haue vtterly impouerished, and ouerthrowne their owne estate, they will be found to be without all comparison. 2 Though some for a time may seeme to be rich by that which they haue borrowed vpon vsury, yet vsury at the length consumeth them, and eateth them vp. 3 Neyther doth this prosperous euent of the borrower iustifie the contract of vsury,Note. which couenanteth for gaine not in euentum lucri, but absolutely, and therefore out of his losse as well as out of his gaine. 4 And lastly I adde, that the more the borrower is in∣riched by this meanes, the more the Common-wealth is damnified. For whosoeuer thriueth by occupying money borrowed vpon vsury, he hath so pitched the prices of his commoditie,Dr. Wilson, of vsury. p 174. as that besides a competent gaine raysed for the maintenance of himselfe and his charge, he also hath gathered vp an ouerplus of a tenth part for the vsurer. And thus by vsury the prices of all commodities are enhaunced, whiles the sellers, who borrow vpon vsury, if they will thriue, must needs make the buyers to pay two shilling in the pound more then otherwise were sufficient.Answer to an Obiection. And be∣cause they which doe borrow vpon vsury, must needs sell for so much as they may gaine both for themselues and the vsurers. Therefore the rest doe pitch the prices of their com∣modities accordingly. Otherwise they which trade with money borrowed vpon vsury could neuer thriue:Bb. Downam in Ps. 15 p. 255, 256. but be∣cause sometimes they doe thriue, it is euident, that all of the same trades doe so pitch their prices, as if all did borrow vpon vsury.
CHAP. 7. Vsurers must repent of their sinne, and make restitution. Vsurers must repent of their sinnes.AS for those who haue practised this sinne, their duty is to repent thereof, because they that put forth their money to vsury shall not dwell in the Mountaine of Gods holinesse, namely, vnlesse they repent. And againe Ezek. 18. He that putteth forth to vsury and taketh increase he shall not liue, but die the death, viz: vnlesse he repent and turne from his wickednesse; for that condition is to be vnderstood by warrant of the Lords owne exposition, Ezek. 18.14, 15, 21. Bb. Downam in Ps 15. p. 312 313.Now vnto Repentance, besides the inward loathing of the sinne and sorrow conceiued for it, is required (as that testimony; of Ezek 33.14.15. Plainely sheweth) both a desisting from the practice of vsury, and a restitution of that which hath beene gotten by vsury, with the harme of of others. For the first: it is the expresse Commandement of God by the Apostle, Eph. 4.28. Let him that stole, steale no more: and by Nehemiah more particularly in this case of vsury Chap. 5.10. Let vs cease from this burthen; mean∣ing vsury: forsaking of sinne accompanieth forgiuing of sinne: Prou. 28 13. Neyther may we thinke that God re∣mitteth those sinnes, which we our selues retaine. Now vpon this forsaking of sinne, will follow the se∣cond duty of repentance,Vsurers must make restitu∣tion else. 1 No repen∣tance. namely restitution, as a ne∣cessary consequent thereof, which restitution whosoeuer maketh not, being able to restore, he neyther hath vn∣fained repentance of his sinne, nor any sound assurance of the forgiuenesse thereof. He hath not repentance: for he doth not forsake the sinne of theft and vsury, that con∣tinueth in it, and he continueth therein that doth not make restitution. For so oft as a man remembreth, that whatsoeuer he hath vniustly gotten by vsury, or any other kind of theft, to the damnifying of others, is not his
owne, but theirs whom he hath wronged, and yet re∣fuseth (being able) to restore the same,Si res aliena propter quam peccatum est, cum reddi pos∣sit non redditur, non agitur pa∣nitentia, sed fingitur. 2 No sound assurance of remission. Epist. 54. ad Maced: so often he committeth theft. Therefore Augustine sayth, that men doe not repent indeed, but counterfeit repentance, if when they are able to restore other mens goods, wherein they haue offended, they do not restore them As he hath not repentance which maketh not restitution, if he be able, so neyther hath he any sound assurance of re∣mission. It is a true saying of Augustine, Non remitti pec∣catum, nisi restituatur ablatum, that the sinne is not remit∣ted, vnlesse that which hath beene vniustly taken, be re∣stored, namely, if the party be able to restore: for whiles a man continueth in his sinne, he cannot beleeue the for∣giuenesse thereof, and he continueth therein, vntill hee make restitution. To restore is to cease from doing wrong, therefore hee that shall not restore, doth not cease from the wrong. But it is further to be considered, to whom and when this restitution is to be made, and how farre forth. 1 To whom?To whom vsu∣rers must re∣store. Surely to him that hath sustained losse or harme thereby, Leuit. 6.5. Numb. 5.7.8. That is, eyther to the vse of the Debtour if he hath beene bitten or to pub∣like and godly vses, if the Common-wealth hath beene endamaged. 2 When?2 When. So soone as thou desirest remission of thy sin, and reconciliation with God for so the Lord hath expresse∣ly commanded. Numb. 5.6.7.8. Leuit. 6.2.3.4.5.6.7. viz. That the sinne first must be confessed to God: Secondly, restitution is to be made to the party offended, the same day that thou seekest reconciliation with God, if not be∣fore: and Thirdly a sacrifice was to be offered, &c. The equity whereof remaineth vnto vs, that in the third place we should call vpon God for the forgiuenesse of our sinne, desiring him for and by the sufficient sacrifice of Christ (which was prefigured by the sacrifices of the Law) to forgiue our sinne Many will seeme to seeke reconciliation
with God; but neuer thinke of making amends to their brother offended. But our Sauiour Christ teacheth vs ano∣ther lesson, Mat. 5.23.24. How farre forth this re∣stitution is to be made.How farre forth is this restitution to be made, that is, of what vsury, and of how much? Ans. Not of meutall vsury, where gaine for loane is intended onely and expected: for howsoeuer that intent corrupteth the act of lending, yet it polluteth not the free gift of the borrower, which is voluntarily giuen in testimony of thankfulnesse. And therefore it bindeth not the lender for restitution to be made to the neighbour whom he hath not wronged, but to repentance toward God. And of how much?For the quantity; so much at the least is to be resto∣red as hath beene gotten by vsury with the harme of others: or if the offender bee not able to restore so much, yet he must restore so much as he is able. The Lord in his Law commandeth, that the offender should restore the whole summe, and also adde a fift part vnto it, Leuit. 6.5. Numb. 5.7. & Zacheus, to testifie his repentance, pro∣miseth foure fold: that those men may know how farre they be from true repentance who will restore nothing at all. If any shall thinke or say, Durus est hic Sermo, this is a hard or harsh Doctrine, which is not so esteemed in re∣spect of other kinds of theft: I Answer, the harder this Doctrine seemeth to Vsurers then to other Theeues and robbers,Note. Vsurers worse then other Theeues. the more desperate is their estate then of others. And this may be another argument to aggrauate the grie∣uousnesse of this sinne, that whereas other Theeues and robbers, if once they be discouered, acknowledge their fault, and are willing to make restitution, Vsurers though conuinced of this sinne, yet stand in defence there∣of and thinke not themselues bound to make restitution. I could with much facility, confirme the iudgement of this reuerend Father, by the concurrence of a world of testimonies; but because the poynt is already dis∣couered to be a manifest truth, I will butDyke of re∣pentance p. 143 Mr. Smith 2. Sermon vpon vsury and in his Sermon of Zacheus con∣uersion. Bb. King on Ionah. Ch. 3. 8. name some of
them that require Vsurers to make restitution, and preferre to the Vsurers consideration, the iudgement of a most learned and iudicious Doctor. Powels positions of vsury p. 68. 69. Mr. Philips Sermons p. 95. Bb. Sands in Sermon vpon, Luke 1.74.75. Mr. Rogers strange vineyard p. 313. Bb. Iewell, vpon 1 Thess. p. 147. Perkins vol. 2. p. 197. If vsury be an vnlawfull trade,Dr. Smith in Willet on Le∣uiticus p. 632. as hath beene sufficient∣ly proued before; then it will follow, that what is wrongfully gotten must be restored home, and restitution be made of the wrong done.Vsurers to re∣store. So Zacheus professeth to re∣compence foure fold what he deceitfully had gotten; the word is [] taken from such as among the Athenians discouered those which carryed out figs, which was forbidden, (they being had their in great price,) and so the word is generally applied to those, that accuse others wrongfully, and forge any cauillation against them, in like manner Vsurers haue trickes, and deuices to enwrap and entangle their poore debters.Vsurers haue trickes to en∣tangle their debters. And if they will with Zacheus become the children of Abraham, they must make restitution of their vnconscion∣able vsury: so was it decreed in a generall counsell,Councells de∣creed restitu∣tion. Posses∣siones quae de Vsuris comparata sunt, vendi debent, et pre∣tia his, ex quibus vsurae extortae sunt, rescitui; possessions gotten by vsury, must be sold, and the price giuen to them, of whom the vsury was extorted; Lateran. Part. 16. c. 5. and Augustine also would haue vsury restored: Quia omne, quod male possidetur, alienum est, because euery thing, which is ill possessed, belongeth to another; Epist. 54. But here in this case of vsury,Cautions to be obserued. these cautions must be obserued. 1 That euery thing gotten by money cannot be restored, but onely those things: Quorum vsus non est consumptio, which are not consumed in the vse, as House, Lands, but meat apparell, which consume in the vse, cannot be resto∣red, but the value of them.
2. Besides the vsury money, something may be gotten humanâ, industriâ, by humane industry and for that re∣stitution is not to be made. 3. And if the lender be damnified, Per dilationem, by the detayning of his money; of that also a consideration must be had. 4. And all the price of the House and ground is not to be restored, but Secundum quantitatem vsurae; according to the quantity of the vsury receiued. To this purpose, Aquin. 2. 29. 18. art. 3. 5. Adde hereunto, if the parties be not liuing of whom the vsury was taken: then restitution must be made to his heyres, and next of his kindred, and for want of them to be giuen to pious vses according to the Law, Numb. 5.8. And so the Canon is: Qui vsuras receperint, cogendi sunt, sub pae∣nâ Excommunicationis, ijs àquibus extorserunt, velhaeredibus restituere, they which haue receiued vsury, are to be com∣pelled vnder paine of excommunication to restore them to such, from whom they extorted it, or to their heyres, Lateranens. ibid. vbi supr. Conclusion. 2 Chro. 30.18 19.Now the good Lord pardon euery Vsurer, that prepareth his heart to seeke God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary.Acts 26 18. The good Lord open their eyes, and turne them from darkenesse to light, and from the power of Satan vnto God: that they may receiue forgiuenesse of sinnes, and in∣heritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in Christ. Now the God of peace, that brought againe from the dead our Lord Iesus, that great Shepheard of the sheepe, through the blood of the euerlasting couenant,Heb. 13.20.21. make them perfect in euery good worke to doe his will, working in them that which is well pleasing in his sight through Iesus Christ, to whom be glory for euer and euer, Amen. Barnard. Serm. 61. in Cant. Meritum meum miseratio Domini.
Mr. George Withers. TO make of griping vsury their Trade among the rich. No scruple now is made In any place. For euery Country-village hath now some vsury, as well as tillage, Yea they that lending most of all detest though but for tollerated interest: Doe nathlesse take those annuities which often proues the bitingst vsuries; By nature money no increase doth bring, most, therefore thinke it a prodigious thing That money put to loane, should bring in gaine. yet some of these by practice doe maintayne As monstrous vsuries: and nought at all are touched in their conscience therewithall. In vsury of Cattell or of Leases we may disburse our money for increases More biting farre then those who dare to take who by meere lending doe aduantage make As money naturally produceth nought, so, by the earth small profit forth is brought: Vntill both cost and labour we bestow, for little else, but thornes and weedes will grow. The Landlord, therefore, here I dare auer, to be no lesse a griping Vsurer, Then is the money master: if he breake the rule of Christian charity, and take More profit then his Tenant can afford, and such as these, are hated of the Lord. Of Vsurers there are some other sorts who keepe no certaine place, but both in Courts, In Cities, and in Country-townes they dwell, and in the tricke of griping they excell; There be of these, that Vse for silence take some others, an Vsurious profit make.
Of their authorities, and doe aduance their wealth by giuing others countenance: Their carriages their neyghbours fetch and bring they haue their seed time, and their haruesting Dispatcht almost for nothing: such as these are many of our Country Iustices. Some by another engine profit catch, they must be prayd and paied for dispatch Yea Clerkes; and many of other officers are greater and more hatefull Vsurers, Then they that most are hated for that crime since these doe often for a little time Which they delay vniustly take what may of no meane summe, the annuall interest pay, These men are cruell: and yet worse by farre. most Treasurers, and their pay-masters are For, that which due vnto vs doth remaine they doe not onely ouerlong detaine, But, oft, of euery hundred, twenty take, ere payment of our, owne, to vs, they make They must haue bribes, their wiues must haue Caroches. or horse, or Iewels, after which encroches Their seruants also, for some other dues (as they pretend) which if we doe refuse To pay vnto them, twise as much we leese, this tricke enricheth also. Referres In Chancery, and in some other Courts and this or makes, or marreth most reports: This is that common cheat, and meanes by which meane officers so speedily grow rich, Although they giue large Incomes, by this way their wiues so on a sudden grow so gay, That were but Kitchin-mayds few yeares before yea many in the blood of Orphanes poore Haue dide their gownes in Scarlet by such courses and clothd and fed themselues with widowes curses. George Withers. FINIS.
