A3835 E620_15 99865544 165777
THE ARTICLES Of Agreement, For the Surrender of the strong & invincible Castle of Edinborough; the manner of the Lord Gen. Cromwel's play∣ing his Fire-works before the Treaty, the number of men slain; the taking of the Scots Roaring-Meg, and 52 Pieces of Ordnance, eleven thousand Arms, 200 Barrels of Gun∣powder; and great store of Match and Bullet. The Lord Gen. Declaration to the Scots; their marching away with flying Colours; and the Protestation of the Earl of Castles, and the L. Humby, touching the King and Parliament; with the Copy of a dissenting Declaation against their King, cast into his Coach as he was coming from the Parliament-hous. depiction of a (city) gate, illustrating the verse of the psalm PSAL. 118. Ver. 20. This is the Gate of the LORD; The righteous shall enter into it. Dec. 31 1650 LONDON, Printed by R. W. 1651.
ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT; FOR The surrender of Edinborough Castle, with all the Ordnance, ten thousand Arms, 40 Barrels of Powder, and great store of Warlike Provision. Honoured Sir, HIs Excellency the Lord General Cromwel being desirous to use all meanes possible, for the redu∣cing of Edenborow Castle, with∣out the effusion of bloud, sent a∣nother Summons to the Lord Governor Dun∣dass, for the surrender thereof; which was again
deni'd: Whereupon Tuesday Decemb. 17 the four Morter pieces, and six Battering Pieces plaid very hard against the Castle, so that in an hours time, all their Guns, except one upon the main Battery, were drawn back, and many of the Granado's fell into the Castle, doing great execution: Notwithstanding which, the Go∣vernour caused a red Flag of Defiance to be hung on the top of the high Tower; but upon playing the last Granado, a most hideous noise was heard within, divers being wounded, and five killed; which soon caused the Enemy to take down their red Flag, and hung out a white one, immediatly sending forth a Drummer, of∣fering to surrender, if they might have liberty to send to the Committee of Estates; but that being denied, a treaty was embraced, and Ma∣jor Aberneth sent out to treat on their behalf; and on ours, Col. Monk, and Lieu. Col. White, who sate up all night in debate of Articles; at last, it was resolved as followeth: 1 That the Castle of Edenburgh should be surrendred to his Excellency the Lord Gen. Cromwel on Tuesday the 24 instant, with all the Ordnance, Armes, Magazin, and Furniture of War thereunto belonging.
2 That the Governour, with the Officers & Souldiers, should march forth with their Arms, Colours flying, Drums beating, matches light∣ed, and bullet in mouth, to such a place as they should make choice of. 3 That the Goods belonging to the Inha∣bitants adjacent, and others, should be restored to them. 4 That the competency of time allowed for them to fetch them away, should not extend a∣bove four dayes, beginning Friday the 19 in∣stant. And for the due observation and per∣formance of Articles, Hostages were delived to the Lord General. There is in the Castle 52 pieces of Ordnance, divers of them large brass pieces, above ten thousand Arms, and much Ammunition and Provision; a List whereof I have sent you here inclosed: together with the Lord Generals Declaration. When our men entred the Castle, they found very litle Wines, less Beer, and not above ten gallons of Water. There marched out about 400 Ministers, Gen∣tlemen, and souldiers, and not above twenty horse. Edinborough 27 Decem. 1651.
The Lord Gen. Declaration. WHereas there is an Agree∣ment of Articles by Trea∣ty, concluded betwixt my self, and Col. Dundass, Governour of the Castle of Edinburgh, which doth give free liberty to all Inhabitants adja∣cent, and all other persons who have a∣ny goods in the said Castle, to fetch forth the same from thence. These are therefore to declare, that all such people before mentioned, who have any goods in the castle, as is before exprest, shall have free liberty between this present Tuesday the 19 instant, and Tuesday the 24, to repair to the castle, and to fetch away their goods, without let or molestation. And I do hereby further declare and require all Officers and sol∣diers of this Army, that they take strict
care, that no violation be done to any person or persons fetching away their goods, and carrying them to such place or places, as to them seemest fit, and if it shall so fall out, that any souldier shall be found wilingly or wilfully to do any thing contrary hereunto, he shall dye fr  me; or any Officer whatsoe∣ve  al either through connivance or o, do any thing contrary hereunto, shall likewise suffer death. O. CROMWEL. Since the publishing of this Declaration, we hear that the Earl of Castles, E. of Bridge, Lord Humby, Sir Jo: Cheesly, and others, have de∣clared against the King and Royal party, pro∣testing against the proceedings of their Parlia∣ment, &c. The Inhabitants in the West have likewise declared against King and Parl. their discontents being exceeding great; as appears by this inclosed Paper, lately cast into their K. Coach; a copy whereof followeth.
That by the Lawes of God, and Na∣ture, they were bound and oblig'd to preserve their Liberties and Freedoms, against all sets and sorts of Persons who endeavour'd to infringe the same, and in Order thereunto, were resolved to shake off the yoak of Monarchy, utterly de∣testing the Agreement lately made be∣tween the Parliament, and their declared KING, as a thing unwarrantable, ar∣bytrary, and usurping. A Lift of the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, &c. taken in Edinburgh Castle. 52 Peeces of Ordnance, viz. The Roaring Meg. 2 Whole Brass canon. 4 Demi-canon. 6 Demi-culverin. 8 Murtherers. 20. Sakers; and other smal Pieces. 11000 Armes. 7000 Musquets. 1200 Pikes. 500 half pikes, and arms for Curiseers. 200 barrels of powder. Great store of Match and other Furniture of War. 700 bushels of meal, Pease flower, and o∣ther such like grain. FINIS.
