A4160 E457_26 99864445 116674
THE ATTESTATION OF THE Ministers of the County of Somerset, Joyning (according to their duty) with the Reverend Ministers of LONDON, And all other their Brethren in the severall parts of this Kingdom: Who declare themselves for the Truth of God, Against the Errors, Heesies, and Blasphemies of the present Times. LONDON: Printed by Fr: Neile for Tho: Ʋnderhill at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1648.
THE ATTESTATION of the MINISTERS of the County of Somerset joyning (according to their duty) with the Reverend Minister; of London, and all other their Brethren in the severall parts of this Kingdom, who declare themselves for the Truth of God, against the Errors, Here∣sies and Blasphemies of the present Times. WE Ministers of the Gospel in the County of Somerset, Brethren and Companions in tribulation, and in the kingdom and pa∣tience of Jesus Christ, being deeply sen∣sible of, and heartily sorrowfull for, the high inundation (and which is more sad, the much sought for Toleration) of Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies; the neglect and contempt of Gods sacred Or∣dinances; the slighting and vilifying of our solemn Covenant; and other abominations in this Church; Have thought it our duty to joyn with our reverend Brethren of the Province of London, a Cloud of faithfull Witnesses gone before us, in giving our Testimony to Gods eternall Truth, now turned, by many, into a lye; and in disclaiming and detesting those Errors by them mentioned, and all other contrary to sound Doctrine and sincere holinesse; Lest, if we should hold our peace, the stones should speak, and God call heaven and earth to witnesse against us because of our backwardnesse to witnesse for Him, and to set to our seals that He is the onely true God, and He whom he hath sent, Jesus Christ. With them therefore We detest the re∣cited Errors, and attest the same holy Truth, by subscribing our Names, and Presenting this our Testimony to common
view, that our minds may be publickly manifest to the incou∣ragement of our own Charges to stand fast, and the stay of the most grievously-languishing Church in this distracted Kingdom. Wherein (notwithstanding) this hope remaineth to support our hearts, that the pious Ordinance of Parliament, setting apart a day of Humiliation for the suppressing and preventing of Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies; and the most earnest pray∣ers on that day poured forth to the God of Truth for the remo∣vall of such abominations, together with our Solemn League and Covenant, laying upon us the greatest ingagement to en∣deavour their extirpation; And lastly, the much longed for (and now hoped for) setling of Church-government, will (at length) more prevail (through the blessing of God) for their utter abolition, then all importunities of men not considerate, for a most unwarrantable Toleration. Samuel Crooke Rector at Wrington. Richard Alleine Rector of Ditcheat. Anthony Parker Rector of Blagdon. Samuel Tilly Rector at Compton Martin. William Gregory Pastor of Backwell. William Thomas Pastor at Vbley. George Newton Minister of Taunton-Magdalene. Robert Tyrling Minister of Taunton-James. Joseph Owfield Minister in Taunton. Samuel Oliver Minister at Wells. John Chetwind Minister at Wells. Richard Alleine Pastor of Batcombe. Purefey Midleham Minister of Westbury. Thomas Codrington Pastor of Keinsham. Iacob Tomkins Minister of Crewkerne. Samuel Pretty Minister of Weston Zoyland. Iohn Moore Minister of Aller. Henry Ieanes Minister of Chedzey. Bartholomew Yoe Minister of Selworthy.
Alexander Robinson Pastor at Porlock. Nathaneel Conduit Minister of Aishil. Robert Balsome Minister of Shepton-Mallet. Edward Bernard Minister of Stowey. Richard Cheswell Minister of Chelwood. Richard Popioy Minister at Langridge. Samuel Westobye Pastor of Nailsy. William Long Minister of Prieston. William Parker Minister of Brewton. Christopher Reade Minister of Wanstrow. Richard Fair clough Pastor of Mels. Nathaniel Abbot Minister of Pilton. Edward Morgan Minister of Pill. Iohn Whitborne Minister of Croscomb. Richard Batchelaur Minister of Cameley. Matthew Alflatt Minister of Clutton. Thomas Creese Minister of Combehay. Thomas Snead Minister of Lameyat. Iohn Darby Rector of Abbes-comb. David Williams Rector of Horsington. Peter Bradford Rector of Maperton. Ioseph Swaffield, Preacher of the Gospel. Henry Albin Preacher of the Gospel. Edward Bennet Minister of Southpetherton. Hugh Pearde Minister of West-Harptrey. Thomas Ladde Minister of Satford. Iohn Luffe Minister of Glaston. William Wright Minister of Froom Selwood. Iohn Northesworthy Minister in West Buckland. Iohn Baker Minister at Curry Mallet. Iohn Norman Preacher of the Word at Bridgewater. Robert How Minister of Thornfalcon. Thomas Forward Minister of Pitmister.
Iohn Langford Minister of Exford. George Bindon Preacher of the Word at Angarsleigh. Timothy Batt Minister of Ilmister. Thomas Lye Minister of Chard. Iohn Pinny Minister of Norton. Iosiah Wyat Minister of Puddimere Milton. Matthew Randal Minister of Higham. Iohn Langdale Minister of Cricket-Thomas. Iohn Torner Minister of Cricket-Malherb. Christopher Laurence Minister of Odcomb. Ioseph Shallel Minister of Chaffecomb. Iames Eliot Minister at Shepton. Thomas Budd Minister of Kingsbury. Thomas Beadon Preacher at Staplegrove. William Chappel Minister of Kingstone. Steph: Berrier Minister of Yatton. Iohn Dolling Minister of Roburrough.
The Copy of a Letter wherein this Attestation was sent up. BEhold a troop cometh! We march at last in a full body. I hope no man will say to us, as one to his loytering Souldiers, Quae vos tam sera moratur segnities? Or as an other to his lingering Citizens, Why are ye the last, &c. If our hands could have been listed, as soon as our hearts concentred, we would not have lain in our houses, when the servants of the Lord are incamped in the open fields. Or could our actions have held pace with our affections, we would not have been, post principia, nor brought up the Rear in this most important engagement against the potent prevalency of so impotent, and impudent an Ene∣mie, that threatens confusion to Law and Gospel; tram∣ples upon Order and distinction, sleights both God and man, Et coesum territat armis. Backwardnesse in the soul∣diers of Jesus Christ for such a cause, might justly make us liable to the curse of Meroz, because we came not forth timely to the help of the Lord against the mighty. Specially since one Zamzummim, one Goliah of Gath (who gives out himself (Magus-like) some great one; and vaunts himself six cubits and a span higher then any of those o the now scorned Miistery, steemed but as grshpers in His sight) dare publickly in Pulpit and Presse, defy the Armies of the living God, the charits and hosemen of Israel! What do the rabble of the sons of Anak (which like Aramites fill the Countrey) croak∣ing like frogs, and unclean spirits of devils, in everie County and corner of these Kingdoms? The Court of
Rome heretofore justly blamed Leo the 10th, that he ap∣plyed not present and powerfull remedies against Luthers heresie (as they called it). Their reason was good, That in matters of faith and Religion, the least errors were not to be neglected (how much lesse the greatest?) and the remedies against Schisme and Heresie should not be de∣laved the least moment. Nam quae nascentibus utiliter ad∣hibentur, inveteratis aegerrimè conducunt. And truly the slow and gentle oppositions, which have been made by this Church and State, have rather beight∣ned then weakned the disease; rather kindled then quench∣ed the flames; rather encouraged then silenced the Ad∣versaries. God grant it may not be layed to our charge. Yet we hope your charity, will not impute our late appearance, to any want of love, and zeal to so good a cause; but to the widenesse of our County, our seldome meetings, and sad distractions. Neither let us be deprived of the honour, to follow you, the Antesignani, and Cap∣tains of the Lords hoast; and to concurre with the rest of our reverend Brethren of other Counties and King∣doms, for that Truth of God which is more precious then our lives, and against that poyson of error that rages in every Congregation through the Kingdom, and eats out the bowels of Peace and Truth. Many hands have made long work, et we hope strong work, that the guiles of hypocrisie, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. The way of God is uncorrupt. The Word of the Lord is tried. He is a shield to all that trust in Him. I am your assured, &c. FINIS.
