B2086 R170518 45789156 172468
SPIRITUAL DISCOVERIES TO THE Overthrow of POPERY Root and Branch. Shewing that I. The Steeplehouse is no Church. II. Hireling teachers no Gospel-Ministers. III. Tythes are against the Gospel-practice. IIII. Paaishes are no Saint-like churches. V. Infant-Baptism is Popery, Rebellion and Blasphemy. VI. No salvation without persection here. VII. A sorcing power makes no Christians. VIII The Epistles were to Gathered churches. IX University-degrees no Gospel-work. X VVho hath no revelation is no true Minister. XI The light within must enlighten us XII A sum of new Discoveries broken sorth. By a Waiter in Israel, and one of the New Co∣venanters. Heb. 8. 8. John 4. 22: Ye worship ye know not what. Acts 17: 23: For as I passed by and beheld your devo∣tion—whom therefore you ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. London, Printed the second time, 1657:
To the Reade Reader, HAving preached in five Steeple-hou, in London, and thirty in the Countrey, and I a Hirling Priest,  all the wages of my hearers that I could get; but God in time was pleased to shew what I did, and whom held forth the VVord unto; so searching spiritually, I  not four in a Parish (of the National way) that ked like Christians, but as Infidels; yet I had daub'd  up with untempered morter a while for my own dis∣est gain. Ezek. 22. 27. 28. I then left selling my Sermons, seeking out, and so found  Independants outstrip us; the Baptists beyond them; ysterians very high; but the Quakers Doctrine most  in the light: So the Lord convincing me, and casting  the unclean spirit, (that Legion of Sins) called mee  in this spiritual Discovery, to publish (as in Deca∣) what he had done for me. Mrak. 5. 9. 20. I have printed before 500. and now 500. more, let  that love the truth be at charge (by a copy) to print 00. or more of the same, that they may go into all parts  England, and so people may have warning, and bee ithout excuse in Gods day.
I. Th  eeple-house is no Church. BEfore Christ came in the flsh, the material tem∣ple was called an holy place, but now an inward spiritual Worship is required; for God dwells not in John 4. 21, 24 Temples made with hands, such are dead things which can do no living actions; for although man by art of sundry materials can frame a pleasant buil∣ding, yet he can put no life into it, not can he priest put holiness in it, only a Popish delusion hath decei∣ved the people, calling that a church which is but  great house. The Church is a people, and so a true Church are a people sanctified, and me in the work of God, be∣ing a company of Believers, which Churchs in God; so it was not a steeplehouse but a sanctified 1 Thes. 1. 1 company that communicated with Paul, but o stee∣plehouses they are as dumb Idol, Psa. 15. 4 8. and 1 Cor. 14. 23 who calls them a Church tells a lye, which untruths have been taught and maintained by the Romish Priests, that like Baals propet deceive the people▪ but seeing these houses are built, let them still be re∣paired, Jer: 2: 8. for I hope shortly better use will be made of them. II. That Parish-hireling Teachers are no true Gos∣pel-Ministers. THey have pretended this a cure of soules, bu made it a trade to preach for hire, and divine  money, preparing war (or law) against such as put Mi. 3. 4. not into their mouths, and so no longer pay, no lon∣ger preach, but shift from one parish to another lik the Kine of Bashn for better pasture; yea, to force Amos 4. 1.
themselves as Tachers into Parishes without their hearers consent, and then force a maintenance from hm, like Elic's sons, 1 Sam 2 16. having been upheld by a civil power of Government, which was as the Bast to carry this false Prophet or Ministry, yet tossing the common people into such a form as as this Roman Clergie cryed up. They owned no Teaches, but such as submitted to their human inventions, calling them Divine In-Institutions, but it any was led forth from this Anti∣christian Church, they were aspersed with Schisma∣tick, Heretick, Anabaptists, &c. that none might go faher in holiness then this Clergie; but if this false Ministry shifted round through Popery, Prela∣cy, Presbery, Dependency, &c. then those that shifted not with them were accounted bad also. This Clergie sought much after the fatest Li∣vings, desiing to ule all, and to teach all, not understanding how a Church of Saints may all pro∣phesiesie one by one, bu desiring to keep all teaching to themselves; they sold the Letter by the Sermon, or 1 Cor. 14 31. Sabbath, or by the yeer, or for life; and so they traded with this ded letter, as if thereby they could raise living souls to God. III. Of Tythes. THe Tiyh-mongers leaving their pretended plea of rght thereunto from the Levitical Priest∣hood, claim them as a Nation all gift from the Sax∣ons time given Anno 855. to be (as they fay) unto a Clergie till Dooms-day. Answer. But the Saxons which gave them were
cast forth of their possession and government by the Danes, and Normans, whereby their gift of Tythes, and all other Saxon Lawes ended also; for as the Saxon Proprietors were rooted up, so likewise was their Laws and Acts, and their gift of Tythes then ended; but then that covetous Romish Clergy did so oversway the ignorant people, that Tythes did continue to that Antichristian Ministry by way of cur∣tesie; and he that now clasms Tythes his due for preaching, must run to Popery for proving it. If any say that Tythes were confirmed to that Clergie since it was refined, let them see the Statute, Ed. 2. ch. 6. 13. See the abridg. pag. 479, 480. how they were only to be sued for in Ecclesiasticall Courts, which Courts and Bishops are put down, and so are Tythes by the same order, if all things were well understood. Tythes or money by bargain and sale for preach∣ing, was never used in Churches of Saints, yet they maintained their Teachers by imparting carnall things unto them, from whom they received spiritu∣al Phil 4. 15. &c, Rom. 15. 27. Gal. 6. 6. things; which maintenance was not forced by a Law without, but by a free contribution from a Law∣of love within; which communicating of gifts spi∣ritual and carnal, was only betwixt Saints, both spea∣kers and hearers, yea the Apostle took wages, as to live of the Gospel, yet all this was from Churches 1 Cor. 9. 14.  Cor. 11. 8. of Saints, and not from such ranting Beasts as the hireling Priests take wages of, and are in fellowship with. The National Congregations are made up of a rabble rout, of all kinde of sinners, that if a man be truly awake from sin, he will be ashamed of Church fellowship with such, but for a Priest to be the head of them, can be no true Minister, but one of Baby∣lons
merchants, who come in as Robbers, climbing Iohn. 10. 12. 2 Tim. 3. 6 the preferment-way, or else as dissemblers, creeping into Steeple-houses, the insinuating way, and so de∣ceive the effeminate, and beeing in fellowship toge∣ther, there is like people, like Priests; and be sure all you that read, so long as maintenance is forced for to Hosea 4. 9 pay teachers, so long England shall never be with∣out a false Ministry; carnal men love such trades best where they can command their wages. Gospel-Teachers first begat a people in Christ to the faith, or gathered a flock, and then had mainte∣nance from them, eating of the milk; yet rather then Paul would be burdensome he did not use this power, he sought not the fleece, but the peoples welfare, not 2 Cor. 11. 9. 2 Cor. 12. 12. Phil. 4. 17. seeking a gift, as the Romish Priests do, but laying down this power of taking maintenance, that so this Gospel-work should not be hindred, 1 Cor. 9. 12. 15. 16. IIII. That Parish-Congregations are no Saint-like Churches. GOspel churches were of Believers, who did com∣municate together as Brethren, not as Beasts, Act. 1 r. 2. 9 2 Thess. 4. 9 10. 1 Tim. 5. 16. puhing one another, or ravening one from another, as Parish-congregations do; but they were gathered out of the world to follow Christ Jesus, being made sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 27. so the Saints do all by love, both in distributing to those in want, and in contributing unto such as are their Teachers; but what is done in the Parish-congregations, they do it by a chain of Law to compel them, who refuse as Beasts to do good untill they are forced thereunto. VVhere els will you look for Ranters, Smearers, I do∣laters, Murderers, Drunkards, Lyars, Sorcerers,
Whoremongers, proud people, disobedient to Parents, selfe▪ lovers, Envious persons, Taritors, Covetous, Fomalists, Sabbath-breakers, Hypocrits, &c. but in in this Societie, who use also the counterfit ordinan∣ces in sprinkling Infants: a pretending to receive the Lords Supper, and a trading with the dead letter, saying it is the word of God, which is but a declara∣tion of it. By that time such beast-like persons, are sifted out for destruction, who shall not inherit the kingdom of God; few will be left for the true church, hav∣ing Amos 9. 9. right to Gospel promises: yet I Judge them not, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. but see them by their fruits, who shew themselves what they are; although some of them more cuningly deck their profession so formally, yet it is but imitati∣on by an outside profession, as the Strumpett with her offerings, neither dare these persons own one a∣nother; Pro. 7. 14. yet their Teachers seeing all this: flatter them in it; saying, hold fast your profession: Bee stedfast: Be not weary of well-doing &c. as if they should say, you Drunkards, Swearers, lyers &c. hold fast what you are hearing and paying me my Tythes, not following Separatists, Anabaptists, Dependents or Quakers least thereby you become Christians indeed, and so leave me to my selfe. Thus the streams of this fourth Romish Monarchy stil run, changing the name from Popery, Prelacy, Presbytery &c. but holding the nature; assuming the names of Christians and yet hateing of pure Christ∣ians, and they are a people deceiving, yet are decei∣ved. and all though some good * Ministers in the seve∣rall As Preston erkins, nd others ages have been amongst them,; and doubtlesse many good people that were hearers, yet what is one amongst a hundred, to make a true church; which
could not be, no more then one Judas amongst the Twelve, could make that a false church; and it is a∣rare thing to find two in a Parrish, Christians indeed yet following of the common nationall hieling teach∣er; nor is it the goodnesse of few▪ that will warrant the Popish standing of false churches; but it was Gods goodnesse to wink at the ignorance of Act. 17. 3 times. V That Infrnt Baptism is Popery, Rebelion and Blasphemy. GOd chose the Jews, giving them circumcision and made the promise to them and to their seed. Acts. . 39. which extended unto as many as the Lord shoud call, that is to the Gentiles; but the Romish church would cut of that everlasting Covenant from the Jews. Gen. 17. 7. and thrust it upon the Gentile-Inants in∣steed thereof; whereas circumcision holds still to the Jews; as Timothie who was a Disciple, yet being half Act. 16. 1. 3 Act. 27. 2i 24. Jewish was circumcised, and Paul cleard himselfe nor to appose circumcision. Infant Baptism is Popery, in that one person un∣dertakes to believe, confesse, repent, and engage to to God for another; and if sureties for children do not thus, then they lye and disemble, for all know the child perceives nothing of it, no more then if a Lamb or bird should be brought, and bid the Priest sprin∣kle and name it: so here the Priests do as the Papists who pretend to have merits, faith, and repen∣tance for themselves, and for such children. 2. It is rebellion to Baptise before teaching, whereas our Saviour hath commanded to teach and Mat. 28. 19 Baptise; first teach them what to do, and then Bap∣tise them into what they know; for if no actuall faith
nor no knowledge of God; what Baptism can be of such a person; no more then of a peice of wood. Those at Ephesus being ignorant of the Holy Ghost, were re-Baptised, yet they knew much more then babes: and to Baptise a child into Christ, which never heard Acts 19. 1. 5 of him, is more like a mad man then a Christian; far worse then to make Boy a Doctor, and then teach him to be a Scollor. Iohn bids people act themselves, no boast of Abrahams faith, and so all that came to him Luk. 3: 8: were people confessing &c. and in the Jaylors house that all which heard▪ the same all, were Baptised, Acts 16: 32 33. but our rebellious Baby sprinklers heed not Scriptures 3. Its Blasphemy; seeing the kingdome of God be∣long to Infants, children without actuall sin, are very happy; but these blasphemous Priests: tell the people that they are not of the heavenly kingdome, Mark 10: 14 untill they have sprinckled them, thus making Gods holynesse, and our Saviours assertion of no effect, they act blasphemy, in takeing a way Goods goodness and setting up their own inventions. VI. That there is no Salvation without pefection in in this life. A Damnable Doctrine hath been a long time held forth; that people must sin while they are here in this lie; grounding it upon Rom. 7. 14. 85. Gal. 5. 17. not considering the Saints groweth of grace; which must be perfected in this life or not at all, to shine more and more unto the perfect day, and haveing this hope of perfection here, man purifies Prov: 4. 18  John 3: 3: himselfe: not hearking to such delusions, which have deceived thousands to sin willingly, as if going to hell contentedly.
Its observed that Paul did preach neare 36. yeares from his conversion, first he was a persecutor, a no∣torious sinner, being converted, he preached the Gospel, yet came not suddenly to a full perfection. Acts 9. 1. 1 Tim: 1: 1 Act. 9. 20. he writes of 3. years Gal. 1. 18. and of 24. yeares. Gal. 2. 1, being still a preacher, yet not come to absolute perfection but presseth and preacheth perfection, not denying it as our ignorant people do. In the 22. yeare of his preaching, being at Corinth he wrote to the Romans, and then complainde of sin. Acts 18: 11: Rom. 7. 17. In the 33. yere of his preaching, he wrote to the Philipians from Rome, and then shews, how he was growing to perfection, stiring up others also: as Phil: 3: 14 15: if he said thus: frinds be of good cheare, the same God that made our Corn our graces) come out of the earth and grow, to be green and florish; although it hath many anoyances (many sinns;) yet be not weary, go on; the same God can bring this corn (these graces) to a full Harvest (to absolute perfecti∣on.) When Paul first wrote unto Timothie, he tells him what he must do but writing the 2. time he shewed 1 Tim: 6. 11, i2: himselfe wholly obtained perfection in this life, 2. Tim 4. 7. he had fought and finished: being then about the 35. yeare of his preaching: so although this grace, was long in growing to the Harvest, yet it was ripe at last, before his death; as appears in sending for his Cloake, books, and parchments. Vers 13. Perfection is called from Math. 5. 4. 8. and holyness as God is holy. 1. Pet. 1. 16. which is a perfecting of holynesse. 2. Cor. 7. 1. being born of incorruptable seed 1. Pet. 23. that perfect man in the fullness of Christ Eph. 4. 13. haeing a forming of Christ in rhem, Gal.
4. 19. to walk as he walked, 1 Ioh. 2. 6. all which is by a growth in grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. attained by dgree where in the buds and seeds thereof increase as, Pet. 1 5 beginning as a grain of Mustrd feed Luk 13. 1 and so as holynesse increaseth, sin decreaseth; ma grows righteous stll Rev 22. 11. above the world o sin, untill all be converted and cast forth; and this ful perfection, is that redemption of the body, wholly from sin which the Saints waited for; the fullnes o Rom. 8. 23 Adoption, at whch time the Lord Omnipotent regin∣eth indeed: and this height of Glory was that spok∣en Rev. 19. 6. of 2. Tim. 4 7. Who attaines this perfection sinns not, Iohn. 3. 6 8. 9 but although Paul had it so long before death, yet it seems the Saint thee! had it the last hour, but both Luke 23. 43 in this life. VII. That a forcing Civill power makes no chris∣an. IN the former English ministrations; each present power & Clergy thought themselves in the onely way of Christ, and to be infallble Disciples, as in Popery, Prelay, and Prebtery &c. and so desire to oce all other uno their opinions; like that curs∣ed Mat 23 15 . King 21. 3: cts 6. 11. 3. people, to mae one proselitye; but who did not yeel, must suffer as Naboth and Stephen or else be smit∣ten with the tongue, as Ier. 18. 18. yet all was but a forming out side as Hypocrits, Satan sitting, and commanding to be worshiped as God, who must bee consumed▪ holds not long; 2. Thess 2. 4. 8. although for a time by the Iayls, Fines, and culors shop men were compelld to be conformable uno human orders, all was but as a chaining up of Bears, Lyons, Wolves,
Lambs, &c. a Beare, a wicked man, will be so still, nd a Lam, a good man, holds the same; yet the haine of a Law, tying all up, makes every one eem holy, o Lmb-like; but now in this time of li∣ertie, is se what the nationall church was, being i a great company of wild beasts chained up, so that hey could not hurt one another. The state of most people, were the Scripture letter hath been held forth, is but as civilizd; ar unlike pure christians; haveing forms of Relgion, which at up the power theeof; but when the little stone, Dan. 2. 34, 35. breakes this fourth Romish Monarchie, making Ba∣ a confusion indeed (as now God, is doing it by his spirituall Assyia, the quakers,) even then shall the first Monarchie appeare in its exelencie under Ie∣sus Christ; yet not to be done with materiall weapons Zach. 4. 6 as som think, but by his spirit, wherein Christ the eternall word shall be the sword to cut down; even th spirituall Cyrus to execute all his offices in glory Isa. 45. 1, 2 amongst his Saints. VIII. That the Epistles were sent to saints onely; not to the world. THe Epistles are part of those scriptures contain∣ing a declaration of Gods word. Luk. 1. 1. Act. 20, 27 1. Cor. 15.7. 1 Iohn 1. 3. which book may come to losse; but the word in selfe is from the beginning, Joh: 1. i. 14 being made flesh, by which man liveth Math. 4. 4 and so did Paul. Gal 2. 20. a dividing word. Heb. 4. 12 which shall not return void Isa. 55. 11 haveing its abiding forever Pet 1. 23. but the Letter, the false Prophets 1 Sam. 3.  Jer. 5. 13 14. had as many have it now, yet God threatned to de∣stroy them.
The Epistles were not written to Parish congrga∣tions, but unto churches of Saints, gathered out of the world, as from the beginning shew. Rom. 1. 7. Eph. 1. 1 & who somtimes had their churches in houses, as, Rom. 16. 5. Co. 4. 15 Phil. 2. and the letter of scrip∣ture is as seed, to be used by a faithfull seedman on good ground, and so ir becomes an effectall growing word; but where it comes to a dry barren heart, it is as dry seed, or a dead letter; and selling this letter for the word, holding forth Scripture promises to wicked wratches, as the Hirelings priests do, is most abominable. IX Than University degrees are contrary to the Gos∣pel. SUch degrees by acts and commencements, are human inventions; wherein men by learning one of another, by going to school, and passing then, sell it in the countrey for Divinity: holding the po∣pish custome, to suffer none to be a parrish Priest, except he first buy human learning, and recive hu∣man ordination; but after that they were called Di∣vine, s although never so filthy as Baals servants were Kings 18 : termed Prophets: whereas he is a Divine, that is both called and taught of God, for the Gospel-work. Divinity is holinesse, and this stolen title they have gotten; as Batchlor of holinesse, Doctor, &c. which degrees they take one of another at their arts and commencments befooling the people, as if they : 23: 30. were made holy of God; stealing the title of holy∣ness from poore Saints, give it themselves, so take∣ing on 5: 44: on 12: 43 honour one of a nother and loveing the praiie of
en, but God is a gainst such a Ministry. So also reverend, once used to God; they assume Psa: 111: 9 o themselves, which the Apostles never did; as to hy reverend brother Paul &c. yea acting as Ieroboam, to make Priests of those lowest an Gods esteem 1. Kin. 1. 13. X That such are no Gosple Ministers which have no re∣velation. THe trade of the Antichristian ministry, was to be a scoolboy; 2. a University man 3. a man in or∣ders and as such had naturall gifts,, more or lesse, so they were improved of; accounting where this lear∣ning was, that there must be the guift of grace, but who had no human learning, such could be no minist∣ers; as if tying the gift of God under the girdle of mens devices: thus one man taught another and ordained another; teaching that trade to preach by ear-say. Men going forth to declare the letter, and writings of others, are no Gosple ministers; but such as are 1 Cor: 2: i: 6. alled of God; to speak his wisdome in a mistery, in hom he reveals Jesus Christ to preach in power, rom the breathings of Gods spirit within; and such Gal: 1: 16. re the teachers sent from the Lord haveing an im∣ediate call, not of men but of God Gal. 1. 1. for no an knows God, as to be a minister by heresay but s things are revealed Math. 11. 25. neither can they now the father, but by revelation from the son Rev. 27. God works by the same spirit now as formerly, and ath promised in the latter dayes, more abundantly Joel 2, 2. Acts 2: 17 hereof whereby he reveals, and makes known him∣selfe
in man; but such as love not such a revelation spiritually, are no Ministers of Christ: they trade onely in the letter as the Scribes, Iesuites, and Anti∣christian Ministry have done, preaching what they have leraned by heare-sy. XI That no light without can avatle us, except there be a leght within. THe light of the body is the eye, but if the eye Luke ii. 34. have no light within it, all the light of the sun can do no good without it: and if God puts not first a light into the creature, how can that creature see any thing of God? therefore know that God enlight∣ens within first, and then shews himselfe to that light. The Gentiles knew not the Law, yet had a light Rom. 2. 14, 15. within: and the outward teaching is Judged and dis∣cerned, by this inward light: as a blind man, can∣not see a candle lighted before him, because he hath no light within his eye, so one blind in sin Iohn 9. 41. cannot understand the things of God, but are foolish∣nesse unto him; whilest he that hath a light within can in a mesure aprehend the things of God, held forth. Christ the Saints husband, tooke of their human nature, and loveingly imparts to them of his Divine John 1. 9. nature, being a light shining inro all; but wicked men darken it by sin, giving way to the flesh o human nature, not suffering Christ in his Divine nature to Joh. 3. 19, 30. rule, and so work their own condemnation; where∣by that which should be the savour of life unto life, be∣comes the savour of death unto death. 2 Cor: 2. i5.
God is light, 1. Iohn 1. 5. in whom the Saints are, 1 Thes. 1. 1. which light in them 2. Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 4. 16. and his light shines in our human nature, as in a dark place to enlighten it, 2. Pet. 1. 16. makeing it as the shining of a Candle, Luk. 11. 36. and so the Saints, walk in this light, and are known in the same; but the formalists know each other by a fleshly form 2 Cor. 5. i which the former Disciples would not do. XII A sum of new discoveries, since time of liber∣tie. The severall Authors, have wrote hereof, as Parkers Exa∣men: Britens body of divinity: Colliers works with o∣thers 1 Originall sin is a meere delusion, 2 Universall redemption is now understood, which takes off Originall sin: Even so, is as the Ballance Beam; and that all, which was in the state Rom. 5. 18 of condemnation by Adams sin, the same all had the free gift to Justification of life, in the state of Jesus Christ, for the words are equivalent; none were left in the first transgression, but all redeemed, (or ran∣somed) Matth. 19 14. out of the same; and so our infants are of Gods kingdom. 3 Human nature, was that in Adam which hark∣ned to the Serpent; and it is the same in us, that first receives sin: and this is a distinct thing from the di∣vine nature: and causeth wrath: the other godly∣nesse. Eph: 2. 3. 2 Pet. 1. 4: 4 Free-grace is offered all, after they have actuallyy sinned, see Ezek. 33. 11. Rev. 3. 20, 2 Pet. 29,
5 Free-will, man must have it in a measure to use his abilities; or else this free grace can do him no more, good then a feast at London can do a man good whilest he is chained up at Yorke. 6 Election was confusedly wrapt up together, which is now seen, to be either Universall or generall, speciall, or particular, and also of persons, places, and things: see Brittens works of these at the Angel in Cornhill. 7 Perfection must be in this life. 8 Eating blood, a heathen custom, never allowed before the Law, under the Law, nor in the Gospel, Gen 9: 4: ev. 7. 26. Acts 15. 29 & 21. 25. but forbidden. 9 Romish Reliques are much seen and down; yet some remaines to Englands sorrow; as Tythes, &c. 10 Stepelehouses, are no Churches 11 Gods anoynted, are not Civilized princes; but his Saints, having that unction. 1. Iohn 2. 20. 12. Thanks is not to be used unto man, but onely to God, except as Paul used it to saints, Rom. 16. 3, 4. Thanks is to bless one another; and cursed Joab, or flat∣tering 2 Sam. 3. 9. with 2 Sam 4. 22: Acts 21. 3: Mat: 6: 37: Mat: 17: 25 oh: 21: 5: Tertullus warrant not us to use it; neither do we ever read else in all the scriptures that one man did thank another. Consider this ye ranting beasts which sit, I drink to you, I thank you. 13 Yea and Nay, Yes and No, in faithful speaking is the scripture-language, which must be among all saints. 14 Thee, thou, thy, and thine is the right scripture-language, used to God, and among all saints; but you and yours is plural, which used to a single person is a lye: so it is not you, Lady, but thee, Lady, 2 Joh: 5: 15 Hireling Teachers are not true Ministerr. 16 The strait Gate is much more seen by Saints, how it will not admit them to carry their pride in Ap∣parel,
and glutting the body through such a passage, but all sin must down. 17 Light within is now known to some. 18 Forms are seen, as not uniting; but to use as God convinceth, seeing the oneness is made perfect Joh: 17: 2 2 Cor: 5 by Christ in the Saints, and they are not to know each other after the flesh. 19 Making Christians is not by a humane power. 20 Scripture-promises are now seen to belong unto the saints, and not unto carnal wretched people, as formerly the Popish Ministry did apply them for self-ends. 21 Infant-baptism is found a meer delusion. 2 The fifth Monarchy is seen to be sweetly begun under Jesus Christ in his spiritual reign, (but not a∣cted by a material sword) God by the power of his spirit in his saints is dashing Babylon in pieces; the Popish parish-Ministry is going down, and Christs pure Psal. 13 8, 9. Zech. 13. Mic. 4: 1. Psal. 1 10 Rev. 11: i Ministry setting up the Fountain for uncleanness be∣ing opened: The Lord setting up his Mountain (or Church) above these false churches, and making peo∣ple willing in the day of his power, from the womb of this spiritual Morning, shewing the kingdom to be his own, and not suffering a cruel clergy to tyraunize over his people. 23 Tythes are seen to be from Anrchrist. 24 Infant-membership; that Infants are of Christs church, is well known to be so, and needs not the Priests help to do it. 25 Christ in the flesh is not only meant of his own flesh, for that a reprobate will confess; but it is now further to be understood to be spoken of the saints flesh, 1 Jo: 4: : as to be formed in them, Gal: 4. 19: 26 Spirit, Soul, and Body, in men are known to be hree distinct parts. For first, Man begets nothing im∣mortal,
yet he begets souls, Gen. 46: 26: Exod: 1: 5: Se∣condly, We never read the soul return'd to God, but Thes. 5. 3. Heb. 4. 12. of the spirit, Eccles: 12: 7: Hab: 23: 46. Psalm. 31: 5: Act: 7: 59: Thirdly, The division of soul and spirit made in Scriptures: 27 University Degrees, appropriating stollenti∣tles, are against the Gospel practise: 28 Mystical Babylon is found to be in all grown people, and all people to be in that fleshly wisdom un∣til they are truly sanctified: 29 Cards, Dice, &c. are all discovered to be from the devil, who hath taught people to counterfeit that great deciding Ordinance, called a Lot, Numb. 26. 55. Iona 1. 7. Acts 1. 26. 30 Playes and Players, with all such feigned and dissembled actions or persons, are disown'd in the light, being from Satan, men must give account for e∣very Mat 12. 36 idle word so used, and Englands Governors must answer before the Lord for suffering of them. 31 Ballads, Fictions, Tale-Books, and idle Songs, are all to be accounted for unto God, both by the Ru∣lers which suffer this filth, and by all such which act therein, its no saints practice. Eph. 5. 3, 4. 32 Preaching by hear-say, a delusion. 33 Circumcision is still to the Jews, see before of Infant baptism. 34 New covenant-work is now seen to be begun, and great appearances of Gods leading forth his peo∣ple from the streams of ignorance, to hear the great er. 31. 33: sa. 27. 12, 3. Trumpet blown, making many partakers of that un∣ction or spiritual teaching, 1 John 2. 27. 35 Gospel-Ordinances are now seen by saints what they are; and how they have been a long time coun∣terfeited in the Romish Church by a hireling mini∣stry.
36 The New commandment is observed among saints, that none are purely in Christ but such as have Joh. 13 34. that Gospel-love without any mixture of sinister ends. 37 Uniting of saints cannot be done by any out∣ward 1 Cor. 12, 13. form, but by being imbodyed into one spirit. 38 Fasting for the abating fleshly desires, and pou∣ring forth services spiritual unto God, is now seen a∣mong saints to be very effectual: for some sins go not forrh, but by prayer and fasting, Matth: 17: 21: 29 Shaking, or giving hands in fellowship or love, hath long time been used in the Romish custom by dis∣simulation, and is not to be allowed, but in sincerity Gal. 2 9. amongst saints in way of true society: 40 The sabbath or holy rest, in observing a seventh part of our time in resting from labour, that so one day in seven there might be no mixture in the service to God and the world, is seen to belong still unto saints; as, first, from Gods example: Secondly, from Gen. 2. 3. Exod. 20. 8. Isaiah 58: 13. that precept of the moral Law. Thirdly, from the blessing of such as were not Jews, which kept the sab∣bath, Is. 56. 3, &c: 4 From the continuance of it, which should be from one sabbath to another for all flesh, Isa. 66. 23. Fifthly, it was never abrogated by Christ, but only works of necessity admitted, Luke 13. i5, 16. Lastly, If God gave forth his commandments by his son, they that break them, and teach men so, shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, Matth. 5: 18, i9. Laws are made in England, but not executed: men in the country take Offices by turns, then beastlike of∣ficers suffer beast-like abuses, by drunkenness, swear∣ing, sabbath-breaking, &c. but if the Government would please to settle in each parish a godly man to oversee these evils by way of an Officer authorized,
it might much conduce to suppressing of vice, and composing petty-differences: see to it O ye Rulers of this people. Many more discoveries appear in these blessed times of liberty, which the wicked party strive to darken and mock at, like the foolish Philosophers at Athens; Acts 17. i8, 32. but God stil brings his work forward. When God shewed me the silthiness of the parish congregations, I durst no longer stay as a member a∣mong them, and searching the several forms, I found the Quakers most pure in doctrine, but their conver∣sations nor principles I know not: I humbly wish all professions to live unto the height and purity of reli∣gion; for the beauty of a christian is a holy life, being unspoted of the world. James 1. 27. I go on seeking, and wait with patience, hoping God will shortly accomplish his covenant-work, Jer. 31. 33: when saints shall shew that pure charity, i Cor: 3: i, &c: and be well known by their masters badge, oh: i3: 35: who will defend them from the wicked one; 1 Joh. 4. 18. and so the primitive purity of saints being Mark 16. 17, 18. restored, their signes of faith shall follow. FINIS.
