B914 E1022_3 99867420 119731
THE Perfect and Experienced FARRIER. Being necessary for all Gentlemen-Troopers, Farmers, Farriers, Carriers, Carmen, Coach-men, and Horse-coursers, &c. Shewing a most Exact, easie and Speedy way of Curing all Sorances and Diseases incident to Horses (and other Cattle.) Wherein is shewed the true Anatomy and Inside of a Horse, with his Intrailes, Sinewes and number of Bones, and Veynes necessary for Blood-letting. Never before Published. Written by ROBERT BARRET of Esborne in Sussex, and Published for the good of his Country. medical examination of a horse LONDON Printed by T. Fawcet, for Fr. Coles, dwelling at the Lambe in the Old-Baily, 1660.
The true Anatomy and Inside of a Horse.
TO THE READER, Gentle Reader, MAny Bookes have been published con∣cerning Horsmanship, and the Cu∣ring of such Diseases, as commonly happen to that Beast, but I have found that many of their workes are meere Collections out of others, and not their owne practice, so that they scarcely know the right office of any member, but rash by prescribe they know not what, as being not able to judge truly of the diffe∣rence betweene one Sorance and another. My Ad∣vertisement to you therefore is, that You would truly observe every thing which I prescribe, and not runne after each new Invention, that is onely applauded, because it is pollisht over with fine Phrases, which I want to set forth my work with∣all; for all the Authors or Eloquence that I have
to perswade you is my owne Practice and Experi∣ence: which that You may understand, I have here placed the proportion of a Horse, with the Letter B, upon every outward Veyne where You ought to let Blood, explaining each Sorance, and the Cure thereof, where I begin with a deformed member in the Head, and so preceed to the rest in order, and from the outward Grievances referre You to the inward hereafter following.
THE Perfect and Experienced FARRIER. SHEWING A most Exact, easie and speedy way of Curing all Sorances and Diseases incident to Horses. ALave-eard Horse is unseemly, yet the Member is according to the Breed of the Horse, but notwithstanding many of them doe prove very good for Ser∣vice; therefore I have thought fit to prescribe you a way how to set and make his Eares stand and be as compleat as any other Horses eares bee. First, take a paire of Sheares and pare his Eares so small as you desire, and then cut a∣way the skin betweene his eares, and with a drawing hot Iron seare the Sinew betweene the Head and the Eare, untill it begin to looke yellow, which done, you may annoynt the Sore with Hogs-grease and Butter, and Honey boyled together, and then put a flat string over his Eares to keepe them as you desire to have them stand, washing the Sore once in two dayes with white Wine vineger, and Salt warmed together; and laying it on the salve with a feather gently, that you make not the Horse wilde and fearfull about the head; for I have knowne many Horses spoyled by being too
hasty with them: Wherefore I advise you to deale gently and quietly at all times, and upon all occa∣sions throughout every Cure that you take in hand. If the Horse eyes be lanke or thick, then looke that his Ey-teeth be not grieved, or that the Wolves teeth trouble him not: if they doe, pull them out, and let him blood under the eye and in the nose with a naule, and annoint his eyes with the fat of a fresh Eele. Pro∣ved. And if hee have a Canker, take hogs-grease, roch-al∣lum, white copresse, bole armoniacke, and temper them together, untill they be so mixed that you cannot dis∣cerne the one from the other, and put some of the salve into the eye once in two dayes, and this serves for any speck or pin or wefe: and if the Haw be ranke cut it out, and spirt in wine or beere, and it will doe well a∣gaine. Proved. For the Canker in the nose, take Whitewine vine∣gat, white copresse, roch allum, sage leaves, woodbine leaves, and coltsfoot, then boyle them together, and streine the water, dressing the Canker once a day for two dayes, and afterwards but once in two dayes: this will also cure the Canker in the mouth, or any other part, so that you put in some Touchwood leaves into the same with a little honey. Proved. The Lampers are to be cut or burned or salted, and the Flapes or Bags are the like, but it is good to let blood in the third grise in the mouth, before you salt him. The Fives are hard round swellings betweene the jaw and the neeke under the Eares. For the Cure of which, you shall first launch the skin a little against
the Kirnell, and then seare the Kirnoll with a small hot Iron, untill it begins to looke yellow, and then annoynt it with oyle of Camomile once in two dayes untill it be whole, but alwayes let him blood in the necke on both sides, and after hee is whole, you may make a charge of Pitch and Rosin, bolearmoniacke, Masticke, and lay it on with Flockes, letting it lye un∣till it fall away of it selfe, and then annoynting it once a weeke with a little hogs grease, camomile, and smal∣ledge boyled together; which will serve for any swel∣ling about the head, if it be annoynted once a day, and will either ripen the sore, or cause the Swelling to va∣nish away. The Gare lyeth in the throat, and may appeare any where about the head or brest, but if it appeare in the brest, wee call it Anticor; these Sorances come sud∣denly, and are cured alike; First launch the skinne, and then fley it so farre as the swelling goes, and with a warme Iron seare the swelling or gelly, but not the skinne, rubbing the place well with white wood ashes and bay salt: and feare not the Cure if hee live but twelve houres after: and then you must provide some oyle of Turpentine, and liquor the place where it is swelled: then may you take this Drinke, one pint of Treakle, and a pint of sack, a spoonfull of the powder of bay-berries, and a spoonfull of Turmericke, and boyle these together, and give it the Horse to drink, and it will drive the gellid humors out, and the heat of the fire; the ashes and salt likewise will draw them ou ward, and so cure him. Provel. The Shoulder-sprained, is when he trailes his toe on the ground, and carries it wide from his body, and if he
pricke his toe forward, then it is a signe that hee may be Shoulder-pitched, which is easily seene; for if hee be much lower and close in the top of one shoulder then the other, hee is Shoulder-pitched, and then you must tye his fore-legs together, and so draw him upon some beame▪ by which meanes his shoulder may come in his place againe: which done, you shall let him blood in the plate-veine, and put in a rowell and blow his shoulder, annoynting it with oyle of spike, nerve∣oyle, and hogs-grease beaten together, and if it be but sprained, then you need but let him blood in the plate∣vaine, and annoynt him, and he will doe well againe in 12 dayes, if not, then rowel him as before expressed. The Parsie is a swelling in any part of the body, and breakes out with knobs, which is thus cured, let him blood in those veines next the place infected, and take blacke sope, tarre, bay-salt, and white copresse, and mixe them together as you vse them, and annoynt the places well once in two dayes, and it will helpe him at three times dressing, but it is good to launch the knobs that be soft, and let out the filth. The Splint is apparant to every man, and is thus cu∣red, Launch the skinne thorow so long as the Splint go∣eth, and when you shall see the knob, take your draw∣ing Iron red hot, and seare the knob till it begin to looke yellow, and then lay a Charge of pitch and rosin, bole-armoniacke, masticke, and sanguis draconis boyled together, and some Flockes of the same colour, letting it lye untill it fall away of it selfe, and then annoynt the place with oyle of turpentine once in two dayes, untill it be whole, and the haire will come againe, and it will be plaine, and no ey-sore, but a small race like
a cut. But if it chance to ketch any grit or durt, then wash it with wine vinegar, roch-allum, and butter, launch two holes, one above the Splint, and one beneath and open the skinne so farre as the knob goeth, and put in the root of Bares-foot, and let it stay in five dayes, annointing it with butter once a day. The Ring-bones are apparent, and the Cure is, if they be newly come, take up the Shackle veines on both sides of the foot, and with a Fleame prick the swell'd places, so as they may bleed, then boyling hot, lay the Charge rehearsed for the Splint: but if the swelling be big, you must open the foot, and draw the swelling with a hot Iron, and annoynt the place with Tarre and Turpentine boyled together, when the Charge falleth away, and not before. And if you thinke that the Horse is a little founderd, or hoofe bound, then you may let him blood in the toe veines, and stop his feet with Tarre, Turpentine, and Hogs-grease with some Hemlockes or Arse-mart in it, boyled together see∣thing hot, and renew it once in two dayes. The Quiter-bone is an Vlcer in rhe foot, which run∣neth at a little hole with white matter, and in the bot∣tome of the hole there lyeth a gristle like a bone, ther∣fore search it to the bottome, and fill the hole with Verdegrease, letting it remaine so three dayes, then take it out, and if you see that it is not come cleane a∣way, stop the hole againe with the same, and take away the hoofe as farre as you see it hollow, and wrap the sore with browne paper dipped in tarre, turpentine, and hogs-grease beaten together after the bone is come a∣way untill it be whole. The Spraine of the Back-Sinew is a very evill thing,
yet take the oyle of Spike, Venice turpentine, Comfry and Tusom leaves, boile them together, and straine the oyntment, then annoint the place with the fame once in two dayes for nine dayes, and most commonly this will helpe, but if it doe not, you must let him blood, and lay a Charge upon it, as is show'd in the Splint, but if his leg swell, it will be good to take up the Shanke veine; a little above the knee, and salt it, and that will asswage the swelling. The Colts-evill is easily knowne, for that comes but in winter, by cold moyst humors, therefore ride him into the water once a day, and that will cure him, but if he have his stones beaten by hard riding, or if they chance to swell by some straine which also may hap∣pen by covering a Mare, I advise you to take oyle of Roses, Smallage, the herbe called Rosa solis, which you shall finde in boggy grounds, boile them in white wine vinegar and bath the swelling with it, and it will helpe the horse with letting blood on the spur-veines and the neck, or you may launch the Horses sheath if need be for it may doe good if it be much swelled. FOr Wounds or Prickes in generall, take Cats grease, Venice turpentine, Camomile, Tutsom leaves, Colts-foot, Hogs grease, Roch-allum, boyle them to∣gether, and straine them, and keepe this Salve alwayes by you; for it is good for any cut or pricke; but you must remember alwayes first to wash the sore with white wine vinegar and butter warme. This is a pro∣ved salve. For the Impostume in the head you must take the juice of Willowes, the juice of Camomile, the juice
of a Pomegrant, and some Linseed oyle, boile these together, and milke-warme put it into the eares, and ei∣ther stop them close, or sow them together for the space of twelve dayes: this also helpeth the worme in the head, or any Deafnesse, it openeth the pores, and is a present remedy for any Giddinesse in the head. A very good Oyle to ripen any kind of Swelling or Knobs or Wennes. Take Linseed, or Hempseed, Pelletory, Smallage, Camomile, the rootes of Lillies, Hemlocks, Speare-grasse, Garlicke, Bears foot, Bores-grease or Hogs grease, oyle of Spike, and Pigeons dung; boile all these well together, so as they be like a Plaist∣er, then lay it on the wen or swelling once a day, for three dayes space, and it will breake; if not, launch it thorow the skin, for it will be ripe; then wash out all the filth with white wine vinegar and roch-allum to∣gether warme, annoynting it with oyle of turpentine and hogs-grease, untill it be whole. This Ole may be used only to such swellings as are old and hard; for it will ripen any thing that it is layd unto, if it be not so hard as a bone. The Fistula every man knowes, but few can cure it, yet by this Medicine, as is well knowne, I have healed many; which is thus to be applyed: Take a pint of the best white wine vinegar, a penniworth of roch-al∣lum, an halfe penniworth of greene copresse, a penni∣worth of honey, and a quarter of a pound of Dogs∣grease, boile them together, untill the copresse be diss∣olved, and open the Fistula on both sides the maine, and keepe the crest whole if you can; then wash the sore with this water once in two dayes, and if there be any bone corrupted it will scale it, and heale the sore. pr.
This will also serve for the Pole-evill as well as any Medicine else, with a little turpentine, hogs-grease, colts-soot, and touchwood leaves boiled together, and strained cleare, that there be nothing in it; for I for∣bid all powders and lime that I have seene vsed, but no reason for it, save only through ignorance and vse, no washing with chamber lye, nor any other water, but drie the sore well with a soft linnen rag, or a piece of spunge, and then wash the sore with the water accor∣ding as is directed, but vse not your salve till it have al∣most done running. If your Horse be Wrenched on the loynes or back, then take two paire of Pastornes, and tye all his foure legs together, then lay him upon good store of straw, and clap a sheepe-skin new taken from the sheep and dipped in brine upon his back, keeping it so for twelve dayes; then let him stnd up, and if you stay him with ropes that hee fall not, hee may do well: but cut off three joynts of his taile, and lay a Charge of Pitch, Rosin, and Bole armoniacke, good and thicke upon his backe, and so let it lie till it fall away. The Falling of the haire is either with Wormes, or with the Mange; if it be with Wormes, let him blood in the taile veine, and wash his taile, or maine, with stronglye and bay-salt; but if it be the Mange, then must you take blacke sope, tarre, brimstone, bay-salt, hogs-grease, and a little Tobacco boyled well to∣gether, and after that you have shaved off the scurfe, then annoint the Horse with it good and warme once or twice at the most, and it will skale foure dayes after, then may you annoint him with hogs-grease, and this will heale him with letting blood.
The Horse that is Stisted cannot gather up his leg, but trailes his toe on the ground: the Cure is thus, Put in the bone, and take up the skin with a paire of pinsers, and burne a hole thorow it, annointing the place well with comfrey and butter boiled together, then side-span the other legs for three dayes, and this will cure him; but if hee be bruised or strained, let him blood on the haunch veine, and blow and rowell the Horse, and annoint him with hogs grease and oyle of Spike beaten together, and warme it in with some warme Iron. The Spavin is a Bunch in the pan of the Hocke; if it be soft, wee call it a Blood-Spavin, if hard, a Bone-Spavin; the cure for the Blood-Spavin is, Take up the veine, and draw the veine out, if the Spavin be big, at the nether place that you open, and salt the veine well, then lay on a Charge of pitch, rosin, bole-armoniacke, masticke, and sanguis draconis, boyled all together, with some Flockes; but if be a Bone-Spavin, you must lay a corasure to it, made of Euforbium, Can∣tharides, a little Mercurie, white wine vinegar and oyle of Spike beaten together: but shave off halfe the skinne so farre as the bunch goeth, and then clap it on like a plaister, tying up his head for the space of three houres, and when it comes off two dayes after annoint it with a little butter, and draw it with a hot Iron, then lay on the Charge before spoken of, letting it lie till it fall away of it selfe, which done, you must annoint it once in two dayes till it be whole; this will cure without faile: but if you lay the corasure on, you must not worke the Horse, nor let him come in water for ten dayes.
The Curbe lies under the Hocke, therefore you must pricke it with a Fleame, and when it hath bled well, then draw small lines with your hot Iron, like a broad arrowes head and lay the same Charge as you doe for the Splint. The Puffing lies like winde in the gambrell place above the Hocke, and if you let him blood in the thigh veine, laying the same Charge unto it as is prescribed for the Curbe, and fier him as you doe the same, it is a present remedy. Malanders and Selenders lye in the bout of the knee▪ and in the Ham behinde: this Sorance is always scabbed, and the more you rub it, the worse it is, if you take not the right course; therfore I advise you to shave all the scurfe off his legs, so farre as it goeth, with a hot Iron, but take heed that the Iron be not too hot, but so as it may scald the scurfe off; and then take a little black sope, and bay-salt, and annoint the place with it once in two dayes for a weeke, and then take sope, and butter, and bole armoniacke, mixed well toge∣ther, and annoint the place untill it be whole. The Tent in a Horses leg, is when the nutriment of the sinewes falls under the fter lock, which will make a Horse lame; it is big and soft, and must be thus cu∣red: Strike it with a Fleame in the middle of the soft place, and it will spout out like the white of an egge, then put a little salt and annoint all the feter-lock with a salve made of Comfrey, tursome leaves, and but∣ter, giving him twelve dayes rest, and then you may use him againe. Wind galls are above the Fetter-locke, and they are not to be opened any where, but as the Tent is; fore∣garter
the Horse with a string, and lap the leg from the knee or hocke downeward, for this Sorance belongeth to all foure legs, and they are cured all alike: and you shall see the Wind-galls come into the same place that the Tent doth, and the same receipt serveth; if not, then you must draw with a hot Iron small races, cros∣waies, on both sides of the legs, and lay the Charge rehearsed for the Splint and Spavin, and it will cure him. The Paines is an evill humour in the body, there∣fore it is good to trot your Horse till hee begin to sweat, then let him blood on both sides of the necke, and take up the haunch veines, and give the same drink that is prescribed for the Liver and Spleene, washing his legs once in two dayes with this water compoun∣ded of white Wine vinegar, white copresse, greene co∣presse, brimstone, butter, and bay-salt boyled together, and afterwards annoynt it with creame. A Horse may be Founderd diverse wayes: either in the feet, or in the legs, or in the body; if hee be foun∣derd in the body, his haire will stare, and if you strike him on his ribs, they will sound like an empty barrell, and he will goe crowdling all foure together, and when he is too sore heated, and coole too suddenly, then he will be as though his backe were broke, and cannot stand, and then he is most commonly past cure: but if he can stand and goe, then make a Charge of oyle of Spike, pigeons dung, and salt, boyled together, and rub it into his backe and loines, covering him with a new Sheep skin with the wooll upon it warme, and make a drinke of Sacke, or strong ale, Isop, mallowes, smallage, fennell, some of a Brionetree-root, treakle,
honey, tarre, goose grease, or sine lard, boyle all these together, and give it the Horse to drinke once a day for three dayes, and in the afternoones a Mesh of malt, and let him blood in the necke, legs, haunch veines, and taile, each place a little: If he be founderd in the feet, pare them thin, and let them bleed in the toes well, then stop up his feet with hogs-grease, and wheat bran, and annoint them with tarre, turpentine, hemlocks, and nettles boiled together, and this will cure him. A good way to stanch blood in any part. If the Horse bleed after letting blood in any veine, you may take a sticke and cleave it halfe way, so as it may clip the skinne together, and put a little bole-armoniacke betweene for a while, and it will stay; or if the wound be big, you may take some of the Horses owne dung and salt mingled together, and binde it to the wound, letting it lye for the space of twelve houres after, and then there is no danger; or you may take nettles and salt beaten together, or the Soot or scraping of the out side of a kettle, or hogs-dung, for any of all these things will stay bleeding. A very good Medicine for the Biting of a Mad dog. First, get some Sweet-brier tree barke, and beto∣nie, beaten to powder, and runnning water and bay-salt boyled together, and give it the Horse, or Sheepe, or Dog, or Hog to drinke, and wash the place well that is bit with the water good and hot; and this will helpe, if you let blood in the Roofe of the mouth. Proved. If a Horse, or any other Beast be stung or bitten with an Adder, Snake, or any kinde of venomous crea∣ture, you may take new milke, and wash the place and then take rotten egges, soot, fresh butter, turpentine,
bay salt, and bole-armoniacke, beaten small and ming∣led well together, then launch the place, and annoynt it with the salve, giving your Horse, or other beast, wine and treakle luke-warme to drinke: and when the ve∣nome is out, annoynt the place with Salet oyle and tur∣pentine beaten together, once in two dayes, untill it be whole. A Re-advertisement to the Reader. Gentle Reader. SOme have writ that a Horse hath no Braine, nor Milt, which I deny; Others have affir∣med, that a Horse may have the Mourning of the Chine, which I deny also; for the Chine and Braine joyne together: And if the Braine should wast, the Horse cannot live. For this cause, and to prevent the like errour, from the outward Sorances and Diseases commonly in∣cident to Horses (whereof I have before treated, and explained their severall Cures) I proceed to the Inward Grievances, and their Remedies: For the more plaine and easie understanding of which, I have laid open every part, Bone, or Sinew, belonging to a Horse, so that every man, though but of a meane capa∣city, may both finde out the cause of any Disease, and the way to Cure it, by those Medicines which I have here prescri∣bed, and by mine owne Expeience often proved, being such things as with ease are commonly to be had in most Gardens, or almost in every Grocers and Apothecaries Shop. And now l advise you to bee very carefull in making a true com∣pound of every Drinke or Medicine which you shall have occasion to use, both for your owne profit and my credit; for
I have left the quantity to your owne discretion, that you may apply it according to the constitution of your Horses bo∣dy, since some are able to beare farre more then others. As also, although many be fearfull to let Blood at some times, yet I wish you upon any great occasion to deferre no time at all, but to doe it speedily, otherwise I hold it fit to ob∣serve the Moone, the temper of the ayre, and time of the day; for a temperate Aire is very good to undertake any Cure in, either inward or outward. And so for your instructions by the Anatomy here prefixed (for it is necessary that every Farrier should know not onely the office, but the number of all the Bones & smallest gristles or Sinewes in every part of the Horse) I have layd open the Horse, and placed the letter A, over his Head, which showes▪ how the Eyes hang to the Braines; as as when hee is living (with other letters to describe the Entrailes, and other members as they lye in order in the Horse.) So as A signifies the Eyes, B signifies the Braine, C C the Teeth, D the Windpipe, E the Gullet, F F the Lights, G the Heart, H the Liver, I the Milt, K the Maw, L the Guts, M the Kidnies, N the Spleene, O the Bladder, P the Dock, Q the Gall, R R the Midriffe. As also I have set figures upon every joynt, according to the number of the Bones therein contained; As for Example. The Figure of 5. next to the Braine, specifies five Bones in the Head and the two figures of 20. upon each side of the Head, so many Teeth: and so of the rest according to their places; for the number of Sinewes likewise, I have placed the figures on the outside of the Horse, with the letter S. to di∣stinguish them from the Bones. And thus wishing thee good successe in all the Cures that you take in hand, I rest Your Friend, R. B.
The true Anatomy and Inside of a Horse. diagram of the anatomy of a horse FIrst, I finde that in the Head there breed many Sicknesses, as the Falling evill, the Staggers, the Slee∣ping evill, the Frenzie, the Pofie, and Giddinesse: be∣sides most Farriers say, that the Moone-eyes are a sore Disease in the Head. The Falling evill is a stopping of the spirits, veines, arteries, and pores, depriving the Horse of his sense, as it doth a man, so that he lyeth as it were dead for a time, yet he may be thus cured. Let him blood on
both sides of the necke, and in the mouth, and in the nose, then take oile of turpentine, ale cost, fennell, ca∣momile, and pionie roots boiled in oile, then straine it, and put the oile in his eares, and either sow or tie them, that it come not out: and boile the same herbe in strong ale giving it the Horse to drinke three mor∣nings, and it will helpe him: This is also good for Giddinesse, or the Palsie, or any Quivering or shaking. proved. The Staggers is a Plurisie of blood thorow-out the whole body, and infumes the senses of the Horse, so that he can neither stand nor goe without staggering, his feeling is taken away, his sight growes dimme, and hee will runne against walls and hedges, staying himselfe on his head; and if he be farre gone, he will sleepe and start as though he were in a dreame: the Cure where∣of, as I have found by experience, is thus. Let him blood in the necke, nose, eyes, and mouth, and if you see that hee lookes yellow, then it is a signe that the Yellowes are come upon him too, therefore to use the cure for both it is not amisse: then if his eares bee cold, take aquavitae and salt, and put it into his eares, and tye them for twelve hours; but if you can get no a∣quavitae, take water and salt, which will doe well, then launch the skinne in his forehead, and open it two in∣ches, and put in garlicke, and annoynt the outside with hogs grease; which done, you must make a Drinke for him of Tansie, turmerick, long pepper, graines, ani∣seed, liquorish, and strong ale, boyled well together, and milk warme give it the horse stirring him up and downe a good space; and if he live but six hours af∣ter his dressing there is likely no danger: and then
you must give him a Mesh of malt twice a day, for foure or five dayes after. This serveth for the Stag∣gers and Yellowes both, if you let him blood in the taile three dayes after you have blooded him in the fore-part. proved. The Sleeping evill is an infection of the blood, and black choller taken by eating mildew'd feeding, for the horse will scowre, and hang downe his head, slee∣ping in the manger, and his mouth will be hot as fire, therefore you shall take blood from him in the nose, and under the eyes, and mouth, in the nose once in two dayes for a weeke with a naule, and make a Drink of bayberries, graines, mustard-seed, marigold seed, an∣niseeds, liquorish, some treakle, butter, and turme∣ricke, boyled together in Beere or ale, and give it the horse to drinke milke-warme, and it will cure him. proved. A Horse that is Taken, or as some call it Frenzie, sor they differ not much at the first, and he standeth still not greatly willing to move nor to eat nor drinke, but of a sudden hee will gape and bite, and to the Farriers judgement is no foule horse; the cure of this disease is thus: cord the horse about the necke, and the veines under the eares will rise, then let them blood in the nose, and two dayes after in the haunch veines, and taile, and make this Drinke with mallowes, smal∣lage, fennell, parsley, bay-berries, graines, and treakle, boyle them in beere or ale, and give it him milk∣warme, then put some of that oyle rehearsed in the Falling evill into his eares. This is a good way and proved. The Posie is a cold congealed humour in the head,
and appeares to mee, as it were a setling of choller in the pores, it is knowne by the horses eyes running yel∣low goul, and underneath or within the ball of the eye you shall see at certaine times of the moone as it were yellow matter, and then some Farriers say that he is Moone-ey'd; true it is; for till the griefe be cu∣red, the horse will be so, and will not thrive because he sleepes in paine: for the cure whereof, you shall take blood under his eyes, and in the nose, and palla of the mouth, and neck, perfuming his head with frankin∣cense, brimstone, and tobacco, upon coles, and put into his eares oile of Rue, and oyle of camomile, beaten to∣gether, then give him the same drinke as you doe for the Sleeping-evill, and this will cure him, being used every morning for five mornings. The Canker in the mouth is when the lips and tongue is full of blisters, and raw: it comes by evill seed, as gritty hay, or raw provender, or eating among wormes castings, or licking earth: the cure is thus; make a Drinke of Rue, Isop, brimstone, saven, roch-al∣lum, and bole-armoniacke, boyled well together, in Beere, and give it the horse, then let him blood in the roofe of the mouth, and the next morning wash his mouth with white wine vinegar, roch allum, and salt once, and this will cure him. Proved. Of the Glanders, Strangullion, and mourning of the Chine. I find that the Strangles at the first is a heat and a cold congealed in young horses, having moyst bodies, and then it groweth to incarnat and breake in matter, and the kirnells under the horses tongue be∣tweene the jawes will swell; and then if it breake and vanish away within a reasonable time by such meats
and drinkes as I have prescribed in the outward So∣rances, it may doe well: but if not, then it is the Glanders, or the Mourning of the Chine, as some call it, but I thinke it may more fitly be called the Con∣sumption of the Lights, for I for my part could never finde it otherwise: therefore according to my experi∣ence I will prescribe the best remedy that ever I could finde. Take oyle of turpentine, oyle of turmericke, fine hogs lard, goose-grease, treakle, suger candie, ho∣ney, onions, camomile, smallage, the wild vine root, anniseeds, liquorish, and fennell seeds, beat them well together, and boyle them, then straine the oyle, and give it the horse every other morning in his nose, for nine dayes, and ride him after it for two houres, then give him a mesh of malt alwayes, during the said nine dayes: which done, let him have comfrey, colts-foot, venecricke, bayberries, graines, and wheat bran all in powder amongst his provender during the space of six weekes after, and if hee be curable this will helpe him. The Pursicke, or Shortnesse of breath, comes alwayes after an extreame cold, or upon the setling of some great sicknesse, causing the conduits or pipes of the Lights to be straight, or else there may be some small conduit or pipe broken, and so the horse coffeth drie, and often, and fetcheth his winde thicke; the best cure therefore is to take Sirrop of liquorish, and new milk from the cow, with treakle, and sugar-candy; Some will give balls made of Venice turpentine, tarre, lard, rosemary, elecampany, anniseeds, liquorish, tansie, lung∣wort, and sporage, which is good, with a little oyle put in his nostrills after it, and so to ride him faire and
gently, feeding him with moyst meat, and he may do well againe. The Garget in Horses, and the Garget in Oxen pro∣ceed both of one cause, yet are not cured both alike, although there be no great difference: this disease if not lookt unto may grow to the Murren or Pestilence either in beast or horse; and therefore I will shew you the causes which first breed it. Where they keepe cattell low and poore in winter, and have ranke feeding in sommer, and standing water which they stale in, having no spring in it to refresh the same; and so the blood being not good at the first time of the yeare, the ranke feeding, and the unwholsome water, infect∣eth the whole substance of the beast, that is, blood, choller, flegme, black choller, nay breath and all, and then cometh the Murren and pestilence: at the first it may swell in the brest, throat, lips, or under the eares or eyes, and they that dye of it are alwayes full of gelly at the heart and lights of all colours: the Cure for the Garget I have already shewed in the outward Sorances; but this is how to prevent the murren or pestilence: take Rue, wormewood, garlick, pelletory, mug-wort, marigolds, red dock-roots, Tan∣sie, elderne barke or berries, turmericke, bayberries, graines, cominseed, anniseed, liquorish, long pepper, venecricke, treakle new tarre, some beares foot, then beat them together, and boyle them in beere with some bay salt among them, then straine them thorow a cloth, and every morning when your cattell are in∣fected give a reasonable quantity to each, and let them blood in the necke and mouth, or for your horse you may boile a reasonable quantity in wine, and give it
him. This is an approved medicine, besides it pur∣geth the body for all diseases, as well as any medicine that can be found, and you shall not need any persume, if you give it in the morning. For Ʋomiting and Wormes. Because I have spoken of water and feeding not fit for cattell, I will now shew you how to stay the vomiting of any unwhol∣some meat, drinke, or any thing that your horse shall swallow, which will appeare quickly: take ale cost, saven, holy thistle, treakle and strong ale or beere, boyle them together, and put in some sallet oyle, and give it him: this is also good for the bots or small wormes, if you pricke him in the mouth. The Diseases in the liver, gall, and spleene. I find that if the liver be inflamed with any hot blood, or the gall be too full of choller, then the spleene can∣not discharge his office, which is easily perceived; for the horse will be weary, dull, and heavie, hot and faint, and commonly full of choller in the mouth and eyes, his veines will swell, and if it be not preven∣ted, it will grow to the Yellowes, of which I have spo∣ken in the Staggers, and now will shew you a very good way: Take liverwort, elder pill, or barbery pill, turmericke, cominseed, venecricke, fennell-seed, tansie, smallage, anniseeds, liquorish, Ivie berries, pel∣letory, parsley seed, coleander seeds, treakle, sugar can∣dy, and boyle these in wine, then straine them, and give it the horse to drinke: this is good to convert choller, it comforts the heart, it helpes the collick al∣so, if you put in the rootes of Filippendula; but let the horse blood in both sides of the necke and mouth and nose, and it will cure him. proved.
The Dropsie or Tenpen, is a swelling in the belly, or may fall into his legs, and breake out in watry hu∣mours like the Paines, which by continuance it will grow unto; therefore to prevent it, after you have rid him or runne him till he sweat, which will cause the watry humours to fly up into his body againe, while he is warme, let him blood on both sides of the necke, and in the mouth, then open the skinne be∣tweene his fore-legs, raising it two inches long, and as much in the hinder part of the belly, and put some of the herbe called Seter-wort or beares-foot into the holes, and that will draw the evill water away, if you let it stay in 4 or 5 dayes, giving the horse the same drinke that is prescribed for the Liver and Spleene, and when the holes are open, use hogs-grease to annoynt them withall, trotting him up and downe every day, and rubbing his body and legs, and he may doe well, if you bath his legs with vinegar and salt very hot. THe Golden water or Oyntment for the eyes is thus compounded; take the Flowers of marigolds and ey-bright, daisies of the biggest sort, the flowers of rosemary and saladine, the inward barke of the palme∣tree, some saffron, the flowers of water-lillies, and the flowers of the bay tree, distill these all together, and keepe it by you in a bottle, that when your hor∣ses eyes beginne to looke yellow or greene like the raine-bow, you may put some of this water into his eares warme, and stop it in foure or five dayes, wash∣ing his eyes with some of the water likewise; and then to make his eyes comfortable, take fresh goose-grease, and the marrow of cats bones, and rost a Lam∣pre,
or Eele, reserving the fat that drippeth in a clean dish, then put some rurmericke unto it, and boile them well together, then put it into a pot, and keepe it till you have need, but you must gather the flowers in May or Iune, and the water will keepe untill the next yeare, if you put some sugar-candy in it. The good∣nesse of this Receipt cannot be enough valued; but you must remember when your horse is grieved to let him blood in the nose with a naule, that he may bleed well. The Strangullion or Sqinsie, is an inflammation of the throat and tongue, so that it is ready to stop the horses wind, and must be thus cured; Let him blood in the plate-veine, and wash his mouth with hot vine∣gar and salt, then take leekes, alexander, honey, and bedlam, boile them in wine, and give it the horse at the nose and mouth, annoynting the swelling with dogs dung and honey, then let him blood in the mouth, and give him no cold water, but let him have pel∣letory to chew in his mouth, which will make the rheume voyd away, or if he cannot chew, put some in his drinke, and as soone as the swelling is asswaged, an∣noint the horse with sallet oyle, and he will doe well againe. proved. The Bloody flux, or Pissing blood, some hold to proceed from the nature of the ground where the Horse goeth, or else by a straine, for the cure, there∣fore take roch-allum, bole armoniacke, solder-wood, worme-wood, polepodium, and salt, stampe the herbs, or drie them to powder, and give it him in new milke two mornings: and this will cure him, if you let him blood in the mouth. proved.
The Mattering of the yard, and the Shedding of the Seed, which comes in covering time most com∣monly, is cured by washing his yard with white wine vinegar, roch-allum, and butter, and giving this drink, in red wine, comfrey, bole-armoniacke, and sugar boiled together: Some will give balls made of venice tur∣pentine, wheat flower, and venecricke, every morning for foure or five mornings, and this will cure, as hath beene well proved. Incording or Bursting may come by leaping, or by stopping the Horse too suddenly: therefore accor∣ding to my experience, I advise you, if his guts, or the Kell be fallen downe, tie all his foure feet together, and with warme milke bath the place, so that it may be gentle, then worke the gu into his place againe, and tie the stones gently with a broad string, so as you may put your singer betweene, bathing him with vi∣negar, bole-armoniacke, salt, and butter, once a day, and give him a drinke made of strong ale or claret wine, comfrey, masticke, and stone pitch; and if it be where you can make a trusse for him, when you have put in the gut, you may lay a Charge on, and binde it up with the trusse: make the charge of rosin, pitch, masticke, bole-armoniacke, and some turpen∣tine; they may fall in some place, where you may cut the skinne a handfull beside the place, and put in the guts, and then sow up the rim of the belly with a needle full of silke, you must take good hold, but not too thicke stirches, nor draw it too hard, yet be sure to make it fast, and annoynt the place with venice tur∣pentine, tutsome leaves, and dogs grease boyled and strained, but be sure to keepe the winde from it for six
dayes, and afterwards put some hogs-grease in your salve. This way I have cured diverse cattell, both horses, oxen, and others. proved. The Fashions may come by an inward cause as well as an outward; for if it begin in the brest, or in the groine, or cod, it is a signe that it proceds from some inward defect, and then the knobs will be big and hard like carbunkles, therefore you shall make a drinke of Rue, or as some call it, herb grasse, tansie, the root of the wlde vine, Isop, walnut tree barke, turmericke, cominseed, smallage, treakle, and bay-salt boiled to∣gether in beere or ale, and give it the horse to drinke for three mornings together, then let him blood in the necke, and in those veines next the place that is in∣fected, and launch the knobs, annointing them with blacke sope, tarre, and bay salt, once in two dayes: and this will helpe him without faile. proved. The disease of the Wombe of the Mare, called the Weather, is when the bag or nature cometh out, and she is in great paine, therfore take white wine vine∣gar and roch-allum warme, and wash the nature bag that cometh out, then put it in againe, then make a drinke of peach-stone kirnells, comfrey, nutmegs, and sinamon, all beaten to powder, and boiled in milke or ale, and give it the Mare twice in a day, and it will helpe her proved. The Hungry evill, and Consumption of the Flesh, is when the horse doth eat his meat fast and greedily, and yet prospers not with it but still growes leaner, which I think doth proceed from some evill habit in the body, although some Farriers do not perceive the cause; therefore I advise you to give your horse
some Rosemary, marigold seed, or diapanta, sage, sa∣vin, earth-nuts, or pig-nuts, oranges and lemons stee∣ped in vinegar three dayes, and some egges steeped with them, and stopped close, till the egge-shells be as soft as the orange, then take out the egges and the o∣ranges whole, and put into the vinegar a quarterne of sugar-candie, treakle, diapanta, savin, sage, nuts, boile them together, and milke-warme give it the horse in the morning, and let him have the egges, and oranges, after the drinke, riding him for two houres after it, then give him sod beanes and pease for the space of six dayes, and a little of this drinke every morning, and it will cause his flesh to rise againe, if you let him blood in the mouth. A very good medicine, to take either in wine or beere, against the Fever, Palsie, or Convulsion of the Sinewes, or to annoynt the body or sinewes withall in time of numnesse or stifnesse: Take Galbanum, cast∣oreum, bedlam, pepper, amoniacum, ladanum dissol∣ved in sallet oyle, bayberries, graines, Rue, Isop, tansie, anniseeds, liquorish, oile of turpentine, Fox-grease, or badgers-grease, tarre, stone-pitch, hogs grease, take of these things an equall quantity, and beat them to pow∣der small, and boyle them together, then give the horse part in wine, and annoint his body and legs with part, warming it in with hot coles in a pan, then keepe him warme, and let him stand drie, and either ride or walk him once or twice a day; giving him no cold water for nine dayes space, but rubbing his body and legs well: and as soone as you see him beginne to use his legs, you may let him blood in all foure a little, an∣nointing him all over with oyle of Copresse, and by
this meanes the horse may recover his former strength and nimblenesse againe, as hath beene proved. Balls to give horses, when you misdoubt their grease to be over heated by too hard riding: Take honey, fine hogs lard, the herbe called Earsene tobacco, savin, Rue, the tops of stocke-gilliflowers, some Isop, ca∣momile, and smallage, shread the herbs small, or beat them in a morter, then temper the honey and lard with them, or boyle them in sacke, and give it the horse to drinke: this will cause the horse to scowre out the grease, and cleanseth his guts from all kinde of wormes. proved. To helpe your horse if you misdoubt hee hath ea∣ten or drunke any poyson: Take Betonie, plantain, and harts-horne, scrape it small, and boile it in milke, and when you have made it blood warme, put in some sallet oyle, venice turpentine, and fine hogs lard or hogs grease, beaten well together before you put it in the milke, and this will qualifie the poyson, and the horse will doe well againe. proved. Balls to keepe your horse in breath and health fit for hunting: first take Rosemary and marigold-seed, anniseeds, and liquorish, comfrey roots, colts-foot, cardus, and fennell roots all dryed to powder, with frankincense, mirrhe, cominseed, turmericke, treakle, sugat-candy, & butter, temper all these well together, and give them to the horse in the morning when you ride him forth, before you water him, and then you may ride him two or three houres, or till your occa∣sion serveth in reasonable time to come in: for the longer you ride him after it, the better it is for him. If at any time your Horse or Oxe cannot Ʋent,
give him this glister, take tobacco and honey, beating it together in a morter, and when it is well mixed put some sallet oyle unto it, and some hogs-grease, then milke-warme put it in his fundament with a straight horne, and let one that hath a small hand stirre it gent∣ly up and downe in his body, and it will helpe him pre∣sently. proved. For a horse that cannot Stale, take a small twig made very smooth, and annoynt it with oyle, then pull out his yard, and thrust the twig up in his bladder, and that will give him vent; which done, you shall give a drinke made of fennell seed, or the root of Filippen∣dula, camomile, smallage, anniseeds, liquorish, and some ordinary horse-spice, which you usually buy at the Mercers shops, boyled all well together in white wine or beere, and this will helpe the horse, but you must stirre him up and downe a good space after. A very good Plaister for Broken bones, if the skin be not broke. Take the whites of egges, bole-armo∣niacke, red lead, and salt, beat them together, and role up the place for three dayes, then open it, and if the bone begins to sodder together, and not swell, dresse it as before, but if it swell, wash the place well with wine vinegar and salt: and if the bones be broke tho∣row the skin, you must mixe blacke sope and bole ar∣moniacke together, and lay on the outside, and make a salve to dresse the wound with of Cats-grease, hogs-grease, venice turpentine, tutsome leaves, comfrey leaves, and colts-foot, boyled all together and strained, and therewith annoynt the sore places, putting some into the wound with a feather, then make an open place betweene the Splints, that the corruption may
runne away, and when it is whole, lay on a Charge of pitch, rofin, masticke, bole-armoniacke and red lead; and swath up the place; and if you let him runne at grasse but one March after, the bone will grow as strong as ever it was. proved. Some never failing Medicines, for certaine mortall Diseases and other griefes incident to Men, Women, Children, or other Creatures. TAke three pintes of Malmesie, or for want thereof good Muskadine, boyle therein one handfull of Sage, one handfull of Rue, being shred small, till a pinte be wasted, then straine it, and set it over the fire againe, putting thereto one penny worth of Long Pepper, halfe an ounce of Ginger, a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, all beaten together; then let it boyle againe a little. This done, take it from the fire and put to it a quar∣ter of a pinte of strong Angelica water, or good A∣quavitae, a quarter of an ounce of Mythridate, a quar∣ter of a pinte of Triacle, mingle all together, stirre it till it be cold, then put it into a glass close stopped, and shake the glass when you take it out for your use. Also it hath been tryed to be specially good for the cure of a quartan Ague.
Take of it for a Man or woman three spoonfuls, for a Child one blood-warme, let them bee well sweated for an houre or thereabouts; as their strength will beare. This medicine is good against the Plague either to prevent or to cure it, but it is also good against those diseases that are kin to the Plague, and particularly it hath cured multitudes that have been sick of this ma∣lignant Fever, which of late hath been so common; it having a speciall quality to draw all infection from the heart. A Remedy for the Plurisie when it is past Blood-letting in which case it is commonly mortall. TAke an Apple and cut off the top for a cover and pick out the cor, then fill the hollow place with white Frankincense, put it on a shovell by the fire, and put the cover upon it, then roast it till it be soft round, then put it into a sawcer and bruise it altogether till it be well mixed, then put so much Sugar to it that will make it savory, let the party eat it. This will drive away the putrifaction from the Lungs and pre∣serve the party. An assured Medicine for to cure the biting of a mad Dog. TAke a good handfull of Bittony, and a handfull of wild Sage, and a handfull of night Shade, and of faire Running water a pinte; stampe the Herbes
and straine them therewith, put thereto a penny worth of Triacle, or the weight of three pence of Mithri∣date, give it to the patient to drinke two or three mornings. This Medicine is good for Cattle, and for Dogs bitten with a mad Dog, and hath been upon occasion tryed to bee effectuall without Mithridate or Triacle, putting a handfull of Rue with the other herbs, and using ordinary Garden Sage where the other is not to be had; the herbs boyled in milk and strained, and six spoonfull given at a time. FINIS. A Table of the severall Diseases contained in this Booke in each Page, according to the Folio. IN the Epistle to the Reader I begin with a deformed member in the Head, from the outward and inward Grievances in a Horse. A most exact and speedy way of Curing all Sorances and Dis∣eases incident to Horses, Folio, 1. For the Canker in the Nose, and how to cure it, ibid. For the Lampers, ibid. For the Fives with the cure, ibid. The Gare and what it is, Folio, 3. For the Farsie, and its cure, folio, 4. The Splint and how cured, ibid.
For the Ring-bones and the cure, Folio, 5. The Quiter-bone is an ulcer in the foot, ibid. The Spraine of the back sinew, ibid. For Wounds or Prickes in generall, Folio, 6. For the Impostume in the Head, ibid. To ripen any kind of Swelling or Knob, Folio, 7. The Fistula and the Cure, ibid. For the Pole-evill, Folio, 8. If your Horse bee Wrenched, ibid. The Falling of the Haire, ibid. For a Horse that is Stifled, Folio, 9. The Spavin is of two kindes, the Blood-Spavin and the bone-Spavin. ibid. The Puffing, Malenders and Selenders lye in the bout of the Knee, and in the Him behind, Folio, 10. The Tent in a Horses Leg, ibid. Windgalls are above the Fetter-locke, ibid. The Paines is an evill humour in the body, Folio, 11. A Horse may bee Poundered divers wayes, ibid. A good way to Stanoh blood in any part, Folio, 12. A good medicine for the Biting of a Mad Dog, ibid. If a Horse be Bitten or Stung, ibid. A Re-advertisement to the Reader, with the Anatomy of the inside of the horse; Folio 15. For the Falling Evill what it is, ibid. For the Staggers what it is, Folio, 16. For the Sleeping-evill. Folio▪ 17. For a Horse that is Taken, called the Frenzie, ibid. The Posie what it is, ibid. For the Glanders, Strangullion▪ and mourning of the Chine, ibid. For the Shortnesse of Breath, Folio, 19. For the Garget in Horses, Folio, 20. For Wormes in Horses, Folio, 21.
For the Dropsie or Tenpen, Folio, 22. The Strangullion or Squinsie, Folio, 23. The Bloody flux or Pissing of Blood, ibid. For the Mattering of the Yard, Folio, 24. For Incording or Bursting, ibid. The Hungry Evill and Consumption of the flesh, Folio, 25. Balls to give a horse when he is overheated. Folio, 27. Balls to keepe your horse in breath for Hunting. ibid. For a horse that cannot Stale, Folio, 28. A very good Plaister for broken bones, ibid. Some never failing Medicines for certaine Mortall Diseases. incident to Men, Women and Children, and other Creatures. Folio, 29. A Remedy for the Plurisie, when it is past Blood-leting. Folio, 30. To cure the biting of a Mad Dog. ibid.
