C1961 45578233 172178
THE CHARACTER AND QUALIFICATIONS OF AN Honest Loyal MERCHANT. Licensed, and Entred according to Order. LONDON: Printed by ROBERT ROBERTS. MDCLXXXVI.
THE CHARACTER and QUALIFICATIONS OF AN HONEST LOYAL MERCHANT. THE Loyal Honest MERCHANT is an Universal Tradesman, and all the World is his Shop; A diligent Bee, ever busie in bringing Honey to the Publick Hive; The Nations Purveyor, that improves its Superfluities, and supplies its Necessities; The same to the Body Politick, as the Liver, Veins, and Arteries are to the Natural; for he both raises and distributes Trea∣sure, the vital Blood of the Common-Weal. He is the Steward of the Kingdoms Stock, which by his good or ill management, does proportionably increase or lan∣guish. One of the most useful members in a State, with∣out whom it can never be Opulent in Peace, nor conse∣quently Formidable in War. FOR he fetches in the good things of the remotest Regions to Enrich his Countrey, and by the honest Magick of Industry, removes the Mines of Peru, and the Golden Sands of Guinea whither he pleases. He can make a barren Heath, or a contemptible Bogg, (that has not
one Tree but what you must plant, nor one Stone but what you must bring thither, a place that has nothing of its own product worth speaking of) to be yet the richest City for its Bigness, and the greatest Store∣house and Empory for all sorts of Commodities in the World. 'Tis by his means, The Taste of choice Arabian Spice we know, Without those scorching Heats that make it grow. In Indian Gems, and Persian Silks we shine; And without Planing, drink of every Vine. WITHOUT him the World would still be a kind of Wilderness, one part unknown and unbeholding to the other; and if ever its remote Inhabitants met, it would be rather for mischief and slaughter, than mutual assi∣stance; Whereas his pains unites divided Empires, and those that never beheld the same Stars; joins people se∣parated by different Climates, Religions, and Policies, into one common Society; And by the Mediation of Commerce, makes the Sun-burnt Ethiopian contribute to the relief of the Frozen Muscovite. HE is the true Orpheus that charms the Savages, and spreads Civility amongst Barbarians; he communicates Arts and Sciences, and all useful Inventions both for Ne∣cessity and Ornament: Unless he had advanced Navi∣gation, Geography might have still lain muffled in Strabo's Cloak, and Astronomy been confin'd to Ptolemy's narrow Horizon; we might to this day have believed the Poets Fables of Frigid and Torrid Zones uninhabita∣ble; That there was no living (forsooth) under the Ae∣quator, or within the Artick and Antartick Circles; Each
quick-sighted Vergilius might have been in danger of Deprivation, for holding the supposed Heresie of Anti∣podes; The Art of Healing it self had incurably lan∣guisht, our Apothecaries Shops been destitute of the best part of the Materia Medica, or choicest Rarities of the Tripple Kingdom; and an English Herbal might have bounded the studies of our most Learned Colledg of Phy∣sicians. NAY further, there seems yet a more sublime and mysterious designment of Providence attending his pains; for by establishing an intercourse with Infidels for Civil Traffick, a door is not seldom open'd to advance the Di∣vine Interest; so that he may propagate our most Holy Faith, as well as vend our Temporal Commodities; and by penetrating both Indies, and (like the Sun) compas∣sing the World, administers opportunities to divulge the Light of the Gospel; whilst our stupid Gallants think, he Voyages only to bring them Pearls to hang at the Ears of their Mistresses, Mango's to relish their Mutton, or Pepper to strew over their Cucumbers. IN these remote Negotiations, he counts it next to denying his Saviour, to occasion by any dishonest or im∣moral Act, his Blessed Name to be Blasphem'd amongst the Gentiles. He would rather endure the Rack himself, than stretch a Piece of Cloath on the Tenters to make it three or four Yards longer, which when sold to a Turk, shall in the next Shower, Cockle all up in a Ruck, causing the honest Musulman to revile both the cheating Christian and his Religion; Tho the later altogether undeserved∣ly, since It most severely condemns Circumvention, and enjoyns not only strict Fidelity and Justice in our deal∣ings, but Charity too, towards all Mankind, even our most professed Enemies.
THIS our Merchant is sensible of, and trembles at that WOE pronounced against those by whom such scanda∣lous Offences come; Therefore keeps a double Guard on his Conversation abroad, as knowing that not only his own private Reputation, but the Honour of his Religion and Nation, in some measure depends thereon. His Faith is firmer than the Needle of his Compass, for it admits not of the least Variation; his Devotion is one and the same, in all Countries, and his Zeal as great beyond, as on this side the Line; For like the Sun, tho he traverse round the habitable Globe, yet still he keeps constant to the Ecliptick of Truth, and will not Barter away the Pearl of Price, for any worldly gains, but uses diligence in the first place to Ensure his Soul, dreading no Shipwrack so much as that of a good Conscience. AND as Piety and Loyalty are inseperable; so next to Sacriledg, (which is a robbing of God) he abhors Smuckling and Running of Goods, or Entring one Commo∣dity for another that pays more, &c. (Which is a rob∣ing of Gods Vicegerent, the King;) His practice being a daily Comment on that Text, Render unto Coesar the things that are Coesars, &c. He reckons all those that use any such unlawful Courses, far from being either good Christi∣ans or Loyal Subjects; Nay esteems it not only a simple Cheat or bare Felony, by any Pretensions, Concealments, Trick or Artifices to defraud his Sovereign of those Dues the Law has setled, But a kind of unfledg'd Treason a∣gainst the Crown, since 'tis apparently a design to weaken and subvert the Royal Power, when we purloin the Reve∣nues necessary for the support of the Government. HE knows, That a Nation may be impoverisht and ruin'd by a great Trade ill manag'd, as well as by too little; and that the Kingdom may get, even when the
Merchant loses, and the Merchant often get when the Kingdom loses; But for his own part is so passionate a Lover of his Country, as to postpone his private Advan∣tages to the utility of the Publick; And therefore thinks himself obliged (whenever fit opportunity is offered) humbly to inform his Sovereign, or some of the Chief Ministers of State, (or Parliament, when conven'd), of the Over-ballance of Importations from any Country; and of all Exportations or Importations of any sort of Goods that are notably prejudicial or profitable to the Kingdom, to the end there may be wholsom Laws made to prevent the One, and encourage the Other; FOR not only the increase or decay of Sea-men and shipping, (the Walls of our British Empire) The encouragement or discouragement of Manufacturers, and consequently the Encrease of People, (which if duly em∣ployed can never be too many, their multitudes being always the first Riches as well as Strength of any Nation) but also the Value of every Country-Gentlemans Lands, Rents, Corn, Cattel, &c. does all ultimately depend upon, and are Influenced by It, and must either Rise or Fall in equal proportion as Forreign Traffick is well or ill manag'd, clog'd, or Encouraged. JUSTICE, square Dealing, and a punctual Honesty, are Essential Qualities in our true-bred Merchant. Hence his Books are allow'd Evidence, and lookt up∣on as a kind of Records; and a small Script of two or three Lines only under his hand, without either Witness or Seal, passes over the world for Thousands of Pounds, as Authentick as Twenty Noverint univer∣si's, or other long-winded Instruments, Sealed and Deli∣vered in the Presence of John Doe, and Richard Roe, and half the Parish besides.
I AM not Ignorant that the Title of Merchant in some parts of the World, is usurp'd by almost all sorts of little People whose Business is to Buy and Sell; But properly (and wholly here in England) it belongs to none but such as drive a forreign Trade, whereby they are vastly differenc'd from ordinary Shopkeepers and Retailers; Our Merchant is a person of Bulk, and con∣siderable Figure in the Common-Weal, and must be En∣dow'd with Qualifications proportionate. 1. HE should have a competent Fund, or Estate left him by his Ancestors; for tho Credit (charily kept) be a main support of, and Emprovement to his Affairs, yet It (alone) can never be a good beginning for such an Employment; for if he have not a fair Visible Stock to build on, every small puff of misfortune will be apt to shock his Reputation. 2. THERE ought also to be strong Natural Parts, an Active Vigorous Body, to endure the Fatigues of Travel; and a ready comprehensive Mind. A good dose of Mercury should go to his Constitution, To render him (etsi non versuti, versatilis tamen Ingenij) tho not of a crafty over-reaching, yet of a brisk accommoda∣ting Genius, whereby he may apply himself with an ea∣sy obliging Address to all sorts of Humours or Acci∣dents; yet this Mercury should be fixt by Saturn, or the Gaiety of his Complexion ting'd with a dash of Melancholy, to keep him from the vanity and extra∣vagancies of a Town-Wit, and the beggarly fate of the everlasting Tatlers; For Secrecy is a vertue almost as necessary to a Merchant as to a Statesman. 3. AS his Birth was Generous, so his Education was Liberal. He has Latin enough to understand an Au∣thor, or Discourse a Stranger; and to serve as a Prepa∣rative
and Ground-Work for the rest of his necessary Accomplishments; But thinks it scarce worth the while to slave seven years under the Tyranny of the Ferula, meerly to obtain the skill of Hunting a Greek Deriva∣tive, and Capping of Verses. 4. HE has the command of his Pen, and writes a fair Genteel Hand, not crampt up to a set Secretary like a Scriveners Boy; nor scrawling Long-Tails, like a Wench at a Boarding-School, but a neat charming mixture of Roman and Italian flowing with a kind of Artificial Negligence. [Of which in my Opinion Mr. Ayres by St. Pauls-School, is at least one of the best Teach∣ers about London.] 5. HE is well-skill'd in that Foundation of Arts, the Science of Numbers: for as Merchandize (next after Religion and Justice) is the life of the Weal-Publick, so Practical Arithmetick is the Soul of Mer∣chandize. But especially he is throughly versed in that noble method of Debtor and Creditor, used only by those of his own Profession. And his Books are kept with so much Order as well as Punctualness and Integrity, that 'tis the easiest thing in the world to find out any thing inquired after; and as soon as found, it carries with it Demonstration. 6. I NEED not tell you, that he is expert in the Na∣ture and Forms of Charter-Parties, Bills of Lading, Invoyces, Contracts, Bills of Exchange, Policies of Ensu∣rance, and the powers, obligations and effects of each of them. He knows the Measures, Weights, and Money of all forreign Countries, I mean the Coyns not only by their several Denominations, but also in their In∣trinsick Values in weight and fineness compared with the Standard of his own Country.
7. HE understands the Customs, Tolls, Taxes, Imposi∣tions and other Charges upon all sorts of Merchandize Exported or Imported to and from forreign Countries, or at home. In what Commodities each Region or Province abounds; what convenient Ports they have, what Wares they want or are fond of; and how, from whence, and at what Rates, furnisht. As also what Goods are Contraband in times of War, and what others in peace are Prohibited (for Reasons of State) in each place, to be Exported or Imported, and how the Rates of Exchange by Bills go from time to time. 8. PARTICULARLY, as Owner, or Part-owner of Ships, he has an Insight into the Goodness and Prices of all Materials requisite for Building or Repairing them, and in the diverse Workmanships thereof; as likewise for Masts, Tackling, Cordage, Ord∣nance, Victuals, Ammunition, &c. Together with the Ordinary Wages of Commanders, Officers, and Mari∣ners; To know upon what Rates and Conditions to Fraight his Ships, and Ensure his Adventures from one Port to another; and to be well acquainted with the Laws, Orders, and Customs of the Ensurance-Offices and Courts of Admiralty both here and beyond the Seas. 9. BY his frequent Voyaging and seeing the Won∣ders of the Lord in the great Deeps, he becomes skilful in Navigation, and not unacquainted with Astronomy; And by his Residence in several forreign parts, he at∣tains to the speaking of divers the most useful Langua∣ges, and is (by the way) a diligent Observer of the Ordinary Revenues and Expences of those Princes and States; Their strength both by Sea and Land; Their Laws, Customs, Policies, Manners, Religion, Architecture,
Military Discipline, Arts, Manufactories, and other Obser∣vables, of which he is capable to give an Account on all occasions for the good of his Country. SO that I scarce know any other Profession which lea∣deth into so much Knowledge, either of the Great World, (as to its Scituation, Products and Mutual Dependence) or of the little World [MAN] (as to his Humours, Bigotries, Passions, Intrigues, and Blind-sides) In the understanding of which two things seems to consist (if I mistake not) the main part of what we call civil Knowledg, Wisdom, or Policy. NOW if our Merchants Occupation be thus necessa∣ry, and require such Variety of excellent Qualifications, How can it but be Honourable too? For what can bet∣ter Recommend any Calling to Wisemens Regards, than its Ʋsefulness? Or be more Genteel and Glorious, than to supply the common Necessities of Mankind? Who is more to be esteemed than the Man whose Industry un∣derprops his Soveraigns Throne with Wealth, and at the same time furnishes his Fellow-Subjects with Em∣ployment, and the means of a comfortable Subsi∣stence? VAIN therefore, unjust, and ungrateful too, are their Clamours who would degrade this Noble Professi∣on as below a Person of Quality to Practice; Because (Forsooth) 'tis Questuary, and respects Gain, (and I won∣der what Profession does not in some degree or other?) As if a Gentleman might Honourably Buy an Office, and Sell his Land or his Breath, but nothing else: As if a Lawyer, or a Physitian might Pocket his Fees (the just Engagements, or Remunerations of his well-intended En∣deavours) without Sullying either his Family, or his Gown; and yet a Merchant should utterly forfeit his Birthright,
by Receiving a Bill of Exchange? I intend no odious Comparisons, or in the least to Affront those other most Worthy and Learned Professions, but only to vindicate the Honour of Merchandize, and convince the World, That if a person of Quality should happen to breed up his Son, or Match a Daughter therein, there's no dan∣ger that they should presently be level'd with the com∣mon Crowd, or Numbred with the Gaffers and the Gam∣mers. FOR since a Person of Honour may without any disparagement, improve his Lands, and let his Houses, and sell his Cattel for as much as he can get; And Buy his Provisions, Furniture, and Equipage as cheap as he can; I am so dull as not to conceive whence any Stains should reflect on his Scutcheon, If he should happen to Equip a Ship, and send abroad Ten Thousand Pounds worth of Cloth or Tin, and in return bring back a gallant Cargo of twice the value, to Enrich his Country as well as himself. 'TIS a smart, but I hope, causeless Reflection of a late IngeniousBritan∣nia Languens, or a discourse of Trade, Printed, 1680. Author. We are (says he) still pretending to be more Acurate in Logick and Philosophy (which howsoever otherwise useful, do not add Twopence per Annum to the Riches of the Nation) we conti∣nue to squeeze all the Sapless Papers and Fragments of Antiquity; we grow mighty well acquainted with the old Heathen gods, Towns, and People; we prise our selves in fruitless curiosities; we turn our Lice and Fleas into Bulls and Pigs by our Magnifying Glas∣ses; we are searching for the World in the Moon with our Telescopes; we send to weigh the Air on the
top of Teneriff; we invent Paceing Saddles, and Gimcracks of all sorts, which are voted Ingenuities, whilst the solid and most useful Notions and Conside∣rations of Trade, are turn'd into a Ridicule, or out of Fashion. SURE I am, whatever low Conceits Aristotle or some other Pedants may have had of Merchandize in old times, when its Dignity was not known, and when indeed it was but Huckstering and Pedlary in respect of what it has since arriv'd to; it must be avow'd, That 'tis long since become not unworthy of Persons of the first Quality; not only the Magnifico's of Luca, and Genoua, The Illustrissimo's of Venice, and the High Mighty Burghers of Holland, and such like Republican Grandees, make it their business; But absolute Sovereign Princes have courted it. Fer∣dinando the first great Duke of Tuscany, and his Suc∣cessors, by their care and diligence to countenance Merchants in their Affairs, have so encreased the practice thereof, That there is scarce a Nobleman or Gentleman in all their Dominions that doth not Traf∣fick either by himself or in Copartnership, whereby within fifty or sixty Years, the Trade to their Port of Legorn is so much augmented, that of a poor little Town (as some yet living can remember it) 'tis now become a fair and strong City, and one of the most famous places for Trade in Europe. TO go higher, some of the most sacred Crowned Heads of Christendom, descended from, and ally'd to the most Ancient and Illustrious Families that the World can boast of; (and in that number principally our present most August and Gracious Sovereign), are so far from counting it any diminution to their Royal
Majesties, That in the highest manner they endea∣vour to encourage Trade, by interesting Themselves therein. Hence our Exchange is allow'd to wear that lofty Title of ROYAL; nor can the Statues of our deceased Princes any where be more Gloriously plac'd, (next to their Repositories in Sacred Ground) than in that Magnificent Rendezvouz of Merchants; To intimate, that the Advancement and promoting of Trade, will be the Honour of our Kings Living and Dead. THE Truth is, The wisest of Kings and Men has long since given his Judgment by his practice in this case; For Solomon himself could never have made Sil∣ver and Gold to be as plenteous in Jerusalem as Stones, and Cedars as Sycamores, if he had not first turned Merchant, join'd in Copartnership with King Hiram, and set out a Navy at Ezion Geber (a Port in the Red Sea) which had the Advantage of Traffick to the In∣dian Ocean, and from thence to Ophir (supposed to be the Isle of Madagascar) whence they brought Gold and Silver and Elephants Teeth, as well as Apes and Pea∣cocks. THEREFORE let none of our Nobility or Gen∣try think it a disgrace to Employ themselves or their Sons in this NOBLE MYSTERY, which as 'tis most advantagious to their Countrey and themselves, so the most excellent Personages have not disdain'd to embark in it: For (as the judicious Mr. MunEnglands Treasure, p. 155. most truly says) Fo∣reign Trade, or the noble Profession of the Merchant, is the great Revenue of the King, the
Honour of the Kingdom; The School of our Arts; The supply of our Wants; The employment of our Poor; The improvement of our Lands; The Nursery of our Mariners; the Walls of the Kingdom; The means of our Treasure; The sinews of our Wars, and the Terror of our Enemies. FOR if Forreign Commerce be of such Import to all Nations, That the Wisest Princes and States every where Endeavour (tho labouring under never so great disadvantage) to Caress as much as they can, and ob∣tain the good Graces of a Lady, that is always attended with so vast a Dowry (for to speak freely, that People that can get the Trade of the World, may quickly, with∣out pursuing the toils of the Coesars and the Alexanders, be, (in effect) Lords of their Neighbours, and give Laws to the World) much more then ought We the hap∣py Inhabitants of Great-Brittain, highly to esteem of Traffick, which God and Nature seem to have design'd for our peculiar Portion; England affording the most; and best natural Products and Materials for Manufactories; the most and best Ports; most commodiously Sci∣tuate for Trade, either to the Streights, the Baltick, or either of the Indies; having also a numerous Peo∣ple, secured in their Liberties and Properties by a Gracious Prince and most wholsome Laws; Seamen as Brisk, Active, Skilful, and Adventrous as ever Plough'd the Ocean; blest besides, with the greatest plenty of all sorts of Provisions, and a vast Fund of Land, by Taxes on which in time of War, the Government may be Supported and Defended, and (in a word) enjoying all other. Advantages that can possibly be im∣agined Requisite; so that it must certainly be our own
Default, if we are not possess'd of a greater and more Advantagious Trade than any of our Neighbours; and consequently be not the Richest and most Considerable People in the World. FINIS.
