C1920 669.f.10[65] R210497 99869290 162602
To the Right Honourable the Lords; Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses Assembled in both Houses of PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of Richard Chambers Merchant and Alderman of the City of London. Sheweth, THat your Petitioner out of a deep sense of your great and weighty affaires in these distracted times, hath with patience waited upon God, and your favours, for a seasonable opportunity to revive his sormer Petition exhibited to this Honourable House the 22 day of November, 1641. in which were expressed at large your Petitioners sufferings and imprisonments, so generally known to all; and fearing to be tedious, the brief Heads whereof are as followeth: I. That your Petitioner for refusing to pay Tonnage and Poundage, as of due right to the King, without authority of Parliament according to Law, and for defending the Parliaments Rights and Liberties therein, and the Petition of Right, suffered as followed: II. Your Petitioner thereupon had all his goods from time to time Imported, seized, and detained for pretended duties in the Custome-house, London; although your Petitioner willed the then Farmers and Officers to pay themselves what was due, and give your Petitioner the re∣mainder; which they denying, your Petitioner supplicated the Lords of the Councell for his Goods; and upon speeches between them, your Petitioner said he had been in Turkie, and in other parts of the world; but in no parts were Merchants so wronge and scrued, as in England; at which words the Lords tooke offence, and would not suffer explanation, as was then humbly desired, but committed your Petitioner Prisoner to the Marshalseys in 1628. III. After which your Petitioner not getting liberty upon three Petitions exhibited, he brought his Habeas Corpus, and with much strugling and importunity had his liberty upon speciall Baile in the Kings Bench. IV After which your Petitioner exhibited his Bill in the Exchequer Chamber, and demanded Writs for delivery of his Goods, but could not obtaine any, but some Orders that the Farmers should keep double their demands, and deliver the rest to your Petitioner; which Orders were not obeyed, and the next day made void, contrary to Law and Justice; onely through the feares and injustice of the then Barons, altering publike Orders of Court upon private Motions, &c. V. Which your Petitioner perceiving, he brought two Replevins according to Law, and executed the same, and tooke his Goods ashoare our of Lighters, and put them into Carts to carry home, but was stopped and hindered by the said Farmers and Officers; whereupon your Petitioner went to the Sheriffes of London for ayde, and delivery of his Goods, upon which they came down; and Sheriffe Acton with faire promises of Justice deluded your Petitioner untill night, in which time he combined with some of the Farmers, and for his owne private gaine, being an under Farmer, sent Notes to the King, and Lords; by which practices and falshood, contrary to Justice, and the duty of his place and oath, he treacherously betrayed your Petitioner and his Goods into the hands of Messengers, who seized his Goods to the Kings possession; for which Act, upon your Petitioners complaint to the Parliament, he was committed to the Tower; and after the Parli∣ament broke up he gained his liberty; and for his good service to the King, William Acton Esquite, was made Knight and Baronet. VI By which practices your Petitioners Goods were forcibly held from him, and he arrested by a Sergeant at Armes, and presently after, two Bils were filed against him in the S ar-chamber; and upon one of which he was for two words sentenced to pay 2000 l. fine to the King, Im∣psonment at the Kings pleasure, and to acknowledge his offence at the Councel board, Star-chamber, and the Exchange London, anno 1629. VII. That your Petitioner presently after the sentence, and before the Fine was estreted into the Exchequer, did according to Law put in his plea into that Court in bar of the said sentence as unjust, and contrary to Law, and refused to conform thereunto, or to any submissions then sent him. VIII. Neverthelesse, contrary to Law and Justice, Extents were taken out against your Petitioner for the said Fine, your Petitioner having then of his estate detained in the Custome-house, as by Records in Exchequer appeareth, 7060 l. estate, out of which were taken for the King at one time 2500 l. at another time 1130 l. and at another time in Currans 700 l. which together is 4330 l. for which to this day he never received satisfaction. IX. That seven yeares after, upon many Petitions exhibited, the King gave your Petitioner liberty, redeeming his perishable Goods; but the remainder lay in the Custome-house London fourteen years, untill they were delivered him by Order of this blessed Parliament. X. By which fourteen years sufferings your Petitioner is damnified in his Estate, Trade, Credit, and by losse of his Factory, and Markets, by fall of price, and long detaining his goods, and with what was taken for the King, with Suits in Law in the Star-chamber and Exchequer, and seven years Imprisonments, with Fees, and other Charges, above sixteen thousand Pounds Eate. The Premisses considered, and for that your Petitioner was the first Merchant which denyed undue pretended Customes aforesaid, as also Ship∣money, and all other illegall Exactions contrary to Law, to his great losse and hazard, and his sufferings thereby the more extremely multi∣plyed and pressed upon him being a single man, for his constancy and resolution in defending the Rights of the Parliament, and the Petition of Right, and the Subjects priviledges, and no ways yeelding to Preferment, Offices and Honours then offered to take him off; and for that the King having a great part of your Petitioners Estate so illegally, and your Petitioner not getting Justice against the King, or any other that de∣fended the Kings pretended demands, having in those days to do with Will, and not Law, although your Petitioner then indeavoured; which since by death of some, and time spent to others, is cut off by the Statute of limitation of Actions, except by the Justice and favour of this most Honorable House he may find remedy against Sir Thomas Trevor, Baron of the Exchequer; Sir William Acton Baronet, the Sheriffe afore∣said; and Sir John Jacob a then Farmer, all yet living; besides all which, your Petitioner hath in these distracted times spent and laid out himself by Loans, Gifts and Taxes for the publike Service of God, and the Common Cause, and Parliament, against the known Enemy, above himself or his Estate. Your Petitioners cause so appearing beyond Precedent, he most humbly beseecheth this most Honourable House to consider, and to be Honourably plea∣sed, that whereas your Petitioners first wounds and sufferings were at the Custome-house as a Merchants so hee may there now after so many hazards and yeares past, receive cure and recompence from that fountaine and place of Customes, of Tunnage and Poundage; where your Petitioner by Trade for forty yeares supplyed and paid much Money, and yet doth; or otherwise as in your grave Wisdomes you shall thinke fit. And that your Petitioner may also have such repaire against Sir Thomas Trevor, Sir William Acton, and Sir John Jacob, for their severall wrongs and injustice, as shall be agreeable to the Justice of this Honourable House: which favours and Justice will support and revive your Petitioner in his lost and decayed Estate, and old age; and much Honour your Honourable House for your care of your faithfull Petitioner, and give life and incouragement to all others for future times, and ever obliege your Petitioner in all service, with his Wife, and nine Chil∣dren to pray for you, and the continuance of this most happy Parliament, &c. Richard Chambers.
Now Right Honourable, see what remarkable Passages God through his Providence hath brought about concerning your Petitioner; which the world taking notice of, he was earnestly pressed not to hide, for example to future ages. Viz. I. THat your Petitioner being sentenced in Star-chamber 6 Maii, 1629. and kept Prisoner in the Fleet for no sub and just six yeares after 6 Maii, 1635. he was discharged by the Kings command without submission, &c. II. That shortly after, your Petitioner being assessed 40 shillings for that illegall Ship-money, hee refusing to pay it, was sen for to the then Lord Major Sir Edward Brmfield, who sent your Petitioner to Newgate forcibly in his Coach at ten a Clockt at night, where he lay, using all humble and legall wayes for his freedome, without effect; but had all the injustice and hinderance that could be offered, untill speech and hope of a blessed Parliament. III. Upon which your Petitioner sued the said Sir Edward in the Kings bench for his false Imprisonment, and had a Verdict and Judgement for 1500 l. dammage; but for non-payment, and his fraudulency, your Petitioner was forced to take out a Commission upon the Statute, and proclaime him Bankrupt; and thereupon got possession of his House (where he kept his Majoralty) in part of satisfaction. IV. After which, the Ward of Walbrooke chose your Petitioner Alderman of the same Ward Sir Edward was Alderman of; and being presented to the Court of Aldermen, they confirmed and swore him Alderman: since which he was chosen Sheriffe of London, and kept his Sheriffalty last yeare, 1644. in that House from whence he was sent to Newgate as aforesaid. V. That the said Sir Edward for Malignancy, &c. lay Prisoner in the Fleet, and now is in the Kings bench, being two of the Prisons to which your Petitioner was committed in his first troubles. VI. That by the Honourable favour of both Houses of Parliament your Petitioner did sit a Commissioner for the Parliament in the Custome-house London, and received the Customes of England two Years, two Months, where your Petitioners first sufferings did arise. VII. That certain Cabinets and Glasses of the Lord Treasurer Weston, your Petitioners mortallenemy in the Exchequer and Star-chamber, were committed to your Petitioner to be sold for the Parliament, (being Bribes presented him.) VIII. That the Archbishop of Canterbury, William Laud, your Petitioners mortall Enemy in all places; who, with the rest, sentenced your Pe∣titioner without proof; and at that time further declared, That if their Lordships concurred in a higher Fine and punishment, he would doe so too; for that this Chambers would take away the breadfrom the King by his Customes; and if the King had more such Chambers, he would have never a Chamber to put his head in. That by the hand of Providence, your Petitioner in the time of his Sheriffalty did bring this Arch∣bishop to execution of-death, after a legall Tryall of Parliament, for his illegall Courses and Treasons. IX. That the Lord Keeper Coventry, in the Star-chamber, cleared your Petitioner of the Crime laid to his charge, being not proved by any wit∣nesse, and protested upon his Conscience, that he conceived your Petitioner had no ill meaning in the words he spake at the Councell Board; but yet concluded, that as the Lords had sentenced him, hee must doe so too; and with Sir Humphrey May, Fined your Petitioner at 1500 l. Imprisonment at the Kings pleasure, to acknowledge his offence at the Councell Board, Star-chamber, and Exchange London: so with Pi∣late he washed his hands of him, and with the multitude condemned your Petitioner, to the ruine of him and his. X. That your Petitioner being Sheriffe of Londen, went to the Tower to acquaint the Archbishop with the time of his execution, according to a Warrant received, and then desiring him to tell your Petitioner who had his Goods, or the proceed of them; he answered, he knew not whereupon your Petitioner told him of his bitter sentence against him without any proof of Crime, as also of the Lord Keepers sentence, which in charity might have qualified him for the suture, and repeating both their sentences to him; and at the expression of the Lord Keepers complying, and washing his hands with Pilate, he turned about and laughed heartily, being the night before he suffered, and never expressed any sorrow for your Petitioner, or desire to pardon him, &c. so your Petitioner departed from him. XI. That the Earle of Dorset sent for your Petitioner from the Fleet, who comming to him, used all perswasions for him to submit and pay Customes, offering preferment, &c. and to bring your Petitioner to the King; but he no way yeelding, after many passages, his Lordship most fearfully cursed, and swore God damne him, your Petitioner was the archest Rebell of the Kingdom, and deserved better to bee hanged then the Gun powder Traitors; and swore God refuse him, if they were living, he would sooner intercede his Majesty for a pardon for them, then your Petitioner, who told him he needed no such pardon; then his Lordship said your Petitioner might imbrue his hands in blood one day; who answered, he hoped God would keep him from that crying sin: then his Lordship called him Prince Chambers, and said, That ano∣ther Redeemer was come into the world to redeem the Subjects Liberties; and that he had wicked Councell, and would know them; for they were Parliament Rascalls, and other Long-gown'd Rascalls, and Puritanicall white-robed Rascalls, such as preach two houres in a Pulpit, of Conscience, which have no more then a Dog; with much other blasphemous speeches. After which he asked your Petitioner againe, if hee would submit to the King, who answered, he did in his Laws, which was the greatest obedience; his Lordship told your Petitioner hee was his friend in the sentence; but if he were to doe it again, he swore God damne him, he would sentence your Petitioner 100000 l. who told his Lorpship, the words he spake he would maintain; whereupon his Lordship willed your Petitioner to give him his hand, which hee did, and kiss't it, hoping of better proceedings; but he swore and curst, and said God damn him, if he or the Lords had conceived or thought your Petitioner had meant the words spoken at the Councell Board, by the King, the Lords, or Government; hee, and they would have cut your Petitioner in pieces alive: So he there also directly and freely cleared your Petitioner of the Crime laid against him, both for himself, and the other Lords, &c. whereupon your Petitioner humbly desired of his Lordship to know for what he was so sentenced. Upon which his Lordship fearefully cursed, and willed him to goe to the Exchange and tell all the Merchants there, That if all the Gunpowder Traytors were living, your Petitioner deserved better to be hanged then all they; with other curses, &c. and your Petitioner desiring his Lordship to have a better opinion of him, said he, of the Devil first; and that your Petitioner and his Race would be damned for this act: so he departed to the Fleet again. XII. That your Petitioner being sentenced 6 May, 1629. to ruine and disgrace, was by the goodnesse of God in the time of his Sheriffalty of London the 6 May, 1645. againe happily Married to a second Wife 16 yeares after. O how righteous art thou O God, and just in all thy judgements, in humbling and exalting, and in mercy, bringing strange things to passe by weak means, according to thy blessed Word, for example of thy children to feare thee, and guide their ways according to thy holy Word: as followeth, Ezek. 45.9. Deut. 16.20. Ecclesiasticus 11.7.8. Psal. 56.5. Eod 23.6, 7. Levit. 19.15. Esa. 56.1, 2. Prov. 17.15. Mich. 2.1, 2. Isa. 10.1. Isa. 29.21. Ezek. 46.18. Eccles. 5.7, 8. Revel. 2.10. Richard Chambers.
