C2754A E155_9 99859534 111622
HIS MAIESTIES RESOLUTION CONCERNING The Magazine in the Tower of London. Likewise the Parliaments Resolution concerning the same, being resolved to dispose therof, as shall be found needfull for the present occasion, and by the Authority of Parliaments. Together with the Parliaments Declaration July 12. Declaring that none shall apprehend, or arrest any of His Maiesties Subjects that obeyeth the Ordinance of Parliament, under pretence of His Majesties Warrants. Also a worthy Speech spoken in the House of Com∣mons by Mr. Iohn Pym, Esquire, laying open the great ruine and destruction that is like to be fall this Kingdome, declaring the Authority of Parliaments. With two humble Motions presented to His Majesty from the High Court of Parliament. Ordered that these particulars aforementioned be forthwith prin∣ted and published. Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com Printed for J. SMITH July. 14. 1642.
A WORTHY SPEECH SPOKEN In the Honourable House of Commons, by Iohn Pym Esquire. Mr. SPEAKER, THe Distempers of this Kingdom are well known, they need not Repetition; for though we have good Laws, yet they want their Execu∣tioner, if they be executed it is in a wrong sence: therfore I shall endeavour to apply a Remedy to the Breaches that are made, and to that end I shall discover first the quality of the Disease.
I. There is a design to alter Law and Re∣ligion, the parties that effect this are Papists, who are obliged by a Maxime in their Do∣ctrine, that they are not able to maintain their Religion, but to extirpate all others. II. The second is our Hierarchy, which can∣not mount to the hight they aime at, without the breach of Law. To which Religion necessarily ioyns, that if the one the other falls. III. Agents and Pentioners to forraign State, who see we cannot comply with them, if wee maintain the Religion established with Us, contrary to theirs, here we intend the Spanish White-gold works, which are of most effect for Earthly Favorites, as for petty promo∣tion, not Conscience. And such are our Judges Spirituall and Temporall, such are also our Councellours of State.
All these setled in their contrivents, that ayme at one end, and to this purpose they walk on four feet, discountenancing of Prea∣chers, and men virtuous for Religion, perse∣cuted under the Law of purity. The second is the discountenancing of Preachers, of contrary dispositions. Thirdly, The negotiating with the Fa∣ction of Rome, by frequent preaching, and instruction to preach of the absolute Mo∣narchie of Kings, here followeth severall Heads. THe politicall interpretation of the Law to serve the Times, and this to impose Taxes with the Colour of Law. A Judge said it, when a Habeas Corpus was paid for by keeping the King in continuall want, that Hee may seeke to their Councels for Relief; to this pur∣pose they keep the Parliament in Di∣staste that their Councell might bee ta∣ken.
The King himself is brought to this, like a woman that useth her self to poy∣son, when she might Eate good Meat, Search the Chronicles, and we shall see no King ever used Parliaments that was brought to this want, Arbitrary Procee∣dings in Courts of Justice, we have Law left to the Conscience of a single man, all Courts are now of Conscience. Plotters to inforce a war between France and Us, that when we had well wearied one another, wee might bee brought to what scorn they pleased, the Partition wall is only Unity, the puni∣shing of Parliament men to affright them from speaking what we think, one was committed for not delivering up the Petitions of the House, a Declaration which slandereth our Proceedings, as full of Lyes as Levites, who would have the first Ground to be our Example, and Papists under appearance to the King, his best Subjects; for they Contribute money to the wars, which the Prote∣stants will not do.
The other is the Military, by getting places of Importance into the Papists hands, as who were Commanders in the late Army, but they who were strong in Arms, but they to whom their Arms is delivered contrary to the Statute. Their indeavours are to bring in strangers to billite upon us. A Letter sent from Mr. Secretary Nicholas to the House of Commons, July 12. THere came Letters to the House of Commons from Mr. Secretary Nicho∣las at Yorke, by Order from his Majesty in answer to a Letter of both Houses to His Majesty, desiring his consent for the taking of some Arms out of the Tower, to be sent to Munster, but his Majesty would not Consent therto, saying that they had taken one part of his Arms from him by force, and then Petition him to deliver up the other. Both Houses ta∣king into consideration the said Letter,
Ordered, that there should be such Arms aken, as should be found needfull for the present occasions, and to be disposed of by the Authority of Parliament. Both houses Ordered also, that there should be these humble Motions presen∣ted to his Majesty. 1. That the Justice of Parliament may passe upon all Delin∣quents. 2. That the generall pardon offered by your Majesty may he granted with such exceptions, as shall be advised by both houses of Parliament. The Lords and Commons in Parliament do de∣clare, That if any Messenger shall be colour of a∣ny Command from his Majesty, or Warrant under his Majesties hand, arrest, take, or carry away any of His Majesties Subjects▪ to any place vvhatsever con¦trary to their Wils, Chat it is both against the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of the Subjects. Ordered that this be printed and published. John Brown Cler. Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Par. D. Com.
