C4091bA 45504434 171739
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL, EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Church-Wardens, and Side-men of every Parish within the Diocess of VVORCESTER, IN THE Episcopal Visitation Of the Right Reverend Father in God VVALTER By Divine Permission Lord Bishop of WORCESTER. OXFORD, Printed by L. LICHFIELD Printer to the Vniversity Anno Domini 1674.
Bibliography THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE depiction of tree of knowledge HENRY STEVENS of Vermont, FSA. &c. 4 Trafalgar Square▪ London. 1882
The Tenor of the Oath to be tendered to the Church-Wardens and Side-men of every Parish in the Diocess of WORCESTER. YOU shall Swear, after diligent enquiry, to make a true answer, according to your know∣ledge, unto the Articles in this Book, now given you in charge; and to present such of your Parish as are Offenders therein, contrary to the duty they owe to God and the Lawes Ecclesiastical: And this you shall do as in the sight of God uprightly and truly. So help you God.
ARTICLES of Visitation and Enquiry within the Diocess of WORCESTER. TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chappels, with the Ornaments and Furniture thereunto belonging. I. IS your Parish Church or Chappel kept in good repair in all parts of it, with such cleanliness decency and order as becom∣eth a house dedicated to the publick worship and service of God? II. Hath any thing belonging to them, as Bells, Lead, &c. been sold or embezelled? When and by whom? III. Is there a Font of Stone with a good Cover to it standing in a convenient place towards the lower part of your Church for the Ad∣ministration of Baptisme? And is there in your Chancell a decent Communion Table with a fair Carper of Silk, or fine Cloath, with another of Fine Linnen, to spread thereon at the Administration of the Lords Supper? And have you a fair Communion Cup or Cha∣lice with a Cover of Silver, and one or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter belonging to that Service? IIII. Have you in your said Church or Chappel a convenient Seat or Pew for your Minister to read Divine Service in: a Pulpit with a comely Cloath or Cushion for the same: a Bible of the last Trans∣lation in a large Volume, and two books of Common Prayer, one for the Minister and the other for the Clerk, all well and substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies set forth by authori∣ty? A book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, The book of Thirty Nine Articles of Religion, and a printed Table of the degrees wherein Marriage is prohibited? Have you also his Majesties Proclamation commanded to be read yearly upon the Sunday before the Thirtieth day of January?
V. Have you a comely large Surplice and other Ornaments for your Minister according to his Degree to wear in his publick Ad∣ministrations for outward decency and distinction? VI. Have you a book of Parchment wherein are Registred the names of all such persons as are Married, Christened and Buried with∣in your Parish? And is the Transcript thereof yearly within a moneth next after the 25th of March brought into the Bishops Registry? VII. Have you likewise another book of Paper wherein to record names and Licenses of all such strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your Church or Chappel? As also a third book where∣in to writ down the Church-wardens Accounts; and such summes of money as have been collected into your Parish upon any briefs that have come unto it: together with a strong Chest with locks and keyes, wherein to keep the aforesaid books, and all other the afore∣mentioned Furniture in safe custody? And lastly have you a Bier, with a black hersecloath for the burial of the dead? TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, the Houses, Glebe, and Tithes belonging to the Church. I. IS your Church-yard sufficiently fenced and kept from all an∣noyance▪ Hath any person encroached upon the same, or cut down the Trees therein? II. Is the Mansion house of your Minister, with all other houses thereunto belonging kept in good repair? Have any of them bin pul∣led down or defaced? Have any encroached upon the land thereto be∣longing, or fell'd the Trees thereon growing? III. Have you a perfect Terrier of all Glebe-lands, Gardens, Or∣chards and Tenements belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? Also a particular List of such Pensions, Tithes, Rents, Customs and other yearly profits within or without your Parish, as belong there∣to? Are any of them withheld from your Minister? And by whom? IIII. Have any of the Antient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage bin taken away, or alienated by Lease, Sale, or Exchange, without Licence from the Ordinary, and the free con∣sent of the Incumbent? Have any Enclosures bin made in your Parish to the detriment of the Church?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. I. IS your Minister Episcopally Ordained Priest or Deacon according to the Laws of the Church of England? II. Is he defamed, or suspected to have obtained either his Be∣nefice or Orders by any Simoniacal compact? III. Hath he bin legally Instituted and Inducted into his Bene∣fice: and did he within two moneths after his Induction publickly in the Church upon some Sunday, or Holyday in the time of Divine Service read the 39 Articles of the Church of England, and there pulickly declare his assent thereunto? IIII. Hath he any Ecclesiastical Benefice, or doth he supply any other Church besides his own? Is he constantly resident among you, or is he at any time for any long season absent? Hath he a setled Cu∣rate to assist him in his absence? Is that Curate an able, discreet, and conformable person, licenced by the Bishop, residing and attend∣ing only upon that Cure? And hath he a competent allowance ac∣cording to the Value of the Living? V. Doth your Parson, Vicar, or Curate read the daily morning and Evening Service, with the Second Service (as it is prescribed) on Sundaies and Holydaies? Doth he read also the Litany on Sun∣daies, as likewise on Wednesdaies and Fridaies. And doth he in reading the Services, and in the Administration of the holy Sacra∣ments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women after Child-birth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and Pro∣nouncing Gods Commination against impenitent sinners, use the Form and words prescribed in the book of Common Praier, without any addition, omission, or alteration of the same? And doth he use all such rites and ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service as are appointed in the said Book? VI. Doth your Minster at the reading and celebrating the Divine offices in your Church, or Chappel constantly weare the Surplice, together with such other Scholastical habit, as is suitable to his Degree? VII. Doth your Minister give you notice of, and duly observe Holydaies, Festivalls, or Feasts, with other Solemn times, as Em∣ber and Rogation Weekes, according as it is by Laws and Canons of this Church appointed?
VIII. Hath your Minister bin licenced to officiate the Bishop of this Diocese, or either of the two Universities? Doth he being thus licenced, diligently read Divine Service and Preach every Lords-day in your Church, or Chappel, unless hindered by Sickness, or reasonable absence? And in such cases doth he procure some law∣full Minister to read praiers, to preach and perform other Ministeri∣al duties? IX. Doth your Minister constantly on Sundaies in the afternoon, immediately after the second Lesson diligently instruct the youth of your Parish in the Church Catechism? And doth he prepare and present them being so instructed to be Confirmed by the Bishop? And doth he endeavour to reclaim all Popish Recusants and other Secta∣ries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religi∣on established in the Church of England, and to their bounden duty in obeying the laws and submitting to the Government thereof? X. Doth your Minister celebrate the Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per so often every year, that every Parishioner may receive thrice at the least? And doth he repell those that ought not to be admitted, giving an account of them to the Bishop? XI. Is he ready to Visit the Sick, and to baptize Infants that are in danger of death? Is there any Infant or other person, by his de∣fault unbaptized in your Parish? Doth he use to baptize any without God-fathers or God-mothers, or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Child, or doth he baptize any at home except in case of imminent danger? XII. Hath he at any time (as you know, or have heard) Preach∣ed any false, heretical, seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the People into parties and factions, to the disturbance of the publick peace and unity either of Church of State? XIII. Hath he presumed to marry any persons in private hou∣ses? Or such as being under age, have not the consent of their Parents, or Guardians? Or without the Banns first published on Three Sun∣daies or Holydaies in the Church? Or any other hours then between Eight and Twelve in the morning, unless he had a Licence so to do? XIIII. Hath your Minister taken upon him to appoint any pub∣lick or private Fasts, Prophecying or Exercises not appointed by au∣thority? Or doth he or any other, either Minister, or Lay person hold any conventicles or meetings in private houses within your Pa∣rish, for People of several Families to resort unto under the pretense
of Preaching, praying, thanksgiving, or humiliation, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided? XV. Is your Minister conformable to the holy Rule and Great Example of our Lord Jesus Christ? Is he a man of a studious, sober, peaceable and exemplary life, for sanctity, charity and industry in his Calling? Is he grave, modest and regular in his outward demeanour, without Vanity in his hair, and his apparrel such as may distinguish him from the Laity, as the Canons of the Church require? Is his dis∣course and whole Conversation becoming a Minister of the Gospel, who remembers the great account he must give for his own and other Mens souls committed to his care? Or is he in any kind whatsoever disorderly and Scandalous? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. I. ARe there any in your Parish that are reputed Hereticks, or Schismaticks, refusing communion with the Church of Eng∣land, or professing any other Religion then what is established in this Church, seduceing others from it, and railing against it? Are there any convicted Papists, known Anabaptists, Familists, Quakers and other Saperatists in your Parish? II. Is there any person in your Parish that lyeth under any Common Fame, or Vehement suspition of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards, Swearers, or Blas∣phemers of God's Name, and his holy Word? Are any noted for Railers, unclean and filthy Talkers, or Sowers of sedition, or living in discord and contention? III. Do any of your Parish upon Sundaies, or Holydaies follow their bodily, or ordinary labour, or permit their servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or wares sold? Or do any Vintners, In∣keepers, or Victuallers and sellers of Ale and Beer suffer any persons to tipple, or game in their houses upon those daies? IV. Doth every person inhabiting and sojourning within your Pa∣rish duly resort unto your Church, or Chappel, upon every Sunday and Holyday appointed for Divine Service? Do they then quietly abide with reverence, order, and decency, during all the whole time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or other Service of God there used? And are there any among you that come only to the Preaching, and not to the Common Prayers of the Church?
V. Doth every person uncover his head, and so continue all the time of Divine Service in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel at the Prayers and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read, making due reverence when the name of our Lord Jesus is men∣tioned? VI. Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their In∣fant Children to be baptized publickly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger; in which case the Child may be baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the Form and Rites appointed in the Litur∣gy? Or do they send them from their own Minister to be baptized in any other Parishes, or make use of any other Minister to baptize, when their own is at home? Or do they keep their Children any longer unbaptized then the Church alloweth? And are there any In∣fants or more aged persons in your Parish as yet unbaptized? Who are they, and of what Age? VII. Doth every Householder in your Parish cause their Child∣ren, Apprentices and Servants to learn the Church Catechisme, and give account of it to your Minister as he shall require it in the Church on Sundaies, or Holydaies as it is appointed? And when they are there∣in well instructed, do they take care to have them brought by the Minister to Confirmation, when occasion is offered by the Bishop, for the increase of all spiritual gifts and graces in them? VIII. Is there any person in your Parish, who being Sixteen years of age doth not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times in the year, of which Easter is alwaies to be one? Doth any in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling, or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad? IX. Have you any among you that be denounced and declared Excommunicate for any crime committed? How long have they bin so excommunicated? And do any of your Parish keep Society with them before they be reconciled to the Church and absolved? X. Are there any living in your Parish as Man and Wife who are within the degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully di∣vorced have Married again: Or any that being lawfully Married, and not separated, or divorced by course of Law do not cohabit together? XI. Are there any Married Women in your Parish who after their delivery from the peril of Childbirth refuse to make their pub∣lick Thanksgiving to God in the Church; and when they come so to do, do they come decently apparrelled, and make their Offerings according to custome?
XII. Are there any of your Parish who refuse to pay their East∣ter Offerings and other Duties to your Minister; or to pay the Rates assessed on them for the repair and Provisions of the Church? XIII. Do any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish that be yet unproved? Or any Goods Administred without a due Grant from the Ordinary? Did any dy∣ing in your Parish or else where, leave any Legacy to your Church, or Chappel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious and cha∣ritable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they bin bestowed? XIV. Do you know, or have you heard of any in your Parish, who having the Presentation of an Ecclesiastical Living, hath made any Si∣moniacal compact, or gain thereby, either in Money, or by reserve of any part of the Tithes, or Glebe belonging to that Benefice? XV. Have any Pewes or Seats been erected in your Church or Chappel without leave from the Ordinary? Is there any strife, or contention about seats in the Church? Have any occasioned Riot, Clamour, or Fighting in the Church at any time? TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clerks and Sextons. I. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappellry a Parssh Clerk of honest life and conversation? And doth he perform his duty in reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your Mi∣nister, and doth he duly attend him in all Divine Services at your Church? And are his wages duely paid unto him? II. Doth he, or your Sexton take care of the Church, to keep it lockt and clean, to open the doores, and to ring the Bells in due time, to call the Living to the worship of God; Also to admo∣nish them by tolling of a Passing-bell of any that are Dying, thereby to meditate of their own death, and to commend the others weak con∣dition to the mercy of God? TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals and Alms-houses, Schooles, School-masters, Physitians, Chirurgions, and Midwives. I. WHat Hospital, Alms-house, or Free-school hath been found∣ed in your Parish? Are they so ordered in the Revenue
and Use as the Founders appointed, and the Law of the Land allowes? II. What School-master, private, or publick, is there in your Pa∣rish? Is he Licenced by the Bishop? Doth he teach his Scholars in the Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Doth he cause them upon Sundaies and Holydaies orderly to repair to your Church, or Chappel, And see that they behave themselves there quietly and reverently during the time of divine Service & Sermon? III. Do any in your Parish practice Physick, Chirurgery, or Midwifery, without Licence from the Ordinary? TIT. VII. Queries to be put to the Minister, concerning the Church-wardens and Side-men. 1. ARe the Church-wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint consent of the Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by the Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? 2. Have the former, and last Church-wardens given up their Ac∣compts duly to the Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Church-wardens the money remaining in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? 3. Do your Church-wardens and Side-men diligently take notice of their names, who without a sufficient cause are absent from Divine Service and Sermons on the Lords daies, and other Holydaies? Do they, by Warrant from the next Justices, Levy Twelve-pence by way of Distress (according to Law) upon their Goods, in case they refuse to pay it, for their wilful and causeless absence? And is the mo∣ney so Levyed distributed to the Poor of your Parish, and kept upon account in a book? 4. Do they present them that come late to Church, after Divine Service is begun, or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer any to stand idle, or talk together in the Church Porch, or walk in the Church, or Church-yard, during the time of Prayer, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices? 5. Do they, against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel, provide a sufficient quantity of fine White Bread, and of good Wine, according to the number of Communicants? 6. Do they cause all Strangers that Preach in your Church, or Chappel, to subscribe their names the same day, in a Book provided for that purpose, together with the name of the Bishop that Licensed them to Preach in this Diocess? And do they permit no other to Preach?
7. Have they (the Church-wardens, and Side-men) who are to give in a true answer upon their Oathes unto all these Articles of En∣quiry, in their several Titles, taken sufficient time to draw up their Presentments at home, before they come to the Visitation? And have they therein consulted with you their Minister for your faithful assistance? FOR both you and they are seriously to consider, that as the faithful discharge of your Trusts, according to your Duties, or Oathes, is a special meanes to repress and reform all sins and disorders in your Parishes, and so to preserve the honour of Religion, and the peace of this Church, to the glory of our God and Saviour (which are the great uses and ends of all Church Government and Visitations:) So if you neglect your duties there∣in, by refusing to present such crimes and faults, as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of by publick Fame, you will not only sin against God, your Consciences, and the Churches Prosperity, and consequently draw upon your selves the guilt of being accessary to the sad decay of Religion, but also become liable to those punishments, which in case of wilful omission and Perjury, are by the Law to be inflicted on you for your defaults, and must expect that the Bishop and his Officers will pro∣ceed against you accordingly. WALTER WIGORN. THe Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of the younger sort in their several Parishes, as they shall think fit to receive Confirmation from the Bishop, and to present them to him to be Confirmed; Especially such as having competently learned their Catechism have not yet received the Holy Communi∣on. And every person that is to be Confirmed, is to have a God-father, or God-mother as a witness at their Confirmation as is appoin∣ted by the Book of Common Prayer. FINIS.
