C7061 E459_24 R205102 99897359 170869
THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant Generall CROMWEL CONCERNING The Citizens of LONDON, and their high and strange ex∣pressions against the Army; with his Protestation touch∣ing the said City, and his Resolution concerning the Northern Expedition. Presented to the view of all His Majesties loyall and faith∣full Subjects within the Kingdome of England and Dominion of Wales. ALSO, The Votes and Resolutions of both Houses of Parliament, con∣corning the Kings Majesties Letter for a Personall Trea∣ty, and their concurrence to his Majesties Desires, for the Scots to joyn in the said Treaty, and to have such servants are needfull to attend His Royall Person. Likewise, the recalling of their former Votes, concerning the KING, and appointing five of the House of Peers, and ten of the House of Commons to treat with his Majesty in the Isle of Wight. Together with strange and terrible Newes from Colchester, and the Scottish Army. Printed for R. W. and are to be sold neer Temple-Bar, 1648.
Lieutenant Generall CROMWELL HIS DECLARATION Concerning The City of London, and the whole Kingdome in generall, declaring his full Resolution and Intentions touching the said City. VVHereas I should long since have acquain∣ted you of the many favours we received from the City of Bristol, by the mediation of Mr. Peters, when we lay before Pembrook, they affor∣ding us not only a great supply of Beer, but linnen for our wounded and sick souldiers, a mercy seasonable and neces∣sary, and at this present sensibly felt; yet in this very poor condition, we can do no more but acknowledge it with
thankfull hearts to God, and by promising to hazzard our lives in a farther adventure for them, and the Kingdome in this our Northern expedition, much enabled and encouraged by the benefit and remembrance of those former favours, together with the supply of 2500 pare of shooes from Northampton, and the like quantity of stockings from the city of Coventry, and our joy is, that God hath cleered up our way by the appearance of his prouidence in his former assistances, and believe it, Sir, as long as we have life, we shall keep to first principles, though a poor naked des∣pised partie, and die by the sides of our faithfull Officers, in the owning of that only, which God and reason allows, as for those against whom we now march, it's our opinion, they if Victors, will put no difference betweene Cavaliers, Presbyterians, and Independents, but we trust, he that hath hitherto gone along with us, will assist us in this enterprize, to blunt some what the edge of their delights, and that they shall reap as thos before them, of that stamp, both old and new, will not English men consider of whom it is said they are the best servants but the worst Masters in the world we grieve for that famous City of London, over whom we never desired to insult, nor marched we through with any such intent, but to let them and the world see and un∣derstand, how false their reports were concerning our en∣deavours to come up and plunder them, but let them know their destruction (if they perish) will be of themselves, not us. And not withstanding all their high and strange expressi∣ons against us, who have been instrumentall of more good to them, then to all the Kingdom, and received the least from them, yet we professe our selves their servants in the worke in hand: and for you noble Citizens of Bristol you have had wonderfull experiences and deliverances, do do not lose them; we appoint no Government to you nor
this Kingdom, we shall stoop, we hope as low as the lowest and look no other way upon our selves, and take no other notice of the workings of providence, then as instruments used by the eternall, since our new modelling, for subduing those who have and would inslave both soul and body to their wils, not Gods and reasons: and so many of us as shall out live these troubles, you shall see will be willing to re∣sign all kind of power and trust, when such an agreement or settlement is made, as may put us in capacity to live under the worst of shades, free from tyranny and persecution. The votes and resolutions of the House of Peers for his Majesties liberty. On Wednesday last, the Lords at a conferrence commu∣nicated to the Commons their votes or resolutions upon the Kings Letter to them, which were to this effect. 1. That the 4 Votes formerly made by both houses be nul, viz. That no addresse be made for future to his Majesty. 2. That none be received from him. 3. That none make any addresse to him without leave. 4. That it shall be high treason so to do. 5. That the Instructions given to Col. Hamond to this end be recalled. In the affirmative the vote. 1. That his Ma∣jesty have come to him all such as are necessary for carry∣ing on the on his part. That he have such servants as are need full to attend his person. 3. That the Treaty be at Newport. 4. That the Parl. invite the Scots to send som Commissioners to the treaty, & that they come at the time agreed. 5. That the King's Maj. may also invite the Scots to the said treaty to treat on the propositions at Hampton court, wherein they concurred. 6. That the number of Lords to treat be five & that the Commons name ten: that his Maj. have as much liberty as he had at Hampton court, lastly, that all possible expedition be made herein, this being apprehended most necessary, to settle a good Peace.
SIR, SInce my last of the 9 instant, here hath hapned little a∣ction till Sunday and Munday last; at which time they made severall Sallies both upon the Suffolk Forces and the Lord Generals. Gen. Lucas and the L. of Loughborow, with a party of Horse and Firelocks made an attempt against the Guards neer the Almshouses, our Horse Guard charged them, and made an intervale through their whole Body, who upon their wheeling about, five piece of Ordnance were fi∣red from the walls upon them, which killed two or three; then both parties bodied, and after a gallant charge by both Parties, the Colchesterians retreat, our men pursues, and in the pursuit killed 7. and took 9. prisoners, with the losse of 5 men. C. Lunsford with another party sallyed out at Buttolphs Gate, who fell upon our Out-guards with great fury, doing some execution, and took about 17. prisoners, but by the gallantry of Col. Barkstead and a party of foot, they were repulsed, their prisoners released, and Col. Lunsford and his party totally routed, and pursued to the very Gates and Sal∣ly ports, leaving divers of his men in a most deplorable and gasping condition. Most of the Salliers which engaged in this action were Kentish-men, who fought with abundance of courage and resolution, and maintained their ground to push-a-pike, go∣ring and mangling some of our horse, vowing revenge upon us, for our late conquest in Kent, but in this action & retreat they felt one hand more heavier then both, above twenty of them being slain in this short dispute and conflict: since
which time, they have declared, that they will fight it out to the last man, and maintain their Workes with the last drop of bloud, the shavers and others in the town, having also vowed the like resolution, protesting to sacrifice their lives with them, against the Army, and all others that shall ad∣here to them. They have sunk severall places under the Walls, and neer the Gates, who by countermining have blowd up one of our Mines, which hath somewhat retarded the work of storming, yet we have four more almost finished and ready to spring, and the better to faciliate the work of storming, are raising of Batteries, and bringing our Trenches neerer the works, which we have accomplished with little losse: the Besieged calls over the walls to our men, saying, That they desire to exchange some tokens with in the town, and to welcome them over the walls with the messengers of Mars; and indeed, we are in a readinesse to satisfie their longing desires, the Councell of war having resolved that approaches be made round the town in order to a storme: And thereupon his Excellency with a Generall Councell of war consisting of all the Officers of Sussex and Essex, aswel as those of the Army, debate high in relation to Colchester, endeavouring to make short work of a long siege, the rea∣son and inducements being these, 1. The Enemy having com for 20. dayes, 2. Their souldiers well satisfied with horse-flesh. 3. No want of fresh water, besides much wine and fruit. 4. The City design much ripened, and may be speedily put in execution. 5. The successe in the North uncertain, and the Princes landing may prove prejudiciall, all which are motives to cause a storm. Colchester Aug. 16. 9. at night.
SIR, DIvers of the Scots forces are come into this county,  are quartered neer Lancaster, they drive all the cows Oxen, and sheep they meet withall towards Scotland, an leave not any moveables unshifted away, to the very po¦hooks there being few Artists in Scotland, they take chi¦dren from their Parents, and put them to redeem them, an some have redeemed their children four times over; an when no redemption money could be had, they have kille the children: If it be asked why they carry not children in¦to Scotland, the answer is, there is no need of them ther There is one observation which hath a great emphesis wit it. They ask people if they have taken the Covenant, if the answer they have, they plunder them of all as enemies t the King; if they have not taken it, they are plundered as S¦ctaries and Cavaliers: so that their oppressions are most i¦sufferable. Preston Aug. 14. 1648. FINIS.
