C7103 E598_2 99864506 165595
A LETTER FROM The Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND, TO The Honorable William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the Parliament of England, Relating the several Successes it hath pleased God lately to give the Parliaments Forces there. Together with the several Transactions about the Surrender of KILKENNY, And the ARTICLES agreed thereupon. Die Sabbathi, 13 Aprilis, 1650. ORdered by the Parliament, That the Letter of the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and the several Papers and Transactions therein inclosed, be forthwith printed and pub∣lished; and that the consideration of the said Letter be re∣ferred to the Councel of State. Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti. London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament of England. 1650.
For the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Parliament of England. Mr. Speaker, I Think the last Letter I troubled you with, was about the taking of Cahiz; since which time there was taken by beating up their quarters, two Colo∣nels, a Lieutenant Colonel, Major, and divers Ca∣ptains, all of Horse: Colonel Johnson, Lieutenant Co∣lonel Longhorn and Major Simes, were shot to death, as having served under the Parliament, but now taken up Arms with the Enemy. Hearing that Castlehaven and Lieutenant General Farrald were about Kilkenny with their Army, lying there quartered, and about Carlo and Loughlin-Bridge; and hearing also that Colonel Hew∣son with a good party from Dublin, was come as far as Ballisannon, and had taken it, we thought fit to send an Express to him, to march up towards us for a conjun∣ction: And because we doubted the sufficiency of his party to march with that security which were to be wish∣ed, Colonel Shilbourn was ordered to go with some Troops of Horse out of the county of Wexford (which was his station) to meet him. And because the Enemy was possessed of the fittest places upon the Barrow for our conjunction, we sent a party of seven or eight hun∣dred Horse and Dragoons, and about five hundred Foot, to attempt upon Castlehaven in the Rere, if he should have endeavored to have defended the places against Colonel Hewson. Our party being a light nimble party, was at the Bar∣row
side before Col: Hewson could be heard of, and pos∣sessed a House by the Grage: They marched towards Loughlin, and faced Castlehaven at a pretty distance, but he shewed no forwardness to engage. Our party not being able to hear of Colonel Hewson, came back as far as Thomas-town, a small walled Town, and a Pass upon the Nur between Kilkenny and Ross, which our men attempting to take, the Enemy made no great resistance, but by the advantage of the Bridge quitted the Town, and fled to a Castle about half a mile distant off, which they had formerly possessed: That night the President of Munster and my self came up to the party, we Summoned the said Castle, and after two days it was surrendred to us; the Enemy leaving their Arms, Drums, Colours and Ammunition behinde them, and engaging never to bear Arms more against the Parliament of England. We lay still after this about two or three days; The President went back to Fetherd, to bring up some great Guns, with a purpose to attempt upon the Granno, and some Castles thereabouts, for the better blocking up of Waterford, and to cause to advance up to us some more of our Foot. In the end we had advertisement that Co∣lonel Hewson was come to Loughlin, where was a very strong Castle and Pass over the Barrow; I sent him word that he should attempt it, which he did, and after some dispute reduced it: By which means we have a good Pass over the Barrow, and entercourse between Munster and Lemster. I sent Colonel Hewson word, That he should march up to me, and we advancing like∣wise with our party, met near by Goran (a populous town) where the Enemy had a very strong Castle, under the command of Colonel Hamond, a Kentishman, who was
a principal actor in the Kentish Insurrection, and did manage the Lord Capels business at his Tryal: I sent him a civil Invitation to deliver up the Castle unto me, to which he returned me a very resolute answer, and full of height: We planted our Artillery, and before we had made a breach considerable, the Enemy beat a par∣ley for a Treaty, which I (having offered so fairly before to him) refused, but sent him in positive conditions, that the Soldiers should have their lives, and the Commission Officers to be disposed of as should be thought fit; which in the end was submitted to. The next day the Colonel, the Major, and the rest of the Commission Officers were shot to death, all but one, who being a very earnest instrument to have the Castle delivered, was pardoned. In the same Castle also we took a Popish Priest, who was Chaplain to the Catho∣liques in this Regiment, who was caused to be hanged. I trouble you with this the rather, because this Regiment was the Lord of Ormonds own Regiment. In this Castle was good store of Provisions for the Army. After the taking of this Castle, it was agreed amongst us to march to the city of Kilkenny, which we did upon Friday the 22th of March; and coming with our body within a mile of the Town, we advanced with some Horse very near unto it; and that evening I sent Sir Walter Butler and the Corporation a Letter, a copy whereof is here inclosed. From whom the next day I received this Answer: We took the best view we could where to plant our Batteries; and upon Monday the 25th our Battery, consisting of three Guns, began to play. After near a hundred shot, we made a breach, as we hoped, stormable: Our men were drawn out rea∣dy for the attempt; and Colonel Ewers ordered with
about One thousand Foot to endeavor to possess the Irish Town much about the time of our storming, which he accordingly did, with the loss of not above three or four men. Our men upon the Signal fell on upon the breach, which indeed was not performed with usual courage nor success, but were beaten off with the loss of one Captain, and about twenty or thirty men killed and wounded. The Enemy had made two retrenchments or counter-works, which they had strongly pallizado'd; and both of them did so command our breach, that in∣deed it was a mercy to us, we did not farther contend for an entrance there, it being probable that if we had, it would have cost us very dear. Having possessed the Irish Town, and there being an∣other walled Town on the other side of the River; eight Companies of Foot were sent over the River to possess that, which accordingly was effected, and not above the like number lost that were in possessing the Irish Town. The Officer that commanded this party in chief, at∣tempting to pass over the Bridge into the city, and to fire the gate, which indeed was done with good resolu∣tion, but lying too open to the Enemy-shot, he had forty or fifty men killed and wounded, which was a sore blow to us. We made our preparations for a second Battery, which was well near perfected: The Enemy seeing him∣self thus begirt, sent for a Treaty, and had it; and in some hours agreed to deliver up the Castle upon the Ar∣ticles inclosed, which we received upon Thursday the 28th of March. We finde the Castle exceeding well fortified, by the industry of the Enemy, being also very capacious; so that if we had taken the Town, we must have had a new work for the Castle, which might have cost much blood
and time, so that we hope the Lord hath provided bet∣ter for us; and we look at it as a gracious mercy, that we have the place for you upon these terms. Whilest these affairs were transacting, a Lieutenant Colonel, three Majors, eight Captains, being English, Welch and Scotch, with others possessed of Cantwel Castle, a very strong Castle, scituated in a Bog, well furnished with provisions of Corn, were ordered by Sir Walter Butler to come to strengthen the Garrison of Kilkenny; But they sent two Officers to me, to offer me the place and their service, and that they might have Passes to go beyond Sea to serve Forraign States, with some Money to bear their charges; the last whereof I consented to, they promising to do nothing to the pre∣judice of the Parliament of England. Colonel Abbot also attempted Enisnag, where were gotten a company of Rogues which revolted from Co∣lonel Jones; The Soldiers capitulated for life, and their two Officers were hanged for revolting. Adjutant General Sadler was commanded with two Guns to attempt some Castles in the County of Tippe∣rary and Kilkenny, which being reduced, exceedingly tend to the blocking up of two considerable Towns: He summoned Polkerry, a Garison under Clonmel, battered it, they refusing to come out, stormed it, put thirty or forty of them to the Sword, and the rest remaining ob∣stinate were fired in the Castle; he took Ballo-Doin, the Enemy marching away leaving their Arms behinde them; he took also the Granno and Donkit, two very considerable places to Waterford, upon the same terms. We have advanced our Quarters towards the Enemy, a considerable way above Kilkenny, where we hope by gaining of ground to get subsistance, and still to grow
upon the Enemy as the Lord shall bless us. Sir, I may not be wanting to tell you, and renew it again, that our hardships are not a few, that I think in my conscience if moneys be not supplyed, we shall not be able to carry on your work; I would not say this to you, if I did not reckon it my duty so to do: But if it be supplyed, and that speedily, I hope through the good hand of the Lord, it will not be long before England will be at an end of this charge; for the saving of which, I beseech you help us as soon as you can. Sir, our Horse have not had one moneths pay of five, we strain what we can that the Foot may be paid, or else they would starve: Those Towns that are to be reduced, especially one or two of them, if we should proceed by the rules of other States, would cost you more money then this Army hath had since we came over; I hope through the blessing of God they will come cheaper to you: But how we should be able to proceed in our at∣tempts without reasonable supply, is humbly submitted and represented to you; I think I need not say, that a speedy period put to this work will break the expecta∣tion of all your Enemies: And seeing the Lord is not wanting to you, I most humbly beg it, that you would not be wanting to your selves. In the last place, it cannot be thought but the taking of these places, and keeping but what is necessary of them, it must needs swallow up our Foot; and I may humbly repeat it again, That I do not know of much above Two thousand of your Five thousand recruits come to us. Having given you this accompt concern∣ing your Affairs, I am now obliged to give you an ac∣compt concerning my self, which I shall do with all clearness and honesty.
I have received divers private intimations of your plea∣sure to have me come in person to wait upon you in Eng∣land, as also copies of the Votes of the Parliament to that purpose; but considering the way they came to me were but private intimations, and the Votes did refer to a Letter to be Signed by the Speaker, I thought it would have been too much forwardness in me to have left my charge here, until the said Letter came: It not being fit for me to Prophesie whether the Letter would be an absolute Command, or having limitations with a liberty left by the Parliament to me, to consider in what way to yield my obedience; your Letter came to my hands upon Friday the 22th of March, the same day that I came before the City of Kilkenny; and when I was near the same, and understood by Dr. Cartright who delivered it to me, That by reason of cross winds, and the want of Shipping in the West of England where he was, hindred him from coming with it sooner, it bearing date the eighth of January, and not coming to my hands until the Twenty second of March; The Letter supposed your Army in Winter Quarters, and the time of the year not suitable for present action, making this as the reason of your Command: And your Forces having been in action ever since the 29th of January; And your Letter which was to be the rule of my obedience, coming to my hands after our having been so long in action, with respect had to the reasons you were pleased to use therein; And having received a Letter signed by your self of the 26th of February, which mentions not one word of the continuance of your plea∣sure concerning my coming over: I did humbly con∣ceive it much consisting with my duty, humbly to beg a positive signification what your will is, professing (as be∣fore
the Lord) that I am most ready to obey your Com∣mands herein with all alacrity, rejoycing onely to be about that work which I am called to by those God hath set over me, which I acknowledge you to be, and fear∣ing onely in obeying you to disobey you: I most hum∣bly and earnestly beseech you to judge for me, whether your Letter doth not naturally allow me the liberty of begging a more clear expression of your command and pleasure, which when vouchsafed unto me, will finde most ready and chearful observance, from Sir, Your most humble Servant, O. CROMVVEL. Carick, April the second, 1650.
A Copy of the Summons to Kilkenny. GEntlemen, My coming hither is to endeavor, if God so please to bless me, the Reduction of the City of Kilkenny to their obedience to the State of England, from which by an unheard of Massacre of the innocent English, you have endeavored to rend your selves; and as God hath begun to judge you with his sore plague, so will he follow you until he have destroy∣ed you, if you repent not: Your cause hath been judged already in England, upon them who did abet your evils, what may the Principals then expect? by this free dealing you see I intice you not to a compliance, you may have Terms may save you in your lives, liberties and estates, according to what will be fitting for me to grant, and you to receive; if you choose for the worst, blame your selves: In confidence of the gracious blessing and presence of God with his own Cause, which this is by many testimonies, I shall hope for a good issue upon my endeavors; expecting a return from you, I rest, Your Servant, O. C. 23 Martii, 1649. The Answer of the Governor of Kilkenny to my Lord Lieutenants Summons. SIR, Your Letter I have received, and in Answer thereof, I am commanded to maintain this City for His Majesty (which by the power of God) I am re∣solved to do: So I rest, Sir, Your Servant, Wa: Butler. Kilkenny, 23 Martii, 1649. For General Cromwel.
A Letter from the Mayor of Kilkenny. RIght Honorable, we know by experience, and have it by your Honors Letters, that you desire not the spilling of blood, nor the spoiling of Cities and Towns: And though I doubt not but your Honor would easily agree to good and profitable conditions for the City and the Citizens, yet we having a Governor of the City, and another of the Castle, who commands us al∣so, if befitting Honorable conditions be not given unto the Military part, the City and Citizens do stand in dan∣ger of ruine, as well from our own party, as from that of your Honors: This in the name of the City and Citizens, I humbly offer to your Honors gracious wise consideration, and desire your favorable remedy there∣in, and rest, Sir, Your Servant, Ja: Archdekin, Mayor of Kilkenny. For the Right Honorable the Lord Cromwel. For General Cromwel. SIR, Your last Letter I received, and in Answer, I have such confidence in God to maintain this place, as I will not lose it upon such terms as you offer, but will sooner lose my life, and the lives of all that are here, rather then submit to such dishonorable conditions: So I rest, Sir, Your Servant, Wa: Butler. Kilkenny, 25 Martii, 1650.
My Lords Letter to the Governor of Kilkenny. SIR, If you had been as clear I was in my last, I might perhaps have understood you, so as to give you some further Answer; but you expressing nothing particularly what you except against in mine, I have nothing more to return, save this, That for some Rea∣sons I cannot let your Trumpeter suddenly come back, but have sent you this by a Drummer of my own. I rest, Your Servant, O. C. 25 Martii, 1650. For the Governor of Kilkenny. A Letter from the Governor of Kilkenny. SIR, Yours of this instant I received; the particulars which you would have me express are these, That the Major and Citizens, and all other the Inhabitants and others now resident in this City and the Liberties thereof, with their servants, shall be secured of their lives, liberties, estates and goods, and live in their own habitations with all freedom: And that our Clergy-men, and all others here residing, of what degree, condition or quality soever, that shall be minded to depart, shall be permitted to depart safely hence with their goods, and whatsoever they have, to what place soever they please within this Realm, and in their departure shall be safely conveyed; and that the said Inhabitants shall have free Trade and Traffick with all places under the Parliament of Englands command, and elsewhere: And that the foresaid Inhabitants shall have their Arms, Ammunition and Artillery for their own defence, the
Town and Liberties thereof paying such reasonable contribution as shall be agreed upon, and not to be otherwise charged: And that the Governors, Com∣manders, Officers and Soldiers, both Horse and Foot now Garisoned, as well in the Castle as in the City, with∣out exception of any of them, shall safely march here∣hence, with their Arms, Ammunition, Artillery, Bag and Baggage, and whatsoever else belongs to them, with their Drums beating, Colours flying, Matches burning, and Bullet in bouch; and that they shall have competent time for their departure and carrying away their goods, with a sufficient and safe convoy: And that Major Nicholas Wale, and all other Commanders, Officers and Soldiers who came out of the English Quarters, now residing here, shall have the benefit of this Agreement; without which I am resolved to main∣tain this place with Gods help: Thus expecting your Answer to this Letter, and that during this Treaty there shall be a cessation of Arms, and all other acts of Hostility of both sides. I rest Sir, Your Servant, Wa: Butler. Kilkenny, 25 March, 1650. For General Cromwel. The Lord Lieutenants Answer to the Mayor of Kilkenny. SIR, Though I could have wished you and the Citizens had been indeed more sensible of your own Interest and concernments; yet since you are minded to involve it so much with that of the Soldiers, I am glad to understand you, which will be some direction to me, what to think and what to do. I rest Your Friend, O. Cromwel. March 26. 1650.
A Letter from the Mayor of Kilkenny. RIght Honorable, I received your Honors Letter in answer of mine which I wrote unto your Honor, in pursuance of the Propositions sent by our Governor un∣to your Honor, for obtaining of the said conditions, which seemed unto us almost befitting to be granted: The military part having exposed themselves for our de∣fence, which obligeth us not to accept of any Condi∣tions but such as may be befitting them; I desire your Honor to grant a Cessation of Arms, and that Hostages on both sides be sent, and Commissioners appointed to Treat of the Conditions. I rest, Your Honors Servant, Ja: Archdekin Mayor of Kilkenny. Kilkenny, the 26th of March, 1650. For the Right Honorable, General Cromwel. SIr, Those whom God hath brought to a sense of his hand upon them, and to amend, submitting thereto, and to the Power to which he hath subjected them, I cannot but pity and tender; and so far as that effect appears in you and your fellow Citizens, I shall be rea∣dy without capitulation to do more, and better for you and them upon that ground, then upon the high De∣mands of your Governor, or his capitulations for you: I suppose he hath acquainted you with what I briefly offered yesterday in relation to your self and the Inha∣bitants, otherwise he hath done you the more wrong,
and hath the more to answer for to God and man: And notwithstanding the advantages (as to the commanding and entring the Town) which God hath given us since that offer, more then we were possessed of before; yet I am still willing upon Surrender to make good the same to the city, and that with advantage; now in regard of that temper which appears amongst you by your Let∣ter, though I shall not engage for more upon the Go∣vernors Demands for you, whose power I conceive is now greater to prejudice and endanger the city, then to protect it: To save it from Plundering or Pillage, I promised the Soldiery, that if we should take it by storm, the Inhabitants shall give them a reasonable gratuity in money in lieu of the Pillages, and so made it death for any man to Plunder, which I shall still keep them to, by Gods help (although we should be put to make an entry by force) unless I shall finde the Inhabi∣tants engaging still with the Governor and Soldiery to make resistance; you may see also the way I chose for re∣ducing the place, was such as tended most to save the Inhabitants from Pillage, and from perishing promis∣cuously (the innocent with the guilty) viz. by attempt∣ing places which being possest, might bring it to a Sur∣render, rather then to enter the city it self by force. If what is here exprest may beget resolution in you, which would occasion your safety, and be consistent with the end of my coming hither, I shall be glad, and rest, Your Friend. March 26th 1650. SIR, Although I may not doubt with Gods help to maintain this place, as I have formerly written, yet I do send you the Bearer to let you know, that I am
content to Treat with you of Propositions to be made of either side, so there be a cessation of Arms, and all acts of Hostility during that Treaty; so expecting your answer, I rest, Sir, Your Servant, WA: BUTLER. Kilkenny, the 25th of March, 1650. A Copy of my Lords Letter to the Governor of Kilkenny. SIR, Except the condition were much bettered, and we in a worse posture and capacity to reduce you (then before the last Letters I sent you) I cannot imagine whence these high Demands of yours arise: I hope in God before it be long, you may have occasion to think other thoughts, to which I leave you; I shall not so much as Treat with you upon these Propositions. You desire some Articles for Honors sake, which out of ho∣nesty I do deny; viz. That of Marching in the Equi∣page you mention: I tell you, my business is to reduce you from Arms, and the Country to quietness and their due subjection, to put an end to War, and not to lengthen it, wishing (if it may stand with the will of God) this people may live as happily as they did before the bloody Massacre and their troubles, and better too; if you and the company with you be of those who re∣solve to continue to hinder this, we know who is able to reach you, and I believe will: For the Inhabitants of the Town of whom you seem to have a care, you know your retreat to be better then theirs; and therefore its not impolitickly done to speak for them, and to engage them to keep us as long from you as you can: If they be willing to expose themselves to ruine for you, you are
much beholding unto them: As for your Clergy-men, (as you call them) in case you agree for a Surrender, they shall march away safely with their Goods, and what belongs to them; but if they fall otherwise into my hands, I believe they know what to expect from me: If upon what I proposed formerly, with this addition concerning them, you expect things to be cleared, I am content to have Commissioners for that purpose. I rest, Sir, Your Servant, O. C. March 26. 1650. A Letter from the Governor of Kilkenny. SIR, In Answer of your Letter, If you be pleased to appoint Officers for a Treaty, for the surrender of the Castle and City upon Soldier-like conditions, I will appoint also Officers of such quality as are in the Garison, provided, that Hostages of equality be sent on both sides, and a cessation of Arms be also granted during the Treaty, assuring a performance on my side of all that will be agreed upon. I rest, Sir, Your Servant, Wa: Butler. Kilkenny, 26 March, 1650. I desire to know whats become of my Trumpeter whom I imployed two days ago. Wa: Butler. For General Cromwel. The Lord Lieutenants Answer to the Governor of Kilkenny. SIR, That no extremity may happen for want of a right understanding, I am content that Commissio∣ners on each part do meet in the Leagure at the Southside
of the city, authorized to treat and conclude; for which purpose, if you shall speedily send me the names and qualities of the Commissioners you will send out, I shall appoint the like number on my part, authorized as aforesaid to meet with them, and shall send in a safe conduct for the coming out and return of yours; as for Hostages, I conceive it needless and dilatory. I expect that the Treaty begin by Eight of the clock this even∣ing, and end by twelve, during which time onely I shall agree to a cessation, expecting your speedy Answer. March 26. For the Governor of Kilkenny. A Letter from the Governor of Kilkenny. SIR, Yours of this instant I received, and do hold the time appointed for the Treaty and cessation of Arms to be too short; Major John Comerford, Captain David Turnball, James Cowley Esq Recorder of this city, and Edward Rothe Merchant, are the Commissio∣ners appointed by me, who will meet such Commissio∣ners as you fix on, at the place by you appointed, by six of the clock to morrow morning, or sooner if you please, so as Hostages be sent to me for their safe return, for without Hostages to Gentlemen will not go: The reason that I conceive the time to be short is, because your Trumpeter came not hither till nine of the clock this night, so as I conceive the business cannot be end∣ed in so short a time: I have commanded mine to for∣bear acts of Hostility during this Treaty, and I desire that you do the like. I rest, Sir, Your Servant, Wa: Butler. Kilkenny, 26 March, 1650.
A Copy of my Lord Lieutenants Answer to the Go∣vernor of Kilkenny. SIR, The reason of the so late coming of my Answer to you, was, because my Trumpet was refused to be received at the North end of the Town, and where he was admitted, was kept long upon the Guard: I have sent you a safe conduct for the four Commissioners named by you; and if they be such as are unwilling to take my word, I shall not to humor them agree to Hostages: I am willing to a Treaty for four hours, pro∣vided it begin by twelve of the clock this morning; but for a cessation, the time last appointed being past, I shall not agree unto it, to hinder my own proceedings. March 27. 1650. Your Servant, O. Cromwel. By both the Governors of the City & Castle of Kilkenny. I Do here appoint and authorize Major John Comer∣ford, Captain David Turnbal, James Cowly Re∣corder of Kilkenny, and Edward Roth Merchant, to treat and agree with the Lord General Cromwel, or such as he shall appoint, touching the yielding up to the said Lord General this city and castle of Kilkenny, and the conditions whereupon they shall be given up; as witness our hands this Twenty sixth of March, 1650. Wa: Butler. Ja: Welsh. A Warrant from the Governors of Kilkenny, to the Commis∣sioners to treat.
Articles of Agreement between the Commissioners appointed by his Excellency the Lord Cromwel, Lord Lieutenant General of Ireland, for and on behalf of his Excellency, of the one part; And those appointed Commissioners by the respective Governors of the City and Castle of Kilkenny, of the other party, March 27. 1650. I. THat the respective Governors of the City and Castle of Kilkenny, shall deliver unto his Ex∣cellency the Lord Cromwel, the Lord Lieute∣nent General of Ireland, for the use of the State of Eng∣land, the said City and Castle, with all Arms, Ammuni∣tion and Provisions of publique Stores therein, without imbezlement; Except what is hereafter excepted at or before nine of the clock to morrow morning. II. That all the Inhabitants of the said City of Kil∣kenny, and all others therein, shall be defended in their persons, goods and estates, from the violence of the Sol∣diery; and that such as shall desire to remove thence else∣where, shall have liberty so to do, with their goods, within three moneths after the date of these Articles. III. That the said Governors, with all the Officers and Soldiers under their respective commands in the said City and Castle, none excepted; and all others who shall be so pleased, shall march away at or before nine of the clock to morrow morning with Bag and Baggage; the Officers with their Attendants, with their Arms, and with their Horses, not exceeding the number of One hundred & fifty horses; & their Foot Soldiers to march out of the Town two miles distant, with their Arms, and with Drums beating, Colours flying, Matches lighted, and Ball in bouch, and
then and there to deliver up the said Arms to such as shall be appointed for receiving them, excepting One hundred Muskets and One hundred Pikes, allowed them for their defence against the Tories. IV. That the said Officers and Soldiers shall have from his Excellency a safe Conduct six miles from the City of Kilkenny, and from thence-forward a Pass for their se∣curity out of his Excellencies quarters; The said Pass to be in force for six days from the date of these presents, they marching at least ten miles each day, and doing no prejudice to the quarters. V. That the City of Kilkenny shall pay Two thousand pounds as a Gratuity to his Excellencies Army, whereof one thousand pounds to be paid on the Thirteth of this Moneth, and the other thousand pounds on the first day of May next following, to such as shall be by his Excel∣lency thereunto appointed. VI. That Major John Comerford and Mr. Edward Roth shall remain Hostages under the power of his Ex∣cellency, for performance of the said Articles on the party of the said City and Garison of Kilkenny. VII. Lastly, for performance of all and singular the premises, the Parties hereunto have interchangeably put their hands the day and year first above-written. Ia: Cowley. Edward Roth. Iohn Comerford. David Turnbal. FINIS.
