C7117 E820_5 R207346 99866403 168010
A MESSAGE SENT FROM His Highness the Lord Protector, TO THE GREAT TURK, WITH His Demands and Proposals; and the releasing of the English Captives. LIKEWISE, The new Edict, and Decree of the Go∣vernor of Argier; the redeeming of all English-men from Thraldom and Slavery, and the bringing of them in to Gen. Blake; the seizing of the Salley men of War, and a Narrative of the general proceed∣ings of the English, in order to the French, Dutch, and Spaniards. EXtracted out of the Original Papers; Licen∣sed and published by special Authority. London, printed for Peter Mitchel, 1654.
A Message sent from his Highness the Lord Protector to the Turks, &c. HIs Highness the Lord Protector having taken into serious consi∣deration, the most deplorable & suffering condition of the poor captiva∣ted English at Argier, and other places in Turky, graciously vouchsafed to send an Express to the Governour of Argier, re∣quiring a Restauration of the English Captives; and withal, adjuring him to de∣sist from any such future violence, against the English Subjects: This Message was
resented with so much terrour and asto∣nishment, that the Governour immediat∣ly gave Order, for the release of all the English; and set forth an Edict, or Pro∣clamation, prohibiting the seizing of any English Vessel whatsoever, upon pain of death; and to incur the seizure of their whole Estate, in case of any obstructing, or interposing any English man whatso∣ever, in their free Trade and Commerce; &c. By an Express from General Blakes Fleet, thus. Sir, When we came into Cales Road, we saluted the Town with 21 pieces of Ordnance, they re∣turned us 7 for one, both English, Spaniards, and Hollanders. The Dutch Admiral vailed his Flag and saluted. Our General assured the Spaniards we intended nothing prejudicial to them, who before suspected us. We sailed from thence to the Straights, anchoring in Gibralter Road; where we went on shore, and were very courteously re∣ceived by the Governour, who promised us ac∣commodation in whatsoever we wanted, and the
Countrey afforded: VVe were very courteous∣ly saluted by the Clergy, and had four Officers of their Army went bare before us, conducting us through the Town, and to the Custome-House, at the request of the Goxernour, who had there provided a very stately Collation for us. He also made proclamation (having received Order from the King so to do) That none whatsoever should affront the English upon pain of present Death. VVe had not been long here, but one of our Vic∣tualling ships (the Dolphin) who by the late storms was seperated from us, came to us: In her way she fell among 7 great French ships, who took her; the Admiral then called our Captain on board his ship (which carried 56 pieces of Brass Ordnance) demanding of him where Gen. Blake was, and what strength he had with him? He re∣plyed, That he was gone to the Steights with 30 Men of VVar. The Admiral therewith was trou∣bled; and proffered him a great sum of money to satisfie for what his men had taken from him, and desired him to stay, and he would enquire after those that had plundered him, and execute them: but our Capt. refused both VVhereupon drink∣ing General Blakes Health, they discharged him, and he came to us with all speed.
A Letter frrom the Navy. UPon our advance from Cadiz, further into the Levant sea, VVee met with many diffi∣culties, not onely by stomy and unseasonable Weather, but by some obscure Rocks, which our Pylots were not very wel acquainted with: But ha∣ving for some time waited upon the Series of Di∣vine Providence, we then immediatly found the Omnipotent workings of the most high Protect∣or, and great Jehovah of Heaven for Us; who, e∣ven in an instant, when we were all toyling and plunging through the Deep, caused the winds to cease, and the Seas to become calm; so that our whole Fleet (blessed be God) in few houres came within sight of each other, who bearing up to the Ambral, our General commanded forth Captain Sacheverel with the Pearl Frigat, and Cap. George Crapnel in the Merlin Galley, as Scouts; who af∣ter 5 hours sayl discovered a Fleet with French co∣lours, consisting of 17 in number, which Cap Sa∣cheverel haled; but the French refused to answer: whereupon, he bare up to them, being accompa∣nied by valiant Ca. Crapnel, and having the wind∣ward, gave them seven broad sides; which thunde∣ring Eccho arriving the Eares of our heroick Ge∣neral, he presently bare up with the George, & the
rest of the Fleet to the very head of them, & charg∣ed them through and through five times together; insomuch, that the French tack'd about, and decli∣ned Engagement; but we embraced the pursuit, & in the chase sunk 3, fir'd two, and took 5, which we deserted, they being so leakie, that suddenly they sunk also. The rest fled towards Naples, where the D. of Guise is with his Fleet; whom we are under sayl to visit. But by a stratagem ('tis said) his Highness, with the Lord St. Paul, and divers o∣ther chief Commanders, are surprized in the City, upon a pretence of surrender; in the mean time, confident I am, (by divine permission) that we shal suddenly ingage them; for our men are resolved to fight them, though they be five to one. Our Ge∣neral hath set up the English Standard, bearing St. Georges Cross, at the Head of all the Flag ships; which carries no little terror to the Pyrats in these parts; who abounded very much upon the Le∣vant; but are now pretty well dispierced; for we have put a period to above 100 of them within the space of a month; and have taken 11 Turkish Gal∣leys, in which Atchievment, Capain Hill with the VVorcester Frigat, and Capt. Cattens in the Lam∣port performed singular service; but the Pearl lost her Mast, and some other ships their Bolt∣sprit, and Tackling.
As touching the influence the Lord Pro∣tector hath gained by his Message to the Turks, 'tis a thing wonderfully to be ad∣mired; and indeed, it causeth no little ad∣miration throughout all Christendome; for, true it is, the Argier men of War are become Associates with the English, and will not permit a man of our Nation to be carryed captive into thraldome; but seiz and takes all their Sally ships, and o∣thers, that have any English them, and brings them in to Gen. Blake, who at this very instant, rides tryumphat in the Le∣vant Ocean. FINIS.
