D568 e422_6 99864251 116476
A DECLARATION CONCERNING is Majesties Royall Person, touching His present Resolution and Condition. And a Copy of the Scots Representation, humbly tendered to His Sacred Majesty in the Name of the whole Kingdom of cotland, concerning the pro∣ceedings of the Parliament of England. s also, the Copy of a Letter from Windsor, touching the great Rising in the West, viz. in Gloucester-shire, Hamp∣sh re, and Wilt-shire. C R depiction of King Charles I of England London, Printed for G. Horton, Ianuary 6. 1647.
A DECLARATION CONCERNING The Kings Majesties Royall Person, ad His Resolution touching the present Affaires of the Kingdome. SIR, SInce my last unto you, Decemb. 31. 1647. we have received other intel∣ligence from the Western Parts, the particulars whereof, I have sent you here inclosed, together with the Copy of another Paper from the Towne of Chippenham in Wiltshire, concerning the late tumultuous rising of a great number of People in those parts, pretending for the Kig. the brief summary followeth: That upon Fryday last, a great Company of People assembled together in a tumultuous manner, and some in a
disguised manner, being very well armed, and having ga∣ther  the quarters of divers souldiers under command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, & in a  manner, sell upon divers Officers and Exc- pludering and spoying of that which they had; but at last, the Officers getting more ayd and assist∣ance together, rallyed and fell fiercely upon the said par∣ty, insomuch that a not conflict did ensue: but at last the Cavalry retreated, the Ex Officers and Souldiers pur∣sued them, wounded some, and took divers prisoners, who did confesse, that the Gloucestershire men did promise to joyn with them, & expected a greater Force from Hamp∣shire, and Wiltshire. It is said, that they have had severall meetings in the a∣foresaid Counties, and hath endeavoured to draw others to them. It is time to take some course to quell these spi∣rits before they break forth into a fire. In hast, I rest, Your assured Friend, Winsor 5. Ian. 1647. His Majesties Declaration and Resolation oncerng His Royall person. CHARLES R. THe necessity of complying with all engaged intersts in these great distempers for a perfect settlement of Peace▪ His Ma∣jesty findes to be none of the least diculties, He hath met with since the time of his afflictions, which is too visible when at the same time that the two Houses of the English Parliament do pre∣sent to his Majesty severall Bills, and Propositions for his content Commissioners of Scotland do openly protest against thens, so that were there nothing in the case but the consideration of
that difference, His Majesty cannot imagine how to give such an nwer to what now is proposed, as thereby to promise himselfe his great end, A perfect Peace; and when His Majesty further considers how impossible it is (in the condition he now stands) to fullfill the desires of his two Houses, since the onely ancient and knowne wayes of passing Lawes, are either by his Majesties per∣sonall Assent in the House of Peers, or by Commission under his great Seale of England, he cannot but wonder at such failings in the manner of addresse which now is made anto him, unlesse his two Houses intend that His Majesty shall allow of a Great Seale made without his Authority, even before there be any con∣sideration had thereupon in a Treaty; which as it may hereafter hazzard the security it self, so for the present it seemes very un∣reasonable to His Majesty: And though His Maesty his willing to beleeve that the intention of very many in both Houses in sen∣ding these Bills before a Treaty was onely to obtain a trust from him, and not to take any advantage by passing them▪ to force o∣ther things from him, which are either against his Conscience or Honour; yet His Majesty beleeves it cleare to all understandings that these Bills contain (as they are now pend) nor onely the di∣vesting himselfe of all Soveraignity, and that without possibility of recovery either of him or his Successours, except by repeale of of those Bills; but also the making his concessions guilty of the greatest pressures which can be laid upon the Subject▪ as in o∣ther perticulars, so by giving an Arbitrary and unlimited power to the two Houses for ever, to raise and levy Forces for Land or Sea-service of what persons (without distinction of qualities) and to what numbers they please, and likewise for the payment of them to leavy what monies in such sort, and by such wayes, and meanes, and consequently upon the Estates of what soever per∣sons they shall think he and appoint which is utterly inconsistent with the liberty and property of the people, and his Majesties trust in protecting; so if the Major part of both Houses should think it necessary to put the rest of the Propositions into Bills His Majesty leaves all the world to judge how unsafe it would be for him to consent thereunto; and if not what a strange con∣dition, what a strange condition of the passing of these foure Bills His Majesty and all his Subjects would be cast into.
And here his Majesty thinks it not unfit to wish his two Hou∣ses to consider well the manner of their proceeding. That when his Maj. desires a personall Treaty with them for the setling of a peace; they in answer, propose the very subject matter of the most essentiall part thereof to be first granted. A thing which will bee hardy credible to posterity. Wherefore his Majesty declares, That neither the desire of be∣ing freed from this tedious and irksome condition of life his Ma∣jesty hath so long suffered, nor the apprehension of what may be∣fall him, in case his two Houses shall not afford him a personall Treaty, shall make him change his Resolution; of not consenting to any Act till the whole peace be concluded. Yet then he intends not only to give just and reasonable satisfaction in the particulars presented to him; but also to make good all other concessions men∣tioned in his Message of the 16 of Novem. last, which he thought would have produced better effects, then what he finds in the Bils and to positions now preferred unto him. And yet his Majesty cannot give over, but now again earnestly presseth for a personall Treaty, so passiontely is he afcted with the advantages which pece will being to his Majesty and all His Subjects, of which he will not at all dispair, there being no other visible way to obtain a wel-grounded peace. However his Maiesty is very much at case within himself, for having fulfilled the Offices both of a Christian and of a King, and will patiently yea is the good pleasure of Almighty God, to in∣cline the hearts of his two houses to consider their King; and  compassionate their fellow subiects miseries. Given at Carisbrk Castle  the Is of Wight. Dm. 8. 1647. For the Speaker of the Lord-house pro tempoe, to be communica∣ted to the Lords and Commons of the Parliament of England a Westst  the Coissis of the Parli of Scot∣land.
A Declaration of the Estates of the Kingdome of Scotland, touching His Majesties person. May it please your Majesty, THere is nothing which we more constantly endeavoured and do more earnestly desire, then a good agreement, and happy peace between your Maiesty, and your Parliament of both Kingdoms; neither have we left any meanes unassayed, that with united Councels with the Houses of Parliament of England, and by making joynt applications to your Mai. there might be a composure of all differences. But the new Proposi∣tions communicated to us by the Houses, and the Bils there∣with presented to your Maiesty are so preiudiciall to Religion, Crown, and the union and interest of the Kingdoms, and so far different from the former proceedings and engagements betwixt the Kingdoms, as we cannot concur therein. There∣fore we do in the name of the Kingdome of Scotland, dissent from these Bils now tendered to your Maiesty. Lauderdail. C. Erskin. R. Barkley. H. Kennedy. A Relation of Captain Ingrams addresse to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Councell of War, de∣clared by way of message, as from GOD. THat Captain Ingram came to the Councell of War, and desired he might be heard to make his acknowledgment,
and give reasons to the contrary, according to the former Order of the Councell of Warre. The Councell of War answered, that that day was ordered to debate with the Commissioners of Parliament, concerning the disbanding of supernumeraries, and desired, that he would withdraw for the present, and a further day should be appoint∣ed or his businesse. He answered, that that was the day, which was ordered for his businesse, and though the Court-Marshall might thinke o∣ther businesse of more publique concernment, yet his businesse was more then ordinary, for he was commanded from God to deliver it, and on that only day. The Generall and Councell of War being willing to give place and preheminence to any thing that should be delivered from God, he was heard, and began to read a very large justification but was desired to forbear for the present. By Letters from Hereford it is advertized, That not long since, there was a great Rising in Wales, and divers of the Welch appeared in severall places of the Coun∣try, in a very mutinous and disorderly manner: insomuch, that at the last, they gathered to a great head, and marched to a place called Long-town within 20. miles of Here∣ford, and fell upon divers of the souldiery in their quar∣ters, but were repulsed, and beaten off by Col▪ Hertons R∣giment. Ianuary 5. Imprimatur G. M. FINIS.
