D631 e465_38 99864645 116877
THE DECLARATION OF THE ARMIE CONCERNING The City of LONDON; And a Letter to the Royalists of the said City, touching their bloudy and inhumane proceedings against the ARMY. WITH Their Resolution and Protestation, touching their Designes within the City, and that if they put them into execu∣tion, they will put Hundreds of them to the sword, and hang their quarters upon the gates, and set their heads upon the Spires of Steeples. ALSO, A great Plot discovered against the Kingdom and City, and a great Overthrow given to the Danes upon the Scottish Seas. Published for generall satisfaction to undeceive the people of England. LONDON: Printed for R. Williamson, 1648.
Terrible NEWES For the City of LONDON THE great insolency of the Royal party with∣in and about the City of London, occasions much jealousie from the Army; the hatred and malice of the Royalists being so great, that it over swayes their discretion so much; that they canno keep themselves within the bounds of ordinary civit¦lity, and discover themselves by seeking their privat-revenge;
as appears by their late horrid action execu∣ted upon certain Members of the Army neer the Strand, who by some of the bloudy Conspirators were most barbarously murthered in their Beds. This inhumane Design strikes terrour to the well-affected party, who being much perplexed thereat, acquaints the Army therewith; insomuch that some of the com∣manders forthwith sends a letter to the City, the effect whereof followeth. The Armies Letter to the City. VVE are much startled at the insolency of the trayterous slaves in London, to kill two Offi∣cers of our Army, one in his bed, and the other with a co∣wardly stab, and of their intended attempt to pistoll our Generall, besides many assaults upon Members of Parlia∣ment, and their Design to have massacred fourscore of them. We do protest, if the Royall slaves continue their inso∣lency, and put uny of these Designs into execution, we will for every mans life take one hundred of their owr party, and according to the quality of each massacred person, and will hang up their heads on spires of steeples, that the world may see the just judgment of God upon these Rebels and Traytors, which his Maiesty contesses are guilty of all the innocent bloud of the four hundred thou∣sand soules that have perished in this War.
This Letter was thought fit to be published to the view of all persons whatsoever, whereby all whom it may concern, may take notice of the sense and resolu∣tion of the Army, and their reall and candid Desires to prevent he effusion of bloud for the future. And do further declare, That they look upon the ci∣ty of London, with a tender eye and affection, being re∣solved to ingage both life and fortunes, for the defence and preservation thereof, against all opposition what∣soever. Further declaring, That it is the resolution and de∣sire of the army, to use their utmost endeavours for the supporting all those who have adhered to them, e∣ven in the great and perilous times of War, and to act upon such principles, that may tend to the publique safety of this Kingdom. The Danes Disign against the Kingdom of England. ON Tuesday Octob. 3. By an Expresse from Scot∣land it was advertized, That the Royalists of Eng∣land have been very active in the Kingdom of Den∣mark, for the arming of a party against this King∣dom, and after some consultation touching the present affairs of this Nation, 10000 Arms were designed for them by the Danes, and shipping appointed to tran∣sport them into Scotland, who accordingly arrived in Lieth Road, thinking to joyn with the Scots Royalists, but being discovered by the Marq. of Argyle, a party were commanded our in severall long Boats, and smal Vessels, who soon boarded the Danish ships, seized on all the Ordnance, arms and ammunition, and secured the ships in the Harbour.
Oth Letters make mention, That The Lieutenant Generall had no sooner set footing on the Scots ground, but great acclamations of joy transcended from one part to another, amongst the well-affected party of that Nation, throughout the Southern Climate; protesting to assist him, with all that was near and dear unto them, for regaining of their liberties, the gaining of a right understanding be∣tween both Nations, and the vanquishing of the com∣mon Enemy of both Kingdoms. And upon a generall Councell, in relation to the Af∣fairs of our Neighbour Nation; it was ordered, That the Parliaments two Armies of England and Scotland should forthwith advance against Monro and his For∣ces, and the question being stated who should com∣mand in chief the Van of the Army, to advance against Sterling Bridge, the main Body of the Enemies Army having intrenched themselves thereabouts, Lieut. Gen. Cromwell rose up at the Councell Table, and declared his great willingnesse to appear in the Van, and to ad∣vance and ingage with them, against the adverse party of peace and truth; which was unanimonsly assented to, and upon the 26. of this instant (we herr) that the Lieutenant Generall advanced with seven English Re∣giments of Horse and Dragoons towards Sterling, to fight the Enemy; but being discovered, and informati∣on given to (the young sparkish Royalist) Monro, he immediatly drew out five old Regiments of Horse & Dragoons that accompanied him from Ireland, and five new raised Regiments under the conduct of the Earle
of Lanerick, and advanced with the said party, com∣manding forth his Scouts, who had no soner travers'd two or three of the Scottish Hills, but they discovered the English Banners: whereupon they made towards their Body, certifying that a small party of English were ranging about the Country, and the rest of them had taken up their quarters in severall Villages adja∣cent: Upon which tydings Monro advanceth, and coming near to the English Forces, the Lieut. Gen. prepared to receive them, insomuch that both Armies ingaged disputing the ground with great resolutnesse and gal∣lantry, the famous Sparks of Chivalry (on each side) exchanging many a bullet betwixt the two Bodies, fi∣ring at the very Breast, and counterchanging their ground, during which Conflict, Monro appeared visi∣ble in the very Front of the Enemy, who upon a sud∣den, indangered (much) our left Wing; but after a sharp dispute, the Lieut. Gen. routed them, put them to a disorderly retreat, killed above 60 upon the place, & took about 100. prisoners, with the losse of 20 men. We hear that old Monro in Ireland hath had a great Defeat by Col. Munk, and all his Ordnance, armes, and ammunition taken. Peatling upon Tweed, 28. Sep. 1648. On Sarterday Sep. 30. the great Plot against the house of Commons were discovered, wherein 80. of them should have been massacred by a party of Royalists, who (as they said) opposed the Treaty in the House. Other letters from France further intimate, That there was a great Conspiracy and Design complotted by the
Royalists against his Excellencies person, and that it was resolved, to have the said Plot put in execution, du∣ring his residence at St. Albans; the manner thus, viz. That two persons of most desperate and insolent fortunes, were designed (by the Royalists) to give their attendance at the said place, and to be resident at the Generals quar∣ters, there to take their opportunity, for the stobbing of the Lord Generall, either by Dagger or Knife. By Letters further from the North it is advertized, That about one hundred of the Reformado-Royalists have set up their Ensignes on the top of Cheviot Hills, where the keep their Randezvouz; but Lieut. Generall Cromwell hath sent 500 Horse and Dragoons to fight them, in case they will not submit, who we heare are very resolute and obstinate, and resolved to sacrifice their lives on the top of the high Mountains. FINIS.
