D753 e549_2 99864943 165003
A DECLARATION Of the proceedings of the Prince of VVales, And His coming to the Isle of JERSEY WITH His Resolution and Intentions thereupon, and a Message to be sent to the London Marchants, containing severall Demands and Proposals, in relation to the NAVIE. ALSO, The Votes of the Parliament of England, concerning Lieut. Col. Jobn Lilburn; and their adjudging the paper, enti∣tuled, The second part of England's new Chaines, treasonable and destructive. TOGETHER With a Proclamation of the States of Holland, touching the Prince and the Parliament; and the taking of 21. Eng∣lish ships richly laden, their Custome amounting to above 20000. pounds. And a List of the Parliaments Navy which are to be employed in this present Expedition. Imprinted at London for R. W. 30. March, 1649.
A DECLARATION Of the Prince of WALES AND His remove from the Hague in Holland, to the Isle of Jersey; with his Resolution and intentions thereupon. SIR, ON the 26 of this instant, the Prince of Wales came to Helver-fluce, accompanied by the prince of Orenge, and many other Gentlemen of eminency, and after some conference between them, his Highnesse took his leave, and took shipping for Jersey, who going aboard the Convertine, lanched forth into the Ocean with a pleasant Gale, the great Guns bidding Vale to his
departure; there are gone with him the Marquesse of Newcastle, the Lord Culpepper, the Lord Wilmot, Major Gen. Massey, and many others; and from Jersey its said they are resolved for Ireland, where the Prince intends to set up his Standard against the parliament of Eng∣land, evill Councell prevaile much: the ships who trans∣ported them from hence were all Men of war, being 8 in number, His Highnesse is very potent, and numerous in shipping, who seize and take severall prizes at Sea, which doth much propagate their design; insomuch, that many Engiish Factors, have solicited Him, desiring that speedy care may be taken for prevention thereof, and after some consultation with his Councell in re∣ference to the same, He declared, and promsied, That if the Marchants of the City of London would gather and advance the sum of 40000. l. for the maintenance of his Navy at Sea, the like should be prevented for the future; and to the end there might be free trading & commerce at Sea, He was resolved to send a message, to acquaint them with these his desires, &c. The Clergy are exceedingly inraged at the transactions in England, and do incite the people to desperate engagements for revenge of the Royall bloud, and investing Charles the second in his Throne: But the States at a general coun∣cel resolved, That proclamation should be made tho∣row out the United Provinces, That such Ministers as should hereafter preach either publikely or privately, any thing concerning State affairs, either in relation to the differences of England, Scotland, France, or else∣where, or should hold any private correspondency from England, or else where, as to that purpose should be forthwith banished. This Proclamation was pro∣claimed by Order from the States. Brill27 Martii, 1649.
On the 26 of this instant we received intelligence that 21 English ships are lately seized on at Sea, by Pr. Rupert and his Associats; some of whom were of great value: the custome thereof, and the two the French took in the straits amounting to above 20000 .l. Di∣vers other ships have been also seized on neer Rie, Ha∣stings, and other places. On the 28. a great storm arose in the hearts of ma∣ny throughout the Cities of London and Westminster, occasioned by the apprehending of Lteut. col. Joh. Lil∣burn, Mr. Overton, and others, vpon suspicion of being authors or dispersers of a book, entituled The second part of Englands new Chains, lately prined and disper∣sed by those called Levellers: the House after many houres debate thereupon, voted the said Book treasona∣ble, pernicious and of dangerous consequence. Upon the apprehending of the aforesaid persons many jealousies arose in relation to a rising within the city for the rescuing of them from the power of the Souldiers; but their Guardiants conducted them safe to White-Hall, where they now remain under re∣straint. Lieu. col. Lilburn shews a great deal of courage and seems not to be danted in the least, saying; That He is resolved to sacrifice his life for the liberty and free∣dom of the people of England. But if this be freedome, to divide the people, and levell estates, let all rationall men judge.
Sir, our Treaty with this desperate enemy is now ended and the Castle delivered up to us, I shall give you a brief relation of the whole proceed thereupon. Upon Munday morning last their Commissioners (ac∣cording to leave given them) came out of the Castle, our Commissioners shewed them the Articles that we would grant them upon surrender thereof; which when they had read, one of them did swear (and the rest con∣curred therein) that they would hold it out to the last moment thkt their provisions lasted, and when those were done, they would eat their horses, and after them their prisoners, before they would be so perfidious to deliver their Governour, or any other of the six de∣manded by them to Justice; but this they offered (up∣on a second debate) that they would surrender the Castle on Wednsday next, and if the six persons de∣manded could escape by force or othrrwise, that it should be adjudged lawfull, and no breach of the Ar∣t cles, which at last was assented unto, the Articles were then that night wholly concluded on by the Com∣missiners on both sides; the substance thus: that all Officers and souldiers, except the six persons before excepted) should have passes to go to their severall homes, there to live quietly without molestation, and protections for so doing, they submitting to all orders ordinances, and Acts of Parliament; and so many of them as have estates to compound for, to have the Major Generals Letter of recommendation to Parlia∣ment, or Committee of Goldsmiths-hall, for their moderate and easie compositions; they engaging by particular subscriptions before their departure, never to act, Councell or abet any thing prejudiciall, to the Parliament or State of England. The articles signed, and sealed, and hostages given; the endeavour of our Souldiery was to look narowly to the escape of the Governour, and the five other excepted persons (they having notice that they intended to make a speedy and
bold attempt for that purpose) on Thursday about the dusk of the evening, these six desperite (but to give the Devils their due) yet gallant enemies, make a salley three on the one side of the Castle and three one the other, the Governour, and the two other with him (be∣ing gallantly mounted) leap our workes, charge our guards, and enter them in defiance of all opposition, and force through, with many wounds given to them, and especially their horses having no sooner past through this extream hot service, they were forced to engage with a strong party of our forces, that were comming to relief the guards, and though themselves and their norses were so exceedingly wounded before they armed their selves, with their first resoluion, and with a most desperate charge forced through, though much wounded again by this party. No sooner had they cleared themselves of this second engagement, but a party of our horse pursue them, and having no way to avoid these foot who took our horse to be another part of the enemies, fired upon them, and before they could make themselves known to be friends, the Go∣vernour, and the other two were quite escaped, but pursuing them about a mile by blood, found two of their horses mortally wounded, and the riders forsa∣ken them, and escaped with the Governor none of them being isnce heard of. The three that sallied out on the other side were repulst, and that night hid them∣selves in a private vault in the Castle, hoping to work themselves out before, they be discovered. Wednsday morning the Castle was surrendred and the Articles exactly performed, they found forty barrels of pow∣der, fish and flesh in abundance, with much corne, which might have preserved these three hundred ene∣mies three moneths longer, if the private souldiery would have stood it out. Pontefract, March, 26.
A List of the Navy designed for this present Expedition to beset forth by the Parliament of England. TFyumph 56 Guns, Capt. Robert Moulton. Bonadventure 46.Captaine Hackwell. Happy Entrace 46 Captain VVildy. Victory 56 guns. Leopard 46. Garland 46. Mary-Rose 30. Hector 30. Tenth VVhelp 22. Greyhound 22. Nichodemus 20. Weymouth Frigate 16. True-Love 22. Increase 22. Eighth Whelp 22. Globe 22. Discovery 22. Faulcon 22. Delight 30. Dove 12. Robert 12. Hunter 12. Eagle 13. Samuell 8. Scout 8. Spy 8. Fly 8. Fortune 8. 12 Marchants ships hired with divers others Ships for the Coast of Ireland. St. Andrew 56 Guns, capt. Sir George Aschew. Lyon 46 Captain Pen. Elizabeth 38 Capt. Reves. Dragon 38 Cap. Young. Tyger 38 Cap. Peacock. Nonsuch 36 Cap. VVil∣loughby. Adventure 36 Capt. Ball. Assurance 36 Ca. Taylor. Expedition 30 C. wheeler. Phenix 36 Cap. Harrison. Providence 30. Signet 32. Star 22. Cressent 22. Constant Warwick 30. Hynd 22. Dolphin 22. Lilley 12. Cavaleer 10. Charles 26. Swan 26. Imprimatur T. JENNINGS. FINIS.
