E1991A R175203 45097714 171309
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the maintaining of the Forces of the seven associated Counties un∣der the Command of EDWARD Earl of MANCHESTER. By a Weekly payment upon the said associated Coun∣ties; to begin the first day of September, and to continue for foure Moneths next ensuing. Septemb. 26. 1644. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed & published. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON: Printed for Edward Husbands.
26 September, 1644. WHereas the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Lincoln, and other Counties with them Associated, out of their loyall respect to His Majestie, their pious disposition to the peace and happinesse of this Kingdome; in obedi∣ence to the Orders of Parliament, have rai∣sed and maintained to the number of Four∣teen thousand Horse, Foot, and Dragoones, or thereabouts, and with them have done many great services against the Common Enemie, tending much to the safetie of the Kingdome; And have also bought many Armes and Ammunition, and must buy more, whereby to furnish themselves with a traine of Artillerie; and have been, and must be at great charges in maintaining and recruiting the said Forces, and in kee∣ping severall Garrisons, making and ere∣cting of Fortifications, Magazines, Courts of Guards, and other things requisite and necessary for the defence and safetie of the said association against the incursions of the Enemie: By all which meanes the said As∣sociation is become much indebted, and without the speedy raising of large and con∣siderable
sums of money proportionable to their vast expences, cannot long subsist in a condition to keep themselves from ruine, and to advance the publique safetie. It is thereupon Ordained by the Lords & Com∣mons in Parliament assembled, and by au∣thoritie of the same, That for the intents & purposes aforesaid, the severall weekly sums of money hereafter in this Ordinance men∣tioned, shall be charged, rated, taxed and le∣vied upon the severall Counties, according to the proportions herein expressed; The same to be paid in weekly to the severall Col∣lectors, & by them to the Treasurer or Trea∣surers appointed by this Ordinance for the receiving hereof. That is to say, Vpon the County of Essex, the weekly sum of one thousand sixe hundred eighty seven pounds ten shillings. Vpon the County of Suffolk, the weekly sum of one thousand eight hundred seventy five pounds. Vpon the County of Norfolk and City of Norwich, the weekly sum of one thousand eight hundred seventy five pounds. Vpon the County of Hertford, the weekly sum of sixe hundred seventy five pounds. Vpon the County of Cambridge, the week∣ly
sum of five hundred sixty two pounds ten shillings. Vpon the County of Huntington, the week∣ly sum of three hundred and thirty pounds. Vpon the County of Lincolne and City of Lincoln, the weekly sum of one thousand two hundred eighteen pounds fifteen shillings. Vpon the Isle of Ely, the weekly sum of two hundred twenty one pounds five shillings. And the said weekly Payments are to be∣gin from the first day of September, in the year of our Lord 1644. and so to continue weekly for four moneths next ensuing from the said first of September. And be it further ordained, that every persō or persons that were to be assessed or taxed by any former Ordinance of Parliament, shall be assessed and taxed by this Ordinance, and shall be liable to as great forfeitures & penalties for not paying of the sum or sums to be assessed, as they should have been, if the same had been assessed by vertue of the last Ordinance for the weekly payment for the said Association, made the 20. of September last: And the severall respective Deputy Lieutenants and Committees named and trusted within the said Association or any part thereof, by the said recited Ordinance,
to take care for the assessing, collecting or levying of any monies, are named & trusted by this Ordinance, and have as full power and authority given by this Ordinance, to nominate and appoint Collectors and Asses∣sors, and to distraine, fine and imprison, or sequester, as they or any of them had by ver∣tue of the said recited Ordinance, in all or any part of the said associated Counties. And the severall Collectors shall pay the severall sums by them collected, at the place or severall places where the Earl of Manche∣ster and the Committee for the Association attending the said Earl, shall appoint to the Treasurer or Treasurers, to be by them na∣med; which Treasurer or Treasurers are to issue out the monies received for the purpo∣ses aforementioned, according to the War∣rants or directions of the said Earl of Man∣chester, & of any two of the said Committees for the said Association, which shall be ap∣pointed thereunto by the said Earl, and a ful Committee consisting of one for every Coun∣ty at the least, and of the Commissary Gene∣rall for the time being of the said Earl of Manchester; And that no monies be issued out without order under the hand of the said Earl, such two of the said Committees, and
the said Commissary Generall, nor yet with∣out the privitie of the whole Committee at∣tending the said Earl. And the said Lords & Commons doe fur∣ther ordain, that all monies collected and not disposed of, or to be collected upon the fifth & twentieth part of mens estates, or of the last four months pay; and all the monies or other benefit arising by vertue of any Ordinance for the third part of the Sequestration setled upon the Earl of Manchester, shalbe paid unto the Treasurers appointed as aforesaid, and from thence to issue out again for ye intents and purposes aforementioned; and the said Earl and Committee for the said association have thereby power given them to call all Collectors, Treasurers, or others that have or are thought to have any of the said mo∣nies in their hands, to an accompt, and to cause the said money in their hands to be paid unto the Treasurers appointed by the former Ordinances. And if any Collectors, Treasurers, or o∣thers shall refuse to accompt or to pay in the monies wherewith they are charged: then the said Earl & committee shal fine them dou∣ble the sum charged upon them, which if it be not paid within six days after the sum is set,
and notice thereof left at his or their dwelling house: it shalbe lawfull to distrein for the same: & if there be not sufficient distresse wherewith to satisfie, then the said Earl and Committee may imprison the offender herein; & sequester his estate, untill the money charged & fine set be leavied and paid. And it is further Ordayned, that four pence in the pound shall be allowed for every sum of money which shall be Collected, and paid to the said Treasurer, whereof two pence shall be for the Collectors, and two pence for the Treasurer: And the said Treasurer shall keep a Register book, of the severall sums received and paid by them, and shall render an account thereof, unto the said Earl and Committee, once every moneth at least. And be it further Ordayned, that three Commissioners hereafter to be nominated and appointed, to reside in the Army, shall take speciall care that they keep constant cor∣respondency with the two Houses of Parlia∣ment, and with the Committee of the Mem∣bers of the House of Commons, appointed for the Associated Counties; and that they take such course that no Commander or Officer shall receive any pay, but such as duely attend their charge: And it is desired, that the said Earl of Manchester do admit to his Counsell for the purposes aforesaid, the said Commissioners
residing in his Army, to advise with them, and arme them with power to view and exa∣mine the Musters of the said Army; and to take such course as shall be thought most fit for the preventing of dead payments, false Musters, free quartering without warrants, Plundering, Seizing of Horses or Armes, or for the avoyding of any other misdemeanor, which may turn to the prejudice of the Com∣mon wealth. And that the said Commissio∣ners, shall once in a moneth, certifie the state of the Army, and give an accompt of their pro∣ceedings unto the Parliament, or to the afore∣said Committee, for the Associated Counties, and likewise certify what further instructions shalbe agreed upon by the Counsell of Warre, touching the same, and the aforesaid Com∣missioners shalbe nominated and appointed, by the Committee for the associated Counties sitting at Cambridge, or the major part of them out of their own number. And be it Lastly Ordained, that the said Earl, Deputy Lieutenants, Committees, collectors, assessors, and every one of them, & every other person, that shall be ayding and assisting to them, or any of them, in doing any thing by vertue of this Ordinance, shalbe de∣fended and saved harmlesse therein by autho∣rity of both Houses of Parliament. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
