G1669 E134_31 99873492 156419
GREAT BRITTANS RVINE PLOTTED, BY SEVEN SORTS OF MEN; Discoved and counter-plotted: In which Is contained a Probable way for the happy and peaceable composing of all the distempers of the time, with Articles for the finding out of Scandalous Ministers. Commended in a Letter to a Friend, and now recommended to the Honourable PARLIA∣MENTS Consideration. By a true-hearted well-wisher to great BRITTANES happinesse. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Vnderhill, and are to be sold at the signe of the Bible in Wood∣street, M.D.C.XLI.
A Letter to a private Freind. Sir, WHiles I looke on the Ladie of Islands, I meane great Britaine, and see her clo∣thed with the mourning weed of so many sad, strange, and dishonoura∣ble accidents which have fallen out in these latter times, mine eyes run wa∣ter, and my head is a Fountain of teares. So that one while the unhappie occurrences of State doe
make me desire a sequestred and contemplative life, that I may with freedome bewaile the sinne and dishonour of our Nation; another while I seem transported with zeal for God his Church, and glory of our Nation; pressed in spirit with renewed thoughts of indignation against the instruments of this present distraction. Sir, In my retirednesse, mee thinkes I have discovered the plot of Britains ruine (as you may perceive by the insuing discourse) together with the contrivers of it and their principles. Afterwards I shall propound unto you the way for the Counterplot, which may be wel contrived in these times, suiting that high and honourable Court of Parliment, whose wisdome is sufficient∣ly able to discover the ill intentions of enemies to Church and State, and provide meanes of preven∣tion seasonably. Sir, When I looke on that illustrious Assem∣bly, I consider it as a well constituted bodie, ha∣ving right symetrie in all parts, the humours well tempred, so that there is no feare of any ex∣cessive predominancie of one above an other; their senses internall and externall active, fancie nimble, intellect profound and serious, memory stong and retentive, besides their hearing, seeing, tasting, smelling, and feeling very good and quick; so that it seemes presumption for one that moves in the inferiour orbes to present objects to such accurate and high intelligences; Yet Sir, whiles passion, judgement, sense of mine own insufficiencie, together with loyalty to my God,
King, and Countrey, struggle thus in the wombe of my conceptions, I am at a stand, and almost resolving to dash my thoughts in the shel and crush them in their embrio, but at last considering these presenr Halcyon dayes, wherein the Kings-fisher begins to make his nest upon the waters, I can∣not but promise my selfe serenitie in bringing forth my conceptions, especially having so fair op∣portunity to put them to nurse, and education in your bosome, whose wisdome, learning, tender∣nesse, and particular faithfulnes, I value as sufficient obligatins of trust and confidence. Neverthelesse Sir, it is not mine intentions, so to confine my conceit unto your private acquain∣tance and tuition, but if it find favour in your eyes you may present it to the view of Sr. Edward Dee∣ring, Sr. Walter Earle, Sr. William Bruerton, Sr. Nathaniell Barnardiston, Mr. Pim, Mr. Hambden, Mr. St. John, Mr. Purphry, or others of the Com∣mons house, whose names are precious with mee, and their minds so stored with the grounds of all true nobility, that I doubt not but they will know how to give a favourable acceptance, or else to pardon the errours of well intended fancie. In the mean time I commit the tuition and ad∣ministration of my conceptions to your selfe, if you see cause, to strike them in cunabulis afore they bee presented to any further view, yet be pleased to give them a burial, beseeming such as are discen∣ded of one of your faithful friends, of Christian and true English parentage.
In my discourse I shall describe, first the Plot, secondly the Counterplot; in the Plot I have con∣sidered the Plot it selfe, the Contrivers, the Princi∣ples. First for the Plot it is Mahomets, the introduction of a new forme of government; wherein Mahomet borrowed à Judais, à Gentibus, à Christianis, from the Jew, from the Gentile, from the Christian, so our last yeeres have borrowed in their imaginarie forme from three severall Places, Sodome, Egypt, Babylon: From Sodome, pride, idlenesse, fulnesse of bread, inordinate lusts, intemperance, &c. From Egypt, cruelty, oppression, tyrannie over Gods Is∣raell, and ruling in Church and State without any rule, but will, like Pharaoh in Egypt. From Babylon the Marchandize of Gold, Silver, precious stones, and Pearles, Revel. 18.12. besides these, Beasts, Sheepe, Horses, Charriotts, slaves, and soules of men, vers 13. without question Sir, Sodome, Egypt, Babylon, or Rome, were the presidents or coppies of our latter times, according to which they have drawn upon our State, to the life, the Atheisme of Sodome, the tyranny of Egypt, the idolatry of Rome or Babylon. A most hellish device to squeese the Juice of three such vicious governments into this of ours, which before the late times of degeneration was the fame and glory of the whole World. The truth of this will appeare by the voluminous Testi∣monies of the grieved partie, before the high and honourable court of Parliament. Secondly, the Contrivers of the plot, whom I
shall referre to these seven heads. First the scan∣dalous Minister; Secondly the corrupt Magi∣strate; Thirdly the innovating Prelate with his officer; Fourthly the professed Papist; Fifthly the Popish Protestant; Sixthly the rigid Armi∣nian; Seventhly the Libertine. First, the scandalous Minister, I meane such as preach very seldome, and then very coldly, happily farr above the capacitie of the hearer, or if hee preach often, his preaching and practice crosse the one the other, hee preacheth against swearing, and yet is a common swearer himselfe, against drunkennesse, and yet is a common drunkard himselfe, at leastwise a common bib∣ber, an intimate friend and ordinary acquain∣tance of the common Tospots, making the Sack∣shop the chiefe place of Studie and contemplati∣on; accounting those the finest fancies which are begot over a sparkling cup, and those divine raptures which are occasioned by exhalations drawne from the good Ale and Sack; my mea∣ning is nor Sir, to wound any moderate man, who upon just occasion of businesse may looke into a Tavern, or sometimes to expresse humanity or courtesie to a friend may sometimes take or give a cup of wine, provided it be inoffensively car∣ried, in reguard of time, persons, or companie, place, moderation, and the like. Such only I in∣tend Sir, who delight more in chirping compa∣nie in the Ale-house or Tavern, then they doe in Communion with the Saints, or their Wives and
Families at home; that account their own hou∣ses prisons, and taverns paradices, whose de∣faults in this kind, such Ministers own wives, and Tavern Boyes are best able to discover. Besides these such also I reckon amongst scan∣dalous Ministers as doe fill their Neighbours eares, and eys, with obscaen & wanton words and carriages, making lascivious ribaldry the fittest musique at a table-meeting, Tom Trinkilo was ne∣ver more acted to the life, then by many of these, who go under the name of the Angells of the Church of England, and by their mimicall, apish, and ridiculous cariages, seek to please the humour of the brave sparks and gallants of our times. Lastlie such also are scandalous ministers as are carried with bitter and malicious spirits, a∣gainst the strict and more exact practise of Reli∣gion, which can scarcely forbeare to disgorge their foule stomacks in the pulpit against them who walke closer with God then themselves, which can finde more Rhetorike to advance ce∣remonie then substance, which can finde no ho∣nestie in a man that practises in all the maine points of Religion, if tender in conscience about a ceremony, but copious and full in testimony of a good fellow, a boone companion, a common swearer, if zealous only in matter of ceremony, such as cannot suffer a pious conscientious man to passe without a jeere, nay haply persecute him, out of his parish, if he conform not in folio to all indifferent ceremonies, such bitter spirits as these give great offence, whiles they arrogate the
names of Christs Ministers, and Ambassadors, and in their lives shew neither humility, nor su∣pernaturall charitie and love of their Master: These and such like are they which pull downe more by their practice then they build up by preaching. These are the watchmen on the wall which meeting with the Spouse of Christ pluck her vaile from her, wound & buffet her, Cant. 5.7. Secondly, the corrupt Magistrate, such I meane as buy, and therefore must sell Justice, which makes the face of his prince, not the laws, the rules of Justice, which in a tryall consider more the person then the cause, such as delays or hastens an hearing according to his satisfaction of the sense of feeling, such as wry Justice upon a great mans letter, or private information that the person before him is a Puritan, as if he that were a Devill should not have his due. Thirdly, innovating Prelates with their Offi∣cers, whether Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officialls, &c. such are they which manage jurisdiction Ec∣clesiasticall, whether Excommunications, Visi∣tations, Synods, Corrections, and other Courts, ad collectionem nummorum non ad correctionē morum. They rather visite mens purses then their persons, spinning their Cannons and Articles like the Spider his web, where little flies are caught but great ones breake through, these are such as have learned in these latter times, the art of commutation, they had rather have a hundred commutations then one publique satisfaction
and acknowledgment. They will connive, dis∣pence, and what not, so that they may have Dr. Argent to make the motion; Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and others, may whore, bee drunk, and what not, so that the fat of their sins may come ad culinam Episcopi, to the Bishop and their Officers Kitchin. Such I suppose are our corrupt Prelates as know how only (if they preach at all) to speake placentia, to sow pillowes under the arme-holes of Prince and People, such as use Rhetorike to screw Prerogative as high as Ty∣ranny, and conclude as much to belong to the King in way of command as to God Almighty. But, O wonder of ages, I meane our gratious King, whom God hath preserved so, that hee hath no more beene poysoned with Episcopall flatterie. Examine all ages, was there ever president for so many suspensions in these Christian Chur∣ches, as by our lte Bishops? was there ever such a fire kindled as in these our days by Prelates, to the hazard of three Kingdomes at once? were there ever Prelates and their officers so grosse for notorious lusts, for oppression, extortion, rasing fees, picking advantages, preaching seldome or never? Were there ever any Bishops since the time of Edward the sixth, and the reformation in those days, that have brought us so far back to a violent necessity of such usages as might more neerely conforme us to the Romish Religion and Ceremonies, bowings, ducking, cringings, Ima∣ges,
&c. These Sir and such like are they who have improved all opportunities and diligence to discourage and supplant all Schollers in the U∣niversities, and Ministers in their severall Dio∣cesses, who have been orthodox and industrious, Queene Elizabeths Protestants, if moderate about the ceremonies, and have planted right men (as they call them) in the roome of Ortho∣dox and Pious men, haply learned, but ambiti∣ous, Simonicall, scandalous, and inclining to all Romish corruption, whereunto their Ecclesiasti∣call Patrons, I mean the Bishops, have invited them, either by their precepts or examples. These Sir and the like are those who are the innova∣ting Prelates, and have quantum in ills brought ruine upon Church and State, and laid the Plot for an universall alteration of both. Fourthly, The professed Papist, I mean such whether convict or not convict as acknow∣ledg the Popes supremacie, never come to our Churches, admire their Popish priests, especially their Jesuites (those infernall Locusts which have come out of the bottomelesse pit) as their holy fathers, such as account Protestants Here∣tiques, and it a sacred point of devotion to kill Protestant Princes, though in a barbarous, base, and trecherous way, such as serve God by Ima∣ges, and account ignorance the mother of devo∣tion, costly, unnecessary, and uncommanded ce∣remonies the glory of the Church. These are they who are fallen into the great conspiracie
against great BRITAINES prosperitie. Fifthly, The Popish Protestants, I mean such as are excessively charitable concerning the professed Papist, they love not to come to Church oftener then the lawes enforce, if the State will give them leave they will conforme to any Popish usage, and are indeed Papists in e∣very point but Supremacie, and pests mariages, and in these likewise in their judgments they are very favourable to the Romish way. Sixthly, The rigid Arminian, who accounts no Doctrine sublime but what advances his own opinion about predestination, free-will, falling from grace, and the like. These account all men unsound, not rightly in∣formed, or very dunces, that are not of their opi∣nion, these finde no musique in a Sermon, where the Minister gives not a touch upon the Armini∣an string. These pretend the advancing of good life by their doctrine, while in the meane time if you ob∣serve them generally, there are none more dis∣solute, proud, vaine, and scurrilous, then they that prate most in the Arminian cause. Seventhly, the Libertine, such I understand to be the swearer, drunkard, whore-master, profa∣ner of the Sabbath, scorner & despiser of others, following no calling but their sinful lusts, harsh & cruell in their dealings, as though God had gran∣ted them a charter to doe what they list, for these and the like doth the land morne, many are the
Princes thereof, and a fruitfull land doth God make barren, for the sin of the inhabitants that dwell therein. Sir, I can never looke on these seven sorts of men, but I call to mind that Septemfluus Amnis the River Nilus which swel'd and overflowed all EGYPT. Yet if it please his Majestie, and this high and honorable Court of Parliament, that three sorts of the seven, viz. the scandalous Minister, the in∣novating Prelate with his Officer, together with the rigid Arminian be well disciplined, you shall observe the other foure, the corrupt Magistrate, the professed Papist, the popish Protestant, and the Libertine presently brought in by the power of the Gospel, and if it please his Majesty with the Parlament to plant in the rooms of the scādalous Ministers and Arminians, approved ministers for doctrine and life, it would be a true piece of po∣licie beyond the Bishop-craft practised in these later times for the advancing of their Hierarchie. And if it so please the wisdome of the State to bestow the Lands and Impropriations belon∣ging to the Bishops and great Churches (besides what shall be thought fit to settle on the Crown) upon Ministers conscientious, industrious, able, and learned, where meanes is most wanting, to make some provision for Ministers widdowes and children, as they doe in the French Church∣es, to maintain Schollers in the Universitie, and enlarge Schoole-masters allowance, I dare con∣fidently
undertake, that learning would not bee discouraged, but the present generation would pray, and posterity for ever would rise up to praise God for such a blessed King and such a happie Parliament. In the meane time, Sir, Three discouragements whisper in my eares, all pretending that this al∣teration is not safe nor fecible. First, if Ecclesiastical government be altered, why may not the civil also be desired to be alte∣red upon the same terms? Ans. First, there is more general grief, and desire of alteration in the Ecclesiastical government then in the Civil. Se∣condly, the conscience is more concerned in the one then in the other, the purse is pinched in the one, the conscience in the other; examine this wel you shall find something worth notice. Thirdly, the Scripture seemes to prescribe more for Ec∣clesiasticall government then Civill, leaving all Nations to libertie for their severall lawes, pro∣vided none crosse his own eternall commands. Ob.Secondly doth not reason require a levell in the Commonwealth as wel as a parity in Eccle∣siasticall dignities? Ans. I am confident no moderate wise man would desire such a levell as to have all Ecclesiasticall grounds ly in a flat, high Mountaines are fitter for barren Wales, then fruitfull England, little hils doe not disparage the most fruitfull grounds. If some Minister have one, some two, some three hundred pounds per annum, haply more, such hills will not bee com∣plained
of, only let the Mountains be throwne into the Seas, I meane the greater promotions, then shall the little hils skip like lambs, when the World is more equally divided one graine of faith may remove these Mountaines into the middest of the Sea. Secondly the Church may bee called the younger sister of the common-wealth, there was a Common-wealth in Israel before the Priest∣hood of Levie, Commonwealths were before Apostles, Pastors, or Teachers, seniority usually gives dignitie, though Rachell the younger sister was faire and more admired by Jacob, yet Leah the elder sister was preferred, for it was the cu∣stome of the Countrey (said Laban.) Thirdly much advantage may come by level∣ling the Church, but unconceiveable mischief by levelling the Common-wealth, sandie Hills may be easily levelled, high stonie Rocks can∣not without difficultie. Verbum sapienti. Thirdly the King will not easily consent? Ans. Sir, I fear it not, never was better King upon the Throne then our gratious Soveraigne, never a∣ny more deepely engaged to maintain Episcopa∣cie, but I am confident that God who hath given him a gratious heart, will give him a discerning spirit, to see the evil consequences of degenerate Episcopacie by the cleere information of his great Counsell. Sir, excuse me for that my Remora hath stayed my ship a little longer among the projectors then
I did intend, I will now come to the principles by which they have wrought. First no ceremony no Bishop, no Bishop no King, a principle it is true, which (it may bee) pleased the palate of a wise man, but as it hath beene used and applyed it hath opened a gap to destruction, schisme, ruine, and danger. It hath beene used as though a King could not rule without the help of a Bishop, whereas Kings swayed their scepters before the Episcopal digni∣tie was ever knowne in the World, and as like themselves as ever since, and as though a Bishop could not subsist without a ceremonie, whereas the Bishops of the Apostles and primitive times (as they were then called) had few or no ceremo∣nies at all. The further you come from Christ, the Apostles, and primitive times, the more ceremo∣nies you shall finde, in Augustines time there were but few in comparison of after times, yet he com∣plaines of a Judaisme, and multitude of ceremo∣nies, above that which is meet, that in a few hun∣dred yeers were crept into the Church. I conceive the Apostles and primitive Bishops were more pious, more conscientious, more in∣dustrious, and did more good, in feeding and go∣verning the Church of God then our late Bi∣shops, and yet they used few or no ceremonies in comparison. Sir, these Septemvirated conspirators if you observe, have all admired this principle, witnesse their inordinate zeal for the ceremonies as though there were no Religion but in the
practice of these; have not the laws of God, I meane the expresse morall Commandements, beene slighted and neglected, the breaches of it easily dispenced withall? The fundamentall lawes of the Kingdome shaken, while these un∣godly projectors have advanced their Ceremo∣nies and Canons? for my part I have ever tooke a King for a beame, of the Deity cast into an an∣gle of the Earth, and that Judgment and Justice make the throne stable, ruling according to Law is the greatest honour and safety of a Prince, and therefore God requires by Moses, that the King shall read in the book of the Law night and day; there are two sorts of Lawes, Gods owne Laws, and the fundamentall lawes of a Kingdome or State, the King is to see the execution of both these, and it is most safe to preserve them with all tendernesse, so that if a King have a care of these, he may bee sufficienrly supported without the help either of Bishop or Ceremonie; methinks it is a disparagement to the Crowne to bee sup∣ported by Bishops; sure I am Solomons throne was supported by Lyons; and for Ceremony to support Bishops, It seemes such a sandy foun∣dation, that with a violent storme the foundati∣on may be washed away, and the whole building may easily fall. Goe through all the seven sorts of men whom I have charged for the con∣spirators of State, you shall hardly finde a man but working a great deale of trouble, by vertue of this principle: I will close all with crossing and thwarting of the proverb, A King may be
without a Bishop, and an Apostles Bishop with∣out a Ceremony. The second principle, that a papist is much ho∣nester then a puritan, and much more to bee fa∣voured; a damnable principle according to the intention and application of it, and of the effects that have followed in this Kingdome. No questi∣on Machiavil, Ignatius, or the Devill began to ap∣ply this old Hereticall name in such an extended and generall way. For in these latter times every man that subscribed unto the Doctrine of the Church, if he was tender in matter of ceremonie hath beene reputed a Puritan, nay, every man that will not sweare, be drunk, wanton, scoffe and jeere others, he is a puritan, though conformable to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, so that the late projectours have united together in this principle and by it have much advanced their designes: upon this ground, the Papist hath beene cherished as the honester mn, men of most refined life, and exact godlinesse and have shewed forth eminent vertue in practice, have beene brow-beaten, discounte∣nanced, and persecuted, drunkards have beene the good Sonnes of the Church, temperate men the stubborne children of their mother; O Tempo∣ra, O Mores, what strange times were we fallen in∣to, when light was called darknesse, and dark∣nesse light, sweete sower, and sowre sweet, good evill, and evill good, when the wicked shall bee justified for a reward, and the righteousnesse of the righteous shall bee taken away from them? This
principle hath beene followed with such hellish zeal that Religion and Vertue are almost bereft of life and sense, for this principle hath put out the eyes, cut off the legges and hands of Religion and Vertue, Help Lord for faith and truth are al∣most perished, and discouraged for looking a∣mongst the sonnes of men. Thirdly, libertie is sweet, a principle which is acknowledged most true, provided it be not ex∣tended in longitude and latitude above the true naturall dimensions of it; If it had beene stretch∣ed no further then Gods service it had beene perfect freedome, but let it be onely understood of the satisfaction of the carnall will and sensuall appetite then liberty is dangerous, and of bad consequence. Now Sir, survey seriously the latter times, you shall observe the scandalous Minister, the corrupt Magistrate, the innovating Prelate and his Officers, the professed Papist, the Popish Protestant, the rigid Arminian, and the Libertine, all sayling in one and the same channell of carnal libertie, and crying out, Te, te, nos poscimus omnes, all of them with one consent desire libertie, not freedom of conscience in indifferent & undeter∣mined things, for this you shall scarce have one hand amongst them, but libertie to sin, to have their lusts, their heterodox and unsound opinions, libertie to cast off the bonds of truth. This princi∣ple doth cement their affections one to an other, and unite them more strongly against all divine obedience, and hath hetherto made the late con∣spiracies against Church and State more formi∣dable
and dreadfull. These and the like diaboli∣call priniples our late projectors have manna∣ged with what faithfulnesse they can, against the God of order, the law of charitie, the rules of pi∣ety, so that the beautie of these glorious Islands by these and the like devises is much defaced and obscured. Sir, having thus surveyed these Proje∣ctors and their principles, methinks it seemes our dutie, and the dutie of all good Christians and true English hearts, to Petition unto the high and honourable Court of Parliament against these, as underminers of State happinesse, either for their reformation, or else punishing or discounte∣nancing of them; for so long as these have pub∣lique encouragement in our State, neither can re∣ligion be secured, nor the throne and tranquility of the Kingdome well established. Its true, whiles we looke upon the numbers of these confederates, upon their strength (for they look like the sons of Anak) or upon their union, for they seem like the scales of a Whale which a sword cannot pierce and divide easily, they render themselves to our eyes like the Mo∣abites and Amonites to Jehosaphat in a very terri∣ble forme, and for our parts wee seeme a little flock of sheepe, and like grassehoppers in compa∣rison: Yet mee thinks (under correction of your better judgement, unto whom I render my selfe as a learner) there is hope in Israel concerning this thing provided the countermine be wel wrought and managed, I shall therefore crave your assi∣stance to make up by your mature thoughts
what is wanting in my conceit of a Counter∣plot. THE COVNTERPLOT. SIR, there is no better Counterplot to the workers of iniquity then for the opposite side to worke contra∣rily, to countermine errors with truth, unrighteousnesse with righ∣teousnesse, uncharitablenesse with charitie, vio∣lence with moderation, and all sinne with a sin∣cere practice of pietie. This for a generall will hold as the great mine which the Church of God is to raise against the enemies of it. But besides this there are three particular mines which I conceive are most fitting at this present, to raise against the aforenamed confe∣derate projectors against great Britain. The first a well managed Commission, the second is a well constituted and orderd Church-assembly, the third is a right frame of Ecclesia∣sticall government. First a well managed Com∣mission, I understand by that, first Commissio∣ners
chosen by the house of Commons, appro∣ved by the House of Lords, which shall bee no parties nor delinquents as far as can bee discer∣ned, these chosen out of every Shire or Dioces. If the Shire be barren of able and sufficient men, then to appoint strāgers rather then delinquents, and those qualified with integritie, wisdome and resolution. Secondly when the Commissioners are thus chosen for both the houses, to move his Majesty for sufficient authority for the managing of the said commission. That the Commissioners may bee enabled to give oaths, to call before them any parties offending or others for witnesses as they shall see cause, and to have as large power to punish contempts, non aparences, or abuse of the Commissioners, as the Archbishops Visi∣tors were wont to have, in their Metropoliticall visitations. Thirdly, when the Commissioners are thus chosen and armed with authority, then to have a booke of Articles according to the tenour of what I shall propound in the latter end of the discourse, and the said Commissioners to have power to admonish, to enjoine recantation, and to deprive Ministers, or else to return their names into the House of Commons to bee censured there, and haply it might conduce well to the worke, to have a Register allowed to the Com∣missioners for every Shire or Diocesse, and some small fee to be paid to the said Commissioners
towards the charges of the said Commissioners and Register, by every delinquent, as in like cases hath beene allowed in Bishops visitations. Secondly a well constituted assembly or Sy∣nod, I meane an assembly of godly, orthodox, learned, wise, and well tempered Divines, ga∣thered by the singular prudence and providence especially of the House of Commons, which haply might be done most opportunely, when the commission hath first discovered the innova∣ting Prelates, the scandalous Minister, Armini∣ans, and Popish Protestants within these Chur∣ches, and disabled them from judging, advising, or determining in any Church affaires till their reformation be eminent and well noted in the World. In an assembly or Synod thus constituted, me thinkes Sir it would doe well to have the Do∣ctrine of the Church well determined and ex∣planed, so that in matter of Doctrine wee might consent with all Protestant Churches, and (if it were possible) that an agreement might bee la∣boured for betwixt us and the Southern and Ea∣stern Churches, and al Churches to be accounted Christian, which shall be found to agree in mat∣ter of Doctrine; who knowes but the singular industry and wisdome of such a well constituted assembly, may fetch in the Asian, African, Euro∣pean, and American Churches into greater unitie and brotherly correspondencie, and haply to the incredible strength of the Christian party against
all the sworne enemies of Christ Jesus, Nay, who can tell but that such a reconciliation wrought in matter of doctrine may be a speciall meanes to undermine the walls of Babylon, to bring under the Mahumetan, and to render the Lord Christ as a more acceptable Messias, to his old and forsaken people the Jews. But now, Sir, I cannot but pause, being transported with such high thoughts, and designes; but are not wee the tools and instruments to serve divine providence? Doth not Creation, Redemption, & the constant benignitie of Gods providence en∣gage us to serve God in his highest and greatest ends? Is there any part of the World where God hath ground better furnished with men of parts, Learning, Tongues, Arts, Sciences, brave and Noble Resolutions, Ancient, and Renow∣ned Valour, and Honourable Atchievements, then in these British Isles? Hath God so honou∣red and qualified Great Britain, with such suffi∣ciencie and eminencie in all things? And shall not Great Britain reach out its Vertues to serve her Lord and Master in his greatest and highest Designes? Well, Sir, Let us not bee discoura∣ged, let us do, quantum in nobis, for our God hath often honoured himselfe by the weakest Instru∣ments. Secondly, I desire the old boundaries and meeres, between actions necessary, and indiffe∣rent, may be searched out, well viewed, restored, and determined; the losse of Meere stones often∣times
occasioneth quarrels betwixt neerest Neighbours, and dearest Friends, for many hun∣dred yeeres by-past, the Meer-stones betwixt ne∣cessity and indifferency have beene (for the most part) lost and buried under ground, so that neces∣sity hath encroached upon indifferencie, or indif∣ferencie upon necessitie. Heavens help us in this, for in earth wee could never find, for many hundred yeers, men of such moderate and temperate spirits as would allow necessitie and indifferencie their owne, without wrong to the one side. Sir, I professe, I would not have God to lose one foot of his own ground, nor the Conscience its Christian privilege, neither yet the Magi∣strate the least due that God allows him; only I could wish it well determined in a competent and impartiall Church Assembly. First, whether the Conscience be tyed to obe∣dience in any thing, but what God requires in his Word, by way of precept, or naturall and necessary inference, and whether it be fit to strain an inference too far and too curiously? Secondly, whether all things be not indiffe∣rent, wherein the Scripture hath not determi∣ned, and the Conscience free to use them or re∣fuse? Thirdly, whether the libertie of Consci∣ence in indifferent things was not purchased by Christ? Fourthly, If it be the Churches priviledge
what man, or civill Magistrate, hath power to take away my priviledge by Christ, without my own consent, testified by my selfe, or others tru∣sted in my behalfe? Fifthly, whether a Nationall Synod (after the Church is well purged) be not a fit way to con∣clude our libertie in indifferent actions, especially there being some to represent the people (haply a Committee of the House of Commons, as∣sisting in the Worke) for the finding out of the bounds of indifferent actions, and the prescribing Laws concerning them? Sixthly, whether any such assembly may make any Law for indifferent actions, but with a Protestation of Revocation upon inconvenien∣ces observed, and generall scandals? Seventhly, whether charitie be not as neces∣sary together with other generall Rules, Phil. 4.8. and as order or subjection to Magistracie, and how these can be all managed without crossing, or violence to some side? But now (mee thinks) whiles I looke into the Arke, I cannot but tremble and cry out with the Apostle, O the depth; these are arcana Ecclesiae, or fitter for a well constituted Synod, then for any particular, or private person to search into them, neither are they fit to be discussed in such a Sy∣nod without singular moderation, charitie, hu∣militie, profound judgement, and integritie. And now Sir, I have done with my second Myne, which being well wrought, will blow
up many of the above-named Conspirators. On∣ly Sir, Let us encourage the work to the utmost for the reconciliation of all Christians in matter of doctrine, who knows but that God, Great Britains Lord, will account the Indies too mean a recompence for her faithfulnesse in erecting the Kingdome of Christ through the World, and making the light of the Gospel more glorious? Sure I am, the opportunitie for the West Indies is fairer then ever, for my part I dare undertake to cleere it, and for neerer Kingdomes, who knows but they may say to us, as those in the Prophecie of Zacharie, Wee will goe with you, for God is with you. Thirdly, A good frame of Church-govern∣ment, which may represent the new Jerusalem, comming downe from Heaven, wherein the Lambe may bee the light, and that unerring Truth of Gods Word the only Rule whereby to work this frame of building. Sir, I am confident, wee shall never be free from scandalous Ministers, Arminians, Innova∣tors, and Popish Protestants, till a new frame of Government be determined, which may more certainly finde out, discover, and suppresse the Enemies of God and his Church, then this of ours. Sir, my meaning is not to assigne any particu∣lar forme or way for Church-government, that is fitter for a Nationall Synod, then my self, only into your bosome I dare vent my conceit in
some generals; I wish the three severall Govern∣ments to be well surveyed, the Episcopall, the Presbyteriall, and the Independent ways in New England, to refine them all in a Church Assem∣bly, And wherein all or any of them may con∣forme us, more neerly to the Word, and sute with the disposition and necessitie of our church, so much, Sir, desire we may follow in any one or all of them, but where these severall Govern∣ments, or any of them, do crosse the Word, and are inconsistent with the present and distracted condition of our Church, I humbly pray to God Almighty, they may be reprobate, so that Christ only may rule in his Church, according to his commission from his Father. Sir, I believe you will find upon the examina∣tion of the three severall Governments, some thing worthy of admiration, and imitation, in e∣very one of them; None of the three Govern∣ments but may have their severall defects or su∣perfluities, one out of all would doe well, yet so as nothing be taken but what agrees with the Word. Sir, by this time, I am afraid I have spent your patience, but if you please well to consider the premises, you shall haply finde some Gold, though much drosse; some sparks of Vertue, and such notions as being cast abroad, in the World, may beget some Noble and brave thoughts in the minds of our Nation; though I give but hints, profound heads can make larger
commentaries, your judgment I know is able to fan away the chaff, and to keep the pure grain to your self. Sir, It were damnable presumption in mee to thinke the Parliament should be bound to my directions, per omnia, yet if such or the like ways were held, I doubt not, but Great Britain would be the wonder of Ages, and a great contribu∣ter to the greater light and glory of all Christian Churches in the World; who knows, but God hath humbled us in the eyes of the World, to raise us to higher honour, and that the Nor∣therne glory, I mean the Scots, and wee should be neere a breach, to make way for a stronger, and neerer Union? bones broken and well set are stronger afterwards, so the Scots and we with our brethren in Ireland, may with more constant, and cordiall Union, advance the glory of our God, our King, and Countrey, to make their names famous amongst Christians, Jewes, and Mahume∣tans; the bloud of Richard the First, and Edward the First, is not wholly lost amongst us, neither of our Progenitours, whose names were terrible as far as the Holy Land; the neer Union lately made with the brave, ingenious, and warlike Hollander, I looke on as the first-fruits of a greater U∣nion, and a Reconciliation in Doctrine and affe∣ctions amongst Christians through the whole World. Sir, I know you are active, Let us stir and set forward Gods great works in the World; who
knows what God would have done? haply in the midst of these great designes, the distressed Palsgrave unto whom our Nation owes much for neernesse in bloud, may be relieved: mistake me not, let all be deliberately surveyed, my end is not movere quieta, sed quietare motum. Sir, wee are all Gods tools to work with all, let him be the end of all, wee may wish and will, but the Kingdome, power, and glory is Gods, let him have the honour unto all Eternitie. A∣men.
Articles concerning the Mi∣nisters of England. FIrst, whether is your Minister a drunkard, a swearer, an unclean person, an obscaene and scurrilous discourser, & cōmon railer against the best men of life and conversation, if tender about Ceremonies; Is he an Intimate, constant, and familiar friend of notorious and common drun∣kards, swearers, or the like, or a violent and bitter persecutor of men of good life, if hee can pick the least advantage against them in matter of Church Discipline or Ceremonies, or doe you know him habited in any notorious and vile sins expresly against the Laws of God and man? two or three witnesses, upon oath, but men without iust disparagement, will be sufficient in any case. Secondly, whether is not your Minister ve∣hemently
suspected or famed for those or the like notorious offences, as are mentioned in the first Articles? Thirdly, Whether is your Minister notorious∣ly insufficient, and unable for his function? Fourthly, Whether is your Minister a Plura∣list and Non-resident? Fiftly, Whether doth your Minister preach constantly and painfully with all plainesse and faithfulnesse for the common use of the hearer, if he doe not, what you conceive is the reason? Sixtly, Whether is your Minister a professed Arminian, or popishly affected, a Socinian, &c. or is he one that hath been not only passive but a∣ctive in the late Innovations in the Church, verie violent in advancing bowings to the Altar, set∣ting up of Images, &c. Seventhly, Whether is your Minister, a cold, lukewarme, and a negligent Preacher?
Articles concerning Archbishops, Bishops, Chancelors, Deans, Archdeacons, Com∣missaries, Officials, Prebends, Canons, Advocates, Registers, Proctors, Appari∣tors, &c. FIrst, whether are these or any of them Drun∣kards, swearers, unclean persons, wantons, Revellers, Incestuous, or guiltie of any no∣torious sinne against the Laws of God and this Kingdome, have any of them been Oppressors, Extorters, and raisers of fees, kept people in their Courts, rather to pick their purses, then correct their vices, have they sought advantages against men, and have they punished and perse∣cuted rather men scrupulous about a Ceremonie, then common Drunkards, notorious Swearers, &c. Lastlie, have they or anie of them abused the Censures of the Church, and not exercised them against notorious Offenders, but rather otherwise. FINIS.
