H1573 E1825_1 99868668 170422
THE MODERN ASSURANCER, OR THE CLARKS DIRECTORY. Containing the PRACTICK PART of the LAW, in the exact Formes and Draughts of all manner of Presidents for Bar∣gaines, and Sales, Grants, Feoffments, Bonds, Bills, Conditions, Covenants, Joyntures, In∣dentures; to lead the Uses of Fines and Recoveries, with good Provisoes, Covenants to stand seised, Char∣ter-Parties for Ships, Leases, Releases, Surrenders, &c. And all other Instruments and Assurances now in use: Intended for all young Studients and Practizers of the LAVV. By J.H. With an exact Table wherein may be found the principall Matters therein contained. LONDON, Printed for Henry Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop in Vine-Court Middle-Temple, and Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1658.
THE MODERN ASSURANCER, OR THE CLARKS DIRECTORY Containing the Practick Part of the LAW, in the exact Formes and Draughts of all manner of Presidents. Printed for H: Twyford, & N: Brooks, 1658.
TO THE READER. THere are many Books of Presi∣dents, of Conveyances, Assu∣rances, and Instruments now extant, which indeed are very good and usefull in their severall natures and kinds. But there being no Peice so contrived as to contain in it self all man∣ner of Instruments; I was desired by se∣verall persons to make an exact Colle∣ction of some Presidents of every sort: so that with this Book (and my former Collections, Intituled the Conveyancers Light) you might be sufficiently furnish∣ed with perfect Presidents fitted for every purpose, without the trouble of turning over other Books: And the same are so
Methodically disposed under particular Heads, that you may out of the same ex∣tract any Grant, Covenant, Proviso, Ar∣ticle, Condition, Agreement, or any other thing as your Case shall require: And by the means aforesaid, you may find both Matter and Forme to compose, perfect, and compleat, any Instrument whatsoever; And the Formes that are here put for Conditi∣ons of Bonds, may wth much ease be turn∣ed into Provisoes, Conditions, or Cove∣nants, as occasion shall require. I shall add no more, but hoping that these my Endeavours will answer thy Expectati∣on; I leave them to thy Candid Censure, John Herne.
THE MODERNE ASSURANCERS STUDY opened; Being a Collection of all manner of ASSURANCES now in use both absolute and Conditionall. Articles of Agreement. Articles of Agreement upon a mar∣riage. ARTICLES Indented of Agreement, con∣cluded upon between I. Q. of Graies-Inne in the County of M. Esquire, W. R. of C. in the County of M. Esquire, W. Q. Citizn and Mereer of L. and R. B. Citizen and Dra∣per of L. aforesaid on the one party: And W. B. Citizen and Haberdasher of L. on the other party, of, for and concerning a marriage to be had and solemnized by Gods grace between the said W. B. and I. Q one of the Daughters and Orphants of I. Q
late Citizen, &c. The which said Articles being agreed and fully concluded upon between the said parties first above mentioned the eight and twentieth of January in the year, &c. do hereafter insue in manner and form following, That is to say, First the said W. B. doth faithfully agree, promise, and conclude to and with the said I. Q. W. R. W. Q. and R. B. That he the said W. B. shall by Gods grace before the 25. of June next coming, take to wife the said I. Q. (if she will thereunto consent and a∣gree.) Item, the same W. B. doth promise, conclude and agree in manner and forme aforesaid, That he shall before the end of Easter term next ensuing, together with his brethren H. B. and B. B. levy a Fine unto such persons as shall be named by the said I. Q. W. R. W. Q. and R B. The which Fine shall be Sur Conusans de droit come ceo, &c. of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in the County, of the clear yearly value of fifty pounds of, &c. over and above all charges and reprises; The which Cognizees in the same Fines and their Heires shall be seised of the said Lands, Te∣nements, and Hereditaments comprized in the said Fine from the time of the celebration of Matrimony between the said W. and I. to the use and behoof of the said W. B. and I. and of the heires males of the body of the said W. B. to be begotten of the body of the said I. and for lack of such issue, then to the use of the said W. B. and of the heires males of his body lawfully begotten: And for lack of such issue to the uses, intents, and true meaning of an en∣tail thereof made by one H.B. deceased, Father of the same W. B. Item, the same W. B. doth promise, conclude, and agree in man∣ner and form abovesaid, That he shall and will within the time and space of foure yeares next ensuing the date hereof, purchase, obtaine, and procure Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of the clear and yearly value of fifty pounds by the year, above all charges and reprises to be lawfully assured and conveyed unto him the said W. and to the said I. and to the heires males, &c. up∣on the body of the said I. to be begotten with the remainder of the same Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to the said W. B. and his heires for ever. And if it fortune that the said W. B. doe decease within the said foure yeares now next ensuing as aforesaid, and before that he have purchased, obtained, and procured Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments to the clear yearly value of fifty
pounds by the year in manner and forme above rehearsed, Then shall the said W. B. leave, give, and bequeath unto the said I. by his last Will and Testament, or otherwise, the full and entire sum of six hundred pounds of, &c. over and besides such part and por∣tion as she the same I. may justly and lawfully claim and challenge by the most laudable and ancient custome of the City of Lon∣don. Item, the same W. B. is pleased and contented, That if the same I. shall fortune to decease before him the said W. B. That then it shall and may be lawfull for the said I. by her last Will and Testa∣ment to give and bequeath the full summe of two hundred pounds of, &c. to what person or persons it shall best stand with the like∣ing, good will and pleasure of her the said I. And the same W. B. doth most faithfully promise and agree to content and pay the same summe of two hundred pounds, to such person and persons as to whom she the said I. shall in manner and forme aforesaid, will, bequeath, name, or appoint the same to be paid within three moneths next after her decease, any Law or usage to the contrary notwithstanding. Item, the said W.B. doth by these presents for him and his Execu∣tors promise and agree in manner and form aforesaid, That if after such time as the full portion, legacy or childs part being due un∣to her the said I. be contented and paid unto the said W. B. There fortune any debt or bond to appeare to be lawfully due to any per∣son or persons by the late Father of the said I. and now not con∣tained in the inventory made of his goods and debts, and which his Executors shall hereafter be lawfully compellable to pay, That then the same W. and his Executors shall contribute, portion, and portion like, as equity, conscience and reason will or shall require for and towards the payment of the same. In witnesse whereof the said parties to these present Articles indented of Agreement, enter∣changeably have set their Seales, &c.
An Indenture of Covenants where two young men ha∣ving taken their Masters Shop after his decease they are bound to the Administrators to ga∣ther in his debt, &c. THis Indenture, &c. Between A. G. and W. D. Citizen and Aldermen of L. Administrators of the goods and chattells which late were of R. C. late Citizen and Salter of L. on the one part, And R. A. and R. H. Citizens, &c. on the other part wit∣nesseth, That the said A. G. in part of the performance of the Testament of the said R. C. and for divers other good considera∣tions, &c. Hath demised, &c. to the said R A. and R H. all that the Shop of the late dwelling house of the said R. C. in the Pa∣rish, &c. To have and to hold the said Shop, &c. from, &c. for five years, &c. yeilding, &c. forty pounds, &c. at the Feasts, &c. And the said R. A. and R. H. for themselves and either of them, their Executors, and Administrators do covenant and grant to and with the said A. and W. and to and with either of them, their Ex∣ecutors, Administrators and Assignes, and every of them by these presents in forme, &c. That they the said R. and R. and either of them, by all earnest waies and meanes without suit in Law to the best that in them shall lye shall endeavor themselves to obtain, get in, and come by all such debt and debts as any Debtor or Debtors did owe unto the said R. C. at the time of his decease and yet remaine unpaid for any Wares, Merchandizes or other things whatsoever which did belong to the said R. C. And that once every week or otherwise at any time and from time to time at all times upon any reasonable demand or request to be made by the said A. and W their Heires, Executors, Administrators or As∣signes, they the said R. and R. and either of them, their Execu∣tors, and Administrators shall make true account to the said A. and W. their Executors, Administrators and Assignes, for so much of the said debts and every part thereof as the said R and R. and ei∣ther of them, or any for them or either of them in the meane time shall have, receive, or take satisfaction for by any meanes. And then shall make speedy and ready payment to the said A. and W. or to one of them, their Executors, Administrators and Assignes of and for so much of the said debts as the said R. and R. or either
of them or any other for them or either of them shall have recei∣ved or taken satisfaction of as aforesaid without any manner of fraud or covin. And also that they the said R. and R. or either of them, their Executors or Administrators during the said term of five years shall not by any meanes directly or indirectly, by them∣selves or any of them, or by any other for them, or any of them take or receive payment or satisfaction for any Goods or Wares, which they or any of them shall sell to any the late Chapmen or Customers which were of the said R. C. and yet have not paid all the debt which they did owe to the said R. C. before such time as such Chapman and Customer of whom the said R. and R. or ei∣ther of them, their Executors or Administrators, or any of them shall receive payment or satisfaction for any of their own goods or wares, shall first have truly paid all the whole debt which such Chapman or Customer did owe to the said R. at the time of his decease (All such Chapmen or Customers which were of the said R. C. at the time of his decease as are dwelling within the City of L. or the Suburbs thereof onely except.) A rentry for non-payment of the Rent, &c. In witnesse, &c. A Bill of Credit. THis present writing witnesseth, That I R. M. of London Al∣derman do undertake to and with H. E. of the City of E. Mer∣chant, his Executors and Administrators, That if he deliver unto Sir F. D. Knight, of any of his Assignes to his use, any summe or summes of money amounting to the summe of five hundred pounds of, &c. or under; And shall take a Bill under the hand and seale of the said S F. confessing and shewing the certainty thereof, That then I my Executor or Administrator having the same Bill delive∣red to me or them shall immediatly upon the receipt of the same Bill pay or cause to be paid to the said H. E. his Executors or As∣signes, all such summes of money as shall be contained in the said bill, To the which payment well and truly to be made, I bind me, &c. In witnesse, &c.
A Bill into the Chancery to have Witnesses examined in perpetuam Rei memoriam. IN most humble wise sheweth unto your Lordships, your Orator I. S. Citizen and Grocer of L. that whereas one I. C. deceased was lawfully seised in his demesne as of fee, of and in three Messu∣ages with the appurtenances in H. B. and A. in the County of H. and of and in twenty acres, &c. and the said I. C. so being seised of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premisses with their appurtenances did about the twelfth day of June in the second and third years of the reigns of our late sovereign Lord, &c. by his Deed of Feoffment for and in consideration of divers great summes of money to him by your Orator paid thereof, enfeoff your said Orator, to have and to hold to your said Orator, his Heires and assignes for ever, to the onely use of, &c. By force whereof your said Orator entred into the laid Messuages, Lands, Tene∣ments, and other the Premisses, and was thereof lawfully seised in his demesne as of fee, and the profits thereof coming hath ever since taken and received as was lawfull for him to doe, But so it is and it may please your Lordships, that by reason your Orator hath his estate in and to the Premisses to him conveyed by force of the same Feoffment, and that the perfecting of your Orators Estate by the same Feoffment by order of Law, there is required execu∣tion thereof by livery of seisin which being matter in Deed, is to be proved by Witnesses. Certaine troublesome and ill disposed persons by the procurement of J. C. the younger, to the end to dis∣credit your Orators title in and to the Premisses have of late noto∣riously and publikely in divers places within the said County, and other places reported that your Orator never had any such estate to him conveyed by Feoffment, but that the said Feoffor thereof dyed seised: By which indirect practises they intend to make men doubt and suspect your Orators right in and to the same, and so to continue in their suspicion till such time as your Orators witnesses which now are living and can testifie the execution of the said Deed should be dead, and then to bring your said Orators estate into tryall, and in and by the common Law of this Realm, where∣in it shall behoove your said Orator to make proofe of the execu∣tion of his said Feoffment, the want of which said proofe conside∣ring the said false and slanderous rumors may then put your said
Orator in great hazard of the losse of his said estate & right which if it should happen would be to the great hinderance of your sayd oratour and against Law and conscience, It may therefore in the consideration of the Premisse please your good Lordships to grant unto your said orator his Highnesse Writ of Subpoena against such persons as your orator shall think convenient witnesses in the pre∣misses commanding them thereby having their costs allowed to appeare before your honours in the Court of Chancery there to be examyned by the examyners of the said Court & testify their knowledges for and concerning the executyon and proof of the same deed & all other circumstances concerning the same, so as the same examination & depositions may remain in this ho∣nourable Court, in perpetuam rei memoriam And your ora∣tor. &c. A Bill of Exchang. AT double usance I pray you pay by this my first bill of Ex∣chang my second not being paid unto R. P. Merchant or the bringer hereof the summe of 39 l. 5 s. Flemish money Currant in Hamborowgh for merchandizes, and is for the very value thereof here by me received of the said R. P. at the day I pray you make him good payment. And thus God keep you. A Charter Party. IN the name of God Amen. This Charter Party Indented of a Freightment made this 28 th. day of N. In the year of our Lord 1651. Between J. C. Master of the good ship or vessell called the F. of L. of the burthen of 200. Tuns or there abouts now riding at Anchor in the river of Thames of the one part, And A. C. of L. Merchant of the other part Witnesseth, that the said J. C. hath granted and letten the said Ship to Freight unto the said A. C. and he the said A. C. hath accordingly hired the said Ship for a voyage by Gods assistance to be made with her as is hereafter mentioned. That is to say the said J. C. for him his executors and administrators, doth covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said A. C. his executors, and assig. by these presents, that the said Ship shal with the first good wind & weather that God shall send next after the 10 th. day of D. next ensuing the date above written shall set saile and depart from and out of the said river of Thames upon her said intended Voyage, and before such depar∣ture
shall receive & take into her all such goods & merchan∣dizes as he the said A. C. his Factor or assignes shall lade or cause to be laden aboard her which she may conveniently stowe and carry in her over and above her victuall, tackle, and apparell, and by Gods assistance as wind and weather shall serve and the periles and dangers of the Seas excepted directly saile and ap∣pley unto Nantz in Brittany, & there discharg the said goods out of her, and also receive relade and take in to her againe all such other goods or merchandizes, as the said A. C. his Factor or as∣signes shall relade or cause to be reladen aboard her, and which she may conveniently stow and carry in her as aforesaid, and then the said Ship shall with the first good wind and weather that God shall afterwards send (the danger of the Seas excepted) directly saile and apply unto the Island of Saint Michael in the Domini∣ons of the King of Portugall and there to discharg and relade a∣gaine according to the order and direction of the said A, C. his Factor or assignes, and according to the like order shall directly saile & apply to the Island of Terceras and Fyall, & there make a dis∣charge of the said merchants goods and merchandizes, and also at Terceras and Fyall aforesaid shall receive relade and take in∣to her againe, all such goods and merchandizes as are there usual∣ly laden which the said A.C. his Factor or assignes shall relade or cause to be reladen aboard the said Ship (and which she may conveniently stow and carry in her over and above her victuall tackle and apparrell, & the said ship being so reladen at Terceras & Fyall she shall (as wind and weather shall serve and the perrils and dangers of the seas excepted) saile retorn and come back to the Island of Saint Michael, & there receive such other goods and merchandizes as the said Merchant shall please to lade which are there accustomed to be laden (& which the said ship may carry as aforesaid conveniently, and then the said Ship shall with the first good wind and weather that God shall afterwards send (the pe∣rills and dangers of the Seas excepted) directly saile and apply unto Falmoth, Plimouth, Dartmouth or the Isle of weight, or to one of those said places; and the said Ship being accordingly arrived at one of the said places the said I. C. or any other person that shall be master of the said Ship for the time being shall send expresse notice by writing to be given or at least unto or for the said A.C. his executors Factors or assignes, at or in the now dwelling house of the said A. C. scituate in D. near Algate London that the said Ship and goods are safely arrived at one of the places aforena∣med,
and at such place of arrivall the said Ship shall stay six daies for an answer, and directions to be returned and given by him the said A. C. his executors, Factors or assignes for the sailing and applying of the Ship afore mentioned unto Haverdegrace in France, Amsterdam in Holland, or to the parts of the city of L. the charge of sending a messenger to give such intelligence as aforesaid shall be satisfied and paid by the said A. C. his executors, Factors or as∣signes, and according to such answer direction and appointment the said Ship shall with the first good wind and weather that God shall send (the perrils and the dangers of the Seas excepted) directly saile and apply either to Haverdegrace in France or Amster∣dam in Holland or the Port of this City of L. which of the said pla∣ces the said Ship shall be so ordered and appointed to saile and apply unto, and within ten daies after the arrivall of the said Ship at the same place to be apointed, the said Ship shall make her right discharge of the said merchants goods & merchandizes, & there end & finish her said intended voyage (the perrils and dan∣gers of the Seas excepted) And the said ship shall tarry and Spend at Nantz the Island of Saint Michael Terceras and Fyall for her severall discharges and reladings there as afore menti∣oned during the space of threescore working daies at Harbour, And the said I. C. or the master of the said Ship for the time be∣ing shall at all and every of the said places receive a note or notes in writing to be made and given by the said A. C his executors, Factors, or assig. certifying therein how many daies the said ship shall have tatried at every severall place afore mentioned, and if the said note or notes be not so given by the said merchant his fac∣tor, or assignes then the master shall or may make protest. And the said A. C. for him his executors & administ. doth covenant promise, & grant to and with the said I. C. his executors admini∣strators, and assignes, by these presents, That the said A. C. his heires, executors, administ Factors or assignes, shall and will not only within the said 60. daies afore limited lade relade & discharg aboard and out of the said Ship at Nantz Saint Michael Terceras and Fyall, as is particularly afore herein mentioned which goods and Merchandizes usually and accustomary to be landen at the same place or places. And after notice of the arrivall of the said Ship unto Falmouth, Plymouth, Dartmouth, or the Isle of Weight, shall within six daies limited give order & direction unto the said J. C. or the master of the said ship for the time being whether the said Ship shall saile unto Averdegrace, Amsterdam, or to the
Port of this City of L. to make there right discharge: And shall at such place to be appointed discharge the said goods and Mer∣chandizes out of the said Ship within ten dayes after the arrivall of the said Ship at such appointed place of discharge as aforesaid, but also shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the said J C. his Executors, administrators, or assignes, Freight for the said Ship at and after the rate of four pounds of lawfull money of England per Tonn for every tonn of goods and merchandizes accounting three Chests of Sugars to a Tonn two thowsand pounds of Tobacco & one and twenty Quintalles of wood Portugal weight to a Tonn, and for other goods or Merchandizes accor∣ding to the usuall custome, and all such moneys as so shall arise and grow due to be paid for the Freight or hire of the said Ship as afore mentioned shall be satisfied and payed unto the said J. C. his Executors, administ. or assignes within three dayes next after the discharge of the said Ship at Haverdegrace or Amsterdam which of them shall be appointed as aforesaid, And the same monies to be paid also according to the course of the exchange at such place to be appointed as aforesaid, And in case the said Ship shall be discharged at L. by the order and direction as afore∣said, Then the same moneyes to arise and grow due at the said rate of Fowre pounds per Tonn as aforesaid shall be truly paid unto the said J. C. his executors, administrators, or assignes in L. within three daies next after such discharge of the said Ship at L. as aforesaid. And further, it is agreed by and between the said parties, to these presents, that in case the said A, C. his execu∣tors, Factors, or assignes, shall not fully lade the said ship upon her return from the said voyage, Yet neverthelesse the said A. C. his executors, or administrators, shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said J. C, his executors, or assignes, at and af∣ter the rate of Foure pounds of lawfull money of England Per tonn for so many Tons as the said Ship can or may carry by measure within 3. dayes after the last discharge to be made by the said Ship in the said voyage, together with averidg accustomed, And it is agreed that all Port charges that shall arise and grow due to be paid from the said Ship for the said intended voyage shall be satisfied and paid in this manner viz. Two third parts thereof by the said A. C. his Factors or assignes, and the other third part thereof by the said J. C. his executors or assignes, And further it is agreed that the said A. C. his Executors, or assignes, shall truly satisfie and pay or cause to be payd unto the said I. C. the sum
of five pounds sterling to buy him a Hat, Provided alwaies, and it is agreed by and between the said parties to these presents that it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said A. C. his executors, Factors or assignes, or any of them to keep the said ship at Demo∣ridge, at Nants, Saint Michael, Terceras, and Fyall, afore mentio∣ned during the space of thirty dayes and no more if need shall require after rhe expiration of the said threescore dayes afore li∣mited for the stay of the said Ship at Nants, S Michael, Terceras and Fyall, afore mentioned for every day of which demoridge the said A. C. his executors, Factors, or assignes shall well and truly pay or cause to be payd unto the said J. C. his executors, administ. or assignes, the summe of three pounds of Lawfull money of Eng∣land Per day for every day the said Ship shall be so occasioned to stay as aforesaid after the expiration of the said threescore dayes afore limited, and the same moneys to arise and grow due for de∣meridge to be paid as it shall grow due any thing aforesaid to the contrary notwithstanding, And moreover, it is agreed by and be∣tween the said parties to these presents, that the sayd A. C. his executors, Factors, or assignes, shall & will pay or cause to be paid unto the said I. C. his executors, or assignes, all such summe and Summes of money as he or they shall have occasion for at the Island of S. Michael, Terceras, and Fyall so that the same moneys do not exceed the Summe of threscore Millrees at most which is to be deducted out of such Freight as shall grow due as aforesaid And it is agreed by and between the said parties to these presents That the Master shall not lade any goods aboard the said Ship for any other Merchant only the Master or his company shall have Five Tunns for their own use without allowance for the same if oc∣casion shall require. And further, it is agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, That the said A. C. his executors, Factors, or assignes at his & their owne costs & charges at every-Port and Place where the said Ship shall arive shall provid de∣mudge Bulke-heads, Deales, and Nailes, and other necessaries, in case any corn or grain shall be laden aboard the said Ship in the said voyage. And further, it is agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, that in case the said Ship by default of the said merchant his Factors, or assignes, shall be dispatched from Nants, S. Michael, Terceras. and Fyall, aforesaid within the sayd threscore dayes afore limitted and thirty dayes at Demoridge as afore mentioned, that then it shall and may be lawfull for the Master of the said Ship to retourn with the said Ship to L. the
Merchant paying Frait as aforesaid, And the said J. C. for him his executors & administ. doth covenant Promise and grant to and with the said A. C. his executors and assignes, by these presents that the said Ship at the time of her departure from and out of the said river of Thames upon her intended voyage shall be strong and sufficiently victualed, tackled, furnished, and apparrelled with Masts, Sales, yards, anchors, Cables, Rops, Cords, boate oares, twelve peeces of Ordinance, guns, gunpowder, Shot, tackle apparrell, amunition, and furniture meet and needfull for the said Ship and voyage together with the aforesaid Master and Twenty men and boyes which men and boyes or so many of them as shall be needfull, shall be ready at all due times with the boat of the said Ship and shall serve and carry the said mer∣chant his Factors or assignes, or any of them to and from Land during the said voyage. And to the performance of all and singu∣lar the covenants, grants, articles, payments, agreements, and all other things afore herein contayned by and on the part and behalfe of the said I. C. his executors, or administrators, or any of them to be paid don and performed as aforesaid the said J. C. bindeth himself his Executors, and administrators, and espcially the said Ship with her Freight tackle and apparrell unto the said A. C. his executors, administrators and assignes, in the summe or penalty of two thowsand pounds of Lawfull money of England truly to be payd by these presents. And likewise to the perfor∣mance of all and singular the covenants, grants, articles, pay∣ment, agreements, and all other things afore herein contayned by and on the part and behalfe of the said A. C. his executors, Administrators, Factors or assignes, or any of them to be payd don and performed as foresaid, the sid A. C. bindeth himself his executors, Administrators and goods unto the said I. C. his execu∣tors administrators, and assignes, in the like summe or penalty of two thousand pounds of like lawfull money of England truly to be payd by these presents, In Witnesse &c, A Charter Party. IN the name of God Amen, This Charter party Indented a fraigh∣ment made the 15. of May, Anno 1657. Between L.T. and W. L. Partowners of the good Ship called the L. of London of the burthen of 100 tonns or thereabouts, now ryding at an anchor in the River of Thames within the Port of this City of London (of which Ship the said W. L. is Commander under God) on the one part, and R. M
of London Merchant on the other part Witnesseth, That the said Partowners have granted and letten to freight the said Ship unto the said Merchant by the month for and during the term or space of twelve moneths, certaine to begin and to be accompted from the departure of the said Ship from Gravesend, outwards bound upon her present intended voyage at and for the rate and price of two hundred and ten pounds of lawfull money of England, per month; and for such and so long time after the expiration of the said twelve moneths, not exceeding twelve moneths more, as it shall please the said Merchant, his factors or assignes to keep the said Ship in his service and imployment, at and for the like rate and price of two hundred and ten pounds of lawfull money of England per moneth: And so after the same rate and price for a lesser time then a moneth accounting the months as they shall fall out in the Callendar, and that the said Merchant hath according∣ly levied the said Ship by the month at the rate and price afore∣said for a voyage (by Gods assistance) to be made with her as is hereafter mentioned. (That is to say) the said Partowners for themselves, their Executors and Administrators, do covenant, grant, and agree joyntly and severally to and with the said Mer∣chant, his Executors, Administrators and Assignes by these pre∣sents, That the said Ship upon or before the twentieth day of June now next ensuing (wind and weather permitting) shall be ready and fitting to set sail and depart from hence upon her said intended voyage, as wind and weather will permit (the dangers of the Seas excepted) shall directly sail and applie unto such parts and places within and without the Streights of Gibralter where the said Ship may safely arrive and lawfully trade not ex∣ceeding the Latitude of thirty degrees, and further to the South∣ward, as the said Merchant, his Factors or Assignes, shall direct, order and appoint; And that the said Ship (the perils and dangers of the Seas excepted) shall end her voyage in the Port of London; And further that the said Ship before her departure from hence, and during the time that she shall be in the service and imployment of the said Merchant, his Factors or Assignes by vertue hereof shall lade, receive, and take into her, and also dis∣charge and un-lade out of her all such Goods, Merchandizes and lading which she may conveniently stow and carry in her over and above her victualls, tackle and apparrell, as the said Merchant, his Factors or Assignes shall think fit to lade and put into her, or discharge and un-lade out of her, and the said Merchant, for him,
his Executors and Administrators doth covenant and grant to and with the said Partowners and either of them, their and either of their Executors, Administrators and Assignes by these presents, That he the said Merchant, his Factors or Assignes shall and will permit and suffer the said Ship with her ordinance, tackle, and ap∣parrell to be safely returned in the River of Thames from the said voyage, and be there discharged from and out of her said inten∣ded imployment, at the expiration of twenty foure moneths to be accounted from the time of the said Ships entrance into her monthly pay as aforesaid (the perills and dangers of the Seas, and necessary use and wearing of her tackle and apparrell and fur∣niture in the meane time only excepted.) And further that the said Merchant, his Executors, Administrators and Assignes shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said Part∣owners or either of them, their or either of their Executors or As∣signes in London, fraight for the said Ship for the said intended voyage at and after the aforesaid rate of two hundred and ten pounds of lawfull money aforesaid monthly, for every month that the said Ship shall remaine and be in the service and imployment of the said Merchant, his Factors or Assignes by vertue hereof: And also after the same rate for a shorter time then a moneth, that is to say, from the time of the said Ships entrance into her monthly pay as aforesaid, untill she shall be returned into the said River of Thames from her said voyage and be there discharged from and out of her said intended imployment, and accounting the moneths as aforesaid: And that all the monies which at and after the rate aforesaid, shall arise or grow due to be paid for the fraight of the said Ship for her said intended voyage shall be truly paid unto the said Partowners o either of them, their or either of their Executors or Assignes in London, in manner and forme follow∣ing (That is to say) the one halfe or moyety thereof within three dayes next after the returne and discharge of the said Ship in the said River of Thames; and the other moyety or halfe part thereof within three months then next following, together with a∣verage, primage, and Petilodminage accustomed. Provided al∣wayes, and it is conditioned, concluded, and fully agreed upon by and between the said parties to these presents, That in case the said Ship shall be out upon her said intended Voyage six moneths to be accompted as aforesaid, and at the end of the sayd six moneths shall be well and in safty in the service of the said Merchant his Factor or assignes (that then the said Mer∣chant
his Factors, or assignes) shall three moneth next after the expiration of the sayd six moneths true and certaine notice or Certificate of such the wellbeing of the said Ship at the end of six moneths being in the meane time given or left to or for the sayd Merchant, his executors or assignes, at his now dwelling house in London so much Freight as at and after the rates afore∣said shall be due for the said Ship for six moneths service. And further that in case the sayd Ship shall be out upon the sayd voy∣age twelve moneths, And at the end of the said twelve moneths shall be well and in safty in the service of the said Merchant or his assignes, that then the sayd Merchant his executors, or assi∣gnes, shall and will within three moneths next after the expira∣tion of the sayd twelve moneths true or certaine notice or certi∣ficate of such the wellbeing of the sayd Ship at the end of twelve moneths being in the meane time given or left in man∣ner and Form aforesayd well and truly pay or cause to be payd unto the sayd Partners or either of them their or either of their executors, or assignes in London over and above the first sayd six moneths Freight so much Freight as, at and after the rate afore∣sayd shall be due for six moneths service more. And moreover that in case the sayd Ship shall be out upon the sayd voyage eighteene moneths and at the end of the same eighteene moneths shall be well and in safty in the service of the sayd merchant or his assignes, that then the sayd merchant his execut. or assig. shall and will within three moneths next after the expiration of the same eighteen moneths, true and certayne notice or certificat of such the well being of the said Ship at the end of 18. moneths, be∣ing in the meane time given or left in such manner and form as is before mentioned, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the sayd partners or either of them their or either of their Factors, Executors or assignes, in London over and above the said six moneths Freight so much Freight as at and after the Rate a∣foresayd shall be due for other six moneths service, any thing a∣foresayd to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided further, and it is conditioned & agreed between the sayd parties to these presents that in case the said Ship shal be returned into the River of Thames from the said voyage, and be there discharged of and out of her sayd intended imployment before the expiration of the said First Twelve moneths to be accounted as aforesayd. Yet never∣thelesse the said Partners or either of them their or either of their Exeuctors, or Assignes, shall have and be
allowed freight for the said Ship at and after the rate aforesaid, for the full time of twelve months any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding: And moreover it is agreed that the said Merchant for him, his Executors and Administrators, doth hereby covenant and agree to furnish and deliver during the said Voyage unto the said Master of the said Ship for the time being, all such monies as he shall have occasion to use for buying of Provisi∣ons and other necessaries, and payment of mens wages which said monies shall be deducted and and allowed from time to time out of the freight that shall respectively grow or become due by vertue hereof, and for that each and every Doller, which shall be supplyed in Christendome, the said Partowners shall allow five shillings a Doller, and the said Partowners for themselves, their Executors and Administrators do covenant and grant joyntly and severally to and with the said Merchant, his Executors or Assignes by these presents, that the said Ship at the time of her departure from hence upon the said Voyage, shall be strong and well and suffici∣ently victualled, tackled, furnished, and apparrelled with Masts, Saile, Saile-yards, Anchors, Cables, Ropes, Cords, Boat-oares, twenty five peices of Ordinance, Guns, Gunpowder, Shot, Tackle, Apparrell, and Furniture meet and needfull for the said Ship and Voyage, together with the said Commander, three hundred forty three men and a boy which men and boy, or so many of them as shall be requisite, shall be ready at all due times with the Boat of the said Ship, and shall serve and carry the said Merchant, his Factors and Goods according to custome, to and from Land du∣ring the said Voyage. And lastly it is agreed between the said par∣ties that all such port charges as shall arise or grow due to be paid during the said Voyage, and all such Steringree as during the same Voyage, shall be used in and about the said Ship, shall be paid, borne, sustained in this manner, that is to say one halfe by the said Merchant, his Executors or Assignes, and the other halfe part thereof by the said Partowners, their Executors and Assignes: And to the performance, &c. A Charter-party passed. IN the name of God Amen, this Charter party of a Freightment made between R. F. of L. Mercer and E. F. of R. in the County of M. Master under God of a good Ship called the Royall Merchant
of L. of the burthen of three hundred Tuns or thereabouts, now ryding at an Anchor in the River of Thames, on the one part of which Ship the said R. and E. are Partowners; And T. C. Mer∣cer, & R.S. Haberdasher, Merchants of London, owners of the other parts and residue of the said Ship, on the other part witnesseth, that the said R. F. and T. W. have granted and letten to freight all their part of the Ship unto the said T. C. and R. S. for a Voy∣age with her to be made by Gods grace in manner and form follow∣ing, that is to say, The said R. F. and E. W. for their part do co∣venant and grant to and with the said T. C. and R. S. by these Present, That the said Ship with the first good wind and weather that God shall send next after the date hereof, shall by Gods grace directly saile from the River of Thames, with such Goods and Mer∣chandizes as shall be laden in her unto the Port of Ligora in Ita∣ly under the Dominion of the Duke of Florence, and there shall discharge such Goods and Merchandizes as shall be appointed there to be un-laden, and from thence shall take her direct course with as much convenient speed as may be unto the Isle of Janta in Graecia, under the Government of the Seignory of Venice, and there shall tarry and abide by the space of forty working dayes next after her first arrivall there at an Anchor for to un-lade such goods and merchandize as is or shall be appointed there to be un-laden freight free. And also within the same time shall re-lade such Goods, Wares, and Merchandises as the said T. and R. their Factors and assignes will there charge and lade into the said Ship after the rate as followeth, that is to say, accounting twenty hun∣dred net of Currance, for a Tunne fifteen barrells of Oyle, for a Tonne so many Galls as will fill foure Hogsheds for a Tonne, and for all other Wares and Merchandises to be laden in the said Ship by the said T. and R. their Factors or assignes after such rate as shal be reasonable, by 4 indifferent persons whereof two to be cho∣sen by the said T. and R. and the other by the said R. and E. and that the said Ship with her burthen shall with the first and next good wind and weather after the expiration of the said forty working dayes by Gods grace directly saile and come from the Isle of Janta unto the said City of London for her right discharge or as near thereunto as she conveniently may; and the said T. and R. do covenant and grant, and either of them covenanteth and gran∣teth by these presents, That they, their Factors, Deputies, or as∣signes, or some of them, shall and will well and truly pay or cause, &c. to the said R. and E. or either of them, their or either of
their certaine Attornies, executors, or administrators, in the said City of L. six pounds of, &c. for every Tonne of such wares and merchandizes as aforesaid as shall be laden in the said Ship by the said T. and R. their Factors deputies or assignes rata∣ble according to the parts and interests of the said R. and E. of and in the said Ship in manner and Forme following that is to say, one third part thereof upon the right discharge of the said Ship and one other third part thereof within the space of six weeks then next following, and the residue therof within the space of 6. weeks then next ensuing. And the said R. & E. do co∣venant and grant and also warrant that the said ship for their parts shall be strong and staunche and well and sufficiently vic∣tualed,, tackled and apparelled with saile-yards, Anchors, Cables, Ropes, Guns, shot, Artillery, gunpowder, and all other instruments, tackle and apparrel needfull and necessary in such a ship for a like voyage; together with an able Master, 56. men and a boy which men and boy shall be ready at all due times with the said Cock-boate of the said Ship to serve the said T. and R. their Factors, and assignes to and from Land during the said voyage and also to discharge and relade the said Ship as oportunity shall serve. And to the aforesaid covenants, grants, articles and all other things on the parts of every of the Parties aforesaid truly to be holden kept and performed in all things as is aforesaid the fame Parties do bind themselves one to an other, That is to say the said R. and E. and either of them do by these presents bind themselves and their severall executors and goods, and their se∣verall Parts and interrests in the said Ship with the furniture of the same to the said T. and R. and to their executors, and admi∣nistrators, And the said T. and R. and either of them do like∣wise bind themselves their executors and administrators and all their goods to the said R. and E. their executors and admi∣nistrators in the summe and penalty of 200 l. of &c. by the par∣ty or parties infringing Covenant to the parties observing, truly to be paid by vertue of these presents. In Witnesse &c. Dated &c. Another Charter partie. IN the Name of God Amen, This charter party Indented of a Freightment made between T. P. citizen and Alderman
of L. And R.C. cityzen and Draper of L. owners of the good Ship called the Primrose of London of the burthen of 140. tunns or there abouts at this present riding in the River of Thames within the port of London whereof is Master under God for this present voyage T. W. on the one part, And B. L. Merchant of Portugall now recident in London on the other part, Witnesseth, That the said owners and masters have granted and letten the sayd Ship to Freight to the sayd merchant, And the said merchant hath hired the sayd Ship for a voyage with her to be made by Gods Grace in forme ensuing, that is to say, The sayd owners and master for them their Executors and administ. and every of them do covenant and grant, and every of them covenanteth and granteth by these pre∣sents to and with the sayd merchant his executors, and Administ. and every of them in form following, That is to say, That the sayd Ship shall ride and tarry within the river of Thames untill the fifteenth day of this instant moneth of July, and shall receive into her within the said Port of London Freight Free all such goods, wears, and merchandize, as it shall please the sayd merchant his Factors or assignes there to charge and lade into her before her departure, And not to receive into her before her departure any of the goods corne or merchandizes of any person or persons with∣out the speciall concent and agreement of the sayd Merchant his Factors, or assignes, (except three packs of merchandizes freight free of the proper goods of the said R. C.) And that the said Ship shal with the first good wind and weather that God shal send next after the sayd 15 th. day of this sayd instant moneth of July departe and Saile from the Port of the sayd city of London with the said received goods of the said merchant unto G. of this Realm, where she shall tarry and abide by the space of ten daies next ensuing her first arrivall there at an Anchor to receive in∣to her Freight free as much corne as she may safely carry, over and besids her victuall, tackle, apparell munition and furniture And moreover that the said Ship shall with the first good wind and weather that God shall send next after the expiration of the said ten daies directly Saile from G. aforesaid unto Lushborne in the realme of Portugall as nigh the same town as she may safely arive to make her right discharge, where the said Ship shall tarry and abide by the space of 45. daies next ensuing her first arrivall there at an Anchor, aswell to discharge such goods received into her within the sayd Port of London and at G aforesaid, As also to recharg and receive into her 140 Tunns in all such goods
wares, & merchandizes, as it shall please the sayd Merchant his Factors or assignes there within the sayd 45. daies to lade into the sayd Ship before her departure. Provided alwayes and it is agreed between the said parties to these presents, And the said owners and Master do covenant and grant for them their execut. and administrators, and every of them by these presents to and with the sayd Merchant his Executors & assignes, That if the said Merchant his Factors, or assignes cannot within the sayd 45. dayes lade the sayd Ship at Lushborne aforesaid, That then the said Ship shall tarry and abide at Lishborne aforesaid by the space of 15. dayes next after the expiration of the sayd 45. dayes, and that the said Ship being as above at Lushborne aforesaid laden shall with the first good wind and weather that God shall send therunto most apt and convenyent next after the expiration of the said abiding daies, or so soon as she shall be laden directly Saile from thence to Andwerp or London to such of the same pla∣ces where it shall please the sayd Merchant his Factors, or Assigns that the sayd Ship shall make her Port of discharge, In conside∣ration whereof the said Merchant for him his executors Factors and assignes and for every of them doth covenant and grant by these presents to and with the said owners and master their exe∣cutors administ. and assignes that the said Merchant his execut. or assignes shall & will aswell within the said Port of London and G. as at Lushborne aforesaid within every of the said limited abiding dayes aswell discharge the sayd Ship as recharge and lade into her 140. Tonnes of whatsoever goods or merchandizes recko∣ning and accounting two Pipes for a Tonne foure Hogesheads for a Tonne three Puncheons for a Tonne, 6. Tertians for a Tonne, 22. Kintales di. of the weight of Andolozia for a Tonne and of bags of Spices and Chests of Sugar according to the use of merchants and merchandizes. And also that he the said merchant his Factors, or assignes shall within the said abiding dayes at Lushborne afore∣said or so soon as the sayd Ship shall be there as above laden give their notice unto the sayd master or his assignes whether the sayd Ship shall make her right discharge at Andwerp or London And also that he the sayd Merchant his Factors or assignes shall and will truly pay or cause &c. unto the said owners or to one of them their executors or assignes for every Tonne of the sayd Ships lading that shall be discharged or unladen at London afore∣said 50 s. of Lawfull money of England the one halfe thereof within 6. dayes next after the right discharge of the same Ship at London
foresayd, and the other halfe thereof within one moneth next ensuing the expiration of the said 6. daies together with petty lo∣deminage Primage and Average there wont and accustomed after the use and custome of English Ships. And also all such charges and duties of 3. d. upon the Tonne as shall be due to be paid to∣wards the reparations at Dover-haven of this Realme according to a Statute in that behalfe Provided. And also that he the said merchant his Factors, or assignes, shall truly pay or cause to be paid, &c. to the said owners or their assignes, freight for every Tonn of the said Ships lading from Lushborne aforesaid that shall be discharged at Andwerpe aforesaid 56 s 8 d. of good and Lawfull money of England or the just value thereof in money there currant the one halfe thereof within six daies next ensuing the right dis∣charge of the said Ship at Andwerpe aforesaid and the other halfe thereof within one moneth next ensuing the expiration of the said six daies, together with pety lodeminage, Primage and ave∣rage there wont and accustomed after the use and custome of eng∣lish Ships, And moreover that the said Merchant his Factors or assignes, shall and will for every day, that the said Ship shall tarry as above at Lushborne aforesaid over and above the sayd 45. daies there truly pay or cause to be paid &c. to the said master or his assignes 6. Duckers money there currant without fraud or guile. And the said owners and master doth covenant grant and warrant by these presents that the said Ship shall be able to re∣ceive into her upper hatches at Lushborne aforesaid over and besides her victuall, tackle and aparell the said quantity of 140. Tunnes, And that the said Ship is and shall be strong and staunch and well and sufficiently victualed, Tackled aparrelled and fur∣nished with Masts, Sailes, saile yards, Anchors, cables, rops, cords Guns, gunpowder shot artilery, tackle, aparell, boate and furniture meet and decent for such a Ship and for such a voyage together with an able master, 26. able men and a boy which men and boy shall be ready at all times convenient during the said voyage with the cock or boate of the said Ship to serve the said Merchant his Factors, or assignes to and from land. And to all and singular covenants grants, and articles, above expressed which on the be∣halfe of the said owners and master and every of them are well and truly to be kept and performed in all things as above the said owners and master binde themselves their executors and administrators, and every of of them and especially the Ship afore∣said with the Freight, tackle and aparell of the same unto the
said Merchant, and to his Executors and Administrators in the pe∣nalty and summe of foure hundred pounds of, &c. truly to be paid by these presents: And in like manner to all and singular cove∣nants, grants, articles and agreements above expressed which on the behalfe of the said Merchant, his Factors and assignes, and e∣very of them are truly, &c. the said Merchant bindeth himselfe, his executors, administrators and goods, and every of them unto the said owners, and to their executors and administrators in the like penalty and summe of foure hundred pounds of, &c. truly to be paid by these presents: In witnesse whereof the parties afore∣said, to these Charter parties indented interchangeably have set their seales. Dated, &c. Another Condition for delivery of Tinne. THe Condition, &c. That if he the within bound A. B. his &c. Doe well and truly deliver or cause, &c. to the within named, &c. his Executors, &c. to his or their owne proper use and behoof for ever, on the first day of the next Midsomer, delivery of Tinne at T. in the County of C. at the Queens Majesties beame, there 250 l. weight of good soft white Merchantable Cornish Tinne frank and free of all charges and demands whatsoever without fraud or covin. That then, &c. A Condition for delivery of Wooll. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within named N. B. hath heretofore had and received of the within named R. W. the summe of thirty pounds of lawfull, &c. If therefore the said N. his, &c. do frank and freely deliver or cause, &c. to the said R. W. his, &c. aswell the full number and quantity of twenty eight weight of Wooll cleane washed, well dryed, and shorne ac∣cording to the custome of the Country, there accounting one and twenty pounds to every weight thereof, as also so much Wooll more of like goodnesse as shall amount unto the summe of five pounds ten shillings after the rate of seventeen shillings six pence for every weight thereof, or else five pounds ten shillings, therefore, at or before the tenth day of Iuly now next coming: That then, &c.
A Condition for payment of an Annuity, during ones life. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bounden A. B. his Heires, Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, do well and truly pay or cause, &c. to the within named C. I. or his Assignes, one annuity or yearly payment of ten pounds of, &c. at the house, &c. for by and during all the terme of the naturall life of the said C. at or in the dayes of the Feasts of, &c. by even and equall por∣tions. The first payment thereof to beg in and to be made in the day of the Feast of, &c. next, &c. and so from thenceforth to have continuance by and during all the terme of the naturall life of the said C. without fraud or covin. That then, &c. A Condition that the Obligor shall be ready at a certaine place to marry the Obligee within thirty dayes warn∣ing. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound E. H. doe and shall be ready at S. in the County, &c. to marry and take to husband the within named C. T. within the Parish Church there according to the order of the Church in that behalfe used alwaies within thirty dayes respit next after the time the said C. shall re∣quire her so to doe, and do marry and take to husband the said C. T. accordingly: That then, &c. A Condition that a man shall marry one before a day. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bounden C. T. do mar∣ry and take to his wife according to the Lawes of the Church in that behalfe used the within named E. H. at or before the feast, &c. which shall be, &c. so that the said E.H. be willing thereunto, the same E. being in the meane time of good and honest Conver∣sation: That then, &c.
A Condition that a man shall not become surety without licence. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bounden T.H. do not at any time hereafter bind or charge himselfe by any Bond, Bill, Promise, Agreement or otherwise to or for the payment of any other debt or debts, or summe or summes of money then onely for such Debts and Summes of money▪ as are or here∣after shall be by the said T. H. properly owing in respect of his owne traffick or businesse without the consent, good will and agreement of the within named W. S. his Executors, Administra∣tors or Assignes: That then, &c. A Condition for ones appearance at a certaine day and place to answer to such things as shall be objected a∣gainst him. THe Condition, &c: That if the within bound R. H. his Exe∣cutors, or Administrators doe personally appear before our So∣veraign Lord the King in his Bench at Westminster, at or before the tenth day of Michaelmas term next coming after the date within written, and then and there do answer unto all such Actions and Demands as the within named R. I. shall there bring or cause to be brought against the said R. H. of for and concerning the taking down, wasting, and carrying away of one Barne of the said R. I. lately standing and scituate in L. in the County of B. That then, &c. A Condition where one is bound not to sell away his interest in a Shop before A. B. have the refusall thereof. THE Condition, &c. That whereas the within named E. C. hath and holdeth that little corner Shop on the east side of M. street next to W. in the Parish of, &c. for the term of twenty years and above yet to come, as appeareth by one Lease thereof made to the said E. by one W. M. and M. his wife by Indenture dated, &c. If the said E. heretofore hath not, or she, her Executors, or administrators do not hereafter grant, bar∣gaine, sell, alien, or do away her said Interest and terme of years
or any part thereof of and in the Premisses to any person or persons, nor take any partner to her the said E. to occupy the said Shop before she make offer thereof to be sold to the said I. H. if he will buy the same. And if for and considering that the said I. will give for the said Lease and term of yeares then to be to come as much as any other will give therefore plainly and simply without any colourable or deceitfull dealing of the said E. or her Executor in that case to be used. She the said E. her Executor or administra∣tor will then grant and bargaine the same to the said I. H. before any other person or persons: That then, &c. A Condition for the good service of a man. THe Condition, &c. That if I. P. Son of the within bound I. P. now servant of the within named F. H, do from henceforth from time to time during so long time as the said I shall remaine in the service of the said F. well and faithfully serve the same F. as his Master in and by all things according to the order and duty of a good and faithfull servant: That then, &c. A Condition for a servants true service with his Master, and for making of true accounts of that shall come to his hands. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound T. T. is con∣tented, and hath covenanted, promised, and agreed the day and year within written to and with the within named T. B. That he the said T. T. shall and will dwell with, and serve the said T. B. for and during all the term and space of foure yeares next insuing from and after the Feast, &c. next, &c. and fully to be compleat and ended for the wages of four pounds of, &c. by the yeare to be paid yearly therefore to the said T. T. by the said T. B. or his as∣signes. If he the said T. T. do justly, faithfully, and truly remain, continue, dwell with, and serve the said T. B. for and during all the said term and space of foure yeares, and do also from time to time and at all times hereafter upon reasonable request make and deliver unto the said T. B. his executors or assignes a good, just, true, and full account, payment and satisfaction of all and singular such summes of money, debts, and other goods of the said
T. B. as he the said T. T. shall receive or cause to be received, or that shall come to the hands, custody, or possession of the same T. T. or any other persons by his meanes or procurement: and further if the said T, T. do not at any time during the said term of foure yeares imbezill, purloin, or unlawfully consume, make, or doe a∣way, or give his consent, the imbeziling, purloining, or unlawful∣ly consumeing, making or doing away of any of the money, debts, goods or chartells of the said T. B. his Executors or assignes, by any wayes or meanes either directly or indirectly: That then, &c. A Condition to answer that an apprentice shal endammage his Master. THe Condition, &c. That where R. B, &c. hath put himselfe an apprentice, &c. If the said R. B. shall at any time or times du∣ring the said term of seven years imbezill, purloin, or unlawfully and untruly make away, consume, wast or mispend any of the Goods, Wares, money or Merchandise of the said B. B. his Execu∣tors, Administrators or assignes or any of them, If then and in e∣very such case the within bound S. B, his Heires, Executors, Ad∣ministrators or assignes, or any of them doe and shall alwaies with∣in six moneths next after notice or warning to him or them thereof given by the said B. his Executors, Administrators or assignes or any of them well and truly satisfie, content and pay, or cause, &c. unto the said B. B, his executors, administrators or assignes, the full value in lawfull english money of all and every such goods, wares, money and merchandise of the said B. his executors, ad∣ministrators and assignes, and every or any of them so to be im∣bezilled, purloined or unlawfully and untruly made away, con∣sumed, wasted, or mispent by the said R. B. as aforesaid; That then, &c. A Condition that a man shall leave his wife two parts of his lands and goods if she survive him. THe Condition, &c. That if it do fortune the above bounden T. G. to marry and take to his wife I. B. &c. and if after the
same marriage had and consummate it do happen him the said T. to decease, and the said I him to survive; If then the said T. before the time of such his decease shall aswell assure and leave to the same I. two full parts of all such goods and chattels as he now hath or hereafter shall have the same into three parts being devided. As also shall assure and convey two full parts of all such Lands and Tenements as he the said T. hereafter shall purchase or procure to be purchased or conveyed to his use at any time during the life of the said I. the same in three parts to be accounted; So that im∣mediatly upon every such severall purchase, two parts at the least of all Lands and Tenements to passe in every such purchase shall at the first assurance and conveyance thereof to be made be convey∣ed and assured to the said I. and to their Heires, or to them and the heirs of their two bodies, and for lack of such issue to the Heirs of the said I. for ever and not otherwise: That then, &c. A Condition to pay a summe of money or deliver a Chain by a day. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound Sir H. C. Knight and W. S. or either of them, or the Executors, &c. do well and truly pay or cause, &c. to the within named T. C. his certain Attorney, Executors or Administrators at the now mansion house of the same T. scituate, the summe of eighty four pounds ten shil∣lings of lawfull, &c. on the seventeenth day of Apr. next, &c. Or in default thereof do at or before the seventeenth day of Apr. afor∣said, well and truly deliver or cause, &c. to the said T.C. his Execu∣tors, &c. at the said now mansion house of the said T. one chain of Gold weighing thirty ounces of 22. Carrets the ounce five or better: That then, &c. A Condition where two Executors are, that each shall an∣swer a moyety of that shall be recovered for any act done by their Testator. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within named H. E. and the within bound I. E. have joyntly taken upon them the
execution of the Testament of T. E, late of R. in the county of E. Genr. deceased. If hereafter it shall happen that any sum or sums of money, or other demand hereafter shall be lawfully demanded against the said Executors or either of them, or their severall Exe∣cutors or Administrators for any thing done, made, or acknow∣ledged by the said T. E. whilest he lived: If then in every such case the said I. E. his Heires, Executors and Administrators upon reasonable request doe and shall beare and satisfie with the said H. his Executors and Administrators, the moyety and one halfe of all such charges, costs, losses and damages as shall grow or happen to them or any of them by reason of any such demands as aforesaid: That then, &c. A Condition to re-deliver a Letters Patents by one borrow∣ed of another. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within named A. P. immediatly before the ensealing and delivery of the Obliga∣tion within written, hath delivered and lent to the within bound R. N. one Letters Patents under the great seal of England, bearing date at G. the, &c. containing foure skins of vellom made and granted by our said Soveraign Lord the King to the said A. P. and to one A. K. of L. Gent. of divers concealed Lands upon a war∣rant therefore granted by our Soveraign Lord the King unto Sir I. P. Knight: As by the Letters Patents at large it doth and may ap∣peare: If the said R. N. his Executor or Administrator at or on this side the tenth, &c. next, &c. well and truly do re-deliver or cause, &c. the said Letters Patents to the said A. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assignes at the now mansion house of the said A. scituate, &c. whole, safe, and uncancelled, and in any part there∣of not defaced, hurt, broken or impaired, That then, &c. A condition for sealing of a generall quittance by one by a day. THe Condition, &c. That if H. F. of L. &c. at or before the Feast, &c. next, &c. do make, seale and deliver to the within named E. B. at his Chamber in the Inner Temple of L. one gene∣rall acquittance to the use of E. L. of, &c. whereby the said H.
shall release and quite claim to the said E. L. all Actions, Suits, Quarrells, Debts, Accounts, Judgements, Executions and De∣mands whatsoever: That then, &c. A Condition where one is become surety and is to become surety for the Obligor, and hath lent and is to lend to the Obligor divers summes of money, all expressed and to be expressed in a Book indented, the Obligor is bound to make payment thereof at the dayes in the said Book limited. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the above named R.M at the request, and for the proper debt of the above bound E.T. hath entred and hereafter may happen to enter into divers bonds unto divers persons for payment of divers sums of mony, And also hath heretofore at and by like request laid out and paid and hereafter may lay out and pay divers sums of money for the debt & in the behalfe of the said E. All which bonds and summes of mo∣ney already made and paid are mentioned and expressed in one Book indented thereof, made between the said E. and R. and be∣gun the eleventh day of July in the year, &c. as by the said Book indented doth appeare. And whereas also the said R. and E. have agreed that all other such bonds and summes of money as the said R. hereafter shall make or pay for the said E. shall be entred into the said book indented, and from time to time shall therein be signed with the hand of the said E. T. or of L. Y. now servant of the said E. as hereafter from time to time shall happen to be mes∣senger from the said E. to the said R. in that behalfe, if therefore the said E. his, &c. from time to time do well and truly satisfie, content and pay, or cause, &c. to the said R. M. at, &c. scituate, &c. all and singular summe and summes of money as the same shall be severally due and payable by vertue of the said severall bonds which are expressed or shall be expressed in the said book indented in forme aforesaid. And also all other summe and summes already mentioned, and which hereafter shall be mentioned in the said book indented as the same severally be or shall be there written down and appointed to be paid without Fraud or Covin: That then, &c.
A Condition where one hath received divers Legacies to the use of Children, he is bound to make payment thereof to them at the times limited in the Will. THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That where R. C. of, &c. deceased, by his last Will and Testament in writing by him made and ordained the eighteenth day of June, in the year of our Lord God: &c. and in the 18. year of the King, &c. amongst other things did give and bequeath to the above named R. W. by the name of R: V: Son to B: W: deceased, his late Daughter, the sum of two hundred pounds of, &c. And by the same his last Will and Testament, did will and bequeath to T: W: Ʋ: W: and I: W: Brothers to the said R: W: the summe of three hundred pounds of, &c. that is to say, to every one of them the summe of a hundred pounds: And by his said last Will and Testament did also give and bequeath to E:W: and A:W: Daughters of the said B: the summe of 1000. marks of, &c. That is to say, to either of them two daughters 500. marks. And further willed that all the said Legacies so appoin∣ted to the said five Children, to wit, T: W, Ʋ: W: &c. should be and remaine in the hands of the above bounden R: W: Uncle to the said five children last mentioned, which T.W, the said R:: hath appointed by his last Will to be his sole Executor: And that the said R. should be bound in the sum of three thousand pounds of, &c. to the said R:W: to pay the said severall Legacies to the forenamed five children, as they shall severally accomplish their severall ages of one and twenty years, or at the dayes of their severall marria∣ges, whether shall first happen to come: And hath willed moreo∣ver, that if it do fortune any of the forenamed five children to decease before payment made unto them of their said severall Le∣gacies, That then the part or portion of him, her, or them so dying shall be equally divided amongst the forenamed five children then living: And over this also hath wholly given and bequeathed the residue of all his goods and cattalls, debts, monies, plate, jew∣ells, and houshold-stuff (His Legacies being paid, his Funerall debts and expences being discharged) to all the aforesaid chil∣dren equally and indifferently to be divided amongst them; as by the said last Will and Testament plainly and at large may and
will appear. And whereas the said R:W: now being above the age of one and twenty years, hath already had and received such of the Legacies aforesaid, as to him are presently belonging by ver∣tue of the Will and Testament aforesaid, as by one acquaintance which the said R.W hath thereof made to the said R:W: plainly may appear. And that all other the said Legacies, Gifts, and Bequests made as abovesaid to his said brethren and sisters, are now to their use in the hands and custody of the said R: W: as by the said last Will and Testament is appointed: If the said R:W: his Heirs, Exe∣cutors, or Administrators, do at the usuall place of payments and Receits in the Royall Exchange, within the City of L: well and truly severally content and pay all and every the said Legacies se∣verally made to the said T:W: Ʋ:W: J:W: E:W: and A: W: as it a∣foresaid, as they shall grow severally due and payable, and accor∣ding to the true intent and meaning of rhe said last Will and Te∣stament. Or else if the said R.W. his, &c▪ in the last day of six months next after lawfull requests thereof to be made at the now Mansion house of the said R:W; scituate in N. in the County of C. do at the said place in the Royall Exchange aforesaid, severally content and pay all and every the said Legacies made to the said T:W: Ʋ:W: &c. severally growing due as is aforesaid, to such person and persons to whom the same shall appoint, and as the same shall grow due and payable, according to the true intent and meaning of the said last Will and Testament, That then, &c. A Condition to leave a woman two hundred pounds in monie, and Goods for her Thirds by the Custome of London, and if her part come to more out of the Husbands Goods at his decease, that then that over-plus be answered also. THe Condition, &c. That if A. now Wife of the above bound E:S. ond naturall Daughter of the above named T: M: do survive the said E: If then the Exectors or Ad∣ministrators of the said E: within the space of, &c. next after the decease of the same E. upon the request of the said A. her Executors or Assignes, do well and truly pay yeild and deliver, or cause, &c. into the hands and posses∣sion
of the said A. her Executors or Assignes for her third part to her common of the Goods and Chattels of the said E. by reason of the custome of L. money, Goods and Chattels to the value of two hundred pounds of lawfull, &c. which the said A. may have and enjoy from thenceforth to and for her own proper use and behoof for ever, without any let, trouble, re-claim eviction or recovery of any person or persons, and also if the said third part coming to the said A. is aforesaid do exceed the value of two hundred pounds. If then within the space aforesaid, and upon like request as afore∣said, the Executors or Administrators of the said E. do well and tru∣ly yeild, pay, and deliver to the said A. so much more money or goods as the said third part aforesaid to her coming as is aforesaid, shall exceed in value the said summe of two hundred pounds: That then, &c. A Condition for working with one for a certaine time for certain wages. THe Condition, &c. That where the within named F. F. for reasonable consideration him moving, hath put him∣selfe a servant to the within named A. U. him to serve from the date within written unto the end and term of one whole year from thence, &c. and fully, &c. The said A. therefore yeild∣ing and unto the said F. weekly foure shillings of, &c. and finding to him the said F. meat, drink, Victualls and washing of his Lin∣nen during the said terme; if therefore the said F. do and shall, dayly by and during all the said terme in the best manner that he can for the wages and consideration aforesaid, as well in the house of the said A. as in any other place, and with any other person which he the said A. his Executors or Administrators shall name and appoint well and truly and diligently, and sufficiently work to and for the use, benefit and behoof of the said A. his Executors or Administrators without Fraud or Covin, all and every such work and works belonging to the art of the said A. as the said A. or his Assignes shall reasonably and lawfully assigne and appoint: That then, &c.
A Condition that where a Widow marrying have∣ving A lease of a house and divers goods therein the husband is bound not to sell any part thereof during the marryage if she survive him then to leave the same discharged of encumbrances done by him. THe condition &c. That whereas there is an agreement and conclusion made between the within bounden G. K. and A. H. of R. in the county of M. Widow for a marryage to be had and solemnized between them two, and whereas the said A. by vertue of one Indenture of Lease bearing date, &c. granted and made by one I. P. Esquire and one I. B Gent. and other conveyances is possessed of one messuage one orchard and a garden with the appurtenances in R. with-insaid, for all the residue of the terme of 21. yeares in the said Indenture mentioned and yet to come, and is also possessed of certaine Plate, Jewells, houshold-stuffe and implements in the said messuage with the appurtenances now being. If it shall so be that the sayd G. and A. doe marry together.Not to alien the Lease. If then at any time or times after the said marryage and during the naturall life of the sayd A. the said G. doth not alien, bargaine, grant, forfeit, charge or encumber the said messu∣age and other the premisses with their appurtenances or any part thereof, or the said Lease and Interest for yeares, or any part thereof any manner of waies nor do remove, convey or car∣ry away or cause &c. any of the said Plate, Iewells, houshold-stuff or implements from or out of the said messuage; or bargaine, sell, change or alter the property thereof or any part thereof, or cause or suffer any execution thereof or of any part thereof by the meanes or occasion of the said G. at any time during the life of the said A. without the concent and agreement of the same A. and if also it so be, that the said G: do decease before the said A. and the same A. do him survive, if then the sayd G. do leave the said Lease and interest which then shall not be expired & also all the sayd Plate, Jewells, and houshold-stuff and imple∣ments, which shall not be before aliened changed or made away by concent of the said A. of such good and lawfull estate, right, title, interest, thereof and of every part thereof free from all in∣cumbrances before that done, made, caused, procured or agreed
unto by the said G. And so as the said A. and her assignes for her and theire owne use may lawfully have possesse and, enjoy the premisses from the decease of the said G. without any let suit trouble or impediment of or by the executors, or administrators, of the said G. or of or by any other person or persons by reason or meanes of any pact or thing done or caused or to be done or caused by the said G. or by his assent occasion or Procurement. That then &c. A Conditioon to make one Free at a certain time, THe Condition &c. That if the within bounden A. B his executors administrators, or assignes, do at and in the Feast of &c. which shall be &c. or within &c. then next following upon reasonable request to him or them to be made by the within named C. D. cause & procure the said C. to be lawfully & orderly according to the custome of the City of L. ad∣mitted into the liberty & Freedome of the same City without any manner of fraud or covin and the only costs and charges of the said C. So alwaies that the said C shall not be lawfully hindered thereof by reason of any Act or thing hereafter to be done occa∣sioned from or affirmed by the said C. That then, &c. A Condition to pay such summes of money as one shall be compelled to pay by reason of a bayling one in the Counter. THe Condition &c. That whereas the within named I. B. and certaine other persons did take to baile and became sureties for one I. C. Citizen &c. being lately arrested to the Counter in Woodstreet of L. by reason of an action there com∣menced against him by one T. D. Clothier, If the said I. B. his heires executors, or administrators, or any of them shall at any time hereafter by reason of the said Baylment and suretyship and without his or their owne procurement be lawfully adjudged awarded or compelled by due order and course of the Law to satis∣fie and pay to and for the use of the said T. D. his executors or assigines any manner of summe of money or any part or parcell of any sume of money whatsoever recovered or adjudged or hereaf∣ter
to be recovered or adjudged against the said I, C. in or by meanes of the said accompt, If then the within bound S. P. his heires &c. do within &c. next after sufficient notice admonition and request to him or them in that behalfe to be given and made by the sayd I. B. his executors, or administrators, well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the sayd I▪ his Executors, &c. at &c. so∣much Lawfull English money at one entire payment as the sayd I. his Executors, or administrators, or any of them shall be so as is aforesayd and by the reason and meanes above mentioned ad∣judged awarded or compelled to satisfie and pay to or for the use of the said T. D. his executors, or assignes, that then, &c. A Condition not to become surety. THe Conditon &c. That if the within bound T. G. with∣out the speciall request and agreement of the within named R.M. at any time hereafter do not become surety or bound for any person or persons nor promise or undertake to pay or satisfie any debt or duty of any person or persons whatsoe∣ver which shall amount or arise above the valve of 6 l. 13 s. 4. d. of Lawfull money of England except only it be for the meere proper and onely debt of the same T. G. himselfe without fraud or covin That then, &c. A Surrender of copy hold Land conditionall. MEmorandum that on the 10. day of September in the 24. yeare of our Soveraigne Lord Charles by the grace of our God, King,H. in comitate Midd, &c. R.N. of H. in the county of M. Yeomon one of the customary Tenants of the said Mannor of H. hath without the Court surrendred into the hands of the Lord of the said man∣nor by the hands of T. K, and I. K, Yeomen two of the customary tenants of the said Mannor of H. one Croft with the appurtenan∣ces commonly called or knowne by the name of great Gilberts Lands now in the tenure or occupation of the said R. N or his assigns contayning by estimation 18. acres be it more or lesse sci∣tuate lying and being within the said Mannor, to the use and be∣hoof of T. S. Citizen and Clothworker of L. and of his heires and assignes forever according to the custome of the said Mannor upon and under this condition neverthelesse that is to say.
That if the said R. N. his Heirs,Nota, a way to remove Sur∣renders conditi∣onall is, that for the day of the Court holding after the surren∣der, other secu∣rity be given for the money, and then the lands to be new surren∣dred after the Court to a day, &c. Executors, Ad∣ministrators, or Assignes, do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said T. S. his Heires, Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, the summ of forty-four pounds of, &c. at one entire paiment, on the eleventh of Febr. which shall be, &c. at the now Mansion house of the said T.S: scituate, &c. That then and from thenceforth the said Surrender to be void and of none effect: And that then and from thenceforth it shall be lawful to and for the said R: N: his Heirs and Assignes, to have again and re-enjoy the said Croft, as in the former estate of the said R. the said Surren∣der to the contrary notwithstanding. A Condition upon the same Surrender. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within bounden R. N. hath on the day of the date within written, without the Court surrendred into the hands of the Lord of the Mannor of L. in the County of M: by the hands of, &c. recite and sursum redd. usque ad finem, as by the writing of the said Surrender more plainly may appear. If the said R: were of the time of the said Surrender law∣fully seised of a good and perfect estate in Feesimple, to the onely use of himself, his Heirs and Assignes for ever, according to the cu∣stome of the said Mannor, of and in the said Court, and then had lawfull power, and good right, and lawfull authority to surrender the same Croft to the use of the said T: S: and of his Heirs and As∣signs for ever, according to the custome of the said Mannor. And also if the said Croft were at the time of the said surrender, and at all times hereafter, and from time to time shall continue and be to the said T: S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever discharged, acquit∣ted, and saved harmlesse of and from all Surrenders, Estates, Titles, Troubles, Forfeitures, Seisures, Cause and Causes of Forfeiture, or Scisure, and all other charges and incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or suffered heretofore, or hereafter before the said e∣leventh day of Febr. to be had, made, done, or suffered. (The Ser∣vices and Customes from and after the same day to grow due to be done for the premisses, to the Lord of the said Mannor for the time
being onely except) And if also the said T.S▪ his Heirs and Assigns, shall or may lawfully, peaceably, and quietly, according to the te∣nor, form, and effect of the said surrender and custome of the said Mannor, have, hold, and enjoy to his and their own proper use and behoof forever, the Croft aforesaid, without any let, resistance, disturbance, or interruption of the said R his Heirs or Assigns, and without any lawfull let, resistance, disturbance, impediment, or interruption of any other person or persons whatsoever. And moreover in case the said R: N. his Heirs, Executors, Administra∣tors, or Assignes, do make default, and do not pay the said summ of four and forty pounds to the said T: S. his Heirs, Executors, Ad∣ministrators, or Assignes, on the said eleven, &c. at the said now dwelling house, &c. If then from and after such default made, the said Croft shall and may be and remain to the said T: his Heires and Assignes for ever, of the full and cleer yearly value of five pounds of, &c. over and beyond all Rents resolute, and other char∣ges and reprises whatsoever: And if then also and from thence∣forth the said R: and N: his Heirs, and all other persons which shall or may have any thing in the said Croft, or any part thereof, do and shall from time to time, and at all times during the space of five years then next following, upon the reasonably request and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said T. his Heires and Assignes, do, knowledge, execute, and suffer, and cause, &c. all and every such act, and acts, thing, and things for the cleer and absolute having and enjoying to and by the said T. S. his Heires and Assignes, to his and their own proper use for ever, of the said Croft with the appurtenances, according to the custome of the said Mannor; as by the said T. his Heires or Assignes, or his or their Councel learned shall be devised, advised, or required, that then, &c. or else, &c. A Condition by a Father, to make his Sons Wife a Joyn∣ture, and to pay a summ of monie by a day, and to leave the Son and his Wife a more summe at his de∣cease. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas there is a Marriage agreed upon and contracted between A. A. the younger, Son and Heir apparant of the said A.A. the elder, now
Lord Mayor of the said City of L: on the one party, and M: C: the onely Daughter of I.C:. late cited, and, &c. deceased on the other party: If the said A: A: the elder, or his Heires, at their own pro∣per costs and charges on this side the 20 day of, &c. next, &c. up∣on reasonable request, and two dayes respite for the overlooking thereof, do make and convey, or cause to be made and conveyed a good and perfect assurance in the Law of all those Lands, Tene∣ments, and Hereditaments of Freehold and Copyhold, whereof the said A: the elder hath delivered particulars to the said H: S: expressing and rating the same at the cleer yearely value of a hun∣dred pounds of, &c. over and above all charges and reprises, to and for the onely use and behoof of the said A.A. the elder for the tearm of his naturall life onely, without impeachment of wast, and after his decease, to and for the use and onely behoof of the said A.A. the younger, and M.C. and of the Heirs of their two bodies betwixt them two lawfully to be begotten: And for lack of such Issue, then to the use of the Heires of the body of the said A.A. the younger lawfully to be begotten: And for lack of such Issue, then to the use of the said A.A. the elder, and of his next Heires for e∣ver, in such manner and form, and to such persons, and by such manner of lawfull and reasonable conveyance and assurance in the Law, as by the said H.S. and E, B. or the Survivor of them, or by their or any of their Councell learned in the Law, shall be lawful∣ly and reasonably devised, or advised, and required as aforesaid, The same Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments by good and lawfull title and conveyance in the Law, then at the time of the said Assurance making, being in the lawfull Seisin of the said A.A. the elder, and A.A. the younger, or of one of them, to the only use of themselves and their Heires, or the Heires of one of them, with∣out any Condition, to the eler and full yearely value of a hun∣dred pounds of, &c. above and beyond all charges and reprises: And the same also then being free and cleer discharged or acquit∣ted, or from thenceforth saved and kept harmlesse, of and from all and singular former Grants, Estates, Titles, and Incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, or knowledged by the said A. A. the elder, or A.A. the younger, or by or under their Title or Estate, or the Title or Estate of either of them; the Rents and Services from and after the decease of the said A.A. the elder, to be due to the chief Lords of the Fee and Leases for tearm of yeares, not to be prejudiciall to the yearly value aforesaid onely except. And if also the said A.A. the elder, his Executors, or Administrators with∣in
six months next and immediatly ensuing, from and after the day of the solemnization of marriage between the said A. A. the youn∣ger, and the said M. C. do well and truly content and pay, or cause, &c. to the said A. the younger, and M.C. towards the prefer∣ment of the same A. in the same marriage the summe of a thousand pounds of, &c. without any manner of fraud or covin. And more∣over if the said A.A. the elder, at the time of his decease, do by his last Will and Testament give and bequeath, or otherwise leave by sufficient conveyance or assurance to the said A.A. the younger, and to the said M.C. the summe of a thousand pounds of, &c. So as the said A. the younger, and the said M. if they two be then li∣ving, may have and enjoy by and after the decease of the said A. the elder, the said summe of a thousand pounds, either by the gift, bequest, or leaving of the said A.A. the elder, without fraud or covin, That then, &c. A Condition by one having the Office of the Keeper of the Worsted Hall, and Hall for English Bayes in London granted unto him to collect the Duties, and be accountant to the Hospitall upon request. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within named Gover∣nours, that is to say, the Mayor and Comminalty, and Citi∣zens of the City of London, Governours of the Possessions Re∣venues, and Goods of the Hospitalls of Edward King of England, the sixth, called Christs Bridewell, and St. Thomas the Apostle, have admitted the within bound R.W. to the Office of the Keeper, of the Market places commonly called the Worsted Hall, and the Hall for English Bayes, within the City of London, therein truly and faithfully from time to time, to collect, gather, and receive, for the use of the said Governours, towards the relief of the poore children harboured in Christs Hospitall in Newgate-market of Lon∣don aforesaid, all and singular such Profits, Rites, and Duties as shall there be due or payable, to the use aforesaid, for Worsted, Bayes, or any other Wares or Merchandizes to be brought to the said Halls, or either of them, or for any Hallage or Stoage of the same in the said Halls, or either of them. If therefore the said R. and W. by and during all the tearm that he the said R. shall con∣tinue in the said Offices, or either of them, do well and faithfully
collect and gather all and singular the said Profits, Rites, and Du∣ties, as a diligent, true, and faithfull Officer ought to do: And if also the said R. his Executors and Administrators, from time to time, when as he or they shall be thereunto reasonably required by the said Governours or their certain Attorneys, or the Treasurer of the said Hospitall for the time being, do yeild, make, and give up to the said Governours, their Deputies or Attorneys, or to the said Treasurer, as well a perfect, just, and true account of all the Pre∣misses: As also full and true payment of and for all the said Pro∣fits, Rites, and Duties, which shall be had or received by the said R. his Servants; Deputies, or Ministers whosoever, from time to time, during his continuance in the said Office, or either of them, That then, &c. A Condition to put in Surety by a day, to save one harm∣less, having given his word for a Debt. THe Condition. &c. That where the within named E. B. at the request, and for the debt of the within bounden T. B. hath a∣greed and undertaken for the payment of thirty pounds of, &c. by the said E. his Executors or Administrators, to be paid to F. D. Citizen and S. of L. his Executors or Administrators, according to the tenor and effect of one paire of Indentures dated, &c. made be∣tween the said F. on the one part, and the said E. on the other part: If the said T. together with one A.B. of, &c. or together with W.B. of, &c. do make or cause to be made, and lawfully seal and de∣liver to the said E.B, his Executors or administrators, at the house, &c. at or before the Feast, &c. one lawfull and sufficient Deed ob∣ligatory, wherein the said T.B with the said A. B. or with the said W.B. shall stand joyntly and severally bound to the said E. his Ex∣ecutors and administrators, in the summe of forty pounds of, &c. for the keeping harmlesse of the said E. his Heires, Executors, and administrators, of, for, and concerning the said thirty pounds which the said D.E hath undertaken to be paid to the said F. his Execu∣tors or administrators, as aforesaid, That then, &c. or else, &c.
A Condition to save one harmlesse being bound for Childrens Portions in the Chamber of London. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within named T.W. toge∣ther with the within named Mary W. and R.S. and one M.G. of L. Habardasher, standeth bound by Recognizance, knowledged be∣fore the right honourable Lord Mayor of the City of L. in the in∣ner Chamber of the Guildhall in the same City, the day and yeare above written, to G. H. Chamberlain of London aforesaid, in a hundred and fifty pounds for the payment of, &c. to the use of E. and P.C. children and Orphans of R.C, late Citizen, &c, as by the said Recognizance, and the Condition subscribed thereunto may plainly appeare. If the said M.W. and R. S. their Executors and administrators, do from time to time at all times hereafter well and sufficiently save and keep harmlesse the said T.W. his Heires, Exe∣cutors, and administrators, and every of them, of and for the said Recognizance, and of and for all actions suits, costs, damages, exe∣cutions, attachments and demands by reason of the same Recogni∣zance to come, grow, or arise to or against the said T. his Heires, Executors, or administrators, or any of them, That then, &c. A Condition to save one harmlesse being Baile for ones appearance in the Kings Bench, upon an Arrest by Latitat. THe Condition, &c. That whereas one W.E. being arrested in London by a Latitat out of the Kings Bench at Westminster, at the Suit of I.H. of C. in the County of E. Merchant, the within na∣med R.M. and P.B. have taken the said W: E: to baile before the Sheriffs of London, for his appearance in the Bench aforesaid, ac∣cording to the tenor of the said Writ: If the within bound I: E: and I: F: their Heires, Executors, and administrators, do from time to time, and at all times hereafter save and keep harmlesse the said R.M. and P: B: their Heires Executors and administrators, and e∣very of them, of and for the baile aforesaid, and all costs, charges, and damages which shall thereby grow, happen, or arise, That then, &c.
Another like Condition. THe Condition, &c That whereas the within bound I: F: was heretofore arrested by a Latitat directed out of the Court of the Kings Bench at Westminster, upon an action of Trespasse at the Suit of, &c. in which action, the within named A: B: hath in the said Court taken to baile the said I. as by the Records remaining in the Court of his Majesties Bench aforesaid plainly appeareth: If the said I. his heires, &c. do, &c. save harmlesse, &c. the said A. &c. and all his Lands, &c. against all persons of and for the said baile, and of and from all actions, &c. to grow or arise by meanes of the same baile, That then, &c. A Condition that where two are bound to pay monie at a day, if they bail, then to pay it within a month after. THe Condition, &c. That where by one former Obligation da∣ted, &c. G: M. and I: E: Citizens, &c. are become bound to the within named C: F: in the summe of a hundred and fifty pounds of, &c. for the payment of a hundred pounds of like monie on the 10. of March next, &c. at the Shop, &c. as by the said Obligation and the Condition thereupon endorsed, more plainly, &c. If the sayd G: M: and I: E: their Executors and Administrators, and every of them do make default in payment of the said summe of a hundred pounds, at the day and place above mentioned, contrary to the tenor of the said recited Obligation: If then within the space of one month next after notice given to the said R M: his Executors or Administrators of such the default of the parties abovesaid, in payment of the said summe of a hundred pounds, he the said R: M: his Executors or Administrators (upon delivery unto him or them of the said former Obligation good and effectuall in the Law, with a lawfull and sufficient assignment made to the said R, from the said G. for the ensuing and recovering of and against the said G. and I. and their severall Executors and Administrators, or any of them, the said summes of monie, in the said former Obligation mentioned, do well and truly pay or cause, &c. to the said C. his certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, at the place afore∣said, the summe of a hundred pounds of, &c. without fraud or co∣vin, That then, &c.
A Condition that if a Goldsmith re-deliver not such Plate and Silver as shall be put to him to be wrought, then the Obligor upon certaine warning to make it good. THe Condition, &c. That if L. G. of L. Goldsmith, shall make default, and do not from time to time at all times well and truly re-deliver or cause, &c. unto the within named H. G shall agree and promise all and singular such weights and masses of Silver as the said H. G. shall at any time during two years next, &c. deliver by himselfe or any of his Servants, or o∣therwise by any other person into the hands of the said L. to be made and wrought into plate or for any other purpose, or other∣wise upon reasonable request do not satisfie and content the said H. his Executors or Administrators of and for the same weights and masses, and every part and parcell thereof. If then within forty dayes next after reasonable request and declaration to be made to the within bound E. G. his executors or administrators by the said H. his executors or administrators of such weights and masses of Silver aforesaid, or of any part thereof as the said L. shall make de∣fault of re-delivery, or of satisfaction, or contentation therefore to the said H. his Executors, administrators or assignes: The said E. G. his Executors or Administrators doe and shall well and truly re∣compence, pay, and satisfie or cause, &c. to the said H. his execu∣tors or administrators the full value of all such Silver as the said L. shall leave not re-delivered or otherwise contented or satisfied for, to the said H. his executors or administrators as aforesaid: That then, &c. A Condition that where a Legacy is given to a Child, the Father receiving it to the Childs use, is bound to save the Executors harmlesse. THe Condition, &c. That where the within named R. C. by his last Will and Testament did give and bequeath to I. S. one of the Sons of the within bound A. S. the summe of twenty pounds of, &c. to be paid unto him the same I. or his Assignes when he
should accomplish the full age of twenty one years; And did fur∣ther will that if the said I. did decease before he should accom∣plish his said age of twenty one years, That the said twenty pounds should goe and continue to and amongst the residue of the Chil∣dren of the said A. then living: As by the said last Will at large will appeare. And whereas the within named A. G. and W. D. at the earnest suit and request of the said A. S. at the ensealing hereof, have paid and delivered the said twenty pounds to the same A. to the use of the said I. his Son, and of such other of his Chil∣dren as the same shall or may appertaine according to the appoint∣ment of the last Will and Testament aforesaid, if the said A. S. and the within bound A. B. their Executors or Assignes or some of them do well and truly pay or cause to be paid the said twenty pounds and every part thereof to such of the children of the said A. as the same shall appertaine as aforesaid, at such time as the same shall be due and payable, or else if the said A. and A. their Heirs, Executors and Administrators or some of them, do from time to time at all times hereafter acquit, discharge, exonerate or well and sufficiently save and keep harmlesse aswell the said A. and W. their Executors and Administrators of the said R. C. aswell against the said I. as against all person or persons which claim or lawfully might claim any right or title to the said twenty pounds or any part thereof, of and for the said twenty pounds and every parcell thereof, and also of and from all Actions, &c. to happen, arise, or grow to or against the said A. and W. their Executors and Administrators, or the Execu∣tors or Administrators of the said R. C. or any of them of and for the said twenty pounds or any part thereof: That then, &c. A Condition that if the Obligee procure the Obligor a Lease in Reversion from his Majestie of certaine Lands by a day then the Obligor to pay him a certaine sum of money therefore. THe Condition, &c. That where the above named T. E. at the instance and procurement of the above named R. B. hath undertaken to travell and make suit for the obtaining of a Lease in Reversion to be made and granted in due manner and forme from our Soveraign Lord the King for the yearly rent of, &c. and for
the terme of 21. yeares to commence at the end or determina∣tion of such Lease and Leases as now are in possession, the same Lease in Reversion to be made as aforesaid to the said R. B. and his Assignes of all those Messuages, Cotages, &c. with their Appur∣tenances scituate, &c. which A. B. and C. D. now have and hold or lately had and held of our said Soveraigne Lord the King for and by the payment of the yearly rent of, &c. If the said T. E. his Executors and Assignes shall obtaine and procure the said Lease to the said R. B. and his assignes in form aforesaid to be made on this side, and before the Feast of Easter next comming. If then upon delivery or lawfull tender of delivery of the said lease made and passed of the Premisses to the said R. B. his Executors and As∣signes as aforesaid under the great Seale of E. whole, safe, and un∣cancelled the said R. B. his Executors or Assignes do pay, &c. to the said T. E. his Executors or Assignes for the said Lease the summe of one hundred pounds of, &c. at, &c. scituate, &c. with∣in the space of twenty one dayes next after such time as the said T. E. his Executors or Assignes shall signifie and give knowledge to the said R. B. his Executors or Assignes by letter or any other cer∣taine Messuage, That the said Lease shall be so obtained as afore∣said, and shall be ready under seal to be delivered as aforesaid: That then, &c. A Condition to convey a Lease or pay a sum of money by a day. THe Condition, &c. That where G. C. of C. in the County of N. Esquire, is by force of an Indenture dated, &c. made be∣tween the within bound W. C. on the one part: And the said G. on the other part lawfully entituled to possesse and enjoy for the terme of forty foure yeares at the least now to come, and under the onely payment of, &c. of lawfull, &c. therefore yearly to be paid during the said Terme, all that Capitall Messuage, &c. scituate, &c. now in the occupation, &c. and all those three Messuages, &c. all which Premisses were demised or letten to farme to the said W. C. by A. B. &c. by an Indenture of Lease and dated, &c. to him made by C D. for the terme of fifty years, and for the year∣ly rent of, &c. as by the same Indenture of Lease it may amongst other things plainly appeare. If the said W. C. or the within bound P. P. or either of them, or the Executors, &c. before the last
day of October next, &c. do deliver or cause to be delivered to the within named I. L. his Executors, Administrators or Assignes at the now dwelling house, &c. a good lawfull and absolute bargaine sale, assignment, and conveyance in the Law to be made from and in the name of the said G. C. to the said I. L. his Executors and Administrators by writing aswell of the said Indenture of Lease, and of the said Indenture dated, &c. made between the said W. and G. as is aforesaid; As also of all the right, title, estate, in∣terest and term of years of the said G. C. which he hath or ought to have by force of the same Indenture, of and in all and singular the Premisses granted by and in the said Indenture of Lease. In which writing so to be made by and from the said G. to the said I. L. as is abovesaid, there shall be contained and expressed, and covenant and grant on the part of the said G his Executors and Administrators to this effect that the said G. C. shall covenant and grant for him, his Executors and Administrators to and with the said I. his Executors and administrators, That aswell the said Indenture of lease and term of years, as also all and singular the Premisses demised in and by the said Indenture of Lease shall from the time of the date of the said writing to be made by the said G. as is abovesaid, continue and endure to the said I. L. his execu∣tors, administrators and assignes at all times upon lawfull request untill the end of the said term of fifty years clearly discharged, acquitted or saved harmlesse of and from all and singular former bargains, &c. before that time had, made, or done by the said G. C. or by any other person or persons by his meanes, commandment, or procurement, the Rents and Covenants reserved in the said In∣denture of Lease onely excepted. Or else if it shall fortune the said G. C. to decease and depart out of this present life before the said last of October next, &c. and the said writing of Assignment to be made by the said G. as is abovesaid, then being not before made and delivered to the said I. L. his executors, administrators or as∣signes as is aforesaid, Then if the said P. P. his Executors, &c. do well and truly pay or cause, &c. to the said I. L. &c. at, &c. the summe of eighty foure pounds of, &c. which the said W. C. oweth to the said I. on the sixth of November then next, &c. at one entire payment, That then, &c.
A Condition to make Grant of an Annuity for two lives by a day. THe Condition, &c. That if E. G. of D. in the County of N. E. Esquire, at or on this side the last of June next, &c. by writing Indented under his hand and seale to be knowledged and enrolled in the high Court of Chancery, give, grant, and confirme to the within named R. M. his executors, administrators and assignes, one annuity or yearly rent of twenty pounds of, &c. being yearly issuing and going out of the Mannors, Lands, Tenements and He∣reditaments whereof the said E, shall then be seised in Fee-simple to the clear yearly value of thirty pounds of, &c. and which shall be and remaine clear of all charges and encumbrances prejudiciall to the same yearly value, the same annuity to be had, levied, ta∣ken, paid and enjoyed to the same R. M. his executors, administra∣tors and assignes by and during all the term of the naturall lives of D. M. now wife of the said R. M. and of R. M. Goldsmith, Son of the said R. M. Alderman, and by and during all the term of the naturall life of the longest liver of them the said D and R. yearly in the Feast dayes of, &c. or on the twentieth day next en∣suing every of the said Feast dayes by even portions at the Shop, &c. The first payment thereof to begin, &c. That then, &c. A Condition that if the Obligor sell his house, then the Ob∣ligee to have the preferment thereof before another. THe Condition, &c. That if the case the within bound T. G. his executors, administrators or assignes or any of them shall at any time or times hereafter be minded or disposed to bargaine, sell, give, grant, alien, demise, let, set, or otherwise do or put away that Capitall Messuage, &c. and three Messuages, &c. in the occupation, &c. scituate, &c. or any of them, or any part or parcell of them or of any of them, or the interest or terme of yeares yet to come, or any part thereof which the said T. G. hath or had, should, ought, might, or may have, of, in or to the said Messuages with the Appurtenances by vertue, force, or meanes of one Indenture of Lease dated, &c. made and granted by A. B. to C. D. for the term of, &c. beginning, &c. or by vertue of any other
writings or conveyances whatsoever, That then if the said I. H. his Executors or Administrators shall have the preferment of buy∣ing and first offer thereof, and shall have the bargaine and sale of the same before any other person or persons, so that the said I. H. his Executors, Administrators or Assignes within twenty dayes next after offer thereof to him or them made will and do give and pay for the same as much ready money as any other person or per∣sons without Fraud or Covin will give and pay for the same: That then, &c. or else, &c. A Condition that where the Obliger hath taken up money by exchange at Antwerp for the Obligee, to be re∣turned by Re-change to London, the Obligor is bound to pay it at re-change with the interest, THe Condition, &c. That where the within named I. A. at the speciall request of the within bound I. L. hath appointed G. L. servant to the said I. A. now resident in Antwerp there to provide and take up as much Flemish money as shall satisfie eight hundred fifty eight pounds seventeen shillings six pence of lawfull money of England, which the said I. L. hath taken up in the City of London by way of Exchange unto Antwerp aforesaid, and from thence to be returned againe by re-change to be paid and clearly satisfied in the City of London aforesaid, by the said I. L. his Executors or Ad∣ministrators according to the order in such case used amongst Mer∣chants. If when the said G. L. or any whom he shall appoint shall fortune to returne the Bills of the said re-change upon the said I.L. his Executors or Administrators unto the City of London, The said I. L. his Executors or Administrators do indelayedly accept the said Bills according to the effect thereof, and the customes of Merchants without fraud, covin or delay. And doe well and truly make pay∣ment or other contentation and satisfaction of and for the said eight hundred fifty eight pounds seventeen shillings six pence of lawfull money of England so to be re-changed as aforesaid, and of and for the exchange and re-change thereof, and all charge arising of or about the same, so and in such sort as no charge, losse, or hin∣drance thereby, or thereof do come, grow, or happen to the said I. A. and G. L. or either of them, or to the Executors or Administra∣tors of either of them, for or touching the Premisses in or by the
default of the said I. L. his Executors or Administrators, That then, &c. Or else, &c. A Condition upon a Letter of Attorney for receiving of sundry debts. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound E. L by his writing or Letter of Attorney bearing date &c. hath autho∣rized and made the within named I I. his lawfull Attorney irre∣vokeable to aske, levy, recover, and receive for him and in his name of C. H. of, &c. And R. B. of W. &c. and of Sir T. K. of O. in the County of K. Knight, and of every of them, and of the Heires, Executors and Administrators of them and every of them, all such debts, dueties, summe and summes of money, and other things that they or any of them were indebted, or did owe unto him the said E. or which they or any of them stood bound to pay unto him by Bond, Bill, Obligation, Specialty, Recognizance, or otherwise; as by the said writing or Letter of Attorney more plainly, &c. If so be the said E. L. his Executors or Administra∣tors doe from henceforth and at all and every time and times hereafter at and upon the lawfull and reasonable request or demand of the said J. J. his executors, administrators or assignes at his and their costs and charges in the Law justly uphold and maintaine with effect the said writing and Letter of Attorney, and the power and authority thereby given, and also all and every such lawfull action and actions, Suits, Plaints, Pleas, Processes, Judgements, and Executions of the same as the said J. his executors, admini∣strators or assignes or any of them hereafter shall attempt, have, commence, pursue or bring in the name of the said E. his executors, or administrators against the said C. R. and Sir T. or any of them, or against the heires, executors, administrators, Goods, Lands, Te∣nements, and Hereditaments of them or of any of them by force of the same writing or Letter of Attorney or otherwise, of and for the having, recovering and receiving of all the same Debts, Duties, and summes of money or any part of them without being non-suit, releasing, discharging or otherwise, making void the same action or actions, Suits, Plaints, Pleas, Processes, Judgements, and Execu∣tions of the same or any of them without the speciall licence, con∣sent, and agreement of the said J. J. his executors, administrators or assignes first had and obtained in that behalfe in writing, and
further if the said E: his Executors, administrators, or assignes, have not at any time or times hereafter received, released, or dis∣charged, nor at any time or times hereafter do receive, release, or discharge any of the foresayd debts, summe and summes of money, or other things which the said E: L: by the foresayd Writing, or Letter of attorney, hath authorized and appointed the said I. to recover and receive of the foresayd C: R: and Sir T: or any part of them, nor any condemnation, judgment, or execution to be had obtained, gotten, or sued forth thereupon or therefore, or any part thereof, without like licence, consent, and agreement first had and obtained in that behalf in wriring as aforesaid. And further if the said I.I. his Executors and assignes do or may at all times here∣after peaceably and quietly have, take, recover, receive, and en∣joy to his and their own proper use for ever, all the same debts, du∣ties, summe and summes of money, and other thing and things which is or shall be recovered or received of the sayd C: R: and Sir T: or any of them, or of the Executors or administrators of them or any of them as aforesaid, and every part thereof, without any let, trouble, claim, eviction, recovery or interruption of the said E: L: his Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, or any of them, or of any other person or persons in the behalf, right, or title, or by the means or procurement of them, or any of them, That then, &c. A Condition where one is bound with Sureties to certain of his wives friends to leave her the worth of foure hundred pounds, monie, Goods, and Chattells, if she survive him. THe Condition, &c. That whereas marriage is concluded, and by Gods favour shall be shortly solemnized between the within bound I. S. and H: D: of N: &c. within said Widow, if it shall fortune the said J. hereafter to decease, and the said H: him to survive: If then the within bound F. S. his Heires, Executors, or Administrators, or the Heires, Executors, or Administrators of the said I: S: do within the space of three months next after the de∣cease of the said I: S: freely and quietly deliver and give, or cause to be freely and quietly delivered and given to the said H: or to her Assignes, for her use, so much ready money, goods, and chat∣tells
as then shall be cleerly and sufficiently well worth four hun∣dred pounds of, &c. and which the said H: from thenceforth may lawfully have, hold, and enjoy to her own use, without any manner of lawfull trouble, reclaim, or recovery of, or by any person or per∣sons, That then, &c. A Condition that a man and his wife shall bring up Chil∣dren, and to pay their Portions. THe Condition, &c. That where the above bound A. P. in her Widowhood, did choose and take upon her as well to keep and bring up A: & S: her Daughters: As also (if God so will) the Child wherewith she is now great, untill their severall marriages or ages of one and twenty years, according to the liberty to her in that behalf given by the above named R: R: in and by his last Will and Testament, and so hath lawfull right to detain and keep the severall Legacies which the said R: R: in his Testament did give unto the said Children, untill the said Children shall severally be married, or severally accomplish the age of one and twenty years, As by the said last Will, &c If the above named T: P: and A: his wife, their Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, do bring up and keep the said Children untill their severall ages or mar∣riages aforesaid: And as they or any of them shall severally at∣tain to the said age, or be married, do pay or cause, &c. unto them and every of them, severally all such summe and summes of money, as to them or any of them shall then be payable, according to the tenor and true meaning of the said last Will and Testament, with∣out fraud or deceit, That then &c. A Condition where A. and B. are bound as Sureties with C. and A. and B. bind themselves to one another to pay half of the money. THe Condition, &c. reciting the first bound, and that A: and B. entred thereinto at the request of the said C: If C: do pay to the party according to the condition of this Bond. Or else before the said 8. of October, do cleerly acquit and discharge the said A: and B. of and for the said Bond; or else if the said A. do law∣fully pay or tender, or cause to be payd or tendred to the party the
said eighth of October, one hundred and ten pounds of the said two hundred and twenty pounds, That then, &c. A Condition to pay money taken up by exchange upon the rechange thereof to London. THe Condition, &c. That where the within named H. K. at the speciall request of the within bound E.C. for her, together with her, hath taken up by way of exchange, at double usance for Ham∣brough of one R.P. the summe of thirty pounds sterling, at the rate and price of, &c. and given their Bill of exchange directed to one W: I: for payment thereof with advise to take the same up again for London, by exchange at double usance as the exchange shall then go upon the said H: K: and E: C: If the said E: C: her Exetutors, Administrators, or Assignes, or any of them do truely content and pay, or cause, &c. the sayd summe of thirty pounds, to such person or persons, as the Bills of exchange shall be returned to be payd, and at such due time and place as therein shall be mentioned: To∣gether with all costs, charges, interests, and damages thereof arising, chancing, or happening, be it by exchange, rechange, or otherwise; and thereof and of every part thereof, do at all times hereafter cleerly acquit, discharge, or save harmlesse the said H. K. his Executors, Administrators, and Goods, and every of them, as well against the said R. his Executors, Factors, and Assignes, as a∣gainst all other person and persons, That then, &c. A Condition to make an assurance of certain Copyhold Lands for one and twenty yeares Rent-free. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound T: P: before, &c. next, &c. do procure and obtain from the Lord of the Mannor of H: in the County of M: a lawfull grant to him, his Heires and Assignes, by Copy of Court-Roll, according to the customes of the said Mannor of, &c. of and for all that Copyhold Land, which the said T: F: or his Assignes now occupy, scituate, &c. And by vertue thereof, and of the license in that behalf to be obtained, do before the five and twentieth day of, &c grant and assure the said Copy∣hold Land to the within named G: N: his Executors and Assignes, to hold to the said G: and his Assignes, for the terme of one and
twenty years from, &c. without any Rent therefore paying to the said, &c. And also if the same G: and his Assignes in the meane time from henceforth do or may occupy and enjoy the said Copy∣hold Land, without any thing therefore answering to the said, &c. And if moreover the said G: his Executors and Assignes, by vertue of such assurance to be had from the said T: as aforesaid, may have, hold, and enjoy the said Land in form aforesaid, and during the terme aforesaid, without any let, trouble, or eviction of the said T: or his Heires or Assignes, or of any other by his or their meanes or procurement, That then, &c. A Condition for sealing of an Obligation by a third man, by a day, where two have already sealed it. THe Condition, &c. That where there is one other Obligation, dated the day and yeare within written, made for the binding of the within bound I: H: W: H: and one C: H: of, &c. joyntly and e∣very of them severally their Heires, Executors, and Administrators, unto the sayd H: P: in the summe of, &c. to be paid to the said H: P: his certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, upon the condition of the same former Obligation, As by the same former Obligation with the Condition thereof al∣ready sealed and delivered to the said H: P: by the said I: H: and W: H: and now remaining with the same H: P: may appear: If the sayd C: H: at his next being within any part of the City of London before he shall then next depart from o out of the said City, do come to the now dwelling house of the said H: scituate, &c. and do there signe, seale, and deliver the said Obligation whole and safe to the sayd H: P: or to his Deputy for his use. So that the said H: P: after notice to him given of the next being of the sayd C: H: in the sayd City, do not wilfully, or of fraud withdraw himself, and the said Obligation from the said C, coming to seale and deli∣ver the same, That then, &c. A Condition to save harmlesse a Womans Joyn∣ture. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound G: : his Heires, Executors, and Administrators, do from time to time and at all times hereafter discharge and keep harmlesse as well all that the
Mannor of K. with the Rights, Members, and appurtenances there∣of in the County of K: and all Lands, Tenements, and Heredita∣ments whatsoever belonging to the same Mannor, as also the with∣in named H: : his Heires and assignes, of and from all such right of Dower, and of and from all such estate and estates of Inheri∣tance or of Freehold, as the said G: and I: his wife have, or either of them hath or hereafter can or may have or claime to have of right to the premisses, or any part thereof: And of and from all Suits, Actions, and Demands whatsoever, to be had, brought, or pursued, for, or concerning the same, That then, &c. Another Condition to like effect. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound A: C: hath bargained and sold to the within named T: S: two Closes lying in, &c. and all that his Toft, &c. To have and to hold the said, &c. to the said C: and his Heires upon condition of and for the payment of two hundred pounds in manner and form as appeareth by a paire of Indentures in that behalf made between the said A: C and T. dated, &c. If the said A: C: his Heires, Executors, and Ad∣ministrators, from time to time and at all times after full payment made of the said summe of two hundred pounds, according to the purport of the said Indenture, do upon reasonable request save and keep harmlesse the said T: his Heires and Assignes, and also the said Closes, &c. of and from all demand in Law or in right, or of Dower or other Interest whatsoever, with K: now wife of the said A. at any time hereafter shall lawfully demand or claim to have of or in the premisses, or any part thereof, That then, &c. Another Condition to like effect. THe Condition, &c. that where the above bound W: P: hath here∣tofore sold, given, and granted unto the above named T: L: one Messuage or Tenement with the appurtenances, scituate, lying, and being in W: aforesaid, as by a deed thereof made dated, &c. more at large doth appear. If therefore the sayd Messuage or Te∣nement, and other the premisses, and every parcell thereof, be at all times hereafter, and from time to time so acquitted, discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved harmlesse of and from the Dower
and right and title of Dower of K: now the wife of the said W: P: as that neither the sayd T: L: nor his Heires and Assignes, nor any of them by reason thereof, or for touching or concerning the same, be not at any time hereafter molested troubled, or sued, That then, &c. A Condition that an Apprentice shall make accounts, and to answer that the Master shall lose by his untruth. THe Condition, &c. That where E: P: Son of R: P: of, &c. hath put himself Apprentice to the within named A: P: for the terme of nine yeares, from the Feast of all Saints next, &c, as by a paire of Indentures of Apprenticehood thereof made, bearing the date within written appeareth. If therefore the sayd E: P: do from time to time, during the said terme, at all times within the space of fif∣teen dayes next after every such time as he shall be thereunto rea∣sonably required by the sayd A: his Executors or Administrators, or any the Factors or Assignes of any of them, make and yeild up to him or them, a true and full account and reckoning of all such Goods, Wares, Chattells, Debts, Money, and Merchandizes, as at any time during the sayd terme shall be committed and come into the hands and custody of the sayd E: by the sayd A: his Executors, Factors, or Assignes: And also if the sayd within bound W: P: his Executors or Administrators, do from time to time within one month next after reasonable request to any of them made by the said A: his Executors or Assignes, make or cause to be made to him or them full recompence and satisfaction of and for all such losses and damages, as the sayd A: his Executors or Administrators shall sustain or lose by any falshood or untruth to be found in the sayd E: P: his Apprentice, at any time during the sayd terme. And fur∣ther if the sayd E: P: do not at any time or times during the sayd terme, unlawfully depart or absent himselfe out of the Service of the sayd A: That then, &c. Memorand. the last branch for absence was left out in the Obli∣gation, that in this behalf was passed to Mr. B.
A Condition for the quiet enjoying of a house, upon the sale of the Lease thereof. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound I: O: by his Poll deed, dated, &c. hath bargained, sold, assigned, and set over to the within named R.F. all his estate, &c. which he hath or ought to have, of or in all that Tenement scituate, &c. which A.B. demised, &c. to, &c. for the terme of, &c. as by the sayd Poll deed, &c. If the sayd R.F. his Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, under the payment of the yearly Rent reserved by the said Inden∣ture of Lease made by the said A.B. and under the performance of the Covenants, Grants, and Agreements therein contained, from thenceforth to grow due to be payd and performed, shall or may peaceably and quietly from the day of the date within sayd, have, hold, and enjoy the sayd Tenement, and other the premisses with the appurtenances, for, by, and during all the residue of the sayd terme of, &c. cleer and free discharged, or otherwise well and suf∣ficiently saved and kept harmlesse, of and from all and singular arrearages of Rent charges and Incumbrances whatsoever, the yearely Rent and Covenants aforesaid, onely except, and without any let, trouble, or interruption of the sayd, &c. his Executors, &c. and without any lawfull let, interruption, or expulsion of any o∣ther person or persons having or claiming, or which shall have or claim any former estate, right, or title, in or to the premisses, or any part thereof, That then, &c. A Condition for discharging of Incumbrances in a sale of Land in Feesimple. THe Condition, &c. That where the within named N: B: hath by his Deed indented, dated, &c. given and granted to the within named T: T: his Heires and Assignes for ever, all that Mes∣suage or Tenement with the appurtenances, scituate in C. &c. now in the Tenure of B.D. or his Assignes. If the said T. T. his Heires and Assignes, shall or may from henceforth forever, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the sayd Messuage, with all and singular the appurtenances cleer and free discharged, or other∣wise at all times sufficiently saved harmlesse by the sayd N: B: his
Heires and Assignes, of and from all and singular former Grants, Bargaines, Sales, Leases, Charges, Estates, and Incumbrances whatsoever, had▪ made, done, or granted by the said N. or by any other person or persons, by or under the estate of the said N. ex∣cept one Lease made of the sayd Tenement with the appurtenan∣ces, by the sayd N. to the sayd I.D. by Indenture dated, &c. upon which Lease there is reserved ten Marks of, &c. yearely Rent, which hereafter during the continuance of the sayd Lease, shall be due and payable to the sayd N. his Heires and Assignes, according to the tenor of the same Lease, That then, &c. A Condition that if Land mortgaged shall be forfeited, it shall remaine to the Mortgagee free of Incum∣brances. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the right honourable F. Earl of B. by his Indenture dated, &c. for the summe of five hundred pounds of, &c. therein specified, hath conveyed to the within na∣med R.M. and to his Heires and Assignes the Moyety of the Re∣ctory and Parsonage of, &c. in the County of B. and the Moyety of the Mannor of W. with the appurtenances in the same County of B. And the Reversion and Reversions thereof with other things; as in and by the said Indenture will appeare, If the said Earl his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, do make default, and do not pay the sayd summe of, &c. and every part thereof, to the sayd R M. his Executors or Administrators, accord∣ing to the purport and true meaning of the said Indenture: If then in such default of payment of the sayd summe of five hundred pounds, or any part thereof, made the sayd R. M. his Heires and Assignes, for his and their own use for ever, shall and may lawfully have, hold, and enjoy all the said Moyety of all and singular the sayd premisses, and also to the same use may lawfully have, take, receive, and enjoy the Rents and Profits thereof for ever, cleerly and freely discharged, or at all times sufficiently kept harmlesse of and from all former Grants, Bargains, Estates, Titles, Charges▪ and all other Incumbrances whatsoever, mentioned in the said Inden∣tures (except onely as in the said Indentures is excepted) That then, &c.
A Condition upon a Poll deed for discharging of Incum∣brances in sale of a Lease. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound Sir H: L: Kt. by his Poll deed, dated, &c. hath bargained, sold, and assigned over to the within named T: H: as well the Mead called Friers Mead, in H: which A: by Indenture dated, &c. demised to the sayd Sir H: for the terme of, &c. As also all the estate, &c. which the sayd Sir H: hath in the same: as by the sayd Poll deed more at large will appeare: If the sayd Mead now be, and by and during all the residue of the sayd term of twenty yeares now to come, shall be and stand cleer & free acquitted and discharged, or otherwise by the sayd Sir H: his, &c. at all times saved harmlesse, of and from all and singular former Bargains, Sales, Grants, Leases, Forfeitures, Surrenders, Re entries, cause, and causes of, &c. and all other char∣ges and Incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or agreed un∣to by the sayd Sir H: except such estate and interest as the sayd Sir H: heretofore hath made to one R: H: and his Assignes, of and in the sayd Mead onely to have continuance and endurance untill the 25. of March, which shall be, &c. and no longer, except also the yearly Rent reserved by the Indenture aforesayd, and the Co∣venants therein specified, which shall from henceforth grow due to be payd and performed, That then, &c. A Condition to make a Voyage to Venice, and from thence to return with expedition. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within named E: R: hath undertaken to make a Voyage in his own person into the City of Venice. If the said E. do as well enter upon the sayd Voy∣age on this side, the tenth day of September next, &c. and do con∣tinue in the same Voyage untill he attain unto the same City, and do personally enter into the same City before the twentieth day of Novem: then next following, except by vehement sicknesse or dis∣eases of his body he be letted to the contrary: As also do from thence return into the Realm of England with all convenient ex∣pedition, as the health of his body will suffer: And there shew himself at the now Mansion house of the sayd R: M: in London,
within twenty dayes next after his return into the said Realm of England, That then, &c. A Condition where two having taken an Administra∣tion during a Minority, each is bound to save harm∣lesse the other of that shall come to his hands. THe condition, &c. That where the within bound W: L: and the within named W: S: have the administration of the Goods and Chattells of W; K: of London C. deceased, to them committed, du∣ring the minority of I: K: Son and sole Executor of the last Will and Testament of the sayd W: K: By reason whereof since the same Ad∣ministration committed sundry summes of money, and other the Goods late pertaining to the sayd W: K: have come to their hands, and much more of the residue of the Goods, Chattells, Debts, and money which were of the sayd W: K: are likely to be received, re∣covered, and gotten by the sayd W: L: and W: S: for which they are and shall stand charged to answer and account for. If the said W: L. his Executors and Administrators from time to time hereafter, as he or they shall be required, do and shall yeild and make a full perfect and true reckning and account to the sayd I: his Execu∣tors and Assignes, and to all and every such other person or per∣sons as he or they shall appoint in that behalf, of and for all such and as much of the sayd Goods, Chattells, Debts, and money, as already are, or afore, or between any such account making, shall be had, received, or medled withall by the sayd W: his Executors Administrators, or Assignes: And do also from time to time and at all times hereafter well and sufficiently discharge, or save and keep harmlesse the said W. S. his Executors and Administrators, and all and every other person and persons, of and for all and sin∣gular such and as much of the sayd Goods, Chattells, money, and debts, as are or shall come to the hands or possession of the sayd W: his Exeeutors, Administrators, or Assignes, and were due, apper∣taining, owing, or belonging to the sayd W: K: in his life time, That then, &c.
A Condition upon a Letter of Attorney for recovery of di∣divers debts with a clause that the Constitutor shall shew his Book to prove them. Recitall of the Letter of At∣torney.THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within bound T. C. hath made his Warrant of Attor∣ny of the date within written to the within named T. L. enabling him to recover, demand, and receive, and to detaine to his own use after the receipt, all and singular summe and summes of money menti∣oned or specified in the Schedule annexed to the same Warrant of Attorney. If the said T. C. his executors or administrators do not revoke, counter∣mand or repeale the said Warrant of Attorney,Not to revoke. or the power or authority thereby given or granted, also if the said T. C. his executors or administrators shall not acquit,Not to release the sums nor withdraw a∣ctions. release, discharge or exonerate at any time hereafter, any of the said sums of money, or withdraw, dis-continue or make nonsuit any a∣ction or suit hereafter to be commenced or prose∣cuted by the said T. L. his executors or assignes for the recovery of the same summe or summes of money or any of them without the request of the same T. his executors or assignes. Further if the said T. C. his executors and administrators do from time to time as request shall be to him or them reasonably made,To avow acti∣ons. do and shall aswell avow justly and suffer to be maintained in his or their name or names at the costs and charges of the said T. L. his executors or assignes, all and every action and suit that the same T. L. his executors or assignes shall pursue or prosecute for or concerning any of the summe or summes of money aforesaid;To shew Books to prove the debts. as also for the better proof of the same to be true debts and bet∣ter atchieving thereof do & shall bring forth all and every the book and books of the said T. C. wherein the same debts or any of them be entred that the same may be shewed, seen, and delivered in evi∣dence as often as occasion shall serve; and also if
the said T. C. have not acquited,That the debts are not acquit∣ted or received. Or if any be re∣ceived to re∣compence the same to the Ob∣ligee, upon request. The Obligee to enjoy the debts to his owne use. released or re∣ceived any of the said debts. Or if any of them be received, acquitted or released, Then if the said T. C. his executors, administrators or as∣signes upon probable proof to him or them offered and declared, doe within foure dayes then next following, pay and recompence to the said T. L. his executors or assignes, the full and even value of all and every the same debts as so are acquited, received or released: and also if he the said T. L. his executors and assignes shall and may have, hold, and enjoy without any account to the same T. C. his executors or administrators, all such of the said debts as shall be received or obtained by the said T. L. his executors or assignes: That then, &c. A Condition for re-delivery of Silver wrought into Plate of such forme and fashion as shall be ap∣pointed. THe Condition, &c. That if from time to time and at all times hereafter as often and when as any Silver shall be by the with∣in named A. M. his servants or assignes delivered to the within bound I. H. or his assignes, to the intent to be made and wrought into Plate, the said I. H. or his assignes doe and shall well and truly re-deliver or cause, &c. unto the said A. or his assignes, all and every the same Silver made and wrought into such forme and fashion as from time to time by the said A. or his servants or as∣signes shall be required or appointed, and that at all times and from time to time within such time and space after the receipt by the said J. of the said silver as shall be accorded & agreed upon between the said A. M. or his servants and assignes, and the said J. H. That then, &c.
A Condition where P. M. hath received a Legacy of an Executor is bound to pay his ratable part back againe, if any debts happen afterward to be paid by the said Executor, yet concealed from his know∣ledge. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound P. M. hath had and received of the within named H. W. Executor of the last Will and Testament of one H. L. late of L. deceased the sum of twenty pounds of, &c. a Legacy which the said H. gave and be∣queathed to the said P. M. if it fortune that any summe or summes of money which the said H. M. owed at his decease yet concealed from the knowledge of the said Executor, shall fortune hereafter to be demanded and received at his hands, or at the hands of his executor and administrator, then if the said P. his executors or ad∣ministrators shall and doe well and truly pay or cause, &c. to the said H. W. his executors or assignes within the space of three moneths next after notice in that behalfe to be given by the said P. his executors or administrators a ratable part and portion of mo∣ney back againe, towards the answering and paying of such summe and sums of money so happening to be demanded and paid, That is to say, ratably according to the value of the said twenty pounds paid to the said P. respecting the quantity thereof rated with the other Legacies of the said H. paid and to be paid to other the Le∣gatories according to the quanty thereof: That then, &c. A Condition where debts are owing by reason of partner∣ship, and the one of the Partners having the trade and receipt of the debts in his own hands is bound to his other Partner to pay him a halfe thereof upon receipt, &c. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within named J. C. and the within bound H P. by reason of their joynt occupy∣ing of Woollen cloth have yet owing to them in debts the sum of two hundred ninty three pounds, if the same H. P. his execu∣tors
or administrators do pay or cause, &c. unto the said J. C. his executors or administrators upon the receipt of any part of the same summe of, &c. the one halfe of every such summe and summes so fortuning to be received by the said H. his executors, or admini∣strators within foure dayes next after the lawfull demand of the said J. his executors or administrators therefore to be made to the said H. P. his executors or administrators, and further if the said H. P. his executors or administrators do not acquit, release, or com∣pound for any the said debts or any part thereof more to the pre∣judice of the said J. his executors, or administrators, Then to the prejudice of the said H. his executors or administrators: That then, &c. A Condition to leave a Son his Childs part. THe Condition, &c. That whereas marriage is to be had and solemnised between the within named J. B. and A. S. Daughter of T. S. Citizen, and C. of L. and whereas in consideration thereof, and of other considerations the within bound R. B. hath agreed hereby to bind himselfe unto the said J. B. for assurance a full childs part and portion to be allowed to the said J. A. out of the goods, chattells and credits of the said R. B. which he shall happen to have at the time of his decease, If there∣fore it happen the said marriage to be solemnized, Then if the said I. B. and A. and the Survivor of them, or the Executors, Admini∣strators or Assignes of the Survivor of them shall and may have, receive and enjoy after the decease of the said R. B. so good, and full childs part and portion of the goods, chattels and credits of the said R. B or the value thereof within twelve moneths next after his decease, to be paid or allowed by the executors or admi∣nistrators of the said R B. as any other of the children of the said R. B. shall then have or be intituled to have of his goods, chattels and credits aforesaid: That then, &c. A Condition to pay the Remainder to make up a childs part, where part is paid aforehand. THe Condition &c. That whereas marriage is shortly to be had and solemnized between the within named I. B. and A. S. Daughter of the within bounden T. S. and whereas
in consideration thereof the said T. S. in part of payment of the childs part and portion of the said A. his Daughter, to her to be due after his decease of his goods, chattels, and credits, and for a present advancement unto her in respect of the said marriage, hath paid at the ensealing hereof to the said I. B. the summe of five hundred pounds of, &c. And moreover hath promised to leave unto the said I. and A. the rest of a childs part and portion after his decease: If therefore it fortune the said marriage to be solemnized, Then if the said I. B. and A. and the Survivor of them, or the Executors, Administrators or Assignes of the Survivor of them shall and may have, receive, and enjoy after the decease of the said T. the residue of her childs part and portion according to the promise of the said T. S. aforesaid, that is to say so much of the goods, chattels, and credits, or the value of so much thereof within twelve moneths next after his decease to be paid or allow∣ed by the Executors, or Administrators of the said T. as with the said five hundred pounds paid aforehand as aforesaid shall make up and supply as good and as full a portion as any other of the chil∣dren of the said T. shall then have or be intituled to have, That then, &c. A Condition to keep one harmlesse who delivereth a Chaine fearing to be put into the Exchequer. THe Condition &c. That where the within bound R. S. hath sold and delivered to the within named L. L. a Chain of Gold weighing, &c. for and in consideration of the sum of eighteen pounds: If so be that the said R. S. at any time here∣after shall be by any information, plaint, suit, or action impleaded, troubled or sued in any wise by reason of the said Chaine for any lack of weight, goodnesse, or finenesse that can be pretended or found to be in the same or otherwise by reason of any Statute or Act of Parliament, wherein the said R. S. may be charged con∣cerning the same, The which Chaine neverthelesse the said L. L. received of the said R. of the weight, finenesse and goodnesse that it ought to have, and at such reasonable rate as it was well worth, then if the said L. his Executors, Administrators or Assignes, do and shall upon reasonable request therefore to be made, repay and recompence to the said R. his executors and administrators all and every such summe and summes of money, and other charges as he
or they or any of them shall happen to disburse, sustain, or pay out by reason of any such information, plaint, suit, action, or otherwise by reason of any Statute or Act of Parliament as aforesaid, That then, &c. A Condition to put in sureties to the Chamber for a sum already committed and now delivered by consent to another mans hand. THe Condition, &c. That where the above bounden T. A. the day and year above written hath taken out of the hands and custody of the above named T. G. the summe of two hundred pounds of, &c. being the part and portion of P one of the children and orphans of the above named C. B. deceased, afferring to the same P. for his part of all the goods and chattels which were of his said Father according to the custome of the city of L. and the said T. A. hath taken upon him to satisfie the Cham∣berlain of the said city with sureties for the payment thereof to the use of the said P. according to the custome of the said City in that behalfe used. If therefore after request to be made to the said T. A. or the above named R. E. their executors or administrators or any of them by the said T. G. or the above named I. L. or R. M. or their assignes, the same T. A. and R. E. their executors or ad∣ministrators with such other good able sureties with them, as by the said Chamberlain of the said City for the time being shall be allowed, do within the space of  dayes next following such request made become bound to the same Chamberlain accor∣ding to the usuall order and custome of the said City for the sure payment of the said, &c. to the use of the said P. O. That then, &c. A Condition to procure new sureties to be bound in the Chamber of London to the discharge of a surety bound already if he request it. THe Conditon &c. That whereas the above named E. A. together with T. S. and W. G and I. G. at the speciall in∣stance and request of the said T. S. and W. G. and I. G. by Recognizance by them knowledged before the Lord Mayor and
Court of Aldermen of the City of London in the inner Chamber of the Guild-hall of the same City on the three and twentieth of October now last past is holden and standeth bound to G. H. Chamberlaine of the said City▪ and to his Successors in the sum of foure hundred pounds of, &c. for the payment of three hundred pounds of the parts and portions of W. M. I. and T. children and orphans of W. H. late Citizen, and S. of London deceased. And further, as by the said Recognizance, & the condition thereof more at large it will appeare, If the said E. A. his heires, executors or ad∣ministrators, at any time hereafter, do make request to the said T. S, W. G. and I. G. their executors and administrators or to any one of them, to procure that the said E. his Heires, Executors and Administrators may be discharged and acquitted of and from the said Recognizance, If the said T. W. and I. their Executors or Administrators for and to the discharging and acquitting of the said E. his Heires, Executors and Administrators of and from the same Recognizance, doe within two moneths next after such re∣quest made as aforesaid, bring in to be bound a new by Recogni∣zance, to be taken and knowledged before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the said City of L. for the time being, another good sufficient person in the stead, place and liew of the said E. & if al∣so the said E. his heirs executors, & administrators & every of them, be in the mean, and from time to time at all times hereafter saved harmlesse by the said, &c. their Executors and Administrators of and from all losses, costs, damages, Judgements, and Executions whatsoever to arise, come or grow of or by means of the said former Recognizance in any wise: That then, &c. A Condition for the assurance of a Parsonage to a Clerk presented against them that can claim former present∣ment by the saeme assurance. THe Condition. &c. That where N. S. of S. in the County of M. Gent. at the request of the withinbound W. W. hath pre∣sented R. G, Son to the within named T. G. as Clerk unto the Parsonage and Rectory of, &c. in the County of M. whereupon the said R. is inducted into the said Parsonage and Rectory by the consent of the right reverend Father E. Bishop of L. If the said R. G. shall or may by vertue of the said presentation and induction at
all times hereafter during the naturall life of the same R. lawful∣ly, peaceably, and quietly, have, keep, possesse, and enjoy the said Rectory and Parsonage with all the Appurtenances of the same, and all profits, commodities, tithes, pensions, advantages, casual∣ties and emoluments whatsoever to the said Parsonage by any meanes due, incident, annexed, or belonging with all and singular their Appurtenances whatsoever, without lawfull let or interrup∣tion of the said N. S. his Heires, Executors, or Assignes or any of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, claiming or ha∣ving or that shall, &c. any former presentation, advowson, or grant made by the said N. or by any other by his meanes, consent, or a∣greement. That then, &c. A Condition for ones forth coming when he shall be cal∣led for. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the within bound R.M. be alwaies forth-comming when he shall be called for, and do also from time to time upon warning make his perso∣nall appearance at and in such place or places as shall be to him notified, there to speak and answer for himselfe before such per∣son or persons as shall be appointed to be auditors for and con∣cerning such things as against the said R. M. shall be said, spoken or alledged: That then, &c. or else it to stand and remain in full strength and vertue. A Condition where two are bound one to another, not to do prejudice upon a Bond in both their names. THe Condition, &c. That where I. F. Citizen and Draper of London, standeth bound to the within named R. C. and W. W. in two hundred pounds of, &c. as by Recognizance or writing ob∣ligatory according to the forme of the Statute of late provided for the recovery of debts to them joyntly made by the said I. dated, &c. and knowledged and sealed before Sir R.C. Knight, Lord cheif Iustice of England will appeare. And whereas in truth the said R, and W. are equally to take benefit of the said Statute, and for that purpose the said Statute was made to them as is aforesaid: If there∣fore he the said R. C. for his part heretofore hath not done, or he,
his executors or assignes at any time hereafter without the request and consent of the said W. his executors or administrators shall not do or procure to be done any act or thing whereby or by meanes whereof the said writing, obligation or summe of two hun∣dred pounds or any part thereof, is or shall be released or acquitted any manner of way, or whereby any action, suit, processe, or exe∣cution hereafter to be had or taken upon the said Statute shall or may be barred, defeated, made frustrate, or lose his effect; And if also the said R. C his executors, administrators and assignes, and every of them do and shall from time to time and at all times here∣after agree, permit, and suffer that the said two hundred pounds if it shall be forfeited, shall be recovered, taken, and levied the one moyety thereof for the onely use and behoof of the said R. his exe∣cutors, administrators and assignes, and the other moyety thereof for the said W. his executors, administrators and assignes without any let, deniall or contradiction of the said R. his executors, ad∣ministrators or assignes: That then, &c. A Condition to justifie a Letter of Attorney, such a one as will serve at all times if there be more summes then one, and whereas the Constitutee is to have them. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound I. M. his execu∣tors, administrators and assignes do at all times hereafter aver, justifie, maintain, and allow all such actions, suits; Writs, Pleas, Plaints, Processes, Condemnations, Iudgements, Executions and Demands as it shall fortune the within named I. C. his executors or assignes at any time hereafter to commence, conceive, purchase, exhibit, procure, or prosecute by force of a Letter of Attorney of the date within written, made from the said I. to the said I. against all or any the persons, debtors therein named, their executors or ad∣ministrators for recovery of the severall summes of money by every of them severally owing mentioned in the said Letter of Attorney to the onely use therein specified. And do permit and suffer the said I. his executors and assignes to recover and receive all and e∣very the said severall debts and summes of money, and the costs, damages and profits of suits and other advantages to come or grow any way to the onely use of the said I. his executors and assignes
for ever, without account, or without release, acquittance, discharge, non-suit, countermandment, dis-avowry, retraxit, or other avoy∣ding of the same persons, summes of money, debts, suits, or other demands accrewing upon the same without the consent in writing of the said I. his executors or assignes first had for the same: That then, &c. A Condition upon a Letter of Attorney that the Constitutee may receive the money to his own use. THe Condition, &c. That where the within named T. D. hath a Warrant of Attorney of the date within written to him, his executors and assignes made by the within bound I. B. to recover, demand and receive of I. H and R. G. fifty pounds where∣in they stand bound to the said I. B. by their Obligation dated, &c. As by the said Warrant of Attorney appeareth. If the said I. B. his Executors and Administrators do and shall suffer the said Warrant of Attorney to stand and continue unrevoked, not made frustrate, or countermanded, and do and shall suffer the said T his Executors and assignes to sue for, recover, receive, and enjoy to and for his and their own use, the said summe of fifty pounds from time to time without any let, molestation, impediment or account of the contrary: And also do and shall upon the rason∣able request, and at the costs and charges of the said T. his Execu∣tors or Assignes avow, justifie and suffer to be maintained all and every lawfull action, suit, plea, processe, judgement and execution that he or they shall take, have, pursue, or prosecute upon the said Obligation in the name or names of the said I his Executors or Administrators without being non suit, discontinuing or hin∣dring any of the same actions, suits, judgements or executions; and also if the said Obligation or summe of money, or any part thereof be not acquitted or released, nor hereafter shall be acquit∣ted or released by the said I. his Executors or Administrators, nor attached without the request of the said T. his executors or Admi∣nistrators: That then, &c. Another Condition upon a Letter of Attorney. THe Condition, &c. That where the above named G. M. by his Warrant of attorney of the date within written hath
constituted, made, and ordained the above named R. S. his exe∣cutors administrators and assignes to recover and receive divers summes of money in the same Warrant of Attorney expressed, and particularly mentioned: As by the said Warrant may plainly ap∣pear. If the said G. his Executors and Administrators doe and shall permit and suffer the said R. his Executors, Administrators and Assignes to recover and sue for the said summes, and every of them, and the same to take, receive and enjoy to his and their owne use without any account thereof, or of or for any part there∣of to be yeilded or demanded to or by the said G. his Executors or Assignes, and without any other let, impediment, or distur∣brance of the said G. his Executors, Administrators or Assignes: And also doe and shall from time to time at all times hereafter, upon and at the reasonable request, costs, and charges of the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assignes, avouch, justifie, and suffer to be maintained all and singular such lawfull Processes, Actions, Suits, and Executions as the said R. his Executors, Admi∣nistrators or Assignes shall sue, take, have, or prosecute in the name or names of the said G. M. his Executors or Administrators for the Recovery and getting of the said summes or any of them without being non-suit, making release, retraxit, or other discontinuance of or in any such Suit, Action, or Processe: otherwise then by the consent of the said R. his Executors or Administrators: And also doe make from time to time to the said R. his Executors, Admini∣strators and Assignes, such further Letters or Warrants of Attor∣ney, for and concerning the recovery and suits aforesaid, or any of them, as by him or them at their own costs shall be devised and rea∣sonably required: And further if the sums of money mentioned in the said Letter of Attorney, and every of them be at the ensealing and delivery hereof lawfully and truly owing to the said G not at∣tached, and shall be proved owing as aforesaid by the said G. or his assignes, at the costs of the said R. his Executors or assignes when he or they shall have need requiring the same proof, and hereafter shall not by any meanes be attached, nor by the said G. his execu∣tors or administrators received, acquitted, released, nor compoun∣ded for, nor any part thereof without the consent and request of the said R. his executors or administrators: That then, &c.
A Condition to pay money upon an Act executory. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound T. A. or I. A. o as well content and pay to the within named I. W. the summe of twenty pounds of, &c. at such time as the sayd I.W. shall deliver to the sayd T. and I. one sufficient Warrant in Writing, under the hand and seale of the within named I. T. by meanes whereof W. C. of B. in the County of L. Servant to C. A. Gent. by the Queens Majesties Letters Patents, in due forme to be made, and sealed with her great Seale of England, shall be, or lawfully may be before the end of Trinity Tearm next coming, made and constituted, Searcher of the Port of B. aforesayd, and of all the Members, Creeks, and places thereof, with the grant of all Fees and Wages to the same belonging, in as large and ample manner as R T. late had and enjoyed the same; As also after the receipt of the sayd Warrant, do moreover content and pay to the said J. W. his Exe∣cutors or Administrators, one other summe of twelve pounds of, &c. at the now dwelling house of the sayd T. scituate, &c. on the fourteenth day of October next coming, That then, &c. A Condition where two are Executors, and the one is bound to the other to pay halfe the Legacies and Debts, and to have halfe of the rest of the Te∣stators Goods, THe Condition, &c. That where the within named J. P. de∣ceased, by his last Will and Testament in Writing, dated, &c. hath made and ordained the within bound A. B. and the within named Agnes B. by the names of his Wife and Son his Executors: And by the same his last Testament, hath given and bequeathed to the sayd A. and A. the residue of all his Goods, Chattells, and Debts, to remain after his debts payd, and Legacies fulfilled to be equally divided between them: As by the sayd last Will and Te∣stament plainly is expressed. If the sayd Andrew his Executors or Assignes, at their own charges, do as well, well and truly pay or cause to be payd or discharged to every person, as of right it doth belong, and in due time the Moyety, and one halfe of all such Le∣gacies and Bequests, as the sayd J. by his sayd last Will and Testa∣ment,
hath severally given, willed, or bequeathed: Or for such Moyety from time to time at all times, do sufficiently keep harm∣lesse the sayd A. her Executors and Administrators: As also do from time to time at all times agree and suffer that the sayd A. her Executors and Assignes, shall and may for ever for their own use, have, hold, keep, and enjoy the one halfe of the sayd residue to remain as aforesayd, of all the sayd Goods, Chattells, and debts which were of the sayd J. without let, interruption, demand, or vexation of the sayd A. his Executors or Administrators, or of any other by or from them or any of them. And moreover if the Exe∣cutors and Assignes of the sayd A. at the Harvest next happening after her decease, may have take and enjoy for their own use, the one halfe of the Corne and Graine then to be growing, standing, or being, in or upon any Ground belonging to the Farme of S. in E. within sayd which Farme the sayd A. and A. now do occupy to∣gether: The sayd Executors or Assignes of the sayd Agnes then yeilding and allowing to the sayd Andrew, his Executors and As∣signes twenty pence of, &c. for the moyety of the rent of every acre of Ground whereon such Corne and Graine shall be standing growing, or being. And if also the sayd A. his Executors and as∣signes do allow and yeild to the sayd Executors or assignes of the sayd Agnes, if they or any of them require it, twelve pence for e∣very tythe of every acre of such of the Ground of the sayd Farme, as shall be in sallow at the decease of the sayd Agnes, That then, &c. A Condition to make one free by a day, and to suffer him in the meane time to take the benefit of his owne labour. THe Condition, &c. That where the within named A. B. is now the Apprentice of the within bound C.D. untill the Feast of St. James the Apostle, which shall be, &c. as by an Indenture ther∣of made to the sayd C.D. by the sayd A.B. doth appeare: If the said C.D. his Executors and administrators at the onely charges of the same C.D. his Executors or administrators, do upon reasonable request, cause the sayd Indenture to be enrolled according to the custome of the City of L. So that the sayd A.B. thereunto do in due manner give his consent. And if also the sayd C.D. his Execu∣tors and administrators, at the like charge. of the same C. D. his
Executors and administrators, do upon reasonable request at the sayd Feast of St James the Apostle, which shall be, &c. or within three months then next following, do procure the sayd A.B. to be lawfully admitted into the liberty and freedome of the City of London, according to the custome of the City aforesaid: And do also freely permit and suffer the said A.B. peaceably to employ and bestow the science, art, and service of the said A, B. to the only use and behoofe of the same A.B. untill the said Feast of Saint James the Apostle, which shall be, &c. and do not at any time demand the same, or any satisfaction or account therefore, or thereto, That then, &c. A Condition to save one harmlesse of the keeping of a Child who hath been charged for the reputed Fa∣ther thereof. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within bound P.H. hath married and taken to wife one M. now his wife at this present, and one woman-child of like name, hath been lately born by her, for the which the within named G.G. hath been charged for the reputed Father thereof; If at all times and from time to time hereafter the said G G. shall and may stand discharged against the said P.Ʋ and M. his wife, and either of them, and the assignes of them, and of either of them, of and for all and every the premis∣ses, and also against all and every person and persons, of and for the keeping, finding, and bringing up of the said Child, and of and from all actions suits, costs, charges, and molestations concern∣ng the premisses, or any of them, That then, &c. A Condition where one having delt in the affaires of an∣other, and made an account, if upon the better exa∣mination thereof it be found faulty, then the Obli∣gor to make recompence to the Obligee. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound I. R. having had to do in the businesse of the within named R. S. whose ap∣prentice the said J. lately was, hath now immediatly before the day of the date hereof, being a point to leave the service of the
said R. yeilding an account in writing to the said R. for and con∣cerning such goods, wares, and things of the said R. as he the said I. had delivered and committed to his charge and dealing whereof no former account hath been yeilded. If it fortune in the better examination of the said account now lastly given up, or otherwise, that any indirect dealing hath been made therein, or of or with any the goods, wares, money, or merchandize of the said R. on the part of the said I. or that the said I hath done any act or thing to charge the said R. whereof concealment is made, and the said R. hath not made acceptance at the making and giving up of this last account. If then the said R. his Executors and Administrators shall and may have his and their recompence of the payment of the said J.R. his Executors or Administrators, of and for all such things as the said R. his Executors or Administrators shall be dam∣nified in, by means of any indirect dealing or act done to charge the said R. by the said J. as aforesaid, and that according to the damage that the said R. his Executors or Administrators shall in∣cur by any such means, the same being provable and requested at the hands of the said J. his Executors or Administrators, That then, &c. A Condition by a Jaylor to save a Sheriff and an under Sheriff harmlesse of all things particularly con∣cerning his charge. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound N. W. his Execu∣tors and Assignes, and every of them shall and do at all times, and from time to time, during so long time as the within named J. H. shall be high Sheriff of the County of K or shall stand charged with the Goales of the said Shire, and the Prisoners of and in the same, acquit, discharge, or save harmlesse the said I. H. his Heires and Executors, of and from all and all manner of Prisoners com∣mitted, or hereafter during the time aforesaid to be committed to the charge of the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, or by the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, or Bayliff, or Bayliffs, by any processe, or otherwise lawfully apprehended, and by the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, or his or their Assign or Assigns delivered, or which hereafter shall be delivered over in charge unto the said N. or his Assignee, and of and for the custody of all
and every such Prisoner and Prisoners,: and also shall and do keep safely all and every Prisoner and Prisoners at the ensealing hereof, being and remaining in the Goale of our Soveraign Lady the Queens Majesty, of her Goale of M. or wherein the custody and keeping of the said N.W. or his assigne or assignes, or any of them: And also shall and do at all and every time and times here∣after during the Sherifalty aforesaid, safely keep all and all man∣ner of such Prisoner and Prisoners as shall be hereafter committed and delivered in charge unto the said N. by the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, or by his or their assigne or assignes, or by a∣ny other person or persons having authority to commit the same. And also shall not, nor do not deliver nor suffer to be delivered, or let escape any Prisoner or Prisoners whatsoever, delivered unto the said N. in charge, without speciall commandment or precept in writing of the said high Sheriff, or under Sheriff, under the seale of the said high Sheriff or under Sheriff to the said N. directed and delivered. And also if the said N. shall and do at all times, and from time to time, as often as need shall require, during the time of the aforesaid Sherifaldry, at his own proper costs and charges, bring, carry, or cause, &c and before the Queens Councell, or any other the Justices or Commissioners of her Majesty, the Justices of Assises, or any other being Commissioners of the Peace, or for Goale delivery, or for the arraignment of any of the said Prisoners, all and all manner of the said Prisoners, or so many of them, un∣der that number of all, as he shall be called, required, or comman∣ded by the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, unto such place and places as shall be given to the said N. or his assignes, in charge by the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, or by his or their as∣signes. And then and there also shall safely keep at his like costs and charges, all and every of the said Prisoners, and every of them, for and during so long time as they and every of them shall so there remain by the commandment aforesaid: And from thence shall at his like costs and charges convey and carry, or cause, &c. all and every the said Prisoners, unto such place or places as he the said N. shall be commanded by the Queens Councell, Justices, Commissioners, Sheriffs, under Sheriffs, or any of them. And the said Prisoners and every of them so carried or conveyed, as is aforesaid, shall and do at his costs and charges safely keep, untill they the said Prisoners and every of them shall be by due order of Law discharged, acquitted, or executed. And do also at his like costs and charges execute, or cause, &c. all and every such Prisoner
and Prisoners as shall be during the said terme, lawfully convicted. And further shall do or cause, &c. all and every such other corpo∣rall punishments as shall be assigned or appointed to any and eve∣ry such Prisoner or Prisoners, according to their severall judgments in that behalf. And also that if the said N. shal not, and do not hereafter during the time that he the said high Sheriff shall be charged with the said Goale and Prisoners, ask, require, demand, exact, extort, have, or take any Fee or Fees of any Prisoner or Pri∣soners to him by any means as is abovesaid, committed, delivered, or given in charge, but such Fees onely as shall be, have been, and are lawfully demandable and leviable of every the said Prisoners, of ancient use and right; So that the said Sheriff or his under She∣riff shall not, nor do not incur and suffer any ignominy, prejudice, slander, or hurt, by reason of any such excessive exaction, or extor∣tion in taking of unlawfull Fees. And do also well and truly be∣have himself in the execution of his Office of Jaylorship aforesaid in all points: and thereof do discharge save and keep harmlesse the said high Sheriff, and his under Sheriff, their Heires and Execu∣tors, against the Queens Majesty, her Heires and Successors, and all and every other person and persons, That then, &c. A Condition where one having received a Childes part of his Fathers Goods in the Fathers life, is bound not to make further claime therefore, nor to trouble his Fathers Executors or Administra∣tors after his decease. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within bound W. K. the younger, hath as appeareth by his acquittance made in that be∣halfe, of the date within written, had and received aforehand of the within named W. K. his Father full allowance and satisfaction of all his Childes part and portion of the Goods, Chattells, and Debts whatsoever of his said Father, whereof he shall fortune to dye possessed, or then to be entituled unto. If therefore the said W K. the younger, his Executors or Administrators, or any other for or in the name or names of him or them, or any of them, at any time or times hereafter before, or after the death of the said W. the elder, do not nor shall not claim, demand, challenge, or
desire to have any further or more allowance for or of his said Childs part or portion, then he hath already had and received: Neither do nor shall at any time or times after the death of the said W. the Father in quiet, vex, molest, or trouble the Executors or Administrators of the same W. or any of them, for in respect of the Childes part or portion of the said W. the younger aforesaid, or for or by reason of any the Goods, Chattells, or Debts of the said W. K the elder, whereof he shall fortune to dye possessed, or then be entituled unto as aforesaid, other then for such as the same W. the elder shall by his last Will and Testament give and bequeath to the said W. the younger, That then, &c. A Condition not to make any challenge against one for any contract of Matrimony, nor to trou∣ble or vex any person whom the Obligee shall marry. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound E. M. or any o∣ther person or persons for her, or in her name, do not at any time or times hereafter make any challenge, claim, or demand in Law, to or against R. N. of L. Merchant, for or by reason of any contract, promise, or matter of Matrimony whatsoever, heretofore passed, concluded upon, or had in talk between the said E. and R. neither do at any time or times sue, vex, trouble, or molest the said R. or any other person or persons, whom he shall hereafter fortune to marry, for or concerning the premisses, or any of them in Law or otherwise, that Then, &c. A Condition to confesse an Action in one of the Counters by a day. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within named A. B. at the time of his decease did owe unto N. W. and others the summe of two hundred pounds of, &c. for the which actions are now depending against the said R. R. in the Counter in Woodstreet of L. And whereas the within named R. M. at the request of the within bound R.R. and T.T. hath at his own charges on the behalf
of the said R. compounded and taken order for the said debt, with the said N W. and the said other persons. If therefore the said R. R. and T.T. when as the said R.M. at any time between the five and twentieth day of March, and the 6th of June next coming, shall en∣ter an action of debt in any of the two Counters in London, against the said R. and T. upon the demand of two hundred pounds, as due and owing to them by the said R. do then within two daies next after the entring of the same action personally appear in the same Counter, where the said action shall be entred, and do there in open Court, in due forme of Law, & according to the use and cu∣stome there used, plainly and apertly confesse and acknowledge up∣on Record themselves to owe to the said R. M. the said summe of two hundred pounds, to be levied of the said R. and T. and either of them, and of all their Goods and Chattells, and the Goods and Chattells of every of them, to the use of the said R.M. and his Exe∣cutors, That then, &c. A Condition by a Bayliff of a Mannor for the due exe∣cution of his Office, and for making true account of the Rents and Revenues of the Mannor. THe Conditioner, &c. That where the within named R. T. hath appointed the within bound R. K. Bayliff of the Mannor of E. in the Counry of E. If the said R. K. shall well and truly exe∣cute the said Office, and to the best he can or may gather and re∣ceive the Rents, Issues, and Profits of and within the said Mannor, from time to time to be due to the said R. And thereof and there∣fore shall at two times in the yeare yearely make true account and due payment to the said R. or his assignes, from time to time so long as the said R. shall continue or deale in the said Office, That then, &c.
A Condition to make a Woman a Joynture by a day, and to make safe delivery of the Writing thereof to the Womans Friends. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound T. W. in his life time, and before the end of one yeare next ensuing, the date within written, do as well plainly and lawfully assure, or cause, &c. by good and lawfull conveyance and assurance in the Law to E. now wife of the said T. and naturall Daughter of the within named T.S. or to some other person or persons, to the use of the same E. for and in the name of her Joynture, Lands, Tenements, and He∣reditaments of freehold or of Copyhold, of the cleer yearely value of forty pounds, or above, of such good and cleer title in the Law, so as the said E. if she fortune to survive the said T. shall or lawful∣ly may from the decease of the said T. have, take, perceive, receive, and enjoy yearely Rents and Profits thereof, to her own onely use, to the cleer yearly value of forty pounds, or above, beyond all charges and reprises, for and during the term of the naturall life of the said E. without any let, molestation, recovery, or eviction: As also within twenty daies next after the making of such conveyance and assurance as aforesaid, do well and safely deliver, or cause, &c. all the Writings and Instruments thereof, and therefore to be made into the hands of the said T.S. if he be then living, or else into the hands of the said E. or of such other person or persons as she shall appoint safely to her use to be kept, That then, &c. A Condition where such as have Childrens Portions out of the Chamber of London, and being by rea∣son thereof charged with their Education, are bound to pay their Mother yearely (who hath undertaken their Education) after the rate of seven pounds per cent. THe Condition, &c. That where the above bound T. S. W. G. and I.S have had and received into their hands of the above named A.H. the summe of seven hundred forty three pounds of the portion of T. M. W. and I. Children and Orphaus of the above
named W. H. and thereupon by severall Recognizances taken and knowledged, according to the custome of the said City of Lon∣don, with others, are become bound to G. H. Chamberlain of the said City, and to his Successors, for the payment thereof, to the use of the said Orphans. As by the said Recognizances and their Conditions doth appear. And whereas the said T. S. W. G. and I.S. by the custome of the said City of L. and that by reason of the having the portions aforesaid, stand charged and chargable with the education and bringing up of the said Children, at their proper costs and charges. If the said T. S. W G. and I. S. their Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, in consideration that the said A. being naturall Mother to the said Children, hath taken upon her (as most convenient it is) their Education and bringing up; do from henceforth content and pay, or cause, &c. to the aid A. her Executors or Assignes, in the daies of the Feasts of, &c. or within ten daies next ensuing either of the same Feasts, yeare∣ly by even portions, at the now Mansion house of the said A. sci∣tuate, &c. between the houres of one and five of the Clock in the afternoon, of every of the same daies, for and towards the finding and education of the said Orphans, and of the Survivors of them yearely from yeare to yeare, during their severall nonages, rate∣ably, and according to the proportion of seven pounds for every hundred pounds, of the said summe of seven hundred forty three pounds, that now doth, or at any time hereafter shall remaine or be in the hands or possession of the said T. W. and J. or any of them, or of their or of any of their Executors or Administrators, and so after the same rate for every part of the said summe of foure hundred seventy three pounds from time to time, according to the quantity of all the time wherein the same summe, &c. or any part thereof, shall fortune to be or remaine in the hand of the said T. W. and J, or any of them, or in the hands of their or any of their Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, That then, &c. A Condition that where two have money out of the Cham∣ber, being Childrens Portions in equall part, each is bound to repay a moyety, and accomplish the Con∣dition of the Recognizance to the Chamber pro part Sep. THe Condition▪ &c. That whereas the within named W. C. and I. H. together with the within bound I. A. and T. T. with o∣thers
by way of Recognizance taken and knowledged before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, in the inner Chamber of the Guildhall of the Gity of L. according to the Custome of the same City, are and stand bound to G. H. Chamberlain of the said City, as well for and touching the sure payment of two hundred and sixty pounds, to and for the use of I. S. M. and T. Children and Orphans of J.J. late Citizen and Merchant-taylor of L. decea∣sed: As also for and touching the payment of a Legacy of seventy pounds given to the said Orphans by their said Father; as by the severall Recognizances thereof in the said Chamber knowledged, and their severall Conditions will appeare. And where also the one moyety; or halfe part of the said summe of two hundred and seventy pounds, and also the one moyety of the said seventy pounds remaineth in the hands and custody of the said J. A. and T. T. If the said J.A. and T.T. and every of them, their Executors and As∣signes, and every of them at all times hereafter, and from time to time for their part, do as well beare and pay to the said Chamber∣lain and his Successors, Chamberlains of the said City, for the time being, to the use of the said Orphans, one moyety or half part of all the said sum and summes of money, and the moyety and one halfe of all other payments and charges which shall be due, pay∣able, or belonging to the same Orphans, or to any of them, of to the said Chamberlain, or his Successors, for their use, or the use of any of them, by force or vertue of the said Recognizances, or any of them, when as the same or any part thereof shall be required by the said Chamberlain or his Successors: And also from time to time, according to the order and custome of the said City of Lon∣don, and agreeably to the conditions of the said Recognizances; do satisfie the Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the Court of Aldermen, and the said Chamberlain for the time being, with suf∣ficient and competent surety and sureties in the stead, lieu, and place which the said J.A. and T.T. now have in the said Recogni∣zances from time to time, as often as any such surety or sureties by vertue of the said Recognizances, or any of them shall be re∣quired, or demanded in the stead, lieu, or place of the said J. and T. or either of them, eitheir by the said Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, or by the said Chamberlain for the time being, or by a∣ny Officer or Minister of the said Mayor and Court of Aldermen, or Chamberlain, or any of them for the time being, that then, &c.
A Condition that one who hath taken a Lease paroll of a Shop, and certaine Implements for so long as the Lessor and he can agree, shall during his abode there∣in, pay the rent, and upon a certaine warning avoid. THe Condition, &c. That where the above named S. E. hath demised and letten to farme to the above named T. G. all that Shop, &c. now in the occupation of, &c. and all such Imple∣ments as now remaine in the said Shop and are specified and ex∣pressed in a Schedule to this present Obligatian annexed. To have and to hold the said Shop and Implements to the said T. and his assignes from the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-angell last, &c. by and during the terme of one whole yeare from thence next fol∣lowing and fully to be compleat; and to have and to hold the same from the end of that year at the pleasure of the said S. and his assignes from halfe yeare to halfe yeare so long as the said S. and his assignes shall so agree paying therefore to the said S. and his assignes the yearly rent of fourteen pounds of, &c. during so long time as the said T. or his assignes shall hold or occupy the said Shop, the same rent from time time from henceforth to be paid in the Feast dayes of, &c. or within, &c. next after every of the same Feast dayes by equall portions, viz, three pounds ten shillings for every payment thereof. If the said T. his executors or assignes do aswell yeild and truly pay to the said S. E. at the Shop aforesaid, three pounds ten shillings of, &c. at every Feast day of the foure severall Feasts aforesaid, or within, &c. next after every of the same Feast daies for the rent of the said Shop and Implements from time to time during so long time as the said T. his executors or as∣signes shall occupy the Shop aforesaid; as also if the said S. his ex∣ecutors or assignes upon any of the evens or vigills of any of the foure severall Feast dayes aforesaid, and after the twenty seventh of September now next ensuing at the Shop aforesaid, shall give warning for the rendring and yeilding againe of the said Shop to the said S. his executors or assignes. If then the said T. his execu∣tors, or assignes at the end of one halfe yeare next after such warn∣ing so given, doe without fraud or covin render and yeild againe the said Shop and all the said Implements (in so good case as they now be) to the said S. his executors or assignes then being ready to accept and receive the same: That then, &c.
A Condition that a Silver-worker shall re-deliver the Silver to him delivered to be wrought in Fashions prescribed alwaies within a time certaine. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound R. H. hath made request to the within named A. M. to worke his Silver, and hath offered to finish the workmanship thereof, and to make safe re-delivery of the same to the said A. M. his executors or assignes alwaies within the space of thirty dayes next after the severall times of any delivery thereof to be made to him the said R. to be worked upon as aforesaid; If therefore the said R. H. from time to time as often as for that purpose any Silver shall be delivered to him by the said A. M. his executors or assignes do work the same Silver or cause it to be wrought according to such fa∣shion & workmanship as shall be appointed. And also do re-deliver or cause, &c. unto the said A. his executors or assignes at the Shop now in the occupation of the said A. in W. of I. the said Silver ready wrought in such workmanship as therefore shall be appoin∣ted as aforesaid, within thirty dayes respite according to the offer of the said R. in that behalfe made as is aforesaid to the said A. M. That then, &c. A Condition to procure the grant of an out-lawes goods to the Obligee by a day. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound W. B. before the second day of February next coming at his proper costs and charges, do aswell procure and obtaine to be made and granted to the above named R. Y. or to his Executors or Administrators a good lawfull perfect, sure, and sufficient gift, grant, conveyance and assurance or grants, &c. in the Law in writing or writings sealed against and from the Queens Majestie, heires and Successors and against and from every other person that right hath of all and singular such goods and chattells as have been in any wise for∣feited to the Queens Majestie aforesaid, by I. G. late of London Haberdasher by reason of any Outlagary or Outlagaries whatsoe∣ver in any Action personall or mixt, pronounced against the said I. G. by any title, name, addition or calling whatsoever at any
time or times between the last Session of the Parliament holden at Westminster in the eihgth yeare, &c. and the five and twentieth day of June in the ninth yeare of her said Reign: As also in the meane time untill the said second day of February do save, defend, and keep harmlesse all the said goods and chattels in whose hands soever they or any of them now be, or shall be from all seisures of the same or any part thereof to be made without the speciall procure∣ment and request of the said R. his Executors or Administrators: And do also before the said second day of February deliver the said wri∣ting or writings safe, whole, and uncancelled to the said R. his Ex∣ecutors or Administrators at the now dwelling house without fraud or covin: That then, &c. A Condition to take one in execution upon a Statute by a day. THe Condition, &c. That whereas one X, C. of, &c. by a cer∣taine writing obligatory commonly called a Statute dated, &c. knowledged and sealed before, &c. according to the Statute in that case provided, hath bound himselfe to the above named I. L in three hundred pounds of, &c to have been paid at a day now past: As by the said writing obligatory more plainly will appeare; And whereas the said three hundred pounds is now clearly forfeited to the said I. L. And thereupon the above named H. D. for and upon good considerations hath agreed and promised to and with the said I. L. to procure the Kings Majesties Writ or Writs for the taking of the body of the said X, and for the levying of the said three hundred pounds to the use of the said I. L. according to the course of the Lawes of this Realme in that behalfe ordained. If the said H. D. doe sue out the said Writ or Writs accordingly to be directed to the Sheriff of the said County of D. and to any other Sheriff or She∣riffs of any other County or Countyes as shall seeme meetest to the said H. And the same to be returnable in Cr. Anim. now next coming: And before the same day of returne doe aswell procure and cause the body of the said C. by vertue of the said Writ or Writs to be lawfully taken and detained in execu∣tion for the said three hundred pounds, as also do procure, re∣turne thereof in due forme, and lawfully to be made upon the said Writ or Writs at the day of the returne thereof aforesaid before the
Kings Majestie in his high Court of Chancery without any manner of fraud or covin: That then, &c. A Condition not to become surety nor play at Dice or Cards. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound A. B. at no time or times hereafter during the space of four years next, &c. become charged, surety or bound by word, promise, bond, bill or otherwise for the debt or cause of any person or persons other then for his own debt or cause for any summe or summes of money, Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandizes, or other things whatsoe∣ver above the value of twenty shillings at one time: And further if the said A. B. or any for him at no time or times hereafter du∣ring, &c. venter, hazard, or play at any Game or Games at or with the Dice or Cards for any summe or summes of money, goods, chattells, wares, Jewels, or other thing or things whatsoever: That then, &c. A Condition in case of divorce or seperation where the man and wives freinds are bound for not entermedling one with another. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas there is, or with as much expedition as may be there shall be by sentence definitive a divorce or separation passed and had be∣tween the within named R. P. and I. now his wife by both their assents. If therefore the said I: do from time to time and at all times hereafter quietly permit and suffer the said R. P. to live, continue, remaine, and be frank and free from and against the said I. at and according to his owne will, liberty, discre∣tion and pleasure, and in such place and places, and with and in the company of such person or persons as the said R. P. shall
think most meet and convenient without any cohibition, lettance, medling, molestation or contradiction of the said I. or any other by her assent or procurement, and if also the said I. or any other person or persons by her assent, meanes or procurement doe not at any time hereafter, neither in word nor deed, nor by any other way or meanes whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, disquiet, molest, vex, defame, hurt or trouble the said P. nor challenge or make any title, claime, entermedling or demand to or for the said R. or to or for any such goods, implements, stuffe of houshold, or any other thing whatsoever that he the said P. or any other for him or to his use at any time hereafter, shall have or be in posses∣sion of, * neither aske, demand, or recover of or against the said R. P. his Executors or Administrators, any manner of allow∣ance or other thing whatsoever, for or toward the diet, meat, drink, apparrell, sustenance or lodging of the said I. That then, &c. Memorand. that this last clause from this marke * is left out in the mans Obligation made to the womans freinds. A Condition upon a sale of Land passed by Feoff∣ment. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the above bound Master and Keepers, &c. by their deed of Feoffment bearing date the day and year above written, have enfeoffed, bargained, sold, and de∣livered to the above named A. C. and his Heires for ever, tone Garden with the Appurtenances now in the occupation, &c. and one house or kitchin with a yard adjoyning with their Appurte∣nances now in the proper tenure or occupation of the said A. C. scituate in G. in the Parish, &c. containing such lengthes and breadths, and lying within such bounds and limits; As by their Deed of Feoffment aforesaid, sealed with their common seale thereof made to the said A. plainly and at large may and will appeare. If the said Master, &c. now be and un∣till livery be made to the said A. C. and his heires of the Premisses by the Feoffment aforesaid, shall be and stand law∣fully seised of the Premisses mentioned to be conveyed by the said Feoffment of a good lawfull and absolute estate to them and their Successors in Fee-simple, without any manner of condition or limitation, and have good and lawfull right of such an estate, to
bargaine, sell, and assure the same to the said A. C. his Heires and Assignes for ever: And also if the said A. his Heires and Assignes from henceforth shall or lawfully and quietly may have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said Garden house or kitchin and yard thereunto adjoyning with their Appurtenances, and every part of the same, and the Reversion and Reversions thereof, for and to the onely use of the said A. his Heires and assignes for ever, without any let, trouble, eviction or impediment of the said Master, &c. or their Successors, and without any lawfull let, trouble or eviction of or by any other person or persons by their meanes, title, or pro∣curement other then by the meanes or title of that Lease made to R. P. which is specified and mentioned in the Feoffment aforesaid: And if also the said Premisses and also the said A. C. his Heires and assignes, and every of them from henceforth shall be and stand clearly and absolutely acquitted, exonerated, discharged, or otherwise saved harmlesse of and from all and singular Bargaines, Sales, Feoffments, Grants, Leass, Annuities, Amerciaments, For∣feitures, Estates, Titles, Charges and Incumbrances whatsoever heretofore had made or done, or hereafter to be had made or done by the said Master, &c. or their Successors, or by the late Keepers and Cominalty of Freemen of the craft or mystery of B. of the City of London, other then onely the said Lease made to the said R. P. as aforesaid; And further if the said Master, &c. and their Suc∣cessors at and upon the reasonable request and costs and charges in the Law onely of the said A. his Heires, Executors or assignes from time to time at all reasonable and convenient times during five whole years now next ensuing, doe and shall make all and singular such other and further reasonable Conveyances and Assu∣rances of and for the Premisses to be had, conveyed, and made sure from them and their Successors to the said A. his Heires and Assignes for the onely use of the same A his Heires and Assignes, as by the said A. his Heires or Assignes, or his or their learned Councell shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised with warranty onely against the said Master, &c. and their Suc∣cessors, or otherwise without warranty: That then, &c.
Another like Condition. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the above bound S. W. here∣tofore by his poll Deed bearing date, &c. hath bargained and sold, given and granted to the above named R. F. and to his Heires for the onely use of the said R. and of his Heires and As∣signes for ever, all those two Messuages or Tenements with their Appurtenances in the same Deed mentioned now or late in the severall tenures of, &c. scituate, &c. within the meets and bounds there expressed. As by the said Deed whereunto if reference be had, will more plainly appeare. If the said R. F. his Heires and Assignes from henceforth for ever, shall or lawfully may have, hold, and enjoy the said two Messuages or Tene∣ments, and all other Hereditaments with their Appurtenances granted to the said R. and his Heires by the Deed aforesaid, and have, take, receive and enjoy the Rents, Issues, and profits thereof to the onely use of the said R. his Heires and Assignes from time to time, and at all times without any let, impedi∣ment, eviction, charge, or incumbrance thereof, or of any part thereof by reason of any former estate, act, or thing, right or title whatsoever done, had or grown before the said estate of the said R. (except the old accustomed rents and services, here∣after to grow due to be paid and done to the cheife Lords of the Fee therof: And also one Lease which the said S. by Indenture dated, &c. hath made of one of the said Messuages, &c. for the terme of twenty one years to C. B. and for the yearly rent of forty shillings therefore yearly to be paid during the same Lease. And also except moreover one other Lease which the said S. by Indenture dated. &c. hath made of the other of the said Messuages with the Appurtenances to W. N. for the terme of one and twenty years, and for the yearly rent, &c. therefore yearly to be paid during the same Lease: That then, &c.
A Condition to save harmlesse of certaine Obligations, and to deliver them an acquittance for the same by a day, or the Obligations cancelled, THe Condition, &c. That where, &c. by three Obligations, all bearing date, &c. unto T. S. &c. in the first in three hun∣dred pounds to pay, &c. on, &c. in the second in, &c. to pay, &c. in the third, &c. to pay, &c. As by the same severall Obligations with their severall Conditions upon them severally endorsed will appeare. If the said X. H. W. D. and F. F. their Heires, Ex∣ecutors or Administrators or any of them, do aswell from time to time at all times save or keep harmlesse the said I. M. his Heires, Executors and Administrators, and every of them of, for and from the said Obligations and every of them, and all Suits, Acti∣ons, and Demands, Costs, Charges, Judgements and Executions of or by meanes of the said Obligations or any of them, to be had, sustained, pursued, or brought against the said I. M. his Heires, Executors or Administrators or any of them; As also do procure that at or on this side, &c. either the said Obligations and every of them be delivered to the said I. M. his Executors or Admini∣strators at the now mansion, &c. discharged and cancelled, or else good and lawfull Releases, Acquittances, or other discharge suffici∣ent in the Law to discharge and acquit the said I. M. his, &c. of and for the said Obligations, or for so many of them as at the time and place aforesaid, or in the meane time before hand shall not be de∣livered to the said I. M. his Executors or Administrators so dis∣charged and cancelled as aforesaid, That then, &c. A Condition that a Chapman being trusted by an occupier in London for wares, shall make payment allwaies for the same at such time as the redelive∣rer and chapman shall agree. THe Condition, &c. That whereas order and composition is had, made, and concluded between the within named W.S. & one R.C.
of the City of Oxon. Haberd. that the said W. or his assignes shall deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said R. or his assignes, for and during the time and space of foure yeares next, &c. such and so many Hats, Caps, and other Wares and things belonging to the Trade and Occupation of a Hab. of Hats and Caps, as the said R. or his assignes shall think meet and convenient to take up (the same Hats, Caps, Wares, and other things so to be taken up by the said R. or his assigns as aforesaid, at one time, not amounting o∣ver and above the summe of, &c of lawfull, &c. If therefore the said R. or his assignes do from time to time, during the said time and space of foure yeares now next ensuing, well and truly con∣tent, satisfie, and pay, or cause the said W. his Executors or assigns, to be well and truly and fully contented, satisfied, and paid, for all such Hats, Caps, and other Wares, or things whatsoever, which the said R. or his assignes shall from time to time within the space aforesaid, have, receive, or take up at the hands of the said W. S. his Executors, administrators, or assignes, and for every part and par∣cell of the same Hats, Wares, or other things whatsoever, and within such reasonable time and space as shall be concluded and agreed upon between the said W. and R. or their assignes in that behalf, without fraud or covin, That then, &c. A Condition for repayment of money upon request, for payment of certain interest yearly, during the Ob∣ligators having of the Principall towards the E∣ducation of Children; and for renewing of Sure∣ties in case of death, or decay in the Obligors. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the above named the right honourable Sir F. K. and Sir W. M. Knights, have delivered to the above bounden W.G.I.S. and T.S. three hundred seventy five pounds five shillings nine pence half penny farthing, of currant money of England, raised and levied of certain of the Lands of T. W. of K in the County of H. Esquire, for the preferment and ad∣vancement of three of the daughters of the same T.W. If the said W.G. I.S. and T.S. their Heires, Executors, or Administrators, do not onely well and truly recontent, and repay, or cause, &c. to the said Sir F.K, and Sir W. M. their certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, the said summe of three hundred seventy five
pounds five shillings nine pence half penny farthing, at the Counting-house commonly called the Tendring house, scituate in the West side of the Royall Exchange in London, on the last day of the expiration of twenty six weeks next ensuing, from and after such time as the said Sir F. and Sir W. their Executors, Admini∣strators, or Assignes, or any of them shall require the repayment thereof, of the said W.G. I.S. and T. S. or any of them, or of the Heires, Executors, or Administrators of any of them, between the houres of one and six of the Clock in the afternoon, on the said last day of the expiration of the said twenty six weeks, without any further delay: But also do yearely contribute and pay to the said Sir F. K. and Sir W. M. their certain Attorney, Executor, or Admi∣nistrator, the summe of two and twenty pounds ten shillings of lawfull, &c. on the eight and twentieth day of September, and four and twentieth day of March, by equall portions, at the Counting-house aforesaid, between the houres of nine and eleven of the Clock in the severall forenoons of the said severall daies of September and March, for and towards the charges of the educa∣tion of the said daughters of the said T. W. from time to time, so long as the said three hundred seventy five pounds five shillings nine pence half penny farthing, shall remain in the hands of the said W.I. and T. their Executors or Administrators, or in the hands of any of them not recontented, and repaid, according to the te∣nor of this present Condition. And moreover if any of the said persons above bounden shall happen hereafter to decease, or ap∣parently to decay in his or their former substance, before such time as the said three hundred seventy five pounds five shillings nine pence, &c. be repaid as aforesaid. If then within one month next after reasonable requests in that behalf to be made to any other of the same persons living,, or to the Executors or Administrators of the Survivors of them, they or any of them do procure so many o∣ther as sufficient and able persons as those above bound now are reputed to be (for and in consideration of the cancelling and ma∣king void of this present Obligation) to become bound a new to the said Sir W. and Sir F. or to the Survivor of them, their Executors and Administrators, by one other good and sufficient Obligation of like penalty, and with like Condition as aforesaid, and then to be sealed, and lawfully and safely delivered to the said Sir F. or S.W. or to the Survivor of them, his Executors or Administrators, or to one of them, without any manner of fraud or covin, That then, &c.
A Condition upon an Indenture of Partnership. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bounden R. T. his, &c. do well and truly observe all the Covenants, &c. contained, &c. according, &c. Or else if the said R. T. his Executors or Admini∣strators, do from time to time abide perform, and keep the Order, Doom, and Judgment of the two Master Wardens of the severall Companies of Drapers and Merchant-Taylors, within the City of London, which shall be for the time being, touching and concerning the satisfaction and payment of all such damages, and other summes of money, as they from time to time shall adjudge and set down in writing for the breach and not performance of the Grants, Covenants, Conditions, Articles, and agreements, or any of them specified in the said Indentures, which on the part and behalf of the said R. his Executors and Administrators are to be observed, performed and kept: And do truely satisfie and pay, &c. Another Condition upon an Indenture of Partnership. THe Condition, &c. That whereas in one paire of Indentures, bearing date the day and yeare within written, made between the within named H. H. on the one party, and the within bound W.P. on the other party, divers and sundry Covenants, Grants, Articles, Clauses, Sentences, and agreements are contained on the part and behalfe of the said W. P. his Executors and Admini∣strators, or some of them to be performed; as in and by the said Indentures more plainly may appeare. If the said H. H. his Execu∣tors or Administrators shall at any time or times hereafter, incur, sustain or receive any damage, losse, or hinderance to or above the value of forty shillings of lawfull, &c. by reason or means of the breach, not performance, or not accomplishment of the said Cove∣nants, Grants, Articles, Clauses, Sentences and agreements, or any of them, on the part and behalf of the said W. his Executors, or Administrators, by the true and plain meaning of the said In∣dentures to be performed. Then if he the said W. his Executors, or Administrators from time to time, within the space of two
monthes, next after request, or warning to him or them, shall have been made or given by the said H.H. his Executors or Administra∣tors, for or touching a recompence, or satisfaction to the same H. his Executors or Administrators, to be had or made, of or for such damage, losse, or hinderance as aforesaid, do and shall well and truly recompence and satisfie to the said H.H. his Executors or ad∣ministrators, at the Shop now in the occupation of the said H. sci∣tuate in P. Church-yard London, the full value in lawfull English money, of all and every such damage, losse, and hinderance, as he the said H. his Executors or administrators shall so incur or su∣stain as aforesaid: and that without fraud, covin, or deceit, That then. &c. or else, &c. A Condition for sealing of a Lease annexed to this Obli∣gation by a day. THe Condition, &c. That if the Dean and Canons of the within named Free-chappell for the time being, shall after the Feast of the Annunciation, &c. which shall be, &c. within one month next after request made to the then Dean of the said Free-chappell by the said E.K. or any other person or persons by him in that be∣halfe sufficiently authorized, seale and deliver the Writing inden∣ted, and ingrossed, filed, and annexed to this present Obligati∣on, as their true and lawfull Deed, without any Condition, to the use of the said E. if he be then living. And if it shall happen the said E. to dye before the said Feast of the Annunciation, &c. which shall be, &c. If then the Dean and Canons of the said Free-chappell for the time being, shall after the said Feast of the Annunciation, &c. within one month next after request made to the said Dean of the said Free-chappell, at the time of the said re∣quest, by the Executors, or Administrators of the said E.K. or some of them, seale and deliver, or cause to be sealed and delivered as their lawfull Deed, one sufficient Lease by Indenture, to be made to the Executors and administrators of the said E. K. of the same Messuage or Tenements, and other the Hereditaments specified in the said Writing indented and hereunto annexed,, containing the number of yeares and rent, with the like Covenants and agree∣ments, to all intents and purposes, as be contained in the said Writing indented hereunto annexed, as their lawfull Deed, to the onely use and behoof of the Executors and administrators, of the said E.K. That then, &c.
A Condition for enjoyance of Land for ever, and that an Heire shall make assurance thereof when he cometh to age. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the above bound G. B. for, and in the behalf of P.C. Son and Heire of I. C. late of L. Gro∣cer, deceased, hath bargained and sold to the above named T. L. and his Heires for ever, all that new Messuage, &c. scituate, &c. which the said G.B. since the decease of the said I. C. had of the Lease and demise of N. L. Gent. And which the same G. by his Deed indented bearing date the day and year above written, hath assigneds and set over to the said T. L. If the said T, L. his Heires and Assigne, from henceforth to his and their own proper use and behoof forever, shall or lawfully may have, hold, occupy, and en∣joy the said new Messuage, with the appurtenances, withouth any let, disturbance, eviction, suit, or molestation of the said P. C. his Heires or assignes, or of any other person or persons, having, or which shall have or claim to have any lawfull Estate, Right, Title, or Interest to the said Messuage, with the appurtenances, or to any part thereof, by, from, or under the Estate, Right, Title, or Inte∣rest of the said I.C. And if also the said P.C. and his next Heire or Heires, and all and every such other person and persons, as have or shall have any lawfull Estate, Right, Title, or interest in, or to the said new Messuage with the appurtenances, or in or to any part thereof, at and upon the reasonable request or requests of the said T.L. his Heires or Assignes, at the costs and charges in the Law of the same T. his Heires or Assignes, do and shall make such lawfull and sufficient conveyance and assurance: conveyances, e∣states and assurances of and in the same new Messuage with the appurtenances, unto the said T.L. his Heires and assignes, to his and their own proper use and behoof for ever: As by the said T. L. his Heires or assignes, or his or their Councell learned in the Lawes of this Realm, from time to time, during the space of five yeares, next after the time wherein the said P. C. and his next Heire or Heires shall accomplish his or their full age of one and twenty-yeares, or otherwise in the mean time before hand, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised, with Warranty there∣of to be made onely against the said persons and their Heires, from
whom such conveyance and assurance shall be required to be made as aforesaid, That then, &c. A Condition that one in whose name a Purchase of Co∣pyhold Land is taken in trust, shall make surren∣der upon requests, &c. THe Condition, &c. That where the above bound I. C. by the purchase, and at the costs and onely charges of the above na∣med A. C. his Father, according to the custome of the Mannor of B. in the Parish of I. in the County of M. now is and standeth seised of an estate of inheritance, of and in one Messuage or Tenement with the appurtenances and one close of Meadow and Pasture, cal∣led B. close, and of, &c. containing, &c. And also according to the custome of the Mannor of C. in the said County of M. is and stan∣deth seised as aforesaid, of and in, &c. All which the said I. C. late had of the surrender of A. B. and C. D. If the said I. C. from time to time, at all times hereafter do, and shall make and execute to every person and persons, and their Heires, such Surrender and Surrenders, Grants, Conveyances, and Assurances, of all and sin∣gular the premisses or any part thereof, in such time and in such manner and forme, as the said A.C. either by word or writing of his hand, at any time during his life, or by his last Will or Testa∣ment, shall in any wise command, will, or appoint the said I. C. to do. And if also the premisses and every part thereof, by the said I. C. in forme aforesaid, to any person or persons to be surrendred, granted, conveyed, or assured, shall stand, be and continue for e∣ver to the same person and persons, and their Heires, and every of them cleer and free discharged and acquitted, of and from all for∣mer Bargaines, Grants, Estates, Leases, Titles, Charges, Forfei∣tures and Incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, procured or a∣greed unto; or to be had, made, procured, or agreed unto by the said J. C. That then, &c. An Obligation upon a Deed of Feoffment. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound W: G: by his Deed, bearing date the day and yeare within said, hath enfeof∣fed the within named N:S: of and in one Tenement with the ap∣purtenances
in H. Lane, in the Parish of, &c. in London, late in the Tenure, &c. and now in the Tenure, &c. as in the said Deed is recited. If the said W.G. at the time of the making of the said Fe∣offment, and execution of the limitation upon the same, were the very true, sole, and lawfull Owner of the said Tenement with the appurtenances: and thereof then stood lawfully and solely seised in his Demesne as of Fee simple, to the onely use of himselfe and his Heires, without any condition or limitation of use. And if al∣so the same Tenement with the appurtenances, for ever hereafter, do stand and continue to the said N. and his Heires, cleer and free discharged and acquitted, or otherwise at all times sufficiently sa∣ved harmlesse, by the said W. his Heires and Executors, of and from all and singular former Grants, Bargaines, Sales, Leases, Charges, Estates and Incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or gran∣ted by the said W.G. or by any other person or persons, by or under the Estate of the said W.G. except one Lease made of the said Te∣nement with the appurtenances, by the said, &c. unto one J. D. Clothworker, by Indenture bearing date, &c. upon which Lease there is reserved five Marks yearely Rent, which hereafter during the continuance of the said Lease, shall be yearely due and paya∣ble to the said N. his Heires and assignes, according to the tenor of the said Lease. And if moreover the said W. and his Heires, and every such other person and persons, as have, or shall claime to have any Estate or Interest, of, in, or to the said Tenement with the appurtenances, or any part thereof, by or under the Estate of the said W.G. except such as shall claim by the Lease aforesaid, at all times, during two yeares next, &c. at the request and charges of the said N. and his Heires, do and shall make, knowledge, do, and suffer all and every such further conveyance and assurance of the said Tenement with the appurtenances, to the said N. and his Heires with Warranty thereof onely against the said W. G. and his Heires; as by the said N. his Heires or assignes, or by his or their learned Councell shall be lawfully and reasonaby devised or advised, That then, &c.
A Condition to cause an Obligation wherein one standeth bound to be cancelled by a day, or else to put in sure∣ties to the Obligees liking to save him harmlesse. THe Condition, &c. That where the above named I. R. toge∣ther with the said T. P. and A. his wife, and the said H. P. at the speciall desire of the same T. is and standeth bound to I. F. and H. R. of, &c. in the summe of one hundred pounds of, &c. for and concerning the payment of certaine severall summes of money to the children of the said A. and of R. R. her late husband according to the Testament of the same R. As by the said former Obligation, bearing date the day and year abovesaid, and Condition there∣upon endorsed may appeare. If the said T. P. his Executors or Ad∣ministrators do within the space of two years next insuing the date abovesaid, procure and cause the said former Obligation wherein the said I. R. standeth bound as aforesaid, to be made void and cancelled, or else within the said space doe put in such sureties as the said I. R. his Executors or Administrators shall like of, and will agree to accept to be bound to the same I. R. his Exe∣cutors and Administrators to save harmlesse them and every of them, of and for the said former Obligation against all men for ever: And in the meane and all times hereafter for ever, doe sufficiently save and keep harmlesse the said I. R. his Heires, Exe∣cutors, and Administrators aswell against the said I. and H. their Executors and Administrators as also all and every other person and persons of and from the said former Obligation, and of and from all Actions, Suits, Judgements, Costs, Damages, Executions and Molestations to grow or arise thereof at any time: That then, &c. A Condition to answer a Fine back (per Rat.) if a Tenant will surrender his Lease before the end thereof. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound B. L. for a Fine of, &c. of lawfull, &c. hath demised and letten to farme to the within named W. N. for the terme of one and twenty years
next ensuing from the Feast of Saint Michael, a Tenemen called, &c. with all Lands, &c. thereunto belonging with other things: As by a paire of Indentures thereupon made between the said B. on the one part, and the said W. on the other part bearing date, &c. will appeare. If at any time hereafter during the said terme it shall happen the said W. N. his Executors or Assignes to dis-like, to hold and occupy the Premisses any longer by the payment of the yearly rent reserved by the said Indentures. And thereof shall give notice to the said B. his Heires or Assignes by the space of one whole yeare and above beforehand: And then in the Feast of Saint Michael next to ensue from the first day of October next fol∣lowing the said notice so to be given, shall and will surrender and yeild up to the said B. his Heires or Assignes at the Tenement a∣foresaid, that part of the said Indenture sealed by the said B. and all the residue of the interest and terme of years by vertue thereof in the said Tenement, and other the Premisses, then to be to come without any fraud or covin: If then the said B. his Heires or As∣signes do in the Feast of Saint Michael at the said Tenement ac∣cept the said Surrender, and doe also then and there well and truly re-pay or cause, &c. to the said W. N. his Executors or Assignes the residue of the said Fine of forty pounds first to be paid, defalked and deducted from the same so much lawfull English money as shall amount to foure pounds a year for every years occupation, that the said W. his Executors or Assignes shall before such Feast of Saint Michael aforesaid have holden or occupied the Premisses by vertue of the Indenture of Lease abovesaid: That then, &c. A Condition to save harmlesse of a Recognizance entred in∣to for childrens portions. THe Condition, &c. That where the within named I. P. in his life time together with the within bounden W. H. and I. H. and one J. C. Fishmonger became bound joyntly and severally by one Recognizance: Taken and knowledged in the inner Cham∣ber of the Guild-hall of the City of L. before Sir A. B. Knight, then Lord Mayor and the Aldermen of the same City, the second day of October in the  year, &c. to G. H. Chamberlaine of the City of L. in the summe of sixty pounds of lawfull, &c. with condition for the sure payment of forty eight pounds of like money to the use of A. B. and C. children and orphans of R. G. Grocer de∣ceased,
and for performance of divers other clauses and articles mentioned and contained in the said Condition of the same Re∣cognizance: As by the same Recognizance and Condition there∣of more plainly may appeare. If the said I. and W. or either of them, their or either of their Executors or Administrators or some one of them at all times hereafter, and from time to time do dis∣charge and acquit, or otherwise sufficiently save and keep harm∣lesse the Heires, Executors and Administrators of the said I. P. and every of their Goods, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Posses∣sions and things, and every part and parcell thereof against the said G H. and his Successors, Chamberlains of the same City, and all and every other person and persons of and for the said Recog∣nizance, and every clause and article contained in the Condition of the same, and of and from all Actions, Suits, Judgements, Losses, Extents, and Executions touching or concerning the same, other then onely such as the said H. P. his Executors or Admini∣strators by their willfull meanes shall procure to be sued or brought against the same H. his Executors or Administrators: That then, &c. A Condition to save Executors harmlesse of Legacies given to certain children by the Testator, and which Lega∣cies the Executors have delivered to the Obligors for the Childrens uses: Also to re-pay the same Lega∣cies, or a rateable part thereof in case the Overplus of the Testators goods (above his Legacies) will not satisfie his debts. THe Condition, &c. That whereas the within named W. K. and S. S. Executors of the last Will and Testament of Dame E. D. Widow deceased, Have before the making of this present Obligation, paid, satisfied and delivered unto the within named T. C. for the use and behoof of E. C. R. C. and M. C. God-chil∣dren of the said Lady D. and Children of the said T. C. and M. his wife the summe of ninty pounds which the said Lady D. in and by her last Will and Testament did give to the said E. C. R. C. and M. C. viz. to every of them thirty pounds a peece: As by the said last Will and Testament of the said Lady D. bearing date, &c. remaining of Record in the prerogative Court of of Canterbury
more plainly will appeare. If the said T. C. and the within bound B. D.To pay the Le∣gacies accor∣ding to the Wil. their executors and admi∣nistrators doe well and truly satisfie, content, and pay the said severall Legacies (so as before gi∣ven) to the said E. R. and M. or to the Survivor of them, and to every of them, or to their Heirs or Assigns according to the true purport, effect and meaning of the last Will and Testa∣ment of the said Lady D. before mentioned: And also do at all times hereafter save and keep harmlesse the said W. and S. and ei∣ther of them,And save harm∣lesse the chil∣dren. and the Executors and Administra∣tors of either of them against the said E. R. and M. children of the said T, C. and M. his wife, and against all other persons claiming, &c. of and for the said summe of ninety pounds, and every part thereof claiming by the said E. R. and M. or any of them, and of and from all Actions, Suits, Molestations, Costs, and Charges touching the same summe or any part thereof, and further in case it doe fortune that any debts due by the said Lady D. or any other thing or things whatsoever wherewith the said Lady D. or her Ex∣ecutors or Assignes might or ought to be charged withall by Law, shall be at any time hereafter lawfully demanded and recovered without any fraud or covin against the said Executors of the said Lady D. or either of them,To re-pay a rateable part, &c. which debt or any other thing or things so recovered shall extend to a greater value or quan∣tity then the overplus of the goods of the said Lady D. will ex∣tend to satisfie over and above the Legacies given in and by her said Testament, and over and above such charges as the said Exe∣cutors have been at & laid out in and about the Funerals of the said Lady D, and also over and above such costs and charges as the sayd Executors have sustained, or shall hereafter sustaine in and about the probate of the Testament and last Will of the said Lady D, If then the said T.C. and B.D. or either of them or the Heires, Exe∣cutors or Administrators, of either of them within three monethes next after reasonable request to them or any of them to be made, shall render repay and yeild back again to the sayd W, R. or S, S. or to the Survivor of them or to the Executors or Administrators of the same Survivor such a rateable part and portion of the said sum of ninety pounds, as being equally rated to and with the other Lega∣cies expressed in the Will and Testament aforesaid shall fall out to be due and may suffice towards the discharge, satisfaction and
restitution of the said debts of the said Lady D. and of any other thing or things whatsoever, wherewith the said Lady D. or her Executors or assignes might or ought to be charged withall by Law exceeding the said Overplus of her said goods, and which shall be demanded, and recovered as aforesaid: That then, &c. Or else, &c. A Condition to release one all charges to be given by sen∣tence in the spirituall Court, THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That where there is a Suit in a cause of Matrimony depending in my Lord Arch∣bishop of Christs Court of the arches in London between B B. of L. Plaintiff on the one part, and E. F. of London Clothworker, De∣fendant on the other party: If the said E. F. shall from time to time and at all times so long as the said Suit shall depend in the said Court, offer, performe,That he shall doe his best to obtaine absolu∣tory sentence. and doe his best good will, diligence and indeavor for the obtaining of absolutory sentence in the said Cause: And within one moneth next and imme∣diatly upon the obtaining of sentence in that cause (if it happen the same to be given absolutory, and in the behalfe and discharge of the said E. F. from the said B. and the contract of Matrimony pretended in that Suit to have been made and to be between the said B B. and E. F.) shall and doe discharge and release the said B.That he shall release her from all charges in Law. of and from all and whatsoever charges the said B. shall be condemned and adjudged to pay unto the said E. F. in and by vertue of that sentence absolutory if any such charges shall be allowed him by the said sentence, and for all other matters concerning this Suit, aswell temporall as ecclesiasticall slanders, debates, or any other thing whatsoever depending upon this said Suit before and untill the day of the date of that release so to be made.That he shall release her from all other mat∣ters whatso∣ever: And further if within six moneths next and immediatly following the pronunciation or giving of sentence absolutory in the said cause in the said Court by the Judge of that Court or his sufficient Deputy for and in the behalfe and discharge of the said E. F. from the said B. and her said pretended contract of
Marriage,That the Obligor shall pay 70 l. with∣in 6. months after sentence given. the above bound H. F. and R. B. or either of them, or the Executors, &c. shall and do well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the above named G. B. his Executors, Ad∣ministrators or Assignes, or any of them at the house of T.A. Skinner, scituate, &c. the summe of seventy pounds of lawfull, &c. And lastly, if the said E. F. and some other able and sufficient man with him, shall at the day of the payment of the said seventy pounds, or within fourteen daies next following, enter into such lawfull and sufficient Bond unto the said G. B. or his assignes, for not reviving of the said Suit or Cause of Matrimony,That E.F. with some other shall be bound not to revive the said Suit after Sen∣tence given. nor molesting of the said B. concerning the same matter dire∣ctly or indirectly, by himself, or any other, as shall be by the learned Councell of the said E.F. and B. or G. B: or their assignes reasonably devised, or advised, That then, &c. A Condion to make a release of charges to be adjudged by a Sentence in a Spirituall Court, and not to revive a Suit of Matrimony against the Obli∣gee, nor any way trouble him in that behalf. THe Conditon &c. That whereas there is a Suit in a Cause of Matrimony depending in my Lord Arch-bishop of C. his Court, of the articles in L. between B. B. of L. Plaintiff on the one part, and E. F. of L. Clothworker Defendant, on the other part. If the said B.B. her Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, or any of them upon lawfull request to her and them, or any of them, made by the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assignes, at the now dwelling house of A. B. Uncle of the said B. scituate within the City of London; after Sentence given in the said Cause of Matrimony, shall and do within six daies after the said request, cleerly acquit and discharge the said E. F. his Executors and Ad∣ministrators, of and from all charges whatsoever, that shall be ad∣judged in that Sentence unto her, and for her the said B. And of and for all other matters concerning this Suit, as well temporall, &c. untill the making of that release, so as afore to be made,
(the Bond made for payment of seventy pounds hereunder menti∣oned onely excepted.) And further if the above bounden G.B. and I.B. or one of them, or some other sufficient and able man with the said G. or J. at or within fourteen daies next following; That day time and instant when the summe of seventy pounds shall be paid or tendred unto the said J. or his assignes, according to the true meaning and purport of a Bond, with Condition made to the said G and bearing date the day and yeare above written, shall and do enter into such a lawfull and sufficient Bond of two hun∣dred Marks of, &c. That the said Suit or Cause of Matrimony by the said B. neither by any man, by her means and procurement is not, neither shall be revived, neither the said E.F: molested, either directly or indirectly by the said B. or by any other, by her the said B. consent or procurement. And further that the said B. hath not, neither hereafter shall revoke any acknowledgment or confession that she hath made touching the delivery of the said E.F. from her the said B. and from the Suit of Matrimony commenced against the said E.F. by her the said B. if that Suit or any such confession before that day shall be ended and made; as shall be by the learn∣ed Councell of the said E.F. and B. or G.B. or their assignes rea∣sonably devised or advised, That then, &c. A Condition to redeem a Lease mortgaged, if the Mort∣gagor redeem it not himself at the day. THe Condition, &c. That where W.M. Citizen and Goldsmith of L. by his Indenture, bearing date the day and yeare within written, for the surety of payment of a hundred pounds of, &c. to the within named I. I. his certain Attorney, Executor, or Admini∣strators, at the now dwelling, &c. on the first day, &c. hath mort∣gaged unto the said I. I. all that Lease of his now dwelling house in W. of London, which was conveyed unto him by E. P. Citizen, &c. and which was granted unto the said E.P. by, &c by his In∣denture of Lease, bearing date, &c. As by the said Indenture made betweeen the said W.M. and I I. doth and may appear. If the said W.M. his Executors, Administrators, or assignes, or some of them, do not well and truly pay, or cause, &c. to the said I. I. his certaine Attorney, Executor, or administrator, the said summe of a hundred pounds at the day and place limited for the payment thereof, by
the said first recited Indenture. If then the said R: M: his Execu∣tors or administrators upon reasonable request to them or any of them to be made by the said J.J. his Executors or administrators and for and in consideration of a lawfull and sufficient assignment and conveyance to be made from the said J.J. his Executors or administrators, to the said R. his Executors and administrators of the said Lease, and of all the right interest and terme of yeares which the said I. his Executors or administrators shall then have to come in the Tenement with the appurtenances, demised by the said Original Lease cleerly acquitted and exonerated of and from all former Bargains, Sales, Leases, arrearages of rents, forfeitures, re-entries, and cause and causes of forfeiture and re-entry, and of and from all other Titles, troubles, and incumbrances whatsoever, then to be had, made, or consented unto by the said J. J. his Exe∣cutors or Administrators, do well and truly pay or cause, &c. to the said J.J. his certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, at the said dwelling, &c. the summe of a hundred pounds of lawfull, &c. without fraud or covin, That then, &c. A Condition that an Heire shall make a Lease of land for three lives when he cometh to age. THe Condition, &c. That if the above bound G. H. when he shall accomplish and come unto the full age of one and twenty yeares, or within three months then next following, do seale and deliver unto the above named J.H. and to such other two persons, as the said J. shall thereunto nominate and appoint a good sure sufficient and lawfull Lease in writing, of and in one Messuage or Tenement, and all houses and buildings thereunto belonging, and all Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Meadowes, Lea∣sures, Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Commodities, and Profits whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances, to the said Messuage or Tenements belonging, or in any wise appertaining, set, lying, and being in M. in the said County of S. and late in the Tenure and Occupation of one W.W. To have and to hold the said Messuage or Tenement, and all other the premisses with their ap∣purtenances, before mentioned, to the said J.H. and to those other two persons whom the said I. shall nominate and appoint, and to his and their assigns, for and during the term of the naturall life of the said I.H. and for and during the naturall lives of those other
two persons whom the said I. in the said Lease shall nominate and appoint, reserving alway to the said G. H. his Heires or assignes, the yearly rent of 20. s. of lawfull English-monie, to be paid yearly by equall portions, at the two usuall Feasts, by the said I. H. and by those other two persons to be named by the said I.H. in the said Lease, or by his or by any their assignes, during all the said term of three lives. And also if the said G.H. when he shall accomplish the full age of one and twenty yeares before specified, or within three months then next after as aforesaid, do deliver or cause to be deli∣vered to the said I H. and to those other two persons to be named in the said Lease, full and peaceable possession livery, and seisin, of and in all the said Messuage or Tenement, and of and in all and singular the premisses with their appurtenances whatsoever, in as ample and large manner as the said W.W. or his assigns, have had, occupyed, and manured the same, That then, &c. A Condition to leave a Wife 100 l. Joynture during her life, if she survive the Husband. THe Condition, &c. That if after marriage had and solemnized between the within bound N.W. and M.C. Sister of the within named I.C. the said N. do depart this present life, and the said M. do survive and overlive the said N. Then if the said N. at the time of his decease, do leave Lands, Tenements, and Here∣ditaments of a good and cleer Title in the Law, of the cleer yearly value of a hundred pounds of &c. over and beyond all charges and reprises whatsoever, lawfully and sufficiently assured unto the said M. or to her use, for and during all the tearm of her naturall life, for and in the name of her Joynture, in such sort that she the said M. and her assignes, from the time of such decease of the said N. may lawfull have and enjoy the same Lands, Tenements, or He∣reditaments, and perceive and receive the yearely Rents and Pro∣fits of the same, to the cloer yearly value abovesaid, by and du∣ring all the tearm of the naturall life of the said M. to and for the onely use of her and her assignes, without any lawfull ler, molesta∣tion, recovery, encumbrance or interruption of or by any person or persons whatsoever, That then, &c.
A Condition depending upon a Release of a Contract of Marriage. THe Condition, &c. That where there is a Suit in a Cause of Matrimony, depending in the Court of the Arches, between B. B. of London Plaintiff, on the one part, and E. F. of London Cloth∣worker on the other part: Wherein as it is hoped and thought the said E. shall be delivered and discharged by Sentence absolu∣tory of the Judge of the said Court, from the claim and demand of the said B. there made and propounded against him: If the said E. shall at his own costs and charges from time to time, and at all times, so long as the said Suit shall depend in the said Court, offer perform, and do his best good will, diligence, and endeavour, for the speedy obtaining of Sentence absolutory in the said Cause, wherein neither the said E. nor the said B. shall be condemned in any expences or charges, for, in, or concerning the said Suit, That then, &c. A Condition for payment of monie upon request. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound A. B. his, &c. do pay, &c. to the within named C.D. his, &c. the sum, &c. of lawfull, &c. at one entire paynent, at the Mansion-house of the said C. D. scituate, &c. at or before the end and expiration of six weeks, next after request, shall have been made by the said C.D. his Execu∣tors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, at the Shop now in the occupation of the said A. B. in W. of L. for, or touching the payment of the said summe of, &c. That then, &c. A Condition by a Raker to a Scavinger, for ridding of Streets in London. THe Condition &c. That whereas the within named R. M. the day of the date within written, hath paid unto the within na∣med W.M. the summe of ten shillings of, &c. and hath promised and undertaken to pay moreover to the said W. the summe of, &c.
of like money in forme following: That is to say, &c. If therefore the said W: M: his Heires, Executors, administrators, or assignes, do weekly by and during the space of one whole year next ensuing, the date within written, on three severall daies in every week, viz. on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, and in meet and con∣venient time, of and upon every such day, cleerly rid and carry a∣way, out of and from all and every part of the Parish of St. P. in W: of London, where the said R: M: is Scavenger, all such dust swee∣pings and other things as shall be swept or laid together in any place or places of or in the said Parish, or which ought to be rid or carried away by the Scavenger there for the time being: And do also at all times hereafter sufficiently save harmlesse the said R: M: of and for all such costs, charges, molestations, troubles, impri∣sonments and demands, as shall or may grow, or happen to or a∣gainst him the said R: M: for or by reason of the non-riddance, or not carrying away of any of the dust sweepings, or other things a∣forementioned at any time during the time aforesaid, That then, &c. A Condition to save a Merchant harmlesse that hath taken up monie at double usance for the Obligor. THe Condition, &c. That where the within named Sir L. D. at the request of the above named J: T: and for the use of the same I: at the Royall Exchange here in London, hath taken up of W: G: &c. by way of Exchange at double usance, as is commonly used amongst Merchants, the summe of, &c. and hath paid and de∣livered the same to the said I: T: If therefore the same J: his Execu∣tort, &c. on the, &c. next, &c. pay, &c. to the said Sir L. &c. the said summ, &c. therewith to pay and satisfie the said summe of, &c. so taken up as aforesaid: And do also then and there without further delay content, pay, and recompence to the said Sir L &c. all such costs, charges, and losses, as in the mean time shall arise or grow to the said Sir L. his Executors, &c. for or by reason of the exchange or rechange, of or for the said summe of, &c. so taken up by ex∣change at double usance as aforesaid, That then, &c.
A Condition that if Land purchased be evicted from the Vendee, then the Vendee to pay  certaine rate for every Acre recovered. And if the Land fall charged with any Statute, Recognizance or Rent then to discharge them or satisfie the Vendee what he shall be endamaged. THe Condition, &c. That where the within bound A.B. by his Deed indented, bearing date, &c. hath bargained, sold, given, and granted to the within named, &c. all those Lands, &c. If the said Lands or any part thereof be at any time hereafter lawfully recovered or evicted from the said, &c. his Heires or assignes. If then the said A: his Heires, &c. do within six months after notice given to him or his Heires, Executors, or Administrators of the said recovery, or eviction, pay, &c. to the said, &c. his Heires or assignes, at, &c. seven pounds of, &c for every acre so recovered or evicted. Or if the premisses or any part thereof, be at any time-hereafter put in execution, or extended by reason of any former Statute-merchant, or of the Staple, judg∣ment, condemnation, recovery, or recognizance, or any rent or ar∣rearages of rent be recovered out of the premisses, or any part thereof: Or the same lawfully charged with the payment, with any rent-charge, or the arrearages of any rent-service. Then if the said A, &c. do from time to time alwaies after notice given to him, his Heires, &c. of any such execution, extent, or rent recover∣ed or charged aforesaid, pay the said debt and every debt due by reason of any such recovery, statute, judgment, or condemnation, or discharge the said execution had of the said lands by reason thereof; and do pay or discharge such rent, rents, and arrearages of rents, or otherwise satisfie and pay to the said I, and his Heires, so much as he, his Heires or assignes, shall thereby by any means be hurt or endamaged, That then, &c.
A Condition by one who having a Remainder in Land gran∣ted the same to the Queen to prevent the sale by him in Possession conditionall, neverthelesse that if he delivered to A. B. a Ring of Silver of a certaine value, that then the Grant should be void: And where now having made a Letter of Attorney to deliver that Ring, he is bound not to revoke it, and to make assurance of the Land, &c. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That where the with∣in named G. E. did stand seised of and in the mannor of N. up∣on S. in the County of N. with the Appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee taile, the Reversion and Remainder thereof to the with∣in bound T. E. and to the Heires of his body lawfully begotten or to be begotten: As by sufficient Conveyance in the Law thereof made more plainly, may and doth appeare. And whereas the said T. E. by his Indenture bearing date the two and twentieth of June, &c. for the consideration therein expressed, hath given and granted unto our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, all that his Re∣version or Remainder whatsoever, of and in the said Mannor of N. and of and in all and singular the Lands, Tenements, Meadowes, Pastures, Feedings, Rents, Reversions, Services, and Heredita∣ments whatsoever to the said Mannor belonging, or in any wise ap∣pertaining, or at any time here tofore accepted, &c. as part par∣cell or member thereof; And the Reversion or Remainder of and in all other his Lands, &c. scituate, &c. within the Townes and eilds of, &c. To have and to hold the said Reversion or Re∣mainder of and in the said Mannor with the Appurtenances, and of and in all and singular other the Premisses before in and by these presents mentioned with all and singular their Appurtenan∣ces to our said Sovereign Lady the Queens highnesse, her Heires and Successors for ever under this proviso and condition hereafter mentioned, that is to say, Provided alwaies that if the said T. E. or his Assignes, at any time hereafter during his naturall life do give and deliver, or cause, &c. unto A. of Q. in the County of L. Gent. his Executors or Assignes one Silver Ring of the value of five pounds of, &c. That then and from thenceforth the said Deed indented, and the Gift and Grant therein contained, and
every clause, article and sentence therein specified for and con∣cerning the said Grant of the Premisses shall be utterly void and of none effect to all intents and purposes, any thing in the said In∣denture contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding, as by the same Indenture appeareth. And where W. W. of N. in the County of W. Gent. hath bargained, compounded and agreed with the said G. and T. for the Premisses to be assured to the said W W. his heires and assignes in Fee-simple absolutely. And where also the said T. E. being minded that the said Deed indented and eve∣ry thing therein contained, for and touching the said Gift and Grant shall cease, determine, and be clearly void to all intents and purposes, and according to the true meaning of the said Conditi∣on and Proviso contained in the said Deed indented, Hath by his Letter of attorney dated, &c. made and constituted F. B. Gent. his lawfull attorney to deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said A. F. his executors or assignes one Silver Ring of the value of five shillings in the performance and fulfilling of the said Proviso and Condition, as by the said Letter of attorney more plainly may appeare: If the said T. E. doe from time to time, and at all times hereafter without fraud, guile, let, or interruption suffer the said Letter of attorney and the authority thereby given and limited to stand and continue in full strength, force and effect without any revocation or disannulling thereof directly or indirectly, and fur∣ther if the said T. his heires, executors or administrators do from time to time, and at all times discharge, exonerate and acquit, or otherwise upon reasonable request, sufficiently save harmlesse aswell the said W.W. his heires and assignes, as also the said Mannor and all and every part thereof, of and from all and singular former Gifts, Grants, &c. had made or done by the said T. E. or any o∣ther person or persons by his assent, consent, meanes, or procure∣ment: And if also the said T. E, do make further assurance, &c. That then, &c. A Condition for Childrens portions in the Chamber of London. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound E. B. do before the Feast of All-Saints now next insuing bring into the Court to be holden before the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of L. which for the time shall be good and sufficient sureties to be bound for the
true and sure payment of seven hundred ninety two pounds one shilling nine pence of, &c. to and for the use and behoof of the children and orphans of the within named C. B. deceased for their severall parts and portions of the orphanage and legacy of their said Fathers goods. Or else do within the time aforesaid, pay to the Chamberlain of the City of L. which for the time shall be to the use of the said orphans, the said summe of, &c. That then, &c. A Letter of Attorney upon an Obligation not forfei∣ted. BE it, &c. I. W. de la B. Merchant stranger, resident at London, have made, ordained, constituted and put in my place, and by these presents, &c. R. M. &c. his executors and assignes, and every of them, my true, lawfull and irrevocable attorny and attornyes, for me and in my name, and in the name or names of mine execu∣tors and administrators or any of them to demand or receive of J. M. the younger Goldsmith, and W. N. Grocer, Citizen, &c. and ei∣ther of them, their or either of their Heires, Executors, Admini∣strators and Assignes, or of any of them on the sixteenth day of October now next coming at or within the now or late dwelling house of A. P. scituate, &c. the summe of three hundred pounds of, &c. specified or mentioned in the Condition of an Obligation of foure hundred pounds bearing date, &c. now last past, wherein the said I. M. and W. N. do stand bound to me the said Ʋ. giving, and by these presents granting for me, mine Executors and Admi∣nistrators unto the said R. M. his Executors and Assignes and eve∣very of them full power and authority for and in the name and names of me the said Ʋ. mine Executors and Administrators, and every or any of us (for and in default of payment of the said sum of three hundred pounds, or any parcell thereof being left unpaid at the said day and place expressed in the said Condition of the said Obligation to sue and implead and cause, &c. the said I. and W. and either of them, their and either of their Heires, Executors, Administrators and Assignes, and every or any of them for the said summe of foure hundred pounds expressed in the said Obligation, and to recover in the same Suit, and to sue execution upon the same Recovery according to the Lawes of this Realme; and also to acquit, compound for, and discharge the said Obligation and
the said summes of money, and either of them, and every parcell of either of the same. One Attorney or more under him or them to substitute, and at his and their pleasure to revoke. And all and e∣very other act and acts, thing and things whatsoever to doe and cause to be done for the recovery, obtaining, getting and discharg∣ing of the said summes of money and either of them, and every part and parcell of either of the same in as ample manner and forme as I the said Ʋ. mine Executors or administrators might or could doe in proper person. Ratifying, establishing and confirming for me, mine executors and administrators all that, and whatsoever my said attorny or attornies or any of them for me or in my name, or in the name of mine executors or administrators shall do or cause to be done in or about the Premisses or any of them by these pre∣sents. In witnesse, &c. dated, &c. A Condition upon the same Letter of Attorney. THe Condition, &c, That where the within bound Ʋ. de la B. by his writing or Letter of attorney of the date within written hath made and ordained the within named R. M. his executors and administrators, his attorney and attorneys for him and in his name, and in the name of his executors, &c. aswell to demand and receive of I. M. &c. on the, &c. next coming at, &c. the summe of three hundred pounds of, &c. specified or mentioned in the Con∣dition of an Obligation of foure hundred pounds bearing date, &c. wherein, &c. as also (for non-payment of the said summe of three hundred pounds, or any part thereof at the day and place expressed in the said Condition of the said Obligation) to sue for, and reco∣ver the said summe of foure hundred pounds specified in the said Obligation in manner and forme as by the said writing and Let∣ter of Attorney more at large appeareth. If the said Ʋ. his execu∣tors and administrators and every of them doe from time to time and at all times hereafter aswell suffer the said Letter of Attorney and the power and authority thereby given or limited to stand and continue in full strength, force and effect without any manner of revocation or disannulling thereof, either directly or indirectly, as also at the request and charges in the Law of the said R. his exe∣cutors and assignes maintaine and justifie with effect all and every such action and actions, Suits, Judgements, and Executions as by the said R, his Executors or Assignes shall be pursued or prosecuted
in the name or names of the said U. his Executors and Administra∣tors or any of them against the said I. and W. or either of them, or either of their Heires, Executors or Administrators or any of them, upon or by meanes of the said Obligation for the recovering or ob∣taining of the said summes of money or either of them, or any par∣cell of either of the same; And if also the said R. his Executors, Administrators and Assignes, and every of them shall and may from time to time, and at all times hereafter at his and their will, liberty, and pleasure aske, levy, sue for, recover, receive, have, re∣taine, and enjoy the said summes of money and either of them, and every parcell of either of the same, to and for the onely use of the said R. his Executors, Administrators and Assignes, aswell without yeilding or making any account of or for the same, or ei∣ther of them, or any part or parcell of either of the same: As also without any ler, bar, stay, impediment, molestation, disturbance, hindrance, or interruption, that shall or may grow, happen, arise, or be by reason, occasion, or meanes of any release, discharge, non-suit, retraxit, disavowry, or other act or thing whatsoever made, done, caused, or consented unto, or any time hereafter to be made, &c. by the said U. his Executors or Administrators or any of them, or any other person or persons by his or their meanes or procure∣ment, unlesse it shall be by and with the request and consent of the said R. his Executors, or Assignes: That then, &c. Another Condition upon a Letter of Attorney for recovering of divers debts. THe Condition, &c. That whereas, &c. If the said T. S. his Executors or Administrators doe not at any time hereafter revoke, countermand,Not to revoke: or repeale the said Letter of Attorney, or the power and au∣thority thereby given or granted: And if also the said T. his Executors and Administrators and every of them at the reasonable request and costs and charges of the said W. B.To make fur∣ther warrants of Attorney. his Executors or Administrators doe and shall from time to time make and give to the said W. his Ex∣ecutors and Administrators, such other and further irrevocable warrants of Attorney as shall be needfull in or about any Suit or Suits, or Recovery of or for the Premisses or
any part thereof. And also if he the said T. S. heretofore hath not released,That no release is made nor shall be made. discharged or ac∣quitted neither he, his Executors or Administra∣tors at any time hereafter do or shall release, ac∣quit, or discharge the said Obligations and Sta∣ture-staple aforesaid or any of them, or any summe or summes of money in them or any of them contained, Neither do or shall dis∣charge, with-draw, discontinue, or cause to be non-suited, any Action, Suit, Processe, or Judgement which the said W. his Executors or Administrators shall here∣after commence and prosecute,For not with-drawing Suits. or cause to be commenced, prosecuted or had in the name or names of the said T. S. his Executors or Administrators for or touching the Premisses or any part thereof against any of the said parties mentioned to be bound in the said Obligations and Statute or any of them without ehe speciall licence, consent, and agree∣ment of the said W. his Executors or Administrators. And further if the said T. his Executors and Administrators from time to time as request shall be to him or them reasonably made, doe and shall avow,To justifie A∣ctions. justifie and maintaine, and suffer to be maintained in his or their name or names at the costs and charges of the said W. his Executors and assignes all and every such lawfull Actions, Suits, Pleas and Processes which the said W. his Executors or as∣signes shall commence or prosecute in the name or names of the said T. his executors or administrators for the recovering or ob∣taining of the said summes of money or any of them. And further if the said W. his executors, administrators and assignes shall and may to his and their own use, without demand of any account or reckoning to be demanded or required, or to be made or given to the said T. his executors,That the Obli∣ge shall enjoy the sums of mo∣ney and benefit of suits with∣out account. admi∣nistrators, or assigns have, hold and enjoy all and every the said summes of money mentioned in the said Obligations and Stature from time to time as the same or any part thereof shall be re∣covered or obtained against any of the parties a∣foresaid, their heirs, executors or administrators or any of their Lands, Tenements, Goods, or chattells, together also with all the benefit, profit, advantage, recovery and commodi∣ty to arise or grow of or by any Suit or Suits, Judgement or Judge∣ments
to be had or given of, for, or concerning the Premisses or a∣ny part thereof: That then, &c. A Condition to deliver Saffron. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bounden R. M. his, &c. do at, &c. scituate, &c. frankly and freely deliver or cause, &c. to the within named A. B. his, &c. for the use of the same A. B. his, &c. at or before, &c. next, &c. twenty pounds weight of good new and Merchantable English Saffron of the growing Counties of Essex and Cambridge: That then, &c. A Condition to deliver Corne. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bounden I M. his heirs, executors, or Administrators or any of them do and shall be∣tween the tenth day of Feb. next insuing the date within written, and the twentieth day of March then next following, frankly and freely deliver, or cause, &c. to the Wardens and Comminalty of the art or mystery of Goldsmiths of the City of L. within named, or to their certaine Attorney, Successors or Assignes, sixty quarters of good, sweet, clean, dry, and well dressed wheat of the best sort, of the growing of the County of Cambridge, safe on Land at the Bridge house staires of L. scituate in or near the Borough of S. in the County of S. That then, &c. A Condition to deliver Corne at sundry dayes. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound I. S. his Exe∣cutors, administrators or assignes doe frankly and freely from all charges and demands deliver or cause, &c. to the within na∣med W. K. his Executors, Administrators or Assignes to their owne use, eight quarters and two bushells of good, sweet, dry, full, clean, and merchantable Wheat at the water-mill called, &c. scituate, &c. in forme, &c. That is to say on Fryday which shall be the three and twentieth day of this present moneth of S. within written five bushells, and from thenceforth at every foure weeks end on the Fryday severally five bushells of the said Wheat
without fraud or covin untill the said S. quarters and 2. bushels of the said Wheat shall be fully delivered, and every bushel thereof to weigh fifty six pounds of lawfull sised weight, That then, &c. Or else, if default shall be made in delivery of the said Wheat, or any part thereof contrary to the tenor and true meaning of this present Condition, That then, &c. A Condition for delivery of Tinne. THe Condition, &c. That if the within bound T. N. his, &c. do deliver or cause, &c. to, &c. his, &c. at the next Midsomer delivery at T. in the County of C. at the Queens beame, there so much good, soft, white and Merchantable Tinne of Cornewall frank and free of all charges and demands whatsoever, as at the price there to be set between the Merchants and the Tinners at the said next Midsomer delivery shall amount to the summe of one hundred pounds of, &c. without fraud, &c. That then, &c. Covenants. For Covenants upon assurance made of a womans Joynture in Free-hold and Copy-hold Lands. THis Indenture, &c. Between the Right worshipfull Sir A A. Knight, Citizen and Alderman of L. on the one part, and H. S. and E.B. Citizen and Ironmongers of L. on the other part. Witnesseth that whereas the said Sir A. in consideration of marriage to be had and now finished and so∣lemnised between A. A. the younger, Son and Heire apparent of the said Sir A. the elder, and M. C. Daughter of, &c. and for a Joynture to the said M. to be had and made of the Lands and He∣reditaments of the said A. the elder, free and copy, he the said A. the elder, did not onely bargaine and sell to the said H. S. and E. B. all that the Mannor or Capitall Messuage with the Appurtenan∣ces called or known by the name of G. scituate, &c. in Y. in the County of W. now in the tenure of, &c. and all those Messuages,
&c. now or late in the severall tenures of, &c. But also by Feoff∣ments and other lawfull Conveyances and Assurances in Law; Hath in like manner conveyed and assured the said Premisses, and the Reversion and Reversions thereof with their Appurtenances to the said H. S. and E. B. to have and to hold all and singular the said Mannor, Messuage, &c. to the said H. and E. and their Heirs to and for the use of the said A. A. the elder, for the terme of his naturall life without impeachment of waste, and after his decease to and for the use and behoof of the said A. the younger, and M. and the Heires of their two bodies between them two lawfully to be begotten, and for lack of such issue to the use of the heirs of the body of the said A. A. the younger lawfully to be begotten, and for lack of such issue then to the use of the said A. A. the elder, and of his heires and assignes for ever: As by two severall Deeds in∣dented of Feoffment thereof made and enterchangably sealed by the said parties, and both bearing date, &c. And by one paire of Indentures interchangably made and sealed between the same par∣ties bearing the same date, and enrolled amongst the Rolls of the high Court of Chancery more at large may appeare: And where∣as the said A. the elder for the said purpose hath also surrendred all those Copyhold-Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the Parish of H. aforesaid, according to the custome of the Mannor there for and to the use of the said A. the elder, for the terme of his life onely: The Remainder to the use of the said A. his Son, and to the said M. and to the heirs of their two bodies, &c. And for lack of such issue to A. the youngers heires of his body, ut supra, And for lack of such issue: Then to the use of the said A. the elder and of his heires and assignes for ever, according to the custome of the said Mannor: The said A. the elder for him, &c. Covenan∣teth, &c. in forme, &c. That the said H. the elder at the time of the severall liveries made of the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments conveyed by the said two Feoffments; And at the time of the ensealing, delivering and acknowledging of the said former Indentures of Bargaine and Sale was by good and lawfull right and title in the Law, solely seised of and in all and singular the Premisses conveyed by the said Feoffments and Indentures in his demesne as of fee to the only use of himself and of his heires for ever, without any condition or limitation of use, & that the said A. the elder at the time of the making of the said surrender of the co∣pyhold lands and Tenements aforesaid, was thereof, & of every part thereof lawfully seised to the only use of himself & his heires accor∣ding
to the custom of the Mannor aforesaid, by good and lawful right and title, according to the said custom without any Forfeiture or for∣mer Surrender thereof, or of any part thereof heretofore made and knowledged to the contrary by the said A. the elder, or his meanes in any wise. And that all and singular the Premisses conveyed by the said two Feoffments, and by the said former Indentures shall continue to the uses therein expressed of the clear yearly value of one hundred pounds of, &c. over and above all yearly charges and re-prises whatsoever, and clear and free discharged and acquitted, or otherwise, &c. saved harmlesse by the said A. the elder his, &c. of and from all and singular former bargains, &c. had, made, done, knowledged, or agreed unto by the said A. the elder: The rents and services from and after the decease of the said A. the elder, to be due to the cheife Lords, &c. and Leases for terme of yeares made of the Premisses or any part of the same, not prejudiciall to the clear yearly value aforesaid onely excepted and fore-prised: And moreover the said A. the elder Covenanteth, &c. That he the said A. and his Heires, and all and every other person and persons whatsoever, having or lawfully claiming, or which shall or may lawfully claime any right, estate, title, or interest, of in or to the Premisses or any part thereof by or under the said A the elder (The said Lessees for their severall estates and interests in the same Premisses above excepted onely except) shall and will there∣of, and of every part thereof at all times during the space of two years next insuing the date of these Presents upon reasonable re∣quest, make, knowledge, doe and execute, and cause, &c. in the Law to the said H. and E. and their Heires, and to the Survivor of them and his Heires all and every such further act and acts, thing and things, assurance and assurances in the Law with warranty onely of the said A. the elder, against him and his heires, or other∣wise without warranty; As by the said H. and E. their Heires or Assignes, or their learned Councell shall be reasonably devised or advised for the further better and more perfect assurance, surety and sure making of all and singular the Premisses with their Appur∣tenances to be had and made sure, onely to the severall uses and behoofs above mentioned. In witnesse, &c.
An Indenture of Covenants between the Fathers of a man and woman to be marryed, where each covenanteth to assure them Land and money of equall quantity by a day, and where each is to allow them more Land a peece at their decease. THis Indenture, &c. Between T. W. of B. in the County of S. Clothier on the one part. And M. W. of K. in the County of W. Clothier on the one part, witnesseth, Thet for and in conside∣ration of marriage to be had, solemnised, and consumnate between R.W. Son and Heire of the said M and E. W. eldest Daughter of the said R. W. It is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed be∣tween the said parties to these Presents in manner and forme following, That is to say,Consideration of marriage. The said M. for him, his heires, Executors and Administrators doth covenant and grant to and with the said T. W. his Executors and Administrators by these Presents; That the said R: W. by Gods favour shall marry and take to his wife the said E. W. and her espouse & wed according to the law of God and use of the Church of England,Each of the fa∣thers covenant that the chil∣dren shall mar∣ry by a day. on this side the first day of May which shall be in the year of our Lord God, &c. If the same E. will thereunto agree: And in like manner the said T.W. for him, &c. doth covenant with the said M &c. that the said E. W. by Gods favour shall marry and take to her Husband the said R. W. and him espouse and wed according to the Law and use aforesaid on this side, and before the first day of May which shall be, &c. if the said R. will thereunto agree. And in further Consideration of the said marriage so betwixt the said R. and E. to be had and consumate as aforesaid: The said M. for him∣selfe, his Heires, Executors, and Administrators doth further cove∣nant, grant, and promise to & with the said T. his Ex. and Adm. by these Presents in manner and forme following▪ that is to say,The husbands Father cove∣nanteth to as∣sure Land by a day. That he the said M. on this side the first day of May above named, shall and will at his own charges and expences make and execute, or cause to be made and executed to the said R. and E. and to the Heires of the said R. or to some o∣ther
person or persons, and their heires such estate and convey∣ance, or estates and conveyances, of Lands, Tenements, and Here∣ditaments in the County of G. to the clear yearly value of twenty pounds above all reprises, and whereof the said M. at the time of the making and executing of the said estates and conveyances shall be lawfully seised in his demesne as of fee simple, so as by force of the same estates and conveyances of the said R. and E. immediatly from and after the time of their said enter marriage shall and may lawfully have and hold all the said Lands, Tenements, and He∣reditaments, and take the yearly profits thereof, of the clear yearly value aforesaid,To uses. to the onely use of the same R. and E. for and during tht terme of their naturall lives, and the terme of the naturall life of the longer liver of them: And so as after the decease of the said R. and E. the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments by force of the said Estates or Conveyances shall or may lawfully descend and come to the heirs of the body of the same R. lawfully to be begot∣ten. And for lack of such issue the same Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to revert to the said M. W. and to the right heires of the same M. for ever without any condition in or upon any of the said estates or conveyances to be made to the contrary in any wise: And that at the time of the making and executing of the estates and conveyances afore∣said,Discharge of Incumbran∣ces. the said Lands, Tenements, and Heredita∣ments shall be, and from thenceforth shall con∣tiue from time to time, at all times to the said R. and E. and to the heires of the body of the same R. cleare and free discharged and acquitted, or saved harmlesse from all former e∣states, titles, conveyances, grants, charges, and encumbrances whatsoever had, made, or agreed unto, or to be had, made or a∣greed unto by the said M.W. which shall or in any wise may be pre∣judiciall to the said estates and conveyances to be made to the uses above specified, or to the clear yearly value abovesaid. And further that the said M.W. at the time of his decease, if the said R. W. his Son or any issue of his body of the body of the said E. lawfully to be begotten shall then be living,The Father to convey other Lands at his decease. shall and will over and above the Premisses, leave other Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, whereof the said M in his life time by good con∣veyance in the Law shall be seised in his demesne as of fee simple, which also shall be, and may reasonably continue
of the clear yearly value of other twenty pounds above all yearly rents and reprises, and whereof the said M. in his life time shall have made, and conveyed such estates and conveyances as that by due course and force of the Lawes of this Realme, the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said clear yearly value of twenty pounds, and clear and free from all former grants, estates, charges, and encumbrances made, done or knowledged, or to be made, done or knowledged by the said M. W. and M, his wife, or by either of them, shall immediatly by and after the decease of the said M. and M. his wife, lawfully and rightfully descend, come, and fall to the said R. and E. and to the Survivor of them, and to the Heires of the body of the same R. to the onely use and behoof of the said R. and E. and of the Survivor of them for the terme of their naturall lives, and the terme of the naturall life of the longer li∣ver of them, and after their deceases to the use of the heires of the body of the said R. lawfully to be begotten. The Reversion of the Premisses to be to the right heires of the said M. for ever. And moreover that he the said M. his Exec. or Adm. at the day of the solemnization of the said marriage between the said R. and E. shall and will freely give and pay to the said R. one hundred pounds in ready currant money of England,The Husbands Father at the marriage to give 100 l. in money. and in like manner for the consideration aforesaid, the said T. W. for him, his Executors and Administrators doth covenant, grant, and promise to and with the said M. W. his Exec. and Adm. by these presents in manner and forme following, That is to say, That he the said T. W. on this side the said first day above named shall and will at his own charges and expences make and execute, or cause, &c. to the said R. and E. or to some other person & persons,The wives fa∣ther to assure Lands. such estate & con∣veyance, or estates and conveyances of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the County of, &c. to the clear yearly value of 20 l. above all reprises: And where∣of the said T. at the time of the making and executing of the said estates and conveyances shall be lawfully seised in his demesne as of Fee-simple: So as by force of the same Estates and Conveyances of the said R. & E. immediatly from and after the time,Ʋses. &c. word for word as on the part of M. W. onely changeable in this, that this Land is to come to the womans heirs, and the reversion to the said T. And further that the said T.W. at the time of his decease shall and will over and
above the Premisses leave other Lands, Tene∣ments,And to give money at the marriage. and Hereditaments, &c. as the said M. hath before covenanted, &c. And a clause for pay∣ment of a hundred pounds at marriage, as the said M. also hath covenanted. In witnesse, &c. An Indenture of Covenants amongst divers interessed for safe custody of a Grand Lease. An Indenture Quinque party.THe Indenture quinque partite made, &c. be∣tween I.S. of D in the County of W. Gent. on the first part, W.N. of London, Esquire on the se∣cond part, F.M. Gent. on the third part, I G of D. aforesaid Gent. on the fourth part, and the War∣dens and Commonalty of the Mystery of M. of the City of L. on the fifth part,Recitall of the date and Lease of the Bishop of W. made to her Majesty. witnesseth, That whereas the Reverend Father in God I Bishop of W. by his Indenture of Lease bearing Date the fourth day of December now last past, before the date of these presents, hath demised, granted, and to farm letten unto our said Soveraign Lady the Queen, diverse Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Parkes, Scites, and parts of Mannors, and other hereditaments, with their appurtenances, in the County of S. the particulars whereof and all wri∣tings made for or about the said Lease to her Ma∣jesty or any other from the said Bishop,Schedules of the particulars, &c. in the said Lease of the Bishops to be annexed to these Quin∣que partite In∣dentures. The necessity for the parties in∣teressed to have the said Lease alway ready, &c. and from her Majesty, for the assignment of the said Lease and premisses to the said I. S. are mentioned in severall Schedales to every part of these presents annexed, and in the same Schedules is also ex∣pressed, to how much of the premisses every of the said severall parties now are severally interessed, and in what manner. And forasmuch as it is ne∣cessary that the said originall Lease and writings aforesaid, be alwaies ready to be shewed forth in defence and maintenance of the said severall in∣terests of the said severall parties and their As∣signes, in and to the premisses, as they are seve∣rally interessed to any part thereof. And that
the said J.S. from the beginning had those parts of the premisses mentioned in the said Schedules to be to the severall interests of the said W. N. F. M. and J: G: onely in trust for the severall be∣hoofs of the said W.F. and J. and their severall Assignes, and not otherwise:I.S. but a man of trust in her Majesties as∣signment to him for the par∣ties interessed in the Bissiops Lease. The accord be∣tween the par∣ties interessed to have the said Lease, &c. safely kept. In a little Iron Chest with one Lock, and eve∣ry of the inte∣ressed to have a severall Key to it. Therefore they the said J: W: F. and J. every of them for himself, his Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, have granted, covenanted, and agreed together; and by these presents do, &c. in manner and forme following: That is to say, that as well the said originall Lease, as all other the writings afore∣said, in presence and sight of all the said parties, shall be put up together into one little Iron Chest or Box to be closed with a good Lock, unto which Lock shall be four several Keys, whereof the said J.S. to have one, the said W. N. to have another, the said F.M. to have one other, and the said I. G. the fourth; And then the said Lease and Writings being so put up into such a Chest or Box, the same presently to be locked and deliver∣ed to the said Wardens, for the time with them and their Successors in their common Hall safely to be kept,The said Chest to be in the cu∣stody of the Warden for the time being. In what man∣ner the said Wardens shall as occasion requi∣reth suffer the said Lease of the Bishop to be shewed for the behoof of the parties interes∣sed therein. to and for the safegard and preserva∣tion of the severall interests of the said J. W. F. and I. and their severall Assignes, in and to such severerall parts as they severally have, or shall have of the premisses. Neverthelesse the said parties interessed for them severally, and their se∣verall Assignes, do grant, appoint, covenant, and agree together, and also give their full authority and Commission to the said Wardens and Com∣minalty, and their Successors: That as often as any of the said parties interessed, or their Assigns shall have need in any Court of Record of her Majesty, her Heires or Successors, before her or their privy Councel, or other authorised Commis∣sioners to be assigned by her Majesty, her Heires or Successors, to shew forth the said Originall In∣denture of Lease and Writings aforesaid, or any of them; that then and so often the said Wardens and their Suc∣cessors,
by any of themselves, or their Officer or Officers, at the reasonable requests of any of the said parties interessed, or their As∣signes, shall and may send the said Chest or Box into any such Court as aforesaid, or before the said privy Councell or Commis∣sioners as aforesaid, there to be opened by the said interessed par∣tie, or his assignes: And the said originall Lease and Writings, or any of them then there to be read and seen, as the case for defence or maintenance of the right of the said interessed, or his assignes shall require. And then presently there and in the same Court,The said Lease to be presently locked up again after it hath been shewed in place requisite, and returned to the Wardens. or otherwise before the said privie Councel, or Commissionrs where the same shall be shewed, to be put up again into the said Chest or Box, and the same to be then locked againe, with the Key thereof in the custody of the said in∣teressed party or his assigne; at whose request the said Chest and Writings were brought thither. And then presently to be safely redelivered to the bringer thereof, and by him to be directly and immediatly returned to the said Wardens for the time being, to their said Common Hall, there again to be kept as before. And this forme and manner from time to time to be observed at every shewing of the said Lease or Writings, or any of them, when and wheresoever. And the said Wardens and Commi∣nalty do acknowledge and confesse by these pre∣sents,The Wardens to acknowledge the receit of the Lease, &c. and the custody thereof to the end aforesaid. that they the said Wardens now being, have had and taken into their custody, and now have in their custody the said Chest or Box, and therein the said originall Lease and Writings, and every of them as they are expressed in the said Schedules, the same with safety to be kept and used in manner and form aforesaid. And also the said Wardens and Comminalty for them and their Successors, do covenant, grant, and promise, to and with the said parties interes∣sed, and every of them, their severall Executors and assignes by these presents; That they the said Wardens and their Successors for the time being, shall and will well and faithfully keep in such good and sufficient custody (as they do keep their own Writings and evidences) the said Chest or Box, and the said Lease and Wrings to them now delivered as aforesaid, by the said interessed: and the same shal upon reasonable request of any of the said parties interessed, or their assigns, for reasonable recompence for their tra∣vel
and pains therin to be taken, in case,The party inte∣ressed in the shewing of the lease to recom∣pence the travel of the Wardens, or of their Offi∣cers for carrying and recarrying of the same to the common Hall. The party inte∣ressed and re∣quiring the Lease to be shewed, to enter bond to do no∣thing to binder the safe redeli∣very thereof to the Wardens cu∣stody. place and manner aforesaid, carry out, or cause to be carri∣ed out the said Chest or Box, and suffer the same to be opened, and the said Lease and other Wri∣tings, or any of them to be perused as aforesaid: So alwaies as the interessed party or his assignes, do first before such carrying out of the said Box, enter good Bond with sufficient Sureties of 600 l. of lawfull, &c. to the said Wardens and Commi∣nalty; That the said Wardens or any of them for the time being, or any other person or persons, by their appointment carrying out the said Chest or Box, shall or may peaceably and quietly have and keep in his custody the said Chest or Box, Lease and Writings, and every of them, and peaceably and quietly carry with him or them the said Chest or Box, Lease and Writings, and every of them have again to the said Common Hall, without any cancelling, hurt, or defacing to be done to them or any of them, from the time of the carrying out of the same, till they be returned in∣to the said Hall again, into the former quiet cu∣stody of the said Wardens for the time being, without any manner attempt, act, or thing, to be done, attempted, procured, or assented unto for the contrary, by any means by the said interessed partie or his assigne, then making request for the carrying out of the said Chest or Box, Lease, and Writings, or any of them. And the said parties interessed, and every of them for himself,The party inte∣ressed to give his said Bond first, as also the recompence of him that shall carry the Chest, before the War∣dens deliver it out to be shew∣ed. and for his Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, do covenant, promise, and agree, to and with the said Wardens and Comminalty, and their Suc∣cessors by these presents; That any of them the said interessed, on the behalf of himself or his as∣signs, shall not require the carrying out of the said Box or Chest from the said common Hall at any time, except he so requiring and so interessed, do first make and deliver to the said Wardens and Comminalty and their Successors, or to some of them, for the common use of the said Wardens, &c. such a Bond, with such sureties as is aforesaid; and shall also first satisfie the per∣son or persons which shall carry out the said Chest, &c. of and for their pains therein to be taken. In witness &c.
An Indenture where one purchasing Land charged with a Recognizance compounded with the Recogni∣zee for the Recognizance, and bindeth him to ex∣tend the same at the Purchasers request, and at his instruction: And after the extent to convey over the interest growing by the extent, &c. THis Indenture, &c. between R.B. of L. Gent. on the one part, and T.R. of C. in the County of C. Esquire, on the other part: Witnesseth, that where T.B. of N. in the County of H. Esq by his Recognizance or Writing obligatory, bearing date the five and twentieth of April, &c. knowledged and sealed before Sir R.B. Knight, then chief Iustice of the same King, of his Common Bench at Westminster, according to the forme of the Statute of the Staple, standeth bound to the said R: B: in two hundred pounds of, &c. payable, as by the same Recognizance it may appear: After which Recognizance so made, the said R.B. by Indenture of Defeasance made betwixt him and the said T.B. bearing date the said five and twentieth day of April, did covenant and grant to and with the said T. that if the same T. his Heires, Executors, or Administra∣tors, did pay, or cause to be paid to the said R. his Executors or administrators the summe of a hundred pounds of, &c. at the Feast &c. then next following: That then the said Recognizance should have been void and of none effect. As by the same Indenture ap∣peareth? At which Feast the said T.B. or any for him did not pay the said summe of a hundred pounds, neither at any time sithence hitherto hath paid the same, or any part thereof to the said R. B. or to any other for his use: So that the said Recognizance now standeth cleerly forfeited to the said R. B. and by his agreement now remaineth in the custody of the said T. R. And the said R. for him, his Executors, and Administrators covenanteth and gran∣teth to and with the said T.R. his Heires, Executors, and Admini∣strators, that he the said R.B. in any wise heretofore hath not: And that his Executors or Administrators at any time hereafter shall not release, discharge, or acquit the said Recognizance or summe of monie therein specified, without the speciall request and agreement of the said T. or of his Heires or Executors. And where
the said T. B. since the knowledging of the said Recognizance, hath enfeoffed sundry persons of his Mannors, Lands, and Tene∣ments; and amongst others hath conveyed to the said T. R. and to his Heires, the Mannors of C and B. in the County of C. and H. and the Mannor and Parsonage of C. in the said County of C. The said R. B. for reasonable considerations, him specially moving, is contented, and doth covenant and grant for him, his Heires, Executors, and administrators, to and with the said T.R. his Heires, Executors, and administrators by these presents; That he the said R.B. his Executors, administra∣tors, or assignes, at any time hereafter without the request of the said T.R. or of his Heires, Executors, or administrators, shall not sue or prosecute any extent or execution upon any of the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said T.B. or of his Heires or Feoffees by reason of the said Recognizance: And that he the said R. his Executors or Administrators at any time during the time of one and twenty years now next ensuing, at and upon rea∣sonable request, and at the costs and charges of the said T: R: his Heires Executors or assignes, shall in due forme of Law sue and take execution of the said Recognizance at the instruction and information of the said T: R: and of his Heires, Executors, admi∣nistrators, or assignes, upon the Lands and Tenements of the same T.B. his Heires and his Feoffees: And that after the said Man∣nors, Lands and Tenements, or any of them,  any part of them, or any of them, or any rent or forme reserved  of any of them, shall be extended and delivered to the said R. B. his Executors or administrators, in execution for or by reason of the said Recogni∣zance, shall within one month next after the said Mannor, or any other the premisses so delivered, or at any other time, upon reaso∣nable request to be made within five yeares then next following, by the said T R. his Heires, Executors, or assignes, to the said R. hi Executors, administrators, or assignes, make, seale, and deli∣ver to the said T: R: his Heires, executors, or assignes, such a suffi∣cient Lease in writing, or other conveyance as shall be devised by the learned Councel of the said T. R. his Heires, Executors, or as∣signes, as well for the assurance and sure making of the said seve∣rall Mannors of C. and B. and Mannor and Personage of C. As al∣so of all other the Mannors, Lands, and Tenements aforesaid, and of every part of them, and of all Rents and Services reserved out of any of them, and of all the issues and profits growing and issu∣ing out of any of them, mean, between the deliberate of them
made to the said R. his Executors or administrators: and the conveyance of them over to be made by him his Executors or Ad∣ministrators, to the said T.R. his Executors or assignes, during and for such time and term, as the said R. his Executors, Administra∣tors, or Assignes, shall have at any time in the same, by reason of the said Recognizance, or the execution or executions thereupon to be made, discharged of all incumbrances done by the said R. his Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, yeilding for the said Man∣nors and other the Premisses, yearly for every year during the said execution and executions, to the said R. his Executors, or Admini∣strators, one Pepper-corne if it be demanded the said Lease, or other conveyance to be made at the onely costs and charges of the said T.R. his Executors or Administrators. In witnesse, &c. An Indenture of Covenants, to make assurance of certaine Lands by a day, to Ʋses in this Inden∣ture contained, with condition that if any of the Ʋsees go about to discontinue the Estate li∣mited, otherwise then to make Joyntures, Leases, Copy estates, &c. his interest shall be deter∣mined. THis Indenture, &c, Betwen Sir G.S. of W. in the County of S. Knight, on the one part, and E.G. Citizen and Goldsmith of London, J.F. of C. in the County of S. Esquire, and H B. of B. in the said County of S. Esquire, and H. G. the younger, Citizen and Goldsmith of L. on the other part, witnesseth, that it is covenanted granted, concluded, and agreed between the said parties to these presents, in manner ond form following, that is to say, the said Sr G.S. for and in consideration of the hearty love which he bea∣reth to Dame D. now his wife,Consideration of his love to his wife and Son. daughter of the said E. G. and for the naturall and Fatherly affe∣ction which he beareth towards H. S. Son of him the said Sir G. and Dame D. And for and in con∣sideration of the performance and fulfilling of certain Covenants, Grants, and Agreements heretofore had, made, and done, between the said Sir G. on the one part: And the said E: G: and H: G: on the other part, doth
covenant, grant, and agree, for him, his Heires Executors, and Administrators,Covenant to make over a fair estate of Mannnors, &c. and every of them to and with the said E.G.I.F.H.B. and H. G. their Heires, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, that he the said Sir G. S. before the 00: day of April next coming, after the date hereof, by his sufficient Deed in writing, under his hand and seal, shall give, grant, and confirm to the said E: G: I.F.H: B: and H: G: and to their Heires, all that the Mannor of C. in the said County of S. with all the Rights, Members, and Appurtenances thereunto belonging, and all that the Mannor of B. with all and singular the appurte∣nances thereunto belonging, in the County of C. And all Messua∣ges, Lands, Tenements, Meases, Warrens, Meadowes, Leasues, Pastures, Waters, Feedings, Fishings, Rents, Reversions, Services, Escheats, Waives, Straives, Fines, Amerciaments, Herriots, Re∣lieves, Courts Lets, view of Frank pledge, Profits of Courts, Advowsons, Right of Patronages of Churches, and all other Profits, Advantages, common Franchises, Liberties, Jurisdictions, and He∣reditaments whatsoever, to the said Mannors, and other the Pre∣misses, or any of them, or any part or parcell of any of them be∣longing, or in any wise appertaining, or with the same or any of them, or any part or parcell of any of them, had, used, occupied, or enjoyed, as any part, parcell, or member of the same Mannors and other the Premisses, or of any of them, or so reputed, known, taken, or accepted, demised, or letten to Farm: To have, hold, and enjoy the said Mannors of C. and B. with all and singular their appurtenances, and all and singular the said Messuage, Lands, Te∣nements, and Hereditaments, and all and every other the Pre∣misses with their appurcenances, and the Reversion and Reversi∣ons of all and singular the said Mannors, Messuages, Lands, Tene∣ments and Hereditaments, and of all other the Premisses, with all and singular their appurtenances, unto the said E.J.H. and H. their Heires and Assignes for ever, to the uses and intents, and under the Provisoes and Conditions hereafter mentioned? That is to say, of the Mannor of B. and of all and singular the appurtenan. to the same belonging, to the use of said Sir G: S: for the term of his life,To the uses fol∣lowing. Of the Mannor of B. to the uses of Sir G and his wife for life, after to H: S: after to a second, third, fourth, and fifth Son. without im∣peachment of Wast: and of the said Mannor of B. with all & singular the app. to the use of the
said Sir G: and Dame D: for the terme of their lives, and of the longer liver of them, without impeachment of Waste, during the life of the said Sir G: and after the decease of the said Sir G. then of the said Mannor of B: with all and singular the appurte∣nances, to the use of the said H. S. and of the Heires of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use of the second Issue Male of the body of the said Sir G: and Dame D. between them lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the third Issue Male of the body of the said Sir G. and Dame D. lawfully begotten, and to the Heires of his body lawfully begotten; and for default of such Issue, then to the use of the fourth Issue Male of the body of the said Sir G: and Dame D: and to the heires of his body lawfully begotten? and for default of such, then to the use of the fifth issue male of the body of the said Sir G. and Dame D. lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use of the right heires of the said Sir G. for ever. And of the said Mannor of C.Of the Mannor of C. to the u∣ses of, &c. with all and singular the appurtenances, to the use of the said Sir G. and Dame D. his wife, without impeachment of Waste, during the life of the said Sir G. and after their deceases, then to the use of the said H: S: and of the heires of the body of the said H. lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue to the use of the second Issue male of the body of the said Sir G: and Dame D: between them to be begotten, and to the Heires of the body of the same second Son lawfully to be begotten (and so to three more Is∣sue males one after another) And for lack of such Issue, then to the use of the right heires of the said Sir G.S. for ever.Proviso to de∣termine their e∣states who go a∣bout to discon∣tinue the Estate taile other then Ioyntures to wives, or Lea∣ses, &c. Provided alwaies, and it is covenanted, concluded, and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, for them and their heires by these present Indentures; That if the said H: S: or any Issue of his body lawfully to be begotten, or any other such Issue male as afore∣said to be begotten of the bodies of the said Sir G: and Dame D: or any Issue of the body of any such Issue male, shall at any time after he or they, or any of them shall be in possession of the said premisses or of any part thereof, or receive or take any Issues or pro∣fits of the said Premisses, or any part thereof intend, agree, or go about to do and execute, or willingly or wittingly to suffer to be
done or executed, any act or thing, whereby the Estates before li∣mitted or appointed, of and in the said Mannors, Lands, or Tene∣ments, or any part thereof, shall be discontinued, recovered, barred, cut off or avoided, or altogether altered or changed, unlesse it be for the making or granting of any of these estates hereafter mentioned, and then also for the termes and times hereafter men∣tioned, and for no longer; That is to say, for a Joynture or Joyn∣tures to be made to such as the said H. or any of the said issues be∣fore mentioned, shall take to his lawfull wife for the terme of life or lives, of such wife or wives onely, or for the preferment of the younger Sons, or of the Daughters of some of the said issues: So that the estates so to be made for the preferment of the said Sons and Daughters, be not to continue above ten yeares at the most, or for the help or relief of any of the said Issues, when they or any of them shall be compelled to go serve the Kings Majesty, or any his Heires or Successors in the Wars, or for Grants by Copies of Court-rolls, according to the customes of the severall Mannors, Leases, or Demises, for and during one and twenty yeares, or for two or three lives at the most, from the time of the making of any such Lease, or Demise of Lands unusually letten, upon which Grants, Leases, and Estates so to be made and granted, other then of the estates made for the Joyntures aforesaid, or for the prefer∣ment of the said younger Children or Daughters, the old accusto∣med Rents, or more, shall be reserved to be paid yearely, during the continuance of the said Leases and Estates to those in reversi∣on of the said premisses, according to the Estates and limitations before in these presents mentioned and appointed, that then and after plain and due proof of the said intendment, agreement, and going about, had and made the estate, right, title, and interest of the said person so intending, agreeing, and going about, shall from the time of the said intending and agreement cease and de∣termine. And that then and from thenceforth the said E. I. H. and H.The use of the Premisses to de∣scend to the next issue limi∣ted by these presents. and the Survivors of them and their heires, and every other person having, claiming, or pretending to have any estate, right, title, or interest, of in and to the premisses, or any part thereof, shall stand and be seised of all and singular the said premisses with the appurtenan∣ces, to the use of the next issue, to whom the said Mannors, Lands, and Tenements are limited and appointed by these presents, to descend, remain, or come; as if the said person
that so intendeth or goeth about to do or suffer to be done as is aforesaid, at the time of the said intendment, agreement, or going about, had been dead and departed this present life, and to the use of the Heires of the body of the said Issue lawfully begotten, under like condition as aforesaid. Provided more∣over,Proviso, that if the Assurer be minded to sell the Mannor of B. then to assure other Lands in lieu thereof, and to the uses aforesaid, and the Trustees to stand seised to the use of the Purchasor. and it is further agreed between the said parties to these presents, That if the said Sir G.S. at any time during his naturall life, shall be mind∣ed or disposed to bargain, sell, or convey away the said Mannor of B. with the appurtenances, and in lieu and place thereof to convey and assure so much other Lands and Tenements to the said E.I.H. and J. and to their Heires, or to the survi∣vor of them and his Heires, according to the e∣states, and to the uses above mentioned; and for the doing of the same, do obtain the consent and agreement of the said E. and H. G. or of the survivor of them in writing, under their hands and seales, or under the hands and seales of the survivor of them, that then the said E. J. H. and H. and the survi∣vor of them and their Heires, immediatly from and after the time of such consent and agreement of the said E. and H. G. or of the survivor of them, and from and after a sufficient conveyance and assurance made by the said Sir G.S. of other Manners, Lands, or Tenements, to the yearly value of the said Mannor of B. in forme aforesaid, to the said E.G. and H G or to the Survivor of them or to such as the said E. and H: C. the younger, or the survivor of them shall nominate and appoint, the said E. and H. and the sur∣vivor of them and their heires, shall stand and be seised of and in the said Mannor of B. with the appurtenances, to the onely use and behoof of such person or persons and their heires for ever, to whom the said Sir G.S. shall so bargain and sell the same as afore∣said, and to none other use or uses whatsoever, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.Discharge of incumbrances. And the said Sir G. S. for him, his Heires, Executors, and Administrators, and evry of them, doth covenant and grant to and with the said E. and H. G. their heirs, executors, and administra- and every of them by these presents in manner and form follow∣ing, that is to say, That all and singular the said Mannors, Messuages, Lands Tenem. and Hereditam. and all and every other the Pre∣misses,
and the reversion and reversions thereof, from henceforth shall continue cleerly and freely acquitted and exonerated, or at all times hereafter shall be saved harmlesse of and from all former Bargains, Sales, Joyntures, Dowers, Statutes, Bonds, Recogni∣zances, Entailes, arrearages of Rents, Annuities, Fees, Intrusions, Judgments, Forfeitures, and Executions, and of and from all other charges, grants, titles, and incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, or done by the said Sir G. at any time before the making and sea∣ling of these presents, the rents and Services from henceforth to be due to the chief Lords of the Fee or Fees of the Premisses, and the Estate of M. B. of, in, and to the said Mannor of B. with the appur∣tenances for the term of her life only: And all Leases for termes of years, and grants by Indentures or Copy of Court Roll heretofore made, whereupon the old and accustomed rent or more is reserved and payable during the said term onely except. And further that he the said Sir G S. from time to time within five years next en∣suing the date of these presents, shall and will do, make, know∣ledge, and suffer, and cause, &c. all and every such further devise and devises, thing and things, at the costs and charges of, &c. as by the said E. and H. their heirs or assigns, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised, for the further surety of all and sin∣gular the Premisses, and of the reversion and reversions of the same with their appurtenances, to the said E. and H. and the survivor of them, and to their heirs and assigns, to the uses and behoofs be∣fore specified, and to none other use or intent. In witnesse, &c. A Covenant in a purchase of Land, that if the Vendee be evicted, then the Vendor to pay the Vendee back again a certain summe of monie for the quantity evicted. ANd the said A. covenanteth, &c. that if any of the said Premisses shall at any time hereafter be lawfully evicted or recovered against the said R. P his heirs or assigns, or he the said R P. his Heires or Assigns be lawfully put from the same, not being through the negligence, consent, faint pleading, or default of the said R.P. his heirs or assigns, That then the said W. his heirs or assigns, shall within six months next after notice thereof reasonably given, pay to the said R. P. his heirs or assigns, for every acre and half acre, or greater or lesser quantity so evicted, or so put from after the rate of six pounds for the acre, at the now Mansion-house of, &c. without fraud, covin, or further delay. In witnesse, &c.
An Indenture where two Owners of a Ship, Covenant with their Ship to fetch a certaine quantity of Salt from beyond the Seas, and to deliver it to a Merchant at Dublin, and the Merchant co∣venanteth upon the receit to pay a summe of mo∣monie for the same. THis Writing indented, or Charter partie made between W. G. of L. Habd. and J.T. of L. Grocer, Owners of the good Ship of London, called the Dragon, of the burthen of five and fifty Tonnes and upward, whereof is Master under God for the present Voyage, one J.N. on the one part, and J.C. the elder of Dublin, in the parts of Ireland Merchant, on the other part; Witnesseth, that it is co∣venanted, bargained, and agreed between the said parties in man∣ner and form following; that is to say, The said W. G. and J. T. for them, their Executors, Administrators, Factors, and Assignes, and every of them do covenant and grant, to and with the said J.C. his Executors, Administrators, Factors, and Assignes, and e∣very of them by these presents; That the said good Ship within the space of eight daies now next ensuing, or so soon after as wind and weather will suffer, shall at the charges and adventure of the said Owners, depart from and out of the Port of London aforesaid, where she now rideth at an Ancker, and from thence shall keep di∣rect course as wind and weather will permit, towards some of the Bayes for Salt, within the Kingdomes or Territories of France, Spaine, or Portugall. And that the said W. and J. their Agents or Factors, at their own costs and charges, with all convenient ex∣pedition, shall fully freight and lade, or cause to be laden the said Ship with good and Merchantable Salt, and then immediatly as wind and weather will serve, shall at their like adventure as afore∣said, depart from the same place of lading with the said Ship, and her lading towards the Port of Dublin in Ireland. And that for the attaining to the same Port of Dublin, the said Master and his Mar∣riners, with all good end endevour according to their knowledge and understanding, shall set and apply their course without any fraud or covin; and that so soon as the said good Ship shall have finish∣ed her said appointed Voyage, and shall arrive in safety with her Lading in the Port of Dublin aforesaid, that then in the same Port
she shall ride at Anker in the common place of ankorage there, called the Poole of Clumme Tarfe: And that then within one day next after the same arrivall there, the said Master or the said Own∣ers, or one of them, or some of their agents, Factors, or Messengers, shall signifie the said arrivall of the said Ship unto the said J. C. his Executors, Administrators, Factors, or Assignes, at the now dwelling house of the said J.C. in Dublin aforesaid; And then and there shall be ready to deliver all the Salt in the said Ship, which shall be fifty five Tonnes at the least, after foure Burdeaux Hogs∣heads to every Tonne, in measuring to be once shaken, and then being full to be stricken off. And that the said Owners, their agents, Factors, or assignes, shall then in forme aforesaid, make true, plaine, and undelayed delivery of all the Salt to be brought in the said Ship into the said port of D. unto the said I. C. his, &c. of and from aboord the said Ship, into their Loyters to be brought and laid close aboord the same Ship, all the same Salt then being freed and cleered of and from all manner of former charges of what manner or sort soever. For and in consideration of which said Bargain, Covenants, and agreements so made by the said Own∣ers, to and with the said I. in form aforesaid: The said J. C. for him &c. doth covenant, &c. to and with the said Owners, their Executors, Administrators, Factors, and Assignes, and every of them by these presents, That upon notice given to the said I. C. his, &c of the safe arrivall of the good Ship aforesaid, in the Port of D. he the said J his Executors, &c. shall and will be ready to take and receive her said Lading of Salt, with all reasonable and convenient expedition; and within ten daies next after the re∣ceit thereof upon reasonable request, shall at the said dwelling house of &c. pay and content, or upon good and true account ac∣cording to the tenor and true meaning of these presents, shall al∣low to the said Owners, their Factors or assignes, then shillings of, &c. for every Hogshead of the said Salt to be delivered to the said J.C. his, &c. as aforesaid, for and in consideration of which said Covenants, Grants, and agreements truly to be kept and perfor∣med, and in part of payment for the said Salt, the said I.C. now at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, hath before hand contented and paid to the said Owners a hundred pounds of, &c. so to be reckoned and accounted upon at the delivery of the said Salt; which said summe of a hundred pounds, they the said Own∣ers do acknowledge by these presents, that they have had and re∣ceived accordingly: and thereof and therefore do cleerly discharge
and acquit the said I. C. his Executors, Administrators, Factors and assignes, and every of them by these presents. If the Ship or Goods miscarry in the Voyage, then the hundred pounds repayable at a time and place certain, &c. In Witnesse, &c. A Covenant where one having sold Land, the Vendee may distrain of other Land of the Vendors for tithe to be recovered against the Vendee; in respect of the Land sold. THis Indenture, &c. Between E: B. of E. &c. on the one part, and R.L. of, &c. on the other part witnesseth; That whereas heretofore the said E.P. and H. P. his Son and Heire apparant, have bargained and sold to the said R. his Heires and assignes for ever, all that close of Meadow-ground called, &c. containing, &c. And also all those two parts in three parts divided, of all that field called, &c. As by the Indentures thereof made between the said E. and H. on the one part, and the said R. on the other part, bearing date, &c. more plainly and at large may and will appeare. The said E.P. for him, his Heires, Executors, and Administrators and every of them doth covenant and grant to and with the said R. his Heires, Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, and every of them by these presents; That when and as often as he the said R. his Heires, or assignes, shall at any time hereafter be constrained or compelled by any order of Law spirituall or temporall, either to pay tithe, or any summe of monie for the Premisses, bargained by the said former Indentures, or any part or parcell thereof, or else to pay unto the Parson or Proprietary of M. Minister and Vicar there, or either of them, his or their Successors or assignes, any summe or summes of money in recompence for the same tithe, that then and so often it shall be lawfull unto the said R. L. his Heires and assignes, into the Mannor of E. with the appurtenan∣ces, in the said County of L. and into all other the Lands Tene∣ments, and Hereditaments of the said E. P. in M. aforesaid, and into every part and parcell thereof, to enter and distrain for such summe or summes of monie, as the said tithe of the said above bargained Premisses doth or shall amount unto, or then shall be esteemed to be worth, or for such summe or summes of monie, as the said R. his Heires or assignes shall be compelled by order of
Law to pay unto the said parson proprietary and Vicar his or their Successors or Assignes for and in recompence of the same Tithe, together with his or their reasonable costs and charges in suits of the Law had and sustained in and about the same. And the Di∣stresse and Distresses then and there so taken, lawfully and quietly to beare, lead, drive and carry away. And the same to detaine, imparke and keep untill the said summe or summes of money which the said R. his Heires or Assignes shall be so compelled to pay as aforesaid, Together with his and their costs and charges in Law as is aforesaid shall be to the said R. his Heires or assignes ful∣ly satisfied and paid. A Covenant by E. P. That if during his, and R. L. his life, he shall be minded to sell the Mannor of S. R. L. shall have the preferment thereof before another. In witnesse, &c. Mr. Fuller Consultor. Assignments. An Assignment of a Licence to transport Wooll; for satis∣faction of a debt due to the Assignee, with covenant that if the Assignee levy not his debt by a day, the Assignor will pay it. THis Indenture, &c. Between Sir F. W. Knight, one of her Majesties principall Secretaries on the one party. And C. H. Governour of the Fellowship of the Merchant Adven∣turers of England on the other part, Witnesseth that whereas our said Soveraign Lady the Queens Majestie, by her Graces Let∣ters Patents under her great Seal of England, bearing date, &c. Hath granted and given licence, power and authority unto the said Sir F. W. by the name of her well beloved Servant F. W. and to his Assigne and Assignes, Deputies and Factors whatsoever, and to e∣very of them, that they and every of them shall and may at his and their will, liberties and pleasure, at all times from thenceforth, and from time to time during the space of twelve years next insu∣ing the date of the Letters Patents, bargaine, provide, buy, and
obtaine, receive, have, and take in, bargaine, sale, gift, or other∣wise, of any person or persons so much Wooll and Woolls of any Country or sort as shall amount the full accomplishment, number and quantity of one thousand Sarplers of Wooll accounting three Sacks of Wooll to every Sarpler, over and besides the clacking, berding, clensing, and refusing of the said Wooll or Woolls, and that the same Wooll and Woolls, and the refuse Wooll and other Woolls clacked, berded, and taken out of the said Wooll or Woolls without fraud or covin: The said Sir F. and his Assigneee, Assignes, Deputies, Factors or Attornies, or his or their assigne or assignes, or any of them shall and may at his and their, or any of their will and pleasure, bargaine, sell, utter, and put away from time to time to such person and persons as shall or will buy or obtaine the same without any danger of any Act, Law, Statute, Provision, and Pro∣clamation, or of any Penalty or Forfeiture whatsoever to the con∣trary notwithstanding; And further our said Soveraign Lady the Queens Majestie by her highnesse said Letters Patents, did give and grant licence and authority unto the said Sir F. W. and his As∣signee, Assignees, Factors, Deputies Attornies, and to every of them whatsoever, that they and every of them at all or any time or times hereafter within the said space of twelve years, aswell by him or them selfe or selves, as by his or their Factors, Attornies, Ser∣vants or Deputies whatsoever, or any of them shall and may ship, lade, freight and imbarke, or cause, &c. at the Port of London, or any other Port of this her Highnesse Realme, where shipping of Woolls is or hath been used in any Ship, Vessell, or Bottome whatso∣ever at one time or at severall times at his or their pleasure or plea∣sures during the said time and space of twelve years, the said num∣ber and quantity of one thousand Sarplers of the said wooll, so clacked, bearded, and cleansed, accounting three Sacks of the said Wooll to every Sarpler, according to her Majesties weight, and just standard now used in her Port of London for the weight of Woolls by the over-sight of her Majesties Officers, Ministers, and other persons then appointed, or which should be appointed for the weighing of Woolls: And the same so shipped, laded, freighted and embarqued, shall and may convey, transport, and carry out, or cause, &c. of this Realm into any place or places beyond the Seas, whatsoever whereunto at that time there should not be any re∣straint or prohibition from her Highnesse her Heires or Successors to any English Merchant to trade or resort with their Merchan∣dizes, and there to sell, put away, and utter the same at his or their
pleasure, for his or their most profit and commodity: As by the said Letters Patents wherein divers other grants and things been contained more at large appeareth, Of which Woolls there yet re∣maine to be provided, bought and transported (as between the said parties is estimated) the quantity of seven hundred Sarplers or thereabouts. Now in consideration that the said C. H. at the request of the said Sir F. hath taken up of divers persons for the use of the said Sir F. divers summes of money amounting in the whole to the summe of nine hundred sixty pounds, as by account remaining betwixt the said Sir F. and the said C. may appeare, and for payment of which said summes of money the said C. stan∣deth bound unto divers persons by Bonds and Specialties: The said Sir F. W. for the more surety or satisfaction of the said summes of money unto the said C. his Executors and Administrators, and for all the interest therefore to be paid. Hath granted, assigned, and set over, and by these presents doth grant, assigne, and set o∣ver unto the said C. H. and his assignes the said Letters Patents, and all his right, property and interest in and to the same, and in and to all licences, grants, liberties, priviledges, and authories whatsoever granted by the said Letters Patents, and also doth by these presents assigne, make, ordaine, constitute and appoint the said C. H. and I. P. his Servant and either of them, his full and onely Deputies, Attornies and Assignes joyntly and severally to bargaine, provide, buy and obtaine, retaine, have and take in, bargaine, sale, gift, or otherwise of any person or persons, so much Wooll or Woolls of any Country or sort as shall amount unto the full accomplishment, number, and quantity of all the residue of the said one thousand Sarplers of Wool yet remaining to be provided & transported, and to bargain, sell, convey, and transport the same at their and either of their wills and pleasures, and all other things whatsoever in the said Letters Patent mentioned to do and cause to be done as the said Sir F. could or might doe, according to the true intent and meaning of the said Letters Patents and the said Sir F. W. for him, his Heires and Executors doth covenant and grant to and with the said C.H. his Executors and Assignes by these presents, That he the same C. his Executors and Assignes shall or may have, perceive, and enjoy to his and their own use, all such benefit, profit, and commodity as hereafter shall be gotten, gained, or had by force of the said Letters Patents, or any matter or thing therein contained for any act done or to be done by the said Sir F. his Executors or Assignes to the contrary untill the said nine hun∣dred
sixty pounds, and the interest thereof shall be truly paid or sa∣tisfied to the said C. his Executors or Assignes, and further the said Sir F. W. for him, his Heires and Assignes doth covenant and grant to and with the said C. his Executors and Assignes by these pre∣sents, That if the said C. or his Assignes within two years next in∣suing the date hereof, shall not clearly get and have to his and their own use by vertue of the said Letters Patents, and of these presents, so much money as will satisfie and pay the said debt of nine hundred and sixty pounds for whi the same C. standeth bound as aforesaid, and all the interest thereof: That then the said Sir F or his assignes shall conrent and pay unto the said C. or his Assignes the same summe of nine hundred sixty pounds with the interest thereof, or so much thereof as shall not be gotten or gained by the said C. or his assignes as aforesaid, Provided al∣waies that upon the payment or other satisfaction as aforesaid made to the said C. his Executors or Assignes aswell of the said nine hundred sixty pounds, as also of such other money as the said C. his Executors or assignes shall disburse or lay out for the forbear∣ing and interest of the said nine hundred sixty pounds, the gift, grant, and assignment aforesaid shall be void and of none effect. In witnesse, &c. Deputations. A Deputation in a Licence to transport cloath, continu∣able till the Deputy shall have levied a certaine debt to him owing by the Constitutor. TO all the Queens Majesties Customers, Comptrollers, Sur∣veyors, Serchers, & Officers of her highnesse Ports, Creeks, and passages, and to all other to whom these presents shall come C. Lord H. of E. Knight of the order of the Garter sendeth greeting, whereas heretofore our Soveraign Lady the Queen by her Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the second day of this present July, hath given and granted licence, power, and authority, to me the said C. Lord H.
mine Executors, Administrators or Assignes whatsoever aswell Englishmen as strangers borne being made denizens, and not made denizens, and every of them, That I and they by my selfe or them∣selves, or by mine or their or any of their Factors, Deputies or As∣signes, aswell Englishmen as Strangers borne, or any of them what∣soever during the space of three years next insuing after the date of the said Letters Patents shall and may lawfully provide and buy, or cause to be provided and bought with mine or their, or any of their owne proper goods, or the goods of any other, and for mine or their or any of their owne proper use, or for the use of any other, the number and quantity of foure thousand broad woollen cloathes or kersies answerable to the same, accounting three kersies for one broad cloath aswell of such sorts of cloath as be commonly called Kentish cloath or Suffolk cloath, or of any other sort whatsoever, and aswell white as coloured cloathes or ker∣sies; And the same foure thousand broad woollen cloathes or kersies answerable to the same to be accounted after the rate aforesaid, and every parcell thereof un-wrought and un-dres∣sed within this Realme, That is to say, not rowed, barbed, first coursed and shorne, or otherwise wrought and dressed, or un wrought and un-dressed, and being white or otherwise coloured in any Ship or Ships, Vessell or Vessells being of her Majesties Realmes and Dominions, or appertaining to her Freinds or Confederates whatsoever, when and as often as to me or them, or to mine or their Attornies, Factors, Assignes or Deputies, Englishmen, Denizens, or Strangers borne, what∣soever or any of them it shall seeme good at one or divers times within the said time of three yeares in any Port or Ports of this Realme of England to lade or ship, and the same from thence into any the Ports of beyond the Seas, then being in league and amity with her Majestie to transport, send, convey, ship and carry over, or cause, &c. there to be sold, disposed, or uttered, un∣rowed, unbarked, not first coursed and un-shorne, or otherwise at mine and their will and pleasure, and to mine and their most benefit and advantage, paying unto her Majesty, her heirs or successors at the full end of two years next after the transportation of any of the said cloathes or kersies for the customes subsidies and imposts, & all and singular dueties whatsoever to her Majesty her heir or successors therefore by any meanes due or to be due such sums of money as Merchants meere Englishmen borne, and Citizens of her
City of London to her Majestie, her Heires and Successors for the like Merchandize out of the said Realme to the parts of beyond the Seas to be transported, do or are bound or have been accusto∣med, or be ordered to pay and not more, or otherwise without any molestation, paine, forfeiture, or losse to be therefore had, sustain∣ed, incurred, paid, or borne by me or them or any of them against her Majesty, her Heires or Successors, or any person or persons, bo∣dies politique or corporate, to be demanded, sued for, or recovered thereof, and without any manner of let, interruption, or distur∣bance of any person or persons whatsoever, and also without any speciall licence or dispensation to be had therefore under the great seal of Eng. Any thing contained in the Statutes recited in the Letters Patents aforesaid, or in any of them, or in any other Act, Statute, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation, Imposition, Re∣straint, or thing before the date of the said Letters Patents, or here∣after to be had or made to the contrary thereof in any wise not∣withstanding: As in and by the said Letters Patents containing divers other Articles, Covenants, Appointments, Grants and Au∣thorities plainly and at large will appeare. Know ye that I the said C. Lord H. have made, ordained and constituted, and by these presents do make, &c. R. Y. of the City of L. Grocer, my Attorny, Factor and Deputy to provide and buy, or cause, &c. the said number and quantity of foure thousand broad woollen cloathes or kersires answerable to the same as aforesaid, or any part of them or any of them, and the same or any part or parcell thereof in any such Ship or Ships, Vessell or Vessells as aforesaid, when and as of∣ten as to him, his Attornies, Factors, or Assignes, it shall seem good at any time within the said terme of three yeares in any port or ports of this Realme of England, to lade or ship, and the same from this Realme of England, into any the ports beyond the Seas, then being in league and amity with her Majesty, To transport, send, convey, ship, and carry over, or cause, &c. there to be sold, disposed, or uttered at the will and pleasure of my said Attorney, Factor, and Deputy to my most benefit and advantage, and in such and so large, absolute and ample manner and forme as I my selfe by vertue of the said Letters Patents, or by warrant of any other or further authority or licence to be had or procured by meanes of a∣ny thing specified in the said Letters patents may or can do. Gi∣ving and granting by these presents to my said Factor and Attor∣ny, my full and whole power and authority for me and in my name to doe, procure, knowledge, and require, and cause, &c.
all manner of thing and things whatsoever, that I my selfe by ver∣tue or warrant of the said Letters Patents, or of any thing therein contained, can, may, or might, do, procure, knowledge, and require, or could or might have done, procured, knowledged, or required, or otherwise have caused to be done, &c. if these presents had not been made; ratifying and allowing for me, mine Executors, Ad∣ministrators and Assignes, all and whatsoever my said Factor and Deputy and his Attornies, Factors and Deputies, shall do or cause to be done in the Premisses, or any part thereof by these presents: And forasmuch as I the said C. Lord H. have had and taken up be∣fore hand of the said R. Y. the summe of nine hundred pounds of lawfull, &c. whereof, &c. I the said C. Lord H. for and in conside∣ration of satisfying againe, and recompensing of the said nine hun∣dred pounds to the said R. Y. his Executors and Administrators for me, mine Executors, &c. do covenant, &c. to and with, &c. That this present Letter of Attorny and Deputation, and all the authority, strength, and effect thereof shall remaine and continue unto the said R. Y. his Executors, Administrators and Assignes, and to every of them in all his full force and virtue, and at any time hereafter shall not be revoked or disallowed by me the said C. Lord H. mine Executors, Administrators or Assignes, or otherwise untill by warrant of the same the said R. Y. his Executors, Admi∣nistrators or assignes for their own use, shall have had and levied of the Premisses in clear profit, the full sum of nine hundred pounds of lawfull, &c. beyond all charges whatsoever, and I the said C. Lord H. for the consideration aforesaid have given and granted, and by these presents, for me, mine executors, administrators and assignes do give and grant to the said R. Y. his executors and administrators nine hundred pounds of lawfull, &c. of the first clear profits which shall rise or be levied and received of the Premisses, the same nine hendred pounds to be had, received, perceived, levied, taken and enjoyed to the onely use, behoof and benefit of the said R. Y. his executors, administrators and assignes without any account there∣of or therefore, or for any part thereof to me the said C. Lord H. mine executors, administrators or assignes ar any time to be made, given or yeilded, or in any wise to be therefore required. In wit∣nesse, &c. Dat. 29. Julij, &c.
A Deputation in a licence for planishing of Plate, with an annuity granted for the same. THis Indenture, &c. between R. S. of London Goldsmith, on the one part, and R.H. of London aforesaid Goldsmith on the other part, Witnesseth that whereas our Soveraign Lord the King by his Letters Patents, bearing date at Richmond, &c. for the consi∣deration therein expressed, hath given and granted licence and authority to the said R. S. by himselfe, his Servants, and any such as he shall set on worke to planish and hollow all and all manner of chargers of Silver, Platters of Silver, Dishes of Silver, Sawcers of Silver, Trenchers of Silver, Basons of Silver, Bolls of Silver, and such like Vessells of Silver hereafter to be uttered and sold within his Highnesse City of L. or Suburbs of the same with divers prohi∣bitions and commandments for and concerning the Premisses, to endure for the terme of the naturall life of the said R. S. As by the said Letters Patents whereunto relation be had more plainly, and at large may and will appeare. Now the said R. S. for the conside∣ration hereafter appearing in these presents, hath given,Assignation. granted, and assigned the said R. H. from henceforth to be servant of the said R. S. in the said faculty and science to use and exercise the same art, science, and mystery as servant of the said R. S. from the date of these pre∣sents during the naturall life of the said R. Together with all pri∣viledges, benefits and commodities to come or grow of or by the exercise of the same office, and by the prohibitions, priviledges, preheminences and commandments aforesaid, and by all, every or any of them, to have, hold, use, occupy, exercise and execute, and cause, &c. the said Office to the said R. H. his Servants and As∣signes in as large and ample manner and forme to all intents and purposes as the said R. S. should or might have had, used, executed and occupyed the same if this present Indenture had not been had or made from the date hereof during the naturall life of the said R S. to and for the behoof and best profit, benefit and commodity of the said R. and his assignes. And the said R. S. covenanteth, &c. That the said Letters Patents, and all other the Premisses are clear and free, and so shall continue during the life of the said R. S. of and from all former grants, deputations, bargaines, charges and incumbrances had, made, or consented unto by the
said R. S. And that he the said R. S. shall at the ensealing of these presents, deliver unto the said R. H. the said Letters Patents un∣cancelled and un-defaced, or by any other meanes made void in the Law by the said R. S. and moreover the said R. S. doth by these presents depute and appoint, and set on worke the said R. H. his Servants and assignes to be the onely workmen of and for the said R. S. in the said art, craft, mistery or science to be done, used, and executed upon all and singular the Vessells and peices of silver above specified by and during all the terme of the naturall life of the said R. S: within the City or Suburbs of L aforesaid, in as am∣ple manner, and with all the commodities aforesaid given or gran∣ted, or prohibited or commanded to or for the said R: S: by vertue of the Letters Patents aforesaid, as he the said R: S: should, ought and might have done if this present Indenture had never, &c. and the said R: S: further covenanteth, &c: That the said R: H: and his assignes shall and lawfully may as aforesaid, use, and exer∣cise the art, craft, mistery or science aforenamed, touched or spe∣cified during all the terme aforesaid, to his and their onely use and behoof without any let or interruption of him the said R: S: or any other claiming in, by or from him, for and in consideration of which said Covenants, articles, agreements, gifts, grants and assign∣ments by the said R: S: to the said R: H: made as abovesaid, and on the part and behalf of the said R: H: & his assigns well and truly to be observed, performed, & kept according to the true meaning of the said parties to these presents: The said R: H: covenanteth, &c: That he the said R. his Executors or assignes shall and will from henceforth during the naturall life of the said R. S. well and truly yeild and pay to the said R. or his sufficient Deputy or assignes, one yearely summe of, &c. at or in a certain Hall called Gold∣smiths Hall, scituate, &c. on the 00. day of N. and on the 00. day of N. by even portions, between the houres of, &c. of the same se∣verall daies, In witnesse, &c.
A Deputation in the moyety of a Licence granted for buy∣ing and bringing into the Realme of a certaine quantity of goods and green fish. TO all men to whom these presents shall come I. D. of the Towne of R. in the County of S. Gent. and W. H. Yeoman purveyor for the Kings Majesties Sea Fish sending greeting in our Lord God everlasting, whereas our Soveraign Lord the Kings Ma∣jesty by his Letters Patents under his great Seal of England, bear∣ing date at G. &c. of his speciall grace and meer motion, and for certaine considerations him moving, hath given and granted li∣cence, liberty and authority to us the said I. and W. that we our selves and the survivor of us, and the Factor or Factors, Deputie or Deputies, Assigne or Assignes of us, and the survivor of us shall and may at all times for and during the space of ten years which did commence and next insue from the fourteenth day of, &c. now last past, buy, bargaine and bring into this Realme of Eng. at our will and pleasure, all and all manner of Cod and Lings in Barrells or other Casks, and all other Fish commonly called green fish or green Cod in Barrells or Casks, in any manner of Ship or Ships, or other Vessell or Vessells or Bottomes being english or strangers, and in league or amity with his Majesty, and the same so had and brought into this Realm to utter and sell by our selves, our factor or factors, deputy or deputies, assign or assigns, or by the fa∣ctor, &c. of the survivor of us to our most profit, gain, & advantage and to the most profit, &c. of the Survivor of us, to any person or persons during, and by all the said term of ten years without any manner of let, impeachment, damage or penalty to be had, suffered or demanded, forfeited or sustained by us the said I. D. and W. H. our Factor or Factors, &c. or any of them for the same, The Statute made at the Parliament holden at Westminster the twelfth day of, &c. touching the deceitfull packing used in Cod and Lings brought in Barrells into this Realme, or any thing therein contained, or any other Act, Ordinance, Statute, Proclamation, Restraint, or other thing heretofore had or made or hereafter to be, &c. to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: So that the said quantity of Fish
so barrelled to be brought in by vertue of the said Licence, ex∣ceed not in the whole the number of six thousand lasts of barrel∣led Fish, and also that the same be brought in within the said term of ten years: As by the said Letters Patents containing therein divers other Grants, Liberties, Authorities, Articles and Pro∣visions more plainly and at large may and will appeare. And whereas it is heretofore bargained and agreed between us the said I. D. and W. H. That I the said I. D. and mine Assignes for our part shall have and enjoy the benefit and advantage of buying, bringing into this Realme, and uttering in the same of three thousand lasts, the one moyety of the said six thousand lasts of barrelled Fish: And that the said W. H. and mine Assignes for our part shall have and enjoy the benefit and advan∣tage of buying, &c. of other three thousand lasts, the other moye∣ty of the said six thousand lasts of barrelled Fish: And whereas also I the said I. D. for and in consideration of, &c. which be∣fore the ensealing of these presents I have had and fully recei∣ved of T. S. of London Esquire, have given, granted, bargained and sold to the said T. S. all my right, title, and interest, power, licence and authority in to and for the buying, bringing into this Realme, and uttering in the same the said three thousand lasts of barrelled Fish: Now to the intent to convey and make a good assurance of the said licence to the said T. S. his Factors and Assigns for to buy, bring into this Realme, and there to utter three thousand lasts of the said barrelled Fish, and also to the intent to convey and assure to the said T. and his Assignes, all such right and interest whatsoever, as I the said I. D. have or had, or may or ought to have in or to the said Letters Pa∣tents, and all and every the Grants, Liberties, Licences and Authorities thereby given or granted, so as I the said I. or any other to my use shall have no further right or interest to deale or meddle in any of the Pre∣misses at any time hereafter we the said I. D.Deputation. and W. H. have made ordeined and constituted: And by these presents doe make, &c. the said T. S. his Factor and Factors, Deputy and Deputies, our lawfull and sufficient Deputy and Deputies from time to time at the pleasure of the said T. his Factors, Deputies or Assignes, Factor, Deputy or Assigne, or any of them by vertue of the Licence aforesaid, during the said terme of ten years to buy, bring into this Realm, and there to utter the said three thousand lasts of barrelled Fish, and every of
any part thereof in so large beneficiall and ample manner as we our selves can or might do by vertue of the said licence: And all the whole & commodity to come or arise of or by the said 3000. lasts of barrelled Fish, and of every or any part thereof, the same to take and enjoy to the said T. his Executors, Deputies and Assignes to their own use, without any account making thereof, or therefore, or for any part thereof to us the said I. and W. or either of us, our Executors, Administrators or Assignes. And also we the said I. and W. have given, granted, and assigned over, and by these pre∣sents do give, grant and set over to the said T. S. his Factors, De∣puties and Assignes, all our whole power, liberty and licence what∣soever to us given by the said Letters Patents to, or for the buying,Grant of the benefit of the licence for a moyety, and to seife Fish brought in con∣trary to the Pa∣tent &c. of three thousand lasts of the said barrelled Fish, parcell of six thousand lasts thereof aforesaid, and also full power and authori∣tie to arrest, seise, and attach all such Fish as the said T. his Factors, Deputies or Assignes shall hap∣pen during the said terme to find brought into this Realme contrary to the said Statute and tenor of the Letters Patents aforesaid, and of so much thereof as shall be arrested, seised, or attached by the said T. S. his Factors, Deputies or Assignes or any of them, they to have take and enjoy all such forfeiture, benefit and advan∣tage thereby, as by the said Letters Patents are in any wise given or granted to the said I. D. and W. H. their Factors, Deputies or assigns, & we the said I. D. & W. H severally either of us for his severall part for himselfe, his Executors and Ad∣ministrators do covenant and grant to and with the said T. S.The parties do severally cove∣nant. his Executors and Administrators, Factors, and assignes and every of them by these presents in manner and forme following; That is to say, That the said T. S. his Factors, Deputies and Assignes shall or lawfully may have and enjoy all and singular the Premisses to them above granted or limited by these presents according to the true meaning of the same without any impediment by or through the meanes of the said I. D. his Executors or assignes for his or their part, or by or through the meanes of the said W. H.For enjoyance. his Executors or assignes for his or their part: and that the said I. D. and W. H. for their severall parts at all times hereafter at the reasonable request and costs and charges in the Law onely of the said T. S. his Fa∣ctors,
Deputies or assignes shall and will make all such further Deputations, assignments, Conveyances, and assu∣rance of and for the buying,For further assurance. bringing into this Realme, and there uttering by vertue and autho∣rity of the said Letters Patents the said three thou∣sand lasts of barrelled Fish, and for such arresting, seising and at∣taching as aforesaid of barrelled Fish to be brought into this Realme contrary to the said Statute and the tenor of the said Let∣ters Patents, as by the Councell learned in the Lawes of this Realme of the said T. his Factors or assignes or any of them shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised according to the plaine and true meaning of these presents and not otherwise. In wit∣nesse, &c. Joyntures. A Womans Joynture in Land. THis Indenture, &c. Between R.P. Cit. and Leather seller of L. on the one part, and R. R. and W. R. of L. Gold∣smiths on the other part, Witnesseth that the said R. P for and in consideration of a marriage to be had and so∣lemnized between the said R.P. and M. P. Widow, naturall daugh∣ter of the said R: R: and Sister of the said W: R: late the wife of I: P: late of L: Carrier deceased, and for a Joynture to be made and assured to the said M: doth by these presents covenant and grant for him, his heires and assignes, to and with the said R: R: W: R: their heires, executors, and assignes: That he the said R. his heirs and assigns and all and every other person & persons, and their heires & assignes that now be or hereafter shall be seised of or in all those three Messuages or Tenements with all their appurte∣nances to the same Tenements or any of them belonging or there∣with now had or occupied by the said R. or his assigns scituate ly∣ing and being in B: in the Parish of Saint M: in the county of S: and of or in one feild with the appurt. called T: field lying on the south side of the feild called H: scituate in the parish of St. O: in the said borough of S: shall from henceforth stand and be seised of the said Messuages, Ten: and the said close called T: feild, & of all other the
Premisses with their Appurtenances to the use of the said M. P. for the terme of her life, and after her decease to the use of the said R. P.  his Heires and Assignes for ever: And the said R. P. covenanteth, &c. That he the said R. P. is at the ensealing and delivery hereof sole seised of all and singular the Premisses of a good perfect and sure estate in the Law in Fee-simple, to the onely use and behoof of him the same R. and his heires and assignes without any Condition; And that the said M. shall or may lawfully have, hold, occupy and enjoy the same Premisses during her naturall life, if she fortune to survive the said R. without any molestation, interruption, or e∣viction of the Heires or Assignes of the said R. P. or of any person or persons having, or which shall have any lawfull estate, title, or interest in or to the said Premisses or any part thereof, by, from, or under the said R. or under his estate in any wise. In witnesse, &c. An Indenture for a womans Joynture. THis Indenture, &c. Between A. C. the elder of L. Salter on the one part, That T.E. of S. in the County of C. Gent. on the other part witnesseth, and for and in consideration of a marriage now immediatly hereafter to be had and solemnized between A. C. the younger of Graies-Inn in the County of M. Gent. son and heire apparent of the said A. C. the elder, and D. R. Daughter in law of the said T. E. and naturall Daughter of W. R. late of S afore∣said Gent. deceased, the said A. C. the elder, for him, his heirs, Executors and Administrators doth covenant, grant, and agree to and with the said T. E. his Executors and Admini∣strators by these presents in manner and form following; That is to say, That he the said A. C. and his Heires, and all and eve∣ry other person or persons now being, or which hereafter shall be or stand seised of or in all that the scire of the Mannor of I. with the appurtenances in the County of C. aforesaid, and of or in all the demesne Lands thereunto belonging now in Lease to F. R. and his Assignes for certaine years yet induring for the yearly rent of fifty pounds of, &c. or above, and of and in the Mannor of B. with the Appurtenances in L. aforesaid, of the clear yearly value of forty pounds or thereabouts, and of or in one Messuage with the
Appurtenances in P. in the County of S. now in the tenure of I. P. of the yearly rent of eleven pounds or thereabouts, shall thereof and of every part thereof (from and after the time of espousalls lawfully had between the said A. the younger, and the said D. and from and after such time as the said A. and D. from the said espousalls shall have lived together unto the time wherein the same D. shall fulfill and accomplish her age of nineteen years) stand and be seised to the use of the said D. for and in the name of her Joynture, for and during all the terme of her na∣turall life. And further that the said A. C.  the elder, now is and standeth lawfully and solely seised in his demesne as of Fee, of and in all the said scite, Mannor, Messuage, and other the Premisses with the Appurtenances to and for the onely use of the same A: the elder, and of his heires with∣out any condition or limitation of use. And that the same scite, Mannor, Messuage, and other the Premisses shall be and stand to the said D. and her assigns for and in the name of her Joynture, ac∣cording to the purport and true meaning of these presents, for and during the terme of her naturall life, clear and free discharged and acquitted, or otherwise by the said A. the elder, and his heires, sufficiently saved harmlesse of and from all former grants, bar∣gaines, sales, estates, and encumbrances whatsoever had or made by the said A. C. the elder, leases for terme of years, whereupon the old yearly rents or more are reserved to be yearly payable to the said A. the elder, his heires and assignes, and the cheif rents and services to the cheif Lords of the Fee or Fees of the Premisses to be due in respect of their Seignories only except and fore prised: And that from and after the decease of the said A. C. the younger (if the said A. C. the younger and D. shall be marrryed together as aforesaid, and after the espousalls betwixt them two had, do live together until such time as the same D. shall have accomplished her age of nineteen years) the said scite, Mannor, Messuage, and other the Premisses shall be or lawfully may be, and continue to the said D. and her assignes for and during all the terme of the naturall life of the same D. for and in the name of her Joynture as aforesaid of the clear yearly value of sixty pounds of, &c. beyond all charges and reprises, and moreover the said A. C. the elder covenanteth, &c. That he the said A. C. the elder on this side the Feast of All-Saints now next coming, if the said marriage betwixt the said A. the younger, and D. shall in the mean time be had, and they both do so long live, shall and will convey and assure
all the said scite, &c. and all other the Premisses and the reversion thereof and therewith so much other Lands and Tenements then to be by good and lawfull Title in the sole seisin of the said A. the elder, as of his demesne in fee, as together shall amount to the cleer yearely value of a hundred pounds of lawfull, &c. unto the said A.C. the younger, and the heires males of his body on the bo∣dy of the said D. lawfully to be begotten: And that as well the Scite, Mannor, Messuage, and other the Premisses, as also the said other lands and tenements so therewith to be conveyed and assurred as aforesaid, from the time of the making of the said conveyance therof, & assurance shall be and stand to the said A. the younger, and the heirs male of his body on the body of the said D. lawfully to be begotten, cleer and free discharged and acquitted, or otherwise by the said A. the elder, and his heires sufficiently saved harmlesse of and from all former Grants, Bargains, Sales, Estates and Incum∣brances whatsoever, had or made, or to be had or made by the said A. the elder, or his heires, Leases for term of yeares made of the Premisses or any part thereof, whereupon the old accustomed rents are reserved to be yearly payable to the said A. the elder and his heires onely except and foreprised. In witnesse, &c. An Indenture for a Womans Joynture in Land without clause,Nota, if the Joynture had been made be∣fore marriage, the Wife then could not claim Dower. that if after the Husbands death she forsake her Joynture, and seek her Dower at the Common Law, this Joyn∣ture to be void. THis Indenture, &c. between Sir G. S of W, in the County of S. Knight, on the one part, and E.G. &c. J.F. &c. H. B. and H. G. the younger, &c. on the other part witnesseth; That the said Sir G. S. for and in consideration of the hearty love and affection which he beareth to Dame D.Consideration of money in marri∣age, and per∣formance of former cove∣nants. now wife of the said Sir G. and one of the daugh∣ters of the said E.G. and also in consideration of the summe of one thousand pounds of, &c. paid and delivered to the said Sir G. by the said E.G. before the making and sealing of these presents for the preferment in marriage of the said Dame
D. And for and in consideration of the performance and fulfilling of certain Grants, Promises, and Agreements heretofore had made and done, between the said Sir G. on the one part, and the said E. G. and H. G. on the other part, doth covenant, grant, and agree for him,Covenant by a day to grant by deed certaine Mannors, &c. his Heires and Execu∣tors, to and with the said E.G. J. F. H. B. and H. G. their Heires Executors and administrators, and every of them, that he the said Sir G. before the tenth day of Aprill next coming after the date hereof, shall by his sufficient Deed in writing, under his hand and seale, give, grant, and confirm to the said E. J H and H. their heires and assignes, all that the Mannor of W. in the County of S. with all the rights, members, and appurte∣nances, thereunto belonging, and the Park adjoyning to the said house, commonly called W. Park; and also the Mannor of A. alias A. in the said County, with all the rights, members, and ap∣purtenances to the same belonging: And all and singular Messu∣age, Lands, Tenements, Meadowes, Pastures, Leasures, Feedings, Waters, Fishing, Deer, Game of Conies, Rents, Reversions, Ser∣vices, Escheats, Waifs, Straies, Fines, Amerciaments, Heriots, Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, Leets, and Profits of Courts, and all other Profits, Advantages, Emoluments, Liberties, Franchises, Priviledges, and Jurisdictions, and all other Hereditaments what∣soever, within the Townes, Parishes, and Fields of W. A alias A. aforesaid, or in either of them, or elsewhere in any other place or places to the said Mannors of W. A. alias A. and to the said Park, or to any of them belonging or in any wise appertaining, or being accepted, known, reputed, or taken, as part parcell or member of the said Mannors, Park, or any of them, or so being usually occu∣pied demised or letten; and all that his Capitall Messuage or Mansion house, scituate and being neer C. Lane neer to the City of L. with all Rooms Buildings Gardens Easements and Commo∣dities to the same belonging or appertaining: And also all that his Messuage or Tenement called the D. and all the Houses Build∣dings Gardens Grounds Tenements void Rooms and Cellars, with the appurtenances which the said Sir G. hath, scituate lying and being at the S. in the Parish of Saint C. without the Bars of the Inner-Temple of L. aforesaid, and all and singular the reversion and reversions of all the said Mannors of W. and A. and of either of them with their appurt. and of the said Park Messuage Lands and Tenements aforesaid, with their appurtenances, and of all
and every the Premisses with the appurtenances; To have hold and enjoy the said Mannors of W.Habendum. and A. with the appurtenances, and all and every the Premisses before mentioned, and the reversion and reversions of the same unto the said E. J. H. and H. their Heires and Assignes for ever, to the uses hereafter expressed, and to no other use intent or purpose:To the use, &c. first of the Hus∣band then of the Wife, and after of the husbands heires. that is to say, To the use of the said Sir G. for and during the term of his naturall life, without impeachment of Wast and after his decease to the use of the said Dame D. during her naturall life, and for and in the name of part of the Joynture of the said Dame D. and after her decease to the use of the right heires of the said Sir E.G. for ever.Covenants for discharge of in∣cumbrances. And the said Sir G. covenanteth, &c. to and with the said E. and H.G. &c. That all and every the said Man∣nors, Lands, Tenements, Messuages and Heredi∣taments with their appurtenances, and all and every other the Premisses covenanted and expressed to be granted, and the re∣version and reversions of the same, and every part and parcell of the same, at the time of the said Gift, grant, and assurance so to be made, shall be, and from henceforth shall continue cleerly and freely acquitted exonerated and discharged, or at all times hereaf∣ter shall be sufficiently saved harmlesse of and from all former Bargains Sales Joyntures Dowers Statutes-merchant, and of the staple, Bonds Recognizances Entailes arrearages of Rents Annui∣ties Fees Judgments and Executions, and of and from all other charges, grants, titles, and incumbrances whatsoever, had made or done at any time before the sealing of these presents, the Rents and services from thenceforth to be due to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the Premisses,Exception of Leases and E∣states by Copy. and all Leases for terme of yeares and Grants by Indenture heretofore made, or by Co∣py of Court roll, according to the customes of the said Mannors or of either of them, whereupon the old and accu∣stomed Rent or more is reserved and payable during the continu∣ance of the said termes and Estates alwaies ex∣cepted.Further assu∣rance. And further the said Sir G.S. covenanteth &c. to and with the said E. and H. G. That he the said Sir G.S. and his heires from time to time, at all times, within the term of five whole yeares next ensuing the
date of these presents, shall and will not onely make, do, know∣ledge, and suffer, and cause, &c. all and every such further devise and devises, thing and things, at the costs and charges in the Law of the said E. and H. their Heires, Executors, or assignes, or some of them; as by the same E. and H. their heires or assignes, or by their learned Councell in the Law, or any of them shall be reasonably and lawfully devised or advised, for the further surety, assurance, and sure making of all and singular the said Mannors, Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances aforesaid, and the reversion and reversions of the same, and of all and every other the said Premisses with the appurtenances what∣soever, to the said E. J. H. and H. and to the sorvivor of them, and to their Heires and Assignes, to the onely intents, uses, and be∣hoofs before specified. And it is further covenan∣ted, condescended,Agreement that the Hus∣band may sell Woods, and make Leases for 21. years, or three lives, re∣serving the old Rents. and agreed between the said parties to these presents, for them, their Heires Executors and Administrators, and the true in∣tent and meaning of these presents been; That the said Sir G. for and during all the term of his naturall life, at his will and pleasure, may lawful∣ly fell, cut down and carry away any timber, trees or woods whatsoever, standing or growing in or upon the soiles or grounds of the Premisses, or any of them: And also to demise, grant, or to Farme let by Copy of Court roll, according to the custome of the said Mannors, or for the number and term of one and twenty yeares, or for longer number and term of yeares, to end and determine upon the end of three lives at the most, or for one, two, or three lives at the most, such part of the Premisses as usually and accustomably have been granted by Copy, or have been used to be demised and letten for terme of yeares or lives, so alwaies that the said grant and demise extend not to the Mannor-house of W. nor to the Park of W. nor to the said house neer C. Lane, nor to any part thereof: And so alwaies that the said Sir G do leave to the said Dame D. to go and remain with the said Mannor house the number of three hundred acres at the least, beside the Park: And so also that up∣on all and every such granting, letting, or demising of the Premis∣ses, or any of them, the said Sir G. do reserve and save the old u∣suall and accustomed rent, duety and service, and rents, duties, and services before accustomed to be paid, yeilden, and done for the Premisses or any of them, so and in such sort, that the same rent,
dutie and service from time to time at all times, may and shall continue due and payable to the said Sir G. for terme of his life, and after his decease to the said Dame D. his wife, and to her Assignes, for and during the terme of her life, and after her decease, to the use of the right Heires of the said Sir G. for ever. And it is further covenanted granted concluded provided and agreed by and between the said parties by these presents,Agreement if the wife de∣mand he Dow∣er at the Com∣mon Law, her estate in these Lands to cease. That if the said Dame D. after the death of the said Sir G. demand by action or Writ of Dower, to have her Dower at and by the order of the Common Lawes of this Realme, of any of the Mannors Lands Tene∣ments or Hereditaments of the said Sir G. And do disagree and refuse to accept and take the said Premisses, and the Mannor of C with all and singular the appur∣tenances, to her by other sufficient conveyance to be limitted and appointed, for and in the name of her Joynture. Or if the said Dame D. do by Action, Suit, or Entry challenge or demand the Mannor of A. in the County of S. by reason of any convey∣ance heretofore had and made, and will not permit and suffer the Heires of the said Sir G: to receive and take the Issues and profits thereof: That then the Estate and in∣terest of the said Dame D:That then, &c. in and to the said Mannor of W: with the appurtenances, to be void and of none effect. And then and from thenceforth the said E: I: H: and H: shall stand and be seised of the said Premisses, with all and singular the appurtenances, to the use of the said Sir G: and his Heires for ever; any thing in these presents con∣tained to the contrary notwithstanding. And further it is con∣discended and fully agreed between the said parties to these presents: That the said Dame D: shall at all times necessary, during her life, well and sufficiently support, repaire, and amend the said Mansion house of W: and the House and Buildings be∣longing to the same in all needfull and necessary reparations. In witnesse, &c.
A Womans Joynture in Land passed by Recovery with single Voucher, with Condition to make good Leae∣ses to be made by the Husband and the Wife. THis Indenture, &c. Between E. G. of the one part, and A.B. and C.D. on the other part, witnesseth, That the said E: G: in consideration of the marriage had between him the said E. and L. now his Wife, Daughter of R: C: Esquire, deceased, and to the intent to make and convey unto the said L▪ a convenient Joyn∣ture of certain of the Lordships Mannors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments of the said E: G: and for divers other good conside∣rations the said E: G: especially moving, doth covenant and grant for himselfe, his Heires Executors and Administrators, to and with the said A: B: and C: D. And it is covenanted granted and agreed between all the said parties to these presens, in manner and forme following; that is to say, That the said E: G:To suffer a re∣covery with sim∣ple Voucher. within the space of one yeare next comming, after the date of these presents, shall permit and suffer the said A: B: and C: D: and the Survivor of them, by Writs of Entry sur disseisin in le port returnable before the Justices of the Common Bench, according to the course and order of common Recoveries, with simple Voucher to recover against him the said E. all those his Lordships and Mannors of E: C: W: and W: in the said County of N: with their appurtenances, and all other the Lands Meadowes Pastures Woods Rents Reversions and Heredi∣taments of the said E scituate lying and being in E. C. W. and W. in the said County of N. And also the Lordships of, &c. in the County of L. and all others the Lands &c. by such convenient names and additions as shall be reasonably devised. And that exe∣cutions shall be had and made of and upon the said recove∣ries.User of the Re∣covery. And further it is by these presents gran∣ted and agreed between the said parties to these presents, That the said recoveries to be had and executed as aforesaid; and every common recovery with Voucher, within the space of one yeare next ensuing, to be suter∣ed by the said E. of the Premisses, and every or any part thereof, by what names or additions soever the same shall fortune to be had
or suffered, immediatly from the execution thereof shall be. And that the persons who shall recover the Premisses, and every or any part thereof, and their heires after every such execution, shall stand and be seised of the Premisses with the appurtenances, to the onely uses, limitations, and intents hereafter in these presents expressed and mentioned; that is to say, To the use and behoof of the said L.To the woman for her life, for her Joynture, and in recom∣pence of her Dower. now wife of the said E. for terme of her life for her Joynture, and in full re∣compence of such Dower as the said L. now is, or hereafter shall be entituled unto, or may hereaf∣ter claim or demand of any the Mannors Lands Tenements or Hereditaments of the said E. her Husband, and after her decease, to the use and behoof of the said E. B. and of the Heires of his body lawfully coming;After to the husband and his heirs, and to divers re∣mainders, ac∣cording to an ancient entaile made by the husbands Fa∣ther. and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the said R. G. Bro∣ther of the said E. and of the heires males of his body lawfully coming; and for default of such Issue respectively and ratably, to the use of such person and persons, and their heires, or the heires of their bodies begotten, or for other whatsoever estates, in such manner and form, and under such uses estates conditions and limitations, as particu∣larly and proportionably therof is limited appoin∣ted or declared by any lawfull devise or convey∣ance made by E.G. Esquire, deceased, late Father of the said E. party to this Indenture for ever.For the strength∣ening of Leases to be made by the husband & the wife, or the husband after the wives de∣cease. Provided, & nevertheless it is agreed between the said parties to these presents, That if the said E.G. the Son, at any time or times hereafter, during the lives of the said E. and L. jontly by any Inden∣ture to be made in the name of the same E. and L. on the one part, and any other person or persons on the other part, or after the death of the said L. by any Indenture to be made in the name of the said E. of the one part, and any other person or persons on the other part shall make any Lease or Leases of the said Mannors, &c. or of any part or parcell thereof, other then of the Capitall Messuage of the said Mannor of great A. and the demesne lands of the said Mannor of great A. or of any part thereof, for any terme or termes of yeares: and do reserve thereupon payable yearly, du∣ring
such Lease or Leases unto the said E. and L. and unto the heires of the same E. at the two usuall Feasts or daies of payment by even portions, the yearely rents now usuall to be paid or paya∣ble, for the Premisses so to be demised, or other yearely rents of better yearely value; That then and from thence forth the Re∣coveries and Executions afore mentioned, as concerning the Lands or Tenements in forme aforesaid, to be letten shall be, and the Recoverers afore mentioned and their heirs, shall of and in the Premisses so to be letten as aforesaid, stand and be seised from the severall beginnings of every such Lease severally, to the use of those person or persons to whom such Lease or Leases thereof shall be made, and severally of their Executors and Assignes, during his or their said Lease or Leases, so as the person or persons to whom such said Lease or Leases shall hereafter fortune to be made their Executors or Assignes, shall pay to such person or persons, who for the time shall have the next and immediate estate of the Freehold of the Premisses so hereafter to be demised, according to the limitation of the uses aforesaid, all such rents in such forme as upon their severall Lease or Leases shall be limited or appointed to be paid; and so as the said severall Lessees, their severall Exe∣cutors, Administrators, and Assignes, do observe and keep all such Conditions in Law, as Tenants for term of yeares by the Lawes or Statutes of this Realme of right'ought to observe and keep: And of and concerning the reversion and reversions and Freehold of the Premisses, in forme aforesaid hereafter demised, to the use and uses of such person or persons, and in such manner and forme, quantity and condition, to every intent, construction, and pur∣pose after and according to the declarations and limitations of the uses in these presents limitted, as if such Lease or Leases had never been had nor made: Any thing to the contrary, &c. In witnesse, &c. Consultors. Manwood, Wilbraham, & Fr. Sanders,
For the assurance of a Womans Joynture. THis Indenture, &c. between T.B. of W. in the County of K. Es∣quire, on the one part, and M.L. Mercer, R.M. Goldsmith, and T.A.S. Citizens of L. on the other part, witnesseth, That the said T.B. for and in consideration of a marriage to be had and solem∣nized, between E. D. Gent. Cosin of the said T. B. and A. L. Wi∣dow, and for a Joynture to be made and assured to the said A. and for her preferment and advancement, doth by these presents cove∣nant and grant for him, his Heires and Assignes, to and with the said M. L. R.M. and T. A. their Heires Executors and assignes that the said T.B. his heires and assignes, and all and every other person and persons their heires and assignes that now be, or hereaf∣ter shall be seised of one Messuage or Tenement with the appurte∣nances in P, called, &c. with all Lands, &c. to the same belonging, or with the same demised or occupyed; and also of all those Mes∣suages, &c. shall from henceforth stand and be seised of the same to the use of the said A. for term of her life, and after her decease, to the use of the said T.B. his heires and assignes for ever. And the said T: B. for him, &c. covenanteth, &c. that the said T. B. is at the ensealing and delivery hereof sole seised of the premisses, of a good and sure estate in Feesimple, to him and his heires: And that the said A. shall or may lawfully hold occupy and enjoy the same during her life. In witnesse, &c. Bydell Consultor.
Indentures. An Indenture for the knowledging of a Fine by a man and his Wife, to the intent to exclude the Woman from ha∣ving (for her Dower) the third part of Land leased by her Husband, after the Marriage betwixt her Hus∣band and her. THis Indenture Tripartite made, &c. Between C. B. Printer to the Queens most excellent Majesty, and K. his Wife on the first part, F.M. of L. Gent. on the second part, and G. S. and H.M. on the third part, witnesseth, That whereas the said C.B. in and by one Indenture, bearing date the third of July last, &c. made between the said C: on the one part, and the said F.M: and E.N. of, &c. on the other part: The said C. B. for the consi∣derations in the said Indenture expressed, did demise, &c. to the said F. and E. all that the Mannor, Capitall Messuage, or Farme called W. in the County of M. with all and singular the rights, members, and appurtenances thereof, and all & singular his Messu∣ages Lands Tenements Rents Reversions Services Priviledges Franchises Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances set, lying, and being, arising, growing, hapning or coming, in the Townes Parishes Hamlets or Feilds of K. and W. in the said County of M. to the said Mannor or Capitall Messuage or Farme belonging, or in any wise appertain∣ing or esteemed, &c. as part thereof, &c. And all and singular other Messuage Meadowes Feedings Pastures Woods under-Woods Priviledges Franchises Commodities Advantages Rents Reversi∣ons Services and Hereditaments whatsoever, of the said C. B. in K. and W. aforesaid, in the said County of M. except and alwaies reserved to the said C: B: his heires and assignes, all the Oakes and Trees whatsoever standing growing or being in or upon one peece of ground invironed with a Wall called the L: which said Oakes and Trees are to grow as an ornament to the Mansion house of the said Mannor Messuage or Farme: To have and to hold to the said F: and E: &c. from the Feast of Michaelmas next ensuing the date
of the said Indenture, for and during the the term of 41. years from thence, &c. and fully to be compleat and ended, yeilding and pay∣ing therefore yearly during the said term unto the said C. his heirs and assigns, 66 l. 13 s. 4 d. of lawfull, &c. at the feast of the An∣nunciation, &c. and St. Mich: &c. by even portions; as by the said Indenture amongst othet things therein contained, more plainly may appeare: The Estate Title Interest and term of years of which said E: N: the said F: M: now hath. Now for and to the intent to bar and exclude the said K: wife of the said C. B, of and from all such Estate, Right or Title of Dower, as she the said K. shall or may have or claim, of, in, or to the same premisses, or of, in, or to any part or parcell thereof during the said term: And for the better ratifying and confirming of the said Grant, Demise, or Lease; and for the better and more assured payment of the said Rent, in and upon the said Demise and Lease reserved. It is covenanted, granted, condiscended, concluded, and fully agreed by and be∣tween all the said parties to these present Indentures in manner and form following; that is to say, The said C. B. for him, his Heires, Executors, and Administrators, and ecery of them, doth covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said F: M. his Exe∣cutors, Administrators, and assignes, and every of them by these presents, That the said C. B. and the said K. now his wife, shall and will before the Feast of Pentecost now next ensuing, at the costs and charges in the Law of the said F.M. his Executors Administra∣tors, and Assignes, or some of them knowledge and levie one Fine unto the said G.S and H.M. to be had and engrossed, with sixteen Proclamations, according to the due course and order of the com∣mon Lawes and Statutes of this Realme in that case provided, of and in all that the said Mannor, Capitall Messuage, and all the said Messuage Farms Lands Tenements Meadowes Feedings Pastures Commons Woods underwoods Reats Reversions Servi∣ces and Hereditaments, and all other the Premisses aforesaid, with their appurtenances, and every part and parcell thereof, by such name or names, and in such manner and form, as by the said F.M. his Executors or assigns, or any of them, or by his or their, or any of their Councell learned in the Law, shall be devised or advised; By which Fine the said C.B. and K. his wife shall knowledge the said Mannor Messuages Lands Tenements Hereditaments and Pre∣misses to be the right of the said G.S. as those which the said G: S: and H: M: then shall have of the Gift of the said C: B: and K: And the same by the said Fine shall remise and quite claim from them
the said C: and K: and their Heirs, to the said G: S: and H: M: and to the Heirs of the said G: S: for ever. And further the said C: and K: his wife, shall for them and the heirs of the said C: warrant the same Mannor, &c. to the said G: and H: and to the Heirs of the said G: for ever, against the said C: and K: and the Heirs of the said C: for ever. And further that he the said C: B: shall and will within convenient time, from henceforth what in him is, suf∣fer, do, and procure to be done at the costs and charges of the said F: M: his Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, or some of them all and every such thing or things as shall be necessary or conve∣nient of and for the engrossing and perfecting of the same fine and Proclamations as is aforesaid. The which Fine so to be levied of the said Premisses, or any part thereof, between the said parties or any of them, before the Feast of Pentecost now next ensuing shall be and shall be adjudged, deemed, and taken to be, to the uses intents, and purposes hereafter expressed and declared, and to none other use, uses, intents, or purposes: that is to say, for the ratifying, confirming, and assured having and enjoying not onely of the said Mannor, Capitall Messuage, Farm, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments before mentioned to be demised and leased to the said F: M: his Executors Administrators and assignes, accord∣ing to the tenor, true intent, and meaning of the said Demise and Lease, for and during all the now residue of the said term of one and forty years, for and under the Covenants, Grants, Articles and agreements, Conditions, Penalties, Rents and Reversions in the said Indenture of the said Demise and Lease comprised and specified to be yeilded, paid, and pone according to the tenor of tue said Indenture. But also of the said Rent and of the reversion of all and singular the premisses,Rent and Re∣version. to the use and behoof of the said C. B. and of his heirs and assigns for ever. And the said F. M. for him, &c. covenanteth with the said C. and K his wife, and the said G. and H. and every of them, and their and every of their heirs ex∣ecutors and administrators by these presents, that he the said F. M. his Executors Administrators and assigns, or some of them, shall & will at his, their, or some of their costs and charges in all things at all times hereafter, beare, pay, and disburse, all and all manner of duties, summes of money, payments, and charges whatsoever, payable, for or by reason of the said Fine before mentioned, which at any time hereafter shall or may accrue, due, or be or any present Fine or Fines to be paid by reason of the said Fine.
And of and for the same and every of them shall acquit and dis∣charge, or otherwise sufficiently save harmlesse the said C: K: G: and H: and every of them, their and every of their Heires Execu∣tors and Administrators, and every of them. In witnesse, &c. Leases. A Deed where two are possessed of a Lease to make them Tenants in Common to prevent the Survivorshir. THis Indenture, &c. between R: C: &c. of the one part, and I: H: of the other part (recite the Lease) Now this Inden∣ture witnesseth, That to the intent no advantage of Survi∣vorship of the said estate and terme of yeares should be between the said R: C: and I. B: but that they should be Tenants in Com∣mon thereof; As for other causes hereafter in these presents de∣clared. The said R: C: hath granted remised and released, and by these presents doth grant, remise, and release unto the said I: B: all the estate, right, title, and interest, and term of yeares of him the said R: C. of in and to one moyety of the said Messuage, Lands, and Premisses, with the appurtenances before mentioned, to be to them demised by the said C: D: as aforesaid; To have and to hold the moyety of the said Messuage, Lands, and Premis∣ses, with the appurtenances, unto the said I: B: his Executors, Ad∣ministrators, and assignes, for and during all the said terme and yeares yet to come and unexpired: And the said I: B: in conside∣ration thereof, hath granted, remised, and released, and by these presents doth grant, remise, and release unto the said R: C: all the estate, right, title, interest, and terme of yeares of him the said I: B: of in and to one moyety of the said Messuages, Lands, and Premisses, with the appurtenances before mentioned, to be to them demised by the said D: C: as aforesaid; to have and to hold the moyety of the Premisses with the appurtenances unto the said R: C: his Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, for and during all the said terme and yeares yet to come and unexpired. And the said R: C: for himself, his Executors, Administrators, and assignes, and for every of them doth covenant, grant, and agree, to and with the said I: B: his Executors, Administrators and assignes, and to and with every of them by these presents, in manner and forme following; That is to say, that he the said R: C: his Executors,
Administrators, and Assignes, shall and will quietly permit and suffer the said I: B: his Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, and every of them from time to time, and at all times during the continuance of the said Lease and terme, to have, take, peaceive, and enjoy the full and whole moyety and half of the Rents, Issues, and Profits of the said before mentioned demised Premisses, and of every part thereof, without any let, distutbance, or interruption of or by the said R: C: his Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, or of any other by his procurement and consent: And that the said R: C: &c. shall from time to time, during the said Lease pay discharge and beare the full moyety of all the yearely and other Rents reservations, payments, and charges, which by force and vertue of the said Lease, are by them the said R: C: and I: B: their and either of their Executors, &c. to be borne and discharged, at and upon such daies and times, and in such manner as in and by the said recited Indenture of demise is required. And that all the Covenants, Articles, and agreements to be found by the said R.C. and I.B. their Executors, &c. by force of the said recited Inden∣ture of Lease, shall from time to time during the said terme be performed, borne, and done, at the indifferent and equall costs and charges, and expences of the said R.C. and I.B. their, &c. And that the said R.C. his Executors, &c. shall and will upon reasonable request, at his and their view, proper costs and charges, well and sufficiently save and keep harmlesse the said I. B. his Executors, &c. of and from all Actions, Suits▪ and troubls by occasion or reason of not paying, doing, or performing by the said R.C. his Ex∣ecutors, &c. the aforesaid payments, covenants, articles, and a∣greements which he or they oughr for his part or portion to pay, beare, discharge, and performe, according to the true meaning of these presents: And that if the said I B. his Executors, &c. shall at any time hereafter be minded to renew the said Lease of the said Premisses for a longer time and terme from the said D.C. that then he the said R C. his Executors, &c. shall and will upon rea∣sonable notice thereof to him or them to be given by the said I. B. his executors, &c. and upon the request of him or them made unto him the said R.C. his executors, &c. for such renewing and new taking of such Lease, joyne with the said I. B. in all needfull and reasonable causes and things for the renewing of the said Lease, and new taking of the said Premisses, for any longer terme or e∣state from the said D C. to them the said R. C. and I. B. &c. and that the said R.C. &c. shall and will beare, pay, and defray the
half of the Fine, and all other charges to be expended for and a∣bout the renewing of the said Lease, and new taking of the same Premisses: And of the said R.C. his Executors, &c. shall at any time or times hereafter be minded to alien, sell, or part with the said estate, interest, or term, or any part thereof, of, in, and to his said moyety of the said premisses, or any part or parts thereof, to any person or persons other then to the wife or children of the said R.C. or any of them, that then the said R. C. shall first make offer thereof at the lowest price, for which he or they shall or will alien or sell the same, unto the said I. B. his Executors, &c. and shall not make offer thereof unto any other, untill the said I.B. his Executors, &c. shall have first refused the same, or neglected to ac∣cept of the said offer by the space of one month next after such offer. And if the said I.B. his Executors, &c. shall accept of the said offer, and agree to give the price so set for the same, that then the said R C. his Executors, &c. shall upon payment to him or them of the monie so set for the price thereof, well and sufficiently grant, convey, and assure to the said I: B. all that his or their moye∣ty of the premisses: And all this and their Estate, Right, Title, Interest, and terme of years, in and to the same then to come of, in, and to the said originall Indenture of Lease discharged, or up∣on reasonable request saved and kept harmlesse by him or them, of all former Grants, Charges, and Incumbrances, had, made, or done by him or them. The like Covenants in all things from I: B: to R: C. A Lease to a Woman for so long and so often as she shall remaine in Widowhood. R. B: Esquire, and P: B: Esquire, by Indenture, dated, &c. for the fatherly and brotherly love and affection that they beare to S: C: daughter of the said R: B. and sister of the said P: B: and towards her advancement and better maintenance and stay of Li∣vering done, demise to the said S: all their Tenements and Gar∣dens scituate in B. Street, &c. except the Mansion house, &c. To hold to her and her assignes, from Michaelmas, &c. to the end and term of one and twenty years, &c. without impeachment of waste, so long and so often as the said Lady S. shall remain in Widowes estate; yeilding yearly to the said R. so long as he shall live, and after to the said Lord W: his Heires and assignes, ten shillings, &c.
And for the consideration aforesaid, do further demise unto the said Lady S. all the Premisses, Habend. from the end of the same one and twenty years, unto the end and term of sixty years, if she live so long, without impeachment of waste, so long and so often as she shall remaine in Widowhead, yeilding the yearely rent as aforesaid. Provided alwaies, that it shall not be lawfull for any person that shall be husband of the said Lady S. to make any Grant, Demise, or alienation of the Premisses, or any part thereof, at any time during the Coverture, &c. A Lease to them that assured the Land for the certaine payment of an Annuity. THis Indenture, &c. Witnesseth, That the said E: and A:Vide an annui∣ty (entituled, An annuity granted for two lives, with the inheritance of Land assured to the payment thereof) wher∣upon this Lease depend∣eth. for and in accomplishment of their former promise and agreement in that behalfe made to and with the said, &c. have demised, &c. to the said, &c. all that their Mannor, &c. and all and singular Messuages, &c. with the Leasures heretofore had of the Grant of the Lessees by an Indenture, &c. Habend, &c. to the Lessees their Executors and assignes, from the day of the date hereof, during the term of one and twenty years, if either of the Lessors live so long. Provided al∣waies, that if at any time during the naturall lives or life of the said E. and A. or either of them the Lessees, their Heires, Executors, or assigns, shall make default at any time, and not pay or cause to be paid to the Lessors, and the Survivor of them, yearly that annuity or year∣ly payment of a hundred pounds, &c and every part thereof to the said E: and A: granted by the said former Indenture above in these presents, recited according to the tenor, &c. of the same Inden∣ture, That then this Lease to be void, &c. and a re-entry, &c. In witnesse, &c.
A Lease upon Condition, that when the Lessor shall have paid the Lessees, such monie as he oweth them, or they stand bound for him, or when they shall be satisfied by Profits of the Land, this Lease shall be void. THis Indenture Tripartite, made, &c. between the right honou∣rable Sir F.W. Knight, one of the principall Secretaries of our Soveraigne, &c. on the one part, and R.M. Citizen and Alderman of L. on the second part, and W.D. of W. in the Parish of K. in the County of M. Gent. on the third part witnesseth, That the said Sir F.Intent.W. for and to the intent that the said R: M: and W. D and either of them, and the Heires, Executors, and Administrators of either of them, shall and may be well and truly satisfied, recompenced, contented, paid, and saved harmlesse, of and for all and singular such summe and summes of monie whatsoever, as they the said R. and W. or either of them heretofore have lent or delivered to the said Sir F. or to any other person or persons, to or for his use, by his consent, re∣quest or agreement, or at any time hereafter shall lend and deli∣ver to or for the use of the said Sir F. by or at his request, consent, or agreement. And also of and for all and singular such Bills, Debt, Obligations, and other Bonds whatsoever, which the said R. and W. or either of them heretofore have made, or hereafter shall make joyntly with the said Sir F. or otherwise without him for his debt, or at his request, hath demised, gran∣ted and to farme letten:Demise. And by these presents, &c. to the said R: M: and W: D: all that the Lorship and Mannor of B: with all the rights, members, and appurtenances thereof, in the County of W: and all and singular Mills, Lands, Tenements, Meadowes, Feedings, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services, Moores, Waters, Fishings, Fines, Amerciaments, Heriots, Courts Leets, Viewes of Frankpledge, and all that which to view of Frankpledge doth belong, assise, and assay, of Bread, Wine, and Ale, and all other Profits, Commodities, Emoluments, and Here∣ditaments whatsoever, to the said Lordship or Mannor belonging or appertaining: And all and singular Mannors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Priviledges, Liberties, Jurisdicti∣ons,
Profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their appurtenances, which the said Sir E. hath, or ought to have in use, possession, remainder, or reversion, or in any other estate whatsoever in B: A: I: : L: W: H: and W: or in any of them within the said County of W. or elsewhere, in any other place or places within the same County; To have and to hold the said Man∣nor of B. and all the rights, members,Habend. and appurtenan∣ces thereof, and also all and singular other the Premisses with their appurtenances, to the said R: and W: their Executors and assignes, from the Feast of the Annunciation, &c. for, by, and du∣ring all the terme of fourescore and nineteen yeares from thence next following, and fully to be compleat and ended,Reddend. yeilding and paying therefore yearely by and during the said terme to the said Sir F. his Heires and as∣signes ten pounds &c. in the Feast of Saint Michael, &c. and the Annuciation, &c. or within the space, &c. by even portions.Provis. Provided that if at any time or times hereafter, during the said terme the said Sir F: W: his heires, executors, administrators or assignes, shall well and truly satisfie content, recompence, or pay, ot cause to be well, &c. to the said R: and W: their executors, administrators, or assignes, or to any of them, all and singular such summe and summes of mo∣nie whatsoever, as they the said R: and W. or either of them here∣tofore have lent or delivered to the said Sir F: or to any other per∣son or persons, to or for his use, by his consent or agreement, or at any time hereafter shall lend or deliver to or for the use of the said Sir F: at his request, or by his consent or agreement. And al∣so all and singular such summe and summes of monie as be or shall be mentioned, in any Bill or Bills of debt, obligation or obliga∣tions, or other Bonds whatsoever, which the said R: and W: or either of them heretofore have made, or hereafter shall make joyntly with the said Sir F. or otherwise without him, or for his debt, or at his request; Together with all such costs, charges, los∣ses, interests, and damages whatsoever, as the said R. and W. or either of them, or the executors or administrators of either of them shall beare, or reasonably sustaine for or by reason of any the summe or summes of money, Bills, Bonds, or Obligations a∣foresaid, or any of them: Or if the said R. and W. or either of them, their executors, administrators, or assignes, or any of them shall be at any time or times hereafter, during the said terme fully satisfied, by reason of the Issues, Profits, Fines, or Revenues of the
Premisses, as partly by the said Sir F: W: his Heires Executors Ad∣ministrators and Assignes, of any of them, and partly by the Issues, Profits, Fines, and Revenues of the Premisses, of and for all and every the debts, summe and summes of money: aforesaid, and of and for all the costs, charges, and losses aforesaid; That then and from thenceforth this present Lease, Grant, and Demise of the Premisses made as abovesaid, shall cease and become void. And that then and from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said Sir F.W. his Heires and Assignes, into all and sin∣gular the Premisses above demised with their appurtenances, whol∣ly to re-enter, as in his or their former estate, these presents, or any thing therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding And the said Sir F: W: for him, his Heires, Exe∣cutors, and Administrators, covenanteth, &c. to and with the said W: and R: and either of them, and the Heires, Executors, Admin. and assigns of them and of either of them; That he the said Sir F. hath good, lawfull, and absolute right, title, and authority to de∣mise and grant all and singular the Premisses with their appurte∣nances, to the said R. and W. and their assignes, for and during the term of years aforesaid, in manner and forme aforesaid. And also that the said R. and W. or either of them, and the Executors Ad∣ministrators and assignes of them, or either of them shall and may lawfully have, hold, occupy, and enjoy all and singular the said Premisses with their appurtenances, for, by, and during all the said terme of, &c. under the Condition and Proviso aforesaid, in manner and forme aforesaid, without any let, trouble, or eviction of the said Sir F. his Heires and Assignes, other then onely the Farmers and Lessees of the Premisses, or any part thereof, which have or claime any Estate or Interest onely for terme of life or lives, yeare or yeares, whereupon the accustomed yearely Rent or Rents be reserved, and shall be yearely payable during the said Estates and termes, and all Copyholders and Copyhold Estates, according to the custome of the said Mannor, for and by the pay∣ment and doing of the old Rents and Services to be paid and done for the same Copyholds. And furthermore the said R. and W. for themselves, and their severall Execut. Adm. and Assigns, and every of them doth covenant, &c. to and with the said Sir F. his Heires and assignes, by these presents; That they the said R. and W. and their and either of their assignes, whilst they two shall be both li∣ving, and also the Survivor of them two, and the Executors Ad∣ministrators, and Assignes of the same Survivor, shall from time to
time take, imploy, and bestow all the Revenues, Profits, and Com∣modities whatsoever, which shall be or lawfully may be had, taken, or received, of or for the Premisses▪ or any part thereof, truly and faithfully in and to the payment of the summe and summs of mo∣ney aforesaid lent or delivered, or to be lent or delivered as afore∣said, and in and to the satisfaction and contentation of and for such Bills Obligations Bonds Costs Charges Losses Interests and Damages as aforesaid, as well to the plain and upright payment, satisfaction, recompence, and saving harmless of the said R: M: his Heires Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, of, for, and touching the Premisses: As also to the like upright payment satisfaction, recompence and saving harmless of the said W: D: his Heires Executors and Administrators, and every of them, of, for and touching the said Premisses, without any manner of fraud or covin. In witnesse, &c. unto two parts of these presents, whereof the one is remaining with the said R: M: and the other with the said W: D: the said Sir F &c. And to the other part thereof remain¦ing with the said Sir F. the said R. and W. &c. A Lease passed by a Fine, one render of a Brewing∣house, together with a Demise of Implements, and a Covenant that if any of the Imple∣ments shall be delivered at the termes end, the Tenant shall answer the price of them. THis Indenture, &c. Between E. B. of P. in the County of S. Esquire, and E. his Wife, And E. C. of L. in the County of C. Esquire, and E. his Wife, Daughter and sole Heire of I. D. late of P. aforesaid Gent. deceased, on the one part, and M: R: &c. on the other part, witnesseth, That for divers good considerations it is covenanted, concluded, and fully agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, in manner and forme following: And first the said E: B: and E: his Wife, do for them and either of them, their Executors and Assignes, covenant and grant to and with the said M: R: his Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, That before rhe end of the next Terme cal∣led Midsomor Terme, if the said Ellen be then living,
upon lawfull request, and at the costs and charges of the said M. his Excutors or assignes, one Fine shall be levied and knowledged with Proclamations between the said parties to these presents; in manner and forme following, of one Messuage and Brewhouse, with the appurtenances, set and being in the Parish of, &c. And of all Cellers, Sollers, &c. to the same belonging, late in the te∣nure or occupation of P, S. and I. S. Citizens, and, &c. of L. and now in the tenure or occupation of A: R: Brewer, which Messuage, Brewhouse, and Premisses abut, &c. and all that Celler, contain-in length, &c. And of all that Messuage, Tenement, or Ale-brew∣house roomes, &c. to the same Tenement, Ale-brewhouse belong∣ing, set, &c. in the said Parish, &c. abutting, &c. And of all and singular lights, casements, commodities, and hereditaments to the Premisses or any part thereof belonging or appertaining, or to or with the same demised, used, letten to Farme, or enjoyed to and by the parties before mentioned, and to the uses and intents, and under the conditions hereafter in these presents mentioned and declared, by the name or names of two Messuages or Brewhouses with the appurtenances, and of one Celler in the Parish of, &c. in the City of L. In and by which Fine the said M. R. shall remise release and quite claime from the said M.R. and his heires, unto the said E. and Ellen his wife for terme of life of the said Ellen, all his right title estate and interest of the foresaid Messuages and o∣ther the Premisses with the appurtenances: For which release and quite claime, the said E. and Ellen his wife shall by the same fine render the said Messuage and Cellar, and other the Premisses with the appurtenances, unto the said M.R. his Executors and As∣signes, to have and to hold the same unto the said M. R his Exe∣cutors, Administrators, and Assignes, from the Feast of the Nati∣vity of Saint Iohn Baptist, next coming after the date hereof, for and during, and untill the full end and accomplishment of one and twenty yeares then next ensuing, and fully to be compleat and ended, if the said Ellen should so long live, yeilding and paying therefore yearely unto the said E.B. and Ellen, and their Assignes during the said terme, if the said Ellen do so long live, the yearely rent of five pounds of, &c. at foure Feasts, &c. or within thirty daies, &c. And the said R.C. and Eliz. his wife, do for them, their Heires Executors and Administrators, covenant with the said M. &c. that within foure months next after request thereof made, the said Eliz. then being living, and of the full age of one and twenty yeares, at the costs and charges of the said M.R. his Executors and
Assignes, one Fine shall be knowledged and levied, with Procla∣mations of the aforesaid Premisses, to the uses and intents, and under the conditions hereafter in these presents expressed, menti∣oned, and declared, by the name or names of two Messuages with the appurtenances ut praedict. In and by which Fine the said M. or his Executors shall remise release, and quite claime from his or their heires, unto the said R. and E. and to the heires of the said E. all his or their estate, &c. in and to the foresaid Messuage and Premisses with the appurtenances: For which release and quite claime the said R. and Eliz. shall by the same Fine render unto the said M. or to his Executors, the same Messuages and Premisses with the appurtenances, to have and to hold the same Premisses unto the said M. his executors and assignes, from the Feast of the Na∣tivity of Saint John Baptist, next coming after the date of these presents, for and during the terme of one and twenty yeares, from thence, &c. yeilding, &c. unto the said R. and Eliz. and to the heires of the said Eliz. after the decease of the aforesaid Ellen B. the yearely rent of fifty pounds of, &c. at foure termes, &c. or within thirty daies, &c. And the said M. R. for him, his Execu∣tors administrators and assignes, doth covenant and grant to and with the said E. B. Ellen his wife, R. C. and Eliz. his wife, and to and with the Heires Executors administrators and assignes of them and every of them by these presents, in manner and forme follow∣ing; that is to say, That the said M.R. his executors and assigns, the said Brewhouse, &c. from time to time, within six months af∣ter warning given by the said E. or Ellen, during the life of the said Ellen, or by the said R. and Eliz. his wife, or any of them, or by the Heires or assignes of the said Eliz. during the said terme, shall repaire, &c. And likewise all the Implements, brewing Vessells, and necessaries contained in a Schedule to these presents annexed, shall repaire, maintaine, and amend, as often and when as need shall require, during the said terme, or at the furhtest within two months after warning or notice thereof given by the patties afore∣said, or any of them, and in the end of the said terme shall leave and deliver to the said Ellen, if she be then living, to her onely use the same Implements, &c. or the like in value, and of as good value as the same be now praised and valued in the said Schedule. And if the said Ellen be then dead, then to leave and deliver the said Utensills, &c. to the next heire of the said J.D. to their onely use. And if all or any of the said Implements and necessaries, shall in the end of the said terme be lacking, lost, or wanting, then to
pay at the end of the said terme, or within thirty daies after to the said Ellen if she be living, and if she be dead, then to the Heires of the said I. D. so much money as the same Implements and Premisses so wanting, be valued and praised at, the payment to be made at the great Door of the aforesaid Beer-brewhouse. And also the said M. his Executors or Assignes, shall the Siegs, &c. and that the said the said M his Executors or Assignes, all and singular the foresaid Houses and Buildings, so well and sufficient∣ly repaired, &c. in the end of the same terme, shall leave and deli∣ver up to the said Ellen, if she be living, and if she be deceased, to the Heires of the said J. D. without further delay. A Cove∣nant for liberty to enter to view reparations, &c. And if it happen the said yearely Rent of fifty pounds, or any part thereof, shall be behnd and unpaid in part or in all, after any of the said Feasts, or daies wherein it shall be due by the space of thirty daies, being lawfully demanded at the great Doore of the said Beer-brew∣house,, That then the said terme shall cease, determine, and be and remaine utterly void. And then the same Fine so to be levied, and the same Premisses and the Estate to be limi∣ted in and by the same Fine, shall be to the onely use of the said Ellen, if she be living, and if she be dead, then to the use of the Heires of the said J. D. And from and after such de∣fault of payment of the same Rent, or any part thereof, it shall be lawfull for the said E: and Ellen, during the life of the said Ellen, and after her decease, to the said R. C and Eliza∣beth, and the Heires of the said Elizabeth, into all and singular the Premisses to enter, as in their former estate, the said Fine, or any thing in these presents to the contrary notwithstand∣ing. And the said E: B: for himself and the said Ellen his Wife, and either of them, their Heires, Executors, and Assignes, further covenanteth with the said M. his, &c. That he the said M. R. his Executors and Assignes, and every of them for and under the said yearely Rent of fifty pounds in forme as is aforesaid to be paid, and under the Covenants, Grants, Condi∣tions, and agreements of these presents, on his or their parts to be observed, performed, and kept, shall or may according to the tenor and true meaning of these presents, peaceably and qui∣etly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy all the said Beer-brewhouse, Ale brewhouse, and all and singular the Premisses with the appurtenances, and also all the Implements, &c. without any let, trouble, or interruption of the said E: B: and Ellen his Wife,
or either of them, and without any other lawfull eviction or expulsion of any other person or persons, by his or their meanes, title, or procurement, during the said terme of one and twen∣ty yeares, if the said Ellen shall so long live. And the said Rt C. as well for himselfe as the said Eliz his Wife, and ei∣ther of them, and for the Heires of the said Eliz. doth cove∣nant, &c. That he the said M. his Executors and Assignes, and every of them, under the said yearely rent▪ &c. and other the Co∣venants, &c. shall or may, &c. peaceably, &c. the said Brewhouse, &c. and also all the said Implements, &c. without any lawfull let, &c. of the said R. and Eliz. his Wife, or either of them, or the Heires or Assignes of the said Eliz. and without any lawfull let, &c. of any other person or persons, by his, her, or their title, meanes, or procurement, during the said terme of one and twenty yeares. Provided alwaies, and it is agreed between the said par∣ties to these presents, That if the said M. his Executors, Ad∣ministrators, or assignes, at any time during the said terme, shall erect and and set up, build, or finish, in or upon the aforesaid Te∣nement, parcell of the Premisses called the Ale-brewhouse, any Implement, brewing Vessells▪ or Utensills; that then the said M: R. his Executors, or assignes, at or before the expi∣ration or determination of these presents, shall and may to his and their owne use and behoofe, take away, convert, and dis∣pose the same Implements▪ &c. any thing to the contrary, &c. In witnesse, &c. A Lease passed to strengthen the former Lease granted in the Brewhouse. THis Indenture, &c. between E: B: of P: in the Counnty of S. Esq and Ellen his wife, Executrix of the Testament and last Will of J.D &c. on the one part: And A: R: of L: Brewer, on the other part, witness. That whereas the said I. D. by his said last Will and Testament, dated, &c. reciting where J: W: of L: Brewer, was then possessed by means of an Indenture of Lease for term of years, which should then be fully ended and determined at the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-angell, which then should be in the yeare of our Lord, &c. of his great Brewhouse, lying▪ &c. did will and as∣sign unto the said Ellen, by the name of Ellen his true and faithfull Wife, full power and authority to make a Lease of 21. yeares,
fully to be compleat and ended, and to begin at the end and expi∣ration of the aforesaid Lease of the said Brewhouse, with all the Vessels, Implements, and things then letten to or with the said house, and contained in a Schedule indented and annexed to the said Indenture of Lease made of the said Brewhouse, and under such Covenants, Grants, and Provisoes as she and her learned Councell and Friends shall think best for the commodity, encrease, and preservation of the then Inheritance of the said house and such Fine and Rent in the same Will limited: As by the said Will more plainly may appeare. This Indenture now further witnes∣seth, that the said E. and Ellen according to the intent and true meaning of the said last Will and Testament. And in considera∣tion of the summe of three hundred pounds of, &c. to be paid be∣fore the ensealing hereof, have demised, granted, and to Farme letten: And the said Ellen by these presents, doth demise unto the said A: R: the said Brewhouses and all the said Implements, &c. And also the said Ellen and E. onely in consideration of the Rent hereunder mentioned, have demised, &c. And the said Ellen by these presents doth demise, &c. unto the said A: all the great Cel∣lar, &c. to have and to hold the said great Beer-brewhouse Im∣plements, &c. unto the said A: R: his Executors administrators and assignes, from the end and expiration of the said Lease of the a∣foresaid Brewhouse, which was in the yeare, &c. for the terme of one and twenty yeares fully, &c. and to have and to hold the said Cellar, unto the said A. his Executors and assignes, from and immediatly after the said Lease of the Brewhouse aforesaid be en∣ded, which was in the yeare, &c. for the terme of sixteen yeares, fully to be compleat, &c. yeilding and paying for the said Brew∣houses, unto the said Ellen B. or her assignes yearely, during the said yeares, if she so long do live, forty pounds of, &c. And after her decease during the residue then to come of the said one and twenty yeares, to the Heires of the said J. D. twenty pounds of, &c. at foure termes of, &c. That is to say, at the Feasts, &c. or within thirty daies, &c. and yeilding and paying yearely for the said great Cellar, during the said sixteen yeares, to the said Ellen and her assignes, if she so long live, and after her decease to the Heires and assignes of the said J.D. forty shillings of, &c. at the foure termes or Feasts before specified, or within thirty daies, &c. And the said A.R. for him, &c covenanteth, &c. to and with the said E: and Ellen, and their assignes by these presents, that the said A. his, &c. the said Brewhouses, &c. shall repaire, &c. du∣ring
the severall termes before, in and by these presents demi∣sed, That is to say, the said Brewhouses for and during the said one and twenty yeares, and the said Cellar during the said sixteen yeares: And the same Premisses so repaired, &c. in the end or de∣termination of the termes before mentioned, shall leave, yeild, and deliver up, together with the said Implements, &c. in as good case as they now be; reasonable wearing of the said Imple∣ments onely except. Provided alwaies, and it is covenanted, granted, concluded, condiscended, and fully agreed by and be∣tween the said parties, That the said E: and Ellen, or any of them during the life of the said Ellen, or the Heires of the said J. D. shall not during the former terme made of the Premisses, granted to one M: R: and as long as the said M: R: his Executors or Assigns, shall pay the rent in the said Lease reserved, ask, demand, or have the rent reserved in these presents, nor shall be chargable with any Covenants Grants Articles or Agreements in these pre∣sents contained. And provided alwaies, and the said parties do covenant and agree, That if the said M: R: his Executors and Assignes, by reason of the said former Demise, or the said A. R. his Executors and assignes, shall and may have and enjoy the said Premisses by these presents, demised against the said E: and Ellen, during the life of the said Ellen; that then the said E: and Ellen, nor any of her Heires Executors or assignes, shall not be charged nor sued in or upon any action of Covenant to be brought upon this present Deed: for the true meaning of these presents is, That this present Demise was and is made, and demised to the said A: R: at the request of the said M: to the end, that by vertue of the said last Will of the said J.D. he might the rather have assurance du∣ring the said terme in these presents mentioned. In witnesse, &c. A Lease of Tynne-work for security of payment of a summe of money. THis Indenture, between M. T. of T. in the County of C: Es∣quire, on the one part, and R.B. Citizen and Goldsmith of . on the other part, witnesseth, That the said M.T. for and in consi∣deration of the sum of 100. Marks of lawfull, &c. whereof, &c. Hath demised, granted, betaken and to Farm letten, and by these presents, &c. unto the said R. B. all that his Tynne-work within
his Mannor of T. and S: which Tinn work is commonly called and known by the name of P: and also all and singular Rights, Profits. Jurisdictions, Preheminencies, Customes, Liberties, Authorities, Interests, and Commodities whatsoever, which the said M: T: hath or can, or may, or ought to have of, for, in, or out of the said Tinn work: And also all Tinn and Tinn Ore for the said Tinn work or Seigniory thereof, or otherwise to be paid or yeilden for or touching the same to the said M: T: his heirs or assigns, To have and to hold all the said Tinn work,Habend commonly called P and all and singular the said Rights, Profits, Jurisdicti∣ons, Preheminencies, Customes, Liberties, Authorities, Interests, Commodities, Tinn and Tinn Ore aforesaid, and all other the Premisses whatsoever to the said R.B. his Executors Administrators and Assignes, from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangell next ensuing. &c. for, by, and during all the whole terme of five yeares from thence, &c. Paying therefore yearely to the said T.M. his Heires and Assignes,Reddend. six pence of lawfull, &c. in the Feast of Easter onely, at one payment, if it be then demanded, for all rents and demands by the said R: B. his Executors or Assignes, to be payd for or out of the Premisses during the said terme. Provided alwaies, that if the said M. T:Proviso. his Heires, &c. do pay, &c. to, &c. the summe, &c. at, &c. on, &c. between the houres, &c. or otherwise in the mean time before hand; That then and from thenceforth the Lease, Grant, and Demise made of the Premisses by these presents, shall cease and determine, and become cleerly void and frustrate, And that then and from thenceforth it shall be lawfull to and for the said M: T: his Heires and Assignes, into all the Premisses to re-enter, and the same to repossesse, as in his or their former estate these Indentures, or any, &c. And the said M. T. for him, his Heires, &c. covenanteth, &c. in forme, &c. that if the said M: his Heires, Executors, and Assignes shall make default to pay the said summe of a hundred Marks to the said R.B. his Executors and Ad∣ministrators in forme aforesaid, that then the said R. B. his Execu∣tors and Assignes for their own use, shall and may lawfully have, hold, and enjoy the said Tinn work called P: and have take, and enjoy all the said Rights, Profits, Jurisdictions, Preheminencies, Customes, Liberties, Authorities, Interests, and Commodities, Tinn and Tinn Ore whatsoever, which the said M. T. his Heires or Assignes, can, or may, or ought to have of, for, in, or out of the said Tinn work, for, by, and during all the said term of five yeares
without any let, deniall, resistance, or interruption of the said M: his Heires or Assignes, and without lawfull let, &c. of any other person or persons whatsoever. And also that then further the said R: B: his Executors Administrators and Assignes, shall and may yearely for their own use every yeare, during the said terme of five yeares, have, take, gather, levie, and enjoy of cleer yearely profits of the Premisses to the summe of twenty pounds of, &c. beyond and besides all manner of costs, charges, and expences whatsoever, with∣out any manner of account thereof, or therefore, or for any part thereof to be made or given to any person or persons. In witnesse, &c. A Lease for a hundred yeares, defeasible upon payment of a summe of money. THis Indenture, &c. Between the right honourable H. Earle of H: Lord H. &c. of the most honourable Order of the Garter, Knight and Lord President of our Soveraign Lady the Queenes Majesties Councel established in the North on the one part, and A. G. and W. D. of L: Aldermen, M. C. of L. Draper, A. S. of L: Mercer, and T. A. of L. Haberdasher on the other part, Witnesseth, That the said Earle of H: for divers causes and considerations him especially moving, hath demised, granted, and to Farme letten, and by these pre∣sents, &c. unto the said A. G. &c. all that his Mannor and Lordship of A. in the County of S. with all and singular the appurtenances, and all Lands, Tenements, Rents, Re∣versions, Services, Profits, and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Mannor belonging or appertaining, or occupyed, used, demised, or leased, as part, parcell, or member of the same, or reputed, taken, Counted, or knowne, as any part, par∣cell, or member thereof; To have and to hold the said Mannor, Lordship, Lands, Tenements, and other the aforesaid Premisses, unto the said A: G. &c their Executors and Assigns, from the day of the date hereof, for and during the term of a 100. years, fully to be compleat and ended, under the conditions hereafter in these presents mentioned and declared: And the said Earle doth for him his Heires Executors and assignes covenant and
grant to and with the said A.G.W.D.M.C.A.S. and T. A. That the said Mannor and Lordship of L. and all other the Premisses, at the ensealing and delivery hereof are, and at all times hereafter, for and during the aforesaid interest for yeares, shall be discharged, ac∣acquitted, or otherwise within six moneths after request thereof made by the said A.G. &c. or by any of them, or by the Survivor of them, his or their Executors or assignes unto the said Earle, his Heires executors or admin. sufficiently saved and kept harmlesse, of and from all and all manner of titles, charges, and incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, or done or to be had, &c. by the said Earl, all Leases not exceeding three lives, or forty yeares, and all Co∣pies by Court Roll made by the said Earle of the said Mannor, and other the aforesaid Premisses, or of any part thereof excepted and foreprised. Provided alwaies, that if the said Earle, his Heires Executors administrators or assignes, shall within six yeares after the date hereof, pay or cause, &c. unto the said A: G: &c. or to any of them, or to the Executors Administrators or assignes of any of them, at the usuall place for receipt of money in the Royall Ex∣change in L: the summ of five thousand pounds of lawfull, &c. That then and from thenceforth this present Lease shall cease and be utterly void: any thing herein contained to the contrary not∣withstanding. And the said Earle doth further covenant and grant for him, &c. to and with the said A.G. &c. That if the said summe of five thousand pounds, shall not be paid according to the intent and true meaning of the said Proviso, That then from and after the default of payment of the said summe of five thousand pounds, the said A. G. &c. shall or may for and during the said terme of a hundred yeares, peaceably and quietly have, hold, and enjoy the said Mannor and other the demised Premisses, without the let or interruption of the said Earle, or of his Heires, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, except before excepted. And whereas the said A: G: have heretofore at the instance and request of the said Earle, taken up upon their credit the said summe of five thousand pounds for the behalf and use of the said Earl: and have also entred into divers Bonds for the payment of divers summes of money for the said Earle. And whereas also the said A: G: &c. have delivered to the said Earle such bonds and statutes as the said Earle stood bound to the said A. G: &c. for the saving of them harmlesse of and from the same summes of money. Now the said Earle in consideration thereof, doth for him his Heires and Assigns, covenant, promise, and grant to and with the said A: &c. That
for the better assurance of the said Mannor and other the Premisses unto the said A: &c. for and during the aforesaid terme of a hun∣dred yeares, the said Earle his Heires and assignes, and all and every other person and persons that have or hereafter shal have any estate of in & to the said Mannor, Lordship and premisses, or of, in, or to any part or parcell thereof, shall stand and be seised thereof, and of every part and parcell thereof to the use of the said A: G: &c. and of their Executors and assignes, under the Condition afore∣said, and according to the true intent and meaning of these pre∣sents, for and during all the said terme of yeares above mention∣ed, and for no longer or other time or terme. In witnesse, &c. A Lease in reversion of a house in London well passed, with Covenant that if the Tenant be distrained upon for Rent-charge issuant out of the house, he shall retain his own Rent for satisfaction. THis Indenture, &c. Between W: H: Citizen and Clothworker of L: on the one part, and W. W. Citizen and Clothworker of L▪ on the other part, Witnes. That whereas W: G: of B: in the County of W: Esquire, by his Indenture of Lease, dated, &c. hath demi∣sed, &c. unto A: W: then of L. Widow and now deceased, her Exe∣cutors administrators, and assignes, for the terme of &c. from, &c. for and by the payment of the yearely Rent, &c. all that his then Messuage or Tenement, with Shops, &c. scituate at W: end in the Parish of S.P. in L▪ as by the said Indenture of Lease, &c. sithence the time of the granting of which said Lease, the said W: H: hath purchased of the said W: G: the reversion of the said Messuage with the appurtenances to him and his Heires in Feesimple, without Condition. And sithence that time also the said Messuage is con∣verted and divided into two severall Tenements and dwelling Houses, and are now in the severall occupations of the said W: W: and of one B: S: of L: Clothworkers. Now the said W: H: in consi∣deration of the summe of two hundred pounds of lawfull, &c. whereof, &c. hath demised, &c. all that corner Tenement with the appurtenances scituate, &c. now being in the proper occupation of the said W.W. being part of the said Messuage which was demised to the said A: W: as abovesaid, in such manner and forme as the same
is now holden and occupied by the said W. W. and divided from the residue of the said Messuage, now in the occupation of the said B: S: which Tenement or dwelling house, in the Tenure of the said W: W: mentioned and intended to be demised by these presents, doth contain all these severall roomes hereafter expressed; that is to say, one Celler, &c. to have and to hold the said Tenement or dwelling House with the appurtenances, above mentioned by these presents to be demised, containing such severall roomes as aforesaid, and all other the Premisses by these presents above de∣mised to the said W: W: his, &c. from the eighth day of Ma, which shall be in the yeare, &c. (Anquiltemps de lias fait aua' Agnes Whithorne ut pred. (estant maintenant au proprietie udit VVilliam VVithorne) finist. unto the end and terme of fifty yeares, &c. yeilding and paying therefore yearly from thenceforth, during the said terme of fifty yeares to the said W: H: his heires or assignes, nine pounds of, &c: at the feast daies of, &c. by even portions, the first payment thereof to begin and to be made in the feast day of the Nativity, &c. which shall be in the said yeare of our Lord, &c. And if it shall happen the said yearely rent of nine pounds, or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid at any time during the said terme of fifty yeares, by the space of twenty daies next over or after any of the said Feast daies, wherein the same or any part thereof ought to be paid as aforesaid, and no sufficient and overt distresse, can or may be found in or about the said Tenement or dwelling House with the appurtenances, demised by these presents, which shall or may be lawfully had and taken away for the said Rent, that then and from thenceforth it shall be lawfull to the Lessor to re-enter, &c. and the Lessee to expell, &c. these presents, &c. And the said W.W: covenanteth, &c. that he the said W. his Executors Administrators and Assignes, at his and their own proper costs and charges, shall and will from time to time, as often as need shall be, during the said terme of fifty yeares, well and sufficiently re∣paire, uphold, sustain and maintain all the said Tenement or dwel∣ling House with the appurtenances, by these presents demised, and every part thereof, in and by all manner of needfull and necessary reparations whatsoever. And also at his and their like costs and charges, all the pavements as well within the said Tenement, as without in the Kings high Street to the same Tenement belonging, and all the Siegs and Widraughts to the said Tenement apper∣taining; shall cause to be paved, cleansed, scoured, and made clean from time to time, as often as need shall be, during the said
term of fifty yeares and all and singular the Premisses in such reparations, being at the end of the said term of fifty yeares, shall and will leave and yeild up: And the said W: H: covenanteth, &c. in manner and forme, &c. That he the said W: H: his Heires, Executors, Administrators, or assignes, shall and will from time to time, during the said term of, &c. cleerly and sufficiently keep and save harmlesse the said Tenement and Premisses by these pre∣sents demised, and also the said W: and W: his Executors and assignes, of and from one yearly rent-charge of thirteen pounds eight shillings foure pence, yearly issuing and going out of the whole Messuage aforesaid, as it was demised to the said A. W. as aforesaid, and payable to the above named W: G. his heires or assignes for ever. As also of and for all other Rent-charges, Rents, & Incumbrances whatsoever, at any time during the said term of, fifty yeares to be due, issuing and going out of the said Tenement with the appurtenances, by these presents demised, or any part thereof (the said yearly rent of nine pounds by these presents, reserved to the said W: H. his Heires and assignes alwaies saved and excepted.) And also that if it happen at any time during the said term of fifty yeares, the said W. W. his Executors Administra∣tors or assignes, or any his or their Goods or Chattells be distrai∣ned for the said yearly Rent charge of thirteen pounds eight shil∣lings foure pence, payable to the said W. G. his Heires or assigns as aforesaid, or for any part thereof, or for any other Rent charge whatsoever, or incumbrance to be due issuing or going out of the said Tenement with the appurtenances, or any part or parcell ther∣of, that then for and in satisfaction of every such Rent charge or Incumbrance, for which the said W: W: his Executors or assignes, or any his or their goods or chattels shall be distrained as is afore∣said, It shall and may be lawfull to and for the said W. VV. his Executors and Assignes, to detaine and keep in his and their own hands, to their own use and behoof, the said yearly rent of nine pounds, by these presents reserved, or so much thereof as the said Rent-charge so distrained for shall amount unto, without any damage, penalty, forfeiture, or losse therfore to be incurred or sustai∣ed by the said VV. VV. his Executors or assigns in any wise; The said clause or article of distresse and condition above mentioned in these presents, for and concerning the said yearely rent of nine pounds by these presents reserved, or any other thing abovesaid to the contrary notwithstanding. And moreover that he the said VV. VV. his Executors Administrators, and assignes, by and under the
payment of the said yearely rent of nine pounds, according to the true meaning of these presents, and by and under the performance of other the Covenants, Grants, and Agreements above expressed, on the part and behalf of the said VV. VV. his Executors and as∣signes to be performed, shall or lawfully may by and during all the said terme of fifty yeares, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occu∣py, and enjoy the said Tenement or dwelling house with the ap∣purtenances, by these presents demised, without any let, trouble, or interruption of the said VV. H. his heires or assignes, or of M: his wife, and without lawfull let, trouble, interruption, expulsion, or eviction of any other person or persons whatsoever: A Covenant on VV. H. his behalfe, that he is absolutely and solely seised in his demesne as of Feesimple, without condition of the reversion of the said Messuage by these presents demised, immediatly after the ex∣piration of the Lease to A: and VV. and that he hath full power and authority to lease and demise the same in manner and forme as before: And that for the better assurance and sure making of the demised Premisses to the said VV. VV. his Executors and as∣signes, for and during the yeares aforesaid, under the Reservation, Covenants, and Conditions aforesaid, the said VV: H: and the said M: now his wife, and the heires of the said VV: H: shall and will at any time after the commencement of the said Lease, during the first two yeares, next within the commencement thereof, do such further act or acts, as the said VV. VV. his Executors or As∣signes, shall reasonably devise and require, the same to be done at the costs and charges in the Law of the said VV. VV. his Executors or Assignes. In witnesse, &c. An under-Lease binding the Tenant to pay the Rent and performe the Covenants contained in the grand Lease, with liberty to the Lessor to resume the things letten, if he be so minded. THis Indenture, &c. between G: B: of L: Gent. on the one part, and VV: M: of F: in the County of C: Gent. on the other part, witnesseth, That where N: S. Bachelor of Divinity, Master of the Colledge of St. J:Recitation of the former de∣mise. the Evangelist, in the University of C: and the Fellowes and Schollars of the same Colledge by their Indenture of Lease bearing date, &c. Have demised, granted, and to Farm-letten un∣to
the said G: all that their Rectory or Parsonage of H: in the County of C: aforesaid, with all manner of Tithes, Oblations, and Commodities to the same belonging (except the Grove or Spring of Ashes.) And where also the same Master, Fellowes, and Schol∣lars, have by their said deed demised, granted, & to Farm-letten to the said G: B: the Mansion place of the Parsonage, with all Houses, Barnes Stables Meadowes Feedings Pastures Lands and Tene∣ments, Orchards, Holts, Rents, and Services thereunto belonging, with all and singular the appurtenances in the Town and Feilds of H: D: and C. (except before excepted) as fully as P. O. and J: B: lately had the same;The Haben∣dum of the former dimis∣sion. To have and to hold the said Rectory and other the Premisses to the said G. his Executors and Assignes, from the Feast, &c. unto the full end and term of twen∣ty yeares, from thence, &c. yeilding, &c. to the said Master, Fellowes, and Schollars,Reddend. and their Successors within the said Colledge, the summe of one and twenty pounds of, &c. at the Feasts of St. Michael, &c. and the Annunciation, &c. by even portions, as by the said former Deed indented, more plainly and at large amongst other things therein contained will appear. The said G: B: for and in consideration of the summe of two hundred and sixty pounds of, &c.The present dimission. to him▪ his Executors or Assignes, to be paid by the said W: M: his Execu∣tors or Assignes, in manner and form hereafter expressed in these presents, hath demised, &c. and by, &c. to the said W: M: ll that the said Rectory and Parsonage of H. with all manner of Tithes Oblations and Commodities thereunto belonging, and the Man∣sion place of the said Parsonage, with all Houses Banes Stables Meadowes Feedings Pastures Lands and Tenements, Orchards, Holts, Rents and Services thereunto belonging, with all and sin∣gular the appurtenances, in the Town and Feilds of H: D:As fully, &c. and C. (except before excepted) as fully as the same to the said G are demised by the said for∣mer Deed indented above recited.Habend, &c. To have and to hold the said Rectory and other the Premisses to the said W: his Executors and Assignes, from the Feast of the Annunciation, &c. last, &c.Reddend. the rent reserved in the former di∣mission. by and during all the term of ten yeares, from thence &c. and fully to be compleat and ended: The said VV: M: his Executors and Assignes, yeilding
and paying therefore yearely during the said terme of ten yeares to the said Master Fel∣lowes and Schollars, and their Successors, the said yearely rent of one and twenty pounds reserved by their said Indenture of Lease, after the very tenor and effect of the same Lease. And moreover yeilding and paying to the said G.Reddend. ano∣ther rent to the present Demi∣sor. his Execurors or assignes yearely hereafter and from henceforth the summe of foure and twenty pounds of, &c. in the Feast of St. Michael, &c. and the annunciation, &c. or within thirty daies next after every of the same daies by even por∣tions, at the now Mansion house of F: G: Esquire, scituate, &c. untill the said summe of two hundred and sixty pounds shall be fully paid.Covenant that the Lessee pay the rent and perform the co∣venants con∣tained in the grand Lease, and the rent re∣served by this Lessor. And the said W.M. covenanteth, &c. in form, &c. that he the said W.M. his Executors and Assignes, during the continuance of the Lease to them made of the Premisses by these presents, and according to the intent and true meaning of the same, shall as well yeild and pay the said yearly rent of one and twenty pounds in manner and form aforesaid, to the said Master Fellowes and Schollars, and their Successors, and do perform and fulfill all and eve∣ry other Covenants, Grants, and Articles, thing and things whatsoever, by force of the said former Indenture of Lease, on the part of the said G: B: and his assignes to be performed, done or fulfilled; and thereof and of all Bonds con∣cerning the same, shall save and keep harmlesse the said G: his Executors and Assignes, during the continuance of this present Lease, against the said Master, &c. their Successors and Assignes, as also shall well and truly pay the said yearly summe of foure and twenty pounds to the said G: his Executors and assignes in form aforesaid,Lessee to yeild up the Premis∣ses to the Lessor at the end of the term. without fraud or covin; and that in the end of the said terme of ten yeares, or other determination of this present Lease, the said W: M. his Executors and assignes upon reasonable request shall quietly without contradiction or resistance, leave and yeild up all the before demised Premisses, to the said G: B: his
Executors or Assignes.The Lessee shall not sue for a new Lease in reversion. And that the said VV: M. his Executors Administrators or Assignes, or any other person or Persons, for or by them or any of them, shall not by any mean directly or indirectly sue or labour to get or procure any new Lease of the Premisses from the said Colledge in reversion thereof, to prevent or prejudice the said G. or his Assignes in any wise.Lessee to deli∣ver to the Les∣sor acquittan∣ces for the rent reserved by the grand Lease. And further that he the said VV.M. his Executors or Assignes, shall from time to time during the continuance of this pre∣sent Lease, within thirty daies next after the said severall Feast daies of St. Michael, &c. and the Annunciation, &c. give and deliver to the said G: B: his Executors or Assignes, at the said Man∣sion house of the said P.G. such sufficient Acquit∣tance as the said W. or his Assignes shall or may get or receive of the said Master Fellowes and Schollars, their Successors or Assignes, for the se∣verall payments of the said yearely Rent of one and twenty pounds.Lessee not to alienate, &c. And moreover that he the said W.M. his Executors or Assignes, shall not at any time during the said terme of ten yeares, (without the speciall licence and agreement of the said G. B. his Executors or Assignes, grant, alienate, or assigne the Premisses or any part thereof, or his or their said interest or estate of or in the same Premisses, or any part thereof, to any person or persons, (except onely so much thereof, as ly or shall arise in C. aforesaid, and the arable Glebeland, and that to be letten onely to the halves from yeare to yeare, and none otherwise. And the said W.M. covenanteth▪ &c.The Leassee to surrender his Lease of the Premisses to the Lessor after premonition given to the Lessee. That if at any time hereafter during the said ten yeares, the said G. shall intend and purpose to dwell in any place within seven miles distance of the said Re∣ctory, and shall be minded to resume the said Rectory and other the Premisses into his own oc∣cupation and use, and thereof shall give premoni∣tion to the said VV.M. his Executors or Assignes, at the said Rectory, in any of the feast daies of S. Michael, or the Annunciation: And thereupon the said G. with his Family, before the end of two yeares next after the said pre∣monition given, shall come and dwell within the said seven miles
distance of the same Rectory, that then in such case the said W: M: his Executors or Assignes, at the end of the said two yeares next ensuing, from the day of such premonition given, shall leave and surrender all the said Rectory and other the Premisses into the hands of the said G: B: if he do require the same.The Lessee shall not be charged with any rent longer then his enjoyance of the Premisses. Provided alwaies, that the said W: M: his Executors Administrators or Assignes, shall not be charged with the payment of the said yearely rent of one and twenty pounds, or the said yearly payment of foure and twenty pounds, or with any other charge towards the said Master Fellowes and Schollars, or their Successors, for any longer time then the said W. his Executors or Assigns shall or may hold and occupy the said Rectory and other the Premisses by vertue of these presents. Provided also, that if it shall fortune the said W:Forfeiture in case of non-performance of Covenants. M: his executors or assignes to make default of or in performance of any the Covenants Clauses or Articles aforesaid, on their or any of their parts to be performed; That then and from thenceforth this present Lease shall cease and cleerly determine, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary notwithstand∣ing.Covenant for enjoyance. And the said G: B: covenanteth, &c. That he the said W: his executors and assignes, according to the intent and true meaning of these presents shall or lawfully may have, hold, and occupy the said Rectory and all the Premisses during the said term of ten yeares, without any let, interruption, or eviction of or by the said G his executors or assignes, at any time contrary to the purport and true meaning of these presents. In witnesse, &c. A Lease to Two in Common. THis Indenture, &c. Between M: L: Citizen and Clothworker of L. administrator, of all and singular the Goods and Chattells which late were of A: I: late of L: Widow deceased, late sole exe∣cutrix of, &c. her late husband, &c. on the one part, and R: H. and H.L: two of the ordinary yeomen of his Majesties Chamber on the other part; witnesseth, That where one T: L: late of L. Esq by his Indenture of Lease, bearing date, &c. did demise, &c. to
one X: C; Citizen and Mercer of L: all that parcell of ground cal∣led C. late appertaining to the late priory of H: then dissolved, being in the Parish of St. L: in the County of M: That is to say, between a parcell of ground there then in the Tenure of, &c. to∣gether with a Fishpond and a Well within the said ground called the C: with all profits and Commodities to the same belonging, or in any wise appertaining; to have, &c. for ninety yeares from Midsomer last, before the date of the said Indenture of Lease, and for the yearly rent of forty shillings sterling, as by the said Inden∣ture of Lease, &c. And where the said X: C: by his Indenture dated, &c, did bargain, sell, assigne, and set over to the said J. J: and his assignes the said Indenture of Lease, and all his right, &c. which he the said X: C: then had, or ought to have had, of and in all the said parcell of ground called, &c. with the Well and Pond therein, and other the Premisses with their appurtenances, by vertue of the said Indenture of Lease, or otherwise: as by the said last recited Indenture more, &c. all the residue of which terme, estate, and interest of which said J: J: of and in the Premisses now to come, the said M: L: by vertue of the administration afore∣said to him committed, of the Goods and Chattells of the said A: I: late the wife and sole executrix of the said J: J: deceased, now lawfully hath and enjoyeth. Now the said M: L. for divers consi∣derations him moving, hath demised, &c. and by these presents, &c. unto the said R: H: and H: L: all that parcell of ground as it is now divided, being part of the said Close called the C. wich now is in the Tenure of the said R: H: and which lyeth along, &c. and containeth, &c. to have, hold, and enjoy the one moyety of the said parcell of ground so demised and so bounded, or howsoe∣ver the same be bounded, with all and singular the appurtenances thereof in severalty to the said R. H: his Execut. or assigns, from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangell next coming, &c. unto the end terme of fifty yeares, &c. and to have and to hold the other moy∣ety of the said parcell of ground so demised and so bounded, or however with all and singular the appurtenances in severalty to the said H L. his, &c. from the Feast of St. Michael, &c. unto the end, &c The said R: H: his executors and assignes, yeilding and paying yearely during the said terme, for his and their said moye∣ty, to the said M. : his executors and assignes, thirty shillings of, &c. at the Feasts of, &c: or within, &c: And the said H: L: his exe∣cutors and assignes yeilding ut supra: And if it shall happen the said yearely nt of thirty shillings so reserved, and to be paid by
the said R: H▪ his Executors or assignes, or any part thereof, to be behind unpaid by the said space of, &e. next aftet any of the said Feasts, in the which it ought to be paid, being lawfully, asked, that then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said M: L. his Executors and assignes, into the said parcell of ground wholly to re-enter, and the same to have againe, retaine, and repossesse, as in his or their former Estate, any thing, &c. And if it happen the said other yearely Rent of thirty shillings, &c. that then, &c. ut supra. And the said R: and H. do severally for themselves, and their severall Executors, administrators, and assignes, covenant, &c. in manner, &c. That they the said R. and H. their Executors, Ad∣ministrators, and assignes, at their own proper costs and charges, shall and will from time to time and at all times, during the said terme of fifty yeares, well and sufficiently repaire, amend and keep in as good case as they now be, all and singular the Fences, and Inclosures, in and upon their said severall moyeties of the premis∣ses now being, and all Houses and Buildings which hereafter during the same terme shall be erected and built, in and upon their said severall moyeties of the said parcell of ground, shall likewise uphold, sustaine, repaire, and amend, when and so often as need shall be, during the said terme of fifty yeares; and all and singular the Premisses so being well and sufficiently repaired and amended in the end of the same terme, shall quietly leave and yeild up: And that when and as often as any Stage-plaies or other shewes shall be played and shewed within the same parcell of ground during the said terme, That then and so often they the said R. and H. their Executors, administrators, and assignes, shall permit and suffer the said M. L. and J. now his wife, and foure or lesse in number, with them or one of them to enter into the Pre∣misses, then and there to have their standing Franck and free, during such Plaies and Shewes, without any thing giving therefore. And the said M. L. covenanteth, &c. That they the said R. and H. their Executors, administrators, and as∣signes, and every of them for the yearely Rent above reserved, and with and under the Covenants, Grants, articles, and agree∣ments above expressed, shall or may peaceably, quietly, have and enjoy both their said several moyeties of the said parcell of ground demised by these presents, for and during all the said term of fifty yeares, without any let or interruption of the said M. his Execu∣tors
Administrators and Assignes, or of any of them, or of J. now the wife of the said M. or of any of her Assignes, or of any other person or persons now, or hereafter claiming any estate, right or title in or to the Premisses, or any part thereof, by, from, or under the said M. L. or the said J. J. or A. his wife, or any of them at any time during the said terme of fifty yeares. In witnesse. &c. Here would be a Covenant that R. H. and H. L. may make any Build∣ings, &c. and for that purpose dig and turne up the ground, &c. which otherwise will be wast, &c. A very good Lease of a Mannor in Rever∣sion. THis Indenture, &c Between the right honourable W. Vis∣count H. Lord F. of C. on the one part, and E. M. servant to the said Viscount on the other part; witnesseth, That where the right honourable H.Recitall. late Earle of E. and Lady M. his wife, by their Indenture of Lease dated, &c. did demise and let to Farme to one J.E. and his Assignes, all that their Mannor called A. together with a Marsh then called C. Marsh, alias A. Marsh, as it then was divided and bounded by severall marks: And also all Lands Meadowes Feedings Pastures Rents and Services whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances and commodities to the said Man∣nor or Marsh belonging, or in any wise appertaining (except onely all Wards, Marriages, Reliefes,Exception. Es∣cheats, Felons Goods, Wrecks of the Sea, and Fish Royall hap∣pening within the said Mannor or Marsh) To have and to hold the said Mannor and Marsh, and all other Premisses except before excepted, from the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel next following the date of the said Indenture, unto the end and terme of fifty years from thence next following, for a certain yearely Rent therefore reserved to be yearly payable du∣ring the said term, as by the said Indenture of Lease, amongst, &c.
Of which said Mannor and Premisses,Recitall of this Lessors seisure of the reversion in fee. the said Viscount is now lawfully seised in his demesne as of Feesimple, to the use of himself and his heires for ever, and the reversion of the Premisses be∣ing immediatly expectant in the same Viscount and his heires, upon the determination and end∣ing of the said Lease and Estate granted as afore∣said,Demise. to the said I: E: Now the said Viscount in consideration of the good and faithfull Service to him heretofore done and bestowed by the said E: M: hath demised, granted, and to Farm-letten, and by, &c unto the said E: M: all that Capitall Messuage or Mansion house called A: Hall, with the appurtenan∣ces, in the County of E: and all the said Marsh called, &c. with all and singular the appurtenances; and all and sin∣gular Messuages,And all Messu∣age, &c. Lands, Tenements, Meadowes, Leasowes, Pastures, and Hereditaments whatsoe∣ver, which the said Viscount hath, or ought to have in A: which heretofore have been occupied and enjoyed, to and with the said Mannor, Place and Farme of A: and all and sin∣gular Messuages, Mills, Houses, Edifices, Barnes, Stables, Build∣ings, Lands, Tenements, Meadowes, Pastures, Feedings, Com∣mons, Marshes, Waters, Streames, Fishings, Ponds, Profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular the appurtenances to the said Mannor-house belonging or appertaining, or as any parts or parcells of the same knowne,Accepted, repu∣ted, &c. Reversion, &c. Exception of, &c. accepted, or reputed, or there∣with heretofore being usually had, occupied, letten to farme, or enjoyed; And the Reversion and Reversions of all and singular the Premisses and of every part thereof (except alwaies and neverthelesse reserved out of this present Lease, to the said Viscount, his heires and assignes, all and singular Lands Tenements and Hereditaments hererofore letten by Copy of Court Roll, and the Rents and Services of all Freeholders to the same Mannor belonging, Court Leets, and Perquisits of Courts Wards, Marriages, Reliefes, Escheats, Felons Goods, VVrecks of the Sea, and Fishes royall whatsoever, within the said Mannor, or any other the Premisses: And except also all Copy-Woods and Springs within the said Mannor, and the Soile of the same Copy-Woods and Springs, and all Woods, Underwoods, and Trees
whatsoever, standing, growing, or being in or upon the Premisses, or any part thereof. To have and to hold the said Mannor-house mess. mills, houses, lands, tenements,Habendum. meadows, feedings, fishings, and hereditaments whatsoever, with their appurtenances, and the said marsh ground called, &c. and all other the premisses by these presents demi∣sed and the reversion and reversions of all and singular the premis∣ses except onely before by these presents excepted) to the said E. M. his executors administrators and assignes, immediately from and after the end and expiration of the said term of fifty years granted, as abovesaid, to the said I. E. or from any sooner or former determination or forfeiture thereof to happen unto the end and term of &c. then next following, and fully to be compleate and ended Yeilding and paying therefore yearly, during the said term of &c.Reddend. granted in the premisses by these presents unto the said Viscount, his heires and assignes, seventeen pounds of, &c. in the Feasts of the Annun∣ciation, &c. and S. Michael, &c. by even portions: The first pay∣ment of the same rent to be made and to begin at such of the same Feasts as shall next ensue and follow after the time wherein the premisses by these presents demised, shall or may by vertue there∣of come to the hands and possession of the said E. his executors or assignes.And if it shall happen, &c. And if it hall hap∣pen the said yearly rent of seventeen pounds, or any part thereof to be behinde and unpaied on or after any of the said Terms or Feasts of payments thereof by the space of six weeks, and it being in the mean time lawfully asked, That then, and at all times after, it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said Viscount, his heires and assignes into the said Mannor-house of A. with the appurtenances, and into all and singular other the Premisses by these presents demised, with their appurtenances wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, re-tain and repossesse, as in his or their former Estate. And from thence the said E. his executors, administrators and assignes, and all other fermors and occupiers thereof wholly to expell, put out, and amove. These presents, &c. And the said E. M. covenant∣eth, &c. in form, &c. That is to say, That e the said E. his executors, administrators, or assignes,Reparation. at their own proper charges, shall and will from time to time, during all the said term, well and sufficiently repair, sustain, maintain and uphold the said Mannor-house, with the ap∣purtenances
and all the houses, edifices and buildings belonging to the said demised Premisses, with the appurtenances, so often as any need shall require, during the said term of, &c. in and with all manner of reparations and things which thereunto shall be need∣full. And also shall and will, well and sufficiently maintain and keep the said marsh-ground called C. marsh, and all other the inclosed grounds and pastures belonging to the said demised Pre∣misses, hedged or ditched, and all the sea, walls and bancks of the same ground sufficiently repaited and maintained in good re∣parations, so often as need shall require, during the said term of, &c. And further, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Viscount,View of re∣parations. his heires and assignes, and to his and their surveyors and officer from time to time during the said term, at two times in every year thereof at their pleasure, to enter into the said Mannor-house of A. with the appurtenances, and into all and singular other the Premisses, to view and see how the same have been maintained and repaired. And that if upon any such view, or viewes, it do forutne that any default or defaults of reparations shall be found needful to be amended, and monition be then given for the amend∣ing thereof to the said E.M. his executors or assigns, That then,Amendment of defaults with∣in six moneths. and so often he the said E. his execu∣tors, or assignes, shall and will, well and sufficiently repair, re-edifie & amend every such default so to be found and admonished as aforesaid, within the space of six moneths next ensuing, after every such monition. And the said E. M. for him, &c. furthermore covenant∣eth,Quitrents. &c. That he the said E. his executors and assignes, shall from time to time, at all times during the term of years granted by these presents, at his and their own charges, bear and pay all manner of Quitrents, Court-rents, and whatsoever hereafter to be going out or payable of or for the said Mannor and house, and other the said demised Premises, with their appurtenances, or of, or for any part thereof. And the said Viscount for him,Houseboot, &c. his heires, executors and administrators, doth covenant, &c. in form, &c. That is to say, That it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said E. his executors, administrators and assignes, to have and take upon the Premisses demised by these presents, Timber for the re∣pairing of the said Mannor-house, and other the Premisses, as need shall require during the said term; and also to have and to
take for fire boot, ploughboot, cartboot, hedgeboot, gateboot and harrowboot, to be spent and imployed in and upon the Premisses by these presents demised, and not elsewhere sufficient wood of the lops and shreds of the trees, standing and growing in and upon the same Premisses, And that so often, and from time to time when need shall require, during the said term of, &c. And also that he the said E. his executors, admi∣nistrators and assignes,Warranty. for the payment of the said yearly rent of seventeen pounds, in manner and form aforesaid, and under the performance of the other covenants and articles mentioned in these presents, on the part of the said E. to be per∣formed, shall and may from the end or expiration, or any other sooner determination of the said former term granted by the In∣denture of Lease above mentioned, unto the said I. E. for and du∣ting al the said term of years granted in the faid Premisses by these presents, lawfully and quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy all the said Messuage or Mannor-house, called A. with the appurtenan∣ces thereof, and all other the Premisses demised by these presents, without any let, eviction, or molestation of the said Viscount, his heirs or assignes, or of any other person or persons, claming, in, by, or from them, or any of them, or by their, or any of their estates or inerests. And the said E. M: covenanteth, &c. That the said E: his executors,The Tenant to suffer the Lord keep Court in the Mannor-house. administrators and assignes, shall at all times, and from time to time during the said term, permit and suffer the Steward, Surveyor, and Officers of the said Viscount and his heirs, to enter into the said Mannor-house, and other the demised Premisses, to keep the Courts of the said Viscount and his heires, as heretofore hath been used and accustomed: And that it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said Viscount, his heires and assignes at his and their will and pleasure, to cut, fell, and carry away, in by, and through the said demised Premisses at all times requisite, during the said term the woods in these presents before excepted, without let, interruption or deniall of the said E. or his assignes. In wit∣nesse, &c.
A Lease of an house in London, containing a Condition, that if a certain summe of money (for an Income) be not paid at the times appointed, the Lease shall be void. THis Indenture, &c. Between R. T. Citizen and Mercer of London, the one part, And R. S. Citizen and Armourer, &c. on the other parr, Witnesseth, that the said R. T. hath demi∣sed, &c. to the said R. S. his executors, and assignes, all that his Messuage or Tenement, with the appurtenances, called the Helmet, set, lying and being in C. in the parish, &c. in the city of London, now being in the severall tenures or occupations of the said R. S. and of H. B. and W. K. And all and singular houses, buildings, yards, cellars, sollers, chambers, rooms, commodities and easments whatsoever to the said Messuage and Tenement, belonging, or appertaining. All which said Messuage and Tenement, and other the Premisses the said H. B. yet hath and holdeth to him and his assignes, for the term of four years next following, from the Feast of the Nativity, &c. last past before the date hereof, of the Demise and Lease to him thereof made by R. P. of A. in the County of . Esquire, by Indenture, bearing date, &c. To have, hold,Habend. and enjoy the said Messuage and Tenement, with the apputrenances, and all and every other the Premisses with their appurtenance to the said Ric. S. his executors, administrators, and assignes, from the Feast of the Nativity, &c. which shall be in the year of our Lord God, &c. by and during all the whole term of one and twenty years, from thence next,Reddend. &c. Yeilding and paying therefore yearly, by and during all the said term of one and twenty years, unto the said R. T. and to his heires and assignes at the now mansion house of the said R. T. scituate in F. Lane in London, ten pounds of, &c. in the Feast dayes of S. Michael, &c. or within thirty daies next ensuing every of the same Feast-daies by even portions.And if it hap∣pen, &c. And if it happen the said yearly rent of ten pounds or any part or parcel thereof to be behinde and not payed at the place of payment before limited, by the space of thirty daies next after any of the said Feast-daies wherein it ought to be payed, as aforesaid, That then, and at any time after, it shall and may be lawfull, to and for the said R. T. his heires and assignes, into the said Mes∣suage
and Tenement, and other the Premisses, with their appurte∣nances wholly to re-enter, And the fame (as in their former estate) to have again, retain, and re-possesse, And the said R. S. his executors, adminst, and assigns, and all others, whatsoever they be, therefrom utterly to expell and amove.Reparations. These pre∣sents, &c. And the said Ric. S. for him his Executors, Administrators, and Assignes, Covenanteth and granteth, to and with the said R. T. his Heires, Executors administrators, and as∣signes, and every of them by these presents, That he the said Ric. his Executors, administ, and Assigns, at his and their own costs and charges, all the aforesaid Messuage and Tenement, and all other the Premisses, with their appurtanances in all things, and by all things well and sufficiently shall repair, sustain, and maintain, and as often as need shall be, new make, and re-edifie by and during all the said term: And also at the like costs and charges of the said Ric. his Executors and Assigns, all the pavements, as well of the said Messuage as in the street before the same, and all the sincks and singes, gutters and widraughts to the said Messuage belonging, well and sufficiently from time to time, shall cause to be paved, purged, made clean and emptied, as often as need shall be, during the term aforesaid, And all and singular the Premisses well and suf∣ficiently repaired, shall leave and yeild up in the end or other de∣termination of the said term: And further, that it shall be law∣full, to and for the said R.T. his Heirs and Assigns, two times in eve∣ry year, during the said term, to enter and come into the aid Mes∣suage and Tenement, and other the Premisses, and every part there∣of, to view and see how the same be repaired. And that the said Ric. S. his Executors, Adminstrators or Assignes, from time to time, during the said term, shall and will repair and amend, every de∣fault there upon such view found, which shall be needfull to be amended, within the space of six moneths next after admonition and knowledge thereof to any then inhabiting there, given at the taking of any such view as aforesaid. And moreover, that he the said Ric. S. shall yearly, during the said term, bear and pay at their owne costs and charges, not onely one yearly Quitrent of thirteen shillings, yearly going out of the Premisses, but also all tasks, talla∣ges, and fifteens, tithes, and other duties therefore to be paid; And thereof shall acquit and discharge the said R. T. his Heires and Assignes during the said term: And the said R. T. for him, &c. Covenanteth, &c. That he the said Ric. his Executors and As∣signes, shall or may lawfully, have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and
singular the said Messuage and Tenement, and all & every other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, from and after the said Feast of the Nativity, &c. in the said year of our Lord God, &c. by, and during all the said term of twenty one years from thence next fol∣lowing, & fully to be compleat, under & according to the paiments, Conditions, Covenants, and articles in these presents specified on the part of the said R. his executors, administ. and assignes, well and truly to be fulfilled and kept, without any let, disturbance, or interruption of the said R. T. his heires or assignes; And with∣out any lawfull let▪ disturbance, or interruption of any other per∣son or persons, which have or shall have any lawfull estate, right, title, or interest in or to the said Messuage or Tenement, and other the Premisses, or in or to any part or parcell thereof. For which Lease, Covenants and Grants above specified, on the part of the said R. T. made and granted to and with the said Ric. S. in form aforesaid, the said R. S. for him, his heirs, executors and admini∣strators, covenanteth, granteth, and agreeth by these presents, to and with the said R. T. his executors and assignes, That he the said Ric. his executors, adminstrators or assignes, shall and will truly content and pay, or cause, &c. to the said R. T. his executors, or adminstrators, the summe of two hundred pounds of, &c. in man∣ner and form following; That is to say, fifty pounds thereof in hand at the ensealing of these presents, whereof the said R. T. doth acknowledge himself paid. And of these fifty pounds, doth clearly acquit the said Ric. his heirs, executors, and administrators by these presents; And other fifty pounds thereof at the Feast, &c. And, &c. And the other twenty five pounds residue and in full pay∣ment of the said summe of two hundred pounds, on, &c. All and every which said severall five payments yet unpaid, are to be paid at the said Messuage called the Helmet, without the great door thereof, opening into C. between the hours, &c. in the afternoon, of every of the said severall Feast-daies for the said seve∣rall payments above limited and appointed. Provided alwayes,Proviso. and it is agreed▪ granted and concluded, by and between the said parties, to these presents, for themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators and assignes, That if the said R. S. his executors, administrators and assignes do make default, and do not pay, or cause to be paid, all & every the said five last payments abovesaid, amounting to the summe of one hundred and fifty pounds, and every part of every the same payments unto the said R. T. his executors or adminstrators, or to his or their lawfull At∣torney
at the place and Feast-daies, and between the houres above in these presents limited, or otherwise to the said R. T. his Execu∣tors or assignes, at some other time and place; That then and so soon as any such default shall be made in payment of any of the said five payments, or any part of any of them: these presents and the Lease and interest thereby made and granted of the said Mes∣suage and other the Premisses to the said R: S: his Executors admi∣nistrators and assignes, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void and frustrate of all intents and purposes, as though the same had never been had or made: And that then and at all times from and after every such default made, it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said R: T: his heires and assignes, into the said Messu∣age and Tenement, and into all and every other the Premisses with their appurtenances wholly to re-enter, and the same to have againe, as in the former estate of the said R. and of his Heires, and all Occupyers thereof, from thence cleerly to expell and amove these presents, &c. In witness, &c. Passe Consultor. A Lease depending upon a Bargain and Sale, with Con∣dition not to let or set. THis Indenture,This Lease de∣pendeth upon a bargain & sale, entituled a bar∣gain and sale of land, where notwithstanding it is provided that if the Ven∣dor pay to the Vendee a cer∣tain sum of mo∣ney within ten years, and a rent for the pre∣misses yearly, for that he shall occupy the same, the sale shall be void. &c. Between A: R: &c. on the one part, and J: K: &c. and A: his wife on the other part, witnesseth, That the said A: R: hath demised, &c. to the said J: K: and A: his wife all that Messuage with the appurtenances in N: aforesaid, called the Whitehart, and all and sin∣gular other Messuages Lands Tenements, Rents, Reversions and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their appurtenances, scituate, lying, and being in N: aforesaid and C: in the County of N: which the said J. by a former paire of Indentures, bear∣ing date, &c. now last past made, and inter∣changably sealed and delivered between the said I.K. on the one part, and the said A: R: on the o∣ther part, hath bargained and sold to the said A: and his Heires forever, in manner and form, as by the same former Indentures will appear; To have and to hold all the said Messuage, and all o∣ther the premisses with the appurtenances, to the said J: and A. and to their Executors Administra∣tors and Assignes from henceforth, untill the feast
of Christmas next coming, &c. and from thence by and during the terme of one and twenty yeares, from thence, &c. and fully, &c. yeilding and paying therefore yearely during the said term, unto the said A: R. his Heires or Assignes, at the said Messuage called the Whitehart forty pounds of, &c. at the Feasts of the Annuncia∣tion, &c, and Saint Michael, &c. Christmas, &c. or within one and twenty daies, &c. by even portions: And the said J.K. for himself, and the said A: his wife, and for their Executors Administrators and Assignes, and every of them covenanteth, &c. that he the said J: K: and A: his wife, and their Executors Administrators and As∣signes, shall at their own costs and charges from time to time and at all times during the said term of, &c. maintain, sustain, uphold, and defend all and singular the said Messuage and other the pre∣misses, in and with all and all manner of reparations which there∣unto at any time during the said terme shall be needfull; and the fame so sufficiently repaired in all things at the end of the same terme, or any other ceasing or determination thereof shall so leave and yeild up. Provided alwaies,Proviso. that if the said I. K. and A: his wife, or their Executors ad∣ministrators or assignes at any time during the said terme, do alien, let, set, demise, or grant to Farme, or otherwise do put away or suffer to be recovered against them or any of them the said Messuage with the appurtenances called, &c. or any part thereof, or do demise, grant, alien, or let to Farme any other the said Messuage with their appurtenances and other the premisses, or any part or parcell thereof, or their interest or terme of yeares aforesaid, or any part thereof, to any person or persons without the specciall consent and agreement of the said A: or of his Heires or assignes, first thereunto had in writing under his Seale: That then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawfull to A: R: to re-enter, &c. In witness, &c. A Lease by a Bishop for three lives, with Letter of Attorney to deliver possession. THis Indenture, between the right Reverend Father in God E: by the providence of God Bishop of L: on the one part, and R: W: Citizen and R: of L: and K: his wife, and R: W: the younger sonne of the said R: W. S: on the other part; witnesseth, That the said Reverend Father in God, for and in consideration of a sur∣render
to him made by the said R: W: S: of a former Lease which the same R: W. had and enjoyed for certain yeares yet not expired, of the Tenement hereafter in these presents granted, and for divers other considerations him the said Reverend Father thereunto especially moving, hath demised, &c. and by these presents for him and his Successors, doth demise, grant, and to Farme let unto the said R: VV: S K. his wife, and R. VV. the younger, all that his Tenement, with Shops, Cellars, Sollers, and all other the ap∣purtenances whatsoever, to the said Tenement belonging or in any wise appertaining, set, lying and being within P: Churchyard in the Parish of St. F. beside the Cathedrall Church of St. P. in L. within the Franchises and Liberties of the said Reverend Father now Bishop of L. abutting upon, &c. To have and to hold the said Tenement, with Shops, Cellars, Sollars, and all other the Pre∣misses, with all and singular their appurtenances to the said R: W: S. K. his wife, and R VV. the younger successively, and to their assignes, for and during the naturall lives of the same R. W. S. K. his wife, and R: W: the younger, and the life of the longest liver of them, yeilding and paying therefore yearely, during this present Lease, and grant unto the said Reverend Father and his successors, or to his or their assignes (the See of the Cathedrall Church of St. P. in L: aforesaid, being full) and to the Dean and Chapter of the same Church, their Officers or Ministers (the said See being void) three and fifty shillings and foure pence of lawfull, &c. at foure usuall termes or feasts of the yeare, that is to say, at the feasts &c. by even portions: And if it happen the said yearely rent of three and fifty shillings foure pence, to be behind unpaid in part or in all, by the space of forty daies next after any Feast or day of payment thereof aforesaid, in which it ought to be paid, if it be lawfully asked, that then, or at any time after it shall be lawfull to and for the said Reverend Father and his successors and assigns, (the See aforesaid being full) and to the said Dean and Chapter, their Officers and Ministers (the said See being void) into the said Tenement, with all and singular the appurtenances wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, and repossess, as in their former estate. And the said R: VV. S. K: his wife, and R: W: the younger, and their assignes, and every of them from thence cleerly to expell, put out, and amove, this present Lease, or any thing therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise not∣withstanding. And the said R: W: S: K: his wife, and R: W: the younger, for them and their assignes, and every of them do cove∣nant
and grant, to and with the said Reverend Father and his successors by these presents, that they the said R: K: and R: and their assignes, or some one of them at their own proper costs and charges, the said Tenement, in and by all things well and suf∣ficiently shall repaire, sustain, support, and maintain as often and when as need shall require during the said terme; And all the Privies or Widraughts to the Premisses belonging, shall cause to be purged, scoured, and made clean: And all the Pavements as well within the said Tenement as without in the Street, to the same Tenement belonging, shall pave, repaire, and amend, or cause &c. from time to time, as often and when as need shall require during the said Lease. And the said Reverend Father for him and his successors covenanteth and granteth to and with the said R: K: and R. and their assignes, and every of them by these presents, That they the said R.K. and R. and every of them for the yearely rent abovesaid, shall and may peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy all the said Tenement and other the premisses with the appurtenances, by and during the naturall lives of the said R: K: and R. and during the naturall life of the longer liver of them, in manner and forme aforesaid, without let, deniall, or interruption of the said Reverend Father or his succes∣sors. To all which Covenants Articles and Agreements on the parts of the said R: K: and R: and their assignes, well and truly to be observed, performed, and kept, in manner and forme before rehearsed. The said R: W: S: bindeth himself, his Executors, and assignes, unto the the said Reverend Father and his successors, in the summe of forty pounds sterling by one Obligation, bearing the date of these presents. And moreover the said Reverend Father hath made, ordained, and put in his place, and by these presents doth make, &c. his well beloved servant S: H: his true and lawfull Attorney, for him and in his name to enter into the said Tene∣ment with the appurtenances, or into some part thereof in the name of the whole, and possession and seisin thereof, or of some part thereof in the name of the whole for him the said Reverend Father and in his name to take, and after such possession so taken and had thereof, to deliver unto the said R: W: S: K: his wife, and R: W: the younger, or to some one of them, in the name of them all, according to the forme and effect of these presents, holding firme and stable, all that and whatsoever his said Attorney shall do or cause to be done, in or about the premisses, or any part or parcell thereof: In witnesse whereof to the one part of these Indentures
remaining toward the said R: K: and R: the said reverend Father in God hath set his seal: and to the other part, &c. The possession and seisin of the Messuage or Tenement within demised with the appurtenances on the second day of March, in the yeare within written, was taken and had quietly by the within named S: H: the Attorney within named, and by him was then lawfully and quietly delivered for and in the name of the reverend Father the Bishop of L: within mentioned, to the within named R: W: S: in the name of him the same R: W: and of the within said K: his wife, and R.W. the younger, accord∣ing to the forme and effect of this present Indenture, in the pre∣sence of these persons whose names are hereunto subscribed; Viz. K. Wife of the said R. W. S. and R.W. the younger be∣ing deceased, and R. W. S. being sole seised for terme of his life, of the Tenement afore-mentioned, surren∣dreth the same to the Bishop (by Deed inrolled in the Chancery) who in consideration of such surrender demiseth the Premisses to the said R. W. for one and twenty yeares, from the date of the Lease, for the like Rent, and under such Covenants as are compri∣sed in the Lease aforesaid. A Habend. in a Lease for three lives. TO have and to hold, &c. to the said E: D: and Eliz.Habend to two, and the remin∣der to a third. his Wife, from the making of these presents, for and during the naturall lives of the said E: and Eliz: and for and during the naturall life of the longer liver of them, and after the deceases of the said E. and E∣liz. the remainder thereof to the said J. D. for and during his naturall life, yeilding, &c. during the naturall lives of the said E. Eliz. and J. and the life of the longest of them, to the said W: N. and B. N. &c.
A very good Lease of a House in London, where the Lord is bound by speciall Covenant to maintain the Principall. THis Indenture, &c. Between F. H. Citizen and Goldsmith of L. on the one part, and I. B. Citizen and Goldsmith of the same City, on the other part, witnesseth, that the said F: H. hath demised, granted, betaken, and to Farme letten, and by, &c. doth, &c. unto the said I.B. all that Messuage or Tenement with the appurtenances, scituate, standing and being in W. of L. in the Parish of, &c. now in the proper occupation of the said F. and all that Shop and Cellar, and all and singular Sollers Commodites and Easements to the said Messuage or Tenement now belonging or appertaining, and therewith by the said F. now had, used, and occupyed, together with such Implements as are mentioned in a Schedule hereunto annexed (except and alwaies reserved out of the Lease and Demise aforesaid, that Shop, &c. now in the occu∣pation of N: M: Goldsmith, and all those two Shops, &c. now in the occupations of W: G: Girdler, and E: H: Cutler) To have and to hold all the said Messuage and Tenement, Shops, Cellar, Sol∣lers, Commodities, Implements, and Easements aforesaid (ex∣cept onely before excepted) to the said I: E: his Executors Admi∣nistrators and Assignes, from the Feast of our Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus, next following after the date of these presents, for, by, and during all the terme of one and twenty yeares, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be compleat and ended, yeilding and paying therefore yearely, by and during all the said terme of one and twenty yeares, to the said F: H: his Heires and Assignes, six pounds thirteen shillings foure pence, of, &c. in the Feasts of, &c. or within the space of thirty daies next after every of the same Feast daies yearely, by equall and even portions. And if it shall happen the said yearely rent of, &c. or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid by the said space of thirty daies, over or after any of the said Feast daies of payment aforesaid (being in the mean time lawfully asked) that then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said F: H: his Heires and Assignes, into the said Messuage or Tenement and other the Pre∣misses above demised, with their appurtenances wholly to re-enter,
and the same to have again, retian, and repossess, as in his or their former estate, any thing above mentioned to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And the said I: B: for him his Execu∣tors administrators and assigns, and for every of them, doth cove∣nant and grant to and with the said F: H: his Heirs Executors ad∣ministrators and assigns, and every of them by these presents, in manner and form following; That is to say, That he the said I: B: his Executors▪ administrators and assigns, at his and their owne costs and charges, shall from time to time and at all times during the said term, as often and whenas need shall require, or within the time and space of three months, next after every monition or warning in writing given to the said I: B: his Executors or Assigns, as is hereafter limited in these presents, well and sufficiently maintain, sustain, and keep the said Messuage and all other the demised Premisses (except only before excepted) in and with all manner of necessary reparations, as tiling, lathing, longing, pla∣stering, boording, flooring, walling, lead-work, glassing, paving, as well within, as in the street without, Brick-work, Stone-work, Staires, and such other like, and the Privies and Widraughts in the said Messuage, shall do to be cleansed and emptied, as often as shall be needfull during the said term (except alwaies all great Timber and Principals, and the Workmanship thereof, which from time to time shall be prepared, wrought, and set up by the said F: H. his heirs, executors, or assigns, at his and their own costs and charges, as often as need shall be during the said term.) And also that it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said F: H: his Heires or assignes, with two or three Workmen with him or them yearely, at four severall times during the said terme, upon reasonable re∣quest and Premonition to be made and given at the said Messuage, to enter into the same Messuage, and other the demised Premisses, to view and survey the estate of the reparations thereof: and that if upon any such view and survey there shall be found any default or defaults of reparations, or lack of amendment of any thing in the demised Premisses, or any part thereof, which by the said I: his executors administrators or assignes, ought to be made, amended, repaired, or kept as aforesaid, and warning given and left in wri∣ting, at the said Messuage, for the making, amending, or repairing thereof, that then the said I: B: his executors administrators and assigns, at their own costs and charges shall and will well and suf∣ficiently make, repair, and amend all and every the said default & defaults within the space of 3. months from time to time, next after
such warning thereof to be given and left in writing as aforesaid: And that at the end of the said terme, the said I: his Executors or Assignes shall leave and yeild up all the Implements aforesaid, in the said Messuage, in as good case as they now are (reasonable wearing onely except:) And that if the said I: his Executors Administrators or assignes, at any time during the said term shall be sued for the occupation of the Premisses, or any part thereof, that then the said I: his Executors Administrators or Assignes, with such expedition as they reasonably may, shall thereof give notice to the said F: his Heires or Assignes. And the said F. H. for him, his heirs, executors, administra∣tors and assignes, and every of them, doth covenant and grant to and with the said J. B. his executors, and assignes, and every of them, by these presents, in manner and form follow∣ing, That is to say, That he the said F. his heires, executors and assignes, shall as well keep harmlesse the demised Premisses, of all former Leases, Grants, and Incumbrances, made by the said F. as also shall bear and pay all and all manner of chief rents and rent-charges, which during the said term shall be due, issuing or going out of the Premisses, or any part thereof (The yearly rent afore reserved by these presents, the Parsons tithe, Clerks wages, Church duties, watch and ward, and such like, alwaies excepted) And also at their own costs and charges, shall keep, maintain, uphold and re-edifie as need shall be, all the great Timber and Principals of the said Messuage and Tenement, from time to time, during the said term: And also that he the said J.B. his executors and assignes for the said yearly rent in form aforesaid to be paid, and under the other Covenants, grants, articles, conditions and agreements in these presents contained and expressed, to be kept and perfomed for or on the part and behalf of the said J. his exec. adm & assigns, shall, or lawfully may have, hold, occupy and enjoy all the said Messuage and Tenement, and all other the Premisses, with their appurenan∣ces (except before excepted) by and during the said term of one and twenty years, without any let, disturbance, or interruption of the said F.H. his heires, executors or assignes, or of any other by his or their means, assent, title, or procurement, and without any law∣full let, vexation, molestation or eviction of any other person or persons, having, or which shall have any former lawfull estate, title, or interest, in or to the said Messuage, and other the above demised Premisse, or any part thereof; For, and in consideration of which said Lease, demise covenants and agreements, so as
aforesaid made by the said F. H. to and with the said J. B. the same J. hath not onely paid beforehand to the said F▪ fourty pounds of lawfull, &c. and is also become bound by his Deed ob∣ligatory of the date of these presents, to pay to the said F. his cer∣tain Atturney, executors, or adminstrators, the summe of one hun∣dred pounds of like money, on the twentie third day of Decem∣ber next coming; But also hath agreed, to content and pay more∣over to the said F. his certain Atturney, executors or administra∣tor, the summe of three hundred pounds of, &c. at the Church door of Saint P. in W. of L. opening into the W. aforesaid, in manner and form following; That is to say, one hundred pounds thereof on the twenty third day of December, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, &c. and one other hundred pounds thereof on the twenty third day of December, which shall be, &c. and one hundred pounds thereof on the twenty third day of, &c. which shall be, &c. in full payment of the said three hun∣dred pounds. Provided alwaies, that if it shall happen the said summe of three hundred pounds, or any part or parcell there∣of to be behinde and unpaid at any of the daies of payment thereof, or of any part thereof aforesaid, That then, and at all times hereafter, it shall and may be lawfull, to and for the said F. H. his heires and assignes, into the said Messuage, and all other the above demised Premisses wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, and re-possesse as in his or their former estate; And the said J. B. his executors, administators and assignes, and every of them from thence to expell, amove, and put ou, These presents, or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding; And the said F. H. covenanteth, &c. That at and upon payment made of the said summe of three hundred pounds, or any part thereof unto the said F. H. his certain Atturney, executors, or ad∣ministrators, according to the tenure and effect of these presents, he the said F. his executors, or adminstrators, upon reasonable re∣quest, shall, and will signe, seal, and deliver to the said J. B. his executors, administrators, or assignes, such reasonable acquittance from time to time, testifying the severall payments of every part of the same three hundred pounds, as the same shall be made, in form as aforesaid, as in that behalf shall be reasonably devised and required by the said J. B. his executors or assignes, without any delay, fraud or covin: In witnesse, &c. A Bond of one hun∣dred marks for keeping the reparations on J.B. his part to be kept.
A Lease for a thousand years, without impeachment of waste, containing divers good Covenants. THis Indenture, &c. Between T. H. of B. in the County of B. Gent. on the one part, And T. R. of C. in the County of C. Esquire on the other part, Witnesseth that the said Tho. H. as well for and in consideration of the summe of eight hundred pounds, of lawfull, &c. Whereof, &c. As also for divers other good causes and considerations, Hath demised, granted, and to farm letten, And by these presents, &c. all that the Mannor of B. with the appurtenances in the said County of B. And the Man∣sion house and Demesnes of the said Mannor; and all and sin∣gular other the houses, edifices, barns, stables, dove-houses, build∣ings, lands, tenements, meadows, leasows, pastures, commons, woods, underwoods, rents, reversions, services, and hereditaments whatsoever, with their appurtenances to the said Mannor, Mansi∣on-house and demesnes, or any of them, or to any part thereof be∣longing or appertaining, or acepted, reputed, taken, known, occu∣pied or enjoyed; as any part, parcel, or member of the said Mannor, Mansion-house demesns, other the Premisses, or of any part or par∣cel therof: And all and singular Messuages, mannors, lands, tenem. and hereditaments of the said Tho. H. in the said County of B. All which Premisses lately were parcell of the Possession of W.H. Esquire deceased. And the reversion and reversions of all and sin∣gular the Premisses with their appurtenances; And the rents and profits thereof, To have and to hold the said Mannor of B. and the Mansion house and demesne of the same Mannor, and all and sin∣gular other the Premisses with their appurtences unto the said T.R. his executors, administrators and assignes, from, &c next, &c. un∣to the end and term of one thousand years from thence next fol∣lowing, and fully to be compleat and ended without impeachment of any manner of waste; And the said Tho. H. covennanteth, &c. in form, &c. That the said T. H. in his own right, and to his own use now is and standeth sole seised in his demesne as of fee simple, of and in the said Mannor of B. with the appurtenances, and of all and singular other the Premisses, with their appurtenances above mentioned to be demised; And that he the said T. H. hath lawfull right, title, and authority, to lease, demise, and grant all and every the said Mannor, and other the Premisses to the said T.R.
his executors and assignes in manner and form aforesaid, for and during the term of years aforesaid. And also that the said Mannor, Messuage, lands, tenements, rents, reversions and hereditaments, and all other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, by these presents, mentioned to be demised, now are, and at all times during the said term of a thousand years, shall be and continue unto the said T. R. his executors, administrators, and assignes, cleerly exone∣rated, acquitted and discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and kept harmlesse by the said T. H. his heires, executors, administra∣tors, or some of them, of and from all manner of former bargains, gift, grants, leases, estates, rents, charges, rents-seck, arrerages of rents, fines, statutes, merchant and of the staple, recognisances, judgements, executions, dowers, joyntures, titles, charges, and incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, caused or knowledged by the said Tho. H. or by the said W. H. or by either of them, or by any other person or persons, having, or which shall have, or law∣fully claime to have any former estate, right, title, or interest, of, in, or to the Premisses, or any part thereof, by from, or under the estate or title of the said Tho. H. or of the said W. H. or any of the ancestors of the same W. The old accustomed rents and services thereof hereafter, during the said term to grow due to be paid and done to the chief Lord or Lords of the fee or fees of the same, or any part thereof, and all yearly rents and payments not exceeding in the whole the summe of fifty pounds of, &c. issuing or going forth of the Premisses, or any part thereof, whereof fourty pounds yearly is to be paid to E. W. widow, late wife of the said W. H. on∣ly for, and during the term of the naturall life of the said E. and no longer; only except and foreprised: And also the said Tho. H. covenanteth, &c. That the said T. R. his executors, administra∣tors and assignes, shall, or lawfully may, by and during all the said term of a thousand years, have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said Mannor, Messuage, lands, tenements, & hereditaments, and all and every other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, and the rents, issues and profits thereof to his and their own use, perceive, receive, and take, without any let, trouble, or interruption of the said T. H. his heires, executors, administrators or assignes, and without any lawfull let, trouble, interruption, expulsion, eviction, or recovery of any person or persons whatsoever (except before excepted) And further, that he the said Tho. H. and his heires, and all and every other person and persons whatsoever, having, or lawfully claiming, or which shall have, or lawfully claime, to have any former estate,
right, title or interest, of, in, or to, the Premisses, or any part thereof by or from the said Tho. H. at all times, from time to time during five years now next coming, at and upon the reasonable request, and costs and charges in the law onely of the said T. R. his executors, administrators or assignes, shall and will, do, make, knowledge and suffer, and cause to be, &c. all and every such lawfull and reasonable, acts and things in the law, for the further and better assurance of the said Mannor of B. with the appurtenances, and other the Premisses with their ap∣purtenances to be assured to the said T. R. his executors and assigns, for and during the said term of a thousand years without impeach∣ment of any waste, as aforesaid, as by the said T.R. his exe∣cutors, administrators, or assignes, or his, or their councell learned in the Laws of this Realm, shall be lawfully and reasonably de∣vised or advised: And also that the said Mannor and the Premis∣ses abovementioned, to be demised by these presents, now are, and during the naturall life of the said E.H. shall be, or lawfully may be and continue to the said T. R. his executors, administratorts, and assignes, of the cleere yearely rent and profit of eighty pounds of, &c. above all reprises; And from and after the decease of the said E. for, and during the residue of all the said term of one thousand years, then to be to come of the cleer yearly value of one hundred and twenty pounds of, &c. beyond all charges and reprises whatsoever. In witnesse, &c. A very good Lease of an Inne by a Company in London. THis Indenture, &c. Between R. P. and G. H. Wardens of the art or mystery of Salters of the city of London, and the assistants and commonalty of the same mystery on the one part; And W. H. of London aforesaid Inholder, on the other part, Wit∣nesseth, That the said Wardens, Assistants and Commonalty of one assent and consent, for them and their successors, for good and resonable causes them moving, Have demised, granted, and to farm letten, And by these presents, &c. unto the said W: H. all that their great Messuage or Inne, called and known by the signe of the George in B. street of London, with all shops, cellars, sollers, ware-house, chambers, stables, easments, rooms, yards, and imple∣ments to the same Messuage or Inn belonging or appertaining, late
in the tenure or occupation of I. A. Inneholder, and sithence in the tenure or occupation of E. D. Innholder, lying and being in or neer B. street aforesaid, in the parish of A. in L. aforesaid, To have and to hold the said great Massuage or Inne, and all other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, to the said W. H. his exe∣cutors, administrators and assignes, in as large and ample manner and form as the said J. A. and E. D. or either of them or their assignes had or held the same, and nor otherwise, from the Feast or the Nativity of S. John Baptist, now next coming, by and du∣ring all the term of twenty one years, from thence, &c. Yeilding and  paying therefore yearly during the said term, to the said War∣den and Communalty, and to their successors and assignes, or to their rent gatherer for the time being, sixteen pounds of, &c. at the Feasts of, &c. by even portions, And the said W. H. for him, his executors, administrators, and assignes, doth covenant, and grant, to and with the said Wardens and communalty, and their successors by these presents, in manner, &c. That he the said W. H▪ his executors, and assignes, at his and their own proper costs and charges, the said Messuage or Inne, and all and every other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, in all manner of reparations whatsoever they be, well and sufficiently shall repair, sustain, sup∣port and maintain, when, and as often as need shall be, during the said term: And also that the said W.H. his executors and assignes, at his and their like costs and charges, all the pavements, appen∣dicts, widraughts, and sges to the said Messuage or Inn appertain∣ing or belonging, well and sufficiently shall make, keep, cleanse, and make clean from time to time, when, and as often as need shall require▪ during the said term, And at the end of the same term all the Premisses, so well and sufficiently made, maintained, repaired, paved, cleansed and amended, shall leave and yeild up. And also that it shall be lawfull to and for the said Wardens and commonalty, their successors and assignes, with their workmen, in∣to the said Messuage or Inne, and all other the Premisses, twice in every year yearly, during the said term, or oftener, at their plea∣sures, to enter, and there to view, search, and oversee the estate of the reparations thereof; And all decayes and defaults in the same to be found; And that he the said W. H. his executors, ad∣ministrators and assignes, from time to time, within the space of three moneths next after any such decay or default in reparati∣on of the Premisses, or any part thereof found, and warning
thereof given at the Messuage or Inne aforesaid, shall and will, well and sufficiently amend and repair all and every the said de∣faults and leakes of reparations at the proper costs and charges of the said W.H. his executors, administrators and assignes, in all manner of things whatsoever, which shall be needfull; And fur∣ther the said W. H. covenanteth, &c. That he said VV. H. his executors, administrators or assignes, or any of them at any time or times during the said term, shall not alien, let, set, give, grant, bargain, sell or mortage, or otherwise do away, or suffer to be re∣covered, alienated, altered, or changed his or their estate, right, title, interest, or term of years, or any part thertof, in, or t he Premisses, or any part therof, to any person or persons, or boy o∣litique or corporate, by any manner of means, way, or device what∣soever: And also that he the said VV.H. his executors, administra∣tors or assignes, during the said term, shall not cut, or alter any principall, or principalls, or great timber of the new frame of the said Messuage or Inne, nor shall convert or imploy the said Mes∣suage or Inne, and other the Premisses, or any part thereof, to any other use then onely an Inne, as the same is now occupied and used, except it be by the consent and agreement of the said Watdens communalty, or their successors, first thereunto had and obtained in writing; Provided alwaies, that if it shall happen the said yearly rent of sixteen pounds, or any part thereof, to be be∣hinde and unpaid by the space of six weeks after any of the daies of the Feasts aforesaid, wherein the same, or any part thereof ought to be paid, as aforesaid, it being in the mean time lawfully asked: Or, if the said VV. H. his executors, administrators or assignes, or any of them, at any time or times, during the said term, do alien, let, set, give or grant, bargain, sell or mortgage, or otherwise do away, or do suffer, or cause his or their said estate, right, title, interest, or term of years, or any part thereof to be forfeited, recovered, aliened, altered, or changed from him or them, or any of them to any other person or persons, body po∣litique or corporate, by any means, way, or device, by reason of any debt, owing or to be owing, trespasse, offence, or fault committed, or to be committed by the said VV. H. his executors, administrators or assignes; Or if any of the principall or princi∣palls, or great timber of the said new frame, shall at any time during the said term, be cut, or altered, or the said Messuage or Inne, with the appurtenances, or any part thereof converted
or imployed to any other use, then onely an Inne, as the same is now occupied and used, except it be by consent and agree∣ment of the said Wardens and communalty, or their succes∣sors, first thereunto had and obtained in writing, That then, and at all times from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said Wardens and communalty their successors, and assignes, or any of them, into the said Messuage or Inne, and all and every other the Premisses, with their appurte∣nance, wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again and re-possesse as in their former estate; And the said VV. his executors, administrators and assignes, and all other persons from thence cleerly to expell and put out; These presents, &c. And the said Wardens and communalty, for them, their suc∣cessors and assignes, do covenant, &c. That they the said Wardens and communalty, their successors and assignes, at their own costs and charges, shall bear and pay, or otherwise dis∣charge all Quitrents which shall be due to be paid for or out of the Premisses, during the said term: And also that he the said W. H. his executors, administrators, and assignes, for the foresaid yearly rent of sixteen pounds in form aforesaid, yearly to be paid, and under and according to the other covenants, grants, articles, charges, provisoes, conditions, and agreements aforesaid, for and on the behalf of the said VV. his execu∣tors and assignes, to be kept and performed, shall, or may lawfully and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said, &c. and all other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, by and during all the said term, &c. without any let, trouble, or in∣terruption of the said, &c. and without any lawfull let, in∣terruption or expulsion of any person or persons whatsoever, by the means, title or procurement of the same Wardens, the successors, or assignes, or any of them. In witnesse, &c. A Lease in London where to abate the Parsons duty part of the rent is taken up by way of Income. THis Indenture, &c. Between D. S. &c. on the one part, And H. W. &c. Witnesseth, that the said D. S. in con∣sideration of the summe of ten pounds of lawfull, &c. to him
beforehand paid by the said H: W: and also in consideration of the summe of one hundred and fifty pounds of lawfull, &c. in the name of a Fine or Income to be paid to the said D: : his Heires Execu∣tors Administrators or Assignes, by the said H: W: his Executors Administrators or Assignes, at the Messuage or Tenement hereaf∣ter in these presents demised, in manner and to me following: that is to say, five pounds yearely, at the Feast of the Nativity of St. J: B: St. Michael, &c. the Birth, &c. and the Annuncition, &c. or within twenty eight daies next ensuing every of the said Feasts, by even portions. untill the said summe of, &c. be fully paid to the said D: S. his Heires Executors Administrators or As∣signes. the first payment thereof to be made at the Feast of the Nativity, &c. now next ensuing, or within twenty eight daies then next following;Demise. hath demised, granted, and to Farme letten, and by these presents, &c. unto, &c. all that his Messuage or Tenement, with a Yard, and all other the Commodities and appurtenances thereunto belonging, scituate, lying,Habend. and being in T: Street, &c. abutting, &c. To have, hold, and enjoy the said demised Messuage or Tenement,Reddend. with the Yard, and all other the Com∣modities and appurtenances thereunto belonging, unto the said H: : his, &c. from, &c. unto the end, &c. yeilding and paying therefore yearely during the said terme to the said D: S: his Heires and Assignes, three pounds of, &c. at the Feasts of the Nativity, &c. or within eight and twenty daies next after every of the same Feasts by even portions.Covenants, to pay the rent and fine. And the said H: W: covenanteth with the said D. his Heires Executors Administrators and assignes, and every, &c. in manner, &c. That he the said H: his Executors Administrators and assignes, shall and will well and truly satisfie, content, and pay, or cause, &c. to the said D.S: his heires or assignes, as well the said summe of, &c. and every part thereof in forme aforesaid, as also the said yearely rent of 3 pounds,For reparai∣ons. and every part and parcel thereof, accor∣ding to the true intent limitation and meaning of these presents And that he the said H: his Executors Administrators and assigns, at his and their own pro∣per costs and charges, all the said Messuage on Tenement, and other the Premisses with their appurtenances above demised, and every part and parcell thereof in Timber, Lead, Glass, Iron, and
all other things whatsoever, well and sufficiently, as well within as without, shall and will repaire, support, uphold, amend, su∣stain, and maintain, when and as often as need shall require, during all the terme aforesaid.For cleansing the Privies. And also at his and their like costs and charges, shall purge empty, and cleanse, or cause, &c. the moyety of all the Privies, Vaults, Widraughts, and Sieges within the said Te∣nement above demised, or thereunto belonging, or serving: And shall also amend and pave, or cause,For amending the Pave∣ments. &c. all the Pavements as well within the Yard, as without in the Street, or elsewhere to the said Te∣nement belonging, as often, and when as need shall require, during this present Lease and Demise: and in the end thereof,For leaving the premisses repaired. all the said demised Pre∣misses, shall leave and yeild up to the said D: S: his heires and assignes, in good and sufficient repa∣rations being. And further the said H: . covenant∣eth, &c.Liberty to view the re∣parations. That it shall be lawfull to and for the said D: S: his heires and assignes, and every of them, with his and their Workmen to enter into the said Mes∣suage or Tenement, and other the premisses with the appurtenances, and into every part and parcell thereof once in the yeare yearely, during the said terme, a his and their will liberty and pleasure, within the space of two daies next after pre∣monition in that behalf to be given by the said D. S. his heire or assignes, to the said H: W: his Executors Administrators or assigns, or to any of them, and the necessary reparations of the said demi∣sed premisses, and every part and parcell thereof, to view, peruse, and oversee, and of the defaults of the same, if any be to give knowledge, monition and warning to the said H. his Executors administrators or assignes, or to the Occupyer or Occupyers of the said demised premisses,Defaults in re∣parations to be amended with∣in three months warning. The Tenant to pay a summe of of money if he lot or sell. or any part or parcel there∣of, for the repairing and amending of the same. All which defaults so there from time to time, found; the said H. for him, &c. covenanteth, &c. that he the said H. his Executors Admini∣strators or assignes, shall within three months next after such monition thereof given, at his and their proper costs and charges, cause to be suffici∣ently repaired and amended. And the said H.W. covenanteth, &c. That he the said H. his Execu∣tors
or administrators, or some of them shall and will, give and pay or cause to be given and paid to the said D. his heirs or assigns, the summe of five pounds of, &c. at one entire payment, immediately when and as soon as he the said H: his Executors administrators or assignes, or any of them shall bargaine, sell, alien, demise, let, set, grant, do away, or suffer to be done away, or had or recover∣ed this present Lease, interest, and terme of yeares, or any part thereof,The Tenant not to cut or alter any principalls. or the said demised premisses, or any part or parcell thereof. And it is further covenan∣ted and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, that it shall not be lawfull to and for the said H: W: his Executors administrators or assignes, or any of them at any time hereafter during the said term to cut, remove, alter, or transport any principall post or partition of the said demised premisses, without the speciall licence and con∣sent of the said D. S. his heires or assignes,Proviso, if the rent or fine be not paid, or reparations not done upon war∣ning, then a forfeiture. first in writing sealed, obtained, and had. Provided al∣waies, and it is agreed between the said parties to these presents, that if it shall happen the said yearely rent of three pounds, or any part or parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid over or after any Feast or term of payment aforesaid, wherein the same ought to be paid by the said space of twenty eight daies, being in the mean time lawfully asked at the said demised Messuage or Tenement. Or if it shall fortune the said sum of 150 l. or any part or parcell thereof to be behind or unpaid in part or in all, contrary to the true intent, limitation, and meaning of these presents, being lawfully demanded at the said demised Messuage or Tenement: Or that the said defaults and re∣parations of the said demised premisses, be not repaired, made, or done within the time and space of monition and warning in that behalf above limited and appointed: That then and from thence∣forth this present Indenture of Lease, and the interest and term of years thereby granted and limited, shall cleerly and utterly cease, determine, and be void, frustrate, & of no force or effect in the Law. And that then and at all times it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said D. his heires and assignes, and every of them, into all and every the said demised Premisses wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, and repossess, as in his or their first & former estate. And the said H. his Executors and administrators, and all other Occupyers of the same therefrom utterly to expell,
put out, and amove, this Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And the said D.S: for him, his heires and assignes covenanteth, &c. that he the said H: his Executors administrators and assignes, paying to the said D: S: his heires or assignes, the said summe of one hundred and fifty pounds, and the said yearely rent of three pounds in form and manner above limited and mentioned, and also duly observing performing, and accomplishing all and singular other the Cove∣nants, Grants, Clauses, Provisoes, Conditions, Articles, and A∣greements in these presents contained, expressed, or mentioned, which on the part and behalf of the said H: his Executors admini∣strators and assignes, or of any of them, or to be observed, perform∣ed, and accomplished, according to the purport, true intent, limi∣tation, and meaning of these present Indentures, shall or may law∣fully peaceably and quietly, have, occupy, and enjoy the said Messuage or Tenement, and other the Premisses with the appur∣tenances above demised, by and during the said term of, &c. without let, resistance, or interruption of the said D. S. his heirs or assigns or any of them, and without lawfull let, resistance, or in∣terruption of any other person or persons lawfully claiming, or which shall lawfully claime by, from, or under the said D: or his state or Interest. In witnesse, &c. A Lease in London, where to abate the Parsons duty, part of the Rent is payable by way of Annuity. THis Indenture, &c. Between R: D: &c. on the one part, and F: B: &c Witnesseth, That the said R: D: for the consi∣derations hereafter in these present Indentures expressed, hath demised, &c. to have, &c. yeilding, &c. covenants for repara∣tions and view, &c. & tum: In consideration of which said Demise, Lease, and Grant so had and made of the said Mes∣suage, &c. and other the Premisses in forme aforesaid; and for the peaceable and quiet having and enjoying of the demised Premisses, according to the true intent and meaning of these present Indentures. The said F: B: for him, &c. doth cove∣nant and grant to and with the said R: D: his, &c. that he the said F. B: his Executors, Administrators, or Assignes, shall and will well and truely pay or cause to be paid unto the said R: his Ex∣ecutos administ. &c. at the foresaid Messuage or Tenement by these
presents demised every yeare yearely during the said terme of nineteen yeares, one annuity or yearely payment of nine pounds o, &c. at foure usuall termes or Feasts in the yeare, that is to say, at the Feasts, &c. or within the space of foure and twenty daies next after every of the same Feast daies, being there lawfully asked by even and equall portions, the first payment there of to begin and to be made in the Feast, &c. or, &c. Provided alwaies, and it is conditioned, concluded, and agreed by and between the said parties to these present Indentures, for them, &c. and every of them by these presents, that if it shall happen the said yearely rent of forty shillings to be behind or unpaid, in part or in all, after any Feast day of payment thereof abovesaid, in which the same rent ought to be paid by the space of foure and twenty daies being lawfully demanded: Or if default shall happen to be made in payment of the said annuity or yearely paymenc of, &c. or any part or parcell thereof, contrary to the true intent and meaning of these present Indentures, that then, &c. a forfeiture and re entry &c. A clause of speciall Warranty, & tum: In witnesse. A Lease for a thousand years, conditionall for payment of a summe of money. THis Indenture, &c. Witnesseth, That the said A: G: for and in consideretion of the summe of fifty pounds of, &c. whereof, &c. hath demised, granted, and to farm letten, and by these presents, &c. unto the said W: S: all that Messuage or Tenement with the appurtenances called C: scituate, &c. in the Town, Parish, and Fields of E: in the County of E. one Marsh called, &c. containg, &c. one croft called, &c. containing by estimation, &c. And all and singular Houses Buildings Barnes Scables Yards Orchards Gardens Lands Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Messuage or Tenement belonging or appertainining: and the reversion and reversions of all and singular the premisses and all and singular rents and profits whatsoever reserved upon any former demise made of the Premisses, or any part thereof; To have and to hold the said Messuage or Tenement, and all and singular other the premisses with the appurtenances:, to the said W: his Executors and Assignes, from the Feast, &c. next, &c. for, by, and during the terme of one thousand yeares, from thence,
&c. without impeachment of any manner of waste, yeilding and paying therefore yearely by and during the said terme, to the said A: G: his Heires and Assignes, one penny onely at the Feast of Easter if it be demanded. And the said A: G: cove∣nanteth, &c. in forme, &c. That he the said A: G: now is the sole and lawfull Owner of all and singular the above demised Premisses, of a good, lawfull, perfect, and absolute estate in the Law, in Fee simple: and hath full power, and good lawfull and rightfull authority, to demise and let to Farme the said Messuage and all other the Premisses, to the said W: S: his Executors and Assignes, for and during the terme of yeares aforesaid, in manner and forme aforesaid: And that the said Messuage and other the Premisses now are and stand, and during the said terme shall stand and continue discharged and acquitted, or otherwise, by the said A: G: his Heires, Executors, Admini∣strators, or Assignes, at all times saved harmlesse, of and from all and singular former Estates, Titles Charges Grants Leases and Incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, caused, or pro∣cured by the said A: G: or H: G. Esquires, deceased, Brother of the said A: or by either of them (such Estate as one H: B: hath in the same from yeare to yeare, alwaies to be determined upon one half yeares warning onely except and foreprised.) And that the said W. S his Executors and assignes, shall, and may have, hold, and enjoy the Messuage, and all other the Premisses with their appurtenances, during the said terme of a thousand yeares, without any let or resistance of the said A: G: his heires or assignes, and without any lawfull let, resistance, or evi∣ction of any other person or persons during the same terme. Provided alwaies, that if the said A: his Heires, Executors▪ &c. do pay, &c. to the said W: S. his certaine Attorney, Execu∣tor, or Administrator, the summe of fifty pounds of, &c. at, &c. on the tenth day, &c. between the houres, &c. That then and from thenceforth these presents, and the Lease, Grant, and De∣mise thereby made of the said Messuage of Tenement, and other the Premisses with their appurtenances as abovesaid, shall be cleerly and utterly void, frustrate, and as absolutely determined and annihilated, as if the same had never been had or made, any thing abovesaid to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstand∣ing. In witnesse, &c.
A Lease of a Parsonage with very good Covenants. THis Indenture, &c. Between A: S: Clark, Parson of the Pa∣rish Church of H: In the County of S: on the one part, and C: A: of H: aforesaid Gent. on the other part, Witnesseth, That the said A: for divers good considerations, &c. hath demised, &c. unto the said C. all the said Parsonage of H: aforesaid, with all and singular the appurtenances, and all and every the Man∣sion Houses, Barnes, Stables, Orchards Glebelands Meadowes Pastures Fold Cross Commons Tithes Fruits Oblations Obven∣tions Portions Rents Commodities Profits Courts Leets, view of Franckpledge Perquisits of Courts Extents and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Parsonage belonging, or as part, parcell, or member thereof had, used, occupyed, or enjoyed (All Woods under Woods and Trees, standing or growing in or upon the Premisses, or any part thereof, and one Chamber called the Bell-Chamber, with free ingresse, egresse, and regresse, to and from the same, alwaies saved, reserved, and excepted; to hold, &c. from Michaelmas last for two yeares, &c. from thence, &c. yeilding and paying therefore yearely, by and during all the said terme of two yeares, to the said A: his Successors and Assignes, five pounds, &c. at the Mansion house, &c. at the feasts &c. or within eight and twenty daies, &c. by even portions. And the said C: A: for him, his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, doth covenant and grant to and with the said A: S. his Successors, executors, and administrators by these presents, in manner and forme as ensueth,To repaire the Chancel. from Article to Article, that is to say, That he the said C. A. his Executors ad∣ministrators and assigns, at their own costs and char∣ges during the said term, shall keep, sustain, and main∣tain the Chancel of the said Parish, well and sufficiently maintain∣ed and repaired, and also the Parsonage Mansion house, and all the Barns Stables Dovehouses and other buildings of the same in good and sufficient reparation of Windtight and Watertight through∣out every part of the same.Fences. And all the Hedges Fences and Inclosures of all the inclosed grounds of the said Parsonage, or thereunto belonging, well and suffici∣ently hedged, ditched, and defenced, and all the premisses so su∣stained, repaired, hedged, ditched; and defenced at the end of the said two years, shall leave and yeild up to the said A. his Successors and assigns, as and by the view and judgment of foure honest and sufficient persons appointed to take the same view, and to give
them judgment thereupon, if to the said A. it shall be thought so needfull. And also that he the said C. his Executors administrators and assigns,Provide a Minister. at their like costs and charges as aforesaid, shall find and provide a convenient and sufficient Mi∣nister to serve the Cure of the said Parish, lawfully, competently, and sufficiently, and shall cause Divine Service from time to time to be done in the Chappell, within the said Parish, so far as to the duty of the said A. of right doth or shall appertain,Sermons. and shall also procure such number of Sermons to be preached within the Parish-church afore∣said, as by the Law ought to be so, as no complaint nor other clamour be made, to the hurt or damage of the said A:Tenths. And shall well and truly content and pay from time to time, all and singular Tenths, Subsidies, Syna∣ges, Proxies, and other charges, annuities, rents, and payments ordinary and extraordinary whatsoever to be due or payable out of or for the said Parsonage, or any other the premisses in any wise, at any time during the said term, and shall also pay and discharge the Tenths to be due to the Kings Majesty, his Heires or Succes∣sors, at or before Christmas, &c. next ensuing the end of the same term: And of all and singular the said charges, payments, annui∣ties, and rents, service of the said Cure, and Sermons to be prea∣ched, shall discharge or save harmlesse the said A. his Successors, Executors, and Administrators, by and during all the said term, the payment or charge of the first Fruits for the Premisses to be paid by the said A: alwaies excepted and to be paid and dischar∣ged by the said A. his Executors and Administrators,Parish Bull. Discharge all demands towards the Parish. at their own proper charges. And moreover that the said C. A: his Executors administrators or assigns, shal during the said terme find to the said Parish a Bull, and do and discharge all other duties and demands to∣wards the Parishioners of the said Parish of H: which they justly and lawfully demand and require of the said A: only as of their Parson and Incumbent of the said Parish Church for the time being:Flight of Doves. And that he the said C: A: his Executors administrators or assigns, during the said term, shall maintain the flight of Doves belonging to the Dovehouse of the said Parsonage, and at the end therof, or before the first of June next ensuing, shal not destroy the old Doves to the said Dovehouse belonging, neither destroy or spoil any quicksets or young springs in or upon any part of the premises.
And that the said C. his executors, administrators and assignes, du∣ring the said term, shall finde and freely yeild to the said A. a fit and convenient stable-room for one horse or gelding in or upon the Premisses, whles the said A. shall be resident or abiding within the said parish,Leave books of oblations. And also at the end of the said term, shall leave and deliver to the said A. the said Parsonage, and all other the Premisses above∣mentioned, and all such books of oblation, tiths, duties, rents and profits, which the said A. hath, or which he, his executors, administrators or assignes then shall have concerning the said Parsonage, or any tithes, oblations, obventions, duties, rents and profits thereof, or of any part thereof, and all quittances of tenths, subsidies, rents and arrerages of any payment whatsoe∣ver, paid or to be paid for the Premisses, or any part thereof by the said A. his executors, administrators or assignes, Provided alwaies that the said A shall deliver to the said C. a plain and perfect re∣membrance of the hand-writing of the said A. confessing the re∣ceit to his own use, of all & singular the said books, quittances, and other things whatsoever,Not to let, &c. to be delivered as aforesaid, Provided alwaies, that it shall not be lawfull to, or for the said C. his executors, administrators, or as∣signes, to grant, or in any wise demise, any of the Tenements be∣longing to the said Parsonge, for any longer terme, or for any greater estate or interest, then in and by these presents is granted to the said C. That is to say, for the term of two years onely, and no longer, any thing to the contrary, &c. And lastly, that if up∣on reasonable warning first given by the said A. to the said C. his executors or assignes, for the reasonable avoiding and amoving of such Curate or Minister, as they shall then presently have in the Cure of the said parish Church. The same A. shall be disposed to take the charge of the same Cure, and will be personally resident upon the same, C. his executors, administrators and assignes, shall within reasonable time after such warning given, receive the said A. in his own person, to execute the charge of the same Cure; and therefore shall content and pay during the said term of two years to the said A. over and above the rent reserved by these pre∣sents from the time that he shall enter into the charge of the said Cure, and shall execute the same, twenty marks of, &c. for his salary, by the year, or after the rate of twenty marks for a year, the same to be paid quarterly, at the four usuall quarter Feasts, as the same or any of them shall ensue and follow from the time wherein
the said A. shall execute the charge aforesaid.Hedgeboot. And the said A. covenanteth, &c. That he the said C. his executors and assignes, shall and may, have, and take all shreds and lops of all manner of usuall trees, standing or growing, in or upon any the Premisses (such trees as stand or grw in or about the Church-yard of the Parish-Church aforesaid, only except) to and for the making of hedges, etherings and stakes for the inclosed grounds, as aforesaid, when, and as often as need shall be, during the said term: And also that the said C. &c. under the said yearly rent of, &c. shall enjoy without let of the said, &c. And without lawfull let or interruption of any manner of per∣son or persons claiming, by, from, or under the said A. or his estate. In witnesse, &c. A Lease of a House in London, knowledged by the Lessor and his wife before the Recorder, and an Alderman, and inroled in the Hustings. THis Indenture, &c. Between W. M citizen and mercer of L. and M. his wie, on one part, and F. C. of L. widow on the other part, Witnesseth, that the said W. and M. as well for and in consideration of a certain summe of lawfull, &c. to the said VV. well and truly beforehand paid by the said E. C. Whereof, and wherewith, &c. As also for and in consideration of sixty pounds more of like money in the name of a fine to be payd to the said W. his certain Attorney, executors, or administrators, by the said E. her execut or administ. at the now Mansion-house of the said W. scituate in C. street in London, in manner, &c. viz. three pounds thereof on the twentieth day of December next, &c. and the other three pounds, the residue of the said summe of sixty pounds on the twentieth of June, which shall be, &c. Have demised, &c. unto the said E. C. all that their corner-shop, scituate and being under the Messuage there now occupied by the said E. which said shop is at the corner of M. street, &c. and containeth in length, &c. To hold, &c from Midsummer next, &c. for twenty one years, &c. and fully to be compleat, yeilding and paying therefore yearly to the said W. and M. and the heires and assignes of the said W. four pounds, &c. at the Feasts of, &c. or within the space of fifteen daies next after every of the same Feast daies, by even portions; And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of four pounds, or any
part thereof to be behinde and unpaid by the said space of fifteen daies over or after any of the Feast-daies of payment thereof abovesaid, and being in the mean time lawfully asked; And no sufficient distresse then and there can or shall be found, which shall or may be had, and lawfully carried away; Or if the said E. her executors, adminstrators or assignes, shall not pay, or cause to be paid, or lawfully tender to pay the said fine of sixty pounds, and every part thereof, to the said W. his certain Attorney, executors, or administrators, at the place aforesaid, and in manner and form aforesaid, That then, and from thenceforth, it shall, and may be lawfull, to and for the said W. and M. and the heires and assignes of the said W. or any of them, into the said corner-shop to re-enter; and the same to have again, retain, and re-possesse as in their for∣mer estate; And the said E. her executors, and assignes, and all others there from to expell, amove and put out; This present In∣denture, or any thing herein contained to the contrary, &c. And the said W. M. for him, his heires, &c. covenanteth, &c. in man∣ner, &c. viz. That he the said W. M. and M. his wife, without any other, having any estate with them, or either of them, at the ensealing of and delivering of these presents, are, and stand seised of the said corner-shop, to them the said VV. and M. and the heirs and assignes of the said VV. for ever in fee simple, without any manner of entaile or remainder over in any wise: And without any condition, mortgage or defeisance; And that she the said E. her executors, administrators, and assignes, paying the yearly rent and fine aforesaid, in manner and form above limited, shall, and may peacebly and quietly have, hold, and enjoy all the said corner shop, without any let, trouble, expulsion or interruption of the said VV. and M. or of the heires or assignes of the same VV. And without any lawfull let, expulsion or eviction of any other porson or persons, during the said term of twenty one years. In witnesse, &c. A Lease from a Parson and Church-wardens of a Church in London, with condition that the Tenant shall not let, nor set without their consent. THis Indenture, &c. Between J. J. Clerk, Parson of the pa∣rish Church of Saint P. in VV. in L. And T. A. Merchant-taylors, and G. R. Cordwainer, citizens of London, Wardens and
Keepers of the goods, rents, and ornaments of the said parish church on the one part, and R.W. citizen and Leather-seller of L. and H. his wife, parishoners of the parish aforesaid on the other part, Witnes∣seth, that the said Parson and Churchwardens, by and with the as∣sent and consent of the most worshipfull & substantiall parishoners of the said parish, have demised, &c. unto the said R. & H. all that little shop or shed, as the same is now had and occupied by the said R. scituate in W. in the said parish of St. P. on the west side of the said Church door, leading out of the said Church into W. aforesaid, To have, &c. to the said R. and H. their executors, administrators and assignes, from Midsummer next, &c. unto the end of twenty one years. &c. Yeilding and paying therefore yearly, during the said term unto the said Parson and Church-wardens, and their suc∣cessors, Parsons and Church-wardens of the said parish church for the time being; fourty six shillings eight pence, of, &c at four Feasts, &c. by even and equall portions; And the said R. and H. his wife, for themselves, &c. Do covenant and grant, to and with the said Parson and Church-wardens, and their successors, Parson, and Churchwardens of the said parish church for the time being, And to and with every of them in form, &c. That he the said R. and H: his wife, their executors, administrators, and assignes, shall and will at their own proper costs and charges, by and during all the said term of, &c. keep and maintain the said shop or shed in suf∣ficient reparations, as well with windows, bars, bolts and locks, as otherwise, in, by, and with all manner of needfull and necessary reparations whatsoever; And the same shop or shed, in such re∣parations being at the end of the said term of, &c. or other deter∣mination of this present Lease, together with all the said win∣dows, doors, bolts and locks, shall and will quietly leave and yeild up to the Parson and Church-wardens of the said parish church, then for the time to be, to the use of the said parish: And also that the said R: and H: or either of them, or the executors, administra∣tors or assignes, of them or of either of them, at any time or times, during the said term, shall not alien, let, set, grant bargain, sell, or other waies do away, or suffer to be recovered, aliened, al∣tered or changed, his or their estate, right, title, interest, or term of years, or any part thereof, of, in, or to the Premisses, or any par thereof by any manner of way, device or means whatsoever, without the speciall licence, consent and agreement of the said Parson and Church-wardens of the said parish church for the time being, and six of the honest and substantiall parishoners of the
said parish in writing, under their hands and seals, first in that behalf to be had and obtained; Provided alwaies, that if it shall happen the said yearly rent of, &c. or any part thereof to be behinde and unpaid, by the space of twenty eight daies, over or after any of the said Feasts, wherein the same, or any part thereof ought to be paid as aforesaid, being lawfully asked; or if the said R. and H. or either of them, or their severall executors, &c. do at any time or times, during the said term, without such licence and consent first had and obtained, as aforesaid, alien, let, set, give, grant, bargain, sell, mortgage, or otherwise do away, or suffer, or cause his, her, or their said estate, right, title, interest, or term of years, or any part thereof, of or in the said shop, or shed, or any part thereof, to be recovered, aliened, altered, or changed, from him, her or them, or any of them, to any other person or person, by any way or means, or device, or by reason of any debt, owing or to be owing, trespasse, offence, or default committed, or to be com∣mitted by the said R. and H. or either of them, their executors or administrators, or any of them; That then, and from thenceforth, this present Lease and Demise, and the term of years thereby granted, shall cease and be void, &c. And that then a re-entry in the Parson and Churchwardens, any thing to the contrary, &c. A clause of speciall warranry by the Lessors. In witnesse, &c. To one part of these Indentures, remaining with the said R. and H. as well the said J. J. T. A and G. R. have set their seals; As also S. L. D. Knight and Alderman of L. and R. M. of the same city Alderman, parishoners of the same parish, in declaration of their consents to this Lease, have subscribed their names; And to the other part, &c. A Lease of the moiety of the Customes and Imposts of Wines to be brought into a certain Port, during a certain term, where the parties agree to constitute a Deputy, to receive the profits to their use. THis Indenture, &c. Between VV. S. of Y. in the County of N. Gent. on the one part, And T. L. of L. Merchant-tailor on the other part, witnesseth, that the said VV. S. hath demised, leased, and to farm letten, and by these presents, &c. unto the said T. L. the moiety and one half of all and all manner of cu∣stomes, subsidies of tonnage, imposts, summes of money, and duties
whatsoever, which should, might or ought to grow due, chargeable or payable to the said VV. S. as assigne of F. R. Esquire, of, for, or by reason of any manner of Wines of the growth of France, and the Dominions and countries of the same, or of, or for the sub∣bsidie of tonnage of all manner of Wines of the growth of France, Spain, and Portugal, and the Dominions and countreys of the same, and of, and for all Renish wines, according to the rate taxed, and assessed by the Statute made in the first year of the reign of our So∣veraigne, &c. That now is, which during the space of five years to be accounted from the Feast of S. Michael, &c. last, &c. shall hap∣pen to be shipped, or brought into the Port of B. in the county of L: or any the members, or places of lading or unlading, belonging or appertaining to the said Port, and within the jurisdiction of the Customhouse of the same Port (forfeitures of such wines, if any shal happen, and the duties of Butlerage and Prisage onely excepted) And also all and every such authorities, liberties, powers, privi∣ledges and preheminences within the said Port of B. and members of the same (onely for the moiety of the Premisses, by these pre∣sents demised, and no otherwise) as the said W. S. as assigne afore∣said, hath, may, might, should, or ought to have in the said Port or members thereof, any manner of way; All and singular which de∣mised Premisses, amongst other things, the King by his Patents de∣mised to the said F. R. And the said F. the same amongst other things, by his Indentures, dated, &c. did lease and demise to the said W. S. To have, receive, perceive, take, levie, and enjoy the said moiety, and one half of all and singular the said customes, &c. ex∣cept, &c. to the said T. L. his executors and assignes, from the Feast of S. Michael last, &c. unto the end and term of five years from thence, &c. Yeilding and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said W. S. &c. fifty pounds of, &c. A clause that if the rent be unpaid, &c. That then and from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawfull, to and for the said W.S. his, &c. at his and their liberty and election utterly to determine and make void these presents, and the interest of the said T. L. his executors, &c. of, in, and to the Premisses by these presents demised, And the same to resume and take again into his and their hands and possession, and to repossesse & enjoy to the only use of the said W. his executors and assignes, as in his or their former right or estate, Any thing to the contrary, &c. And it is covenanted, granted, and agreed by and be∣tween the said parties, to these presents, and every of them several∣ly, doth covenant, grant and agree, to and with the other of them,
for himself, his executors, &c. by these present Indentures, That they the said VV. and T. and their severall executors, adminstra∣tors and assignes, for their severall moieties and interest in the Pre∣misses demised by these presents, at their severall equall costs and charges, shall bear, pay, do and accomplish towards the said F. R. his executors and assignes, all things whatsoever, by reason of the said Lease made to the said VV. S. to be paid, done and accomplished, for the Port of B. and members thereof; And shall in like manner severally bear and sustain, all other charges of and for the Premis∣ses. And in like sort shall have severall right and interest every of them, to one severall moiety, of all and singular profits, gains, commodities, allowances, discharges, & advantages to come or grow of the Premisses by these presents demised, according to the tenor, limitation, purport and true meaning of the said Lease of the said F. R. made to the said VV. as aforesaid (whereof the said T. hath, and keepeth a true copy in his custody, signed with the hand of the said VV. S.) the paiment of the yearly rent of three hundred pounds, reserved by the said Lease made by the said F. R. onely except, Of and for which yearly rent of three hundred pounds, the said VV. S. his executors and assignes, shall discharge and acquit the said T. L. his executors and assignes at all times; And it is agreed between the said parties, &c. That the said VV. and T. their executors and assignes, during the said term, by their mutu∣all consents, and at their equall costs and charges, shall ordain, authorize, depute and constitue for them, a sufficient Deputy or de∣puties from time to time, which for them, and in their names, shall, and may receive to their use, all duties, imposts, customs and summs of money to come or arise towards the said W. and T. their execu∣tors or assignes for the Premisses in the said Port of B. and mem∣bers thereof to be received or had; In witnesse, &c. A Lease of a House in London, to take place in re∣version after the decease of one who hath an estate for life in the same. THis Indenture, &c. Between R. S. citizen and Habardasher of L. on the one part, And E. O. of L Habardasher on the other part, Witnesseth, That whereas one J. R. of L. Esquire, is seised for term of his naturall life amongst others, of, and in all
that one Messuage or Tenement, with a shop, cellar, &c. to the said Messuage or Tenement belonging or appertaining, now in the tenure of, &c. scituate in the Parish of S. M. within the city of L. and to the said W. M. demised by the said J. R. for the term of thir∣ty eight years, if the said J. R. should so long live; As by an In∣denture of Lease, bearing date, &c. thereof made by the said J.R to the said W. M. more plainly appeareth. The reversion of which said Messuage or Tenement, with the appurtenances, after the decease of the said J. R. to the said R. S. and his heirs for ever, of right appertaineth and belongeth; Now the said R. S. for, and in con∣sideration of, &c. Whereof, &c. Hath demised, granted, and to farm letten, and by, &c. unto the said E. O all the said Messuage or Tenement, with all shops, cellars, &c. to the said Messuage or Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining, in as large and ample manner as the said W. M. now occupieth the same, To have and to hold the said Messuage, Tenement, with shops, cellars, &c. and other the Premisses above demised, with all and singular the appurtenances unto the said E. O. his executors and assignes, from the day of the decease of the said J. R. unto the end and term of twenty five years from thence, &c. Yeilding and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said R. his heirs and assignes, nine pounds of, &c. at four Feast, &c. The first payment thereof to be made and to commense and to begin at such Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, as shall next and immediately happen, come, and follow, from and after the death and decease of the said J. R. And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of, &c. or any part thereof to be be∣hinde unpaid by the space of fifty six daies, next over or after any Feast or term of payment thereof, or of any part thereof, in which it ought to be paid, as aforesaid, the same being lawfully de∣manded at the said Messuage, That then, and so often the said E O. his executors, administrators and assignes, shall forfeit and lose to the said R S. his heirs and assignes, five marks of law∣full, &c. Nomine poenae; And that then, and so often, it shall, and may be lawfull, to and for the the said R S. his heires and as∣signes, to enter into the said Messuage, and all other the demised Premisses, and there distrain, as well for the said yearly rent, and every part thereof, so behinde and unpaid; as also for the said Nomine poenae, from time to time, so to be frfeited and lost, as aforesaid, and all arrerages thereof; And the distresse and di∣stresses there to be found, lawfully and quietly to take, lead, drive, and carry away, And the same to detain, hold and keep, untill
they of the said yearly rent, and of every paine to be forfeited, as aforesaid, and being unpaid, and of all arrereages of the same, together with their costs and damages in that behalf, to be sustained, shall be fully paid and satisfied; And if then there shall be no sufficient open and overt distresse in or upon the said Messuage, and other the said demised Premisses to be found, which may lawfully and quietly be had and taken away, That then and from thenceforth, it shall be lawfull to and for the said R. his heirs and assignes, and every of them, into the said Messuage or Tenement, with the appurtenances, and into all and singular other the above demised Premisses, wholly to re-enter; And the said E. O. his executors, administrators and assignes, from thence cleerly to expell and put out, These Presents, or any thing, &c. to the contrary, &c. And the said E. O. for him, &c. covenanteth, &c. That he the said E. his executors, administrators and assignes, at his and their own proper costs and charges, all the said Messuage or Tenement, and all other the Premisses above demised by these presents, with the appurtenances, in and by all manner of re∣parations, as well great timber as other, well and sufficiently shall repair, sustain, maintain and uphold from time to time, as often, and when as need shall require, during the said term; And also at his and their like costs, all the pavements, as wel within the said Messuage or Tenement, as without in the street before the same, to the same belonging, as often, and when as need shall require, shall cause to be paved, made and amended. And the widraughts, privies, sincks and gutters belonging to the said Mes∣suage or Tenement, as often, and when as need shall be, during the said term of twenty five years, shall cause to be cleansed, scoured and purged, And at the end of the said term of twenty five years, the same Premisses so being well and sufficiently re∣paired, sustained, maintained, paved, amended, scoured and cleansed, as aforesaid, to the said R. his heirs or assignes, shall so leave, surrender and yeild up; And also the said Tenant co∣venanteth, &c. That he the said E. his executors, administra∣tors and assignes, at his and their own proper costs and charges, from time to time, during the said term of twenty five years, shall bear and pay his rateable and competent part and portion of all such charges and expences, as shall be requisite and need∣full to be made of and for the cleansing, scouring and making clean of a certain sinck or water-course which passeth through the ground or soil of the said Messuage or Tenement above by
these presents demised where through issueth and cometh as well the waters that come and fall from two other tenements; as also the waters that fall or come from the said Messuage or Tenement demised by these presents: And moreover, the Tenant covenant∣eth, &c. That it shall be lawfull to and for the said R. S. his heirs and assigns, four times in every year at his and their will and plea∣sure, with workmen, during the said term of twenty five years, into the said Messuage or Tenement, with the appurtenances before by these presents demised, and into every part thereof to enter and come; And upon such entrance made, there to view, survey, search and see if the same and every part of the same be well & sufficient∣ly repaired; And that if upon any such view or survey any default in reparation of the said Premisses, or any part thereof shall be found which shall have need of amendment, And whereof the said R. his heirs or assignes shall leave notice in writing at the said Messuage by these presents demised, That then, from time to time the said E. his executors, administrators or assignes shall well and sufficiently, and cleerly and throughly repaire and amend every such default within the space of six moneths next after such notice thereof left in writing as aforesaid, at all times during the said term without any default, fraud or covin; And the said R. S. for him, &c. covenanteth, &c. That the said E. his, &c. by and under the payment of the said yearly rent and performance of the covenants, articles and agreements aforesaid, for and on the part of the said E. his executors and assignes to be performed, shall or may peaceably and quietly have, hold, &c. the said Mes∣suage, &c. by and during all the said term of, &c. without any let, &c. of the said R. his, &c. at any time during the same term, and without any lawfull let, &c. of any person or persons, having, or which shall have any lawfull right or title to the said Messu∣age, &c. by or from the said R. his heirs or assignes at any time, during the same term. In witnesse, &c. A Lease of old housing, where the Tenant covenant∣eth to pull down the same, and new build it within a certain term, at his own cost and charges. THis Indenture, &c. Between W. H. citizen and Grocer of L. on the one part, And T. S. citizen and Bricklayer of L. on the other part, Witnesseth, That the said W. H. for the consideration
hereafter in these presents expressed, hath demised, &c. unto the said T. S. all that his old Stable now in the occupation of, &c: sci∣tuate in P. Lane, &c. And all that his old Shed next adjoyning on the West-side of the said Stable, and that his Garden-plot or peice of ground, containing from East to West, &c. scituate on the West-side of the said old Shed; To have, &c. to the said T: S, &c. from, &c. for foure and twenty yeares, yeilding, &c. unto the said W. his Heires and Assignes, three pounds of, &c. at foure feasts, &c. by even portions: for and in consideration of which said Grant, Lease, and Demise by these presents made and granted of the said demised Premisses, by and from the said W. to the said T. as aforesaid. The said T. S. for him, &c. covenanteth with the said W. his, &c. That he the said T. his Executors Administrators or Assignes,Pull down the old Building. shall within foure yeares next ensuing the date hereof, take and pull down all the old Edifices and Buildings of the said demised Pre∣misses, and in lieu and stead thereof, shall and will within the said foure yeares at the proper costs and charges and expences of the said T. his Executors Administrators and Assignes,New Build. Tenement of three Stories and a Garret. Height of the Stories. make-new, build, erect, set up, and perfectly finish upon the Ground and Soile, where the said old Build∣ings now stand, one new and substantiall Tene∣ment of new Timber, which shall contain three Stories in height, with a Garret over the same: The first Story whereof shall contain in height nine Foots of assise; and the second Story thereof shall contain in height eight Foots and a halfe of assise,Content. A Cellar. and the third Story thereof shall contain in height seven Foots and a half of assise. And that the said new Tenement shall containe from the East to the West foure and twenty Foots of assise or above, and from the North to the South, as the, room will suffer. And that he the said T. his Executors or Assignes, within the said four yeares, at his and their like costs and charges, shall make and finish under the said new Tenement, a new Cellar of Brick for the same new Tenement, with a strong Cellar floor over the same Cellar,A Vault. and also one Vault for a Privy of Brick-work, and a new Tonnel of Brick for the same.Chimneys. And also shall
within the said 4 years make three several Brick Chimneys within the said new Tenement, whereof one to be in the Hall, another in the Kitchin, and the other in the Chamber;Foundation of Chimneys. all which Chimneys shall be supported and borne up with a strong Pillar of Brick, or a strong Arch of Brick, out of the ground-work or foundation of the same Tenement: And shall make two Man∣tletrees of stone to two of the said Chimneys which shall be in the said Hall and Camber. And shall and will also within the said foure yeares, make, set up, and finish within the said new Te∣nement, foure saire strong,Bay-Windowes. new bay Carpenters Windowes, which shall every of them contain in length six Foots of assise, at the least;Cleer Stories. And as many cleer Stories as shall be needfull for or a∣bout the said new Tenement: And shall within the said foure yeares perfectly finish the said new Tenement, withall Glasing, Tiling, and all other things necessary whatsoever,Proviso for non payment of rent. meet and conveni∣ent for the same. Provided alwaies, that if it shall happen the said yearly rent of three pounds, or any part or parcell thereof to be behind and unpaid by the space of eight and twenty daies, next after any Feast or terme of payment above mentioned, wherein the same ought to be paid,or being lawfully asked at the said demised Premis∣ses:Any Covenants for new build∣ing. Or if it happen the said T. his Executors Administrators or Assignes, to make default of or in performance, fulfilling, or observing of the said Covenant, Grant, or agreement touching the new building, erecting, & setting up of the said new Tenem. or of or in the making, erecting, building, or finishing of the said new Tenem. with and other the Premisses, or any of them, within the space of foure yeares next coming, from and after the Feast of, &c. contrary to the forme aforesaid;To re-enter. that then and at all times after it shall be lawfull to and for the said W: H: his heires and assignes, into all and singular the Pre∣misses with the appurtenances, wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain and repossess, as in his or their former estate, and the Tenants to expell, &c. any thing to the contrary, &c. And further the said T: S: covenanteth, &c. that he the said T. his Exe∣cutors
administrators and Assignes,To repaire after building. at his and their own proper costs and charges shall well and sufficiently from and after the erecting and new building of the said new Tenement, uphold, amend, maintain, keep and sustain the same new Tenement with the appurtenances, and every part and parcell thereof, in and by all things needfull from time to time, at all times during the said terme of foure and twenty yeares.Enclosures. And also that he the said T: his, &c. at his and their costs and charges, shall well and sufficiently uphold and maintaine all the Fences and Inclosures of the said Garden plot or peece of ground, and every part and parcell thereof from time to time,Pavement. during the said terme of, &c. And also amend or new make the Pavement in the Street, before the said demised premisses, and cause the Privy and Wi∣draughts of the said demised premisses,Privy. to be suf∣ficiently cleansed amd emptied from time to time as often as need shall require, during the said terme of foure and twenty yeares; and in the end, expiration, cessation, or other determination whatsoever of the said terme of,Leade, repair∣ed, &c: shall leave and yeild up unto the said U: his Heires and As∣signes, the said new Tenement and other the pre∣misses,& in good and sufficient reparations, and furnished with Glass,All Glass, &c. Glass-windowes, Case∣ments, Doores, Locks, Bolts, Hinges, Lead, and Tiling: And that he the said T. his Executors Administrators or Assignes,Not to remove any new build∣ing. or any of them, or any other person or persons, by his or their means, consent, or procurement, shall not at any time hereafter, during the force and continuance of this present Lease and Demise, remove, pull down, or take away, or cause, &c. any Building, Room, or Edefice whatsoever, which he the said T: his Executors, administrators, or assignes, shall make, or set up, or cause, &c. in, upon, or about the said demised premisses, or any part or parcell thereof: and shall leave the same there standing, as they shall be made and set up, without spoiling the same, or any of them, for the use of the said W: his Heires or assignes, at the end or surceasement of this present Lease and De∣mise.
And moreover the Tenant covenanteth,Liberty to view. &c. that it shal and may be lawfull to and for the said W: his Heires and assignes, and three or foure such other persons as he or they will bring in his or their company at convenient time in the day, at his and their free will, li∣berty, and pleasure, to enter into all and singular the premisses twice in the yeare, yearely during the said, &c. to view, survey, and see whether the said new Tenement be builded, maintained, and kept in reparation in forme aforesaid, or not. And of all defaults there from time to time, found and needfull to be amended, to give warning for the repairing and amending thereof, within six months after such warning so given, with∣in which said six months the said T: covenanteth, &c. fully and sufficiently to repaire and amend all and singular such defaults as aforesaid, without fraud or longer delay. A Covenant of speciall Warranty by the Lord. In witnesse, &c. An under Lease back againe, by one having two Leases from a man of the Premisses demised by the one of them, conditionally he may enjoy that letten by the other. THis Indenture, &c. Between A: C: and J: C: Citizen and S. of London, on the one part, and W: G: of M: in the County of M: Esquire, on the other part, witnesseth, That where the same W: G: by his Indenture of Lease dated, &c. did demise to the said A: C: one Messuage called R. Tenement, with the appurtenances, scituate in the Parish of T: in the County of H: and all Houses, Edifices, &c. to the said Messuage appertaining; to have and to hold to the said A. C. his Executors and assigns for the term of forty years, commencing at the Feast of, &c. for the yearly rent of eight pounds therefore yearely to be paid; as by the same Indenture of Lease amongst other things therein contained, more plainly, &c. And where the said W: G: hath agreed, covenanted, and promised, to and with the said A: C: his Executors and assigns, that it shal be lawfull to and for the said A: his Execut. and Ass. to fell cut down stub, grub, carry away & enjoy, to the only use of the said E: and of his Ass. all and all manner of woods, under woods, timber, trees,
great trees, shrubbs, thorns and bushes whatsoever, growing or being, or to grow or be in or upon the Premisses, or any part there∣of at any time during the said term without any impeachment thereof, or therefore, saving alwaies sufficient hedges and inclo∣sures about all and singular the inclosed grounds of the said Pre∣misses: And where also the said W. G. by one other his former Indenture of Lease, dated, &c. for the consideration therein mentioned, Hath demised, granted, and to farm letten unto the said A. C. and J. C. and to their executors and assignes, all that great Messuage or Tenement, with the appurtenances, scituate and being in B. street, in the Parish of, &c. And all houses, &c. to the said Messuage belonging, &c. To hold, from the Feast of Saint Michael, &c. now last past, for the term of sixty years then next ensuing, and fully to be compleat, paying therefore the yearly rent of three pounds six shillings eight pence, of, &c. in manner and form as by the said former Indenture of Lease last specified may also appear: Now the said A. C. and J. C. for divers con∣siderations them specially moving, Do by these presents, demise, grant, and to farm let unto the said W. G. his executors, or as∣signes, all the said great Messuage or Tenement, with the appur∣tenances scituate in B. street aforesaid, and all other the Premisses to the same Messuage or Tenement belonging, or therewith occu∣pied or demised as aforesaid, To have and to hold the said Mes∣suage, and other the Premisses with the appurtenances, in B. afore∣said, unto the said W. his executors and assigns, from the day of the date of these presents, by and during all the term of fifty nine years and nine moneths from thence, &c. and fully, &c. charged and onerated by all the same term, with the said yearly rent of three pounds six shillings eight pence, thereupon reserved by the said former Indenture of Lease made by the said W: G: to the said A: C: and J: C: as aforesaid, Provided alwaies, that if it happen that the said A: C: his executors, administrators or assignes, or any of them, shall at any time hereafter be lawfully evicted, expelled, or put out, of or from the possession or occupation of the said Messuage, called R: Tenement, with the appurtenances, or any other the Premisses demised by the first Lease, &c. or of, or from any part or parcell thereof before the full and cleer end and expiration of all that term of fourty years, mentioned in the said first recited Indenture of Lease thereof made, as aforesaid, or to be lawfully interrupted, letted, molested, or sued in Law for the felling, cutting down, stub∣ing, grubing, taking, or carrying away of the said woods, under∣woods,
&c. contrary to the said covenant, promise, and agree∣ment of the said W: G: above recited; That then and from thence∣forth these present Indentures, and all and every covenant, article and sentence therein contained, which on the part of the said A: and J. their executors or assignes, or any of them from thence∣forth shall be to be performed, shall be cleerly void, &c. And then a re-entry in A: and J: C: &c. And an expulsion of W: G: &c. Any thing to the contrary, &c. And the said W: G: covenanteth with the said A: and J: &c. That if it shall happen the said A: C: his executors, administrators or assignes, or any of them to be lawfully evicted, expelled, or put out of the said Tenement, called R: or out of any other the Premisses, or any part thereof de∣mised to the said A: by the said first recited Indenture of Lease at any time before the end and expiration of the said term of fourty years therein granted by the same Indenture, or to be law∣fully letted to fell, &c. the said woods and underwoods, &c. at any time, during the said term of fourty years, contrary to the covenant, promise, and agreement of the said W: G: above in these presents recited, That then and at all times, from and after the time of such expiration, expelling, puting out, let, molestation, re∣sistance, or interruption, The said A: and J: their executors and assignes, shall and may lawfully and quietly re-enter into the said great Messuage in Southwark, and into all other the Pre∣misses demised by these presents, And the same, and all the issues rents and profits thereof lawfully and peaceably from thenceforth for ever, have, take, perceive, receive, possesse, hold and enjoy, to the onely use of the said A: and J. their, &c. by and during all the residue of the said term of sixty years, which then shall be to come, without any let of the said W: &c. and with∣out lawfull let of any others, &c. In witnesse, &c. A Lease made of Lands by an Heir out of pos∣session thereof, to one, to the intent he may re∣cover the same. THis Indenture, &c. Between R: C: of W. in the County of M. yeoman, cosin and next heire of R: C: of T. in the County of K. yeoman deceased, and son and next heir of R: C: late of C. in the County of K yeoman also deceased on the one part. And VV. G. of C. in the County of S. Gentle∣man, on the other part, Witnesseth, That the said R. C.
doth by these presents demise, grant, betake, and to farm let unto the said W. G. all that his Mannor of T. in the tenure of A. B. Esquire, or his assigns in the County of K. with the appurtenances, and all the lands, tenements, rents, services, commodities and pro∣fit thereunto belonging, or in any wise appertaining, called or known by the name of S. and T. with all their appurtenances, lying in the parish of T. and now in the tenure of T. O. or his assignes, Together with all other lands, tenements, rents, services, commo∣dities and profits, scituate, lying or being within the parish of T. in the said County of K. And all other the Mannors, Messuages, lands, tenements, liberties, priviledges, franchices, rents, commodities and hereditaments with their appur. in the said parishes, or any of them which did descend or come, or ought to have descended or come to the said R. C. after, or by the deaths of the said R. C. and R. C. or either of them, or otherwise in possession, reversion or remain∣der, To have and to hold all the said Mannors, lands, tenements and hereditaments; and all and singular other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, to the said G. his executors and assignes from the date hereof, by and during, and untill the end and term of, &c. from thence, &c. Yeilding and paying therefore yearly during the said term to the said R. C. his heires and assignes, 00 l. of lawfull, &c. at the Feasts of S. Michael, &c. and the Annun∣tiation, &c. by even portions: And the said A. C. for him, his heirs, &c. covenanteth, &c. to and with the said G. &c. That all and singular the said Mannors, &c. and other the Premisses, with the appurtenances, at all times, during the said term of, &c. shall be and continue to the said G. his executors, administrators and assignes, cleer and free discharged and acquited, or upon rea∣sonable request, therefore from time to time made, sufficiently saved harmlesse by the said R. his heirs, executors and administra∣tors, of and from all and singular former grants, bargains, sales, leases, titles, charges and incumbrances whatsoever, had made, done or agreed unto by the said R. or by any other person or per∣sons by the ascent, means, or procurement of the same R. in any wise. In witnesse, &c. Bullock Gonsultor.
A Lease by the Queen of certain hundreds, and the grant of the Offices of Steward and Bailiff in the same Hundreds, during the Lease. THe Queen, To all, &c. Know ye that We, as well for and in consideration of the good and faithfull service which J. E. one of the yeomen of Our Chamber heretofore, hath done to Us, and hereafter intendeth to do, As of Our certain science, meer motion, and speciall Grace, Have demised, granted, betaken, and to farm letten, And by these presents do demise, grant, and to farm let unto the said J. E. all those Our Hundreds of W. A. and F. with all and singular their rights, members, and appurtenances in Our County of S. And all those Our certain yearly rents, or common fines of four pounds two shillings nine pence; And all other rents of free suiters within the said Hundred, and every, or any of them, And the three weeks Court there; And all, and all Mannor-Courts, leets, view of frank pledge within the said Hun∣dreds and perquisits, and profits thereof, And all suits to the Courts of the said Hundreds, and to every or any of them, And all goods and cattels waved and strayed of felons, fugitives, felons of themselves, or of them which be condemned or outlawed, of them which he put in exigent: And also all manner of fines, amerce∣ments and issues which shall come, grow, happen, arise, or renew in any Court or Courts to be holden within the Hundred aforesaid, or which shall happen, grow, arise, or renew before Our Justices of Assises, or Our Justices of Peace, or Our Clerk of the Market with∣in the said County of S. And which shall, may, or ought to be levied within the said Hundreds; And all and singular liberties, priviledges, franchises, rights, jurisdictions, profits, commodities, advantages and emoluments whatsoever to the said Hundreds, or any of them belonging or appertaing, or within the said Hundreds, or any of them happening, growing, renewing, or arising; And also all and singular Our liberties, priviledges, franchices, rights, jurisdictions, commodities, profits and advantages within the said Hundreds, growing, happening, renewing, or arising whatsoever, any person or persons whatsoever heretofore in the right of the said Hundreds or any of any them ever at any time had held or enjoyed or ought to have had, &c. (except neverthelesse, and alwaies re∣served to Us, Our heirs and successors, all, and all manner of fines, amerce∣ments
and issues yearly, and from time to time, coming, growing, or renewing in any of Our Courts of Record, and liberty to levie and gather the same within the Hundreds aforesaid) Saving to the said J. and his assignes, all those issues, fines and amerciaments which shall come, grow, happen, arise, or renew in Our Court-Hundreds, as is aforesaid, or before Our Justices of Assise, or Our Justices of Peace, or Our Clerk of the Market, from time to time, at any time hereafter, as is aforesaid. And further, We of Our especiall Grace, certain Science and meer motion, have given and granted; And by these present, for Us Our heirs and successors, do give and grant to the said J. the Office of Steward and Bailiff within Our said Hundreds of W. A. and F. in Our said County of S. And all and singular rights, priviledges, liberties, profits, fees, customes, wages, preheminences, and jurisdictions whatsoever to the said Offices, or to either of them due, incident or belonging; And the keeping of all & singular courts, leets and law daies within the said Hundreds, and every or any of them. And We, for Us, Our heirs and successors, do by these presents, ordain and constitute the said J. E. Our Steward and Our Bailiff, within the said Hundreds, and every of them, To have and to hold all the said Hundreds, certain rents, or common fines, rents of free suiters, and perquisites and profits of Courts, within the said Hundreds and every of them, And the said issues, fines, and amerciaments, and the said Offices of Steward and Bailiff, with all the rights, customes, fees, wages, and liberties thereof, and all and singular other the the Premisses, with all and singular their appurtenances (except onely before excepted) to the said J. E. his executors and assigns, from the Feast of S. Michael, &c. last past, &c. for by & during all the term of twenty one years from thence, &c. Yeilding, and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, to Us, Or heirs & successors, at the Receit of Our Exchequer at Westminster, or to any other Our Receiver of any of our rents, revenues, within the said County of S. for the time being, six pounds sixteen shillings eight pence, of lawfull, &c. at the Feasts of the Annunciation, &c. and S. Michael, &c. by even portions; Provided alwaies, that if it shall happen the said yearly rent of, &c. or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid by the space of fourty daies after any Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, wherein the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, That then, and from thenceforth this present demise, and grant, shall be utterly void, and had for nought, Any thing in these presents contained to the contrary not∣withstanding, And We of Our meer motion, certain science and
speciall Grace, for Us and for Our heirs and successors, do further grant by these presents, That this Our present grant and demise, under the said yearly rent and condition aforesaid, shall be good, firm, and stable, Any misrecitall, not recitall, misnaming, not true naming, expresse mention of the true yearly value or certainty of the Premisses, or any of them, Or any statute, prohibition, ordi∣nance, proclamation, or restraint to the contrary thereof before this time, made, ordained, or provided, or any other cause or mat∣ter whatsoever in any wise notwithstanding. In witnesse, &c. Licenses. A Licence by a Lord of a Mannor to a Copyholder to pull down houses on Copyhold land. TO all and singular My Stewards, Surveyors, Bailiffs, and other Officers whatsoever, within my Mannor of L. in the County of S. J: E: Earl of O: Send greeting; Whereas I am informed that H: G: of London, Goldsmith, hath lately purchased of T: T: of N: Esquire, certain old houses, within my said Mannor, being Copy∣hold, which the said T: T: hath surrendred to the use of the said H: G: and his heirs, according to the custome of the said Mannor, My will and pleasure is, And by these presents I give and grant to the said H: G. his heirs and assignes, my full license and absolute liberty and authority, to pull down, and to take and carry away all the said houses, and every or any part thereof, to and for the use of the said H: his heirs and assignes, from time to time, as to him or them, or any of them, shall seem meet; Any custome or usage what∣soever within the said Mannor, if any be heretofore had or used to the contrary notwithstanding; And I will and command you and every of you, that the said H: and his assignes, may quietly have and enjoy the full and whole benefit of my said grant and license without any deniall, let or impediment of you or any of you, as you tender my good contentation in that behalf, In witnesse, &.
A License to let and set, where a Proviso is contained in a Lease to the contrary. TO all, &c. R: H: Doctor of Divinity, Warden, and the Colledge of the Soules of all faithfull people deceased, of O: send greet∣ing; Whereas we the said Warden and Colledge, by our Inden∣ture of Lease, sealed with our common Seale, and bearing date, &c. did grant and demise unto F: M: of, &c. all that our Mannor of, &c. To have, &c. and fully to be compleat and ended,In and by which Indenture it it provided, with a clause, that the said F: M: or his assignes, shall not give, grant, let, set, or otherwise alien, that his Lease during the said term of, &c. to any person or persons whatsoever, without the expresse, consent, and assent of the said Warden and Colledge, or their Successors, first had, and obtained under their common Seale. Now know yee, that we the said Warden and Colledge, for us and our Successors, have consented and agreed, and by these presents do consent and agree, that the said F: M: shall or may bargain, give, grant, set, or let the said Estate, inte∣rest, and terme of yeares, of and in the Premisses, in and by the said recited Indenture demised, and of and in any part or parcell thereof, to any person or persons at the will and pleasure of the said F: or his Assignes; The said Covenant or any thing in the said Indenture mentioned or contained, to the contrary notwith∣standing. In, &c. Mortgages. A Mortgage of a Lease with good Covenants. THis Indenture, &c. Between T: I: Citizen and Vintner of L: on the one part, and J. J. Citizen and Founder of L: on the other part, witnesseth, That where, &c. by Indenture of Lease dated, &c. did demise, &c. to E: B: Widow, all those their Messua∣ges and Tenements called the Cardinalls Hat, and Bores-head,
with Cellars, &c. set and being in the Parish of St. S: without N: in the Suburbs of the City of L: To have, &c. And for the yearely rent of nine pounds of lawfull, &c. therefore yearely to be paid, as by, &c. The Estate, Lease, Interest, and terme of yeares, of which the said E: B: of and in the premisses, for and during all the resi∣due of the said terme of forty yeares now to come, the said T. J. for him, his Executors and Administrators, covenanteth and gran∣teth by these presents, that he hath, and that he is thereof law∣fully possessed by vertue of good and sufficient conveyances in the Law to him thereof made: And now the said T. J. for and in con∣sideration of the summe of a hundred and nine pounds, eighteen shillings of, &c. whereof, &c. hath given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by these presents doth give, &c. all the said Messuage and Tenements, with their appurtenances, called the Cardinalls Hat, and Bores-head aforesaid, and all and singular other the premisses: and also all the Estate, right, title, interest, term of yeares, claim and demand of the said T: J. of in, and to the said Messuage, Tenements, and other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, together with the said Originall Inden∣ture of Lease, and all other Writings and Conveyances which the said T: J: hath touching or concerning the same Premisses, to have and to hold the said Messuages, Tenements, and all other the pre∣misses with their appurtenances, and also all the said Estate, right, title, interest, terme of yeares, claime and demand of the said T: J: of, in, and to the same, to the said I: I: his Executors and Assignes, from henceforth, for, by and during all the residue of the said terme of forty yeares now to come and unexpired. And the said T: J: covenanteth, &c. in forme, &c. that the said T: J: at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is the very true law∣full, sole, and rightfull Owner of the said Indenture of Lease, and of all and every the premisses thereby demised or granted, and of all the residue of the said terme of forty yeares now to come and unexpired, and hath good right and lawfull authority to give grant, bargain, sell, assigne and set over all and every the same Premisses, to the said J: I: his Executors Administrators and As∣signes, in manner and forme aforesaid: And that by the said O∣riginall Indenture here is made, a good Lease of all the premisses, which according to the true meaning of these presents, shall or may have endurance and continuance in the said I: I: and his assignes, by and during all the residue of the said terme of forty yeares yet to come: and that the same Messuage, Tenements, and
other the premisses, with their appurtenances, now are and be, and on the eighteenth day of Iune, which shall be, &c. shall be, and from thenceforth shall stand and continue to the said I: his Execu∣tors or assignes, according to the purport and true meaning of these presents, for and during all the residue of the said terme of forty yeares then to be to come and unexpired, cleerly and freely discharged and acquitted, or otherwise from time to time at all times sufficiently saved harmlesse, of and from all and singular former Bargaines, Sales, Grants, Leases, Arrearages of Rent, Forfeitures, Re-entries, and Cause and Causes of Forfeiture and Re-entry, and of and from all other Charges, Estates, Titles, Troubles, and Incumbrances whatsoever, (the yearely Rent and Covenants specified in the said Ori∣ginall Indenture of Lease, from and after the said eighteenth day of June, which shall be in the said yeare, &c. to grow due to be paid, done, and performed on the part of the said E. and her Assignes onely except) Provided alwaies, and the said J. J. covenanteth, &c. That if the said T. J. his Executors, &c. do pay, &c. to the said J. J. his certaine Attorney, Exe∣cutor, or Administrator, at the now Mansion house of, &c. sci∣tuate, &c. the summe of, &c. of lawfull, &c. on the said eighteenth day of June, which shall be, &c. between the houres, &c. That then and from thenceforth these presents, and the Gift, Grant, Bargain, Sale, and Assignment thereby made, of all and singular the Premisses, shall be cleerly void and of none effect: And that then and from the time of such payment made to the said I. I. his Executors or Assignes in forme afore∣said, it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said T. J. his Executors and Assignes, the said Tenements and other the pre∣misses with their appurtenances, to have againe, repossesse, and re-enjoy, as in his or their former Estate, any thing herein mentioned to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding, And the said J. J. for him, his Executors and Administrators covenanteth, &c. that he the said J. his Executors or Admini∣strators, after full payment made to him or them of the said &c. in forme aforesaid, shall and will upon request to him or them therefore, deliver, or cause, &c. to the said T. his Execu∣tors or Assignes, whole and uncancelled, as well the said Ori∣ginall Indenture of Lease, as also all the severall Convey∣ances thereof, which hereafter are particularly recited, that is to say, one poll Deed made from the said E. B. to one R. W. one
other poll Deed made from the said R. to one W. A. and one Deed indented, made from the said W. A. to the said T. J. with∣out any delay, fraud or covin. In witnesse, &c. A Mortgage of a Lease to save harmlesse of a Bond by the Mortgagee entred into, binding the Mort∣gagor upon the Condition to pay the Rent reser∣ved upon the Lease, and deliver to the Mortga∣gee Acquittances for it by a certain day. THis Indenture, &c. Whereas W. G. Citizen and Carpenter of L. by his Indenture of Lease demised, &c. And whereas also E. B. Citizen and Haberdasher of L. together with T. C Citizen and Parriar of L. and with me the said W. R. at the speciall request and desire of me the said W. R. and for my onely debt and duty by our Writing or Bond Obligatory, bearing date the two and twen∣tieth day of February, in the foure and twentieth yeare of the raign &c. stand and be joyntly and severally bounden unto J. C: &c. Citizen and Clothworker of L. in the summe of forty pounds of lawfull, &c. with Condition thereupon endorsed, for the true payment, at the now dwelling house of the said I. C. scituate and being, &c. of the summe of twenty pounds of like money, in man∣ner and forme following, that is to say, on the first day of Mach next coming, after the date of the same Writing or Bond obliga∣tory, twenty shillings on the first day of April then next ensuing, twenty shillings on the first day of May then next ensuing, twenty shillings; and so from henceforth every month monthly follow∣ing, on the first day of every month twenty shillings, untill the said summe of twenty pounds and every part thereof shall be so fully and truly paid, as by the same Writing or Bond obligatory, and the Condition thereof more plainly and at large may appeare. Now know yee, that I the said W. R. for the full and cleer indem∣nity and discharging of the said E. B. his Executors and Admini∣strators, and every of them against the said I. C. his Executors ad∣ministrators and assignes, and every of them, and all other of and for the said writing or Bond obligatory. And also of all actions, suits costs, penalties, damages, and all other damages concerning the same, have given, granted, bargained, sold, delivered, assigned, & set over, and by these presents do fully and cleerly give, grant bargain, sell, deliver, assigne, and set over unto the said E. B. as well
the said Indenture of Lease, as also all such Estate, Right, Title, Interest, terme of yeares, claime, and demand, as I the said W: R: have, should, may, might, or ought to have or claime, to, of, and in the said Messuage or Tenement, Yard, Shed, and all other the Premisses with the appurtenances, in and by the said Indenture of Lease demised and granted, by force of the said Indenture of Lease, or otherwise, by any other waies or meanes, right, interest, or title whatsoever; To have and to hold the said Messuage or Tenement, Yard, Shed, Indenture of Lease, and all other, &c. Provided alwaies, that if I the said W: R: my Executors Administra∣tors or Assignes, or any of us, do well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the foresaid J: C: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, at or within the foresaid now dwelling house of the said J: C. sci∣tuate, &c. the foresaid summe of twenty pounds of lawfull, &c. on the daies of payment thereof mentioned in the Condition of the foresaid writing or Bond Obligatory: And that according to the true intent and meaning thereof, for the full and cleer in∣demnity and discharge of the said E: B: his Executors and Admi∣nistrators, and every of them in that behalfe. And shall also from time to time, untill full payment of the said summe of twenty pounds be made according to the true intent and meaning of the foresaid writing, or Bond Obligatory, well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the foresaid W: G: his Executors Administrators or Assignes, the foresaid yearely rent of five pounds, in and by the said Indenture of Lease, for the rent and farme of the premisses reserved: And that at the Feast daies of payment thereof men∣tioned in the said Indenture of Lease, or within the space of twen∣ty daies next after every of the same Feast-daies, and within the same space of twenty daies, shall bring shew and deliver to the said E: B: his Executors Administrators or Assignes, at the now dwelling house of the said E: scituate in the Parish, &c. a suffici∣ent and lawfull Acquittance, under the hand and Seale of the said W: G: his Executors Administrators or Assignes, testifying the pay∣ment and receipt of the same rent accordingly, or shall make suf∣ficient proof unto the said E: B: his Executors or Assignes, at the place aforesaid, within the time and space aforesaid, of the pay∣ment of the said rent, in manner and forme aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning hereof: that then I the said W: R: shall have againe redelivered to me, my Executors Administra∣tors or assignes, the said Indenture of Lease whole and uncancel∣led. And that then and from thenceforth this my present writing
and every Covenant, Gift, Grant, Bargaine, Article, and Agree∣ment herein contained, shall be cleerly void and of none effect, any thing in these presents expressed to the contrary thereof not∣withstanding. And if default shall happen to be made in payment of the said summe of twenty pounds, or any part thereof, by me the said W: R, my Executors administrators or assignes, contrary to the true intent and meaning of the foresaid Writing or Bond Obliga∣tory, or in performance of any the Conditions aforesaid, in part or in all, contrary to the forme aforesaid: That then I the said W: R: for me, my Executors and administrators, do covenant and grant to and with the said E. B. his Executors administrators and assignes by these presents, that this my present Writing and every Covenant, Gift, Grant, Bargaine, Article, and Agreement herein contained, shall stand and remaine in full strength and vertue: and that the said E: his Executors administrators and assignes, immediatly from and after such default of payment made of the said summe of twenty pounds, or any part thereof, contrary to the true intent and meaning of the foresaid Writing or Bond Obliga∣tory, or in performance of any Conditions aforesaid, shall and may lawfully, peaceably, and quietly enter, have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the said Messuage or Tenement, Yard, Shed, and all other the premisses with the appurtenances, in and by the said Indenture of Lease demised and granted (except as in the same is excepted) according to the contents, true meaning, forme and effect of the said Indenture of Lease, without any let, trouble, title, expulsion, eviction, recovery, or interruption of me the said W: R: my Executors administrators or assignes, or any of us, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, during all the residue of the said terme of seven and twenty yeares then to come. In wit∣nesse whereof to this my present writing, I the said W: R. have set my Seale the foure and twentieth day of February, in the foure and twentieth yeare of the raigne of our Soveraign, &c.
Provisoes. A very substantiall Proviso barring a man and his Executors, not to do away a Lease, unlesse the Taker come to the Landlord and take anew. PRovided alwaies, that if it shall happen at any time hereafter this present Lease, to be by the said J. C. his Executors Admi∣nistrators or Assignes, aliened, sold, set over, or departed from, to any manner of person or persons; or that the same Lease be by the said I. C. by his last Will and Testament in writing or without writing, bequeathed to any manner of person or persons: or if the same Lease do come to the hands and possession of his Executor or Executors, administrator, or administrators, by reason of Execu∣torship, or Letters administratory of the Ordinary; or else to be by order of Law as a Chattell of the same I. C. extended and put in execution by force of any Proces or Precept out of any the Queens Majesties Courts, or of her Heires or Successors, Kings and Queens of England, taken out of the hands and possession of the said I. C. or out of the hands and possession of the Executor or Executors, administrator, or administrators of the said I. C. That then he, she, or they that shall so receive, have, and enjoy the same Lease, by reason of any the fore-recited waies or meanes, shall within forty daies next after the receit or obtaining thereof, come to the said R. B. his Executors or assignes, and surrender in his or their old Lease, into the hands of the said R. B. his Execu∣tors or assignes: and receive and take at the hands of the said . his Heires or assignes, a new Lease of so many yeares as shall be then to come undetermined of the same old Lease, which new Lease shall also containe the like Covenants, payments, and pro∣mises in every point as this present Lease, doth, and shall also enter and be bound in the like Bond, for the performance of such Covenants as the said I C. shall for the performance of the Cove∣nants comprised in these presents be bound in; which Lease
and Bond shall be made at the costs and charges of him, her, or them that shall and will take the benefit of the same Lease: and if she or they which shall come to the lawfull possession hereof, by reason of any of the waies or meanes afore recited, do not surren∣der in his or their interest in the old, and take a new as aforesaid; Or else do refuse to enter into Bond as aforesaid, for the perfor∣mance of such Covenants as the said I. C. shall for the perfor∣mance of the Covenants comprised in these Indentures, be bound in, that then the Lease to be void, and re-entry, &c. VVills. A Clause in a Testament to enable an Executor to sell his Testators Lands. ITem, I will and ordaine that the Executor of this my Testament, or his Executor, or Executors, Administrator or Administrators, for and towards the performance of my said Testament, within the space of foure yeares next after my decease, shall bargaine, grant, alien, and sell away in Fee-simple, all those my Lands, &c. for the doing, executing, and perfect finishing whereof, I do give, grant, will, and transfer by these presents, to my said Exe∣cutor, and to his Executors and Administrators, full and lawfull power, authority, right, and title, and interest to grant, alien, bargaine, and sell, and also to convey and assure all my said Lands, &c. to any person or persons, and to their Heires for ever, in Feesimple, by all and every such lawfull way and means in the Law, and otherwise as to my said Executor, &c. or to his or their Learned Councell shall seem meet and reasonable.
Releases. An Indenture testifying the payment of a summe of money, according to a Condition contained in a Deed of Feoffment, for making void of the same Feoffment. THis Indenture, witnesseth, That whereas heretofore J. W. B. then of H. in the County, &c. Gent. by my Deed indented, bearing date the twelfth day of September, in the yeare, &c. did enfeoffe my Brother F. B. J. B. and R: G. Husbandman, and one N. L. Gent. deceased, of and in all that my moyety of the manner of H. with the appurtenan. in the County of H. with all those my Lands Tenm. Rents Reversions and Services, being parcell of the said Mannor of H. or thereunto belonging: and all other my Messuages Lands Tenements Rents Reversions Services and Hereditaments in H. aforesaid, to such use and uses as in the said Feoffment are specified, with this Proviso notwithstanding, that if I the said W. B. or mine Heires, at any time hereafter should pay or tender to pay to the said F. B. N. C. I. B. and R. G. or to any of them, or to the Heires of the Survivor of them, ten shillings of, &c. then declaring or to them signifying mine intent then to be, to have againe, that my moyety of the Mannor afore∣said, and all and singular the premisses in mine old state; that then immediatly and from thenceforth my said former Writing, Deed, and Feoffment should be void and of no force, any thing in the same to the contrary notwithstanding, as by the same for∣mer Deed indented more plainly may appeare. Now be it known, that I the said W. B. minding to make the said former Deed inden∣ted, and Feoffment aforesaid, cleerly void, have for that purpose according to the tenor of the said Proviso, paid to the said I. B. on the day of the date of these presents, ten shillings of, &c: then declaring and signifying, and by these presents now declaring, and signifying to my said Feoffees now living, and to every of them that mine intent then at the payment of the said ten shillings, was and now is to have againe, that my moyety of the Mannor
aforesaid, and all and singular the premisses in mine old estate, that is to say, in such estate as I had thereof before I made the said former Deed: And that now from henceforth the said former Writing, Deed, and Feoffment shall be void. And I the said I. B. do knowledge that I had & received the said ten shillings at the hands of the said W. B. as aforesaid, and heard him declare his intention to be by the payment thereof as is aforesaid: and also we the said F. B. and R. G. do take notice thereof and knowledge our consent thereunto by these presents; to both parts whereof as well I the said W. B. as the said F. B. I. B. and R. G. have set our Seales, given, &c. Surrenders. A Surrender Conditionall by Tenant for terme of life, to him in Reversion for a Recovery to passe. THis Indenture, &c. between, &c. witnesseth, That whereas the said A B. now hath, and holdeth divers Lands Meadowes Pastures and Commons scituate, &c. of an Estate for terme of his naturall life, under a certaine yearly rent by vertue of a Lease thereof unto him made by Indenture, the reversion thereof to the said H. S. and his Heires appertaining. Now this Indenture wit∣nesseth, that the said A. B. for divers good causes, &c. doth by these presents surrender and yeild up unto the said H. S. all the Estate and Interest of the said A. in and to the said Lands, &c. upon condition neverthelesse, that if the said H. S. his Executors administrators or assignes, do not, or shall not well and truly pay, or cause, &c. to the said A. the summe of five hundred pounds of, &c. on the, &c. at the, &c. that then and from thenceforth this present Deed of Surrender shall be utterly void and of none effect, and then the said A. B. to have againe the said Lands, &c. as in his first and former Estate, any thing to the contrary, &c. And the said H. S. for him, &c. doth covenant, &c. for the Tenants enjoy∣ing, till the day in the Condition mentioned.
A Surrender by two Tenants for life to him that hath the Reversion. THis Indenture, &c. Between Sir E. L. of, &c. and R. F. of, &c. and T. F. of, &c. of the one part, and S. H. and M. his wife of the other part, witnesseth, That whereas the said Sir E. L. and R. F. by force and meanes of good and sufficient conveyance and assurance in the Law, are, and do stand lawfully seised in their Demesne as of Freehold, for and during the terme of the naturall life of the said T. F. of and in all that the Farme, &c. the immediate remainder or reversion of the said Farme to the said S. H. and M. his wife, and the Heires of the said M. belonging and appertain∣ing. Now the said Sir E. L. and R. F. at the request of the said T. F. to them in this behalf made, and for divers and sundry good and reasonable causes, &c. them in this behalf moving; have granted and surrendred, and by these presents, &c. unto the said S. and M. and to the Heires of the said M. the said Farme, &c. And all the estate, right, title, interest, claime, and demand of the said Sir E. and R. and either of them, to, of, or in the said Farm, &c. and every or any part or parcell thereof; To have and to hold all and singular the premisses with the appurtenances, to the said S: and M: and the Heires and Assignes of the said M: to and for the proper use and behoof of the said S: and M: and of the heirs and assignes of the said M: for ever. And the said Sir E: L: for him &c. covenanteth, &c. that the said S: and M: and the Heires and assignes of the said M: shall or may from time, &c. hereafter law∣fully, &c. have, hold, occupy, possesse, and enjoy the said Farme, &c. and all the Rents, Issues, Revenues, and Profits thereof or thereby from time to time coming, growing, arising, or renewing, to perceive, receive, take, and enjoy to their own proper use and behoof for ever, as well free and cleerly discharged, &c. of, for, and from all and singular former Bargaines, &c. had, made, &c. or to be had, made, &c. by the said Sir E. As also without any let, &c. The like Covenant by R: F. In witnesse, &c.
Testimonialls. A Testification of having the assignment of a Lease in trust, where it is set over to be saved from drowning by purchase of the fee simple. TO all, &c. H. B. of L. Haberdasher, and S. H. of L. afore∣said, Draper, send greeting: Whereas W. N. of B. in the County of E Gent. by his poll Deed bearing date, &c. Hath con∣veyed, bargained, sold, assigned and set over to us the said H. and S. those two severall Indentures of Lease, whereof the one beareth date, &c. and the other beareth date, &c. made to the said W. N. by M. B. Gent. of all the marsh-grounds, &c. As by the said Deed of the said W: N: more plainly and at large may and will appear: Know ye, that we the said H: and S: had the same conveyance, bar∣gain, sale and assignment to us made as aforesaid, only in trust to be used and imployed from time to time, at the appointment, will and pleasure of T. M. citiz. & Haberdasher of L with whose only money the said Leases were purchased, and to us the said H: & S: conveyed, as aforesaid, and not otherwise, or in any other manner whatso∣ever, which Leases and conveyance, we have therefore on the day of the date hereof delivered into the custody of the said T: S: by him, his heirs and assignes, to be preserved or annihilated at his or their pleasure, binding our selves, and premising for us, our heirs, executors and administratos by these presents, That we and the survivour of us, his executors and administrators, shall and will, grant and convey, bargain, sell, and set over the said Leases, and either of them, and all our estate, title and interrest, of, in and to the said marsh grounds, and other the Premisses, at all times here∣after, when as the said T. S. his heirs or assignes, shall require the same to such person or persons as the said T. S. his heirs or assignes shall in that case nominate and appoint, In witnesse, &.
A Writing or Testimoniall certifying the paiment of a summe of money according to a Condition con∣tained in an Indenture, for making void of the same, and uses therin contained. BE it known that on the day of N. in the year, &c. in the forenoone of the same day, W: B: the elder, citizen and Mercer of L. was living, and then being personally present in the Chappell in W: London, called the Mecers Chappell, with his own hands the same day in the same Chappel, did pay to the proper hands of W: B: the younger, natural son of the said W. B. the elder, the summe of 100 l. of lawfull, &c. at one entire payment, according to the tenor, purport and effect of one pair of Indentures, made be∣tween the said W: B: on the one part, and A: B. C: and D. na∣turall sons of the said W: B: the elder on the other part, And bear∣ing date, &c. which said summe of one hundred pounds the said W: B: the younger had and received accordingly, And then and there the said W: B: the elder, did plainly and openly declare, that he did so pay the said summe of one hundred pounds, to the intent that according to the condition contained in the said indentures, the same Indentures, for all the lands, tene∣ments, and hereditaments therein specified, from henceforth should be and remain to the use of the said W: B: the elder, his heirs and assignes for ever, and to none other use or uses, And to the intent also, that from thenceforth, the said W: the elder, his heirs and assignes, and all other, person and persons, and their heirs, seised, or to be seised, of or in all that Messuage, &c. and all & singular other lands, tenemnts and hereditaments in the said In∣denture specified, or of every or any part thereof, should from thenceforth stand, and be thereof, and of every part thereof seised to the onely use of the said W: the elder, his heirs and assignes, and to none other use, uses or intents, any thing in the said In∣dentures expressed, or thereupon to be construed to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding; Whereupon we A: B: C: D, and E: F: which were present with the said W: B: the elder, in the Mercers Chappel aforesaid, when and whilest, as he did with his own hands there pay the said summe of, &c. of lawfull, &c. unto the said W. the younger, in manner and form abovesaid, being called and
required by the said W: B: the elder, to bear witnesse of the said payment and other the Premisses, for testimony of the truth in this behalf to all to whom it doth and may appertain have here∣unto with the said W. B. the elder subscribed our names, and set our seals, Given, &c. Uses. An Indenture to lead the Ʋse of a Recovery to strengthen a Lease of Land in London made by a Tenant for life, and the Tenant, in tail in re∣mainder. THis Indenture tripartite made, &c. Between L: H: of L. widow, late wife of T. H. of L. Gent. deceased, and before that the wife of C. W. late citizen and Merchant-taylor of L. de∣ceased, and C: W: of L. Gent. son of the said C: W: deceased, and of the said L. on the first part, And E: D: of L. Gent. and R: W: ci∣tizen and Gold-smith of L. on the second part. And T: P: of L. Draper, on the third part, witnesseth,Recitall of the Lease. that where the said L: H: and C: W: the son, by their indenture of Lease, bearing date the first day of this instant moneth of February, for the considerations therein mentioned. Have demised, granted, betaken, and to farm letten to the said T: P: all that Messuage or Tenement, being the corner Messuage or Tenement over against Leaden-hall corner, in the parish, &c. and all shops, &c. To have, &c. from Michaelmas, &c. for twenty one years, &c. Yeilding, &c. to the said L: and C: the son and to the heirs and assignes of the said G. twenty pounds of, &c. at four Feasts,Surrender by the Tenant for life. as by the said Indenture of Lease, &c. It is now fully concluded, condescended, and agreed, by and between the said parties, to these presents, in manner and form following: That is to say; First the said L: H: doth by these presents, surrender to the said C. the son, her estate, title, and interest of and in the said Messuage or Tenement, shops, &c. and other the Premisses with the appurtenances, upon condition, That within three moneths
next after the date hereof,Condition of the surrender. the said Messuage, &c. shall be lawfully assured to the said L. H. for the term of her life, with the reversion expectant, to and in the said C. the son, and his heirs, according to the form hereunder limited: And the said, C. W. the son, doth covenant and grant,For better as∣surance to suf∣fer a Recovery. for him and his heirs, to and with the said E. D. R. VV. and T. P. and every of them, their heirs, executors, and admi∣nistrators, and the heirs, executors and administra∣tors of every of them, by these presents, That for the better as∣surance, and sure making of the said Messuage, &c. to the said T. P. his executors and assignes, for, and during the said term of twenty one years, the said C. W. the son, shall permit and suffer the said E. D. and R. VV. to pursue and bring the Kings Majesties Writ of Right patent out of her Majesties High Court of Chancery, against the said C: VV: the son, to be directed to the Major and Sheriff of the city of London; upon which Writ of Right patent, according to the custome of the city of London, for passing of common Recoveries for assurance of lands, tenements, and hereditaments, the said E: D: and R: VV: shall demand against the said C: W: the said Messuage or Tenement, and other the Premisses, with the appur∣tenances, by the name of one Messuage, and two shops, with the appurtenances in the parish of S. P. &c. And unto which Writ the said C. VV. by himself, or his sufficient Attorney, shall appear and vouch to warranty the common vouchee; (Whereupon recovery, judgement and execution may be had, according to the course of of common recoveries with voucher used in the said city) And it is by these presents covenanted,Ʋse of the Recovery. granted, expressed, concluded, condiscended, de∣clared, and agreed upon, by and between all and every the said parties to these presents, That the said E. D. and R. W. and their heirs, from and immediately after judgement and execution in form aforesaid shall be had, shall stand and be seised of and in the said Messuage, &c. with the appurtenances, And that the said recovery and the execution thereof, and all other recoveries to be had or executed of the Premisses, or any part there∣of by or between the said parties, or any of them, by what names, or in what manner or form soever shall be, and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be to the uses and intents hereafter in these presents mentioned and declared; That is to say, to the use of the said L: H: for and during the term of her naturall life, And after
the decease of the said L. to and for the onely and proper use and behoof of the said C. W. and of the heires of the same C. for ever, and to none other use, uses, intents, nor purposes whatsoever. In witnesse, &c. An Indenture for raising of Ʋses in Land, with a Condition to alter the same at pleasure. THis Indenture, &c. Between Dame A. L &c. late wife, &c. on the one part, And J. H. Grocer, and J. N. Goldsmith, citizens of London on the other part; Whereas the said Dame A. L. for divers causes and considerations her specially moving, Hath by writing indented, sealed with the seals of the said Dame A: and of one T: H: now Treasurer of Christs Hospitall in L. bearing date the 00 day of this present April, revoked, annulled, made frustrate and void, And by these presents, doth revoke, an∣null, make fruustrate and void, all and singular use and uses, limi∣tations of use and uses, and estates, at any time or times heretofore created, limited, raised, or made by the said Dame A: by Inden∣ture made between her and any others, or otherwise of, or in the lands, tenement and hereditaments hereafter in these presents ex∣pressed and mentioned, and of, and in every part and parcell of the same, other then such as have been created, limited, or raised, or made to the use of the said Dame A. L. and of her heirs and assigns for ever, and other then Lease or Grant, Leases or Grants by me made of the Premisses, or of any part thereof, for term of life, lives, or years; as by the said former Writing indented more at large doth and may appear.Consideration. This Indenture now witnesseth, that the same Dame A: L: for and in consideration of the marriage heretofore had between the said Sir T: L: and the said Dame A. and in consideration of the naturall love and motherly good will which the said Dame A. hath, and beareth to K: B: and W: B: daughters of the said Sir T. L. and Dame A. And for and toward the better advancement and main∣tenance of the said K: B: and W: B: and for and toward the more certain and quiet stay, order, and disposition of the lands, tene∣ments and hereditaments hereafter mentioned, in and to such of the children and kindred of the said Sir T: L: and Dame A: and in and to their heirs and assignes for ever, as she doth think most worthy for their duty and obedience to enjoy and possesse the same, and for divers other causes and considerati∣ons, the said Dame A: specially moving,Covenants. Doth Cove∣nant,
grant and agree for herself, her heirs and assignes, to and with the said J: H: and J: N: their and every of their heirs and assigns, And it is now covenanted, granted, concluded, and fully agreed, between the said parties to these presents, for them, their heires, executos and assignes, and to and with other of them, their heires, executors & assigns, in manner and form following: First,To make an estate by a day. that she the said Dam A: L: and her heires, be∣fore the Feast of All Saints next, &c. shall make, as∣sure and convey, or cause to suffer to be made, as∣surred, or conveyed to the said J: H: and J: N: and their heires, or the Survivor of them and his heires for ever, a good, sure and law∣full estate in fee simple, of and in one Messuage and Tenement, with the appurtenances in, &c. and of and in, &c. And of and in all other the Messuages, lands, tenements, and hereditaments of the said Dame A: whereof she the said Dame A: is seised of any estate of inheritance in H: and J: aforesaid in the said County of, &c. to the uses, behoofs, intents, limitations, and purposes hereafter in these presents expressed or mentioned under the provisoes and con∣ditions hereafter mentioned, and to none other use, behoof, limi∣tation or purpose; That is to say, to the use and behoof of the said Dame A: and of her assignes, for term of her life without impeachment of waste:To stand seised to uses. And it is further covenanted, granted, conditioned, and fully agreed beween the said parties to these presents, that im∣mediately, from and after the death of the said Dame A: the said J: and J: and their heires, and the survivor of them and his heirs, shall stand and be seised of, and in all that, &c. To the use and behoof of the said K: B: and of her heires and assignes for ever. And of and in, &c to the use and behoofe of the said W: B: and of her heirs and assignes for ever.Provisoes for the making good of Lea∣ses. Provided alwaies, and neverthelesse it is covenanted, granted, condiscen∣ded, conditioned, concluded and agreed be∣tween the said parties to these present Indentures for them, their heirs and assignes, to and with the other of them; That if the said Dame A: hath made, or at any time hereafter, during her naturall life, shall make any demise, lease, or grant, for term of life, lives, or years of any of the said lands, tenements and hereditaments, and other the Premisses, or of any part or parcell of the same, to any person or persons, That then, and from henceforth, the said J: and J: and their heirs, and
the survivor of them, and his heirs, shall stand and be seised of such parcell, and of so much of the said lands, tenements, and other the Premisses, with the appurtenances, as is, or shall be so demised, letten, or granted by the said Dame A: to the use and behoof of such person or persons to whom any such demise, lease or grant is, or shall be so made, onely for, and during such estate and interest, as is, or shall be comprised in such demise, lease, or grant, according to the purport of the same demise, lease or grant, so long as such person or persons, to whom such demise, lease or grant is, or shall be so made, shall and will within fourty daies next af∣ter reasonable request, not onely pay the rents, duties, customes, and services reserved, or which shall be reserved upon any such lease or grant to such person or persons, to whom the use, reversion, or remainder thereof, immediately shall then appertain by means of any conveyance covenanted to be made by these presents, or else of any covenant contained in these Indentures; But also per∣form all such covenants, grants, articles and agreement, as on the part and behalf of such person or persons shall be to be perform∣ed, fulfilled, or kept, comprised in such demise, lease or grant, and use herein contained or limited, to the contrary in any wise not∣withstanding, Provided alwaies, and it is further covenanted, &c,Condition to avoid the now uses upon pay∣ment of ten shill. to, &c. between the said parties by these presents, That if the same Dame A: at any time hereafter, during her life, do render or pay to the said Treasurer, or to any one of the Governous, of Christs Hospitall in London, for the time being, or to any other, to their, or any of their use, the summe of ten shillings of lawfull, &c. for the behoof and reliefe of the poor children of the said Hospitall of Christs Church within the city of London, for the intent and purpose to alter all or any of the uses aforesaid. That then and fronceforth, the aforesaid use and uses,shall cease, &c. limitations and intents limi∣ted, or appointed by this present Indenture shall cease, determine, and be utterly void; And that then, and from thenceforth the said J: and J: and their heirs, and the survivor of them and his heirs, and the said Dame A: and all other person and persons, being then seised of the said lands, tenements, and other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, shall, &c. to the use of the said Dame A: and of her heirs and assignes for ever, and to none other use, intent or purpose, This Indenture, or any thing therein contained to the contrary, in any
wise notwithstanding;If the party sei∣sed in see die be∣fore assurance made, then uses are raised ac∣cording to the estates prelimi∣ted. And the said Dame A. for the considerations before in these presents decla∣red, and for divers other causes her moving, Doth covenant and grant, for her self, her heires and assignes, to and with the said J. and J. their heirs, executors, and administrators, and the heirs, executors, and administrators of either of them. That if she the said Dame A. do happen to die before the said Feast of All-Saints next, &c. and before any estate or assurance by her made of the said Mes∣suages, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, and other the Pre∣misses, with their appurtenances, to the said J. and J. and their heirs, or the survivor of them and his heirs, according to the intent and true meaning aforesaid, That then she the said Dame A. and her heirs, and all and every other person and persons, and their heirs, having any estate of interest, or inheritance, in or to the said lands, tenements, & other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, or in or to any part or parcell thereof, shall immediatly from and after the last instant, of the third day next before the day of the death of the said Dame A. for the considerations aforesaid, stand and be seised, of and in the said Messuages, lands, tenements, mea∣dows, pastures, woods, under-woods, rents, reversions, services, and hereditaments, and of and in all and singular other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, to the severall uses, intents, behoofs, pur∣poses and limitations before in these presents expressed and limited under such provisoes, determinations and conditions, and in such manner and form as are before in these presents mentioned and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose, And that if the said Dame A. do happen to live untill the said Feast of, &c. next, &c. And that before the same day, there be no estate or as∣surance by her made of the said Messuage, lands, tenements and hereditaments, and other the Premisses, with the appurtenances, to the said J. and J. and their heirs, or to the survivor of them and his heirs, according to the true intent and meaning aforesaid, That then and from thenceforth for ever, for the considerations afore∣said, the said Dame A. and her heirs, and all and every other person & persons, and their heirs, having, or which then shall have any estate or interest of inheritance, in or to the Premisses, with their appurtenances, or in or to any part or parcell thereof, shall from thenceforth for ever, for the considerations aforesaid, stand and be seised of and in the said Messuage, lands, tenements and
hereditaments, and of, and in all and singular other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, to their severall uses, intens, be∣hoofs, purposes, and limitations before, in and by these presents, expressed under such provisoes, determinations and conditions, and in such manner and form as are before in these presents mentioned and declared, and to none other use, intent, or purpose.Expressing of conveyances to be the uses a∣foresaid. And it is further covenanted and agreed between the said parties to these presents, That all and every estates, assurances, and conveyan∣ces whatsoever, at any time hereafter to be made by the said Dame A. to the said I. and I. and their heirs, or to the survivor of them and his heirs, of the said lands, tenements, hereditaments, and other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, or of any parcell thereof, shall be to the severall uses, interrests, purposes and limitations before in these presents expressed under such provisoes, determinations, limitations, and conditions, as are before in these presents mentioned and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose. In witnesse, &c. A signification to defeit uses created in land, accord∣ing to a Proviso, &c. TO all to whom this present Writing indented shall come X. H. Esq sendeth greeting in our Lord God everlasting, Whereas Sir J. S. of O. in the County of N. Knight, by the assents, consents and agreements of Sir. R. C. Knight, I. S. Esquire son and heir ap∣parent of the said Sir I. S. and T. S. another of the sons of the said Sir I. S. as well at the contemplation of our soveraign Lady, the Queens Majesty, and by the mediation of the Right honourable W. Lord B. Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter. T. Earl of S. and Knight of the said most noble Order of the Garter, And R. Earl of L. of the same most noble Order of the Garter, Knight, by Indenture quadripertite, bearing date, &c. for and in consideration of the summe of two hundred marks of lawfull, &c. ordered and appointed by the said Earl of S. and Earl of L. to be paid by the said X. H. to the said Sir I. S. and for and in considera∣tion of certain Messuages, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, sci∣tuate, lying and being in M. B. and N. in the said County, then being of the cleer usuall yearly rent of seven pounds 16 shillings and one penic, And by the said Indenture quadripertite, conveyed
and assured by the said X: H: unto the said Sir I: S. and to his heirs and assigns, to his and their own uses, and for divers other good considerations in the same Indenture specified; hath bargained and sold, given and granted unto the said X. H. and to his Heires and Assignes for ever, to the use of the said X. and of his Heires and Assignes for ever, certain Lands and Tenements supposed to be one Yard-land and a half with the appurtenances, in H. aforesaid, then or late before, being in the tenure or occu∣pation of the said X. H. or of his assigns, and also all other those Lands Tenements and Hereditaments with the appurtenances in H. and C. in the said County, and in either of them, then or late before, being in the tenure or occupation of the said X. or of his assignes, which the same Sir J. S. at any time theretofore had or was seised of: and also one Messuage and certain Lands supposed to be one half Yard-land, be it more or lesse, with the appurtenan∣ces in C. aforesaid, then or late before, being in the tenure or occupation of R. T. or of his Assignes: and also three parts of one Messuage, or Farme-place of one Dove house, one. Garden, one Close, and of two yard lands with the appurtenances in H. afore∣said, then or late before, being in the tenure or occupation of one H. P. or of his assignes: And also three parts of one Messuage, &c. and one other Messuage, &c. And all other those Lands Te∣nements and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances in H. afore∣said, which the said Sir J. S. at any time then to fore had or was seised of, scituate, lying or being in H. aforesaid: And also all those Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, with all and singular their appurtenances, scituate, lying, or being in C: aforesaid, and then or late before being in the tenure or occupa∣tion of the said X. H. and of R: T: or of either of them, or of the as∣signe or assignes of them or either of them, which the said Sir I. S: at any time then to fore had or was seised of, scituate, lying, and being in G. aforesaid: All which said Premisses in H: and C: a∣foresaid, then were of the usuall cleer yearely rent of fifty seven pounds thirteen shillings. And whereas the said Sir I: S: by the said Indenture quadripartite, hath covenanted, granted, and a∣greed for himself, his Heires Executors and administrators, to and with the said X: H: his Heires and assignes, that if he the said X. H. his Heires or assignes, or any of them, at any time then af∣ter, should attempt or go about to procure, get, or obtaine any further assurance of the foresaid Lands Tenements and other the
Premisses in H. and C. aforesaid,Act of Par∣liament. or any parcell there∣of to be assured or conveyed by any Act of Parliament in any Session or Sessions of the two next Sessions of Parliament then next to be holden, to be had or made to the said X. H his Heires and assignes, against the said Sir J. his Heires and assigns, and every of them, and against all such other person or persons and their Heires, as should or might have, claime, or demand, any Estate or Estates, right, title, use, or interest of, in, to, or out of the premisses in H: or C: aforesaid, or of, in, to, or out of any part, or parcell of the same, by, from, or under he said Sir J. or by reason or means of any act or acts, thing or things, assurance, or assurances then to fore had, made, or done by the said Sir I. or by any other person or persons, by his assent, means, or procurement: That then he the said Sir I. S. I. S. the Son and T: S. the Son, and every of them, shall all as much as they, or any of them conveni∣ently could or might consent unto, and give their furtherance, for the further and better assurance and sure making of the Premisses in H: and C: aforesaid, and every part and parcell of the same, un∣to the said X. his Heires and assignes, to the use of the same X and of his Heires and assignes, to be had and made by Act of Parlia∣ment as is aforesaid, as in and by the said Indenture amongst di∣vers other things therein contained, more plainely and at large it doth and may appeare. And further, whereas the said X. H. by his Indenture quadripartite,Recitall of an Indenture to raise Ʋses. bearing date, &c. made between the said X: H: by the name of X: H: Esquire, Captaine of the Guard of our said Soveraign Lady the Queen, attendant upon her royall Person on the first part, and Sir W: M: Knight, &c. on the second part, F: S: Esquire, on the third part, and W: D: Gent. on the fourth part,Cosideration of payment of debts owing. hath for and in consideration of the true payment of such debts as the said X. did then owe, or at the time of his de∣cease should owe either unto our said Soveraigne Lady the Queens Majesty, or to her Highnesse Heires and Successors,Covenant that the parties to whom the assu∣rance is made shall stand sei∣sed of the Man∣nors, &c. or to any other person or persons: And for divers other good causes and considerations in and by the said Indenture at large set forth specified and declared, hath for him and his Heires covenanted, granted, and agreed, to and with the said Sir W: M: I: S: and W: D: and their Heires Executors and admi∣nistrators,
that he the said X. his Heires and assignes, and all and every other person and persons, and their heires and assignes, which then stood and were seised, or which then after should stand or be seised, of or in the Mannor of H: with the appurtenances, in the County of N: and of and in the Scites and Demesnes of the late dissolved Monastery in S. in the said County of N. and of and in all those Woods, under Woods, and Grounds called C. Wood, in the said County of N. and of and in the Man∣nor of B: with the appurtenances, in the County of S: and of and in the Scite and Demesnes of the late Monastery of B: in the said County of S, and of and in all those two Parks in the County of W: commonly called C: Parks, whereof the one is called the H: Park, and the other the W: Park, and of and in the Mannor of S. in the said County of W, with the appurtenances, and of and in the Advowson of the Church of S. aforesaid, and of and in all the Castle and Mannor of C: with the appurtenances, in the Isle of P: in the County of D: and the advowson of the Church of C. Castle with the Chappell of K. thereunto annexed, in the said Coun∣ty of D: and of and in all other the Mannors Messuages Lands Te∣nements Reversions Services Woods under-woods, Liberties, Franchises Jurisdictions and Hereditaments of the said X. in H. S: C: B: C: S: C: and the Isle of P. in the Counties of N: S: W: and D: or any of them,And all other Lands, &c. and of and in all or any other the Mannors Messuages Mills Orchards Gardens Lands Tenements Meadowes Leasures Pastures Woods under Woods Rents Reversions Services Advowsons Parsonages Tithes Waters Fishings Courts Liberties Jurisdictions Profits Commodities and Hereditamens whatsoever, of the said X. H. with all and singular their appurtenances scituate, lying, or being in the said County of, &c. or any of them, or else∣where within the Realme of E: of or in the which Mannors Lands Tenements and other the Premisses, the said X: H. then had any Estate of Inheritance in Feesimple in Possession Reversion or Re∣mainder, should from thenceforth stand and be sei∣sed thereof,To Ʋses. and of every part and parcell thereof, to such use & uses as be in and by the said Inden∣ture quadripartite last recited, set forth, specifi∣ed, and declared,Proviso to de∣feat the same by sealing and recording a Writing. as in and by the same Inden∣ture it doth and may at large appeare, with one Proviso in the same Indenture contained, whereby it is provided, covenanted, granted, concluded
condiscended and agreed between the said parties to these pre∣sents, for them and their Heires; that if the said X. H: at any time then after during his life, by his writing subscribed with his hand and sealed with his Seale, and enrolled in any of the Courts of Record of the Queens Highnesse, her Heires or Succes∣sors, should signifie or declare that his will and pleasure should be that the uses and behoofs limitted or expressed in those presents, should be void and of none effect, as touching or concerning all the said Mannors Lands Tenements Hereditaments and other the Premisses, or any part or parcell thereof, that then all the uses behoofes, intents, estates, and limitations con∣veyed,Uses. raised or contained by or in those presents touching or concerning all the said Mannors Lands Tenem. and Hered. & other the prem. whereof, or in the which the uses, intents, or behoofs limited or expressed, in those presents should be so sig∣nified or declared to be void and of none effect, or touching or concerning any part or parcell of the same premisses, whereof or in the which the uses, intents, or behoofs limited or expressed in those presents should be so signified or declared to be void and of none effect,Void. should from thenceforth be utterly void and of none effect, and that then all and every person and persons, and their heires, which then stood, or were seised, or which then after should stand or be seised of or in the said Mannors Lands Tenements Hereditaments and other the premisses, or of or in any part, parcell, or member of the same, should from thenceforth stand and be seised of and in the same premisses, o of or in the which uses, intents, or behoofs limited or expressed in those presents, should be so signified, or declared to be void and of none effect, or of or in such part or parcell of the same premisses,Seised to the use of X: H. of or in the which uses, behoofes, or intents limited or ex∣pressed in those presents, should, &c. to the use and behoof of the said X. H. and of his heires and assignes forever, and to no other use, intent, or purpose: And that then and from thenceforth it should and might be lawfull to and for the said X: H: and his heires, into the said Mannors Lands Tenements and He∣reditaments, and other the premisses, whereof or in the which the uses, intents, or behoofes, limited or expressed in those pre∣sents, should be so signified or declared to be, &c. or into such part, parcell,Re-have. or member of the pre∣misses, whereof or in which, &c. should be, &c. to
re-enter, and the same to rehave and enjoy, as in his or their for∣mer estate or estates, the said Indenture or any limitation of use in the same, or any clause, sentence, article, or agreement therein contained, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding,Pro ut Sciatis. as in and by the said Indenture more plainly may appeare. Know yee me the said X. H. for and to the intent to get and obtaine further and better assurance of the aforesaid Lands Tenements and other the premis∣ses in H. and C. or in either of them to me the said X. mine heires and assignes, to the use of me the said X. and of mine heires and assignes, against the said Sir J: S: his Heires and assignes, and e∣very of them, and against all such other person and persons, and their heires, as shall or may have claime or demand any estate or estates, right, title, or interest, of, in, to, or out of the premisses in H. and C. aforesaid, by the said Sir J. to me bargained and sold, or of, in, to, or out of any part or parcell of the same, by, from, or under the said Sir J: S: or by reason or meanes of any act or acts, thing or things, assurance or assurances heretofore had made, or done by the said Sir J: or by any other person or persons, by his assent, meanes, or procurement to be had and made by Act of Parliament in the next Session of Parliament to be holden, according to the true intent and meaning of the aforementioned Covenant in the said former recited Indenture quadripartite, a∣mongst other things contained.Signification to avoid, &c. And for and up∣on divers other considerations me moving, to have signified and declared by this my present Deed indented, subscribed with my hand and sealed with my Seale, which I mean shall be inrolled in one of the Courts of Record of the Queens Highnesse, her Heires or Succes∣sors, do signifie, pronounce, and declare, that my whole mind, full meaning, intent, wil, and pleasure is, that the uses, behoofs, intents, estates, and limitations conveyed, raised, contained, limited, or expressed by or in the said Indenture quadripartite, bearing date, &c. for, touching, or concerning only the said Lands Tenem. and other Hereditaments in H. and C. aforesaid, and by the said for∣mer Indenture quadripartite to me, mine heires and assignes, bargained and sold by the said Sir I: S: shall from henceforth be void and of none effect. And that I the said X. and mine heires and all and every other person or persons, and their heires which now stand or be seised, or which hereafter shall stand or be seised, of or in the said Lands Tenements and hereditaments in H. and C:
aforesaid, and by the said Sir I. to me and mine heires, by the said former recited Indenture quadripartite, bargained and sold as is aforesaid, or of or in any part or parcell of the same, shall from henceforth stand and be seised of and in the same to the use and behoof of me the said X. H. and of mine heires and assignes for ever, and to none other use, intent, or purpose. The said last recited Indenture quadripartite,Notwithstand∣ing, &c. or any limitation of use in the same, or any clause, sentence, covenant, or agreement therein contained, or any other matter, cause or thing whatsoever, to the contrary thereof in any notwithstanding. In witnesse, &c. A payment of a summe of money to the intent to alter uses raised in land, &c. THis Writing indented, Witnesseth, That I, Dame A: L: of L. widow, late the wife of Sir T. L. Knight, late Alderman of the city of L aforesaid deceased, Have on the day of the date here∣of, paid unto the hands of T. H. now Treasurer of the Hospitall of, &c. within the said city of L. to the use of Sir J. L. Knight, now Lord Maior of the same city of L. the summe of ten shillings of, &c. for the behoof and and relief of the poor children of the said Hospitall of, &c. within the said city of L. for the in∣tent and purpose to alter all the uses limited, appointed, raised, or made by one pair of Indentures, bearing date, &c. made betwixt me the said Dame A. on the one part, And Sir W. C. Knight, I. S. one of her Majesties Justices of her Pleas before her Highnesse, to be holden, and T. B. Esquire, on the other part, of and in those two Messuages, &c. and of and in all that, &c. and of and in, &c. and of and in all other the Messuages, lands, tenements, or he∣reditaments, mentioned or specified in the said former Indentures above expressed in these presents. And I the said Dame A. L. do by these presents, revoke adnull, make frustrate, and avoid all and singular use and uses, limitations of use and uses, and estates by me at any time or times heretofore created, limited, raised, or made, of or in the Premisses, or any part or parcell thereof by the said former Indent. above recited, or otherwise, other then such as have been created, limited, raised, or made to the use of me the said Dame A. and of mine heirs and assignes for ever, and other then lease or grant, leases or grants by me made of the Premisses, or of
any part thereof for term of life, lives, or years; So as now from henceforth, I the said Dame A. and all other person and persons, seised of any estate of inheritance, of or in the Premisses, or any part thereof, and of every part thereof stand and be seised to the use of me the said Dame A. and of mine heirs and assignes for ever, and to none other use, intent, or purpose; The said former Indenture, or any former act or thing by me the said Dame A. here∣tofore done, caused, procured, or agreed unto to the contrary not∣withstanding. And I the said T. H. do knowledge and confesse by these presents, That the said Dame A. did pay unto me the said T. H. the sum of ten shillings, and that I had and received the same of the said Dame A. in maner and form aforesaid. In witness whereof, we the said Dame A. and T. H. to both parts of this present Writings indented, have set our seals. Given, &c. An Indenture leading the use of a fine after the fine knowledged. THis Indenture, &c. Between W. H. citizen, and G. of L. on the one part, And R. W. citizen and G. of L. on the other part, Witnesseth, that whereas the said W. H. heretofore by his Indenture dated, &c. for the consideration therein mentioned, did give, grant, bargain, and sell to the said R. and to his heirs and and assignes, for the onely use of the said R. and of his heirs and assignes for ever, all that Messuage or tenement, with the appur∣tenances, scituate in P. in the Parish of S. in the County of M. which sometimes was parcell of the possessions of, &c. And also two gardens, &c. And the reversion and reversions, &c. And where by the said former Indentures, the said W. did covenant to and with the said R. That he the said W. and A. then yet his wife before the last day of Easter Term then next following, should knowledge and levie in due form of Law, one fine, with Proclamations of all and singular the Premisses, to the said R. and his heires, according to the common and usuall order of fines before the Justices of our Soveraigne Lord the King, of his Common bench at Westminster, by the name of, &c. As by the said former Indentures more at large, may and will appear, which said fine, by assent of the said parties, was forborn, and not levied untill the morrow after the Feast of the holy Trinity now last past, at which time the fine aforesaid hath been had and levied by the said W. and A. his wife,
in manner and form aforesaid; And now the said W. for him and his heirs, And the said R. for him, his heirs and assignes, have co∣venanted and agreed together, And now do covenant, grant and agree together by these presents, And by the same presents do cleerly and plainly expresse and declare, That the said fine of the Premisses, levied by the said W. and A. his wife, to the said R. and his heirs, as aforesaid, was so had and levied to the use of the said R. and of his heirs and assignes, And was alwaies meant and in∣tended to be, And is meant and intended to be, And from hence∣forth for ever shall be and be deemed & taken to be, to and for the use and behoof of the said R. and of his heirs and assignes for ever, and to none other use or uses, intent or purposes whatsoever. In witnesse, &c. An Indenture of a Joynture before Marriage. THis Indenture, &c. Between, &c. In consideration of the said intended marriage, and in pursuance and part of the per∣formance of certain Articles, &c. And for the better provision of maintenance for her, the said C. and in part of her Joynture of the lands and tenements of the said R. he the said R. G. hath demised, granted, bargained, sold, ser, and let to farm; And by these pre∣sents doth, &c. unto the said B. All these Mess. &c. And the re∣version and reversions, remainder and remainders thereof, and of every part thereof, with the appurtenance. To have and to hold unto the said B. and C. &c. and the survivour of them, and his heirs, from the day of the date hereof for and during all the time and term of one hundred years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be compleat and ended, To the uses, behoofs, intents and pur∣poses herein expressed, mentioned and declared, And to no other use, behoof, intent or purpose in any wise; That is to say, That the aforesaid H. B. and A. B. and their heires, shall stand and be pos∣sessed of all and singular the Premisses, to the onely use and be∣hoof of the said R. G. and his assignes, during so many years of the foresaid term as shall expire in his life time, and immediately after his decease, to the onely use and behoof of the aforesaid his intended wife and her assignes, during so many years of the said term as shall expire in her life time, and after her decease, then to the onely use of the first son of the said R. upon the body of the said C. to be begotten, and the heires of his body, during all the then remaining time of the term aforesaid. And for default of such issue, to the second, third, and fourth sons of the said R.
upon the body of the said C. to be begotten, and the heirs of their bodies successively: And for default of such heirs males, then to the use of the first daughter of the said R. on the body of the said C. to be begotten, and the heirs of her body, And so to their second, &c. An Indenture for the acknowledging and leading the use of a fine to the use of the Conizors. THis Indenture, &c. Between W: B: of S. in the County of S. yeoman, and J: his wife, one of the daughters and heires of the said J: L. late of S. aforesaid deceased, on the one part, And J: M: of L. Cordwainer, and W: F: of the same city, Cloth-worker on the other part, Witnesseth, that for divers good and especiall causes and considerations, it is covenanted and agreed between the said parties, That the said W: B: and J: his wife, be∣fore the Feast of All Saints next coming, in due form, and accord∣ing to the course of the Laws of this Realm, shall levie one fine before the Kings Majesties Justices of his Common bench at West∣minster, of one tenement, &c. All which Premisses, come to the part of the said J: upon the division made between her and J. her sister, the other daughter, and co-heir of the said J: L: And that by the same fine they shall expresse all and singular the Pre∣misses by the name of two Messuages, two Cottages, two Gardens, twenty acres of land, four acres of meadow, and ten acres of pasture, with their appurtenences in S: and W: in the County of S. And also by the same fine, shal knowledge all and singular the Pre∣misses, to be the right of the said J: M: as those which the said I. M. and W. F. then shall have of the gift and grant of the said W: B: and I: his wife, And the same then by the said fine, shall remise and quite claime from them and their heires, to the said I: M: and W: F: and the heires of the said I: M: for ever. And moreover, that the said W: B: and I: his wife, by the same fine shall grant, for them and the heires of the said I: that they shall warrant the said tenements, with the appurtenances to the said I: M: and W: F: and to the heirs of the said I: M: against them the said W: B. and I. and the heires of the said I. for ever.The Use. And it is covented, concluded and agreed, between the said parties, to these presents, and every of them, for themselves and their heirs, do covenant and agree
with the other of them, and their heires, and the heires of every of them by these presents, That the said fine so to be levied of the said Messuage, tenements, cottages, and other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, as aforesaid shall be, and by these presents is fully and plainy expressed, agreed and declared to be to the uses and intents hereafter in these Indentures expressed, and not to any other use or uses, intent or intents whatsoever, That is to say, to the onely use and behoof of the said W. B. and J: his wife, and of the heirs of the survivor, of the same W. B. and I. for ever. In witnesse, &c. An Indenture for knowledging a Recovery to sundry uses, with provision that the Estate Taile be not altered. THis Indenture Tripartite made, &c. Between I. F. of B. in the County of B. Esqire, on the one part, And the right wor∣shipfull Sir I. M. Knight, I. H. and H. C. Esquires, on that other part, And the right worshipfull R C. of S. in the County of S. Esquire, and I. N. and M. F. Gent. on the third part, Witnesseth, that for divers reasonable causes and considerations, the said I. F. especially moving, and also upon great trust and confidence by him reposed in the said Sir I. M. J. H. H. C. R. C. J. N. & M. F. It is covenanted, granted, condescended and agreed, between the said J. E. Sir J. M. &c. and every of them the said parties, for his and their part, doth severally covenant and grant, to and with other, in manner and form following, that is to say, That he the said J. F. before the Feast of St. Andrew. the Apostle next, &c. shall permit and suffer the said Sir J. M. J H. H. C &c. an M. F. to recover against him the said J F. by Writ of Entry Sur dissesin in the post, with voucher or vouchers over, according to the order and of course of common Recoveries before the Kings Justices of Common Plees at Westminster, the Mannors of S. and N. lying and being in the County of K. and all lands, tene∣ments, and hereditaments, with the appurtenances, being part, parcell or member of the same, or any part thereof, or reputed, taken, demised, or occupyed, as part, parcell, or members of the said Mannors, or either of them, and all other his Lands Tene∣ments, and Hereditaments in the said County of K by the names of the Mannors of : and M: with the appurtenances, one Barne
two thousand acres of Land, a thousand acres of Meadow, a thou∣sand acres of Pastures, a thousand acres of Fresh-marsh, a thousand acres of Salt-marsh, and ten pounds of quit Rent with the appur∣tenances in S: N: L: M: and O: in the said County of K: which said recovery the said J: F: also covenanteth, promiseth, and granreth to suffer to be executed by a Writ of Habere facias seisi∣nam, according to the common Lawes. And it is further covenan∣ted, granted, condiscended, and fully agreed between the said par∣ties: And the said Sir I: M: I: H: &c. for them and every of them their Heires and Executors, and the Heires and Executors of every of them, do covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said J: F: his Heires Executors and assignes, and every of them by these presents, that as well the said Sir J: M: Knight, J: H. &c. and their Heires, immediatly after such recovery so had, made, and executed, shall stand and be seised of and in the said Mannors, and all and singular other the premisses with the appur∣tenances: As also the said recovery shall be to the onely uses, in∣tents, and meaninings hereafter in these presents expressed and de∣clared, and to none other uses, behoofs, or intents & meanings: That is to say, of, and in as much of the premisses with the appurtenances as now be, or late were in the severall tenures or occupations of W. G. and C: S: and of all such quit rents as one F. S. of R. for him∣self, doth pay unto the said J. F. and his heirs, in the County of K.The Uses, &c. To the onely use of M. D. widow, mother of the said J. F. and her assignes, for term of her naturall life; And after the decease of the said M. to the use of the said I. F. for term of his life, without impeachment of wast, And after the decease of the said I. F. then to the use of the executors of the last Will and Testament of the said I: F: for term of six years immediately after his decease, if it fortune the said I. F.Toward the performce of a Will. to survive the said M. for and toward the performance of the last Will and Testament of the said I: F: And if it fortune the said J. F. to decease and die, leaving the said M. then after the decease of the said M: to the use of the Excutors of the said J. for and during the term of six years next after the de∣cease of the said M: for and toward the performance of the said last Will and Testament of the said J: F: And after the decease of the said J: and M: and after the end of the said six years, then to the use of Dame J now wife of the said J: F: and late wife of Sir F. F. Knight, deceased, for term of the life of the said Dame J.
And after the decease of the said Dame J. and also after the de∣cease of the said M. and J F. and after the end of the said six years, then to the use of the heirs males of the body of the said J. begotten upon the body of the said Dame J: and the heires males of the body of the said heires males lawfuly begotten,An use to cer∣tain heirs maes as long as they go not about to discontinue the estate hereby li∣mited. as long as the said heirs males, or any of them shall not alien, disconti∣nue, suffer any recovery, knowledge or levie any fine, or do or suffer any to be done, any other act or acts whereby the Premisses, or any part there∣of shall be discontinued, altered or changed from the estate or interest aforesaid, And if it shall happen any of the heirs males of the body of the said J: F:If these heires go about to dis∣continue the e∣state, then this Recovery to be to the use of o∣ther persons till they do the like. to be begotten upon the body of the said J. to alien, discontinue, suffer any recovery, knowledge or levie any fine, or do or suffer to be done any act or acts, whereby the Premisses, or any part or parcell thereof shall be discontinued, altered, or changed from the estate or interest, beforementioned, That then as well the said Sir J: M: H: &c. and their heirs, and the sur∣vivor and survivors of them, and the heirs of the survivors of them shall stand and be seised, And also the said Recovery of the Pre∣misses last before specified, shall be to the onely use and behoof of B: F: son and heir apparent of the said I: F: and the heirs of his body lawfully begoten, as long as the said B: F: shall not alien, &c. or do any other act or acts, &c. And if it shall happen the said B F. or the heirs males of the body of the said B: to alien, Then the Recovery to be to the use of B. F: &c. and so divers other re∣mainders over every remainder, being bound in form prelimi∣ted. And it is further covenanted, granted, condiscended and agreed between the said parties to these presents, And the said Sir J: M: J: H: &c. and every of the said parties, for them and every of them, their heirs and executors, and the heirs and executors of every one of them, Do covenant and grant, to and with the said J: F: his heires, executors and assignes, and every of them, by these presents, That as well the said Sir J: M: &c. and their heires, and the survivor and survivors of them and their heirs, shall stand and be seised of and in all the residue of the said Mannors, lands, te∣nements, and all and singular other the Premisses, with the purtenances, as also the said Recovery shall be to the only us
the said J: F: and Dame J: his wife, and their assignes, for term of their lives, and life of the longest liver of them, without impeach∣ment of wast, during the life of the said J: F: And after the de∣cease of the said J: and Dame J: then to the use of the heires males of the said J: begotten upon the body of the said Dame J: and the heirs males of the body of the said heirs males lawfully begotten, as long as the said heirs males, of any of them shall not alien, &c. (And so divers remainders, over to divers sundry per∣sons, each remainder bound in form prelimited) And it is further covenanted, condiscended, and agreed, between the said parties to these presents, That the costs and charges of the said Recovery shall be born and paid by the said J: F: his Executors, or Ad∣ministrators. In witnesse, &c. An Indenture to knowledge severall Recoveries of land in severall Counties to sundry uses. IT is now covenanted, granted, promised, concluded and agreed, by and between the said parties, by these presents, in manner and form following, That is to say, That the said Sir T: C: and Lady J. his wife, shall before the Feast of Pentecost next ensuing the date hereof, suffer the said T. F. and T. W. to pursue three of the Kings and Queens severall Writs of Entries Sur disseisin in the Post against the said Sir T. C. and Lady I. his wife, before the Kings and Queens Majesties Justices of the Common Pleas at West∣minster, By one of which said severall Writs of Entry, the said T. F. and T. W. shall demand against the said Sir T. & J. all and singular the said Mannors, Messuages, lands, tenements, rents, reversions and hereditaments, with the appurtenances, in the said County of Y. by the name of the Mannors of St. O. &c. sixty Meeses, thirty Cottages, &c. And by one other of the said Writs of Entry, the said T. and T. shall demand against the said Sir T. and I. all and singular the said Mannors, &c. and other the Premisses in the County of the City of Y. by the name of the Mannor of S. with the appurtenances, and of three Messuages, &c. And by the said third Writ of Entry, the said T. and T. shall demand against the said, &c. all and singular the said Messuage, and other the Pre∣misses, with their appurtenances in the said County of M by the e of ten Meeses, &c. The foresaid three severall Writs of Entry, very of them to be returnable before the Kings and Queens
Majesties, And that at the day of the returne of every of the said severall Writs of Entry, the said Sir T. and J. shall appear there∣unto, and after Declaration severally made upon every of the said severall Writs of Entry by the said T. F. and : W: the said Sir T. and Lady J. after defence by them made thereunto shall vouch to warranty the said T. L. of C. who shall then be ready personally, or by his lawfull Attorney, to enter into warranty, and shall war∣rant the same, And the said T. L. of C. after Declaration made by the said T: F: and T: W: against him, shall vouch to warranty the common vouchee, the which shall then be ready personally to enter into the warranty, And shall warrant the same; And that after Declaration made by the said T. F. and T. W. against the said common vouchee, the same common vouchee after severall defences by him made, shall traverse the Disseisin supposed by the said severall Writs of Entry and Declaration, whereunto the said T. F. and T: W: shall imparle after which imparlance granted the said T. F and T: W: shal come again into the same Court, And the said common vouchee shall then make default, and depart in de∣spite of the Court, Whereupon the said T: F: and T: W: shall have judgement to recover seisin of the said Mannors, &c. against the said Sir T and J: And the same Sir T: C: to recover over in value against the said T: L: of C. And the said T. L. to have judgement to recover over in value against the said common vouchee; And the same common vouchee to be amercied. And also it is concluded and agreed between the said parties to these presets, That the said T. L: of C: shall suffer the said T: F: and T: W: to pursue the Kings and Queens Writ of Right patent, against the said T: L: to be returnable and returned before the Maior, Aldermen and She∣riffs of the city of L. in the Court of the Hustings of the same city of L. according to the Laws and customes of the same city; By which Writ of Right, the said T: F: and T: W: shall demand against the said T: L. of C. all the said Messuage, lands, tene∣ments, and other the Premisses, with their appurtenances in the said city of L. by the name of two Messuages, and two gardens, with their appurtenances, in the Parish of St. P. in the said city of L. And that at the day of the return of the same Writ the said T: E: of C. shall appear thereunto, and after Declaration there∣upon made, the said T: L: after such time as he shall have made defence thereto, shall vouch to warranty the common vouchee therewith shall be then and there ready to enter into warranty, and shall warrant the same, And after that Declaration ther
against him made the same vouchee, after defence by him made shall joyn the mise upon the meer right; That is to say, that the said common vouchee hath more right to hold the same two Messuages, and two gardens, with their appurtenances, in manner and form as he holdeth the same, Then the said T: F: and T: W: have to demand the same, whereupon the said T: F: and T: W: shall imparle, after which imparlance the said T. F. and T. W. shall come again into the said Court, And the said common vouchee shall then make default, and shall depart in despite of the same Court, Whereupon the said T: and T: shall have no judgement according to the Laws and customes of the said city to recover seisin of the said two Messuages, and two gardens, against the said T. L. and the said T. L. to take judgement to re∣cover over in value against the said common vouchee to be amer∣cied: And it is concluded, covenanted, granted, and agreed by these presents, betwixt all the said parties, to these presents, That as well all and every the said recoveries to be had, pursued, and executed in manner and form aforesaid; As also all and every other Recovery and recoveries hereafter to be had of the same Premisses, or any other parcell thereof, by or against the said Sir T: and Dame J. with a vouchee over of the said T: L: of C. afore∣said, and every Fine and fines, Deed and Deeds, enrolled, and all and every other assurance, conveyance, and assurances hereafter to be had, made, or suffered of the Premisses, or any part thereof, between the said parties, to these present Indentures, or from one of them to another, or by or from all the said parties, to any other person or persons, at all and every time, from time to time here∣after, shall be to the onely uses hereafter in these presents men∣tioned, And that the said persons mentioned in these present In∣dentures, and their heires, and all and every other person end per∣sons, that shall be seised and taken to be seised of the Premisses, and every parcell thereof by vertue of the said recoveries, fines, and as∣surances, shall be seised to the uses hereafter expressed; That is to say, the said recoveries, and other assurances to be suffered, had, made and extended of the Mannors, lands, tenements, reversions, services, and hereditaments, and all other the Premisses with the appurtenances, in the said County of Y. the city of Y. and County of M. shall be to the onely use and behoof of the said Lady J. C. and of the heires of the body of the said Lady, J. by the said Sir T. L. Knight, deceased, her late husband, law∣fully begotten. And if it happen the said Lady J. C. to die
without issue of her body, of her said late husband lawfully be∣gotten, Then to the onely use of the said T. L. of C. his heirs and assignes for evermore. And the said Recoveries and other Estates and Assurances hereafter to be suffered, had, made and executed of the said two Messuages, and two Gardens, with their appurtenances in the said city of L. shall be to the onely use and behoof of the said Dame J. C. her heires and assignes for evermore. In witnesse, &c. An Indenture to lead the use of a Recovery. THis Indenture, &c. Between J. R. of L. in the County of E. Esquire, and C. R. son of the said J. R. on the one part, And T. R. and A. R. on the other part, Witnesseth, that whereas the said J. R. standeth seised in his Demesne as of an Estate of inheritance, or of Freehold, of and in divers Mes∣suages, with their appurtenances, scituate, lying and being with∣in the city of L. hereafter mentioned, That is to say, of, and in five messuages in L. in the Parish, &c. and of and in, &c. It it now covenanted, granted, and agreed, by and between the said parties, to these presents, and their heires, That the said Messuages, and all commodities, and easements to the same be∣longing, with the appurtenances whatsoevr, and every part and parcell thereof, scituate, lying and being within the said city of L. Whereof the said J. R. is seised of any estate of inheritance, or of freehold by the severall names of, &c. with the appurte∣nances in the city of L. before the Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle next ensuing the date hereof, shall be recovered by a Writ of Entrie Sur deseisin in le past, to be pursued of the said Messuage, and other the Premisses, with their appurtenances, by the said T. and A. R. or the survivor of them, against the said J. R. whereunto the said J. R. shall appear, and vouch to warranty the said C. R. who shall likewise appear and enter into the warranty, and vouch over the common vouchee, who shall enter into a warranty, and after imparlance to a day make departure in despite of the Court, to the end a perfect recove∣ry may be had of the Premisses, with such vouchers as is afore∣said, according to the due course of and order Recoveries at the Common Law, which said Recovery shall be in due form of law executed. And after the execution thereof, it is cove∣nanted,
granted, concluded, condiscended, and fully agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents, and their heires, That the said T: R: and A. and their heires, and the heires of every of them, shall stand and be seised of the said Messu∣age, &c. and every part and parcell thereof to be recovered in form aforesaid, by what name or names, or in what manner soever the same shall be recovered to the onely use and be∣hoof of the said J. R. and his heirs for ever. In witnesse, &c.
THE TABLE. ARticles of agreement upon a Marriage, fol. 1 Assignment of a License to transport Wooll, for satisfaction of a debt due to the As∣signee, with Covenant, that if the Assinee levie not his debt by a day, the Assignor will pay it. 137 B. BIll of Credit, 5 Bill in Chancery to examine Witnesses in perpetuam rei memoriam, 6 Bill of Exchange, 7 C. CHarter-partie, with Covenants large, 7 CHarter-party large, 12 Charter-party-passed, 16 Another Charter-party, 18 See more in Partners. Conditions. For delivering Tynne, 22
For delivering Wooll, ibid. For paying an Annuity, 23 To marry the Obligee upon warning, ibid. Not to become Suretie without license, 24 For appearing at a day and place to answer, &c. ib. For letting the Obligee have the refusall, ib. For the good Service of a man, 25 For a Servants true Service and accounting, ibid. That an Apprentice shall not damage his Master, 26 For leaving an Estate to a Wife, ib. For paying a summ of money, or delivering a Chain, 27 Between Executors for each answering a moyety of what shall be recovered for their Testators Acts. ib. For redelivering Letters Pattents borrowed, 28 For sealing a generall Acquittance, ibid. For paying such summs as are or shall be exprest in a Book, this is in nature of a standing Counter-security between a Debtor and his Surety, 29 For paying Legacies according to a Will, 30 For levying a Wife a certain summe, and what more her Thirds shall amount to by the custome, 31 For working a certain time for certain Wages, 32 That the husband shall not sell the wives goods, but leave them discharged of Incumbrances done by him, 33 To make one free at a certain time, 34 For paying the Obligee what shall be recovered against him for being Bail to the Obligor, ibid. For saving one harmlesse for beeng bail, 41 42 Not to become Surety, 35 Condition on a Surrender, 36 For making a Joynture paying a summe of money at a day, and leaving another at death, 37 For collecting duties, and being accountable by an Officer to a Company, 39
For giving the Obligee Counter-security by a day, 40 For saving one harmlesse being bound in the Chamber of London, 41 Where two are bound, if they bail, then to pay the money within a month, 42 For making good of Plate delivered to a Goldsmith, if it be not redelivered, 43 For saving harmlesse an Executor for paying a Childs Legacy to the Father, ibid. For paying money if the Obligee procure a Lease, 44 To convey a Lease, or pay a summe by a day, 45 For granting an Annuity by a day, 47 That the Obligee shall have the refusall, if the Obligor sell his house, ibid. For returning money taken up at Antwerpe by rechange to London, 48 On a Letter of Attorney for receit of debts, 49 For leaving a wife foure hundred pounds in money or goods if she survive, 50 That a man and his wife shall bring up Children and pay their Portions, 51 Between Co sureties, each for paying half the debt, ib. To pay money taken up by Exchange upon rechange thereof at London, 52 To make assurance of Copyhold-Lands Rent free▪ ibid. For sealing an Obligation by a third party, two having sealed, 53 To save harmlesse a womans Joynture, ibid. Another to the like effect, 54 Another to the like effect, ib. That an Apprentice shall account, &c. answer what his Master shall lose by his untruth, 55 For quiet enjoyment of a house upon sale of a Lease there∣of, 56
That if a Mortgage be forfeited, it shall remaine to the Mortgagee free from Incumbrance, 57 For discharging of Incumbrances, or sale of a Lease by poll Deed, 58 For making a Voyage to Venice, and returning with expe∣dition, 58 For two Administrators during a Minority, each saving the other harmlesse, 59 Ʋpon a Letter of Attorney for recovering debts, with clauses that the Constitutor shall not revoke but avow the Actions, and shew his Book to prove them, 60 For redelivery of Silver wrought into Plate of such forme as shall be appointed, 61 For repaying a Legacy received of the Executor, shall pay debts yet concealed, 62 For one Partner having the Trade and receit of debts, his paying the other Partner a moyety, ibid. For leaving his Son his Childs part, 63 For paying the remainder of a Childs part, where part is paid before, ibid. For saving one harmlesse, who delivers a gold Chain, fear∣ing to be put into the Exchequer, 64 To put in Sureties to the Chamber for a summe delivered thence to another hand, 65 To procure new Sureties in the Chamber to discharge a Surety already bound, if he request it, ibid. For assuring a Parsonage to a Clark presented, against them that can claim former Presentments, 66 For ones forth coming when called for, 67 For not doing prejudice on a Bond in the name of both par∣ties, 67 For justifying a Letter of Attorney, 68 That the Constitutee in a Letter of Attorney, shall receive
the money to his own use, 69 Another on a Letter of Attorney, ibid. For paying money upon an Act Executory, 71 Between two Executors for paying half the Legacies and debts, and having half the best of the Testaors goods, ib. To make one free by a day, and that in the mean time he shall take the benefit of his own labour, 72 For saving harmlesse the reputed Father from keeping a Bastard, 73 For making good an Account, if on further examination it prove faulty, ibid. By a Jaylor for saving the Sheriff and under-Sheriff harm∣lesse, 74 For one that hath received his Childs part, not to make further claim, nor trouble his Fathers Executors, &c. 76 Not to challenge Contract of Matrimony, nor trouble any person the Obligee shall marry, 77 To confesse an Action in one of the Counters by a day, ibid. For a Baylifs due executing of his Office, and accounting, 78 To make a woman a Joynture, and deliver the writing thereof to her friends, 79 By such as have portions forth of the Chamber of London, for the paying for the Education of the Children, ibid. For repairing a moyety and performing the Condition of the Recognizance, where two have money forth of the Chamber, 80 For paying Rent, and voiding on warning on a Lease at Will. 82 For a Silver-workers re-delivery of Silver wrought in fa∣shions, prescribed alwaies within a certain time, 83 For procuring a grant of an Outlawes Goods by a day, 83 For taking one in execution on a Stat. by a day, 4
Not to become Surety, nor play at Dice or Cards, 85 In case of Divorse, where the man and wives Friends bind themselves not to intermeddle, 85 For quiet enjoying and discharge of Incumbrances, &c. on sale of Land passed by Feoffment, 86 Another like Condition. 88 For saving harmlesse from Obligations, and delivering them up, or acquittance for them, 89 To pay for such Wares as shall be delivered from a Trades∣man in London to his Chapman elsewhere, ibid. For repayment of money on request, for paying certain in∣terest yearly during the Obligor having the principall towards Childrens maintenance, and for renewing sure∣ties in case of their death or decay, 90 Ʋpon an Indenture of Partnership, 92 Another to the same effect, ib. For sealing a Lease annexed to the Obligation by a day, 93 For enjoying land for ever, and that an heire shall make further assurance when he comes of age, 94 That a Trustee in purchase of Copyhold-land shall surren∣der on request, 95 Ʋpon a Deed of Feoffment, ib. For saving harmlesse from, or cancelling an Obligation by a day, 97 For answering back a Fine (per rate) if the Tenant will surrender his Lease before the end, ib. For saving harmlesse from a Recognizance for Childrens portions, 98 For saving Executors harmlesse from Legacies delivered to the Obligor for the Legatees use, and for repairing a rateable part, if the Over-plus of the Testators Goods will not satisfie his debts, 99
To release all charges given by sentence in the Spirituall Court, 101 To release charges to be adjudged in the Spirituall Court, and not to revive a Suit of Matrimony against the Ob∣ligee, nor trouble him in that behalf, 102 For redeeming a Lease mortgaged, if the Mortgagor re∣deem it not by the day, 103 That an heir shall make a Lease when he comes of age, 104 For leaving a Wife a Joynture, 105 Ʋpon a Release of a Contract of Marriage, 106 For paying money on request, ib. By a Baker to a Scavenger for ridding the streets, ib. To save a Merchant harmlesse that hath taken up money at double Ʋsance for the Obligor, 107 For the Vendor paying a rate for every acre that shall be recovered against the Vendee, and to satisfie or discharge Incumbrances that shall appear, 108 Not to revoke a Letter of Attorney, but save harmlesse the premisses from Incumbrances, and make further assu∣rance,&c. 109 For Childrens portions in the Chamber of London, 110 On a Letter of Attorney upon a Bond not forfeited, 112 The like on a Letter of Attorney for recovering divers debts, 113 To deliver Saffron, 115 To deliver Corn, ibid. To deliver Corn at divers daies, ib. For delivery of Tynne, 116 Covenants. In a purchase that the Vendor repay the Vendee a summe for such part as the Vendee shall be evicted of 133 For the Vendees distraining other Lands for Tythes to be recovered against him in respect of the Land he purcha∣sed, 136
That if a tenant be distrained for a rent charge, he shall re∣tain his own rent for recompence. 181 One common Joynture in free-hold and copy-hold. 116 Between the fathers of a man and woman to be married for allowing them money and lands, and more at death. 118 For safe custody of a Lease amongst divers Interessed. 122 Touching a Recognizance for the Cognizees, extending the land at request of the purchaser, and to convey over the interest growing thereby. 126 To make assurance of lands to uses conditioned, that the uses interst shall determine, if he go about to discontinue. 128 Deputations. IN a License to transport cloth continuable till the deputie shall have levyed a debt owing to him by the consti∣tutor. 140 In a License for planishing of plate, with an annuity grant∣ed for the same. 144 In the moyetie of License for byuing and bringing in of fish. 146 Indentures raising uses, &c. FOr acknowledging a fine by a man and his wife to ex∣clude her from her dower in lands leased by him after their marriage. 161 For making two possessed of a Lease, Tenants in common to prevent survivorship. 164 To lead the use of a Recovery to strengthen a Lease made by tenant for life, and he in taile in reversion 265 For raising uses in land with condition to alter the same at pleasure. 267 Leading the use of a fine after the fine acknowledged. 268
Leading a fine to the use of the Cognizor. 270 For suffering a Recovery to sundry uses, with provision that the intaile be not altered. 271 Indenture of Covenants to raise uses conditioned, the Ʋsees interests to be void if he discontin. 128 Joyntures. A womans Joynture in land. 149 Indenture for a womans Joynture. 150 A Joynture with clause of being void if she seeke her dower. 152 A Joynture in land passed by Recovery, with clause for making good of Leases to be made by husband and wife. 157 For assuring a womans Joynture. 160 A Joynture before marriage. 169 A Joynture in free-hold and copy-hold, with divers cove∣nants. 116 Leases. TO a woman so long and often as she shall continue in widowhood. 166 To them that assured land for certain payment of an An∣nuity. 167 Ʋpon condition of being void on the Lessers paying the Lessees such money as he owes them, or they as bound for him or when they shall be satisfied by the profits. 168 Of a Brewhouse by fine, with a Demise of Implements to be redeemed, or answered at the end of the term. 171 Another Lease to strengthen the former of a Brewhouse. ib. Of Tinne work for securing a summe of money. 177
For an hundred years deseazable on paying a summe of money. 179 Of an house in London. 181 An Ʋnderlease binding the tenant to pay the rent and per∣form the covenants in the Grand lease, with liberty to the Lessor to resume the things letten, if he be minded. 184 A Lease to two in common. 188 Of a Mannor in reversion. 191 Of an house in London on condition to be void for nonpay∣ment of money at times appointed. 196 A Lease with condition, not to set or let. 199 By a Bishop for three lives, with a Leter of Attorney to de∣liver possession. 200 A very good Lease for an house in London. 204 A Lease for a thousand yeares without payment of wast with divers good covenants. 208 By a Company in London of an Inne, &c. 208 A Lease in London, where to abate duties to the Parson, part of the rent is taken up by way of fine. 213 A like Lease, the rent being payable by way of An∣nuity. 217 For a thousand yeares conditionally for a summe, &c. 218 Of a Parsonage with good covenants. 220 Of an house in London acknowledged before the Recor∣der, &c. and inrolled in the Hustings. 223 Of a Shop by the Church-doore by the Parson, and Church-wardens, with condition not to let without con∣sent. 224 Of the customes and impost Wines in a Port, with an agreement to constitute a Deputy to recover the pro∣fits. 226 Of a house in Lond. in reversion after an estate for life. 228
Of old housing to be plucked down and re-built by the Tenant. 231 A re-demise of one Lease conditioned for quiet holding ano∣ther from the same party. 235 By an heir forth of possession to the end he may recover the Premisses. 237 By the Queen of certain hundreds, with a grant of the Offices of Steward and Bailiff in same. 239 Letters of Attorney. UPon an Obligation not forfeited. 111 To deliver possession. 200 Licenses. By a Lord to his Copyholder, to pull down houses on his land. 249 To let and set where a Proviso is in a Lease to the con∣trary. 242 Mortgages. OF a Lease with good covenants. ibid. Of a Lease to save harmlesse from a bond, binding the Mortgagor to perform the condition. 245 Partners. See in Title Charter-party. AN Indenturee between partners being to gather the former shopkeepers debts, & pay them to his Executor. 4 Between two owners of a shop, for fetching salt, and deli∣vering it to a Merchant in Dublin, and the Merchant to pay a summe for the same. 134
Provisoes. A very substantiall Provisoe barring a man and his Ex∣ecutors, not to make away a Lease, unlesse the Lessee take a new one, 248 Releases. OF a moyety in the Lease between the Joynt-tenants thereof to prevent Survivorship, 164 Testifying the receit of a summe of money, and making void a Deed of Feoffment, 250 Surrenders. COnditionall for life to him in Reversion for a recove∣ry to passe, 251 By two Tenants for life to him in Reversion, 252 Testimonialls, Declarations, &c. OF a Trust in a Lease, 253 Certifying the payment of money according to a Condi∣tion in an Indenture for making void thereof, 254 To defeat Ʋses according to a Proviso, 261 Of payment of a summe of money to alter Ʋses, &c. 267 Uses. AN Indenture to knowledge severall recoveries of land in severall Counties to sundry Ʋses. 274 An Indenture to lead the Ʋse of a Recovery. 277 Wills. A Clause in a Will to enable an Executor to sell his Testators Lands, 249 FINIS.
These Books are Printed for H. Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop in Vine-Court Middle-Temple, in Fleetstreet. THe Practick part of the Law, or the Compleat At∣torney. The second part of the Practick part of the Law, or the Lay-mans Lawyer. Kitchins Jurisdictions of Courts Leet, Courts Barons, &c. Plowdens Abridgment in English. Abridgement of Lord Cokes Comment on Littleton. Abridgement of Poultans Statutes at large, by Edmund Wingate, Esquire. The Office and Duty of an Executor in 80. The body of the Law, with a brief Summary, by Edmund Wingate, Esquire. Richard Brownlow Esquire, Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas. His Reports, the first part. His Reports, the second part. His Declarations and Pleadings in English. His Judiciall Writs. The twelfth part of the Reports of Sir Edward Coke, English, Fol. Judge Huttons Reports, English, Fol. Judge Owens Reports, English, Fol. The Epitomy of all the Common and Statute Law of this Nation now in force, by Wlliam Sheppard, Serjeant at Law.
The Marrow of the Law; or a second part of the faithfull Counsellor, by Sarjeant Sheppard. Sir Robert Brook's Reading on the Statute of Limi∣tations. The Book for the drawing up of all manner of Judgements. The Reading upon the Statue of Bankrups, by John Stone, Esquire. The Conveyancers Light, or the Compleat Clerk, or Scri∣veners Guide, containing exact Presidents of all manner of Assurances and Instruments now in use, by the Learn∣ed Judges, and Eminent Lawyers, &c. Collected by John Herne. The Law of Conveyances, shewing the natures, kindes, and effects of all manner of Assurances, with directions to sue out all manner of Writs of Extent, Elegit, and Judiciall Writs upon Statutes, Recognizances, Judge∣ments, &c. by John Herne of the Middle-Temple, Gent. The Moderne Assurancer, or the second part of the Practick part of the Law, containing exact Forms and Draughts of all manner of Presidents now in use, &c. The Grounds and Maxims of the Law, by Mich. Hawks. Perkins in English. Abridgement of Doctor and Student. Cowels Interpreter, in Fol. Sergeant Bridgmans Reports. The Pleader, containing the forms of all Declarations and Pleadings, Issues, Judgements, and Proceedings in all kindes of Actions, as they were taken and entred by the late Prothonotaries, and published by John Herne. Sir John Davis upon the Law of Impositions: Tonage, Poundage, Prizage, and Customes, &c. The Commentary on Originall Writs, by William Hughes, Esquire.
An Abridgement of the Common Law, drawn out of the old and new Books of Law, and reduced into Chapters, Sections, and Divisions, by William Hughes, Esquire. An Abridgement of the Acts and Ordinances of Parlia∣ment, from 1640. to 1656. by William Hughes, Esquire. Caesars Commentaries, with Sir Clement Edmonds Observations in English, Fol. The History of the Wars of Suethland and Poland, by John Fowler, Esquire, in Fol. Sir John Finnets Observations touching the Reception and Precedence, the Treatment and Audience, the Puntillioes and Contests of Forrein Ambassodors. Natura Exenterata, Or Nanture unbowelled; being choice secrets fitted for the cure of all sorts of infirmities: collected by the Countesse of Arundell. Anti-Socinianisme, being a Confutation of the Socinian Heresies, with a Description of their lives and deaths, by N. Chewney, M. A. The Life of the Apostle Saint Paul. S. Bonaventures Meditations, Soliloquies and Prayers. Mr. Cragg against Mr. Tombes, upon the Argument concerning Infants-Baptisme, with Mr. Crags Reply to Mr. Tombes his Answer. Stevensons Poems. European Mercury, describing the Highwaies and Stages through the most remarkable parts of Christendome. An Exposition on the fourth Article of the Apostles Creed, by John Crompe, M. A. The humble Remonstrance of Sir John Stowell. The Vindication of Sir John Stowell.
The discontented Colonel, by Sir John Sucklin. The Floting Island, by William Strowd, a Comedy. Londinopolis, or a Prospect of the famous Cities, London and Westminster. Eight Sermons of Mr. Craggs, in 80. with a Discourse of Marriages. Things New and Old; or a Store-house of Similies, &c. by John Spencer, a large Fol. Olaus Magnus his History of the Goths, Sweads and Vandals. The Minister of State. Killing Murder and no Murder, by Mich. Hawks.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are Printed for Nath. Brook, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill. Excellemt Tracts in Divinity, Controversies, Sermons, Devotions. THe Catholique History collected and gathered out of Scrip∣ture, Councels, and ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr. Vanes Lost Sheep returned home: by Edw. Chesensale Esq Octavo. Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion tryed whether it be of God or man, in severall Sermons, by J. Webster, Quarto. Israels Redemption, or the Propheticall History of our Savi∣ours Kingdome on Earth, by K: Matton. The Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, and Prophanesse; or a more hopefull way to Grace and Salvation, by K: Young, Octavo. The summ of Practicall Divinity, or the Grounds of Religion in a Chatechisticall way, by Mr. Christopher Love, late Minister of the Gospel: a usefull Peice. Heaven and Earth shaken; a Treatise shewing how Kings and Princes, their Governments are turned and changed, by J. Davis, Minister in Dove: admirably usefull, and seriously to be conside∣red in these times. The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion; to which is added Songs in the night, or cheerfulnesse under afflictions; by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich. Admirable and Learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosopy, Magick, Astrology, Geomancy, Chymistry, Physiognomy, and Chiromancy. Magick and Astrology vindicated, by H. Warren. Lux Veritatis, Judiciall Astrology vindicated, and Demonology confuted, by W. Ramsey Gent. Conelius Agrippa his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy: Magicall Elements of Peter de Abona, the nature of Spirits; made English by R. Turner.
Paracelsus Occult Philosophy, of the Mysteries of Nature, and his secret Alchimy. An Astrologicall Discourse with Mathematicall Demonstrations proving the influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elemen∣tary Bodies, by Sir Chr. Heydon Knight. Supernaturall Sights and Apparitions seen in London, June 30, 1644. by William Lilly: as also all his Works in one Volume. The admired Peice of Physiognomy, and Chyromancy, Meto∣poscopy, the Simmetricall Proportions, and Signall Moles of the Body, the Interpretation of Dreames; to which is added the Art of memory, illustrated with figures, by R: Sanders in Folio. The no less exquisite then admirable Work Theatrum Chemicum, Britannicum: containing severall Poeticall Peices of our famous English Philosophers, who have written the Hermitique Mysteries in their own ancient Language; faithfully collected into one Volume, with Annotations thereon: by the Indefatigable Indu∣stry of Elias Ashmole, Esq, illustrated with Figures Excellent Treatises in the Mathematicks, Geometry of Arithmetick, Surveying, and other Arts, or Mechanicks. Tectonicon, shewing the exact measuring of all manner of Land, Squares, Timber, Stone, Steeples, Pillars, Globes: as also the making and use of the Carpenters Rule. The unparalleld work for ease and expidition, intituled, The exact Surveyor; or the whole Art of surveying of Land, shewing how to plot all manner of Grounds, whether small Inclosures, Champain, Plain, Wood-lands, or Mountains, by the Plain Ta∣ble; as also how to find the Area, or Content of any Land, to Protect, Reduce, or Divide the same; as also to take the Plot or Cart, to make a Map of any Mannor, whether according to Rath∣burne, or any other Eminent Surveyors Method: a Book excel∣lently usefull for those that sell, purchase, or are otherwise em∣ployed about Building: by I. Eyre. The Golden Treatise of Arithmetick, Naturall and Artificall, or Decimalls; the Theory and Practice united in a simpatheticall Proportion betwixt Lines and Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure, Magnitude, and Affecti∣on, demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by Calculations, and confirmed with variety of Examples in every Species: made com∣pendious
and easie for Merchants, Citizens, Sea-men, Accoun∣tants, &c. by Th. Wilsford Corrector of the last Edition of Re∣cord. Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-writing, as it hath been pro∣ved by many hundreds in the City of London, and other places, by them practised, and acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest, and swiftest method; the meanest capacity by the help of this Book, with a few houres practice, may attaine to a perfection in this Art: by Jer. Rich. Author and Teacher thereof, dwelling in Swithens Lane in London. Excellent and approved Treatises in Physick, Chyurgery, and other more familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, &c. Culpepers Semiotica Uranica, his Astrological judgment of diseases from the Decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged: the way and manner of finding out the cause, change, and end of the Disease: also whether the sick be likely to live or dye, and the time when recovery or death is to be expected, according to the judgment of Hipocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr. Cul∣peper's censure of Urines. Culpeper's last Legacy, left to his wife for the publick good, being the choycest and most profitable of those Secrets in Physick and Chyrurgery; which whilst he lived, were lock up in his Breast, and resolved never to be published till after his death. The Art of Simpling: an Introduction to the knowledge of ga∣thering of Plants, wherein the difinitions, divisions, places, descri∣ptions, differences, names, virtues, times of gathering, uses, tem∣pratures of them are compendiously discoursed of: also a discovery of the lesser World, by W. Cole. Adam in Eden, or Natures Paradice: the History of Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, with their severall originall Names, the pla∣ces where they grow, their discriptions and kinds, their times of flourishing and decreasing: as also their severall signatures, ana∣tomicall appropriations and particular Physicall virtues; with ne∣cessary Observations on the seasons of planting and gathering of our English plants. A Work admirably usefull for Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons, and other ingenious persons, who may in this Her∣ball find comprised all the English Physicall Simples, that Gerard or Parkinson, in their two Voluminous Herballs have discoursed of, even so as to be on Emergent occasions their own Physitians, the Ingredients being to be had in their owne Feilds and Gardens,
published for the generall good, by W. Coles, M. D. The compleat Midwives practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the body of Mankind: or perfect Rules derived from the experiences and writings not onely of our English, but the most accomplisht and absolute practices of the French, Spa∣nish, Italians, and other Nations: so fitted for the weakest capa∣cities, that they may in a short time attain to the knowledge of the whole Art: by Dr. T. C. with the advice of others, illustrated with Copper Figures. The Queens Closet opened: incomparable secrets in Physick, Chyrurgery, Preserving, Candying, and Cookery; as they were presented to the Queen by the most experinced persons of our times, many whereof were honoured with her own practice. Elegant Treatises in Humanity, History, Romances, and Poetry. Oedipus, or the Resolver of the secrets of love, and other na∣turall Problems by way of question and answer. The admirable and most impartiall History of New-England, of the first Plantation there, in the year 1628. brought down to these times, all the materiall passages performed there, exactly related. The Teares of the Indians: the History of the bloody and most cruell proceedings of the Spaniards in the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, and other places of the West-In∣dies, in which to the life are discovered the Tyrannies of the Spa∣niards, as also the justnesse of our War so succesfully managed against them. The Illustrious Shepheardesse. The Imperious Brother: writ∣ten originally in Spanish by that incomparable Wit, Don John Pe∣rez de Montalban: translated at the requests of the Marchionesse of Dorchester, and the Countesse of Strafford, by E. P. Fons Lacrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears, the lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah in Verse, with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas: by J. Quarles. Poeticall, with severall other accurately ingenious Treatises, lately Printed. Sportive Wit, the Muses Merriment: a new Spring of Drollery, Joviall Fancies, &c. The Conveyancer of Light or the Compleat Clark, and Scri∣veners Guide, being an exact Daught of all Presidents and Assu∣rances now in use: as they were penned and perfected by divers learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both ancient and modern: whereunto is added a Concordance from
King Rich. the Third, to this present. Themis Aurea, the Lawes of the Fraternity of the Rosie Cross, in which the Occult secrets of their Philosophicall Notions are brought to light: written by Count Mayerus, and now Englisht by T. H. The Iron Rod put into the Lord Protectors hand: a Prophe∣ticall Treatise. Medicina Magica tamen Physica, Magicall but Naturall Physick: containing the generall Cures of Infirmities and Diseases belong∣ing to the bodies of men, as also to other Animalls and domestick Creatures, by way of Transplantation: with a description of the most excellent Cordiall out of Gold, by Sam. Bolton of Salop. J. Tradiscan's Rarities, published by himself. The perfect Cook: a right Method in the Art of Cookery, whe∣ther for Pastery, or all other manner of Alla mode Kickshaws, with the most refined waies of dressing of Flesh, Fowl, or Fish, ma∣king of the most poinant Sawces, whether after the French or En∣glish manner, together with fifty five waies of dressing of Eggs: by M. M. Admirable usefull Treatises, newly Printed. The expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physick restored to practice: the Apothecaries Shop, and Chyrurgeons Closet opened: with a Survey, as also a Correction of most Dis∣pensatories now extant, with a judicious Censure of their defects, and a supply of what they are deficient in: together with a lear∣ned account of the virtues and quantities, and uses of Simples and Compounds, with the Symptomes of Diseases, as also prescripti∣ons for their severall cures: by that renowned P. Morellus Phy∣sitian to the King of France: a work for the order, usefulnesse, and plainnesse of the Method, not to be paralleld by any Dispensato∣ry, in what Language soever. Cabinet of Jewels, Mans Misery, Gods Mercy, Christs Treasury, &c. In eight Sermons, with an Appendix of the nature of Tythes under the Gospell, with an expediency of Marriage in Publique Assemblies, by I. Cragg Minister of the Gospel. Natures secrets, or the admirable and wonderfull History of the Generations of Meteors, describing the temperatures of the Ele∣ments, the heights, magnitudes, and influences of Stars, the cau∣ses of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemicall Diseases and Prodigies of precedent times, with presages of the VVeather, and descriptions of the Weather-glass: by T. Wilsford, Gent.
The Mysteries of Love and Eloquence; or the Arts of Wooing and Complementing, as they are managed in the Spring Garden, Hide Park, the New-Exchange, and other Eminent places. A Work in which are drawn to the life the Deportments of the most Accomplisht persons: the Mode of their Courtly Entertainment, Treatment of their Ladies at Ball, their accustomed Sports, Drolls and Fancies, the witchcraft of their perswasive Language, in their approaches, or other more secret dispatches, &c. by E. P. The so much desired and deeply learned Commentary on Psalm. 15. by that Reverend and Eminent Divine Mr. Christopher Carth∣wright Minister of the Gospel in York. The Saints Tombe-stone, or the Remains of the Blessed: A plain Narrative of some remarkable passages in the holy life and happy death of Mrs. Dorothy Shaw, wife of Mr. John Shaw, Prea∣cher of the Gospel at Kingston on Hull, collected by her dearest Friends, especially for her sorrowful husband and six daughters consolation and invitation. The Accomplisht Cook, the mystery of the whole Art of Cooke∣ry, revealed in a more easie and perfect method then hath been publisht in any Language: Expert and ready waies for the dressing of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish, the raising of Pastes, the best directions for all manner of Kick-shawes, and the most poinant Sauces, with the termes of Carving and Sewing: the Bills of Fare, an exact account of all Dishes for the season, with other All-amode Curio∣sities, together with the lively Illustrations of such necessary Fi∣gures, as are referred to practice: approved by the many yeares experience and carefull industry of Robert May, in the time of his attendance on severall persons of honour of this Nation. The exquisite Letters of Mr. Robert Loveday, the late admired Translator of the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating of his memory, publisht by his deare Brother Mr. A. L. The new World of English words, or a generall Dictionary, containing the Termes, Etimologies, Definitions, and perfect Interrpretations of the proper significations of the hard English words throughout the Arts and Sciences, Liberal or Mechanick, as also all other Subjects that are usefull or appertain to the Lan∣guage of our Nation, by I. T. and others in Folio. The way to Bliss, by Elias Asmoll, Esquire. FINIS.
