N973 E607_11 R205878 99865118 117355
NEVVS from IRELAND Concerning The Proceedings of the Presbytery IN The County of Antrim in IRELAND, in several Sittings in that County, Against Mr. James Ker, & Mr. Jeremy O Queen. Two of their fellow-Ministers of the same Presbytery, for their refusing to reade that Treasonable REPRESENTATION, which was by the said Presbytery then at Belfast, commanded to be read publiquely by all Ministers, in Febr. 1648. Published for the undeceiving of those who (not knowing what they desire) would have Presbytery Established by Law in this Commonwealth. Printed from the RELATION made thereof by Mr. James Ker, and by him delivered to Colonel Venables, Commander in chief of the Forces of the Commonwealth of England in the Counties of Down and Antrim. 2 TIM. 39. But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be mani∣fest to all men, as theirs also was. Nil asperius humili, quum surgit in altum. London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament of England. 1650.
HAving received this following Narrative from so sure an hand, with this Expression following: The enclosed will let you understand the proceedings of the Presbytery in these parts; by which you may see what a blessed Government it is like to prove, if Authorized once. The man concerned in it, gave it me himself, being I think his own hand; the Petition and the Confession in the loose paper, were offered in his behalf to the Classis, and they re∣turned the Confession in answer thereunto: You may make what use you please of it there, if you think good you may pub∣lish them. I thought it would be of good use to publish, if perhaps some whose simple ignorance, and not their Interest and Faction, is the cause and ground of their adhering to that party, may there∣by dare to believe, That the thing they have onely heard of, from those whose cunning craftiness lie in wait to deceive, and never have seen its teeth or claws, is not such a harmless Beast as it hath been represented; and therefore take heed how they Establish it in Power, lest it being Established, they feel its force. That the whole may be the better understood, I have caused the Representa∣tion it self to be printed before it, which hath heretofore received a full Answer; wherein the Treasonableness of it was laid open, and its tendency discovered, and from that tendency the sad effects that have since followed, were therein foretold. The man that thus suffered by them, seems a good man, and conscientious, but pitifully under darkness and bondage in his judgement, as to Presbytery and their Principles: But for his Antagonists the Presbytery, that appear sometime at Belfast, sometime at Banger, & sometime at Carrickfergus, I should do them great wrong to give them any other Character, then that learned one they have given to themselves in their Preamble, Observations and Answers to the Objections against their Representation, and in the Confession, or Recantation or Penance they prescribed him, without which he might not return to the Exercise of his Ministery; for sottish, barbarous, bold, ignorant stuff, Tyrannically imposing upon their
Brethren, and Treasonably acting and prescribing against the State, perhaps you will hardly finde one to have out-gone them, though you should search all the Crowd of the Doctors of the Canon-Law, who have acted the Officials under the Bishops, whe∣ther Popish or Protestant. It were too much honor to it, to say any thing by way of Answer; and 'twere too much wrong to the meanest Reader, to think he needed it: It is gross enough, it may speak for it self, and saith sufficiently to make any man (at least who hath not taken the Covenant, or who understands it) to be very coldly affected toward that same thing Presbytery: Onely it must be observed, what influence the Commission of the Kirk of Scotland had upon the Presbyteries and Presbyterians of Ireland. If they did not Appeal to them, or received their Com∣mands, yet at least they consulted them as their Oracle, and re∣ceived their Dictates tanquam ex tripode, as infallible directions. 'Twas a great while before there were other Applications to Rome, or more Power exercised by her; these have made a good progress for learners: They tread in the Mothers steps prettily. 'Tis worth observing too, how Reverentially the Province of London is quoted; their Dictates and Opinions may in time come to be admitted into the Canon among the Reverend Decrees, though for the present they get place but among the Extravagants. But this is too much for them: Read the Book, and see the pitiful slavery they lie under, where a Presbytery is Established.
A Necessary REPRESENTATION OF The present and imminent Danger TO RELIGION, Laws and Liberties. WHen we do seriously consider the great and many Duties which we owe unto God, and his People, over whom he hath made us Overseers, and for whom we must give an accompt; and when we behold the laudible Examples of the worthy Ministers of the Province of London, and of the Commissioners of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, in their free and faithful Testimo∣mies against the insolencies of the Sectarian Party in England. Considering also the dependance of this Kingdom upon the Kingdom of England, and remembring how against strong opposition, we were assisted by the Lord the last year, in dis∣charge of the like Duty, and how he punished the contempt of our Warning upon the Despisers thereof, we finde our selves as necessitated, so the more encouraged to cast in our mite in the Treasury, lest our silence should involve us in the guilt of unthankfulness, and our People in security, and neglect of Duties.
In this discharge of the trust put upon us by God, we would not be looked upon as sowers of Sedition, or Troubles of Na∣tional and divisive motions; our record is in heaven, That no∣thing is more hateful unto us, or less intended by us, and there∣fore we shall not fear the malicious and wicked aspersions, which we know Satan by his Instruments is ready to cast, not onely upon us, but upon all who sincerely endeavor the advancement of Reformation; what of late have been, and now are the insolent and presumptuous practises of the Sectaries in England, is not unknown unto the world: for notwithstanding the spe∣cious pretences for Religion and Liberties, yet their loose and present actions being therewith compared, do clearly evidence, That they love to wear a rough Garment to deceive, since they with a high hand despised the Oath in breaking the Cove∣nant, which is so strong a foundation to both, whilest they load it with slight Reproaches, calling it A bundle of Particulars, and contrary Interests, and a Snare to the People; and likewise labor to establish by-Laws, and universal Toleration of all Religions, which is an avowed overturning of Unity in Religion, and so directly repugnant to the Word of God, the two first Arti∣cles of our Solemn Covenant; which is the greater wicked∣ness in them to violate, since many of the chiefest of themselves have with their hands lifted up to the most High God sworn and sealed. Moreover, the great disaffection to the settlement of Reli∣gion, and to their further breach of the Covenant, doth more fully appear by their strong oppositions to Presbyterial Go∣vernment (the hedge and bulwark of Religion) whilest they express their hatred to it, more then to the worst of Errors, by excluding it under the name of Compulsion, when they embrace even Paganism and Judaism in the Arms of Toleration: Not to speak of their aspersions upon it, and the asserter thereof as Antichristian and Popish thoughts, they have deeply sworn to maintain the same Government in the first Article of the Co∣venant, as it is established in the Church of Scotland, which they now do despightfully blaspheme. Again, it is more then manifest, That they speak not the vin∣dication, but the extirpation of Laws and Liberties, as appears
by their seizing on the person of the King, and at their pleasure removing him from place to place, not onely without the con∣sent, but (if we mistake not) against a direct Ordinance of Par∣liament; their violent surprizing, imprisoning and secluding many of the most worthy Members of the honorable House of Commons, directly against the declared Priviledge of Parlia∣ment; an action certainly without parallel in any ages, and their proposal abolishing all Parliamentary power for the fu∣ture, and establishing a Representative (as they call it) in stead thereof. Neither hath their fury staid here, but without all Rule or Example (being but private men) they have proceeded to the Tryal of the King, against both the Interest and Protestations of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the former publique Declara∣tions of both Kingdoms (besides their violent haste, rejected the hearing of any defences) with cruel hands have put him to death; an act so horrible, as no History Divine or Humane hath layed any president of the like. These and many other detestable insolencies may abundantly convince any unbyassed judgement, That the present practice of the Sectaries and their Abettors, do directly overturn the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdoms, root out lawful and Supreme Magistracy (the just Priviledges whereof we have sworn to maintain) and introduce a fearful confusion & lawless Anarchy. The Spirit of God by Solomon tells us, Prov. 30.21. That a Ser∣vant to reign, is one of the four things for which the earth is dis∣quieted, and which it cannot bear: we wonder nothing that the Earth disquieted for these things, but we wonder greatly of the Earth can bear them; and albeit the Lord so permit, that Folly be set in great dignity, and the rich set in low places; That Ser∣vants ride upon horses, and Princes walk as Servants upon the earth, Eccles. 10.6, 7. yet the same wise man saith, Prov. 19.10. Delight is not seemly for a fool, much less for a Servant to have rule over Princes. When we consider these things, which we cannot but de∣clare and manifest our utter dislike and detestation of such un∣warrantable practises, directly subverting our Covenant, Laws, Religion and Liberties, and as Watchmen in Zion, warn all the lovers of Truth, and well-affected to the Covenant, carefully
to avoid compliance with, or not bearing witness against such horrid insolencies, lest partaking with them in their sins, they also be partakers of their plagues: Therefore in the spirit of meekness we earnestly intreat, and by Authority of Jesus Christ (whose servants we are) charge and abtest all who shall resolve to adhere unto Truth and the Covenant, diligently to observe, and conscientiously to perform these following Duties: First, that according to our Solemn Covenant, every one study more to the power of Godliness, and personal Reforma∣tion of themselves and families, because for the great breach of this part of the Covenant, God is highly offended with these Lands, and justly provoked to permit man to be the instrument of our misery and afflictions. Secondly, that every one in their stations and callings, ear∣nestly contend for the faith which once was delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. and seek to have their hearts established with grace, that they be not unstable, and wavering, carried about with every wind of Doctrine, but that they receive the Truth in love, avoiding the company of such as withdraw from, and vilifie the publike Ordinances, speak evil of Church-Government, vend damnable Errors under the specious pretence of a Gospel, nay and New-Light, and highly the persons and courses of notorious Sectaries, lest God give them over to strong delusions (the plagues of these Times) that they may believe lyes, & be damned. Thirdly, that they would not be drawn by counsel, command or example, to shake off the ancient and fundamental Go∣vernment of these Kingdoms by King and Parliament, which we are so deeply engaged to preserve by our Solemn Covenant, as they would not be found guilty of the great evils of these times (condemned by the holy Ghost) the despising of Domi∣nion, and speaking evil of Dignities. Fourthly, that they do cordially endeavor the preservation of the Union among the well-affected in the Kingdoms, not being swayed by any National respect; remembring that part of the Covenant, That we shall never suffer our selves, directly nor indirectly, by whatsoever combination, perswasion or terror, to be divided or withdrawn from this blessed union and conjunction.
And finally, albeit there be more present hazards from the power of Sectaries (as there was from Malignants the last year) yet we are not ignorant of the evil purposes of Malignants even at this time in all the Kingdoms, and particularly in this; and for this cause we exhort every one with equal watchfulness to keep themselves free from associating with such, or for swer∣ving in their judgements to Malignant Principles, and to avoid all such persons as have been from the beginning known oppo∣sers of the Covenant, combining themselves with Papists and other notorious Malignants, especially such who have been chief promoters of the late Engagement against Englands ca∣lumniators of the work of Reformation, imputing the misery of the present times unto the advancers thereof; and that their just hatred to Sectaries, incline not their mindes to favor Malignants, or to think that because of the power of Sectaries, the cause of God needs the more to fear the Enemy, or to stand in need of the help of Malignants.
OBJECTIONS Given in by the under-Subscribers, to the Reverend Moderator and remanent Brethren of the Presbytery sitting at Carrickfergus, May 3. 1649. Which Objections occasioned the not Reading the Representation. 1. IN general, many of the Assertions therein contained, seems to us to be exceeding more hask then beseemeth us, being in number few yong men, and far from true In∣telligence. 2. Although we cannot say (as we are informed) That the late and present actings of the Army in England, are without great hazard to Religion and Liberties, yet we doubt whether we may truly say, That they do clearly evidence to us, That they love to wear a rough garment to deceive, as is asserted in the Repre∣sentation. 3. And forasmuch as we have neither in writ nor print seen any publike thing set forth by the Army, wherein they call the Covenant A bundle of particular and contrary Interests, and A snare to the people, therefore we desire the truth of that Assertion to be proven. 4. We desire the truth of that made more manifest (viz.) That the Army is laboring to establish by a Law, an Universal Toleration of all Religions, without acception, yea even Pa∣ganism and Judaism. 5. If we should reade the Representation, we conceive our selves unable to prove that point, which affirms many of the chiefest of the Army to be perjured. 6. Neither do we as yet know, That the said Army doth despightfully blaspheme Presbyterial Government, and call it and the Assertors thereof Antichristian and Popish. 7. It is a question to us, Whether these Members that were removed, were the most worthy Members of the Honorable House of Commons.
8. Although it is affirmed, That the removing of these Mem∣bers, is an action certainly unparalleld in any age, yet the truth of it is doubtful to us. 9. We cannot affirm, That the King was tryed by private men, and with cruel hands put to death, because it is a civil question beyond our capacity, which we conceive might abide a dispute in the three Kingdoms, before it be absolutely determined, as it is now asserted in the Representation. 10. We could wish, That the word just hatred to Sectaries, were expressed just hatred to their evil courset. Mr. James Ker. Mr. Jeremy O Queen. The Presbyteries Observations upon, and Answers unto a Paper given in unto them by Mr. James Ker and Mr. Jeremy O Queen, En∣tituled, OBJECTIONS, &c. May 4. 1649. BEfore we come to observe or answer any thing in your Paper, we cannot but put you in minde, how that our first hearing of your disobedience, in refusing to reade our Repre∣sentation, was to us a great grief of minde, and weight of spi∣rit; and how great lenity we have since used towards you, for your gaining from your Error, both by publike and private Con∣ference at several Presbyterial Meetings; but when all this had not produced the desired affect, we further appointed you to give in your Scruples in writing, That we might judicially An∣swer the same: and therefore we do now exhort and charge you, seriously to ponder these our Observations and Answers; and that you labor to receive satisfaction from them, that so you may prevent a further Censure, which otherways you will necessitate us unto.
Observations. 1. IN all the whole paper, wherein you often mention the Ar∣my in England, you do not at all term them Sectaries, or any ways obstructers of Reformation, which doth imply an approving of their courses. 2. In most of your Scruples you plainly insinuate, That you give no credit to the Presbyteries Information held forth in the Representation, but seems to trust more to other private In∣telligence. 3. In your Paper you give several doubts, without mention∣ing any reason of them. Answers. 1. TO the first: First, we conceive it to be presumptuous rashness, if not Laodicean luke-warmness in you, to asperse the Presbyteries necessary and zealous expressions of their detesting the courses of Sectaries, in calling them exceed∣ing more hask then beseemeth; for we finde that the holy Ghost in Scripture useth more sharp expressions against sin and sinful courses, then any used by us in the Representation. 2. We say, however ye may think (because of your affection to Sectaries) such expressions unbeseemeth you, yet they are not so in rela∣tion to the Presbytery; for though as we have often been up∣braided by Malignants in our publike actions, and now by you also, that we are but yong men, and few in number; yet as we are Watchmen in Sion, it beseemeth us well to speak against sin with zeal and fervency of spirit, and to rebuke with all Autho∣rity, according to the Rule of the Apostle. Neither doth it become any one or two Members to question the truth of our Intelligence, we having found it valid in several publike papers come to our hands. 2. To the second: 1. We are sorry to hear you making any doubt or question, That the late and present actings of the Sectarian Army is hazardous to Religion and Liberties, which is clearly insinuated in your expressions, seeing this is so
fully expressed by the Ministers of Christ in the three King∣doms. 2. We think strange how you can doubt, without giving any Reason, that the Army in England have loved to wear a rough Garment to deceive, seeing it is known to the world, that their late and present actings against Religion, doth strongly belye their many and often renewed Professions for both. 3. To the third: We desire you to search for the Armies own Remonstrance, wherein you will finde the very same expressions against the Covenant, which are mentioned in the Repre∣sentation. 4. To the fourth: We refer you to the truth of that point, unto the Representation of the Ministers of London, the Testi∣mony of the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland, and to the Paper emitted by the Ministers of Essex, and the Agree∣ment of the People, which though ye say ye have not seen, yet being considered by the Presbytery, we think it your duty in such matters of Fact, to give credit to our unanimous as∣sertion. 5. To the fifth: 1. We say, That the Representation hath no such expression into it, That the chiefest of the Army are perjured. 2. Albeit you be unable to prove, That many of the chiefest of the Sectaries, who have Sworn the Covenant, have violate the same, yet the Presbytery can make it appear, by comparing their actions with several printed papers of the Covenant, wherein their Names are expresly set down, some whereof were brought over by the Commissioners of the Par∣liament, Governors of Ʋlster. 6. To the sixth: If ye were diligent Readers of the Con∣troversies of the Times, and of the Sectaries Writings, to finde out their Errors, it needed be no question to you, to scruple against the Representation. 7. To the seventh: Albeit it be a question to you, yet it is not a question to the Presbytery; neither yet to the Ministers of the Province of London, who are nearer to true Intelligence then you are. 8. To the eighth: The Representation saith but the same things that is asserted by the Ministers of the Province of Lon∣don, and if you be better read in History, we desire you may produce a contrary Instance.
9. To the ninth: We say, 1. That your doubt doth im∣port, That you do not dislike that horrid action committed against the person of the King, which is so unanimously detest∣ed by the Ministers of Christ in the three Kingdoms. 2. We considently affirm, That they were but private men, because not authorized by any Judicatory, but onely a small number of the House of Commons, and these Abettors of the Army, the rest being secluded violently who were against their Designs, not onely without, but against the consent of the House of Peers. 3. That the King was by them cruelly put to death, is hence necessarily inferred, and though ye have not capacity to understand such a civil question, yet the Ministers of London in their Vindication do well understand it, asserting their ab∣horrence of that act as fully as the Representation doth. 4. Your capacity by this, shall never be capable of understand∣ing such a civil question, until it shall be disputed by the three Kingdoms; which if it shall never fall out, you shall never have so much capacity, by your own confession, as to under∣stand it. 10. To the tenth: The last of your Objections are a Wish, That the Presbytery should express no hatred to Sectaries; but we wish, That ye do not retain in your hearts, and express with your mouthes and actions, too much love to their courses: and we further say, That the Scriptures warrants us to express perfect hatred to them that hate God, and it is a mark of a man that shall dwell in Gods Holy Hill, Psal. 15.4. in whose eye a vile person is contemned; so that not the vile courses onely, but even the vile person in the concret should be con∣temned by the lovers of God: But while you are so tender over the persons of Sectaries, we are afraid you are too much inclined to favor their ways; and we further wish, That ye would be earnest with God in prayer, That your darkness may be inlightned, and you preserved from Errors on the right and left hand; and that you be not a cause of a Breach in the Pres∣byteries Union, which hath been so long preserved, to the ter∣ror of our Enemies, and our own rejoycing; and that ye will lay aside an obstinate Spirit, striving rather to take satisfaction to your Scruples, which is now clearly held forth to you, and not
tenaciously to adhere to your former failing, lest you provoke God to blast and desert you, and necessitate the Presbytery to use the Rod of Discipline against you. Thomas Peebles CLERK to the Presbytery. A REPLY Made by Mr. James Ker and Mr. Jeremy O Queen, to the Presbyteries Observations upon, and An∣swers unto the Objections, given in to the Presbytery by them, May 3. 1649. To the Preamble. FIrst, we conceive that our delaying to read the Representation, because of several Objections which we were not cleared of, cannot be justly called Disobedience, or refusing to read it. Secondly, As for your great lenity, whether it hath been in great measure or not, it self being well mesured, shall shew; viz. for immediately after we gat the first Command to read it, and to be present at the next Presbytery, because it pleased the Lord to cast such impedimens in our way, as the report of Owen mac Carte and his forces to be falling on us, we were necessarily hindred; yet before the Reasons of our stay was known, your lenity did extend it self so far, as to issue out to us a summoning Letter, to be present at the next Meeting, but not telling us when or where this Meeting should be. The second and most material degree of your lenity towards us in this business (if we be not mistaken) is this, That after we had found out by diligent inquisition, when and where this Meeting shuld be, we came unto it, and before we were asked so much as what was the Rea∣sons of our staying, we were Censured to go aff the Judicatory,
and being held aff the Seat, after some discourse with a Com∣mittee, you desired us to give in our Scruples in writing, and ye would Answer us in writing, which we did accordingly; and after ye had framed this your Answer to us, before we saw it, you sate down in the Presbytery, and judicially Voted, That the same might be A satisfactory Answer to our Objections; and in your Answer you charge us seriously to ponder the same, and re∣fers us to several Papers and Books: and not onely did your le∣nity limit us to the space of some few hours for the pondering of these your Answers, and finding out all these Papers and Books, but also refused to delay our Sentence, till we should immediately go to the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland, to see if they could give us satisfaction herein. This being the substance of your lenity towards us in this business, let all that reads it, observe how far it hath extended it self. Thirdly, for that Sentence of gaining us from our Error, we conceive it might insinuate this much to the Reader, that we hold some erroneous Opinion contrary to Orthodox Doctrine, the con∣trary whereof we declare to the world, That we do not hold any erroneous Opinion, nor any thing which we know to be different from that Orthodox Doctrine which you your selves hold, saving the omitting to read the Representation, occasioned by these Obje∣ctions given in to you. To the Observations. 1. For brevities sake, We Reply this much, Whether the Army, or Sectaries in the Army, should carry the denomination, we cannot determine; or whether we do any ways term them Ob∣structers of Reformation, we refer your Wisdoms and the Reader to our second Objection. 2. We say, That we do not insinuate at all (much less plainly insinuate) that we give no credit to the Presbytery, or trusts more to private Intelligence, but rather that we would have the ground cleared upon which we would give credit to any; and so much the more, because of the diversities of Reports. 3. Although we did forbear for brevities sake to put down the Reason of each doubt in writing, yet we conceive our Bre∣thren
might remember that in our private debates we gave Rea∣sons thereof. To the Answer. 1. TO the first, We are content that what we have said in pre∣senting our Objections to your wisdoms, be termed Pre∣sumptuous Rashness; rather then that any thing in your late Pro∣ceedings be found so to be, or whether we asperse the Presbytery, by calling it positively exceeding more hask; or whether we say it seems so to us, we refer your wisdoms and the Reader to our first Objection: As for the parallel made betwixt the Holy Ghost in reproving of sin, having all true intelligence of all things, and yong men in affirming matters of fact, being far from true intel∣ligence, we conceive holdeth not. 2. As for your taking upon you to enter into judge our affections, we conceive it were more safe for you to judge of that which properly belongs to your judgement; then to enter in to judge of that which properly belongs to God; and we conceive that our comparing yong men and few, with grave men and many in our Neighbor Kingdoms, is neither to be called upbraiding, nor yet to be parallel'd with such upbraiding as Malignants useth; and we desire it may be remembred, that we did not say that the assertions were too sharp against sin, but rather (if we may explain our meaning) to be against persons to us unknown; and to conclude our Reply to this Answer, we say, that alhough ye would seem to us to insinuate by some of your ex∣pressions in the preamble and conclusion, that we hold some error, yet we would manifest this unto the world, that we do not desire to adhere to any error, nor to this error; viz. to believe as the Church believeth, without any further tryal of what the Church believeth. 2. To the second, First, you say we call in question from the word, as we are informed, and yet we conceive that both you and we in this business ought to say nothing but as we are informed, and that truly. 2. Our reason of doubting that it doth not clearly evidence to us, because love and to deceive, imports an inward
affection and intention, which we conceive cannot be clearly evi∣denced to us by several late and present acts: Neither is it long since acts of the contrary nature did appear in that Army, as their good service against Malignants in England, and also against the like in Scotland, and their relieving the godly party there from Malignants oppression. 3. To the third: We have searched the Armies own Remon∣strance, and findes not these Expressions into it. 4. To the fourth: 1. You refer us to several Papers to get Solu∣tion, and yet you suspend us within some few hours after your re∣ferment, as though we could within these few hours finde all these papers, and ponder them, and give our Answer from them all. 2. Although their Toleration of so many Errors, is worthy to be condemned; yet these papers do declare, That they do not tolerate neither Popery nor Prelacy, much less Paganism and Judaism, because they exclude all that professes not faith in Christ. 5. To the fifth: 1. We acknowledge, That the word perjury is not expresly into it; but these words that says, They have sworn and sealed it, with their hands lifted up to God, and with a high hand have violated and despised it, would seem to us to im∣port so much. 2. We desire it may be remembred, That we did not say that we were unable to prove, that The chiefest of the Secta∣ries were perjured, but The chiefest of the Army; and for that we refer the Reader to the Objection it self. 6. To the sixth: We acknowledge we are not such diligent Readers as we should be, yet we say, That our Objection was not that we did not know, that the chiefest of the Sectaries did de∣spightfully blaspheme Presbyterial Government, &c. but that we did not as yet know that the chiefest of the Army did so, as is clear in our Objection. 8. To the eighth: 1. The Reverend Ministers of the Pro∣vince of London saith simply, It was unparalleld, but saith not, Upparalleld in any Age: 2. Much less do they affirm, That it was Certainly unparalleld in any Age. 9. To the ninth, We say likeways, 1. That it would rather im∣port, That we were ignorant of the Power of that Judicatory which did Try him, then that it doth imply, That we dislike not horrid acts. 2. If that be as fairly proven as it is confidently
affirmed, we acknowledge that Objection salved. 3. We desire that it may be remembred, That we did not say that it was above our capacity, because it was not disputed in the three Kingdoms,  because it was a question meerly Civil, and we not being well seen in Civil Affairs, and therefore as it might abide a dispute in the three Kingdoms, before it were so absolutely determined; so much the more might abide us a dispute, before we would so perempo∣rily determine it. 10. Lastly, what we have said in our last Objection, we refer the intelligent Reader to compare the same with the Answer: As for your fear, That we favor the evil courses of Sectaries, we desire it may be removed by this Affirmation, viz. That we have preached publikely against their evil courses; and we do now de∣clare, That we neither do, nor never did affect their evil courses; and that we do resolve, not onely to speak freely against their evil courses, when we are so far distant from them, but also, if God call us to speak before their faces, we could as plainly re∣prove their evil courses (if our hearts deceive us not) as any who now charges us with affection to their evil courses. As for your wishing us to be diligent in prayer, we confess that the neglect thereof is our daily challenge. And as for our darkness to be in∣lghtned, and that in relation to the Representation, We conceive that both you and we might be inlightned, although several things in the Representation had never come to light at all. As for your desire that we be not a cause of a breach in the Presbyteries Union, we call the Lord to record, that it hath been our desire, That neither you nor we be causers thereof; and likeways as you wish, That our delaying to reade the Representation be not the cause thereof, we wish likewise, That your earnest pressing to reade it (before our Objections were salved) be not the cause thereof. As for any obstinate spirit, the Lord help you and us, and all his people, to lay it aside. And forasmuch as you affirm, That there is clear satisfaction held forth to our Scruples, we know, before we saw it you judged it to be so: but we confess, if it were so to us as you affirm it is to you, we could the sooner agree; however, whether it be so or not, we refer all that desires to know it, to this our Reply. And finally, for that great necessity which presseth you to use the Rod of Discipline against us, we pray and wish,
That in striking with the Rod, you be not guilty of Moses fault, who when he should have strucken but once, did strike twice. James Ker. Jeremy O Queen. The Answer of a Letter, which Letter was sent from a Friend in Scotland, to Mr. James Ker in Ireland. Loving Brother, I Received yours, and in the very first Line thereof, you fall on upon my weakness how it hath appeared at such a nick of time; I do acknowledge my weakness, onely this I must say, You that are strong ought then to bear with the weak, and not to pass such a hard censure against us as ye do in your Letter, at least until ye had more seriously pondered the difference between them and us; and until ye had been more fully and clearly in∣formed of all their Proceedings and ours in this business: Nei∣ther is it always the strongest that God doth greatest things by, and reveals most of his minde unto, but God hath chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised hath God chosen, That no flesh should glory in his presence: Neither do ye labor to convince us by strength of Argument in this business, but onely by your bare assertion, you condemn all before you have well tryed all; and encourages the Presby∣tery against us, by sending your Letters first to the Presbytery to break open before I saw them: All which appears to me to be no great token of strength in you, whatever weakness it argue in me; neither left I this untold you, that misreports would be going of us, and therefore did expresly forbid you to believe
all reports, till ye should know the certainty of things; and whether ye have done so or not, your Letter will bear witness of it; ye tell me if any in the three Kingdoms might have been deluded by that People, ye was the man, that ye are not deluded by them, I am very glad; but I conceive it had been better to purpose, to have shown in what tenets I am deluded with them, for it seems to me that in your Letter ye would insinuate as much, and yet ye tell me not what is the error I hold: But though ye keep silence of the errors of my minde, yet ye tell me that your heart is wo for some dividing in my practice at such a time; If I be dividing from Christ, or from the Orthodox Doctrine, or from the grave and godly reform∣ed Churches, either in Scotland or elsewhere, then shew me wherein, and I shall think you have some reason to say so: But if it be onely some scruples and doubts which hinders me to joyn with some late and present actings in this Countrey, untill I shall be cleared thereof, and mainly rising from that ground; viz. because I see not the grave and godly in other places act∣ings as they do; then I conceive your heart needs not be wo for such doubting, till I should be cleared: But if ye will call it a dividing, let it be so, yet I hope this will be granted, that a lawful division is better nor an unlawful conjunction: And if the thing should be good in it self (which doth not yet appear so to me) yet I hope it must appear so to me before I can be any actor therein, because what we do we must do in faith, and every one must be perswaded in his minde of the lawfulness of the thing that he doth: For this cause we have sent to the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland (whose judgement and practice we much reverence) thereby to try what is the judgement and practice in these things which we doubt of; and yet ye say, ye had rather have helped to carry my head to the grave, before it had come to your hands; I acknowledge that were not much matter, for any good I can do in this world, yet I must put you in minde, that your own brother Mr. James, came not only before the Commission, but before the general Assembly it self, and that for supposed errors: And yet I wot not if it will follow, that therefore ye had rather have helped to carry his head to the grave, who can tell but God hath more to do with
him, and with me both, though now I be so loadened with re∣proaches, and yours amongst the rest? Who can tell but God shall clear me even in this business, and make it appear, that it was singular mercy and loving kindeness that keeped me from such courses as these that are on foot now in this poor Land, and that the ringleaders thereof shall be made to think shame of themselves and their way also, which the Lord himself is making clearer from time to time; although you be pleased to term it that base thing in me, and would have it taken away in a private way; I pray you is it private now, when it is come to the ears of the three kingdoms? was not this the thing that many a time we desired, that it should not come to publique hearing at all, for fear of opening the mouthes of all? When this could not be obtained, did we not earnestly press that they would forbear to silence us, till we should go to Scotland to see if we could get satisfaction there? Was not all refused us, and nothing less would serve, then to make it as publique as the three Kingdoms? Is this now a private thing? when by stopping our mouthes they have opened the mouthes of many thousands, every one speak∣ing as they please and effect; ye say that the course that is on foot by our friends in this Land, is the same is on foot with you: This is the main and principle thing that I would have proven and made to appear; but under favor, I must say ye af∣firm much and proves little, but in this I desire to have you ex∣cused, I know it is by misinformation, by such as would have informed the last year that it was a treacherous act to take in the Garisons from Malignants, but it did nor lie in their hands so to do; and it may be, their information shall prove as untrue now this year: I know Scotland has made a solemn Testimony, which I am satisfied with, and am content to declare against Sectaries as that doth, but that is far from the strain of the Re∣presentation at which we scruple; which charges many of the prime men, and chiefest of all the Army, of the grossest Hy∣pocrisie, Perjury, Treason, and wilful Murther, and that of their Prince, and such-like fearful Challenges and capital Crimes; and not onely the Army do they so challenge, but also the Par∣liament it self (if it be a Parliament) If the Church of Scotland do hold and maintain all these things, why do they not make it
manifest and publique to the world, by some publique Declara∣tion, I am sure it is not in the Solemn Testimony; if they have made any since, I have not seen it or heard it; or if they will not do it, why should we be pressed to a thing which they will not do themselves? and why do ye not rather challenge the Presbytery, for the following a course which the Church of Scotland has not done, nor (for any thing I know) will not do, is this fair dealing of yours? But this is not all the work that is on foot by our Friends in this Land, for which also we are suspended: But after all this, they did cast off General Monks, intrusted by the Parliament of England, although he did imploy his Power both for the good of Presbytery and Countrey, and was content to renew the Covenant; and whom they intrusted in his stead, it is manifest now to the three Kingdoms: Also they made a Declaration, wherein they put most of the for∣mer Challenges, and also that they will resist and oppose all the Power that now rules in England; That they shall give at all times due obedience to the yong King, until he shall be establish∣ed according to our Covenant (which now I conceive my Lord Airds is doing) and that all, both Army and Countrey must Subscribe this Declaration, or else be esteemed publique Ene∣mies to the Covenant. Moreover, they caused all the Countrey and Army to rise in Arms, and that expresly against all the Power that now rules in England; notwithstanding that nei∣ther our friends in England that is against that Army, has given us any call so to do, nor has Scotland risen in Arms against them as yet: And that this business against the Army in England might be gotten the better prosecute, they have joyned with Malignants up and down, both Officers & Soldiers not a few. All this and much more some of us saw and told them oft of it, that which was come to pass the day, but no credit was given to us: When the honest Army and Malignant Army in the Lagane, did both rise against Derry, having one and the same quarrel, as was confessed; I then did publiquely ask the Presbytery, first, what was the quarrel against Derry; it was answered me, that I strack against the Foundation, and yet I trow, the quarrel was scarce honest to this day. 2. I asked, why did not the honest Army fight against the Malignant Army, and put them first out
of the way, rather then to go against the Derry that was both farther from them, and also a great Stone Wall between them and them, and the Malignant Army, but at the other end of the Moss; it was answered, that I was challenging the honest Army in the Lagane, and not them. 3. I proponed, if the honest Army in the Lagane have the same quarrel that the Ma∣lignant Army has (as was acknowledged) and the Malignant Army has on the same quarrel that they had the last year (which was also acknowledged) and the last years quarrel was unlawful, Then said I, the honest Armies quarrel in the Lagane seems to me to be unlawful: No Answer gat I of this, but only it was upon the same debates immediately voyced, that Mr. Jeremy O Queen and I should remove off the Seat, because, said they, It was not fit that we should examine the Committee of the Presbyteries proceedings of the aforesaid Questions, because, said they, we did not read the Representation, which was the ground of all their Proceedings; and immediately we were both removed to this day; and that upon the same Debates, at that same time we told them to their faces publiquely, That it was Malignants that we had chiefly to do with, because the quarrel this year was the same that was the last year: And par∣ticularly we told them, that my Lord Airds was the same man (in whom they so much trusted) that now they finde him to be; That they were up in Arms and in blood for the yong King, and yet he never like to give satisfaction; That they were joyn∣ing with Malignants, and that George Monro would come and help them with their work, which was mainly against Sectaries, and for the King (which they were doing without a Commission, but George Monro has his Commission) all this we told them ten weeks ago, and our reward was suspension: After this, they sent Commissioners to the Lagane, and did associate the Malignant Army with the honest Army (except five or six persons of the Malignants that my Lord President did take and slay) and set over them all an Officer that was put from his charge the last year for the expedition: And shortly af∣ter, all turned Malignants together, and then Sir Robert Stewart came and commanded them all, and yet the Councel of War sent Ammunition to them, even since Sir Robert came to them,
and then Sir Robert made George Monre welcom with the bloody Irishes, who is now come into our bosom. These and many such like things is the work on foot here amongst us; and dare ye say in conscience, That this is the same with that of the godly party in Scotland? dare ye hold up your face to God and avow it? why then do ye affirm it? and why do ye encourage them that is thus already insnared? and labors thus to bear down us, who is desiring to witness against a curse that God is witnessing to be against him? And all this work of theirs is grounded upon the Representation, as they themselves declare; and when the fruit is so bad, the tree cannot be good. And for any thing that we yet see, we have cause to bless God, that keeped us both from the one and the other: Is there nothing here that ye can see in us (that will not nor dare not joyn with all these things above-mentioned) but Schism, Singularity and Self-wittedness? Is it Schism, because we will not joyn with all these courses aforesaid? Is it Singularity or Self-witted∣ness, because we desire to adhere to the judgement and pra∣ctice of the Church of Scotland, the godly party in England (even that are against that Army) and many of the godly and well-affected in this poor Land, that is blessing God that made us refrain from joyning with such courses as these, that has been on foot here amongst us. Is it nothing for us to cast off these intrusted by the Parliament of England, and to take on Malig∣nants in stead thereof? To make such Declarations, and then to press them upon mens consciences to read and subscribe, under the pain of being publike enemies to Reformation and the Co∣venant. Was there ever a paper pressed upon Ireland to be subscribed, since the Black Oath, except the Covenant (and, as I conceive, scarce that it self) or upon Scotland, since the Refor∣mation began, except what the Parliament did the last year anent the unlawful Expedition? Was there any, or needed there to be any greater sign, that the way they were on was not good, but their pressing of such Subscriptions? I wish it be not so here, with this work which so much ye commend: Is it time for us to engage War against the Army in England, when none but we are doing it (except Malignants) and when we are so inclosed and compassed about with Papists and Malignants, that has been
holding up a Banner against Christ for so many years; and for our zeal against Sectaries in England has joyned with Malignants up and down, and by this means has suffered the bloody Ene∣mies with George Monro to come into the midst of us: Much ado we have been making against these that was far from us, and neglecting these that was in our bosom: Much ado for the yong King, and yet he never like to give satisfaction. Dear Brother, consider of these things, Is all these nothing but fri∣volous, weak and full of jangling (as ye term them) and yet the Representation is the root, upon which all these branches did grow; I say, the ground of all, as themselves declare, and a part of the cause of our Suspension, as the Sentence it self doth bear yet in record, which they term it there (besides the not reading the Representation) our great disaffection to the pre∣sent publike work carryed on by the Presbytery, Army & Coun∣trey (it is observable, That the Presbytery is first in order, as the principal Agent of all this work) Now where this work of theirs is, or what it is, since the time that we began not to joyn with them, for my part I know not; except it be in this, That we have made our selves altogether Enemies to the Kingdom of England; That all this poor corner of the Land is overspread with Malignants and Papists; That they have suspended us from our Charge this ten weeks by-gone, and now the enemy is suspending them from their Charges; That the poor Countrey is lying under the Enemies feet, and troubled both in their con∣sciences and goods: And the best of it is this, That these in the countrey that will not pay them Sess and Press, to be plundred of all that they have; and these in the Army that will not joyn with the Enemy, are to lay down all their Arms: and though the Army should defend the countrey, yet it is now preached as a noble deed in them, if they will but lay down their Arms; This is now counted brave courage and suffering in them: These things are the issue and Result of all our friends work here (as appears to me) since they and we began to differ, and not to joyn together: and whether a dividing from them, or a conjun∣ction with them be best, ye and all that beholds may judge, if their intention was to take all the Garisons out of the English hands, and put them into the Scots; if God has blessed this
their intention well, our friends themselves will tell you of it: I know their great design was, To resist and oppose all the power that now Rules in England; but when they cannot or will not resist & oppose one thousand of Papists and Malignants that is come in among them, how they can or will resist and op∣pose all the power that now Rules in England, ye in your calm blood, and all the judicious may guess. Many a time Mr. Je∣remy and I told them, That there was as many Papists and Ma∣lignants in Ireland, as would give them this year all fighting their fill, although they did let England alone with their resisting and opposing: and all that we gat for such Advice, was Silen∣cing for our Reward: And now they that would fight against all, God will not honor them once to draw the sword against these that is setting up the Mass amongst them. And if all what is said be so frivolous as ye term it to be, then I retort it back again upon you, Why then for such frivolous things should all this din and stir be made? Why should such frivolous things be pressed upon our consciences, whether we would or not? Why for such frivolous things should we be deprived of our Mini∣stery, and so many Souls in a countrey side be starving for want of the Gospel? Is these frivolous things? or all their papers together, are they Canonical? Are they either Old Testament or New? or are they a humane Invention? Why then with such Authority should it be pressed upon us? Was not this wont to be solid reasoning against Bishops long ago? is Truth worn old, or out of date? What then means all this now? I remem∣ber Bishops did stop honest mens mouthes, but never gat the honor to open them again: I wish that this do not befal our Presbytery; I heard one of them pray in publike, That if this work which they have now in hand be not according to Gods minde, that then the vengeance of God might come upon them and their Posterity. Some says they have prayed in Faith, but I wish it be not so; and desires that they and all the people of God may be made sensible of their wrongs, and pardoned for what they have done amiss. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. Yours in Christ, JAMES KER. July 13. 1649.
A Letter sent from Mr. James Ker in Ireland, to the Commissioners of the general Assembly of the Church of SCOTLAND. Right Reverend Brethren, Mr. Jeremy O Queen and I did write to you twice before, the first was anent the Representation, whereof we gat your Answer; the other was concerning their work from which we did disassent, because we both did and does conceive that it was not approven of God, the chief heads whereof we did write to you in our last Letter: We conceive ye are much wronged b misinformation, and by this means we are wronged also; ye say that ye are certainly informed, that our last Papers was not communicate to the Presbytery or any of our Brethren, but put into the hands of others; I say that is mis∣information, for we did offer that our Reply to the whole Pres∣bytery, and that offer was publiquely done in face thereof, and they also absolutely refused it, and would not receive it; at that time we said, if they would not, we would give it to such as would, and so we did; at that same time we further urged, that if they would not receive it, yet that they would be pleased to hear it read over to them, and so we did read the Heads of it unto them informal as it was, for they would not give us time to put it in form, but afterward we put it in form: Now I would fain know, if we could do any more to get it communicate to them; ye say we have divulged other Papers, which lay the whole weight of our refusing to joyn with the Presbytery, upon other grounds and jealousies then we express in our Papers to them, wherein ye wish we had dealt more bro∣therly and dutifully: To which I answer, that we could not ex∣press them in our Papers to them, because they did not desire us to give in these things in writing at all, for there was nothing in writing desired, except anent the Representation: But it is well known, that it was other grounds that was the greatest cause of our dis-joyning, and the greatest cause of our Suspen∣sion,
and for which we were publiquely accused and condemn∣ed before the Presbytery, which they term in their sentence (besides the not reading the Representation) our great dis∣affection to the present Publique Work, which is carryed on by the Presbytery, Army and Countrey; and if your wisdoms be not yet informed what this work of theirs is (or rather was) I desire it may be remembred what we said in our last Letter to you, and for a more full account of this work of theirs, we re∣fer you to the Answer of a Letter of my good Brothers, Ro∣bert Symsons, which he can shew you, which Answer will in∣form you whether we had just reason to dis-assent from their work or not: As for our deceitfulness in shewing such things, I conceive it is our duty soberly to vindicate our selves and our Ministery from false aspersions put upon us, and to represent things as they are, that so they that will see may see, and let the blame lie where it is. Lastly, ye say three times in your Letter, that we see not nor discerns not through the evils of the times; I do acknowledge we see not well, and so as we should, and far less do we see the Presbyteries late proceedings to be such as we should have joyned with, we see not the truth of all that they affirm in their Representation, neither do ye affirm it all to be true positively, although that was the thing we desired you to do in our first Letter to you; we see not how they could de∣cline these intrusted by the Parliament of England (upon the grounds that they did it) and to take on Malignants in stead thereof: to preach for, and cause the poor Countrey Subscribe an unsound Declaration, for which I was publikely accused my self before the Presbytery, because I did hinder my Parishioners to subscribe the same; and the then Councel of War did send out their very punctual Orders throughout the Countrey to all the Ministers and Elders, to return in all haste all such dis-affected Countrey-mens names as would not take the Covenant and subscribe the Declaration (to make it honest, they put it in be∣side the Covenant) which Orders I can yet shew subscribed by Lord Montgomery, whom the Presbytery helped to advance, and entred themselves and him in the Plea, and now they have left him in the mire, but how he will come out I know not; we saw it not right to associate with a Malignant Army in the
Lagane, and to raise in Arms a poor handful of scattered peo∣ple in Ʋlster, to resist and oppose all the Power that now rules in England, as is asserted in the aforesaid Declaration, there be∣ing a numerous Army of Papists and Malignants at that same time on foot in the Land: These things ye have passed over with silence, for which cause chiefly we were silenced, and yet ye stand not to declare that the Presbyteries sentence against us is just: If these, and such like as these aforesaid be just, then is our sentence just. There is one in Heaven above us all, that knows and sees the justness of all, and perhaps will measure to them and others such measure as they have given to us and our poor flocks this 29 weeks by-gone; and though it be most true that our sight is very short, yet I desire it may be remembred, that at that time when the Presbytery was most great and intire with my Lord Airds, that even then we saw and declared to their faces publiquely, that he was then the man that now all men that is not blinde does acknowledge him to be, and that the Presbytery was helping him to get an Army at his back, lest he should go and appear before the Parliament of England for his faults: That the Quarrel this year was the same that was the last year, that they were in blood already for the yong King, and that George Monre would come and help them with their work: This much and more we saw, and told them of it in the beginning of May, and George Monro came not into Colrain till the seventh of June, and yet we shall be con∣demned by you, and the Presbytery must be justified and loap free for all, let them do what they list, but I know all this ye have done by misinformation: And now after they have done all these things, and so set an open door to Malignants to come in and overspread all the Countrey, and to take up all the Ga∣risons: Then they begin to make Declarations against Malig∣nants, whom they say is unexpectedly come in amongst them; was it unexpectedly, when we gave them such fair warning be∣forehand of it? but prejudice against us, had so byassed their Judgment, that nothing that we could say could have any weight with them at all; and had it not bin for the respect that we carry to the Gospel, and our tenderness of them, how hard soever they have dealt with us, we should both have spoken and done
in another strain, nor yet we have done, I desire to boast non, I am the least of all his servants, yet I cannot smother the good∣ness and kindness of God towards me in this business, that made me, and that one other man, to stand against the stream, and to bear witness against such a foul piece of work, as was on foot in this poor Land, the dregs whereof remains to this day, and I fear others shall finde the smart of it hereafter, or all be done: I never did doubt but this work of theirs would end here, as it has done: Neither do I doubt, but that the Malignants and Pa∣pists, that has outrun them, and taken the quarrel out of their hand, but they will come down also, though now they seem to be high. I will not presume to take upon me to give advice, to such a great Judicatory as ye are: Yet I hope the will pardon me to express some of my fears to you, which I am pressed in spirit to do concerning Scotland, since ye time that I saw the Parliament of Scotlands Answer to a Letter from the Parlia∣ment of England, dated (if I mistake not) in May last; wherein (as I conceive) ye will not acknowledge at all, these that now rules in England, and did refuse to treat with them at all, till they were so and so: If Scotland continue in that strain, and will not keep so much correspondence with these that now rules in in England, as that ye may live in peace together (which I conceive might be done, although ye needed not to justi∣fie their fault) Then I fear one of two stroaks for Scot∣land, either that the Malignants will trod down all the ho∣nest party there, which seems probable to me might be easily done, if they had but once a little head there on foot; and if this should fall out, by which means the honesty party should be delivered to me, I confess is unseen: Or else if ye all stick toge∣ther and go one way (as now ye seem to me to do) Then I fear ye fall in blood with England, and if ye do (at least till your call be more clearer nor yet it is) I am afraid that England sub∣due Scotland, and how then ye will help your self, I confess to me is also unseen: It seems strange to me, that the States of Scotland could treat with James Graham, and give him so ma∣ny thousands to go his way, for all his murders in Scotland: And could send Commissioners and treat with George Monro the last year in Scotland, that differences might be composed,
and that with the Church advice, and yet cannot treat with these in England: If ye call these in England enemies, so were they: If they call themselves a Common-wealth: what then, is that worse to you nor an enemy? Is that worse to you nor these that has wasted your Land, That has been skilful to de∣stroy, and are declared to be traitors and rebels? If these in England has broken the Covenant, has not these above menti∣oned, done the same: Was not both James Graham, and George Monro Covenanters (to your shame be it spoken) Is these in England worse enemies nor such Malignants are (as I have heard the chiefest men of our Presbytery say, and so came of it when they should have fought against George Monro at Bellimony) but I hope the honest Party in Scotland is not of that minde: I will not let my self believe, that they have changed that princi∣ple, which they have holden so fast this eleven year by-past; and not onely so, but even the last year it self, when the Eng∣lish Army was in Scotland amongst them: If you say they will not treat with you, except you acknowledge them a Common-wealth, I say that is their Objection, and not yours: If they will not, then let the blame lye upon them, but let it not lye up∣on you: There is four Reasons which being well pondered, makes me to think, that these that has been friends, and ioyn∣ing together in the three Kingdoms, since the 38 year of God, should not fall in blood suddenly, and so turn most hateful ene∣mies to each other, at least till these reasons be removed (and I wish Ministers would be more on this strain) First, not as long as there is any Army of Papists and Malignants on foot in any of the three Lands, who has still been holding up a banner a∣gainst Christ and his People in these Lands, this eleven year by-past: Secondly, Till the King give all just satisfaction, at least to the honest Party in Scotland, and that really evidenced: Thirdly, Till all means of treaty, and all other means possible be first assayed: Fourthly, Till the honest Presbyterian Party in England (I mean these that is godly amongst them, because ma∣ny Bishops men are there) give Scotland and Ireland a call so to do: All these I confess are and has been of much weight with me all this year (I know not what weight they have or will have with you) but it seems they have had no weight with our Pres∣bytery
at all: For first there was an Army of Papists and malig∣nants on foot in Ireland (and sometimes also in Scotland) Secondly, The King had not given satisfaction: Thirdly, All means of treaty and other ways was not used, with these that now rules in England: Fourthly, No call from the honest Presby∣terians there, and yet they will not stand to write, & preach and countenance, that all the Countrey should rise in arms, to resist and oppose all the power that now rules in England, although they have been our friends and dear brethren, all these years by∣gone, and has done good service against the common-enemy, and are doing so still (although for that word I was publiquely chal∣lenged before the Presbytery) and let as many as pleases speak of their downfal, yet as long as there lies so much of the root of the quarrel in this, viz. that they will not suffer or admit Kings to rule over them that will not rule for Christ: It seems to me their fall will not be so soon as many thinks, if Scotland take warning from our Presbytery to look or they loup, their lesson will not be so dear bought as perhaps otherways it may cost them, If Presbyteries take upon them to crush the people of God, except all will do whatsoever they please to command them: I suspect that God hemb in the power of Presbyteries, not because Pres∣byteries are wrong Judicatories, but because they take power to them that God never gave them: I fear that the Presbytery in Ireland, when they had enough of power they would not be content with it, but took too much upon them, that they shall not enjoy that power in haste, even what they might have had before: I fear that in seeking to break us by their power, that God will turn it about to break themselves: I fear that God be not well pleased with them for ingaging all the poor Country in War against Derry and other parties, and being so ingaged, and also under Malignants feet, then to run away to Scotland and leave them altogether, and few or none to give them any counsel what to do in this their strait, and then to call such run∣ing away suffering, I fear such suffering be not acceptable to God. One thing I must tell you more, and so make an end, I have used all means both with you and the Presbytery, to get my mouth opened again without offence to any: My last Letter to the Presbytery was this as follows, Reverend Brethren, I in∣tended
to have been with you at this time, but am necessarily hindered: I would also let you know that it is my earnest de∣sire, that differences might be taken away and our union made up because that the delaying thereof, helps to enlarge the dif∣ference, makes the godly to stumble, opens the mouth of the wicked, and makes our charges lye desolate, upon these weigh∣ty considerations, it is my desire (If your wisdoms thinks it fit) that ye would be pleased to relax your sentence, and by Gods grace I shall joyn with you in times coming in all things, that may be for the advancement of Gods work, in this poor Land, both against Sectaries and Malignants, leaving these things to your consideration, I remain yours, &c. These are the words of my Letter to them verbarim, but no Answer I gat at all of it: Breach of union seems nothing to them, their credit and power (or rather the abuse of power) seems to be dearer to them then the offence done to God: The opening the mouths of the wic∣ked, making the godly to stumble, The silencing of Ministers, The laying Country sides desolate for want of the Gospel, Their Act against us must stand, as that of the Medes and Per∣sians, until we will approve all that they have done, which is now manifest as the Sun, the folly thereof; unless we will call darkness light, and light darkness: We must stand at the beck, and their Act (though never so wrong) must tye us from all the parts of our Ministerial function; but whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto them, more then unto God, judge ye: As for Sectaries, I am content to declare against them, but that will not serve them, except it be just in their mould: No∣thing less will serve them, then to cause me to charge and chal∣lenge them with the grossest hypocrisie, perjury, treason, wil∣ful murdering the King, and slanderers of the highest sort: If the Presbytery can follow these challenges, and charges, and ca∣pital Crimes, not onely against Sectaries, but against the Ar∣my in England (and perhaps now in Ireland and not onely the worst of the Army, but the chiefest of the Army; and not one∣ly the chiefest of the Army, but many of the chiefest as is asser∣ted in their Representation: I say if they know how to follow such charges as these, let them be doing; for my part I intend to be none of their witnesses: My desire to your reverend and
godly wisdoms, is this, That now after full information (which I conceive ye wanted before, or else ye would not have done as ye did) that ye would be pleased to deal with the Presbyte∣ry, to make them sensible of their wrong, not onely done a∣gainst God, but also against England (which perhaps were not a needless work for their new expedition) and against us their Brethren; and upon the acknowledgement of their fault, to re∣lax their sentence, and after that is done, I am content to joyn with them hereafter, otherways if ye will not desire them to do so, or they being desired if they shall not do so: Then I de∣sire you that ye may have me excused, if I shall preach the Go∣spel, without asking their leave any further at all: And let it be remembred, that they have divided from Truth, and from me, and not I from them, and which is worse, will not be made sen∣sible of it: And had it not been more out of the respect that I did carry to you and your Judicatory, in not desiring to give you offence, (which now I hope will not be after all these means are used, and so much time spent in waiting on them) and out of the respect that I did carry, and does to that Government, and Judicatory here, if they would but know the right limits thereof, and not abuse it as they do: And besides, that the power of Armies was all for them, at that time, If these had not weighed more with me, to make me so long silent, then all their sentence, I should not have been one day silent at all, be∣cause I conceive although the Presbytery be a lawful Judicatory, yet their unlawful Act in silencing me wrongfully cannot binde me thereunto, no more nor the unlawful Act of the Parliament of Scotland, the last year for the expedition could binde the Countrey to obedience thereto, though otherways it was a lawful Parliament of it self, for such unlawful Acts in Church or State, are not lawful power from God, but the abuse of pow∣er which I conceive we are not bound to obey, I have spoken my own minde; as for Mr. Jeremy, he is in Scotland, he can declare his own minde himself: I am like to be much pressed both with∣out and within, to preach the Gospel: Neither was the Gospel without affect by Mr. Jeremies Ministery and mine, Yet not we, but the grace of God with us: I know not if this has stirred up our Brethrens envy against us, because perhaps we were not a
whit behinde themselves in that, but I hope better things of them, and loves to have much charity, if I could get, and it were but half grounds to walk upon: One thing in all that is said, I must earnestly crave and intreat of you, viz. that prejudice make not any truth unsavory to you, or to despise it, be∣cause come from a weak Instrument: Thus I have shewn you my minde (and as I conceive in sobriety) If it be acceptable it is well, if not, I have discharged my conscience, and what I have said shall remain in record, as witness thereof: So wishing you all grace and peace in him, I remain At Bellimony, Sept. 15. 1649. Your Brother to serve you in what I can, JAMES KER.
To the Reverend Moderator, and remanent Brethren of the Presbytery at Banger: The humble Petition of the Congregation of Ballymony, Humbly sheweth, THat whereas it is not unknown unto your grave Wisdoms, with what great difficulty and hard wrestling, through the good hand of our God upon us, and by your Wisdoms faithful care, we obtained a faithful Pastor to be planted amongst us, to the great rejoycing of our Spirits, in hope of living happily under the Comfort of his Ministery, whatsoever might be our outward condition by Gods appointment, in these sad times of Distraction: But this rich and inestimable favor we had not enjoyed long, till Satan, the arch Enemy of our peace and welfare, by Gods per∣mission, for our chaslisement, prevailed to make a woful rent; and through occasion of our said Pastor his differing somewhat in judgement from your Wisdoms, in the matter of the late Re∣presentation of the imminent danger of Religion, from enemies of Truth, emitted in February, 1648. We have now for a whole year almost been deprived, to our great grief, of the benefit of his publike Ministery, which hath proved no small detriment and damage unto our inward Consolation in these perillous Times, while so many Wolves have been raging among the Flock: For preventing whereof in time coming, not being able with peace of minde to live any longer under so sad and uncouth an affliction, withut using all possible honest means for salving of the wound, in obedience unto your Wisdoms Wholsom Admonitions unto us upon our last Petition, for releasing our said Pastor of his Su∣spension, we have not onely been endeavouring to become sensible of what might be found amiss in our carriage, in relation to this business; but also have been dealing with him, not without suc∣cess, for which we bless God, that he may declare himself ready and willing in the due acknwledgment of any oversight which hath appeared by any word or writ of his concerning this matter, to make satisfaction, as your Wisdoms shall think meet, in the spi∣rit
of meekness to appoint: And therefore your Petitioners do humbly beg, in the bowels of Christ, that you would without any longer delay, take compassion upon this our desolate condition, and not suffer us to wander or scatter any longer, as so many sheep without a Shepherd; That without any longer delay, you would be pleased, in tender commiseration of this our sad estate, to relax the said Sentence; and so much the more, that we are now grievously threatned by these who bear Rule, to have a stran∣ger thrust in upon us (except our said Pastor be presently restored unto the publike ministration) The dangerous effect whereof, as it is like to prove very sad to us, so are we sure, it will be very unpleasing unto your Wisdoms, when it may be too late to be prevented: And if your Wisdoms shall not be intreated in the bowels of Christ to grant this our humble Desire, we do hereby clear our selves, That we shall be free of all the sad Conse∣quences that may follow upon the refusal thereof: And so ex∣pecting your Wisdoms favorable and satisfactory Answer, We shall humbly pray, &c.
A Copy of the Confession ordered by the Presbytery sitting at Banger, to be Subscribed by Mr. JAMES KER. I Do profess my self to be grieved for the offence I have done to God, in not joyning with the Presbytery, in reading the Representation set out by them against the proceedings of the Sectaries in England, and that I have been so long in con∣senting to their Ordinance, and submitting my self to them: And likewise, I acknowledge my wrong in writing some Letters to Scotland, wherein were some things reflecting upon the Pres∣bytery and their proceedings unadvisedly written by me, and somethings I writ impertinently to the Commission of the Church. Also I promise by the assistance of God, to concur with the Presbytery in time to come, in Preaching and Praying against the present unlawful Power of Sectaries who now com∣mand in this Kingdom and in England, and against the breach of Covenant, and to pray for the King; and that upon his agreeing to the faithful advice of his Subjects, God may re∣store him unto his right over these Kingdoms: And likeways that I shall read the Representation when they shall desire me. FINIS.
