O631A E138_16 99859983 112088
NEVV LAMBETH FAYRE NEWLY CONSECRATED AND PRESENTED BY THE POPE HIMSELFE, CARDINALS, BISHOPS, IESVITS, &c. VVherein all Romes Reliques are set at sale, with the old Fayre Corrected and enlarged, Opening and Vending the whole Mistery of Iniquity. By Richard Overton. VVith remarkable Annotations declaring under what Pope, and in what yeare of our LORD every Relique and Ceremonie came into the Church. LONDON, Printed By R. O. and G. D. 1642.
To the READER. THis Vessell once hath lane'd into the Maine But being landed, must to Sea againe, Her decks repair'd, and every place beside Shee'l venture once more  the falling Tyde Fraught with more Reliques, the she was before Such as Romes Conclave long hath kept in store Ship-splitting Rocks, with fearce tempestious wind Shee dreads not (Reader) if thou be'st but kind If Boreas storme, and all the Winds beside, Thy kind acceptance will allay their pride, be not prejudicate, but if thine eye Pry out their faults, be pleas'd to passe them by. Thus then, she ventures, to present her Ware And bids you welcome to▪ New Lambeth-Fayre.
NEW LAMBETH-FAYRE, Opening and Vending the whole Mistery of Iniquitie. THe Pope of Rome to heare the great distresse Of our Lord Bishops, and their bad successe At the late Fayre of Lambeth was perplext, And at their trading there was highly vext, That in a fury (posting thence amaine,) He came to consecrate the Fayre againe, With Pope Silvester the first appoin∣ted the Colledg of Cardinalls Anno, 315. Pope Marcellus ordained 16. in Rome to baptize converts from Paganisme, and for the buriall of Martyrs. Cardinals (puft up with Roman pride) And lofty Prelats, and a world beside Of Iesuits, Yea, Hells Infernall Gate Was set wide open, to advance their state, From whose black sulpherous smoak, there did arise Legions of Locusts (darkning all the skyes) Thousand of thousands, Monks and Fryers store And Virgin Nuns, came to attend the WHORE, 'Tis endesse to expresse, such was the TraineThe Order of Iesuites was the Invention of Io∣hannes Columbi∣nus in Scna a City of Hethruria Anno, 1368. That did presse after with their might and maine: Such Troops of Black-coats came unto this Fayre, Which cast a sable darknesse on the aire, Which made my Muse, to view that ghastly sight, To be afraid they'd turne the day to Night:* The Order of Monks first raised by Basili∣us Magnus Bi∣shop of Cesaria in Cappadocea Anno, 389. A numerous Fleet of Ships were richly fraught, And all with safety to the Land vere brought, With sacred Reliques, Trinkets long before Expel'd this Iland, now were brought a shore Which being done; the Pope did then prepare Himselfe, again to consecrate the Fayre: The strange Seaven headed Beast pranc'd through the Town
Having ten Hornes, and every Horne a Crowne, And on his back his Holinesse he bore Which was an Emblem of great Babells WHORE; The Cardinalls, Priests, Prelats, and the rest Rode in state after (wondring at the Beast;) Who as he rode along did consecrate The Fayre againe to more propitious Fate: Which being done, and all their Booths were made, With all things fitting for that holy Trade, Vpon their Booths and Stalls for feare of evill, Were Crosses set to scare away the Divell. The Cryer then commanded did proclame The Fayre again, thus in his Holy Name. O╌yes — O╌yes — O╌yes. IT is decreed, ordered, and this day commanded by the Councell of all the holy(a) Pope Ben∣net the 2. obtai∣ned the supre∣macy of Empe∣rour Constantine and to be Christs Vicar, St. Peters Successor &c. Anno, 667. Church, first of our most holy Father of Fathers a St. Peters Successor, Christs Vicar, our high Priest, chiefe Pontifex and Pope of Rome, his Cardinalls, Arch-Bishops and Bishops, and of all the Clergie of the Holy Church, that (in the name of his Holinesse, and of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of all the he and she Saints) forth with this holy and spirituall Fayre (thus consecrated) shall begin, wherin all sorts of sared Ware and Babalonish Reliques shall be set at sale for the ransoming of his imprisoned holinesse, William Laud Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, his Grace, with the rest of his sacred Brethren now in durance in the Tower for their most pious papall and Archprelaticall Pro∣testationThe said Em∣perour gave to Pope Siluester and his succes∣sors, Rome. Ita∣ly, and the West parts for St. Pe∣ters Patrimony for ever. and Petition, and for the raysing up supply for their Viaticall expenses with us in our returne to Babilon the Great. Vivat papa Romanorum In secula seculorum, Et ultra. Amen Amen. This done the Pope (in hight of Romish pride) With Cardinalls were appointed by Pope Gregory the 10. for the election of Popes Anno, 1272. Cardinalls, and all the Troop beside Of Hell smoak-vented Locusts shew'd their Ware Which they brought with them to New Lambeth Fayre. Heer's a rare Head, the Pope cry'd out amaine. 'Tis stuft with Treasons full as't can containe, Come buy this Head, 'tis fild with Noble braines, Tak't in your hand, Ile sell't you for small gaines, Would'st thou know how to sway the Royall Throne? Live like a King, and make a King like none; 'Ile sell that Art, good as the Divell ere made; Thou never see a beetter Man of th'Trade,
Buy Treasons of the Maker, here are store, Vpon my word, I am great Babels WHORE: Here's Powder Plots, Oh most admired Ware, They'l blow up Kings and Kingdomes in the Ayre, Come hither Sir, are you for Sea or Land? Her's Plots for both, will fit you out of hand; How like you 88. Oh such a Plot Will tame the fury of the cursed Scot! Her's the late Fleet, the Flemish Butter Box, Saluted lately with so many knocks. But the best Plot that ever yet was found Is now on foot upon the Irish Ground, Oh here is ware will quell your proudest Foe, And make him swim in blood where ere you goe! Take but one Dram of this, and it will make Both England, Wales and Scotland too to quake, 'Tis the rar'st one my Holinesse hath brought Vnto this Fayre, thus to be sold and bought, I brought a Paterne purpose for this Land To bring the Hereticks to my command, Buy't for its vertue, for it hath a power To free my Laud, and set' him out' oth Towre, Here's Faux his Brain pan, for a Quaffing Boull To drinke an Health in Treasons to his soul, Gowries Conspiracie, or what else may be Fatall to Kings, and Triumph unto Me, Here's Straffords Witt, will teach you how to ride In Charles His Waine, and through the Stars beside, But like to Phaeton too busie with the Sun He was throwne out, and so his life was done. Come hither Sir, doe you desire to be Greater then Pope Inno∣cent arrogated to himselfe power to crown and deprive Im∣perours, Kings, and Princes at his pleasure, Anno. 1195. Kings, or Emperours in degree, Make Kings your Pope Alex∣ander the 3. compelled Lewes King of France, and Henry King of England, to be his Lackies. Pope Adrian was angry with the Emperour for holding the left Stirrop. Anno 1158. Slaves, and Emperors kisse your Pope Le the first offered his feet to Prin∣ces to be kssed▪ Anno 850. Toe, And to your Highnesse make them barefoot goe? I have that Art, no Mortall can compare, Or ever bring the like to any Fayre: Tis better then Lawn-sleeves, for this will make Not onely Kings, but Kingdomes too to shake, Not many Kings surceas'd, I was supreame Here in this Ile, but time hath turnd the streame.
But though the thing be something out of date, Here's Plots to boot, which will renew its state, Come buy this Gem, then in small time I hope You'll prove a Prelate, but beware the Rope. Here's ayd for'th Irish, to subdue and quell The Protestants, and send them thence to Hell: Oh that curst Crew, I have new Plots in store To shed their blood and leave them in their Goare, Millions of Money I have had ere while Fo stratagems invented for this Ile, Well let them thrive, I may ere long I hope Shew them a trick thus to abuse the Pope, My eldest Son sole heire unto my Powre Whom they most falsly have clapt in the Towre, I will redeeme if in this sacred Fayre, I can get money for my popish ware, Ile be reveng'd, or else my Triple-crowne Shall lye at stake, to credit his renowne, You that affect his sacred holinesse Ile sell you plots will free him from distresse, Come buy them Tribe of Levi, for I know You'd free your Primate, if you knew but how, Come here ye Dum-Diegoes, view and see My Romish Conclave, come and buy of me, If you want Treasons or confounding Plots To conquer England and subdue the Scots▪ Here buy this plot, and take it on my word, It is the best the Divells in hell afford, I have a thousand thousand Divells to bring Tydings from Ntions, and from every King, How States are sway'd, and how they'r wheeld about, Some at the court, and some with rable-rout, That I know when the fittest time will be To make a commick state a tragadie, Whereat my muse began to start aside As one that scarce durst longer there abide To see such Sparks of Velvet, as came there To cheapen treasons; but I will forbeare, To nominate, to whom the Pope did vent Accursed Plots to breake our Parliament:
To see such trading there my Muse resolu'd, To try else where what other things were sold, And thence departing further she espi'd The Roman Cardinalls in glorious pride, Their stalls were so adorn'd with severall kinds Of Babels Trinkets to content their minds, Which made her wonder, wondring did behold Pesecution for conscience came in under Pope Pelagius 1. Anno. 552. af∣ter established, at the great Lat∣teran Councell, Anno, 1215. retained in Eng∣land by bloody Bishops and their Courts to the yeare 1641. Saints in their blood lye groveling on the mould, Their Shops and hangings were besmear'd with blood Of Martyr'd soules, which had their Lawes withstood, Gazing at this, the next thing that she saw Were bleeding hearts, squees'd in a griping paw, Dividing aire with hell-breath'd Dialect In these harsh tearms, Oh now I could disect, Thousands of soules, thus peecemale in my spight Though their curs'd Wives and Children were in sight, Here are devises for to torture those That shall his holinesse or us oppose, Our Spanish Inquisition if you'l buy 'Twill fit you for all tortures presently, This I brought with me 'cause I heard of late Your High-Commission is grown out of date, Here's a conceit will make both great and small Nations, and peoples, kindreds, tongues and all,* Foretold Rev. 13. first assaied by Boniface the first, granted by Emperour Ph∣cas a Tyrant, and Emperour Constantine: Obtained by Pope Bennit the 2. Anno. 66. Bow to your Marke, and number of your Name That none shall buy or sell without the same. Then cries another here is Purgatory, Limbo Infantum, atrum, and the Story Of Bell and Dragon, Tobit and his Dogg Come buy these Trinkets and away Ile jogg, Here's the Pope Le the third, de∣creed that all mens judgment must be subject▪ to the Popes de∣crees, Anno. 817. Nicholas the first, that they should be e∣quall with Gods Word, Anno, 871. Decretals Pardons for the dead Indulgences the holy Crosse and Bead, The next to him a salvage Bonner stood Much like the other that was dipt in bloud, And he sold fire and faggots to torment And burne the Saints up all incontinent, Another he had got a world of Spits With Instruments to hack them all to bits, Another he sold Hunger Thirst and cold With loathsome Goales for such as should be bold,
Once to controle them in their papall sway, Or dash their glory with an heavenly ray, But the most hideous gstly sight of all Was a fierce Frend, an other Cardinall: For in his shop with horrour and amaze Were all the tortures us'd in former dayes, The ten hot Persecutions, in their rage, And all the rest us'd in this present Age, Were there at sale, that he appeard to be More cruell farre then starn Tesiphome, Snakie hair'd Megera, Alecto el, Are scarce so cruell in th' Infernll Cell, Sometimes hs shop was fild with sulphurie smoak, One would have thought his chapmen would'been choakt Then presently the fire and faggot blaz'd Which made my muse affrighted stand amaz'd, To see such Millions frying in the fire While this stearn Tyrant gnash't his teeth with Ire, The Skins of Saints, their Tongues, their eyes, and eares, Were there at sale with floods of brinish teares. Weary of this, my Muse display'd her Wing And soaring higher heard the wlkin Ring, With various voyces chattering in the Ayre, To sell their Trinkets in new Lambeth-Fayre: Bald-pated Fryers, with th'Infernall Traine Of Romish Vermine cri'd with might and maine, Their severall Trinkets, It was decread at a Counsell held at Lions gnder Pope Gre∣nory the 10. An∣no 1271. That  Parsons and Vicars should be called for ever after Priests, & no mo ePrelats, Priests and all the rest Of Hell-sent Locusts, that came with the Beast, Cald to their chap-men, swearing by the Masse Their ware was such as through the World might passe, Pope Gre∣gory the 1. de∣vised Anthems. Anthems and Pope Dama∣sus added Hymnes to the Service. Hymnes, and Pope Pela∣gius the 1. Or∣dained Funerall Dirges, with Masses of requi∣m to be sung For the dead. Anno 552. Dirges for the dead, The Pope Greg. the 1. Ordai∣ned the Office of the Masse Anno 590. Au∣thors of the Masse, Gregory, Gelasius, Sirici∣us, Clement, A∣lexander, Pela∣gius Sergius &c. Popes. Latin Masse with the Incarnate Bread, Bell Book and Candle, to accurse all evill, And Invented by Alexander the 1. Anno 10. Holy water to affright the Devill, Divine First com∣manded by Pope Agapetus Anno, 533. Procession, holy Pope Cletus allowed Pilgri∣mages Anno 81. Pilgrimage All sorts of Whimsies, fit for every age, Fresh Avie Maries from the holy function, Cream, Oyle and Cream, brought in by Pope Cle∣ment. Anno. 92, Salt, and Spittle, with the Appoynted for dying Per∣sons, by Pope Felix 4. Anno 525. sacred Vnction, Orders for Pope  ordained Preists for every. Town, village &c Anno 101. Priests, First M∣kish Order began under Pope Siri∣cius, first raised by Basilius mag∣nus Bishop of Ce∣sarea in Capp. dcea. Anno. 389. Monks, Pope inno∣cent. 3. in the 18. Year of his pa∣pacy ordained Fryers, there be nine severall Or∣ders of them. Friers, and the nest Of Abbie Lubbers, Priors, and the rest,
The shirt of haire, the Pennance, was invented by Pope Nicholas the first. Pennance and the Crosse in Baptisme first commanded by Pope Clement. Anno. 92. Crosse, Prayers unto Saints, and such like popish drosse, Shroving of women▪ with such pritty knacks, To calculate the Stars upon their backs, Morning Orisns, prostrate on their beds, And Pope Iohn the first raised up the Order of Nuns. Virgin Nuns cr'd out their Maiden-heads: Omne Venale others cry and call Here's Money Pardons to forgive you all▪ You that are Blades, and doe desire to roare, Here's Dispensations for to wenth and whore, Here's carnall Merits, Rites, and Innovations, And Ceremonies, for all kind of Nations. Pope Vitali∣an first brought in Organs into the Church, An. 653. Vitalian Cri'd with Organs on his back Iust fidler like, what Musick doe you lack, And dancing after, Guid Aro∣rinus the first, devised these six notes. Guid'gan to play, And quaver'd out, V, Re, My, Fa, Sol, La, Lay out your money, others cry'tis drosse Here's Pope  ordained the Paschall ∣pers to be Hal∣lowed, Anno 414. Paschall Tapers, Pope Grego∣ry the first brought creepings to the Crosse into the Church. creepings to the crosse, By Gregory. Tentales for soules departed, Ibid. sacred Palmes, The first began under Pope Silvester, Anno 35. Hermits aprell, consecrated Almes, Here's Holy-fire or∣dained by Zozi∣mus. holy fire for Easters Eve to hear Your stomacks to concoct your Sunday's meat, Pope Ignius first ordained Churches to bee hallowed, Anno 143. Church Consecrations, Ornaments of gold, And hallow'd Golgotha's Pope Calix∣tus first ordained Church-yards, and the hallow∣ing of them. An. 222. Calixtussold, Collects and  Pope Gre∣gory first, and Pope Gelasius first brought them in. Gregory calls aloud, And Pope Sabian first brought Bells into the Church. Anno 603. Sabian with his Bells ran through the croud, Iejune To prevent Shee Popes it was decreed that at their election they should sit bare arsed in a bottomlesse Chaire, and a Cardinall with al humility should groape with his hand whether &c. if he had them, then the Cards▪  should cry, Testiculs habet, answer Deo gra∣. Anno. 860. Telesphorus Iack-a-lent did bring (Brought hither first by Carcbertus King.) Then presently Pope Ioan cries as she rides, My back, my back, my belly and both my sides, And in a fury cals (as she were wild) Come hither friends, and buy this holy Child, And Innocent to wash of Adams sinn, Brought holy water to baptize it in. Synods and Counsells, others came to vent, The Lateran, Nicene, Bracharence, and Trent, The Orleans, Lyons: endlesse is the kind Of various Reliques that are yet behind, All there at sale: But in the very pride Of this New Faire, my prying Muse espi'd
An ugly Owle came fluttering through the aire On purpose sure to view their popish ware, Much like that schreching broadfac'd Bird of night Whose three dayes daring presence did affright, Romes mighty Senate, that they durst not stay; But thought it was the Divell, and ran away. Even so this Owle (pearch'd on the top of all. The sacred Crosse fixt on the Pope his stall; Which when they saw some gan to hoote, and fling Their Crosier Staffes, to make her take the wing, But this bold Bird of darknesse would not rise Doe what they could, but staring with her eyes, Out-fac'd them all, which presently amaz'd The Pope himselfe, who thought the Divell had gaz'd; That in affright they pack'd up all their Ware, For Rome againe, and left New Lambeth Faire. But our more bolder Bishops not affraid, Of Owles, nor Divells, were nothing disamay'd, But with undanted Courage all amaine, Came to this Fayre thus consecrate againe, The Cleark ofth'Fayre was presently bespoken, To give them liberty their Stalls to open: Proclaim't againe, the Bishops all they cry'd, Wee'll try if we can longer here abide: The Clerke gave leave, the Cryer on a Hill Standing, began to cry with voyce so shrill. O yes, Oyes, J doe cry, The Bishops Trinckets who will buy? This being done of Bishops all the Crew, Began with speed, their wearing Robes to shew. And with extended voyce, they all did cry,* About the year 248. lived a priest called Fidus, 158. yeares after Iohn the Apo∣stle, who would that young chil∣dren should bee baptised upon the 8. day. But Cyprian with 66. Bishops or∣dained they should retaine it without delay. About 300. yeares after the Apostles it be∣came more gene∣rall. Cassander in lib. de Infant. Bap. It was ra∣tify'd and con∣firmed by pope Innocent 3. at the second Bra∣charense Coun∣sell, Anno 610. Decreed like∣wise at the 5. Carthage Coun∣sell retained and continued still in England; more  the pitty. Pope Euginius de∣creed Godfathers, and God-mo∣thers An. 143. Come Customers, see what you lack and buy; Here's (b) Vestments Consecrate, all sorts and sizes, You mayhave here, if you'll come to the prises: Buy Fayrings for your Children, herr are toyes, Fit for your purpose, be they Gerls, or Boyes; Caps for your Boyes, to hurle into the aire▪ And Beads for Gerles, are here in Lambeth Fayre:
What though these Robes were first devis'd in Hell, Tush thats no matter, we'll good pen-worths sell: Hre look upon them, they are good and strong, They'r neate and handsom, and will last you long, They'r very full and large, you nere saw stronger; I would not sell them durst I keepe them longer. Buy a Crucifix, another loud doth call, 'Twill scare the Devill, and will preserve your soule; Lay out your money, hang up worldly elfe, I will sel't cheaper, then I had't my selfe: It's strange to se how men their money keepe, What come you all to Lambeth-Fayre to sleepe; Come buy Lawn sleeves I have no money took, Here try them on, you't like a Bishop looke; And may get honour both of great and small, And Lord it ore your fellow Brethren all: If that the times should chance once more to turne, Then might you Lord it, like as we have done, Come hither Friend, and buy this silken Gowne, I'm sure you cannot match't in Lambeth Towne:(o) Pope Ste∣ven the first de∣creed that a Priest in time of divine service should use no o∣ther but Hal∣lowed garments Anno 261. In this same Gowne, did Canterburies Grace, At High-Commission shew his gracelesse face; Many a storme, and shower it will abide, Yea, and a world of knaverie it will hide; Sir, looke upon't, and view it at your leisure, Goe to the price, for you I faine would pleasure,(p) First brought into England by Au∣stin the Monk, sent by Pope Gre¦gory the first, to preach the do∣ctrine of Rome, with all their Superstitions and Traditions first entertained at Canterbury, Ann. 590. Come buy his Graces Gowne, the price is small, And if you will I'le sell you grace and all. Though he have worn't, it's neere the worse for wearing, Girt it but close and never feare the rearing. Come buy my Crosier staffe, another he begins, Tis excellent to keepe Dogs from your shins: Pray Sir let me some of your money take, And keepe this staffe for its old masters sake. Another comes as if his back would breake, Burthen'd with Vestures, and gan thus to speake, Trinckets I have good store, within my packe, I pray you view them, and see what you lack; See for your love, and for your Money buy, Name what you want, I'le fit you presently,
My packe it is a Wardrope large and faire, Wherein are Miters, Caps rotund and square, The rar'st Episcopalls, that ere you see, Are in my pack, come pray you buy of me; Here's rich Embroydred ware, chuse where you please, I have a thousand such like knacks as these: Buy this brave Rochet, buy this curious Cope, The tippet, Scarfe, they all came from the Priests appa∣rell invented by Pope Zachary, Anno 752. Pope; 'Ile sell them at a fare you cannot loose, Or else exchange them for a pair of shoofe; I must to Rome, I can no longer stay, I pray you buy them, I must hence away. Then after that unto this jolly Fayre, A little Wren, came flying through the ayre, And on his back betwixt his wings be bore, A minster stuft, with Crosses, Pope Sixtus the 2. first or∣dained Altars. Altars store: With sacred Pius the first brought in Fonts, Anno 147, Fonts, and rare guilt Cherubims, And bellowing Organs chanting curious Hymnes; The hallow'd Host, dum Priests and singing boyes, With Antick Cringers, and a thousand toyes: Thus then this mighty Wren, unto the Fayre, Brought his Cathedrall pack, thus stuft with wre, The door's wide-op't, there thousands came to see, The Romish Reliques of the Hierarchie; Where all wre et to sale, and at low rate, Because they gan to wax quite out of date: Buy my high Altars, he lifts up his voice, All sorts of Masse Bookes, here you may have choice▪ Here's Durandus saith that the sound of Bells cause tem∣pests, thunderings, Lightnings, Winds, wicked Spirits, and Di∣veli to crase. bells baptiz'd, will make a dainty found, Pray if you please step in and ring them round: Then after that were seene a Regiment, Of Hell-borne Locusts from C sent, To draw a mighty Cart wherein were brought▪ Plurality of Beefices was condemned at a Counsell, held at Lyons by 600. Bishops, and 1000. Prelates, Anno 1271. Notwithstanding continued in England till the yeare 1642. Plurality of Churches to be bought: Then came another if he had beene there, Would scar'd the Devills from th' Infernall Spheare. For store of Crosses on his back he bore, Char, and Cheap-side and a thousand more, And cri'd what though they be condemn'd of Treason? Come buy them quickly while they are in season:
Then cri'd an other, Sir, what will you buy? J pray step in Sir, do not so passe by. Here's a Cathedra, once Saint Peterschair, The rarest thing to buy in Lambeth-fayre, The candid under Pope Adrian at a Sy∣nod at Franck∣ford; 796. Surplesse with the Wedding Ringes: Pictures for Bibles, and such pretty things: Here's the late Made by the Convocat. in England An. 1640. Canons, and the new found Oath: To sell Et ctera J am very loath: You formerly have heard by true Relation These are the toyes wee made i'th' convocation: Oath ex Officio, here if you will buy: Or Put down in England, Anno 1641. High commission, take it presently. Here's Calixtus ordained them 4. times in the yeare Anno 208. Ember weekes with thin-chapt Jack a lent, To helpe you at a pinch when all is spent: Here's brought in by severall Popes. Easter day by Pope Pius 1. Anno 147. Midsommer day by Silvester 1. Anno 315. Feast of All Saints by Boni∣face, 4. Anno 606. Candle∣mas, by Pope Swinesnout, A. 684. Holy Dayes to sport the time away: Or Booke of Pastimes for the Sabbath Day: Here's Deanes and Prbends and the filthy Nest Of Pursevants, Promoters, and the rest, Chancelours, Officialls, Surrogates, and all The lofty Courtiers of Commission Hall. Come Clergy Chapmen, to your Hierarchie, Here's excellent ware, as good as ere you see; Iure Divino, that is become our Doome, Wee'l sel't for Warfage to the Coast of Room, Burialls, and Churchings, we have wondrous store, Vpon my word, they all came from the VVhore; Then next to him, a fiery fat guts fell. Brought six and twenty Bishopricks to sell: With gags and whips, and Prisons for all those That should their cursed Hierarchie oppose, With catch him Psvant, take him to the Iayle, There let him lye without Mainprise or Baile, 'Ere he get from us, wee will make him see Experimentally, we Bishops bee; Our Courts and Iurisdictions are at sale: Come buy them quickly, 'ere they be too Hale. An other Bishop, with a Box did ride, And with extended voyce he lodly cri'd, To Schollars all that Ministers would be, Come hither, buy the Holy Ghost of me;
But Simon Magus he was in the ground, And none to buy the Holy Ghost was found. Another Bishop lifting up his voyce, Cri'd out amaine, of Livings I have choice, I'le sell you two or thee, if that you please, So you'le have money comming in with ease, If that to Preach your selfe you can't indue, Get some poore Iourney-man to serve your Cure; You'l quickly light on such a one I trow, We have made more, then how to live doe know, Wax (d) Candells, Tapors, another cries and calls,Brought into the Church by Gre∣gory 1. Anno 590 These brought I with me from Cathedrall Paules, They'l scare the Divell, and put him unto flight, When he perceives a consecrated light; When we at Mattens, and at Even-song were, We had them by us then, devoyde of feare; They'l bring delight unto your eyes and nose, They burne so cleere and smell so like a Rose, Or else you may on whom you will bestow it, They'l joy to thinke a Bishop once did owe it. Come hither Friend, another loud doth call, I'le sell you here my Common-Prayer-Bookes all, Sir view this same, and take it in your hand, This Booke but lately no man durst withstand, For if he did, and wee thereof did heare, Wee forthwith made him a Commissioner, And if he chan'd appearance for to misse, To Limbo Patrum he was sent for this: And if he did not us some mony give, J that Abysse we doom'd him still to live. Money my hearts another loud doth call; J see J am not now in Lambeth Hall, No sooner J from Dinner then was risen, Men brought me chinke to free them out of Prison. J'm broake, I'm broake, another did say, Cme uy my Hoods, I can no longer stay: What meane you Sirs? the day is lmost spent, Cme buy my Trinkets all incontinent: Cme thither frind, the price is very small, I ll my Coate, i is Canonicall;
Come buy this Miter Sir, if you be able, The vertue of it is inestimable, Buy't Sir, and weare it, and then soon I hope, You will rise higher and become a Pope; I tell you truely had not fortune left me I would have kept it untill Death bereft me, An other Bishop he a Pack brought in, The which was stuft with Licences toth'brim, And presently he cryeth out with fury, Here's Licences to Preach, to Church and bury: If Wedding's out and you'r dispos'd to Wed, Come buy a Licence and away to Bed. It now beginning to grow towards night,Marriage made a Church action by Evaristu▪ Comes a grave Doctor running in with might, His courage stout was something now abated, He brings his golden Slippers, consecrated, And crys, come buy these Slippers here of mine, They are emboss'd with Holines Divine; They will in all your wayes preserve you sound, And with them you may tread on holy Ground, They'r fild with Holinesse within, and round about, Here looke upon them, see how't breaketh out. What all passe by? 'tis strange time turns her wheell, And bends her borw upon us, that we feell, No handsaile yet, our ware's becharmed sure, And (like our selves) there's none will it indure, It's doom'd to dismall fate, despis'd and scorn'd, Though nev'r so costly, or so much adorn'd; Here's owne venale, yet no money flies, Our Ware's dog-cheape, and thus our credit dies: For such a Fayre I never did behold, We bring our Ware, but nothing can be sold: I wonder said one, what was our intent, To make our Fayre thus at the Parliament. For we are mocked here by sawcy Jacks, They bid the Pedlrs to put up their Packs: We thought our ware would sould at such a price, And of our hands been vented in a trice, That this last Act upon the English Stage Would 'forded money for our Pilgrimage. To Babylon the Great: How'ere we dream'd no lesse Then Ransom for his 'prisoned Holinesse:
But he, nor we, must in this Lambeth Faire Get helpe I see by this our Popish Ware. Whilst thus the Bishops there, their guts, and they, Cald to their Customers to come away: A Messenger came running through the croud, And to the Bishops thus he spake aloud, Away to Rome or T chuse you whether, I know your shooes are made of running leather: For all the Lawes oth' Land, you have out-ruo, And I come here to tell you what is done, The Parliament hath cast you from their Spheare, For dire Aspects that yee have caused there, Ye are devoted and from thence are hurl'd And lie like Starres shot on the lower world; Your ware's not worth a fart for all your cogging, See where the Hangman comes away, be jogging; Then comes young Gregory with an Hempen Broome, To sweep these Vermin to the Sea of Rome; A Broome said I? my tongue it surely falters, 'Twas Tiburne hung with six and twentie Halters, Which scar'd them all to see that hard mishap, They'd rather ten times seen a Cornerd Cap. With that the Bishops cri'd we are undone, we are so fatt, alas we cannot run. But unto them a lustie Porter struts, Sirs here's a Basket that will hold your Guts; Take my advise, (the knave hath Halters plentie) You'l run the better when your bellie's emptie. Alas cry'd they, is all-our labour losse? Others get money, we have but the Crosse! For we are crossed in our expedition, And flie we must, for all our late Petition, Yet notwithstanding herein lies our hope, We shall be entertained by the Pope. With that like men of Sences quite bereft, They trold away and all their trinckets left, A friend of mine to me did then repaire, Desiring me, to pen this famous Fayr, Which I have done▪ and have it here to sell; Come buy the Fayre of me, and so farewell. FINIS.
