p1503a 99897844 137388
A PERFECT NARRATIVE: Or a Full, and Exact RELATION Of the late Great and Bloody FIGHT BETWEEN The DƲTCH, SPANISH, and IMPE∣RIAL FORCES on the one Side, and the FRENCH ARMY, under the Command of the PRINCE of CONDE, on the Other. With the Numbers Slain on both Sides; and a List of the COMANDERS that were Kill'd, and taken Pri∣soners: As it is Confirmed by several Letters. Published to prevent False Reports. LONDON, Printed for H. B. 1674.
THE NARRATIVE Of the Late FIGHT BETWEEN THE French & Confederate ARMIES. THe Imperial Forces being Joyned, sometime since, with the Dutch, and Spa∣nish Troops, making in all, a Body of above Sixty Thousand Men, Effect∣ive, were drawn up very neer the French Army, under the Command of the Prince of Conde which lay Encamped in a very Secure Post; and 'tis supposed, might might intend to have declined a Pitcht-field, until Turenne, with the Forces lately Imployed in the Palatinate had Joyned them, had they not unexpectedly been Surprized into a Battel: The Manner whereof (after several various Reports-) is now sound, and Confirmed to be thus: On the First of August, the Confederate Armies designing to pass a River; a great Party of the French taking the Advantage, came, unexpectedly, forth of a Wood, and fell upon the Reer-Guard, consisting of about Nine, or Ten Regiments, for the most part Spanish, whereof the hindermost were those of Holstein the Regiment of Morber, and the Regiment of the Young Prince of Vandemont; All which, with some others, were Miserably Shattered; and, for the most part, Cut to Pieces in the first Charge of the French Fury; So that the Remainder were forced to Flye: And that part of the Army that was gone over the Ford, made what haste they could back again, to their Relief, the whole Army making Head as fast as the Inconve∣nience of the place, which was very troublesome, and uneven, would Permit. In This Defeat of the Rear, the Prince of ORANGE'S Carriages were Surprized, but as they were Carrying them off; A strong Fresh Party of the Dutch came in, which after a sharp dispute, were compelled to retreat by a Bo∣dy of six Thousand Horse sent in by the Prince of Conde, who in a very short time were met by a Party of our Cavalry, and most furiously engaged, and now the Generals on either side drawing up with all possible speed, and sending Releifs to their respective Friends, the Gross of both Armies came to a smart and most cruel En∣gagement, nothing of Courage or Resolution being omitted on either hand: The ad∣verse Troops breaking into and through each other, and the Generals often mingled a∣mongst the common Soldiers of the Enemy; In which confusion the Prince of
Orange gave incomparable Testimonies of his Valour and Heroick Spirit, and the rest of the Commanders inspired with an example of such undaunted Gallantry, seemed to brave all dangers, though several of them there unfortunately, yet glori∣ously fell, dying in Bed of Honour; The Prince of Conde, and grand Officers of the other side, meeting them with an equal Bravery and Resolution, so that the Prince himself had his Horse thrice shot under him, and though at first it was reported he was near slain or wounded, yet we are now satisfied he came off unhurt though 'tis certainly affirmed, the brave Duke D' Engnin his Son received some wounds in the Face. The fight continued desperately till mid night, and then after some intermission, was renewed again the next morning, with as much Courage as ever: Both sides acquitted themselves with extraordinary Valour, but especially the Imperial Infantry; Never did Fortune weigh the Issue of a Battel more Nicely; Nor could that of Pharsalia (where Fate Decided the Empire of the World) be bought with a more Sullen Obstinacy. The first Attaque, began on Saturday, about eleven of the Clock, in the Fore-noon, and continued with all imaginable fury, and horror; except some little respit about midnight, till the same time-next day: at which time, both Parties wearied, but not satisfied, seperated from each other, the French Retreating to their Trenches; and though the Confederate Troops may boast themselves to be left Masters of the Field, yet they thought fit also, quickly to repair to their former Posts. The slaughter in the whole, cannot but be very great, though as to the certain Num∣ber, common Fame speaks very differently, according as the Interests, or Assertions, of the several Reporters run Byast to either Party. Some relating near twenty Thou∣sand in all slain, though more moderate Computers cannot allow of above half that Number, the Confederates Writing about four Thousand on their side; and near twice as many of the French. But the Paris Letters speak just contrary, though most certain it is, abundance of the Flower of the French Gentry, (some affirm near four Hundred) spurred on by an excess of Gallantry Sacrificed here their lives to Honour. The Account of Persons of extraordinary Quality, stands thus. Of the Dutch, Spani∣ards, &c. The Marquess D'Aslentar dead of his Wounds. Monsieur De Cavier killed. The Baron De Beck killed. Prince Charles of Lorrain Wounded. Count Wolbeck Wounded in three places. Prince Prio Wounded. The Prince of Salme taken Pri∣soner. Duke of Holstein Wounded, and taken Prisoner. The Count Morode Wounded, and taken Prisoner. Of the French. The Duke D'Enguin Wounded. Duke of Luxenburgh Wounded. Monsieur Rochford Wounded with a Musquet Shot. Monsieur Montal his Thig broke. The Chevalier Fowrilles Wound∣ed. The Count De Lussan Wound∣ed. FINIS.
